 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jocrd
Challenges in diagnosis and treatment of olfactory reference syndrome: A
case study
Ahmad N. AlHadia,b,⁎, Asma H. Almaghrebib,c
a Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, King Saud University, King Saud University Medical City, PO Box 242069, Riyadh 11322, Saudi Arabia
b SABIC Psychological Health Research & Applications Chair (SPHRAC), College of Medicine, King Saud University, King Saud University Medical City, PO Box 242069,
Riyadh 11322, Saudi Arabia
c Saudi Commission for Health Specialties, PO Box 94656, Riyadh 11614, Saudi Arabia
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Olfactory Reference Syndrome
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
DSM-5
Saudi Arabia
A B S T R A C T
In olfactory reference syndrome (ORS), patients exhibit a preoccupation with a perceived foul or offensive odor
that they emit, which leads to significant distress and functional impairment. It has been reclassified in the
“other specified” category under obsessive-compulsive and related disorder of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). However, there is limited information about how to diagnose and suc-
cessfully treat this disorder. This study describes the case of a 20-year-old male who was diagnosed with ORS
after excluding other differential and treated using combination strategies that included selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). Following 16 weeks of treatment, the patient
showed significant improvement in his functioning, which was measured with different scales. The scales were
used to measure anxiety and depression revealed the patient was below clinical threshold levels. The Yale-Brown
Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS), used to measure the severity of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
symptoms, showed mild OCD, with a reduction of 68% from his initial score. In the four-month post-treatment
follow-up, the patient maintained his improvement. These findings suggest that further studies regarding the
classification of ORS as a specific category are warranted, and should include combination therapy, particularly
CBT.
1. Theoretical and research basis for the treatment
Olfactory reference syndrome (ORS) was first introduced by Pryse-
Phillips in 1971 (Pryse-Phillips, 1971). It is a psychiatric condition
defined by a preoccupation that one emits a foul or offensive odor as-
sociated with significant distress and functional impairment (Lochner &
Stein, 2003). ORS is not clearly mentioned as a distinct disorder with
separate diagnostic criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5).(Sanahuja & Espinosa, 2016). The over-
lapping symptoms of ORS with other psychiatric disorders, and variable
insight levels, have led to ongoing debate regarding its classification
(Feusner, Phillips, & Stein, 2010). It was first categorized as an atypical
somatoform disorder in the DSM-III (American Psychiatric Association,
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-III, American
Psychiatric Association, 1980), then implicitly mentioned in the text for
social phobia and as an example of delusional disorder of the somatic
type in DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV-TR, American Psychiatric
Association, 2000). Later, in view of the insufficient empirical evidence
to include it as a separate diagnosis, it appeared in the DSM-5 in “Other
Specified Obsessive Compulsive Disorders”, a variant of “taijin kyo-
fusho”, under obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (OCRDs) (Van
Ameringen, Patterson, & Simpson, 2014). Conversely, the International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD
11) has considered ORS for inclusion as a discrete diagnostic entity
within OCRDs (Stein et al., 2016).
Hence, ORS is still underdiagnosed and under-treated. The clinical
presentations and treatment options are varied and mixed from case to
case. There are several published reports of treatment success using
pharmacotherapy that include SSRIs and SSRI with antipsychotic aug-
mentation or antipsychotics alone (Albers, Amato, & Albers, 2018;
Dominguez & Puig, 1997; Michael, Boulton, & Andrews, 2014; Stein, Le
Roux, Bouwer, & Van Heerden, 1998). In contrast, case reports using
psychotherapy are limited (Allen-Crooks & Challacombe, 2017; Lim &
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2018.07.004
Received 11 June 2018; Received in revised form 11 July 2018; Accepted 19 July 2018
⁎ Corresponding author at: SABIC Psychological Health Research and Applications Chair (SPHRAC) Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, King Saud
University, Medical City King Saud University, PO Box 242069, Riyadh 11322, Saudi Arabia.
E-mail addresses: alhadi@ksu.edu.sa, psy@ksu.edu.sa (A.N. AlHadi), sphrac@ksu.edu.sa (A.H. Almaghrebi).
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 19 (2018) 23–28
Available online 21 July 2018
2211-3649/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
T
 Ajay, 2012; Martin-Pichora & Antony, 2011; Zantvoord, Vulink, &
Denys, 2016) and published reports regarding ORS treatment remain
scarce. Thus, specific treatment guidelines do not yet exist. Herein
(from the Middle East) we report a case of an ORS patient who is
showing good response to cognitive behavioral therapy with SSRIs. This
report helps to add data regarding clinical features of ORS and man-
agement of similar cases which will result in a better understanding of
this disorder and more accurate classification.
2. Case introduction
The patient was a 20-year-old male student in the medical field,
referred to the psychiatry clinic because of excessive and persistent
overvalued notions that he emitted a sweaty body odor that offended
others.
His complaint began three years prior to presentation in the clinic.
He stated that while he was attending a class, his friend who was sitting
next to him remarked, “someone used excessive amounts of deodorant”.
His friend was looking at him and seemed upset. Because of this, the
patient believes his friend was referring to him. After this event, he
started taking precautions to ensure his smell was not offensive. He
checked his odor regularly, showered prior to leaving home and use an
excessive amount of shower gel. In the beginning, he used deodorant
excessively, but with time he stopped using deodorant because he
thought it was would not adequate to mask his sweaty odor. Instead, he
thought deodorant worsened the odor. He admitted the fear of giving
off a sweaty smell makes him anxious. He sweats profusely from his
back and axillae and worries that the foul smell will bother others and
hurt their impression of him.
Eventually, his anxiety was precipitated by people wrinkling their
noses, coughing or touching their face, or if he found his clothes wet.
These experiences reinforced his beliefs regarding his odor and made
him vigilant of others behavior. To rectify his problems, he obviates any
position that causes him to feel hot or sweating; these behaviors in-
clude: drinking coffee or tea, walks in the sun, and turning off the air
condition (regardless of the temperature). He reported that he avoids
social gatherings, collective prayers and outgoing interactions that in-
volve any degree of proximity to others. For example, in his class he sits
in the last row and leaves more than arm's length between him and his
colleague beside him. He also does this with his family around dinner
table. In the mosque, he attends late in order to pray in the last row
(near the gate) so he can stay for a short time and leave quickly. These
behaviors are coupled with bathing and changing his clothes frequently
and checking his odor often. His condition worsened with time and does
not improve with better weather. He remains unable to have a mean-
ingful social life or enjoy hobbies. His academic performance declined
with frequent absence and poor concentration in class. He tried many
times to ignore this fixation but he could not. He was feeling depressed
and was worried about his future.
He prescribed himself as: “I am interested in details, orderliness, and
perfectionism. I am pious but currently, I am a hypocrite, having a double
face, unable to distinguish between right and wrong and control myself”. His
sister has been treated for OCD, she was repeating ablution and prayers.
Our patient had no past or current history of medical conditions and no
past psychiatric history.
During examination of the patient's mental state, he wore scrubs and
had good hygiene and grooming. He was anxious, concerned about
emitting an odor and avoided eye-contact. He was tearful because his
problem is very distressing him. He was articulate, with coherent
speech. He believed his thoughts regarding his odor were variable, and
ranged between the possibility that he did not emit a sweaty body odor
and being completely convinced in his belief when interpreted with
perceived clues during social interactions. There were no auditory or
olfactory hallucinations. No clear delusions, no suicidal thoughts or
self-harm and his cognitive-state was intact.
3. Assessment
Symptoms were assessed using the standard IAPT service outcome
measure, which has well-validated scales. The GAD-7 scale used to
measure of anxiety and the PHQ-9 used to measure depression were
used (AlHadi et al., 2017; Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001; Spitzer,
Kroenke, Williams, & Löwe, 2006). In addition, we used the Yale-Brown
Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) to measure the severity of the
patients OCD symptoms and the World Health Organization Quality of
life-BREF (WHOQOL-BREF) to measure quality of his life prior to
treatment (THE WHOQOL GROUP, 1998; WK et al., 1989). We ad-
ministrated the Arabic version of the OCD questionnaire to determine
the type of OCD and personality disorders scale (Aldemerdash, Ghanim,
& Zainah, 2007; Momen & Abo-Hindi, 2006). At the time of treatment,
we were not aware of validated measures or any useful measure spe-
cifically created for olfactory reference syndrome. However, There is an
ORS questionnaire online, developed by the OCD center of Los Angeles
for clinical use, but has no article for citation (“OCD Center of Los
Angeles,” n.d.).
The first author (consultant psychiatrist and certified psychothera-
pist) met the patient for the first time and made the assessment and
diagnosis. The second author (psychiatry resident) conducted the CBT
sessions under supervision. Signed informed consent to publish this
information was obtained from the patient.
4. Case conceptualization
We used the classical Beckian model for case conceptualization.
(Fig. 1) We believe that early experiences and situations had developed
perfectionism schema and core beliefs in form of: “I need to be in control”
and “I need to be 100% sure always”. These core believes can be acti-
vated in situations like the first situation that is mentioned in Fig. 1.
Also his family history of OCD may play a genetic role and make him
more predisposed to OCD related disorders. The catastrophic and all or
none thinking shaped the assumptions and automatic thoughts, e.g. “I
must control my sweat all the time” and “Taking shower before leaving home
is mandatory always”. Compensatory strategies (i.e. safety behaviors)
helped to maintain the unrealistic thoughts. Avoidance, repetitive
checking, excessive showering and clothes changing did not give him
the chance to check the reality of his thoughts regarding the smell and
other related thoughts.
We believed that correcting maladaptive thoughts will help a lot in
his anxiety and worry. Also, exposure (instead of avoidance and doing
the safety behaviors) will make him tolerate anxiety and help him to
examine his believes and find out that they are not realistic.
This conceptualization is somehow similar to OCD cases. It shares
using exposure and cognitive restructuring to decrease anxiety level in
patients with OCD.
The gold standard of treatment for OCD is behavioral therapy; ex-
posure and response prevention to break the cycle of conditioning that
maintains symptoms (Leahy, Holland, & McGinn, 2012). Adjunctively
to ERP, cognitive therapy to modify maladaptive beliefs may increase
the efficacy of standard behavioral treatment (Leahy et al., 2012). ORS
shares some belief domains with OCD. For example, our patient showed
a tendency to overestimate threat, perfectionism, inflated personal re-
sponsibility and intolerance of uncertainty. On the other hand there was
no clear over-importance of the significance of one's thoughts and he
did not have beliefs in the necessity to control one's thoughts (Obsessive
Compulsive Cognitions Working Group, 2001; “Psychometric validation
of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire & the Interpretation of Intrusions
Inventory: Part I.,”, 2003). We assumed that over-estimation of threat
and catastrophic thinking associated with other belief domains like
perfectionism and intolerance of uncertainty, led to the anxiety and
desire to control the odor always.
A.N. AlHadi, A.H. Almaghrebi
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 19 (2018) 23–28
24
 5. The course of treatment and assessment of progress
In the beginning, Fluoxetine (20 mg daily) was prescribed and then
raised to 40 mg daily. Two weeks later, an intervention composed of 16
sessions over 3 months of individual CBT was arranged; the duration of
each session was between 50 and 60 min. All sessions were conducted
by
a psychiatry
resident, under the
supervision
of a qualified
psychiatric consultant specialist in CBT.
In the first session, an assessment of the patient's condition and his
suitability for short-term cognitive therapy (by rating form) was per-
formed (Safran, Segal, Vallis, & Shaw, 1990). The patient was highly
educated, intelligent, articulate, psychologically minded and had family
support and strong relationships with close friends. He was suitable and
motivated to receive CBT and optimistic that therapy would be helpful.
Fig. 1. Case formulation.
A.N. AlHadi, A.H. Almaghrebi
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 19 (2018) 23–28
25
 He agreed to adjunctive psychotherapy, with medication. He was in-
troduced to the concept of the homework assignment. The assessment
scales for anxiety, depression and quality of life were administered. The
homework was to read self-help material from the book "Mind over
Mood" by Dennis Greenberger and Christine Padesky which regarded
skills and principles used in cognitive behavioral therapy (Greenberger
& Padesky, 1995).
The focus of the second session was on psychoeducation about OCD
and related disorders, as well as ORS, treatment options, and prognosis.
He was introduced to the cognitive behavioral model, the physiological,
cognitive, emotional and behavioral components of anxiety and ex-
posure-response behavioral techniques were explained. As homework,
we encouraged him to read the next chapter of Mind Over Mood to
enhance his understanding of CBT.
In the third session, he was assigned to write out goals of therapy
and the homework was to log all obsessions and rituals. His therapy
goals include; by the end of the sessions, he will be:
– Able to sit with his family without worrying about his sweaty body
odor
– Able to attend his class and sit in the front row without worrying
about his sweaty body odor
– Able to pray in mosque without worrying about his sweaty body
odor
– Able to use reasonable amounts of shower gel and deodorant
– Able to leave his home without taking unnecessary bath or shower
In the fourth session, he was helped to construct a hierarchy of
anxiety-provocations and avoiding situations. He was then directed to
create a plan of graded exposure with response prevention situations,
which were to begin by himself, then include his family, and then so-
ciety and his peers at the university. Examples of items included were:
to drink hot beverages without being in front of an air conditioner, to sit
with his family around the dinner table with space less than an arms-
length, to attend collective prayers and to sit in the first row in class.
The homework was to begin his initial exposure.
From the fifth session to the seventh session, we focused on re-
viewing his homework, which was exposure to social contact at the
mosque without engaging in safety behaviors. For example, he would
avoid attending late or praying near from the gate. We discussed the
obstacles, reviewed the principles of exposure-response prevention
technique and motivated him to go up in his hierarchy. We believed
that exposure will help tolerate anxiety and also to help him examine
his unrealistic thoughts.
By the end of the seventh session, he could pray the Friday prayer
(one of the most exalted Islamic rituals that is attended by the majority
of Muslims) and sit with his family with significant reductions in his
fear of having body odor. For homework, he was given an article on
ORS to read and continue exposure exercises.
During his eighth session, the patient came excited, admitted that
the article helped him to understand his fears and related his symptoms;
also, he was happy because he felt that he is not alone and realized
others may be suffer from the same illness. He reported a subjective
improvement of 50% regarding his fear from emitting sweaty smell
compared to this fear prior to therapy. We started cognitive re-
structuring by using thought records, which helped him to identify his
automatic thoughts during moments of obsessional anxiety. The
homework was to continue reading the next three chapters in Mind
Over Mood, which describes the use of thought records, in addition to
moving up in his hierarchy.
The thought records needed five sessions to be mastered through
Socratic questioning, which helped him to challenge his thoughts and
changed them to more balanced and realistic ones. The ‘hot’ thoughts,
which were predominant in making him anxious were “my body will
emit a bad and sweaty odor and people around me will have a bad im-
pression about me”. Thought records were filled out between sessions
and he moved up in his hierarchy. Catastrophic thinking and all or none
rigid rules started to be weaker.
On his thirteenth session, the thought records were completed. He
reported that the recording made him more aware of his thoughts and
that led to minimizing the time he spent on rituals. He was on the last
step in the exposure hierarchy and was worried about relapse because it
was a sensitive step. Because he used to sit in the last row in class, with
no one sitting beside him, we asked him to move to the front gradually,
and sit in the first row when he wished. Homework was to begin ex-
posure in class.
In the next session, the patient admitted he moved two steps in his
class, he was a little bit anxious because he remembered the comments
from his friend three years prior and was afraid that the same thing will
happen again. We reviewed the exposure and response prevention
technique and helped him to see that he was overestimating the like-
lihood of negative outcomes and underestimating his ability to control
his anxiety and his previous successful in similar situations. This can be
considered as a behavioral experiment where maladaptive beliefs were
changed by doing a certain activity to examine the thoughts.
During the last two sessions, he ceased exposure in class because of
vacation. For this, he presented with a tentative schedule for the ex-
posure during school time. He was pleased with his progress and re-
ported an 80% improvement in his mood and functioning. He also re-
ported significant reductions in the use of safety behavior after
exposing himself to a number of avoided situations that had been on his
hierarchy. The nature of the disorder and relapse prevention strategies
were discussed. During the follow-up 2 months later, the patient was
seen in the clinic and reported significant resolution of his symptoms
and a 90% improvement in his social and occupational functioning.
Follow-up after 4 months revealed that he had maintained his progress.
Anxiety and depression scales were given with severity of OCD scale.
6. Outcomes
We administrated the Quality of life-BREF (WHOQOL-BREF) in the
first session, and GAD-7 and PHQ-9 scales to measure anxiety and de-
pression, respectively. There are 4 domains in WHOQOL-BREF included
in the following order: physical health, psychological health, social
relationships, and environment. The higher scores denote higher
quality of life. He scored 38/100 in the 1st and 2nd domains and 69/
100 in the 3rd and 4th domains. The levels of depression and anxiety
were measured in the first and final sessions. The results in this analysis
showed a decrease from moderate severe depression (15) to normal
range (4) and from moderate anxiety (14) to mild anxiety (5). His
pretreatment scores on Y-BOCS revealed 24 out of a possible 40, which
reflected severe OCD. He showed a significant improvement over the
course of treatment. He was given Y-BOCS scale every 5th session after
initial session. By the final treatment session, he had a total score 8 on
the Y-BOCS (Fig. 2), which reflects mild OCD, which was a reduction of
68% from his initial score. The Arabic version of OCD questionnaire,
which was given during the second session with the personality dis-
order scale, showed he was dominant in the contamination and clean-
liness type, and sometimes religious type, with personality traits that
were high toward avoidant and Obsessive-compulsive personality dis-
order. Four-months post-treatment, the result of GAD-7, PHQ-9 and Y-
BOCS scales showed normal ranges regarding anxiety and depression
and had total score of 7- subclinical OCD, respectively.
7. Treatment implications of the case
This case illustrates the phenomenology and treatment of a patient
that presented with ORS, which manifests as variety of psychiatric
disorders that include obsessive-compulsive disorder, body dysmorphic
disorder, somatic delusion and social phobia, but differs from all of
them in that the core symptom is a preoccupation with emitting an odor
(Feusner et al., 2010; Veale & Matsunaga, 2014).
A.N. AlHadi, A.H. Almaghrebi
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 19 (2018) 23–28
26
 Due to the lack of special diagnostic category and criteria for ORS,
its diagnosis and proper treatment were challenging. Therefore, in the
beginning, we ruled out alternative possibilities before making a defi-
nite diagnosis. In the differential diagnosis, we considered the diagnosis
of obsessive-compulsive disorder first because he spent many hours per
day preoccupied with intrusive thoughts about his smell. He engaged in
some of the compulsive behaviors that resembles those seen in an ob-
sessive compulsive disorder such as repeatedly checking his odor,
showering excessively, and attempting to mask the odor. Yet, those
repetitive behaviors are safety seeking in response to his thoughts that
he emits a sweaty body odor and his inability to control his sweating.
These behaviors are, therefore, not due to fear of contracting germs,
like behaviors in OCD. In addition, OCD patients tend to have diverse
types of symptoms over time, but our patient did not describe having
any obsessions or compulsions that were time-consuming or that in-
terfered significantly with his life, other than those related to body odor
(Swedo, Rapoport, Leonard, Lenane, & Cheslow, 1989). What he re-
ported regarding some obsessive thoughts regarding contamination and
occasional religious were sub-syndromal and have a relation to his ol-
factory concerns and attention to his personal and general hygiene.
Similarly, his answers in the Arabic version questionnaire about OCD
domains revealed the dominant contamination type. OCD patients
avoid social situations because of the embarrassment associated with
compulsive rituals. This was not consistent with our patient. His
avoidance was entirely based on embarrassment, due to the fear of
offending others and shame from their negative impression (Moutier &
Stein, 1999). One additional feature that makes OCD a less likely di-
agnosis is that OCD beliefs are delusional in less than 5% of cases, and
ideas or delusions of reference appear lower in OCD than in ORS (Eisen,
Phillips, & Rasmussen, 1999; Insel & Akiskal, 1986; Kozak & Foa,
1994). Our patients’ belief was variable during the course of the illness
and most of the time he was convinced that he emits a sweaty body
odor. All of the above would suggest a different diagnosis than OCD.
We ruled out social anxiety disorder because our patient had fear
that was related to his body odor perception, and he denied any anxiety
in social situations outside his concerns regarding social impression, an
idea of reference and social avoidance. In addition, he was sociable
before developing this problem. Body dysmorphic disorder was also
ruled out because the core belief was not affected by his physical ap-
pearance. Because his belief wasn't fixed throughout time and did not
reach delusion in severity (he sometimes feels his preoccupation about
his odor is silly, excessive and meaningless), the diagnosis of delusional
disorder, the somatic type, was also ruled out. All depressive and an-
xiety symptoms developed later and were secondary to the impact of
the symptoms on his studying and social functioning.
The patient presented with a consistent clinical profile that was
characterized by distress, preoccupation of emitting a sweaty odor and
engaged in time-consuming activities to avoid or reduce the effect of
the smell on others. Accordingly, he received the diagnosis of ORS. The
Arabic version of personality disorders scale showed traits of obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder that
could be considered as predisposing factors to developing ORS. His
belief system is characterized by a sense of perfectionism, moralism and
rigidity that likewise are presented in OCD patients (McFall &
Wollersheim, 1979; Steketee, Quay, & White, 1991).
OCD is reclassified in DSM-5 in the new category ‘’Obsessive-
Compulsive and Related Disorders (OCRDs)”. That designation has
implications for the assessment and treatment of these disorders.
OCRDs included nine categories that include body dysmorphic disorder,
trichotillomania and excoriation disorder. In addition, “other specified”
classes for those clinically significant symptoms that do not meet cri-
teria for one of the disorders in the OCRDs class but have aspect(s) of
Obsessive-Compulsive disorders. ORS is considered one of these (Van
Ameringen et al., 2014). Attributable to the core feature of ORS; ob-
sessions about personal odor and compulsive odor-related behaviors is
suggested to use the same effective treatment strategies in a patient
with OCD. For that, we administrated Y-BOCS, which included 10 items
designed to assess the severity of the obsessive thoughts and compulsive
behaviors as a tool to evaluate his improvement.
Having a correct diagnosis will help in choosing the best evidence
-based intervention. In CBT it is not necessary to have a specific diag-
nosis to have a good case conceptualization. The most important to
have a good understanding of the patient problem, how it is started and
what make it continue.
For medication, the serotonergic drugs increased the percentage of
improvement in the range of 50–70% in patients that are likely to re-
spond to treatment (Sadock, Sadock, & Ruiz, 2015). We used the
strategy of combining medication (SSRIs) and cognitive behavioral
therapy because our patient was suffering from functional impairment,
especially in his academic performance and he needs to feel better as
soon as possible. His medication use began two weeks prior to psy-
chotherapy and remained stable across the course of CBT (fluoxetine,
40 mg daily). Fluoxetine was chosen for its preferable side effects,
mainly minimal weight-gain and sedation, which were important to the
patient. We assumed the improvement was caused by different factors,
his desire for treatment, compliance on medication, commitment to
psychotherapy sessions, high education level and intelligence, stability
in the patient's family situation (with good support) and an absence of
comorbidity history like other psychiatric disorders, substance use
disorder and another medical illness. Since most OCRDs has a tendency
toward chronicity and lack of information regarding the course and
prognosis of ORS, we advised the patient to continue his medication.
We need to remain informed on his progress.
8. Recommendations to clinicians and students
ORS is understudied, even though it is a disabling disorder. It is not
yet categorized as a distinct disorder. Its complexity and relationship to
other disorders is not yet determined. The lack of standardized diag-
nostic criteria causes confusion in psychiatry regarding its diagnosis
and selecting a proper treatment after diagnosis. Our patient is an ex-
ample of this confusion. By classifying ORS under OCRDs in the DSM-5
indicates that ORS may respond to the same treatment. Our findings
indicate that the patient responded well to CBT, notably ERP combined
with SSRI. At the same time, having a good understanding for the pa-
tient problem is very important factor for reaching effective interven-
tion especially in CBT. For those suffering patients that need clinical
attention, we hope this case study will help to increase awareness of the
clinical features of ORS and also help in organizing treatment and lead
to future systematic studies on ORS.
Fig. 2. Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) total score across the
16 treatment sessions and at follow-up, 4 months posttreatment.
A.N. AlHadi, A.H. Almaghrebi
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 19 (2018) 23–28
27
 Acknowledgments
This research was financially supported by SABIC Psychological
Health Research and Applications Chair, Department of Psychiatry,
College of Medicine, Deanship of Post Graduate teaching, King Saud
University.
Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.
References
Albers, A. D., Amato, I., & Albers, M. W. (2018). Olanzapine improved symptoms and
olfactory function in an olfactory reference syndrome patient. The Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 30(2), 164–167.
Aldemerdash, A., Ghanim, M., & Zainah, M. (2007). Personality Disorders Scale (first).
Cairo: Ghareeb Publishers.
AlHadi, A. N., AlAteeq, D. A., Al-Sharif, E., Bawazeer, H. M., Alanazi, H., AlShomrani, A.
T., & AlOwaybil, R. (2017). An arabic translation, reliability, and validation of
Patient Health Questionnaire in a Saudi sample. Annals of General Psychiatry, 16(1),
32. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12991-017-0155-1.
Allen-Crooks, R., & Challacombe, F. (2017). Cognitive behaviour therapy for olfactory
reference disorder (ORD): A case study. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related
Disorders, 13, 7–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2017.02.001.
American Psychiatric Association (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental dis-
orders: DSM-III. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental dis-
orders: DSM-IV-TR. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Dominguez, R. A., & Puig, A. (1997). Olfactory reference syndrome responds to clomi-
pramine but not fluoxetine: A case report. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 58(11),
497–498.
Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., & Rasmussen, S. A. (1999). Obsessions and delusions: The
relationship between obsessive-compulsive disorder and the psychotic disorders.
Psychiatric Annals, 29(9), 515–522. https://doi.org/10.3928/0048-5713-
19990901-08.
Feusner, J. D., Phillips, K. A., & Stein, D. J. (2010). Olfactory reference syndrome: Issues
for DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27(6), 592–599. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.
20688.
Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L.,
... Charney, D. S. (1989). The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale. I.
Development, use, and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46(11), 1006–1011.
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810110054008.
Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. A. (1995). Mind over mood: A cognitive therapy treatment
manual for clients. Mind over Mood: A Cognitive Therapy Treatment Manual for Clients.
Insel, T., & Akiskal, H. (1986). Obsessive-compulsive disorder with psychotic features - a
phenomenological analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 1527–1533.
Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (1994). Obsessions, overvalued ideas, and delusions in ob-
sessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32(3), 343–353.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-7967(94)90132-5.
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. W. (2001). The PHQ-9. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 16(9), 606–613. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-1497.2001.
016009606.x.
Leahy, R. L., Holland, S. J. F., & McGinn, L. K. (2012). Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder. In
R. L. Leahy (Ed.). Treatment plans and interventions for depression and anxiety disorders
(pp. 357–362). New York, New York, USA: Guilford Press (Second).
Lim, L., & Ajay, D. (2012). A case of Jikoshu-Kyofu treated with cognitive behavioural
therapy. Singapore Medical Journal, 53(7), 139–142.
Lochner, C., & Stein, D. (2003). Olfactory reference syndrome: Diagnostic criteria and
differential diagnosis. Journal of Postgraduate Medicine, 49(4), 328–331.
Martin-Pichora, A. L., & Antony, M. M. (2011). Successful treatment of olfactory reference
syndrome with cognitive behavioral therapy: A case study. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 18(4), 545–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2010.11.007.
McFall, M., & Wollersheim, J. (1979). Obsessive-compulsive neurosis: A cognitive beha-
vioral formulation and approach to treatment. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 3,
333–348.
Michael, S., Boulton, M., & Andrews, G. (2014). Two cases of olfactory reference syn-
drome responding to an atypical antipsychotic and SSRI. Australian and New Zealand
Journal of Psychiatry, 48, 878–879. https://doi.org/10.1177/0004867414526791.
Momen, D., & Abo-Hindi, W. (2006). Designing a scale for obsessive compulsive disorder
symptoms. Derasat Nafseyah, 16(3).
Moutier, C., & Stein, M. (1999). The history, epidemiology, and differential diagnosis of
social anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60, 4–8.
Obsessive Compulsive Cognitions Working Group (2001). Development and initial vali-
dation of the obsessive beliefs questionnaire and the interpretation of intrusions in-
ventory. Behaviour Research and Therapy. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7967(00)
00085-1.
OCD Center of Los Angeles (n.d.). Retrieved June 1, 2018, from 〈https://ocdla.com/ol-
factory-reference-syndrome-test〉.
Pryse-Phillips, W. (1971). An olfactory reference syndrome. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 47(4), 484–509. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.1971.
tb03705.x.
Psychometric validation of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire and the Interpretation of
Intrusions Inventory: Part I (2003). Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41(8), 863–78.
Retrieved from 〈http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12880642〉.
Sadock, B., Sadock, V., & Ruiz, P. (2015). Obessive-compulsive disorder. In KAPLAN &
SADOCK’S Synopsis of Psychiatry Behavioral Sciences/Clinical Psychiatry (p. 425).
Safran, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Vallis, T. M., & Shaw, B. T. (1990). Suitability for short term
cognitive interpersonal therapy: Interview and rating scales. In Jeremy D. Safran, &
Zindel V. Segal (Eds.). Interpersonal Processes in Cognitive Therapy. New York: Basic
Books.
Sanahuja, C., & Espinosa, A. (2016). Olfactory reference syndrome. European Psychiatry,
33, 365–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2016.01.1310.
Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B. W., & Löwe, B. (2006). A brief measure for
assessing generalized anxiety disorder. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166(10), 1092.
https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.166.10.1092.
Stein, D. J., Kogan, C. S., Atmaca, M., Fineberg, N. A., Fontenelle, L. F., Grant, J. E., &
Reed, G. M. (2016). The classification of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
in the ICD-11. Journal of Affective Disorders, 190, 663–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jad.2015.10.061.
Stein, D. J., Le Roux, L., Bouwer, C., & Van Heerden, B. (1998). Is olfactory reference
syndrome an obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorder? The Journal of Neuropsychiatry
and Clinical Neurosciences, 10(1), 96–99. https://doi.org/10.1176/jnp.10.1.96.
Steketee, G., Quay, S., & White, K. (1991). Religion and guilt in OCD patients. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 5(4), 359–367. https://doi.org/10.1016/0887-6185(91)90035-R.
Swedo, S., Rapoport, J., Leonard, H., Lenane, M., & Cheslow, D. (1989). Obsessive-
compulsive disorder in children and adolescents. Clinical phenomenology of 70
consecutive cases. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 335–341.
THE WHOQOL GROUP (1998). Development of the world health organization WHOQOL-
BREF quality of life assessment. Psychological Medicine, 28(3), 551–558.
Van Ameringen, M., Patterson, B., & Simpson, W. (2014). DSM-5 obsessive-compulsive
and related disorders: Clinical implications of new criteria. Depression and Anxiety,
31(6), 487–493. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22259.
Veale, D., & Matsunaga, H. (2014). Body dysmorphic disorder and olfactory reference
disorder: Proposals for ICD-11. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 36(1), 14–20. https://
doi.org/10.1590/1516-4446-2013-1238.
Zantvoord, J. B., Vulink, N., & Denys, D. (2016). Cognitive behavioral therapy for ol-
factory reference syndrome: A case report. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 77(9),
e1144. https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.15cr10451.
A.N. AlHadi, A.H. Almaghrebi
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 19 (2018) 23–28
28
