 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
1
The global response and unmet actions for HIV and sex 
workers
Kate Shannon, Anna-Louise Crago, Stefan D Baral, Linda-Gail Bekker, Deanna Kerrigan, Michele R Decker, Tonia Poteat, Andrea L Wirtz, Brian Weir, 
Marie-Claude Boily, Jenny Butler, Steffanie A Strathdee, Chris Beyrer
Female, male, and transgender sex workers continue to have disproportionately high burdens of HIV infection in 
low-income, middle-income, and high-income countries in 2018. 4 years since our Lancet Series on HIV and sex 
work, our updated analysis of the global HIV burden among female sex workers shows that HIV prevalence is 
unacceptably high at 10·4% (95% CI 9·5–11·5) and is largely unchanged. Comprehensive epidemiological data on 
HIV and antiretroviral therapy (ART) coverage are scarce, particularly among transgender women. Sustained coverage 
of treatment is markedly uneven and challenged by lack of progress on stigma and criminalisation, and sustained 
human rights violations. Although important progress has been made in biomedical interventions with pre-exposure 
prophylaxis and early ART feasibility and demonstration projects, limited coverage and retention suggest that 
sustained investment in community and structural interventions is required for sex workers to benefit from the 
preventive interventions and treatments that other key populations have. Evidence-based progress on full 
decriminalisation grounded in health and human rights—a key recommendation in our Lancet Series—has stalled, 
with South Africa a notable exception. Additionally, several countries have rolled back rights to sex workers further. 
Removal of legal barriers through the decriminalisation of sex work, alongside political and funding investments to 
support community and structural interventions, is urgently needed to reverse the HIV trajectory and ensure health 
and human rights for all sex workers.
Introduction
In July, 2014, The Lancet published a Series on HIV 
and sex workers, launched at the International AIDS 
Conference in Melbourne, VIC, Australia. The Series of 
reviews of global epidemiology and structural deter­
minants, prevention science, community empower 
ment, 
human rights abuses, and HIV disparities among men 
and transgender women who sell sex highlighted the 
heavy HIV burden and suboptimal coverage of HIV 
prevention and treatment for sex workers across low­
income, middle­income, and high­income countries for 
both concentrated and generalised epidemics. Despite 
substantial advances in the development of global HIV 
prevention and treatment tools, progress with scaling up 
programmes and sustaining coverage is hampered by a 
lack of funding and political will, insufficient data on 
HIV burden and antiretroviral therapy (ART) cover­
age, and ongoing human rights abuses, criminalisa­
tion, stigma, and discrimin 
ation. The final paper1 in the 
Series was a call to action that laid out an ambitious 
agenda for programmatic and policy change, research 
invest 
ment, and sustained community engagement and 
empowerment.
Since the 2014 Lancet Series, the HIV burden among 
sex workers remains high and, according to the few 
countries with available data, ART coverage remains 
limited. Some notable exceptions in the prevention 
science literature exist including the SAPPH­IRe trial2 in 
Zimbabwe that is specifically measuring the feasibility 
and effect of combination prevention services, including 
pre­exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). However, low PrEP 
retention and limited ART coverage suggest that there are 
still key barriers to scaling up these services, especially in 
settings with repressive regimes in which addressing 
community empowerment is challenging, and in which 
human rights abuses and structural inequities among sex 
workers persist. The pace of expansion of community 
empowerment efforts outside of south Asia has been 
slow and remains underfunded.3
In the months after our 2014 Lancet Series, UNAIDS/
WHO launched ambitious 90­90­90 targets to mob 
ilise 
the political and financial response to HIV. Bilateral 
and multilateral funding agencies, including the US 
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), 
The Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
com 
mitment to the UNAIDS 90­90­90 targets, and fast 
tracking the end of AIDS by 2030, have led to ambitious 
target setting that has potential to support the rapid scale­
up of HIV prevention and treatment, and through in­
fectious disease modelling contribute to measurability of 
Published Online 
July 20, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(18)31439-9
Gender and Sexual Health 
Initiative, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada (Prof K Shannon PhD); 
University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada (A-L Crago MA); 
Center for Public Health and 
Human Rights, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA 
(S D Baral MD, D Kerrigan PhD, 
M R Decker ScD, T Poteat PhD, 
A L Wirtz PhD, B Weir PhD, 
Prof C Beyrer PhD); Desmond 
Tutu HIV Research Centre, 
University of Cape Town, 
Cape Town, South Africa 
(Prof L-G Bekker PhD); Imperial 
College, London, UK 
(Prof M-C Boily PhD); UN 
Population Fund, Bangkok, 
Thailand (J Butler PhD); and 
University of California 
San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA 
(Prof S A Strathdee PhD)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Kate Shannon, Gender and 
Sexual Health Initiative, 
University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada 
kate.shannon@ubc.ca
Search strategy and selection criteria
We updated the search done up to 2013 for the Lancet 
Series on sex work and HIV to include reports and 
manuscripts published from Jan 1, 2006, to Sept 6, 2017, 
focusing on biological estimates of HIV prevalence. We 
developed search strategies on the basis of a combination 
of controlled vocabulary including medical subject headings 
(MeSH) and other keyword searches with terms associated 
with sex work, including “sex work”, “sex worker”, 
“prostitute”, “male sex workers”, “banthas”, “fletes”, “hijra”, 
“khotkis”, “khusras”, or “money boys”. MeSH terms used 
included “HIV”, “Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome”, 
“HIV Infections”, “human immunodeficiency virus”, and 
“acquired immunodeficiency syndrome”, and keywords 
used included “HIV”, “AIDS”, “HIV1”, and “HIV2”.
 Review
2 
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9
Achieved?
Comments
For governments
Increased number of countries or regions decriminalising sex work
No
Increasing move to end-demand criminalisation models; 
one notable exception is South Africa
Increased number of countries or regions ending impunity for 
crimes and abuses against sex workers
No
··
Evidence of advanced evidence-based policies and practices in 
partnership with sex worker-led organisations
No
Number of countries adopting SWIT rights-based health and HIV 
programming is limited
Evidence of countries ending discriminatory laws, policies, and 
practices against female, male, and transgender sex workers
Partially (progress 
very slow)
African National Congress moves to decriminalise sex work after 
substantial advocacy
Evidence of increased inclusion of sex workers in HIV epidemiological 
surveillance; results should be made available to the public
No
··
Recognising sex work as work and developing occupational health 
and safety standards, and mechanisms to redress violence and 
other labour and rights violations
No
··
For donors
Evidence of increased funding for HIV response among sex workers
Partially
Funding from the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
and the Global Fund
Raising support for the research agenda for combination HIV 
prevention and care services for sex workers
Yes
Increased demonstration and feasibility studies
Investigation of novel and enhanced combination prevention
Partially
··
Support of sex work-led organisations at global, regional, and 
country levels
Partially  
(progress slow)
In November, 2015, the US Agency for International Development 
and UNAIDS gave a 4-day workshop on SWIT in west Francophone 
Africa to national representatives who work with sex workers
Funding of empowerment models to community-led organisations
Partially
··
Collection of reliable data for HIV and sex work, including ART and 
condom coverage, comprehensive sexual and reproductive health 
services, migration, trafficking in persons, gender-based violence, 
and human rights violations towards sex workers
Partially
Some progress on violence and other structural measures in settings 
with a heavy HIV burden; lack of adequate denominators limit HIV 
burden and ART coverage estimates; no integration of violence or 
rights-based measures in global funding indicators (eg, UNAIDS fast 
track 90-90-90)
For research
Increased number of HIV seroprevalence and testing surveys
Yes
HIV burden data now available for 70% of countries for female 
sex workers; HIV data still scarce for male and transgender 
women sex workers
Increased HIV incidence data in sex workers
No
··
Evidence of increased research into HIV prevention and treatment 
for male sex workers and transgender sex workers
Partially (progress 
very slow)
Few PrEP studies include transgender sex workers
Increased HIV data for transgender women sex workers (in 2014, 
HIV data for transgender women sex workers were only available 
from 15 countries)
Partially  
(progress slow)
In 2017, HIV data for transgender women sex workers were 
available in 18 countries
Phase 1 and 2 trials (eg, for oral and injectable PrEP, and vaginal and 
rectal microbicides) should include sex workers of all genders in 
sufficient numbers for stratified results
Partially
··
Test feasibility and acceptability of prevention packages and trials of 
efficacy
Yes
Widespread roll-out of feasibility and acceptability studies of PrEP 
with sex workers
Increased studies on the continuum of HIV care for sex workers
Partially (progress 
very slow)
··
Increased implementation science, community empowerment, and 
stigma reduction studies for sex workers
Partially  
(progress slow)
Most community empowerment interventions are still from 
south Asia (eg, the Avahan project), with only three new studies 
from outside the region
Increased studies of structural measures (risks or protective) of HIV
Partially  
(progress slow)
Increased studies of structural measures of HIV in Africa, largely 
cross-sectional
Increased integration of violence, discrimination, and other human 
rights measures into sex work and HIV studies
No
Violence, discrimination, and human rights measures still not 
included in most biomedical and implementation science studies
New studies on effect of decriminalisation on health outcomes, 
police violence prevention, and community empowerment 
interventions
Partially
Two ecological studies9,10 of decriminalisation and legalisation on 
violence, HIV, and sexually transmitted infection outcomes; no new 
modelling studies
SWIT=sex worker implementation tool. ART=antiretroviral therapy. PrEP=pre-exposure prophylaxis.
Table 1: Progress on calls to action for research on HIV and sex work
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
3
See Online for appendix
economic and social rights.4 However, a lack of political 
and financial investment for addressing structural barriers 
(eg, contextual factors external to the individual) remains 
a major obstacle to measuring and achieving these goals 
for sex workers. Without accurate denominators, and with 
the barriers of stigma and criminalisation in including 
sex workers in HIV surveillance,5,6 bringing scientific 
advancements to scale remains largely out of reach for 
sex workers.
The Lancet Series set out key markers for potential 
progress in human rights and HIV response, suggesting 
that effects on violence, safety of work environments, and 
sexual risks after the decriminalisation of sex work had the 
potential to avert 33–46% of HIV infections in sex work 
over the next decade.7 The Series coincided with the release 
of the WHO consolidated guidelines on prevention, 
treat 
ment, and care for key populations, which set out 
recom 
men 
dations on creating enabling environments, 
com 
munity empowerment, and decriminalisation. Some 
policy progress has been made with Amnesty International, 
an international human rights body, taking a formal policy 
position in support of full decriminal 
isation of sex work 
after careful review of evidence and extensive consult­
ation.8 However, progress in the protection of the human 
rights of sex workers in far too many settings has been 
hindered by the introduction of end­demand criminal­
isation laws (the so­called Nordic model), despite scientific 
and evaluation data showing the harmful effects of 
criminalisation models.
Programmatic and scientific advances
The 2014 call­to­action paper1 made several recommen­
dations for programmatic and scientific advances. Despite 
some progress in the reporting of HIV burden, social 
and structural research, and combination pre 
vention 
advance 
ments, many actions have not been achieved 
(table 1).
Global HIV burden among sex workers
Encouragingly, the updated review presented here found 
increases in data availability for HIV prevalence among 
female, transgender, and male sex workers, although 
incidence data remain scarce (appendix pp 3–32). Among 
female sex workers specifically, the original review1 
identified HIV burden data from 79 countries and 
437 025 women, with the updated review identifying 
451 HIV burden datapoints covering 101 countries and 
2 103 380 women (table 2). New data were identified in 
North America, Latin America and the Caribbean, Europe, 
and regions in the east and south of Africa. Several trends 
were identified, including improved sampling strategies 
with respondent­driven sampling representing 19% and 
time­location sampling representing 33% of studies 
identified. Our updated global meta­analysis estimated 
HIV prevalence among all female sex workers at 
10·4% (95% CI 9·5–11·5), which is similar to the 2014 
estimate of 11·8%.1 However, large variability was seen in 
the prevalence of HIV among female sex workers across 
regions (figure 1), and increased HIV burden was observed 
compared with adult women in all regions (figure 2), with 
HIV acquisition risks affected by HIV prevalence in male 
clients and high incidence among female sex workers. 
Mathematical models of HIV transmission have suggested 
that even in more generalised HIV epidemics across sub­
Saharan Africa, 5–20% of new HIV infections in several 
sub­Saharan African countries occur in female sex work­
ers.12 These data show that HIV prevalence will continue to 
rise among female sex workers in generalised epi 
demics 
while epidemics in general populations contract.
In countries in North America, Europe, and Asia, the 
burden of HIV infection among female sex workers is 
affected by co­occurring risks related to injecting drug 
use. Women engaged in substance use are not only at 
increased risk for HIV acquisition directly via use of 
contaminated equipment, but also indirectly via other 
environmental and occupational exposures. Substance 
use is also associated with increased exposure to violence 
perpetrated by clients, police, and strangers; increased 
client loads; polysubstance use; and work in unsafe 
locations, which could further facilitate HIV acquisition 
through reduced condom use in these situations.13,14 How­
ever, a study13 in Russia reported that women who ended 
drug use more than 6 months before the study had low 
exposure to such situations, similar to sex workers who 
never injected drugs.
The call to action recommended separating reporting of 
HIV burden among transgender women and male sex 
workers. Research on the health of transgender people, 
mostly focused on HIV, has increased substantially in 
the past few years15–18—although available data remain 
relatively scarce. 18 countries now report HIV data on 
transgender women who are sex workers, only slightly 
higher than the 15 countries in 2014. Although most 
HIV research involving transgender women has been done 
in the USA, a review19 of HIV epidemiology in transgender 
Number of 
datapoints
Numbers of 
countries 
with data
Sample size 
by region
Estimated regional 
HIV prevalence, % 
(95% CI)
I²* 
Asia and Pacific
183
23
1 825 054
5·7 (4·9–6·6)
99·8%
Eastern Europe and central Asia
20
10
17 266
8·0 (4·9–11·8)
98·4%
Middle East and north Africa
19
9
11 615
1·8 (1·1–2·7)
88·2%
Eastern and southern Africa
81
15
66 256
33·3 (29·2–37·6)
99·2%
West and central Africa
46
14
56 640
20·1 (16·7–23·8)
99·1%
Latin America and Caribbean
56
17
61 196
4·2 (3·4–5·0)
95·1%
Western and central Europe 
and North America
45
13
63 986
7·4 (4·9–10·4)
99·2%
Overall
451†
101
2 103 380†
10·4 (9·5–11·5)
99·8%
*Heterogeneity was assessed with the I2 statistic that describes the percentage of variation between studies that is due 
to heterogeneity rather than chance. †Includes additional papers that report data from three countries and regions 
(Benin, Uganda, and India). 
Table 2: Global burden of HIV among female sex workers from 101 countries, separated by region, 
between 2006 and 2017 (n=2 103 380)
 Review
4 
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9
populations identified 14 studies from Latin America (with 
the majority from Peru and Brazil); ten studies from Asia, 
including India, Pakistan, and Thailand; and nine from 
Europe, including Spain and Portugal. Once again, no data 
on transgender women were available from eastern Europe 
or central Asia. Small sample sizes and conflation of 
transgender women and men who have sex with men 
(MSM) continue to challenge access to transgender­
specific HIV data, particularly in Africa.20
By contrast, 22 articles with HIV prevalence data in male 
sex workers have been published since the pub 
lication of 
the Lancet call to action, including 12 from Asia, three from 
Europe, two from the USA, two from Peru, two from 
Kenya, and one from Australia (appendix pp 3–32). 
Studies with male sex workers are affected by heterogeneity 
of the underlying population being studied, ranging from 
MSM who have never sold sex to men who sell sex as a 
primary profession. HIV and sexually transmitted in­
fection (STI) prevalence outcomes vary accordingly, with 
MSM who sell sex often having a higher burden of HIV 
than other MSM, and male sex workers who professionally 
sell sex often having lower or equivalent burdens of HIV 
than MSM who are not sex workers. Moreover, male sex 
workers tend to report higher engagement with HIV 
prevention services including condom use than do MSM 
who are not sex workers.
Our Series called for increased attention and responses 
to HIV burden in young people who sell sex. Emergent 
data suggest that transactional sex among adolescent girls 
and young women (AGYW) is a determinant of HIV 
acquisition and transmission.21 The PEPFAR­funded 
Determined Resilient Empowered AIDS­free Mentored 
and Safe initiative launched in 2014 to respond to the 
increased needs of AGYW in some of the most generalised 
HIV epidemics across sub­Saharan Africa, including 
young people who sell sex.22 Investment in programmes 
and services for young people of all genders who sell or 
trade sex is needed given the sub 
stantial proportion of 
young people engaged in transactional sex. Similar to adult 
sex workers, biological, behavioural, and structural factors 
increase HIV risks in young people who sell sex. Crucially, 
early entry into selling sex for AGYW aged 13–17 years has 
been associated with increased exposure to violence, 
incarceration, and HIV­related and STI­related risks, re­
flecting a confluence of biological factors that facilitate STI 
and HIV acquisition, and age­based and gender­based 
power disparities that compromise negotiation power for 
AGYW.21,23,24 Although sex work is officially designated for 
people of the age of majority, policy contradictions for 
individuals under this age drive them further under­
ground, and render them further criminalised and effect­
ively excluded from services. Responding to evidence of 
exacerbated risk in this population requires harm re­
duction and rights­based services for young people selling 
sex rather than punitive restrictions.
Social and structural research
The call­to­action paper made several recommendations 
for increased integration of social and structural measures 
in HIV and sex work research. Although some promis­
ing developments have occurred, including increased 
reporting of structural risks and violence measures in 
epidemiological research and some emergent innovation 
in modelling, the scope and pace of progress has been 
slow. Our 2014 Lancet paper7 reported that less than half 
of global epidemiological studies with HIV and HIV­
related outcomes among sex workers considered one or 
more macrostructural, community, or work­environment 
upstream factors, despite the importance of structural 
determinants of HIV.7 Few studies considered one or 
more structural determinants in the heaviest or emerging 
HIV epidemic settings of sub­Saharan Africa, Russia, or 
Figure 1: Global burden of HIV among female sex workers between 2006 and 2017 expressed as HIV prevalence by region
0–1·0
1·1–5·0
5·1–10·0
10·1–20·0
20·1–50·0
>50·0
No data meeting criteria
Latin America and Caribbean
4·2% (95% Cl 3·4–5·0)
West and central
Africa
20·1% (95% Cl 16·7–23·8)
Western and central Europe
and North America
7·4% (95% Cl 4·9–10·4)
Middle East and 
north Africa
1·8% (95% Cl 1·1–2·7)
Eastern and southern Africa
33·3% (95% Cl 29·2–37·6)
Asia and Pacific
5·7% (95% Cl 4·9–6·6)
Eastern Europe and central Asia
8·0% (95% Cl 4·9–11·8)
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
5
eastern Europe. Since 2014, several key studies have 
documented the effects of macrostructural factors on 
HIV outcomes and access to care among sex workers, 
including stigma,25,26 migration,27,28 and effects of laws and 
policies such as policing27 and violence,29–32 with a small 
number of studies also from Russia and eastern Europe.13 
Many of the published studies were done in western 
Africa, central Africa, and South Africa,21–28 reinforcing 
the importance of these associations by use of a com­
bination of quantitative and qualitative methods. Taken 
together, this work highlights the need for effective 
responses to address HIV­related risks secondary to high­
order determinants (such as violence and stigma) of HIV 
acquisition and transmission. Research progress has also 
been slow on detailed measures of types and exposures 
of violence, contextual factors shaping violence, and 
other structural exposures including work environments, 
policing, and migration in relation to HIV.
Our call to action set out key targets for scaled up 
methods and modelling. We updated our search from 
2014 onwards to identify new mathematical modelling 
studies of the influence of structural factors not limited to 
criminalisation and violence on any STI (including HIV) 
first, among female sex workers only and second, among 
sex workers. We identified 2691 studies among female sex 
workers of which 34 were mathematical modelling 
studies and only two assessed the population­level effects 
of structural interventions. These two studies33,34 sug­
gested that community empowerment and com 
munity 
mobilisation interventions could reduce new infections 
by 17–40% and be cost­effective. Research has been slow 
on the development of longitudinal and dynamic models 
crucial to further disentangle pathways to HIV on which 
to intervene, both in high and emerging epidemics, and 
low and medium prevalence settings.35 No new math­
ematical modelling studies focused on violence, stigma, 
decriminalisation, or any other structural factors affecting 
HIV in sex work have been published.
Encouragingly, two large­scale ecological studies9,10 pro­
vide important data that support our Lancet 2014 modelling 
showing that the removal of criminal laws targeting sex 
work drastically reduces HIV risks through reduced 
violence and police harassment, and access to safe indoor 
work spaces. Reeves and colleagues’ ecological analysis9 of 
27 European countries found that countries in which 
aspects of sex work are fully or partly legalised have a lower 
burden of HIV among female sex workers than countries 
that criminalise it (after adjusting for prevalence of sex 
workers who inject drugs, gross domestic product, HIV 
prevalence, and ART coverage among adults of 
reproductive age). In investigating the effect of enforce­
ment by use of the World Bank Rule of Law (a measure of 
confidence in effective and fair judiciary and policing) on 
HIV prevalence, the authors suggest that fair and effective 
judiciary could be a mediating pathway. Indeed, legalisation 
(including explicit regulation of where and how the 
industry can operate), unlike decriminalisation (in which 
the industry follows regulations of other businesses), can 
remove barriers and can also create a two­tier system that 
pushes more vulnerable sex workers to the margins.36 In 
Rhode Island, USA, a legal loophole decriminalised indoor 
sex work for 6 years, reducing sexual violence by 30% and 
STI incidence by 40%, not just among sex workers, but in 
the general female population.10
Antiretroviral therapy and combination prevention
Despite launch of global markers by WHO/UNAIDS in 
2014 to fast track the HIV response, data on HIV care 
continuum have been slow to emerge and specific data on 
early ART initiation and test and treat models among sex 
workers remain incomplete. Challenges in accurately 
estimating size of sex work populations in the absence 
of accurate denominators, and structural barriers to 
engagement in ART programmes and research persist. 
Qualitative data in sub­Saharan Africa suggest that 
profound structural barriers of stigma and discrimination 
impede progress in the HIV care continuum.37 Import­
antly, studies38,39 confirm that successful HIV treatment 
trajectories are impeded by violence and displacement 
due to policing.
The SAPPH­IRe trial2 in Zimbabwe found high pre­
valence (78%) of viral load suppression among sex workers 
taking ART (68% of women who were aware of their HIV­
positive status), but only 50% of all female sex workers 
living with HIV had suppressed viral load. No significant 
difference in viral load suppression was reported between 
the SAPPH­IRe arm and the stand 
ard sister clinic arm, 
but with adequate support in the SAPPH­IRe arm, female 
sex workers achieved 90­90­90 targets (90% were recieving 
ART and 90% had viral load suppression). Similarly, in 
Cambodia, initiation of ART among female sex workers 
was high (83% of sex workers living with HIV); however, 
only 39% of sex workers were still on ART at 12 months 
and only 23% had viral load suppression.40 In Uganda, sex 
workers were most likely to have delayed initiation relative 
to the general population during the roll­out of early ART 
Figure 2: Regional HIV prevalence estimates among female sex workers and all adult women11
Error bars show 95% CIs.
Asia and
Pacific
Eastern Europe
central Asia
Middle East
and north
Africa
Eastern and
southern
Africa
West and
central Africa
Latin America
and Caribbean
Western and
central 
Europe and 
North America
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
HIV prevalence (%)
Female sex workers
All adult women (UNAIDS 2016 estimates)
 Review
6 
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9
initiation.41 Higher ART retention was observed in 
South Africa, with only 30% loss to follow­up at 12 months, 
similar to the current standard of care.42
Since 2014, combination HIV prevention among sex 
workers has been catalysed by global plans to roll out 
PrEP and HIV self­testing, while exploring the accept­
ability of vaginal and rectal microbicides. Our Series 
called for tailored combination HIV prevention, es­
pecially the integration of PrEP in different global 
settings.43 The call to action noted the paucity of evidence 
of these interventions in sex workers due to the exclusion 
of involvement of sex workers in clinical trials. Since 
then, feasibility and acceptability studies among sex 
workers have indicated acceptability within groups, while 
also identifying implementation challenges.42,44–46
Interest in oral PrEP and microbicide rings among 
female sex workers and transgender women sex workers 
was high across diverse global settings, and acceptability 
of HIV self­testing was also high in two large­scale 
randomised controlled trials in Uganda47 and Zambia.48 
Additionally, a small survey49 (n=12) among young men 
and transgender women sex workers in Puerto Rico 
found rectal microbicide gels to be acceptable; a similar 
result was reported in a study45 involving female sex 
workers done in the USA. However, challenges around 
the fear of breaching confidentially or confronting violent 
situations, and side­effects, were associated with reduced 
HIV self­testing and PrEP acceptability.49
In 2016 and 2017, the South African and Kenyan 
Governments proposed National Sex Worker HIV Plans 
that included access to PrEP and early ART for female sex 
workers. In South Africa, free PrEP uptake among sex 
workers was initially slow. Uptake was higher among 
younger females (aged 21–30 years) than older females 
(aged >30 years).2 The Kenyan PrEP roll­out included sex 
workers, discordant couples, and young women and girls, 
and is beginning to gather momentum in a few high­
burden districts. The Treatment And Prevention for 
female Sex workers (TAPS) demonstration project42 in 
South Africa reported that PrEP can be implemented 
within female sex workers’ routine services in urban 
settings with a high prevalence of HIV. However, although 
initiation on PrEP was high, and despite high adherence 
(70–85%), only 22% of participants were retained over 
12 months.42 Kenya’s Bridge to Scale project50 enrolled 
1143 female sex workers on PrEP by February, 2017, but 
also reported retention as their biggest challenge. 
Zimbabwe’s SAPPH­IRe trial2 similarly reported a low 
average PrEP retention period of only 4 months. 
Investment in community mobilisation and follow­up 
promotion of regular HIV testing at clinics led to a 
doubling of HIV testing and diagnosis, suggesting the 
need for additional adherence support. The TAPS study 
reported that retention of sex workers who are HIV­
positive on ART was high,42 suggesting that adherence 
models and lessons from ART need to be applied to 
people who use PrEP, or that new adherence mech­
anisms need to be developed for sex workers who are 
HIV negative.
Although PrEP has emerged as a potentially powerful 
tool for reducing HIV incidence among key popula­
tions, data on uptake and efficacy among transgender 
women, including those who sell sex, remain limited. The 
only published study51 of PrEP efficacy among transgender 
women (n=339) reported a lack of efficacy for tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate­based oral PrEP among transgender 
women (hazard ratio 1·1, 95% CI 0·5–2·7). However, 
adherence was only 18% and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 
was detected in none of the transgender women at the 
seroconversion visit, suggesting that barriers to adherence 
could have been the main cause of low efficacy. A small 
study49 suggests that barriers to uptake include concerns 
about side­effects, lack of transgender­inclusive PrEP 
promotion, medical mis 
trust, and prioritisation of 
hormone use. Transgender women have noted that 
PrEP could be empowering in sex work situations in 
which they have reduced power to negotiate safe sex. 
Two studies52,53 have documented high willingness to take 
PrEP among transgender women sex workers—84% in 
Argentina and 61% in Shenyang, China.
Community empowerment
Our 2014 call to action included recommendations 
for scale­up and increased funding in community 
empower 
ment and sex worker­led programming in the 
HIV response. Despite recognition in the UNAIDS 2015 
Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic of the global 
evidence for rights­based health programming with sex 
workers based on principles of community empower­
ment, the adoption of the Sex Worker Implementation 
Tool54 (developed by WHO, UNAIDS, UN Development 
Programme, UN Population Fund, and Global Network 
of Sex Work Projects in 2012) by governments and non­
governmental organisations has been slow.
In 2014, a systematic review and meta­analysis55 docu­
mented the effectiveness of community empower 
ment 
responses to HIV among female sex workers in low­
income and middle­income countries, including a more 
than three­times increase in the odds of consistent 
condom use with clients and a 32% reduction in the odds 
of HIV infection. Our 2014 call to action documented 
several key gaps in the literature, including lack of 
evidence on the effect of community empowerment 
approaches on HIV care and treatment outcomes, 
scarcity of data on the role of community empowerment 
along the causal pathway between programme exposure 
and behavioural and biological HIV outcomes, and 
lack of rigorous evaluations of community empower­
ment approaches among female sex workers in sub­
Saharan Africa. Since 2014, important advances have 
occurred in each of these three areas. Yet, the level and 
pace of progress have been limited in scope and scale.
We updated our 2014 search on community empower­
ment and HIV­related outcomes among female sex 
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
7
workers for the period 2013–17 and found an additional ten 
articles that met our original search criteria.55 Similar to 
our 2014 review, most of these studies (seven [70%] of ten) 
were done in south Asia as part of the Avahan project and 
most focused on behaviour outcomes (eg, condom use 
or STI incidence),56,57 with one on HIV prevalence.58 In 
terms of examining the effectiveness of community 
empower 
ment on HIV care outcomes, a longitudinal eval­
uation of the Abriendo Puertas (Opening Doors) model in 
the Dominican Republic found that a community­driven, 
multilevel intervention among female sex workers living 
with HIV was associated with improved engagement and 
adherence to ART.59
In Swaziland, Fonner and colleagues60 documented the 
role of social cohesion and participation on HIV outcomes 
among female sex workers in terms of their positive 
influence on condom use with clients and HIV testing, 
showing that intervening on these factors could play a key 
part in the HIV response among sex workers in Africa. 
However, the need for rigorous assessments of community 
empowerment­based responses to HIV among female sex 
workers in sub­Saharan Africa continues to be great given 
the regional burden of HIV.
Our previous review also highlighted challenges in 
the implementation and sustainability of community 
empower 
ment­based HIV prevention initiatives, includ­
ing both internal (eg, lack of trust and competition between 
workers) and external (eg, stigma and legal constraints) 
challenges in the sex worker com 
munity. Addressing these 
challenges requires sustainable funding invested not only 
Panel 1: Amnesty International policy on decriminalisation of sex work
Resolution on state obligations to respect, protect, and fulfil 
the human rights of sex workers
In August, 2015, the Amnesty International Board voted to 
formally adopt a policy8 for full decriminalisation of adult sex 
work, including laws that prohibit associated activities such as 
bans on buying, solicitation, and general organisation of sex 
work. The policy is consistent with international health policy 
bodies including WHO, UNAIDS, UNDP, UN Population Fund, 
Human Rights Watch, and the Global Commission on HIV. The 
policy has the following features and details:
• 
A starting point for preventing and redressing human rights 
violations against sex workers, and the need for states to 
not only review and repeal laws that make sex workers 
vulnerable to human rights violations, but also refrain from 
enacting such laws.
• 
Amnesty International’s overarching commitment to 
advancing gender equality and women’s rights.
• 
The obligation of states to protect every individual in their 
jurisdiction from discriminatory policies, laws, and practices, 
given that the status and experience of being discriminated 
against are often key factors in leading people to engage in 
sex work, as well as in increasing vulnerability to human 
rights violations while engaged in sex work, and in limiting 
options for voluntarily ceasing involvement in sex work.
• 
The harm reduction principle.
• 
States have an obligation to prevent and combat trafficking 
for the purposes of sexual exploitation and to protect the 
human rights of victims of trafficking.
• 
States have an obligation to ensure that sex workers are 
protected from exploitation and can use criminal law to 
address acts of exploitation.
• 
Any act related to the sexual exploitation of a child must be 
criminalised. Recognising that a child involved in a 
commercial sex act is a victim of sexual exploitation, 
entitled to support, reparations, and remedies, in line with 
international human rights law, and that states must take 
all appropriate measures to prevent sexual exploitation and 
abuse of children.
• 
Evidence indicates that people engage in sex work as a 
result of marginalisation and limited choices. Therefore, 
Amnesty International will urge states to take appropriate 
measures to realise the economic, social, and cultural rights 
of all people so that no person enters sex work against their 
will or is compelled to rely on it as their only means of 
survival, and to ensure that people can stop sex work if 
they choose.
• 
Ensuring that the policy maximises protection of the full 
range of human rights—in addition to gender equality, 
women’s rights, and non-discrimination—related to sex 
work, including personal security, the rights of children, 
access to justice, the right to health, the rights of indigenous 
peoples, and the right to a livelihood.
• 
Recognising and respecting the agency of sex workers to 
articulate their own experiences and define the most 
appropriate solutions to ensure their own welfare and 
safety, and complying with broad, relevant international 
human rights principles regarding participation in decision 
making, such as the principle of free and informed 
consent obtained before consultation with respect to 
indigenous peoples.
• 
The evidence from Amnesty International’s and external 
research on the lived experiences of sex workers and on the 
effects on human rights of various criminal law and 
regulatory approaches to sex work.
• 
The policy will be fully consistent with Amnesty 
International’s positions with respect to consent to sexual 
activity, including in contexts that involve abuse of power or 
positions of authority.
• 
Amnesty International does not take a position on whether 
sex work should be formally recognised as work for the 
purposes of regulation. States can impose legitimate 
restrictions on the sale of sexual services if such restrictions 
comply with international human rights law; restrictions 
should be for a legitimate purpose, provided by law, 
necessary for, and proportionate to, the legitimate aim 
sought to be achieved, and not discriminatory.
 Review
8 
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9
in HIV­related aspects of community empowerment, but 
also the organisational capacity of sex worker rights groups 
to mobilise their collective resources. The latter should 
generate solidarity within the community, as well as 
stimulate and sustain strategic partnerships with allies 
that can assist in enacting structural change.
Policy advancements and challenges
Perhaps the most important policy advance since our 2014 
Lancet Series is Amnesty International’s high­profile 
decision to call for full decriminalisation of sex work on 
the basis of human rights and health evidence (panel 1).8 
Although Amnesty International does not set policy, it has 
tremendous influence in shaping policy frameworks 
globally and the importance of this recommendation 
cannot be overstated. In 2016, an expert group convened 
by UN Women published recommendations regarding 
sex work, including the suggested decriminalisation of sex 
work on human rights grounds. UN Women is developing 
a policy on sex work and sex worker groups are challenging 
them to meaningfully involve sex workers in the process.61
Our call to action made several recommendations for 
policy change, including increasing the number of 
countries and regions that decriminalise sex work and 
ending impunity for crimes and abuses against sex 
workers. Since our 2014 Lancet paper showing the 
potential to avert HIV infections through decriminal­
isation and downstream effects on violence, sexual risk 
behaviour, and the safety of work environments,7 
meaningful policy change has yet to be achieved in most 
settings and the harms of criminalisation continue to be 
articulated in reports to the Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In 
criminalised environments, sex workers report a profound 
lack of police protection, exacerbated by experiences of 
violence.30 One notable exception is South Africa, in which 
on Dec 20, 2017, the African National Congress, after huge 
efforts by the sex worker rights movement, resolved to 
decriminalise sex work and reject proposals from its 
delegates to move to an end­demand criminalisation 
model of criminalising clients but not sex workers.
Since 2014, Canada, Ireland, and France have imple­
mented versions of criminalisation under an end­demand 
model. Large­scale anticlient raids have been reported 
alongside raids on sex workers in Tanzania. In 2016, a bill 
was introduced in Uganda to criminalise clients of sex 
workers.62 Although data on end­demand criminalisation 
approaches are only just becoming available, data suggest 
similar outcomes to full criminal 
isation models. In 
Vancouver, BC, Canada, local enforcement guidelines in 
2013 to cease targeting sex workers while continuing to 
target clients and third parties showed similar amounts 
of violence, police harassment, and rushed negotiations, 
including reduced ability to negotiate safe sex, compared 
with 2012 when sex workers remained targets for arrest.63 
Unfortunately, despite these data being shared with 
Canada’s federal Government, and a landmark human 
rights ruling by the highest court that struck down 
previous criminal laws, new end­demand laws were 
rolled out in late 2014. Analysis of arrests on brothel­
keeping offences in Ireland found that of 141 people 
charged, “91% of the people convicted were sex workers, 
not owners or managers of brothels who have others 
working for them”.64
The conflation of trafficking with sex work persistently 
shapes sex work policy, often with important human 
rights implications for sex workers. Research continues to 
document the effect of criminalisation on severe violence 
and other human rights abuses against sex workers glo­
bally. The scholarly literature increasingly offers direction 
on how to craft policy, including decrim 
inalisation, that 
upholds the necessary distinction and human rights of sex 
workers and those trafficked.65 However, Germany’s 2017 
law introduced new regula 
tions inclusive of mandatory 
medical examinations and compulsory registration at the 
local level, adding add 
itional layers of regulation over the 
legalisation policy enacted in 2002.
Research gaps and agenda
Substantial gaps in knowledge need to be addressed if we 
are to truly realise health and human rights for sex 
workers and optimise the benefits of new and emerging 
HIV prevention and treatment tools (panel 2). Structural 
determinants and socioecological models66,67 can guide 
complex epidemiological analyses of HIV epidemic 
structures and intervention science in sex work, but 
progress in research has been slow, and structural and 
contextual factors that confound accurate HIV reporting 
remain under­reported for many of the same reasons: 
lack of funding and political will, criminalisation and 
stigma, and the invisibility of sex work and HIV. 
Collecting reliable, ethical, and community­engaged data 
to measure epidemic structures remains a major 
challenge for HIV programming and policy making 
for sex work. Criminalisation, stigma, violence, and 
mig 
ration are major structural barriers to counting sex 
workers for surveillance, engagement in HIV services, 
and accurate reporting. Accurate surveillance estimates 
of female, male, and transgender sex workers are crucial 
for assessment of the effects of programmes and 
structural interventions. In our updated meta­analysis, 
only 11% of HIV prevalence data were from the integrated 
biological and behavioural surveillance survey or country­
level surveillance system data. Because UNAIDS global 
AIDS monitoring tracks 90­90­90 targets and service 
coverage,68 the lack of denominators and limited in­
clusion of sex workers in country­level surveillance 
remain major barriers to fast­tracking the end of AIDS.
Crucial implementation science questions regard 
ing the 
progress and effect of community­led initiatives as they 
incorporate novel biomedical approaches, includ 
ing ART­
based prevention strategies such as PrEP and treatment as 
prevention (TasP), need immediate attention given their 
ongoing expansion. Important scient 
ific advancements in 
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
9
biomedical interventions have been made with a cascade 
of feasibility and accept 
ability studies for PrEP and TasP 
among sex workers; however, data suggest very low 
retention of PrEP and TasP among sex workers. From a 
broad health and human rights perspective, key operational 
research questions also include how to better integrate 
HIV with other relevant health services (eg, reproductive 
health and substance use) and how to increase access to 
social and economic services to improve overall health and 
wellbeing. Implementation science is urgently needed to 
reduce and monitor changes in societal stigma regarding 
sex work at the community level and to ensure that sex 
workers are appropriately screened and referred to tailored 
violence prevention and care services. Immediate and 
sustained political and funding investment in community 
empowerment and rights­based intervention approaches 
to HIV in sex work are necessary.
In these implementation science efforts, sex worker 
organisations can play a key part by documenting their 
experiences and efforts to respond to HIV and pro­
tect the human rights of sex workers, and ensure 
that the community is providing leadership (panel 3). 
Community­driven monitoring tools such as the Com­
munity Ownership and Preparedness Index70 are import­
ant examples of how sex worker organisations can 
en 
gage in implementation science to document changes 
in community­led and sustained efforts. Several south­
south cooperation initiatives (including partnerships 
between low­income and middle­income countries) are 
also ongoing to document and share community­led, 
pro 
grammatic lessons learned between low­income or 
middle­income countries.71
Conclusions
The HIV pandemic among sex workers remains under­
addressed and under­resourced, with glaring gaps in 
comprehensive measures of HIV prevalence, incidence, 
and ART coverage; slow and stalled retention of PrEP; and 
repressive policy climates and ubiquitous human rights 
violations against sex workers in far too many settings. 
Achieving 90­90­90 targets and shifting the HIV landscape 
cannot be achieved without addressing the human rights 
of sex workers. Some progress has been made on re­
cording structural measures of violence, stigma, and 
discrimination, particularly in settings with a heavy HIV 
burden such as sub­Saharan Africa in which these 
measures were absent 4 years ago. However, the pace of 
progress remains too slow and more complex measures 
and methods to model structural factors are needed to 
improve HIV prevalence in sex workers.
Panel 2: Research gaps and priorities
Epidemiology of HIV
• 
Develop methodological innovations to better estimate 
size of sex work populations; contextual and structural 
features of HIV and antiretrovial therapy coverage are 
crucial to estimating priorities, reach, and targets for 
programmes and policies.
• 
Address structural barriers to including female, male, and 
transgender sex workers in HIV surveillance, including 
criminalisation, stigma, and lack of political will and donor 
investment.
• 
Increase the number of countries measuring and reporting 
transgender HIV data, including stigma and discrimination.
Social and structural
• 
Expand research of social and structural measures, 
including more complex multilevel data such as 
longitudinal data, in dialogue with qualitative research, 
particularly in regions with a heavy HIV burden such as 
sub-Saharan Africa and emerging HIV endemic settings of 
Russia and eastern Europe in which repressive regimes and 
discrimination continue to slow the roll-out of biomedical 
interventions.
• 
Carefully monitor regional and local enforcement and 
arrest data alongside violence and sex worker-level 
evidence to disentangle how various policies and 
enforcement strategies shape violence, stigma, and access 
to health services and the HIV care continuum.
• 
Anchor mathematical models in solid empirical evidence 
in collaboration with social scientists and the sex work 
community to disentangle the influence of structural 
interventions and policing approaches on violence, HIV and 
sexually transmitted infection burden, and access and 
retention in biomedical interventions.
Biomedical and implementation science
• 
Integrate and consider human rights and structural risk 
measures in biomedical interventions from the outset to 
ensure uptake of scientific advancements of pre-exposure 
prophylaxis, early initiation of antiretroviral therapy, and 
self-HIV testing.
• 
Include and integrate structural and community 
empowerment within and alongside biomedical 
interventions.
• 
Increase community-led and sex worker-tailored 
implementation science and biomedical interventions.
• 
Increase resource investment in structural and community 
empowerment implementation research (beyond the 
Avahan project), particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.
Policy evaluation and human rights monitoring
• 
Integrate evidence on human rights of health into global 
funding indicators (eg, UNAIDS and the Global Fund).
• 
Considering that many countries are reviewing legislation 
around sex work and that community-based randomised 
trials are unlikely to be possible in most settings, 
researchers should plan rigorous monitoring and 
evaluation of the effect of these changes on sex workers’ 
health, safety, and human rights in advance.
 Review
10 
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9
In most countries and regions, community movement 
and policy advocacy have not translated into real and 
sustained uptake of community empowerment and 
structural interventions within or alongside biomedical 
interventions. With growing advances in biomedical tools, 
sex workers must not be left behind in the HIV response. 
The fact that adequate global ART coverage data for sex 
workers in most settings are lacking is unacceptable. 
Despite relatively strong feasibility and acceptability of 
PrEP, demons 
tration projects report limited retention, 
reinforcing the importance of community engagement 
and tailored sex worker approaches and concurrent 
structural inter 
ventions to optimise the effect of biomedical 
inter 
ventions.
Civil society has continued to highlight the exclusion of 
sex workers and other key populations in implementation 
by major donors, including PEPFAR and the Global 
Fund. PEPFAR has seen a slow increase in country 
operational plans investing in female sex workers from 
US$32 000 000 in 2013 to $38 000 000 in 2017
.72 The actual 
country expenditures appear relatively stable from 2014 
to 2017
. In 2016, the Global Fund undertook a review of 
policies and action plans in relation to key populations 
and gender. Although substantial progress was noted in 
investing in engagement of civil society in roll­out of the 
Global Fund,73 major concerns were expressed in regards 
to securing meaningful engagement of sex workers 
through 
out the granting processes, alongside investment 
and sustainability of engagement.74 As of May, 2018, the 
Global Fund board approved revised eligibility criteria to 
improve flexibility in giving priority to heavy burden 
settings and key populations, as well as revised eligibility 
criteria for high­income countries with no HIV pre­
valence data on key populations.
Political commitment and funding should be put 
behind the WHO/UNAIDS Sex Worker Implementa­
tion Tool54 to ensure commitment to rights­based pro­
gramming and greater investment in civil society groups 
to lead the HIV response. Integration of evidence and 
measures of human rights of health within global funding 
Panel 3: Human rights monitoring by sex workers
Criminalisation and violence against sex worker human 
rights defenders
The criminalisation of sex work continues to provide cover and 
sanction to state-sponsored human rights abuses against sex 
workers and sex worker human rights defenders.
• 
In Zimbabwe, courts have denied sex workers the right to 
peaceful assembly to protest violence against them by citing 
sex workers’ illegality.
• 
44 sex workers were arrested and jailed for 2 weeks in 
Uganda for participating in an emergency meeting to 
respond to the murders of 20 women—most of whom were 
sex workers.
• 
Sex workers attending a vigil for two transgender sex 
workers who were murdered in Guyana faced harassment 
and threats from police. The head of the Guyana Sex Worker 
Coalition reported a police officer cranked his gun at her.
• 
Angelica Miriam Quintanilla, Director of LIQUIDAMBAR—a 
sex worker-led organisation in El Salvador—was shot to 
death in the sex worker area of San Salvador in which 
women face systematic harassment from police and gangs. 
According to a fellow sex worker activist, Karina Bravo of 
Ecuador, “this tireless warrior was foully murdered for 
denouncing the violence that female sex workers face”.
• 
Transgender sex workers face very high amounts of violence 
in Turkey; 43 transgender people were murdered between 
2008 and 2016, including sex workers. According to a 
mapping of violence against transgender sex workers, 
75% had experienced violence and half the perpetrators 
were identified as police.
Sex workers set precedents in courts: ending impunity and 
challenging criminalisation
• 
19 sex workers from the Dedza district of Malawi 
successfully challenged their arrest for “living on the avails 
of prostitution”. The Zomba High Court overturned the 
arrests and deemed them unconstitutional.
• 
According to Aniz Mitha of the Malawian Sex Workers’ 
Alliance, “the wrongful arrest of sex workers is one of the 
main issues in the country”. She continued, “we hope that 
this case sends a clear message that sex workers are 
deserving of rights, and the police should not be arresting 
us when we are not doing anything illegal”.
• 
Three men were found guilty and sentenced for a violent 
attack on Kemalita Ördek, a transgender sex worker and the 
executive director of the Red Umbrella Sexual Health and 
Human Rights Association. Speaking to the Global Network 
of Sex Work Projects, Kemalita said “I believe the 
perpetrators got a just judgment. The court team increased 
the level of sentences for the perpetrators compared to the 
demand of the prosecutor. The prosecutor demanded very 
low sentences. This was a surprise for me.” Legal expert 
Denis Aksoy stated that “because the victim’s identity as a 
sex worker was taken as a basis, this penalty imposed on the 
ground of sexual assault will be seen as a precedent”.
• 
In 2014, Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights successfully 
argued that the solicitation-related arrest and conviction of 
nine women violated rights to personal liberty and equal 
opportunity stipulated within the newly ratified 
constitution. The resulting court order in favour of their 
cases was widely interpreted as effective decriminalisation. 
Epidemiological data showed substantial decreases in the 
proportion of sex workers stopped by police after this 
high-profile case,69 illustrating the effect of policy 
interpretation even within criminalised environments.
• 
Nicaragua is now the third country—after Colombia and 
Guatemala—to have a sex workers’ union recognised by 
the Ministry of Labour.
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
11
indicators (eg, UNAIDS and the Global Fund) will be key 
factors in driving this progress. Global funding 
commitments to the UNAIDS/WHO 90­90­90 targets 
and the plan to fast track the HIV response by 2030 have 
set ambitious targets to scale up HIV prevention and 
treatment; however, key populations of sex workers 
remain invisible. HIV prevention and treatment tools are 
available but, without comprehensive HIV epidemiology, 
a lack of denominators and failure to address structural 
determinants (including decriminalisation of sex work) 
means that progress in achieving health and rights for all 
sex workers will fall short.
Contributors
KS did the original conceptualisation of the manuscript, drafted the 
outline, led the paper writing team, drafted the introduction, social and 
structural research gaps, and conclusion sections, and contributed to the 
global HIV burden and policy sections, table 1, and panels 1–3. 
A­LC contributed to the policy and research gaps sections, table 1, 
panel 2, and panel 3. SDB contributed to the global HIV burden of male 
sex worker and youth and research gaps sections, table 1, and panel 3. 
L­GB contributed to the antiretroviral therapy and combination 
prevention section, table 1, and panel 3. DK contributed to the 
community empowerment and research gaps sections, table 1, and 
panel 3. MRD contributed to the global burden of youth, policy, and 
research gaps sections, table 1, panel 2, and panel 3. TP contributed to 
the global HIV burden among transgender sex workers and research 
gaps sections, table 1, and panel 3. ALW led the systematic review and 
analysis for the global burden of HIV among female and male sex 
workers sections and contributed to the global burden section, the 
figures, table 2, and the appendix. BW contributed to the introduction 
and conclusion sections, table 1, and panel 1. M­CB led the modelling 
updates and contributed to the social and structural determinants and 
research gaps sections, table 1, and panel 3. JB contributed to the 
community empowerment and conclusion sections, table 1, and panel 3. 
SAS contributed to the introduction and research gaps sections, table 1, 
and panel 3. CB contributed to the conceptualisation of the manuscript 
and to the overall writing and editing of the manuscript.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
The 2014 Lancet Series on HIV and sex work was supported by grants to 
the Center for Public Health and Human Rights at Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health (JHSPH) from The Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation and the UN Population Fund. The global HIV 
epidemiology update was supported by the US Agency for International 
Development (USAID). KS was funded in part by a Canada Research 
Chair in Global Sexual Health and HIV/AIDS and the US National 
Institutes of Health (NIH; R01DA028648­09). M­CB is funded in part by 
the HIV Prevention Trials Network (HPTN) modelling centre (funded 
by the NIH [UM1 AIO68617]). BW and CB were funded in part by the 
NIH to the Johns Hopkins Center for AIDS Research 
(CFAR; P30AI094189). The epidemiological update was supported by 
Global HIV, which received support from Supporting Operational AIDS 
Research (cooperative agreement AID­OAA­140060) and was made 
possible by the generous support of US citizens through the President’s 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and USAID. The contents of this paper 
are our sole responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the official 
views of NIH, USAID, or the US Government. The content is solely our 
responsibility and does not necessarily represent the official views of the 
NIH. We thank Amrita Rao (JHSPH, USA) for her contributions to the 
search and data extraction for the analysis of global HIV burden, 
Caitlin Kennedy and Ping Yeh (JHSPH, USA) for their contributions to 
the community empowerment review update, and Helen Coupland 
(Imperial College, London, UK) for her contribution to the modelling 
search. We thank Ruth Morgan Thomas from the Global Network of Sex 
Work Projects for her guidance on engagement of sex workers with 
major global funders.
References
1 
Beyrer C, Crago A­L, Bekker L­G, et al. An action agenda for HIV and 
sex workers. Lancet 2015; 385: 287–301.
2 
Cowan FM, Davey CB, Fearon E, et al. The HIV care cascade 
among female sex workers in Zimbabwe: results of a 
population­based survey from the Sisters Antiretroviral Therapy 
Programme for Prevention of HIV, an Integrated Response 
(SAPPH­IRe) Trial. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2017; 74: 375–82.
3 
Kerrigan D, Mbwambo J, Likindikoki S, et al. Project Shikamana: 
baseline findings from a community empowerment­based 
combination HIV prevention trial among female sex workers in 
Iringa, Tanzania. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2017; 
74 (suppl 1): S60–S68.
4 
Davis SL, Goedel WC, Emerson J, Guven BS. Punitive laws, key 
population size estimates, and Global AIDS Response Progress 
Reports: an ecological study of 154 countries. J Int AIDS Soc 2017; 
20: 21386.
5 
Mishra S, Boily MC, Schwartz S, et al. Data and methods to 
characterize the role of sex work and to inform sex work programs 
in generalized HIV epidemics: evidence to challenge assumptions. 
Ann Epidemiol 2016; 26: 557–69.
6 
Sabin K, Zhao J, Garcia Calleja JM, et al. Availability and quality of 
size estimations of female sex workers, men who have sex with 
men, people who inject drugs and transgender women in low­ and 
middle­income countries. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0155150.
7 
Shannon K, Strathdee SA, Goldenberg SM, et al. 
Global epidemiology of HIV among female sex workers: influence 
of structural determinants. Lancet 2015; 385: 55–71.
8 
Amnesty International. Policy on state obligation to respect, uphold 
and fulfil the human rights of sex workers. May 26, 2016. 
https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/pol30/4062/2016/en/ 
(accessed March 10, 2018).
9 
Reeves A, Steele S, Stuckler D, McKee M, Amato­Gauci A, 
Semenza JC. National sex work policy and HIV prevalence among 
sex workers: an ecological regression analysis of 27 European 
countries. Lancet HIV 2017; 4: e134–40.
10 
Cunningham S, Shah M. Decriminalizing indoor prostitution: 
implications for sexual violence and public health. Rev Econ Stud 
2017; 85: 1683–715.
11 
UNAIDS. 2016 Regional Factsheets. 2016. http://www.unaids.org/
en/resources/fact­sheet (accessed April 3, 2018).
12 
Borquez A, Cori A, Pufall EL, et al. The incidence patterns model 
to estimate the distribution of new HIV Infections in 
sub­Saharan Africa: development and validation of a mathematical 
model. PLoS Med 2016; 13: e1002121.
13 
Wirtz AL, Peryshkina A, Mogilniy V, Beyrer C, Decker MR. 
Current and recent drug use intensifies sexual and structural HIV 
risk outcomes among female sex workers in the Russian 
Federation. Int J Drug Policy 2015; 26: 755–63.
14 
Dunne EM, Dyer TP, Khan MR, Cavanaugh CE, Melnikov A, 
Latimer WW. HIV prevalence and risk behaviors among 
African American women who trade sex for drugs versus economic 
resources. AIDS Behav 2014; 18: 1288–92.
15 
Wanta JW, Unger CA. Review of the transgender literature: where do 
we go from here? Transgend Health 2017; 2: 119–28.
16 
Reisner SL, Deutsch MB, Bhasin S, et al. Advancing methods for US 
transgender health research. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2016; 
23: 198–207
.
17 
Nemoto T, Cruz T, Iwamoto M, et al. Examining the sociocultural 
context of HIV­related risk behaviors among kathoey (male­to­female 
transgender women) sex workers in Bangkok, Thailand. 
J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care 2016; 27: 153–65.
18 
Reisner SL, Poteat T, Keatley J, et al. Global health burden and needs 
of transgender populations: a review. Lancet 2016; 388: 412–36.
19 
Poteat T, Scheim A, Xavier J, Reisner S, Baral S. Global epidemiology 
of HIV infection and related syndemics affecting transgender people. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2016; 72 (suppl 3): S210–19.
20 Keshinro B, Crowell TA, Nowak RG, et al. High prevalence of HIV, 
chlamydia and gonorrhoea among men who have sex with men and 
transgender women attending trusted community centres in Abuja 
and Lagos, Nigeria. J Int AIDS Soc 2016; 19: 21270.
21 
Wamoyi J, Stobeanau K, Bobrova N, Abramsky T, Watts C. 
Transactional sex and risk for HIV infection in sub­Saharan Africa: 
a systematic review and meta­analysis. J Int AIDS Soc 2016; 19: 20992.
 Review
12 
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9
22 Hensen B, Hargreaves JR, Chiyaka T, et al. Evaluating the impact 
of DREAMS on HIV incidence among young women who sell sex: 
protocol for a non­randomised study in Zimbabwe. 
BMC Public Health 2018; 18: 203.
23 Goldenberg SM, Chettiar J, Simo A, et al. Early sex work initiation 
independently elevates the odds of HIV infection and police arrest 
among adult sex workers in a Canadian setting. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Sundr 2014; 65: 122–28.
24 
Toska E, Pantelic M, Meinck F, Keck K, Haghighat R, Cluver L. 
Sex in the shadow of HIV: a systematic review of prevalence, risk 
factors, and interventions to reduce sexual risk­taking among 
HIV­positive adolescents and youth in sub­Saharan Africa. 
PLoS One 2017; 12: e0178106.
25 Lyons CE, Ketende S, Diouf D, et al. Potential impact of integrated 
stigma mitigation interventions in improving HIV/AIDS service 
delivery and uptake for key populations in Senegal. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2017; 74 (suppl 1): S52–S59.
26 Hargreaves JR, Busza J, Mushati P, Fearon E, Cowan FM. 
Overlapping HIV and sex­work stigma among female sex workers 
recruited to 14 respondent­driven sampling surveys across 
Zimbabwe, 2013. AIDS Care 2017; 29: 675–85.
27 
Duff P, Birungi J, Dobrer S, Akello M, Muzaaya G, Shannon K. 
Social and structural factors increase inconsistent condom use by 
sex workers’ one­time and regular clients in northern Uganda. 
AIDS Care 2018; 30: 751–59.
28 Coetzee J, Jewkes R, Gray GE. Cross­sectional study of female sex 
workers in Soweto, South Africa: factors associated with HIV 
infection. PLoS One 2017; 12: e0184775.
29 Wirtz AL, Schwartz S, Ketende S, et al. Sexual violence, condom 
negotiation, and condom use in the context of sex work: results 
from two west African countries. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2015; 68 (suppl 2): S171–79.
30 Decker MR, Lyons C, Billong SC, et al. Gender­based violence 
against female sex workers in Cameroon: prevalence and 
associations with sexual HIV risk and access to health services 
and justice. Sex Transm Infect 2016; 92: 599–604.
31 
Goldenberg SM, Muzaaya G, Akello M, Nguyen P, Birungi J, 
Shannon K. War­related abduction and history of incarceration 
linked to high burden of HIV among female sex workers in 
conflict­affected northern Uganda. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 
2016; 73: 109–16.
32 Maheu­Giroux M, Baral S, Vesga JF, et al. Anal intercourse among 
female sex workers in Cote d’Ivoire: prevalence, determinants, 
and model­based estimates of the population­level impact on HIV 
transmission. Am J Epidemiol 2018; 187: 287–94.
33 Wirtz AL, Pretorius C, Beyrer C, et al. Epidemic impacts of a 
community empowerment intervention for HIV prevention 
among female sex workers in generalized and concentrated 
epidemics. PLoS One 2014; 9: e88047
.
34 
Vassall A, Chandrashekar S, Pickles M, et al. Community 
mobilisation and empowerment interventions as part of HIV 
prevention for female sex workers in southern India: 
a cost­effectiveness analysis. PLoS One 2014; 9: e110562.
35 Boily MC, Shannon K. Criminal law, sex work, HIV: need for 
multi­level research. Lancet HIV 2017; 4: e98–99.
36 Shannon K, Csete J. Violence, condom negotiation, and HIV/STI 
risk among sex workers. JAMA 2010; 304: 573–74.
37 
Lancaster KE, Cernigliaro D, Zulliger R, Fleming PF. HIV care 
and treatment experiences among female sex workers living with 
HIV in sub­Saharan Africa: a systematic review. Afr J AIDS Res 
2016; 15: 377–86.
38 Goldenberg SM, Deering K, Amram O, et al. Community 
mapping of sex work criminalization and violence: impacts on 
HIV treatment interruptions among marginalized women living 
with HIV in Vancouver, Canada. Int J STD AIDS 2017; 
28: 1001–09.
39 Mendoza C, Barrington C, Donastorg Y, et al. Violence from a 
sexual partner is significantly associated with poor HIV care and 
treatment outcomes among female sex workers in the Dominican 
Republic. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2017; 74: 273–78.
40 
Muth S, Len A, Evans JL, et al. HIV treatment cascade among 
female entertainment and sex workers in Cambodia: impact of 
amphetamine use and an HIV prevention program. 
Addict Sci Clin Pract 2017; 12: 20.
41 
Mayanja Y, Kamacooko O, Bagiire D, Namale G, Kaleebu P, 
Seeley J. ‘Test and treat’ among women at high risk for 
HIV­infection in Kampala, Uganda: antiretroviral therapy 
initiation and associated factors. AIDS Behav 2018; 22: 1053–61.
42 
Eakle R, Gomez GB, Naicker N, et al. HIV pre­exposure 
prophylaxis and early antiretroviral treatment among female sex 
workers in South Africa: results from a prospective observational 
demonstration project. PLoS Med 2017; 14: e1002444.
43 
Bekker LG, Johnson L, Cowan F, et al. Combination HIV 
prevention for female sex workers: what is the evidence? 
Lancet 2015; 385: 72–87
.
44 
Restar AJ, Tocco JU, Mantell JE, et al. Perspectives on HIV pre­ 
and post­exposure prophylaxes (PrEP and PEP) among female 
and male sex workers in Mombasa, Kenya: implications for 
integrating biomedical prevention into sexual health services. 
AIDS Educ Prev 2017; 29: 141–53.
45 
Peitzmeier SM, Tomko C, Wingo E, et al. Acceptability of 
microbicidal vaginal rings and oral pre­exposure prophylaxis for 
HIV prevention among female sex workers in a high­prevalence 
US city. AIDS Care 2017; 29: 1453–57
.
46 
Cowan FM, Delany­Moretlwe S, Sanders EJ, et al. 
PrEP implementation research in Africa: what is new? 
J Int AIDS Soc 2016; 19 (suppl 6): 21101.
47 
Ortblad K, Kibuuka Musoke D, Ngabirano T, et al. Direct 
provision versus facility collection of HIV self­tests among female 
sex workers in Uganda: a cluster­randomized controlled health 
systems trial. PLoS Med 2017; 14: e1002458.
48 
Chanda MM, Ortblad KF, Mwale M, et al. HIV self­testing among 
female sex workers in Zambia: a cluster randomized controlled 
trial. PLoS Med 2017; 14: e1002442.
49 
Giguere R, Frasca T, Dolezal C, et al. Acceptability of three novel 
HIV prevention methods among young male and transgender 
female sex workers in Puerto Rico. AIDS Behav 2016; 
20: 2192–202.
50 Were D, Irungi E. PreP scale up in Kenya: bridge to scale project. 
International AIDS Society Conference on HIV science; Paris, 
France; July 25, 2017
.
51 
Deutsch MB, Glidden DV, Sevelius J, et al. HIV pre­exposure 
prophylaxis in transgender women: a subgroup analysis of the 
iPrEx trial. Lancet HIV 2015; 2: e512–19.
52 Wang Z, Lau JTF, Yang X, et al. Acceptability of daily use of free 
oral pre­exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) among transgender women 
sex workers in Shenyang, China. AIDS Behav 2017; 21: 3287–98.
53 Zalazar V, Aristegui I, Kerr T, et al. High willingness to use HIV 
pre­exposure prophylaxis among transgender women in 
Argentina. Transgend Health 2016; 1: 266–73.
54 
WHO. Implementing comprehensive HIV/STI programmes with 
sex workers: practical approaches from collaborative 
interventions. October, 2013. http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/sti/
sex_worker_implementation/en/ (accessed Jan 10, 2018).
55 Kerrigan D, Kennedy CE, Morgan­Thomas R, et al. A community 
empowerment approach to the HIV response among sex workers: 
effectiveness, challenges, and considerations for implementation 
and scale­up. Lancet 2015; 385: 172–85.
56 Beattie TS, Mohan HL, Bhattacharjee P, et al. Community 
mobilization and empowerment of female sex workers in 
Karnataka State, south India: associations with HIV and sexually 
transmitted infection risk. Am J Public Health 2014; 104: 1516–25.
57 
Kuhlmann AS, Galavotti C, Hastings P, Narayanan P, Saggurti N. 
Investing in communities: evaluating the added value of 
community mobilization on HIV prevention outcomes among 
FSWs in India. AIDS Behav 2014; 18: 752–66.
58 Alary M, Banandur P, Rajaram SP, et al. Increased HIV 
prevention program coverage and decline in HIV prevalence 
among female sex workers in south India. Sex Transm Dis 2014; 
41: 380–87
.
59 Kerrigan D, Barrington C, Donastorg Y, Perez M, Galai N. 
Abriendo Puertas: feasibility and effectiveness a multi­level 
intervention to improve HIV outcomes among female sex workers 
living with HIV in the Dominican Republic. AIDS Behav 2016; 
20: 1919–27
.
60 Fonner VA, Kerrigan D, Mnisi Z, Ketende S, Kennedy CE, Baral S. 
Social cohesion, social participation, and HIV related risk among 
female sex workers in Swaziland. PLoS One 2014; 9: e87527
.
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online July 20, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31439-9 
13
61 
Global Network of Sex Work Projects. Expert Group Meeting 
convened by UN Women includes recommendations on sex work. 
Dec 22, 2016. http://www.nswp.org/news/expert­group­meeting­
convened­un­women­includes­recommendations­sex­work 
(accessed Feb 2, 2018).
62 Ugandan Parliament. Sexual Offenses Bill, Bill 35. Dec 11, 2015. 
http://parliamentwatch.ug/wp­content/uploads/2016/10/ L­14­04­
16­The­Sexual­Offences­Bill­2015.­1.pdf (accessed March 10, 2018).
63 Krüsi A, Pacey K, Bird L, et al. Criminalisation of clients: 
reproducing vulnerabilities for violence and poor health among 
street­based sex workers in Canada. BMJ Open 2014; 4: e005191.
64 
UglyMugs. Ugly Mugs Ireland and UK. Brothel keepers media 
analysis 2008–2013. 2016. https://uglymugs.ie/10135/ (accessed 
March 10, 2018).
65 Tandon T, Armas­Cardona G, Grover A. Sex work and trafficking: 
can human rights lead us out of the impasse? 2014. 
https://www.hhrjournal.org/2014/10/sex­work­and­trafficking­can­
human­rights­lead­us­out­of­the­impasse/ (accessed Feb 20, 2018).
66 Shannon K, Goldenberg G, Deering K, Strathdee SA. HIV infection 
among female sex workers in concentrated and high prevalence 
epidemics: why a structural determinants framework is needed. 
Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2014; 9: 174–82.
67 
Baral SD, Friedman MR, Geibel S, et al. Male sex workers: practices, 
contexts, and vulnerabilities for HIV acquisition and transmission. 
Lancet 2015; 385: 260–73.
68 UNAIDS. Global AIDS Monitoring 2018—indicators for 
monitoring the 2016 United Nations Political Declaration on 
Ending AIDS. Jan 19, 2018. http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/
documents/2018/Global­AIDS­Monitoring (accessed May 28, 2018).
69 Busza J, Mtetwa S, Fearon E, et al. Good news for sex workers in 
Zimbabwe: how a court order improved safety in the absence of 
decriminalization. J Int AIDS Soc 2017; 20: 21860.
70 
Narayanan P, Moulasha K, Wheeler T, et al. Monitoring community 
mobilisation and organisational capacity among high­risk groups in 
a large­scale HIV prevention programme in India: selected findings 
using a Community Ownership and Preparedness Index. 
J Epidemiol Community Health 2012; 66 (suppl 2): ii34–41.
71 
Kerrigan D, Kennedy CE, Cheng AS, et al. Advancing the strategic 
use of HIV operations research to strengthen local policies and 
programmes: the Research to Prevention Project. 
J Int AIDS Soc 2015; 18: 20029.
72 
amFAR. PEPFAR Country/Regional Operational Plans. 2017
. http://
copsdata.amfar.org (accessed May 28, 2018).
73 
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. 
Community, rights and gender special initiative 2014–2016 
evaluation. Nov 21, 2016. https://www.
globalfundcommunitiesdelegation.org/community­rights­and­
gender­special­initiative­2014­2016­evaluation/ 
(accessed June 2, 2018).
74 
Global Network of Sex Work Projects. Global Fund technical brief. 
Addressing sex workers, men who have sex with men, transgender 
people, people who use drugs, and people in prison and other 
closed settings in the context of the HIV epidemic. January, 2017
. 
https://www.theglobalfund.org/media/4794/core_keypopulations_
technicalbrief_en.pdf (accessed June 2, 2018). 
© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
