 REG ART INCL REV
The Built Environment as a Determinant of Physical Activity: 
A Systematic Review of Longitudinal Studies and Natural 
Experiments
Mikko Kärmeniemi, MSc1,2,3 • Tiina Lankila, PhD4 • Tiina Ikäheimo, PhD3,5 •  
Heli Koivumaa-Honkanen, PhD6,7,8 • Raija Korpelainen, PhD1,2,3
Published online: 17 January 2018
© Society of Behavioral Medicine 2018. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
Abstract
Background Physical inactivity is a global problem that 
increases the risk of many chronic diseases and short-
ens life expectancy. The built environment contributes to 
physical inactivity through accessibility of amenities and 
transportation patterns. With better urban planning, cit-
ies could be designed to enhance active transportation 
and population health on a permanent basis.
Purpose We conducted a systematic review to identify deter-
minants of the built environment associated with physical 
activity and to evaluate how changes in the built environ-
ment are associated with changes in physical activity.
Methods We searched six databases, from the inception 
of each until December 2015, for studies that were writ-
ten in English, used longitudinal before-and-after design 
and assessed changes in both the built environment and 
physical activity. A total of 21 prospective cohort studies 
and 30 natural experiments were included in the review.
Results The review showed that changes in the built en-
vironment and in physical activity were related. A higher 
objective accessibility and new infrastructure for walk-
ing, cycling and public transportation were associated 
with increased overall and transportation-related phys-
ical activity. Some evidence was found for perceived aes-
thetics and safety as determinants of physical activity.
Conclusions Improved objectively measured accessibility 
of different type of destinations and public transpor-
tation and land use mix were associated with increased 
physical activity. Creating new infrastructure for walk-
ing, cycling and public transportation could induce de-
mand for walking and cycling. The results support the 
creation of compact and diverse residential areas and 
investments into infrastructure that encourage active 
modes of transportation.
Keywords  Evidence synthesis • Urban form • Physical 
activity • Active transportation • Causal inference
Introduction
Physical inactivity is associated with many chronic dis-
eases and early deaths. It was estimated to cost inter-
national $67.5 billion worldwide through health care 
Mikko Kärmeniemi
mikko.karmeniemi@oulu.fi
1 
Center for Life Course Health Research, University of Oulu, 
Aapistie 5 B, 9220 Oulu, Finland
2 
Department of Sport and Exercise Medicine, Oulu 
Deaconess Institute, Oulu, Finland
3 
Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital 
and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
4 
Geography Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
5 
Center for Environment and Respiratory Health Research, 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
6 
Institute of Clinical Medicine (Psychiatry), University of 
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland
7 
Department of Psychiatry, Kuopio University Hospital, 
Kuopio, Finland
8 
Department of Psychiatry, Lapland Hospital District, 
Rovaniemi, Finland
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
DOI: 10.1093/abm/kax043
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 costs and productivity losses in 2013 [1]. Land use and 
transportation policies have been recognized as major 
contributors to physical inactivity around the world. 
Thus, designing cities to support active transportation 
is a feasible strategy for enhancing physical activity and 
population health on a permanent basis [2].
The recent Lancet series on urban design, transport 
and health identified eight integrated regional and local 
interventions to enhance active transportation and re-
duce private motor vehicle use: destination accessibility, 
employment distribution, parking policies, pedestrian- and 
cycling-friendly street networks, residential density, public 
transportation availability, mixed land use, and desir-
ability of active travel modes [3]. Moreover, compact cit-
ies that encompass these features experience health gains 
in terms of diabetes, cardiovascular disease and respira-
tory disease [4].
To develop healthy communities and effective envir-
onmental interventions for promoting physical activity, 
it is important to gather robust knowledge of the most 
essential modifiable factors of the built environment 
that activate people. During the past 15 years, the en-
vironmental determinants of physical activity have been 
mainly studied in cross-sectional settings. Few longitu-
dinal studies have examined causality [5, 6].
The number of longitudinal studies assessing the 
effect of changes in the built environment on physical 
activity has multiplied during the last 5 years. The rap-
idly growing evidence base regarding the environmental 
determinants of physical activity must be regularly 
updated and reviewed with systematic methodology [7]. 
The objectives of the present systematic literature review 
were (a) to identify determinants of the built environ-
ment associated with physical activity and (b) to evaluate 
how changes in the built environment are associated with 
changes in physical activity.
Methods
The review follows the guidelines of the PRISMA 
statement [8]. The protocol was registered to the inter-
national prospective register of systematic reviews 
(PROSPERO) on January 30, 2016 (registration number: 
CRD42016033646).
Eligibility Criteria
We included studies utilizing longitudinal before-and-
after design (i.e. prospective longitudinal cohort studies 
and natural experiments with at least two data collection 
points). Still, natural experiments with before-and-after 
cross-sectional data (with different individuals) were also 
included. To be eligible, a study had to assess changes 
in the built environment and physical activity between 
baseline and follow-up.
Participants representing the general population, 
without age restriction, were eligible. We excluded stud-
ies on institutionalized individuals or on subjects not 
able to perform habitual physical activities.
A change in the built environment was used as the 
main exposure. We included both perceived and ob-
jective Geographic Information System (GIS)-based 
measures of the built environment since previous studies 
have shown discrepancies between their potential effects 
on physical activity [5]. Of interest were prospective lon-
gitudinal cohort studies assessing residential relocation 
and natural experiments focusing on changes in the built 
environment. Hence, a change in the built environment 
had to be assessed in terms of moving from one kind 
of environment into another or improvements in neigh-
borhood- or town-level infrastructure (i.e. creating new 
walking or cycling trails). Also, studies in which changes 
in the built environment were assessed with subjective 
perceptions and studies that used micro-environment 
interventions (i.e. park improvements) were included. 
Studies that measured the built environment inside 
homes, workplaces or schools or studies that focused 
solely on neighborhood socioeconomic status were 
excluded.
We used a change in physical activity as the primary 
outcome, including self-reported or objectively measured 
(a) overall physical activity, (b) transportation-related 
physical activity, and (c) leisure time physical activity. 
For inclusion, we accepted studies using a variety of out-
come measures, such as walking, cycling, jogging, exer-
cise, moderate to vigorous physical activity, travel mode, 
share or number of trips, travel behavior, number of 
cyclists, and number of visitors. We also included stud-
ies in which the change in physical activity was reported, 
even if it was not the primary outcome measure. We 
included only studies written in English and published in 
scientific peer-reviewed journals.
Information Sources
We searched six electronic databases: Medline, PubMed, 
Scopus, Web of Science, Transportation Research 
Information Services, and the Active Living Research 
database. In addition, we screened reference lists from 
previous reviews and other relevant publications to find 
additional studies.
The Medline search strategy (Supplementary Fig. S1) 
was developed in cooperation with a health science li-
brarian using medical subject headings and adapted for 
other databases using free word searches. Key search 
terms for physical activity were these: physical activity, 
active transportation, walking, bicycling, motor activity, 
and exercise. The search terms covered active modes of 
transportation because physical activity was our main 
outcome. However, in Medline also transportation was 
240 
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 included as a medical subject heading which encom-
passed active transportation.
For the built environment, the terms included neigh-
borhood, physical environment, built environment, walk-
ability, environment design, environment, and cities. For 
study design, the terms were longitudinal studies, cohort 
studies, follow-up studies, natural experiments, causality, 
residential relocation, and neighborhood self-selection. 
The searches were carried out for studies published from 
each database’s inception until December 11, 2015.
The initial literature search produced 4,335 articles 
(Fig. 1). In addition, we identified 35 publications by 
screening reference lists from previous reviews and other 
relevant publications. Based on titles and abstracts, we 
excluded 4,101 studies that were out of this review’s 
scope. Then duplicates were removed. The initial search 
and title and abstract screening were managed by M.K. 
Full text papers (n = 111) were screened by at least three 
review authors (M.K., T.L., and either R.K. or T.I.) 
for final inclusion, using a predefined inclusion form 
containing the eligibility criteria. Disagreements were 
resolved by discussion. Finally, 51 studies were found to 
be eligible for this review. The review’s authors were not 
blinded to the studies’ authors or institutions.
Data from all of the included studies (n = 51) were 
extracted into a predefined data extraction document by 
M.K., with verification by R.K., T.L., and T.I., in order 
to reduce bias and error. Extraction included the follow-
ing items: methods (objective, study design, outcome 
measures, covariates, statistical analysis and residential 
self-selection adjustment); participants (country, setting, 
population, number, age, gender, subject selection, con-
trol group assessment, and response rates); exposures 
(experiment description if applicable, built environment 
measures and follow-up time and frequency); and main 
results (changes in physical activity).
Risk of Bias in Individual Studies
We assessed the risk of bias at the study level with 
the QualSyst tool developed by the Alberta Heritage 
Foundation for Medical Research [9]. It was selected be-
cause it enabled us to evaluate studies with the two differ-
ent designs included in the present review.
The risk of bias was evaluated with its summary score 
(range: 0‒1), with a higher score indicating better quality. 
The tool contains 14 criteria, including objective, study 
design, method of subject/comparison group selection, 
subject characteristics, intervention allocation, blinding, 
outcome measure definition, exposure measure definition, 
sample size, analytic methods, estimate of variance, con-
trol for confounding, reporting results and conclusions. 
All items were scored depending on the degree to which 
the specific criteria were met (“yes” = 2, “partial” = 1, 
Fig. 1. PRISMA flow diagram of the study selection process.
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251 
241
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 “no” = 0). Items not applicable to a particular study de-
sign were marked “N/A” and excluded from the summary 
score. We adjusted the tool for the longitudinal study 
designs included in the review. Hence, follow-up and ex-
posure time to the experiment, sample representativeness 
over time, response rate and loss to follow-up and resi-
dential self-selection adjustments were evaluated as part 
of the 14 criteria presented before. In terms of natural 
experiments, we also evaluated use of control groups and 
their similarity to intervention groups.
To ascertain the validity of the tool, the review authors 
(M.K., R.K, T.I., and T.L.) independently evaluated five 
randomly selected research papers (10%) from categories 
representing two prospective longitudinal cohort stud-
ies, two natural experiments and one park improvement 
study. Disagreements concerning the items and evalu-
ation were resolved by discussion. Based on validation of 
the tool, M.K. evaluated the remaining research papers, 
with verification by the other review authors.
Synthesis of Results
We used the association between changes in the built 
environment and changes in physical activity as the pri-
mary measure of effect. To eliminate potential bias due 
to confounding, only adjusted effect estimates were uti-
lized in the analyses. We chose narrative synthesis as a 
method due to the heterogeneity of studies and the var-
iety of exposure and outcome measures, which prevented 
quantitative meta-analysis.
The Figs. 2 and 3 displaying the results were prepared 
according to the number of associations coded as posi-
tively significant (“+”), negatively significant (“−”) or 
having no association (“0”). Associations with p-value ≤ 
.05 were considered statistically significant. The number 
of associations in the figures refer to the sum of all the 
associations obtained from different studies. In a specific 
category, multiple associations may arise from the same 
study if several variables that were combined in that cat-
egory had been used, or different types of physical activity, 
for example, walking and cycling were assessed separately. 
Data synthesis was stratified by the built environment 
measurement mode and domain of physical activity.
We combined different exposure measures of the ob-
jectively measured built environment as follows: new 
infrastructure for walking, cycling and public trans-
portation; accessibility of destinations and public 
transportation and land use mix; park and playground 
improvements; street network characteristics; population 
density; and aggregate walkability measures. Perceived 
Fig. 2. Number of associations between objective built environment (BE) measures and physical activity (PA). Characters in the cells: 
O = objectively measured physical activity, S = self-reported physical activity, Quality scorereference, N = Sample size.
242 
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 built environment measures were combined into the cat-
egories of accessibility, aesthetics, safety, convenience, 
barriers, and street network characteristics.
The development of the built environment categories 
was an inductive process derived empirically from the 
studies. First, all measures were combined into a single 
table stratified by objective or self-reported measurement 
mode. Then, we thematically combined similar measures 
and created the categories which were labeled to repre-
sent all the individual measures included. Individual 
measures included in the different categories are pre-
sented in parentheses in Figs. 2 and 3. Physical activity 
was stratified by domain (overall, transport and leisure 
time physical activity) as suggested in a recent paper con-
cerning improving current practice in reviews of the built 
environment and physical activity [7]. All reported asso-
ciations in the text are statistically significant.
Results
Study Characteristics
Of the eligible 51 studies, 20 studies were prospective 
longitudinal cohort studies, and 31 were natural 
experiments. The number of individuals followed-up 
upon in individual studies ranged from 32 to 1,300,000. 
Average follow-up time was 3.7 years, ranging from 
1 month to 15 years. The study population consisted of 
adults in 35 studies, children and adolescents in six stud-
ies and elderly people in two studies; eight studies did not 
use age restrictions. All of the studies were conducted 
from 2003 to 2015. All were conducted in high-income 
economies (28 in North America, 11 in Europe, nine in 
Australia, two in Asia and one in New Zealand). The 
setting was urban in 38 studies, suburban or rural in six 
and not stated in seven.
Physical activity was measured objectively (e.g. with 
accelerometers) in five studies and with systematic obser-
vations in nine studies. Self-reported physical activity 
was used in 34 studies. Three studies used both self-re-
ported and objectively measured physical activity. The 
built environment was measured objectively (with GIS) 
in 24 studies, the perceived built environment was used 
in 10 studies and a combination was used in six stud-
ies. Construction of new infrastructure was used as the 
only measure of the built environment in 11 studies. For 
comprehensive study characteristics, effect sizes and 95% 
confidence intervals, see Supplementary Table S1.
Fig. 3. Number of associations between perceived built environment (BE) measures and physical activity (PA). Characters in the cells: 
O = objectively measured physical activity, S = self-reported physical activity, Quality scorereference, N = Sample size.
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251 
243
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 Quality of the Studies Included in the Review
The mean quality score in prospective longitudinal co-
hort studies was high (0.87 on average, range: 0.73‒1.00). 
The main sources of bias were related to confounding, 
measurement and subject selection. Fifty-five percent of 
the studies used non-validated measures of physical ac-
tivity or did not use time-varying measures of the built 
environment. In 40% of the studies, the sample was not 
population-representative, and there were high rates of 
loss to follow-up.
In natural experiments, the mean quality score was 
0.78 (range: 0.59‒0.91). All natural experiments suf-
fered from poor sample representativeness or lack of a 
control group. Other major methodological limitations 
were related to confounding (65% of the studies), small 
sample sizes and response rates (58% of the studies) and 
short periods of exposure to the experiment (48% of the 
studies). Quality scores of the individual studies are pre-
sented in Supplementary Table S1.
Objective Built Environment Measures
The overview of the findings related to the objectively 
measured built environment and its association with the 
different physical activity domains is presented in Fig. 2.
New Infrastructure for Walking, Cycling, and Public 
Transportation
Of the 16 natural experiments, a change in infrastructure 
was associated with increased physical activity in nine 
studies and decreased physical activity in one study. The 
average quality of these studies was moderate (quality 
score 0.78, range: 0.59‒0.86). The strongest level of evi-
dence was found for overall and transportation-related 
physical activity.
The majority of these studies assessed new routes for 
walking and cycling. Among British adults, living closer 
to new, high-quality, traffic-free routes for walking and 
cycling was associated with an increase in these activities 
by 15.3 min/week and total physical activity by 12.5 min/
week for each kilometer closer to the new route a person 
lived. In addition, walking for transportation increased 
by 8.8 min [10]. With the same population, the effect 
of proximity to the new routes on change in time spent 
walking and cycling was 90% explained by use of the 
new infrastructure implying causal inference [11].
Town-level cycling initiatives were associated with an 
increase from 5.8% to 6.8% in the prevalence of cycling 
and 1.71% increase in walking to work within 10 years 
among 1.3 million commuters [12]. The initiatives 
included cycling to workplaces, schools and colleges, 
general infrastructure improvements, cycling to stations, 
and targeting specific neighborhoods or groups. In a 
U.S. study, constructing a new greenway/trail was asso-
ciated with on average eight more people walking and 
cycling in the experimental neighborhood during the 
2-hr data collection period [13].
A new cycle path was associated with more cycling in 
the intervention area (24%) compared to control neigh-
borhoods (7%) among Australian adults. The shorter the 
distance to the new path was, the higher was its use [14]. 
Similar results were obtained in respect to proximity to a 
new busway with a parallel path for walking and cycling, 
which predicted 1.8 times higher likelihood for a large 
increase in active travel mode share compared to subjects 
living further away [15].
Three natural experiments found significant asso-
ciations between new rail infrastructure and physical 
activity. In USA, a new rail stop was associated with 
increased bouts of moderate activity and increased time 
spent in leisure walks [16, 17]. A new railway corridor 
was also associated with increased overall physical ac-
tivity among households who valued transit-oriented de-
velopment [18].
Moreover, 19 percentage point increase in trans-
portation walking and 11 percentage point increase in 
transport cycling were found among children after pro-
viding bike parking infrastructure [19]. There were also 
some contradictory findings related to new infrastruc-
ture. Installation of a new multi-use trail was associated 
with a decreased amount of walking and total activity 
(β = −0.26) in all other age groups except for adults, who 
increased their total physical activity [20].
Accessibility
Overall, improved accessibility was associated with 
increased physical activity in eight and decreased phys-
ical activity in one study. Accessibility was assessed 
according to number of destinations, land use mix, 
public transit availability, sport facility availability or dis-
tance to parks. The average quality score of the studies in 
this category was high (0.87, range: 0.68‒1).
Increases in both social and walking destinations were 
associated with enhanced transportation walking by 3.53 
and 3.33 min/week, respectively [21], and one unit in-
crease in the number of daily destinations with 0.37-unit 
increase in overall physical activity among females [22]. 
Among Australian adults, each objectively measured 
transportation-related destination was associated with 
an increase in walking for transportation by 5.8 min/
week and each recreational destination with an increase 
in recreational walking by 17.6 min/week after relocation 
to a new housing development designed according to the 
Livable Neighborhoods Guidelines [23, 24]. Among the 
same study population, an increase in the total number 
of destinations and land use mix were related to more 
walking for transportation [25]. Participants with access 
244 
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 to more destinations types had 1.4 times higher odds 
for increased transport walking compared to those with 
poorer access. In terms of land use mix the odds were 
1.33 times higher for participants with more diverse en-
vironment [25].
In USA, moving to a new urbanist community pre-
dicted over 4,000 fewer steps per day among women 
along with an increased land use mix [26]. A greater 
increase in recreational facility density was associated 
with a less pronounced decline in recreational physical 
activity over time by 10.3 MET min/week [27]; however, 
pay facility availability was associated with increased 
bouts of moderate to vigorous physical activity in male 
and public facility availability in female movers with rela-
tively small effect sizes (0.024% and 0.053%, respectively) 
[28]. In China, greater exposure to recreational areas on 
campus was associated with increased walking distances 
(β = 0.147) among university students [29]. In Finland, 
moving to an area with poor access to sport facilities 
was associated with 2.35 times higher odds to decreased 
overall physical activity compared to non-movers [30].
Better public transit availability assessed according to 
the number and distance to transit stops was associated 
with increased transportation-related walking in three 
studies, odds ratios ranging from 1.44 to 2.33 compared 
to participants with poorer access [25, 31, 32].
Park and Playground Improvements
Seven natural experiments assessed park and play-
ground upgrades which included signage, promotional 
incentives, outreach and support for group activities, 
recreational areas, walking paths, play equipment, 
seating, safety surfacing and waste facilities. Park and 
playground improvements were associated with higher 
physical activity in five studies and the average quality 
of these studies was moderate (0.74, range: 0.65‒0.81).
A new recreational park was associated with a three-
fold increase in energy expended within the park bound-
aries and an increase in the total number of people 
observed using it [33]. An increase of 7 to 12% in park 
use and an increase in energy expenditure of 610 MET-
hours were found in another study after providing 
incentives and consultancy for marketing and outreach, 
and modifications or upgrades in facilities [34]. New 
equipment, landscaping and ground surfaces were also 
associated with increases in park use (β = 233.1) and in 
MET-hours expended (β = 254.8) [35].
Significant renovations in park playfields in the USA 
were associated with a fivefold increase in sedentary vis-
itors, a threefold increase in moderately active visitors 
and a twofold increase in vigorously active visitors [36]. 
After manipulating seating in a park playground, greater 
MET intensities were found when seating was not access-
ible [37]. Following the intervention the odds for adults 
standing and being engaged in moderate to vigorous 
physical activity were 9.4 and 4.1, respectively when 
compared to sitting.
Street Network Characteristics
Improved street connectivity was associated with 
increased physical activity in five studies and decreased 
physical activity in two studies. On average, the quality 
of these studies was high (0.87, range: 0.68‒0.95).
A recent study from the USA revealed positive asso-
ciation between change in the network ratio of street 
connectivity and an increase in transportation walking 
by 1.81 min/week [21] whereas, in another study, the as-
sociation was dependent on the urbanicity level catego-
rized in tertiles based on Census tract-level population 
density (low, middle, and high) [38]. In low-urbanicity 
areas, intersection density was positively associated with 
walking, bicycling and jogging (β = 1‒1.3) while, in 
high-density areas, both local road density and propor-
tion of local roads had an inverse association with walk-
ing, biking and jogging frequencies in women (β = −1.3 
to −1.4).
Moving to an area with fewer cul-de-sacs was asso-
ciated with 757 more daily steps in American women 
[26]. Increased exposure to pedestrian network inter-
sections was associated with increased walking distance 
(β = 0.895) and walking ratio (β = 0.408) among Chinese 
university students [29]. Two Australian studies revealed 
that relocation to a new, livable housing development 
with higher street connectivity was associated with 1.13 
time higher odds for increased transportation-related 
walking and 1.2 times higher odds for taking up recre-
ational cycling [25, 39]. Among Danish males, increased 
intersection density had a negative association with 
overall physical activity (β = −35.47) [22].
Density
Overall, four studies showed that higher population 
density was associated with more physical activity. The 
average quality of the studies was moderate (0.79, range: 
0.68‒0.86).
Higher housing density was associated with 2.72 times 
higher odds for increased utilitarian and 1.28 times 
higher odds for increased exercise walking compared 
to the least-dense areas among women [31]. Moreover, 
women who moved to less-dense neighborhoods were 
36% more likely to report decreased levels of utili-
tarian walking. An increase in population density was 
also associated with 3.8% increase in walking trips [32] 
and 1.54 higher odds to uptake transportation-related 
cycling [39]. Higher population density was also related 
to increases in walking distance (β = 0.187) and walking 
altitude range (β = 0.996) [29].
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251 
245
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 Aggregate Walkability Measures
Higher walkability was associated with increased phys-
ical activity in three high-quality studies (average quality 
score = 0.91, range: 0.86‒0.95).
Two studies from North America assessed walkability 
with Walk Score which measures distances to different 
amenities. In a U.S. study, moving to a location with 
10-unit higher Walk Score was associated with an in-
crease in transportation walking by 16.04 min/week [40]. 
Among Canadian adults, moving from low to highly 
walkable neighborhoods (i.e. neighborhoods with two 
or three Walk Score quartile difference) increased the 
odds of utilitarian walking by 59% compared to moving 
to a neighborhood with the same walkability level [41]. 
In young Danish women, an increase in the movability 
index was associated with an increase in overall physical 
activity (β = 10.15) [22]. The movability index combined 
residential density, recreational facility area, density of 
daily destinations, and street connectivity.
Perceived Built Environment Measures
An overview of the findings related to the perceived built 
environment measures and their association with the dif-
ferent domains of physical activity is presented in Fig. 3.
Accessibility
Better perceived access to destinations was associated 
with increased physical activity in two high-quality stud-
ies (average quality score = 0.89, range: 0.86‒0.91).
Increased perceived access to parks (OR = 2.60) and 
recreation destinations (OR = 1.57) were associated with 
an increase in transportation-related cycling after re-
location to a new livable housing development among 
Australian adults [39]. Also, among the same study popu-
lation, the odds for transportation related walking were 
3.11 times higher for participants who perceived higher 
number of destinations, 1.27 times higher for those living 
in environments with better land use mix and 1.80 times 
higher for those with access to a railway station in their 
neighborhood [25].
An increase in perceived number of neighborhood 
sport facilities was associated with increased weekly fre-
quency of leisure time moderate to vigorous physical ac-
tivity (β = 1.07) among adolescent students who engaged 
in leisure-time physical activity more than three times a 
week at baseline [42].
Aesthetics
A higher sense of aesthetics was associated with improved 
physical activity in all of the four studies that assessed 
the pleasantness and positive features of neighborhoods. 
The average quality score for these studies was moderate 
(0.79, range: 0.73‒0.82).
Men who increased their perception of aesthetics 
of the neighborhood were 2.25 times more likely to in-
crease in overall walking compared to those who did not 
change their perception [43]. Another study revealed that 
each additional neighborhood feature perceived to have 
changed favorably was associated with increased walking 
for transportation by 3.0 min/week and increased recre-
ational walking by 2.2 min/week [24]. According to a UK 
study, perceiving one’s commuting route as less pleasant 
to walk was associated with less time spent walking while 
commuting (β = −11.94) [44]. Austrian women who 
reported poor health and found their neighborhoods un-
attractive had 2.7 times greater likelihood to regress from 
regular running than women who perceived their neigh-
borhoods as attractive [45].
Safety
Perceived neighborhood safety was associated with 
increased physical activity in one study, and traffic and 
crime related unsafety with decreased physical activity in 
three studies. The average quality of these studies was 
moderate (0.80, range: 0.77‒0.86).
Changes in parents’ perceptions of neighborhood 
safety from “very safe” to “somewhat or not at all safe” 
was associated with 0.13 fewer weekly days of vigorous 
physical activity among American children [46]. If traffic 
was not perceived as a problem, men appeared to walk 
less (OR = 0.40) but women more (OR = 1.76) [43]. In an-
other study, each one level increase in fear of crime on a 
five-point Likert-scale was associated with reduced total 
walking by 22 mean min/week and reduced recreational 
walking by 13 mean min/week within the neighborhood 
[47]. In addition, the use of new routes for walking and 
cycling predicted 1.31 higher odds for improved percep-
tions of safety in the UK [11].
Convenience
An Australian study with a moderate quality score (0.77) 
found that if participants perceived greater convenience 
of walking opportunities in their neighborhood they 
were twice as likely to increase walking [43].
Other Effects of Changes in the Built Environment
Town level initiatives to enhance cycling were associated 
with 0.32 percentage point increase in the use of public 
transportation and three percentage point decrease in the 
prevalence of driving to work [12]. New rail stops were 
associated with decreased car rides (β = 6.44) among 
246 
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 new users of public transportation [16] and new railway 
corridors with reduced driving among households who 
valued transit-oriented development features [18].
New busways with parallel paths for walking and 
cycling were associated with over 30% decrease in trips 
made by car [15]. A U.S. study showed that increased 
neighborhood 
accessibility 
was 
associated 
with 
reduced vehicle (β = −5.76) and person miles travelled 
(β = −6.79) and number of trips per tour (β = −0.19) but 
increased number of tours (β = 0.26) [48]. In the same 
study, increased regional and workplace accessibility was 
related to reduced driving [48].
A study from the UK revealed multiple associations 
related to perceived changes in commuting route and 
travel mode [44]. More convenient public transportation 
was associated with using other methods of commuting 
than private cars (OR = 3.31). If the route was perceived 
to become less pleasant to walk or more dangerous when 
cycling or crossing roads, driving increased (β = 5.22–
7.57). If the route was perceived as less dangerous to 
cycle, cars were used less for commuting (OR = 3.70). 
In another study, a new dedicated bike lane was associ-
ated with a 57% increase in the number of cyclists [49]. 
A new bike lane was also associated with an increase 
in the average number of cyclists from 79.2 to 257.1 on 
an intervention street whereas on the adjacent control 
streets the number of cyclists decreased from 54.4 to 
36.3 [50].
Discussion
Summary of Evidence
This extensive systematic review aimed to identify the 
determinants of the built environment associated with 
physical activity and to evaluate how changes in the built 
environment are associated with changes in physical ac-
tivity. This is the first review with focus on studies using 
longitudinal design, that is, prospective longitudinal 
cohort studies and natural experiments, which implies 
the highest level of evidence to date about this topic. 
Moreover, the analysis was stratified based on different 
domains of physical activity, which should strengthen 
the evidence base. The high-quality evidence showed 
that changes in the built environment were associated 
with increased transportation-related and overall phys-
ical activity.
A considerable number of studies indicated that cre-
ating new infrastructure for walking, cycling, and public 
transportation were related to increased physical activity. 
The findings were most consistent for transportation-re-
lated and overall physical activity, which were especially 
associated with the creation of new trails for walking 
and cycling. In addition to increased physical activity, 
new infrastructure for walking, cycling, and public 
transportation was associated with decreased use of pri-
vate cars in four studies [12, 15, 16, 18].
The findings from the natural experiments are prom-
ising in terms of increasing physical activity and reduc-
ing the use of private motor vehicles by making the built 
environment more supportive for walking, cycling, and 
public transportation. This would imply that behavior is 
responsive to changes in the built environment and de-
mand for active transportation can be induced, which 
would have direct implications for greater investments 
into high-quality infrastructure for these active modes 
of transportation in order to make the modal shift from 
private motor vehicles possible. However, many of the 
natural experiments suffered from methodological weak-
nesses, so the results must be interpreted with caution.
A higher objectively measured accessibility was asso-
ciated with increased transportation-related and overall 
physical activity in high-quality studies. In terms of trans-
portation-related physical activity, the results originated 
from four study populations, and all showed positive as-
sociation [21, 24, 25, 31, 32]. The strongest evidence was 
found for the number of destinations with four positive 
associations indicating an increase from 3.3 to 17.6 min/
week or showing 1.4 times higher odds for increased 
physical activity. A higher land use mix also increased 
walking in two studies. In addition, availability of public 
transportation was associated with increased transporta-
tion walking in three studies. Regarding overall physical 
activity, majority of the studies showed positive associ-
ation [22, 26, 29, 30]. The findings provide implications 
for zoning policy and support the creation of compact 
and diverse residential areas where housing is mixed with 
commercial, public and recreational destinations and the 
circumstances for daily living are located within walking 
and cycling distance.
For objectively measured street network connectivity 
and population density, the evidence was more mixed and 
was limited to the few studies assessing these features. 
Higher street connectivity was associated with increased 
overall physical activity in three studies [26, 29, 38] and 
transportation-related physical activity in two studies 
[21, 25], but there were also two negative and several null 
associations. Increased population density was positively 
associated with increased transportation-related physical 
activity in three out of four studies [31, 32, 39].
Also, few longitudinal studies have evaluated aggre-
gated walkability measures and their association to phys-
ical activity. Three high-quality studies indicated that 
improved walkability is related to higher physical activity 
[22, 40, 41]. Based on the studies included in the present 
review, park and playground improvements seem to be 
a feasible strategy to enhance overall physical activity. 
However, these studies suffered from methodological 
weaknesses which render it difficult to evaluate the true 
impact on physical activity.
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251 
247
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 In terms of the perceived built environment measures, 
four studies showed positive associations between pleas-
antness and positive neighborhood features and physical 
activity [24, 43–45]. Also, environments considered safe 
were associated with more overall physical activity and 
leisure time physical activity in four studies [11, 43, 46, 47]. 
The perceived number of destinations and public transit 
availability were associated with transportation-related 
physical activity in the RESIDential Environment Study 
(RESIDE) in Australia. Because the five positive associ-
ations were observed only in two studies [25, 39] within 
the same study population, general conclusions cannot 
be drawn about perceived accessibility. Overall, 10 stud-
ies did not find significant associations between changes 
in the built environment and changes in physical activity 
[51–60].
Physical activity occurs in multiple domains and eco-
logical models emphasize domain-specific and context 
specific environmental influences which should be con-
ceptually matched [7]. This review showed that increase 
in overall physical activity was mostly associated with 
creation of new infrastructure for walking, cycling, and 
public transportation; park and playground improve-
ments; and objectively measured accessibility. Only few 
studies assessed changes in perceived built environment 
measures and their association with changes in overall 
physical activity. Two out of three studies indicated 
that environments considered more unsafe were asso-
ciated with declined overall physical activity. In terms 
of transportation related physical activity, the review 
showed that improved objectively measured accessi-
bility and new infrastructure for walking, cycling and 
public transportation were associated with increased 
physical activity. Moreover, improved perception of 
aesthetics was associated with transportation related 
physical activity in two out of three studies. In terms of 
leisure-time physical activity, no uniform associations 
were found.
Thus far, the studies concerning longitudinal associ-
ation between the built environment and physical activity 
have suggested that street and pedestrian connectivity, 
land use and destination mix, and overall neighborhood 
design are important factors for supporting physical ac-
tivity among adults [6]. However, the majority of this 
evidence originated from cross-sectional studies that 
adjusted for neighborhood self-selection. Previous evi-
dence from cross-sectional studies also indicate that high 
population density is correlated with increased physical 
activity [6, 61]. This is also considered a prerequisite for 
creating neighborhoods where housing is mixed with 
commercial and recreational destinations and where 
public transit is easily accessible [3]. Moreover, a study 
that compared 11 countries revealed a correlation be-
tween aesthetics and safety with moderate to vigorous 
physical activity [62].
The findings related to objectively measured accessi-
bility are in line with previous cross-sectional evidence 
suggesting that mixed land use and accessibility of differ-
ent types of destinations and public transit contribute to 
population-level transportation-related physical activity 
in urban settings among adults [63, 64]. The results of 
the present review show that land use and destination 
mix can result in increased transportation-related and 
overall physical activity. Moreover, we found some evi-
dence that perceived aesthetics and safety can affect 
physical activity. In terms of objectively measured street 
connectivity, population density and other perceived 
built environment measures, no valid conclusions could 
be drawn due to the limited number of studies.
Regarding the quality of the examined research, the 
risk of bias was lower in prospective longitudinal cohort 
studies compared to natural experiments. Also, a recent 
review concerning the risk of bias in natural experiments 
concluded that they suffer from methodological limita-
tions in a number of key bias domains [65]. In terms of 
natural experiments, the use of control groups, longer 
follow-up and exposure times as well as more advanced 
methods for assessing the exposure to the experiment are 
needed to detect the true effects on behavior. Moreover, 
only five studies used objectively measured physical 
activity as the main outcome and the recall bias is a 
common problem with self-reported physical activity 
measures. There were 22 studies with a quality score 
of 0.85 or above. Also, within these high-quality stud-
ies, the results reflect that new infrastructure for walk-
ing, cycling and public transportation is associated with 
increased overall physical activity and transportation-re-
lated physical activity and that accessibility is associated 
with transportation-related physical activity.
The research field is evolving rapidly, particularly in 
terms of more advanced study designs. However, lon-
gitudinal studies and natural experiments are not free 
from confounding. True experimental studies assessing 
changes in the built environment and their effect on 
physical activity will most likely never be feasible, so the 
methodology of observational studies and natural exper-
iments needs to be enhanced.
It is essential to adjust for people’s reasons for select-
ing a specific place to live and their general attitudes to-
wards active transportation, a topic that has been broadly 
discussed elsewhere [66–68]. Residential mobility and 
motivations for changing residences have been shown to 
involve a complex interplay between age, family status, 
and timing of life events [69]. They primarily emanate 
from factors related to quality of life, such as improved 
housing, neighborhoods, commuting and health ben-
efits, and in addition, family reasons are important for 
choosing a specific place to live [69].
An individual might, for example, choose a place of 
residence in a car-dominant neighborhood based on the 
248 
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 area’s affordable housing. Even in this case, physical ac-
tivity might actually increase due to longer distances to 
amenities if attitudes towards active transportation are 
positive. In the present review, the majority (80%) of the 
studies did not adjust for residential self-selection. Some 
used fixed effects models to adjust for unmeasured with-
in-person confounders that are stable over time. Still, the 
possibility remains that, for example, people’s attitudes 
might change during the follow-up.
Recently, an international comparative study revealed 
that, among adults, living in an activity-friendly neigh-
borhood was associated with 68 to 89 min more physical 
activity than living in a non-activity-friendly neighbor-
hood [61]. The findings were generally similar across di-
verse cities in different countries, which would imply that 
physical activity can be increased in different settings 
with similar built environment characteristics. Only a few 
longitudinal studies focused on different settings (such 
as rural and sparsely populated areas) or on low-income 
countries, which are recommended areas of research for 
future longitudinal studies. More research on different 
age groups is required to make stratification possible. 
Thus far, mostly adults have been studied. Further stud-
ies on perceived measures of the built environment as 
determinants of physical activity are also needed.
Strengths and Limitations of the Review
The present review has multiple strengths. We conducted 
an extensive search of publications from six databases 
and evaluated the quality of the evidence. We assessed 
the primary measure of effects according to changes in 
the built environment and their association with changes 
in physical activity. Moreover, we were able to stratify the 
analysis according to the domain of physical activity and 
the built environment measurement type.
The review also has limitations. We focused solely on 
peer-reviewed publications and did not conduct a search 
for grey literature, which might introduce publication bias. 
Age stratification was not feasible because the population 
of most of the studies consisted of adults. Most studies 
were also conducted in urban settings and in high-income 
countries. Hence, the applicability of the results to different 
populations or settings is somewhat limited. Furthermore, 
the heterogeneity of the studies and the diversity of out-
come and exposure measures prevented us from conduct-
ing a meta-analysis. We extracted the statistically significant 
associations from original studies using the most adjusted 
model. An alternative would have been to use the results 
with minimum adjustments to make the effect sizes of dif-
ferent studies more comparable. Since we were not able to 
conduct a quantitative meta-analysis, we expect that the 
use of the most adjusted models will not bias our results. 
In addition, the built environment categories used to derive 
the results are potentially heterogeneous, and the different 
exposure measures included in those might be defined con-
ceptually and computationally in different ways.
Conclusions
The findings from this review support the hypothesis that 
urban and transport planning have an effect on physical 
activity of the citizens. The review showed that improved 
objectively measured accessibility assessed with the 
number of different type of destinations, access to public 
transportation, and land use mix was associated with 
increased transportation related physical activity. The 
evidence also suggests that transportation-related and 
overall physical activity could be increased and the use 
of private motor vehicles reduced by creating new infra-
structure for walking, cycling, and public transportation.
The results provided support for the benefits of 
designing activity-friendly and health-enhancing cities 
and living environments. The findings have implications 
for zoning policy and support the creation of compact 
and diverse residential areas where housing is mixed 
with commercial, public, and recreational destinations 
in order to enhance everyday physical activity. Moreover, 
investments into infrastructure for active modes of 
transportation could reinforce the modal shift from 
private motor vehicles into walking, cycling and public 
transportation. Further studies with more rigorous study 
designs assessing changes in the built environment and 
their effects on physical activity are warranted to ascer-
tain causalities and to assess the effects of other factors 
of the built environment.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at Annals of 
Behavioral Medicine online.
Acknowledgments We acknowledge grant support from the 
Ministry of Education and Culture, the Finnish Cultural 
Foundation, the Outpatient Care Research Foundation and the 
Juho Vainio Foundation. The funders played no role in designing, 
conducting, interpreting or publishing the study.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Authors’ Statement of Conflict of Interest and Adherence to Ethical 
Standards The authors have no actual or potential competing fi-
nancial interests with the organization that sponsored the research. 
The corresponding author has the approval of all other listed 
authors for the submission and publication of the manuscript.
Authors’ Contributions All people who have the right to be rec-
ognized as authors have been included in the list of authors and 
everyone has made independent contribution to the manuscript.
Ethical Approval The material has been acquired according to 
ethical standards.
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251 
249
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 References
1. Ding D, Lawson KD, Kolbe-Alexander TL, et al.; Lancet 
Physical Activity Series 2 Executive Committee. The eco-
nomic burden of physical inactivity: a global analysis of 
major non-communicable diseases. Lancet. 2016; 388(10051): 
1311–1324.
2. Sallis JF, Bull F, Burdett R, et al. Use of science to guide city 
planning policy and practice: how to achieve healthy and sus-
tainable future cities. Lancet. 2016; 388(10062): 2936–2947.
3. Giles-Corti B, Vernez-Moudon A, Reis R, et al. City planning 
and population health: a global challenge. Lancet. 2016; 
388(10062): 2912–2924.
4. Stevenson M, Thompson J, de Sá TH, et al. Land use, trans-
port, and population health: estimating the health benefits of 
compact cities. Lancet. 2016; 388(10062): 2925–2935.
5. Ding D, Gebel K. Built environment, physical activity, and 
obesity: what have we learned from reviewing the literature? 
Health Place. 2012; 18(1): 100–105.
6. McCormack GR, Shiell A. In search of causality: a system-
atic review of the relationship between the built environment 
and physical activity among adults. Int J Behav Nutr Phys 
Act. 2011; 8: 125.
7. Gebel K, Ding D, Foster C, Bauman AE, Sallis JF. Improving 
current practice in reviews of the built environment and phys-
ical activity. Sports Med. 2015; 45(3): 297–302.
8. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG; PRISMA 
Group. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Ann Intern Med. 
2009; 151(4): 264–269, W64.
9. Kmet LM, Lee RC, Cook LS. Standard Quality Assessment 
Criteria for Evaluating Primary Research Papers From a 
Variety of Fields. Edmonton, Canada: Alberta Heritage 
Foundation for Medical Research (AHFMR). HTA Initiative 
#13; 2004.
10. Goodman A, Sahlqvist S, Ogilvie D; iConnect Consortium. 
New walking and cycling routes and increased physical ac-
tivity: one- and 2-year findings from the UK iConnect Study. 
Am J Public Health. 2014; 104(9): e38–e46.
11. Panter J, Ogilvie D; iConnect consortium. Theorising and 
testing environmental pathways to behaviour change: natural 
experimental study of the perception and use of new infra-
structure to promote walking and cycling in local communi-
ties. BMJ Open. 2015; 5(9): e007593.
12. Goodman A, Panter J, Sharp SJ, Ogilvie D. Effectiveness and 
equity impacts of town-wide cycling initiatives in England: a 
longitudinal, controlled natural experimental study. Soc Sci 
Med. 2013; 97: 228–237.
13. Fitzhugh EC, Bassett DR Jr., Evans MF. Urban trails and 
physical activity: a natural experiment. Am J Prev Med. 2010; 
39(3): 259–262.
14. Rissel C, Greaves S, Wen LM, Crane M, Standen C. Use 
of and short-term impacts of new cycling infrastructure in 
inner-Sydney, Australia: a quasi-experimental design. Int J 
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2015; 12: 129.
15. Heinen E, Panter J, Mackett R, Ogilvie D. Changes in mode 
of travel to work: a natural experimental study of new trans-
port infrastructure. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2015; 12: 81.
16. Brown BB, Werner CM. Before and after a new light rail stop: 
resident attitudes, travel behavior, and obesity. J Am Plan 
Assoc. 2009; 75(1): 5–12.
17. Brown BB, Werner CM. A new rail stop: tracking moderate 
physical activity bouts and ridership. Am J Prev Med. 2007; 
33(4): 306–309.
18. Curtis C, Olaru D. The impacts of a new railway: travel be-
haviour of residents in new station precincts. In: Viegas JM, 
Macario R, eds. 12th World Transport Research Conference. 
Lisbon, Portugal: World Transport Research Conference; 
2010: 25.
19. McDonald NC, Yang Y
, Abbott SM, Bullock AN. Impact of 
the Safe Routes to School program on walking and biking: 
Eugene, Oregon study. Transp Policy. 2013; 29: 243–248.
20. Burbidge S, Goulias K. Evaluating the impact of neighbor-
hood trail development on active travel behavior and overall 
physical activity of suburban residents. Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board. 2009; 2135: 78–86.
21. Hirsch JA, Moore KA, Clarke PJ, et al. Changes in the built 
environment and changes in the amount of walking over 
time: longitudinal results from the multi-ethnic study of ath-
erosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 2014; 180(8): 799–809.
22. Schipperijn J, Ried-Larsen M, Nielsen MS, et al. A longitu-
dinal study of objectively measured built environment as de-
terminant of physical activity in young adults: the European 
Youth Heart Study. J Phys Act Health. 2015; 12(7): 909–914.
23. Western Australian Planning Commission. Liveable neigh-
bourhoods: A Western Australian government sustainable cit-
ies initiative. Perth, Australia: Western Australian Planning 
Commission; 2004.
24. Giles-Corti B, Bull F, Knuiman M, et al. The influence of 
urban design on neighbourhood walking following residen-
tial relocation: longitudinal results from the RESIDE study. 
Soc Sci Med. 2013; 77(1): 20–30.
25. Knuiman MW, Christian HE, Divitini ML, et al. A longitu-
dinal analysis of the influence of the neighborhood built en-
vironment on walking for transportation: the RESIDE study. 
Am J Epidemiol. 2014; 180(5): 453–461.
26. Wells NM, Yang Y
. Neighborhood design and walking. 
A quasi-experimental longitudinal study. Am J Prev Med. 
2008; 34(4): 313–319.
27. Ranchod YK, Diez Roux AV, Evenson KR, Sánchez BN, 
Moore K. Longitudinal associations between neighborhood 
recreational facilities and change in recreational physical ac-
tivity in the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis, 2000-2007. 
Am J Epidemiol. 2014; 179(3): 335–343.
28. Boone-Heinonen J, Guilkey DK, Evenson KR, Gordon-
Larsen P. Residential self-selection bias in the estimation of 
built environment effects on physical activity between adoles-
cence and young adulthood. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2010; 
7: 70.
29. Sun G, Oreskovic NM, Lin H. How do changes to the built 
environment influence walking behaviors? A longitudinal 
study within a university campus in Hong Kong. Int J Health 
Geogr. 2014; 13: 28.
30. Halonen JI, Stenholm S, Kivimäki M, et al. Is change in 
availability of sports facilities associated with change in phys-
ical activity? A prospective cohort study. Prev Med. 2015; 73: 
10–14.
31. Coogan PF, White LF, Adler TJ, Hathaway KM, Palmer JR, 
Rosenberg L. Prospective study of urban form and physical 
activity in the Black Women’s Health Study. Am J Epidemiol. 
2009; 170(9): 1105–1117.
32. Joh K, Chakrabarti S, Boarnet MG, Woo A. The walking renais-
sance: A longitudinal analysis of walking travel in the Greater 
Los Angeles Area, USA. Sustainability. 2015; 7(1): 8985–9011.
33. King DK, Litt J, Hale J, Burniece KM, Ross C. ‘The park 
a tree built’: Evaluating how a park development pro-
ject impacted where people play. Urban Forestry & Urban 
Greening. 2015; 14(2): 293–299.
34. Cohen DA, Han B, Derose KP, Williamson S, Marsh T, 
McKenzie TL. Physical activity in parks: a randomized con-
trolled trial using community engagement. Am J Prev Med. 
2013; 45(5): 590–597.
250 
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
 35. Cohen DA, Han B, Isacoff J, et al. Impact of park renova-
tions on park use and park-based physical activity. J Phys Act 
Health. 2015; 12(2): 289–295.
36. Tester J, Baker R. Making the playfields even: evaluating the 
impact of an environmental intervention on park use and 
physical activity. Prev Med. 2009; 48(4): 316–320.
37. Roemmich JN, Beeler JE, Johnson L. A microenvironment 
approach to reducing sedentary time and increasing physical 
activity of children and adults at a playground. Prev Med. 
2014; 62: 108–112.
38. Hou N, Popkin BM, Jacobs DR Jr., et al. Longitudinal asso-
ciations between neighborhood-level street network with 
walking, bicycling, and jogging: the CARDIA study. Health 
Place. 2010; 16(6): 1206–1215.
39. Beenackers MA, Foster S, Kamphuis CB, et al. Taking up 
cycling after residential relocation: built environment factors. 
Am J Prev Med. 2012; 42(6): 610–615.
40. Hirsch JA, Diez Roux AV, Moore KA, Evenson KR, 
Rodriguez DA. Change in walking and body mass index fol-
lowing residential relocation: the multi-ethnic study of ath-
erosclerosis. Am J Public Health. 2014; 104(3): e49–e56.
41. Wasfi RA, Dasgupta K, Eluru N, Ross NA. Exposure to 
walkable neighbourhoods in urban areas increases utilitarian 
walking: Longitudinal study of Canadians. J Transp Health. 
2015; 3(4): 440–447.
42. Wong BY
, Ho SY
, Lo WS, Cerin E, Mak KK, Lam TH. 
Longitudinal relations of perceived availability of neighbor-
hood sport facilities with physical activity in adolescents: an 
analysis of potential moderators. J Phys Act Health. 2014; 
11(3): 581–587.
43. Humpel N, Marshall AL, Leslie E, Bauman A, Owen N. 
Changes in neighborhood walking are related to changes in 
perceptions of environmental attributes. Ann Behav Med. 
2004; 27(1): 60–67.
44. Panter J, Griffin S, Ogilvie D. Active commuting and percep-
tions of the route environment: a longitudinal analysis. Prev 
Med. 2014; 67: 134–140.
45. Titze S, Stronegger W
, Owen N. Prospective study of individual, 
social, and environmental predictors of physical activity: wom-
en’s leisure running. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2005; 6(3): 363–376.
46. Datar A, Nicosia N, Shier V
. Parent perceptions of neigh-
borhood safety and children’s physical activity, sedentary 
behavior, and obesity: evidence from a national longitudinal 
study. Am J Epidemiol. 2013; 177(10): 1065–1073.
47. Foster S, Knuiman M, Hooper P, Christian H, Giles-Corti 
B. Do changes in residents’ fear of crime impact their walk-
ing? Longitudinal results from RESIDE. Prev Med. 2014; 62: 
161–166.
48. Krizek KJ. Residential relocation and changes in urban travel 
- Does neighborhood-scale urban form matter? J Am Plan 
Assoc. 2003; 69(3): 265–281.
49. Parker KM, Gustat J, Rice JC. Installation of bicycle lanes 
and increased ridership in an urban, mixed-income setting in 
New Orleans, Louisiana. J Phys Act Health. 2011; 8(Suppl 1): 
S98–S102.
50. Parker KM, Rice J, Gustat J, Ruley J, Spriggs A, Johnson C. 
Effect of bike lane infrastructure improvements on ridership 
in one New Orleans neighborhood. Ann Behav Med. 2013; 
45(Suppl 1): S101–S107.
51. Coombes E, Jones A, Page A, Cooper AR. Is change in en-
vironmental supportiveness between primary and secondary 
school associated with a decline in children׳s physical activity 
levels? Health Place. 2014; 29: 171–178.
52. Dawson J, Hillsdon M, Boller I, Foster C. Perceived barriers 
to walking in the neighbourhood environment and change 
in physical activity levels over 12 months. Br J Sports Med. 
2007; 41(9): 562–568.
53. Lee IM, Ewing R, Sesso HD. The built environment and 
physical activity levels: the Harvard Alumni Health Study. 
Am J Prev Med. 2009; 37(4): 293–298.
54. Dill J, McNeil N, Broach J, Ma L. Bicycle boulevards and 
changes in physical activity and active transportation: find-
ings from a natural experiment. Prev Med. 2014; 69(Suppl 1): 
S74–S78.
55. Ward Thompson C, Curl A, Aspinall P, Alves S, Zuin A. Do 
changes to the local street environment alter behaviour and 
quality of life of older adults? The ‘DIY Streets’ intervention. 
Br J Sports Med. 2014; 48(13): 1059–1065.
56. Cohen DA, Golinelli D, Williamson S, Sehgal A, Marsh T, 
McKenzie TL. Effects of park improvements on park use and 
physical activity: policy and programming implications. Am J 
Prev Med. 2009; 37(6): 475–480.
57. Quigg R, Reeder AI, Gray A, Holt A, Waters D. The effect-
iveness of a community playground intervention. J Urban 
Health. 2012; 89(1): 171–184.
58. Evenson KR, Herring AH, Huston SL. Evaluating change in 
physical activity with the building of a multi-use trail. Am J 
Prev Med. 2005; 28(2 Suppl 2): 177–185.
59. MacDonald JM, Stokes RJ, Cohen DA, Kofner A, 
Ridgeway GK. The effect of light rail transit on body mass 
index and physical activity. Am J Prev Med. 2010; 39(2): 
105–112.
60. Christian H, Knuiman M, Bull F, et al. A new urban planning 
code’s impact on walking: the residential environments pro-
ject. Am J Public Health. 2013; 103(7): 1219–1228.
61. Sallis JF, Cerin E, Conway TL, et al. Physical activity in 
relation to urban environments in 14 cities worldwide: a 
cross-sectional study. Lancet. 2016; 387(10034): 2207–2217.
62. Cerin E, Cain KL, Conway TL, et al. Neighborhood environ-
ments and objectively measured physical activity in 11 coun-
tries. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014; 46(12): 2253–2264.
63. Cerin E, Leslie E, du Toit L, Owen N, Frank LD. Destinations 
that matter: associations with walking for transport. Health 
Place. 2007; 13(3): 713–724.
64. Saelens BE, Handy SL. Built environment correlates of 
walking: a review. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008; 40(7 Suppl): 
S550–S566.
65. Benton JS, Anderson J, Hunter RF, French DP. The effect of 
changing the built environment on physical activity: a quan-
titative review of the risk of bias in natural experiments. Int J 
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2016; 13(1): 107.
66. Mokhtarian PL, Cao X. Examining the impacts of residen-
tial self-selection on travel behavior: a focus on methodolo-
gies. Transp Res Pt B-Methodol. 2008; 42(3): 204–228.
67. van de Coevering P, Maat K, van Wee B. Multi-period re-
search designs for identifying causal effects of built environ-
ment characteristics on travel behaviour. Transp Rev. 2015; 
35(4): 512–532.
68. Boone-Heinonen J, Gordon-Larsen P, Guilkey DK, Jacobs 
DR Jr., Popkin BM. Environment and physical activity dy-
namics: the role of residential self-selection. Psychol Sport 
Exerc. 2011; 12(1): 54–60.
69. Geist C, McManus PA. Geographical mobility over the life 
course: motivations and implications. Popul Space Place. 
2008; 14(4): 283–303.
70. De Meester F, Van Dyck D, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Deforche B, 
Cardon G. Changes in physical activity during the transition 
from primary to secondary school in Belgian children: what 
is the role of the school environment? BMC Public Health. 
2014; 14(1): 261.
ann. behav. med. (2018) 52:239–251 
251
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/abm/article-abstract/52/3/239/4815762
by guest
on 28 February 2018
