  
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been 
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to 
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 
10.1111/peps.12206. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Running Head: JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY 
 
Worked to Death: The Relationships of Job Demands and Job Control with Mortality  
 
Corresponding author: 
 
Erik Gonzalez-Mulé  
Department of Management & Entrepreneurship 
Kelley School of Business 
Indiana University 
1309 E 10th St. 
Bloomington, IN 47405 
812-855-2644 
erikgonz@indiana.edu 
Co-author: 
Bethany Cockburn 
Department of Management & Organizations 
Henry B. Tippie College of Business 
The University of Iowa 
W317 Pappajohn Business Building  
Iowa City, IA 52242 
319-335-1504 
bethany-cockburn@uiowa.edu 
 
Acknowledgements: This paper was presented at the 2015 Academy of Management 
Conference in Vancouver. The authors would like to thank Amy Colbert and Zhenyu Yuan 
for their constructive feedback as well as Carol Roan and their colleagues for her assistance 
in accessing data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey. We would also like to thank 
Nathan Podsakoff and two anonymous reviewers for their invaluable recommendations and 
developmental feedback throughout the review process.  
 
 
 
 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     2 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Despite recent calls in the literature to examine the effects of the occupational context 
on physiological outcomes, such as mortality, little research has accumulated on this front. 
Thus, the purpose of this study is to investigate the interactive relationship between job 
demands and control and death. Drawing from the job design, stress, and epidemiology 
literatures, we argue that job demands will be positively related to mortality under conditions 
of low control, and negatively related to mortality under conditions of high control. We tested 
our hypothesis using a seven year time-lagged design in a sample of 2,363 individuals from 
the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. Our results supported our hypothesis, with results 
showing that for individuals in low control jobs, high job demands are associated with a 
15.4% increase in the odds of death compared to low job demands. For those in high control 
jobs, high job demands are associated with a 34% decrease in the odds of death compared to 
low job demands. Supplementary analyses revealed a similar pattern predicting body mass 
index in the group of surviving individuals. We discuss the implications of these findings for 
theory and practice, while proposing several avenues for future research. 
 
Keywords: Job characteristics, stress, strain, mortality 
 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     3 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
―… in this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.‖ 
- 
Benjamin Franklin (1789) 
 
As Benjamin Franklin noted, one of the great invariants in life is death. As such, 
investigating the factors that contribute to death is the goal of many scholars in various fields 
of study, such as epidemiology, sociology, and clinical psychology. Despite the wide ranging 
interest in studying human mortality, studies exploring the work factors associated with 
death are largely absent from the organizational psychology and management literatures. 
This is particularly surprising given that individuals spend a majority of their adult lives 
working and, assuming full time work from age 21 until 65, will have worked over 90,000 
hours in their lifetime (Erdogan, Bauer, Truxillo, & Mansfield, 2012). Because work is a 
central component of individuals’ lives, it follows that aspects of individuals’ work context 
should relate to important life outcomes. This logic forms the basis for spillover models of 
health and attitudes (e.g., Judge, Ilies, & Dimotakis, 2010; Tait, Padgett, & Baldwin, 1989) 
as well as job-based theories of stress whereby aspects of individuals’ work conditions affect 
health and psychological well-being both inside and outside of the work context (Crawford, 
LePine, & Rich, 2010; Hobfoll, 1989; Karasek, 1979). Recent reviews on the relationship 
between justice and health (Robbins, Ford, & Tetrick, 2012), work factors and life 
satisfaction (an important indicator of well-being; Erdogan et al., 2012), and work stress and 
health (Ganster & Rosen, 2013) echo the importance of the work domain to individuals’ 
lives outside of work while simultaneously emphasizing that more research is needed to 
understand the link between work and nonwork domains.  
Given the inextricable link between individuals’ work context and broader life 
outcomes, scholars have recently called for research that moves beyond investigating the 
antecedents of proximal psychological (e.g., life dissatisfaction) and physiological (e.g., 
increased cortisol levels) health outcomes to investigating how job factors relate to more 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     4 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
distal human health outcomes, such as mortality (Grant & Wade-Benzoni, 2009; Sliter, 
Sinclair, Yuan, & Mohr, 2014; Stein & Cropanzano, 2011). For example, Demerouti, 
Bakker, Nachreiner, and Schaufeli (2001, p. 510) stated that ―further research is necessary to 
clarify such prolonged causal links‖ between job factors and distal physiological outcomes. 
Similarly, Heaphy and Dutton (2008) called for a renewed research agenda into human 
physiology from the perspective of organizational theories with an emphasis on delineating 
the impact of the work context on broad life outcomes. They argue that this line of research 
highlights ―the fundamentally important effect of work contexts‖ (Heaphy & Dutton, 2008, 
p. 138) and reinforces the utility of studying human physiology through the lens of 
organizational psychology. It is surprising, then, that despite the scholarly and practical 
interest in studying how work relates to employee health, no studies in the organizational 
psychology or management fields have explicitly examined the relationship between job 
characteristics and mortality. This is a glaring gap in the literature, as investigating the link 
between job factors and mortality is fundamentally important to various stakeholders, 
including organizations, employees, and society.  
From the perspective of organizations, the job factors associated with longevity are 
also likely to be associated with constructs more proximal to organizational performance, 
such as employee absenteeism, stress, and health (Demerouti et al., 2001; Ganster, 2005). 
Further, although death typically occurs after individuals have exited the workforce1, job 
design factors may predict premature mortality, which is typically preceded by other 
psychological and physiological maladies (e.g., depression, diabetes; Heraclides, Chandola, 
Witte, & Brunner, 2009). For example, Ganster, Fox, and Dwyer (2001) found that 
employees in highly demanding jobs with low control over how to do their work contribute 
to increased employer healthcare costs. Thus, these issues collectively contribute to 
                                                          
 
1 For example, the average age of death in the United States is approximately 79 years, which is 14 years after 
the typical retirement age. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     5 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
productivity losses and increased healthcare costs for employers. Knowledge of how to 
structure jobs in a manner that increases employee longevity could have far reaching 
economic effects for both employers and society as a result of improved employee health 
outcomes.  
Relatedly, these same job factors that might be related to mortality also affect the 
quality of life of employees.  For example, working under time pressure, a prototypical job 
demand, has been linked to lower levels of work-life balance (Syrek, Apostel, & Antoni, 
2013), while general work stress has been linked to higher levels of work-family conflict 
(Ford, Heinen, & Langkamer, 2007). Further, both Japanese and Chinese cultures have a 
word dedicated to define ―death by overwork‖ (karōshi, guolaosi, respectively; O’Reilly & 
Rosato, 2013), although this concept has little presence in the organizational psychology and 
management literatures.  For some jobs (e.g., firefighter, policeman) the risk of death is self-
evident, but for other jobs in which incumbents experience a great deal of stress (e.g., social 
work, nurses; Maslach & Schaufeli, 1993), the risks may not be as obvious. Evidence linking 
specific job factors and a greater risk of mortality could help managers and employees 
structure jobs to mitigate stress and avoid its potentially negative consequences.  
Finally, human health and mortality are basic aspects of societal functioning. For 
example, ―the preservation of life‖ is one of three unalienable human rights in the United 
States Constitution as well as the World Health Organization constitution, just as a key goal 
of the Academy of Management mission is to improve people’s lives, and the World Health 
Organization considers health a fundamental human right. Further, economists recently 
recommended abandoning GDP as an indicator of a country’s well-being in favor of 
―measuring what actually does make life worthwhile‖, such as well-being and life 
expectancy (p. 283; Costanza, Kubiszewski, Giovannini, Lovins, et al., 2014). These 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     6 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
perspectives collectively highlight the fundamental importance of human well-being to 
societal functioning as well as to the stated mission of management scholars.   
Given that employee health is critically important to employees, employers, and 
society at large, the current study aims to provide an answer to the question of how job 
factors relate to mortality, with the goal of informing both theory and practice. This study 
contributes to the literature in two key ways. First, our study answers a call in the literature 
to investigate the work-related antecedents of human physiological outcomes (Heaphy & 
Dutton, 2008). We draw from the job demands-control (JDC) model (Karasek, 1979) to 
argue that job demands and control will interact to predict mortality, such that job demands 
are positively related to mortality when coupled with low control. Further, we extend the 
JDC model by drawing from the stress literature to argue that demanding jobs, when coupled 
with high control, result in a decreased risk of mortality (Crawford et al., 2010). Second, 
given that the JDC model was originally conceived as a model of mental strain and is 
typically studied in that context in organizational research, we draw from research in the 
epidemiology literature to extend the predictions of the JDC model to our criterion of 
interest. Thus, our study helps bridge the gap between long-standing research traditions on 
the antecedents of job strain in the context of the JDC model and the ultimate human 
physiological outcome: death. We test our model in a sample of 2,363 participants from the 
Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey using a time-lagged design where job demands and job 
control were measured seven years prior to a follow-up survey where participant death was 
assessed. In the sections that follow, we discuss the JDC model which provides the 
underlying rationale for our model examining mortality through the lens of job demands and 
control factors, we integrate research from the stress literature with the JDC model to frame 
our hypothesis, and we highlight theory and empirical findings from the epidemiology 
literature that link the predictions from the JDC model to mortality. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     7 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 
The Job Demands-Control Model 
Griffin and Clarke (2011) define stress as a combination of environmental events that 
act on an individual (i.e., stressors) and the individual’s responses to those stressors (i.e., 
strain). Strain can, of course, take many forms, such as exhaustion, absenteeism, burnout, 
mental and physical health disorders and, the primary focus of this study, death (Darr & 
Johns, 2008). Given the salience of strain to a plethora of organizationally relevant 
outcomes, scholars have sought to identify its antecedents with a long research tradition of 
examining contextual work conditions as predictors of strain (Podsakoff, LePine, & LePine, 
2007). The JDC model provides a parsimonious framework that, over the past 20 years, has 
been the dominant theoretical model in the study of stress and strain (Ganster & Rosen, 
2013; Karasek, 1979). In essence, Karasek (1979) proposed that ―strain results not from a 
single aspect of the work environment, but from the joint effects of the demands of a work 
situation and the range of decision-making freedom available to the worker facing those 
demands‖ (p. 287).  Job demands are defined as psychological demands on employees in the 
form of time pressure, concentration requirements, and workload, while job control is 
defined as one’s control over one’s tasks and conduct (Karasek, 1979). Job control can come 
in the form of increased autonomy or participation in decision-making at work, and is also 
referred to as job decision latitude in the JDC model.  
According to the JDC model, job demands are ―instigators of action‖ (Karasek, 1979, 
p. 287) because they motivate behavior towards goal pursuit while simultaneously causing 
anxiety because of the discrepancy between one’s current state and one’s desired end state 
(i.e., goal accomplishment). This is in contrast to situations with low demands which 
Karasek termed as being ―passive‖ and ―low strain‖ in nature. This anxiety is a source of 
discomfort that people will seek to resolve, and it is either improved or worsened by the 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     8 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
presence of high or low job control, respectively. In a demanding job with low job control, 
individuals’ action towards achieving one’s work goals are blocked, which leads to persistent 
psychological discomfort and proximal strain indicators, such as burnout and exhaustion 
(Demerouti et al., 2001; Richter & Hacker, 1998). For example, working under tight, 
difficult-to-meet deadlines places excess demands on an individual’s psychological and 
physical resources at work (Demerouti et al., 2001; LePine, Podsakoff, & Lepine, 2005). In 
the case of low control, individuals do not have the necessary discretion to delegate work 
tasks, decide on the order in which work is completed, and self-set goals to meet the time 
constraints of their job (Ilies, Dimotakis, & De Pater, 2010). In this situation, the time 
constraints of the job are likely to be harmful, as individuals suffer from a persistent state of 
strain because of their inability to meet the demands of their job. 
On the other hand, Karasek (1979) proposed that increased control at work will help 
offset the deleterious consequences of job demands while stimulating goal achievement. This 
is because high control causes demanding jobs to be ―active‖ in nature and, in accordance 
with self-determination theory, the JDC posits that individuals’ ability to display competence 
in high control situations would counteract the negative consequences of demanding jobs 
(Ryan & Deci, 2000). Although Karasek’s theory is general in nature and is typically 
interpreted by scholars to suggest a buffering effect of high control on demands, we extend 
his theory by arguing that job demands will be negatively related to strain under conditions 
of high job control. Specifically, according to the stress literature, job demands are 
conceptualized as a type of challenge stressor (e.g., Demerouti & Bakker, 2011), or a 
―stressor that people tend to appraise as potentially promoting their personal growth and 
achievement‖ (Podsakoff et al., 2007, p. 438). In essence, this line of research shows that job 
demands lead to work-derived psychological fulfillment because they promote increased 
mastery, adaptive behavior, and active problem solving (Crawford et al., 2010; Podsakoff et 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     9 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
al., 2007). This psychological fulfillment is associated with increased strain resolution, 
manifested in terms of reduced adverse health consequences and improved problem coping 
(Lazarus, 1981; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). However, in the context of the JDC model, we 
argue that job demands only result in psychological fulfillment and accompanying strain 
resolution when individuals have the necessary control in their jobs to resolve the challenges 
of their demanding work situation (Demerouti et al., 2001; Karasek, 1979; Theorell & 
Karasek, 1996). This is analogous to Selye’s (1978) concept of ―eustress‖, whereby people 
derive fulfillment from difficult work, but only when one perceives having high control over 
the processes used to accomplish the work (Le Fevre, Matheny, & Kolt, 2003; 2006). In 
support of this argument, Cavanaugh, Boswell, Roehling, and Boudreau (2000) found that 
managers, who typically have a great deal of job control, view job demands such as high 
workload and time pressure as opportunities to learn and achieve and, as a result, job 
demands were associated with greater job satisfaction. Thus, we expect that individuals in 
demanding jobs who are able to pursue self-set goals and determine the order in which work 
is done are more likely to experience strain resolution from work-derived psychological 
fulfillment, because these situations also provide them with the resources they need to 
successfully meet their job’s demands (Fox, Dwyer, & Ganster, 1993; McCall, Lombardo, & 
Morrison, 1988).  
The extant empirical evidence in the management and organizational psychology 
literatures provides some support for our arguments, although it is important to note that no 
studies in the management literature have applied the JDC model to the study of mortality. 
For example, in a study of nurses, Fox and colleagues (1993, p. 307) concluded that 
―perceptions of high workload are not in themselves predictive of health-related outcomes, 
and a high workload might even have a positive effect on well-being when accompanied by 
personal belief in a high level of control‖. On the other hand, Ilies and colleagues (2010) 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     10 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
found that individuals in jobs with high workloads and low control suffered from increased 
affective distress; however, there was no relationship between workload and affective 
distress when jobs also had high control. Numerous studies have echoed these findings, 
which collectively support the notion that low job control causes job demands to be harmful, 
but provide mixed evidence as to whether high job control acts as a buffer for the negative 
effects of job demands, or actually makes job demands beneficial to employee well-being 
(e.g., Bakker, Demerouti, & Euwema, 2005; Ganster et al., 2001; Ganster & Rosen, 2013; 
Sonnentag & Zijlstra, 2006; Totterdell, Wood, & Wall, 2006). This might be because many 
of the studies drawing from the JDC model in the organizational psychology and 
management literatures employ relatively short time lags (e.g., 2 months in Fox et al., 1993; 
2 weeks in Ilies et al., 2010) between assessing stressors and subsequent strain outcomes. It 
is likely that these strain processes take several years to manifest themselves, especially on 
physiological outcomes like death, and our proposed ―reversal‖ effect of job control on job 
demands may not appear in shorter term studies (Hockey, 1993; Seeman, McEwen, Rowe, & 
Singer, 2001). However, as we discussed above, there are strong theoretical reasons to 
expect that the relationship between job demands and strain indicators, such as mortality, 
will be negative under conditions of low control and positive under conditions of high 
control.  
 
 
Linking the Job Demands-Control Model to Mortality 
Although the JDC model was initially conceptualized as a model of mental strain, 
research in organizational psychology and management over the past two decades has 
extended the predictions from the JDC to a variety of additional physiological strain 
indicators, such as elevated blood pressure, cortisol levels, and heart disease (e.g., Fox et al., 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     11 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
1993; Ganster et al., 2001). These studies either implicitly or explicitly draw from the 
allostatic load (AL) model from the epidemiology literature to highlight the effects that the 
work context has on more distal human physiological disorders (Selye, 1955). Put simply, 
the AL model posits that individuals’ body systems (e.g., cardiovascular, immune, 
metabolic) adjust their functioning to cope with stressors (Sterling & Eyer, 1988). In 
response to stressors, these systems adapt in various ways, effectively setting new baseline 
levels of psychological and physiological functioning that result in changes to the body. For 
example, the model predicts that an individual in a job with a great deal of environmental 
stressors will, over time, experience an increase in body mass as a result of the body’s 
metabolic system responding to stress, regardless of the objective characteristics in the 
environment at a given moment. This adaptive process represents the ―wear and tear‖ 
experienced by physiological systems as a function of repeated and unresolved stressors (p. 
3, Juster, McEwen, & Lupien, 2010). The AL model proposes that, if left unresolved, this 
process leads to proximal indicators of strain, such as elevated stress hormones, elevated 
body mass, and burnout, which eventually cause more distal indicators of strain, such as 
depression, cardiovascular disease, and, ultimately, death. This is consistent with a growing 
body of research that shows that hormones associated with stress, such as cortisol, might also 
relate to cancer emergence, including breast and prostate cancer (e.g., Carlson, Speca, Patel, 
& Goodey, 2004; Reiche, Nunes, & Morimoto, 2004). Relatedly, according to the tension 
reduction hypothesis (Conger, 1956), individuals cope with stressors by engaging in risky 
and unhealthy behaviors, such as alcohol consumption, smoking, and a sedentary lifestyle 
(Robbins et al., 2012). These unhealthy behaviors are directly related to illness and mortality 
(Breslow & Enstrom, 1980; Taylor, 1999). Thus, even causes of death that may on the 
surface be unrelated to work strain, such as various types of cancers and even work 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     12 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
accidents, may actually result as an indirect consequence of individuals’ coping with 
unresolved work strain and the cascading process outlined in the AL model. 
The AL model has enjoyed robust empirical support, as Juster and colleagues’ (2010) 
review of the literature concluded that proximal strain indicators were related to physical 
declines, risk of cardiovascular disease, and all-cause mortality in several studies with time 
lags between three and seven years (Berkman et al., 1993; Seeman et al., 2001; Seeman, 
Singer, Rowe, Horwitz, & McEwen, 1997). Although little is known as to how the JDC 
model relates to mortality, the AL model provides a theoretical linkage between contextual 
elements of individuals’ jobs (i.e., job characteristics) that are distal antecedents of 
physiological outcomes (i.e., mortality). For example, a study by Blackmore et al. (2007) 
showed that high demands, low control jobs are most strongly predictive of depression, and 
that high demands, high control jobs resulted in a decreased chance of depression. A meta-
analysis by Kivimäki and colleagues (2006) conducted on studies largely from the 
epidemiology literature showed that individuals were more likely to develop heart disease 
when in jobs characterized by high demands and low control. They also found that the effects 
of high job demands and low control on cardiovascular disease were a consequence of more 
proximal increases in blood pressure, anxiety, and cortisol levels. However, one caveat in 
interpreting these findings is that many studies in the epidemiology literature categorize their 
data into groups (e.g., individuals with scores on control below the mean and scores on 
demands above the mean are classified as ―high strain‖) as opposed to directly testing the 
interactive effects proposed by the JDC model (Kivimäki et al., 2011). In the present study, 
we seek to ameliorate some of these methodological problems by operationalizing job 
demands and control factors in a manner that is more consistent with Karasek’s (1979) 
original conceptualization, while explicitly testing the interactive relationship of job demands 
and job control with mortality. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     13 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Summary of the Present Study 
In sum, the extant literature provides support for the importance of the work context 
operationalized through the lens of the JDC model to a wide variety of nonwork outcomes, 
including physiological outcomes and unhealthy behaviors. However, the direct link between 
the JDC model and mortality has been largely unstudied. We argue here that, according to 
the JDC and AL models, demanding jobs that are accompanied by high control result in a 
lower probability of death. We propose that this is because individuals experience strain 
resolution derived from their ability to display mastery, experience personal growth, and 
derive enjoyment from completing challenging tasks when they have the necessary resources 
to cope with the increased workload associated with an ―active‖ job (Crawford et al., 2010; 
Podsakoff et al., 2007; Ryan & Deci, 2000; Selye, 1978). As such, they are less likely to 
experience physical and mental strain and engage in subsequent unhealthy behavior, as well 
as suffering from other secondary and tertiary physiological disorders following from strain 
(e.g., depression, cardiovascular disease, diabetes) that are linked with mortality later in life 
(Conger, 1954; Fox et al., 1991; Juster et al., 2010). On the other hand, in conditions of low 
control, job demands will be positively related to mortality. This is because demands create 
anxiety that individuals are motivated to resolve and when job control is low, individuals are 
constrained in their ability to do so, resulting in a persistent state of strain (Demerouti et al., 
2001; Karasek, 1979). Unresolved strain may lead to unhealthy behaviors and physiological 
outcomes such as cortisol increases, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease that are associated 
with a greater probability of death (Carlson et al., 2004; Kivimaki et al., 2006; Reiche et al., 
2004). Therefore, we hypothesize the following: 
          Hypothesis: Job demands and job control will interact to predict mortality, such that 
job  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     14 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
demands will be negatively related to mortality when job control is high, 
and  
positively related to mortality when job control is low.  
Method 
The data in the study were obtained from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS). 
The WLS is a longitudinal study of a random sample of over 10,000 individuals who 
graduated from Wisconsin high schools in 1957 conducted by the University of Wisconsin-
Madison with principal support from the National Institute on Aging (Hauser & Sewell, 
2014). WLS participants were interviewed at different time intervals from 1957 through 2011 
to provide data on educational, occupational, and emotional experiences.  Participants were 
interviewed in their homes, over the phone, or through the mail. The WLS has been used for 
research in fields such as gerontology (Carr & Khodyakov, 2007), sociology (Brand & Xie, 
2010), education (Plug & Vijverberg, 2005), and economics (Parish, Seltzer, Greenberg, & 
Floyd, 2004).  It has had only limited use in the field of management (e.g., Hauser, 2007; 
Judge, Livingston, & Hurst, 2011; Patel & Thatcher, 2012), and these studies examined 
research questions that were unrelated to ours with a different subset of variables from the 
WLS data.  
For the primary variables of interest in our study, we used the 2003-2005 and the 
2010-2011 data administrations (referred to as ―2004‖ and ―2011‖ throughout WLS literature, 
respectively) for inclusion in our study. These data administration points were important 
because they allowed a time-lagged view of the relationship between job demands and 
control, both of which were measured in 2004, as they relate to mortality in 2011. At the 
2004 time point, the individuals in our sample were near the retirement age, but many were 
still employed. We chose the 2011 time point because this is the most recent time point for 
which data is available that assesses participants as they are approaching the typical life 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     15 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
expectancy, while providing us with a seven-year time lag between measuring job demands 
and control and mortality. This time lag is consistent with studies conducted in epidemiology 
that examine the link between more proximal strain indicators and distal outcomes (e.g., 
Seeman et al., 2001). 
Although the WLS originally included 10,317 participants, sample attrition has 
occurred over the nearly 50-year span of the study.  In the 2004 wave of data collection, 
which was the wave that contains the independent and control variables, the retention rate 
was 70.4%.  Only those participants who either participated in the 2011 wave of data 
collection or who were reported deceased by a family member were included in the study. 
Further, we excluded all individuals who reported being retired in 2004, and only included 
individuals who responded to the job demands and job control surveys in 2004 and who 
provided data on all the control variables. As a result of these inclusion criteria, our final 
sample included 2,363 individuals with usable data. The individuals in our sample ranged 
from 63 to 67 years of age in 2004 (M = 64.27, SD = .66), and were 50.3% female.  
Measures 
Job Demands and Control.  To measure job demands and control, the developers of 
the WLS adapted items from Carayon and colleagues (Carayon, 1993; Carayon, Yang, & 
Lim, 1995) and supplemented these items with additional internally developed items that 
corresponded to Karasek’s (1979) original conceptualization of the constructs. Specifically, 
the job demands items focus on the workload, concentration demands, and time pressure 
related to completing one’s work, while the job control items correspond to one’s decision 
latitude over one’s job.   
Using these items, we created a nine-item scale to measure job demands and a six-
item scale to measure job control. Sample items for job demands include ―To what extent do 
you agree that your job requires working very hard?‖ and ―To what extent do you agree that 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     16 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
you are not asked to do an excessive amount of work at your job?‖ (reverse scored). 
Participants indicated their strength of agreement with the items on a Likert scale ranging 
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree), while for one item, scale anchors ranged 
from 1 (never) to 5 (always).  For this reason, we standardized the job demands items then 
averaged the standardized scores to calculate a job demands score for each participant. We 
obtained a coefficient alpha reliability of .76 for this measure. Example items for job control 
include ―To what extent do you agree that your job allows you to make a lot of decisions on 
your own?‖ and ―To what extent do you agree that you can determine the order in which your 
work is to be done on your job?‖ Responses were scored on a 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 
(strongly agree) response scale.  We obtained a coefficient alpha reliability of .84 for this 
measure.  A complete list of the items used to measure all of the constructs is presented in the 
Appendix.  
 
Mortality.  Mortality status in 2011 was reported by the participant if they 
participated in the survey, or by an outside source such as a spouse or child if the participant 
was deceased. Responses were coded as 0 (alive) or 1 (deceased). Of the participants in our 
sample, 189 (8%) were deceased in 2011. The administrators of the WLS also sought to 
determine the most proximal cause of death by asking responding family members for the 
deceased’s death certificate, or in the case of an unavailable death certificate, by asking 
family members to report on the cause of death. The WLS reports these causes of death very 
generally. For example, both lung and stomach cancer would be reported as cancer. This 
information was available for only 136 of the deceased individuals. Despite the coarseness 
and incomplete nature of the data, we present the frequency in Table 1 of the different causes 
of death to show the congruence between our theory and the most common causes of death in 
the sample. As shown in the table, the most common cause of death was cancer (55.15%), 
followed by diseases of the circulatory system (22.06%). The remaining causes of death 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     17 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
accounted for less than 10% of the deaths each.   
[Insert Table 1 about here] 
Control Variables 
We controlled for several demographic characteristics, health indicators, several 
socioeconomic status variables (including whether the individuals were managers), and 
affect.  
Demographic characteristics. First, we controlled for participants’ gender (0 = male, 
1= female) measured at the initiation of the WLS in 1957, as gender has been found to 
differentially predict life expectancies between males and females, with men having shorter 
predicted life spans than women (Pinkhasov et al., 2010). Second, we controlled for 
participants’ age in 2004, given that older participants were more likely to be deceased at the 
next measurement occasion. Third, we controlled for marital status coded as 0 = not married 
and 1 = married, as marriage has been shown to be related to a lower risk of mortality 
(Manzoli, Villari, Pirone, & Boccia, 2007).  
Health indicators. Fourth, given the well-known association between smoking and 
various causes of death, as well as the fact that individuals might engage in risky behavior 
such as smoking to cope with unresolved stress, we controlled for smoking history. We used 
a dichotomous variable that asked ―Have you ever smoked regularly in your entire life?‖ (0 = 
no, 1 = yes). Fifth, we controlled for the potentially confounding effect of individuals’ health 
in 2004. We did so because it is conceivable that unhealthy individuals may perceive jobs as 
more demanding and have less control over their jobs, and these individuals may also be 
more likely to be deceased seven years later. To control for health, we used the Health 
Utilities Index Three (HUI3; Feeny, Furlong, Boyle, & Torrance, 1995)2. The HUI3 is an 
                                                          
 
2We also operationalized overall health using a single-item self-report measure scaled from 1 = Excellent to 5 = 
Poor. This measure is correlated .40 with the HUI3 index, and controlling for it has identical effects to the HUI3 
in our analyses. We ultimately chose to use the HUI3 because of its widespread use in the health literature.  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     18 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
internationally popular measure used for calculating an index of overall health.  The first step 
in calculating this index is for participants to answer eight questions that report their health 
status on the domains of vision, hearing, speech, ambulation, dexterity, emotion, cognition, 
and pain, For example, for vision, participants report their level of functioning on a six-point 
scale with descriptive anchors ranging from ―The respondent has been unable to see at all‖ 
which would receive a score of ―1‖ through ―The respondent has been able to see well 
enough to read ordinary newsprint and recognize a friend on the other size of the street, 
without glasses or contact lenses‖ which would receive a score of ―6‖.  Second, scores 
derived from the descriptive anchors are recoded into within-domain morbidity scores (e.g., a 
score of ―3‖ on the Vision domain is converted to a score of .73).  These within-domain 
morbidity scores are based on an algorithm of weights calculated from an initial Canadian 
sample, although the measure has been used and validated in samples across the world.  In a 
final step, within-domain morbidity scores are entered into a formula3 to calculate an overall 
health score ranging from deceased (0) to perfect health (1). 
We also created an equally weighted index to test whether the weighting scheme 
affected our results, but the results were identical, so we used the weighted index. Further, the 
HUI3 was developed as a formative construct, whereby an individual’s health index is an 
aggregate of the eight different health domains such that the health domains are causes rather 
than reflections of an individual’s health (Jarvis, MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2003; Law, 
Wong, & Mobley, 1998). Put differently, being in poor health does not cause an individual to 
have poor vision, a lack of hearing, or impaired cognition. Rather, an individual’s standing on 
these potentially unrelated domains causes their overall level of health. In addition, there is 
no reason to expect the domains are necessarily correlated with one another (although they 
might be). For example, poor vision is not necessarily related to difficulty walking. 
                                                          
 
3The weighted formula for the HUI3 is Overall Health Utility = 1.371 (vision score * hearing score * speech 
score * ambulation score * dexterity score * emotion score * cognition score * pain score) - .371. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     19 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Therefore, indices of internal consistency, such as alpha, are inappropriate for this measure 
(Bollen & Davis, 2009; MacKenzie, Podsakoff, & Podsakoff, 2011). However, Boyle, 
Furlong, Feeny, Torrance, and Hatcher (1995) reported a test-retest reliability of .77 for the 
HUI3 with one month in between administrations. 
Socio-economic status and managerial work. Sixth, we controlled for four 
indicators of socio-economic status (SES), as SES has been found to interact with stressors, 
such as those experienced from job demands, to increase the likelihood of disease and 
mortality (Ganster & Rosen, 2013; Juster et al., 2010). Specifically, we controlled for the 
participant’s highest educational attainment as of 2004, the occupational prestige of the 
participant’s 2004 job as measured by the Nakao-Treas Prestige Rating, the participant’s total 
net worth, and the participant’s total household income in 2004. Because of the heavy skew 
in the latter two variables, we log-transformed them. Seventh, we controlled for whether the 
individual occupied a managerial job (0 = not a manager, 1 = manager), as we cite 
managerial work in our theoretical development section as an exemplar of a highly 
demanding job but which has a high accompanying level of control (Cavanaugh et al., 2000).   
 
Affect. Finally, we controlled for negative and positive affect because these traits 
have been found to impact individuals’ responses to stress, and may also predict health 
outcomes (Watson & Pennebaker, 1989). We used items from the WLS that corresponds to 
Watson and Clark’s (1984) conceptualization of affect. Participants were presented with a 
question (e.g., In a typical week, how enthusiastic are you?), to which they responded on a 
four-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 4 (a great deal). We chose ten items that 
corresponded to positive affect (α = .87) and eleven items that corresponded to negative 
affect (α = .82).  
Confirmatory Factor Analyses and Tests of Validity  
We conducted confirmatory factor analyses (CFA) using LISREL 8.8 (Jöreskog & 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     20 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Sörbom, 1993) to test the proposed factor structure of our multi-item measures (job demands, 
job control, positive affect, negative affect).  Results of the CFA indicated that a four-factor 
structure was an acceptable fit to the data (χ2
(588) = 7301.20, SRMR = .08, CFI = .90). 
Further, we compared the fit of the four-factor model to a two-factor model where the 
correlation between job demands and job control was set to negative one to indicate a latent 
factor representing job stressors, and where the correlation between positive and negative 
affect was set to negative one to represent two poles of affect as opposed to different affect 
constructs. The results showed that the two-factor model was a poor fit to the data and a 
significantly worse fit than the four-factor model (χ2
(590) = 15580.99, SRMR = .13, CFI = .78; 
Δ χ2
(2) = 8279.79, p < .001), thereby providing support for our hypothesized factor structure.  
We also took several steps to examine the validity as well as reliability of our latent 
constructs. Bagozzi and Yi (1988) recommend a holistic approach to establishing validity and 
reliability, including calculating the average variance extracted (AVE), composite reliability, 
and inspecting the factor loadings. AVE is calculated as the average square root of the 
standardized factor loadings of the items in a measure. Fornell and Larcker (1981) have 
recommended that AVE be higher than .50, as that indicates that less than 50% of the 
variance in the items is due to measurement error. Further, they recommend that the AVE for 
the constructs be greater than the squared correlation between any two latent constructs. The 
AVE for each of our constructs was .49 for positive affect, .51 for negative affect, .36 for job 
demands, and .53 for job control, and all were larger than the squared correlations between 
any two constructs. Given that AVE is a conservative estimate of convergent validity, 
Bagozzi and Yi (1988) also recommend calculating composite reliability as an additional 
index of convergent validity. Composite reliability is calculated as the sum of the squared 
standardized factor loadings divided by the sum of the squared standardized factor loadings 
plus the sum of the error variance for each item at the construct level (Raykov, 1997). 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     21 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Bagozzi and Yi (1988) recommend that composite reliability values be greater than .60. The 
composite reliabilities of our constructs were as follows: .91 for positive affectivity, .91 for 
negative affect, .83 for job demands, and .89 for job control. Further, all of the individual 
item factor loadings in our model were statistically significant and in the appropriate 
direction.  
Finally, we used expert judges to evaluate the content validity of our measures of job 
demands, job control, positive affect, and negative affect (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955; 
Schriesheim, Powers, Scandura, Gardiner, & Lankau, 1993).  Following procedures used by 
Judge and Hurst (2008), a content validity survey was sent to professors and graduate 
students who have experience in conducting applied psychology and management research in 
the departments of management in two large Midwestern universities. These 17 expert raters 
(11 faculty members and six upper level doctoral students) were not informed of the purpose 
of the study. Content validity was assessed in two steps.  First, our experts were presented 
with the construct definitions and asked to sort each of the items into one of the four 
constructs: job demands, job control, positive affect, and negative affect.  After our expert 
judges sorted the items into one of the four constructs, we compared their answers to how we 
sorted the items.  For job demands, the expert judges agreed with our choice of items 98% of 
the time.  This means that 98% of the time we sorted the same items into the job demands 
construct that our 17 expert judges selected.  For job control, a match was made 100% of the 
time.  For positive affect, a match was made 99% of the time. For negative affect, a match 
was made 98% of the time.   
Second, our experts rated how confident they were that the item fit the construct on a 
scale from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5).  A score of one indicated our experts 
had low confidence that the item fit the construct they selected, while a score of five 
indicated high confidence. The average confidence ratings for job demands was M = 4.65, 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     22 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
(SD = 0.60).  The average confidence ratings for job control was M = 4.75 (SD = 0.61).  The 
average confidence ratings for positive affect were M = 4.36 (SD = 0.62). The average 
confidence ratings for negative affect was M = 4.46 (SD = 0.67).  These average ratings were 
comparable to ratings in other content validity studies (e.g., M = 4.54, SD = 0.31; Judge & 
Hurst, 2008). Overall, the results of the survey indicated that the expert judges agreed with 
the items we chose from the WLS as being representative of the constructs, and agreed that 
the items were strong indicators of the four respective constructs. Thus, we concluded that 
our measures demonstrated sufficient validity.  
Results 
Table 2 presents correlations and descriptive statistics for our study variables. The 
correlations between mortality and gender (r = -.05), age (r = -.04), smoking (r = .08), 
overall health (r = -.12), net worth (r = -.05), and positive affect (r = -.06) were all 
statistically significant at the .05 level, but modest in magnitude. To test our hypotheses, we 
first mean centered all of our continuous measures. Then, we multiplied the job demands and 
control scales to create the interaction term. We then used logistic regression to test the 
relationships of the control variables, job demands, job control, and their interaction with 
mortality. As shown in Table 3, we present the log odds ratios associated with each predictor 
in the column labeled B, as well as the odds ratios in the column labeled Exp(B). We also 
present two indices of model fit: the Hosmer and Lemeshow (H-L) and chi-square (χ2) 
indices of fit. The H-L index examines whether the S-shaped logistic function is appropriate 
for the observed data, while the χ2 index is analogous to an overall F test from logistic 
regression and provides the joint significance of prediction of the variables in the model. For 
the H-L index, lower, non-statistically significant values indicate better model fit, while for 
the χ2 index higher, statistically significant values indicate better model fit.  To interpret our 
results, we focus on the odds ratios as the index of effect size. Odds ratios communicate the 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     23 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
change in the likelihood of occurrence of the dependent variable, given a one unit change in 
the independent variable. An odds ratio greater than one indicates a positive effect, an odds 
ratio equal to one indicates no effect, and an odds ratio less than one indicates a negative 
effect. Odds ratios can be interpreted in a straightforward way in terms of percent change in 
the likelihood of the dependent variable occurring by subtracting 1 and multiplying by 100. 
For example, an odds ratio of 2 indicates that for a one unit change in the independent 
variable, the likelihood of the dependent variable occurring increases by 100%. On the other 
hand, an odds ratio of .50 indicates that for a one unit change in the independent variable, the 
likelihood of the dependent variable occurring decreases by 50%. As shown in Equation 1, 
the control variables as a whole were significantly related to mortality (χ2 = 65.16, p < .01) 
and provided a good fit to the data (H-L index = 4.83, n.s.). Specifically, gender (exp(B) = 
.62), age (exp(B) = .75), marital status (exp(B) = .72), smoking history (exp(B) = 1.58), 
overall health (exp(B) = .16), positive affect (exp(B) = .76), and negative affect (exp(B) = 
.65) were all statistically significant predictors of mortality at the p < .05 level. As shown in 
Equation 2, neither job demands (exp(B) = .95) nor job control (exp(B) = .91) were 
significantly related to mortality, and the incremental chi square contributed by the two 
variables jointly was not significant (Δχ2 = .59, n.s.).  
[Insert Tables 2 and 3 about here] 
As shown in Equation 3, the interaction between job demands and job control was 
significantly related to mortality (exp(B) = .72) and the incremental chi square associated 
with the interaction term was also significant (Δχ2 = 3.09, p <.05). Further, the H-L index 
indicated that the model was a good fit to the data (H-L = 4.95, n.s.). This evidence provided 
preliminary support for our hypothesis4. Next, as shown in Figure 1, we graphed the 
                                                          
 
4 We also conducted the analyses without the inclusion of the control variables. The results of these analyses 
also supported the hypothesis, as the magnitude of the effect size associated with the interaction and statistical 
significance levels were similar to that obtained with the controls. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     24 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
interaction to determine whether the conditional effects of job demands on mortality were 
negative when job control is high and positive when job control is low. To create the graph, 
we chose values of job demands and job control that were ± 1 standard deviation (SD) from 
the mean and entered them into the logistic regression equation, multiplying these values by 
their respective beta weights and summing the results to obtain predicted values for the 
dependent variable. Because these values were on a log odds scale, we transformed them 
into probabilities to present a more intuitive graphical representation of our results. To do so, 
we first calculated the exponent of these values and then divided the exponentiated values by 
the exponentiated values plus one (Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2003). As shown in 
Figure 1, the pattern of results fit our hypothesis. Specifically, the graph shows that the 
probability of death for individuals in jobs with low control increased from about 9% when 
these jobs had low demands, to about 10.5% when the jobs had high demands. Conversely, 
the probability of death for individuals in jobs with high control decreased from about 10% 
when the jobs also had low demands to about 7.5% when the jobs had high demands. 
Although these changes in probabilities might appear small in an absolute sense, we also 
calculated the conditional odds ratios (i.e., the slopes of the lines in the odds ratio metric) to 
estimate the relative impact of job demands on death in our sample at low and high levels of 
control and provide an additional indicator of the practical significance of our findings. 
Specifically, at low levels of control, the conditional odds ratio for the effect of job demands 
on mortality was exp(B) = 1.14, indicating a positive effect, while at high levels of control 
the conditional odds ratio for the effect of job demands on mortality was exp(B) = .75, 
indicating a negative effect. While neither conditional odds ratio was individually 
statistically significant at the .05 level, they show that for individuals in low control jobs, a 
one unit change in job demands is associated with a 14% increase in the odds of death, while 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     25 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
for those in high control jobs, a one unit change in job demands is associated with a 25% 
decrease in the odds of death. Applied to our data, these values correspond to a 15.4% 
increase in the odds of death across the range of our graph when comparing low control-low 
demand jobs to low-control-high demand jobs, and a 34% decrease in the odds of death 
when comparing high control-low demand jobs to high control-high demand jobs. These 
results collectively provide support for our hypothesis5. 
[Insert Figure 1 about here] 
 
 
Supplementary Analyses 
 
Although our primary goal in this study was to examine how job demands and control 
interact to predict mortality, the AL model proposes that prolonged stress exposure may lead 
to the deterioration of the body’s metabolic, cardiovascular, and immune systems, and this 
deterioration is what directly leads to death (Ganster & Rosen, 2013). Because of the nature 
of our data (i.e., with only two time points), we were unable to directly test this notion. 
However, we sought to determine whether our hypothesis generalizes to an additional, 
objective AL health indicator in the sample of individuals that were still alive at the end of 
our seven-year study period. Thus, we examined whether our proposed interaction between 
job demands and control was also related to body mass index (BMI). BMI is a key health 
indicator in the AL model (Ganster & Rosen, 2013), as high BMI is associated with damage 
to the metabolic and cardiovascular system and is also associated with an increased risk of 
death (Berrington de Gonzalez et al., 2010; Calle, Thun, Petrelli, Rodriguez, & Heath, 1999). 
                                                          
 
5 Because there were only 260 (11%) people at the endpoints of our graph at ± 1 SD of job control and demands, 
we also examined whether the pattern we found generalized to less extreme values of job control representing 
―low‖ and ―high‖ levels that include more of our sample. At ± ¾ SD of job control, the conditional odds ratios 
were 1.08 for low levels of control and .79 at high levels of control. At ± ½ SD, the conditional odds ratios were 
1.02 at low levels of control and .82 at high levels of control. Thus, we concluded that the pattern of results we 
found was consistent across various levels of job control.  
 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     26 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Although these individuals did not die in the 7 year span between the job-demands control 
data collection in 2004 and the 2011 data collection, a significant interaction between job 
demands and control predicting BMI would suggest that these individuals may be at 
increased risk of suffering from poor quality of life or even death shortly thereafter.  
We were able to obtain BMI data for 1,812 (83%) of the surviving study participants. 
BMI scores in the 2011 wave of data collection were calculated by the WLS researchers from 
participants’ self-reported height and weight. According to the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood institute, healthy BMI corresponds to scores between 18.5 and 24.9, underweight 
corresponds to scores under 18.5, overweight corresponds to scores between 25 and 29.9, and 
obese corresponds to scores above 30. The average BMI of the 2011 survivors in our sample 
was 28.60 (SD = 5.5), which is not surprising given that BMI increases over the lifespan, and 
the advanced age of our sample. We used ordinary least squares (OLS) regression to regress 
participant BMI in 2011 on our control and study variables, using the same steps as in our 
logistic regression analyses. These results are presented in Table 4, with the B and β columns 
showing unstandardized and standardized coefficients, respectively. As shown in Equation 3, 
the interaction between job demands and control was statistically significant (B = -.80; β = -
.06, p < .05). This result is also presented graphically in Figure 2, where we plotted the 
predicted BMI scores at ± 1 SD from the mean on job demands and control. The simple slope 
of the low job control line was statistically significant (b = .82, p < .05) while the slope of the 
high control line was not (b = -.18, n.s.). Although the magnitude of these results were small, 
it is important to note that it is not atypical to find small effects of job demands on BMI 
(Kramer & Chung, 2015), and that even small changes in BMI lead to a large increase in risk 
of death (Berrington de Gonzalez et al., 2010). 
[Insert Table 4 and Figure 2 about here] 
Discussion 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     27 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Scholars have long recognized the importance of the work context to employee well-
being, and have recently called for additional research to explore how work can affect 
employee health, including death (e.g., Erdogan et al., 2012; Robbins et al., 2012; Heaphy & 
Dutton, 2008). The purpose of this study was to answer this call by investigating the 
relationship between job demands and control and mortality. To do so, we extended and 
integrated theory on the job-based antecedents of stress from the applied psychology, 
management, and epidemiology literatures. We predicted that job demands and control 
factors would interact to predict mortality such that job demands would be positively related 
to mortality under conditions of low job control, and that job demands would be negatively 
related to mortality under conditions of high control. Our empirical findings supported our 
hypothesis, showing that the odds of death for individuals in low control jobs increase by 
15.4% when coupled with high demands jobs as opposed to low demands jobs, and that the 
odds of death for individuals in high control jobs decrease by 34% when coupled with high 
demands jobs as opposed to low demands jobs. These results suggest that the JDC model 
provides a useful lens through which to study the distal relationship between contextual work 
elements and physiological outcomes. It is also important to note that our test was especially 
rigorous, given that we controlled for many possible confounding factors such as 
demographic characteristics (e.g., gender, age, marital status), health indicators (e.g., 
smoking history, overall health), socioeconomic status (e.g., net worth, income, education, 
job prestige), and affect. We found that our pattern of results also generalizes to predicting 
BMI in a sample of the individuals who did not die during the course of our seven-year time 
lagged study. Our findings have several important implications for theory and practice.  
Theoretical Implications 
 
First, the positive relationship between job demands and mortality under conditions of 
low control supports our arguments that job demands, especially those linked to challenge 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     28 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
stressors, are stressors that individuals are motivated to resolve, and strain is likely to result 
when individuals are unable to resolve the source of stress (Karasek, 1979). This contributes 
to a longstanding research tradition examining the exacerbating effects of low job control on 
the consequences of job demands, and we extend these findings from research on lower level 
physiological outcomes, such as affective distress or increased cortisol levels, to death (e.g., 
Fox et al., 1993; Ilies et al., 2010). Examining the ultimate human physiological criterion 
provides support for the ―wear and tear‖ process proposed by the AL model (Juster et al., 
2010), such that job demands that remain unresolved because individuals do not have the 
necessary control over their work cause long-term physiological damage. This is a 
particularly important finding from the point of view of contemporary stress theories that 
focus on the effects that psychological variables have on distal physiological outcomes, such 
as cardiovascular functioning (e.g., Heaphy & Dutton, 2008), but which have been relatively 
unexplored. 
Second, we found support for the notion that individuals in demanding jobs but with 
an accompanying high level of control enjoy a decreased likelihood of mortality. This stems 
from our logic that, when coupled with high control, demanding jobs provide individuals 
with psychological fulfillment derived from personal growth, demonstration of mastery, and 
increased feelings of competence because they have the necessary resources to respond to 
challenges in the work environment (Crawford et al., 2010; Podsakoff et al., 2007; Ryan & 
Deci, 2001; Selye, 1978). Such a state allows individuals to resolve work-related strain. We 
thus extend the JDC model by incorporating theory from the stress literature to propose more 
specific effects than that in Karasek’s (1979) original work. It is important to note that the 
literature has found mixed effects with respect to the exact nature of the job demands-control 
interaction, with some studies finding support for a buffering effect of job control, others 
finding that job control reverses the effects of job demands, and others finding no interactive 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     29 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
relationship at all (Fox et al., 1993; Ilies et al., 2010). To this end, Ganster and Rosen (2013, 
pp. 1111-1112) commented that ―there is strong evidence that high demands and low control 
each are associated with [distal physiological] outcomes, but it is less clear whether control 
actually shows a buffering effect for high demands‖. Given that our study employs a seven-
year time-lagged design, a sample size of over two thousand people, and theoretically and 
empirically relevant control variables that are absent from most studies (c.f., Ganster & 
Rosen, 2013), we believe that our study directly contributes to providing clarity to the mixed 
state of the literature.   
Third, our supplementary analyses on surviving participants’ BMI revealed that our 
proposed interaction generalizes to a more proximal AL indicator. Specifically, individuals 
benefit from decreased BMI as a function of job demands when in high control jobs, and 
suffer from increased BMI as a function of job demands when in low control jobs. Although 
we could not directly test the mediating processes proposed by the AL model, this finding 
provides evidence that the job demands-control interaction operates in a similar fashion on 
BMI, a ―secondary‖ strain outcome in the AL model, as it does on death. This finding 
contributes to recent research in the applied psychology field showing that work and family 
demands lead to increases in the growth rate of BMI over time (Kramer & Chung, 2015) by 
examining how job control can help lessen (or augment) BMI increases over time. 
Practical Implications 
Our findings have several important practical implications for employees and 
employers. First, employers of individuals in highly demanding jobs in which employees also 
have little control should be aware of the increased risk of mortality facing their employees. 
Knowledge of these risks might help employers structure jobs in a way that helps minimize 
damage to employees’ well-being. It is worth noting that jobs typically characterized by high 
demands and low control, such as frontline service (e.g., retail sales, restaurant server, 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     30 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
secretary) and manufacturing occupations (e.g., machine operators, welders) employ millions 
of individuals and, in the case of frontline service jobs, are some of the fastest growing 
occupations in the United States (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2014). These employees carry 
above average risks of mortality resulting from their occupations, with accompanying large 
personal and societal costs. In fact, of the individuals that were ± 1 SD from the mean on both 
job demands and control (i.e., the endpoints of our graph), 26% of the deaths occurred in 
people occupying frontline service jobs and 32% of the deaths occurred in people occupying 
manufacturing jobs that also reported high job demands and low control. Barring job redesign 
interventions initiated by employers and other organizational actors (Holman, Axtell, Sprigg, 
Totterdell, & Wall, 2010), individuals in these jobs may be able to craft their own jobs. For 
example, Wrzesniewski and Dutton (2001) proposed that even minor job crafting through 
adjusting the job or reframing its meaning can significantly increase an individual’s 
perception of control.  They further posit that even when job crafting results in extra work for 
the individual (i.e., higher demands), it is still likely to be beneficial as work can become 
more meaningful and individuals improve the perception of their work-related identities. 
Organizations can also take steps to facilitate individual job crafting by providing employees 
with flexible work arrangements, supportive supervision, and decision-making autonomy 
(Morgeson & Humphrey, 2006) targeted towards helping employees in stressful jobs realize 
more control over their work. Finally, providing information about the potential risks for 
individuals in these jobs may allow employees to make better informed occupational choices.   
Second, the reversal effect we observed in this study has particularly important 
practical implications for employees and employers. Because we found that job demands 
actually contribute to reducing instances of death when coupled with high control, our results 
suggest that organizational interventions can be targeted at increasing job control rather than 
reducing workload, time pressures, and concentration requirements of work. This allows 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     31 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
employers and employees to still reap the productivity effects of demanding jobs, while 
avoiding the negative consequences to employee health (Ilies et al., 2010). Thus, 
organizations can implement interventions aimed at job redesign (Holman et al., 2010; 
Humphrey, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2007), stress reduction (van der Klink, Blonk, Schene, & 
van Dijk, 2001), and supporting appropriate time-off (Libet et al., 2001), all of which provide 
the added benefit of not only preventing negative outcomes such mortality, but also 
increasing positive outcomes such as work satisfaction, increased psychological resources 
(van der Klink et al., 2001) and improved well-being (Holman et al., 2010). Therefore, we 
believe that employers share in the responsibility with employees of facilitating employee 
well-being and health, and suggest that employers can do so in a way that simultaneously 
contributes to bottom-line organizational effectiveness.  
Limitations and Future Research Directions 
Like all studies, this study has several limitations. First, although there are 
considerable strengths to our sample, such as the large number of participants and the time-
lagged data, the sample also has limitations. For example, the participants all graduated from 
Wisconsin high schools, were racially homogenous (i.e., white, non-Hispanic), and were all 
born in the same decade, therefore potentially calling into question how generalizable the 
results are to other samples of individuals.  Further, the participants were in the workforce in 
a time in which individuals were more likely to stay with one career and one organization on 
a long-term basis.  That pattern of career and employer stability has been declining for over 
30 years (Bidwell, 2013; Hollister & Smith, 2014). It is possible that the relatively stable jobs 
experienced by those in our sample could exponentially compound the effects of the stressors 
in ways that current individuals who change careers and employers more frequently will not 
experience. With the current pattern of higher employee mobility, individuals may exit highly 
stressful jobs more quickly than the individuals in the current sample. Additionally, our study 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     32 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
is confined to considering the impact of recent jobs on participants’ careers, rather than the 
full range of jobs in which they have been employed.  Earlier jobs may have been 
substantially different from the more recent jobs and may be important predictors of health 
problems.  For example, there may be long-term effects of many early career physically 
demanding jobs that are not captured by our study (e.g., pesticide exposure experience by 
farmers is related to long-term increased risk of dementia; Bosma, van Boxtel, Ponds, Houx, 
& Jolles, 2000). Thus, future research should consider organizational tenure, the number of 
job and employer transitions that individuals experience, and early career exposure as 
moderators of the relationship between the interaction of job demands and controls and strain 
outcomes.  
Second, the participants in our study were all employed, but near the end of their 
careers.  Although the advanced age of the participants allowed us to study the work context 
that is most temporally proximal to participant mortality, it is possible that there is something 
functionally different about the type of work these individuals are engaged in compared to 
earlier work. Further, it could be that younger workers are better able to cope with demanding 
jobs, regardless of the level of control, than workers at the end of their careers. Future 
research could follow individuals at an earlier point in their career to learn if the JDC model 
accurately predicts various strain outcomes over time, especially for secondary and other 
tertiary strain processes that are precursors to mortality. A related future research direction 
could be to incorporate the attraction-selection-attrition framework (ASA; Schneider, 1987) 
to study how change over time in job demands and control influences the range of primary to 
tertiary processes. The ASA framework predicts that individuals gravitate towards jobs and 
organizations that ―fit‖ their values, skills and abilities. When there is a poor fit between the 
individual and job or organization, individuals are likely to exit the situation. Thus, according 
to the ASA framework, individuals gravitate towards better fitting jobs over time. This 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     33 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
suggests that older workers, at least relative to younger workers, may have had time to find 
an organization that is a good fit, thus reducing stress and accompanying strain. This 
possibility emphasizes the importance of considering the increases and decreases in strain an 
individual may experience across their lifetime and thus investigating the JDC model across 
the individual’s entire career.  Future research could study how and why certain individuals 
gravitate towards jobs with varying levels of job demands and job control, and how 
occupational changes throughout individuals’ lives relate to secondary and tertiary strain 
outcomes.   
Third, we were unable to study the mediating effects of more proximal strain 
processes proposed by the AL model.  However, substantial existing research provides 
evidence for the relationships between job demands and job control as they relate to more 
proximal psychophysiological outcomes in the AL model (Ganster & Rosen, 2013). For 
example, there is consistent evidence that the JDC model predicts anxiety, job attitudes 
(Ganster & Rosen, 2013) and increased emotional exhaustion (Lee & Ashforth, 1996). 
Further, jobs with high demands and low control have been linked to increased blood 
pressure (Fox et al., 1993; Ilies et al., 2010) and increased cortisol levels (Fox et al., 1993).  
Therefore, future research should explicitly test the mediating effect of more proximal 
psychophysiological processes on the link between the JDC model and mortality. 
Fourth, despite the rigorous test we offer of our hypothesis, there were some 
additional control variables we were unable to include which may potentially affect the 
interpretation of our results and some unexpected results that merit discussion. Specifically, 
social support from the organization (Humphrey et al., 2007) or from other individuals (e.g., 
marital support; Van der Doef & Maes, 1998) can relate to well-being, and may also be 
related to individuals’ perceptions of job demands and job control. For example, social 
support can be conceptualized as a resource that acts similarly to job control in moderating 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     34 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
the effects of job demands (Demerouti et al., 2001). In this regard, it is interesting to note that 
marital status had a significant, negative relationship with mortality risk, which underscores 
the importance of social support to well-being outcomes. Further, although we have alluded 
to some jobs having inherently high or low levels of job demands and control (e.g., 
managerial work; service occupations), we were unable to control for objective job 
characteristics. We did control for managerial work status, but found that it was unrelated to 
mortality risk. It is possible that objective job characteristics act as antecedents to perceptions 
of job demands and control, and could therefore also indirectly affect mortality outcomes 
(Humphrey et al., 2007). Future research should examine how social support and objective 
job characteristics affect the nature of the interaction we found here.  
In addition, we found that negative affect was negatively related to mortality in the 
logistic regression equation, despite being correlated near zero. This suggests that negative 
affect is serving as a suppressor variable with respect to another variable in the model. 
Suppressor variables increase the relationship of another variable with the dependent variable 
by partialling out components of the first measure. Follow-up analyses (not shown here but 
available from the first author on request) revealed that the suppressor effect of negative 
affect only emerged when positive affect was included in the model. Previous research has 
noted that variables similar to negative affect, such as emotional stability, self-control, and 
sense of well-being (a subscale of the California Personality Inventory that relates to self-
doubt and worrying), also function as suppressor variables when predicting other criteria, 
such as crime and job performance, when included in regression models with other 
personality traits (Collins & Schmidt, 1997; Schmidt, Shaffer, & Oh, 2008). Future research 
should examine the joint relationship of positive and negative affect with mortality and other 
objective health indicators to determine whether the suppressor variables we observed here 
generalize to other studies.  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     35 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Relatedly, although our measure of job demands demonstrated acceptable construct 
validity across several methods (e.g., composite reliability, significant factor loadings, and 
content validity study), the AVE, which is an indicator of convergent validity, was relatively 
low. Although low convergent validity of job demands measures is not uncommon among 
studies conducted using archival datasets (e.g., Karasek, 1979; Li, Fay, Frese, Harms, & Gao, 
2014), this could serve to attenuate relationships between job demands and the other variables 
in our study (Carlson & Herdman, 2010). Future research should develop alternative scales 
that may be more reliable and valid measures of job demands. This is particularly important 
given that there are several scales frequently used to measure different aspects of job 
demands (e.g., workload; Fox et al., 1993; Ilies et al., 2010) and there is little guidance 
available in the literature as to which scales are the most construct valid measures of job 
demands. 
Fifth, our data included multiple causes of death, which raises the question of whether 
our predictions might hold for some causes, but not others. For example, the allostatic load 
model focuses on causes of death related to the failing of body systems (e.g., cardiovascular 
or respiratory systems), while the tension reduction hypothesis posits that individuals will 
engage in unhealthy behaviors (e.g., smoking, eating unhealthy food) to cope with strain. As 
we noted earlier, causes of death were only available for a subset of our sample, but we tested 
whether our predictions differed across causes of death by dummy coding the causes of death 
for the individuals in our sample that were deceased, and conducting multinomial logistic 
regression analyses. These analyses test whether our set of predictors differentially predict 
the likelihood of a specific categorical outcome occurring. The results found no significant 
differences, even when we included only job demands, control, and their interaction in the 
model. Nonetheless, future research should examine whether our proposed relationships 
between job stressors and mortality are generalizable across different causes of death. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     36 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Finally, in our study we draw from the challenge-hindrance stressor literature to frame 
our hypothesis. However, we do not examine the effects of hindrance stressors, such as role 
ambiguity, organizational constraints, and organizational politics (Podsakoff et al., 2007) on 
mortality, or their interactive relationship with job control. This is consistent with Karasek’s 
(1979) JDC model and other studies drawing from the model, which almost exclusively use 
indicators of job demands that are synonymous with challenge stressors, such as workload or 
time pressure (e.g., Fox et al., 1993; Ganster et al., 2001; Ilies et al., 2010). Extant theory 
considers hindrance stressors to be universally harmful, with little empirical evidence 
indicating that job control can buffer the effects of hindrance stressors on strain outcomes 
(LePine et al., 2005). However, the job demands-resources model (Bakker et al., 2001) 
proposes that, in addition to job control, an expanded set of job resources can offset the 
deleterious effects of job demands, and some of these resources may generalize to hindrance 
stressors. For example, an individual in a job with a great deal of role ambiguity could benefit 
from supportive supervision, such that role ambiguity becomes less harmful to the individual 
when their supervisor is involved in helping them do their job and clarifying unclear 
information. Future research should explore this notion.  
Conclusion 
As Benjamin Franklin reminds us, death is inevitable. However, increasing longevity 
will always be a human goal and along with it the desire to improve individuals’ health and 
well-being.  This study provides evidence that job demands and control may provide specific 
ways to increase (or decrease) the length of employees’ lives. These findings further 
underscore the importance of the employment context to important human physiological 
outcomes and show that certain work contexts may provide the catalyst to living longer, or 
speed the path towards the inevitable. Collectively, our study integrates diverse theoretical 
perspectives from the work psychology, management, and epidemiology literatures to link 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     37 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
the effects of one’s work context to mortality, and we urge managers to consider the effects 
that job demands and control factors have on employee mortality when structuring work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     38 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
References 
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of 
the  
Academy of Marketing Science, 16, 74-94. doi:10.1007/bf02723327. 
Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., & Euwema, M. C. (2005). Job resources buffer the impact of 
job  
demands on burnout. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 10, 170-180. 
doi:0.1037/1076-8998.10.2.170 
Berkman, L. F., Seeman, T. E., Albert, M., Blazer, D., Kahn, R., Mohs, R., Finch, C., 
Schneider, E., Cotman, C., McClearn, G.,… Rowe, J. (1993). High, usual and 
impaired 
functioning in community-dwelling older men and women: Findings from the 
MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Successful Aging. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology, 46, 1129-1140. doi:10.1016/0895-4356(93)90112-e 
Berrington de Gonzalez, A., Hartge, P., Cerhan, J. R., Flint, A. J., Hannan, L., MacInnis, R. 
J., ... & Beeson, W. L. (2010). Body-mass index and mortality among 1.46 million 
white adults. New England Journal of Medicine, 363, 2211-2219. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1000367 
Bidwell, M. J. (2013). What happened to long-term employment? The role of worker power  
and environmental turbulence in explaining declines in worker tenure. Organization 
Science, 24, 1061-1082. doi:10.1287/orsc.1120.0816 
Blackmore, E. R., Stansfeld, S. A., Weller, I., Munce, S., Zagorski, B. M., & Stewart, D. E. 
(2007). Major depressive episodes and work stress: Results from a national population 
survey. American Journal of Public Health, 97, 2088-2093. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2006.104406 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     39 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Bollen, K. A., & Davis, W. R. (2009). Causal indicator models: Identification, estimation, 
and  
testing. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 16, 498-522. 
doi:10.1080/10705510903008253 
Bosma, H., van Boxtel, M. P. J., Ponds, R. W. H. M., Houx, P. J., & Jolles, J. (2000). 
Pesticide  
exposure and risk of mild cognitive dysfunction. The Lancet, 356, 912-913. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(00)02685-4 
Boyle, M. H., Furlong, W., Feeny, D., Torrance, G. W., & Hatcher, J. (1995). Reliability of 
the 
health utilities index – Mark III used in the 1991 cycle 6 Canadian general social 
survey  
health questionnaire. Quality of Life Research, 4, 249-257. doi:10.1007/BF02260864 
Brand, J. E., & Xie, Y. (2010). Who benefits most from college? Evidence for negative 
selection  
in heterogeneous economic returns to higher education. American Sociological 
Review, 75, 273-302. doi:10.1177/0003122410363567 
Breslow, L., & Enstrom, J. E. (1980). Persistence of health habits and their relationship to  
mortality. Preventive Medicine, 9, 469-483. doi: 10.1016/0091-7435(80)90042-0 
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014). Occupational outlook handbook. Retrieved from  
 
http://www.bls.gov/ooh.  
Calle, E. E., Thun, M. J., Petrelli, J. M., Rodriguez, C., & Heath Jr, C. W. (1999). Body-mass 
index and mortality in a prospective cohort of US adults. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 341, 1097-1105. doi:10.1056/NEJM199910073411501 
Carayon, P. (1993). A longitudinal test of Karasek’s job strain model among office workers.  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     40 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Work & Stress, 7, 299-314. doi:10.1080/02678379308257070 
Carayon, P., Yang, C. L., & Lim, S. Y. (1995). Examining the relationship between job 
design  
 
and worker strain over time in a sample of office workers. Ergonomics, 38, 1199- 
 
1211. doi:10.1080/00140139508925182 
Carlson, K. D., & Herdman, A. O. (2010). Understanding the impact of convergent validity 
on  
research results. Organizational Research Methods, 15, 17-32. 
doi:10.1177/1094428110392383 
Carlson, L. E., Speca, M., Patel, K. D., & Goodey, E. (2004). Mindfulness-based stress 
reduction in relation to quality of life, mood, symptoms of stress and levels of 
cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and melatonin in breast and 
prostate cancer outpatients. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 29, 448-474. 
doi:10.1016/S0306-4530(03)00054-4 
Carr, D., & Khodyakov, D. (2007). End-of-life health care planning among young-old adults: 
An  
assessment of psychosocial influences. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: 
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 62, S135-S141. 
doi:10.1093/geronb/62.2.S135 
Cavanaugh, M. A., Boswell, W. R., Roehling, M. V., & Boudreau, J. W. (2000). An 
empirical examination of self-reported work stress among US managers. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 85, 65-74. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.85.1.65 
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple 
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. Mahway, New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     41 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Collins, J. M., & Schmidt, F. L. (1997). Can suppressor variables enhance criterion-related 
validity in the personality domain?. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 57, 
924-936. doi:10.1177/0013164497057006003 
Conger, J. J. (1956). Reinforcement theory and the dynamics of alcoholism. Quarterly 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 17, 296-305.  
Costanza, R., Kubiszewski, I., Giovannini, E., Lovins, H., McGlade, J., Pickett, K. E.,  
 
Ragnarsdottir, K. V., Roberts, D., De Vogli, R., & Wilkinson, R. (2014). Time to 
leave  
 
GDP behind, Nature, 505, 283-285. doi:10.1038/505283a 
Crawford, E. R., LePine, J. A., & Rich, B. L. (2010). Linking job demands and resources to  
employee engagement and burnout: A theoretical extension and meta-analytic 
test. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 834-848. doi:10.1037/a0019364 
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. 
Psychological Bulletin, 52, 281-302. doi:10.1037/h0040957 
Darr, W., & Johns, G. (2008). Work strain, health, and absenteeism: A meta-analysis. Journal 
of  
Occupational Health Psychology, 13, 293-318. doi:10.1037/a0012639 
Demerouti, E., & Bakker, A. B. (2011). The job demands-resources model: Challenges for 
future  
research. South African Journal of Industrial Psychology, 37, 1-9. 
doi:10.4102/sajip.v37i2.974 
Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Nachreiner, F., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2001). The job demands- 
resources model of burnout. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 499-512. 
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.86.3.499 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     42 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Erdogan, B., Bauer, T. N., Truxillo, D. M., & Mansfield, L. R. (2012). Whistle while you 
work: A review of the life satisfaction literature. Journal of Management, 38, 1038-
1083. doi:10.1177/0149206311429379 
Feeny, D., Furlong, W., Boyle, M., & Torrance, G. W. (1995). Multi-attribute health status 
classification systems:  Health Utilities Index. PharmacoEconomics, 7, 490-502. 
doi:10.2165/00019053-199507060-00004 
Ford, M. T., Heinen, B. A., & Langkamer, K. L. (2007). Work and family satisfaction and  
conflict: A meta-analysis of cross-domain relations. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 92, 57-80. doi:10.1037/a0022170 
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with 
unobservable variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18, 
39-50. doi:10.2307/3151312 
Fox, M. L., Dwyer, D. J., & Ganster, D. C. (1993). Effects of stressful job demands and 
control  
on physiological and attitudinal outcomes in a hospital setting. Academy of 
Management  
Journal, 36, 289-318. doi:10.2307/256524 
Ganster, D. C. (2005). Executive job demands: Suggestions from a stress and decision-
making  
perspective. Academy of Management Review, 30, 492-502. 
doi:10.5465/AMR.2005.17293366 
Ganster, D. C., Fox, M. L., & Dwyer, D. J. (2001). Explaining employees' health care costs: a  
prospective examination of stressful job demands, personal control, and physiological 
reactivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 954-964. doi:10.1037//0021-
9010.86.5.954 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     43 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Ganster, D. C., & Rosen, C. C. (2013). Work stress and employee health: A multidisciplinary  
review. Journal of Management, 39, 1085-1122. doi:10.1177/0149206313475815 
Grant, A. M., & Wade-Benzoni, K. A. (2009). The hot and cool of death awareness at work:  
Mortality cues, aging, and self-protective and prosocial motivations. Academy of 
Management Review, 34, 600-622. doi:10.5465/AMR.2009.44882929 
Griffin, M. A., & Clarke, S. (2011). Stress and well-being at work. In S. Zedeck (Ed.), APA  
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Volume 3 (pp. 359-397). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/12171-010 
 
Hauser, R. M. (2007). Will practitioners benefit from meta-analysis? Academy of  
Management Perspectives, 21, 24-28. doi:10.5465/AMP.2007.26421236 
Hauser, R. M., & Sewell, W. H. (2014). Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS): 1957-2011  
 
Version [data file and codebook]. Retrieved from 
http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch. 
Heaphy, E. D., & Dutton, J. E. (2008). Positive social interactions and the human body at 
work:  
Linking organizations and physiology. Academy of Management Review, 33, 137-162. 
doi:10.5465/AMR.2008.27749365  
Heraclides, A., Chandola, T., Witte, D. R., & Brunner, E. J. (2009). Psychosocial stress at 
work  
doubles the risk of type 2 diabetes in middle-aged women: Evidence from the 
Whitehall study. Diabetes Care, 32, 2230-2235. doi:10.2337/dc09-0132 
Hobfoll, S. E. (1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress.  
American Psychologist, 44, 513-524. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.44.3.513 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     44 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Hockey, G. R. J. (1993). Cognitive-energetical control mechanisms in the management of 
work demands and psychological health. In A.D. Baddeley and L. Weiskrantz (Eds.), 
Attention, selection, awareness and control: A Tribute to Donald Broadbent (pp. 328-
345). Oxford: OUP.  
Hollister, M. N., & Smith, K. E. (2014). Unmasking the Conflicting Trends in Job Tenure by  
Gender in the United States, 1983–2008. American Sociological Review, 79, 159-181. 
doi:10.1177/0003122413514584 
Holman, D. J., Axtell, C. M., Sprigg, C. A., Totterdell, P., & Wall, T. D. (2010). The 
mediating  
role of job characteristics in job redesign interventions: A serendipitous quasi-
experiment. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 31, 84–105. doi:10.1002/job.631 
 
Humphrey, S. E., Nahrgang, J. D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2007). Integrating motivational, 
social,  
 
and contextual work design features: A meta-analytic summary and theoretical 
extension  
of the work design literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1332-1356. 
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.92.5.1332 
Ilies, R., Dimotakis, N., & De Pater, I. E. (2010).  Psychological and physiological reactions 
to high workloads: Implications for well-being. Personnel Psychology, 63, 407-436. 
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01175.x 
Jarvis, C. B., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, P. M. (2003). A critical review of construct  
 
indicators and measurement model misspecification in marketing and consumer  
 
research. Journal of Consumer Research, 30, 199-218. doi:10.1086/376806 
Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1993). LISREL 8: Structural equation modeling with the  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     45 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
SIMPLIS command language. Scientific Software International. 
Judge, T. A., Ilies, R., & Dimotakis, N. (2010). Are health and happiness the product of  
wisdom? The relationship of general mental ability to educational and occupational 
attainment, health, and well-being. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 454-468. 
doi:10.1037/a0019084 
Judge, T. A., & Hurst, C. (2008). How the rich (and happy) get richer (and happier): 
relationship of core self-evaluations to trajectories in attaining work success. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 93, 849-863. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.93.4.849 
Judge, T. A., Livingston, B. A., & Hurst, C. (2012). Do nice guys—and gals—really finish 
last?  
The joint effects of sex and agreeableness on income. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 102, 390-407. doi:10.1037/a0026021 
Juster, R. P., McEwen, B. S., & Lupien, S. J. (2010). Allostatic load biomarkers of chronic 
stress  
and impact on health and cognition. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35, 2-
16. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.10.002 
Karasek Jr, R. A. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: Implications 
for  
job redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285-308. doi:10.2307/2392498 
Kivimäki, M., Nyberg, S. T., Batty, G. D., Shipley, M. J., Ferrie, J. E., Virtanen, M., Marmot, 
M.  
G., Vahtera, J., Singh-Manoux, A., & Hamer, M. (2011). Does adding information on 
job strain improve risk prediction for coronary heart disease beyond the standard 
Framingham risk score? The Whitehall II study. International Journal of 
Epidemiology, 40, 1577-1584. doi:10.1093/ije/dyr078 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     46 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Kivimäki, M., Virtanen, M., Elovainio, M., Kouvonen, A., Väänänen, A., & Vahtera, J. 
(2006).  
Work stress in the etiology of coronary heart disease: A meta-analysis. Scandinavian 
Journal of Work, Environment & Health, 32, 431-442. doi:10.5271/sjweh.1049 
Kramer, A., & Chung, W. (2015). Work demands, family demands, and BMI in dual-earners  
families: A 16-year longitudinal study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100, 1632-
1640. doi:10.1037/a0038634 
Lazarus, R. S. (1981). The stress and coping paradigm. In C. Eisdorfer, D. Cohen, A. 
Kleinman,  
 
& P. Maxim (Eds.), Models for clinical psychopathology (pp. 177-214). New York:  
 
Spectrum. 
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: Springer. 
Law, K. S., Wong, C. S., & Mobley, W. M. (1998). Toward a taxonomy of multidimensional  
 
constructs. Academy of Management Review, 23, 741-755. doi:10.2307/259060 
Lee, R. T., & Ashforth, B. E. (1996). A meta-analytic examination of the correlates of the 
three 
dimensions of job burnout. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 123-133. 
doi:10.1037//0021-9010.81.2.123 
Le Fevre, M., Matheny, J., & Kolt, G. S. (2003). Eustress, distress, and interpretation in  
occupational stress. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 18, 726-744. 
doi:10.1108/02683940310502412 
Le Fevre, M., Kolt, G. S., & Matheny, J. (2006). Eustress, distress and their interpretation in  
 
primary and secondary occupational stress management interventions: Which way  
 
first?. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 21, 547-565. 
doi:10.1108/02683940610684391 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     47 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
LePine, J. A., Podsakoff, N. P., & LePine, M. A. (2005). A meta-analytic test of the challenge 
stressor–hindrance stressor framework: An explanation for inconsistent relationships 
among stressors and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 764-775. 
doi:10.5465/AMJ.2005.18803921 
Li, W. D., Fay, D., Frese, M., Harms, P. D., & Gao, X. Y. (2014). Reciprocal relationship 
between proactive personality and work characteristics: A latent change score 
approach. Journal of Applied Psychology, 99, 948-965. doi:10.1037/a0036169 
Libet, J. M., Frueh, B. C., Pellegrin, K. L., Gold, P. B., Santos, A. B., & Arana, G. W. (2001). 
Absenteeism and productivity among mental health employees.  Administration and 
Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, 29, 41-50. 
doi:10.1023/A:1013116931570 
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2011). Construct measurement and 
validation procedures in MIS and behavioral research: Integrating new and existing 
techniques. MIS Quarterly, 35, 293-334.  
Manzoli, L., Villari, P., Pirone, G. M., & Boccia, A. (2007). Marital status and mortality in 
the  
elderly: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Social Science & Medicine, 64, 77-
94. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.08.031 
Maslach, C., & Schaufeli, W. B. (1993). Historical and conceptual development of burnout. 
In  
 
W.B. Schaufeli, C. Maslach, & T. Marek (Eds.), Professional burnout: Recent  
 
developments in theory and research (pp. 1-16). Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis. 
McCall, M. W., Jr., Lombardo, M. M., & Morrison, A. M. (1988). The lessons of experience:  
 
How successful executives develop on the job. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     48 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
O’Reilly, D., & Rosato, M. (2013). Worked to death? A census-based longitudinal study of 
the relationship between the numbers of hours spent working and mortality 
risk. International Journal of Epidemiology, 42, 1820-1830. doi:10.1093/ije/dyt211 
Parish, S. L., Seltzer, M. M., Greenberg, J. S., & Floyd, F. (2004). Economic implications of  
caregiving at midlife: Comparing parents with and without children who have 
developmental disabilities. Journal Information, 42, 413-426. doi:10.1352/0047-
6765(2004)42<413:EIOCAM>2.0.CO;2 
Patel, P. C., & Thatcher, S. M. (2014). Sticking it out: Individual attributes and persistence in  
self-employment. Journal of Management, 40, 1932-1979. 
doi:10.1177/0149206312446643 
Pinkhasov, R. M., Wong, J., Kashanian, J., Lee, M., Samadi, D. B., Pinkhasov, M. M., &  
Shabsigh, R. (2010). Are men shortchanged on health? Perspective on health care 
utilization and health risk behavior in men and women in the United 
States. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 64, 475-487. doi:10.1111/j.1742-
1241.2009.02290.x 
Plug, E., & Vijverberg, W. (2005). Does family income matter for schooling outcomes? 
Using  
adoptees as a natural experiment. The Economic Journal, 115, 879-906. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0297.2005.01023.x 
Podsakoff, N. P., LePine, J. A., & LePine, M. A. (2007). Differential challenge stressor- 
hindrance stressor relationships with job attitudes, turnover intentions, turnover, and 
withdrawal behavior: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 438-454. 
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.92.2.438 
Raykov, T. (1997). Estimation of composite reliability for congeneric measures. Applied  
 
Psychological  
Measurement, 21, 173-184. doi:10.1177/01466216970212006 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     49 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Reiche, E. M. V., Nunes, S. O. V., & Morimoto, H. K. (2004). Stress, depression, the 
immune system, and cancer. The Lancet Oncology, 5, 617-625. doi:10.1016/S1470-
2045(04)01597-9 
Richter, P., & Hacker, W. (1998). Workload and strain: Stress, fatigue, and burnout in 
working  
 
life. Heidelberg, Germany: Asagner. 
Robbins, J. M., Ford, M. T., & Tetrick, L. E. (2012). Perceived unfairness and employee 
health: A meta-analytic integration. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 235-272. 
doi:10.1037/a0025408 
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic  
motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55, 68-78. 
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68 
Schmidt, F. L., Shaffer, J. A., & Oh, I. S. (2008). Increased accuracy for range restriction 
corrections: Implications for the role of personality and general mental ability in job 
and training performance. Personnel Psychology, 61, 827-868. doi:10.1111/j.1744-
6570.2008.00132.x 
Schnieder, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel Psychology, 40, 437-453.  
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1987.tb00609.x 
Schriesheim, C. A., Powers, K. J., Scandura, T. A., Gardiner, C. C., & Lankau, M. J. (1993). 
Improving construct measurement in management research: Comments and a 
quantitative approach for assessing the theoretical content adequacy of paper-and-
pencil survey-type instruments. Journal of Management, 19, 385-417. 
doi:10.1177/014920639301900208 
Seeman, T. E., Singer, B. H., Rowe, J. W., Horwitz, R. I., & McEwen, B. (1997). Price of  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     50 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
adaptation – Allostatic load and its health consequences. Archive of Internal 
Medicine,  
 
157, 2259-2268. doi:10.1001/archinte.1997.00440400111013 
Seeman, T. E., McEwen, B. S., Rowe, J. W., & Singer, B. H. (2001). Allostatic load as a 
marker  
 
of cumulative biological risk: MacArthur studies of successful aging. Proceedings of 
the  
 
National Academy of Science, 98, 4770-4775. doi:10.1073/pnas.081072698 
Selye, H. (1955). Stress and disease. Science, 122, 625-631. 
doi:10.1126/science.122.3171.625 
Sliter, M. T., Sinclair, R. R., Yuan, Z., & Mohr, C. D. (2014). Don’t fear the reaper: Trait 
death  
anxiety, mortality salience, and occupational health. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
99, 759-769. doi: 10.1037/a0035729 
Sonnentag, S., & Zijlstra, F. R. (2006). Job characteristics and off-job activities as predictors 
of  
need for recovery, well-being, and fatigue. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 330-
350. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.330 
Stein, J. H., & Cropanzano, R. (2011). Death awareness and organizational behavior. Journal 
of  
Organizational Behavior, 32, 1189-1193. doi:10.1002/job.715 
Sterling, P. & Eyer, J. (1988). Allostatis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. In S.  
Fisher & J. Reason (Eds.), Handbook of life stress, cognition, and health (pp. 629-
649) Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons.  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     51 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Syrek, C. J., Apostel, E., & Antoni, C. H. (2013). Stress in highly demanding IT jobs: 
Transformational leadership moderates the impact of time pressure on exhaustion and 
work–life balance. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 18, 252-261. 
doi:10.1037/a0033085 
Tait, M., Padgett, M. Y., & Baldwin, T. T. (1989). Job and life satisfaction: A reevaluation of 
the  
strength of the relationship and gender effects as a function of the date of the 
study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 502-507. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.74.3.502 
Taylor, S. E. (1999). Health psychology (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Theorell, T., & Karasek, R. A. (1996). Current issues relating to psychosocial job strain and  
cardiovascular disease research. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 1, 9-26. 
doi:10.1037/1076-8998.1.1.9 
Totterdell, P., Wood, S., & Wall, T. (2006). An intra-individual test of the demands-control  
model: A weekly diary study of psychological strain in portfolio workers. Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 79, 63-84. 
doi:10.1348/096317905X52616 
Van der Doef, M., & Maes, S. (1998). The job demand-control (-support) model and physical 
health outcomes: A review of the strain and buffer hypotheses. Psychology and 
Health, 13, 909-936. doi:10.1080/08870449808407440 
Van der Klink, J. J., Blonk, R. W., Schene, A. H., & Van Dijk, F. J. (2001). The benefits of 
interventions for work-related stress. American Journal of Public Health, 91, 270-
276. doi:10.2105/AJPH.91.2.270 
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to experience 
aversive  
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     52 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
emotional states. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 465-490. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.96.3.465 
Watson, D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1989). Health complaints, stress, and distress: Exploring 
the  
central role of negative affectivity. Psychological Review, 96, 234-254. 
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.96.2.234 
Wrzesniewski, A., & Dutton, J. E. (2001). Crafting a job: Revisioning employees as active  
crafters of their work. Academy of Management Review, 26, 179–201. 
doi:10.5465/AMR.2001.4378011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     53 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Table 1 
Causes of Death for a Subset of the Sample  
Cause of Death 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Cancer 
75 
55.15% 
Circulatory system 
30 
22.06% 
Respiratory system 
11 
8.09% 
Ill-defined conditions 
7 
5.15% 
Endocrine, nutritional, 
metabolic, immunity 
5 
3.67% 
Digestive system 
4 
2.94% 
Blood and blood-forming 
organs 
1 
.74% 
Genitourinary system 
1 
.74% 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
1 
.74% 
Injury and poisoning 
1 
.74% 
Note. Cause of death data were only available for 136 of the 189 deceased individuals in our 
sample. 
 
 
  
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been 
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to 
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 
10.1111/peps.12206. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Table 2 
Variable Intercorrelations and Descriptive Statistics 
Note. n = 2,363.  Reliabilities are presented in the diagonal. All correlations with an absolute value 
equal to or greater than .04 were significant at the .05 level. SES = socioeconomic status. Gender was 
coded 0 = male and 1 = female; smoking history was coded 0 = never regularly smoked, 1 = regularly 
smoked; marital status was coded 0 = not married, 1 = married; managerial job was coded 0 = non-
managerial job, 1 = managerial job; mortality was coded 0 = alive and 1 = deceased.  
Variable 
M. 
S.D. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
1. Gender 
.49 
.50 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Age 
64.27 
.67 
-.08 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Smoking history 
.54 
.50 
-.12 
-.02 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Marital status 
.77 
.42 
   -.26 
 .01 
-.04 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Overall health 
.87 
.16 
-.03 
-.01 
-.09 
.06 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Log net worth 
12.68 
1.55 
-.17 
-.06 
-.04 
.25 
.11 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Log income 
10.30 
2.75 
-.13 
-.01 
.04 
.09  
.05 
.36 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Education level 
14.03 
2.49 
-.15 
-.12 
-.04 
.02 
.08 
.21 
.15 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Job prestige 
534.31 
219.96 
-.06 
-.12 
-.03 
.05 
.07 
.24 
.13 
.46 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Managerial job 
.21 
.40 
-.14 
-.04 
.02 
.08 
.07 
.17 
.08 
.19 
.19 
- 
 
 
 
 
11. Positive affect 
3.09 
.52 
.11 
-.01 
-.06 
.07 
.23 
.05 
.02 
.08 
.07 
.04 
(.87) 
 
 
 
12. Negative affect 
1.38 
.35 
.11 
-.02 
.02 
-.09 
-.27 
-.10 
-.03 
.02 
-.02 
-.05 
-.31 
(.82) 
 
 
13. Job demands 
.00 
.59 
-.01 
-.04 
.02 
-.06 
-.03 
.02 
.01 
.09 
.09 
.06 
-.01 
.13 
(.76) 
 
14. Job control 
3.20 
.64 
-.16 
-.04 
.02 
.05 
.11 
.17 
.06 
.23 
.27 
.20 
.16 
-.17 
-.16 
(.84) 
15. Mortality 
.08 
.27 
-.05 
-.04 
.08 
-.04 
-.12 
-.05 
-.01 
-.03 
-.04 
-.03 
-.06 
.00 
.01 
-.03 
  
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been 
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to 
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 
10.1111/peps.12206. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Table 3 
Logistic Regression Results Predicting Mortality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equation 1 
 
 
Equation 2 
 
 
Equation 3 
Variable 
B   
Exp(B) 
 
B 
Exp(B) 
 
B 
Exp(B) 
Demographic characteristics 
  Gender 
-.48** 
.62 
 
-.49** 
.61 
 
-.48** 
.62 
  Age 
-.30** 
.75 
 
-.30** 
.74 
 
-.30** 
.74 
  Marital status 
-.32* 
.72   
 
-.33* 
.72 
 
-.34* 
.71 
Health indicators 
  Smoking    
  history 
.46** 
1.58 
 
.46** 
1.59 
 
.46** 
1.59 
  Overall health 
-1.87** 
.16 
 
-1.87** 
.16 
 
-1.88** 
.15 
Socio-economic status and managerial work 
  Log net worth 
-.06 
.94 
 
-.06 
.94 
 
-.07 
.94 
  Log income 
.01 
1.01 
 
.01 
1.01 
 
.01 
1.01 
  Education level 
-.02 
.98 
 
-.02 
.98 
 
-.02 
.98 
  Job prestige 
.00 
1.00 
 
.00 
1.00 
 
.00 
1.00 
  Managerial job 
-.21 
.81 
 
-.19 
.83 
 
-.17 
.84 
Affect 
  Positive affect 
-.27* 
.76 
 
-.26 
.77 
 
-.26 
.77 
  Negative affect 
-.44* 
.65 
 
-.45* 
.64 
 
-.46* 
.63 
Job demands and control 
  Job demands 
 
 
 
-.06 
.95 
 
-.08 
.92 
  Job control 
 
 
 
-.10 
.91 
 
-.06 
.94 
  Demands x 
control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-.33* 
.72 
H-L Test 
 
4.83 
 
 
7.20 
 
 
4.95 
 
Model χ2 
 
65.16** 
 
 
65.75** 
 
 
69.84** 
Δ χ2 
 
- 
 
 
.59 
 
 
4.09* 
 
Note.  N = 2,363. B are log odds ratios; Exp(B) are odds ratios.  Δ χ2 refers to the significance of 
the last-entered block of variables, after accounting for the previous block. H-L Test refers to the 
Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness of fit test.  Mortality was coded 0 = alive and 1 = deceased; gender 
was coded 0 = male and 1 = female; smoking history was coded 0 = never regularly smoked and 1 
= regularly smoked; marital status was coded 0 = not married and 1 = married; managerial job was 
coded 0 = non-managerial job and 1 = managerial job.    
*p < .05  
**p < .01 
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
56 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Table 4. 
Ordinary Least Squares Regression Results Predicting BMI of Surviving Participants 
 
 
Equation 1 
 
 
Equation 2 
 
 
Equation 3 
Variable 
B   
β 
 
B 
β 
 
B 
β 
Demographic characteristics 
  Gender 
-.81** 
-.07 
 
-.77** 
-.07 
 
-.75** 
-.07 
  Age 
-.50** 
-.06 
 
-.50** 
-.06 
 
-.51** 
-.06 
  Marital status 
-.12 
-.01  
 
-.09* 
-.01 
 
-.08 
-.01 
Health indicators 
  Smoking    
  history 
-.47 
-.04 
 
-.49 
-.05 
 
-.49 
-.05 
  Overall health 
-4.49** 
-.13 
 
-4.50** 
-.13 
 
-4.46** 
-.13 
Socio-economic status and managerial work 
  Log net worth 
-.28** 
-.08 
 
-.29** 
-.08 
 
-.30** 
-.08 
  Log income 
.10 
.05 
 
.10 
.05 
 
.10 
.05 
  Education level 
-.30** 
-.14 
 
-.31** 
-.14 
 
-.30** 
-.14 
  Job prestige 
.00 
.03 
 
.00 
.02 
 
.00 
.03 
  Managerial job 
-.32 
-.02 
 
-.37 
-.03 
 
-.33 
-.02 
Affect 
  Positive affect 
.16 
.02 
 
.12 
.01 
 
.12 
.01 
  Negative affect 
-.50 
-.03 
 
-.54 
-.03 
 
-.55 
-.04 
Job demands and control 
  Job demands 
 
 
 
.32 
.04 
 
.32 
.03 
  Job control 
 
 
 
.20 
.02 
 
.27 
.03 
  Demands x 
control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-.80* 
-.06 
 
R / R2 
.21** /  .04 
 
.22** /  .05 
 
.22** / .05 
Δ R2 
 
- 
 
 
.00 
 
 
.00* 
 
Note. N = 1,812. B are unstandardized coefficients and β are standardized coefficients.  ΔR2 
refers to the significance of the last-entered block of variables, after accounting for the 
previous block. Gender was coded 0 = male and 1 = female; smoking history was coded 0 = 
never regularly smoked and 1 = regularly smoked; marital status was coded 0 = not married 
and 1 = married; managerial job was coded 0 = non-managerial job and 1 = managerial job.    
*p < .05  
**p < .01 
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
57 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 Figure 1. Interaction of Job Demands and Job Control Predicting Probability of Death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
Low
High
Probability of Death 
Job Demands 
High Control
Low Control
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
58 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Interaction of Job Demands and Job Control Predicting Body Mass Index. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  
Scale Items Used 
27.90
28.20
28.50
28.80
29.10
29.40
29.70
30.00
Low
High
Body Mass Index 
Job Demands 
High Control
Low Control
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
59 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Job Demands 
 
1. To what extent do you agree that your job requires working very hard? 
2. To what extent do you agree that your job requires working very fast? 
3. To what extent do you agree that your job requires long periods of intense 
concentration? 
4. To what extent do you agree that your job is very hectic? 
5. To what extent do you agree that you have too much work to do everything well on 
your job? 
6. To what extent do you agree that you are not asked to do an excessive amount of 
work at your job? (reverse scored) 
7. To what extent do you agree that you have enough time to get the job done? (reverse 
scored) 
8. To what extent do you agree that you are free of conflicting demands that others make 
on your job? (reverse scored) 
9. How frequently does your job require working under time pressure?  
 
Job Control 
 
1. To what extent do you agree that your job allows you to make a lot of decisions on 
your own? 
2. To what extent do you agree that you have a lot of say about what happens on your 
job? 
3. To what extent do you agree that you can determine the order in which your work is 
to be done on your job? 
4. To what extent do you agree that you can determine when a task is to be done on your 
job? 
5. To what extent do you agree that you can determine your own work rate on your job? 
6. To what extent do you agree that you have very little freedom to decide how you do 
your work on the job? (reverse scored) 
 
Positive Affect  
 
1. In a typical week, how caring are you?     
2. In a typical week, how delighted are you?             
3. In a typical week, how determined are you?       
4. In a typical week, how much do you enjoy yourself?       
5. In a typical week, how enthusiastic are you?             
6. In a typical week, how friendly/warm are you?         
7. In a typical week, how interested are you?         
8. In a typical week, how loved are you?                
9. In a typical week, how protected are you? 
10. In a typical week, how thrilled by something are you?     
 
Negative Affect 
 
1. In a typical week, how angry/irritated are you? 
2. In a typical week, how calm/serene are you? (reverse scored)            
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
60 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
3. In a typical week, how confused are you?          
4. In a typical week, how embarrassed are you?    
5. In a typical week, how frustrated are you?    
6. In a typical week, how helpless are you?      
7. In a typical week, how hesitant are you?      
8. In a typical week, how lonely are you?        
9. In a typical week, how nervous/anxious are you?   
10. In a typical week, how sad/blue are you? 
11. In a typical week, how worried are you? 
 
Health Utilities Inventory 3 
 
Domain 
Level 
Description 
 
VISION 
1 
Able to see well enough to read ordinary 
newsprint and recognize a friend on the other 
side of the street, without glasses or contact 
lenses. 
 
 
2 
Able to see well enough to read ordinary 
newsprint and recognize a friend on the other 
side of the street, but with glasses. 
 
 
3 
Able to read ordinary newsprint with or 
without glasses but unable to recognize a 
friend on the other side of the street, even with 
glasses. 
 
 
4 
Able to recognize a friend on the other side of 
the street with or without glasses but unable to 
read ordinary newsprint, even with glasses. 
 
 
5 
Unable to read ordinary newsprint and unable 
to recognize a friend on the other side of the 
street, even with glasses. 
 
 
6 
Unable to see at all. 
 
  
  
  
  
HEARING 
1 
Able to hear what is said in a group 
conversation with at least three other people, 
without a hearing aid. 
 
 
2 
Able to hear what is said in a conversation 
with one other person in a quiet room without 
a hearing aid, but requires a hearing aid to hear 
what is said in a group conversation with at 
least three other people. 
 
 
3 
Able to hear what is said in a conversation 
with one other person in a quiet room with a 
hearing aid, and able to hear what is said in a 
group conversation with at least three other 
people, with a hearing aid. 
 
 
4 
Able to hear what is said in a conversation 
with one other person in a quiet room, without 
 
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
61 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
a hearing aid, but unable to hear what is said in 
a group conversation with at least three other 
people even with a hearing aid.  
 
5 
Able to hear what is said in a conversation 
with one other person in a quiet room with a 
hearing aid, but unable to hear what is said in a 
group conversation with at least three other 
people even with a hearing aid. 
 
 
6 
Unable to hear at all. 
 
  
  
  
  
SPEECH 
1 
Able to be understood completely when 
speaking with strangers or friends. 
 
 
2 
Able to be understood partially when speaking 
with strangers but able to be understood 
completely when speaking with people who 
know me well. 
 
 
3 
Able to be understood partially when speaking 
with strangers or people who know me well. 
 
 
4 
Unable to be understood when speaking with 
strangers but able to be understood partially by 
people who know me well. 
 
 
5 
Unable to be understood when speaking to 
other people (or unable to speak at all). 
 
  
  
  
  
AMBULATION 
1 
Able to walk around the neighbourhood 
without difficulty, and without walking 
equipment. 
 
 
2 
Able to walk around the neighbourhood with 
difficulty; but does not require walking 
equipment or the help of another person. 
 
 
3 
Able to walk around the neighbourhood with 
walking equipment, but without the help of 
another person. 
 
 
4 
Able to walk only short distances with walking 
equipment, and requires a wheelchair to get 
around the neighbourhood. 
 
 
5 
Unable to walk alone, even with walking 
equipment. Able to walk short distances with 
the help of another person, and requires a 
wheelchair to get around the neighbourhood. 
 
 
6 
Cannot walk at all. 
 
  
  
  
  
DEXTERITY 
1 
Full use of two hands and ten fingers. 
 
 
2 
Limitations in the use of hands or fingers, but 
does not require special tools or help of 
 
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
62 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
another person. 
 
3 
Limitations in the use of hands or fingers, is 
independent with use of special tools (does not 
require the help of another person). 
 
 
4 
Limitations in the use of hands or fingers, 
requires the help of another person for some 
tasks (not independent even with use of special 
tools). 
 
 
5 
Limitations in use of hands or fingers, requires 
the help of another person for most tasks (not 
independent even with use of special tools). 
 
 
6 
Limitations in use of hands or fingers, requires 
the help of another person for all tasks (not 
independent even with use of special tools). 
 
  
  
  
  
EMOTION 
1 
Happy and interested in life. 
 
 
2 
Somewhat happy. 
 
 
3 
Somewhat unhappy. 
 
 
4 
Very unhappy. 
 
 
5 
So unhappy that life is not worthwhile. 
 
  
  
  
  
COGNITION 
1 
Able to remember most things, think clearly 
and solve day to day problems. 
 
 
2 
Able to remember most things, but have a little 
difficulty when trying to think and solve day to 
day problems. 
 
 
3 
Somewhat forgetful, but able to think clearly 
and solve day to day problems. 
 
 
4 
Somewhat forgetful, and have a little difficulty 
when trying to think or solve day to day 
problems. 
 
 
5 
Very forgetful, and have great difficulty when 
trying to think or solve day to day problems. 
 
 
6 
Unable to remember anything at all, and 
unable to think or solve day to day problems. 
 
  
  
  
  
PAIN 
1 
Free of pain and discomfort. 
 
 
2 
Mild to moderate pain that prevents no 
activities. 
 
 
3 
Moderate pain that prevents a few activities. 
 
 
4 
Moderate to severe pain that prevents some 
activities. 
 
 
5 
Severe pain that prevents most activities. 
 
 
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
63 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOB DEMANDS-CONTROL AND MORTALITY                                                                     
64 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Data Transparency Appendix 
The data reported in this manuscript are from a publicly available dataset titled the 
―Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey‖. The data is accessible from 
http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch. A full list of all published works using the data is 
available at http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/publications/pubs.php?topic=ALL. This is 
the author team’s first use of the database.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
