 C L I N I C A L
P R A C T I C E
G U I D E L I N E
Pediatric Obesity—Assessment, Treatment,
and Prevention: An Endocrine Society
Clinical Practice Guideline
Dennis M. Styne,1 Silva A. Arslanian,2 Ellen L. Connor,3 Ismaa Sadaf Farooqi,4
M. Hassan Murad,5 Janet H. Silverstein,6 and Jack A. Yanovski7
1University of California Davis, Sacramento, California 95817; 2University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15224; 3University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792; 4University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom; 5Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905; 6University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32607; and 7National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892
Cosponsoring Associations: The European Society of Endocrinology and the Pediatric Endocrine
Society. This guideline was funded by the Endocrine Society.
Objective: To formulate clinical practice guidelines for the assessment, treatment, and prevention of
pediatric obesity.
Participants: The participants include an Endocrine Society–appointed Task Force of 6 experts, a
methodologist, and a medical writer.
Evidence: This evidence-based guideline was developed using the Grading of Recommendations,
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach to describe the strength of recommendations
and the quality of evidence. The Task Force commissioned 2 systematic reviews and used the best
available evidence from other published systematic reviews and individual studies.
Consensus Process: One group meeting, several conference calls, and e-mail communications
enabled consensus. Endocrine Society committees and members and co-sponsoring organizations
reviewed and commented on preliminary drafts of this guideline.
Conclusion: Pediatric obesity remains an ongoing serious international health concern affecting
;17% of US children and adolescents, threatening their adult health and longevity. Pediatric obesity
has its basis in genetic susceptibilities influenced by a permissive environment starting in utero and
extending through childhood and adolescence. Endocrine etiologies for obesity are rare and usually
are accompanied by attenuated growth patterns. Pediatric comorbidities are common and long-term
health complications often result; screening for comorbidities of obesity should be applied in a
hierarchal, logical manner for early identification before more serious complications result. Genetic
screening for rare syndromes is indicated only in the presence of specific historical or physical features.
The psychological toll of pediatric obesity on the individual and family necessitates screening for
mental health issues and counseling as indicated. The prevention of pediatric obesity by promoting
healthful diet, activity, and environment should be a primary goal, as achieving effective, long-lasting
results with lifestyle modification once obesity occurs is difficult. Although some behavioral and
pharmacotherapy studies report modest success, additional research into accessible and effective
methods for preventing and treating pediatric obesity is needed. The use of weight loss medications
during childhood and adolescence should be restricted to clinical trials. Increasing evidence
ISSN Print 0021-972X
ISSN Online 1945-7197
Printed in USA
Copyright © 2017 by the Endocrine Society
Received 30 June 2016. Accepted 10 November 2016.
First Published Online 31 January 2017
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; BMI, body mass index; CDC, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; CVD, cardiovascular disease; FDA, Food and Drug
Administration; GH, growth hormone; HbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; LAGB, laparoscopic
adjustable gastric banding; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; PCOS, polycystic ovary
syndrome; QOL, quality of life; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RYGB, Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; VSG, vertical sleeve gastrectomy; WHO, World
Health Organization.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
709
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 demonstrates the effectiveness of bariatric surgery in the most seriously affected mature teenagers who
have failed lifestyle modification, but the use of surgery requires experienced teams with resources for
long-term follow-up. Adolescents undergoing lifestyle therapy, medication regimens, or bariatric surgery
for obesity will need cohesive planning to help them effectively transition to adult care, with continued
necessary monitoring, support, and intervention. Transition programs for obesity are an uncharted area
requiring further research for efficacy. Despite a significant increase in research on pediatric obesity since
the initial publication of these guidelines 8 years ago, further study is needed of the genetic and biological
factors that increase the risk of weight gain and influence the response to therapeutic interventions. Also
needed are more studies to better understand the genetic and biological factors that cause an obese
individual to manifest one comorbidity vs another or to be free of comorbidities. Furthermore, continued
investigation into the most effective methods of preventing and treating obesity and into methods for
changing environmental and economic factors that will lead to worldwide cultural changes in diet and
activity should be priorities. Particular attention to determining ways to effect systemic changes in food
environments and total daily mobility, as well as methods for sustaining healthy body mass index changes,
is of importance. (J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102: 709–757, 2017)
Summary of Recommendations
1.0 Diagnosing overweight and obesity
1.1 We recommend using body mass index (BMI) and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) normative BMI percentiles to diagnose
overweight or obesity in children and adolescents
$2 years of age. (1jÅÅÅs)
1.2 We recommend diagnosing a child or adoles-
cent .2 years of age as overweight if the BMI
is $85th percentile but ,95th percentile for age
and sex, as obese if the BMI is $95th percentile,
and as extremely obese if the BMI is $120% of the
95th percentile or $35 kg/m2 (1|ÅÅss). We
suggest that clinicians take into account that
variations in BMI correlate differently to comorbidities
according to race/ethnicity and that increased muscle
mass increases BMI. (2jÅsss)
1.3 We suggest calculating, plotting, and reviewing a
child’s or adolescent’s BMI percentile at least
annually during well-child and/or sick-child visits.
(Ungraded Good Practice Statement)
1.4 We suggest that a child ,2 years of age be di-
agnosed as obese if the sex-specific weight for
recumbent length is $97.7th percentile on the
World Health Organization (WHO) charts, as US
and international pediatric groups accept this
method as valid. (2jÅsss)
1.5 We recommend against routine laboratory eval-
uations for endocrine etiologies of pediatric obe-
sity unless the patient’s stature and/or height
velocity are attenuated (assessed in relationship
to genetic/familial potential and pubertal stage).
(1jÅÅÅs)
1.6 We recommend that children or adolescents with a
BMI of $85th percentile be evaluated for potential
comorbidities (see Table 2 and Fig. 1). (1jÅÅÅs)
1.7 We recommend against measuring insulin con-
centrations when evaluating children or adoles-
cents for obesity. (1jÅÅÅs)
2.0 Genetic obesity syndromes
2.1 We suggest genetic testing in patients with extreme
early onset obesity (before 5 years of age) and that
have clinical features of genetic obesity syndromes
(in
particular
extreme
hyperphagia)
and/or
a family history of extreme obesity. (2jÅÅss)
3.0 Prevention of obesity
3.1 We suggest that clinicians promote and partici-
pate in the ongoing healthy dietary and activity
education of children and adolescents, parents,
and communities, and encourage schools to
provide adequate education about healthy eating
(1). (2jÅsss)
3.2 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and
support healthy eating habits such as:
· avoiding the consumption of calorie-dense,
nutrient-poor foods (e.g., sugar-sweetened
beverages, sports drinks, fruit drinks, most
“fast foods” or those with added table sugar,
high-fructose corn syrup, high-fat or high-
sodium processed foods, and calorie-dense
snacks)
· encouraging the consumption of whole fruits
rather than fruit juices. (1jÅÅss)
3.3 We recommend that children and adolescents
engage in at least 20 minutes, optimally 60
minutes, of vigorous physical activity at least
5 days per week to improve metabolic health
and reduce the likelihood of developing obesity.
(1jÅÅss)
710
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 3.4 We suggest fostering healthy sleep patterns in
children and adolescents to decrease the likeli-
hood of developing obesity due to changes in
caloric intake and metabolism related to disor-
dered sleep. (2jÅÅss)
3.5 Werecommendbalancingunavoidabletechnology-
related screen time in children and adolescents
with increased opportunities for physical ac-
tivity. (1jÅÅss)
3.6 We suggest that a clinician’s obesity prevention
efforts enlist the entire family rather than only the
individual patient. (2jÅsss)
3.7 We suggest that clinicians assess family function
and make appropriate referrals to address family
stressors to decrease the development of obesity.
(2jÅÅss)
3.8 We suggest using school-based programs and
community engagement in pediatric obesity
prevention. (2jÅÅss)
3.9 We recommend using comprehensive behavior-
changing interventions to prevent obesity. Such
programs would be integrated with school- or
community-based programs to reach the widest
audience. (1jÅÅss)
3.10 We recommend breast-feeding in infants based
on numerous health benefits. However, we can
only suggest breast-feeding for the prevention of
obesity, as evidence supporting the association
between breast-feeding and subsequent obesity is
inconsistent. (2jÅsss)
4.0 Treating obesity
Lifestyle: general considerations
4.1 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and
support intensive, age-appropriate, culturally
sensitive, family-centered lifestyle modifications
(dietary, physical activity, behavioral) to pro-
mote a decrease in BMI. (1jÅÅÅs)
4.2 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and sup-
port healthy eating habits in accordance with the
following guidelines of the American Academy of
Pediatrics and the US Department of Agriculture:
· decreased consumption of fast foods
· decreased consumption of added table sugar
and elimination of sugar-sweetened beverages
· decreased consumption of high-fructose corn
syrup and improved labeling of foods con-
taining high-fructose corn syrup
· decreased consumption of high-fat, high-
sodium, or processed foods
· consumption of whole fruit rather than fruit
juices
· portion control education
· reduced saturated dietary fat intake for chil-
dren and adolescents .2 years of age
· US Department of Agriculture recommended
intake of dietary fiber, fruits, and vegetables
· timely, regular meals, and avoiding constant
“grazing” during the day, especially after
school and after supper
· recognizing eating cues in the child’s or ado-
lescent’s
environment,
such
as
boredom,
stress, loneliness, or screen time
· encouraging single portion packaging and
improved food labeling for easier use by con-
sumers. (Ungraded Good Practice Statement)
4.3 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and
support the reduction of inactivity and also a
minimum of 20 minutes of moderate to vigorous
physical activity daily, with a goal of 60 min-
utes, all in the context of a calorie-controlled
diet. (1jÅÅss)
4.4 We suggest that clinicians encourage and support
patients to limit nonacademic screen time to 1 to
2 hours per day and decrease other sedentary
behaviors, such as digital activities. (2jÅsss)
4.5 We suggest that the health care team identify
maladaptive rearing patterns related to diet and
activity and educate families about healthy food
and exercise habits. (2jÅsss)
4.6 We suggest that the health care team probe for
and diagnose unhealthy intrafamily communi-
cation patterns and support rearing patterns that
seek to enhance the child’s or adolescent’s self-
esteem. (2jÅsss)
4.7 We suggest that the health care team evaluate for
psychosocial comorbidities and prescribe as-
sessment and counseling when psychosocial
problems are suspected. (2jÅsss)
4.8 We suggest pharmacotherapy for children or
adolescents with obesity only after a formal
program of intensive lifestyle modification has
failed to limit weight gain or to ameliorate
comorbidities (2jÅsss). We recommend against
using obesity medications in children and ado-
lescents ,16 years of age who are overweight
but not obese, except in the context of clinical
trials. (1jÅsss)
4.9 We suggest that Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)–approved pharmacotherapy for obesity
be administered only with a concomitant lifestyle
modification program of the highest intensity
available and only by clinicians who are expe-
rienced in the use of anti-obesity agents and are
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
711
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 aware of the potential for adverse reactions.
(2|Åsss)
4.10 We suggest that clinicians should discontinue
medication and reevaluate the patient if the pa-
tient does not have a .4% BMI/BMI z score
reduction after taking antiobesity medication for
12 weeks at the medication’s full dosage.
(2jÅsss)
4.11 We suggest bariatric surgery only under the
following conditions:
· the patient has attained Tanner 4 or 5 pubertal
development and final or near-final adult
height, the patient has a BMI of .40 kg/m2 or
has a BMI of .35 kg/m2 and significant,
extreme comorbidities
· extreme obesity and comorbidities persist despite
compliance with a formal program of lifestyle
modification, with or without pharmacotherapy
· psychological evaluation confirms the stabil-
ity and competence of the family unit [psy-
chological distress due to impaired quality of
live (QOL) from obesity may be present, but
the patient does not have an underlying un-
treated psychiatric illness]
· the patient demonstrates the ability to adhere
to the principles of healthy dietary and activity
habits
· there is access to an experienced surgeon in a
pediatric bariatric surgery center of excellence
that provides the necessary infrastructure for
patient care, including a team capable of long-
term follow-up of the metabolic and psycho-
social
needs
of
the
patient
and
family.
(2jÅÅss)
4.12 We suggest against bariatric surgery in pre-
adolescent children, pregnant or breast-feeding
adolescents (and those planning to become
pregnant within 2 years of surgery), and in any
patient who has not mastered the principles of
healthy dietary and activity habits and/or has an
unresolved substance abuse, eating disorder, or
untreated psychiatric disorder. (2|Åsss)
Method of Development of Evidence-Based
Clinical Practice Guidelines
The Clinical Guidelines Subcommittee of the Endocrine Society
deemed prevention and treatment of pediatric obesity a priority
area in need of practice guidelines and appointed a Task Force
to formulate evidence-based recommendations. The Task Force
followed the approach recommended by the Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evalua-
tion group, an international group with expertise in the
development and implementation of evidence-based guide-
lines (2). A detailed description of the grading scheme has
been published elsewhere (3). The Task Force used the best
available research evidence to develop the recommendations.
The Task Force also used consistent language and graphical
descriptions of both the strength of a recommendation and
the quality of evidence. In terms of the strength of a rec-
ommendation, strong recommendations use the phrase “we
recommend” and the number 1, and weak recommendations
ue the phrase “we suggest” and the number 2. Cross-filled
circles indicate the quality of the evidence, such that Åsss
denotes very low quality evidence; ÅÅss, low quality;
ÅÅÅs, moderate quality; and ÅÅÅÅ, high quality. The
Task Force has confidence that persons who receive care
according to the strong recommendations will derive, on
average, more good than harm. Weak recommendations re-
quire more careful consideration of the person’s circumstances,
values, and preferences to determine the best course of action.
Linked to each recommendation is a description of the evidence
and the values that the Task Force considered in making the
recommendation; in some instances, there are remarks, a sec-
tion in which the Task Force offers technical suggestions for
testing conditions, dosing, and monitoring. These technical
comments reflect the best available evidence applied to a typical
person being treated. Often this evidence comes from the un-
systematic observations of the Task Force and their values and
preferences; therefore, one should consider these remarks as
suggestions.
In this guideline, the Task Force made several statements
to emphasize the importance of shared decision making,
general preventive care measures, and basic principles of
pediatric obesity prevention and treatment. They labeled
these as “Ungraded Good Practice Statement.” Direct evi-
dence for these statements was either unavailable or not
systematically appraised, and thus considered out of the
scope of this guideline. The intention of these statements is to
draw attention and remind providers of these principles; one
should not consider these statements as graded recommen-
dations (4).
The Endocrine Society maintains a rigorous conflict-of-
interest review process for developing clinical practice
guidelines. All Task Force members must declare any po-
tential conflicts of interest by completing a conflict-of-
interest
form.
The
Clinical
Guidelines
Subcommittee
reviews all conflicts of interest before the Society’s Council
approves the members to participate on the Task Force and
periodically during the development of the guideline. All
others participating in the guideline’s development must
also disclose any conflicts of interest in the matter under
study, and most of these participants must be without any
conflicts of interest. The Clinical Guidelines Subcommittee
and the Task Force have reviewed all disclosures for this
guideline and resolved or managed all identified conflicts of
interest.
Conflicts of interest are defined as remuneration in any
amount from commercial interests; grants; research support;
consulting fees; salary; ownership interests [e.g., stocks and
stock options (excluding diversified mutual funds)]; honoraria
and other payments for participation in speakers’ bureaus,
advisory boards, or boards of directors; and all other financial
benefits. Completed forms are available through the Endocrine
Society office.
712
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 The Endocrine Society provided the funding for this
guideline; the Task Force received no funding or remuneration
from commercial or other entities.
Commissioned Systematic Review
The Task Force commissioned 2 systematic reviews to
support this guideline [Treatments of Pediatric Obe-
sity: An Umbrella Systematic Review (5); The Associ-
ation of Weight Loss and Cardiometabolic Outcomes
in Obese Children: Systematic Review and Meta-
Regression (6)]. The first was an umbrella review of
randomized
controlled
trials
(RCTs)
that
had
a
duration .6 months and evaluated medication, sur-
gery, lifestyle, or community-based interventions in
overweight or obese children or adolescents. The
purpose of this review was to estimate the effectiveness
of these interventions and to rate the quality of sup-
porting evidence. This review summarized data from
133 RCTs enrolling 30,445 patients and provided an
evidence profile for each intervention. The second
was a study-level meta-regression that identified changes
in BMI associated with cardiometabolic changes (lipid
panel, liver function tests, systolic blood pressure, di-
astolic blood pressure, hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), and
fasting blood glucose) in pediatric overweight and obese
subjects.
The Problem With Obesity
Pediatric obesity is a persistent, epidemic, international
problem, and preventing pediatric obesity and its
comorbidities is of paramount importance. Treating
children or adolescents is difficult and requires changes
in diet, activity, and environment. Intensive lifestyle
interventions, contacting both patient and family at least
monthly (and weekly if possible) for the first 3 months, and
providing dietary and nutritional education, a physical
activity prescription, and behavioral therapy are poorly
reimbursed, which often impedes these services. Addi-
tionally, there is inadequate national and international
recognition of the value of addressing global obesity
prevention and treatment, and we must work with key
policymakers to improve this. Elevated BMI among US
children and adolescents 6 to 19 years of age is associated
with 1.4 billion dollars of additional health care dollars
for outpatient visits and other health care expenditures
compared with children and adolescents with normal
BMIs (7). The Brookings Institution predicted that if all
12.7 million US children and adolescents with obesity
became obese adults, the individual average cost would
be .$92,000, and the societal costs during their lifetimes
might be .$1.1 trillion (8).
1.0 Diagnosing overweight and obesity
1.1 We recommend using BMI and the CDC nor-
mative BMI percentiles to diagnose overweight or
obesity in children and adolescents $2 years of
age. (1jÅÅÅs)
1.2 We recommend diagnosing a child or adoles-
cent .2 years of age as overweight if the BMI
is $85th percentile but ,95th percentile for age
and sex, as obese if the BMI is $95th percentile,
and as extremely obese if the BMI is $120% of the
95th percentile or $35 kg/m2 (1jÅÅss). We
suggest that clinicians take into account that
variations in BMI correlate differently to comor-
bidities according to race/ethnicity and that in-
creased muscle mass increases BMI. (2jÅsss)
1.3 We suggest calculating, plotting, and reviewing
a child’s or adolescent’s BMI percentile at least
annually during well-child and/or sick-child visits.
(Ungraded Good Practice Statement)
1.4 We suggest that a child ,2 years of age be di-
agnosed as obese if the sex-specific weight for
recumbent length is $97.7th percentile on the
WHO charts, as US and international pediatric
groups accept this method as valid. (2jÅsss)
Definitions
Children and adolescents $2 years of age are diag-
nosed as overweight if the BMI is $85th percentile
but ,95th percentile and obese if the BMI is $95th
percentile for age and gender on the revised 2000 CDC
charts. A child ,2 years of age is obese if the weight
for recumbent length is $97.7th percentile of WHO
growth standards (9). Extreme obesity is defined as a
BMI $120% of the 95th percentile or $35 kg/m2 (10). A
recent proposal suggests redefining this state as class 2
obesity, as it relates to the definition of class 2 obesity in
adults; class 3 pediatric obesity is proposed (but not yet
fully accepted) to be BMI $140% of the 95th percentile
or $40 kg/m2, as this is considered to represent an even
higher risk group. Class 2 and class 3 obesity are in-
creasing significantly in girls of all ages, most clearly
between 6 and 11 years of age, and in boys between 12
and 19 years of age with a nonsignificant trend in
boys ,12 years of age (11).
Evidence
The CDC BMI charts (12) are the accepted standards
for US children and adolescents $2 years of age and
provide a means for determining changes in pediatric
obesity prevalence. The US Preventive Services Task Force
found that the BMI of children and adolescents correlates
reasonably well to percentile rankings of percent body fat
measured by more direct methods (13). However, BMI
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
713
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 cannot differentiate muscle from adipose tissue, and
thus cannot differentiate between excess adipose tissue
and increased lean muscle mass when classifying a child
or adolescent as overweight or obese. Pediatric racial/
ethnic differences in the percentage of fat at a specific
BMI further complicate BMI measures; for example,
non-Hispanic black children and adolescents have a
lower percentage body fat than do comparable non-
Hispanic whites or Mexican Americans at the same
BMI, and they are less likely to have high adiposity (14).
Additionally, Singapore Chinese adolescents have a
higher percentage fat at the same BMI than do white
comparison groups (15). Furthermore, in the 1999–2002
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
obese male Hispanic adolescents had a higher risk of
hepatic steatosis than did girls and other ethnic
groups, indicating the limits of BMI alone as a risk
factor (16). A systematic review found differences in
regional mass and body composition in adults between
race/ethnic groups when BMI and height are held
constant and further differences within the same
gender and race/ethnic group by age (17). Therefore,
although we do recommend using BMI in clinical prac-
tice, it is not an infallible indicator of overweight or
obesity. Clinicians should consult endocrinologists when
questions arise.
The prevalence of pediatric overweight and obesity
in all racial and ethnic groups increased between the
1960s and 1970s until about 2000 when it leveled off in
most groups (Table 1). As of 2014, the prevalence of
obesity in subjects 2 to 19 years old is 17%. The reason
17% of the population is above the 95th percentile for
age is that the CDC only uses weight data prior to 1980
(using NHANES II data) for ages .6 years (before the
obesity epidemic developed) and uses height data up to
the end of 1994 (the end of NHANES III data collection)
for the stature charts. Some recent data suggest a de-
crease in the prevalence of overweight and obesity in
children ,5 years of age, but the durability of this
potential decline remains unknown. This trend may be
explained by the oversampling of Asian preschoolers in
that particular dataset; these children had a lower
overall BMI.
Different racial and ethnic populations demonstrate
differences in the prevalence of obesity and overweight
and in the trajectory of change during the last decades
(Table 1). Thus, using these BMI definitions may un-
derestimate risk to the health of pediatric Asian patients.
Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis including 53,521
patients between a mean age of 4 to 18 years demon-
strated that using these BMI cutoffs led to a specificity
of 0.93 but a sensitivity of only 0.73 when compared
with reference standard methods for measuring body
adiposity, such as dual energy X-ray absorptiometry,
hydrostatic weighing, air-displacement plethysmogra-
phy, isotope dilution, bioelectrical impedance analysis,
and skin-fold thickness measurements. This suggests that
most children and adolescents diagnosed as obese by BMI
do indeed have excess fat, but that a normal BMI is
compatible with excess body fat in ;25% of subjects
(22). Clinical judgment must augment the definitions of
obesity based on BMI alone to determine which children
or adolescents are actually overfat.
The odds ratio of adult obesity increases for obese
adolescents as they approach 18 years of age. The odds
ratio of adult obesity rises progressively with the number
of parents who are obese, but the greatest predictive effect
of parent obesity is found in infancy regardless of the
infant’s weight (23). Determining overweight or obesity
in young children may also help identify which in-
dividuals are most likely to become overweight or obese
in adulthood. There is an increase in BMI in the first year
followed by a fall and then a second rise in BMI at about 6
years of age (termed the adiposity rebound); an early BMI
rebound before 5 years of age carries a higher risk for
adult obesity. Recent analysis suggests that BMI (or
possibly just height) at 7 years of age may provide equally
robust predictive ability (24). Longitudinal data from
7738 participants from the National Center for Educa-
tional Statistics, Early Childhood Longitudinal Study,
Kindergarten Class of 1998–1999 demonstrated the
greatest incidence (new onset) of obesity and overweight
between the first to third grades; furthermore, there
was a fourfold higher risk for obesity at age 14 years in
the subjects overweight in kindergarten. These data
support a focus on prevention before 9 years of age (25).
However, a longitudinal study of 4884 subjects from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, the Population
Study of Income Dynamics, and the National Health
and Nutrition Evaluation Surveys demonstrated that
screening for obesity at 5 years of age would miss 50%
of those who became obese by 18 years of age, whereas
screening at 15 years of age would miss only 9%; the
authors recommend using universal prevention methods
instituted at a young age and continuing through child-
hood and adolescence, rather than focusing only on
overweight young children (26). These contrasting study
conclusions demonstrate a continued need for research
into childhood prediction of obesity.
Values and preferences
The Task Force placed a high value on the ease of
calculating BMI and familiarity with this measure among
providers and patients over other limitations of using
BMI. BMI currently is the most reasonable measure
for evaluating overweight and obesity, guiding proper
714
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 management, and determining the need for specialist
referral (when values rise toward the extreme). The utility
of predicting adult obesity and comorbidities from
childhood and adolescent BMI calculations may be
somewhat limited, supporting a universal prevention
approach to obesity that begins in early childhood.
1.5 We recommend against routine laboratory eval-
uations for endocrine etiologies of pediatric obe-
sity unless the patient’s stature and/or height
velocity are attenuated (assessed in relationship to
genetic/familial potential and pubertal stage).
(1jÅÅÅs)
Evidence
Endocrine and syndromic disorders as a cause of
overweight/obesity are rare in children and adolescents
and are associated with additional symptoms (26). The
distinguishing feature of endocrine causes of obesity, such
as growth hormone (GH) deficiency, hypothyroidism, or
Cushing syndrome, is that stature and height velocity are
decreased, whereas a normal or increased growth rate
generally excludes endocrine causes. However, Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy/pseudohypoparathyroidism,
although associated with short stature in adolescence,
may be associated with increased growth velocity in the
first 2 to 3 years of life. Pediatric overweight/obesity
is also associated with earlier breast development,
pubarche, and menarche in girls, and advanced skeletal
development in boys that will lead to increased growth
rate (27–30). The evidence is stronger in girls than boys
because a subgroup of boys with obesity exhibit delayed
testicular development (31). Thus, clinicians should not
test for endocrine causes of obesity unless the patient is
short relative to genetic potential and has decreased
growth velocity against the backdrop of continued weight
gain (26, 32).
This rule is not inviolable, however, as acquired hy-
pothalamic obesity is a syndrome of intractable weight
gain caused by hypothalamic damage from a tumor or its
treatment with surgery or radiotherapy (33). Such pa-
tients may have adequate growth velocity even when GH
deficient but have tumor-related signs and symptoms or
have already undergone tumor treatment.
Values and preferences
The Task Force placed a high valueon limiting endocrine
assessments for the etiology of pediatric overweight or
obesity to those rare patients who are obese and short or
with decreased height velocity and placed a low value on the
unnecessary diagnostic endocrine laboratory screening of
children and adolescents who are obese without other signs
or symptoms or contributory neurosurgical history.
Remarks
Clinicians can determine a deceleration in height velocity
(as needed to account for the stage of puberty) either by
using a height velocity (34) curve normalized for age and/or
Table 1.
Prevalence of Pediatric Overweight and Obesity in the United States
Age
Obesity
Combined Overweight and Obesity
1963–1970
1999–2000
2004
2011–2014
1999–2000
2003–2004
2011–2012
0–23 mo
7.20%
11.60%
8.10%
2–5 y
5
10.50%
13.90%
8.90%
22.0%
26.50%
22.80%
6–11 y
4.20%
15.30%
18.80%
17.50%
29.8%
37.20%
34.20%
12–19 y
4.60%
15.50%
17.40%
20.50%
30.0%
34.30%
34.50%
2–19 y
13.9%
17.1%
17.0%
28.2%
33.60%
31.80%
12–19 y by race
Hispanic
21.90%
43.3
34.3%
38.1
Boys
22.4
43.6
37.3%
39.6%
Girls
221.4
42.9
31.1%
36.5%
African American
19.50%
39.5
36.5%
39.8%
Boys
18.40%
35.6
31.4%
37.3%
Girls
20.70%
43.7
42.1%
42.5%
White
14.70%
26.2
34.7%
31.2%
Boys
14.30%
27.4
38.70%
31.5%
Girls
15.10%
24.8
30.4%
31.0%
Asian
8.60%
—
—
24.6%
Boys
11.80%
—
—
33.9%
Girls
5.30%
—
—
15.0%
All
16.90%
30.0
34.30%
34.5%
Boys
16.90%
30.0
36.8%
35.1%
Girls
17.10%
30.0
31.70%
33.8%
Years of study for all ethnicities are noted under the column headings “Obesity” and “Combined Overweight and Obesity.” [Derived from Ogden et al.,
2015 (18), Hedley et al., 2004 (19), Ogden et al., 2014 (20), and Ogden et al., 2002 (21).]
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
715
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 stage of puberty or by observing that the patient is crossing
height percentile curves downward on the standardized
height attainment charts (12) for average-maturing, early-
maturing, and late-maturing children (35). Clinicians
should refer maturing children who are obese with short
stature and decreased growth velocity despite continued
weight gain to a pediatric endocrinologist, as these patients
may have an endocrinopathy.
1.6 We recommend that children or adolescents with a
BMI $85th percentile be evaluated for potential
comorbidities (see Table 2 and Fig. 1). (1jÅÅÅs)
1.7 We recommend against measuring insulin con-
centrations when evaluating children or adoles-
cents for obesity. (1jÅÅÅs)
Evidence
Pediatric overweight and obesity is associated with
substantial comorbidities, including prediabetes/type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM); dyslipidemia; prehypertension/
hypertension; sleep apnea; nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD); proteinuria and focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis; early subclinical atherosclerosis;
hyperandrogenemia/polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS);
slipped capital femoral epiphysis and pseudotumor cerebri
(36–42); and cardiovascular disease (CVD) morbidity, and
premature mortality in adulthood (43–47). The greater the
severity of obesity, the higher the risks of cardiometabolic
risk factors, particularly among boys (11). Importantly, the
risks of CVD outcomes among children and adolescents
who were obese and became nonobese by adulthood appear
similar to those who were never obese (46). Thus, clinicians
should carefully examine medical and family histories and
laboratory assessments of children and adolescents who are
overweight or obese to identify comorbidities early and
initiate appropriate management.
Values and preferences
The Task Force placed a high value on identifying
adiposity-related
complications
and
screening
for
comorbidities because of their high prevalence and
their association with morbidity and mortality. The
Task Force also placed a high value on reducing un-
necessary testing and evaluation, such as the routine
measurements of fasting insulin, because of lack of
scientific evidence for its usefulness in clinical practice
by general providers.
Remarks
A thorough medical and family history is crucial for
assessing obese youths, because obesity and associated
comorbidities may be asymptomatic/subclinical but have
familial tendencies. The family history should encompass
obesity; bariatric surgery (typically not revealed by
families unless specifically asked); T2DM; gestational
diabetes; dyslipidemia; hypertension; NAFLD; cirrhosis;
sleep apnea and use of continuous positive airway
pressure; premature CVD events/deaths (such as heart
attacks or strokes); and (in women) infertility, PCOS, or
hyperandrogenism-associated signs and symptoms. Cli-
nicians should assess the presence of polyuria/polydipsia,
blurry vision, fungal vaginitis/discharge in girls, and
unexplained weight loss, all of which could be indicative
of hyperglycemia. Clinicians should also look for the
presence of frequent unexplained headaches, which raise
the possibility of hypertension or sleep apnea; habitual
snoring, restless sleep, morning headaches, generalized
tiredness, and/or excessive daytime sleepiness, as well as
hyperactive inattentive behavior in young children as
manifestations of sleep apnea (48); gastrointestinal dis-
comfort as a manifestation of NAFLD (39); musculo-
skeletal symptoms (49); and (in pubertal girls) acne,
hirsutism (including the recent use of hair removal
techniques that would mask the degree of hirsutism at the
time of the examination), and onset and pattern of menses
to screen for the possibility of PCOS. Clinicians should
obtain a careful history for psychiatric disorders, because
children and adolescents who are overweight or obese are
more likely to suffer from mental health disorders than
their normal weight counterparts (50, 51). Furthermore,
clinicians should obtain a history of second-generation
antipsychotics use, such as clozapine, risperidone, olan-
zapine, and quetiapine, because of their association with
weight gain (52, 53). Although the various techniques
assessing dietary intake are unreliable and subject to error
(9, 54), it is still important to estimate the type and
quantity of beverage intake, the frequency of dining out
and where, and the frequency and type of snacks (among
other dietary issues). Clinicians should also obtain a
history of sedentary behaviors, such as hours spent on
screen activities, and physical activity (e.g., duration,
frequency, in school and at home, sports participation,
walking to school and stores).
Clinicians should evaluate the following:
· weight, height, and BMI calculation [Even though the
International Diabetes Federation includes waist cir-
cumference (an indicator of insulin resistance mea-
sured at the level of the iliac crest $ 90th percentile)
as a defining factor for metabolic syndrome in children
and adolescents 10 to 16 years of age and as a finding
of concern in children 6 to 10 years old (55, 56), given
the intermeasurement variability of waist circumfer-
ence measurements in a clinical setting performed by
different support staff, this research tool does not add
significantly to what we learn from BMI (57).]
716
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 2.
Screening for Comorbidities of Pediatric Overweight or Obesity
Comorbidity
Tests and Interpretation
Source
Prediabetes HbA1c
5.7% to ,6.5% (39 to ,48 mmol/mol)
(note the unpredictability of this test in pediatrics in the text)a
American Diabetes
Association (59)
IFG (verify fasting
status)
Fasting plasma glucose of $100 but ,126 mg/dL
($5.6 but ,7.0 mmol/L)
IGT (if OGTT is used)
Two-hour glucose of $140 but ,200 mg/dL ($7.8 but ,11.1 mmol/L)
Diabetes mellitus
HbA1c $ 6.5% ($48 mmol/mol)a,b
American Diabetes
Association (59)
Fasting plasma glucose of $126 mg/dL ($7.0 mmol/L)
(fasting is defined as no caloric intake for 8 h)b
Two-hour plasma glucose of $200 mg/dL ($11.1 mmol/L)
during an OGTTb
In a patient with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia,
a random plasma glucose of $200 mg/dL
Dyslipidemia
Fasting lipids
Expert Panel
Summary
Report (58)
Triglycerides (mg/dL) (multiply by 0.0113 to convert to mmol/L):
0–9 y , 75 (acceptable), 75–99 (borderline high), $100 (high);
10–19 y , 90 (acceptable), 90–129 (borderline high), $130 (high)
LDL cholesterol (mg/dL) (multiply by 0.0259 to convert to mmol/L):
,110 (acceptable), 110–129 (borderline high), $130 (high)
Total cholesterol (mg/dL) (multiply by 0.0259 to convert to mmol/L):
,170 (acceptable), 170–199 (borderline high), $200 (high)
HDL cholesterol (mg/dL) (multiply by 0.0259 to convert to mmol/L):
,40 (low), 40–45 (borderline low), .45 (acceptable)
Non–HDL cholesterol (mg/dL)
(multiply by 0.0259 to convert to mmol/L) (can be nonfasting)
,120 (acceptable), 120–144 (borderline high), $145 (high)
Prehypertension
and hypertension
3–11 y: (standardized according to sex, age, and height percentile)
Expert Panel
Summary Report
(58); Mancia
et al., 2013 (61)
BP . 90th percentile to ,95th percentile = prehypertension
BP $ 95th percentile to ,99th percentile + 5 mm Hg = stage 1 HTN
BP $ 99th percentile + 5 mm Hg = stage 2 HTN
12–17 y: (standardized according to sex, age, and height percentile)
BP of .90th percentile to ,95th percentile or
.120/80 = prehypertension
BP $ 95th percentile to ,99th percentile + 5 mm Hg = stage 1 HTN
BP $ 99th percentile + 5 mm Hg = stage 2 HTN
18 to 21 y:
BP $ 120/80 to 139/89 mm Hg = prehypertension
BP $ 140/90 to 159/99 mm Hg = stage 1 HTN
BP $ 160/100 to 179/109 mm Hg = stage 2 HTN
BP . 180/110 mm Hg = stage 3 HTN
NAFLD
ALT . 25 U/L (boys) and .22 U/L (girls)
Schwimmer et al.,
2010 (62)
PCOS
Free and total testosterone and SHBG,
per Endocrine Society PCOS guidelinesc
Legro et al., 2013
(63)
Obstructive sleep
apnea
If positive history, refer to pulmonary for nocturnal
polysomnography and if not available overnight oximetry
Wise et al., 2011
(48)
Psychiatric
If positive history, refer to mental health specialist
Zamethkin et al.,
2004 (51)
To convert mg/dL to mmol/L, multiply by 0.0555 for glucose, 0.0259 for cholesterol, and 0.0113 for triglycerides.
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; HTN, hypertension; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; LDL,
low-density lipoprotein; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test (1.75 g/kg, maximum 75 g); PCOS, polycystic ovary
syndrome.
aThe test should be performed in a laboratory using a method that is NGSP certified and standardized to the DCCT assay.
bIn the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, should be confirmed by repeat testing.
cGiven variability in testosterone levels and the poor standardization of assays, it is difficult to define an absolute level that is diagnostic of PCOS or other
causes of hyperandrogenism (familiarity with local assays recommended) (63). The preferred assay is HPLC tandem mass spectroscopy (64). [Derived from
(a) ADA, 2014 (60); (b) Expert Panel 2011 (58); (c) Schwimmer et al., 2010 (62); (d) Legro et al., 2013 (63); (e) Wise et al., 2011 (48); (f) Zametkin et al., 2004 (51)].
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
717
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 · blood pressure [using height/age/sex percentile nor-
malized blood pressure tables to interpret the findings
(58)]
· acanthosis nigricans and skin tags
· extreme acne and hirsutism in pubertal girls
· fundoscopic examination for pseudotumor cerebri
· tenderness and range of motion of the knee, leg, or foot
· peripheral edema, thyroid examination for goiter
· physical findings associated with syndromic obesity,
particularly if there is a neurodevelopmental abnor-
mality (see section 3).
We list suggested screening tests in Table 2.
In 2009 an International Expert Committee recom-
mended using HbA1c to diagnose diabetes and pre-
diabetes (65). It recommended classifying asymptomatic
individuals as having diabetes if they had HbA1c $ 6.5%
($48 mmol/mol) on 2 separate occasions and classifying
asymptomatic individuals with prediabetes if they had
HbA1c $ 6.0% ($42 mmol/mol) (65), or HbA1c of
5.7% to ,6.5% (39 to ,48 mmol/mol) (66). Although
they based these recommendations on studies in adults
with no validation in pediatrics (65), the committee
recommended that the same criteria be applied in ado-
lescents. However, several studies have demonstrated
poor performance of HbA1c in diagnosing prediabetes or
diabetes in pediatrics, underestimating the prevalence of
both (67–69). Another pitfall in using the HbA1c is the
unresolved issue of racial/ethnic disparities in the correla-
tion between HbA1c and ambient blood glucose (70).
Given such drawbacks, HbA1c screening (alone) in over-
weight or obese children and adolescents is a poor
diagnostic tool for prediabetes and T2DM. Additional
definitive testing (fasting or random glucose or oral
glucose tolerance test) may be necessary in high-risk
youths based on medical history, familial risk, race/
ethnicity, and/or the presence of additional risk factors
for diabetes (71). In a cost effectiveness analysis of
various screening strategies for identifying pediatric
diabetes and dysglycemia, the preferred strategy for
dysglycemia was the 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test
with 100% effectiveness (proportion of cases identi-
fied) and efficiency (cost per case identified) at $390 per
case, and the least effective and efficient was HbA1c
(ranges, 7% to 32% and $938 to $3370 per case) (72).
NAFLD is usually asymptomatic and thus requires
screening for detection. Presently, no screening guidelines
exist outside of recognizing those at risk by weight cat-
egorization (BMI $ 85% for age and sex) (39). Recently
new normative standards were proposed for alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) concentrations (#25 U/L for
boys and # 22U/L for girls) (62), because pediatric liver
biopsy specimens from patients with normal or mildly
elevated ALT ($26 to 50 U/L for boys and $23 to 44 U/L
for girls) had significant histologic abnormalities, in-
cluding advanced fibrosis (73). Using highly sensitive
research methods of magnetic resonance spectroscopy or
magnetic resonance imaging, fatty liver is likely present in
most pediatric obesity whether the liver enzymes are high
or not. High ALT levels would suggest a more advanced
stage of NAFLD, hepatitis, or fibrotic changes. Thus,
even though ALT elevation underestimates liver injury in
NAFLD, it is still an easily available screen for clinicians
to use when assessing children and adolescents who are
overweight or obese.
Many clinicians measure insulin values thinking it adds
to the diagnosis of comorbidities. In fact it does not, and
such measurements are not recommended. Although obe-
sity is associated with insulin resistance/hyperinsulinemia,
attempts to diagnose insulin resistance by measuring plasma
insulin concentration or any other surrogate (74) in the
clinical setting has no merit because it has no diagnostic
value. Fasting insulin concentrations show considerable
overlap between insulin-resistant and insulin-sensitive
youths (74). Therefore, there is no well-defined cut point
differentiating normal from abnormal and no universally
accepted, clinically useful, numeric expression that defines
insulin resistance (75), unlike the case for glucose or lipids.
A major requirement for any screening program is the
availability of an accurate, reliable, reproducible, stan-
dardized, and easily applicable method of measurement.
Adult studies have shown that measures of fasting insulin
explain no more than 5% to 50% of the variability in
insulin sensitivity in nondiabetic subjects (76). Different
studies have proposed different cutoffs for so called “insulin
resistance values” varying by 2.5-fold (76). In pediatrics, the
transient puberty-related insulin resistance that occurs
with the completion of puberty further complicates this
(77, 78). Moreover, measuring insulin is hampered by
the lack of standardized insulin assays, and poor re-
producibility of even the same assay (79). Further
limitations include race/ethnicity-related differences in
insulin concentrations due to differences in the meta-
bolic clearance rate of insulin (80) and the cross-
reactivity between insulin and proinsulin. In youths
with T2DM, despite severe deficiency in insulin se-
cretion, fasting insulin concentrations are higher than
in youths without diabetes (81). Importantly, fasting
insulin concentrations are similar in youths who are
obese with normal glucose tolerance vs impaired glu-
cose tolerance (82), allowing for the possible danger of
missing a diagnosis of impaired glucose tolerance if one
uses fasting insulin concentrations as a screening tool.
Because of these limitations, measuring plasma insulin
concentrations remains a research tool with no clinical
value for evaluation of obesity. Measuring fasting
718
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 insulin concentrations to try to diagnose insulin re-
sistance within general practice should be abandoned.
2.0 Genetic obesity syndromes
2.1 We suggest genetic testing in patients with extreme
early onset obesity (before 5 years of age) and that
have clinical features of genetic obesity syndromes
(in particular extreme hyperphagia) and/or a family
history of extreme obesity. (2jÅÅss)
Evidence
In addition to the obvious environmental drivers,
multiple common and rare genetic variants contribute to
substantial heritability for BMI and waist circumference
(83, 84). Approximately 7% of patients with extreme
pediatric obesity may have rare chromosomal abnor-
malities and/or highly penetrant genetic mutations that
drive their obesity (85). This percentage is likely to in-
crease with newer methods for genetic testing.
Values and preferences
When assessing children and adolescents with extreme
obesity, clinicians should consider potentially treatable
causes and genetic conditions (Fig. 1). The diagnosis of a
genetic obesity syndrome can provide information that
helps the family and health care providers appropriately
manage the child’s or adolescent’s health and possibly
lessen the social stigma. Additionally,clinicians canprovide
genetic counseling. A genetic diagnosis can inform man-
agement, including the possibility of bariatric surgery
(many such patients are relatively resistant to weight loss
through changes in diet and exercise).
Remarks
It is currently useful to categorize genetic obesity syn-
dromes as those with developmental delay and/or dys-
morphism and those without these features, although the
clinical spectrum can be quite variable (Table 3). Clinicians
should obtain a careful family history to identify potential
consanguineous relationships, a family history of severe
obesity/bariatric surgery, the ethnic and geographical
origin of the child or adolescent, and family members to
guide the appropriate use of diagnostic tests (Fig. 1).
Obesity syndromes with developmental delay
Dominant disorders
Prader-Willi syndrome is a methylation disorder
caused by the deletion of a critical segment on the pa-
ternally inherited chromosome 15q11.2-q12, loss of the
entire paternal chromosome 15 with the presence of 2
maternal copies (uniparental maternal disomy), or an
imprinting defect that can be sporadic or due to a
mutation of the paternally derived imprinting control site
of the 15q13 region (88). Plasma ghrelin levels are
markedly elevated in children, adolescents, and adults
with Prader-Willi syndrome, although the physiological
relevance of this finding is unknown (89). GH treatments
decrease body fat and increase linear growth, muscle
mass, and energy expenditure (90).
Maternal transmission of heterozygous mutations in
GNAS1 leads to classical Albright hereditary osteodys-
trophy and resistance to several hormones that activate
heterotrimeric G proteins in their target tissues, whereas
paternal transmission leads only to Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy (91).
Chromosomal
rearrangements
and
heterozygous
mutations involving single-minded 1 brain-derived neu-
rotrophic factor (92, 93), or its receptor, TrkB, lead to
hyperphagia and developmental and behavioral abnor-
malities (94, 95). Clinicians should consider de novo
mutations if both parents are of normal weight and in-
telligence quotient.
Recessive disorders
Homozygous mutations that disrupt 1/some of the 16
Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes lead to Bardet-Biedl syn-
drome (96). Other recessive disorders affecting proteins
localized to the basal body of the monocilium, such as
Alstr¨
om syndrome and TUB gene mutations (97), are also
associated with obesity.
Obesity syndromes without developmental delay
Rare copy number variants (deletions/duplications)
that disrupt multiple genes can cause extreme pediatric
obesity without learning difficulties (98). Mutations in
specific genes, mostly involving the leptin–melanocortin
pathway, cause extreme obesity characterized by hy-
perphagia (increased drive to eat) and impaired satiety
(reduced sensation of fullness after a meal) (Table 3).
Clinicians should take a careful history to identify food-
seeking behavior, searching for/stealing food, waking at
night to find food, and eating food others leave behind,
which should prompt genetic investigation (neurologic
causes should be excluded in patients with a new history
of these behaviors). These behaviors typically occur as a
result of the disruption of hypothalamic pathways in-
volved in the regulation of energy balance. Pica syndrome
is evident in only a small subset of children and ado-
lescents with hyperphagia.
Dominant disorders
Heterozygous mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor
are found in 2% to 5% of subjects with extreme pediatric
obesity, making this the most common genetic form of
obesity (99, 100) (Table 3). Homozygous mutations in
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
719
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Figure 1. Diagnosis and management flowchart. *Measure insulin and proinsulin in patients with clinical features of PCSK1 deficiency. [Adapted
from August GP et al. (86) with permission, © Endocrine Society.] [Republished with permission of Springer Science and Bus Media BV from
Farooqi S and O’Rahilly S (87); permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.]
720
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 melanocortin 4 receptor have also been identified in off-
spring from consanguineous families (101). Heterozygous
missense mutations affecting proopiomelanocortin-derived
peptides and rare variants in melanocortin 2 receptor ac-
cessory protein 2 may also contribute to extreme obesity by
modulating melanocortin signaling (102, 103). In the near
future, selective melanocortin receptor agonists may be
feasible therapies for patients with mutations in the mel-
anocortin pathway. Several studies have shown that ad-
olescents and adults with heterozygous melanocortin 4
receptor mutations lose weight following Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery (104).
Recessive disorders
Homozygous mutations that reduce the production,
secretion, or biological activity of leptin are associated
with extreme hyperphagia, frequent infections, hypo-
gonadotropic hypogonadism, and mild hypothyroidism;
these features can be fully treated with subcutaneous
injections of recombinant human leptin (105–107).
Recombinant human leptin is currently available on a
named patient basis through selected centers.
Serum leptin is a useful test in patients with severe
obesity, as undetectable serum leptin is highly suggestive
of congenital leptin deficiency. Mutations that result in
detectable but bioinactive leptin are rare (107). Serum
leptin concentrations are usually appropriate for the
degree of obesity in most patients with homozygous
mutations in the leptin receptor gene that have compa-
rable clinical features (108) (Table 3).
Children and adolescents who are homozygous or com-
poundheterozygousformutationsintheproopiomelanocortin
Table 3.
Genetic Obesity Syndromes With and Without Developmental Delay
Genetic Obesity Syndrome
Clinical Features
Obesity with developmental delay
Dominant
Prader-Willi syndrome
Hypotonia, failure to thrive in infancy followed by weight gain, short stature
(due to GH deficiency), hyperphagia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
sleep disturbance, obsessive behaviors
Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy
Short stature in some but not all patients, skeletal defects, impaired olfaction, and
hormone resistance (e.g., parathyroid hormone) if a mutation is maternally inherited
SIM1 deficiency
Hyperphagia with autonomic dysfunction (characterized by low systolic blood pressure),
speech and language delay, neurobehavioral abnormalities,
including autistic type behaviors
BDNF/TrkB deficiency
Hyperactivity, impaired concentration, limited attention span,
impaired short-term memory and pain sensation
Recessive
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Dysmorphic extremities (syndactyly/brachydactyly/polydactyly), retinal dystrophy or
pigmentary retinopathy, hypogonadism, renal abnormalities/impairment
TUB deficiency
Retinal dystrophy, deafness
Obesity without developmental delay
Dominant
Alstr ¨
om syndrome
Retinal dystrophy; extreme insulin resistance; deafness; dilated cardiomyopathy; progressive
pulmonary, hepatic, and renal dysfunction
MC4R deficiency
Hyperphagia, accelerated linear growth, disproportionate hyperinsulinemia,
low/normal blood pressure
SH2B1 deficiency
Hyperphagia, disproportionate hyperinsulinemia, early speech and language delay
that often resolves, behavioral problems including aggression
KSR2 deficiency
Mild hyperphagia and reduced basal metabolic rate, insulin resistance often with
acanthosis nigricans, irregular menses, early development of T2DM
Recessive
Leptin deficiency
Extreme hyperphagia, frequent infections, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
mild hypothyroidism
Leptin receptor deficiency
Extreme hyperphagia, frequent infections, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
mild hypothyroidism
POMC deficiency
Hyperphagia, cholestatic jaundice or adrenal crisis due to ACTH deficiency,
pale skin, and red hair in whites
PCSK1 deficiency
Small bowel enteropathy, hypoglycemia, hypothyroidism,
ACTH deficiency, diabetes insipidus
[Republished from Farooqi and O’Rahilly (87) with permission of Springer Science and Bus Media BV, permission conveyed through the Copyright
Clearance Center.]
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; GH, growth hormone; POMC, proopiomelanocortin;
T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
721
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 gene require long-term corticosteroid replacement, as proo-
piomelanocortin is a precursor of adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone in the pituitary gland (102). Compound heterozygous or
homozygous mutations in the PCSK1 gene, which encodes the
processing enzyme (prohormone convertase 1/3), may present
in infancywithpersistent diarrhea requiringparenteral feeding.
Anabnormallyhighlevelofplasmaproinsulin(comparedwith
mature insulin) indicates this possible diagnosis (109).
3.0 Prevention of obesity
The prime objective in addressing the obesity epidemic
should be prevention to avoid the comorbidities of
obesity. Although beyond the scope of this statement,
which addresses postnatal prevention, preconception and
prenatal interventions are also of major importance, and
the Task Force supports the recommendations of the
WHO to address this area of prevention (110).
3.1 We suggest that clinicians promote and participate
in the ongoing healthy dietary and activity edu-
cation of children and adolescents, parents, and
communities, and encourage schools to provide
adequate education about healthy eating (1).
(2jÅsss)
Evidence
The authors of the Endocrine Society’s previous
guideline on pediatric obesity commissioned a meta-
analysis (111) which summarized evidence from RCTs
that measured the impact of lifestyle interventions to
prevent pediatric obesity. The study found modest effects
of these interventions; there was decreased sedentary
behavior in long-term trials (P = 0.05) with a significantly
greater effect when directed toward children in contrast
to adolescents (P = 0.02), reduced unhealthy dietary
habits (P = 0.02), but only a trend towards increased
physical activity (P = 0.06–0.07). These beneficial effects
did not translate into important changes in BMI (111),
but the Task Force recognized that weight maintenance
in a growing child or adolescent is as effective as weight
loss in an adult. The present committee updated and
expanded upon these findings as listed below and in
Table 4.
Decreasing caloric intake by consuming more fruits
and vegetables and reducing dietary fat and refined
carbohydrate intake can decrease the risk of developing
obesity and T2DM (152). Many children and adolescents
eat fewer than 3 servings of fruits and vegetables a day
rather than meeting the US Department of Agriculture
dietary recommendation of 5 to 7 fruit and vegetable
servings per day. Inadequate consumption of dietary fiber
may contribute to excessive weight gain, highlighting the
need to continue to address vegetable and whole fruit
intake (153). Whole fruit intake increased and fruit juice
intake decreased from 2003–2004 to 2009–2010 (154).
Children and adolescents in the public school system in
the United States consume up to 40% of their calories at
school, so attention to the composition of foods and
drinks available to them during the school day is critical
(155). New US federal guidelines are encouraging, in that
they eliminate trans fat, limit saturated fat, and decrease
total sugar content of foods served in schools (156).
Values
The committee places a high value on increasing
vegetable and fruit intake to decrease the risk of de-
veloping obesity. Calorie-dense, nutrient-poor foods
should not be available in the school and school sports
environments, where their presence increases their con-
sumption and implies adult assent.
3.2 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and
support healthy eating habits such as:
· avoiding
the
consumption
of
calorie-dense,
nutrient-poor foods (e.g., sugar-sweetened bever-
ages, sports drinks, fruit drinks, most “fast foods”
or those with added table sugar, high-fructose
corn syrup, high-fat or high-sodium processed
foods, and calorie-dense snacks)
· encouraging the consumption of whole fruits
rather than fruit juices. (1jÅÅss)
Evidence
Drinking sugar and sugar-sweetened beverages is asso-
ciated with developing obesity (157, 158). Table sugar
consists of 50% glucose and 50% fructose; sugar-sweetened
beverages often have a higher percentage of fructose,
sometimes up to 65%; and high-fructose corn syrup is found
in many foods besides liquid beverages. Metabolic responses
differ significantly between fructose and glucose.
Consuming nutrient-poor, calorie-dense, high-fat foods
and sugar-sweetened beverages is a risk factor for obesity
(156). Reducing sugared-beverage consumption (e.g.,
soda, fruit drinks, sports drinks, and excessive con-
sumption of fruit juices) is an effective way to reduce
ingested calories (159). However, children and adolescents
currently consume, on average, 30% to 40% of calories
from nutrient-poor, energy-dense foods and drinks (160).
Although sugar-sweetened beverage intake is decreasing in
younger children, it has actually increased since 2007 in
adolescents (161). Fruit juice provides a more concen-
trated dose of carbohydrates than does whole fruit and
may not lead to the feeling of satiety experienced after
ingesting whole fruits. Thus, healthy children should limit
fruit juice ingestion and children with dental caries or
excessive weight should ingest less than the maximal
722
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 recommended volumes. Therefore, fruit juice has no role in
the diet of infants under 6 months of age. After
6 months of age, fruit juice must be limited to 4 to 6
ounces per day until children reach 6 years of age, after
which 8 to 12 ounces is an acceptable serving,
according to the American Academy of Pediatrics
policy. In view of the fact that it is easy for children to
exceed such limits, the Early Childhood Longitudinal
Study—Birth Cohort of .4000 children demonstrated
that daily ingestion of fruit juice at 2 years of age
resulted in an increase in BMI at 4 years compared with
children who had no or infrequent fruit juice. The study also
demonstrated that whole fruit provides increased nutritional
benefit over juice. This committee encourages the con-
sumption of whole fruits rather than fruit juices (162, 163).
Since 1965, teens have doubled their consumption of
sugar-sweetened and fruit-flavored beverages (156, 164).
School-based interventions can reduce soda consumption
and reduce weight in students at the highest BMI per-
centiles (152, 165). Although there has reportedly been a
95% decrease in the amount of regular sodas shipped to
schools, other sweetened beverages (such as sports
drinks) have become more available in schools (166).
However, as of 2014–2015, federal guidelines now
restrict the use of such “competitive foods” in the
school environment. Obese or normal weight children
and adolescents who substituted noncaloric beverages
in lieu of sugar-sweetened beverages had less of an
increase in BMI at 1 year (115, 116). Because there was
no difference in satiety between those who drank sugar-
sweetened beverages and those who did not, it appears
that a child or adolescent will not compensate for the
decreased caloric intake of nonsweetened drinks by
increasing his or her caloric intake via other foods or
drinks. This lack of compensation may partly explain
the reduced weight gain associated with nonsweetened
drinks (115, 167).
Although there are reports that reducing glycemic load
may have a beneficial effect in the prevention or treatment
of obesity, a systematic review of epidemiologic, pro-
spective, and intervention studies did not demonstrate
consistent results (168).
Water is frequently recommended as a beneficial re-
placement for sugar-sweetened beverages. Whereas a
systematic review found only a weak association between
water consumption and weight control in longitudinal
studies, the introduction of water jets to New York City
elementary school students led to a 0.022 to 0.025 de-
crease in BMI and a 0.6% to 0.9% decrease in risk for
overweight; this is possibly related to a 12.3% decrease in
milk purchases (169). Water remains the most reasonable
“drinking” choice for quenching thirst and changing
behavior from high-sugar drinking habits (170).
Values
The Task Force placed a high value on decreasing access
to sugar-sweetened beverages by children and adolescents
as a means of obesity prevention and treatment and a high
value on strengthening the message to families that these
beverages contribute to pediatric obesity.
Remarks
The costs of comorbidities related to pediatric and
adult obesity are spiraling, and we must explore measures
to limit nonnutritive excess calories as one means of
preventing obesity. No nation can afford the social and
financial ramifications of increased obesity incidence left
unchecked. The individual practitioner cannot prevent
obesity alone; a multidisciplinary health care team in-
cluding dieticians, mental health practitioners, and nurses
provides the optimal setting.
However, the committee agrees with the WHO that
such changes must reach beyond the clinical setting and
require policy changes at the highest level, as well as the
cooperation of commercial entities. The committee sup-
ports the suggestion by the WHO for worldwide tax le-
verage on calorie-dense, nutrient-poor foods (110, 171).
3.3 We recommend that children and adolescents
engage in at least 20 minutes, optimally 60 min-
utes, of vigorous physical activity at least 5 days
per week to improve metabolic health and reduce
the likelihood of developing obesity. (1jÅÅss)
Evidence
A common goal for preventing obesity is to increase
physical activity and decrease sedentary time in addi-
tion
to
reducing
energy
intake.
A
meta-analysis
showed a positive association between sedentary
time and the risk for obesity, although the effects were
small (172). The 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for
Americans (173) and other sources suggest 1 hour of
activity per day for children and adolescents at a
minimum; although this is a reasonable aspirational
goal, the minimal achievable activity level that pro-
duces beneficial effects may be less. Shorter bursts of
activity, such as 20 minutes a day 3 to 5 days per week,
can improve metabolic measurements in obese children
and adolescents in a 3 to 6 month period, and these
lower activity levels may also prevent obesity (124).
The beneficial effects of exercise are most consistent in
the heaviest children and adolescents who previously
had not engaged in activity. See Table 4 and section 5
on treatment for more information on how activity and
sedentary time affect obesity.
Lack of activity may lead to obesity and overweight,
but obesity also decreases the coordination and exer-
cise capacity of affected and adolescents, as well as the
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
723
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 likelihood of being chosen for team sports, resulting
in an overall decreased desire for physical activity
(174–177).
Values
The Task Force placed a high value on interventions
with a low potential for adverse effects and burdens such
as increasing physical activity and decreasing sedentary
time. The benefits on metabolic fitness are regularly
demonstrated, although changes in weight or BMI are
less consistent.
3.4 We suggest fostering healthy sleep patterns in
children and adolescents to decrease the likelihood
of developing obesity due to changes in caloric
intake and metabolism related to disordered sleep.
(2jÅÅss)
Evidence
Disordered sleep length and quality in adults, chil-
dren, and adolescents affects appetite and decreases
insulin sensitivity (150). Table 4 lists 8 studies that
show how different sleep durations or changes in sleep
duration affect dietary intake in children and adoles-
cents. These results suggest that sleep duration affects
obesity development, although 2 other studies chal-
lenge these findings, weakening the strength of the
evidence (130, 131).
Values
The committee puts a high value on ensuring adequate
sleep time for all children and adolescents, although the
effect on dietary intake and weight gain is not definitive.
The National Sleep Foundation recommends 8 to 11
hours of sleep for school age children and adoles-
cents (178).
3.5 We recommend balancing unavoidable technology-
related screen time in children and adolescents
with increased opportunities for physical activity.
(1jÅÅss)
Evidence
A systemic analysis of 24 papers reviewing 15 studies
demonstrated strong evidence for decreasing screen time
and increasing physical activity to prevent obesity (135);
another study reported that decreasing screen time de-
creases sedentary time (136). A 2-generation study as-
sociated increased BMI with .2 hours of screen time per
day
for
both
parents and
offspring
(134).
Data
from .11,000 preschool children 4 to 6 years of age
linked increased caloric intake from snacks and sugar-
sweetened beverages to increased screen time (135,
179, 180).
Values
There are frequent requirements for video screen use
for schoolwork; as technology becomes more prevalent,
such requirements will not decrease. However, the
committee put a high value on adhering to the American
Academy of Pediatrics guidelines limiting discretionary
screen time for children (85, 181).
3.6 We suggest that a clinician’s obesity prevention
efforts enlist the entire family rather than only the
individual patient. (2jÅsss)
Evidence
A meta-analysis commissioned by the original Task
Force demonstrated a nonsignificant trend associating
family involvement with the prevention of obesity, es-
pecially if the child is ,8 years of age (140, 181).
One recent meta-analysis suggested that family-based
therapy is effective for treating obesity (137), and another
highlighted the importance of the intensity of parental in-
volvement in the success of family interventions to prevent
and treat obesity (138). Furthermore, studies of weight loss
in obese children and adolescents demonstrated the im-
portance of including family members in the process;
without parental inclusion, the effect on weight loss was not
significant (182). However, there is a need for more research
into the influence of family participation for the prevention
or treatment of pediatric obesity (139, 140, 183). In spite
of a general consensus that an authoritative parenting style
is optimal and restrictive parenting in terms of food choice is
not, there are insufficient data to determine what type of
parenting approach is most effective in preventing pediatric
obesity (184).
Values
The Task Force placed a high value on involving the
entire family in obesity prevention efforts as a practical low-
risk approach, while understanding that much of the evi-
dence comes from treatment studies and even those studies
are not unanimous on the effects of family intervention.
3.7 We suggest clinicians assess family function and
make appropriate referrals to address family
stressors to decrease the development of obesity.
(2|ÅÅss)
Evidence
There is evidence for an association between the de-
velopment of pediatric obesity and family dysfunction as
well as exposure to stress (Table 4).
Values
The committee placed a high value on fostering healthy
family functioning and minimizing pediatric stress, as
724
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 adverse life events are linked to the development of obesity
as well as numerous other complications throughout life.
3.8 We suggest using school-based programs and
community engagement in pediatric obesity pre-
vention. (2jÅÅss)
Evidence
A school-based program offers the promise of stan-
dardization across multiple sites and also can reach large
populations of children and adolescents during the early
and teenage years.
Numerous school-based interventions focused on re-
ducing obesity rates. The Cardiovascular Health in
Children study improved outcomes by decreasing body
fat and cholesterol (185). The Cardiovascular Health in
Children II study was effective in reducing body fat and
blood pressure in middle school children and adoles-
cents (186).
A school-based intervention can reduce body fat and
blood pressure in young adolescents (186). One reason
the short-term Cardiovascular Health in Children in-
terventions were successful in affecting physiological
variables may be the increased time spent in moderate to
vigorous physical activity in school (20 minutes per day
in elementary schools, 30 minutes in middle schools).
Both school design and adult supervision for physical
activity affect the amount of physical activity that sixth
to eighth graders engage in during free time (187).
Additionally, school-based intervention for .4000
middle school children and adolescents at risk for
T2DM in the HEALTHY Study Group demonstrated
efficacy in decreasing overweight and obesity in both the
intervention and control groups, and decreased BMI z
score, fasting insulin, prevalence of obesity, and per-
centage of students with waist circumference . 90th
percentile in the intervention group (188). School sys-
tems have begun to initiate before- and after-school
lifetime fitness programs that appear to be helpful in
controlling weight gain (189). As noted, evidence sup-
ports prevention efforts in the third grade, which
could be carried out in an entire school and preschool
environment.
There is moderate evidence that community-based
pediatric obesity prevention programs, when com-
bined with a school-based component, can have pos-
itive 1-year effects on preventing obesity (145).
Community-based participatory research may help
enhance school-community involvement, resulting in
effective obesity prevention programs (146). A review
of multiple settings (early care and education, school,
community, health providers, and the home) demon-
strated strength for each of these approaches and
suggested that a combined approach holds more
promise (190).
Values
In making these suggestions, the committee set a high
value on the ability of school-based programs to reach a
wide population that would benefit from obesity prevention
and emphasized the need for additional community-based
interventions that used techniques coordinated with a
school setting.
3.9 We recommend using comprehensive behavior-
changing interventions to prevent obesity. Such
programs would be integrated with school- or
community-based programs to reach the widest
audience. (1jÅÅss)
Evidence
A systematic review of RCTs using behavior change
techniques to prevent or treat obesity demonstrated that 6
techniques held promise for preventing obesity during a
period of at least 6 months. These techniques were:
· providing individualized information on the conse-
quences of behaviors conducive to the development of
obesity
· restructuring the environment to make individualized
behavior change more successful
· guiding practices expected to decrease the develop-
ment of obesity
· guiding the identification of role models or advocates
to change behavior
· implementing stress management/emotional control
training
· providing general communication skills training.
Values
The committee realized the difficulty in providing
widespread exposure to behavior change programs but
placed a high value on the pursuit of effective techniques
of behavior change.
3.10 We recommend breast-feeding in infants based
on numerous health benefits. However, we can
only suggest breast-feeding for the prevention of
obesity, as evidence supporting the association
between breast-feeding and subsequent obesity is
inconsistent. (1jÅsss)
The previous guidelines supported breast-feeding as
an effective method of preventing obesity. However,
reports on the effect of breast-feeding on preventing
obesity are mixed during the last 10 to 15 years. In
particular, sibling analyses point to confounding effects
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
725
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 in interpreting the results of cohort studies (151).
Furthermore, a 6.5-year-long longitudinal cluster-
randomized study of 13,889 subjects demonstrated
no effect of breast-feeding on the development of
obesity, even among those with more sustained breast-
feeding duration (149).
Likewise, 2 meta-analyses showed no strong evidence
for the associating between the time of introducing
complementary feeding and the development of pediatric
overweight or obesity (191, 192).
Values
The committee places high value on promoting breast-
feeding to improve infant health but can only suggest
breast-feeding as a method for preventing obesity.
Remarks
For most children and adolescents and their families,
lifestyle patterns related to eating and exercise are
established early, affecting children and adolescents not
only when they are young but also throughout life.
Health care providers should follow universal pre-
vention methods to avoid the harmful health conse-
quences of less-than-optimal lifestyle choices, conveying
to all patients and families in a culturally sensitive and
language-appropriate manner the energy needs and es-
sential nutrient requirements of young children, and the
importance of physical activity. This is of particular
importance when we consider the increased efficacy of
prevention trials when directed toward younger
children.
The intestinal microflora may influence the develop-
ment of obesity. Although it is premature to discuss
methods of altering the intestinal flora, evidence suggests
that Bacteroides fragilis is more frequent in the stool of
overweight vs normal weight children, adolescents, and
adults (193). The intestinal microflora varies between
vaginal and cesarean section birth and also due to the
composition of early diets, including breast milk. Up-
coming results of clinical trials, which modify the
microbiome, may suggest new methods of obesity pre-
vention and treatment.
A recent systematic review that looked at the way
urban environments affect health behaviors or outcomes
for children and adolescents reported some evidence of
potential health benefits from urban environment in-
terventions relating to road safety and active travel.
However, evidence for the effectiveness of such in-
terventions was weak due to study designs that were
opportunistic and nonrandomized, used subjective out-
come measures, and did not incorporate follow-up of
study participants (194). Nonetheless, health care pro-
viders are encouraged to advocate for common sense
changes, including providing safe walking/biking areas
in parks, school routes, and neighborhoods and pro-
viding programs for active play in free time. Environ-
mental change recommendations require additional
research with more robust study designs incorporating
objective outcome measures to inform meaningful
policy change.
4.0 Treating obesity
Lifestyle: general considerations
4.1 We recommend clinicians prescribe and support
intensive, age-appropriate, culturally sensitive,
family-centered lifestyle modifications (dietary,
physical activity, behavioral) to promote a de-
crease in BMI. (1jÅÅÅs)
Evidence
The 2015 Endocrine Society Task Force commissioned
a systematic review to evaluate the impact of weight
change on metabolic outcomes in children and adoles-
cents who are obese (5). The results showed that change
in BMI was associated with improvements in triglycer-
ides, high-density lipoprotein, and systolic blood pres-
sure. This analysis is limited by the fact that it used
aggregate data. Other studies also showed associations
between weight change and other metabolic outcomes
(Fig. 2) (195, 196).
Successful weight management, through lifestyle in-
terventions, delays the onset of T2DM in adults (197)
and improves cardiovascular fitness (198, 199). Many
pediatric weight management programs have found
improved body composition and metabolic parameters
(13, 200).
A commonly held belief is that lifestyle modification is
not sufficiently efficacious. Children and adolescents may
not lose weight, or despite initial success, children and
adolescents might regain weight after the active phase of
the program has ended (201). A factor in weight regain
may be lack of continued exercise. The odds for weight
regain are twofold greater in those who are sedentary
(201). In a 10-year study of adults who participated in the
National Weight Control Registry, .87% of participants
maintained at least 10% weight loss for 5 to 10 years. A
worse outcome was associated with decreased physical
activity, decreased dietary restraint, decreased frequency
self-weighing, increased energy intake as fat, and increased
disinhibition (202).
There is sufficient evidence that intensive lifestyle
modification programs can be effective tools for pediatric
weight control in the short term (203, 204). Further-
more, implementing a formal maintenance program
after the completed treatment phase can be important for
726
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 maintaining achieved weight loss (205). This finding is
consistent with the concept of obesity as a chronic dis-
ease (206).
A Task Force–commissioned meta-analysis of ran-
domized pediatric trials of combined lifestyle interventions
for treating obesity (diet and exercise) showed a modest
but significant effect on obesity (equivalent to a decrease in
BMI of 1.5 kg/m2; P , 0.00001) when interventions
targeted family involvement. When parents were not
specifically included, the effect on weight loss was not
significant (182). These results suggest involving the family
when delivering combined lifestyle interventions.
An additional meta-analysis of RCTs of lifestyle in-
terventions (without an analysis of family involvement)
found moderate positive effects from the interventions
when compared with no treatment or information-only
controls. These effects persisted for an average follow-up
period of 15 months (207). Although there was overlap
with the Task Force meta-analysis, each study contained
reports not covered by the other.
An evidence-based position statement of the American
Dietetic Association supports the utility of family-based
lifestyle interventions for children and similar multi-
component programs for adolescents (208). These rec-
ommendations are consistent with conclusions of a
combined CDC and American Medical Association ex-
pert committee (209) and an evidence-based review of
pharmacological interventions for pediatric obesity that
highlighted the importance of concomitant intensive
lifestyle interventions, including dietary, exercise, and
family counseling (210).
Values and preferences
In making this recommendation, the Task Force
placed a high value on promoting healthy, safe pediatric
lifestyle modification that included family involvement,
with potential wide-reaching benefits.
Remarks
Clinicians should encourage BMI reduction for pa-
tients with obesity. A Task Force commissioned meta-
analysis demonstrated favorable effects on systolic blood
pressure, serum triglycerides, and serum high-density
lipoprotein with decreasing BMI or weight (5).
When interpreting these data, one must consider that the
beneficial effects seen in the 133 RCTs and 16 systematic
reviews are for averaged data, not individualized patients;
other factors such as age, ethnicity, or genetics may
modify individual responses. Very large changes may not
be necessary. Although a BMI decrease of 1.5 kg/m2
(reported in the meta-analysis commissioned by the first
Task Force) may seem small, if maintained for the long
term, overweight or obese children and adolescents may
benefit by maintaining weight as they grow; BMI will
decline as linear growth proceeds, and lifestyle modifi-
cation may reduce fat mass, increase lean body mass,
and improve cardiovascular fitness (211). Seven percent
weight loss may be a more realistic goal for children and
adolescents with extreme obesity. Well-designed RCTs,
with large numbers of patients, employing intensive
lifestyle intervention and follow-up maintenance pro-
grams, will help develop refined techniques. A review
of 25 years of behavioral therapy intervention in
children and adolescents has demonstrated that long-
term weight loss maintenance is possible (212). Other
RCTs of diet, physical activity, and/or behavior modi-
fication have also demonstrated persistent changes in
BMI (212, 213).
Dietary
4.2 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and sup-
port healthy eating habits in accordance with the
following guidelines of the American Academy of
Pediatrics and the US Department of Agriculture:
· decreased consumption of fast foods
· decreased consumption of added table sugar
and elimination of sugar-sweetened beverages
· decreased consumption of high-fructose corn
syrup and improved labeling of foods con-
taining high-fructose corn syrup
· decreased consumption of high-fat, high-sodium,
or processed foods
· consumption of whole fruit rather than fruit
juices
· portion control education
· reduced saturated dietary fat intake for children
and adolescents .2 years of age
· US Department of Agriculture recommended
intake of dietary fiber, fruits, and vegetables
· timely, regular meals, and avoiding constant
“grazing” during the day, especially after
school and after supper
· recognizing eating cues in the child’s or ado-
lescent’s environment, such as boredom, stress,
loneliness, or screen time
· encouraging single portion packaging and im-
proved food labeling for easier use by con-
sumers. (Ungraded Good Practice Statement)
Evidence
(Refer to section 3.2 for some of the evidence for rec-
ommendation 4.2.) Children and adolescents who are
overweight are more likely to skip breakfast and consume
few large meals per day (214) than do their leaner coun-
terparts who are more likely to consume smaller, more
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
727
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 frequent meals (215). Because snacks tend to be higher in
calorie density than meals, frequent snacking (among
children and adolescents) is associated with a high intake of
fat, sugar, and calories and with overweight (216).
Educating families, children, and adolescents about
the need to measure out single snack portions from
multiserving packages and place them in single-serving
containers can significantly change the amount of food
children and adolescents consume (217).
Values and preferences
The committee placed a high value on decreasing
snacking and decreasing overall caloric intake to reduce
weight gain among children and adolescents.
Remarks
A meta-analysis in children and adolescents suggests
that improved weight can be achieved regardless of the
macronutrient composition of the diet, and this mirrors
similar results found in adults (218). The WHO has
recently recommended that adults, children, and ad-
olescents limit sugar to ,5% to 10% of total daily
energy intake, unless the sugars are contained in fresh
fruits and vegetables, which are lower in calories and
higher in fiber than processed carbohydrates. The other
carbohydrates, which they term “free sugars,” include
honey; other sweeteners; glucose/fructose; and sugar
added by a cook, consumer, or producer. This recom-
mendation was termed “strongly” because of moderate
quality evidence that increasing free sugars in one’s diet
increases body weight, and decreasing free sugars decreases
body weight (110).
A dietician familiar with the energy needs of growing
children and adolescents should supervise calorie re-
duction for weight loss or maintenance in patients of this
age group. Unbalanced hypocaloric diets (e.g., “fad diets”)
may be deficient in essential vitamins and minerals.
Physical activity
4.3 We recommend that clinicians prescribe and
support the reduction of inactivity and also a
minimum of 20 minutes of moderate to vigorous
physical activity daily, with a goal of 60 minutes,
all in the context of a calorie-controlled diet.
(1|ÅÅss)
Evidence
In the absence of caloric restriction, moderate exercise
does not cause weight loss. However, in combination with
decreased caloric intake, exercise can achieve and maintain
significant weight loss. Studies performed in the school
setting have shown beneficial effects of exercise in children
and adolescents (204). The beneficial effects of both aerobic
exercise and resistance training can be short-lived, and
exercisemust be sustainedovermonths. Even20 minutes of
aerobicactivity 5 days perweek over 13 weeks can decrease
body and visceral fat (124). Recent studies in Denmark and
elsewhere have demonstrated benefits in mild intensity
jogging and in small 10- to 15-minute intervals of exercise,
which may be more readily achievable (219, 220).
Physical fitness, even without weight loss, may confer
health benefits. Improvements in cardiovascular fitness
were associated with improvements in body composition
and diabetes risk factors in adolescents (220). In addition
to improving metabolic fitness, exercise has been linked
to improvements in cognitive function and concentration
(124). (Refer to section 4.8 regarding school-based in-
terventions to increase activity.)
Values
The Committee placed a high value on losing weight
(in the form of body fat) by decreasing caloric intake and
increasing energy expenditure.
Remarks
Although current recommendations state that school
children and adolescents (who spend about half their
waking hours in school) should receive a minimum of 30
to 60 minutes of moderately vigorous physical activity
and at least 60 minutes of aerobic (moderate and vig-
orous) physical activity each school day, only 5% of
school districts in the United States have a requirement
for a specific amount of physical education (221–225).
Clinicians should place emphasis on increasing a child’s
or adolescent’s activity by helping facilitate:
· the ability to safely walk to and from school
· increased use of stairs (and improved signage to in-
dicate their location)
· increased breaks for movement in the classroom
· increased movement during recess and gym.
Moderate to vigorous exercise is defined as causing
some increase in breathing and heart rate; in a healthy
person this is usually associated with brisk walking,
dancing, swimming, or cycling on flat terrain. In ex-
ercise physiology terms, the energy expended should be
at least 3 metabolic equivalents (85, 226). Moderate
exercise allows talking but not singing, and vigorous
exercise makes it impossible to sing and difficult to talk.
This generalization should help families understand and
identify the difference between moderate and vigorous
exercise.
The use of motivational interviews to help an older
child or adolescent and/or his or her parent set physical
fitness or dietary goals may lead to greater success in
728
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 decreasing BMI (218, 219). In spite of limitations in-
herent in the method, clinicians should assess a patient’s
readiness for change when determining how to approach
the family.
4.4 We suggest that clinicians encourage and support
patients to limit nonacademic screen time to 1 to 2
hours per day and decrease other sedentary be-
haviors, such as digital activities. (2jÅsss)
Evidence
The 2009 Cochrane analysis reported that a combined
behavioral approach incorporating both dietary and
physical activity changes can produce a significant and
clinically meaningful reduction in overweight in children
and adolescents (204). A meta-analysis commissioned by
the original Task Force of 3 randomized trials of in-
terventions for reducing sedentary activity reported im-
precise results (i.e., that these interventions had both a
favorable and unfavorable impact on obesity outcomes)
(182). Both girls and boys demonstrated small decreases
in the amount of screen time in a German study, and these
decreases did not correlate with increases in physical
activity (227).
Values and preferences
The committee placed a high value on limiting digital
access time and other efforts to decrease sedentary time.
As our ever-increasing digital environment necessitates
increased screen time, a plan for the world’s children and
adolescents should complement necessary screen time
with:
· environments that demand and facilitate movement
· monetary incentives for decreased caloric intake (such
as taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages).
The committee agrees with research that finds an as-
sociation with the presence of a television set in a child’s
bedroom to increased screen time and increase caloric
intake while weakening the positive influence of parents
on promotion of healthy habits (228, 229).
Psychological complications of overweight and
obesity
Psychosocial
4.5 We suggest that the health care team identify
maladaptive rearing patterns related to diet and
activity and educate families about healthy food
and exercise habits. (2jÅsss)
4.6 We suggest that the health care team probe for and
diagnose unhealthy intrafamily communication
patterns and support rearing patterns that seek to
enhance the child’s or adolescent’s self-esteem.
(2jÅsss)
4.7 We suggest that the health care team evaluate for
psychosocial comorbidities and prescribe assess-
ment and counseling when psychosocial problems
are suspected. (2jÅsss)
Evidence
In section 4 we discuss the importance of involving the
whole family, and not just the child or adolescent, in
prevention and treatment interventions.
How interactions between parents and children and
adolescents and parenting styles contribute to unhealthy
lifestyle habits is a subject of investigation (230, 231). An
additional factor to overcome before initiating any in-
tervention may be the parents’ inability to recognize that
their child or adolescent is overweight, particularly for
the preschool child (232–234).
Obesity is associated with QOL, with levels measured
in obese children and adolescents equivalent to those seen
in pediatric cancer or diabetes (235, 236). In addition to
low QOL, children and adolescents with obesity have
significant psychosocial comorbidities, including poor
self-esteem (237–239), increased risk of depression and
anxiety (240–242), and higher-than-average risk of
eating disorders and substance abuse. Low self-esteem
(243) and perceived or actual higher BMIs are associated
with increased likelihood of smoking and alcohol con-
sumption (244).
To remove the bias that might be seen in a clinic
sample, the Childhood Growth and Development Study
in Australia enrolled healthy weight (n = 158), overweight
(n = 77), and obese (n = 27) children from the schools and
from families asking to be referred (n = 19). Heights,
weights, and psychological testing were done in the
schools for the school-based cohort (245). Increasing
BMI z scores were associated with decreasing self-
worth and global self-esteem as well as with de-
creased athletic competency, social acceptance, and
dissatisfaction with their physical appearance. These
associations were reported as young as age 8 years, but
the association with physical appearance was more
pronounced in the older group (246). The presence of
psychosocial distress in a population of school children
and adolescents not seeking clinic referral, as well as
those seeking referral, indicates that psychosocial is-
sues are present in both clinical and nonclinical pop-
ulations of youths who are obese.
A review of the literature found lower QOL scores for
social acceptance, family life, physical appearance, school
functioning, and physical functioning in all but 2 of the 34
publications included in the study. Factors influencing
lower QOL included degree of obesity, symptoms of
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
729
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 depression, lack of social support from classmates/family,
and low socioeconomic status (247).
In general, low self-esteem does not seem to be a sig-
nificant problem until adolescence, as self-esteem is similar
between preteen children who are obese and normal
weight. During adolescence, however, self-esteem becomes
more closely tied to body image, and rapidly plummets,
with those adolescent females who have higher BMIs
and body image dissatisfaction having the lowest self-
esteem (248).
Individuals with eating disorders tend to define self-
worth by their body image (249), possibly explaining the
association between eating disorders and youths who are
overweight and obese. Surveys from 135 Hispanic and
African American girls who are obese or overweight
revealed that 52% had been teased about their weight by
girls and 60% had been teased about their weight by
boys. Of those who were teased, 70% skipped meals,
dieted, or starved themselves; 12% reported binge eating;
and 33% stated they had “emotional” eating. All of the
girls surveyed stated they were unhappy about their
weight and wanted to be thinner (250). Eating disorders,
including binge eating and anorexia nervosa/bulimia, are
more commonly seen in those who have depression,
anxiety, and disruptive behavior (251, 252).
Parental reaction to their child’s weight affects how the
child responds. Bullying by peers and families contributes
to poor body image and impaired psychosocial func-
tioning (253).
Some may harass their child, letting them know how
unattractive he/she is, resulting in worsening body image
and poor self-esteem. A retrospective Internet-based
study of college students with great concern about
their weight, body shape, and eating behaviors revealed
that .80% had a history of parents or siblings making
negative comments about their weight, shape, or eating
behaviors. Most scored above average in psychometric
emotional-abuse tests, with positive associations with
negative parental comments and higher weight and
negative associations with social support and self-esteem
(254). Some parents are overly restrictive, potentially
causing their children and adolescents to binge when they
have access to unrestricted food (255, 256). Alternatively,
adolescents with extreme obesity may develop anorexia
bulimia, anorexia nervosa, or purging behaviors in an
effort to lose weight. A cross-sectional cohort study of
adolescents with extreme obesity and their parents found
bulimic symptoms did not correlate with the degree of
obesity but were associated with maternal psychopa-
thology, including somatization and anxiety (257).
Youths who are obese are more likely to be teased and
bullied and are less likely to have a “best friend” or be
considered popular by classmates than their thinner peers
(258). Parents, teachers, and peers indicate that youths
who are obese are more isolated and have poorer social
skills than do their thinner counterparts (259). Those
with low self-esteem (243) and perceived or actual higher
BMIs are more likely to smoke and drink alcohol than
those with higher self-esteem (244). Additionally, they are
less athletic and less likely to have romantic relationships,
contributing to increased teasing, worsening of self-
esteem, loneliness, depression, anxiety, and introverted
behavior (260).
In general, those who are most obese report more
psychological distress (246, 261). Girls become more
depressed with increasing BMI than do boys, and some
studies indicate that depression in African American boys
is not linked to BMI but rather to peer teasing (246, 262).
Race and socioeconomic status (in addition to sex) affect
how children and adolescents react to obesity; however,
there are conflicting reports on the effect of obesity on
psychological status in different groups. One study
found that African American children have more body
image dissatisfaction and anxiety than do their same-
weight white counterparts (262), whereas a study of
adolescents found that African Americans and His-
panics are less stigmatized than whites (263). High
socioeconomic status adolescents who are obese with
psychopathology are less likely to seek help at a weight-
loss program than are low socioeconomic status ado-
lescents who are obese (252), possibly due to a more
negative perception regarding obesity in high socio-
economic status families.
As adolescents who are obese consistently report
high rates of depression, anxiety, and binge eating
disorders, all overweight patients should be assessed
for psychopathology. Assessment and counseling by a
psychologist are often indicated. Clinicians should
prescribe antidepressant medications with caution, as
atypical antipsychotics cause rapid (often extreme)
weight gain (264).
Diuretics, diet pills, and self-induced emesis are not
uncommonly used to achieve rapid weight loss by ado-
lescents. One study demonstrated that laxative use, self-
induced vomiting, and diet pill ingestion were more
common in adolescents who are obese compared with
those who are normal weight and overweight (265). Six
percent of 6957 middle school children and adolescents in
North Carolina used diet pills and 7.1% used laxatives or
self-induced vomiting. The case prevalence of diet pills
was 3.4 in normal weight, 4.1 in overweight, and 9.5 in
adolescents who are obese; the case prevalence of laxa-
tives was 1.3, 0.7, and 3.2, respectively; and the case
prevalence of self-induced vomiting was 3.4 in normal
weight vs 7.6 in adolescents who are obese. Females more
commonly abused substances for weight loss, such as
730
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana; they were also more
likely to participate in risky sexual behaviors (265).
Clinicians should discuss these maladaptive behaviors at
clinic visits, as they are potentially harmful. It is im-
portant to emphasize moderation rather than restriction
and to counsel against risky weight loss strategies
Remarks
As psychosocial issues are so prevalent, providers
should psychologically screen all youths who are obese
for the presence of mental health issues, asking questions
regarding:
· school absences/refusal
· teasing by peers regarding weight/appearance
· persistent anxiety
· depression/self-harm
· anger outbursts
· sexual activity, alcohol, drug use
· eating disorders—purging, anorexia, binge eating
· family functioning/family attitudes about weight and
specifically obesity/parent psychopathology.
Parents
and/or
children
and
adolescents
should
complete a mental health screening measure, such as the
Pediatric Symptom Checklist (266). Clinicians can review
this during patient visits and refer patients to a mental
health professional when indicated. Obesity-related
mental health issues are a pervasive problem, and a
team-based approach is essential, involving school
counselors, nurses, and teachers, as well as health care
providers. It might also be helpful to consult with school
personnel to initiate school-based counseling. A list of
local programs (e.g., YMCA, Boys and Girls Clubs) that
offer physical activity programs and healthy snacks is
also helpful. Behavioral modification is helpful in de-
termining the child’s readiness to change and potential
barriers to achieving change (264).
Pharmacotherapy
4.8 We suggest pharmacotherapy for children or
adolescents with obesity only after a formal
program of intensive lifestyle modification has
failed to limit weight gain or to ameliorate
comorbidities (2jÅsss). We recommend
against using obesity medications in children and
adolescents ,16 years of age who are overweight
but not obese, except in the context of clinical
trials. (1jÅsss)
4.9 We suggest that FDA-approved pharmacother-
apy for obesity be administered only with a
concomitant lifestyle modification program of
the highest intensity available and only by cli-
nicians who are experienced in the use of
antiobesity agents and are aware of the potential
for adverse reactions. (2jÅsss)
4.10 We suggest that clinicians should discontinue
medication and re-evaluate the patient if the patient
does not have a .4% BMI/BMI z score reduction
after taking antiobesity medication for 12 weeks at
the medication’s full dosage. (2jÅsss)
Evidence
The FDA recently approved a number of weight-loss
medications for adults (216, 267, 268) and considers
these medications to be appropriate for those $16 years
of age who have BMI $ 30 kg/m2 or who have BMI $
27 kg/m2 and at least 1 weight-related comorbid con-
dition (e.g., hypertension or T2DM). However, although
the utility of pharmacotherapy in pediatric obesity has
been recently reviewed (269–271), there are no published
data directly comparing adult and adolescent outcomes
for obesity pharmacotherapy.
Physicians should be discouraged from prescribing
weight loss medications off-label to those ,16 years old
because of: 1) the lack of FDA approval for use; 2) the
limited number of well-controlled safety and efficacy
studies in obese children and adolescents, 3) the limited
efficacy demonstrated in adults for most agents, and 4)
the need to weigh the relative risk of drug-induced ad-
verse events in children and adolescents against a med-
ication’s long-term theoretical potential for reducing
obesity-related morbidity and mortality.
Despite these concerns, the negative health impact
of pediatric obesity may justify long-term medication.
However, pharmacotherapy should only be prescribed in
combination with comprehensive lifestyle modification
programs (210, 271–274) that have substantial efficacy
(270). The limited available evidence suggests the best
pediatric pharmacotherapy outcomes are among patients
adherent to lifestyle program recommendations (275).
Among pharmacotherapeutic agents approved for
adult obesity (Table 5), only orlistat is FDA approved for
obesity treatment of ages 12 to 16 years. Orlistat
(299–305) inhibits gastrointestinal lipases, reducing ad-
olescent’s fat absorption by ;30% (299). Orlistat reduces
BMI significantly in adolescents by ;0.7 to 1.7 kg/m2
(150, 318), but treatment is associated with significant
gastrointestinal side effects (Table 5). Orlistat must be
taken with each meal, thus reducing its utility in school-
attending adolescents. Orlistat appears to affect the ab-
sorption of fat-soluble vitamins E and D (299). Available
data suggest that ;50% of pediatric patients that are
prescribed orlistat discontinued it within 1 month, 75%
stop using it by 3 months, and only 10% remain on
orlistat after 6 months (319, 320). Given its limited
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
731
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 4.
Factors Associated With Prevention of Pediatric Obesity
Study Format
Relationship
Source
Relationship
to the
Development
of Obesity or
Metabolic
Improvement
4.2 Increased sugar sweetened beverages intake
2- to 5-y-old children from various
periods of the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Surveys
There was a decrease of 57 calories/d intake of sugar-
sweetened beverages between 2003–2004 and
2009–2010 with no appreciable change in sugar
intake thereafter up to 2011–2012
Ford et al.,
2015 (112)
Probable +
Cross-sectional analysis of 4880
children between 3 and 11 y from
the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey between 1999
and 2004
Sugar-sweetened beverage intake was independently
associated with decreased HDL, increased C-reactive
protein, and increased waist circumference
Kosova et al.,
2013 (113)
+
Longitudinal study of 9600 children in
the Early Childhood Longitudinal
Survey–Birth Cohort
There was a 1.4 odds ratio for being obese if a 5-y-old
child drinks 4 or 5 sugar-sweetened beverages per
day but no such risk for 2-y-old; however there was
a significant influence on drinking sugar-sweetened
beverages at 2 y of age and an increase in BMI z score
during the next 2 y
DeBoer et al.,
2013 (114)
+
Randomized controlled study of 224
teenagers that reduced sugar
sweetened beverage intake
There was a decrease in the change in BMI and weight
at 1 y but no difference at 2 y
Ebbeling et al.,
2012 (115)
+
Eighteen-month study of 642
primarily normal-weight Dutch
children aged 4 y 10 mo to 11 y 11
mo who were divided into groups
receiving 8 ounces of sugar-free
drink or 105 kcal containing sugar-
sweetened drinks
There was an increased weight gain and increase in
BMI in the sugar-sweetened group
de Ruyter et al.,
2102 (116)
+
One hundred forty-six 7- to 11-y-olds
drinking sugar-free or sugar-
sweetened beverages
There was no difference in the level of satiety
experienced; the conclusion is that the child will not
compensatefor allcaloriesmissingfromnonsweetened
drinks, which may partly explain a lower degree of
weight gain with nonsweetened drink ingestion
de Ruyter et al.,
2012 (116)
+
4.3 Higher level of activitya
Meta-analysis of 11 RCTs of activity
ranging in length from 20 min to
.1 h/d and ranging in frequency
from twice a week to every day of
the school week
There was little effect on BMI, but there were decreases
in triglycerides and systolic and diastolic blood
pressure when the intervention lasted at least 6 mo;
total cholesterol, however, did increase during some
studies
Cesa et al.,
2014 (117);
Vasconcellos
et al., 2014
(118)
2
Nine randomized controlled pediatric
studies (n = 367) included in
a meta-analysis
At least 3 mo of exercise in 3 sessions per week of
60 min each led to decreased fasting glucose and
insulin and body fat
Garcia-Hermoso
et al., 2014
(119)
2
Meta-analysis of 24 studies of fasting
insulin levels and 12 studies on
insulin resistance in pediatric
normal weight overweight and
obese
There was a small but positive effect in improving
fasting insulin resistance in children, with the
greatest effect occurring in those with the highest
BMI standard deviation values
Fedewa et al.,
2014 (120)
2
Systematic review of 16 studies of
school-based jumping exercises
There was small positive effect of bone-targeted
exercise on fat mass (SMD, 20.248; 95% CI,
20.406 to 20.089) and lean mass (SMD, 0.159;
95% CI, 20.076 to 0.394), but there are few studies
Nogueira and
Hrovat, 2014
(121)
2
Meta-analysis of 40 studies on the
effect of resistance training in
pediatric overweight or obese
Resistance training in children and adolescents who are
overweight and obese appears to generally have
very small to small effects on body composition and
moderate to large effects on strength
Schranz et al.,
2013 (122)
2
Systematic review of 2 aggregate
data meta-analyses representing
14 and 17 studies in 481 and 701
boys and girls, respectively
Exercise decreased the percentage of body fat but does
not necessarily have an effect on BMI; therefore,
replacing fat tissue with muscle may not necessarily
be reflected by characteristic clinic-based
anthropomorphic data
Kelley and Kelley,
2013 (123)
2
(Continued)
732
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 4.
Continued
Study Format
Relationship
Source
Relationship
to the
Development
of Obesity or
Metabolic
Improvement
Randomized controlled pediatric
study of .200 subjects who
experienced 20 or 40 min of fun but
nonetheless aerobic activity 5 d/wk
during 13 wk
There was a dose response decrease in insulin
resistance measured by the area under the curve of
an oral glucose tolerance test, decreased total body
fat and visceral fat, and a similar improvement in
fitness measured by peak VO2; the conclusion is that
there is benefit for a child who is obese if the child
will actually engage in at least 20 min of aerobic
exercise 5 d/wk, (and we expect this may extend to
the prevention of obesity)
Davis et al., 2011
(124)
2
4.4 Decreased sleep duration or variation
A systematic review and unbiased
meta-analysis of 11 longitudinal
studies of 24,821 children and
adolescents
There was a twofold increase in risk for obesity with
“short” sleep duration according to sleep standards
Fatima et al.,
2015 (125)
+
Sleep duration in a cross-sectional
pediatric study (n = 676)
Energy density of the diet, added sugar, and SSBs
decreased with increased sleep
Kjeldsen et al.,
2014 (126)
+
Variability in sleep duration of 10 min
per night
This was positively associated with energy density (P =
0.04), sugar-sweetened beverages intake (P = 0.03),
and Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire score
independent of sleep duration
Kjeldsen et al.,
2014 (126)
+
One hour decrease in pediatric sleep
duration (n = 441) during 200 d
There was a higher intake of added sugar (P = 0.001)
and sugar-sweetened beverages (P = 0.002) with no
change in energy density of the diet (P = 0.78)
Hjorth et al.,
2014 (127);
Kjeldsen et al.,
2014 (126)
+
Sleeping ,10 h at 16 mo of age in
1303 twins
There was a 50 kcal increased intake
Fisher et al., 2014
(128)
+
Increasing pediatric sleep duration an
average of 2 h 20 min (n = 37)
There was decreased caloric intake by 134 kcal/d and
lowered plasma leptin
Hart et al., 2013
(129)
+
Three hundred eleven term infants;
sleep duration at 9 mo, 18 mo, and
3 y of age
There was no relationship between sleep duration and
adiposity indicators in 9- to 36-mo-old children: the
SKOT cohort
Klingenberg
et al., 2013
(130)
None
Eight hundred two 4- to 14-y-old
children and adolescents; sleep and
intake followed for 7 d
There was no relationship between sleep duration and
energy intake, but there was a trend toward
a positive association with intake of dietary fiber and
vegetables and a negative association with intake of
poultry, and a trend toward a negative association
with intake of liquid “discretionary calories”
Hoppe et al.,
2013 (131)
None
Longitudinal cohort study of 550
children of average age 9.6 y
There was an odds ratio of 2.08 for obesity with ,10 h
sleep
Chaput et al.,
2011 (132)
+
A meta-analysis of 12 studies
including 20,003 children
There was a 1.86 odds ratio for obesity with “short”
duration of sleep
Cappuccio et al.,
2008 (133)
+
4.5 Increased screen time
Measurements at ;12 y of age of 234
parents from a previously
established cohort were compared
with 382 of their offspring for
screen time and measures of
adiposity
Both generations demonstrated a relationship
between screen time and obesity at about 12.5 y of
age, demonstrating a need to target high-risk
families across generations
Steffen et al.,
2013 (134)
+
A systematic review of 7 prospective
studies on television time and 1
study on computer use
Six studies of varying quality demonstrated a positive
relationship between screen time and the
development of obesity
te Velde et al.,
2012 (135)
+
Seventy children studied every 6 mo
during 2 y in a randomized
controlled study to decrease
television viewing 50% and
decrease sedentary activity in the
intervention group of 35
The intervention decreased sedentary activity especially
in lower socioeconomic group children; there was
relationship between decreased television viewing,
decreased BMI, and decreased energy, but not
increased activity
Epstein et al.,
2008 (136)
+
(Continued)
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
733
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 4.
Continued
Study Format
Relationship
Source
Relationship
to the
Development
of Obesity or
Metabolic
Improvement
4.6 Increased family involvement in prevention
Fifteen RCTs of family-based lifestyle
interventions for children and
adolescents
Family-based interventions based in behavior theory
had more effect than did those theoretically
connected to family systems theory
Sung-Chan et al.,
2013 (137)
2
A systematic review including 24
studies including parental
involvement in long-term weight-
control interventions with
a nutritional focus
Although there were inadequate data to determine
whether parental involvement in prevention
programs is important, medium and high levels of
parental involvement in obesity treatment programs
improved outcomes, suggesting that parental
involvement should be studied in prevention
van der Kruk
et al., 2013
(138)
Probable +
Fifteen studies (7 were longitudinal)
included measures of frequency of
family meals although in an
inconsistent manner
There was inconsistent and weak evidence of an
inverse association between the frequency of family
meals and risk of pediatric overweight; there is need
for robust longitudinal studies on this topic
Valdes et al.,
2013 (139)
None
A systematic review of 9 studies
including portion manipulation
interventions or portion education/
training interventions
Most studies demonstrated increased intake with
increased portion size, and that parents can be
educated to estimate portion size more accurately,
but there were other studies that contradicted both
concepts
Small et al., 2013
(140)
2
4.7 Disordered family function or abuse
Systematic review of 16
cross-sectional and 1 longitudinal
study of family function
Lower levels of family functioning, including poor
communication, poor behavior control, poor family
cohesion, high levels of family conflict, and low
family hierarchy values representing low authority,
dominance, and decision power, showed low to
moderate relationship to the subject’s classification
of pediatric obese or overweight; however, out of 4
interventional studies only 2 showed that improved
family functioning decreased the risk of obesity, but
these studies were suboptimal
Halliday et al.,
2014 (141)
+
A meta-analysis of 41 studies
including 190,285 participants
Pediatric maltreatment was associated with a 1.36
increased risk ratio for pediatric obesity
Danese and Tam,
2014 (142)
+
Systematic review of 36 studies
Interpersonal violence increased the risk of obesity later
in life
Midei et al., 2011
(143)
+
Systematic review of 6 prospective
and 2 retrospective studies
Stressful environments during childhood and
adolescence, including lack of good care, pediatric
anxiety disorders, learning difficulties, low school
achievement, and childhood/adolescence abuse,
increased adult obesity risk, depression in
adolescence, and increased the risk for obesity in
girls only
Vamosi et al.,
2010 (144)
+
4.8 Increased school involvement
Nine community-based studies (5
RCTs and 4 non-RCTs) of which 1
was conducted only in the
community setting, 3 were
conducted in the community and
school setting, and 5 were
conducted in the community
setting in combination with at least
1 other setting, such as the home
There was moderate strength of evidence that
a combined diet and physical activity intervention in
the community with a school component is effective
at preventing obesity or overweight
Bleich et al., 2013
(145)
2
A systematic review of 16 studies
involving school prevention
programs with community
involvement
School programs with more community involvement
were more successful than those with less
community involvement
Krishnaswami
et al., 2012
(146)
2
(Continued)
734
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 efficacy and low long-term use, orlistat appears of limited
benefit in practice.
Additional medications not FDA approved for the
treatment of pediatric obesity
Metformin (306–311, 321–334) is not FDA approved
for obesity treatment. However, metformin reduces hepatic
glucose production, increases peripheral insulin sensitivity,
and may reduce appetite (335). Metformin decreases BMI,
but with a mean decrease of only 1.16 kg/m2 over 6 to
12 months (336). Metformin may also possibly be useful in
combating the weight gain observed in children and ado-
lescents who are taking atypical psychotropic medications
(337, 338) or who have PCOS (324, 331, 339). However,
given its limited weight-loss efficacy, metformin is not a
considered a weight-loss treatment.
Sibutramine (275, 284, 285, 340–346) was removed
from the US market in 2010 because of concerns for
Table 4.
Continued
Study Format
Relationship
Source
Relationship
to the
Development
of Obesity or
Metabolic
Improvement
Meta-analysis of 37 studies of 27,946
children generally between 6 and
12 y of age
There were beneficial effects of pediatric obesity
prevention programs on BMI with school curriculum
that includes healthy eating; physical activity and
body image; increased sessions for physical activity
and the development of fundamental movement
skills throughout the school week; improvements in
nutritional quality of the food supply in schools;
environments and cultural practices that support
children eating healthier foods and being active
throughout each day; support for teachers and other
staff to implement health promotion strategies
and activities, as well as parent support and
home activities that encourage children to be
more active, eat more nutritious foods, and
spend less time in screen-based activities;
however, weaknesses in studies and potential
bias point to the necessity for improved studies in
the future
Waters et al.,
2011 (147)
2
4.10 Increased breast feeding
Meta-analysis of 25 studies with
a total of 226,508 participants
Breast-feeding was protective of the development of
obesity with a dose response effect in 17 studies
Yan et al.,
2014 (148);
Kramer et al.,
2009 (149)
+
A cluster-randomized trial of a breast-
feeding promotion intervention of
13,889 subjects (81.5%) followed
up at 6.5 y from 31 Belarusian
maternity hospitals and affiliated
clinics
Although there were substantial increases in the
duration and exclusivity of breast-feeding, there was
no reduction in obesity at age 6.5 y
Kramer et al.,
2009 (149)
None
Meta-analysis of 10 studies of breast-
feeding
Five studies showed protective effects and 5 did not;
likewise, there were mixed findings on length of
breast-feeding and time of introduction of
complementary food
Weng et al.,
2012 (150)
Mixed
Cohort analyses of 11,998 teenagers
from the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health
There was a decreased risk of obesity in girls breast-fed
at least 9 mo with similar, but less significant, effects
in boys; however, analysis of sibling pairs eliminated
any significance from the relationship,
demonstrating the effect of confounding effects on
cohort analyses
Nelson et al.,
2005 (151)
+
Note: Numbers 4.2–4.8 and 4.10 refer to numbered recommendations in the manuscript.
Abbreviations: AOR, adjusted odds ratio; BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; RCT, randomized
controlled trial; SKOT, Scottish Childhood Obesity Treatment Trial; SMD, standardized mean difference; TV, television; VO2, oxygen
consumption.
aSome studies included obese children and adolescents, but results may relate to prevention.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
735
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 cardiovascular safety but remains available in several
other countries.
Other medications approved for obesity treatment
of $16 years of age or under investigation generally have
few relevant pediatric data (297, 298) (Table 5).
Some centrally active, amphetamine-like catecholamin-
ergic and dopaminergic stimulants, such as phentermine
and diethylpropion, are FDA approved as short-term
monotherapy (a few weeks) for obesity in adults. Re-
cently, lisdexamfetamine dimesylate was FDA approved to
treat binge eating in adults (282, 283). Lisdexamfetamine
treatment was associated with short-term weight loss, but
this medication is not FDA approved for weight manage-
ment. Because of adverse effect profiles (Table 5), abuse
potential (347), and the absence of trials showing long-term
weight loss efficacy, none of the amphetamine-like agents is
recommended for obesity management in children and
adolescents.
Although not FDA approved for the treatment of
obesity, GH treatment of children and adolescents with
Prader-Willi syndrome, particularly when started early
(90), decreases body fat percentage and increases lean
body mass (348), with effects that may be sustained for
the long term (90). A summary of the benefits and risks of
GH treatment (349) and consensus guidelines for GH
therapy in Prader-Willi Syndrome are available (350).
Octreotide limits the opening of voltage-gated calcium
channels in beta cells (351, 352), decreasing the magni-
tude of insulin response to glucose (353). In obese adults
with insulin hypersecretion, treating with long-acting
repeatable octreotide for 6 months resulted in ;2%
greater weight loss than in controls (316). Studies have
reported weight stabilization, instead of significant
weight gain, in children and adolescents with hypotha-
lamic obesity treated with somatostatin analogs (315,
354). Given its side-effect profile, octreotide appears to be
potentially beneficial only for those with hypothalamic
obesity.
Liraglutide, a glucagon-like peptide 1 analog, is ap-
proved for long-term adult obesity treatment; the effec-
tive 3 mg dose produced an additional weight loss of
4.5% vs placebo at 1 year, with sustained effects for up to
2 years (355). Small trials suggest that another glucagon-
like peptide 1 analog, exenatide, may potentially have
efficacy in adolescent obesity; used for .3 months,
exenatide reduced BMI by .1 kg/m2 (compared with
control), with continued BMI reduction during a 3-month
open-label phase (297, 298).
Leptin therapy in leptin-deficient patients produces
significant loss of fat mass (295, 356, 357). Un-
fortunately, leptin therapy in adults who are not leptin
deficient has little effect on body weight (358–360).
Agents that have been recently approved for long-term
obesity treatment in adults (Table 5) currently lack
pediatric-specific data. The additional weight loss (beyond
that achieved with placebo) at 1 year among adults ranges
from ;3% (lorcaserin) to ;10% (phentermine plus
topiramate) (267), but none is without potential risks. If
Figure 2. Change in metabolic outcome per unit change in BMI or weight. Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; SBP, systolic blood
pressure; TG, triglyceride.
736
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 adult patients taking full-dose lorcaserin, bupropion plus
naltrexone, liraglutide, or phentermine plus topiramate do not
see clinically meaningful weight loss (.3% to 5% of body
weight) after 12 weeks, clinicians should discontinue treat-
ment, because significant weight loss after 1 year is unlikely.
Similar results were found for adults given orlistat (361). In the
largest adolescent orlistat trial (362), 21% of orlistat-treated
adolescents decreased their body weight by $5% at 12 weeks
and went on to decrease body weight by 7.8% after 1 year of
treatment; however, those who lost ,5% at 12 weeks had a
2.3% weight gain after 1 year (362). Thus, clinicians should
discontinue pharmacotherapy agents when sufficient weight
loss is not observed after 12 weeks.
Values and preferences
We placed a higher value on avoiding drug side effects
and on achieving healthy weight through the incorporation
of healthy behaviors. The suggestion to minimize the use of
pharmacotherapy in children and adolescents reflects the
limited efficacy and small number of long-term pediatric
trials for existing agents, along with the imperative to
manage pediatric obesity as a serious chronic condition in
which long-term success overrides short-term gains.
Remarks
Drugefficacyisbasedonlyonreductionsof BMIorBMI z
scores. Antiobesity drugs may have differential effects on
obesity-associated comorbidities based on their mechanisms
of action. For example, certain medications (e.g., metformin)
have more potent effects on glucose tolerance. Clinicians
should tailor drug selection to the individual patient and pay
strong attention to the patient’s concomitant medications,
medical conditions, and family history, as well as each
medication’s efficacy and adverse event profile. The benefits
of any drug used to treat pediatric obesity should clearly
outweigh its long-term risks. Clinicians should be aware that
no obesity medication has been shown to reduce the in-
cidence of cardiovascular morbidity or mortality (267).
The recommendation to discontinue medication when
it appears relatively ineffective after 12 weeks of use is
consistent with adult obesity pharmacotherapy labeling.
The FDA label for liraglutide recommends discontinua-
tion when adults have ,4% weight reduction. Most
drugs should be discontinued if a 5% decrease in BMI/
BMI z score does not occur.
Although pediatricians prescribe many medications
“off-label”, we think pharmacotherapeutic agents not yet
approved for the treatment of pediatric obesity should be
restricted to large, well-controlled clinical studies.
Bariatric surgery
4.11 We suggest bariatric surgery only under the
following conditions:
· the patient has attained Tanner 4 or 5 pubertal
development and final or near-final adult
height, the patient has a BMI of .40 kg/m2 or
has a BMI of .35 kg/m2 and significant,
extreme comorbidities
· extreme obesity and comorbidities persist
despite compliance with a formal program
of lifestyle modification, with or without
pharmacotherapy
· psychological evaluation confirms the stability
and competence of the family unit, psycholog-
ical distress due to impaired QOL from obesity
may be present, but the patient does not have an
underlying untreated psychiatric illness
· the patient demonstrates the ability to adhere
to the principles of healthy dietary and activity
habits
· patient has access to an experienced surgeon
in a pediatric bariatric surgery center of ex-
cellence providing the necessary infrastructure
for patient care, including a team capable of
long-term follow-up of the metabolic and
psychosocial needs of the patient and family.
(2jÅsss)
4.12 We suggest against bariatric surgery in pre-
adolescent children; pregnant or breast-feeding
adolescents (and those planning to become
pregnant within 2 years of surgery); and in any
patient who has not mastered the principles of
healthy dietary and activity habits and/or has an
unresolved substance abuse, eating disorder, or
untreated psychiatric disorder. (2jÅsss)
Evidence
Clinicians prescribe bariatric procedures for weight
loss in adolescents because of the poor success of non-
surgical treatment in achieving and maintaining weight
loss in adolescents with extreme obesity.
Indications for weight loss surgery include BMI of
.35 kg/m2 with major comorbidities of obesity (T2DM,
moderate to extreme sleep apnea, pseudotumor cerebri,
debilitating orthopedic problems, and nonalcoholic steato-
hepatitis with advanced fibrosis). Patients are also candi-
dates for bariatric surgery if they have a BMI of .40 kg/m2
with mild comorbidities (hypertension, dyslipidemia, mod-
erate orthopedic problems, mild sleep apnea, nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis, and extreme psychological distress that is
secondary to their obesity) (363).
Because of the beneficial effects on QOL, social re-
lationships, and depression in studies of adolescents
(364–367), some as long as 2 to 3 years in duration
(368, 369), proponents of bariatric surgery suggest that
extreme psychological distress is an indication for
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
737
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 5.
Medications Studied for the Long-Term Treatment of Obesity
Drug
Status
Common Side Effects
Monitoring and
Contraindications
Source
Centrally acting anorexigenic agents
Phentermine,
diethylpropion,
and mazindola
Approved only for short-
term use in adults
Insomnia, elevation in
heart rate, dry mouth,
taste alterations,
dizziness, tremors,
headache, diarrhea,
constipation, vomiting,
gastrointestinal
distress, anxiety,
restlessness
Monitor HR, BP. These
medications are
contraindicated in
uncontrolled
hypertension,
hyperthyroidism,
glaucoma, agitated
states, history of drug
abuse, and MAOIs; use
caution when
prescribing to patients
with even mild
hypertension
Rauh and Lipp, 1968
(276); Lorber, 1966
(277); von Spranger,
1965 (278); Andelman
et al., 1967 (279);
Golebiowska et al.,
1981 (280);
Komorowski, 1982
(281)
Lisdexamfetamine
dimesylatea
Not FDA approved for
obesity. Approved for
binge eating disorder in
adults and for attention
deficit hyperactivity
disorder in patients 6 y
of age and older
Dry mouth, sleeplessness
(insomnia), increased
heart rate, jittery
feelings, constipation,
anxiety
This medication is
contraindicated with
MAOIs. There is a risk
for sudden death in
people who have heart
problems or heart
defects, and stroke and
heart attack in adults.
Monitor blood pressure
and heart rate. May
produce psychotic or
manic symptoms, such
as hallucinations,
delusional thinking, or
mania. May worsen
peripheral
vasculopathy, including
Raynaud phenomenon
McElroy et al., 2015 (282);
McElroy et al., 2015
(283)
Sibutramine
Withdrawn in the US
(increased risk of
serious cardiovascular
events). Still available in
some countries such as
Brazil
Tachycardia,
hypertension,
palpitations, insomnia,
anxiety, nervousness,
depression, diaphoresis
Monitor HR, BP. Do not
use with other drugs,
MAOIs
Berkowitz et al., 2003
(275); Godoy-Matos
et al., 2005 (284);
Berkowitz et al., 2006
(285)
Lorcaserina
Approved for long-term
use in adults
Headache, dizziness,
fatigue, nausea, dry
mouth, cough, and
constipation; back
pain, cough,
hypoglycemia in
patients with T2DM
There is a risk for
serotonin syndrome or
neuroleptic malignant
syndrome-like
reactions. Evaluate
patients for signs or
symptoms of valvular
heart disease.
Euphoria,
hallucination, and
dissociation have been
seen with
supratherapeutic
doses. Interactions with
triptans, MAOIs,
including linezolid,
SSRIs, SNRIs,
dextromethorphan,
tricyclic
antidepressants,
bupropion, lithium,
tramadol, tryptophan,
and St. John’s wort
Smith et al., 2010 (286);
Fidler et al., 2011 (287)
(Continued)
738
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 5.
Continued
Drug
Status
Common Side Effects
Monitoring and
Contraindications
Source
Liraglutidea
Approved for long-term
use in adults
Nausea, diarrhea,
constipation, vomiting,
headache, decreased
appetite, dyspepsia,
fatigue, dizziness,
abdominal pain,
increased lipase
Monitor heart rate at
regular intervals. This
medication is
contraindicated in
patients with a history of
medullary thyroid
carcinoma or in patients
with multiple endocrine
neoplasia syndrome
type 2. Discontinue
promptly if pancreatitis is
suspected
Zinman et al., 2009 (288);
Wadden et al., 2013
(289); Astrup et al.,
2009 (290)
Phentermine plus
topiramatea
Approved for long-term
use in adults
Paresthesias, dizziness,
taste alterations,
insomnia, constipation,
dry mouth, elevation in
heart rate, memory or
cognitive changes
This medication is
contraindicated in
glaucoma,
hyperthyroidism,
MAOIs. Concerns
about teratogenicity
(increased risk of oral
clefts) mandate
effective contraceptive
use and pregnancy test
monitoring in females.
Metabolic acidosis,
hypokalemia, and
elevated creatinine
have been reported,
and periodic
monitoring is advised.
Abrupt withdrawal of
topiramate may cause
seizures
Garvey et al., 2012 (291);
Allison et al., 2011
(292)
Bupropion plus
naltrexonea
Approved for long-term
use in adults
Nausea, constipation,
headache, vomiting,
dizziness, insomnia, dry
mouth, diarrhea
Monitor HR, BP. Do not
administer to patients
with a history of seizure
disorders or with anorexia
or bulimia nervosa or to
patients who are using
opioids or abruptly
discontinuing use of
alcohol, benzodiazepines,
barbiturates, or
antiseizure medications.
There is potential
increased risk of suicidality
Greenway et al., 2010
(293); Padwal, 2009
(294)
Drugs in development or used off-label that may act centrally as anorexigenic medications
Recombinant human
leptin, metreleptina This drug is under
investigation. In
monotherapy it was
successful for treating
leptin deficiency
Headache, abdominal
pain
This drug is useful only in
leptin deficiency.
Antibodies with
neutralizing activity have
been identified in
patients treated with
metreleptin. T cell
lymphoma has been
reported in patients with
acquired generalized
lipodystrophy. A risk
evaluation and
mitigation strategy
should be in place to
prevent inappropriate
prescription
Farooqi et al., 2002 (105);
Farooqi et al., 1999
(295)
(Continued)
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
739
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 5.
Continued
Drug
Status
Common Side Effects
Monitoring and
Contraindications
Source
Exenatidea
Not FDA approved for
obesity
Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, feeling jittery,
dizziness, headache,
dyspepsia
Acute pancreatitis,
including fatal and
nonfatal hemorrhagic
or necrotizing
pancreatitis, has been
reported. Observe
patients carefully for
signs and symptoms of
pancreatitis. Discontinue
promptly if pancreatitis is
suspected.
Contraindicated in
patients with severe
renal impairment
Rosenstock et al., 2010
(296); Kelly et al., 2013
(297); Kelly et al., 2012
(298)
Drugs affecting nutrient trafficking
Orlistat
This drug is FDA approved
for treatment of obesity
in adolescents $12 y
old
Oily spotting, flatus with
discharge, fecal
urgency, fatty/oily
stool, increased
defecation, fecal
incontinence
This drugis contraindicated
in chronic malabsorption
syndromes and
cholestasis.
Cholelithiasis and, rarely,
severe liver injury,
including hepatocellular
necrosis and acute
hepatic failure leading to
death, have been
reported. It decreases
drug concentrations of
cyclosporine and
levothyroxine. Doses
should be temporally
separated from orlistat.
Fat-soluble vitamin
absorption is decreased
by orlistat. Use with
caution in those at risk
for renal insufficiency.
MVI supplementation is
strongly recommended.
A low- dose preparation
is approved for over-the-
counter sale
McDuffie et al., 2002
(299); Zhi et al., 2003
(300); Norgren et al.,
2003 (301); Ozkan
et al., 2004 (302);
McDuffie et al., 2004
(303); Chanoine et al.,
2005 (304); Maahs
et al., 2006 (305)
Drugs affecting internal milieu/metabolic control
Metformina
This drug is not FDA
approved for obesity. It
is approved for $10 y
of age for T2DM
Nausea, flatulence,
bloating, diarrhea;
usually resolves
Do not use in renal failure
or with i.v. contrast. MVI
supplementation is
strongly recommended.
Potential risk for vitamin
B12 deficiency when
used long-term. Avoid
alcohol intake
Freemark and Bursey,
2001 (306); Atabeck
and Pirgon, 2008 (307);
Love-Osborne et al.,
2008 (308); Wilson
et al., 2010 (309);
Yanovski et al., 2011
(310); Kendall et al.,
2013 (311)
Octreotide (for
hypothalamic
obesity)a
This drug is not FDA
approved for obesity
Cholelithiasis (can be
prevented by
concurrent ursodiol),
diarrhea, edema,
abdominal cramps,
nausea, bloating,
reduction in T4
concentrations,
decreased GH but
normal IGF-I
Monitor fasting glucose,
FT4, HbA1c. Useful only
for hypothalamic
obesity. Ursodiol
coadministration is
strongly recommended
Gambineri et al., 2005
(312); Haqq et al., 2003
(313); Lustig et al.,
2001 (314); Lustig
et al., 1999 (315);
Lustig et al., 2006 (316)
(Continued)
740
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 bariatric surgery (368, 370). Most guidelines now in-
clude obesity-related psychological distress an in-
dication for bariatric surgery if the adolescent’s BMI
is .40 kg/m2 (363, 370).
A psychologist must assess the bariatric surgery candi-
date to determine the severity of psychological impairment
as well as ability to comply with the requirements for
successful outcome. It is essential that all potential candi-
dates have a stable home environment with good family
support and the ability to carry out the necessary post-
operative behaviors—adherence to dietary guidelines (in-
cluding macronutrient administration) and physical activity
recommendations. Adolescents who are unable to give
assent; who have untreated or unstable psychiatric issues
other than depression; who are substance abusers; or who
are pregnant, planning pregnancy, or breastfeeding are not
good candidates for bariatric surgery (370). All candidates
for bariatric surgery should agree to psychological evalu-
ation before surgery and in the perioperative period (371).
Surgery can be malabsorptive, restrictive, or combina-
tion procedures. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding
(LAGB) (83) is a purely restrictive procedure that isolates
the upper stomach by placing an adjustable silicone ring
around the entrance to the stomach [Fig. 3(A)] (223). The
LAGB procedure has high reoperation and long-term
complication rates, which increase with time and thus it
is rarely used anymore (373–375).
Malabsorptive procedures decrease intestinal mucosal
function by rearranging the anatomy of the intestine,
resulting in malabsorption of nutrients. RYGB is a
combination procedure in which the surgeon creates a
small stomach pouch and the remainder of the stomach is
bypassed. The surgeon inserts a segment of the jejunum in
the small gastric pouch, which connects to the proximal
portion of the jejunum that drains the bypassed portion of
the stomach and the duodenum [Fig. 3(C)]. The RYGB
has the restrictive properties of a partial gastrectomy
while causing malabsorption and “dumping syndrome”
by bypassing much of the stomach.
In vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG), a surgeon resects
;85% of the stomach, removing the fundus and greater
curvature, leaving a narrow gastric remnant [Fig. 3(F)].
There is no rearrangement of the anatomy, making it less
likely that patients having VSG will have malabsorption
of micronutrients or postoperative bowel obstruction, as
compared with RYGB (370). Because VSG has less
surgical complications than the RYGB, patients use it
with increasing frequency (373, 376). The Teen Longi-
tudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (Teen-LABS)
study (a prospective, multisite observational study at 5
academic centers) performed 52 RYGB and 1 VSG in
2008 vs 24 RYGB and 29 VSG in 2011 (377).
In addition to the anatomic effects of the procedures,
both RYGB and VSG decrease the orexigenic hormone
ghrelin (87, 378, 379) and increase the anorexogenic
incretins glucagon-like peptide 1 and peptide YY (380,
381), thus decreasing appetite and improving insulin
sensitivity (382).
Table 5.
Continued
Drug
Status
Common Side Effects
Monitoring and
Contraindications
Source
Recombinant human
GHa
This drug is not FDA
approved for obesity. It
is FDA approved in
Prader-Willi syndrome
to increase height
velocity
Edema, carpal tunnel
syndrome, death in
patients with
preexisting obstructive
sleep apnea
GH should be used only
after screening to rule
out obstructive sleep
apnea in patients with
Prader-Willi syndrome.
Clinicians must closely
monitor pulmonary
function, adrenal
function, glucose,
HbA1c
Shadid and Jensen, 2003
(317)
Note: All agents are contraindicated in pregnancy. See full prescribing information for all adverse effects, cautions, and contraindications. Pharma-
cotherapy is not usually considered if the BMI is below the 95th percentile, but there are additional factors to consider. If we initiate pharmacotherapy early
in the course of obesity, we may prevent extreme weight gain and metabolic complications, but we may treat an excess of children and adolescents, raise
the rate of unwarranted side effects, and increase the costs to individuals and to society. Alternatively, if we begin medication late in the course of obesity,
we run the risk of runaway weight gain and long-term morbidity. One approach that reconciles these difficulties is to act aggressively with lifestyle
intervention in overweight and mildly obese patients to prevent extreme obesity and to consider pharmacotherapy when the risk of complications is high
or soon after complications emerge. The tipping point for pharmacotherapy could be if the family history is strongly positive for a major comorbidity.
Lifestyle intervention should precede pharmacotherapy and should be maintained during pharmacotherapy. Derived from August et al. (86).
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; FT4, (plasma) free thyroxine; HR, heart rate; IV, intravenous; MAOI, monoamine oxidase
inhibitor; MVI, multivitamins; SNRI, selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; SSRI, selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors; T4, thyroxine.
aThe use for obesity treatment in children and adolescents ,16 y of age of these non–FDA-approved agents should be restricted to large, well-controlled
studies.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
741
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Adolescents having VSG performed between 2008 and
2011 had 61.3% excess weight loss at 1 year (n = 41) and
62.3% excess weight loss at 2 years (n = 8) (383). The
largest pediatric study to date found a similar BMI re-
duction with VSG (37%) (384) as with RYGB (35% to
37%) (385) at 1 year following surgery. This is consistent
with the results of the Adolescent Morbid Obesity Study
(376), a Swedish study of 81 adolescents with a mean
BMI decrease from 45.5 to 29.7 kg/m2 2 years following
RYGB (367). Three-year data from the Teen-LABS study
found that the mean BMI decreased overall from 53 to
38 kg/m2 (a decrease of 27%) with a 28% BMI decrease
in those receiving RYGB (n = 161) and a 26% decrease in
the teens who had VSG (n = 67) (369).
Regardless of procedure, the percentage of weight loss
is independent of initial BMI, so those who are extremely
obese will still be obese following surgery (385). Even
when obesity persists, most comorbidities associated with
obesity improve markedly following the surgery. A study
of 22 adolescents who were extremely obese showed
positive effects of RYGB on glucose homeostasis pa-
rameters with 38% decline in BMI (61 to 39 kg/m2) 1 year
after surgery (386). Positive effects of bariatric surgery
have included the reversal of T2DM (387), improvements
in glucose homeostasis in nondiabetics (379), improved
insulin sensitivity and secretion (388), resolution of sleep
apnea (389), improvements in nonalcoholic steatohe-
patitis (381), improvements in severe arthropathy (371),
and improvements in cardiovascular risk factors [dysli-
pidemia, hypertension, and inflammation (390) and in-
creased adiponeptin and decreased IL-1, IL-8, CRP, and
TNF-a (391)], as well as decreased left ventricular mass
index, improvements in left ventricular hypertrophy,
improvements in diastolic function, and improved rate-
pressure product, all of which suggest decreased cardiac
workload (392).
The Teen-LABS study indicated that 39% of enrolled
patients had more than 4 major comorbid conditions at
baseline (376). Three-year follow-up of the patients en-
rolled in Teen-LABS found a 95% remission of T2DM
(19 of 20 teens who had diabetes at the time of surgery),
76% remission of prediabetes (13 of 17 patients), 74%
remission of hypertension (56 of 76 with initial high
blood pressure), and a 66% normalization of dyslipi-
demia (84 of 128 patients) (369).
The Teen-LABS study assessed comorbid conditions
and surgical complications in the perioperative period in
242 adolescents during the first month following surgery
Figure 3. Bariatric surgical procedures. (A) LAGB, (B) vertical banded gastroplasty, (C) RYGB, (D) biliopancreatic diversion, (E) biliopancreatic
diversion with duodenal switch, (F) VSG, (G) ileal interposition with sleeve gastrectomy, and (H) Santoro III. (A), (C), and (F) are applicable to
section 4 (Bariatric Surgery). [Reproduced from Nandagopal R et al. (372), with permission.]
742
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 (377). There were no procedure-related deaths. Sixty-six
percent had laparoscopic RYGB, 28% had VSG, and 6%
had LAGB. Major complications occurring within the
30 days following surgery (gastrointestinal leaks, suicidal
ideation, anticoagulation for pulmonary embolus) oc-
curred in 7 patients (0.4%), and minor complications
occurred in 27 patients (11.2%; 2.5% of patients un-
dergoing RYGB, 3.0% VSG, and 7.1% AGB) (377). The
most common complications with both RYGB and VSG
were abdominal pain/diarrhea/nausea/dehydration fol-
lowed by stricture with RYGB and wound infection with
VSG (373). Nineteen of 242 patients had major com-
plications within 30 days of surgery (9.3% with RYGB,
4.5% following VSG, and 7.1% with AGB). Late com-
plications occurred in 10% to 15% of patients and in-
cluded hernias at incision sites, cholelithiasis, small bowel
obstruction, stomal stenosis, protein calorie malnutri-
tion, vitamin and mineral deficiencies, and weight regain
(376, 377, 393, 394). The Adolescent Morbid Obesity
Surgery Study in Sweden had a 33% adverse event rate,
with 15% (n = 12) requiring reoperation, 5 for internal
hernias, 5 for cholecystectomy, 1 for adhesions, and 1 for
pain without surgical findings (364). Seven percent had
psychological sequelae, 2 with suicide attempts from
medication overdose, 1 with self-destructive behavior
and suicidal ideation, and 3 with depression and anxiety.
All had psychological problems before surgery. Five
patients had excessive use of addictive drugs (none of
these patients disclosed the fact that they had preexisting
addictions at the time of presurgery assessment) (367).
Although most patients have improvement in QOL, self-
esteem, anxiety, and depressive symptoms (365), these
improvements were not universally maintained at 2 years
following surgery (368). Suicidal ideation has been re-
ported, possibly related to unrealistic expectations that
their life would be completely different following surgery
or to continued poor self-image with weight regain (367).
The most recent Teen-LABS study, evaluating 242 ado-
lescents at 3 years after RYGB or VSG, found the mean
QOL improved from 63 to 83 based on the total score
from the Impact of Weight on Quality of Life–Kids
survey (369).
As these procedures all have potential adverse events,
it is important to have life-long monitoring for compli-
cations. Adherence to prescribed nutritional guidelines
is essential for all weight-loss surgery patients post-
operatively because low levels of minerals and vitamins
can occur due to restricted nutrient intake, decreased
gastric acid production, decreased production of intrinsic
factor and digestive enzymes, or food intolerance (es-
pecially following the dumping syndrome with RYGB)
(121, 395). Iron deficiency is the most common mineral
deficiency, as RYGB not only causes malabsorption but
also has low gastric acid production, further impairing
iron absorption (121, 370). Decreased bone minerali-
zation is common, as RYGB decreases cholecalciferol
absorption by 25% and calcium and phosphorous
concentrations may be low, resulting in significant bone
density loss (396). Vitamin deficiencies are common,
including deficiencies of vitamins B12, B1, and folate, as
RYGB and VSG both reduce the surface of the distal
portion of the stomach, resulting in inadequate secretion
of intrinsic factor. Annual screening is recommended for
patients at risk for developing vitamin deficiencies. As
RYGB can result in copper, selenium, and zinc de-
ficiencies, it is recommended that all patients having
bariatric surgery receive supplementation with a multi-
vitamin with minerals (370). Patients need to be moni-
tored long term for changes in bone density, hair loss
secondary to zinc deficiency, and neurologic complica-
tions (363). It is recommended that they avoid alcohol
and decrease the intake of sugar and fructose-containing
drinks. Despite the importance of nutritional supple-
mentation following bariatric surgery, the Adolescent
Morbid Obesity Surgery study found a 67% non-
compliance rate with prescribed vitamin and mineral
intake at 2 years following surgery. Low ferritin levels
were found in 12% of patients before surgery and in 39%
of patients 2 years after surgery. Similarly, Vitamin B12
deficiency increased from 1.3% before surgery to 13%
after surgery (367). The 3-year follow-up data from the
Teen-LABS study found similar results. Low folate levels
were found in 3% of youths at baseline and in 8% at
3 years, low vitamin B12 concentrations increased
from ,1% to 8%, low 25 hydroxyvitamin D levels in-
creased from 37% to 43%, and the percentage of adoles-
cents with low ferritin levels increased from 5% at baseline
to 57% at 3 years (369).
These data emphasize the need for a multidisciplinary
team that should include a bariatric surgeon, a pediatric
obesity specialist to screen and manage the comorbidities, a
dietitian to plan the diet and assure adequate nutritional
intake, a mental health professional to perform the initial
psychological assessment and provide counseling during
the postoperative adjustment, a program coordinator to
facilitate compliance and follow-up, and a social worker
to provide resources to help overcome barriers to care
and run support groups (373). Long-term follow-up
is essential to maintain compliance with nutritional
recommendations.
We agree with the expert panels (226, 227) that suggest
bariatric surgery for adolescents with obesity-related
comorbid conditions that threaten the adolescent’s
health—a BMI of .35 kg/m2 and an extreme comor-
bidity or a BMI of .40 kg/m2 and less extreme
comorbidity.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
743
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Remarks
As adolescents appear to have a greater rate of diabetes
resolution and improvement in other obesity-related
comorbidities than do adults, it may be beneficial to
consider earlier surgery in obese teens, as they likely have
less vascular damage than do older individuals.
Values and preferences
The Task Force suggestion of bariatric surgery in
adolescents who are extremely obese with serious comor-
bidities places a high value on amelioration of life-
threatening complications and lower value on surgical
cost and perioperative complications.
Conclusion
Pediatric obesity remains an ongoing serious interna-
tional health concern affecting ;17% of US children
and adolescents, threatening their adult health and lon-
gevity. Pediatric obesity has its basis in genetic suscep-
tibilities influenced by a permissive environment starting
in utero and extending through childhood and adoles-
cence. Endocrine etiologies for obesity are rare and
usually are accompanied by attenuated growth pat-
terns. Pediatric comorbidities are common and long-term
health complications often result; screening for comor-
bidities of obesity should be applied in a hierarchal,
logical manner for early identification before more se-
rious complications result. Genetic screening for rare
syndromes is indicated only in the presence of specific
historical or physical features. The psychological toll of
pediatric obesity on the individual and family necessitates
screening for mental health issues and counseling as in-
dicated. The prevention of pediatric obesity by pro-
moting healthful diet, activity, and environment should
be a primary goal, as achieving effective, long-lasting
results with lifestyle modification once obesity occurs is
difficult. Although some behavioral and pharmacother-
apy studies report modest success, additional research
into accessible and effective methods for preventing and
treating pediatric obesity is needed. The use of weight loss
medications during childhood and adolescence should be
restricted to clinical trials. Increasing evidence demon-
strates the effectiveness of bariatric surgery in the most
seriously affected mature teenagers who have failed
lifestyle modification, but it requires experienced teams
with resources for long-term follow-up. Adolescents
undergoing lifestyle therapy, medication regimens, or
bariatric surgery for obesity will need cohesive planning
to help them effectively transition to adult care, such as
continued
necessary
monitoring,
support,
and
in-
tervention. Transition programs for obesity are an un-
charted area requiring further research for efficacy.
Despite a significant increase in research on pediatric
obesity since the initial publication of these guidelines 8
years ago, there remains an unmet need for further study
of the genetic and biological factors that increase the risk
of weight gain and influence the response to therapeutic
interventions. Also needed are more studies to better
understand the genetic and biological factors that cause
an obese individual to manifest 1 comorbidity vs another
or to be free of comorbidities. Continued investigation
into the most effective methods of preventing and treating
obesity and into methods for changing environmental
and economic factors that will lead to worldwide cultural
changes in diet and activity should be priorities. Partic-
ular attention to determining ways to effect systemic
changes in food environs and total daily mobility, as well
as methods for sustaining healthy BMI changes, is of
importance.
Summary of Changes
Since the publication of the original guidelines 8 years ago
there have been an additional 1778 references added to
PubMed concerning pediatric obesity. We have in-
corporated the most relevant data from these to update
and enhance the original text.
The epidemiology and definition section contains the
latest statistics on trends in childhood obesity, including
an apparent recent stabilization of the prevalence. New
definitions for extreme obesity are added with a notation
that this is the group that continues to rise. The preva-
lence in ethnic minorities as well a discussion of the
limitations of applying the BMI equation to all ethnic
groups are addressed.
The evaluation section provides the latest guidelines
for utilizing laboratory evaluation for diagnosis and
management of comorbidities of obesity. Special em-
phasis on avoiding endocrine evaluation in most
children as well as avoiding measurement of insulin
values is provided to prevent unnecessary laboratory
testing.
The genetics section has been extensively revised with
the latest genomic findings presented in table form and
provides guidelines on when to invoke genetic testing in
obese children, particularly those with early onset obe-
sity, family history of extreme obesity, and hyperphagia.
A combined flowchart demonstrating pathways of di-
agnosis from history and physical examination to genetic
testing is included.
Prevention of obesity is discussed with numerous new
studies that support most previous conclusions on life-
style modification. However, although breast-feeding is
beneficial for an infant in numerous ways and was
supported as a recommendation to prevent obesity in the
744
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 previous guidelines, recent data weaken support for
breast-feeding as a means of preventing obesity and
breast-feeding is now a suggestion.
The treatment section focuses on lifestyle changes as
the basis of all efforts to treat childhood obesity and
supports most previous recommendations and sugges-
tions. A chart demonstrating how much change in systolic
blood pressure and lipid values might be expected with a
decrease in 1 unit of BMI (kg/m2) or a decrease of 1 kg of
body weight is added.
A discussion of the significant toll childhood obesity
takes on the psychological function of a child follows.
Guidelines for evaluation of children and access to tools
to evaluate child and family function are provided. Re-
ferral to appropriate counseling programs is emphasized
when psychological problems or aberrant family dy-
namics are found.
Although noting that all but one of the pharmacological
agents targeting obesity are not approved until 16 years
of age, agents and their method of action are presented in
detail in a table. Lifestyle modification is emphasized as a
basis for any additional pharmacological therapy. Should
pharmacological therapy be invoked, even off label,
guidelines for use and for discontinuation in the case of
lack of efficacy are provided. When pharmacotherapy is
considered, only clinicians experienced in the use of the
agents should use them.
The increasing information on the benefits and risks of
bariatric surgery is presented along with a discussion of
the types of procedures that might be used. There is
emphasis upon contraindications in the use of bariatric
surgery in growing children and immature teenagers.
Emphasis that procedures should only be carried out in
those mature pubertal individuals with severe comor-
bidities of obesity in the presence of a motivated and
compliant patient and family and only in the hands of an
experienced surgeon with a dedicated and experienced
support team is provided.
The last section sets new goals for future research
into the thorny questions of the best method to de-
termine the etiology of childhood obesity and methods
to prevent and treat childhood obesity and its
comorbidities.
Financial Disclosures of the Task Force*
Dennis M. Styne (chair)—Financial and Business/
Organizational Interests: None declared, Significant
Financial Interest or Leadership Position: Teva,
Bristol Myers, Organovo (Ownership Intrests). Silva
A. Arslanian—Financial and Business/Organiza-
tional Interests: Aegerion (Consultant), Boehringer-
Ingelheim (Advisory Board & Data Safety Monitoring),
Bristol-Myers Squibb (Advisory Board), INTARCIA
Therapeutics, Inc. (Consultant), Lilly USA, LLC (Advi-
sory Board), Novo Nordisk (Advisory Board), Rambaxy
(Consultant), Sanofi-aventis (Advisory Board), Janssen
Pharmaceutical (Principal Investigator), NIH (Grantee
and Reviewer), Significant Financial Interest or Leader-
ship Position: Aegerion (Consultant), Boehringer-Ingelheim
(Advisory Board & Data Safety Monitoring), Bristol-
Myers Squibb (Advisory Board), INTARCIA Thera-
peutics, Inc. (Consultant), Lilly USA, LLC (Advisory
Board), Novo Nordisk (Advisory Board), Rambaxy
(Consultant), Sanofi-aventis (Advisory Board), Janssen
Pharmaceutical (Principal Investigator), NIH (Grantee
and Reviewer). Ellen L. Connor—Financial and Business/
Organizational Interests: Pediatric Endocrine Society
(Obesity Committee Chair), Significant Financial Interest
or Leadership Position: none declared. Ismaa Sadaf
Farooqi—Financial and Business/Organizational In-
terests: none declared, Significant Financial Interest or
Leadership Position: none declared. M. Hassan Murad,
**—Financial and Business/Organizational Interests: Mayo
Clinic, Evidence-based Practice Center, Significant Financial
Interest or Leadership Position: none declared. Janet H.
Silverstein—Financial and Business/Organizational
Interests: Pediatric Endocrine Society (Chair, MOC
Committee, Member SCAMPS Committee), Daichi
Sankyo (Clinical Trial [funds to UF]), Sanofi (Clinical
Trial [funds to UF]), Significant Financial Interest or
Leadership Position: Daichi Sankyo (Clinical Trial [funds
to UF]), Sanofi (Clinical Trial to UF). Jack A. Yanovski—
Financial and Business/Organizational Interests: Zafgen
Inc. (Principal Investigator [funds to NIH]), Signif-
icant Financial Interest or Leadership Position: None
declared.
* Financial, business, and organizational disclosures
of the Task Force cover the year prior to publication.
Disclosures prior to this time period are archived.
**Evidence-based reviews for this guideline were
prepared by the Mayo Clinic, Evidence-based Practice
Center under contract with the Endocrine Society.
Acknowledgments
We offer special thanks to the committee that developed the
original version of these guidelines (76). We also offer thanks to
Drs. David B. Allen and George A. Bray for careful review and
thoughtful suggestions and Eric Vohr, medical writer, for ex-
cellent editorial assistance.
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: The
Endocrine Society, 2055 L Street NW, Suite 600, Washington,
DC 20036. E-mail: publications@endocrine.org; Phone: 202-
971-3636.
Disclosure Summary: See Financial Disclosures.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
745
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 References
1. Daniels SR, Hassink SG; Committee on Nutrition. The role of the
pediatrician in primary prevention of obesity. Pediatrics. 2015;
136:e275–e292.
2. Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, Eccles M, Falck-Ytter Y, Flottorp S,
Guyatt GH, Harbour RT, Haugh MC, Henry D, Hill S, Jaeschke
R, Leng G, Liberati A, Magrini N, Mason J, Middleton P,
Mrukowicz J, O’Connell D, Oxman AD, Phillips B, Schunemann
HJ, Edejer T, Varonen H, Vist GE, Williams JW, Jr, Zaza S.
Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations.
BMJ. 2004;328:1490.
3. Swiglo BA, Murad MH, Schunemann HJ, Kunz R, Vigersky RA,
Guyatt GH, Montori VM. A case for clarity, consistency, and
helpfulness: state-of-the-art clinical practice guidelines in endo-
crinology using the grading of recommendations, assessment,
development, and evaluation system. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2008;93:666–673.
4. Guyatt GH, Schunemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, Akl EA. Guideline
panels should not GRADE good practice statements. J Clin
Epidemiol. 2015;68:597–600.
5. Rajjo T, Mohammed K, Alsawas M, Ahmed AT, Farah W, Asi N,
Almasri J, Prokop LJ, Murad MH. Treatment of pediatric obesity:
an umbrella systematic review. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;
102:763–775.
6. Rajjo T, Almasri J, Al Notal A, Farah W, Alsawas M, Ahmed AT,
Mohammed K, Kanwar A, Asi N, Wang Z, Prokopi J, Murad MH.
The association of weight loss and cardiometabolic outcomes in
obese children: systematic review and meta-regression. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102(3):758–762.
7. Trasande L, Chatterjee S. The impact of obesity on health service
utilization and costs in childhood. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;
17:1749–1754.
8. Kasman MHR, Werman A, Mack-Crane A, McKinnon R. An in-
depth look at the lifetime economic cost of obesity. Available at:
http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Events/2015/05/12-economic-
costs-of-obesity/0512-Obesity-Presentation-v6-RM.pdf?la=en.
Accessed 17 March 2016.
9. Krebs NF, Himes JH, Jacobson D, Nicklas TA, Guilday P, Styne D.
Assessment of child and adolescent overweight and obesity.
Pediatrics. 2007;120(Suppl 4):S193–S228.
10. Kelly AS, Barlow SE, Rao G, Inge TH, Hayman LL, Steinberger J,
Urbina EM, Ewing LJ, Daniels SR; American Heart Association
Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in the Young Com-
mittee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young,
Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism, and
Council on Clinical Cardiology. Severe obesity in children and
adolescents: identification, associated health risks, and treatment
approaches: a scientific statement from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2013;128:1689–1712.
11. Skinner AC, Perrin EM, Moss LA, Skelton JA. Cardiometabolic
risks and severity of obesity in children and young adults. N Engl J
Med. 2015;373:1307–1317.
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for
Health Statistics. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/.
Accessed 17 March 2016.
13. Whitlock EP, O’Conner EA, Williams SB, Beil TL, Lutz KW.
Effectiveness of Primary Care Interventions for Weight Man-
agement in Children and Adolescents: An Updated, Targeted
Systematic Review for the USPSTF. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2010.
14. Flegal KM, Ogden CL, Yanovski JA, Freedman DS, Shepherd JA,
Graubard BI, Borrud LG. High adiposity and high body mass
index-for-age in US children and adolescents overall and by race-
ethnic group. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91:1020–1026.
15. Deurenberg P, Bhaskaran K, Lian PL. Singaporean Chinese adolescents
have more subcutaneous adipose tissue than Dutch Caucasians of the
sameageandbodymassindex.AsiaPacJClinNutr.2003;12:261–265.
16. Graham RC, Burke A, Stettler N. Ethnic and sex differences in the
association between metabolic syndrome and suspected non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease in a nationally representative sample of
US adolescents. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2009;49:442–449.
17. Heymsfield SB, Peterson CM, Thomas DM, Heo M, Schuna JM,
Jr. Why are there race/ethnic differences in adult body mass index-
adiposity relationships? A quantitative critical review. Obes Rev.
2016;17:262–275.
18. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Flegal KM. Prevalence of
obesity among adults and youth: United States, 2011–2014.
NCHS Data Brief. 2015;(219):1–8.
19. Hedley AA, Ogden CL, Johnson CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Flegal
KM. Prevalence of overweight and obesity among US children, ad-
olescents, and adults, 1999–2002. JAMA. 2004;291:2847–2850.
20. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of
childhood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011–2012.
JAMA. 2014;311:806–814.
21. Ogden CL, Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Johnson CL. Prevalence and
trends in overweight among US children and adolescents,
1999–2000. JAMA. 2002;288:1728–1732.
22. Javed A, Jumean M, Murad MH, Okorodudu D, Kumar S, Somers
VK, Sochor O, Lopez-Jimenez F. Diagnostic performance of body
mass index to identify obesity as defined by body adiposity in
children and adolescents: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Pediatr Obes. 2015;10:234–244.
23. Whitaker RC, Wright JA, Pepe MS, Seidel KD, Dietz WH. Pre-
dicting obesity in young adulthood from childhood and parental
obesity. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:869–873.
24. Freedman DS, Kettel Khan L, Serdula MK, Srinivasan SR,
Berenson GS. BMI rebound, childhood height and obesity among
adults: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord.
2001;25:543–549.
25. Cunningham SA, Kramer MR, Narayan KM. Incidence of
childhood obesity in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:
403–411.
26. Reinehr T, Hinney A, de Sousa G, Austrup F, Hebebrand J, Andler
W. Definable somatic disorders in overweight children and ad-
olescents. J Pediatr. 2007; 150:618–622, 622.e1–5.
27. Rosenfield RL, Lipton RB, Drum ML. Thelarche, pubarche,
and menarche attainment in children with normal and elevated
body mass index. Pediatrics. 2009;123:84–88.
28. Mamun AA, Hayatbakhsh MR, O’Callaghan M, Williams G,
Najman J. Early overweight and pubertal maturation—pathways
of association with young adults’ overweight: a longitudinal study.
Int J Obes. 2009;33:14–20.
29. Johnson W, Stovitz SD, Choh AC, Czerwinski SA, Towne B, Demerath
EW. Patterns of linear growth and skeletal maturation from birth to 18
years of age in overweight young adults. Int J Obes. 2012;36:535–541.
30. Crocker MK, Stern EA, Sedaka NM, Shomaker LB, Brady SM, Ali
AH, Shawker TH, Hubbard VS, Yanovski JA. Sexual di-
morphisms in the associations of BMI and body fat with indices of
pubertal development in girls and boys. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2014;99:E1519–E1529.
31. Wagner IV, Sabin MA, Pfaffle RW, Hiemisch A, Sergeyev E,
Korner A, Kiess W. Effects of obesity on human sexual devel-
opment. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2012;8:246–254.
32. Han JC, Lawlor DA, Kimm SY. Childhood obesity. Lancet. 2010;
375:1737–1748.
33. Steele CA, Cuthbertson DJ, MacFarlane IA, Javadpour M, Das KS,
Gilkes C, Wilding JP, Daousi C. Hypothalamic obesity: prevalence,
associations and longitudinal trends in weight in a specialist adult
neuroendocrine clinic. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;168:501–507.
34. Kelly A, Winer KK, Kalkwarf H, Oberfield SE, Lappe J, Gilsanz V,
Zemel BS. Age-based reference ranges for annual height velocity in
US children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:2104–2112.
35. Tanner JM, Davies PS. Clinical longitudinal standards for height
and height velocity for North American children. J Pediatr. 1985;
107:317–329.
746
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 36. Reinehr T, Wiegand S, Siegfried W, Keller KM, Widhalm K,
l’Allemand D, Zwiauer K, Holl RW. Comorbidities in overweight
children and adolescents: do we treat them effectively? Int J Obes.
2013;37:493–499.
37. Flechtner-Mors M, Thamm M, Wiegand S, Reinehr T, Schwab
KO, Kiess W, Widhalm K, Holl RW. Comorbidities related to BMI
category in children and adolescents: German/Austrian/Swiss
Obesity Register APV compared to the German KiGGS Study.
Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;77:19–26.
38. Welsh JA, Karpen S, Vos MB. Increasing prevalence of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease among United States adolescents,
1988–1994 to 2007–2010. J Pediatr. 2013;162:496–500.e1.
39. Huang JS, Barlow SE, Quiros-Tejeira RE, Scheimann A, Skelton J,
Suskind D, Tsai P, Uko V, Warolin JP, Xanthakos SA. Childhood
obesity for pediatric gastroenterologists. J Pediatr Gastroenterol
Nutr. 2013;56:99–109.
40. Alonso-Alvarez ML, Cordero-Guevara JA, Teran-Santos J,
Gonzalez-Martinez M, Jurado-Luque MJ, Corral-Penafiel J,
Duran-Cantolla J, Kheirandish-Gozal L, Gozal D. Obstructive
sleep apnea in obese community-dwelling children: the NANOS
study. Sleep. 2014;37:943–949.
41. McGill HC, Jr, McMahan CA, Herderick EE, Zieske AW,
Malcom GT, Tracy RE, Strong JP. Obesity accelerates the pro-
gression of coronary atherosclerosis in young men. Circulation.
2002;105:2712–2718.
42. Christensen SB, Black MH, Smith N, Martinez MM, Jacobsen SJ,
Porter AH, Koebnick C. Prevalence of polycystic ovary syndrome
in adolescents. Fertil Steril. 2013;100:470–477.
43. Eriksson JG, Kajantie E, Lampl M, Osmond C. Trajectories of
body mass index amongst children who develop type 2 diabetes as
adults. J Intern Med. 2015;278:219–226.
44. Bibbins-Domingo K, Coxson P, Pletcher MJ, Lightwood J,
Goldman L. Adolescent overweight and future adult coronary
heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2371–2379.
45. Tirosh A, Shai I, Afek A, Dubnov-Raz G, Ayalon N, Gordon B,
Derazne E, Tzur D, Shamis A, Vinker S, Rudich A. Adolescent
BMI trajectory and risk of diabetes versus coronary disease.
N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1315–1325.
46. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Berenson GS, Venn A, Burns TL,
Sabin MA, Srinivasan SR, Daniels SR, Davis PH, Chen W, Sun C,
Cheung M, Viikari JS, Dwyer T, Raitakari OT. Childhood adi-
posity, adult adiposity, and cardiovascular risk factors. N Engl J
Med. 2011;365:1876–1885.
47. Franks PW, Hanson RL, Knowler WC, Sievers ML, Bennett PH,
Looker HC. Childhood obesity, other cardiovascular risk factors,
and premature death. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:485–493.
48. Wise MS, Nichols CD, Grigg-Damberger MM, Marcus CL,
Witmans MB, Kirk VG, D’Andrea LA, Hoban TF. Executive
summary of respiratory indications for polysomnography in
children: an evidence-based review. Sleep. 2011;34:389–398.
49. Taylor ED, Theim KR, Mirch MC, Ghorbani S, Tanofsky-Kraff
M, Adler-Wailes DC, Brady S, Reynolds JC, Calis KA, Yanovski
JA. Orthopedic complications of overweight in children and ad-
olescents. Pediatrics. 2006;117:2167–2174.
50. BeLue R, Francis LA, Colaco B. Mental health problems and
overweight in a nationally representative sample of adolescents:
effects of race and ethnicity. Pediatrics. 2009;123:697–702.
51. Zametkin AJ, Zoon CK, Klein HW, Munson S. Psychiatric aspects
of child and adolescent obesity: a review of the past 10 years. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004;43:134–150.
52. Bak M, Fransen A, Janssen J, van Os J, Drukker M. Almost all
antipsychotics result in weight gain: a meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2014;9:e94112.
53. Musil R, Obermeier M, Russ P, Hamerle M. Weight gain and anti-
psychotics: a drug safety review. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2015;14:73–96.
54. Caulfield LE. Methodological challenges in performing targeting:
assessing dietary risk for WIC participation and education. J Nutr.
2005;135:879–881.
55. Zimmet P, Alberti KG, Kaufman F, Tajima N, Silink M, Arslanian
S, Wong G, Bennett P, Shaw J, Caprio S. The metabolic syndrome
in children and adolescents—an IDF consensus report. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2007;8:299–306.
56. Lee S, Bacha F, Arslanian SA. Waist circumference, blood pres-
sure, and lipid components of the metabolic syndrome. J Pediatr.
2006;149:809–816.
57. Daniels SR. Should pediatricians be measuring waist circumfer-
ence? J Pediatr. 2006;149:A1.
58. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents, National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines
for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and
Adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics. 2011;128(Suppl 5):
S213–S256.
59. American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and classification of
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(Suppl 1):S81–S90.
60. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes—2014. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(Suppl 1):S14–S80.
61. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Bohm
M, Christiaens T, Cifkova R, De Backer G, Dominiczak A,
Galderisi M, Grobbee DE, Jaarsma T, Kirchhof P, Kjeldsen SE,
Laurent S, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE,
Sirnes PA, Sleight P, Viigimaa M, Waeber B, Zannad F. 2013 ESH/
ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the
Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the
European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 2013;31:1281–1357.
62. Schwimmer JB, Dunn W, Norman GJ, Pardee PE, Middleton MS,
Kerkar N, Sirlin CB. SAFETY study: alanine aminotransferase
cutoff values are set too high for reliable detection of pediatric
chronic liver disease. Gastroenterology. 2010;138:1357–1364.
e1–2.
63. Legro RS, Arslanian SA, Ehrmann DA, Hoeger KM, Murad MH,
Pasquali R, Welt CK. Diagnosis and treatment of polycystic ovary
syndrome: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:4565–4592.
64. Rosner W, Auchus RJ, Azziz R, Sluss PM, Raff H. Position
statement: utility, limitations, and pitfalls in measuring testos-
terone: an Endocrine Society position statement. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2007;92:405–413.
65. International Expert Committee. International Expert Committee
report on the role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis of diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2009;32:1327–1334.
66. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes—2010. Available at: http://care.diabetesjournals.org/
content/33/Supplement_1/S4.full. Accessed 17 March 2016.
67. Lee JM, Gebremariam A, Wu EL, LaRose J, Gurney JG. Evalu-
ation of nonfasting tests to screen for childhood and adolescent
dysglycemia. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:2597–2602.
68. Nowicka P, Santoro N, Liu H, Lartaud D, Shaw MM, Goldberg R,
Guandalini C, Savoye M, Rose P, Caprio S. Utility of hemoglobin
A1c for diagnosing prediabetes and diabetes in obese children and
adolescents. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:1306–1311.
69. Lee JM, Wu EL, Tarini B, Herman WH, Yoon E. Diagnosis of
diabetes using hemoglobin A1c: should recommendations in
adults be extrapolated to adolescents? J Pediatr. 2011; 158:
947–952.e1–3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.11.026
70. Dagogo-Jack S. Pitfalls in the use of HbA1c as a diagnostic test: the
ethnic conundrum. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010;6:589–593.
71. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes—2014. Available at: http://care.diabetesjournals.org/
content/37/Supplement_1/S5.full. Accessed 17 March 2016.
72. Wu EL, Kazzi NG, Lee JM. Cost-effectiveness of screening
strategies for identifying pediatric diabetes mellitus and dysgly-
cemia. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:32–39.
73. Molleston JP, Schwimmer JB, Yates KP, Murray KF, Cummings
OW, Lavine JE, Brunt EM, Scheimann AO, Unalp-Arida A.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
747
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Histological abnormalities in children with nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease and normal or mildly elevated alanine aminotrans-
ferase levels. J Pediatr. 2014;164:707–713.e3.
74. George L, Bacha F, Lee S, Tfayli H, Andreatta E, Arslanian S.
Surrogate estimates of insulin sensitivity in obese youth along the
spectrum of glucose tolerance from normal to prediabetes to di-
abetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:2136–2145.
75. Levy-Marchal C, Arslanian S, Cutfield W, Sinaiko A, Druet C,
Marcovecchio ML, Chiarelli F. Insulin resistance in children:
consensus, perspective, and future directions. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2010;95:5189–5198.
76. Monzillo LU, Hamdy O. Evaluation of insulin sensitivity in clinical
practice and in research settings. Nutr Rev. 2003;61:397–412.
77. Hannon TS, Janosky J, Arslanian SA. Longitudinal study of
physiologic insulin resistance and metabolic changes of puberty.
Pediatr Res. 2006;60:759–763.
78. Ball GD, Huang TT, Gower BA, Cruz ML, Shaibi GQ, Wei-
gensberg MJ, Goran MI. Longitudinal changes in insulin sensi-
tivity, insulin secretion, and b-cell function during puberty.
J Pediatr. 2006;148:16–22.
79. Robbins DC, Andersen L, Bowsher R, Chance R, Dinesen B, Frank
B, Gingerich R, Goldstein D, Widemeyer HM, Haffner S, Hales
CN, Jarett L, Polonsky K, Porte D, Skyler J, Webb G, Gallagher K.
Report of the American Diabetes Association’s Task Force on
standardization of the insulin assay. Diabetes. 1996;45:242–256.
80. Arslanian SA, Saad R, Lewy V, Danadian K, Janosky J. Hyper-
insulinemia in African-American children: decreased insulin
clearance and increased insulin secretion and its relationship to
insulin sensitivity. Diabetes. 2002;51:3014–3019.
81. Gungor N, Bacha F, Saad R, Janosky J, Arslanian S. Youth type 2
diabetes: insulin resistance, b-cell failure, or both? Diabetes Care.
2005;28:638–644.
82. Bacha F, Lee S, Gungor N, Arslanian SA. From pre-diabetes to
type 2 diabetes in obese youth: pathophysiological characteristics
along the spectrum of glucose dysregulation. Diabetes Care. 2010;
33:2225–2231.
83. Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, Justice AE, Pers TH, Day FR,
Powell C, Vedantam S, Buchkovich ML, Yang J, Croteau-Chonka
DC, Esko T, Fall T, Ferreira T, Gustafsson S, Kutalik Z, Luan J,
Magi R, Randall JC, Winkler TW, Wood AR, Workalemahu T,
Faul JD, Smith JA, Hua Zhao J, Zhao W, Chen J, Fehrmann R,
Hedman AK, Karjalainen J, Schmidt EM, Absher D, Amin N,
Anderson D, Beekman M, Bolton JL, Bragg-Gresham JL, Buyske
S, Demirkan A, Deng G, Ehret GB, Feenstra B, Feitosa MF, Fischer
K, Goel A, Gong J, Jackson AU, Kanoni S, Kleber ME,
Kristiansson K, Lim U, Lotay V, Mangino M, Mateo Leach I,
Medina-Gomez C, Medland SE, Nalls MA, Palmer CD, Pasko D,
Pechlivanis S, Peters MJ, Prokopenko I, Shungin D, Stancakova A,
Strawbridge RJ, Ju Sung Y, Tanaka T, Teumer A, Trompet S, van
der Laan SW, van Setten J, Van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wang Z,
Yengo L, Zhang W, Isaacs A, Albrecht E, Arnlov J, Arscott GM,
Attwood AP, Bandinelli S, Barrett A, Bas IN, Bellis C, Bennett AJ,
Berne C, Blagieva R, Bluher M, Bohringer S, Bonnycastle LL,
Bottcher Y, Boyd HA, Bruinenberg M, Caspersen IH, Ida Chen
YD, Clarke R, Daw EW, de Craen AJ, Delgado G, Dimitriou M,
Doney AS, Eklund N, Estrada K, Eury E, Folkersen L, Fraser RM,
Garcia ME, Geller F, Giedraitis V, Gigante B, Go AS, Golay A,
Goodall AH, Gordon SD, Gorski M, Grabe HJ, Grallert H,
Grammer TB, Grassler J, Gronberg H, Groves CJ, Gusto G,
Haessler J, Hall P, Haller T, Hallmans G, Hartman CA, Hassinen
M, Hayward C, Heard-Costa NL, Helmer Q, Hengstenberg C,
Holmen O, Hottenga JJ, James AL, Jeff JM, Johansson A, Jolley J,
Juliusdottir T, Kinnunen L, Koenig W, Koskenvuo M, Kratzer W,
Laitinen J, Lamina C, Leander K, Lee NR, Lichtner P, Lind L,
Lindstrom J, Sin Lo K, Lobbens S, Lorbeer R, Lu Y, Mach F,
Magnusson PK, Mahajan A, McArdle WL, McLachlan S, Menni
C, Merger S, Mihailov E, Milani L, Moayyeri A, Monda KL,
Morken MA, Mulas A, Muller G, Muller-Nurasyid M, Musk AW,
Nagaraja R, Nothen MM, Nolte IM, Pilz S, Rayner NW,
Renstrom F, Rettig R, Ried JS, Ripke S, Robertson NR, Rose LM,
Sanna S, Scharnagl H, Scholtens S, Schumacher FR, Scott WR,
Seufferlein T, Shi J, Vernon Smith A, Smolonska J, Stanton AV,
Steinthorsdottir V, Stirrups K, Stringham HM, Sundstrom J,
Swertz MA, Swift AJ, Syvanen AC, Tan ST, Tayo BO, Thorand B,
Thorleifsson G, Tyrer JP, Uh HW, Vandenput L, Verhulst FC,
Vermeulen SH, Verweij N, Vonk JM, Waite LL, Warren HR,
Waterworth D, Weedon MN, Wilkens LR, Willenborg C,
Wilsgaard T, Wojczynski MK, Wong A, Wright AF, Zhang Q;
LifeLines Cohort Study, Brennan EP, Choi M, Dastani Z, Drong
AW, Eriksson P, Franco-Cereceda A, Gadin JR, Gharavi AG,
Goddard ME, Handsaker RE, Huang J, Karpe F, Kathiresan S,
Keildson S, Kiryluk K, Kubo M, Lee JY, Liang L, Lifton RP, Ma B,
McCarroll SA, McKnight AJ, min JL, Moffatt MF, Montgomery
GW, Murabito JM, Nicholson G, Nyholt DR, Okada Y, Perry JR,
Dorajoo R, Reinmaa E, Salem RM, Sandholm N, Scott RA, Stolk
L, Takahashi A, Tanaka T, Van’t Hooft FM, Vinkhuyzen AA,
Westra HJ, Zheng W, Zondervan KT; ADIPOGen Consortium;
AGEN-BMI Working Group; CARDIOGRAMplusC4D Con-
sortium;
CKDGen
Consortium;
GLGC;
ICBP;
Magic
In-
vestigators; MuTHER Consortium; MIGen Consortium; PAGE
Consortium; ReproGen Consortium; GENIE Consortium; In-
ternational Endogene Consortium, Heath AC, Arveiler D, Bakker
SJ, Beilby J, Bergman RN, Blangero J, Bovet P, Campbell H,
Caulfield MJ, Cesana G, Chakravarti A, Chasman DI, Chines PS,
Collins FS, Crawford DC, Cupples LA, Cusi D, Danesh J, de Faire
U, den Ruijter HM, Dominiczak AF, Erbel R, Erdmann J, Eriksson
JG, Farrall M, Felix SB, Ferrannini E, Ferrieres J, Ford I, Forouhi
NG, Forrester T, Franco OH, Gansevoort RT, Gejman PV, Gieger
C, Gottesman O, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Hall AS, Harris TB,
Hattersley AT, Hicks AA, Hindorff LA, Hingorani AD, Hofman
A, Homuth G, Hovingh GK, Humphries SE, Hunt SC, Hypponen
E, Illig T, Jacobs KB, Jarvelin MR, Jockel KH, Johansen B,
Jousilahti P, Jukema JW, Jula AM, Kaprio J, Kastelein JJ,
Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi SM, Kiemeney LA, Knekt P, Kooner JS,
Kooperberg C, Kovacs P, Kraja AT, Kumari M, Kuusisto J, Lakka
TA, Langenberg C, Le Marchand L, Lehtimaki T, Lyssenko V,
Mannisto S, Marette A, Matise TC, McKenzie CA, McKnight B,
Moll FL, Morris AD, Morris AP, Murray JC, Nelis M, Ohlsson C,
Oldehinkel AJ, Ong KK, Madden PA, Pasterkamp G, Peden JF,
Peters A, Postma DS, Pramstaller PP, Price JF, Qi L, Raitakari OT,
Rankinen T, Rao DC, Rice TK, Ridker PM, Rioux JD, Ritchie
MD, Rudan I, Salomaa V, Samani NJ, Saramies J, Sarzynski MA,
Schunkert H, Schwarz PE, Sever P, Shuldiner AR, Sinisalo J, Stolk
RP, Strauch K, Tonjes A, Tregouet DA, Tremblay A, Tremoli E,
Virtamo J, Vohl MC, Volker U, Waeber G, Willemsen G,
Witteman JC, Zillikens MC, Adair LS, Amouyel P, Asselbergs FW,
Assimes TL, Bochud M, Boehm BO, Boerwinkle E, Bornstein SR,
Bottinger EP, Bouchard C, Cauchi S, Chambers JC, Chanock SJ,
Cooper RS, de Bakker PI, Dedoussis G, Ferrucci L, Franks PW,
Froguel P, Groop LC, Haiman CA, Hamsten A, Hui J, Hunter DJ,
Hveem K, Kaplan RC, Kivimaki M, Kuh D, Laakso M, Liu Y,
Martin NG, Marz W, Melbye M, Metspalu A, Moebus S, Munroe
PB, Njolstad I, Oostra BA, Palmer CN, Pedersen NL, Perola M,
Perusse L, Peters U, Power C, Quertermous T, Rauramaa R,
Rivadeneira F, Saaristo TE, Saleheen D, Sattar N, Schadt EE,
Schlessinger D, Slagboom PE, Snieder H, Spector TD,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stumvoll M, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden AG,
Uusitupa M, van der Harst P, Walker M, Wallaschofski H,
Wareham NJ, Watkins H, Weir DR, Wichmann HE, Wilson JF,
Zanen P, Borecki IB, Deloukas P, Fox CS, Heid IM, O’Connell JR,
Strachan DP, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Abecasis GR,
Franke L, Frayling TM, McCarthy MI, Visscher PM, Scherag A,
Willer CJ, Boehnke M, Mohlke KL, Lindgren CM, Beckmann JS,
Barroso I, North KE, Ingelsson E, Hirschhorn JN, Loos RJ,
Speliotes EK. Genetic studies of body mass index yield new in-
sights for obesity biology. Nature. 2015;518:197–206.
748
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 84. Wardle J, Carnell S, Haworth CM, Plomin R. Evidence for a
strong genetic influence on childhood adiposity despite the force of
the obesogenic environment. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87:398–404.
85. Farooqi IS, O’Rahilly S. Mutations in ligands and receptors of the
leptin-melanocortin pathway that lead to obesity. Nat Clin Pract
Endocrinol Metab. 2008;4:569–577.
86. August GP, Caprio S, Fennoy I, Freemark M, Kaufman FR, Lustig
RH, Silverstein JH, Speiser PW, Styne DM, Montori VM. Pre-
vention and treatment of pediatric obesity: an endocrine society
clinical practice guideline based on expert opinion. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:4576–4599.
87. Farooqi SOR, O’Rahilly S. Genetic obesity syndromes. In: Grant
S, ed. The Genetics of Obesity. New York, NY: Springer; 2104:
23–32.
88. Sahoo T, del Gaudio D, German JR, Shinawi M, Peters SU, Person
RE, Garnica A, Cheung SW, Beaudet AL. Prader-Willi phenotype
caused by paternal deficiency for the HBII-85 C/D box small
nucleolar RNA cluster. Nat Genet. 2008;40:719–721.
89. Cummings DE, Clement K, Purnell JQ, Vaisse C, Foster KE, Frayo
RS, Schwartz MW, Basdevant A, Weigle DS. Elevated plasma ghrelin
levels in Prader Willi syndrome. Nat Med. 2002;8:643–644.
90. Bakker NE, Kuppens RJ, Siemensma EP, Tummers-de Lind van
Wijngaarden RF, Festen DA, Bindels-de Heus GC, Bocca G,
Haring DA, Hoorweg-Nijman JJ, Houdijk EC, Jira PE, Lunshof L,
Odink RJ, Oostdijk W, Rotteveel J, Schroor EJ, Van Alfen AA,
Van Leeuwen M, Van Pinxteren-Nagler E, Van Wieringen H,
Vreuls RC, Zwaveling-Soonawala N, de Ridder MA, Hokken-
Koelega AC. Eight years of growth hormone treatment in children
with Prader-Willi syndrome: maintaining the positive effects.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:4013–4022.
91. Weinstein LS, Chen M, Liu J. Gsa mutations and imprinting
defects in human disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002;968:173–197.
92. Ramachandrappa S, Raimondo A, Cali AM, Keogh JM, Henning
E, Saeed S, Thompson A, Garg S, Bochukova EG, Brage S, Trowse
V, Wheeler E, Sullivan AE, Dattani M, Clayton PE, Datta V,
Bruning JB, Wareham NJ, O’Rahilly S, Peet DJ, Barroso I,
Whitelaw ML, Farooqi IS. Rare variants in single-minded 1
(SIM1) are associated with severe obesity. J Clin Invest. 2013;123:
3042–3050.
93. Bonnefond A, Raimondo A, Stutzmann F, Ghoussaini M, Ram-
achandrappa S, Bersten DC, Durand E, Vatin V, Balkau B,
Lantieri O, Raverdy V, Pattou F, Van Hul W, Van Gaal L, Peet DJ,
Weill J, Miller JL, Horber F, Goldstone AP, Driscoll DJ, Bruning
JB, Meyre D, Whitelaw ML, Froguel P. Loss-of-function muta-
tions in SIM1 contribute to obesity and Prader-Willi-like features.
J Clin Invest. 2013;123:3037–3041.
94. Yeo GS, Connie Hung CC, Rochford J, Keogh J, Gray J, Sivar-
amakrishnan S, O’Rahilly S, Farooqi IS. A de novo mutation
affecting human TrkB associated with severe obesity and de-
velopmental delay. Nat Neurosci. 2004;7:1187–1189.
95. Han JC, Liu QR, Jones M, Levinn RL, Menzie CM, Jefferson-
George KS, Adler-Wailes DC, Sanford EL, Lacbawan FL, Uhl GR,
Rennert OM, Yanovski JA. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and
obesity in the WAGR syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:
918–927.
96. Beales PL, Warner AM, Hitman GA, Thakker R, Flinter FA.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome: a molecular and phenotypic study of 18
families. J Med Genet. 1997;34:92–98.
97. Borman AD, Pearce LR, Mackay DS, Nagel-Wolfrum K,
Davidson AE, Henderson R, Garg S, Waseem NH, Webster AR,
Plagnol V, Wolfrum U, Farooqi IS, Moore AT. A homozygous
mutation in the TUB gene associated with retinal dystrophy and
obesity. Hum Mutat. 2014;35:289–293.
98. Bochukova EG, Huang N, Keogh J, Henning E, Purmann C,
Blaszczyk K, Saeed S, Hamilton-Shield J, Clayton-Smith J,
O’Rahilly S, Hurles ME, Farooqi IS. Large, rare chromosomal
deletions associated with severe early-onset obesity. Nature. 2010;
463:666–670.
99. Farooqi IS, Yeo GS, Keogh JM, Aminian S, Jebb SA, Butler G,
Cheetham T, O’Rahilly S. Dominant and recessive inheritance of
morbid obesity associated with melanocortin 4 receptor de-
ficiency. J Clin Invest. 2000;106:271–279.
100. Vaisse C, Clement K, Durand E, Hercberg S, Guy-Grand B,
Froguel P. Melanocortin-4 receptor mutations are a frequent and
heterogeneous cause of morbid obesity. J Clin Invest. 2000;106:
253–262.
101. Farooqi IS, Keogh JM, Yeo GS, Lank EJ, O’Rahilly S. Clinical
spectrum of obesity and mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor
gene. N Engl J Med. 2003; 348: 1085–1095.
102. Lee YS, Challis BG, Thompson DA, Yeo GS, Keogh JM, Madonna
ME, Wraight V, Sims M, Vatin V, Meyre D, Shield J, Burren C,
Ibrahim Z, Cheetham T, Swift P, Blackwood A, Hung CC,
Wareham NJ, Froguel P, Millhauser GL, O’Rahilly S, Farooqi IS.
A POMC variant implicates beta-melanocyte-stimulating hor-
mone in the control of human energy balance. Cell Metab. 2006;3:
135–140.
103. Asai M, Ramachandrappa S, Joachim M, Shen Y, Zhang R,
Nuthalapati N, Ramanathan V, Strochlic DE, Ferket P, Linhart K,
Ho C, Novoselova TV, Garg S, Ridderstrale M, Marcus C,
Hirschhorn JN, Keogh JM, O’Rahilly S, Chan LF, Clark AJ,
Farooqi IS, Majzoub JA. Loss of function of the melanocortin 2
receptor accessory protein 2 is associated with mammalian obe-
sity. Science. 2013;341:275–278.
104. Hatoum IJ, Stylopoulos N, Vanhoose AM, Boyd KL, Yin DP,
Ellacott KL, Ma LL, Blaszczyk K, Keogh JM, Cone RD, Farooqi
IS, Kaplan LM. Melanocortin-4 receptor signaling is required for
weight loss after gastric bypass surgery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2012;97:E1023–E1031.
105. Farooqi IS, Matarese G, Lord GM, Keogh JM, Lawrence E, Agwu
C, Sanna V, Jebb SA, Perna F, Fontana S, Lechler RI, DePaoli AM,
O’Rahilly S. Beneficial effects of leptin on obesity, T cell hypo-
responsiveness, and neuroendocrine/metabolic dysfunction of
human congenital leptin deficiency. J Clin Invest. 2002;110:
1093–1103.
106. Licinio J, Caglayan S, Ozata M, Yildiz BO, de Miranda PB,
O’Kirwan F, Whitby R, Liang L, Cohen P, Bhasin S, Krauss RM,
Veldhuis JD, Wagner AJ, DePaoli AM, McCann SM, Wong ML.
Phenotypic effects of leptin replacement on morbid obesity, di-
abetes mellitus, hypogonadism, and behavior in leptin-deficient
adults. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:4531–4536.
107. Wabitsch M, Funcke JB, Lennerz B, Kuhnle-Krahl U, Lahr G,
Debatin KM, Vatter P, Gierschik P, Moepps B, Fischer-Posovszky
P. Biologically inactive leptin and early-onset extreme obesity.
N Engl J Med. 2015;372:48–54.
108. Farooqi IS, Wangensteen T, Collins S, Kimber W, Matarese G,
Keogh JM, Lank E, Bottomley B, Lopez-Fernandez J, Ferraz-
Amaro I, Dattani MT, Ercan O, Myhre AG, Retterstol L, Stanhope
R, Edge JA, McKenzie S, Lessan N, Ghodsi M, De Rosa V, Perna F,
Fontana S, Barroso I, Undlien DE, O’Rahilly S. Clinical and mo-
lecular genetic spectrum of congenital deficiency of the leptin re-
ceptor. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:237–247.
109. Jackson RS, Creemers JW, Ohagi S, Raffin-Sanson ML, Sanders L,
Montague CT, Hutton JC, O’Rahilly S. Obesity and impaired
prohormone processing associated with mutations in the human
prohormone convertase 1 gene. Nat Genet. 1997;16:303–306.
110. World Health Organization. 2015 Guideline: sugars intake for
adults and children. Available at: http://www.who.int/nutrition/
publications/guidelines. Accessed 10 January 2016.
111. Kamath CC, Vickers KS, Ehrlich A, McGovern L, Johnson J,
Singhal V, Paulo R, Hettinger A, Erwin PJ, Montori VM. Clinical
review: behavioral interventions to prevent childhood obesity:
a systematic review and metaanalyses of randomized trials. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:4606–4615.
112. Ford CN, Ng SW, Popkin BM. Ten-year beverage intake trends
among US preschool children: rapid declines between 2003 and
2010 but stagnancy in recent years. Pediatr Obes. 2016;11:47–53.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
749
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 113. Kosova EC, Auinger P, Bremer AA. The relationships between
sugar-sweetened beverage intake and cardiometabolic markers in
young children. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113:219–227.
114. DeBoer MD, Scharf RJ, Demmer RT. Sugar-sweetened beverages
and weight gain in 2- to 5-year-old children. Pediatrics. 2013;132:
413–420.
115. Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Chomitz VR, Antonelli TA, Gortmaker
SL, Osganian SK, Ludwig DS. A randomized trial of sugar-
sweetened beverages and adolescent body weight. N Engl J
Med. 2012;367:1407–1416.
116. de Ruyter JC, Olthof MR, Kuijper LD, Katan MB. Effect of sugar-
sweetened beverages on body weight in children: design and
baseline characteristics of the Double-blind, Randomized IN-
tervention study in Kids. Contemp Clin Trials. 2012;33:247–257.
117. Cesa CC, Sbruzzi G, Ribeiro RA, Barbiero SM, de Oliveira Pet-
kowicz R, Eibel B, Machado NB, Marques R, Tortato G, dos
Santos TJ, Leiria C, Schaan BD, Pellanda LC. Physical activity and
cardiovascular risk factors in children: meta-analysis of ran-
domized clinical trials. Prev Med. 2014;69:54–62.
118. Vasconcellos F, Seabra A, Katzmarzyk PT, Kraemer-Aguiar LG,
Bouskela E, Farinatti P. Physical activity in overweight and obese
adolescents: systematic review of the effects on physical fitness
components and cardiovascular risk factors. Sports Med. 2014;
44:1139–1152.
119. Garcia-Hermoso A, Saavedra JM, Escalante Y, Sanchez-Lopez M,
Martinez-Vizcaino V. Endocrinology and adolescence: aerobic
exercise reduces insulin resistance markers in obese youth: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014;
171:R163–R171.
120. Fedewa MV, Gist NH, Evans EM, Dishman RK. Exercise and
insulin resistance in youth: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2014;133:
e163–e174.
121. Nogueira I, Hrovat K. Adolescent bariatric surgery: review on
nutrition considerations. Nutr Clin Pract. 2014;29:740–746.
122. Schranz N, Tomkinson G, Olds T. What is the effect of resistance
training on the strength, body composition and psychosocial
status of overweight and obese children and adolescents? A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2013;43:893–907.
123. Kelley GA, Kelley KS. Effects of exercise in the treatment of
overweight and obese children and adolescents: a systematic re-
view of meta-analyses. J Obes. 2013;2013:783103.
124. Davis CL, Tomporowski PD, McDowell JE, Austin BP, Miller PH,
Yanasak NE, Allison JD, Naglieri JA. Exercise improves executive
function and achievement and alters brain activation in over-
weight children: a randomized, controlled trial. Health Psychol.
2011;30:91–98.
125. Fatima Y, Doi SAR, Mamun AA. Longitudinal impact of sleep on
overweight and obesity in children and adolescents: a systematic
review and bias-adjusted meta-analysis. Obes Rev. 2015;16:
137–149.
126. Kjeldsen JS, Hjorth MF, Andersen R, Michaelsen KF, Tetens I,
Astrup A, Chaput JP, Sjodin A. Short sleep duration and large
variability in sleep duration are independently associated with
dietary risk factors for obesity in Danish school children. Int J
Obes. 2014;38:32–39.
127. Hjorth MF, Quist JS, Andersen R, Michaelsen KF, Tetens I,
Astrup A, Chaput JP, Sjodin A. Change in sleep duration and
proposed dietary risk factors for obesity in Danish school children.
Pediatr Obes. 2014;9:e156–e159.
128. Fisher A, McDonald L, van Jaarsveld CH, Llewellyn C, Fildes A,
Schrempft S, Wardle J. Sleep and energy intake in early childhood.
Int J Obes. 2014;38:926–929.
129. Hart CN, Carskadon MA, Considine RV, Fava JL, Lawton J,
Raynor HA, Jelalian E, Owens J, Wing R. Changes in children’s
sleep duration on food intake, weight, and leptin. Pediatrics. 2013;
132:e1473–e1480.
130. Klingenberg L, Christensen LB, Hjorth MF, Zangenberg S,
Chaput JP, Sjodin A, Molgaard C, Michaelsen KF. No relation
between sleep duration and adiposity indicators in 9-36 months
old children: the SKOT cohort. Pediatr Obes. 2013;8:e14–e18.
131. Hoppe C, Rothausen BW, Biltoft-Jensen A, Matthiessen J, Groth
MV, Chaput JP, Tetens I. Relationship between sleep duration and
dietary intake in 4- to 14-year-old Danish children. J Nutr Sci.
2013;2:e38.
132. Chaput JP, Lambert M, Gray-Donald K, McGrath JJ, Tremblay
MS, O’Loughlin J, Tremblay A. Short sleep duration is in-
dependently associated with overweight and obesity in Quebec
children. Can J Public Health. 2011;102:369–374.
133. Cappuccio FP, Taggart FM, Kandala NB, Currie A, Peile E,
Stranges S, Miller MA. Meta-analysis of short sleep duration and
obesity in children and adults. Sleep. 2008;31:619–626.
134. Steffen LM, Sinaiko AR, Zhou X, Moran A, Jacobs DR, Jr,
Korenfeld Y, Dengel DR, Chow LS, Steinberger J. Relation of
adiposity, television and screen time in offspring to their parents.
BMC Pediatr. 2013;13:133.
135. te Velde SJ, van Nassau F, Uijtdewilligen L, van Stralen MM,
Cardon G, De Craemer M, Manios Y, Brug J, Chinapaw MJ.
Energy balance-related behaviours associated with overweight
and obesity in preschool children: a systematic review of pro-
spective studies. Obes Rev. 2012;13(Suppl 1):56–74.
136. Epstein LH, Roemmich JN, Robinson JL, Paluch RA, Winiewicz
DD, Fuerch JH, Robinson TN. A randomized trial of the effects of
reducing television viewing and computer use on body mass index
in young children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2008;162:239–245.
137. Sung-Chan P, Sung YW, Zhao X, Brownson RC. Family-based
models for childhood-obesity intervention: a systematic review of
randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev. 2013;14:265–278.
138. van der Kruk JJ, Kortekaas F, Lucas C, Jager-Wittenaar H.
Obesity: a systematic review on parental involvement in long-term
European childhood weight control interventions with a nutri-
tional focus. Obes Rev. 2013;14:745–760.
139. Vald´
es J, Rodriguez-Artalejo F, Aguilar L, Jaen-Casquero MB,
Royo-Bordonada MA. Frequency of family meals and childhood
overweight: a systematic review. Pediatr Obes. 2013;8:e1–e13.
140. Small L, Lane H, Vaughan L, Melnyk B, McBurnett D. A sys-
tematic review of the evidence: the effects of portion size ma-
nipulation
with
children
and
portion
education/training
interventions on dietary intake with adults. Worldviews Evid
Based Nurs. 2013;10:69–81.
141. Halliday JA, Palma CL, Mellor D, Green J, Renzaho AM. The
relationship between family functioning and child and adolescent
overweight and obesity: a systematic review. Int J Obes (Lond).
2014;38:480–493.
142. Danese A, Tan M. Childhood maltreatment and obesity: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Mol Psychiatry. 2014;19:544–554.
143. Midei AJ, Matthews KA. Interpersonal violence in childhood as a
risk factor for obesity: a systematic review of the literature and
proposed pathways. Obes Rev. 2011;12:e159–e172.
144. V´
amosi M, Heitmann BL, Kyvik KO. The relation between an
adverse psychological and social environment in childhood and
the development of adult obesity: a systematic literature review.
Obes Rev. 2010;11:177–184.
145. Bleich SN, Segal J, Wu Y, Wilson R, Wang Y. Systematic review of
community-based childhood obesity prevention studies. Pediat-
rics. 2013;132:e201–e210.
146. Krishnaswami J, Martinson M, Wakimoto P, Anglemeyer A.
Community-engaged interventions on diet, activity, and weight
outcomes in U.S. schools: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med.
2012;43:81–91.
147. Waters E, de Silva-Sanigorski A, Hall BJ, Brown T, Campbell KJ,
Gao Y, Armstrong R, Prosser L, Summerbell CD. Interventions for
preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2011;Cd001871.
148. Yan J, Liu L, Zhu Y, Huang G, Wang PP. The association between
breastfeeding and childhood obesity: a meta-analysis. BMC Public
Health. 2014;14:1267.
750
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 149. Kramer MS, Matush L, Vanilovich I, Platt RW, Bogdanovich N,
Sevkovskaya Z, Dzikovich I, Shishko G, Collet JP, Martin RM,
Smith GD, Gillman MW, Chalmers B, Hodnett E, Shapiro S. A
randomized breast-feeding promotion intervention did not reduce
child obesity in Belarus. J Nutr. 2009;139:417S–421S.
150. Weng SF, Redsell SA, Swift JA, Yang M, Glazebrook CP. Sys-
tematic review and meta-analyses of risk factors for childhood
overweight identifiable during infancy. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97:
1019–1026.
151. Nelson MC, Gordon-Larsen P, Adair LS. Are adolescents who
were breast-fed less likely to be overweight? Analyses of sibling
pairs to reduce confounding. Epidemiology. 2005;16:247–253.
152. James J, Thomas P, Cavan D, Kerr D. Preventing childhood
obesity by reducing consumption of carbonated drinks: cluster
randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2004;328:1237.
153. Pereira MA, Ludwig DS. Dietary fiber and body-weight regula-
tion. Observations and mechanisms. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2001;48:969–980.
154. Kim SA, Moore LV, Galuska D, Wright AP, Harris D, Grummer-
Strawn LM, Merlo CL, Nihiser AJ, Rhodes DG. Vital signs: fruit
and vegetable intake among children—United States, 2003–2010.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:671–676.
155. Glickman D, Parker L, Sim L, Del Valle Cook H, Miller EA, eds.
Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention: Solving the Weight
of the Nation. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2012.
156. Williams C. Children’s dietary intakes. Available at: http://www.
cnpp.usda.gov/sites/default/files/dietary_guidelines_for_americans/
Resource1-Children.pdf. Accessed 10 January 2016.
157. Bray GA, Popkin BM. Calorie-sweetened beverages and fructose:
what have we learned 10 years later. Pediatr Obes. 2013;8:242–248.
158. Caprio S. Calories from soft drinks—do they matter? N Engl J
Med. 2012;367:1462–1463.
159. Dietz WH. Sugar-sweetened beverages, milk intake, and obesity in
children and adolescents. J Pediatr. 2006;148:152–154.
160. Council on School Health, Committee on Nutrition. Snacks,
sweetened beverages, added sugars, and schools. Pediatrics. 2015;
135(3):575–583.
161. Babey SH, Jones M, Yu H, Goldstein H. Bubbling over: soda
consumption and its link to obesity in California. Policy Brief
UCLA Cent Health Policy Res. 2009;(PB2009-5):1–8.
162. Shefferly A, Scharf RJ, DeBoer MD. Longitudinal evaluation of
100% fruit juice consumption on BMI status in 2–5-year-old
children. Pediatr Obes. 2016;11:221–227.
163. American Academy of Pediatrics. The use and misuse of fruit juice
in pediatrics. Pediatrics. 2001;107:1210–1213.
164. Reedy J, Krebs-Smith SM. Dietary sources of energy, solid fats,
and added sugars among children and adolescents in the United
States. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110:1477–1484.
165. Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Osganian SK, Chomitz VR, Ellenbogen
SJ, Ludwig DS. Effects of decreasing sugar-sweetened beverage
consumption on body weight in adolescents: a randomized, con-
trolled pilot study. Pediatrics. 2006;117:673–680.
166. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Availability of less
nutritious snack foods and beverages in secondary school-
s—selected States, 2002–2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2009;58:1102–1104.
167. de Ruyter JC, Olthof MR, Seidell JC, Katan MB. A trial of sugar-
free or sugar-sweetened beverages and body weight in children.
N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1397–1406.
168. Rouhani MH, Kelishadi R, Hashemipour M, Esmaillzadeh A,
Azadbakht L. Glycemic index, glycemic load and childhood
obesity: A systematic review. Adv Biomed Res. 2014;3:47.
169. Schwartz AE, Leardo M, Aneja S, Elbel B. Effect of a school-based
water intervention on child body mass index and obesity. JAMA
Pediatr. 2016;170:220–226.
170. Muckelbauer R, Barbosa CL, Mittag T, Burkhardt K,
Mikelaishvili N, Muller-Nordhorn J. Association between
water consumption and body weight outcomes in children and
adolescents: a systematic review. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22:
2462–2475.
171. World Health Organization. Using price policies to promote healthier
diets. Available at: http://www.euro.who.int/en/publications/abstracts/
using-price-policies-to-promote-healthier-diets. Accessed 8 March
2016.
172. Tremblay MS, LeBlanc AG, Kho ME, Saunders TJ, Larouche R,
Colley RC, Goldfield G, Connor Gorber S. Systematic review of
sedentary behaviour and health indicators in school-aged children
and youth. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2011;8:98.
173. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 2008
Physical activity guidelines for Americans summary. Available at:
http://health.gov/paguidelines/guidelines/summary.aspx. Accessed
17 March 2016.
174. D’Hondt E, Deforche B, Gentier I, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Vaeyens
R, Philippaerts R, Lenoir M. A longitudinal analysis of gross
motor coordination in overweight and obese children versus
normal-weight peers. Int J Obes. 2013;37:61–67.
175. Norman AC, Drinkard B, McDuffie JR, Ghorbani S, Yanoff LB,
Yanovski JA. Influence of excess adiposity on exercise fitness and
performance in overweight children and adolescents. Pediatrics.
2005;115:e690–e696.
176. Olds TS, Ferrar KE, Schranz NK, Maher CA. Obese adolescents
are less active than their normal-weight peers, but wherein lies the
difference? J Adolesc Health. 2011;48:189–195.
177. Zabinski MF, Saelens BE, Stein RI, Hayden-Wade HA, Wilfley
DE. Overweight children’s barriers to and support for physical
activity. Obes Res. 2003;11:238–246.
178. National Sleep Foundation. National Sleep Foundation recom-
mends new sleep durations. Available at: https://sleepfoundation.
org/media-center/press-release/national-sleep-foundation-
recommends-new-sleep-times. Accessed 8 March 2016.
179. Olafsdottir S, Berg C, Eiben G, Lanfer A, Reisch L, Ahrens W,
Kourides Y, Molnar D, Moreno LA, Siani A, Veidebaum T,
Lissner L. Young children’s screen activities, sweet drink con-
sumption and anthropometry: results from a prospective Euro-
pean study. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2014;68:223–228.
180. Boyland EJ, Whalen R. Food advertising to children and its effects
on diet: a review of recent prevalence and impact data. Pediatr
Diabetes. 2015;16:331–337.
181. American Academy of Pediatrics. Children, adolescents, and
television. Pediatrics. 2001;107:423–426.
182. McGovern L, Johnson JN, Paulo R, Hettinger A, Singhal V,
Kamath C, Erwin PJ, Montori VM. Clinical review: treatment of
pediatric obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-
domized trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:4600–4605.
183. Upton P, Taylor C, Erol R, Upton D. Family-based childhood
obesity interventions in the UK: a systematic review of published
studies. Community Pract. 2014;87:25–29.
184. Faith MS, Van Horn L, Appel LJ, Burke LE, Carson JA, Franch
HA, Jakicic JM, Kral TV, Odoms-Young A, Wansink B, Wylie-
Rosett J. Evaluating parents and adult caregivers as “agents of
change” for treating obese children: evidence for parent behavior
change strategies and research gaps: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;125:1186–1207.
185. HarrellJS,McMurray RG, GanskySA,BangdiwalaSI,Bradley CB.A
public health vs a risk-based intervention to improve cardiovascular
health in elementary school children: the Cardiovascular Health in
Children Study. Am J Public Health. 1999;89:1529–1535.
186. McMurray RG, Harrell JS, Bangdiwala SI, Bradley CB, Deng S,
Levine A. A school-based intervention can reduce body fat and
blood pressure in young adolescents. J Adolesc Health. 2002;31:
125–132.
187. Sallis JF, Conway TL, Prochaska JJ, McKenzie TL, Marshall SJ,
Brown M. The association of school environments with youth
physical activity. Am J Public Health. 2001;91:618–620.
188. Foster GD, Linder B, Baranowski T, Cooper DM, Goldberg L,
Harrell JS, Kaufman F, Marcus MD, Trevino RP, Hirst K. A
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
751
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 school-based intervention for diabetes risk reduction. N Engl J
Med. 2010;363:443–453.
189. Yin Z, Moore JB, Johnson MH, Barbeau P, Cavnar M, Thornburg
J, Gutin B. The Medical College of Georgia Fitkid project: the
relations between program attendance and changes in outcomes in
year 1. Int J Obes. 2005;29(Suppl 2):S40–S45.
190. Foltz JL, May AL, Belay B, Nihiser AJ, Dooyema CA, Blanck HM.
Population-level intervention strategies and examples for obesity
prevention in children. Annu Rev Nutr. 2012;32:391–415.
191. Pearce J, Taylor MA, Langley-Evans SC. Timing of the in-
troduction of complementary feeding and risk of childhood
obesity: a systematic review. Int J Obes. 2013;37:1295–1306.
192. Pearce J, Langley-Evans SC. The types of food introduced during
complementary feeding and risk of childhood obesity: a systematic
review. Int J Obes. 2013;37:477–485.
193. Kozyrskyj AL, Kalu R, Koleva PT, Bridgman SL. Fetal pro-
gramming of overweight through the microbiome: boys are dis-
proportionately affected. J Dev Orig Health Dis. 2016;7:25–34.
194. Audrey S, Batista-Ferrer H. Healthy urban environments for
children and young people: a systematic review of intervention
studies. Health Place. 2015;36:97–117.
195. Tucker CM, Butler A, Kaye LB, Nolan SE, Flenar DJ, Marsiske M,
Bragg M, Hoover E, Daly K. Impact of a culturally sensitive health
self-empowerment workshop series on health behaviors/lifestyles,
BMI, and blood pressure of culturally diverse overweight/obese
adults. Am J Lifestyle Med. 2014;8:122–132.
196. Li JS, Barnett TA, Goodman E, Wasserman RC, Kemper AR.
Approaches to the prevention and management of childhood
obesity: the role of social networks and the use of social media and
related electronic technologies: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;127:260–267.
197. Klein S, Sheard NF, Pi-Sunyer X, Daly A, Wylie-Rosett J, Kulkarni
K, Clark NG. Weight management through lifestyle modification
for the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes: rationale
and strategies: a statement of the American Diabetes Association,
the North American Association for the Study of Obesity, and the
American Society for Clinical Nutrition. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:
2067–2073.
198. Albright AL, Gregg EW. Preventing type 2 diabetes in commu-
nities across the U.S. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44:S346–S351.
199. Douketis JD, Macie C, Thabane L, Williamson DF. Systematic
review of long-term weight loss studies in obese adults: clinical
significance and applicability to clinical practice. Int J Obes. 2005;
29:1153–1167.
200. Harder-Lauridsen NM, Birk NM, Ried-Larsen M, Juul A,
Andersen LB, Pedersen BK, Krogh-Madsen R. A randomized
controlled trial on a multicomponent intervention for overweight
school-aged children—Copenhagen, Denmark. BMC Pediatr.
2014;14:273.
201. Weiss EC, Galuska DA, Kettel Khan L, Gillespie C, Serdula MK.
Weight regain in U.S. adults who experienced substantial weight
loss, 1999–2002. Am J Prev Med. 2007;33:34–40.
202. Thomas JG, Bond DS, Phelan S, Hill JO, Wing RR. Weight-loss
maintenance for 10 years in the National Weight Control Reg-
istry. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46:17–23.
203. Lloyd-Richardson EE, Jelalian E, Sato AF, Hart CN, Mehlenbeck
R, Wing RR. Two-year follow-up of an adolescent behavioral
weight control intervention. Pediatrics. 2012;130:e281–e288.
204. Oude Luttikhuis H, Baur L, Jansen H, Shrewsbury VA, O’Malley
C, Stolk RP, Summerbell CD. Interventions for treating obesity in
children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;Cd001872.
205. Wilfley DE, Stein RI, Saelens BE, Mockus DS, Matt GE,
Hayden-Wade HA, Welch RR, Schechtman KB, Thompson PA,
Epstein LH. Efficacy of maintenance treatment approaches for
childhood overweight: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298:1661–1673.
206. Rhodes ET, Ludwig DS. Childhood obesity as a chronic disease:
keeping the weight off. JAMA. 2007;298:1695–1696.
207. Wilfley DE, Tibbs TL, Van Buren DJ, Reach KP, Walker MS,
Epstein LH. Lifestyle interventions in the treatment of childhood
overweight: a meta-analytic review of randomized controlled
trials. Health Psychol. 2007;26:521–532.
208. Hoelscher DM, Kirk S, Ritchie L, Cunningham-Sabo L. Position
of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: interventions for the
prevention and treatment of pediatric overweight and obesity.
J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113:1375–1394.
209. Spear BA, Barlow SE, Ervin C, Ludwig DS, Saelens BE, Schetzina
KE, Taveras EM. Recommendations for treatment of child and
adolescent overweight and obesity. Pediatrics. 2007;120(Suppl 4):
S254–S288.
210. Freemark M. Pharmacotherapy of childhood obesity: an evidence-
based, conceptual approach. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:395–402.
211. Goldschmidt AB, Wilfley DE, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN, Epstein
LH. Indicated prevention of adult obesity: how much weight
change is necessary for normalization of weight status in children?
JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:21–26.
212. Epstein LH, Paluch RA, Roemmich JN, Beecher MD. Family-
based obesity treatment, then and now: twenty-five years of pe-
diatric obesity treatment. Health Psychol. 2007;26:381–391.
213. Goldschmidt AB, Stein RI, Saelens BE, Theim KR, Epstein LH,
Wilfley DE. Importance of early weight change in a pediatric
weight management trial. Pediatrics. 2011;128:e33–e39.
214. Arora M, Nazar GP, Gupta VK, Perry CL, Reddy KS, Stigler MH.
Association of breakfast intake with obesity, dietary and physical
activity behavior among urban school-aged adolescents in Delhi,
India: results of a cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2012;
12:881.
215. Grydeland M, Bergh IH, Bjelland M, Lien N, Andersen LF,
Ommundsen Y, Klepp KI, Anderssen SA. Correlates of weight
status among Norwegian 11-year-olds: the HEIA study. BMC
Public Health. 2012;12:1053.
216. Yanovski SZ, Yanovski JA. Naltrexone extended-release plus
bupropion extended-release for treatment of obesity. JAMA.
2015;313:1213–1214.
217. Wansink B, Painter JE, North J. Bottomless bowls: why visual cues
of portion size may influence intake. Obes Res. 2005;13:93–100.
218. Gow ML, Ho M, Burrows TL, Baur LA, Stewart L, Hutchesson
MJ, Cowell CT, Collins CE, Garnett SP. Impact of dietary
macronutrient distribution on BMI and cardiometabolic out-
comes in overweight and obese children and adolescents: a sys-
tematic review. Nutr Rev. 2014;72:453–470.
219. Schnohr P, O’Keefe JH, Marott JL, Lange P, Jensen GB. Dose of
jogging and long-term mortality: the Copenhagen City Heart
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:411–419.
220. Lee DC, Pate RR, Lavie CJ, Sui X, Church TS, Blair SN. Leisure-
time running reduces all-cause and cardiovascular mortality risk.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:472–481.
221. National Physical Activity Plan Alliance. The National Physical
Activity Plan. Available at: http://www.physicalactivityplan.org/
theplan/about.html. Accessed 17 March 2016.
222. Dentro KN, Beals K, Crouter SE, Eisenmann JC, McKenzie TL,
Pate RR, Saelens BE, Sisson SB, Spruijt-Metz D, Sothern MS,
Katzmarzyk PT. Results from the United States’ 2014 report card
on physical activity for children and youth. J Phys Act Health.
2014;11(Suppl 1):S105–S112.
223. Chriqui J, Resnick E, Chaloupka F. Bridging the Gap. School
district wellness policies: evaluating progress and potential for
improving children’s health five years after the federal man-
date. Volume 3. February 2013. Available at: http://www.
bridgingthegapresearch.org/_asset/13s2jm/WP_2013_report.pdf.
Accessed 17 March 2016.
224. Johnston LD, O’Malley PM, Terry-McElrath YM, Colabianchi N.
Bridging the Gap. School policies and practices to improve health and
prevent obesity: National secondary school survey results. Volume 3.
March 2013. Available at: http://www.bridgingthegapresearch.
org/_asset/gqq408/SS_2013_report.pdf. Accessed 17 March 2016.
752
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 225. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth risk behavior
surveillance—United States, 2011. Available at: http://www.cdc.
gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6104a1.htm. Accessed 17
March 2016.
226. Pate RR, Davis MG, Robinson TN, Stone EJ, McKenzie TL,
Young JC. Promoting physical activity in children and youth:
a leadership role for schools: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Ac-
tivity, and Metabolism (Physical Activity Committee) in collab-
oration with the Councils on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young
and Cardiovascular Nursing. Circulation. 2006;114:1214–1224.
227. Bucksch J, Inchley J, Hamrik Z, Finne E, Kolip P. Trends in
television time, non-gaming PC use and moderate-to-vigorous
physical activity among German adolescents 2002–2010. BMC
Public Health. 2014;14:351.
228. Veldhuis L, van Grieken A, Renders CM, HiraSing RA, Raat H.
Parenting style, the home environment, and screen time of 5-year-old
children; the “be active, eat right” study. PLoS One. 2014;9:e88486.
229. Schwartz MB, Gilstad-Hayden K, Henderson KE, Luedicke J,
Carroll-Scott A, Peters SM, McCaslin C, Ickovics JR. The re-
lationship between parental behaviors and children’s sugary drink
consumption is moderated by a television in the child’s bedroom.
Child Obes. 2015;11:560–568.
230. Rhee KE, Lumeng JC, Appugliese DP, Kaciroti N, Bradley RH.
Parenting styles and overweight status in first grade. Pediatrics.
2006;117:2047–2054.
231. Jordan AB, Hersey JC, McDivitt JA, Heitzler CD. Reducing
children’s television-viewing time: a qualitative study of parents
and their children. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e1303–e1310.
232. Hearst MO, Sherwood NE, Klein EG, Pasch KE, Lytle LA. Pa-
rental perceptions of their adolescent’s weight status: the ECHO
study. Am J Health Behav. 2011;35:248–255.
233. Huang JS, Becerra K, Oda T, Walker E, Xu R, Donohue M, Chen
I, Curbelo V, Breslow A. Parental ability to discriminate the weight
status of children: results of a survey. Pediatrics. 2007;120:
e112–e119.
234. Goodman E, Hinden BR, Khandelwal S. Accuracy of teen and
parental reports of obesity and body mass index. Pediatrics. 2000;
106:52–58.
235. Schwimmer JB, Burwinkle TM, Varni JW. Health-related quality
of life of severely obese children and adolescents. JAMA. 2003;
289:1813–1819.
236. Varni JW, Limbers CA, Burwinkle TM. Impaired health-related
quality of life in children and adolescents with chronic conditions:
a comparative analysis of 10 disease clusters and 33 disease
categories/severities utilizing the PedsQL 4.0 generic core scales.
Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2007;5:43.
237. Griffiths LJ, Parsons TJ, Hill AJ. Self-esteem and quality of life in
obese children and adolescents: a systematic review. Int J Pediatr
Obes. 2010;5:282–304.
238. Franklin J, Denyer G, Steinbeck KS, Caterson ID, Hill AJ. Obesity
and risk of low self-esteem: a statewide survey of Australian
children. Pediatrics. 2006;118:2481–2487.
239. Nowicka P, Hoglund P, Birgerstam P, Lissau I, Pietrobelli A,
Flodmark CE. Self-esteem in a clinical sample of morbidly obese
children and adolescents. Acta Paediatr. 2009;98:153–158.
240. Britz B, Siegfried W, Ziegler A, Lamertz C, Herpertz-Dahlmann
BM, Remschmidt H, Wittchen HU, Hebebrand J. Rates of psy-
chiatric disorders in a clinical study group of adolescents with
extreme obesity and in obese adolescents ascertained via a pop-
ulation based study. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2000;24:
1707–1714.
241. Vila G, Zipper E, Dabbas M, Bertrand C, Robert JJ, Ricour C,
Mouren-Simeoni MC. Mental disorders in obese children and
adolescents. Psychosom Med. 2004;66:387–394.
242. Erermis S, Cetin N, Tamar M, Bukusoglu N, Akdeniz F, Goksen
D. Is obesity a risk factor for psychopathology among adoles-
cents? Pediatr Int. 2004;46:296–301.
243. Braet C, Mervielde I, Vandereycken W. Psychological aspects of
childhood obesity: a controlled study in a clinical and nonclinical
sample. J Pediatr Psychol. 1997;22:59–71.
244. Koval JJ, Pederson LL, Zhang X, Mowery P, McKenna M. Can
young adult smoking status be predicted from concern about body
weight and self-reported BMI among adolescents? Results from a
ten-year cohort study. Nicotine Tob Res. 2008;10:1449–1455.
245. Gibson LY, Byrne SM, Davis EA, Blair E, Jacoby P, Zubrick SR.
The role of family and maternal factors in childhood obesity. Med
J Aust. 2007;186:591–595.
246. Gibson LY, Byrne SM, Blair E, Davis EA, Jacoby P, Zubrick SR.
Clustering of psychosocial symptoms in overweight children. Aust
N Z J Psychiatry. 2008;42:118–125.
247. Zeller MH, Modi AC. Predictors of health-related quality of life in
obese youth. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14:122–130.
248. Tiggemann M. Body dissatisfaction and adolescent self-esteem:
prospective findings. Body Image. 2005;2:129–135.
249. Fairburn CG, Harrison PJ. Eating disorders. Lancet. 2003;361:
407–416.
250. Olvera N, McCarley K, Matthews-Ewald MR, Fisher F, Jones
M, Flynn EG. Pathways for disordered eating behaviors in
minority girls: the role of adiposity, peer weight-related teasing,
and desire to be thinner. J Early Adolesc. 2015;October 2015:
1–20.
251. Eddy KT, Tanofsky-Kraff M, Thompson-Brenner H, Herzog DB,
Brown TA, Ludwig DS. Eating disorder pathology among over-
weight treatment-seeking youth: clinical correlates and cross-
sectional risk modeling. Behav Res Ther. 2007;45:2360–2371.
252. Van Vlierberghe L, Braet C, Goossens L, Mels S. Psychiatric
disorders and symptom severity in referred versus non-referred
overweight children and adolescents. Eur Child Adolesc Psychi-
atry. 2009;18:164–173.
253. Gray WN, Janicke DM, Ingerski LM, Silverstein JH. The impact
of peer victimization, parent distress and child depression on
barrier formation and physical activity in overweight youth. J Dev
Behav Pediatr. 2008;29:26–33.
254. Taylor CB, Bryson S, Celio Doyle AA, Luce KH, Cunning D,
Abascal LB, Rockwell R, Field AE, Striegel-Moore R, Winzelberg
AJ, Wilfley DE. The adverse effect of negative comments about
weight and shape from family and siblings on women at high risk
for eating disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:731–738.
255. Birch LL, Fisher JO, Davison KK. Learning to overeat: maternal
use of restrictive feeding practices promotes girls’ eating in the
absence of hunger. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78:215–220.
256. Rollins BY, Loken E, Savage JS, Birch LL. Effects of restriction on
children’s intake differ by child temperament, food reinforcement,
and parent’s chronic use of restriction. Appetite. 2014;73:31–39.
257. Isnard P, Quantin L, Cortese S, Falissard B, Musher-Eizenman D,
Guedeney A, Frelut ML, Mouren MC. Bulimic behaviours and
psychopathology in obese adolescents and in their parents. Int J
Pediatr Obes. 2010;5:474–482.
258. Zeller MH, Reiter-Purtill J, Ramey C. Negative peer perceptions
of obese children in the classroom environment. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2008;16:755–762.
259. Fox CL, Farrow CV. Global and physical self-esteem and body
dissatisfaction as mediators of the relationship between weight status
and being a victim of bullying. J Adolesc. 2009;32:1287–1301.
260. Pearce MJ, Boergers J, Prinstein MJ. Adolescent obesity, overt and
relational peer victimization, and romantic relationships. Obes
Res. 2002;10:386–393.
261. Pinhas-Hamiel O, Singer S, Pilpel N, Fradkin A, Modan D,
Reichman B. Health-related quality of life among children and
adolescents: associations with obesity. Int J Obes. 2006;30:
267–272.
262. Young-Hyman D, Tanofsky-Kraff M, Yanovski SZ, Keil M,
Cohen ML, Peyrot M, Yanovski JA. Psychological status and
weight-related distress in overweight or at-risk-for-overweight
children. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14:2249–2258.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
753
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 263. McClure AC, Tanski SE, Kingsbury J, Gerrard M, Sargent JD.
Characteristics associated with low self-esteem among US ado-
lescents. Acad Pediatr. 2010;10:238–244.e2.
264. Rojas A, Storch EA. Psychological complications of obesity.
Pediatr Ann. 2010;39:174–180.
265. Garry JP, Morrissey SL, Whetstone LM. Substance use and weight
loss tactics among middle school youth. Int J Eat Disord. 2003;33:
55–63.
266. Jellinek MM, J. Pediatric Symptom Checklist. 2015. Available at:
http://www.massgeneral.org/psychiatry/services/psc_home.aspx.
Accessed 13 January 2017.
267. Yanovski SZ, Yanovski JA. Long-term drug treatment for obesity:
A systematic and clinical review. JAMA. 2014;311:74–86.
268. Clements JN, Shealy KM. Liraglutide: an injectable option for the
management of obesity. Ann Pharmacother. 2015;49:938–944.
269. Viner RM, Hsia Y, Tomsic T, Wong IC. Efficacy and safety of
anti-obesity drugs in children and adolescents: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Obes Rev. 2010;11:593–602.
270. Peirson L, Fitzpatrick-Lewis D, Morrison K, Warren R, Usman Ali
M, Raina P. Treatment of overweight and obesity in children and
youth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ Open. 2015;
3:E35–E46.
271. Sherafat-Kazemzadeh R, Yanovski SZ, Yanovski JA. Pharma-
cotherapy for childhood obesity: present and future prospects. Int
J Obes. 2013;37:1–15.
272. Speiser PW, Rudolf MC, Anhalt H, Camacho-Hubner C, Chiarelli
F, Eliakim A, Freemark M, Gruters A, Hershkovitz E, Iughetti L,
Krude H, Latzer Y, Lustig RH, Pescovitz OH, Pinhas-Hamiel O,
Rogol AD, Shalitin S, Sultan C, Stein D, Vardi P, Werther GA,
Zadik Z, Zuckerman-Levin N, Hochberg Z. Obesity consensus
working G. Childhood obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;
90:1871–1887.
273. Centre for Public Health Excellence at NICE (UK); National
Collaborating Centre for Primary Care (UK). Obesity: The Pre-
vention, Identification, Assessment and Management of Over-
weight and Obesity in Adults and Children. London, England:
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (UK); 2006.
274. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents. Expert Panel on
Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Re-
duction in Children and Adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics.
2011;128(suppl 5):S213–S256.
275. Berkowitz RI, Wadden TA, Tershakovec AM, Cronquist JL. Be-
havior therapy and sibutramine for the treatment of adolescent
obesity: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;289:1805–1812.
276. Rauh JL, Lipp R. Chlorphentermine as an anorexigenic agent in
adolescent obesity. Report of its efficacy in a double-blind study of
30 teen-agers. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1968;7:138–140.
277. Lorber J. Obesity in childhood. A controlled trial of anorectic
drugs. Arch Dis Child. 1966;41:309–312.
278. von Spranger J. Phentermine resinate in obesity. Clinical trial of
Mirapront in adipose children. Munch Med Wochenschr. 1965;
107:1833–1834.
279. Andelman MB, Jones C, Nathan S. Treatment of obesity in un-
derprivileged adolescents. Comparison of diethylpropion hydro-
chloride with placebo in a double-blind study. Clin Pediatr (Phila).
1967;6:327–330.
280. Golebiowska M, Chlebna-Sokol D, Kobierska I, Konopinska A,
Malek M, Mastalska A, Zwaigzne-Raczynska J. Clinical evalu-
ation of Teronac (mazindol) in the treatment of obesity in children.
Part II. Anorectic properties and side effects (author’s transl).
Przegl Lek. 1981;38:355–358.
281. Komorowski JM, Zwaigzne-Raczynska J, Owczarczyk I, Gole-
biowska M, Zarzycki J. Effect of mazindol (teronac) on various
hormonal indicators in children with simple obesity. Pediatr Pol.
1982;57:241–246.
282. McElroy SL, Hudson JI, Mitchell JE, Wilfley D, Ferreira-Cornwell
MC, Gao J, Wang J, Whitaker T, Jonas J, Gasior M. Efficacy and
safety of lisdexamfetamine for treatment of adults with moderate
to severe binge-eating disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2015;73:235–246.
283. McElroy SL, Guerdjikova AI, Mori N, Keck PE, Jr. Psycho-
pharmacologic treatment of eating disorders: emerging findings.
Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2015;17:35.
284. Godoy-Matos A, Carraro L, Vieira A, Oliveira J, Guedes EP,
Mattos L, Rangel C, Moreira RO, Coutinho W, Appolinario JC.
Treatment of obese adolescents with sibutramine: a randomized,
double-blind, controlled study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;
90:1460–1465.
285. Berkowitz RI, Fujioka K, Daniels SR, Hoppin AG, Owen S, Perry
AC, Sothern MS, Renz CL, Pirner MA, Walch JK, Jasinsky O,
Hewkin AC, Blakesley VA. Effects of sibutramine treatment in
obese adolescents: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2006;145:
81–90.
286. Smith SR, Weissman NJ, Anderson CM, Sanchez M, Chuang E,
Stubbe S, Bays H, Shanahan WR. Multicenter, placebo-controlled
trial of lorcaserin for weight management. N Engl J Med. 2010;
363:245–256.
287. Fidler MC, Sanchez M, Raether B, Weissman NJ, Smith SR,
Shanahan WR, Anderson CM. A one-year randomized trial of
lorcaserin for weight loss in obese and overweight adults: the
BLOSSOM trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:3067–3077.
288. Zinman B, Gerich J, Buse JB, Lewin A, Schwartz S, Raskin P, Hale
PM, Zdravkovic M, Blonde L. Efficacy and safety of the human
glucagon-like peptide-1 analog liraglutide in combination with
metformin and thiazolidinedione in patients with type 2 diabetes
(LEAD-4 Met+TZD). Diabetes Care. 2009;32:1224–1230.
289. Wadden TA, Hollander P, Klein S, Niswender K, Woo V, Hale
PM, Aronne L, Investigators NN. Weight maintenance and ad-
ditional weight loss with liraglutide after low-calorie-diet-induced
weight loss: the SCALE Maintenance randomized study. Int J
Obes. 2013;37:1443–1451.
290. Astrup A, Rossner S, Van Gaal L, Rissanen A, Niskanen L, Al
Hakim M, Madsen J, Rasmussen MF, Lean ME, Group NNS.
Effects of liraglutide in the treatment of obesity: a randomised,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
study.
Lancet.
2009;374:
1606–1616.
291. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Look M, Gadde KM, Allison DB, Peterson
CA, Schwiers M, Day WW, Bowden CH. Two-year sustained
weight loss and metabolic benefits with controlled-release
phentermine/topiramate in obese and overweight adults (SE-
QUEL): a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 extension
study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;95:297–308.
292. Allison DB, Gadde KM, Garvey WT, Peterson CA, Schwiers ML,
Najarian T, Tam PY, Troupin B, Day WW. Controlled-release
phentermine/topiramate in severely obese adults: a randomized
controlled trial (EQUIP). Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011;20:330–342.
293. Greenway FL, Fujioka K, Plodkowski RA, Mudaliar S, Gutta-
dauria M, Erickson J, Kim DD, Dunayevich E. Effect of naltrexone
plus bupropion on weight loss in overweight and obese adults
(COR-I): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2010;376:595–605.
294. Padwal R. Contrave, a bupropion and naltrexone combination
therapy for the potential treatment of obesity. Curr Opin Investig
Drugs. 2009;10:1117–1125.
295. Farooqi IS, Jebb SA, Langmack G, Lawrence E, Cheetham CH,
Prentice AM, Hughes IA, McCamish MA, O’Rahilly S. Effects of
recombinant leptin therapy in a child with congenital leptin de-
ficiency. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:879–884.
296. Rosenstock J, Klaff LJ, Schwartz S, Northrup J, Holcombe JH,
Wilhelm K, Trautmann M. Effects of exenatide and lifestyle
modification on body weight and glucose tolerance in obese
subjects with and without pre-diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:
1173–1175.
297. Kelly AS, Rudser KD, Nathan BM, Fox CK, Metzig AM,
Coombes BJ, Fitch AK, Bomberg EM, Abuzzahab MJ. The effect
754
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist therapy on body mass
index in adolescents with severe obesity: a randomized, placebo-
controlled, clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:355–360.
298. Kelly AS, Metzig AM, Rudser KD, Fitch AK, Fox CK, Nathan
BM, Deering MM, Schwartz BL, Abuzzahab MJ, Gandrud LM,
Moran A, Billington CJ, Schwarzenberg SJ. Exenatide as a weight-
loss therapy in extreme pediatric obesity: a randomized, controlled
pilot study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012;20:364–370.
299. McDuffie JR, Calis KA, Uwaifo GI, Sebring NG, Fallon EM,
Hubbard VS, Yanovski JA. Three-month tolerability of orlistat in
adolescents with obesity-related comorbid conditions. Obes Res.
2002;10:642–650.
300. Zhi J, Moore R, Kanitra L. The effect of short-term (21-day)
orlistat treatment on the physiologic balance of six selected
macrominerals and microminerals in obese adolescents. J Am Coll
Nutr. 2003;22:357–362.
301. Norgren S, Danielsson P, Jurold R, Lotborn M, Marcus C.
Orlistat treatment in obese prepubertal children: a pilot study.
Acta Paediatr. 2003;92:666–670.
302. Ozkan B, Bereket A, Turan S, Keskin S. Addition of orlistat to
conventional treatment in adolescents with severe obesity. Eur J
Pediatr. 2004;163:738–741.
303. McDuffie JR, Calis KA, Uwaifo GI, Sebring NG, Fallon EM,
Frazer TE, Van Hubbard S, Yanovski JA. Efficacy of orlistat as an
adjunct to behavioral treatment in overweight African American
and Caucasian adolescents with obesity-related co-morbid con-
ditions. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004;17:307–319.
304. Chanoine JP, Hampl S, Jensen C, Boldrin M, Hauptman J. Effect
of orlistat on weight and body composition in obese adolescents:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;293:2873–2883.
305. Maahs D, de Serna DG, Kolotkin RL, Ralston S, Sandate J, Qualls
C, Schade DS. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
of orlistat for weight loss in adolescents. Endocr Pract. 2006;12:
18–28.
306. Freemark M, Bursey D. The effects of metformin on body mass
index and glucose tolerance in obese adolescents with fasting
hyperinsulinemia and a family history of type 2 diabetes. Pedi-
atrics. 2001;107:e55.
307. Atabek ME, Pirgon O. Use of metformin in obese adolescents with
hyperinsulinemia: a 6-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008;21:
339–348.
308. Love-Osborne K, Sheeder J, Zeitler P. Addition of metformin to a
lifestyle modification program in adolescents with insulin re-
sistance. J Pediatr. 2008;152:817–822.
309. Wilson DM, Abrams SH, Aye T, Lee PD, Lenders C, Lustig RH,
Osganian SV, Feldman HA. Metformin extended release treat-
ment of adolescent obesity: a 48-week randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial with 48-week follow-up. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2010;164:116–123.
310. Yanovski JA, Krakoff J, Salaita CG, McDuffie JR, Kozlosky M,
Sebring NG, Reynolds JC, Brady SM, Calis KA. Effects of met-
formin on body weight and body composition in obese insulin-
resistant children: a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes. 2011;60:
477–485.
311. Kendall D, Vail A, Amin R, Barrett T, Dimitri P, Ivison F, Kibirige
M, Mathew V, Matyka K, McGovern A, Stirling H, Tetlow L,
Wales J, Wright N, Clayton P, Hall C. Metformin in obese
children and adolescents: the MOCA trial. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2013;98:322–329.
312. Gambineri A, Patton L, De Iasio R, Cantelli B, Cognini GE,
Filicori M, Barreca A, Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Pagotto U, Pas-
quali R. Efficacy of octreotide-LAR in dieting women with ab-
dominal
obesity
and
polycystic
ovary
syndrome.
J
Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:3854–3862.
313. Haqq AM, Stadler DD, Rosenfeld RG, Pratt KL, Weigle DS, Frayo
RS, LaFranchi SH, Cummings DE, Purnell JQ. Circulating ghrelin
levels are suppressed by meals and octreotide therapy in children
with Prader-Willi syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:
3573–3576.
314. Lustig RH, Hinds PS, Ringwald-Smith K, Christensen RK,
Kaste SC, Schreiber RE, Rai SN, Lensing SY, Wu S, Xiong X.
Octreotide therapy of pediatric hypothalamic obesity: a double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88
(6):2586–2592.
315. Lustig RH, Rose SR, Burghen GA, Velasquez-Mieyer P, Broome
DC, Smith K, Li H, Hudson MM, Heideman RL, Kun LE. Hy-
pothalamic obesity caused by cranial insult in children: altered
glucose and insulin dynamics and reversal by a somatostatin
agonist. J Pediatr. 1999;135:162–168.
316. Lustig RH, Greenway F, Velasquez-Mieyer P, Heimburger D,
Schumacher D, Smith D, Smith W, Soler N, Warsi G, Berg W,
Maloney J, Benedetto J, Zhu W, Hohneker J. A multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-finding trial
of a long-acting formulation of octreotide in promoting weight
loss in obese adults with insulin hypersecretion. Int J Obes. 2006;
30:331–341.
317. Shadid S, Jensen MD. Effects of growth hormone administration
in human obesity. Obes Res. 2003;11:170–175.
318. Czernichow S, Lee CM, Barzi F, Greenfield JR, Baur LA, Chalmers
J, Woodward M, Huxley RR. Efficacy of weight loss drugs on
obesity and cardiovascular risk factors in obese adolescents:
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev. 2010;
11:150–158.
319. Viner RM, Hsia Y, Neubert A, Wong IC. Rise in antiobesity drug
prescribing for children and adolescents in the UK: a population-
based study. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2009;68:844–851.
320. Sun AP, Kirby B, Black C, Helms PJ, Bennie M, McLay JS. Un-
planned medication discontinuation as a potential pharmacovi-
gilance signal: a nested young person cohort study. BMC
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014;15:11.
321. Lutjens A, Smit JL. Effect of biguanide treatment in obese children.
Helv Paediatr Acta. 1977;31:473–480.
322. Kay JP, Alemzadeh R, Langley G, D’Angelo L, Smith P, Hol-
shouser S. Beneficial effects of metformin in normoglycemic
morbidly obese adolescents. Metabolism. 2001;50:1457–1461.
323. Arslanian SA, Lewy V, Danadian K, Saad R. Metformin therapy in
obese adolescents with polycystic ovary syndrome and impaired
glucose tolerance: amelioration of exaggerated adrenal response
to adrenocorticotropin with reduction of insulinemia/insulin re-
sistance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:1555–1559.
324. Allen HF, Mazzoni C, Heptulla RA, Murray MA, Miller N,
Koenigs L, Reiter EO. Randomized controlled trial evaluating
response to metformin versus standard therapy in the treatment of
adolescents with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Pediatr Endocrinol
Metab. 2005;18:761–768.
325. Schwimmer JB, Middleton MS, Deutsch R, Lavine JE. A phase 2
clinical trial of metformin as a treatment for non-diabetic pae-
diatric non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2005;21:871–879.
326. Bridger T, MacDonald S, Baltzer F, Rodd C. Randomized
placebo-controlled trial of metformin for adolescents with poly-
cystic ovary syndrome. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:
241–246.
327. De Leo V, Musacchio MC, Morgante G, Piomboni P, Petraglia F.
Metformin treatment is effective in obese teenage girls with PCOS.
Hum Reprod. 2006;21:2252–2256.
328. Srinivasan S, Ambler GR, Baur LA, Garnett SP, Tepsa M, Yap F,
Ward GM, Cowell CT. Randomized, controlled trial of metfor-
min for obesity and insulin resistance in children and adolescents:
improvement in body composition and fasting insulin. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:2074–2080.
329. Fu JF, Liang L, Zou CC, Hong F, Wang CL, Wang XM, Zhao ZY.
Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in Zhejiang Chinese obese
children and adolescents and the effect of metformin combined
with lifestyle intervention. Int J Obes. 2007;31:15–22.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
755
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 330. Burgert TS, Duran EJ, Goldberg-Gell R, Dziura J, Yeckel CW, Katz
S, Tamborlane WV, Caprio S. Short-term metabolic and cardio-
vascular effects of metformin in markedly obese adolescents with
normal glucose tolerance. Pediatr Diabetes. 2008;9:567–576.
331. Hoeger K, Davidson K, Kochman L, Cherry T, Kopin L, Guzick
DS. The impact of metformin, oral contraceptives, and lifestyle
modification on polycystic ovary syndrome in obese adolescent
women in two randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:4299–4306.
332. Clarson CL, Mahmud FH, Baker JE, Clark HE, McKay WM,
Schauteet VD, Hill DJ. Metformin in combination with structured
lifestyle intervention improved body mass index in obese ado-
lescents, but did not improve insulin resistance. Endocrine. 2009;
36:141–146.
333. Rezvanian H, Hashemipour M, Kelishadi R, Tavakoli N, Pour-
safa P. A randomized, triple masked, placebo-controlled clinical
trial for controlling childhood obesity. World J Pediatr. 2010;6:
317–322.
334. Wiegand S, l’Allemand D, Hubel H, Krude H, Burmann M,
Martus P, Gruters A, Holl RW. Metformin and placebo therapy
both improve weight management and fasting insulin in obese
insulin-resistant adolescents: a prospective, placebo-controlled,
randomized study. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010;163:585–592.
335. Adeyemo MA, McDuffie JR, Kozlosky M, Krakoff J, Calis KA,
Brady SM, Yanovski JA. Effects of metformin on energy intake
and satiety in obese children. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2015;17:
363–370.
336. McDonagh MS, Selph S, Ozpinar A, Foley C. Systematic review of
the benefits and risks of metformin in treating obesity in children
aged 18 years and younger. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168:178–184.
337. Morrison JA, Cottingham EM, Barton BA. Metformin for weight
loss in pediatric patients taking psychotropic drugs. Am J Psy-
chiatry. 2002;159:655–657.
338. Klein DJ, Cottingham EM, Sorter M, Barton BA, Morrison JA. A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of metformin
treatment of weight gain associated with initiation of atypical
antipsychotic therapy in children and adolescents. Am J Psychi-
atry. 2006;163:2072–2079.
339.
¨
Onalan G, Goktolga U, Ceyhan T, Bagis T, Onalan R, Pabuccu R.
Predictive value of glucose-insulin ratio in PCOS and profile of
women who will benefit from metformin therapy: obese, lean,
hyper or normoinsulinemic? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol.
2005;123:204–211.
340. Violante-Ort´
ız R, Del-Rio-Navarro BE, Lara-Esqueda A, Perez P,
Fanghanel G, Madero A, Berber A. Use of sibutramine in obese
Hispanic adolescents. Adv Ther. 2005;22:642–649.
341. Garc´
ıa-Morales LM, Berber A, Macias-Lara CC, Lucio-Ortiz C,
Del-Rio-Navarro BE, Dorantes-Alvarez LM. Use of sibutramine
in obese mexican adolescents: a 6-month, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial. Clin Ther. 2006;
28:770–782.
342. Reisler G, Tauber T, Afriat R, Bortnik O, Goldman M. Sibutr-
amine as an adjuvant therapy in adolescents suffering from
morbid obesity. Isr Med Assoc J. 2006;8:30–32.
343. Budd GM, Hayman LL, Crump E, Pollydore C, Hawley KD,
Cronquist JL, Berkowitz RI. Weight loss in obese African
American and Caucasian adolescents: secondary analysis of a
randomized clinical trial of behavioral therapy plus sibutramine.
J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2007;22:288–296.
344. Daniels SR, Long B, Crow S, Styne D, Sothern M, Vargas-
Rodriguez I, Harris L, Walch J, Jasinsky O, Cwik K, Hewkin A,
Blakesley V. Cardiovascular effects of sibutramine in the treat-
ment of obese adolescents: results of a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. Pediatrics. 2007;120:e147–e157.
345. Danielsson P, Janson A, Norgren S, Marcus C. Impact sibutramine
therapy in children with hypothalamic obesity or obesity with
aggravating syndromes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:
4101–4106.
346. Van Mil EG, Westerterp KR, Kester AD, Delemarre-van de Waal
HA, Gerver WJ, Saris WH. The effect of sibutramine on energy
expenditure and body composition in obese adolescents. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:1409–1414.
347. Klein-Schwartz W. Abuse and toxicity of methylphenidate. Curr
Opin Pediatr. 2002;14:219–223.
348. Carrel AL, Myers SE, Whitman BY, Allen DB. Benefits of long-
term GH therapy in Prader-Willi syndrome: a 4-year study. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:1581–1585.
349. Wolfgram PM, Carrel AL, Allen DB. Long-term effects of
recombinant human growth hormone therapy in children with
Prader-Willi syndrome. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013;25:509–514.
350. Deal CL, Tony M, Hoybye C, Allen DB, Tauber M, Christiansen
JS; the 2011 Growth Hormone in Prader-Willi Syndrome Clinical
Care Guidelines Workshop. Growth Hormone Research Society
workshop summary: consensus guidelines for recombinant hu-
man growth hormone therapy in Prader-Willi syndrome. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:E1072–E1087.
351. Hsu WH, Xiang HD, Rajan AS, Kunze DL, Boyd AE III. So-
matostatin inhibits insulin secretion by a G-protein-mediated
decrease in Ca2+ entry through voltage-dependent Ca2+ chan-
nels in the beta cell. J Biol Chem. 1991;266:837–843.
352. Mitra SW, Mezey E, Hunyady B, Chamberlain L, Hayes E, Foor F,
Wang Y, Schonbrunn A, Schaeffer JM. Colocalization of so-
matostatin receptor sst5 and insulin in rat pancreatic b-cells.
Endocrinology. 1999;140:3790–3796.
353. Bertoli A, Magnaterra R, Borboni P, Marini MA, Barini A, Fusco
A, Bollea MR. Dose-dependent effect of octreotide on insulin
secretion after OGTT in obesity. Horm Res. 1998;49:17–21.
354. Lustig RH, Hinds PS, Ringwald-Smith K, Christensen RK, Kaste
SC, Schreiber RE, Rai SN, Lensing SY, Wu S, Xiong X. Octreotide
therapy of pediatric hypothalamic obesity: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:
2586–2592.
355. Scott LJ. Liraglutide: a review of its use in the management of
obesity. Drugs. 2015;75:899–910.
356. Gibson WT, Farooqi IS, Moreau M, DePaoli AM, Lawrence E,
O’Rahilly S, Trussell RA. Congenital leptin deficiency due to
homozygosity for the Delta133G mutation: report of another case
and evaluation of response to four years of leptin therapy. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89:4821–4826.
357. Paz-Filho G, Wong ML, Licinio J. Ten years of leptin replacement
therapy. Obes Rev. 2011;12:e315–e323.
358. Shetty GK, Matarese G, Magkos F, Moon HS, Liu X, Brennan
AM, Mylvaganam G, Sykoutri D, Depaoli AM, Mantzoros CS.
Leptin administration to overweight and obese subjects for
6 months increases free leptin concentrations but does not alter
circulating hormones of the thyroid and IGF axes during weight
loss induced by a mild hypocaloric diet. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011;
165:249–254.
359. Moon HS, Matarese G, Brennan AM, Chamberland JP, Liu X,
Fiorenza CG, Mylvaganam GH, Abanni L, Carbone F, Williams CJ,
De Paoli AM,SchneiderBE,Mantzoros CS.Efficacy of metreleptinin
obese patients with type 2 diabetes: cellular and molecular pathways
underlying leptin tolerance. Diabetes. 2011;60:1647–1656.
360. Korner J, Conroy R, Febres G, McMahon DJ, Conwell I, Karmally
W, Aronne LJ. Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
study of leptin administration after gastric bypass. Obesity (Sil-
ver Spring). 2013;21:951–956.
361. Rissanen A, Lean M, Rossner S, Segal KR, Sjostrom L. Predictive
value of early weight loss in obesity management with orlistat: an
evidence-based assessment of prescribing guidelines. Int J Obes
Relat Metab Disord. 2003;27:103–109.
362. Chanoine JP, Richard M. Early weight loss and outcome at one
year in obese adolescents treated with orlistat or placebo. Int J
Pediatr Obes. 2011;6:95–101.
363. Nobili V, Vajro P, Dezsofi A, Fischler B, Hadzic N, Jahnel J,
Lamireau T, McKiernan P, McLin V, Socha P, Tizzard S, Baumann
756
Styne et al
Pediatric Obesity Guidelines
J Clin Endocrinol Metab, March 2017, 102(3):709–757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
 U. Indications and limitations of bariatric intervention in severely
obese children and adolescents with and without nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis:
ESPGHAN
Hepatology
Committee
position
statement. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015;60:550–561.
364. Sarr MG. Medical indications for weight-loss surgery in adoles-
cents: but are there other equally important indications? JAMA
Pediatr. 2014;168:11–12.
365. Zeller MH, Modi AC, Noll JG, Long JD, Inge TH. Psychosocial
functioning improves following adolescent bariatric surgery.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;17:985–990.
366. Loux TJ, Haricharan RN, Clements RH, Kolotkin RL, Bledsoe SE,
Haynes B, Leath T, Harmon CM. Health-related quality of life
before and after bariatric surgery in adolescents. J Pediatr Surg.
2008;43:1275–1279.
367. Olbers T, Gronowitz E, Werling M, Marlid S, Flodmark CE,
Peltonen M, Gothberg G, Karlsson J, Ekbom K, Sjostrom LV,
Dahlgren J, Lonroth H, Friberg P, Marcus C. Two-year outcome
of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in adolescents with
severe obesity: results from a Swedish nationwide study (AMOS).
Int J Obes. 2012;36:1388–1395.
368. Zeller MH, Reiter-Purtill J, Ratcliff MB, Inge TH, Noll JG. Two-
year trends in psychosocial functioning after adolescent Roux-en-
Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7:727–732.
369. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, Michalsky MP, Helmrath
MA, Brandt ML, Harmon CM, Zeller MH, Chen MK, Xanthakos
SA, Horlick M, Buncher CR. Weight loss and health status 3 years
after bariatric surgery in adolescents. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:
113–123.
370. Wasserman H, Inge TH. Bariatric surgery in obese adolescents:
opportunities and challenges. Pediatr Ann. 2014;43:e230–e236.
371. Hsia DS, Fallon SC, Brandt ML. Adolescent bariatric surgery.
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;166:757–766.
372. Nandagopal R, Brown RJ, Rother KI. Resolution of type 2 di-
abetes following bariatric surgery: implications for adults and
adolescents. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2010;12:671–677.
373. Barnett SJ. Surgical management of adolescent obesity. Adv
Pediatr. 2013;60:311–325.
374. Widhalm K, Fritsch M, Widhalm H, Silberhumer G, Dietrich S,
Helk O, Prager G. Bariatric surgery in morbidly obese adolescents:
long-term follow-up. Int J Pediatr Obes. 2011;6(Suppl 1):65–69.
375. Himpens J, Cadiere GB, Bazi M, Vouche M, Cadiere B, Dapri G.
Long-term outcomes of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding.
Arch Surg. 2011;146:802–807.
376. Rosenthal RJ, Diaz AA, Arvidsson D, Baker RS, Basso N, Bel-
langer D, Boza C, El Mourad H, France M, Gagner M, Galvao-
Neto M, Higa KD, Himpens J, Hutchinson CM, Jacobs M,
Jorgensen JO, Jossart G, Lakdawala M, Nguyen NT, Nocca D,
Prager G, Pomp A, Ramos AC, Rosenthal RJ, Shah S, Vix M,
Wittgrove A, Zundel N. International Sleeve Gastrectomy Expert
Panel Consensus Statement: best practice guidelines based on
experience of .12,000 cases. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8:8–19.
377. Inge TH, Zeller MH, Jenkins TM, Helmrath M, Brandt ML,
Michalsky MP, Harmon CM, Courcoulas A, Horlick M, Xanthakos
SA, Dolan L, Mitsnefes M, Barnett SJ, Buncher R. Perioperative
outcomes of adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery: the Teen-
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (Teen-LABS) study.
JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168:47–53.
378. Tritos NA, Mun E, Bertkau A, Grayson R, Maratos-Flier E,
Goldfine A. Serum ghrelin levels in response to glucose load in
obese subjects post-gastric bypass surgery. Obes Res. 2003;11:
919–924.
379. Korner J, Bessler M, Cirilo LJ, Conwell IM, Daud A, Restuccia
NL, Wardlaw SL. Effects of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery on
fasting and postprandial concentrations of plasma ghrelin, peptide
YY, and insulin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:359–365.
380. Karamanakos SN, Vagenas K, Kalfarentzos F, Alexandrides TK.
Weight loss, appetite suppression, and changes in fasting and
postprandial ghrelin and peptide-YY levels after Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy: a prospective, double
blind study. Ann Surg. 2008;247:401–407.
381. Ram´
on JM, Salvans S, Crous X, Puig S, Goday A, Benaiges D,
Trillo L, Pera M, Grande L. Effect of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass vs
sleeve gastrectomy on glucose and gut hormones: a prospective
randomised trial. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012;16:1116–1122.
382. Hafeez S, Ahmed MH. Bariatric surgery as potential treatment for
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a future treatment by choice or by
chance? J Obes 2013;2013:839275.
383. Alqahtani AR, Antonisamy B, Alamri H, Elahmedi M, Zimmerman
VA. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy in 108 obese children and
adolescents aged 5 to 21 years. Ann Surg. 2012;256:266–273.
384. Al-Qahtani AR. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding in ad-
olescent: safety and efficacy. J Pediatr Surg. 2007;42:894–897.
385. Inge TH, Jenkins TM, Zeller M, Dolan L, Daniels SR, Garcia VF,
Brandt ML, Bean J, Gamm K, Xanthakos SA. Baseline BMI is a
strong predictor of nadir BMI after adolescent gastric bypass.
J Pediatr. 2010;156:103–108.e1.
386. Lawson ML, Kirk S, Mitchell T, Chen MK, Loux TJ, Daniels SR,
Harmon CM, Clements RH, Garcia VF, Inge TH. One-year
outcomes of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for morbidly obese ado-
lescents: a multicenter study from the Pediatric Bariatric Study
Group. J Pediatr Surg. 2006;41:137–143, discussion 137–143.
387. Inge TH, Miyano G, Bean J, Helmrath M, Courcoulas A, Harmon
CM, Chen MK, Wilson K, Daniels SR, Garcia VF, Brandt ML,
Dolan LM. Reversal of type 2 diabetes mellitus and improvements
in cardiovascular risk factors after surgical weight loss in ado-
lescents. Pediatrics. 2009;123:214–222.
388. Inge TH, Prigeon RL, Elder DA, Jenkins TM, Cohen RM,
Xanthakos SA, Benoit SC, Dolan LM, Daniels SR, D’Alessio DA.
Insulin sensitivity and b-cell function improve after gastric bypass
in severely obese adolescents. J Pediatr. 2015;167:1042–1048.e1.
389. Kalra M, Inge T. Effect of bariatric surgery on obstructive sleep
apnoea in adolescents. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2006;7:260–267.
390. Michalsky MP, Inge TH, Simmons M, Jenkins TM, Buncher R,
Helmrath M, Brandt ML, Harmon CM, Courcoulas A, Chen M,
Horlick M, Daniels SR, Urbina EM. Cardiovascular risk factors in
severely obese adolescents. JAMA Pediatr. 2015;169:438.
391. Holterman AX, Holterman M, Browne A, Henriques S, Guzman
G, Fantuzzi G. Patterns of surgical weight loss and resolution of
metabolic abnormalities in superobese bariatric adolescents.
J Pediatr Surg. 2012;47:1633–1639.
392. Ippisch HM, Inge TH, Daniels SR, Wang B, Khoury PR, Witt SA,
Glascock BJ, Garcia VF, Kimball TR. Reversibility of cardiac
abnormalities in morbidly obese adolescents. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2008;51:1342–1348.
393. Michalsky M, Kramer RE, Fullmer MA, Polfuss M, Porter R,
Ward-Begnoche W, Getzoff EA, Dreyer M, Stolzman S, Reichard
KW. Developing criteria for pediatric/adolescent bariatric surgery
programs. Pediatrics. 2011;128(Suppl 2):S65–S70.
394. Strauss RS, Bradley LJ, Brolin RE. Gastric bypass surgery in
adolescents with morbid obesity. J Pediatr. 2001;138:499–504.
395. Sugerman HJ, Sugerman EL, DeMaria EJ, Kellum JM, Kennedy C,
Mowery Y, Wolfe LG. Bariatric surgery for severely obese ado-
lescents. J Gastrointest Surg. 2003;7:102–108.
396. Kaulfers AM, Bean JA, Inge TH, Dolan LM, Kalkwarf HJ. Bone
loss in adolescents after bariatric surgery. Pediatrics. 2011;127:
e956–e961.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-2573
press.endocrine.org/journal/jcem
757
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-abstract/102/3/709/2965084 by guest on 03 June 2019
