 AMA Journal of Ethics® 
March 2018, Volume 20, Number 3: 269-277 
 
POLICY FORUM 
Why Crisis Pregnancy Centers Are Legal but Unethical 
Amy G. Bryant, MD, MSCR, and Jonas J. Swartz, MD, MPH 
 
Abstract 
Crisis pregnancy centers are organizations that seek to intercept women 
with unintended pregnancies who might be considering abortion. Their 
mission is to prevent abortions by persuading women that adoption or 
parenting is a better option. They strive to give the impression that they 
are clinical centers, offering legitimate medical services and advice, yet 
they are exempt from regulatory, licensure, and credentialing oversight 
that apply to health care facilities. Because the religious ideology of these 
centers’ owners and employees takes priority over the health and well-
being of the women seeking care at these centers, women do not receive 
comprehensive, accurate, evidence-based clinical information about all 
available options. Although crisis pregnancy centers enjoy First 
Amendment rights protections, their propagation of misinformation 
should be regarded as an ethical violation that undermines women’s 
health. 
 
What Are Crisis Pregnancy Centers? 
Drive down any highway in America, and you might see a sign: “Pregnant? Scared? Call 
1-800-555-5555.” Most often, these signs are advertisements for crisis pregnancy 
centers (CPCs). CPCs, sometimes known as “pregnancy resource centers,” “pregnancy 
care centers,” “pregnancy support centers,” or simply “pregnancy centers,” are 
organizations that seek to intercept women with unintended or “crisis” pregnancies who 
might be considering abortion. Their mission is typically to prevent abortions by 
persuading women that adoption or parenting is a better option [1, 2]. One of the first 
CPCs opened in 1967 in Hawaii [3]. 
 
Most CPCs are religiously affiliated [4], and a majority are affiliated with a network or 
umbrella organization such as Birthright International, Care Net, Heartbeat International, 
or the National Institute of Family and Life Advocates [1, 3]. These umbrella 
organizations offer legal support, ultrasound training, and other services to CPCs. With 
an estimated 1,969 network-affiliated CPCs in the US in 2010 [1], CPCs outnumber 
abortion clinics, which were estimated at 327 as of 2011 [5]. Many state governments 
fund CPCs through mechanisms such as “Choose Life” specialty license plates and 
grants, and many also receive federal funding [3, 6]. 
AMA Journal of Ethics, March 2018 
269 
  
In this article, we will argue that both the lack of patient-centered care and deceptive 
practices make CPCs unethical. We will first highlight the discrepancy between the lack 
of standards for quality of care provided by CPCs and the innumerable restrictions on 
abortion clinics. We then show that CPCs violate principles of medical ethics, despite 
purporting to dispense medical advice. Finally, we will review legal challenges to CPCs, 
including an upcoming Supreme Court case, and regulatory challenges in an industry that 
seeks to be perceived as providing health care while simultaneously seeking to elude the 
need to be held to evidence-based standards of caring for women with unexpected 
pregnancies. 
 
What Do Crisis Pregnancy Centers Do? 
What might not be immediately apparent to someone seeking help at a CPC is that these 
centers take a distinct anti-abortion approach to pregnancy in that unintended or “crisis” 
pregnancies have two viable options, adoption or parenting. Multiple “undercover” or 
“secret shopper” surveys of CPCs and detailed reviews of the centers’ promotional 
materials and websites reveal that these centers give the impression of being medical 
clinics or having medical expertise [3, 7-9]. Often using neutral-sounding language, 
these centers offer to help women with free pregnancy tests, ultrasounds, testing for 
sexually transmitted infections, and counseling on “all options” for pregnancy. In 
addition, pregnant women are often offered resources such as maternity clothes, 
diapers, and parenting classes. These centers often offer to give a “pregnancy 
verification” form, which women can use to enroll in prenatal care or to apply for 
government assistance with medical care (e.g., Medicaid or the Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children) [3, 8, 9]. 
 
CPCs, as a rule, not only discourage abortion but also refuse to provide referrals to 
abortion clinics, although they often provide “counseling” about “dangers associated 
with premarital sexual activity” [10]. Women who visit CPCs typically do not realize that 
they are not in an abortion clinic and are surprised to find that abortion is not considered 
an option at these centers [3]. As obstetrician-gynecologists, we have had several 
disgruntled patients come to us who were disappointed and felt deceived by the care 
that they had received at CPCs. 
 
Arguments against Crisis Pregnancy Centers 
CPCs have received criticism from lawmakers, physicians, scholars, and reproductive 
rights organizations for many of their practices [2, 3, 11]. They strive to appear as sites 
offering clinical services and unbiased advice. Lay volunteers who are not licensed 
clinicians at CPCs often wear white coats and see women in exam rooms [3, 8]. They also 
purport to provide medical advice on a variety of issues, including sexually transmitted 
infections, early pregnancy, and abortion [3, 8]. Because centers are sometimes located 
close to abortion clinics and have names and logos similar to nearby abortion clinics, 
 
 
www.amajournalofethics.org 
270 
 women could mistakenly seek care there rather than at the intended clinic. They also 
seek to target women who are most likely to seek abortion, particularly low-income 
women and women of color [12]. These strategic practices appear designed to mislead 
abortion clinic clients [3, 8]. 
 
Despite looking like legitimate clinics, most CPCs are not licensed [9, 13], and their staff 
are not licensed medical professionals [13]. CPCs that are not licensed medical clinics 
cannot legally be held to the privacy provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) [3], which could lead to violations of client privacy. For 
example, client information might not be kept confidential, and information about 
pregnancy or abortion intentions might be shared with people outside the clinic [14, 15]. 
Some CPCs have adopted a “Commitment of Care and Competence” statement that is 
provided by umbrella organizations, such as Heartbeat International and Care Net [16, 
17]. This statement includes provisions on patient confidentiality and accurate clinical 
information; however, adoption of these guidelines is optional and adherence is not 
regulated or enforced [3]. 
 
Perhaps most worrisome, regardless of whether a particular location is licensed, CPCs 
engage in counseling that is misleading or false [8]. Despite claims to the contrary, these 
centers do not meet the standard of patient-centered, quality medical care [18]. The 
counseling provided on abortion and contraception by CPCs falls outside accepted 
medical standards and guidelines for providing evidence-based information and 
treatment options. For example, CPCs often suggest a link between abortion and 
subsequent serious mental health problems [3], while multiple studies have invalidated 
this assertion [19-21]. Similarly, centers cite debunked literature showing an association 
between abortion and breast cancer [22]. Although abortion has been shown to be safer 
than childbirth [23], it is portrayed as a dangerous or even deadly procedure [7]. 
 
Contrary to the claim that many CPCs make that they provide comprehensive services 
and offer women “all options,” most of these centers do not provide comprehensive 
women’s reproductive health care, abortion care, or referrals for abortion [1, 3]. For 
example, CPCs tend to avoid discussion of contraception and dismiss the role of 
condoms in preventing sexually transmitted infections [24]. 
 
Are Crisis Pregnancy Centers Legal? 
The question of whether CPCs are “legal” is complicated. Centers lack regulatory 
oversight as they are not medical practices and do not charge for services. This exempts 
them not only from laws and statutes specific to medical clinics but also from Federal 
Trade Commission or state regulations that apply to commercial enterprises. Their 
practices are considered to fall under the classification of free speech, which is protected 
by the First Amendment [2, 11]. This makes them much harder to regulate and provides 
AMA Journal of Ethics, March 2018 
271 
 them with a loophole to avoid scrutiny while providing information that does not 
conform to medical standards of care. 
 
Multiple, largely unsuccessful legal challenges have been brought against CPCs, mainly in 
the form of local ordinances that require them to disclose that they are not medical 
centers and that they do not refer for abortion [4, 9]. One notable exception is the 
Reproductive FACT Act in California, which requires CPCs to offer information on where 
clients can obtain a full scope of low-cost or free reproductive health services. CPCs 
without a physician on staff must also disclose their unlicensed status [13]. This law was 
upheld by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in October 2016 [13], but it is likely to be 
heard before the Supreme Court in March 2018 [25]. A ruling by the Supreme Court in 
favor of CPCs could definitively hamper efforts to curb deceptive practices by considering 
them free speech. This would be unjust because of the harms to women incurred by 
inaccurate information provision and by an organization’s noncompliance with 
regulations such as HIPAA. Seeking abortion is time-sensitive; providing inaccurate 
information causes delays that can lead to higher costs and risks or even an inability to 
receive care [8]. The safety and well-being of women seeking abortion or any 
reproductive health care should take precedence over free speech, particularly when 
exercising that right can harm patients. 
 
In stark contrast, despite receiving no federal and often no state funding [26], abortion 
clinics face increasingly high legal barriers [11]. Abortion clinics are strictly regulated, and 
abortion practice is often restricted by waiting periods, gestational age limits, and 
targeted regulation of abortion providers (TRAP) laws [11, 27]. Moreover, several states 
require medically inaccurate scripts and counseling that fail to protect free speech for 
abortion providers [27]. In North Carolina, where we practice, the state requires directed 
counseling, and informed consent must be given 24 hours prior to an abortion procedure 
[28]. This mandated counseling includes information on how women can see real-time 
images of the fetus and hear the heartbeat through an agency that provides this service 
for free; in other words, health care professionals must let women seeking abortion 
know about the existence of CPCs. 
 
Are Crisis Pregnancy Centers Unethical? 
Because CPCs purport to offer medical advice and care, it seems reasonable to expect 
them to abide by medical ethical principles. Four fundamental principles are widely 
recognized as guides to practice: beneficence, nonmaleficence, respect for autonomy, 
and justice [29]. Beneficence requires that treatment and care do more good than harm; 
that the benefits outweigh the risks, and that the greater good for the patient is upheld 
[29]. Providing inaccurate and misleading information violates the principle of 
beneficence because it is not patient-centered and does not fully consider the patient’s 
well-being. Anti-abortion ideology thus supersedes the needs, values, and preferences 
of the woman seeking care. Respect for autonomy is similarly not expressed, because a 
 
 
www.amajournalofethics.org 
272 
 key component of autonomy is having the information needed to make an informed 
decision and the ability to make medical decisions free of coercion. Again, by placing 
ideology over accurate and comprehensive counseling, CPCs violate respect for a 
woman’s autonomy by failing to give her the tools necessary to make the decision that is 
best for her life and circumstances [3]. 
 
Nonmaleficence, or the idea that health care professionals should “do no harm,” is 
violated in multiple ways by CPCs. First, because these centers might tell women they 
have “plenty of time” to get an abortion, they could delay access to abortion, which could 
lead to women missing the gestational age cut-off for abortion in a given state; expose 
women to more involved and slightly riskier procedures at higher gestational ages; or 
cause women to miss the opportunity for abortion altogether [8]. Second, false or 
misleading information about contraception, condoms, and abortion could lead to 
unnecessary anxiety or failure to use measures that protect against sexually transmitted 
infections [24]. 
 
From a public health standpoint, these centers endanger women by misinterpreting and 
misrepresenting medical evidence. States implicitly endorse these centers when they 
provide support for them. Women are put in a difficult position when they have to 
navigate a perplexing landscape: abortion is safe and legal in every state, yet some 
states support and promote centers that provide inaccurate information on abortion. 
These conflicting messages presume a level of sophistication on the part of patients—
that they understand the political landscape that underlies the abortion debate and that 
they are able to make informed, autonomous decisions despite the misinformation that 
they are given [11]. 
 
Distributive justice assumes a fair distribution of resources. In the setting of CPCs, justice 
is violated when women are not apprised of the availability of abortion services and 
access to abortion is consequently obstructed. Moreover, CPCs often target low-income 
women and women of color, adolescents, and women with less formal education [3, 12]. 
By impeding access to abortion through delays, expense, or other tactics, CPCs may 
propagate racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic inequities [12]. Multiple factors contribute to 
women’s seeking to terminate a pregnancy, including economic considerations, the need 
to parent other children, relationship factors, professional aspirations, and educational 
goals [30, 31]. Those who are unable to obtain an abortion might be less likely to have 
and achieve aspirational goals, which affect overall well-being, and are exposed to the 
greater health risk of carrying a pregnancy to term [23, 32]. 
 
What are the ethical obligations of CPC personnel? CPCs are often staffed by lay 
volunteers [13], but many have volunteers who are licensed medical professionals such 
as nurses, physicians, and ultrasound technicians [1]. Even in their capacity as 
volunteers, health care professionals should conform to the ethical standards guiding 
AMA Journal of Ethics, March 2018 
273 
 their profession. It is less clear what the standards for providing ethical care should be 
for lay volunteers. However, given that the federal government and 14 states fund CPCs 
[13], taxpayers should expect that all volunteers adhere to accepted medical ethical 
standards when providing health care advice. 
 
Towards a More Ethical Approach 
As nonprofit organizations, CPCs have the right to exist. Indeed, they could provide a 
valuable resource for some women, particularly those seeking material support for a 
pregnancy they plan to continue [33]. However, as we have seen, they also employ 
dubious communication strategies—withholding information about abortion referral, 
not being transparent about clinically and ethically relevant details, or using 
inflammatory language to scare women and dissuade them from having abortions [3, 8, 
9]. 
 
Honest information about the perspective from which they dispense advice and support, 
in addition to forthright acknowledgement of their limitations, is essential for these 
centers to provide an ethical service to women. For no other medical procedure would 
someone who is not a health care professional seek to give detailed counseling on the 
risks of the procedure. CPCs should provide clear advertising and refrain from providing 
misleading and false information about abortion. Clear acknowledgement that no 
abortion referrals will be made would also be a step in the right direction. Until taxpayers 
can be assured that these centers conform to ethical standards of licensed medical 
facilities, offer sound medical advice, and do not lead to harm, states should refrain from 
directly or indirectly funding these centers. 
 
Finally, health care professionals should be aware of the existence of CPCs and alert to 
the harms they can cause. Because primary care physicians who encounter pregnancy 
diagnoses may not be comfortable with options counseling [34], they should educate 
themselves about where women can obtain comprehensive reproductive health care 
locally to avoid referrals to CPCs for women considering abortion. Health care 
professionals also should support laws, like California’s, that regulate CPCs by preventing 
them from withholding critical information about abortion availability from women 
seeking abortion. 
 
References 
1. Family Research Council. A passion to serve: how pregnancy resource centers 
empower women, help families, and strengthen communities. 2nd ed. 
downloads.frc.org/EF/EF12A47.pdf. Published 2010. Accessed October 5, 2017. 
2. Rosen JD. The public health risks of crisis pregnancy centers. Perspect Sexual 
Reprod Health. 2012;44(3):201-205. 
3. Chen AX. Crisis pregnancy centers: impeding the right to informed decision 
making. Cardozo J Law Gend. 2013;19(3):933-960. 
 
 
www.amajournalofethics.org 
274 
 4. Heartbeat International. The ground is tilled and the seed is planted by the 
“greatest generation.” https://www.heartbeatinternational.org/heartbeat-
history. Published March 30, 2011. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
5. Jerman J, Jones RK. Secondary measures of access to abortion services in the 
United States, 2011 and 2012: gestational age limits, cost, and harassment. 
Womens Health Issues. 2014;24(4):e419-e424. 
6. Guttmacher Institute. “Choose life” license plates. 
https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/choose-life-license-plates. 
Updated October 1, 2017. Accessed October 30, 2017. 
7. United States House of Representatives Committee on Government Reform 
Minority Staff Special Investigations Division. False and misleading health 
information provided by federally-funded pregnancy resource centers. 
https://www.chsourcebook.com/articles/waxman2.pdf. Published July 2006. 
Accessed January 23, 2018. 
8. Bryant AG, Levi EE. Abortion misinformation from crisis pregnancy centers in 
North Carolina. Contraception. 2012;86(6):752-756. 
9. Bryant AG, Narasimhan S, Bryant-Comstock K, Levi EE. Crisis pregnancy center 
websites: information, misinformation and disinformation. Contraception. 
2014;90(6):601-605. 
10. Family Research Council, 20. 
11. Ahmed A. Informed decision making and abortion: crisis pregnancy centers, 
informed consent, and the first amendment. J Law Med Ethics. 2015;43(1):51-58. 
12. National Women’s Law Center. Crisis prengancy centers are targeting women of 
color, endangering their health. https://nwlc.org/resources/crisis-pregnancy-
centers-are-targeting-women-color-endangering-their-health/. Published 
March 6, 2013. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
13. Holtzman B. Have crisis pregnancy centers finally met their match: California's 
reproductive FACT Act. Northwest J Law Soc Policy. 2017;12(3):77-110. 
https://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=h
ttps://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=1155&context=njlsp. Accessed 
January 10, 2017. 
14. Knight N. Why a Hawaii woman sent a cease-and-desit letter to an anti-abortion 
clinic. Rewire. March 17, 2017. https://rewire.news/article/2017/03/17/why-
hawaii-woman-sent-cease-desist-letter-anti-abortion-clinic/. Accessed 
November 27, 2017. 
15. Camp A. Crisis pregnancy center in my home county in Illinois caught violating 
patient privacy by local media. Progressive Midwesterner. February 11, 2015. 
https://progressivemidwesterner.wordpress.com/2015/02/11/crisis-
pregnancy-center-in-my-home-county-in-illinois-caught-violating-patient-
privacy-by-local-media/. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
16. Care Net. Commitment of care and competence. 
http://cdn2.hubspot.net/hub/367552/file-2184391815-pdf/Commitment-of-
AMA Journal of Ethics, March 2018 
275 
 Care-Comp-6-09-C.pdf?t=1420732123416. Published June 2009. Accessed 
November 27, 2017. 
17. Heartbeat International. Our commitment of care and competence. 
https://www.heartbeatinternational.org/about-us/commitment-of-care. 
Published March 17, 2009. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
18. Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing 
the Quality Chasm : A New Health System for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press; 2001. 
19. Major B, Appelbaum M, Beckman L, Dutton ME, Russo NF, West C. Report of the 
APA Task Force on Mental Health and Abortion. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association; 2008. 
http://www.apa.org/pi/women/programs/abortion/mental-health.pdf. 
Accessed January 18, 2018. 
20. Major B, Appelbaum M, Beckman L, Dutton MA, Russo NF, West C. Abortion and 
mental health: evaluating the evidence. Am Psychol. 2009;64(9):863-890. 
21. Biggs MA, Upadhyay UD, McCulloch CE, Foster DG. Women’s mental health and 
well-being 5 years after receiving or being denied an abortion: a prospective, 
longitudinal cohort study. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74(2):169-178. 
22. Beral V, Bull D, Doll R, Peto R, Reeves G; Collaborative Group on Hormonal 
Factors in Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and abortion: collaborative reanalysis of 
data from 53 epidemiological studies, including 83,000 women with breast 
cancer from 16 countries. Lancet. 2004;363(9414):1007-1016. 
23. Raymond EG, Grimes DA. The comparative safety of legal induced abortion and 
childbirth in the United States. Obstet Gynecol. 2012;119(2)(pt 1):215-219. 
24. Bryant-Comstock K, Bryant AG, Narasimhan S, Levi EE. Information about sexual 
health on crisis pregnancy center web sites: accurate for adolescents? J Pediatr 
Adolesc Gynecol. 2016;29(1):22-25. 
25. National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra. SCOTUS Blog. 
http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/national-institute-family-life-
advocates-v-becerra/. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
26. Guttmacher Institute. State funding of abortion under Medicaid. 
https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/state-funding-abortion-
under-medicaid. Published January 1, 2018. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
27. Guttmacher Institute. An overview of abortion laws. 
https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/overview-abortion-laws. 
Published January 1, 2018. Accessed November 27, 2017. 
28. Mercier RJ, Buchbinder M, Bryant A, Britton L. The experiences and adaptations 
of abortion providers practicing under a new TRAP law: a qualitative study. 
Contraception. 2015;91(6):507-512. 
29. Gillon R. Medical ethics: four principles plus attention to scope. BMJ. 
1994;309(6948):184-188. 
 
 
www.amajournalofethics.org 
276 
 30. Upadhyay UD, Biggs MA, Foster DG. The effect of abortion on having and 
achieving aspirational one-year plans. BMC Womens Health. 2015;15:102. 
https://bmcwomenshealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12905-015-
0259-1. Accessed January 23, 2018. 
31. Biggs MA, Gould H, Foster DG. Understanding why women seek abortions in the 
US. BMC Womens Health. 2013;13:29. 
https://bmcwomenshealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1472-6874-
13-29. Accessed January 23, 2018. 
32. Gerdts C, Dobkin L, Foster DG, Schwarz EB. Side effects, physical health 
consequences, and mortality associated with abortion and birth after an 
unwanted pregnancy. Womens Health Issues. 2016;26(1):55-59. 
33. Kimport K, Dockray JP, Dodson S. What women seek from a pregnancy resource 
center. Contraception. 2016;94(2):168-172. 
34. Holt K, Janiak E, McCormick MC, et al. Pregnancy options counseling and abortion 
referrals among US primary care physicians: results from a national survey. Fam 
Med. 2017;49(7):527-536. 
 
Amy G. Bryant, MD, MSCR, is an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology in the 
Family Planning Division at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine in Chapel 
Hill. Her research interests include abortion access, crisis pregnancy centers, and 
postpartum, long-acting, reversible contraception. 
 
Jonas J. Swartz, MD, MPH, is a clinical fellow in family planning at the University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine in Chapel Hill. He did his residency training at Oregon Health 
& Sciences University and his research interests include contraception coverage, 
abortion policy, health reform, and immigration. 
 
Related in the AMA Journal of Ethics 
Directive Counseling about Becoming Pregnant, February 2012 
Legislating Abortion Care, April 2014 
Mandated Ultrasound Prior to Abortion, April 2014 
Prenatal Risk Assessment and Diagnosis of Down Syndrome: Strategies for 
Communicating Well with Patients, April 2016 
Reproductive Rights and Access to Reproductive Services for Women with Disabilities, 
April 2016 
Teen Pregnancy and Confidentiality, November 2014 
 
 
 
The viewpoints expressed in this article are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect 
the views and policies of the AMA. 
 
Copyright 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.  
ISSN 2376-6980 
AMA Journal of Ethics, March 2018 
277 
