 © American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
Original research article
INTRODUCTION
Exome or genome sequencing, collectively referred to as 
genomic sequencing (GS), provides unparalleled opportunities 
to screen thousands of disorders in newborns that have previ-
ously been considered impossible to detect. In addition to iden-
tifying risks for treatable childhood-onset diseases, GS may 
also allow early intervention to improve the outcome for many 
other genetic disorders, avoid the diagnostic odyssey in ill 
newborns, make genomic data available for future indications, 
provide pharmacogenomic information for guiding drug use, 
and help in reproductive planning. Although there are many 
benefits, concerns such as identification of variants of uncertain 
significance and social and economic implications of the find-
ings need to be addressed before GS is more widely adopted.
Another major challenge restricting the wider application 
of GS is interpreting the vast amount of genomic data within 
a short timeframe. To ensure that only results of high predic-
tive value are returned, best practice today calls for thorough 
review of evidence for each variant.1 Laboratories often use bio-
informatics tools to reduce the number of variants requiring 
manual assessment based on a set of filtration criteria such as 
allele frequency, predicted protein impact, and reported patho-
genicity claims. However, an important part of the interpreta-
tion process—determining whether the gene impacted by the 
variant is strongly associated with disease and meets criteria 
to be returned—involves manually reviewing the validity of 
each gene’s role in disease and assessing the utility of return-
ing the result using attributes such as penetrance and age of 
onset. At present, there is no resource of genes curated for these 
attributes, making analysis laborious and time-consuming. 
Although it is currently not feasible to predefine all disease-
causing variants in advance, it is possible to curate disease-
associated genes and predetermine which are appropriate to be 
reported in a newborn GS (nGS) scenario. Creating and shar-
ing a list of nGS target genes would help accelerate and stan-
dardize the interpretation process and facilitate the use of this 
technology to support newborn screening (NBS) programs.
The BabySeq Project is a randomized, controlled trial to 
explore medical, behavioral, and economic outcomes associ-
ated with the use of GS in newborns. To facilitate nGS results 
Submitted 14 July 2016; accepted 26 October 2016; advance online publication 12 January 2017. doi:10.1038/gim.2016.193
Purpose: Genomic sequencing (GS) for newborns may enable detec-
tion of conditions for which early knowledge can improve health out-
comes. One of the major challenges hindering its broader application 
is the time it takes to assess the clinical relevance of detected variants 
and the genes they impact so that disease risk is reported appropri-
ately.
Methods: To facilitate rapid interpretation of GS results in new-
borns, we curated a catalog of genes with putative pediatric relevance 
for their validity based on the ClinGen clinical validity classification 
framework criteria, age of onset, penetrance, and mode of inheri-
tance through systematic evaluation of published evidence. Based on 
these attributes, we classified genes to guide the return of results in 
the BabySeq Project, a randomized, controlled trial exploring the use 
of newborn GS (nGS), and used our curated list for the first 15 new-
borns sequenced in this project.
Results: Here, we present our curated list for 1,514 gene–disease 
associations. Overall, 954 genes met our criteria for return in nGS. 
This reference list eliminated manual assessment for 41% of rare vari-
ants identified in 15 newborns.
Conclusion: Our list provides a resource that can assist in guiding 
the interpretive scope of clinical GS for newborns and potentially 
other populations.
Genet Med advance online publication 12 January 2017
Key Words: clinical validity; exome sequencing; gene–disease 
 
association; newborn screening
1Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Partners HealthCare Personalized Medicine, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; 2Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 4Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston 
Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 5Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 6Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston 
Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 7Department of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 8Center for Medical 
Ethics and Health Policy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA; 9Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA; 10The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence: Heidi L. Rehm (hrehm@partners.org)
A curated gene list for reporting results of newborn  
genomic sequencing
Ozge Ceyhan-Birsoy, PhD1,2,3, Kalotina Machini, PhD1,2,3, Matthew S. Lebo, PhD1,2,3,  
Tim W. Yu, MD3,4,5, Pankaj B. Agrawal, MD, MMSC3,4,6, Richard B. Parad, MD, MPH3,7, 
Ingrid A. Holm, MD, MPH3,4, Amy McGuire, PhD8, Robert C. Green, MD, MPH3,9,10, 
Alan H. Beggs, PhD3,4, Heidi L. Rehm, PhD1,2,3,10; for the BabySeq Project
Genetics in meDicine  |  Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017
809
 CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al  |  A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing
Original research article
interpretation, we curated 1,514 genes for evidence supporting 
the gene’s role in disease, age of onset, penetrance, and mode of 
inheritance based on a set of criteria determined by our inter-
disciplinary group of clinical and molecular geneticists, pedia-
tricians, neonatologists, and biomedical ethicists. Using this 
information, we classified each gene as to whether it met the 
criteria to be returned in nGS. To provide proof of principle 
that our curated gene–disease association reference list facili-
tates results interpretation in nGS, we utilized it in the analysis 
of the first 15 newborns sequenced in the BabySeq Project.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The BabySeq project
Two cohorts of newborns and their parents were enrolled in 
the BabySeq Project: (i) healthy newborns from Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital Well Newborn Nursery and (ii) ill newborns 
from Boston Children’s Hospital’s neonatal intensive care unit. 
Family histories were obtained for each participant at enroll-
ment in a genetic counseling session. Half of the newborns 
in each cohort were randomized to receive standard care and 
genetic counseling based on their family histories only; the 
others received GS in addition to standard care and genetic 
counseling based on both their GS results and family histo-
ries. GS reports of those randomized to receive sequencing 
were entered into the newborn’s medical record. The impact 
of GS on newborn clinical care, parent and physician behav-
iors, and economic outcomes were evaluated in parents using 
baseline, 3-month, and 10-month postdisclosure surveys and 
in clinicians using baseline, postdisclosure (GS arm only), and 
end-of-study surveys. This study was approved by the Boston 
Children’s Hospital and Partners institutional review boards. 
Informed consent was obtained from each participant.
Generation of a gene–disease association reference list
Each specific gene–disease pair was curated for the following 
attributes:
Validity of gene–disease association. Evidence that the 
gene has a causal role in disease was determined based on 
the framework released by the Clinical Genome Resource 
(ClinGen) Gene Curation Working Group (https://www.
clinicalgenome.org/working-groups/gene-curation/projects-
initiatives/clinical-validity-classifications/). In this method, the 
validity of a gene–disease association is evaluated by reviewing 
the evidence reported in the literature, such as the number of 
families with pathogenic variants in the gene and functional 
studies, and classified into the following categories: conflicting 
evidence, no reported evidence, limited evidence, moderate 
evidence, strong evidence, and definitive evidence.
Age of onset. The youngest age at which individuals with 
pathogenic variants in the gene presented with disease was 
curated based on available information in the literature and 
classified into the following categories: ≤2 years of age, 2–10 
years of age, 10–18 years of age, and >18 years of age.
Penetrance. Estimated penetrance was curated based on the 
phenotype information for reported individuals in the literature 
and classified as “high” if ≥80% of individuals were symptomatic, 
“moderate” if 20–80% of individuals were symptomatic, and “low” 
if <20% of individuals were symptomatic. Because our assertions 
regarding penetrance were based on the literature without direct 
phenotyping of individuals, our approach was limited by the 
number of reported individuals and the phenotype description 
for affected and control individuals; therefore, our classifications 
reflect an estimate based on the available literature. To reflect 
the amount of evidence, a confidence rank was added to each 
assertion if the assertion was made for (i) genes with definitive or 
strong evidence and a large number of families or (ii) genes with 
only a small number of families (moderate evidence–level genes). 
For genes with limited or conflicting evidence, penetrance was 
not assessed and was noted as “unknown.
” 
Inheritance. The most common inheritance pattern for the 
gene was determined.
Sequencing and results analyses
Sequencing and results analyses were performed as described 
in the Supplementary Materials and Methods online. Variants 
were assessed and classified as described.2,3
RESULTS
Establishing criteria for the return of results in nGS
Our interdisciplinary group determined a set of criteria for 
return of results in nGS that were incorporated into our BabySeq 
Project protocol. Two distinct reporting strategies were cre-
ated for the two cohorts in our study in the context of return-
ing results for screening purposes versus for diagnostic testing 
(Figure 1a). A newborn genomic sequencing report (NGSR) 
was developed to return results relevant to both healthy and 
ill newborns. The criteria were developed to maximize benefit 
while minimizing uncertainty from reporting disorders with 
low penetrance, late onset, or suboptimal evidence for asso-
ciation. The NGSR was restricted to four groups of results: (i) 
childhood-onset (earliest reported onset before the age of 18) 
disease risk, involving genes with at least strong evidence to 
cause highly penetrant childhood-onset disorders; (ii) genes 
with moderate evidence and/or moderate penetrance associ-
ated with conditions for which action during childhood may 
prevent a devastating outcome later in life, considering that the 
benefit of learning that a newborn has a pathogenic variant in 
such a gene is likely to outweigh the uncertainty in disease risk; 
(iii) genes with strong pharmacogenomic associations (class 1 
and 2A genes in the PharmGKB database (https://www.phar-
mgkb.org)) that are relevant to the pediatric population, includ-
ing RYR1 associated with malignant hyperthermia, TPMT 
associated with thiopurine toxicity, and G6PD associated with 
hemolytic anemia due to glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency; and (iv) carrier status for any gene meeting these 
criteria (Figure 1b,c). Only pathogenic and likely pathogenic 
variants in these genes were included in the NGSR.
 Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017  |  Genetics in meDicine
810
 A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing  |  CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al
Original research article
Although only variants classified as pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic are returned to healthy infants, our group deter-
mined that all variants with evidence to support a clear or pos-
sible contribution to the infant’s indication should be returned 
for ill newborns, consistent with professional guidelines.4 
Hence, variants of uncertain significance in genes relevant to 
the newborn’s clinical indication, even if the gene has moder-
ate or limited evidence to cause the specific indication, are also 
returned to provide an opportunity for follow-up studies that 
may help clarify their clinical significance (Figure 1).
Identifying genes that meet criteria for reporting in NGSR 
and indication-based analyses
Our interdisciplinary group determined the set of rules for clas-
sifying each attribute. The following approach was used to ensure 
that genes associated with common genetic conditions that may 
present or be actionable during childhood were prioritized in 
the curation process. First, 430 genes defined as pediatric dis-
ease genes by Bell and colleagues5 were curated. Second, to iden-
tify genes associated with later onset or incomplete penetrance 
conditions for which action during childhood might prevent 
a devastating outcome, we searched for diseases known to our 
study team to be adult-onset or to have incomplete penetrance 
so they could be evaluated for validity and actionability. This 
search generated 113 genes, including 56 genes recommended by 
the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics to be 
returned as incidental findings6 and additional genes associated 
with cardiomyopathy, cardiac conduction disease, breast and/
or ovarian cancer, gastric cancer, nevoid basal cell carcinoma, 
melanoma, dyskeratosis congenita, pituitary adenoma, familial 
Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, amyotrophic lateral scle-
rosis, myofibrillar myopathy, spinal and bulbar muscular atro-
phy, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, aceruloplasminemia, 
glycogen storage disorders, amyloidosis, and diabetes. Finally, to 
prioritize additional genes and accelerate indication-based analy-
sis for ill newborns, lists of genes associated with 15 common 
newborn conditions encountered in Boston Children’s Hospital’s 
neonatal intensive care unit (hyperbilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, 
bowel dysfunction, hypothyroidism, hearing loss, respiratory 
disorder, inborn errors of metabolism, congenital heart disease, 
hypotonia, seizures, anemia/thrombocytopenia, thrombophilia, 
renal disease, skeletal dysplasia, and dermatologic disease) were 
created by assembling all genes reported in association with 
these presentations in the literature, through searching in OMIM 
(Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man), HGMD (the Human 
Genome Mutation Database), and PubMed. In addition, new 
genes were curated during the analysis of variants identified in 
BabySeq cases if the gene had not been previously curated. As 
of October 2016, curation of 1,514 gene–disease pairs has been 
completed, which includes 1,395 genes associated with one or 
more conditions (Supplementary Table S1 online). Curation of 
all genes associated with six common newborn disorders (hyper-
bilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, bowel dysfunction, hypothyroid-
ism, hearing loss, and respiratory distress) has been completed. 
Curation of genes associated with the remaining nine common 
neonatal intensive care unit disorders is ongoing.
Based on criteria consistent with the ClinGen clinical validity 
framework, 34% of the gene–disease pairs had definitive, 33% 
had strong, 16% had moderate, and 16% had limited evidence 
for association (Figure 2). Two genes, MYBPC3 and TMPO, 
Figure 1  Return of results criteria in the BabySeq project. (a) All newborns in the sequencing group receive a newborn genomic sequencing report (NGSR) 
that returns risk and carrier status for childhood-onset disease and pharmacogenomics variants that may be relevant to the pediatric population. In addition, 
sick newborns receive an indication-based analysis (IBA) that returns all variants with evidence to cause or contribute to the infant’s disease, with an option 
to query pharmacogenomics variants related to the infant’s care. (b) Criteria for genes to be included in the NGSR and IBA. NGSR was limited to genes with 
strong evidence to cause highly penetrant childhood-onset disorders; while genes related to the infant’s clinical features with moderate evidence or moderate 
penetrance or typically present at later ages were also included in IBA. When a specific disease is suspected based on the infant’s presentation, genes associated 
with that disease with limited evidence or low penetrance may also be returned. (c) Criteria for variants to be included in the NGSR and IBA. Only pathogenic and 
likely pathogenic variants were returned in the NGSR, whereas IBA also included variants of uncertain significance in genes associated with the infant’s indication.
Healthy newborn
Sick newborn
Newborn Genomic Sequencing Report
Risk for childhood-onset disease
Carrier status for childhood-onset disease
Pharmacogenomic variants (relevant to pediatrics)
Indication Based Analysis
Variants associated with the infant’s clinical features
Option to query pharmacogenomic variants
related to the infant’s care
If any indication arises
Strong
High
Childhood
Moderate
Moderate
Adulthood
Limited
Low
NGSR
IBA
Specific disease
suspected
Gene-disease
evidence level
Penetrance
Age of onset
Pathogenic
Likely pathogenic
Uncertain 
significance
Likely benign
Benign
Newborn Genomic Sequencing Report
Indication Based Analysis
a
b
c
Genetics in meDicine  |  Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017
811
 CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al  |  A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing
Original research article
had conflicting evidence for a causal role in dilated cardiomy-
opathy. The majority (94%) of the genes were associated with 
diseases presenting during childhood (<18 years), with 79% 
presenting at age ≤2 years, whereas only 6% presented dur-
ing adulthood; however, it should be noted that the genes were 
selected primarily for pediatric presentation.
Our understanding of penetrance is limited by the number 
of individuals screened for a particular gene or a variant in an 
unbiased manner and how well those individuals have been 
phenotyped. Therefore, our annotations of penetrance should 
be considered with this limitation. Based on the information 
available, approximately 73% of genes had high, 9% had mod-
erate, and 1% had low penetrance. This classification was made 
with high confidence for 1,023 genes that had data from a large 
number of individuals (definitive or strong evidence) and with 
lower confidence for 246 genes with a smaller number of families 
(moderate evidence). We did not attempt to define penetrance for 
the 16% of curated genes that had limited or conflicting evidence.
Among the 1,023 genes with strong and definitive evidence 
for disease association, 97% were reported to present before 
age 18 years, with 81% presenting during infancy (≤2 years) 
(Figure 2). Furthermore, 88% of these genes had high, 11% had 
moderate, and 1% had low penetrance.
Based on the results of our curation, we classified gene–-
disease pairs into three categories.
Category A: genes included in the NGSR with  
definitive or strong evidence to cause a highly  
penetrant childhood-onset disorder
Pathogenic variants in genes under this category have a high 
predictive value for a childhood-onset disorder and therefore 
meet our criteria to be returned in nGS. Return of such variants 
would provide more reliable information about risk for child-
hood-onset disease. Overall, 884 (58%) gene–disease pairs were 
in this category (Supplementary Table S1 online).
Category A includes four groups of genes (for a representa-
tive group of genes in category A, see Table 1). The first group 
is associated with diseases for which most affected individuals 
were symptomatic at birth or during the newborn period. For 
such diseases, GS may eliminate the need for extensive clinical 
tests and reduce diagnostic odysseys. The second group includes 
genes associated with disorders that presented soon after birth 
and had treatment opportunities available. Some of these dis-
orders are detectable by tandem mass spectrometry or other 
assays and are currently tested by conventional NBS programs. 
The third group is associated with diseases that present during 
childhood and would benefit from early intervention but cur-
rently are not tested in conventional NBS programs, such as 
lysosomal storage diseases or immunodeficiencies that are not 
detectable by T-cell-receptor excision circle assays. Finally, the 
fourth group of genes present during childhood and have no 
Figure 2 Summary of curated data for 1,514 gene–disease associations. The level of evidence that the gene is associated with disease, age of onset, and 
penetrance for all gene–disease pairs curated (top) and statistics for those with strong and definitive evidence (bottom) are demonstrated. Overall, 884 genes 
that have strong/definitive evidence to cause highly penetrant childhood-onset disease and 70 additional genes that are actionable in childhood met the BabySeq 
Project NGSR criteria, ~59.3% of which are typically inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and ~6.4% are inherited in an X-linked recessive manner.
Evidence
Age of onset
Penetrance
Age of onset
Penetrance
Genes with strong and definitive evidence (1,023)
Inheritance pattern of genes
meeting BabySeq reporting criteria (954)
Definitive
Strong
Moderate
Limited
Conflicting
<2 years
2–10 years
10–18 years
>18 years
High
Moderate
Low
Unknown
518
(34.2%)
505
 (33.4%)
246
(16.2%)
243
(16.1%)
2 
(0.1%)
1199
(79.2%)
146
(9.6%)
82 
(5.4%)
87
(5.7%)
1108 
(73.2%)
140
(9.2%)
21
(1.4%)
245
(16.2%)
<2 years
2–10 years
10–18 years
>18 years
High
Moderate
Low
831
(81.2%)
99
(9.7%)
60
(5.9%)
33
(3.2%)
901
(88.1%)
111
(10.8%)
11
(1.1%)
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal recessive
X-linked dominant
X-linked recessive
Imprinted
300
(31.4%)
566
(59.3%)
24
(2.5%)
61
(6.4%)
3
(0.3%)
884 genes
Strong/Definitive evidence
for Childhood-onset and
Highly penetrant disease
70 genes
reported based
on actionability
954 genes
meet BabySeq
reporting criteria
+
 Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017  |  Genetics in meDicine
812
 A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing  |  CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al
Original research article
effective treatment opportunities available at present, although 
knowledge at birth may still be beneficial to improve the health 
care and quality of life of the newborn and family. These benefits 
include timely supportive care, reducing the diagnostic odyssey 
when symptoms develop, preparation for the care of an ill child, 
and allowing family counseling and reproductive planning.
Category B: genes included in the NGSR based on 
actionability during childhood
This category consists of genes with moderate evidence or mod-
erate penetrance for which professional guidelines or expert 
opinion determined that noninvasive interventions would be 
likely to improve the outcomes. Genes associated with diseases 
such as cardiomyopathies, cardiac conduction diseases, and 
certain cancer syndromes for which noninvasive screening dur-
ing childhood may allow early detection were placed into this 
category.7–11 These genes may be included in the NGSR because 
the benefits of preventing a devastating outcome are likely to 
outweigh the uncertainty of disease risk. Two groups of genes 
were considered to fall into this category: (i) genes with mod-
erate evidence and/or penetrance for which noninvasive inter-
vention during childhood may prevent a devastating outcome 
and (ii) genes associated with diseases that typically present 
in adulthood but for which noninvasive intervention dur-
ing childhood may significantly improve the clinical outcome 
(Supplementary Table S2 online). An example of a gene in this 
category is MYBPC3, which is associated with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. MYBPC3 has definitive evidence for a causal 
role in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which may present dur-
ing childhood.12–19 Although the penetrance is only moderate, 
knowing this risk at birth may allow routine surveillance by 
echocardiography and noninvasive interventions when needed, 
which would provide tremendous benefits for reducing the risk 
of sudden cardiac death.
Seventy genes were placed in category B. Overall, 954 of the 
curated 1,514 gene–disease associations (63%) were in catego-
ries A and B and therefore met criteria to be returned.
Category C: genes that did not meet criteria to be returned 
in the NGSR
This category consists of genes excluded from reporting in the 
NGSR either due to having insufficient (moderate/limited/no/
conflicting) evidence to cause disease or having low/moder-
ate penetrance, therefore having low predictive value, or due 
to being associated with adult-onset conditions for which there 
is no evidence that noninvasive intervention during childhood 
may improve outcome (Table 2). These genes did not meet our 
reporting criteria for healthy newborns or as incidental find-
ings for newborns with unrelated indications; however, they 
may be returned in an indication-based analysis if associated 
with the patient’s symptoms. If additional evidence support-
ing the gene’s role in disease or suggesting earlier disease onset 
becomes available in the future, then these genes may be reclas-
sified for inclusion in the NGSR.
Table 1 Example genes in category A
Gene
Disease
Gene
Disease
Genes associated with diseases that 
present at birth
CHD7
Charge syndrome
MYH3
Arthrogryposis, distal
EDA
Ectodermal dysplasia, hypohidrotic
NIPBL
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
FGFR3
Achondroplasia
PEX1
Zellweger syndrome
HRAS
Costello syndrome
SHH
Holoprosencephaly
MTM1
Myotubular myopathy
TBX5
Holt-Oram syndrome
Genes associated with diseases that are 
currently tested in conventional NBS and 
are likely to benefit from early treatment
BTD
Biotinidase deficiency
GALT
Galactosemia
CBS
Homocystinuria
GJB2
Hearing loss
CFTR
Cystic fibrosis
IVD
Isovaleric acidemia
FAH
Tyrosinemia type I
PAH
Phenylketonuria
GAA
Glycogen storage disease type II 
(Pompe disease)
OTC
Ornithine transcarbamylase 
deficiency
Genes associated with diseases that may 
benefit from early treatment but currently 
are not tested in conventional NBS
ABCD1
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
GALC
Krabbe disease
ATP7B
Wilson disease
GBA
Gaucher disease
DHCR7
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
IDUA
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
DMD
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
MPI
Congenital disorder of 
glycosylation type Ib
ELANE
Congenital neutropenia
ZAP70
Severe combined 
immunodeficiency
Genes associated with diseases that 
present during childhood and currently 
lack effective treatment opportunities
APTX
Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia and 
hypoalbuminemia
MECP2
Rett syndrome
COL7A1
Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica
NEB
Nemaline myopathy
ERCC6
Cockayne syndrome
POMT1
Walker-Warburg syndrome
IKBKAP
Familial dysautonomia
RAI1
Smith Magenis syndrome
LMNA
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
TPP1
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
NBS, newborn screening.
Genetics in meDicine  |  Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017
813
 CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al  |  A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing
Original research article
Use of the curated gene database in nGS analysis
To understand whether curating gene–disease association 
facilitates interpretation of genomic sequence data for nGS, we 
used our reference list in the NGSR analysis of the first 15 new-
borns sequenced in the BabySeq Project. Initial filtration iden-
tified variants with predicted loss of function or those reported 
in HGMD or ClinVar and having an allele frequency ≤3% in 
the general population. This approach resulted in 8 to 21 vari-
ants (median 14 variants) in genes associated with Mendelian 
disease per case, which were further assessed to determine 
whether they met criteria for NGSR inclusion. To ensure that 
variants in genes with recently published information and 
those that have not been previously curated were not missed, 
the curated gene list was not used in variant filtration. The gene 
list was used to accelerate variant analysis following the ini-
tial filtration described so that for each rare variant identified, 
only new information that would change the classification of 
the gene was reviewed if the gene had been curated previously. 
Otherwise, the gene was curated at the time of case analysis. 
In total, 201 variants were detected in 163 genes, with variants 
in 27 genes detected more than once. Of the 163 unique genes, 
111 had already been curated and we checked whether any 
new information was available that would change their previ-
ous classifications. The remaining 52 genes were curated during 
the analysis of each case. Overall, 68/163 genes (42%) did not 
meet the criteria for return at the time of analysis (Table 3). 
Based on results of gene curation, 83/201 variants (41%) were 
in genes not meeting NGSR criteria excluding them from fur-
ther analysis.
Variants in 95/163 genes were further assessed for clini-
cal significance and 18 were classified as pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic and returned (Supplementary Table S3 online). 
All of these variants were heterozygous and conferred carrier 
status for highly penetrant recessive childhood-onset disor-
ders. No variants with strong evidence to suggest childhood-
onset disease risk were identified. Eleven of 15 cases had at 
least one carrier status variant reported (six newborns had one, 
four had two, and one had four carrier status variants; four had 
none).
Assessment time for each rare variant ranged between 
10 minutes and 4 hours, depending on the available literature. 
Excluding 41% of the median number of 14 variants/exome 
from further assessment saved several hours in the interpreta-
tion process.
DISCUSSION
To accelerate interpretation and facilitate integration of GS into 
infant care, we curated 1,514 genes and classified them based on 
the appropriateness for return in nGS, using criteria established 
by our expert group. Our expectation is that future criteria for 
return of results in nGS will benefit from insights gathered in 
the BabySeq Project and similar studies.
The validity of gene–disease associations were classified 
using criteria based on the ClinGen clinical validity framework. 
It should be noted that the intent of the framework was to pro-
vide a provisional classification that is subsequently reviewed 
and finalized by disease experts; many of the validity assess-
ments have not yet been approved by experts.
Table 2 Example genes in category C that were excluded from the NGSR
Gene
Disease
Evidence 
for 
role in 
disease
Earliest 
age of 
onset
Penetrance
Reason for exclusion
F5
DVT
Strong
Childhood
Low
Low penetrance: The factor V Leiden variant leads to increased risk for DVT 
by 2- to 4-fold in heterozygotes and 80- to 100-fold in homozygotes. Due 
to the low penetrance of this gene, ACMG guidelines do not recommend 
factor V Leiden testing in asymptomatic individuals in the absence of other 
risk factors.23–28
FLG
Ichthyosis vulgaris
Strong
Childhood
Moderate
Moderate penetrance: Autosomal dominant ichthyosis vulgaris due to 
variants in FLG is characterized by palmar hyperlinearity, keratosis pilaris, 
and a fine scale. Penetrance is moderate. The phenotype is often mild and 
escapes clinical attention.29–32
APP
Alzheimer’s disease
Strong
Adulthood
Low
Adult-onset: Alzheimer’s disease is an adult-onset condition and there 
is currently no intervention during childhood that may improve the 
outcome.33–35
BRCA1
Breast cancer
Strong
Adulthood
High
Adult-onset: BRCA1-associated breast cancer has not been reported in 
individuals younger than 18 years of age and currently there is no evidence 
that screening during childhood may allow early detection or significantly 
improve the outcome.36–39
GTF2H5
Trichothiodystrophy
Moderate
Childhood
High
Moderate evidence: Although the gene has been reportedly associated 
with presentation during childhood with high penetrance, there is currently 
a moderate level of evidence for a causal role in disease.
CCDC78
Congenital 
myopathy
Limited
Childhood
High
Limited evidence: CCDC78 has been reported in association with 
congenital myopathy with high penetrance based on the small number of 
reported individuals. However, there is currently limited evidence for this 
gene’s role in disease.
ACMG, American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics; DVT, Deep vein thrombosis.
 Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017  |  Genetics in meDicine
814
 A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing  |  CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al
Original research article
Table 3 Genes excluded from analysis in the first 15 BabySeq cases
Gene
Disease
Reason for exclusion
ACADL
Sudden infant death
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
AP1S3
Pustular psoriasis
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
ASCL1
Central hypoventilation syndrome
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
AXL
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
BNC2
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
BRCA1
Breast cancer
Adult-onset disease
BRCA2
Breast cancer
Adult-onset disease
CARS2
Epileptic encephalopathy
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
CDH1
Orofacial clefts
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
CIRH1A
North American Indian childhood cirrhosis
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
COG5
Congenital disorder of glycosylation, type IIi
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
CPZ
Autism
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
CR2
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
CSTA
Exfoliative ichthyosis
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
DCTN1
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Adult-onset disease
DTHD1
Leber congenital amaurosis with myopathy
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
ECE1
Hirschsprung disease
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
ERCC4
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
FAAH2
Autism spectrum disorder
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
FKBPL
Infertility
Insufficient evidence for role in disease, adult-onset disease
FLG
Ichthyosis vulgaris
Moderate penetrance
FMO3
Trimethylaminuria
Non-disease phenotype
FOXF2
Disorders of sex development with cleft palate
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
FSCN2
Retinitis pigmentosa
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
GUCY2C
Meconium ileus
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
HERC2
Autism spectrum disorder
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
HFE
Hemochromatosis
Low penetrance
IFT122
Cranioectodermal dysplasia
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
IRS1
Diabetes mellitus, noninsulin dependent
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
ITGA7
Congenital muscular dystrophy
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
LHB
Hypogonadism
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
LMNB2
Lipodystrophy, partial
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
LPIN2
Majeed syndrome
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
LRRK2
Parkinson disease
Adult-onset disease
MATN4
Multiple anomalies
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MED25
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MIB1
Left ventricular noncompaction
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MPDU1
Congenital disorder of glycosylation, type If
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MTO1
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and lactic acidosis
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MYO1C
Sensorineural hearing loss
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MYO1F
Sensorineural hearing loss
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
MYPN
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
NEDD4L
Epilepsy, photosensitive generalized
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
NLRP7
Hydatidiform mole
Adult-onset disease
OTOG
Sensorineural hearing loss
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
OTUD4
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, ataxia, and dementia
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
PDE11A
Adrenocortical hyperplasia
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
PODXL
Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
POMC
Proopiomelanocortin deficiency
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
PVRL1
Cleft lip/palate
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
RAD51B
Breast and/or ovarian cancer
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
Table 3 Continued on next page
Genetics in meDicine  |  Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017
815
 CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al  |  A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing
Original research article
There are no guidelines for defining categories of age of onset 
or penetrance of genes. Therefore, we generated our own crite-
ria to curate these attributes. Because the pathogenic mecha-
nism and, thus, the expression of the phenotype may differ for 
each gene, we made our classifications at the gene level. The 
assertions regarding penetrance and age of onset were made 
with higher confidence for genes that had definitive or strong 
evidence due to the larger amount of data available for these 
genes. Our ability to evaluate these attributes was limited by 
the phenotype reports in the literature, which are undoubtedly 
biased toward diseased individuals due to the common use of 
families enriched with multiple relatives with the condition.
Among the 1,514 gene–disease associations curated, 32% 
did not have a strong or definitive level of evidence for a causal 
role in disease, suggesting that caution should be exercised in 
interpreting variants identified in these genes. Age of onset was 
younger than 18 years for 94% of curated genes. This large per-
centage is partly due to prioritization of genes associated with 
newborn presentations. Because we started with genes defined 
as disease-causing in the literature, none of the genes in our list 
were classified as having no evidence for a role in disease. As a 
result of this prioritization, the statistics of our curated list are 
likely to be different than those for a randomly selected list of 
genes. However, it is interesting that although genes associated 
with pediatric disorders were prioritized, only 63% met criteria 
to be returned in the NGSR. This result emphasizes the need for 
expert review of genes to determine appropriateness for report-
ing in nGS.
Although we established a strict set of criteria for the return 
of results, the decision regarding whether a gene met NGSR cri-
teria was challenging for many genes. One such group of genes 
presented with a mixed phenotype that partially met report-
ing criteria. For example, there was moderate evidence that the 
FLNC gene is associated with myofibrillar myopathy, a disease 
including myopathy and cardiac arrhythmias. Although cardiac 
arrhythmias may be considered actionable during childhood, 
reporting pathogenic variants in this gene would disclose infor-
mation regarding risk for adult-onset myopathy, which does not 
meet NGSR reporting criteria. Therefore, FLNC was considered 
as not meeting NGSR criteria. Another group of challenging 
genes had low penetrance; however, knowing that a person has 
pathogenic variants in them may be beneficial to avoid precipi-
tating factors and may have a positive impact on the clinical 
outcome. An example is HMBS, which is an established gene 
for acute intermittent porphyria with low penetrance (approxi-
mately 10% are symptomatic). This gene does not meet report-
ing criteria due to low penetrance; however, learning about the 
risk for acute intermittent porphyria at birth may provide the 
opportunity to avoid precipitating factors and reduce the risk 
for acute attacks. As we learn more about the benefits and risks 
of returning such information in nGS, genes similar to FLNC 
and HMBS may be included in future nGS.
The majority of the 954 genes meeting NGSR criteria were 
associated with recessive conditions. This implies that if the car-
rier status for recessive disorders is reported in nGS, then it may 
have a significant impact on the number of individuals with 
reported variants. Indeed, carrier status variants were identified 
in the majority of the first 15 BabySeq cases. Returning carrier 
status in nGS may be helpful for the child and family mem-
bers in future reproductive planning and may provide clinically 
significant information for some recessive disorders for which 
carrier individuals may have mild presentations. However, ade-
quate genetic counseling is essential to ensure that results are 
well understood and that follow-up testing options are available 
for parents to estimate their reproductive risk. Although there 
is literature regarding the impact of returning carrier status 
information to children, these studies generally focus on ado-
lescents with a family history of disease. There are currently no 
SERPINA1
Antitrypsin alpha 1 deficiency
Low penetrance
SLC27A5
Bile acid amidation defect
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
SLC9A3R1
Nephrolithiasis/osteoporosis, hypophosphatemic
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
SLCO1B3
Hyperbilirubinemia
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
SMO
Medulloblastoma
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
TGFBR3
Premature ovarian failure
Insufficient evidence for role in disease, Adult-onset disease
TMC8
Epidermodysplasia verruciformi
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
TMPO
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Disputed evidence for role in disease
TRPM2
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
TSPEAR
Sensorineural hearing loss
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
TTC21B
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
VPS53
Progressive cerebello-cerebral atrophy
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
VSX1
Keratoconus
Adult-onset disease
WDR36
Glaucoma
Adult-onset disease
YARS2
Myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
ZFPM2
Tetralogy of Fallot
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
ZNF674
Mental retardation
Insufficient evidence for role in disease
Table 3 Continued
Gene
Disease
Reason for exclusion
 Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017  |  Genetics in meDicine
816
 A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing  |  CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al
Original research article
data regarding the implications of returning the carrier status of 
newborns. To understand the impact of returning carrier status 
information in nGS, we included this information in the NGSR 
in the BabySeq Project.
There is ongoing debate about genetic testing for adult-
onset disorders in children and whether nondisclosure of 
adult-onset disease risk may do more harm to both the child 
and the family, especially if the disorder is actionable.20–22 
One example is BRCA1 variants associated with breast can-
cer risk. It is true that there is currently no intervention in 
childhood known to impact the outcome of breast cancer. 
However, withholding this information may lead to the pos-
sibility of never receiving the result throughout their lifetime 
if later analysis is not pursued, thus losing the benefit of early 
intervention, which may be lifesaving. Furthermore, return-
ing pathogenic variants in BRCA1 in a newborn would also 
disclose that one of the parents probably harbors the same 
variant. Early intervention based on this knowledge may have 
lifesaving consequences for the infant’s parent, which in turn 
could obviously impact the child’s quality of life. This subject 
will certainly continue to be discussed as the use of GS for 
children increases. Alternative approaches may include opt-
in by the parents to receive adult-onset disease risk informa-
tion for their newborn.
Although we periodically update our classifications for previ-
ously curated genes, because new information is published con-
stantly, our reference list should not be considered final. Despite 
this limitation, the reference list was useful for facilitating results 
interpretation in the first 15 BabySeq cases and eliminated the 
need for manual variant assessment for 41% of detected rare 
variants in genes reported as Mendelian disease genes. This 
exclusion rate is expected to increase as additional genes are 
curated. Our curated list is available as Supplementary Table 
S1 online, and future updates will be made available online as 
a public resource.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper 
at http://www.nature.com/gim
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research reported in this publication was supported by the 
National Institutes of Health under awards U19HD077671, 
R01HD075802, U01HG006500 and U41HG006834. The content 
is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
DISCLOSURE
O.C.-B. is an employee of the Mount Sinai Genetic Testing Labo-
ratory, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. T.W.Y. reports 
receiving consulting fees from and equity in Claritas Genomics 
outside of the submitted work. R.C.G. is supported by NIH grants 
and reports that he receives personal compensation for speaking 
or consulting from AIA, Helix, Illumina, Invitae, and Prudential. 
The other authors declare no conflict of interest.
REfERENCES
 
1. 
Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, et al.; ACMG Laboratory Quality Assurance 
Committee. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence 
variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. 
Genet Med 2015;17:405–424.
 
2. 
Duzkale H, Shen J, McLaughlin H, et al. A systematic approach to assessing the 
clinical significance of genetic variants. Clin Genet 2013;84:453–463.
 
3. 
McLaughlin HM, Ceyhan-Birsoy O, Christensen KD, et al.; MedSeq Project. A 
systematic approach to the reporting of medically relevant findings from whole 
genome sequencing. BMC Med Genet 2014;15:134.
 
4. 
Rehm HL, Bale SJ, Bayrak-Toydemir P, et al.; Working Group of the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Laboratory Quality Assurance 
Commitee. ACMG clinical laboratory standards for next-generation 
sequencing. Genet Med 2013;15:733–747.
 
5. 
Bell CJ, Dinwiddie DL, Miller NA, et al. Carrier testing for severe childhood 
recessive diseases by next-generation sequencing. Sci Transl Med 2011;3:65ra4.
 
6. 
Green RC, Berg JS, Grody WW, et al.; American College of Medical Genetics 
and Genomics. ACMG recommendations for reporting of incidental findings in 
clinical exome and genome sequencing. Genet Med 2013;15:565–574.
 
7. 
Gersh BJ, Maron BJ, Bonow RO, et al.; American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines; 
American Association for Thoracic Surgery; American Society of 
Echocardiography; American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; Heart Failure Society 
of America; Heart Rhythm Society; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions; Society of Thoracic Surgeons. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
diagnosis and treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: executive summary: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2011;124:2761–2796.
 
8. 
Ackerman MJ, Priori SG, Willems S, et al. HRS/EHRA expert consensus statement 
on the state of genetic testing for the channelopathies and cardiomyopathies 
this document was developed as a partnership between the Heart Rhythm 
Society (HRS) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA). Heart 
Rhythm 2011;8:1308–1339.
 
9. 
Thakker RV, Newey PJ, Walls GV, et al.; Endocrine Society. Clinical practice 
guidelines for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2012;97:2990–3011.
 
10. Calmettes C, Ponder BA, Fischer JA, Raue F. Early diagnosis of the multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndrome: consensus statement. European 
Community Concerted Action: Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma. Eur J Clin Invest 
1992;22:755–760.
 
11. American Gastroenterological Association. American Gastroenterological 
Association medical position statement: hereditary colorectal cancer and 
genetic testing. Gastroenterology 2001;121:195–197.
 
12. Morita H, Rehm HL, Menesses A, et al. Shared genetic causes of cardiac 
hypertrophy in children and adults. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1899–1908.
 
13. Richard P, Charron P, Carrier L, et al.; EUROGENE Heart Failure Project. 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: distribution of disease genes, spectrum of 
mutations, and implications for a molecular diagnosis strategy. Circulation 
2003;107:2227–2232.
 
14. Van Driest SL, Vasile VC, Ommen SR, et al. Myosin binding protein C mutations 
and compound heterozygosity in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2004;44:1903–1910.
 
15. Olivotto I, Girolami F, Ackerman MJ, et al. Myofilament protein gene mutation 
screening and outcome of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Mayo 
Clin Proc 2008;83:630–638.
 
16. Alfares AA, Kelly MA, McDermott G, et al. Results of clinical genetic testing 
of 2,912 probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: expanded panels offer 
limited additional sensitivity. Genet Med 2015;17:880–888.
 
17. Oliva-Sandoval MJ, Ruiz-Espejo F, Monserrat L, et al. Insights into genotype-
phenotype correlation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Findings from 18 
Spanish families with a single mutation in MYBPC3. Heart 2010;96:1980–1984.
 
18. Watkins H, Conner D, Thierfelder L, et al. Mutations in the cardiac myosin 
binding protein-C gene on chromosome 11 cause familial hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Nat Genet 1995;11:434–437.
 
19. Bonne G, Carrier L, Bercovici J, et al. Cardiac myosin binding protein-C 
gene splice acceptor site mutation is associated with familial hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Nat Genet 1995;11:438–440.
 
20. Ross LF, Ross LF, Saal HM, David KL, Anderson RR; American Academy of 
Pediatrics; American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Technical 
report: Ethical and policy issues in genetic testing and screening of children. 
Genet Med 2013;15:234–245.
Genetics in meDicine  |  Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017
817
 CEYHAN-BIRSOY et al  |  A gene list for reporting results of newborn genomic sequencing
Original research article
 
21. Botkin JR, Belmont JW, Berg JS, et al. Points to consider: ethical, legal, and 
psychosocial implications of genetic testing in children and adolescents. Am J 
Hum Genet 2015;97:6–21.
 
22. Wilfond BS, Fernandez CV, Green RC. Disclosing secondary findings from 
pediatric sequencing to families: considering the “benefit to families”. J Law 
Med Ethics 2015;43:552–558.
 
23. Emmerich J, Rosendaal FR, Cattaneo M, et al. Combined effect of factor V 
Leiden and prothrombin 20210A on the risk of venous thromboembolism–
pooled analysis of 8 case-control studies including 2310 cases and 3204 
controls. Study Group for Pooled-Analysis in Venous Thromboembolism. 
Thromb Haemost 2001;86:809–816.
 
24. Dahlbäck B, Zöller B, Hillarp A. Inherited resistance to activated protein C caused 
by presence of the FV:Q506 allele as a basis of venous thrombosis. Haemostasis 
1996;26(suppl 4):301–314.
 
25. Bertina RM, Koeleman BP
, Koster T, et al. Mutation in blood coagulation factor 
V associated with resistance to activated protein C. Nature 1994;369:64–67.
 
26. Kjellberg U, van Rooijen M, Bremme K, Hellgren M. Factor V Leiden mutation 
and pregnancy-related complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010;203:469.
e1–469.e8.
 
27. Gohil R, Peck G, Sharma P
. The genetics of venous thromboembolism. A meta-
analysis involving approximately 120,000 cases and 180,000 controls. Thromb 
Haemost 2009;102:360–370.
 
28. Grody WW, Griffin JH, Taylor AK, Korf BR, Heit JA; ACMG Factor V. Leiden 
Working Group. American College of Medical Genetics consensus statement 
on factor V Leiden mutation testing. Genet Med 2001;3:139–148.
 
29. Oji V, Seller N, Sandilands A, et al. Ichthyosis vulgaris: novel FLG mutations in the 
German population and high presence of CD1a+ cells in the epidermis of the 
atopic subgroup. Br J Dermatol 2009;160:771–781.
 
30. Nomura T, Akiyama M, Sandilands A, et al. Prevalent and rare mutations in the 
gene encoding filaggrin in Japanese patients with ichthyosis vulgaris and atopic 
dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 2009;129:1302–1305.
 
31. Sandilands A, Terron-Kwiatkowski A, Hull PR, et al. Comprehensive analysis of 
the gene encoding filaggrin uncovers prevalent and rare mutations in ichthyosis 
vulgaris and atopic eczema. Nat Genet 2007;39:650–654.
 
32. Smith FJ, Irvine AD, Terron-Kwiatkowski A, et al. Loss-of-function mutations 
in the gene encoding filaggrin cause ichthyosis vulgaris. Nat Genet 2006;38: 
337–342.
 
33. Kamino K, Orr HT, Payami H, et al. Linkage and mutational analysis of familial 
Alzheimer disease kindreds for the APP gene region. Am J Hum Genet 
1992;51:998–1014.
 
34. Goate A, Chartier-Harlin MC, Mullan M, et al. Segregation of a missense 
mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 1991;349:704–706.
 
35. Levy E, Carman MD, Fernandez-Madrid IJ, et al. Mutation of the Alzheimer’s 
disease amyloid gene in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, Dutch type. Science 
1990;248:1124–1126.
 
36. Welcsh PL, King MC. BRCA1 and BRCA2 and the genetics of breast and ovarian 
cancer. Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:705–713.
 
37. Tonin PN, Mes-Masson AM, Futreal PA, et al. Founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 
mutations in French Canadian breast and ovarian cancer families. Am J Hum 
Genet 1998;63:1341–1351.
 
38. Struewing JP, Hartge P, Wacholder S, et al. The risk of cancer associated with 
specific mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among Ashkenazi Jews. N Engl J Med 
1997;336:1401–1408.
 
39. Castilla LH, Couch FJ, Erdos MR, et al. Mutations in the BRCA1 gene in families 
with early-onset breast and ovarian cancer. Nat Genet 1994;8:387–391.
 Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017  |  Genetics in meDicine
818
