 1056
ACMG StAteMent
© American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) 
guidelines and statements have assisted patients seeking pre-
natal screening information and health-care providers respon-
sible for providing accurate and up-to-date information to their 
patients.1–3 Until recently, noninvasive prenatal screening for 
aneuploidy relied on measurements of maternal serum ana-
lytes and/or ultrasonography. These have a false-positive rate of 
approximately 5% and detection rates of 50–95%, depending on 
the specific screening strategy used. Advances in genomic tech-
nologies led to noninvasive prenatal screening that relies on the 
presence of cell-free DNA derived from the placenta but cir-
culating in maternal blood, which is referred to here as nonin-
vasive prenatal screening (NIPS). Massive parallel sequencing 
of maternal and placental (also called fetal when speaking of 
the fraction of this DNA in maternal blood) fragments of DNA 
occurs simultaneously. Sequencing with quantification can be 
random, targeted, and followed by quantification or exploi-
tation of single-nucleotide polymorphisms.4–8 Alternatively, 
sequencing can take place by measuring the release of hydrogen 
ions as nucleotides are added to a DNA template (i.e., semicon-
ductor sequencing).9 Microarray technology can also be used 
to quantify DNA.10 Bioinformatics that enable these method-
ologies is complex and proprietary. Since the introduction of 
NIPS in 2011, health-care providers and patients have experi-
enced marketing pressures, rapidly evolving professional prac-
tice guidelines, and confusion regarding the appropriate role of 
Submitted 7 June 2016; accepted 7 June 2016; advance online publication 28 July 2016. doi:10.1038/gim.2016.97
Noninvasive prenatal screening using cell-free DNA (NIPS) has been 
rapidly integrated into prenatal care since the initial American Col-
lege of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) statement in 2013. 
New evidence strongly suggests that NIPS can replace conventional 
screening for Patau, Edwards, and Down syndromes across the 
maternal age spectrum, for a continuum of gestational age beginning 
at 9–10 weeks, and for patients who are not significantly obese. This 
statement sets forth a new framework for NIPS that is supported by 
information from validation and clinical utility studies. Pretest coun-
seling for NIPS remains crucial; however, it needs to go beyond dis-
cussions of Patau, Edwards, and Down syndromes. The use of NIPS 
to include sex chromosome aneuploidy screening and screening for 
selected copy-number variants (CNVs) is becoming commonplace 
because there are no other screening options to identify these con-
ditions. Providers should have a more thorough understanding of 
patient preferences and be able to educate about the current draw-
backs of NIPS across the prenatal screening spectrum. Laboratories 
are encouraged to meet the needs of providers and their patients by 
delivering meaningful screening reports and to engage in education. 
With health-care-provider guidance, the patient should be able to 
make an educated decision about the current use of NIPS and the 
ramifications of a positive, negative, or no-call result.
Genet Med advance online publication 28 July 2016
Key Words: cell-free fetal DNA; noninvasive prenatal testing; 
 
prenatal genetic screening
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA; 2Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School and Division of Medical Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 3American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; 4GeneDx, 
Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA; 5New York City Health + Hospitals/Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA; 6University of South Carolina School of Medicine, 
Greenville Health System, Greenville, South Carolina, USA; 7Montefiore Medical Center, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Women’s Health, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Correspondence: Anthony R. Gregg (greggar@ufl.edu)
The Board of Directors of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics approved this statement on 23 May 2016.
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy,  
2016 update: a position statement of the American College 
of Medical Genetics and Genomics
Anthony R. Gregg, MD, MBA1, Brian G. Skotko, MD, MPP2, Judith L. Benkendorf, MS3, 
Kristin G. Monaghan, PhD4, Komal Bajaj, MD5, Robert G. Best, PhD6, Susan Klugman, MD7 and 
Michael S. Watson, MS, PhD3; on behalf of the ACMG Noninvasive Prenatal Screening Work Group
Disclaimer: This statement is designed primarily as an educational resource for clinicians to help them provide quality medical services. Adherence to this  
statement 
is completely voluntary and does not necessarily assure a successful medical outcome. This statement should not be considered inclusive of all proper procedures and 
tests or exclusive of other procedures and tests that are reasonably directed toward obtaining the same results. In determining the propriety of any specific  
procedure 
or test, the clinician should apply his or her own professional judgment to the specific clinical circumstances presented by the individual patient or  
specimen. 
 
Clinicians are encouraged to document the reasons for the use of a particular procedure or test, whether or not it is in conformance with this  
statement. Clinicians 
also are advised to take notice of the date this statement was adopted and to consider other medical and scientific information that becomes available after that date. 
It also would be prudent to consider whether intellectual property interests may restrict the performance of certain tests and other procedures.
 Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016  |  GeNetiCs in MediCiNe
 1057
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update  |  GREGG et al
ACMG StAteMent
NIPS in prenatal practice.11–15 This position statement replaces 
the 2013 “
ACMG Statement on Noninvasive Prenatal Screening 
for Fetal Aneuploidy.”3
We emphasize that all genetic screening has residual risk (i.e., 
risk of having a genetic condition even after receiving a negative 
or “normal” result). This concept is independent of the screen-
ing modality, condition screened, or number of conditions 
screened. The concept of residual risk supports our use of the 
acronym NIPS, where the “S” represents screening. It is impor-
tant to emphasize what NIPS does not provide to patients. NIPS 
is not used clinically to screen for single-gene disorders (e.g., 
variation in the genome caused by relatively small changes in 
nucleotide sequence). NIPS is not used to predict late preg-
nancy complications. NIPS does not screen for open neural 
tube defects; therefore, maternal serum α-fetoprotein testing 
to screen for open neural tube defects should still be offered at 
15–20 weeks of gestation. NIPS does not replace routine fetal 
anatomic screening using ultrasound.
Screening tests move through a predictable stepwise progres-
sion from laboratory development to clinical use. The ACMG 
recognizes this course as (i) analytical validity, (ii) clinical valid-
ity, and (iii) clinical utility. The last of these is the most complex.
• 
Analytical validity refers to whether the screening test 
detects the target of the test in those with the target (ana-
lytical sensitivity) without detecting it in those without 
the target (analytical specificity). Regarding NIPS, ana-
lytical validity asks whether various concentrations of 
maternal and placental DNA can be used to determine 
the presence or absence of fetal aneuploidy (or other 
conditions). Analytical validity has been established 
for the variety of screening methods discussed in this 
article.10,16–19
• 
Clinical validity refers to how well NIPS performs and 
focuses on detection rate (DR), the proportion of those 
who screen positive and will have the clinical condi-
tion (clinical sensitivity), and the proportion who will 
not (clinical specificity (SPEC)). These test metrics are 
independent of the prevalence of the condition being 
screened. Because NIPS addresses fairly uncommon con-
ditions, validation studies are used to understand the DR 
and SPEC using banked or research samples. This allows 
overrepresentation of samples for the target condition of 
interest. Between 2011 and 2013, there were at least eight 
widely quoted validation studies spread across four labo-
ratories offering NIPS clinically.4–8,20–22 Validation studies 
reached similar conclusions. NIPS had very high DR and 
SPEC, reaching nearly 99% for Down syndrome caused 
by trisomy 21, translocations, and trisomy 21 mosaicism. 
The DR and SPEC were 80–100% for Edwards syndrome 
caused by trisomy 18 and trisomy 18 mosaicism, as well 
as for Patau syndrome caused by trisomy 13, transloca-
tions and trisomy 13 mosaicism. In this document, we 
refer to all three syndromes as “traditionally screened 
aneuploidies.” Thus, in clinical validation studies, NIPS 
was shown to outperform conventional screening 
approaches.23–25
• 
Clinical utility refers to whether a screening test is reli-
able and useful to patients. Clinical utility studies inform 
patients, providers, and payers about decision making. 
These studies can provide objective test metrics such as 
positive predictive values (PPVs) and negative predic-
tive values (NPVs). It is noteworthy that PPV and NPV 
can be determined for a population by modeling (using 
DR and SPEC as well as population prevalence) or by 
actual measure. Furthermore, one can establish PPV on 
a population basis (e.g., all women of a certain age) or 
individually (using information that is patient-specific). 
Cost efficacy in terms of dollars or cost utility measured 
by cost per case detected or quality-adjusted life-year is 
also used to describe clinical utility.26 Because cost effi-
cacy and cost utility studies use a high degree of model-
ing and assumptions (clinical care and monetary), these 
are at risk for bias (systematic and random). We chose 
not to include studies of this nature when making our 
recommendations.
iMPLeMeNtAtiON OF NiPs iNtO PRACtiCe: 
GeNetiC testiNG As A MULtiFACeted CLiNiCAL 
PROCess
Genetic testing and screening modalities used in pregnancy, 
such as NIPS, are offered with the aim of providing patients 
information that can help them optimize their pregnancy 
outcomes.27 It is accepted practice, when implementing these 
modalities, to follow a multifaceted process in which genetic 
counseling is a common thread. Specific steps include: pretest 
education, counseling, and informed consent; the screening 
or testing procedure; a laboratory component that includes 
test interpretation; and, finally, the disclosure of results to the 
patient within a context that includes the appropriate educa-
tion, counseling, and follow-up.
The core of genetic counseling is establishing patient desire 
and expectations. Genetic counseling is not merely educational; 
it is a patient-centered form of medical communication facili-
tating decisions on a course of action that are made solely by 
the patient once the patient has been given the necessary facts, 
alternatives, and anticipated consequences.28,29 In this context, 
genetic counseling follows the Rogerian method, which is cli-
ent-centered and nondirective.30 ACMG recognizes it is beyond 
the scope of prenatal care providers to describe all genetic con-
ditions amenable to diagnosis or screening in a pretest counsel-
ing session. However, an effort should be made to discuss in a 
general way the types of conditions that can (e.g., aneuploidy, 
translocations, microdeletions, and microduplications) and 
cannot (e.g., many single-gene disorders), be identified, includ-
ing test limits in the case of the former, when a family history is 
unremarkable.31
GeNetiCs in MediCiNe  |  Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016
 1058
GREGG et al  |  Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update
ACMG StAteMent
Patient preferences for information should play a pivotal role 
in guiding the use of NIPS in prenatal care. This is in keeping 
with generally accepted genetic counseling tenets and respects 
that clinical utility may vary between patients.28,29 Clinical utility 
includes test metrics (PPV and NPV), cost, and a patient’s unique 
value system construct framed by (among other things) cultural 
traditions and religious beliefs. We recognize that this construct 
is not homogeneous across the United States. The desire for 
diagnostic testing or screening, the uptake of diagnostic test-
ing, and decisions made when positive results are confirmed 
are influenced by a patient’s value system. However, establish-
ing a patient’s value system construct can be complex and con-
fusing. In the context of an evolving technology such as NIPS, 
the patient’s ability to accept uncertainty with regard to possible 
screening outcomes should also be considered and explored as 
part of the pretest communication process. Cost plays a role in 
society’s willingness to pay. Insurance coverage (private or pub-
lic), responsibility for co-payments, and out-of-pocket expenses 
factor into the nature of follow-up diagnostic tests, availability of 
genetic counseling services, and reproductive decision making.
For the genetic testing and screening modalities used in preg-
nancy to provide patients with information that can help them 
optimize their pregnancy outcomes, patients must be allowed 
to make informed choices that occur across a time continuum. 
Prenatal screening and diagnostic testing target 20 weeks of ges-
tation as an upper limit for implementation.32 Decision making 
is circumscribed by state-specific laws (e.g., 20 weeks),33 which 
highlights the importance of timely delivery and processing 
of accurate and complete information at each step. NIPS can 
be performed at an earlier gestational age than conventional 
screening, and there is no gestational age upper limit after 10 
weeks of gestation. This means that patients can get the most 
accurate screening information at an earlier gestational age, 
thus enhancing informed decision making.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○  
Providing up-to-date, balanced, and accurate infor-
mation early in gestation to optimize patient decision 
making, independent of the screening approach used.
○  
Laboratories work with public health officials, policy-
makers, and private payers to make NIPS, including 
the pre- and posttest education and counseling, acces-
sible to all pregnant women.
For some patients the goal in prenatal screening may be 
to maximize the detection of fetal genetic diagnoses. In this 
scenario, fetal diagnostic testing (e.g., chorionic villous sam-
pling or amniocentesis) followed by chromosomal microarray 
(CMA) using fetal DNA should be offered, and NIPS may not 
be the best choice. With diagnostic testing, whole-chromosome 
abnormalities, unbalanced chromosome rearrangements, small 
losses or gains of chromosomal material (CNVs), and in some 
cases single-gene disorders can be detected. An NIH study of 
prenatal CMA suggested the background rate of small clinically 
significant CNVs is 1–2%.34 Fetal diagnostic testing carries a 
small risk. Pregnancy loss rates before 24 weeks of gestation 
for amniocentesis range from 0.1 to 0.9% (1/1,000–1/111) and 
for chorionic villous sampling range from 0.2 to 1.3% (1/500–
1/77).35,36 Results from these studies reflect diagnostic testing 
performed because of abnormal ultrasound findings, positive 
aneuploidy screening, or other at-risk conditions. Therefore, 
one can conclude that these procedure-related miscarriages are 
overestimates of risk compared to selecting a procedure solely 
for obtaining maximal information.
Patients may prefer a screening test, and there are many to 
choose from. Conventional screening approaches such as first-
trimester screening, second-trimester screening, or combina-
tions of both (e.g., stepwise sequential screening) have good 
detection rates (80–95%) but high false-positive rates (3–5%). 
Stepwise sequential screening has both (~95% and ~5%) but 
is not universally used due to the required logistics. When 
choosing a conventional screening approach, patients should 
be aware of the high false-positive rate, which may lead to diag-
nostic procedures and, consequently, diagnoses not detected 
by NIPS (e.g., some chromosome abnormalities and CNVs). 
For patients who prefer to avoid diagnostic testing but desire 
highly accurate screening for Patau, Edwards, and Down syn-
dromes, NIPS may be preferred. There are pros and cons to any 
screening approach. After careful counseling, patients will ide-
ally select the paradigm that is most aligned with their goals. 
Prenatal care providers should try to understand the clinical 
utility construct of individual patients during the informed 
consent and decision-making processes.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○  
Allowing patients to select diagnostic or screening appro-
aches for the detection of fetal aneuploidy and/or genomic 
changes that are consistent with their personal goals and 
preferences.
○  
Informing all pregnant women that diagnostic testing 
(CVS or amniocentesis) is an option for the detection 
of chromosome abnormalities and clinically significant 
CNVs.
sHOULd NiPs Be OFFeRed tO ALL PAtieNts, 
iNCLUdiNG tHOse At LOW OR AVeRAGe RisK?
In 2013, the ACMG was careful not to restrict NIPS to spe-
cific patient groups.3 Recent clinical utility trials23–25,37 com-
pared NIPS to conventional screening methods for women at 
low risk or average risk compared to women at high risk. The 
DR, SPEC, PPV, and NPV for Patau, Edwards, and Down syn-
dromes were reported. Clinical utility, measured as PPV and 
NPV in these studies, supports the earlier ACMG position, and 
several  
professional organizations have subsequently altered 
their  
positions.38–40 Data from two large studies show that for 
“low risk women”
, the PPV for Down syndrome after NIPS was 
50–81% (N=55,244)24,25, and for “high risk women” this was 
94% (N=72,382).25 NIPS and conventional screening were com-
pared and showed NIPS was superior with regards to PPV (80.9 
vs. 3.4%, N=15,841).24  The NPV approached 100% for Down 
 Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016  |  GeNetiCs in MediCiNe
 1059
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update  |  GREGG et al
ACMG StAteMent
syndrome in these studies. Similarly, for Patau and Edwards 
syndromes, the PPVs after NIPS (Patau 33–90%, Edwards 
50–70%)24,25 were superior to those with conventional screen-
ing (Patau 14%, Edwards 3.4%)24 and the NPV was 100% for 
both conditions.23,24
High PPV provides benefits to patients by enabling them to 
more easily weigh the advantages and disadvantages of follow-
up diagnostic testing. Additional benefits of NIPS include 
earlier implementation with no gap across the gestational age 
spectrum, unlike conventional screening methods. This allows 
confirmatory diagnostic testing earlier in gestation and provides 
a screening option for patients who present for care any time 
after the first trimester. Earlier diagnosis facilitates providing 
up-to-date, balanced, and accurate information at a time that 
may enable patients to consider the broadest range of repro-
ductive options. In some cases, patients will elect to alter the 
course of the pregnancy or pregnancy care; others will investi-
gate adoption or choose to learn about the expected outcome, 
neonatal care, and long-term care for a child with disabilities.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○  
Informing all pregnant women that NIPS is the most 
sensitive screening option for traditionally screened 
aneuploidies (i.e., Patau, Edwards, and Down 
syndromes).
○  
Referring patients to a trained genetics professional 
when an increased risk of aneuploidy is reported after 
NIPS.
○ Offering diagnostic testing when a positive screening 
test result is reported after NIPS.
○ Providing accurate, balanced, up-to-date informa-
tion, at an appropriate literacy level when a fetus is 
diagnosed with a chromosomal or genomic variation 
in an effort to educate prospective parents about the 
condition of concern. These materials should reflect 
the medical and psychosocial implications of the 
 
diagnosis41 (see Patient Resources).
○ Laboratories should provide readily visible and clearly 
stated DR, SPEC, PPV, and NPV for conditions being 
screened, in pretest marketing materials, and when 
reporting laboratory results to assist patients and pro-
viders in making decisions and interpreting results.
○ Laboratories should not offer screening for Patau, 
Edwards, and Down syndromes if they cannot report 
DR, SPEC, and PPV for these conditions.
sHOULd NiPs Be Used tO sCReeN FOR 
AUtOsOMAL ANeUPLOidies OtHeR tHAN 
PAtAU, edWARds, ANd dOWN sYNdROMes?
The expansion of NIPS to autosomes beyond 13, 18, and 21 
is technically possible. Whole-chromosome fetal aneuploidy 
other than these common aneuploidies most often results 
in early fetal loss.42 Counseling related to these rare auto-
somal aneuploidies is made difficult by limited case reports 
and variable expressivity. Confined placental mosaicism 
for chromosome 16 has been well described and results in 
a spectrum of fetal outcomes from no clinical phenotype 
to fetal growth restriction. In a large retrospective study 
of amniocentesis performed for maternal age, ultrasound 
findings, biochemical abnormalities, or familial indications, 
1/14,830 patients had trisomy 2, 8, 12, or 22.43 Detection 
of lethal chromosome abnormalities for which the natural 
course will be fetal loss has the potential to result in unnec-
essary diagnostic procedures and unnecessary pregnancy 
termination procedures. In addition to having a personal 
impact on patients, data collection in the public health 
sector could result in inflated pregnancy loss attributed to 
diagnostic procedures and maternal complications from 
pregnancy termination.
• 
ACMG does not recommend:
○ NIPS to screen for autosomal aneuploidies other than 
those involving chromosomes 13, 18, and 21.
HOW ARe NO-CALLs AVOided, iNteRPReted, 
ANd MANAGed?
Fetal fraction
The placental fraction accounts for approximately 10% of all 
cell-free DNA in maternal circulation.6,21,44 Data suggest that 
the lower limit of cell-free fetal DNA for a reliable result is 
approximately 4%. A no-call may be reported if there is not a 
sufficient amount of fetal cell-free DNA in the maternal blood 
sample. In two prospective studies including more than 16,000 
pregnancies, a low fetal fraction in maternal circulation was 
associated with an increased risk of fetal aneuploidies.24,45 The 
biologic mechanism of low fetal fraction and its association 
with aneuploidies is speculative. Interestingly, triploidy was 
most common (31%); however, trisomy 21 was seen in 23% of 
cases of low fetal fraction.24 Others showed that a fetal fraction 
of DNA in Down syndrome cases is often the same or higher 
when compared to pregnancies with euploid fetuses.46,47 Since 
the introduction of NIPS into clinical practice, fetal fraction 
has not been uniformly reported by laboratories. The described 
relationship between low fetal fraction and increased risk of 
aneuploidy adds to the importance of reporting the reason for a 
no-call and of indicating in the report whether a low fetal frac-
tion was identified.
Factors that influence fetal fraction include maternal 
weight and gestational age.47–49 There is no specific thresh-
old to describe the relationship between fetal fraction and 
maternal weight. However, in cases of significant obesity, a 
no-call due to low fetal fraction should be anticipated. There 
is a gestational age threshold, below which results are not 
reliable (9 or 10 weeks depending on the laboratory used). 
Data suggest that before 20 weeks, fetal fraction increases less 
than 0.1% per week, which challenges the idea that repeating 
sample collection is a viable approach to overcoming a low 
fetal fraction.47,49
GeNetiCs in MediCiNe  |  Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016
 1060
GREGG et al  |  Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update
ACMG StAteMent
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ Offering diagnostic testing for a no-call NIPS result 
due to low fetal fraction if maternal blood for NIPS 
was drawn at an appropriate gestational age. A repeat 
blood draw is NOT appropriate.
○ Offering aneuploidy screening other than NIPS in 
cases of significant obesity.
○ All laboratories should include a clearly visible fetal 
fraction on NIPS reports.
○ All laboratories should establish and monitor analyti-
cal and clinical validity for fetal fraction.
○ All laboratories should specify the reason for a no-call 
when reporting NIPS results.
Long stretches of homozygosity
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms or array-based assays require 
adequate heterozygosity between the maternal and fetal genomes 
to provide meaningful data for the analysis of genomic balance 
and copy number. Therefore, stretches of homozygosity between 
the maternal and fetal genomes render any differences in copy 
number within that region undetectable, including small duplica-
tions or deletions. In addition to preventing in the interpretation 
of genomic balance, large regions of homozygosity for a single 
chromosome may be suggestive of uniparental disomy (UPD), 
whereas large regions of homozygosity dispersed over many 
chromosomes may be suggestive of parental consanguinity.50
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ Informing patients that a no-call result may be due to 
long stretches of homozygosity, which could be due to 
either UPD or parental consanguinity.
○ Referring patients to a trained genetics professional 
when a no-call result suspicious for UPD or parental 
consanguinity is received.
○ Offering diagnostic testing with CMA when a no-call 
result is obtained after NIPS due to possible UPD or 
parental consanguinity.
sHOULd NiPs Be OFFeRed tO sCReeN FOR seX 
CHROMOsOMe ANeUPLOidies?
In one retrospective study of 88,970 amniocenteses, the diag-
nosis of any sex chromosome aneuploidy was made in 1/272 
patients.43 This was higher for women older than 35 years 
compared to younger women (1/210 and 1/459, respectively). 
Conventional screening for aneuploidies does not detect 
sex chromosome aneuploidies. The most common of these, 
monosomy X (Turner syndrome), has been estimated to occur 
in 1–1.5% of pregnancies51 and is a common cause of first- 
trimester pregnancy loss (~23%).52 The phenotype of individu-
als with a 47,XXX or 47,XYY karyotype is highly variable but 
may include social or cognitive deficits.53 Klinefelter syndrome 
(47,XXY), however, does have a classic phenotype and is associ-
ated with sterility.53
The detection rate (clinical validity) of sex chromosome 
aneuploidies after NIPS is reported to be more than 90% and 
has a false-positive rate of approximately 1%.54–57 The PPV 
(clinical utility) for the aggregate of sex chromosome aneuploi-
dies among prospectively collected samples was 48.4% (range 
for specific aneuploidies, 30–67%).57 A PPV in these ranges 
is considerably higher than those accepted for conventional 
screening of Patau, Edwards, and Down syndromes.
Etiologies of false-positive sex chromosome aneuploidy results 
have been considered, and an approach to distinguish true positives 
from false positives was described.58 Maternal medical, endocrine, 
and fertility history can help to identify the cause of a false-positive 
result. This includes patients with an organ transplantation from 
either a 46,XY individual or unknown gender donor. Other causes 
of false-positive results are similar to those for traditional aneu-
ploidies. These include confined placental mosaicism, “vanishing” 
twin or higher-order co-fetus, and, rarely, maternal neoplasm. 
For these reasons, patients should be counseled about the advan-
tages and disadvantages of sex chromosome aneuploidy screening 
within the construct of their preferences for information.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ Informing all pregnant women, as part of pretest coun-
seling for NIPS, of the availability of the expanded use 
of screening for sex chromosome aneuploidies.
○ Providers should make efforts to deter patients from 
selecting sex chromosome aneuploidy screening for 
the sole purpose of biologic sex identification in the 
absence of a clinical indication for this information.
○ Informing patients about the causes and increased 
possibilities of false-positive results for sex chromo-
some aneuploidies as part of pretest counseling and 
screening for these conditions. Patients should also be 
informed of the potential for results of conditions that, 
once confirmed, may have a variable prognosis (e.g., 
Turner syndrome) before consenting to screening for 
sex chromosome aneuploidies.
○ Referring patients to a trained genetics professional 
when an increased risk of sex chromosome aneu-
ploidy is reported after NIPS.
○ Offering diagnostic testing when a positive screening 
test result is reported after screening for sex chromo-
some aneuploidies.
○ Providing accurate, balanced, up-to-date informa-
tion and materials at an appropriate literacy level 
when a fetus is diagnosed with a sex chromosome 
aneuploidy in an effort to educate prospective parents 
about the specific condition. These materials should 
reflect medical and psychosocial implications for the 
 
diagnosis41 (see Patient Resources).
○ Laboratories include easily recognizable and highly vis-
ible DR, SPEC, PPV
, and NPV for each sex chromosome 
aneuploidy when reporting results to assist patients and 
providers in making decisions and interpreting results.
○ Laboratories should not offer screening for sex chro-
mosome aneuploidies if they cannot report DR, SPEC, 
PPV, and NPV for these conditions.
 Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016  |  GeNetiCs in MediCiNe
 1061
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update  |  GREGG et al
ACMG StAteMent
sHOULd NiPs Be OFFeRed FOR deteCtiON OF 
COPY NUMBeR VARiAtiON (CNV)?
Conventional aneuploidy screening focuses on whole- 
chromosome aneuploidies that have an overall live birth 
 
frequency of 1/800 (Down syndrome)59 to 1/30,000 (Patau 
 
syndrome). Expanding NIPS to include detection of specific 
conditions caused by a CNV (e.g., 22q11.2 deletion, 1p36 
 
deletion, 15q11.2–13 deletion) is technically possible (analytical 
 
validity).60–63 The phenotypes associated with these conditions 
can be severe; therefore, they may be appropriate conditions for 
prenatal screening. However, providers and patients must be 
aware that expanding the use of NIPS to include the detection 
of CNVs requires in-depth knowledge of the limitations of the 
technology, return of results, and follow-up.
Validation studies indicate a high detection rate (>97%) and 
low false-positive rate (<1%) can be achieved. However, there 
are few clinical utility studies. Therefore, PPV and NPV have 
been modeled.63–65 One report showed that for a specific combi-
nation of CNVs studied, PPV ranged from 3.8 to 17%. In a large 
retrospective study of more than 21,000 samples, the aggregate 
PPV for several CNVs screened simultaneously was 18% (spe-
cific conditions: 11–48%). Methods to improve PPV have been 
reported.65 Modeling PPV and NPV is made more complex for 
genome-wide analysis for which validation studies are limited 
in scope and number.26,63 Determination of PPV and NPV is 
hampered by the inherent limitations of studying multiple rare 
conditions with variable expressivity. As greater portions of 
the genome are analyzed for CNVs, false positive and negative 
results are expected to increase. This may result in an increase 
in patient anxiety and fetal procedures and a burden on an 
already limited genetic counseling workforce.
Validation studies make the point that DR and SPEC depend on 
many variables (e.g., depth of read),10,60–63 which can change the 
false-positive and false-negative rate when NIPS is used for pre-
natal detection of CNVs. Pretest and posttest counseling is further 
confounded by variable expressivity and penetrance of the condi-
tions being screened, size of the deletion being screened, specific 
genes within the critical region of the locus interrogated, and the 
number of genes within the critical region being screened.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ Informing all pregnant women of the availability of the 
expanded use of NIPS to screen for clinically relevant 
CNVs when the following conditions can also be met:
• 
Obstetric care providers should discuss with 
their patients the desire for prenatal screening 
as opposed to diagnostic testing (i.e., CVS or 
amniocentesis).
• 
Obstetric care providers should discuss with their 
patients the desire for maximum fetal genomic 
information through prenatal screening.
• 
Obstetric care providers should inform their 
pati 
ents of the higher likelihood of false-positive 
and false-negative results for these conditions as 
compared to results obtained when NIPS is lim-
ited to common aneuploidy screening.
• 
Obstetric care providers should inform their pati-
ents of the potential for results of conditions that, 
once confirmed, may have an uncertain prognosis.
○ Referring patients to a trained genetics professional 
when NIPS identifies a CNV.
○ Offering diagnostic testing (CVS or amniocentesis) 
with CMA when NIPS identifies a CNV.
○ Providing accurate, balanced, up-to-date information 
at an appropriate literacy level when a fetus is diag-
nosed with a CNV in an effort to educate prospective 
parents about the condition of concern. These materi-
als should reflect the medical and psychosocial impli-
cations of the diagnosis65 (see Patient Resources).
○ Laboratory requisitions and pretest counseling infor-
mation should specify the DR, SPEC, PPV
, and NPV of 
each CNV screened. This material should state whether 
PPV and NPV are modeled or derived from clini-
cal utility studies (natural population or sample with 
known prevalence).
○ Laboratories include easily recognizable and highly vis-
ible DR, SPEC, PPV
, and NPV for each CNV screened 
when reporting laboratory results to assist patients and 
providers in making decisions and interpreting results. 
Reports should state whether PPV and NPV are mod-
eled or derived from clinical utility studies (natural 
population or sample with known prevalence). When 
laboratories cannot report specific DR, SPEC, PPV
, 
and NPV
, screening for those CNVs should not be per-
formed by that laboratory.
• 
ACMG does not recommend:
○ NIPS to screen for genome-wide CNVs. If this level 
of information is desired, then diagnostic testing (e.g., 
chorionic villous sampling or amniocentesis) fol-
lowed by CMA is recommended.
sPeCiAL CONsideRAtiONs
Multiple gestation and/or donor oocytes:
There are unique challenges when NIPS is used in multiple ges-
tation pregnancies conceived through donor oocytes.  These are 
specific to the analytical method and bioinformatics employed 
by the laboratory.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ In pregnancies with multiple gestations and/or donor 
oocytes, testing laboratories should be contacted 
regarding the validity of NIPS before it is offered to 
the patient as a screening option.
Unanticipated findings
Both constitutional and acquired forms of genomic imbal-
ance in the mother (e.g., aneuploidy of chromosome X, 
microdeletions, neoplasia, chimerism due to allogenic organ 
GeNetiCs in MediCiNe  |  Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016
 1062
GREGG et al  |  Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update
ACMG StAteMent
or tissue transplantation, or mosaicism) and imbalances 
within the fetoplacental genome (e.g., confined placental 
mosaicism) can give rise to identifiable bioinformatic pat-
terns that may confound interpretations. Therefore, provid-
ers should be aware of the potential for false-positive results 
that may resolve after diagnostic testing. Although it is not 
the purpose of NIPS to identify clinically relevant maternal 
genomic information, patients and providers should be aware 
of the potential for inadvertent discovery of such information 
and the potential for additional follow-up testing unrelated 
to the pregnancy.
Given the differences in laboratory methodologies and bioin-
formatic processing that may be used, it is beyond the scope of 
this document to address considerations that might be unique 
to any specific method in use. It therefore remains the respon-
sibility of each laboratory to make physician providers aware of 
clinically relevant features that are specific to the methodology 
used. This is best accomplished through educational materials 
and laboratory reports.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ Informing patients of the possibility of identifying 
maternal genomic imbalances and that this possibility 
depends on the specific methodology used.
○ Referring patients to a trained genetics professional 
when NIPS identifies maternal genomic imbalances.
○ Offering aneuploidy screening other than NIPS for 
patients with a history of bone marrow or organ 
transplantation from a male donor or donor of uncer-
tain biologic sex.
○ Discussing the possibility of discordant fetal biologic 
sex if maternal blood transfusion was performed <4 
weeks prior to the blood draw for NIPS.
Positive and negative predictive values
Understanding the importance of PPV is paramount to screen-
ing. PPV is a screening test metric that is useful when patients 
screen positive. This metric is used by patients in deciding the 
next steps in decision making. Because the specificity is so high 
after NIPS for traditionally screened aneuploidies, NPV is less 
often the focus. However, it is one of the key features of this 
technology. A high NPV offers patients reassurance in the post-
test setting. There are several mathematical approaches that can 
be used to model PPV and NPV from validation data. PPV for 
aneuploidy is very sensitive to prevalence/a priori risk, and to a 
lesser extent DR and SPEC, which do not fluctuate with mater-
nal age. Maternal age is a highly important factor in determin-
ing the prevalence of Down syndrome and other aneuploidies, 
but it is not a factor when considering CNVs. One reason why 
PPV is much lower for detection of CNVs is that the prevalence 
and detection rate are low compared to traditionally screened 
aneuploidies. A common error is to interpret PPV across an 
entire population without taking into account patient-specific 
information (e.g., prevalence based on maternal age when 
necessary).
There are several online calculators for determining 
patient-specific PPV and NPV after NIPS (e.g., http://secure.
itswebs.com/nsgc/niptcalculator/index.html). PPV seems 
irrelevant to anyone not facing a positive test result. If the 
PPV of each condition being considered were reported when 
results were negative, then there would be an excess of data 
cluttering a report.
• 
ACMG recommends:
○ Laboratories provide patient-specific PPV when 
reporting positive test results.
○ Laboratories provide population-derived PPV when 
reporting positive results in cases in which patient-
specific PPV cannot be determined due to unavailable 
clinical information.
○ Laboratories provide modeled PPV when reporting 
positive results for which neither patient-specific nor 
population-derived PPV are possible.
○ Providers use validated online calculators to provide 
patient-specific PPV when results from NIPS are pos-
itive to facilitate clear and accurate communication 
with patients.
○ Incorporating laboratory-specific DR and SPEC to 
provide clear and patient-specific information when 
using validated online calculators.
PAtieNt ResOURCes
In a consensus statement by the ACMG, the American College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the National 
Society of Genetics Counselors (NSGC), and Down syndrome 
organizations, there was unanimous agreement that patient 
education materials about prenatal testing and associated con-
ditions should result from “collaboration among healthcare and 
advocacy organizations.”41 According to Public Law 110–371 
(https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/110/s1810/text), 
enacted in 2008, “partnerships between healthcare professional 
groups and disability advocacy organizations” were empha-
sized regarding the collection, synthesis, and dissemination 
of “current evidence-based information” related to prenatal 
conditions. With these charges in mind, the ACMG has identi-
fied available patient resources (listed alphabetically) that have 
resulted from collaborations between healthcare professional 
groups and advocacy organizations.
Down Syndrome Pregnancy (http://downsyndromepreg-
nancy.org/books). This site, for expectant parents preparing 
for the birth of a baby with Down syndrome, provides a range 
of books in English and Spanish that are recommended in the 
“NSGC Guidelines for Communicating a Prenatal or Postnatal 
Diagnosis of Down Syndrome” and that have been reviewed by 
medical and patient advocacy experts.
Genetics Home Reference (https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov). This 
online reference provides information for patients and families 
about more than 1,000 genetic conditions. All content is written 
by a full-time staff with backgrounds in genetics, reviewed by 
outside experts, and contains input from support and advocacy 
 Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016  |  GeNetiCs in MediCiNe
 1063
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update  |  GREGG et al
ACMG StAteMent
organizations. Genetics Home Reference is a service of the 
National Library of Medicine, which is part of the National 
Institutes of Health, an agency of the US Department of Health 
and Human Services.
Genetic Support Foundation (https://www.geneticsup-
portfoundation.org). This nonprofit organization, founded by 
genetics professionals, provides information about pregnancy 
and genetics and the different conditions that can be detected 
prenatally. It often includes instructional videos.
Lettercase/The National Center for Prenatal and Postnatal 
Resources (http://www.lettercase.org). Lettercase offers profes-
sionally reviewed materials about genetic conditions. Currently, 
“Understanding a Down Syndrome Diagnosis” and “Understanding 
a Turner Syndrome Diagnosis” are available in print and digital ver-
sions in several languages. The materials are intended for expect-
ant couples who have received a prenatal diagnosis of Down or 
Turner syndrome but have not yet made a decision regarding their 
pregnancy options. The materials are prepared with assistance 
from the ACMG, ACOG, NSGC, and national patient advocacy 
organizations.
NSGC “Fact Sheet about Down Syndrome for New and 
Expectant Parents” (http://nsgc.org/p/cm/ld/fid=387) and 
“A Patient’s Guide to Understanding Noninvasive Prenatal 
Testing” (http://nsgc.org/p/cm/ld/fid=385). These fact sheets 
on the NSGC website, which provide basic downloadable 
information, were reviewed by the National Society of Genetic 
Counselors Down Syndrome Information Act Working Group, 
with assistance from the National Center for Prenatal and 
Postnatal Resources.
PROVideR ResOURCes
The following resources (listed alphabetically) were created by 
respected medical organizations or medical expert consensus 
and can serve as useful references for medical providers.
Delivering a diagnosis. Resources describing simulation 
training for healthcare professionals who deliver a prenatal 
diagnosis to expectant couples are available. These projects 
were funded by federal grants and efficacy was researched and 
published.66,67
Down syndrome healthcare guidelines. “Healthcare 
Supervision for Children with Down Syndrome” (http:// 
pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/128/2/393). This was 
 
written by the Committee on Genetics of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, provides guidance for healthcare pro-
fessionals. Resources for parents are also listed.
GeneReviews (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK1116). This online resource for clinicians provides peer-
reviewed information written by medical experts. Information is 
updated every 2 to 4 years through a formal review process. It 
is an excellent source of information, and physicians faced with 
a need to learn about common CNVs may find this resource 
useful.
“Care of Girls and Women with Turner Syndrome: A 
Guideline of the Turner Syndrome Study Group.” This was 
written by the Turner Syndrome Consensus Study Group of the 
National Institutes of Health and was adopted by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics.68
22q11 deletion syndrome (DiGeorge syndrome) guide-
lines. Peer-reviewed expert consensus documents are available 
for the evaluation and management of patients with 22q11 dele-
tion syndrome (DiGeorge syndrome).69,70 This is the most com-
mon copy-number variation currently being offered through 
NIPS. Resources for other CNVs may be found in GeneReviews.
sUMMARY
New data and provider and patient demands require an updated 
position on the use of NIPS in prenatal care. We provide a frame-
work for understanding how genetic technology moves from 
an idea into clinical practice. We hope this framework helps to 
explain ACMG’s recommendations. Clinical validation strongly 
suggested that NIPS can replace conventional screening for Patau, 
Edwards, and Down syndromes. Objective measures of clinical 
utility support this. Test metrics support NIPS across the maternal 
age spectrum and continuum of gestational age beginning at 9–10 
weeks as long as patients are not significantly obese. In the latter 
case, fetal fraction leading to an inability to make a call is limiting.
We have raised the bar for pretest counseling by expanding 
NIPS beyond that for Patau, Edwards, and Down syndromes. 
Providers should have a thorough understanding of patient pref-
erences; efforts to educate about the limitations are not trivial. 
Although clinical utility studies are limited, they point to a role 
for NIPS in sex chromosome aneuploidy screening and screening 
for selected CNVs. We support these uses when the live birth fre-
quency of conditions reaches or exceeds that of currently screened 
conditions and when test metrics meet or exceed those of well-
established approaches to prenatal screening. Furthermore, we 
considered the potential for children to be impacted by early treat-
ment. Our recommendations will affect communication between 
providers and patients and between providers and testing labora-
tories. Laboratories are encouraged to meet the needs of providers 
and patients by delivering meaningful screening reports, engag-
ing in education, and identifying ways to address distributive jus-
tice, a medical ethical principle that challenges genomics-based 
innovative and clinically useful technologies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ACMG Noninvasive Prenatal Screening Work Group is grate-
ful to Marsha Harben of the University of Florida for her tireless 
assistance in the preparation of this document.
DISCLOSURE
B.G.S. serves on the Advisory Board of several nonprofit entities 
providing education about Down syndrome. The other authors 
declare no conflict of interest.
GeNetiCs in MediCiNe  |  Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016
 1064
GREGG et al  |  Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update
ACMG StAteMent
REfERENCES
 
1. 
Driscoll DA, Gross SJ; Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee. First 
trimester diagnosis and screening for fetal aneuploidy. Genet Med 2008;10: 
73–75.
 
2. 
Grody WW, Thompson BH, Gregg AR, et al. ACMG position statement on prenatal/
preconception expanded carrier screening. Genet Med 2013;15:482–483.
 
3. 
Gregg AR, Gross SJ, Best RG, et al. ACMG statement on noninvasive prenatal 
screening for fetal aneuploidy. Genet Med 2013;15:395–398.
 
4. 
Palomaki GE, Kloza EM, Lambert-Messerlian GM, et al. DNA sequencing of 
maternal plasma to detect Down syndrome: an international clinical validation 
study. Genet Med 2011;13:913–920.
 
5. 
Ehrich M, Deciu C, Zwiefelhofer T, et al. Noninvasive detection of fetal trisomy 
21 by sequencing of DNA in maternal blood: a study in a clinical setting. 
 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;204:205.e1–205.11.
 
6. 
Norton ME, Brar H, Weiss J, et al. Non-Invasive Chromosomal Evaluation 
(NICE) Study: results of a multicenter prospective cohort study for detection 
of fetal trisomy 21 and trisomy 18. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;207:137.e1– 
137.e8.
 
7. 
Bianchi DW, Platt LD, Goldberg JD, Abuhamad AZ, Sehnert AJ, Rava RP; 
MatErnal BLood IS Source to Accurately diagnose fetal aneuploidy (MELISSA) 
Study Group. Genome-wide fetal aneuploidy detection by maternal plasma 
DNA sequencing. Obstet Gynecol 2012;119:890–901.
 
8. 
Nicolaides KH, Syngelaki A, Gil M, Atanasova V, Markova D. Validation of 
targeted sequencing of single-nucleotide polymorphisms for non-invasive 
prenatal detection of aneuploidy of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, and Y. Prenat 
Diagn 2013;33:575–579.
 
9. 
Liao C, Yin AH, Peng CF, et al. Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of common 
aneuploidies by semiconductor sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2014;111:7415–7420.
 
10. Stokowski R, Wang E, White K, et al. Clinical performance of non-invasive 
prenatal testing (NIPT) using targeted cell-free DNA analysis in maternal plasma 
with microarrays or next generation sequencing (NGS) is consistent across 
multiple controlled clinical studies. Prenat Diagn 2015;35:1243–1246.
 
11. Skirton H, Goldsmith L, Jackson L, Lewis C, Chitty LS. Non-invasive prenatal 
testing for aneuploidy: a systematic review of Internet advertising to potential 
users by commercial companies and private health providers. Prenat Diagn 
2015;35:1167–1175.
 
12. Lutgendorf MA, Stoll KA, Knutzen DM, Foglia LM. Noninvasive prenatal testing: 
limitations and unanswered questions. Genet Med 2014;16:281–285.
 
13. Benn P, Borrell A, Chiu RW, et al. Position statement from the Chromosome 
Abnormality Screening Committee on behalf of the Board of the International 
Society for Prenatal Diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 2015;35:725–734.
 
14. Wilson KL, Czerwinski JL, Hoskovec JM, et al. NSGC practice guideline: prenatal 
screening and diagnostic testing options for chromosome aneuploidy. J Genet 
Couns 2013;22:4–15.
 
15. ACOG practice bulletin number 163: screening for fetal aneuploidy. Obstet 
Gynecol 2016;127:e123–137.
 
16. Fan HC, Quake SR. Detection of aneuploidy with digital polymerase chain 
reaction. Anal Chem 2007;79:7576–7579.
 
17. Lo YM, Corbetta N, Chamberlain PF, et al. Presence of fetal DNA in maternal 
plasma and serum. Lancet 1997;350:485–487.
 
18. Lo YM, Lun FM, Chan KC, et al. Digital PCR for the molecular detection of fetal 
chromosomal aneuploidy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:13116–13121.
 
19. Fan HC, Blumenfeld YJ, Chitkara U, Hudgins L, Quake SR. Noninvasive diagnosis 
of fetal aneuploidy by shotgun sequencing DNA from maternal blood. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 2008;105:16266–16271.
 
20. Ashoor G, Syngelaki A, Wagner M, Birdir C, Nicolaides KH. Chromosome-
selective sequencing of maternal plasma cell-free DNA for first-trimester 
detection of trisomy 21 and trisomy 18. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;206:322.
e1–322.e5.
 
21. Sparks AB, Struble CA, Wang ET, Song K, Oliphant A. Noninvasive prenatal 
detection and selective analysis of cell-free DNA obtained from maternal blood: 
evaluation for trisomy 21 and trisomy 18. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;206:319.
e1–319.e9.
 
22. Zimmermann B, Hill M, Gemelos G, et al. Noninvasive prenatal aneuploidy 
testing of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, and Y, using targeted sequencing of 
polymorphic loci. Prenat Diagn 2012;32:1233–1241.
 
23. Bianchi DW, Parker RL, Wentworth J, et al.; CARE Study Group. DNA sequencing 
versus standard prenatal aneuploidy screening. N Engl J Med 2014;370:799–808.
 
24. Norton ME, Jacobsson B, Swamy GK, et al. Cell-free DNA analysis 
for noninvasive examination of trisomy. N Engl J Med 2015;372: 
1589–1597.
 
25. Zhang H, Gao Y, Jiang F, et al. Non-invasive prenatal testing for trisomies 21, 
18 and 13: clinical experience from 146,958 pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2015;45:530–538.
 
26. Kaimal AJ, Norton ME, Kuppermann M. Prenatal Testing in the Genomic Age: 
Clinical Outcomes, Quality of Life, and Costs. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126: 
737–746.
 
27. Edwards JG, Feldman G, Goldberg J, et al. Expanded carrier screening in 
reproductive medicine-points to consider: a joint statement of the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists, National Society of Genetic Counselors, Perinatal Quality 
Foundation, and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. Obstet Gynecol 
2015;125:653–662.
 
28. Benkendorf JL, Callanan NP, Grobstein R, Schmerler S, FitzGerald KT. An 
explication of the National Society of Genetic Counselors (NSGC) code of ethics. 
J Genet Couns 1992;1:31–39.
 
29. Bennett RL, Callanan N, Gordon E, et al.; The National Society of Genetic 
Counselors Code of Ethics Work Group. Code of ethics of the National Society 
of Genetic Counselors: explication of revisions. J Genet Couns 2006;15: 
313–323.
 
30. Rogers CR. Counseling and Psychotherapy. Houghton Mifflin: Cambridge, MA, 
1942.
 
31. Elias S, Annas GJ. Generic consent for genetic screening. N Engl J Med 
1994;330:1611–1613.
 
32. Driscoll DA, Gross SJ; Professional Practice Guidelines Committee. Screening for 
fetal aneuploidy and neural tube defects. Genet Med 2009;11:818–821.
 
33. Guttmacher Institute. An overview of abortion laws. http://www.guttmacher.
org/state-policy/explore/overview-abortion-laws. Accessed 4 January 2016.
 
34. Wapner RJ, Martin CL, Levy B, et al. Chromosomal microarray versus 
karyotyping for prenatal diagnosis. N Engl J Med 2012;367:2175–2184.
 
35. Akolekar R, Beta J, Picciarelli G, Ogilvie C, D’Antonio F. Procedure-related 
risk of miscarriage following amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2015;45: 
16–26.
 
36. Mujezinovic F, Alfirevic Z. Procedure-related complications of amniocentesis 
and chorionic villous sampling: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2007;110: 
687–694.
 
37. Guedj F, Bianchi DW, Delabar JM. Prenatal treatment of Down syndrome: a 
reality? Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2014;26:92–103.
 
38. Committee Opinion No. 640: cell-free DNA screening for fetal aneuploidy. 
Obstet Gynecol 2015, 126:e31–37.
 
39. SMFM Statement: clarification of recommendations regarding cell-free DNA 
aneuploidy screening. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:753–754.
 
40. Benn P, Borell A, Chiu R, et al. Position statement from the Aneuploidy 
Screening Committee on behalf of the Board of the International Society for 
Prenatal Diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 2013;33:622–629.
 
41. Edwards JG, Ferrante RR. Understanding prenatal screening and diagnosis 
of Down syndrome from the health professional and advocacy community 
perspectives. 2009. https://www.acmg.net/StaticContent/Resources/
Consensus%20Conversation%20Statement.pdf.
 
42. Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in 
Medicine. 8th edition. Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2007.
 
43. Forabosco A, Percesepe A, Santucci S. Incidence of non-age-dependent 
chromosomal abnormalities: a population-based study on 88965 
amniocenteses. Eur J Hum Genet 2009;17:897–903.
 
44. Ashoor G, Syngelaki A, Poon LC, Rezende JC, Nicolaides KH. Fetal fraction in 
maternal plasma cell-free DNA at 11-13 weeks’ gestation: relation to maternal 
and fetal characteristics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;41:26–32.
 
45. Pergament E, Cuckle H, Zimmermann B, et al. Single-nucleotide polymorphism-
based noninvasive prenatal screening in a high-risk and low-risk cohort. Obstet 
Gynecol 2014;124(2 Pt 1):210–218.
 
46. Rava RP, Srinivasan A, Sehnert AJ, Bianchi DW. Circulating fetal cell-free 
DNA fractions differ in autosomal aneuploidies and monosomy X. Clin Chem 
2014;60:243–250.
 
47. Kinnings SL, Geis JA, Almasri E, et al. Factors affecting levels of circulating 
cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma and their implications for noninvasive 
prenatal testing. Prenat Diagn 2015;35:816–822.
 
48. Wataganara T, Peter I, Messerlian GM, Borgatta L, Bianchi DW. Inverse 
correlation between maternal weight and second trimester circulating cell-free 
fetal DNA levels. Obstet Gynecol 2004;104:545–550.
 
49. Wang E, Batey A, Struble C, Musci T, Song K, Oliphant A. Gestational age and 
maternal weight effects on fetal cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. Prenat Diagn 
2013;33:662–666.
 Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016  |  GeNetiCs in MediCiNe
 1065
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy: 2016 update  |  GREGG et al
ACMG StAteMent
 
50. Rehder CW, David KL, Hirsch B, Toriello HV, Wilson CM, Kearney HM. American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics: standards and guidelines for 
documenting suspected consanguinity as an incidental finding of genomic 
testing. Genet Med 2013;15:150–152.
 
51. Hook EB, Warburton D. Turner syndrome revisited: review of new data supports 
the hypothesis that all viable 45,X cases are cryptic mosaics with a rescue cell 
line, implying an origin by mitotic loss. Hum Genet 2014;133:417–424.
 
52. Pauli RM, Reiser CA, Lebovitz RM, Kirkpatrick SJ. Wisconsin Stillbirth Service 
Program: I. Establishment and assessment of a community-based program 
for etiologic investigation of intrauterine deaths. Am J Med Genet 1994;50: 
116–134.
 
53. Jones KL, Jones MC, del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malfor 
mation. Paalman MH, Carey JC, eds. Elsevier Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 
2013. 7:7–83.
 
54. Mazloom AR, Džakula Ž, Oeth P, et al. Noninvasive prenatal detection of sex 
chromosomal aneuploidies by sequencing circulating cell-free DNA from 
maternal plasma. Prenat Diagn 2013;33:591–597.
 
55. Samango-Sprouse C, Banjevic M, Ryan A, et al. SNP-based non-invasive prenatal 
testing detects sex chromosome aneuploidies with high accuracy. Prenat Diagn 
2013;33:643–649.
 
56. Nicolaides KH, Musci TJ, Struble CA, Syngelaki A, Gil MM. Assessment of fetal 
sex chromosome aneuploidy using directed cell-free DNA analysis. Fetal Diagn 
Ther 2014;35:1–6.
 
57. Porreco RP
, Garite TJ, Maurel K, et al.; Obstetrix Collaborative Research Network. 
Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal trisomies 21, 18, 13 and the common 
sex chromosome aneuploidies from maternal blood using massively parallel 
genomic sequencing of DNA. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014;211:365.e1–365.12.
 
58. Bianchi DW, Parsa S, Bhatt S, et al. Fetal sex chromosome testing by maternal 
plasma DNA sequencing: clinical laboratory experience and biology. Obstet 
Gynecol 2015;125:375–382.
 
59. de Graaf G, Buckley F
, Skotko BG. Live births, natural losses, and elective terminations 
with Down syndrome in Massachusetts. Genet Med 2016;18:459–466.
 
60. Peters D, Chu T, Yatsenko SA, et al. Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of a fetal 
microdeletion syndrome. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1847–1848.
 
61. Srinivasan A, Bianchi DW, Huang H, Sehnert AJ, Rava RP
. Noninvasive detection 
of fetal subchromosome abnormalities via deep sequencing of maternal 
plasma. Am J Hum Genet 2013;92:167–176.
 
62. Zhao C, Tynan J, Ehrich M, et al. Detection of fetal subchromosomal 
abnormalities by sequencing circulating cell-free DNA from maternal plasma. 
Clin Chem 2015;61:608–616.
 
63. Lefkowitz RB, Tynan JA, Liu T, et al. Clinical validation of a noninvasive prenatal 
test for genomewide detection of fetal copy number variants. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2016; e-pub ahead of print 17 February 2016.
 
64. Wapner RJ, Babiarz JE, Levy B, et al. Expanding the scope of noninvasive 
prenatal testing: detection of fetal microdeletion syndromes. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2015;212:332.e1–332.e9.
 
65. Gross SJ, Ryan A, Benn P. Noninvasive prenatal testing for 22q11.2 deletion 
syndrome: deeper sequencing increases the positive predictive value. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:254–255.
 
66. Ferguson JE 2nd, Kleinert HL, Lunney CA, Campbell LR. Resident physicians’ 
competencies and attitudes in delivering a postnatal diagnosis of Down 
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 2006;108:898–905.
 
67. Lunney CA, Kleinert HL, Ferguson JE 2nd, Campbell L. Effectively training 
pediatric residents to deliver diagnoses of Down syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 
2012;158A:384–390.
 
68. Bondy CA; Turner Syndrome Study Group. Care of girls and women with Turner 
syndrome: a guideline of the Turner Syndrome Study Group. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2007;92:10–25.
 
69. Bassett AS, McDonald-McGinn DM, Devriendt K, et al.; International 22q11.2 
Deletion Syndrome Consortium. Practical guidelines for managing patients 
with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. J Pediatr 2011;159:332–9.e1.
 
70. Habel A, Herriot R, Kumararatne D, et al. Towards a safety net for management 
of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: guidelines for our times. Eur J Pediatr 
2014;173:757–765.
GeNetiCs in MediCiNe  |  Volume 18  |  Number 10  |  October 2016
