 Cell Research (2017) 27:1195-1215.
www.nature.com/cr
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Cardiotrophin 1 stimulates beneficial myogenic and 
vascular remodeling of the heart
Mohammad Abdul-Ghani
1, 2, *, Colin Suen
1, 2, *, Baohua Jiang
1, Yupu Deng
1, Jonathan J Weldrick
2, 3, 
Charis Putinski
1, 2, Steve Brunette
1, Pasan Fernando
1, 4, Tom T Lee
5, Peter Flynn
5, Frans H H Leenen
2, 6, 3, 
Patrick G Burgon
2, 6, 3, Duncan J Stewart
1, 2, 6, Lynn A Megeney
1, 2, 6
1Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa Hospital, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; 
2Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada; 
3University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4W7, Canada; 
4Department of 
Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6, Canada; 
5Fate Therapeutics Inc., 3535 General Atomics Court Suite 200, 
San Diego, CA 92121, USA;
 6Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario 
K1H 8M5, Canada
The post-natal heart adapts to stress and overload through hypertrophic growth, a process that may be pathologic 
or beneficial (physiologic hypertrophy). Physiologic hypertrophy improves cardiac performance in both healthy and 
diseased individuals, yet the mechanisms that propagate this favorable adaptation remain poorly defined. We identify 
the cytokine cardiotrophin 1 (CT1) as a factor capable of recapitulating the key features of physiologic growth of the 
heart including transient and reversible hypertrophy of the myocardium, and stimulation of cardiomyocyte-derived 
angiogenic signals leading to increased vascularity. The capacity of CT1 to induce physiologic hypertrophy originates 
from a CK2-mediated restraining of caspase activation, preventing the transition to unrestrained pathologic growth. 
Exogenous CT1 protein delivery attenuated pathology and restored contractile function in a severe model of right 
heart failure, suggesting a novel treatment option for this intractable cardiac disease.
Keywords: cardiotrophin 1; cardiac; hypertrophy; right heart failure; physiologic; reversible; caspase
Cell Research (2017) 27:1195-1215. doi:10.1038/cr.2017.87; published online 8 August 2017
*These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Lynn A Megeney
a, Duncan J Stewart
b
aE-Mail: lmegeney@ohri.ca
bE-Mail: djstewart@ohri.ca
Received 18 December 2016; revised 6 March 2017; accepted 21 June 
2017; published online 8 August 2017
Introduction
Heart muscle growth, commonly referred to as cardiac 
hypertrophy, is a compensatory response that matches 
organ size to the systemic demands of the body. Hyper-
trophy can be a detrimental or beneficial adaptation, de-
pending on the type of growth that occurs.  In pathologic 
hypertrophy, heart muscle mass increases (wall thick-
ness) without a corresponding improvement in function. 
Pathologic hypertrophy is generally irreversible and 
readily transitions to heart failure (HF), making this mal-
adaptive process a leading cause of morbidity and mor-
tality [1]. Given the prominence in disease etiology, the 
biochemical and molecular characteristics of pathologic 
hypertrophy have been intensely studied and documented 
[2, 3].
Physiologic cardiac hypertrophy is a form of bene-
ficial remodeling, characterized by a modest increase 
in heart mass with improved contractile function that is 
reversible. Both pregnancy and endurance exercise pro-
vide well-documented means to engage this form of or-
gan growth, a response that can also directly antagonize 
pathologic hypertrophy and the progression to HF [4, 5]. 
Akt- and MAPK-mediated signaling cascades appear to 
be consistent molecular signatures of physiologic hyper-
trophy, yet there is a paucity of definitive information 
regarding systemic factors that may initiate or propagate 
this healthy remodeling event [6-10]. Insulin-like growth 
factor has been examined as a probable physiologic hy-
pertrophy agonist [11-13], yet the pleiotrophic effects of 
this hormone may preclude its use as a bona fide cardiac 
 1196
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
restoration agent.
Cardiotrophin 1 (CT1) was originally identified as a 
promising hypertrophic agonist in vitro [14, 15], howev-
er its expression has been more recently linked to myo-
cardial pathology, systemic elevated blood pressure, and 
cardiac failure in both animals and humans [16-19]. De-
spite these observational data implicating CT1 in certain 
cardiovascular diseases, this cytokine is known to bind 
and engage gp130 receptor complexes, a known pro-sur-
vival signal for cardiomyocytes [20-22]. Therefore, 
we reasoned that elevated expression of CT1 in human 
cardiac pathologies may simply reflect a compensatory 
response, which attempts to curtail disease progression 
through the biologic remodeling activity of CT1.
Here, we demonstrate that human CT1 protein (hCT1) 
engages a fully reversible form of myocardial growth, 
and that hCT1 attenuates the ongoing pathology and 
loss-of-function in an aggressive and unremitting model 
of right heart failure (RHF). hCT1 promotes cardiomyo-
cyte growth in part by inducing a limited activation of an 
otherwise pathologic hypertrophy signal, as mediated by 
the caspase 3 protease. In addition, hCT1 engages a car-
diomyocyte-derived vascular growth signal to ensure that 
the modest heart muscle growth is temporally matched 
with a supporting angiogenic response. Moreover, 2 
weeks administration of hCT1 in vivo produced cardiac 
remodeling that was similar to that induced by exercise 
and, in a model of progressive RHF due to severe pul-
monary arterial hypertension, improved cardiac function 
and reversed right ventricle (RV) dilatation. These data 
suggest that hCT1 fulfills the criteria as a beneficial re-
modeling agent, with a capacity to curtail or limit an in-
tractable form of HF.
Results
hCT1 induces fully reversible cardiomyocyte cell growth 
through serial sarcomere addition
We hypothesized that CT1 may induce physiologic 
cardiomyocyte growth and beneficial myocardial adapta-
tion. To test this hypothesis we examined whether human 
recombinant CT1 (hCT1) protein altered the structure of 
rodent neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes. We reasoned 
that if CT1 was a conserved remodeling factor, then the 
human protein should engage a positive impact on rodent 
cardiomyocytes. Cardiomyocytes treated with hCT1 
displayed a dramatic reorganization in cell architecture 
within 24 h, leading to a significant increase in the length 
to width ratio compared to untreated cardiomyocytes 
(Figure 1A-1C), as was reported previously for CT1 
[15], but in contrast to the initial report of the discovery 
of CT1, which described a concentric growth pattern in 
treated cells [14]. The increase in the length to width 
ratio with hCT1 exposure, which was associated with 
adding sarcomeres in series, was in direct contrast to the 
morphologic alterations that occurred when cardiomyo-
cytes were treated with pathologic hypertrophy agonists 
such as the α-adrenergic stimulant phenylephrine (PE) 
(Figure 1A). PE-treated cells engaged concentric growth, 
typically characterized by sarcomeres added in parallel, 
leading to increased cell size, but with a reduced length 
to width ratio (Figure 1A-1C).
A defining characteristic of physiologic hypertrophy 
is the fact that the adaptation is fully reversible on ces-
sation of the stress, with individual cardiomyocytes and 
the intact heart itself returning to pre-stress dimensions 
[5]. When cardiomyocytes were treated with hCT1 for 
a 48 h period, followed by removal of the cytokine, the 
cells rapidly resumed pre-treatment dimensions, similar 
to untreated cardiomyocytes (Figure 1D-1G). This re-
versible growth phenotype contrasted with PE-treated 
cells, where discontinuation of PE did not lead to a de-
crease in cell size over the same time period, a consistent 
feature of pathologic hypertrophy induction in vivo (Fig-
ure 1D-1G).
Aerobic exercise regimes can limit or lessen patho-
logic cardiac hypertrophy and negative remodeling [5], 
suggesting that beneficial growth factors (such as CT1) 
may similarly impede pathologic inductive cues. Nota-
bly, when cardiomyocytes were treated with both PE and 
hCT1, the cells displayed the growth characteristics of 
hCT1 alone (Figure 1A-1C). This observation suggests 
that hCT1 may recapitulate a key aspect of the exercise 
response, and limit or repress ongoing pathologic growth 
signals in heart muscle cells.
hCT1 stimulates a reversible and non-pathologic growth 
of the intact heart
To date, all extant in vivo observational studies of CT1 
and heart function have shown negative correlation data, 
linking elevations in circulating/plasma CT1 to various 
forms of cardiac dysfunction [18, 19, 23]. A single study 
examining exogenous delivery of high concentrations of 
bolus-injected CT1 protein noted increased gross weight 
of the heart and morphology consistent with pathologic 
hypertrophy [17]. However, carefully monitored dose-re-
sponse studies in both mouse and pig have shown that 
administration of CT1 protein protects the liver against 
ischemia reperfusion injury [24, 25], while other stud-
ies have reported that chronic CT1 protein delivery 
augments fatty acid metabolism and reduces insulin re-
sistance [26], all of which suggest that CT1 conveys a 
beneficial systemic response. 
Given these considerations, we chose to examine 
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1197
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
 1198
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
whether sustained 2 weeks delivery of hCT1 was ben-
eficial or harmful to cardiac morphology and function. 
The decision to test 2 weeks of protein delivery was 
predicated on the hypothesis that the capacity of a 
biologic agent (hCT1 protein) to engage cardio-adap-
tive measures would most likely require sustained 
exposures, akin to the systemic changes which occur 
during exercise and pregnancy. hCT1-loaded osmotic 
minipumps were surgically implanted into rodents and 
protein was delivered for a continuous 14-day period 
(at 6 µg/kg/h, a hCT1 concentration within the dose 
range noted above). Animals subjected to this hCT1 
dosing regimen displayed a cardiac remodeling that 
was reminiscent of exercise adaptation, with a modest 
yet significant increase in ventricle wall thickness and 
no alteration in right to left ventricle internal diameter 
ratio (RVID:LVID) (Figure 2A-2C). Different alter-
ations were observed in isoproterenol (ISO) or PE-treat-
ed animals, which displayed a dramatic increase in 
wall thickness, with concomitant severe change in the 
RVID:LVID ratio (Figure 2B-2E). Importantly, we 
noted a complete reversion of cardiac growth/remod-
eling at 6 weeks following discontinuation of hCT1 
after a 2-week exposure. Here, the overall heart mass 
of hCT1-treated animals was similar to control animals, 
with ventricle wall thickness and RVID:LVID ratios 
reverting to baseline levels (Figure 2F-2I). However, 
animals treated with PE for a similar 2-week period, 
followed by 6 weeks of recovery, continued to display a 
cardiac morphology that is consistent with a patholog-
ic state, i.e., elevated wall thickness and RVID:LVID 
ratios (Figure 2F-2I). Moreover, changes in myocar-
dial wall thickness were paralleled by a corresponding 
change in cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area (Figure 
2F and 2J), consistent with the CT1-inspired in vitro 
adaptations.
We next examined isolated cardiomyocyte morpholo-
gy from adult rodent (murine) hearts, which is represen-
tative of conditions where true physiologic adaptation 
occurs. We treated adult mice for 2 weeks with phos-
phate-buffered saline (PBS), hCT1 (6 µg/kg/h) or PE 
(10 mg/kg/d), observing that hCT1 caused an increased 
lengthening of isolated mouse cardiomyocytes versus 
PE or PBS control (Figure 2K-2N). Furthermore, the 
length to width ratio of PE-treated cardiomyocytes was 
significantly less than those for both hCT1 and PBS con-
trol, where hCT1 and PBS treatments resulted in similar 
length to width ratios (Figure 2K-2N). These data are 
similar to what we observed for isolated and cultured 
neonatal primary cardiomyocytes (Figure 1), the only 
notable difference is that in the in vitro model there was 
a significant increase in the length to width ratio and not 
just length following hCT1 treatment, as was the case 
in the in vivo assessments (Figure 2K-2N). The greater 
length changes in vitro with hCT1 administration may 
be attributed to a lack of physical constraints within this 
system, which allows the cells to continue to add sarco-
meres in series, beyond what physical space constraints 
would be permissive in vivo.
hCT1 stimulates beneficial cardiomyocyte remodeling 
through a constrained activation of caspase 3 
The morphologic variation in ventricular cardiomyo-
cytes during pathologic versus physiologic hypertrophy 
suggests that distinct signaling mechanisms control 
these divergent cell adaptations. This is a generally ac-
cepted hypothesis and robust evidence exists to support 
this proposition, i.e., activation of Akt-mediated signals 
induces a physiologic hypertrophy and offers protec-
tion against pressure overload pathology, while calci-
neurin-mediated signals are largely regarded as patho-
logic growth cues [3, 8]. The primary limitation with this 
concept is that the early stages of pathologic growth are 
often compensatory or beneficial in nature in response 
to a stress adaptation [1]. As such, a reasonable nuance 
to the prevailing hypothesis is that the divergent forms 
Figure 1 Human cardiotrophin 1 (hCT1) induces morphologic changes in primary cardiomyocytes with reversion upon re-
moval of hCT1 stimulation. (A) Primary neonatal cardiomyocytes were stimulated for 24 h with hCT1 (0.5 nM), PE (100 µM), 
hCT1 and PE, or control serum-free medium (Ctrl, SF) followed by morphometric analysis (cell area and length:width ratio). 
Cells were stained with α-actinin (red) and nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 40 µm. (B, C) Morphometric anal-
ysis of (A) above. Treatment with hCT1, PE, and hCT1+PE induced a significant increase in cell area versus control (n = 3; 
*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01). However, only hCT1 (or hCT1+PE) stimulation resulted in elongated/eccentric growth versus con-
trol (n = 3; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01). (D) Cardiomyocytes were stimulated as in (A) above, but for 2 days followed by removal 
for 4 days. After 2 days, both hCT1 and PE induced hypertrophy versus control at day 2 (n = 3; *P < 0.05 and ****P < 0.0001). 
Cells reverted to pre-treatment dimensions upon removal of hCT1, whereas removal of PE caused cells to remain hypertro-
phied versus Control at day 6 (n = 3; ***P < 0.001). (E-G) Length:width ratio population frequency analysis of (D) above. The 
majority of cardiomyocytes (~ 60%) display a length:width ratio of 1.0-2.0 (Day 0); however, upon treatment with hCT1 (Day 
2), a significant shift in length:width ratio of 3.0-9.0 was observed versus control at day 2 (n = 3; **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001) 
with reversion occurring at day 6 upon hCT1 removal.
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1199
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
 1200
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
of hypertrophy may share a common molecular origin, 
where the more extreme form of growth (pathologic 
hypertrophy) derives from an unconstrained molecular 
signal. For example, the Mef2 transcription factor family 
has been noted to have elevated activities in both patho-
logic and maturational cardiac growth programs [27-29].
To address this supposition we examined whether 
hCT1-induced cardiomyocyte remodeling was asso-
ciated with a blunted activation of the mitochondrial-/
intrinsic-mediated cell death pathway. This sequential 
proteolytic cascade was initially defined as a hallmark 
of apoptosis, yet this pathway is now widely recognized 
as a signaling cascade that confers a variety of essential 
non-death cell adaptations [30-32]. Prior observations 
from our laboratory have demonstrated that agonists pro-
ducing pathologic hypertrophy engage robust activation 
of the intrinsic cell death pathway and distal pathway 
activation alone (caspase 3) is essential and sufficient to 
induce hypertrophy without attendant apoptosis [33]. We 
noted that hCT1 treatment of cardiomyocytes resulted in 
a rapid proximal activation of this signal cascade, with 
increased caspase 9 activity (Figure 3A-3B; Supplemen-
tary information, Figure S1A). Caspase 3 activity was 
effectively engaged by hCT1, yet was notably decreased 
when compared with that in the presence of the hyper-
trophy agonist PE, with a similar reduction in caspase 
3 activity when cardiomyocytes were treated with both 
hCT1 and PE (Figure 3C). hCT1-treated cardiomyo-
cytes also rapidly engaged caspase 3-sensitive transcrip-
tional responses, including the activation of Mef2- and 
NF-κB-dependent reporters (Figure 3D). However, un-
like exposure to standard pathologic agonists such as PE 
and ISO, the activation of Mef2 and NF-κB in response 
to hCT1 was limited in duration (Figure 3D). hCT1 also 
selectively engaged a robust STAT3-dependent reporter 
activity unlike PE, which preferentially activated STAT1 
(Supplementary information, Figure S2A and S2B). In-
terestingly, STAT1 and STAT3 appear to have opposing 
roles in regulating survival and inflammation: STAT1 
acts as a pro-inflammatory factor and induces apoptosis, 
whereas STAT3 is anti-inflammatory and promotes cell 
survival [34]. It is the intricate balance between STAT1 
and STAT3 activation that may determine the outcome 
of PE or hCT1 treatment. In this case, hCT1 stimulation 
is likely cardioprotective due to preferential activation of 
STAT3 over STAT1 (Supplementary information, Figure 
S2A and S2B). Finally, blockade of caspase 9 activity 
(through exposure to peptide inhibitors) or caspase 3 ac-
tivity (through adenoviral delivery of the biologic effec-
tor caspase inhibitor p35) completely abrogated hCT1-in-
duced cell growth and hCT1-induced upregulation of 
pro-hypertrophic markers such as ANP (Figure 3E-3H; 
Supplementary information, Figure S1B and S1C). ANP 
expression increases in both pathologic and physiologic 
hypertrophy settings, as such production and secretion 
of this natriuretic peptide provides a robust measure of a 
global hypertrophy response [35]. Although we provide 
evidence that caspase 9 and 3 activity are required for 
hypertrophy induction by both hCT1 and PE, the extent 
of caspase activity is not as robust during hCT1 stimu-
lation when compared to PE. Importantly, this limited 
caspase activation in response to hCT1 is still significant 
enough to engage a beneficial hypertrophic response that 
is sensitive to caspase inhibition.
These observations suggest that hCT1 engages a re-
stricted activation of the intrinsic cell death pathway to 
Figure 2 Administration of hCT1 in vivo induces beneficial cardiac growth, while withdrawal of hCT1 causes reversion to 
baseline cardiac dimensions. (A-J) Osmotic minipumps were implanted subcutaneously in rats containing PBS control (Ctrl), 
hCT1 (6 µg/kg/h), and isoproterenol (ISO, 1 mg/kg/d) or phenylephrine (PE, 10 mg/kg/d) to induce hypertrophy over 2 weeks. 
After 2 and 6 weeks post treatment, M-mode echocardiography analysis was used to assess myocardial structure/function. (A) 
Echocardiography images. Arrows and arrowheads (upper panels) point to the right ventricle free wall (RVFW) and septum. 
Dotted lines (lower panels) span the right and left ventricle internal diameter (RVID and LVID, respectively) of the inner cham-
bers. (B-E) Both hCT1 and ISO (or PE) induced a significant increase in cardiac hypertrophy versus control (n = 6; *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.0001). However, only rats treated with ISO or PE exhibited an increase in the RVID:LVID ratio (n = 
6; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01). (F-J) 6 weeks post withdrawal, hCT1-treated rats displayed reversion of heart growth, whereas 
PE-treated rats maintained a significant increase in HW:BW (heart weight to body weight ratio), RVFW wall thickness, car-
diomyocyte cross-sectional area, and RVID:LVID ratio versus control (n = 6; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.0001). (F), 
Whole hearts (left panel; scale bar, 10 mm), Hematoxylin and Eosin-stained sections (middle and right panels; scale bars, 
10 mm and 50 µm, respectively). (K-N) Similar procedure as in (A) above, however, adult murine cardiomyocytes were ana-
lyzed. After 2 weeks of treatment, hCT1 significantly increased the length of cardiomyocytes versus PBS control or PE (K; n 
= 6, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001) while PE significantly increased the width versus PBS control and hCT1 (L; n = 6, ****P 
< 0.0001). The length to width ratio of PE-treated cardiomyocytes was significantly decreased versus PBS control and hCT1 (M; 
n = 6, ****P < 0.0001), whereas no significant difference (ns) was observed between PBS control and hCT1. Representative 
images (N) of murine cardiomyocytes were stained with Alexa Fluor-488 Phalloidin (F-actin, green) and DAPI (nuclei, blue). 
Scale bar, 50 µm.
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1201
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
 1202
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
initiate the beneficial remodeling of cardiomyocytes. 
There are numerous examples in the literature regarding 
concurrent signals or feedback mechanisms that limit 
caspase 3 activation and we surmised that such a path-
way was operant during hCT1-induced hypertrophy. 
Here, we examined whether hCT1 was coincident with 
the activation of CK2, a kinase that phosphorylates both 
caspase 3 and its cognate substrates, effectively squelch-
ing protease activity and limiting proteolytic cleavage 
[36, 37]. Inhibition of CK2 (via exposure to TBBt) 
during hCT1 stimulation of cardiomyocytes resulted in 
a significant increase in cell size and ANP expression 
when compared to cardiomyocytes treated with hCT1 
alone (Figure 3I-3J; Supplementary information, Figure 
S3). Treatment of cardiomyocytes with both PE and the 
CK2 inhibitor did not lead to any additional increase 
in cell size or ANP expression compared to PE alone, 
suggesting that CK2 activation is not a feature of patho-
logic signaling cascades. The inhibition of CK2 activity 
during hCT1 stimulation also resulted in a morphologic 
alteration, where the affected cardiomyocytes displayed 
a growth phenotype more characteristic of exposure to 
pathologic agonists such as PE (i.e., a reduction in the 
length to width ratio, Figure 3K; Supplementary infor-
mation, Figure S3). These observations imply that hCT1 
mediated a constrained activation of caspase 3 activity 
via CK2-targeted phosphorylation and that this biochem-
ical step is a key feature of beneficial cardiomyocyte 
remodeling, instrumental in preventing a transition to 
fulminant pathologic hypertrophy. 
hCT1 stimulates a cardiomyocyte-derived paracrine sig-
nal to enhance angiogenesis and limit fibrosis 
Physiologic cardiac hypertrophy is associated with an 
increase in capillary density, whereas pathologic hyper-
trophy is characterized by a relative decline or no change 
at all [9, 38]. Indeed, this compensatory vascular growth/
angiogenesis is permissive for the increased workload 
that accompanies physiologic hypertrophy. The intra-de-
pendence of these tissue adaptations suggests that the 
myocardium and its supporting vasculature may engage 
in a paracrine or autocrine signal to match myocardial 
growth with an improved blood supply. In support of 
this premise, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
has been demonstrated to be produced and secreted by 
cardiomyocytes and gene targeted deletion of this growth 
factor leads to prominent cardiac pathology [39, 40]. 
Alternatively, a beneficial remodeling agent may act con-
currently but independently on myocardial and vascular 
cells to spur organ growth. 
To begin to address this supposition we initially exam-
ined capillary density in the myocardium of hCT1-treat-
ed versus control and PE-treated animals (a similar 14-
day treatment regime as noted in Figure 2). hCT1-treated 
animals displayed a significant increase in the number 
of CD31-positive capillaries compared to control or 
PE-treated animals, indicative of beneficial remodeling 
of the myocardium (Figure 4A and 4B). Discontinuation 
of hCT1 treatment led to a reversion of capillary density 
to control values (Figure 4C and 4D), suggesting that 
the angiogenic properties of hCT1 are fully reversible, 
Figure 3 hCT1 engages a restricted activation of the intrinsic caspase-mediated cell death pathway. (A, B) Primary cardiomy-
ocytes were treated for 1 h with control serum-free medium (Ctrl), hCT1 (0.5 nM), or PE (100 µM) in the presence or absence 
of the caspase 9 inhibitor (z-LEHD-fmk, 20 µM). Caspase 9 was significantly activated with hCT1 and PE versus control (n = 
3; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01) and this was decreased in the presence of z-LEHD-fmk (n = 3; *P < 0.05). (C) Cardiomyocytes 
were treated with hCT1 (0.5 nM), PE (100 µM), or hCT1+PE for 15 min and 24 h and analyzed by western immunoblotting. 
hCT1 caused a moderate increase in caspase 3 activity compared to PE at 24 h. Caspase 3 activity also decreased with 
combined PE and hCT1 stimulation (arrows). GAPDH was the loading control. (D) Cardiomyocytes were transfected with 
reporter plasmids under the control of NF-κB or Mef2 promoters and luciferase activity was measured after treatment with: 
control serum-free medium (Ctrl), hCT1 (0.5 nM), PE (100 µM), or procaspase 3-activating compound 1 (PAC-1; 25 µM). 
hCT1 treatment resulted in NF-κB and Mef2 activation at 1 and 3 h versus control (n = 4; * P< 0.05 and **P < 0.01); and at 24 h, 
only NF-κB activity was sustained (n = 4; *P < 0.05). However, PE and PAC-1 treatment caused significant activation of Mef2 
after 24 h (n = 4; **P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.0001). Co-stimulation of hCT1/PE and hCT1/PAC-1 significantly reduced Mef2 
activity compared to PE and PAC-1 alone (n = 4; ****P < 0.0001 and *P < 0.05, respectively). (E, F) Similar procedure as in 
(A) above; however, with 24 h treatment. hCT1 and PE significantly increased cell area and the pro-hypertrophic marker ANP 
versus control (n = 3; ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001) and this was significantly attenuated in the presence of  z-LEHD-fmk (n 
= 3;*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01). (G, H) Cardiomyocytes were infected for 24 h with an adenovirus (AdV) encoding the caspase 
inhibitor, p35-AdV, prior to inducing hypertrophy with hCT1 or PE for 24 h. GFP-AdV was used as a control. p35-AdV sig-
nificantly inhibited hCT1 and PE induced hypertrophy (n = 3; **P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.0001, respectively) and inhibited ANP 
expression (n = 3; **P < 0.01 and *P < 0.05, respectively). Both p35-AdV and GFP-AdV were used at a mean of infectivity (MOI) 
of 20. (I-K) Similar procedure as in (E, F) above; however, casein kinase 2 (CK2) activity was blocked using TBBt (50 µM). 
CK2 inhibition significantly increased cell size and ANP expression (n = 3; *P < 0.05) while reducing length:width ratio (n = 3; 
**P < 0.01) when compared to hCT1 treatment alone.
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1203
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
 1204
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
akin to hCT1-mediated growth alterations in cardiomy-
ocytes and the myocardium proper (Figures 1 and 2). 
Next, we sought to identify whether the hCT1 pro-angio-
genic activity was associated with a cardiomyocyte-de-
rived paracrine signal. Comparative gene expression 
analysis revealed that hCT1-treated cardiomyocytes 
exhibited robust induction of angiogenic factors includ-
ing angiopoietin-like 4 (Angpt14), Fms-related tyrosine 
kinase 4 (Flt4), von Willebrand factor 5A (Vwa5a), with 
modest but significant increases in VEGF expression 
(Supplementary information, Table S1). Stimulation of 
cardiomyocytes with hCT1 led to a rapid increase of 
VEGF protein within the cell, yet treatment with patho-
logic hypertrophy agonists such as PE or the caspase 3 
small molecule activator, PAC-1 resulted in a minimal 
increase (Figure 4E). In addition, blockade of caspase 
3 activity (through adenoviral delivery of the biologic 
effector caspase inhibitor p35) significantly inhibited the 
hCT1-induced increase in VEGF, whereas the minimal 
increase in intracellular VEGF with PE was also inhibit-
ed with p35 adenovirus (AdV) (Supplementary informa-
tion, Figure S4A and S4B). This suggests that VEGF ex-
pression induced by hCT1 or PE is mediated, in part, by 
caspase signaling. In addition, western analysis of media 
derived from hCT1-treated cardiomyocytes demonstrat-
ed that the increased production of VEGF protein was 
associated with an increased release of the growth factor 
(Figure 4F). It is interesting to note that the minimal cel-
lular VEGF expression induced by PE was not detected 
in the media after 24 h (Figure 4F). Presumably, patho-
logic stimulation with PE impedes any robust secretion 
of VEGF from the cell thus hindering angiogenesis such 
that it cannot keep pace with hypertrophy. Indeed, others 
have detected minor amounts of secreted VEGF in the 
media after prolonged (48 h) stimulation with PE [41]. 
These results suggest that hCT1 promotes cardiomyocyte 
secretion of angiogenic factor(s) via a signaling mecha-
nism that is concurrent to and dependent on caspase 3. 
Given that angiogenesis can promote the transport 
of oxygen and nutrients to cardiomyocytes, we next ex-
plored the metabolic effect of inducing hypertrophy with 
hCT1 or PE. Under normal conditions, the majority of 
energy (ATP) generated in the heart is derived from mi-
tochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and, during hyper-
trophy, there is an increased metabolic demand to com-
pensate for the increased workload [42]. Thus, oxygen 
consumption of cardiomyocytes is an important indicator 
of normal cellular function where unhealthy cells with 
dysfunctional mitochondria display a lower oxygen con-
sumption compared to healthy cells and exercise adapted 
cardiomyocytes display rates of oxygen consumption 
above baseline values. Accordingly, we measured the 
rate of oxygen consumption and observed that treatment 
with hCT1  for 24 h resulted in a significantly higher rate 
of oxygen consumption compared to pathologic stimu-
lation with PE (Supplementary information, Figure S5). 
Moreover, the microarray data indicated a slight, yet sig-
nificant, compensatory decrease at the gene expression 
level of a wide array of oxidative mitochondrial enzymes 
(Supplementary information, Table S1). This observation 
suggests that hCT1 may increase the efficiency of oxida-
tive mitochondrial energy metabolism during physiolog-
ical hypertrophy and would provide further support that 
hCT1 can model the benefits of increased aerobic fitness 
(oxygen consumption rate) observed during endurance 
exercise training. It should also be noted that hCT1 re-
sults in increased expression of anti-oxidant regulatory 
factors (i.e., mitochondrial superoxide dismutase 2 and 
metallothionein 2A), a mechanism that is consistent with 
enhanced metabolic control (Supplementary informa-
tion, Table S1). Finally, studies have shown that CT1 can 
significantly improve mitochondrial dysfunction leading 
to neuroprotection in a mouse model by increasing mi-
tochondrial cytochrome oxidase activity and ATP energy 
Figure 4 hCT1 enhances angiogenesis and limits fibrosis during cardiac hypertrophy. (A-D) Rats were treated with hCT1 or 
PE for 2 weeks followed by withdrawal for 6 weeks. Capillary density was assessed by staining for CD31 (brown) and coun-
terstaining with Hematoxylin (blue). hCT1-treated rats displayed a significant increase in CD31-positive capillaries (n = 4;**P 
< 0.01) at 2 weeks with reversion at 6 weeks post withdrawal; whereas PE-treated rats displayed a significant decrease at 2 
weeks post treatment and 6 weeks post withdrawal (n = 4; *P < 0.05). Scale bar, 50 µm. (E) Primary cardiomyocytes were 
incubated with control serum-free medium (Ctrl, SF medium), hCT1 (0.5 nM), PE (100 µM), or PAC-1 (25 µM) for 24 h. hCT1 
treatment resulted in a greater increase in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression compared to PE or PAC-1. 
Immunofluorescence was used to detect α-actinin (red), VEGF (green), and nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 
40 µm. (F) Similar procedure as in (E) above, however, conditioned medium was harvested at 24 h and expression of secret-
ed VEGF protein was detected upon immunoblotting with anti-VEGF antibody. A significant increase in VEGF was observed 
in hCT1-treated samples (sets A-C) when compared to PE or Ctrl. (+), recombinant VEGF protein (40 ng) used as positive 
control. (#), cross-reactivity bands of antibody to components in conditioned medium. (G-J) Rats were treated as in (A) above 
and fibrosis/collagen was assessed using Masson’s Trichrome staining (blue deposits). Rat hearts exposed to PE exhibited a 
significant increase in collagen/fibrosis at 2 weeks post treatment as well as 6 weeks post withdrawal (n = 4; ***P < 0.001 and 
**P < 0.01, respectively). Scale bar, 50 µm.
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1205
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
levels, while decreasing reactive oxygen species produc-
tion [43], observations that are consistent with the data 
presented here.
In addition to elevated vascularity and metabolic pro-
file, we assessed whether hCT1 limited fibrosis/fibrotic 
deposition, a phenotypic change that is consistent with 
pathologic hypertrophy [44]. We noted that hCT1-treated 
animals had no appreciable increase in fibrotic deposi-
tion compared with PE-treated animals, which displayed 
robust elevations in collagen deposits (Figure 4G-4J). 
hCT1-treated cardiac fibroblasts were also devoid of the 
robust increase in Galectin-3 that occurs during exposure 
to PE (Supplementary information, Figure S6A-S6C). 
Collectively, these data support the contention that CT1 
induces multiple cellular adaptations to ensure a matched 
organ level response to maintain and augment cardiac 
function.
hCT1 stimulation improves cardiac function in a model 
of severe right heart failure
The capacity for hCT1 to induce beneficial myocardial 
remodeling suggests that this protein may provide a trac-
table means to limit the progression of cardiac patholo-
gies. To test this general premise, we examined whether 
hCT1 administration could limit and/or improve cardiac 
performance in a model of RHF due to severe pulmonary 
arterial hypertension (PAH)-induced inhibition of VEG-
FR2 with SU5416 (SU) followed by a 3-week exposure 
to hypoxia (Hx). The SUHx model faithfully reproduces 
many of the features of human PAH, which develops 
from a generalized thickening and obliteration of distal 
lung arterioles [45-47]. The severity of symptoms and 
the prognosis in PAH is largely driven by the degree to 
which the RV can adapt to the marked increases in after-
load, and inability to compensate results in progressive 
RHF, reduced cardiac output, and ultimately death.
Our initial experiments revealed that systemic de-
livery of hCT1 protein during early stages of hypoxia 
exposure (prior to the development of RHF) provided 
an effective means to prevent the onset of RHF (Supple-
mentary information, Figure S7A and S7B). However, 
this was associated with improvements in pulmonary he-
modynamics, possibly due to the beneficial effects of the 
pro-angiogenic actions of hCT1 on the development of 
this disease. Therefore, we tested whether hCT1 protein 
delivery would mitigate RHF at later stages of disease in 
the SUHx model, when the severe PAH was fully estab-
lished and RHF was already present. Here, we observed 
that delivery of hCT1 protein (beginning after 3 weeks 
of hypoxia exposure) was sufficient to reverse the RHF 
pathology, where hCT1-treated SUHx animals displayed 
significant improvement in both contractile function (car-
diac output, fractional area change) and structural dimen-
sions of the heart (RVID:LVID ratio) (Figure 5A-5C; 
5E and 5F). In addition, hCT1-treated SUHx animals 
displayed increased RV vascularity (increased capillary 
density as measured by CD31 staining) and reduced RV 
cardiomyocyte cell size with a characteristic eccentric 
growth phenotype, when compared to sham-treated 
SUHx animals (Figure 5G-5J). Importantly, hCT1 treat-
ment did not mitigate or lessen the elevated pulmonary 
pressures in the SUHx model (Figure 5D), strongly sug-
gesting that hCT1 improved cardiac function by inducing 
heart/myocardial specific remodeling events.
Discussion
Here, we demonstrate the capacity of a single exog-
enously delivered protein, CT1, to produce beneficial 
remodeling of the heart. The cardiac adaptations elicited 
by CT1 display the essential characteristics and benefits 
that are associated with endurance exercise adaptation, 
all of which are fully reversible when CT1 protein de-
livery is discontinued.  Remarkably, administering CT1 
alone achieves an organ level reorganization of the heart, 
impacting the myocardial and vascular cell components 
through a cardiomyocyte instructed response, i.e., CT1 
stimulates both cell growth and a pro-vascular paracrine 
signal in the cardiomyocyte population.
Heart failure is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality in affluent societies and a growing epidemic 
worldwide [48]. The most intensely studied form of the 
disease, congestive HF, can be effectively managed with 
combinatorial interventions that enhance contractile 
performance, while reducing afterload on the weakened 
muscle (through diuretic-mediated reduction in fluid lev-
els) [49]. RHF, which occurs when the right heart cannot 
adapt to an increase in afterload, has emerged as an equal 
if not greater public health crisis. This results from an 
increase in pulmonary arterial pressure or pulmonary hy-
pertension (PH). Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) 
is a rare but serious form of PH; however, by far the 
most common cause of PH is HF with preserved ejection 
fraction (HFpEF). Despite the important progress in the 
treatment of left HF with reduced ejection fraction, ef-
fective pharmacologic management of RHF, particularly 
in the context of HFpEF, has proven to be an intractable 
problem [50]. In addition, patients with RHF, regardless 
of etiology, have a very limited capacity to engage in 
and derive the myocardial benefits that are associated 
with aerobic exercise programs [50]. Our observations 
suggest that CT1 can dramatically improve cardiac per-
formance in RHF, whereby the failing myocardium is 
functionally reprogrammed at the whole organ level.
 1206
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1207
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
The myocardial remodeling activity of CT1 is relayed 
through a complex and self-adjusting molecular signal 
cascade. For example, CT1 engages a temporally brief 
upregulation in the mitochondrial intrinsic cell death 
pathway, culminating in a pulse of caspase 3 activation. 
Robust activation of this signal cascade is a key feature 
of pathologic hypertrophy [33], yet CT1 appears to de-
ploy the cellular remodeling capacity of caspase 3 as a 
conduit to initiate physiologic growth. Our observations 
imply that caspase 3 stimulates an overlapping gene 
expression program during physiologic and pathologic 
hypertrophy, i.e., Mef2-dependent transcription, and 
that varying the duration of this biologic signal may 
be a primary mechanism to manage the divergent out-
comes (Figure 6). CT1 activation of CK2 appears to be 
central to the process of restrained caspase signaling, 
as inhibition of this kinase leads to more robust caspase 
activity and a pathologic hypertrophy phenotype. How 
CT1 signals to CK2 is not entirely clear, although a post 
gp130-mediated cascade is a likely conduit. In the eryth-
roleukemic cells, cytokine stimulation has been shown 
to promote a direct physical interaction between CK2 
and the gp130 scaffold kinases JAK1/JAK2, resulting in 
an autoactivation loop between the JAKs and CK2 [51]. 
Whether this regulatory network is operant in CT1-stim-
ulated cardiomyocytes will require further investigation. 
Our experiments strongly suggest that CT1 stimulation 
of CK2 function is critical to limit caspase activation, a 
key molecular step in establishing the physiologic hyper-
trophy phenotype. CK2 is a holoenzyme that is constitu-
tively active [36, 37], as such our data suggest it is most 
likely that CT1 stimulation limits the interaction between 
the kinase complex and caspase 3 and or the relevant 
caspase 3 substrates, rather than directly increasing CK2 
activity. We have noted that during hypertrophy stimu-
lation, the caspase 3 activation pattern is tightly scripted 
within the cell, forming discrete foci in peri-nuclear lo-
cations [36]. We attempted to monitor a CK2/caspase 3 
interaction via proximity ligation assay (PLA), but were 
unable to establish an interaction between these enzymes 
using this methodology. The activated caspase 3 protein 
foci suggest that the protease may exist within aggregat-
ed structures, a condition that would not be conducive to 
monitoring protein interactions via PLA.
This variable signal hypothesis is consistently demon-
strated in the developmental biology literature, where 
temporal activation of caspase 3 acts as a critical induc-
tive cue for cell differentiation, while sustained activa-
tion leads to cell death within the same cell population 
[30, 31]. Certainly, a temporal removal of Mef2 repres-
sion by caspase targeting of HDAC3 (as we have noted 
in [33]) would provide an amenable mechanism to titrate 
Mef2 activity, with a more robust activation of this path-
way a characteristic of pathologic hypertrophy. Indeed, 
prior observations have shown that complete deletion 
of HDAC3 is synonymous with unrestrained pathologic 
myocardial growth [52]. Nevertheless, caspase 3 cleav-
age of HDAC3 is unlikely to solely account for the pro-
found phenotypic variation between physiologic versus 
pathologic hypertrophy. Here, we favor the supposition 
that sustained caspase 3 activation leads to the targeting 
of a cohort of substrates that alter the structural integ-
rity of the cardiomyocyte, and that these substrates are 
either inaccessible or subject to very limited proteolytic 
targeting when caspase 3 is transiently engaged by CT1. 
Indeed, caspase cleavage of contractile proteins such 
as Troponin T and myosin light chain have been noted 
in nonapoptotic cardiomyocytes during progression to 
dilation and failure [53, 54], consistent with the CT1-in-
spired limited caspase activation model we favor (Figure 
6).
It is generally accepted that prolonged pathological 
cardiac hypertrophy frequently transitions to HF, which 
causes eccentric hypertrophy with chamber dilation and 
Figure 5 hCT1 attenuates the morphologic and hemodynamic effects of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in the Su-
gen/hypoxia (SUHx) rat model. (A) PAH was induced by administering a single subcutaneous injection of SU5416 (SU) at 
20 mg/kg (VEGF receptor antagonist) followed by exposure to chronic hypoxia (Hx) at 10% oxygen for 3 weeks. Rats were 
recovered for 24 h in normoxia before subcutaneous implantation of osmotic minipumps containing hCT1 (6 µg/kg/h) or phos-
phate-buffered saline (PBS). Echocardiography was conducted and the following parameters were measured: right ventricle 
free wall thickness (RVFW; B), right to left ventricle internal diameter ratio (RVID:LVID; C), pulmonary artery acceleration time 
(PAAT; D), fractional area change (FAC; E), and cardiac output (CO; F). Control rats were not exposed to SU5416 or hypoxia. 
(B-F) Significant differences were observed between the PAH-induced SUHx rat groups (hCT1 or PBS) and the control rat 
group (n = 3; ****P < 0.0001). At 5-6 weeks, hCT1-treated SUHx animals showed a significant increase in CO (F) and FAC 
(E), and a decrease in RVID:LVID (C) and RVFW (B) versus the PBS-treated SUHx group (n = 3; **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 
and ****P < 0.0001 ). (G, H) hCT1 treatment significantly increased capillary density versus PBS-treated SUHx animals (n 
= 3; *P < 0.05). (H) Capillaries stained with endothelial-specific CD31+ antibody followed by chromogenic detection (DAB, 
brown). Nuclei counterstained with Hematoxylin. Scale bar, 50 µm. (I, J) hCT1 treatment significantly decreased cardiomyo-
cyte cross-sectional area in the right ventricle versus PBS-treated SUHx animals (n = 3; *P < 0.05). (J) Masson’s Trichrome 
staining of heart cross-sectional area. Scale bar, 50 µm.
 1208
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
Figure 6 Proposed model of hCT1-mediated physiologic cardiac hypertrophy. hCT1 promotes reversible and beneficial car-
diac remodeling by restraining caspase activation via CK2; whereas pathological stimulation (with PE, ISO, or hypoxia/PAH) 
causes unrestricted caspase activation with progression to cardiac dysfunction. Heart (pink), caspases (yellow), hCT1 (human 
cardiotrophin 1), PE (phenylephrine), ISO (isoproterenol), CK2 (casein kinase 2), PAH (pulmonary arterial hypertension).
thinning of the myocardium [3]. Although studies have 
shown that increased cardiomyocyte lengthening con-
tributes to chamber dilation and myocardial thinning in 
HF [55], there is an appreciable number of studies that 
provide compelling evidence that exercise training also 
induces a beneficial cardiomyocyte response, in both 
morphology and function, by means of cardiomyocyte 
lengthening/elongation [56-59]. For example, low-in-
tensity endurance training in rats resulted in eccentric 
hypertrophy of the left ventricle (LV) with increased 
length to width ratio of cardiomyocytes [57]. Although 
RV cardiomyocytes showed no change in length to width 
ratio, the authors postulate that the adaptive response of 
RV cardiomyocytes might depend on a more prolonged 
or intense exercise regimen such as high-intensity endur-
ance training. Furthermore, cardiomyocyte lengthening 
was positively correlated with aerobic fitness in rats ex-
posed to exercise treadmill training and detraining [59]. 
With training, cardiomyocyte length increased along 
with aerobic fitness. However, most of the aerobic fit-
ness gained over 2-3 months was lost within 4 weeks of 
detraining, including regression of cardiomyocyte length 
back to sedentary control values [59].
It is also important to note that programmed cell death 
(apoptosis) of cardiomyocytes is an essential process 
in the progression of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) 
and HF, and patients with DCM and HF have signifi-
cantly higher apoptosis than control patients [60, 61]. 
It is reasonable to conjecture that much of the eccentric 
hypertrophy and cardiomyocyte lengthening seen in the 
progression of DCM and HF is likely attributed to the in-
direct stretching of a weakened myocardium, which is a 
secondary effect to the direct loss of cardiomyocytes due 
to apoptosis. In the context of our study and our proposed 
model (Figure 6), we show that hCT1 stimulation does 
not lead to cell death, but rather, the observed cardio-
myocyte lengthening is a result of specific engagement 
of a beneficial and reversible physiological hypertrophy 
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1209
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
process.
Moreover, there is plausible evolutionary evidence in-
dicating that cellular elongation (or length to width ratio 
increase) provides a survival advantage to a cell or an 
organism [62]. Remarkably, some cells respond to stress 
(nutrient deprivation) by changing shapes via elongation 
(i.e., similar to eccentric growth and increased length to 
width ratio with hCT1 stimulation), which maximizes 
the “surface area to volume ratio” and this allows for ef-
ficient nutrient uptake during times of stress. On the con-
trary, spherical cells (i.e., similar to concentric growth 
and reduced length to width ratio with PE) have the 
worst possible shape for efficient nutrient/substrate up-
take. This could partly account for the effects seen with 
pathological hypertrophy due to the inability of the hy-
pertrophied cardiomyocyte to meet metabolic demands.
We have noted that CT1 engages signals that are pro-
to-typical of the larger IL-6 cytokine family and are not 
conserved responses to pathologic hypertrophy agonists 
per se, i.e., gp130-mediated activation of STAT-depen-
dent transcriptional activity. The STAT transcriptional 
response was sustained and likely contributes to the 
unique phenotypic outcome that characterizes physiolog-
ic hypertrophy and its beneficial remodeling events. At 
this stage we do not understand precisely how STAT-de-
pendent signaling manifest change within the adapting 
cardiomyocyte. There is evidence to suggest that STAT 
activity can modify contractile protein content through 
upregulation of angiotensin gene expression, while 
promoting a pro-survival anti-apoptotic response [63]. 
This observation is certainly consistent with our studies, 
where CT1 stimulates a restricted caspase activation pat-
tern. STAT transcriptional activity may also be a primary 
mechanism by which CT1 engages the cardiomyocyte 
production of angiogenic factors, i.e., STAT3 has been 
shown to be essential for promoting pro-angiogenic ac-
tivity/capillarization within the myocardium [64, 65].
The myocardial and vascular remodeling capacity of 
CT1 implies that it may be effective in combating myop-
athies and ischemic heart disease in general. For exam-
ple, the scalable and reversible hypertrophy that derives 
from CT1 stimulation may improve the contractile func-
tion of the post-infarct myocardium, while the pro-an-
giogenic and anti-fibrotic activities would curtail the loss 
in functional myocardium that occurs in the weeks fol-
lowing the initial ischemic damage. Indeed, preliminary 
experiments demonstrate that hCT1 protein can reduce 
scar size and improve contractile performance in a ro-
dent infarct model up to 8 weeks from the initial insult 
(ligation of the left descending coronary artery; Supple-
mentary information, Figure S7A and S7B). The rodent 
myocardium is more robust in the formation of collateral 
vessels compared to the human heart, nevertheless these 
observations provide a strong impetus to explore CT1 
as a viable myocardial rejuvenation therapy in ischemic 
disease settings. Collectively, our studies suggest that 
CT1 protein therapy may provide a tractable means to 
improve cardiac function across a broad range of myopa-
thic and ischemic disease.
Although pathologic hypertrophy frequently becomes 
irreversible and transitions to HF [66], the phenotype 
can be reversed under limited circumstances. For exam-
ple, inhibition of cGMP phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A) 
has been shown to prevent and reverse pressure over-
load-induced pathologic cardiac hypertrophy [67]. Also, 
calcineurin-dependent pathologic cardiac hypertrophy is 
partially reversible upon removal of calcineurin activity 
[68]. Furthermore, common anti-hypertensive treatments 
(e.g., β-blockers and angiotensin receptor blockers) can 
lead to partial reversion of pathologic hypertrophy in pa-
tients with hypertension [69]. Although these treatments 
reverse pathologic cardiac growth, the reversion is not 
complete as there is remnant fibrosis present. One of the 
most essential features distinguishing physiological from 
pathological hypertrophy is the capacity for complete 
growth reversion without residual fibrotic pathology [70]. 
As such, our observations are consistent with the hypoth-
esis that hCT1 induces reversible physiological hypertro-
phy.
Finally, it is germane to note that therapeutic strate-
gies designed to interdict or block caspase 3 activity, as 
a means to reduce myocardial cell death, are destined to 
fail. The transient activation of caspase 3 is a key step in 
the beneficial remodeling process afforded by CT1, and 
may also be central to exercise and pregnancy-associated 
myocardial adaptation. As such, indiscriminate disrup-
tion in the baseline activity of this protease will lead to 
a decline in adaptive capacity of the myocardium, while 
exacerbating disease progression.
Materials and Methods
Rats and mice
All animal studies (primary cell retrieval and in vivo analysis) 
were approved by the University of Ottawa Animal Care Com-
mittee. Sprague-Dawley rats, Fischer rats, and C57BL/6 mice 
were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, 
USA).
Neonatal rat primary cardiomyocytes
Primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were freshly isolated from 
hearts of 2-day-old Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River Labora-
tories). Hearts were excised and placed in Joklik’s-modified Eagle 
medium (JMEM). Ventricles were separated from the atria, minced 
with scalpel blades, and transferred to a 50 ml Falcon tube for di-
gestion with 200 units per ml of Collagenase II (Worthington) in a 
 1210
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
total of 10 ml JMEM at 37 °C with gentle agitation. After 15 min, 
use a 25 ml pipet to slowly triturate (pipet up and down) the tissue 
and media about 2-3 times and then briefly wait for the tissue to 
settle at the bottom of the pipet. Then, pipet out (“spit”) the tissue 
into a clean tube for further Collagenase digestions while discard-
ing the supernatant remaining in the pipet (“Digestion #0”), which 
contains mostly red blood cells and cell debris.
Perform another 4-5 rounds of Collagenase digests of the 
minced/digested heart tissue (as above); however, this time, the 
supernatant (containing an appreciable amount of primary cardio-
myocytes) is transferred to a tube containing 10 ml of fetal bovine 
serum to stop the Collagenase reaction. This tube is centrifuged 
at 100× g for 5 min at room temperature to pellet the cells. The 
supernatant is discarded and the cells are resuspended in 1 ml Dul-
becco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) growth medium. Pool 
all the individual 1 ml cardiomyocyte fractions from the Collage-
nase digests into one tube. Transfer the volume of pooled cardio-
myocytes onto a 70 µm filter pore size cell strainer (CellTreat) as-
sembled on top of a 50 ml Falcon tube to help further remove cell 
clumps and cell debris. Wash the cell strainer with an additional 25 
ml of DMEM growth medium.
Conduct a pre-plating step (to separate out cardiac fibroblasts 
and enrich for cardiomyocytes) by transferring the entire volume 
of flow-through onto a sterile 15 cm tissue culture dish and incu-
bate at 37 °C for 30 min. Fibroblasts will adhere to the dish while 
cardiomyocytes remain in the media. Carefully collect the media 
using a 25 ml pipet and transfer to a new sterile 15 cm tissue 
culture dish for another round of pre-plating to further enrich for 
cardiomyocytes. After the second pre-plating incubation, transfer 
media to a sterile tube and centrifuge at 100× g for 5 min at room 
temperature. Discard the supernatant and resuspend the ventricular 
pellet in 5 ml of DMEM growth medium and this is the primary 
cardiomyocyte stock.
Count the number of cardiomyocytes using a Hemocytometer 
(cells per ml), then seed the desired number of cells directly onto 
collagen-coated tissue culture dishes and allow cells to recover 
overnight in DMEM growth medium in an incubator at 37 °C with 
5% CO2. The next day, DMEM growth medium was replaced with 
serum-free (SF) medium and incubated for another day (up to 24 h) 
at 37 °C prior to conducting specific experiments.
Adult mouse primary cardiomyocytes
Adult C57BL/6 mice (Charles River Laboratories) at 9 weeks 
of age were anesthetized using Avertin (0.4 mg/g) intraperitone-
ally. Thoracic cavity was then opened to expose the heart. Using 
a syringe pump, pre-warmed (37 °C) perfusion solution (126 mM 
NaCl, 4.4 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 4 mM NaHCO3, 30 mM 2,3-bu-
tanedione monoxime, 10 mM HEPES, 11 mM glucose, 0.5 mM 
EDTA, 0.09% Collagenase Type 2, 0.125% trypsin, 25 µM CaCl2 
pH 7.4) was pumped through a 26G needle at a rate of 4 ml/min. 
The needle was inserted into the LV through the apex of the heart 
and the right atrium was cut. The mouse was then perfused for 5 
min. The heart was then carefully removed and placed into a stop 
solution (126 mM NaCl, 4.4 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 4 mM NaH-
CO3, 30 mM 2,3-butanedione monoxime, 10 mM HEPES, 11 mM 
glucose, 0.5 mM EDTA, 100 µM CaCl2, 2% BSA pH 7.4) at 37 
°C for 10 min. The heart was then cut into small pieces and gently 
triturated about 20-30 times using a wide-bore pipette in a petri 
dish. A 100 µm nylon mesh filter was used to remove large debris. 
Formalin (20%) was added in a 1:1 ratio to obtain a final concen-
tration of 10% formalin. Cells were fixed for 15 min. The solution 
was then spun at 50× g for 5 min to pellet cardiomyocytes. Super-
natant was disposed and cardiomyocytes were resuspended in PBS 
prior to conducting fluorescence cell staining.
Recombinant hCT1 protein production
BL21 (DE3) cells (New England Biolabs) were transformed 
with a plasmid encoding wild-type hCT1. A fresh starter culture 
prepared from the transformed cells was diluted by 25-fold into 
0.5 L Overnight Express autoinduction medium (EMD Millipore) 
prepared in 2×YT supplemented with 100 µg/ml kanamycin. The 
culture was grown in a shaking incubator at 37 °C for overnight. 
Cells were harvested and washed by PBS.
Cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 
pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT) supplemented 
with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 0.1% w/
v sodium deoxycholate. Cells were lysed by sonication. The in-
clusion bodies contained in the pellet were washed three times by 
Triton wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton 
X-100, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT, pH 8.0) followed by three 
times by Tris wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 
mM DTT, pH 8.0).
Washed inclusion bodies were solubilized in solubilization 
buffer (100 mM sodium acetate, 2 M urea, 2 mM DTT, pH 3.5) at 
room temperature and centrifuged at 22 000× g for 30 min. The su-
pernatant was dialyzed against Refolding buffer (20 mM HEPES, 
2 mM DTT, pH 7.5) overnight at 4 °C . The refolded protein was 
centrifuged at 22 000× g for 30 min and filtered through a 0.22 µm 
filter and loaded to a HiTrap CM FF column (5 ml, GE Life Sci-
ences) pre-equilibrated with solvent A (10 mM sodium phosphate, 
pH 7.5). Column was washed by 5 column volumes of solvent A, 
and the bound proteins were eluted stepwise by solvent A in 0.1 M 
NaCl then by solvent A in 1 M NaCl. The 0.1 M NaCl eluate was 
pooled and dialyzed against PBS overnight at 4 °C . Protein purity 
was estimated by SEC-HPLC to be > 95%. Mass spectrometry 
and Edman degradation indicated that the purified protein has a 
sequence of Ser2-Ala201 of the wild-type hCT1.
Neonatal rat cardiomyocyte treatments
To induce hypertrophy, cardiomyocytes were treated for 24 (or 
48) h with the following hypertrophic agonists diluted in SF con-
trol medium (SF, Ctrl): hCT1 recombinant protein at 0.5 nM (10 
ng/ml) and PE at 100 µM. Serum-free control medium was also 
used as a non-hypertrophic control.
For caspase 9 inhibition, cardiomyocytes were pre-treated 
with N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Leu-Glu-His-Asp-fluoromethylketone 
(z-LEHD-fmk, 20 µM; BioVision) for 2 h before the induction of 
hypertrophy when fresh inhibitor was added. For effector caspase 
inhibition, cardiomyocytes were infected for 24 h with an AdV 
encoding the biologic effector caspase inhibitor p35 upstream of a 
GFP reporter (p35-AdV) prior to inducing hypertrophy with hCT1 
or PE for a further 24 h. A GFP expressing reporter (GFP-AdV) 
was used as a control and both p35-AdV and GFP-AdV were 
infected at a mean of infectivity of 20 prior to hypertrophic stimu-
lation. For Casein kinase 2 (CK2) inhibition, cardiomyocytes were 
pre-treated with 4,5,6,7-tetrabromobenzotriazole (TBBt, 50 µM; 
EMD Millipore) for 1 h before the induction of hypertrophy when 
fresh inhibitor was added.
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1211
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
To obtain conditioned medium for detection of the secreted 
angiogenic factor – VEGF, cardiomyocytes were seeded at a den-
sity of 1.0 × 10
6 cells directly onto 60 mm diameter tissue culture 
dishes. Hypertrophy was induced with hCT1 (0.5 nM) or PE (100 
µM) diluted in a total volume of 3 ml of control SF medium. After 
24 h, the conditioned medium was transferred onto an Amicon 
Centrifugal Filter Device with a 3 kDa cut-off (EMD Millipore) 
and centrifuged at 4 000× g for 30 min at room temperature. The 
concentrated conditioned medium was analyzed by western im-
munoblotting. Recombinant VEGF protein (Abcam) was used as a 
positive control.
Luciferase assays
Primary rat cardiomyocytes were seeded onto collagen-coat-
ed 48-well tissue culture plates (0.7 × 10
5 cells/well) in DMEM 
growth medium. The following day, cells were transfected using 
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen), SF Opti-MEMα (Thermo Fish-
er), 4 ng of Renilla luciferase internal control plasmid, and 200 ng 
of Firefly luciferase reporter DNA plasmid under the control of: 
pro-hypertrophic gene promoters (NF-κB or Mef2), or a pro-sur-
vival gene promoter (Stat3), or a pro-inflammatory gene promoter 
(Stat1) for 5 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2. The medium was replaced 
with SF medium and cells were incubated overnight at 37 °C with 
5% CO2. The next day, cardiomyocytes were treated with: non-hy-
pertrophic SF medium control (Ctrl), hCT1 (0.5 nM), PE (100 
μM), or procaspase 3-activating compound 1, PAC-1 (25 μM). 
Treatments were conducted at early time points (30 min, 1 h, and 3 
h) and at a later time point (24 h). Luciferase activity (pro-hyper-
trophic reporter activation) was measured using the Dual Lucifer-
ase Assay System as per manufacturer’s instructions (Promega). 
Luciferase values were normalized to the Renilla internal control 
values and to the SF medium control values.
Oxygen consumption rate assay
Primary rat cardiomyocytes were seeded onto collagen-coat-
ed 98-well tissue culture plates (0.9 × 10
5 cells/well) in DMEM 
growth medium. The next day, cell culture medium was replaced 
with SF medium for 24 h. Cardiomyocytes were treated for 1 or 
24 h with the following hypertrophic agonists diluted in SF con-
trol medium (SF, Ctrl): hCT1 recombinant protein at 0.5 nM (10 
ng/ml) and PE at 100 µM. Serum-free control medium was used 
as a non-hypertrophic control. The MitoXpress – Xtra Oxygen 
Consumption Rate (OCR) Assay kit was used to measure oxygen 
consumption according to manufacturer’s instructions (Cayman 
Chemical). Glucose Oxidase enzyme was used as a positive con-
trol. The phosphorescent oxygen probe (MitoXpress – Xtra) was 
used to measure the rate of oxygen consumption in whole cells by 
standard fluorescence intensity analysis using an excitation of 380 
nm and emission of 650 nm.
Immunocytochemistry
Fluorescent cell staining was conducted on primary rat cardio-
myocytes (or cardiac fibroblasts) that were seeded at a density of 
2.7 × 10
5 cells directly onto 25 mm diameter collagen-coated glass 
coverslips. Cells were washed three times in PBS (3 min each) fol-
lowed by fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. Cells were 
then permeabilized in Blocking buffer (1% bovine serum albumin 
– BSA, 2% normal goat serum, 0.4% Tx-100 in PBS) for 15 min. 
Cells were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature with prima-
ry antibody (diluted in Blocking buffer) followed by three succes-
sive washes in PBS at 3 min each. Cells were then blocked again 
in Blocking buffer for 15 min followed by a 1 h incubation in 
fluorescently conjugated secondary antibody (diluted in Blocking 
buffer). Cells were then washed again in PBS (five times at 5 min 
each). Nuclei were counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylin-
dole (DAPI) and cells were mounted onto microscope slides with 
DakoCytomation fluorescent mounting medium (Dako). Digital 
fluorescent images were obtained using the Zeiss AxioVision SE64 
Imaging software (Zeiss).
Primary antibodies used: mouse anti-α-actinin (Sigma), rabbit 
anti-atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP; Abcam), rabbit anti-active 
caspase 9 (Abcam), rabbit anti-VEGF (Abcam), rabbit anti-vimen-
tin (Abcam), mouse anti-Galectin-3 (Abcam).
Secondary antibodies used: goat anti-mouse-Cy3 and donkey 
anti-rabbit-Cy3 (EMD Millipore), Alexa Fluor-488 goat anti-rabbit 
and Alexa Fluor-647 donkey anti-mouse (ThermoFisher).
Fluorescent cell staining was also conducted on isolated adult 
primary mouse cardiomyocytes; however, a high-affinity fluores-
cently labeled phallotoxin probe was used to detect filamentous 
F-actin: Alexa Fluor-488 conjugated Phalloidin (ThermoFisher). 
Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. Digital images were ac-
quired by fluorescence microscopy and cells were analyzed using 
ImageJ.
Western blotting
Cells were washed in PBS and harvested by centrifugation. 
Cells were then resuspended in lysis buffer supplemented with 
protease inhibitors (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% 
glycerol, 1% Tx-100, 1 mM EGTA, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM NaF, 
10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.3 mM PMSF, 2.5 mM sodium 
orthovanadate) and incubated at 4 °C with gentle rotation for 1 
h. Crude lysate was centrifuged at 17 000× g for 10 min. Equal 
amounts (20 µg) of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE and 
transferred to PVDF membrane for immunoblotting. After block-
ing the membrane with TBST-milk (10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM 
NaCl, 0.05% Tween-20, 5% non-fat powdered milk), membranes 
were incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C followed 
by incubation with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated sec-
ondary antibody for 1 h. Protein expression was detected using the 
ECL detection kit (GE Healthcare).
Primary antibodies used: rabbit anti-active caspase 3 (Cell Sig-
naling), rabbit anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(GAPDH; Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-VEGF (Abcam).
Secondary antibodies used: goat anti-mouse IgG-HRP and goat 
anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (Bio-Rad).
In vivo analysis
Reversion study and 2-week-only analysis    (i) Preparation and 
surgical implantation of osmotic minipumps. Osmotic minipumps 
(Model 2002, Alzet; Durect) were used to infuse the following 
over 2 weeks: hCT1, PE, ISO, or PBS as a non-hypertrophic con-
trol. Alzet minipumps (Model 2002) have a reservoir volume of 
200 µl and infuse at a steady rate of 0.5 µl/h for 2 weeks. hCT1 
was diluted accordingly in PBS based on the average rat weight 
per group to give a final infusion dose of 6 µg/kg/h. Similarly, the 
infusion doses for PE and ISO were 10 and 1 mg/kg/d; respec-
tively. All prepared minipumps (PBS, hCT1, PE, and ISO) were 
pre-equilibrated in normal saline (0.9% NaCl) overnight at 37 °C 
 1212
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
in order to reach a steady-state pumping rate of 0.5 µl/h at the time 
of subcutaneous implantation into Sprague-Dawley rats. Rats were 
anesthetized with a mixture of 2% Isoflurane and pure oxygen 
(at 1L per min). Under sterile conditions, a subcutaneous incision 
was made between the shoulder blades in the upper back using a 
scalpel blade and an osmotic minipump was gently inserted under 
the skin. The incision area was then firmly stapled and rats were 
placed back into their respective cages to recover.
(ii) For the Reversion study, osmotic minipumps (Model 2002) 
were implanted into three groups of rats. PBS control, hCT1 at 6 
µg/kg/h, or PE at 10 mg/kg/d. Rats weighed an average of 300 g at 
time of surgery. After 2 weeks, cardiac echocardiography was per-
formed, minipumps were then surgically removed, and rats were 
allowed to recover. At 6 weeks post withdrawal (i.e., at 8 weeks of 
the study), rats were subjected to another round of cardiac echo-
cardiography and rats were killed and heart tissues were excised 
for analysis. Of note, the 2-week-only rat study group was divided 
into the following three groups: PBS control, hCT1 at 6 µg/kg/h, 
or ISO at 1 mg/kg/d. 
(iii) Tissue analysis and histology. All excised hearts were 
placed in 10% formalin for at least 48-72 h prior to embedding in 
paraffin and sectioning. The following immunohistochemical anal-
yses were conducted on sectioned tissues: hematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E) for general morphology, Masson’s Trichrome for collagen/
fibrotic deposition, and CD31+ (platelet endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule) staining for angiogenesis and capillary density. Analysis 
for CD31+ was antibody-based and utilized the colorimetric detec-
tion of a 3’,3’-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen (brown pre-
cipitate) according to manufacturer’s instructions (MACH4 Detec-
tion System; BioCare Medical). Immunohistologic analyses were 
also conducted by the Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (PALM) 
Histology Core Facility at the University of Ottawa, Canada.
Sugen/hypoxia (SUHx) rat analysis    (i) SUHx study outline. 
PAH was induced by administering a single subcutaneous injection 
of SU5416 (SU) at 20 mg/kg (a potent VEGFR – VEGFR antago-
nist) into Fischer rats followed by exposure to chronic hypoxia (CH; 
10% oxygen) for 3 weeks. At 3 weeks, rats were recovered for 24 
h under normoxic conditions (21% oxygen) before subcutaneous 
implantation of Osmotic minipumps (Model 2ML4) containing ei-
ther hCT1 (6 µg/kg/h) or PBS. Cardiac echocardiography analysis 
was conducted weekly up to the end of study at 7 weeks at which 
time rats were killed and heart tissues excised for analysis and his-
tology.
(ii) Preparation of osmotic minipumps for SUH analysis. Af-
ter 3 weeks induction of PAH in Fischer rats followed by 24 h of 
recovery under normoxic conditions, osmotic minipumps (Model 
2ML4, Alzet; Durect) were used to infuse hCT1. PBS was infused 
for the control rat group. Osmotic minipumps (Model 2ML4) have 
a reservoir volume of 2 ml and infuse at a steady rate of 2.5 µl/
h for 4 weeks. hCT1 was diluted accordingly in PBS based on 
the average rat weight per group (150 g) to give a final infusion 
dose of 6 µg/kg/h. All prepared minipumps (PBS and hCT1) were 
pre-equilibrated in normal saline (0.9% NaCl) overnight at 37 °C 
in order to reach a steady-state pumping rate of 2.5 µl/h at the time 
of subcutaneous implantation.
Adult mouse primary cardiomyocyte morphology analysis    (i) 
Study outline. Adult C57BL/6 mice (9 weeks of age) were sub-
cutaneously implanted with Osmotic minipumps (Model 1002) 
containing: hCT1, PE, or PBS as a non-hypertrophic control. After 
2 weeks of infusion, the mice were anesthetized and adult mouse 
primary cardiomyocytes were isolated by perfusing and digesting 
whole hearts (see protocol for isolating adult mouse cardiomy-
ocytes). Cardiomyocytes were then stained using immunocyto-
chemistry and analyzed for morphological changes.
(ii) Preparation and surgical implantation of osmotic minipumps. 
Osmotic minipumps (Model 1002, Alzet; Durect) were used to 
infuse the following over 2 weeks: PBS (control), hCT1 (6 µg/kg/
h), and PE (10 mg/kg/d). Alzet minipumps (Model 1002) have a 
reservoir volume of 100 µl and infuse at a steady rate of 0.25 µl/
h for 2 weeks  All prepared minipumps (PBS, hCT1, and PE) were 
pre-equilibrated in normal saline (0.9% NaCl) overnight at 37 °C 
in order to reach a steady-state pumping rate of 0.25 µl/h at the 
time of subcutaneous implantation.
Myocardial infarction analysis    Ligation of the left anterior de-
scending coronary artery (LAD) was used to induce a myocardial 
infarct in rats. Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 250 g at the 
time of surgery were subjected to LAD ligation surgery or were 
sham operated (open cavity, no LAD). Following ligation, animals 
were given an intracardiac injection of hCT1-AdV at 7.5 × 105 
infectious particles per gram weight, administered into the middle 
region of the LV. A separate group of animals were given saline 
following LAD surgery. The animals were allowed to recover for 2 
weeks followed by a second intracardiac booster injection of either 
hCT1-AdV or saline (as above).
At 8 weeks post myocardial infarction, LV function was mea-
sured for each animal using a 2 F high-fidelity micro-manometer 
catheter (Millar Institute) inserted into the LV through the right 
carotid artery. A Harvard Data Acquisition system (Harvard Ap-
paratus) was used to acquire data and processed using AcqKnowl-
edge III software (ACQ 3.2) for measurement of left ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure, a critical hemodynamic measurement of 
ventricular performance. Immediately after acquisition, animals 
were injected with a 2 M KCl solution to stop the heart in diastole. 
The heart was excised and fixed in 10% formalin prior to paraffin 
embedding. Approximately 5-8 µm sections were stained with 
H&E and counterstained with Masson’s Trichrome to visualize the 
infarct area.
Microarray analysis
Primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes (previously seeded at 
2.5 × 10
6 onto collagen-coated 10 cm tissue culture dishes) were 
treated for 24 h with hCT1 (0.5 nM) or with control SF medium. 
Total RNA was isolated using a TRIzol reagent extraction method. 
Briefly, 2 ml of TRIzol (ThermoFisher) was added per dish and 
gently agitated for 5 min at room temperature to lyse cells. The 
lysate was transferred to a 15 ml Falcon tube and 0.4 ml of chloro-
form was added. The tube was vortexed for 20 s, left to rest/settle 
for 3 min, and centrifuged at 3 200× g for 25 min, all at room 
temperature. The clear upper aqueous layer (containing RNA) 
was transferred to a sterile eppendorf tube and an equal volume of 
isopropanol was added to precipitate RNA overnight at −20 °C. 
The RNA pellet was centrifuged at 10 000× g for 15 min at 4 °C, 
washed in 70% ethanol (RNase-free), and resuspended in 100 µl 
of sterile water (RNase-free).
The RNA was cleaned with the RNeasy MinElute Cleanup kit 
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1213
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
(Qiagen) and 300 ng of RNA was processed for microarray using 
the Affymetrix GeneChip WT PLUS Reagent Kit (Affymetrix) ac-
cording to manufacturer’s instructions. The microarray processing 
and bioinformatics analysis was conducted at the StemCore Facil-
ity of The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Canada. Raw data 
files for the microarray analysis have been deposited in the NCBI 
Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE87521.
Statistical analysis
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance 
for multiple-group comparisons was determined using one-way 
ANOVA followed by post-hoc statistical analysis (GraphPad 
Prism software). Dunnett’s test was used for pairwise comparisons 
of treatment groups with control groups and Tukey’s test was used 
for pairwise comparisons between treatment groups.  P < 0.05 was 
considered significant.
Acknowledgments
We thank Michael Rudnicki and Jeff Dilworth for insightful 
discussion. We would also like to thank Monir Ahmad (for per-
forming the myocardial infarction surgeries) and the Ottawa Bio-
informatics Core Facility. This work was supported by grants from 
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (to LAM and DJS), the 
Ontario Research Fund (LAM and DJS), the Heart & Stroke Foun-
dation of Canada (LAM) and through a sponsored research con-
tract with Fate Therapeutics (LAM). LAM has served as a member 
of the scientific advisory board of Fate Therapeutics (to 2015).
Author Contributions
MA-G, CS, BJ, YD, JJW, CP, SB, PF, TTL, PF, FHHL, PGB, 
DJS, and LAM designed research; MA-G, CS, BJ, YD, JJW, CP, 
SB, PF, TTL, PF and PGB performed research; MA-G, CS, BJ, 
YD, JJW, CP, SB, PF, TTL, PF, FHHL, PGB, DJS, and LAM ana-
lyzed data; and MA-G, CS, DJS, and LAM wrote the paper.
Competing Financial Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
References
1  
Hill JA, Olson EN. Cardiac plasticity. N Engl J Med 2008; 
358:1370-1380.
2  
Harvey PA, Leinwand LA. The cell biology of disease: 
cellular mechanisms of cardiomyopathy. J Cell Biol 2011; 
194:355-365.
3  
van Berlo JH, Maillet M, Molkentin JD. Signaling effectors 
underlying pathologic growth and remodeling of the heart. J 
Clin Invest 2013; 123:37-45.
4  
Chung E, Leinwand LA. Pregnancy as a cardiac stress model. 
Cardiovasc Res 2014; 101:561-570.
5  
Roh J, Rhee J, Chaudhari V, Rosenzweig A. The role of exer-
cise in cardiac aging: from physiology to molecular mecha-
nisms. Circ Res 2016; 118:279-295.
6  
Bueno OF, De Windt LJ, Tymitz KM, et al. The MEK1-
ERK1/2 signaling pathway promotes compensated cardiac 
hypertrophy in transgenic mice. EMBO J 2000; 19:6341-
6350.
7  
Condorelli G, Drusco A, Stassi G, et al. Akt induces enhanced 
myocardial contractility and cell size in vivo in transgenic 
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:12333-12338.
8  
Maillet M, van Berlo JH, Molkentin JD. Molecular basis of 
physiological heart growth: fundamental concepts and new 
players. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2013; 14:38-48.
9  
Shiojima I, Walsh K. Regulation of cardiac growth and coro-
nary angiogenesis by the Akt/PKB signaling pathway. Genes 
Dev 2006; 20:3347-3365.
10  Shiojima I, Yefremashvili M, Luo Z, et al. Akt signaling me-
diates postnatal heart growth in response to insulin and nutri-
tional status. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:37670-37677.
11  Duerr RL, Huang S, Miraliakbar HR, Clark R, Chien KR, 
Ross J, Jr. Insulin-like growth factor-1 enhances ventricular 
hypertrophy and function during the onset of experimental 
cardiac failure. J Clin Invest 1995; 95:619-627.
12  McMullen JR, Shioi T, Huang WY, et al. The insulin-like 
growth factor 1 receptor induces physiological heart growth 
via the phosphoinositide 3-kinase(p110alpha) pathway. J Biol 
Chem 2004; 279:4782-4793.
13  Sapra G, Tham YK, Cemerlang N, et al. The small-molecule 
BGP-15 protects against heart failure and atrial fibrillation in 
mice. Nat Commun 2014; 5:5705.
14  Pennica D, King KL, Shaw KJ, et al. Expression cloning of 
cardiotrophin 1, a cytokine that induces cardiac myocyte hy-
pertrophy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995; 92:1142-1146.
15  Wollert KC, Taga T, Saito M, et al. Cardiotrophin-1 activates 
a distinct form of cardiac muscle cell hypertrophy. Assembly 
of sarcomeric units in series VIA gp130/leukemia inhibito-
ry factor receptor-dependent pathways. J Biol Chem 1996; 
271:9535-9545.
16  Ishikawa M, Saito Y, Miyamoto Y, et al. A heart-specific 
increase in cardiotrophin-1 gene expression precedes the 
establishment of ventricular hypertrophy in genetically hyper-
tensive rats. J Hypertens 1999; 17:807-816.
17  Jin H, Yang R, Keller GA, et al. In vivo effects of cardiotro-
phin-1. Cytokine 1996; 8:920-926.
18  Lopez B, Gonzalez A, Querejeta R, Larman M, Rabago G, 
Diez J. Association of cardiotrophin-1 with myocardial fibro-
sis in hypertensive patients with heart failure. Hypertension 
2014; 63:483-489.
19  Schillaci G, Pucci G, Perlini S. From hypertension to hyper-
trophy to heart failure: the role of cardiotrophin-1. J Hyper-
tens 2013; 31:474-476.
20  Fischer P, Hilfiker-Kleiner D. Survival pathways in hypertro-
phy and heart failure: the gp130-STAT axis. Basic Res Cardi-
ol 2007; 102:393-411.
21  Hirota H, Chen J, Betz UA, et al. Loss of a gp130 cardiac 
muscle cell survival pathway is a critical event in the onset of 
heart failure during biomechanical stress. Cell 1999; 97:189-
198.
22  Yoshida K, Taga T, Saito M, et al. Targeted disruption of 
gp130, a common signal transducer for the interleukin 6 fam-
ily of cytokines, leads to myocardial and hematological disor-
ders. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996; 93:407-411.
23  Calabro P, Limongelli G, Riegler L, et al. Novel insights into 
the role of cardiotrophin-1 in cardiovascular diseases. J Mol 
Cell Cardiol 2009; 46:142-148.
24  Aguilar-Melero P, Luque A, Machuca MM, et al. Cardiotro-
 1214
Cardiotrophin 1 promotes physiological cardiac hypertrophy
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 10 | October 2017
phin-1 reduces ischemia/reperfusion injury during liver trans-
plant. J Surg Res 2013; 181:e83-91.
25  Iniguez M, Berasain C, Martinez-Anso E, et al. Cardiotro-
phin-1 defends the liver against ischemia-reperfusion injury 
and mediates the protective effect of ischemic precondition-
ing. J Exp Med 2006; 203:2809-2815.
26  Moreno-Aliaga MJ, Perez-Echarri N, Marcos-Gomez B, et al. 
Cardiotrophin-1 is a key regulator of glucose and lipid metab-
olism. Cell Metab 2011; 14:242-253.
27  Kolodziejczyk SM, Wang L, Balazsi K, DeRepentigny Y, 
Kothary R, Megeney LA. MEF2 is upregulated during cardiac 
hypertrophy and is required for normal post-natal growth of 
the myocardium. Curr Biol 1999; 9:1203-1206.
28  Naya FJ, Black BL, Wu H, et al. Mitochondrial deficiency 
and cardiac sudden death in mice lacking the MEF2A tran-
scription factor. Nat Med 2002; 8:1303-1309.
29  van Rooij E, Fielitz J, Sutherland LB, et al. Myocyte en-
hancer factor 2 and class II histone deacetylases control a 
gender-specific pathway of cardioprotection mediated by the 
estrogen receptor. Circ Res 2010; 106:155-165.
30  Abdul-Ghani M, Megeney LA. Rehabilitation of a contract 
killer: caspase-3 directs stem cell differentiation. Cell Stem 
Cell 2008; 2:515-516.
31  Dick SA, Megeney LA. Cell death proteins: an evolutionary 
role in cellular adaptation before the advent of apoptosis. Bio-
essays 2013; 35:974-983.
32  Fuchs Y, Steller H. Programmed cell death in animal develop-
ment and disease. Cell 2011; 147:742-758.
33  Putinski C, Abdul-Ghani M, Stiles R, et al. Intrinsic-mediated 
caspase activation is essential for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110:E4079-4087.
34  Regis G, Pensa S, Boselli D, Novelli F, Poli V. Ups and 
downs: the STAT1:STAT3 seesaw of interferon and gp130 
receptor signalling. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2008; 19:351-359.
35  de Almeida JC, Alves CL, de Abreu LC, et al. Involvement of 
the atrial natriuretic peptide in cardiovascular pathophysiolo-
gy and its relationship with exercise. Int Arch Med 2012; 5:4.
36  Dick SA, Chang NC, Dumont NA, et al. Caspase 3 cleavage 
of Pax7 inhibits self-renewal of satellite cells. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 2015; 112:E5246-5252.
37  Duncan JS, Turowec JP, Duncan KE, et al. A peptide-based 
target screen implicates the protein kinase CK2 in the global 
regulation of caspase signaling. Sci Signal 2011; 4:ra30.
38  Hudlicka O, Brown M, Egginton S. Angiogenesis in skeletal 
and cardiac muscle. Physiol Rev 1992; 72:369-417.
39  Giordano FJ, Gerber HP, Williams SP, et al. A cardiac myo-
cyte vascular endothelial growth factor paracrine pathway 
is required to maintain cardiac function. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 2001; 98:5780-5785.
40  Osugi T, Oshima Y, Fujio Y, et al. Cardiac-specific activation 
of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 promotes 
vascular formation in the heart. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:6676-
6681.
41  Zhou Y, Bourcy K, Kang YJ. Copper-induced regression of 
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is associated with enhanced vas-
cular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 signalling pathway. 
Cardiovasc Res 2009; 84:54-63.
42  Abel ED, Doenst T. Mitochondrial adaptations to physiolog-
ical vs. pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Res 
2011; 90:234-242.
43  Wang D, Liu X, Liu Y, Shen G, Zhu X, Li S. Treatment ef-
fects of Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) on streptozotocin-induced 
memory deficits in mice. Exp Gerontol 2017; 92:42-45.
44  Piek A, de Boer RA, Sillje HH. The fibrosis-cell death axis in 
heart failure. Heart Fail Rev 2016; 21:199-211.
45  Abe K, Toba M, Alzoubi A, et al. Formation of plexiform le-
sions in experimental severe pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Circulation 2010; 121:2747-2754.
46  Jiang B, Deng Y, Suen C, et al. Marked strain-specific differ-
ences in the SU5416 rat model of severe pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2016; 54:461-468.
47  Ryan JJ, Marsboom G, Fang YH, et al. PGC1alpha-mediated 
mitofusin-2 deficiency in female rats and humans with pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 
187:865-878.
48  Ziaeian B, Fonarow GC. Epidemiology and aetiology of heart 
failure. Nat Rev Cardiol 2016; 13:368-378.
49  Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA 
guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2013; 62:e147-239.
50 Shah SJ, Kitzman DW, Borlaug BA, et al. Phenotype-specific 
treatment of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a 
multiorgan roadmap. Circulation 2016; 134:73-90.
51  Zheng Y, Qin H, Frank SJ, et al. A CK2-dependent mech-
anism for activation of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. 
Blood 2011; 118:156-166.
52  Montgomery RL, Potthoff MJ, Haberland M, et al. Mainte-
nance of cardiac energy metabolism by histone deacetylase 3 
in mice. J Clin Invest 2008; 118:3588-3597.
53  Communal C, Sumandea M, de Tombe P, Narula J, Solaro RJ, 
Hajjar RJ. Functional consequences of caspase activation in 
cardiac myocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:6252-
6256.
54  Moretti A, Weig HJ, Ott T, et al. Essential myosin light chain 
as a target for caspase-3 in failing myocardium. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:11860-11865.
55  Gerdes AM, Kellerman SE, Moore JA, et al. Structural re-
modeling of cardiac myocytes in patients with ischemic car-
diomyopathy. Circulation 1992; 86:426-430.
56  Carneiro-Junior MA, Peluzio MC, Silva CH, et al. Exercise 
training and detraining modify the morphological and me-
chanical properties of single cardiac myocytes obtained from 
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Braz J Med Biol Res 2010; 
43:1042-1046.
57  Carneiro-Junior MA, Primola-Gomes TN, Quintao-Junior JF, 
et al. Regional effects of low-intensity endurance training on 
structural and mechanical properties of rat ventricular myo-
cytes. J Appl Physiol 2013; 115:107-115.
58  Carneiro-Junior MA, Quintao-Junior JF, Drummond LR, et 
al. The benefits of endurance training in cardiomyocyte func-
tion in hypertensive rats are reversed within four weeks of 
detraining. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2013; 57:119-128.
59  Kemi OJ, Haram PM, Wisloff U, Ellingsen O. Aerobic fitness 
is associated with cardiomyocyte contractile capacity and en-
dothelial function in exercise training and detraining. Circula-
tion 2004; 109:2897-2904.
 Mohammad Abdul-Ghani et al.
1215
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
60  Glumac S, Pejic S, Kostadinovic S, Stojsic Z, Vasiljevic J. 
Apoptosis in endomyocardial biopsies from patients with di-
lated cardiomyopathy. Folia Biol 2016; 62:207-211.
61  van Empel VP, Bertrand AT, Hofstra L, Crijns HJ, Doeven-
dans PA, De Windt LJ. Myocyte apoptosis in heart failure. 
Cardiovasc Res 2005; 67:21-29.
62  Young KD. The selective value of bacterial shape. Microbiol 
Mol Biol Rev 2006; 70:660-703.
63  Kunisada K, Negoro S, Tone E, et al. Signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3 in the heart transduces not only a 
hypertrophic signal but a protective signal against doxorubi-
cin-induced cardiomyopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 
97:315-319.
64  Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Hilfiker A, Fuchs M, et al. Signal trans-
ducer and activator of transcription 3 is required for myocar-
dial capillary growth, control of interstitial matrix deposition, 
and heart protection from ischemic injury. Circ Res 2004; 
95:187-195.
65  Obana M, Maeda M, Takeda K, et al. Therapeutic activation 
of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 by inter-
leukin-11 ameliorates cardiac fibrosis after myocardial infarc-
tion. Circulation 2010; 121:684-691.
66  Bernardo BC, Weeks KL, Pretorius L, McMullen JR. Molecu-
lar distinction between physiological and pathological cardiac 
hypertrophy: experimental findings and therapeutic strategies. 
Pharmacol Ther 2010; 128:191-227.
67  Takimoto E, Champion HC, Li M, et al. Chronic inhibition of 
cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase 5A prevents and reverses car-
diac hypertrophy. Nat Med 2005; 11:214-222.
68  Berry JM, Le V, Rotter D, et al. Reversibility of adverse, 
calcineurin-dependent cardiac remodeling. Circ Res 2011; 
109:407-417.
69  Fagard RH, Celis H, Thijs L, Wouters S. Regression of left 
ventricular mass by antihypertensive treatment: a meta-anal-
ysis of randomized comparative studies. Hypertension 2009; 
54:1084-1091.
70  Vega RB, Konhilas JP, Kelly DP, Leinwand LA. Molecular 
mechanisms underlying cardiac adaptation to exercise. Cell 
Metab 2017; 25:1012-1026.
(Supplementary information is linked to the online version of 
the paper on the Cell Research website.)
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 Unported License. The images or other 
third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the 
credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons 
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder 
to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
