 Prediction of acute myeloid leukaemia risk in healthy individuals
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
The incidence of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) increases with age and mortality exceeds 90% 
when diagnosed after age 65. Most cases arise without a detectable prodrome and present with the 
acute complications of bone marrow failure1. The onset of such de novo AML cases is typically 
preceded by the accumulation of somatic mutations in pre-leukaemic haematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cells (HSPC) that undergo clonal expansion2,3. However, recurrent AML mutations 
also accumulate in HSPCs during ageing of healthy individuals who do not develop AML, a 
phenomenon referred to as age-related clonal haematopoiesis (ARCH),4–8. To distinguish 
individuals at high risk of developing AML from those with benign ARCH, we undertook deep 
sequencing of genes recurrently mutated in AML in the peripheral blood cells of 95 individuals 
sampled on average 6.3 years before AML diagnosis (pre-AML group), together with 414 
unselected age- and gender-matched individuals (control group). Pre-AML cases were distinct 
from controls with more mutations per sample, higher variant allele frequencies (VAF) reflective 
of greater clonal expansion, and enrichment for mutations in specific genes. Genetic parameters 
were used to derive a model that accurately predicted AML-free survival; this model was validated 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding author: Correspondence should be addressed to L.I.S (liranshlush3@gmail.com), G.S.V (gsv20@sanger.ac.uk), 
J.E.D. (John.Dick@uhnresearch.ca), M.G. (moritz.gerstung@ebi.ac.uk) or P.Br. (BrennanP@iarc.fr).
❖co-corresponding authors
Data availability
Discovery cohort targeted sequencing BAM files data will be deposited at the European Genome-phenome Archive (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/) under accession number EGAD00001003583. All other data are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request. Validation cohort sequencing data is deposited at the European Genome Phenome Archive with accession number 
EGAD00001003703. Code for derivation of the prediction model is publically available on Github (https://github.com/gerstung-lab/
preAML). Code for the analysis of ECS is publically available through Protocol exchange under the name “Identification of somatic 
mutations from targeted and barcoded sequencing data”.
Author contribution
S.W.K.N., O.W., N.M.C., and E.N. contributed equally to the work. S.A. performed error-corrected sequencing, analysed sequencing 
data, performed statistical analyses, contributed to genetic predictive model derivation and wrote the manuscript. G.C. performed 
variant calling, statistical analyses, derived genetic predictive models and wrote the manuscript. M.G., S.W.K.N., O.W. and R.C 
derived genetic predictive models. N.M.C., E.N. and N.B. derived the clinical prediction model. P.C.Z., Z.Z., I.C., K.N., C.L., C.H., 
D.H., F.M., J.E., J.M., D.P., L.T., P.K., S.V.B. and A.B. provided sequencing and technical support and enabled sample acquisition. 
L.H., Y.S., T.T.W., T.J.P., K.R. and D.J. provided bioinformatics support. R.L., S.H., M.J., K.M.B., A.K. and N.J.W. enabled sample 
acquisition, clinical data curation and/or provided clinical expertise. D.S., J.D.M., P.A., E.S., S.B., Ph.Be and I.M. contributed to data 
analysis and interpretation. P.J.C. and E.P. contributed to data interpretation and designed the targeted sequencing assay for the 
validation cohort. J.C.Y.W. revised the manuscript. J.R.Q., A.Ka., A.Kr., C.L.V., A.T., E.S.F., J.M.H., R.C.T., R.T., G.M., H.B., S.Pa., 
R.K., S.S., S.Po., N.W., N.S., K.T.K., M.F., J.M.K., E.R., P.V. and R.V. enabled sample acquisition (EPIC). A.T. and R.D.B. analysed 
Clalit data and derived clinical prediction model. M.G. derived predictive genetic models, contributed to sequencing data analysis and 
manuscript writing. J.E.D. contributed to funding applications, study supervision, manuscript writing. P.Br. supervised sample 
acquisition from all the EPIC centres. G.S.V., L.I.S. designed and supervised all aspects of the study and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2018 July ; 559(7714): 400–404. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0317-6.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 in an independent cohort of 29 pre-AMLs and 262 controls. Since AML is rare, we also developed 
an AML predictive model using a large electronic health record database that identified individuals 
at greater risk. Collectively our findings provide a proof-of-concept that it is possible to 
discriminate ARCH from pre-AML many years prior to malignant transformation. This could in 
the future enable earlier detection, monitoring and potentially inform intervention.
To examine the occurrence of somatic mutations prior to the development of AML, we 
undertook deep error-corrected targeted sequencing of AML-associated genes in a discovery 
cohort (DC) of 95 pre-AML cases and 414 age- and gender-matched controls 
(Supplementary Table 1). A validation cohort (VC) comprising 29 pre-AMLs and 262 
controls (Supplementary Table 1) underwent deep sequencing with an overlapping gene 
panel. Taking both cohorts together, ARCH, defined on the basis of putative driver mutations 
(ARCH-PD), was found in 73.4% of the pre-AML cases at a median of 7.6 years prior to 
diagnosis. By contrast, ARCH-PD was observed in 36.7% of the controls (P<2.2 x 10-16, 
two-sided Fisher’s exact test) (Fig. 1a), consistent with data from a study of >2,000 
unselected individuals assayed using a similarly sensitive method9,10. Additionally, 39% of 
pre-AMLs above the age of 50 harboured a driver mutation with VAF>10%, compared to 
only 4% of controls, a prevalence in keeping with the largest studies of ARCH in the general 
population4 (P<2.2 x 10-16, two-sided Fisher’s exact test; Extended Data Fig. 1).
The median number of ARCH-PD mutations per individual increased with age and was 
significantly higher in the pre-AML group relative to controls (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 
2). Furthermore, examination of ARCH-PD VAF distribution revealed significantly larger 
clones among the pre-AML cases (P=1.2 x 10-13, two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test, Fig. 
1c). To gain insight into clonal growth dynamics, we examined serially collected samples 
available for a subset of the VC. We did not find significant differences in clonal expansion 
rates between pre-AMLs and controls (Extended Data Fig. 2 a,b), although this may in part 
reflect the shorter follow-up of pre-AMLs, small sample size and large variance in growth 
rates (Extended Data Fig. 2c). The observed differences between pre-AMLs and controls 
may arise through cell-intrinsic or -extrinsic factors. Although these variables have not been 
studied adequately in ARCH, a number of observations in different contexts such as aplasia, 
post-chemotherapy and advanced age have shown that increased clonal fitness is associated 
with distinct mutations depending on context10–12. Interestingly, mutations in splicing 
factor genes were significantly enriched among the pre-AMLs relative to the controls (odds 
ratio, 17.5; 95% CI, 8.1-40.4, P=5.2 x 10-16, two-sided Fisher’s exact test) and presented in 
significantly younger individuals (median age 60.3 vs 77.3 years, P=1.7 x 10-4, two-sided 
Wilcoxon rank sum test, Fig. 2a). Previous work suggests that spliceosome mutations appear 
to confer competitive advantage in the context of ageing10. Hence it is possible that the 
significantly higher prevalence of such clones in younger pre-AMLs may reflect extrinsic 
selection pressures rather than earlier mutation acquisition.
In keeping with previous reports9, we found that DNMT3A and TET2 were the most 
commonly mutated genes in both groups (Fig. 2b). We could not identify any NPM1c or 
FLT3-internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations, consistent with these arising late in 
leukaemogenesis10,13. Recurrent CEBPA mutations, which are implicated in ~10% of de 
Abelson et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 novo AML14, were also absent, suggesting that driver events in this gene may also be late 
events in AML evolution. In order to quantify the impact of different mutations on the 
likelihood of progression to AML, we ranked ARCH-PD mutations based on the number of 
times they have been reported in COSMIC among individuals with haematological 
malignancies15. We found that mutations that are highly recurrent in cancer specimens were 
more common in pre-AMLs than in controls with ARCH-PD, whereas driver events in the 
controls tended to affect loci that are less frequently mutated in haematological malignancies 
and occurred at significantly lower VAF (Fig. 2c, Fig. 2d). Overall, these findings 
demonstrate notable differences in the mutational landscape of ARCH and pre-AML. 
Moreover, this work, in conjunction with recent insights into the origins of AML relapse16, 
suggests that AML progression typically occurs through many years of pre-leukaemic HSPC 
clonal evolution before acquisition of late mutations leads to overt malignant transformation.
Based on these findings we next developed an approach to quantify the relative contributions 
of driver mutations and clone sizes to the risk of progressing to AML. We tested different 
regularised logistic and Cox proportional hazards regression approaches, which achieved 
similar performance on both DC (Concordance, C = 0.77 ± 0.03) and VC (C = 0.84 ± 0.06) 
(Extended Data Fig. 3 and Extended Data Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 3). Models trained on 
only DC or VC had similar coefficients, thereby justifying combining the data sets for a 
more accurate analysis of the individual risk contributions (C = 0.77 ± 0.03, AUC=0.79, 
Supplementary Table 3). Quantitatively, we found that driver mutations in most genes 
conferred an approximately two-fold increased risk of developing AML per 5% increase in 
clone size (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Table 3). Notable exceptions to this trend are the most 
frequently mutated ARCH genes, DNMT3A and TET2, which confer a lower risk of AML 
progression (Fig. 3a,b, Supplementary Table 3). Conversely, a larger effect size was apparent 
for TP53 (hazard ratio HR=12.5, 95% CI 5.0-160.5) and U2AF1 (HR=7.9, 95% CI 
4.1-192.2) mutations (Fig. 3a,b). However, we note that other ARCH-PD genes such as 
SRSF2 can contribute a similar relative risk due to their presence at higher VAF in pre-
AMLs (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 5a, Supplementary Note). Of note, mutations in TP53 
and spliceosome genes (including U2AF1) are also associated with a poorer prognosis in 
AML14. As the risk of each ARCH-PD mutations is deleterious and the effect of multiple 
mutations present in the same individual is multiplicative, a higher number of mutations is 
predicted to increase AML progression risk (Fig. 3c). Likewise, the size of the largest driver 
clone was also strongly associated with AML progression risk in agreement with the risk of 
individual mutations generally being proportional to VAF (Fig. 3c). Collectively, whilst the 
VAF and mutation number confer much of the predictive value, this model does demonstrate 
distinct gene-level risk factors, and is able to quantify the cumulative impact of multiple 
mutations and clonal size on the likelihood of progression to AML.
Although our predictive model performs well in identifying those at risk of developing AML 
in our experimental cohorts, AML incidence rates in the general population are low 
(4:100,000)1, and thus millions of individuals would need to be screened to identify the few 
pre-AML cases, with many false positives. We therefore sought to determine whether 
routinely available clinical information could improve prediction accuracy or identify a 
high-risk population for targeted genetic screening. We first analysed complete blood count 
(CBC) and biochemistry data available for 37 of the pre-AMLs and 262 controls. As 
Abelson et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 reported previously5,10,17, ARCH-PD was overwhelmingly associated with normal blood 
counts and this was also the case for pre-AML cases, indicating that these did not represent 
undiagnosed myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)18. We identified a significant association 
between higher red cell distribution width (RDW) and risk of progression to AML 
(P=0.0016, Wald Test with Bonferroni multiple testing correction, Fig. 3d). Although 
traditionally used in the evaluation of anaemia, raised RDW has been correlated with 
inflammation, ineffective erythropoiesis, cardiovascular disease and adverse outcomes in 
several inflammatory and malignant conditions19. The correlation between RDW and AML 
risk remained highly significant when controls without ARCH-PD were excluded from the 
analysis (P=3.5 x 10-06, Wald test with Bonferroni multiple testing correction, Extended 
Data Fig. 5b). Higher RDW has previously been associated with ARCH and overall 
mortality5, but has never been shown to distinguish ARCH from pre-leukaemia. In order to 
verify RDW as a predictive factor and determine whether additional clinical parameters are 
associated with AML risk, we studied the Clalit database20, which contains the electronic 
health records (EHR) with an average of 3.45 million individuals per year collected over a 
15-year period21. We identified 875 AML cases using stringent criteria based on diagnostic 
codes and treatment records (Extended Data Fig. 6, Supplementary Table 4). Analysis of 
RDW trends revealed significantly raised measurements several years prior to AML 
diagnosis relative to age and sex-matched controls (Fig. 4a). Additional parameters that 
correlated with AML risk included reductions in monocyte, platelet, red blood cell and white 
blood cell counts, albeit usually remaining above the thresholds for clinically relevant 
cytopenias18 (Fig. 4a, Extended Data Fig. 7). These findings suggest that evolving de novo 
AML may sometimes have a significant prodrome with subtle but discernible clinical 
manifestations. We next applied a machine learning approach to construct an AML 
prediction model based entirely on routinely documented EHR variables (Extended Data 
Fig. 8, Supplementary Table 4). This model was able to predict AML 6-12 months prior to 
diagnosis with a sensitivity of 25.7% and overall specificity of 98.2%. The model performed 
consistently across different age groups with an increased relative risk of 28 and 24 for 
males and females, respectively, between the age of 60 and 70 years (Fig. 4b). To better 
understand which patients are most likely to be accurately classified by this model, we 
compared absolute lab values between true positives (TP) and false negatives (FN). We 
found that 35.5% of FN predictions were for patients associated with infrequent blood count 
data (Extended Data Fig. 9). Some of the TP cases had mildly abnormal blood counts that 
would not initiate a diagnostic work-up (Fig. 4c), and cytopenias that would be compatible 
with undiagnosed MDS18 were uncommon.
Collectively, our findings provide new insights into the pre-clinical evolution of AML and 
support the premise that individuals at high risk can be identified years before they develop 
overt disease. To this end, we present two distinct models for the prediction of de novo 
AML: one based on somatic point mutations and the other on routinely documented clinical 
information. We find that basic clinical and laboratory data can identify a high-risk subgroup 
6-12 months before AML presentation, whilst genetic information can identify a substantial 
fraction of cases several years to more than a decade before diagnosis. By characterising 
features that distinguish benign ARCH from pre-leukaemia, our models give valuable 
insights into leukaemogenesis. It is evident from the current study, together with our recent 
Abelson et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 analysis of mutation acquisition from pre-leukaemic development through to relapse16, that 
long-term pre-leukaemic HSPCs frequently carry mutations and undergo significant clonal 
expansion whilst retaining differentiation capacity for years before AML diagnosis. 
Furthermore, it is clear that some mutations, particularly those affecting TP53 and U2AF1, 
impart a relatively high risk of subsequent AML, while mutations in other genes, for 
example DNMT3A and TET2, confer a lesser risk of malignant transformation. Previous 
studies suggest that oncogenic mutations in TP53 and spliceosome genes confer little or no 
competitive advantage in the absence of particular selective pressures22,23, indicating that 
cell-extrinsic factors may be important determinants of clonal trajectory.
Cancer predictive models have enabled successful early detection and intervention 
programmes for several solid tumours24,25,26. However, screening tests are unavailable for 
the sub-clinical stages of most haematological malignancies. Our study provides proof-of-
concept for the feasibility of early detection of healthy individuals at high risk of developing 
AML, and is a first step in the design of future clinical studies to investigate the potential 
benefits of early interventions in this deadly disease. However, the infrequency of AML 
necessitates that future screening tests provide high sensitivity and specificity. Our findings 
suggest that basic clinical data may identify a higher risk population that might benefit from 
targeted genetic screening. Equally, combining clinical and genetic information in a single 
model and including structural driver events is likely to improve model accuracy further. 
Nevertheless, establishing the utility of such a tandem approach will require extensive 
clinical and genetic analysis on the same population cohort, in a prospective setting. 
Furthermore, ARCH is associated with several non-malignant conditions4,5, and may play a 
causal role in cardiovascular disease27,28. Hence genetic testing for ARCH may also prove 
useful in the management of common age-related diseases. Moreover, this study has broader 
implications for cancer screening and early intervention beyond AML. Advances in 
sequencing technologies have revealed a remarkable degree of somatic genetic diversity in 
normal ageing tissues, often characterised by the presence of clones harbouring canonical 
oncogenic mutations29. The degree to which clones at high risk of malignant transformation 
can be reliably distinguished from their indolent counterparts is an important biological 
question with compelling clinical ramifications. Understanding the selective pressures and 
cell-intrinsic mechanisms governing clonal fate is the next important step in developing 
strategies to predict and prevent progression to overt malignancy.
Methods
1 Study participants
Samples for both the DC and VC were ascertained from participants in the EPIC study30. 
All the relevant ethical regulations were followed. Written informed consent was obtained 
from all participants in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and protocols approved 
by the relevant ethics committees (IARC Ethics Committee approval #14-31, the Weizmann 
institute of science Ethics board approval #60-1 and East of England - Cambridgeshire and 
Hertfordshire Research Ethics Committee reference number 98CN01). AML patients were 
identified based on the following ICD9 codes: 9861/3 9860/3 9801/3 9866/3 9891/3 9867/3 
9874/3 9840/3 9872/3 9895/3 9873/3, which included only cases of de novo AML, and no 
Abelson et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 secondary AML. All patients provided peripheral blood samples from which the buffy coat 
fractions were separated and aliquoted for long-term storage in liquid nitrogen prior to DNA 
extraction.
1.1 Discovery cohort—509 DNA samples were collected from individuals upon 
enrolment into the EPIC study between 1993 and 1998 across 17 different centers30 
(Supplementary Table 1). Altogether 95 individuals who developed AML an average of 6.3 
years (IQR=4.8 years) after the sample was collected were included in the pre-AML group. 
414 age and gender matched individuals were selected for the control group, as they did not 
develop any hematological disorders during the average follow-up period of 11.6 years 
(IQR=2.1 years). The median age at recruitment was 56.7 years (range, 36.08 to 74.42). In 
order to minimize any possible demographic biases, an approximate 1:4.5 pre-AML to 
control ratio was maintained across the different centres.
1.2 Validation cohort—Samples were ascertained from individuals enrolled in the 
EPIC-Norfolk longitudinal cohort study between 1994 and 2010. Samples and clinical 
metadata were available from 37 AML patients (of which 8 were already included in the 
DC) and 262 age- and gender-matched controls without a history of cancer or any 
haematological condition. The average time between the first blood sampling and AML 
diagnosis was 10.5 years (IQR 8.3 years). The averge follow-up period for the control cohort 
was 17.5 years (IQR 3.8). For 12 individuals in the pre-AML cohort, 2-3 blood specimens 
were available, taken a median of 3.4 years apart. Of the 262 controls, 141 had multiple 
blood samples available, spanning a median of 10.5 years. Blood counts and other clinical 
parameters were available for all study participants (Supplementary Table 1).
2 Targeted sequencing
2.1 Discovery cohort sequencing—Targeted deep sequencing was performed using 
error-corrected sequencing (ECS) as follows.
Ligation of sequencing adaptors. Shearing of genomic DNA, preparation of pre-capture 
sequencing libraries, hybridization-based enrichment, assessment of the libraries quality and 
enrichment following hybridization were performed as previously described31. Briefly, 
100ng of genomic DNA was sheared before library construction (KAPA Hyper Prep Kit 
#KK8504, Kapa Biosystems) with a Covaris E220 instrument using the recommended 
settings for 250bp fragments. Following End Repair and A-Tailing, adapter ligation was 
performed using 100-fold molar excess of Molecular Index Adapter. Library clean-up was 
performed with Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beckman-Coulter) and the ligated fragments 
were then amplified for 8 cycles using 0.5μM Illumina universal and indexing primers.
Target capture. Targeted capture was carried out on pools containing 3 indexed libraries. 
Each pool of adaptor-ligated DNA was combined with 5μl of 1mg/ml Cot-I DNA 
(Invitrogen), and 1 nmol each of xGEN Universal Blocking Oligo – TS-p5, and xGen 
Universal Blocking Oligo – TS-p7 (8nt). The mixture was dried using a SpeedVac and then 
re-suspended in 1.1μl water, 8.5μl NimbleGen 2× hybridization buffer and 3.4μl NimbleGen 
hybridization component A. The mixture was heat denatured at 95°C for 10 minutes before 
addition of 4μL of xGen Lockdown Probes (xGen® AML Cancer Panel v1.0, 3pmol). Each 
Abelson et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 pool was then hybridized at 47°C for 72 hr. Washing and recovery of the captured DNA was 
performed according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Briefly, 100μl of clean 
streptavidin beads was added to each capture. Following separation and removal of 
supernatant on a magnet, 200μL 1X Stringent Wash Buffer was added and the reaction was 
Incubate at 65°C for 5 min. Supernatant containing unbound DNA was removed before 
repeating the high stringency wash one additional time. Next, the bound DNA was washed 
as follows: 1) 200μl 1X Wash Buffer I and separation of the supernatants by magnetic 
separation, 2) 200μl 1X Wash Buffer II following magnetic separation, 3) 200μl 1X Wash 
Buffer III and removal of the supernatants using magnetic separation. The captured DNA on 
beads was resuspended in 40μl of Nuclease-Free water before dividing the total volume into 
2 PCR tubes and subjecting the libraries to 10 cycles of post-capture amplification 
(manufacturer recommended conditions; Kapa Biosystems). Prior to sequencing, libraries 
were spiked in with 2% PhiX.
2.2 Validation cohort sequencing—Targeted sequencing was performed using a 
custom cRNA bait set (SureSelect, Agilent, UK, ELID #0537771) designed complementary 
to all coding exons of 111 genes implicated in myeloid leukaemogenesis (Extended Data 
Table 1). Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral whole blood and sheared using the 
Covaris M220. Equimolar pools of 10 libraries were prepared and sequenced on the Illumina 
HiSeq 2000 using 75 base paired-end sequencing as per Illumina and Agilent SureSelect 
protocols.
3 Variant calling
3.1 Discover cohort variant calling and error correction—126bp pair-end reads 
sequencing data from the Illumina platform were converted to fastq format, the 2bp 
molecular barcode information at each read of the pair was trimmed and was written in the 
reads’ name. The Thymine nucleotide required for ligation was removed from the 
sequences. Burroughs-Wheeler Aligner (BWA-mem)32 was used for alignment of the 
processed fastq files to the reference hg19 genome, following indel-re-alignment using 
GATK33. An in-house algorithm was written to collapse read families that share the same 
molecular barcode sequence, the left most genomic position of where each read of the pair 
maps to the reference and the CIGAR string. Families comprised of at least 2 reads were 
used to generate consensus reads (CR) and a consensus base was called when there was at 
least 70% agreement. When a consensus base was called, it was assigned with the maximum 
base quality score observed in its corresponding pre-collapsed reads. Furthermore, when 
possible, duplex reads (DR)34 were generated from two CR, from a singleton read (SR) and 
a CR, or from two SR. For each sequenced sample, we generated two BAM files, called 
bam1 and bam2. Bam1 one consists of DR, CR and singleton reads, thereby including some 
error corrected and non-error corrected reads however still containing all the genomic 
information encoded in the data in the form of unique DNA molecules. Bam2 consists of DR 
and CR but not singleton reads. Both files were then analysed to detect SNVs and small 
indels using Varscan235. In order to further remove sequencing artifacts and improve 
sensitivity, we applied a two-step polishing statistical approach that models the error rate at 
each sequenced genomic position. For both steps, bam1 was used and all the samples except 
the sample being investigated were included for error rate modelling. At step one, as 
Abelson et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 previously described31, the error rates were modelled by fitting weibull distribution curves 
to the non-reference allele fractions. SNVs with allele fractions that were statistically 
distinguishable from the background error rates (P=0) were further analysed. At Step 2, the 
coverage of the non-reference allele fractions was considered by using linear line fitting that 
describes the negative correlation that exist between the log (non-reference allele fraction) 
and the corresponding log(coverage) values. This allowed us to estimate different error rates 
at different coverage depths. As indel errors are rare and cannot be appropriately modelled 
by the same statistical framework they were called using barcode mediated error correction 
alone. At least 10 CR, 5 supporting reads on the forward strand, 5 supporting reads on the 
reverse strand, and 2 DR were required to call an indel. Additional post-processing steps 
applied to data from both the DC and VC are detailed in section 3.3. Variants were annotated 
using Annovar36.
3.2 Validation cohort variant calling—Sequencing reads were aligned to the 
reference genome (GRCh37d5) using the Burrows-Wheeler aligner (BWA-aln). Unmapped 
reads, PCR duplicates and reads mapping to regions outside the target regions (merged 
exonic regions + 10bp either side of each exon) were excluded from analysis. Sequencing 
depth at each base was assessed using Bedtools coverage v2.24.037.
Substitutions 
Somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) were called using shearwater, an algorithm 
developed for detecting subclonal mutations in deep sequencing experiments (https://
github.com/gerstung-lab/deepSNVv1.21.5)38–40 considering only reads with minimum 
nucleotide and mapping quality of 25 and 40, respectively. This algorithm models the error 
rate at individual loci using information from multiple unrelated samples. Additionally, 
allele counts at the recurrent AML mutation hotspots listed in Methods section 4 were 
generated using an in-house script (https://github.com/cancerit/alleleCount) and manually 
inspected in the Jbrowse genome browser41. To further complement our SNV calling 
approach, we applied an extensively validated in-house version of CaVEMan v1.11.2 
(Cancer Variants through Expectation Maximization)42. CaVEMan compares sequencing 
reads between study and nominated normal samples and uses a naïve Bayesian model and 
expectation-maximization approach to calculate the probability of a somatic variant at each 
base (https://github.com/cancerit/CaVEMan).
Post-processing filters required that the following criteria were met for CaVEMan to call a 
somatic substitution:
1)
If coverage of the mutant allele was less than 8, at least one mutant allele was 
detected in the first 2/3 of the read.
2)
Less than 3% of the mutant alleles with base quality ≥ 15 were found in the 
nominated normal sample.
3)
Mean mapping quality of the mutant allele reads was ≥ 21.
4)
Mutation does not fall in a simple repeat or centromeric region.
Abelson et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 5)
Fewer than 10% of the reads covering the position contained an indel according 
to mapping.
6)
Less than 80% of the reads report the mutant allele at the same read position.
7)
At least a third of the reads calling the variant had a base quality of 25 or higher.
8)
Not all mutant alleles reported in the second half of the read.
9)
Position does not fall within a germline insertion or deletion.
The following additional post-processing criteria were applied to all SNV calls:
1)
Minimum VAF 0.5% with a minimum of 5 bidirectional reporting the mutant 
allele (with at least 2 reads in forward and reverse directions).
2)
No indel called within a read length (75bp) of the putative substitution.
Small insertions and deletions 
Small insertions and deletions (indels) were sought using two complementary bioinformatics 
approaches. Firstly, an in-house version of Pindel v2.243 (https://github.com/cancerit/
cgpPindel) was applied. We additionally used the aforementioned deepSNV algorithm in 
order to increase sensitivity for indels present at low VAF. VAF correction was performed 
using an in-house script (https://github.com/cancerit/vafCorrect).
Post-processing filters required that the following criteria were met for a variant to be called:
1)
Minimum of 5 reads supporting the variant with minimum of 2 reads in each 
direction. For Pindel, the total read count was based on the union of BWA and 
Pindel reads reporting the mutant allele.
2)
Minimum VAF 0.5%
3)
Variant not present within an unmatched normal panel of approximately 400 
samples.
4)
No reads supporting the variant identified in the nominated normal sample.
Mutations were annotated according to ENSEMBL version 58 using VAGrENT44 for 
transcript and protein effects (https://github.com/cancerit/VAGrENT) and Annovar36 for 
additional functional annotation.
3.3 Additional post-processing filters applied to DC and VC data—The 
following variants were flagged for additional inspection for potential artifacts, germline 
contamination or index-jumping event:
3)
Any mutant allele reported within 75bp of another variant.
4)
Any mutant allele with a population allele frequency > 1 in 1000 according to 
any of five large polymorphism databases: ExAC, 1000 Genomes Project, 
ESP6500, CG46, Kaviar that is not a canonical hotspot driver mutation with 
COSMIC recurrence > 100.
Abelson et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 5)
Mutations that were present in > 10% of the control cohort but not recurrent in 
COSMIC were flagged as potential germline variants or sequencing artefact.
6)
As artifactual indels tend to be recurrent, any indels occurring in >2 samples 
were flagged as for additional inspection.
4 Curation of oncogenic variants
Putative oncogenic variants were identified according to evidence for functional relevance in 
AML as previously described and used to define ARCH-PD14.
Variants were annotated as likely driver events if they fulfilled any of the following criteria:
1)
Truncating mutations (nonsense, essential splice site or frameshift indel) in the 
following genes implicated in AML pathogenesis by loss-of-function: NF1, 
DNMT3A, TET2, IKZF1, RAD21, WT1, KMT2D, SH2B3, TP53, CEBPA, 
ASXL1, RUNX1, BCOR, KDM6A, STAG2, PHF6, KMT2C.
2)
Truncating variants in CALR exon 9.
3)
JAK2 V617F
4)
FLT3 ITD
5)
Non-synonymous variants at the following hotspot residues:
a.
CBL E366, L380, C384, C404, R420, C396
b.
DNMT3A R882
c.
FLT3 D835
d.
IDH1 R132
e.
IDH2 R172, R140
f.
KIT W557, V559, D816
g.
KRAS A146, Q61, G13, G12
h.
MPL W515
i.
NRAS Q61, G12, G13
j.
SF3B1 K700, K666
k.
SRSF2 P95
l.
U2AF1 Q157, R156, S34
6)
Non-synonymous variants reported at least 10 times in COSMIC with VAF < 
42% and population allele frequency < 0.003.
7)
Non-synonymous variants clustering within a functionally validated locus or 
within 4 amino acids of a hotspot variant with population allele frequency < 
0.003 and VAF < 42%.
Abelson et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 8)
Non-synonymous variants reported in COSMIC > 100 times with population 
allele frequency < 0.003 regardless of VAF.
Our driver curation strategy inevitably runs a small risk of including germline variants in 
familial AML genes. We feel that in the real world, where a matched constitutional DNA 
sample would be unavailable, this is the best approach.
5 Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed in the R statistical programming environment. two-
sided Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to assign significance level for differences in 1) the 
median number of somatic mutations among the pre-AML and control groups 2) the median 
VAF of mutations among groups. 3) The age of individuals with spliceosome mutations. 
Fisher's exact test was used to assign significance to differences in the prevalence 1) of 
ARCH among the groups. 2) spliceosome mutation in the pre-AML group
6 Predictive modelling
6.1.1 Cox proportional hazards model with random effects—We used a Cox 
proportional hazards regression to model AML progression-free survival as previously 
described14. We used random effects for the Cox proportional hazards model in the CoxHD 
R package (http://github.com/gerstung-lab/CoxHD). A key strength of this approach is the 
ability to include many variables in one model while shrinking estimated effects for 
parameters with weak support in the data, thus controlling for overfitting. We used 
weighting to minimise the biases introduced by the artificial case-control ratio52,53 and 
calculated hazard ratios relative to the (approximate) true cumulative incidence of about 
1-3/1,000 in the given age range over a follow up of 10-20 years. The observed driver 
mutation frequency and VAF in pre-AMLs closely resembled values expected based on the 
estimated risks, indicating that risk model and driver prevalence are well aligned (Extended 
Data Fig. 4). Full details of model derivation and comparisons with alternative methods are 
included in the accompanying code (Supplementary Note, also available at https://
github.com/gerstung-lab/). In brief, variables comprised age, gender and the variant allele 
fraction of putative driver mutations (see Methods section 4 for details of variant curation). 
We performed agnostic imputation of missing variables by mean and linear rescaling of gene 
variables by a power of 10 to a magnitude of 1. The model was first trained separately on the 
DC and VC. For each of these two models we evaluated the following measures of 
predictive accuracy before and after leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV): (i) 
concordance (C)45 and (ii) time-dependent area under the receiver-operating characteristic 
curve (AUC)46. The models trained on the VC and DC were then cross-validated using the 
data from the other cohort. In view of the cross-validation results and close correlation 
between coefficients (Supplementary Table 3), we derived a model on the combined cohorts 
using both cohorts in order to achieve greater accuracy on the individual effects. Confidence 
intervals were calculated using 100 bootstrap samples. The coefficients and performance 
metrics for each iteration of the model are detailed in Supplementary Table 3.
Concordance measures were obtained using the survConcordance() function implemented in 
the survival R package. Dynamic AUC was calculated with AUC.uno() implemented in the 
Abelson et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 survAUC package. Time-independent AUC was calculated by the performance function 
implemented in the ROCR package. The expected incidence of AML was calculated from 
the UK office of national statistics, available at http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-
professional/cancer-statistics/statistics-by-cancer-type/leukaemia-aml/incidence. All-cause 
mortality data was obtained from the office of national statistics (https://www.ons.gov.uk/).
6.1.2 Ridge regularised logistic regression—Using the same covariates as in 6.1.1 
we fitted ridge regularised logistic regression model to dichotomised outcome data. While 
logistic regression is a common choice for case-control analyses, a downside of this 
approach is the inability to explicitly use time-dependent covariates. The penalty parameter 
was chosen using LOOCV on the full cohort; this value was then used on the DC and VC to 
yield the same scaling of coefficients. Confidence intervals were calculated using 100 
bootstrap samples. Fitting was performed using the glmnet R package. AUC as the primary 
performance metric was calculated using the ROCR R package.
6.2 Regression models—Two predictive models were developed.
Model 1: This model performs logistic-regression based prediction using four types of 
features: (1) gender; (2) age at blood sampling; (3) the sum of the VAFs ARCH-PD reported 
in COSMIC v80 to be recurrent (at least 2 case reports in haematopoietic and lymphoid 
tissues); and (4) somatic mutation burden of selected genes, where each gene was 
represented by the sum of the VAFs corresponding to ARCH-PD mutations in that gene. We 
measured the predictive performance of each gene via the AUC obtained in a 5-fold cross 
validation when using only the gene as a predictive feature, and only retained genes with 
AUC>55% in the final model.
Model 2: We applied Lasso regression as implemented in the glmnet R package, while 
enabling leave-one-out cross-validation to fit a Cox regression model. A minimal subset of 
ARCH-PD variants was selected whose respective weighted combined VAFs were highly 
predictive of AML development in the training set. Scores were calculated for each patient 
as a linear combination of VAF of mutations weighted by regression coefficients that were 
estimated from the training data. As most scores were zero in the training subset, non-zero 
scores were discretised to take on a value of 1 that corresponds to AML prediction.
Models 1 and 2 were trained on the DC and tested for their association with AML 
development using the VC data. Survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan–Meier 
and Cox proportional hazards models. Wald’s test was used to evaluate the significance of 
HRs. Logistic regression models were used with the PPV metric to determine the ability of 
various mutations and other patient parameters to predict AML development. The rms R 
package was used for logistic regression analysis, while the pROC 1.8 R package was used 
for ROC curve analysis.
7 EHR-AML predictive model
Clalit database—The Clalit database includes information from patients covered by the 
Clalit health services in Israel26 during the years 2002-2017. The Clalit train-set data, 
contains the electronic health records of 3.45 million individuals per year on average. All 
Abelson et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 data was anonymised through hashing of personal identifiers and addresses and 
randomisation of dates by sampling a random number of weeks for each patient and adding 
it to all dates in the patient diagnoses, laboratory and medication records. This approach 
maintained differential data analysis per patient. Diagnoses codes were acquired from both 
primary care and hospitalisation records, and were mapped to the ICD-9 coding system due 
to historical reasons, with few exceptions that used a partial ICD-10 coding system. Lab 
records were normalised for age and gender by subtracting raw test values from the median 
levels observed among all test values with matching gender and age (using a bin size of 5 
years). We observed some chronological biases in lab ranges, but avoid normalising these 
and instead insured case and controls are matched for chronological distributions.
Defining AML cases—We screened for all active patients (18 < age < 100) that were 
diagnosed with AML (ICD-9 code 205.0*) between the years 2003 and 2016. We then 
excluded cases based on the following criteria:
1)
We excluded patients with prior myeloid malignancies to omit secondary AML, 
consistent with the case selection for the genetic model. The following diagnosis 
were excluded if documented within 5 years prior to the diagnosis of AML: 
essential thrombocythemia (ICD-9 238.71), low grade myelodysplastic 
syndrome (MDS) (ICD-9 238.72) high grade MDS lesions (ICD-9 238.73), 
MDS with 5q deletion (ICD-9 238.74), MDS, unspecified (ICD-9 238.75), 
polycythemia vera (ICD-9 238.4), myelofibrosis (ICD-9 289.83), chronic 
myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) (ICD-9 206.10-206.22)
2)
Patients that had any procedures performed on bone marrow or spleen (ICD-10 
code Z41) in the 5 years period prior first mention of AML diagnosis code in 
their record. These patients were presumed to have an inaccurate AML 
diagnosis date or misdiagnosis recorded.
3)
Patients that received medications suggestive of an alternative diagnosis of 
chronic myeloid leukaemia, lymphoid malignancy or acute promyelocytic 
leukaemia (APL):
•
At any time prior to diagnosis: imatinib, dasatinib, anagrelide, 
hydroxycarbamide, asparaginase, pegaspargase, arsenic trioxide.
•
At any time after diagnosis: imatinib, dasatinib, methotrexate, tretinoin, 
arsenic trioxide.
•
At any time after diagnosis, along with any acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia (ALL) diagnosis (ICD-9 204) or more than single dose: 
mercaptopurine.
APL cases were excluded as early diagnosis of APL will most probably not 
change its outcome, as treatment is successful already.
4)
Patients without a hospitalisation record within 3 months prior or 3 months post 
onset diagnosis. This parameter was used as it is unlikely that an AML patient 
will not be hospitalised close to diagnosis. This filter reduced false positive cases 
and better defined the onset date.
Abelson et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We refined the estimated time of onset using the earliest time at which any of the following 
diagnosis appeared in the patient's history: amyloidosis (ICD-9 277.3), lymphoid leukemia 
(ICD-9 204), myeloid leukemia (ICD-9 205), leukemia of unspecified cell type (ICD-9 208).
This strategy retained 875 AML cases in the training set for further analysis. These were 
further validated by manual expert inspection of the complete records of 8 % of the cases.
To define the control set, we included all Clalit individuals that are not cases. Since our 
analysis was aggregating data from a historical time window of 15 years, we associated each 
control with a randomised time point for evaluation. Using this approach, both cases and 
controls represented a specific time point in the historical record of a patient, with matching 
calendric, age and gender distributions. Through this strategy 5,238,528 controls were used.
Defining features for construction of a predictive a score—We extracted the 
following features for discriminative analysis of cases and controls (this procedure was 
applied repeatedly in cross validation as discussed below):
-
Age (in years) at time point
-
Gender 
-
Lab features. Out of 2770 different types of lab tests, we selected the top 50 
most frequent lab tests (Supplementary Table 4). For each lab measurement, we 
used median age/gender normalised test values per patient in three time 
windows ranging from 6-12 months prior to onset, 1-2 years prior to onset and 
2-3 years prior to onset. In addition, we compute the slope of the normalised lab 
measurements in the 6 – 12 month time window using a linear regression model.
Diagnosis features: of the 1780 different major ICD-9 diagnosis codes, we select 
only diagnosis which were previously observed in at least 10 different cases and 
have an increased relative risk for AML > 2 fold (as observed on the training set, 
Supplementary Table 4). For each diagnosis code, we mark whether it appeared 
in each of the patients in time intervals of 6 months – 3 years, and 3-5 years 
prior to onset.
-
BMI features: for each patient in the cohort we extracted median BMI, weight 
and height as measured in time intervals of 6 months to 2 years, and 2-3 years 
prior to onset.
Gradient boosting: We used the R package xgboost to infer parameters for a classifier 
given cases and controls. Objective was set to binary:logistic, the evaluation metric to AUC. 
We set nrounds=5000, eta = 0.001, gamma = 0.1, lambda=0.01, alpha=0.01, max_depth=6, 
min_child_weight=2, subsample=0.7 and colsample_bytree=0.7. The boosting algorithm 
reports a function f that computes a predictive score given the features. Given a threshold T 
the expression f(patient features)>T defines a classifier. To standardise thresholds we 
estimate quantiles for the scores on the train set T(p) = quantile(f(train),p) and define the 
classifier for specificity level p as f(patient features) > T(p) (Supplementary Table 4).
Abelson et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Cross validation and relative risk evaluation—To evaluate the predictive value of 
classification scheme while considering the strong age and gender biases in the incidence of 
AML, we performed five-fold cross validation after splitting the cases and controls to five 
age and gender matched groups. For each fold, we sampled 100,000 controls and combined 
with the cases, constructed the feature set and trained the model. The model was then tested 
on the fold cases along with 200,000 sampled controls. We used standardised classifier 
parameters and standardised thresholds as inferred based on each train set to generate a 
series of classifications on each test set and merged these based on the control quantiles in 
the test as described above. Given a threshold p to define high and low prediction score, we 
counted for each bin b that defines a patient in a specific age (<40, 40-50, 
50-60,60-70,70-80,>80) and gender group:
Nbcase – number of cases in bin, Nbcontrol - number of controls in bin
Nb– number of patient in bin (entire database – recall controls are only a sample of the 
cohort)
Nb(case, high score) = NbTP = number of true positives (TP)
Nb(case, low score) = NbFN = number of false negatives (FN)
Nb(control, high score) = NbFP = number of false positives (FP)
Nb(control, low score) = NbTN = number of true negatives (TN)
For each age/gender group, the absolute risk for AML in the bin is computed by rbabs= 
Nbcase/Nb. The absolute risk given high score is estimated rbabs,high = NbTP/ (NbFP+ NbTP). 
The relative risk in the bin is defined by rrb = rbabs,high/ rbabs, where the sensitivity level for 
the classifier threshold level is defined as senseb = NbTP/Nbcase.
rr =
TP ∗ CASES
TP + FN
TP ∗ CASES
TP + FN
+ FP ∗ CONTROLS
FP + TN
CASES
CASES + CONTROLS
8 Clonal growth rate calculation
Individual clones were defined by different mutations in different study participants. Per 
each clone we calculated alpha according to the following formula:
α = log (V / V0) / (T - T0)
Where T and T0 indicates the age of the individual at the two measurement time points. V 
and V0 correspond to the VAF at T and T0 respectively.
Extended Data
Abelson et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 1. Prevalence of ARCH-PD mutations with VAF ≥ 10% according to age.
Red and blue lines represent the proportion of pre-AMLs and controls, respectively, 
harbouring ARCH-PD mutations with VAF ≥10%.
Abelson et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Serial collected sampling supports a long-lived HSPC as the cell of 
origin for most ARCH-PD clones
a,b, VAF trajectory of persistent clones carrying putative driver mutations in pre-AML cases 
(right panel) and controls (left panel). Age is indicated on the x-axis. In the upper panel, 
VAF is shown on the y-axis and each persistent mutation is shown in a different colour, with 
circles denoting individual serial samples and solid lines representing the growth trajectory 
between serial samples. In the lower panel, dashed lines indicate the time interval between 
the last sampling and the end of follow-up (controls) or AML diagnosis (cases). c, Clonal 
Abelson et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 growth rates (α) are shown for 27 control clones corresponding to 54 time points and 13 pre-
AML clones corresponding to 15 time points. Box plots show median and whiskers 
represent the lower and upper quartiles.
Abelson et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. Performance of combined model in predicting AML progression.
a, Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for prediction of AML development using 
model 1 (see Methods). The red dot indicates the point on the curve with the highest positive 
predictive value (PPV) with sensitivity of 41.9% and specificity of 95.7%. b, Kaplan-Meier 
estimates of time to AML diagnosis for individuals predicted to develop AML (red) and not 
develop AML (blue) by model 1 (HR = 10.38, P 4.2e-10 ,Wald test) and c) model 2 (HR = 
10.75, P = 1.75e-08, Wald test), from the point of enrolment until the end of follow-up to the 
EPIC study.
Abelson et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 4. AML predictive models
a,b,c Time-dependent receiver operating characteristic curve for Cox proportional hazards 
model trained on the DC (a), VC (b) and combined cohorts (c). d,e,f Dynamic AUC for Cox 
proportional hazards models trained on the DC (d), VC (e) or combined cohort (f). g,h, Red 
and blue bars indicate the observed and expected VAF (g) and driver frequency (h) for pre-
AML cases and controls for each gene indicated on the x-axis. DC, discovery cohort (n = 
505 unique individuals); VC, validation cohort (n=291 individuals); ROC, receiver operating 
characteristic; AUC, area under curve.
Abelson et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 5. AML-free survival according to mutation status and RDW.
a, Kaplan-Meier curves of AML-free survival, defined as the time between sample 
collection and AML diagnosis, death or last follow-up. Survival curves are stratified 
according to mutation status in genes mutated in at least 3 samples across the combined 
validation and discovery cohorts. N=796 unique individuals. b, Kaplan-Meier curve of 
AML-free survival stratified according to RDW value >14 or ≤14. Plot represents data for 
N=128 biologically independent individuals with RDW measurements recorded, including 
Abelson et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 all pre-AMLs regardless of ARCH-PD status, and controls with ARCH-PD (controls without 
detectable mutations omitted). RDW, red cell distribution width.
Abelson et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 6. Description of the cohort and the EHR derived measurements
a, Kaplan-Meier curves showing age stratified survival rates for 875 individuals who 
developed AML. b, Line plot representation of the number of cases per 100,000 control 
individuals in the EHR database. The centre values and error bars define the average and s.d 
respectively
Abelson et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 7. Laboratory measurements contributing to EHR model
Box plot of normalized lab measurements (upper panels) and their association (lower panel) 
with higher AML risk. Box plots show median and whiskers represent the lower and upper 
quartiles
Abelson et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Top 50 EHR model parameters
Bar chart showing the relative contribution of the top 50 features incorporated into the EHR 
prediction model, ranked according to their predictive value (gain).
Abelson et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 9. Distribution of EHR model parameters
Heat-map illustrating absolute values of clinical measurements. Blue, white and red 
represent low, intermediate and high values, respectively. Light grey represents missing data. 
FN and TP annotation is indicated on the lower bar as dark-grey and yellow color 
respectively. FN, false negative; TP, false positive; EHR, electronic health record.
Abelson et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data table 1
Genes sequenced by cRNA bait pulldown in the validation cohort.
GNB1
FBXW7
CUL2
RAD51
CBLC
CSF3R
IRF1
CDH23
IDH2
U2AF2
MPL
CSF1R
PTEN
CREBBP
ASXL1
NRAS
NPM1
SMC3
SMG1
PTPRT
NOTCH2
PHACTR1
HRAS
CBFB
GNAS
RIT1
DAXX
WT1
CTCF
RUNX1
CACNA1E
PHIP
SF1
SMPD3
U2AF1
FAM5C
MYB
EED
PRPFB
CSF2RB
DNMT3A
FNDC1
CNTNS
TP53
CBX7
ASXL2
CUX1
MLL
NF1
EP300
SF3B1
MLL5
CBL
SUZ12
ZRSR2
IDH1
LUC7L2
ETV6
STAT5B
BCOR
CUL3
BRAF
KRAS
KANSL1
KDM6A
GIGYF2
CUL1
MLL2
DCAF7
GATA1
CBLB
EZH2
PRPF40B
SRSF2
SMC1A
GATA2
MLL3
PPFIA2
ASXL3
PHF8
STAG1
RAD21
SH2B3
SETBP1
MED12
PIK3CA
MYC
PTPN11
DNMT1
ATRX
FRYL
JAK2
FLT3
EPOR
RPS6KA6
KIT
CDKN2A
PDS5B
JAK3
DIAPH2
UGT2A3
HNRNPK
DCLK1
CEBPA
STAG2
TET2
NOTCH1
RB1
ZFP36
PHF6
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Sagi Abelson#1, Grace Collord#2,3, Stanley W.K. Ng4, Omer Weissbrod5, Netta 
Mendelson Cohen5, Elisabeth Niemeyer6, Noam Barda7, Philip C. Zuzarte8, 
Lawrence Heisler8, Yogi Sundaravadanam8, Robert Luben9, Shabina Hayat9, Ting 
Ting Wang1,10, Zhen Zhao1, Iulia Cirlan1, Trevor J. Pugh1,8,10, David Soave8, Karen 
Ng8, Calli Latimer2, Claire Hardy2, Keiran Raine2, David Jones2, Diana Hoult11, 
Abigail Britten11, John D. McPherson8, Mattias Johansson12, Faridah Mbabaali8, 
Jenna Eagles8, Jessica Miller8, Danielle Pasternack8, Lee Timms8, Paul 
Krzyzanowski8, Phillip Awadalla8, Rui Costa13, Eran Segal5, Scott V. Bratman1,8,14, 
Philip Beer2, Sam Behjati2,3, Inigo Martincorena2, Jean C.Y. Wang1,15,16, Kristian 
M. Bowles17,18, J Ramón Quirós19, Anna Karakatsani20,21, Carlo La Vecchia20,22, 
Antonia Trichopoulou20, Elena Salamanca-Fernández23,24, José M. Huerta24,25, 
Abelson et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Aurelio Barricarte24,26,27, Ruth C. Travis28, Rosario Tumino29, Giovanna Masala30, 
Heiner Boeing31, Salvatore Panico32, Rudolf Kaaks33, Alwin Krämer34, Sabina 
Sieri35, Elio Riboli36, Paolo Vineis36, Matthieu Foll12, James McKay12, Silvia 
Polidoro37, Núria Sala38, Kay-Tee Khaw39, Roel Vermeulen40, Peter J Campbell2,41, 
Elli Papaemmanuil2,42, Mark D Minden1,10,15,16, Amos Tanay5, Ran D Balicer7, 
Nicholas J Wareham11, Moritz Gerstung2,13,❖, John E. Dick1,43,❖, Paul 
Brennan12,❖, George S. Vassiliou2,41,44,❖, and Liran I. Shlush1,6,45,❖
Affiliations
1Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network (UHN), Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome 
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK 3Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom 4Institute of 
Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada 5Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann 
Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel 6Department of Immunology 
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 7Clalit Research Institute, Tel Aviv, 
Israel 8Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
9Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Institute of Public Health, 
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK 10Department 
of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 11MRC 
Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 12International Agency 
for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, France 13European 
Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute EMBL-EBI, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK 14Department of Radiation 
Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 15Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 16Division of Medical 
Oncology and Hematology, UHN, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 17Department of 
Molecular Haematology, Norwich Medical School, The University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK 18Department of Haematology, Norfolk and Norwich University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Norwich, UK 19Public Health Directorate, Asturias, Spain 
20Hellenic Health Foundation, Athens, Greece 212nd Pulmonary Medicine 
Department, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
“ATTIKON” University Hospital, Haidari, Athens, Greece 22Department of Clinical 
Sciences and Community Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy 23Escuela 
Andaluza de Salud Pública. Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA. 
Hospitales Universitarios de Granada/Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain 
24CIBER Epidemiology and Public Health CIBERESP
, Madrid, Spain 25Department 
of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health Council, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain 
26Navarra Public Health Institute, Pamplona, Spain 27Navarra Institute for Health 
Research, Pamplona, Spain 28Cancer Epidemiology Unit; Nuffield Department of 
Population Health University of Oxford, UK 29Cancer Registry and Histopathology 
Department, Civic - M.P
.Arezzo Hospital, ASP Ragusa, Italy 30Cancer Risk Factors 
and Life-Style Epidemiology Unit; Cancer Research and Prevention Institute – 
ISPO, 50141, Florence, Italy 31Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of 
Abelson et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Human Nutrition (DIfE), Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Germany 32Dipartimento Di Medicina 
Clinica E Chirurgia; Federico Ii University, Naples, Italy 33Division of Cancer 
Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 
34Clinical Cooperation Unit Molecular Hematology/Oncology, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ) and Dept. of Internal Medicine V, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany 35Epidemiology and Prevention Unit; Fondazione IRCCS 
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori; Milano, Italy 36Imperial College London, London, UK 
37Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, Torino, Italy 38Unit of Nutrition and Cancer, 
Cancer Epidemiology Research Program and Translational Research Laboratory, 
Catalan Institute of Oncology, ICO-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain 39University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 40Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands 41Department 
of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, UK 
42Center for Molecular Oncology and Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA 43Department 
of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Toronto, Canada 44Wellcome 
Trust Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 45Division of Hematology, Rambam Healthcare 
Campus, Haifa, Israel
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Quest for cure grant to L.I.S., J.C.Y.W. and M.D.M. from the Leukemia and 
Lymphoma Society, and the following grants to L.I.S from: ERC Horizon 2020 MAMLE, Abisch-Frenkel 
foundation and an American Society of Hematology Scholar Award. Further funding to J.E.D. was provided by the 
Canada Research Chair Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, the province of Ontario, Canadian Cancer 
Society, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research and the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care to 
UHN, whose views are not expressed here. Work conducted at the Sanger Institute was supported by the Wellcome 
Trust and UK Medical Research Council. S.A. was personally funded by the Benjamin Pearl fellowship from the 
McEwen Centre for Regenerative Medicine, G.C. by a Wellcome Trust Clinical PhD Fellowship (WT098051); 
G.S.V. by a Wellcome Trust Senior Fellowship in Clinical Science (WT095663MA) and a Cancer Research UK 
Senior Cancer Research Fellowship (C22324/A23015). We thank Amanda Mitchell and all the members of the Dick 
and Shlush laboratories for comments and Tom Hudson for early study planning. We thank Gabi Barabash for 
organising the Clalit dataset collaboration. The EPIC study centers were supported by the Hellenic Health 
Foundation, Regional Government of Asturias, the Regional Government of Murcia (no. 6236), the Spanish 
Ministry of Health network RTICCC (ISCIII RD12/0036/0018), FEDER funds /European Regional Development 
Fund (ERDF), "a way to build Europe”, Generalitat de Catalunya, AGAUR 2014SGR726; EPIC Ragusa in Italy-
Aire-Onlus Ragusa; Epic Italy-Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) Milan, Italy. S.V.B. and 
T.J.P are supported by the Gattuso-Slaight Personalized Cancer Medicine Fund at the Princess Margaret Cancer 
Centre.
References
1. Deschler B, Lubbert M. Acute myeloid leukemia: epidemiology and etiology. Cancer. 2006; 
107:2099–2107. DOI: 10.1002/cncr.22233 [PubMed: 17019734] 
2. Corces-Zimmerman MR, Hong WJ, Weissman IL, Medeiros BC, Majeti R. Preleukemic mutations 
in human acute myeloid leukemia affect epigenetic regulators and persist in remission. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:2548–2553. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1324297111 [PubMed: 24550281] 
3. Shlush LI, et al. Identification of pre-leukaemic haematopoietic stem cells in acute leukaemia. 
Nature. 2014; 506:328–333. DOI: 10.1038/nature13038 [PubMed: 24522528] 
4. Genovese G, et al. Clonal hematopoiesis and blood-cancer risk inferred from blood DNA sequence. 
N Engl J Med. 2014; 371:2477–2487. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1409405 [PubMed: 25426838] 
Abelson et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 5. Jaiswal S, et al. Age-related clonal hematopoiesis associated with adverse outcomes. N Engl J Med. 
2014; 371:2488–2498. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1408617 [PubMed: 25426837] 
6. Xie M, et al. Age-related mutations associated with clonal hematopoietic expansion and 
malignancies. Nat Med. 2014; doi: 10.1038/nm.3733
7. Busque L, et al. Nonrandom X-inactivation patterns in normal females: lyonization ratios vary with 
age. Blood. 1996; 88:59–65. [PubMed: 8704202] 
8. Shlush LI. Age related clonal hematopoiesis (ARCH). Blood. 2017; doi: 10.1182/
blood-2017-07-746453
9. Acuna-Hidalgo R, et al. Ultra-sensitive Sequencing Identifies High Prevalence of Clonal 
Hematopoiesis-Associated Mutations throughout Adult Life. Am J Hum Genet. 2017; 101:50–64. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.013 [PubMed: 28669404] 
10. McKerrell T, et al. Leukemia-associated somatic mutations drive distinct patterns of age-related 
clonal hemopoiesis. Cell Rep. 2015; 10:1239–1245. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.005 [PubMed: 
25732814] 
11. Wong TN, Ramsingh G, Young AL. Role of TP53 mutations in the origin and evolution of therapy-
related acute myeloid leukaemia. Nature. 2014
12. Yoshizato T, et al. Somatic Mutations and Clonal Hematopoiesis in Aplastic Anemia. N Engl J 
Med. 2015; 373:35–47. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1414799 [PubMed: 26132940] 
13. Kronke J, et al. Clonal evolution in relapsed NPM1-mutated acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2013; 
122:100–108. DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-479188 [PubMed: 23704090] 
14. Papaemmanuil E, et al. Genomic Classification and Prognosis in Acute Myeloid Leukemia. N Engl 
J Med. 2016; 374:2209–2221. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1516192 [PubMed: 27276561] 
15. Forbes SA, et al. COSMIC: somatic cancer genetics at high-resolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017; 
45:D777–D783. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1121 [PubMed: 27899578] 
16. Shlush LI, et al. Tracing the origins of relapse in acute myeloid leukaemia to stem cells. Nature. 
2017; doi: 10.1038/nature22993
17. Buscarlet M, et al. DNMT3A and TET2 dominate clonal hematopoiesis and demonstrate benign 
phenotypes and different genetic predispositions. Blood. 2017; 130:753–762. DOI: 10.1182/
blood-2017-04-777029 [PubMed: 28655780] 
18. Arber DA, et al. The 2016 revision to the World Health Organization classification of myeloid 
neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood. 2016; 127:2391–2405. DOI: 10.1182/
blood-2016-03-643544 [PubMed: 27069254] 
19. Hu L, et al. Prognostic value of RDW in cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Oncotarget. 2017; 8:16027–16035. DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13784 [PubMed: 27926498] 
20. Balicer RD, Afek A. Digital health nation: Israel's global big data innovation hub. Lancet. 2017; 
389:2451–2453. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30876-0 [PubMed: 28495105] 
21. Dagan N, Cohen-Stavi C, Leventer-Roberts M, Balicer RD. External validation and comparison of 
three prediction tools for risk of osteoporotic fractures using data from population based electronic 
health records: retrospective cohort study. BMJ. 2017; 356:i6755.doi: 10.1136/bmj.i6755 
[PubMed: 28104610] 
22. Wong TN, et al. Role of TP53 mutations in the origin and evolution of therapy-related acute 
myeloid leukaemia. Nature. 2015; 518:552–555. DOI: 10.1038/nature13968 [PubMed: 25487151] 
23. McKerrell T, Vassiliou GS. Aging as a driver of leukemogenesis. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7doi: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.aac4428
24. Vickers AJ. Prediction models in cancer care. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011; 61:315–326. DOI: 10.3322/
caac.20118 [PubMed: 21732332] 
25. Cassidy A, et al. The LLP risk model: an individual risk prediction model for lung cancer. Br J 
Cancer. 2008; 98:270–276. DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604158 [PubMed: 18087271] 
26. Wang X, Oldani MJ, Zhao X, Huang X, Qian D. A review of cancer risk prediction models with 
genetic variants. Cancer Inform. 2014; 13:19–28. DOI: 10.4137/CIN.S13788
27. Fuster JJ, et al. Clonal hematopoiesis associated with TET2 deficiency accelerates atherosclerosis 
development in mice. Science. 2017; 355:842–847. DOI: 10.1126/science.aag1381 [PubMed: 
28104796] 
Abelson et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 28. Jaiswal S, et al. Clonal Hematopoiesis and Risk of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease. N Engl 
J Med. 2017; doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1701719
29. Martincorena I, Campbell PJ. Somatic mutation in cancer and normal cells. Science. 2015; 
349:1483–1489. DOI: 10.1126/science.aab4082 [PubMed: 26404825] 
30. Riboli E, et al. European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC): study 
populations and data collection. Public Health Nutr. 2002; 5:1113–1124. DOI: 10.1079/
PHN2002394 [PubMed: 12639222] 
31. Newman AM, et al. An ultrasensitive method for quantitating circulating tumor DNA with broad 
patient coverage. Nat Med. 2014; 20:548–554. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3519 [PubMed: 24705333] 
32. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:589–595. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp698 [PubMed: 20080505] 
33. McKenna A, et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next-
generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–1303. DOI: 10.1101/gr.
107524.110 [PubMed: 20644199] 
34. Kennedy SR, et al. Detecting ultralow-frequency mutations by Duplex Sequencing. Nat Protoc. 
2014; 9:2586–2606. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2014.170 [PubMed: 25299156] 
35. Koboldt DC, et al. VarScan 2: somatic mutation and copy number alteration discovery in cancer by 
exome sequencing. Genome Res. 2012; 22:568–576. DOI: 10.1101/gr.129684.111 [PubMed: 
22300766] 
36. Yang H, Wang K. Genomic variant annotation and prioritization with ANNOVAR and 
wANNOVAR. Nat Protoc. 2015; 10:1556–1566. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2015.105 [PubMed: 
26379229] 
37. Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. 
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:841–842. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033 [PubMed: 20110278] 
38. Gerstung M, et al. Reliable detection of subclonal single-nucleotide variants in tumour cell 
populations. Nat Commun. 2012; 3:811.doi: 10.1038/ncomms1814 [PubMed: 22549840] 
39. Gerstung M, et al. Precision oncology for acute myeloid leukemia using a knowledge bank 
approach. Nat Genet. 2017; 49:332–340. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3756 [PubMed: 28092685] 
40. Martincorena I, et al. Tumor evolution. High burden and pervasive positive selection of somatic 
mutations in normal human skin. Science. 2015; 348:880–886. DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa6806 
[PubMed: 25999502] 
41. Buels R, et al. JBrowse: a dynamic web platform for genome visualization and analysis. Genome 
Biol. 2016; 17:66.doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-0924-1 [PubMed: 27072794] 
42. Stephens PJ, et al. The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast cancer. 
Nature. 2012; 486:400–404. DOI: 10.1038/nature11017 [PubMed: 22722201] 
43. Raine KM, et al. cgpPindel: Identifying Somatically Acquired Insertion and Deletion Events from 
Paired End Sequencing. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. 2015; 52doi: 10.1002/0471250953.bi1507s52
44. Menzies A, et al. VAGrENT: Variation Annotation Generator. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. 2015; 
52doi: 10.1002/0471250953.bi1508s52
45. Harrell FE Jr, Lee KL, Mark DB. Multivariable prognostic models: issues in developing models, 
evaluating assumptions and adequacy, and measuring and reducing errors. Stat Med. 1996; 
15:361–387. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19960229)15:4<361::AID-SIM168>3.0.CO;2-4 
[PubMed: 8668867] 
46. O'Quigley J, Xu R, Stare J. Explained randomness in proportional hazards models. Stat Med. 2005; 
24:479–489. DOI: 10.1002/sim.1946 [PubMed: 15532086] 
Abelson et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Prevalence of ARCH, number of mutations and clone size in individuals who developed 
AML
a, Prevalence of ARCH-PD among pre-AML cases (red) and controls (blue). b, The number 
of ARCH-PD mutations detected in cases and controls according to age. Box plot centres, 
hinges and whiskers represent the median, first and third quartiles and 1.5 x interquartile 
range, respectively. c, VAF of ARCH-PD mutations. Significant differences are defined as 
P<0.0005 (two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni multiple testing correction) 
Abelson et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and are indicated by asterisks (*). All panels show data for n=800 biologically independent 
samples.
Abelson et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Acquisition of specific recurrent AML mutations by healthy individuals at young age is 
associated with progression to AML
a, Relative frequency of mutations in the indicated genes according to age group for pre-
AMLs (red) and controls (blue). b, Proportion of pre-AML cases and controls harbouring 
ARCH-PD mutations in recurrently mutated genes. Asterisks (*) indicate P<0.05 (Fisher’s 
exact test with Bonferroni multiple testing correction). c, Plot showing the cumulative 
frequency of recurrent AML mutations (reported in >5 specimens in COSMIC) in pre-AML 
cases and controls. ARCH-PD mutations are ranked from left to right along the x-axis from 
Abelson et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 low to high recurrence. d, VAF of recurrent mutations in cases and controls. Low, 
intermediate and highly recurrent COSMIC mutations are defined as those reported in 5-19 
samples, 20-300 samples and >300 samples, respectively. Box plots indicate median, first 
and third quartiles and 1.5 x interquartile range. P-values were calculated by two-sided 
Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni multiple testing correction. All panels show data 
for n=800 unique individuals.
Abelson et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Model of future AML risk
a, Forest plot of the risk of AML. Purple, orange and green circles indicate hazard ratios and 
horizontal lines denote 95% confidence intervals for the combined cohort. For each gene, the 
indicated hazard ratio applies to the AML risk conferred by each 5% increase in mutation 
VAF over a 10 year period. The green vertical line indicates the mean HR across all genes. 
The HR for RUNX1 must to be interpreted with caution due to the relatively high prevalence 
of deleterious germline variants in this gene, which may not be readily distinguishable from 
somatic mutations in unmatched sequencing assays (see Methods). The proportion of 
individuals with mutations in each gene and the average VAF are indicated to the right of the 
forest plot; red and blue circles represent pre-AMLs and controls, respectively, with circle 
sizes scaled to reflect mutation frequency and VAF. b-d, Kaplan-Meier curves of AML-free 
survival, defined as the time between sample collection and AML diagnosis, death or last 
follow-up. Survival curves are stratified according to mutation status in selected genes (b), 
Abelson et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 number of driver mutations per individual and largest clone detected (c) and red cell 
distribution width (RDW) (d). Panels a-c represent data for n=796 unique individuals and 
panel d includes n=299 individuals for whom RDW measurements were available.
Abelson et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Increased risk for AML development is inferred from electronic health records.
a, Box plot of normalised lab measurements. Increased RDW, reduction in monocyte, 
platelet, red blood cell and white blood cell counts presented high association (lower panel) 
with higher AML risk and differed at least a year before AML diagnosis. b, Model 
performance stratification by age and gender. c, Absolute lab values for true positive (TP) 
and false negatives (FN) predictions. WBC, white blood cell count; MONO.abs, absolute 
monocyte count; PLT, platelet count; NEUT.abs, absolute neutrophil count; RBC, red blood 
cell count; RDW, red cell distribution width. Box plots indicate median, first and third 
quartiles and 1.5 x interquartile range.
Abelson et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 26.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
