 © American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
ACMG StAteMent
There exist 5,000–7,000 rare genetic diseases, each of which 
harbors considerable clinical variability. None are common 
individually. In addition, more common diseases with genetic 
influences may have rare variants associated with them. Vast 
allelic heterogeneity lies at the foundation of most genetic dis-
eases, the effects of which are compounded by background 
genomic variation that may further affect clinical presentation.
The considerable variation in clinical presentation and 
molecular etiology of genetic disorders, coupled with their 
relative individual rarity, makes it clear that no single provider, 
laboratory, medical center, state, or even individual country will 
typically possess sufficient knowledge to deliver the best care 
for patients in need of care. Even in the relatively rare situation 
in which pathogenic variants are few (e.g., sickle cell anemia), 
variants in other alleles may contribute to the genomic varia-
tion and clinical manifestations of disease. For more genetically 
complex conditions such as cystic fibrosis, in spite of decades of 
study, as many as 10% of cases have a CFTR variant so rare that 
it is represented in only one or two people in current databases, 
a situation paralleled in many genetic diseases.1,2
To ensure that our patients receive the most informed care 
possible, the American College of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics advocates for extensive sharing of laboratory and 
clinical data from individuals who have undergone genomic 
testing. Information that underpins health-care service deliv-
ery should be treated neither as intellectual property nor as a 
trade secret when other patients may benefit from the knowl-
edge being widely available. It is similarly important for under-
standing the risks associated with genetic test results that 
place asymptomatic/presymptomatic individuals at high risk 
of developing a genetic disease. Sharing data in this precom-
petitive space will provide both a resource for clinical labora-
tories interpreting test results and clinical validity data that can 
benefit device manufacturers developing new tests and testing 
platforms. Contributing to public clinical databases in the pre-
competitive space recognizes that information about genetic 
diseases is dense and accumulating rapidly, and that informa-
tion science is empowering the use of “big data.” Further, the 
shift to public databases being populated by de-identified case-
level information from electronic health records will speed 
the time to “publication” of what are essentially case reports in 
real time. This process can also reduce the time period during 
which one might be able to protect trade secrets. Recognizing 
the importance of data sharing for both research and clinical 
care, the National Institutes of Health has established a genomic 
data-sharing policy for its funded investigators.3
Responsible sharing of genomic variant and phenotype data 
will provide the robust information necessary to improve clini-
cal care and empower device and drug manufacturers that are 
developing tests and treatments for patients.
• 
Broad data sharing is necessary and will improve care by 
making available the best data possible by which:
○ Key clinical attributes of the phenotype of those with 
genetic diseases can be described
○  
The qualitative strength of the association between 
genetic diseases and the underlying causative genes 
can be established
Submitted 31 October 2016; accepted 1 November 2016; advance online publication 5 January 2017. doi:10.1038/gim.2016.196
Disclaimer: These recommendations are designed primarily as an 
educational resource for medical geneticists and other health-care 
providers, to help them provide quality medical genetic services. 
Adherence to these recommendations does not necessarily assure a 
successful medical outcome. These  
recommendations should not be 
considered inclusive of all proper procedures and tests or exclusive of 
other procedures and tests that are reasonably directed to obtaining 
the same results. In determining the propriety of any specific proce-
dure or test, the geneticist should apply his or her own professional 
judgment to the specific clinical circumstances presented by the indi-
vidual patient or specimen. It may be prudent, however, to document 
in the patient’s record the rationale for any significant deviation from 
these recommendations.
Genet Med advance online publication 5 January 2017
Key Words: genomic data sharing; genomic databases; gene variant 
databases; genotype:phenotype correlations
1American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. Correspondence: Michael S. Watson (mwatson@acmg.net)
The Board of Directors of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics approved this statement on 26 September 2016.
Laboratory and clinical genomic data sharing is crucial to 
improving genetic health care: a position statement of the 
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
ACMG Board of Directors1
Genetics in meDicine  |  Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017
721
 ACMG Board of Directors  |  Laboratory and clinical genomic data sharing
ACMG StAteMent
○ The classification of genomic variants across the 
range of benign to pathogenic can be established
○ Differences in variant interpretation among labora-
tories can be reconciled
○ The appropriate classification of variants of uncer-
tain significance can be made
○ Standards used in variant classification can be 
improved
• 
Data sharing will provide the scientific community, 
health-care providers, and industry with the best data on 
which:
○ Web-based systems for integrated clinical decision 
support are based
○ Secondary studies using these data are powered
• 
Data sharing will offer significant financial benefits by 
which:
○ More standardized approaches to coverage and reim-
bursement policies can be made
○ The expensive duplication of previously resolved, but 
unpublished, research efforts currently occurring 
among pharmaceutical companies can be reduced
The analytical challenges of migrating and integrating 
clinical and laboratory data across the genome are daunting. 
Standardization of laboratory and clinical information will 
enable:
• 
Data compatibility
• 
Interoperability between information systems
Importantly, broad data sharing is compatible with the criti-
cal imperative of protecting the privacy of individual health-
care information and the security of data systems holding that 
information. For data to be shared safely for patients and pro-
viders, systems are required that:
• 
Ensure the security of databases, whether centralized or 
federated
• 
Ensure the privacy of patient and family medical 
information
• 
Provide transparency in the documentation of data- 
sharing transactions
Clinical-grade standards by which claims about gene/disease 
associations and the clinical significance of variants are made 
(e.g., data provenance, database versioning, and expert infor-
mation curation) are central to a shared genomics data system. 
However, the need to deliver safe and effective care for those 
with or at risk for rare diseases, despite weak data for most vari-
ants and inevitable conflicts in data interpretation, requires bal-
ancing regulatory oversight with the need to provide services 
regardless of how well a rare disease is understood.
Due to the vast amount of data now being generated by 
genomic testing, genetic diseases will offer the opportunity to 
develop the framework for a national learning health-care sys-
tem because the shared experiences of those caring for these 
patients continually contribute to improvements in delivering 
services to this population. A learning health-care system that 
facilitates access to diagnostic, treatment, and outcomes data 
to inform the care of today’s patients requires a paradigm shift 
in how we share data to be used in research and clinical prac-
tice. Academic medical centers have already begun to address 
how providers within their systems can use information about 
their patients to benefit other patients. This approach could be 
made national in scope to the benefit of patients everywhere. 
The National Institutes of Health has already made such data 
sharing a priority in the research that it funds. However, to 
accomplish these goals, and to ensure that the tremendous 
amounts of information now being generated are not wasted, 
our community must both demonstrate the will to share data 
broadly and develop the mechanisms to do so easily. These 
efforts will require support and participation from clinical 
laboratories, clinicians, regulatory agencies, researchers, and 
patients to ensure success in improving patient care through 
genomic medicine.
DISCLOSURE
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
REfEREnCES
 
1. 
The Clinical and Functional Translation of CFTR (CFTR2). http://cftr2.org. 
Accessed 8 November 2016.
 
2. 
Rehm HL, Berg JS, Brooks LD, et al.; ClinGen. ClinGen–the Clinical Genome 
Resource. N Engl J Med 2015;372:2235–2242.
 
3. 
National Institutes of Health. NIH Genomic Data Sharing Policy. http://gds.nih.
gov/03policy2.html. Accessed 8 November 2016.
 Volume 19  |  Number 7  |  July 2017  |  Genetics in meDicine
722
