 https://doi.org/10.1177/1363459317724853
Health
2018, Vol. 22(6) 603 
–623
© The Author(s) 2017
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1363459317724853
journals.sagepub.com/home/hea
‘It’s sometimes hard to tell 
what patients are playing at’: 
How healthcare professionals 
make sense of why patients and 
families complain about care
Mary Adams, Jill Maben and Glenn Robert
King’s College London, UK
Abstract
This article draws from sociological and socio-legal studies of dispute between patients and 
doctors to examine how healthcare professionals made sense of patients’ complaints about 
healthcare. We analyse 41 discursive interviews with professional healthcare staff working 
in eight different English National Health Service settings to explore how they made sense 
of events of complaint and of patients’ (including families’) motives for complaining. We 
find that for our interviewees, events of patients’ complaining about care were perceived 
as a breach in fundamental relationships involving patients’ trust or patients’ recognition of 
their work efforts. We find that interviewees rationalised patients’ motives for complaining 
in ways that marginalised the content of their concerns. Complaints were most often 
discussed as coming from patients who were inexpert, distressed or advantage-seeking; 
accordingly, care professionals hearing their concerns about care positioned themselves as 
informed decision-makers, empathic listeners or service gate-keepers. We find differences 
in our interviewees’ rationalisation of patients’ complaining about care to be related to 
local service contingences rather than to fixed professional differences. We note that it was 
rare for interviewees to describe complaints raised by patients as grounds for improving 
the quality of care. Our findings indicate that recent health policy directives promoting a 
view of complaints as learning opportunities from critical patient/consumers must account 
for sociological factors that inform both how the agency of patients is envisaged and how 
professionalism exercised contemporary healthcare work.
Keywords
experiencing illness and narratives, organisation of health services, patient–physician 
relationship, profession and professionalisation, theory
Corresponding author:
Mary Adams, King’s Improvement Science, Department of Health Services and Population Research King’s 
College, London, 16 De Crespigny Park, London SE58AF. 
Email: mary.adams@kcl.ac.uk
724853 HEA0010.1177/1363459317724853HealthAdams et al.
research-article2017
Article
 604 
Health 22(6)
Introduction
Since the 1990s, the relationship between complaints about healthcare made by patients 
and the quality of care received has been a focus of interest for health service managers, 
policy makers and researchers. There has been increasing international recognition that 
‘patient complaint’ constitutes a unique and relatively low cost indicator of the quality of 
care given (Gallagher and Mazor, 2015; Schlesinger et al., 2015). English National 
Health Service (NHS) provider organisations and clinicians are encouraged to welcome 
‘complaints as a free gift’ and to improve their reporting systems in order to ‘listen and 
learn’ from these events (Care Quality Commission (CQC), 2014; Healthwatch, 2013). 
The parallel rise in New Public Management directives in the United States and the 
United Kingdom – with its emphasis on service efficiency, market competition, and pub-
lic accountability and devolution – promotes the value of ‘consumer sovereignty’ as a 
political and administrative technique (Aberbach and Christensen, 2005).
However, critical sociological research on the phenomena of patient dispute in medi-
cal care suggests that ‘listening and learning’ from complainants requires more than 
improvements in operational systems (Annandale, 1989; Mulcahy, 2003). Studies also 
note that the defensiveness of individual clinicians often silences the critical voice of 
patients (Hrisos and Thomson, 2013). Framing the issue more broadly than individual 
behaviours, Mulcahy’s (2003) analyses of NHS doctor and patient dispute notes the 
endurance or and even hardening of defensive professional claims and identities. She 
identifies how collegial circles of medical experts continue to assert the authoritative 
expertise and moral entitlement of the doctor to define appropriate care. Mulcahy’s find-
ings indicate the intransigence of established styles of ‘older professionalism’ that recent 
sociologies of healthcare professionals (Elston, 2009; Freidson, 1994) describe as in 
decline. Our article builds on these sociological studies both to examine how care profes-
sionals working in different care services make sense of complaints made by patients and 
families (hereafter ‘patients’) and to explore what these complaints, and the rationales 
underpinning them, indicate about health professionals’ exercise of authority and exper-
tise in different relationships of care. Indeed, Annandale (1989) highlights the tendency 
for complaints made by patients within healthcare organisations to be framed as interper-
sonal matters, such as ‘clinician-patient communication’, rather than addressed as issues 
relating to organisational or national health policy agendas. Annadale’s and Mulcahy’s 
analyses offer more nuanced readings of patients’ complaining about care as events that 
illuminate wider socio-political shifts in patient and healthcare professional identities. 
Their research invites closer investigation of how patients’ complaining about care is 
interpreted and acted in different care settings and in relation to various healthcare pro-
fessional identities.
Our study, guided by Mesman’s (2008) notion of repertoire, explores the situational 
as well as the normative dimensions of healthcare professionals’ responses to patients’ 
complaining about care. The idea of ‘repertoire’ focuses analytical attention on the prac-
tical styles of reasoning as ordering strategies: the loose general principles by which 
people both decide what matters in particular situations and legitimate their views and 
actions according to ‘what matters’. As Mesman (2008) notes, the evocation of a reper-
toire is a moral as much as reasoning activity.
 Adams et al. 
605
Our study examines in-depth interviews with 41 healthcare professionals (doctors, 
nurses and allied health professionals) at different levels of seniority and working in 
eight NHS services in England in order to understand how they sought to make sense 
of the effects of patients complaining about care and the motives of those who 
complained.
Theoretical foundations
Sociological studies situate the rise of consumer-orientated regulation of medical work 
in the context of a wider, late modern destabilisation of independent/liberal professional 
authority and expertise (Freidson, 1994; Mulcahy, 2003). The crystallisation of NHS 
patients’ legal entitlements, including the right to the hearing of complaints about medi-
cal and healthcare, was driven by wider recognition of the values of individual self-
assertion and entitlement and of the legitimacy of experiential knowledge (Mold, 2012; 
cf. Habermas, 1981). As Mold (2012) notes, the accommodation of public commentary 
in health service reforms includes multiple, and sometimes inconsistent, framings as the 
interests of ‘patients’, ‘citizens’, ‘consumers’ or ‘users’ are articulated. These framings 
entail different assumptions about the interests of the public, ranging from concerns with 
‘care’, ‘equity’, ‘choice’ or ‘satisfaction’.
Freidson (1994) examines how the medical profession was restructured in response to 
administrative and popular challenges to prevailing forms of professional power and 
moral authority. He identifies a restructuring of the medical profession within the work-
place and the wider political economy. This ‘new professionalism’ includes the exercise 
of various forms of social expertise and authority pertaining to technological develop-
ment, bureaucratic rationalisation and risk associated with late modernity. However, as 
Elston (2009; following Giddens, 1990: 83) points out, such claims to expertise and 
oversight over abstract systems are ever more relevant, conditional and uncertain in pre-
sent times. The position of front-line healthcare professionals who occupy ‘key access 
points’ to complex systems is precarious. Their authority often relies on individuals’ situ-
ated and variable ‘facework’ of patient reassurance and collaboration. Commitment to 
self-audit and individual appraisal have become significant components of each profes-
sional’s work agendas according to the values of ‘partnership with patients’, ‘good com-
munication skills’ and ‘lay involvement in regulation’ (Davies, 2003 in Elston, 2009: 
31). These behaviours seek to assure patients and the public of the trustworthiness of 
systems and practices that are assumed to be open to popular criticism.
Milewa (2009) suggests that it is against these contemporary politicisations and 
uncertainties about the work of systems and about those professionals who ‘stand for’ 
systems, that actual events of complaining about healthcare by patients takes shape.
To date, however, there is limited study examining if and how healthcare profession-
als experience and articulate any ambivalent positionality – as patient partners and sys-
tems representatives – in everyday work situations. Allen et al.’s (2015) study examines 
how midwives continually arbitrate between family preference and unit policy regulat-
ing family access to a hospital unit. These writers identify the underlying dissonance of 
these healthcare professional between ‘the ideals of woman-centred care and the need to 
attend to the needs of the institution’ (Allen et al., 2015: 26–27).
 606 
Health 22(6)
We build on these critical approaches to consider healthcare professionals’ efforts to 
make sense of patients’ complaining about care as indicative of underlying negotiations 
over the moral nature of ‘patient care’ and ‘organisational care’ work.
Study context and methods
Between 2009 and 2012 we conducted a national mixed methods study to investigate the 
influence of staff motivation, affect and well-being on patients’ experiences of care in 
NHS acute and community health services across England (Maben et al., 2011). 
Following a nested case-study design, we conducted research in two acute and two com-
munity NHS trusts that had been purposively selected as ‘high’ and ‘low’ performing 
organisations for staff well-being at work and patient experience of care, based on rou-
tine national annual survey data. Two services were purposively selected in each trust 
following this same logic (‘high’ and low’ performance in relation to patient experience 
and staff well-being at work). Service selection also took account of variations in disease 
trajectories and patient ‘dwell time’ in service. Each author led on the collection and 
analysis of the mixed methods data (staff and patient surveys; observation of practice and 
interviews with staff and patients) in two to four of the service case-study sites. In this 
article, only methods, analysis and findings for interviews with staff are reported.
The staff interviews were designed to explore, across the range of services, staffs’ 
views and experiences of patient care work, their own well-being at work and their 
reflections on the relationship between these experiences and the experiences of patients. 
A semi-structured interview schedule was used to explore respondents’ experiences 
without introducing issues that they might feel drawn to repeat.
Following our schedule, the interviews were designed to be discursive in style with 
authors interested in exploring with staff ‘the assembly process as much as … what was 
assembled’ (Holstein and Gubrium, 2011: 143). This design was to allow exploration of 
how staff reasoned about the ‘why, how and to what effect’ of events of workplace events 
and conditions on the experience of staff and patients. Thus, staff could frame their nar-
ratives differently in responses to questions such as ‘What makes a good/bad day for 
you?’ and ‘Tell me about a recent event that made you feel good/bad about your job?’ For 
all emerging topics, interviewers prompted staff to flesh out the details of events and 
reflect on their experience by asking ‘Can you tell me some more about that?’ and ‘What 
are your thoughts on that now?’.
The study received ethical approval through the NHS Research Ethics Committee 
process (ref: 09/H0709/51) and all research participants gave informed written consent.
Data collection and analysis
The qualitative research in the eight services was conducted by the authors between 
January and June 2010 and included 86 narrative-style interviews with front-line health-
care professionals The eight service case studies were emergency admissions (eau.), 
midwifery (mat.), older peoples’ acute medicine (opm.), in-patient haematology (haem.), 
adult community nursing (cns1.), community matron service (cms.), intermediate care 
service (ics) and an adult community and palliative care nursing services (cns2.). For 
 Adams et al. 
607
each of the eight services, staff interviewees were selected for maximum variation in 
profession, discipline, seniority and time in service (see Table 1).
The audio-recorded interviews with staff in each service lasted approximately 60 min-
utes and were conducted either face-to-face with individuals in a private area of their 
workplace or by telephone. All recordings were transcribed verbatim and anonymised. 
Each transcript was coded for descriptors that included profession, seniority, specialism, 
work experience and responsibilities and service setting. The NVivo8 software program 
was used to organise the anonymised interview transcripts and to manage and audit qual-
itative data analysis. Transcripts were analysed iteratively by each research site using a 
grounded theory approach whereby emergent themes were discussed between the authors 
to develop a coding frame that was adapted as new themes emerged from the data ( 
Charmaz 2006; Silverman 2009). Preliminary findings were also discussed in regular 
project meetings involving the wider study team. Two emergent themes were ‘patients 
and families complaining about care’ and ‘staff attitudes to patients’.
The issue of patients’ and families’ complaining about care issue emerged as an unso-
licited theme in the course of the research, as the authors began to notice that significant 
percentage (just over 47%) of staff across eight national case-study sites (n = 41 of 86 
transcripts) and greater percentage (almost 60%) of staff across seven of these eight 
national study sites (n = 41 of 76 transcripts) identified ‘patient and family complaints’ as 
events that had significant effect on both ‘attitudes to patients’ and ‘staff affect’. The 
exceptional study site was the midwifery service (mat) where no staff discussed com-
plaints raised by patients as affecting them or their relationships to patients. This service 
was therefore excluded from our present analysis; however, we return briefly to this 
exception in our discussion.
A secondary phase of manual coding of staff interview data was undertaken by M.A. 
to further develop the themes presented in this article: the connection between patients 
complaining and care relationships and understanding why patients complain. After 
agreement on these themes with J.M. and G.R., M.A. refined these themes into sub-
themes. We identified the theme of negative staff attitudes towards patients’ complaining 
and further subthemes of complaining as mistrust; complaining as disregard of staff and 
services; complaining as misjudgement; complaining as distress; complaining as advan-
tage-seeking and the outlier theme of complaining to improve things. More abstracted 
theoretical categories were developed by all authors by tracing variations, reoccurrence 
and the range of perspectives on themes and subthemes within and across transcripts. 
These categories were identified as ‘healthcare professionals’ expectations of care rela-
tionships’ and ‘healthcare professionals’ notions of patients’ care entitlements’, which 
run through the subthemes above.
Findings
The incidence and effects of complaining by patients
With few exceptions, healthcare professionals viewed events of patients’ complaining as 
damaging to themselves and to their wider relationships with their patients. A significant 
finding is that all experiences of patients complaining were highly emotive for front-line 
 608 
Health 22(6)
healthcare staff, often irrespective of their profession and seniority. Interviewees 
described feelings of ‘gutting’, ‘devastation’, ‘awful shame’, ‘disbelief’, ‘shock’ or 
‘incomprehension’ that a complaint should be raised about themselves or colleague and, 
as often, about the service where they worked. This view was not directly related to the 
progression of a complaint through clinical or general management structures or to the 
issues comprising the subject of a complaint.
According to our interviewees, it was rare for complaints about care raised by patients 
to involve more than immediate teams or to be progressed beyond the clinical division. 
There were only two cases where complaints about care were progressed beyond the 
clinical division described. Events of patients complaining ranged from letter writing to 
Table 1. Outline of Service and Number of Interviews Discussing Patients Who Complained.
‘LOW’ PERFORMING SERVICE 
(STAFF WELLBEING AND PATIENT 
EXPERIENCE)
‘HIGH’ PERFORMING SERVICE 
(STAFF WELLBEING AND PATIENT 
EXPERIENCE)
 
Total Interviews  
(n)
Interviews discussing 
patients who 
complained (n)
Total Interviews 
(n)
Interviews discussing 
patients who 
complained (n)
Trust A
(High 
performing) 
Older People’s Acute Medicine (opm)
Haematology (haem)
16
(senior and junior 
doctors and 
nurses)
9
(senior and junior 
doctors and 
nurses)
10
(senior and 
junior doctors 
and nurses)
5
(senior and junior 
doctors and 
nurses)
Trust B
(Low 
performing) 
Emergency Admissions (eau)
Midwifery (mat)
9
(senior and junior 
doctors and 
nurses)
7
(senior and junior 
doctors and 
nurses)
10
(senior and 
junior midwives)
0
Trust C
(High 
performing) 
Adult Community Nursing (cns1)
Community Matron Service (cms)
12
(senior and junior 
nurses)
7
(senior and junior 
nurses)
8
(senior nurses)
3
(senior nurses)
Trust D
(Low  
performing 
Intermediate Care Service (ics)
Adult community Nursing (cns2)
12
(senior and junior 
allied health 
professionals and 
nurses)
8
(senior and junior 
allied health 
professionals and 
nurses)
9
(senior and 
junior nurses)
2
(senior and junior 
nurses)
 
All interviews = 86
Interviews Discussing Patients Who Complained = 41
 Adams et al. 
609
senior ward or unit staff to a short direct or indirect conversations with colleagues or 
front-line care staff in another service. As shown in Table 2, interviewees described a 
wide variety of complaints made by patients – including complaints about direct care and 
service delivery issues – that affected their work and their wider attitudes towards 
patients. Complaints described included delayed discharges from hospital, overly busy 
wards, poor access to single rooms, limited availability of pain relief, inadequate per-
sonal care for frail patients, poor communication with relatives, and complaints about 
rude or careless staff. Indeed, many of the issues that generated complaints made by 
patients had already been identified in our wider study and were already widely recog-
nised as patient care or service delivery issues.
As Table 2 also illustrates, staff-reported issues raised by patients who complained 
often resonated with staff’s experiences of work in the service settings.
We found that staff who worked in service settings where overall work experiences 
and patient care experiences were poorer were more likely to describe complaints made 
by patients as having a negative effect on their work and on their wider attitudes towards 
patients. While some senior staff from all professional backgrounds noted that they had 
learned, over the years, to ‘stand back’ and ‘not feel the effects’ of a complaint, an issue 
common to 33 of the 41 transcripts was the lasting effects of at least one complaint made 
by a patient at some point in a healthcare professionals’ career.
Some interviewees indicated why events of patients complaining, even when about 
wider failings in services, might be upsetting for healthcare professionals. For example, 
a nurse manager in the emergency admissions unit remarked,
Complaints should give you an indication of how things are going … like what we should be 
addressing and can’t see for ourselves … but it’s when patients pick up on it and take it up 
themselves … it’s like we shouldn’t have let it get to that point. (eau:int.2)
As this nurse manager implies, the felt disruptions of a complaint raised by a patient 
was often less about the grounds of complaint and more about the event of complaint.
Expressed dissatisfactions with care provision by patients indicated that something 
was amiss in their relationships with healthcare professionals. Similarly, a community 
matron, reflecting on the effects of a patient’s relative raising a complaint about one of 
her colleagues, commented:
Well, it wasn’t the best [care] … so we can all learn from that one … but it’s the way he did it 
[complained] … why would he do it like that [go to the Head of Department] and not come to 
us? That’s the thing that really threw us all … and now we all think that it’s about how they felt 
about us really … that’s the really difficult thing. (cms:int.:6)
These reflections suggest that beyond the particular issues at stake in a patients’ com-
plaint about care, a significant concern for many care professionals is what is indicated 
by patients’ complaining: a rupture in the expected and professionally valued qualities of 
the patient–clinician relationship.
We examine this issue in the following section, focusing on how staff interpreted 
patients’ complaining as indications of mistrust or poor appreciation of their efforts to 
care.
 610 
Health 22(6)
Table 2. Service settings as experienced by staff and staff-reported issues of patients who complained.
‘LOW’ PERFORMING SERVICE
(STAFF WELLBEING AND PATIENT EXPERIENCE)
‘HIGH’ PERFORMING SERVICE
(STAFF WELLBEING AND PATIENT EXPERIENCE)
Trust A
(High performing)
 
Older People’s Acute Medicine (opm)
Haematology (haem)
Short-term, intensive, 
emotionally and physically 
demanding medical and nursing 
care; high nursing and staff 
turnover; inconsistent and 
limited medical staffing.
A high volume of family complaints 
were raised, in writing or verbally, 
to ward and local service managers.
Complaints most frequently 
described by staff were ‘poor
communication with relatives’; ‘poor 
personal care’ (feeding and changing 
of patients); ‘wards too busy; ‘wards 
too noisy’
Long-term (intermittent, 
life-long), emotionally and 
technically demanding medical, 
nursing and therapeutic care. 
High staffing levels with intense 
and complex interpersonal care 
of patients.
Written or spoken complaints about care 
were managed by the clinical director for 
the directorate or local service managers.
These were occasional but expected to be 
very upsetting for staff.
Complaints most frequently described by 
staff were
‘poor team co-ordination’; ‘poor clinical 
decisions’;
‘disorganised clinics’
Trust B
(Low performing)
 
Emergency Admissions (eau)
Midwifery (mat)
High intensity nursing and 
medical care; hort ‘dwell’ 
time; small group of frequent 
attenders. A ‘stress hotspot’ 
noted by
directors of services
Complaints were frequently raised 
in writing, verbally or through on-
line feedback systems.
Staff recalled complaints about ‘poor
facilities’; ‘rude staff’; ‘careless staff’; 
‘no single rooms’ ;‘trivial things’.
Midwifery-led services with 
strong ethos of
women-centred care supported 
by informal and
long-standing staff support 
networks and local
learning sets
Staff noted difficulties of meeting raised 
family expectations but none discussed 
complaints as a factors affecting them or 
their relationships with patients.
 Adams et al. 
611
‘LOW’ PERFORMING SERVICE
(STAFF WELLBEING AND PATIENT EXPERIENCE)
‘HIGH’ PERFORMING SERVICE
(STAFF WELLBEING AND PATIENT EXPERIENCE)
Trust C
(High performing)
 
Adult Community Nursing (cns1)
Community Matron Service (cms)
High volume of home to 
home visits to temporary and 
longstanding patients to meet 
service targets; enduring staff 
shortages and reliance on bank 
staff. Staff ‘disillusionment’ and 
‘apathy’ noted by directors of 
services.
Service managers, team leads and 
front-line staff noted the high 
volume of written and verbal 
complaints raised within the service.
Complaints frequently described by 
staff were ‘rude
staff’; ‘staff not caring’; ‘missed calls’; 
‘poor care’ and safety concerns.
Intensive care, highly skilled 
and low-volume nursinservice. 
Patients have highly complex 
health and
social care needs, remain in the 
service on a
long-term basis and develop 
close relationships with single 
professionals
A few matrons had been subjects of family 
complaints to service managers and private 
solicitors. These professionals and their 
immediate colleagues noted these events 
as highly traumatic to them.
Complaints more frequently described by 
staff were by families noting
‘care not explained’; ‘no communication 
with family’
Trust D
(Low performing
 
Intermediate Care Service (ics)
Adult community Nursing (cns2)
High-volume and geographically 
spread joint-funded (health/
social care) service to 
meet patients’ personal and 
rehabilitation care needs for 
up to six-weeks after hospital 
discharge.
Two recent external investigations 
of poor care supervision in one care 
home.
Staff considered management of 
complaints of patients and families 
had contributed towards work 
stress, staff sickness and high 
turnover and vacancies for qualified 
staff.
Complaints most frequently 
described by staff were ‘poor
planning’; ‘poor supervision of 
[residential] care’; ‘inadequate
advice before discharge’
In contrast to cns1, a lower 
volume of home to home 
visits with longstanding 
patients supported at home 
for community, palliative 
and terminal care delivered 
by three established, and 
collaborative nursing teams.
Complaints were rare in this service. 
Occasional verbal or written complaints to 
a nursing team manager were to do with 
‘misunderstandings’ or ‘family pressures’.
Table 2. (Continued)
 612 
Health 22(6)
Complaining as mistrust
We’ve had some humdinger of complaints [about care in residential homes] … but those 
families didn’t come to us so it makes you wonder what’s wrong that they didn’t come to us … 
that’s the bigger sort of question for us now. (ics:int 4)
The comments of this intermediate care nurse highlight one way in which complaints 
made by patients were rationalised by staff: as revealing a ‘bigger sort of question’ about 
patient mistrust in their authority or expertise. This interpretation of why complaints hap-
pened was more frequent in community health services, but also arose for other inter-
viewees; doctors, nurses and therapists who worked in the haematology/oncology 
hospital wards. These clinical areas were distinctive because practices and conditions of 
patient care work often relied on ongoing care relationships being sustained between 
individual patients and a particular staff team overtime. In these services, the ideals of 
professional care work relied on interactions with individual patients that progressively 
build confidence in professional expertise. In such circumstances, a complaint raised by 
a patient indicated a profound loss of trust. Thus, a haematologist and senior ward sister 
both reflected on one family’s complaining about treatment decisions for their son as 
about mistrust. The ward sister described the case as ‘one boy’s family just lost it with 
us’ (haem:int6); while the haematologist reflected:
so now there are going to be problems … like that point of losing faith … like now we are on 
different sides. (haem:int5)
Also, in their discussions about such events, nurses, doctors and therapists spoke of 
their naivety or incompetence in anticipating their patients’ declining confidence in 
them. Similarly, a community nurse recalled, from many years previously, the event of a 
complaint raised by a patient who she often visited. The patient complained about her 
advising him on the adjustment of a clinical procedure so that it would be more conveni-
ent for him:
I thought I’d handled the situation very well but later found out the patient obviously wasn’t 
happy. He didn’t say he wasn’t happy but he basically went to the hospital and told them. I 
misread the situation, because I really didn’t realise that he was so upset that he would do 
something about it and I felt that the patient hadn’t been totally honest with me. I did feel hurt. 
I felt betrayed really … I didn’t see it coming. (cns2:int3)
Staff with different disciplinary backgrounds, and various years of experience, spoke of 
the gradually acquired informal skills for anticipating situations where trust begins to dis-
solve and complaining is likely to happen. Thus, an occupational therapist commented:
sometimes it’s hard to tell what patients are playing at but you can often see it [a complaint] 
coming … you spot the rumblings … like the looks or something … when you say or suggest 
something … so now I’m like ‘I can feel one coming on today’ I’m always on tenterhooks now 
and that’s about gaining experience about patients really. (ics:int7)
 Adams et al. 
613
This ‘gaining experience of patients’ was described more candidly by another mem-
ber of the intermediate care team as
just sort of finding out that families can really stab you in the back and not even know they’re 
doing it. (ics:int9)
Complaining as disregard of staff and services
In hospital settings where care provision relied less on ongoing interpersonal relation-
ships with patients, events of complaint were more often rationalised by care profession-
als as signs of ingratitude or disregard for the individual efforts or services involved in 
providing care.
Thus, an emergency admissions practitioner commented,
We get a lot of people that clearly feel they want to write and complain, so it’s nice to get that 
other side. That is the thanks and gratitude. (eau:int3)
Staff in all services remarked on the felt tensions that they experienced between the 
increasing expectations of those receiving care and the declining resources for meeting 
these expectations. At the same time, hospital nurses and doctors, in particular, expected 
patients to recognise, and adjust their expectations to, the time and service constraints 
that staff had to deal with. Thus, one consultant in the acute medicine for the elderly unit 
commented,
we’ve had some very positive feedback … so there are families who manage to see through the 
stress the staff are under, because it is never perfect [because] there’s not enough resource but 
they can see we do our best. (opm:int5)
This expectation that patients should accommodate service constraints rather than 
voice their concerns about service limitations was notable in service areas where the 
efforts of staff were more visible. For example, in the haematology chemotherapy day 
service, senior physicians noted the frequent delays in referrals and treatments but as one 
of them explained,
they all know that we are trying to get them through and they know that it’s hard for all of us 
really. (haem:int4)
This sense that patients’ should accept care and treatment delays because staff are 
‘doing their best’ was echoed by community nursing staff. As one district nurse described,
So you’ll get somebody who needs pain relief and you won’t get a call [from the call centre] for 
an hour and then no full address and the family are saying ‘what took you so long?’ and we have 
done our best and they have to see that we have other families as well as them. So then we take 
a breath and speak to them and most of the time people do see it from our side and they back 
down and they’re very sorry and thankful. (cns2:int2)
 614 
Health 22(6)
This nurse indicated how events of patients’ complaining about the limitations of a 
service rather than the practices of healthcare staff themselves became located and nego-
tiated within immediate care relationships. However, we also found that healthcare pro-
fessionals’ assumptions about, and behaviours towards, patients who complained was 
influenced by their uncertainties and concerns about patients’ motives for complaining.
Complaining as misjudgement
Interviewees from all services often noted their felt lack of influence over those aspects 
of care that can lead patients to complain. Senior doctors and nurses, in particular, noted 
their declining capacity to address patients’ dissatisfactions as aspects of care manage-
ment were felt to be ‘actually beyond my control’, ‘coming from somewhere else’ or ‘out 
of our hands’. One interviewee, a senior doctor in older peoples’ acute medicine, com-
mented that the complaints raised by patients ‘just scapegoat those people who are trying 
to give them the best’ (opm:int5). Also, in some services, notably in emergency admis-
sions and older people’s medicine, interviewees often discussed patients’ complaints in 
terms of the limited public understanding of the complexity or urgency of acute care. 
Thus, a staff nurse in emergency admissions noted,
It’s always a problem with ‘discharges’, they can’t go home when they want. We have to go up 
to Pharmacy, obviously the patients don’t understand, they think they can just get their tablets, 
that’s it and go but there’s a lot of planning into a discharge.
It could be two hours getting it all together and the ‘discharges’ are like, ‘I’ve got a taxi ordered 
at 4 o’clock’. Well it doesn’t work that way. (eau:int 5)
In services where resources were particularly stretched and where reported com-
plaints was felt to operate as a proxy of clinical and service performance for managers 
(emergency admissions; older people’s medicine; intermediate community care), both 
nurses and senior doctors felt that the time demanded to attend to complaints about care 
diverted attention away from real clinical priorities. A senior nurse in emergency admis-
sions noted,
Half the patients that we see, we make a massive difference to their health. We stop them 
arresting. And it’s not being dramatic, we really do and half the patients are oblivious to what 
you’ve done and they’re more bothered about, ‘they haven’t even offered me a bloody cup of 
tea for five hours …’ and you think, ‘oh, my God, if only you knew’. (eau:int3)
The assumption that patients who complain often lack insight into their own care and 
treatment priorities was echoed in the comments of a senior consultant in the same 
service:
A lot of it is, ‘Can you take this venflon out?’ I get that every day. Or, ‘My chair is not very 
comfortable’. I had that this morning. Or, ‘when will I be moved to the ward? Or, when can I 
go home?’ There’s nothing that I can do about that but this is the stuff of written complaints you 
know. (eau:int1)
 Adams et al. 
615
A view based on misunderstanding or ignorance about care practices or priorities was 
indicated more often by interviewees working in acute care for the elderly. Ward staff 
elaborated that patients and families complained because they ‘missed the whole picture’ 
and ‘only saw just in front of them’, thus failing to appreciate why particular care deci-
sions were made. Staff also tended to dismiss the complaints voiced by families on the 
grounds that family members were only partial witnesses of what actually happened on 
the ward, because of limited visiting hours, patient privacy, and the possibility of patients 
recalling and reporting events inaccurately.
The notion that ‘some people complain about just about anything’ was another way 
in which interviewees rationalised patients’ complaining. This sense of randomness of 
the complaint furthered the view of patients as unreliable commentators on the quality 
of care given. Thus, a senior nurse and complaints manager in emergency admissions 
remarked,
It always amazes me how you can have two patients in a bed beside each other at the exact same 
time, one will have a good experience, and one will have a bad experience. I don’t know 
whether it’s down to individual patient expectation and whether we have let them all down in 
some ways so it’s difficult to rationalise sometimes. (eau:int2)
Interviewees in all services also reflected on how they negotiated the increasing 
expectations of patients and employers for them to respond to complaint even if this ran 
counter to their clinical priorities. The notion of a ‘front stage’ service delivery and ‘back 
stage’ clinical priority was indicated by senior professional staff. Thus, one senior physi-
cian and clinical manager commented,
It’s as soon as the food’s gone cold or someone’s waiting then there’s a complaint … I think if 
you walk in a ward that’s clean, you can forget about the medical care, but, you know, if it’s 
clean and tidy, the relatives will be happy, you know, they get their food on time, you know, 
that’s fine. (opm:int2)
While clinical managers noted patient sensitivity to ‘front stage’ care and sought to 
improve this with training interventions, some staff expressed their frustrations at patients 
whose expectations of important aspects of care were misinformed. One relatively junior 
nurse working in the older people’s medical ward spoke about the risk of ‘front stage’ 
service overtaking more fundamental care priorities:
It’s generally good [here] but maybe that’s because the patient isn’t aware of what it could be. 
So although the patient is very happy, they’ve been lying in bed having drinks and food, but 
they’re not aware that actually their experience could be much, much better if their drug is on 
time, which they might not know about. (opm:int2)
Complaining as distress
Another way that interviewees rationalised complaints made by patients was as a symp-
tom of distress caused by illness. Understood in these terms, the professional care task 
was to deal with emotional upset with empathy and interpersonal skills. Interviewees 
 616 
Health 22(6)
from the most time pressured services, notably emergency admissions and older people’s 
medicine, often felt that they ‘took the blame’, or ‘the brunt’ or ‘got the backlash’ for 
patient anxieties expressed as complaint. By contrast, interviewees from services where 
relational care was recognised as important, understood the issue of complaint arising 
from patient distress differently. Thus, a senior nurse in haematology commented,
They are mindless complaints because at the end of it there are patients that come in and they’re 
so stressed that they want … that’s just how they find themselves. (haem:int3)
In all services, interviewees who were more experienced described the particular skills 
required to respond to patients who had complained about one issue because they were actu-
ally distressed about wider events. For two consultants in older people’s medicine, this 
meant attending personally to those family members who appeared more likely to raise a 
complaint. A ward sister in emergency admissions described her approach to reducing writ-
ten complaints as ‘just listening to unhappy patients’ (eau: 3). Other staff in hospital and 
community services described their work as ‘fielding’ and ‘diffusing’, ‘just apologising and 
finding it [the apology] easy to say’ and ‘letting [complainants] get it out of their system’.
This ‘listening’ work, as described by several interviewees, often involved simply accept-
ing the version of events given by complainants. Thus, a haematology registrar recalled a 
meeting with relatives who had complained about care given to their deceased father:
They had questions about what happened on the day [that he died] and you can understand that 
the family might be upset and they need to grieve and get all of this out of the way, but 
particularly when you think that you’ve done a really good job, [it] is quite disheartening. Like 
you have to remind yourself that these people are grieving, and even though I want to stand up 
and say, ‘We didn’t do this, we did this, and we did this, I can’t say that’. (haem:int1)
Staff in services with high patient ‘through put’ discussed the value of accommodat-
ing complainants’ emotional needs in more cynical terms: to ‘cover yourself’ or ‘antici-
pate and avert’, and ‘to smile and deal with it’. Here also, different staff spoke of the need 
to appear contrite so as to protect themselves or their junior colleagues from intimidation 
by both complainants and by some senior managers.
Complaining as advantage-seeking
In the more resource-squeezed services, interviewees described complaints as a means 
by which patients sought advantage over others in the timing or quality of their care. 
Particularly in emergency admissions, interviewees shared the view that patients sought 
to secure best services by threatening to ‘write a complaint’. Here also interviewees 
spoke of their personal vulnerability to aggravated and complaining patients with several 
senior staff recalling a dread of ward rounds where they all felt ‘ganged up on’ by dis-
satisfied patients. Several interviewees discussed the same examples of senior consult-
ants being intimidated by families and unable to respond to this because ‘you’d be 
frowned upon about being assertive and dealing with it in case they actually do raise a 
complaint’ [eau:int3]. This sense of shared vulnerability to threats to formalise com-
plaints by patients in some service settings was accompanied by comments that such 
 Adams et al. 
617
services ‘harden you up’. Thus, one ward sister noted the need for those working in this 
service to listen to patients but ‘not take it too seriously’ and ‘not to get too involved’ 
(eau: int2). However, emergency admissions staff, nurses and doctors, also noted that the 
threat of a patient or family to ‘write a complaint’, coupled with management directives 
to reduce ‘complaints’, affected clinical judgement, often to the detriment of other 
patients. For example, a senior nurse commented,
It’s unfair that the people that are truly sick and very ill sometimes have to wait an unacceptable 
length of time and when you look at the whole bulk of people that are here you could weed 
quite a few out who don’t need investigation, that don’t need this, that don’t need that, but 
expect it. And doctors, and us now as nurse practitioners, over-investigate people because you 
dare not. Because there is always the feeling that they’ll complain. It’s almost like a threat. 
They dictate exactly what they want even if it’s not necessarily right. (eau:int3)
In this service also, staff described the time-consuming work of negotiation over 
available resources in order to prevent patients from formalising a complaint that took 
‘time away from other patients’. Medical consultants described situations where limited 
resources, like single side rooms reserved for the patient with infectious diseases, were 
found for those threatening to formalise a complaint to hospital managers. Similarly, in 
the two community health settings where two families had progressed their complaints 
to service managers, and outside regulatory agencies, staff felt particularly vulnerable 
when organising or giving care, and discussed the compromises in judgement they felt it 
necessary to make when families voiced complaints about receiving limited care for their 
relatives. Thus, the mental health practitioner in the intermediate care team commented,
The fear of complaints puts power in the hands of a few and it’s only the ones who know their 
way around the system, are genned up, who we end up listening to and that’s wrong. (ics:int3)
In this service interviewees often noted their important role as decision-makers in the 
rationing of hard-pressed public resources and the inequities that arose when service 
managers’ priorities were driven by the reduction of ‘patient complaints’.
Complaining to improve things
A far less common way that interviewees rationalised the complainants’ motives was to 
acknowledge that ‘they have a point’. Particularly in hospital settings, front-line staff 
generally felt that they could do no more than offer a cursory apologies to complainants. 
Few interviewees in community or acute services felt willing or able to agree with com-
plainants or explore with them care and service deficiencies. Thus, while some staff in 
particularly hard-pressed services noted the need to ‘increase public awareness of the 
pressures on staff and patients here’ (ics:int4), other clinical managers considered such 
dialogue inappropriate. A unit manager in emergency admissions noted,
you get staff blatantly telling waiting patients that we’re very short-staffed but at the end of the 
day patients don’t want to hear this, as it’s not their fault that we’re short staffed and it’s not 
professional and staff need to get on with it, the patients don’t need to hear it. (eau:int4)
 618 
Health 22(6)
By contrast, a senior clinical manager in older people’s medicine indicated a different 
reason for avoiding any candid discussion of service shortcomings with complainants:
When I worked here years ago we only had one complaint and it was different then.
We were all horrified, absolutely horrified, people were in tears about it but now you hear 
nurses just saying ‘Well, if you don’t like it, here’s a complaint leaflet’ and it goes up the chain. 
[Years ago] we were mortified and we had to do something about it [ourselves]. (opm:int 4)
These contested claims over the responsibilities of care professionals for acting on 
complaints made by patients indicate their ongoing dissonance over the values of patient 
care and the interest of their service or employing organisation. Indeed, several inter-
viewees from some services (notably intermediate care and emergency admissions) dis-
cussed the events surrounding a patient’s complaint about care as these were felt to reveal 
the loyalty of managers to them. In these services, staff felt betrayed by their organisation 
as well as distrusted by many patients. Thus, an intermediate care nurse recalled that
the thing was how it [a grievance raised by a family] all panned out with them [she signals to 
offices of service managers] because that really taught us a thing or two with where loyalties 
lie. (ics:int4)
Notably, nurses and doctors in one service setting, haematology, gave greater cre-
dence to the constructive potential of complaints made by patients. Here, interviewees 
described how repeated complaints about ward catering and cleaning had inspired them 
to petition for change by involving complainants in this work. A senior nurse explained 
the rationale for such involvement:
Particularly for haematology patients they do have very specific needs and, yeah, because they 
understand their illness probably better than we do, they’re very observant, checking that 
everything’s been done, they have the experience. (haem:int5)
These reflections indicate how more fundamental assumptions about patients’ capaci-
ties and expertise condition the ways in which care professionals rationalise the events 
and motivations of complaint. In this exceptional service, where ‘expertise by experi-
ence’ was recognised in both decision-making and care practices, patients’ grievances 
could, in particular circumstances, be taken seriously and patients could be envisaged as 
valuable collaborators for improving hospital services.
Discussion
Repertoires of care and complaint
Our findings have identified and explored the underlying repertoires of care evoked by 
professionals as they seek to understand events of patients complaining. We found that 
such events are almost always considered damaging – to healthcare professionals them-
selves and, potentially, to care and service arrangements for other patients. This view of 
 Adams et al. 
619
complaining as disruptive is particularly marked in services where the care of patients 
and experiences of work were already felt to be compromised (our poor performing 
services).
We found that healthcare professionals tended to understand events of patients’ com-
plaining as indicative of wider breaches in the clinician–patient relationship – notably, in 
the sense of patients’ trust in and appreciation of professional care work. This was a 
recurring concern for staff who felt that their work or relationships with patients were 
affected by patients complaining, and this concern was often irrespective of the issues 
raised in complaints by patients.
Additionally, healthcare professionals also sought to understand the ‘real’ motive for 
a patient complaining and to develop and legitimate an appropriate response according 
to ‘what matters’ (Mesman, 2008: 198). We found an array of moral positions elaborated 
by healthcare professionals in relation to patients’ motives. We identified some relation-
ship between the local structural features and tacit ethos of patient care of healthcare 
delivery and the legitimation of appropriate response to patients who complained. 
Furthermore we noted that, from the point of view of the majority of our staff interview-
ees, the complaining of patients bore limited relationship to care or service realities or 
improvement priorities.
Service settings and patients’ motives
Our findings highlight the significance of service settings and occupational differences, 
rather than professional distinctions, for understanding how complaints raised by patients 
were rationalised by staff. Considering how staff in the eight different services (see Table 
2) tended to make sense of the complaints made by patients, a series of general trends are 
notable. Staff were more likely to interpret complaints as a sign of breached relationships 
of trust in clinical areas such as haematology and community health services where 
ongoing care relationships, rather than ‘on off’ care encounters, were more common (cf. 
Potter and McKinlay, 2005). In these service settings where there was often greater 
‘dwell time’ and where the relational care of patients was recognised, the art of fostering 
interpersonal relationships of trust, and of anticipating discontent, was emphasised by 
staff, irrespective of professional background. In services where the ideal of relational 
care carried greater purchase for staff, as in haematology and palliative care services, 
complaints were more often interpreted as signs of distress or misunderstanding. By 
contrast, in services such as emergency admissions where transient care encounters pre-
dominated, staff more often assumed that complaints happened when patients failed to 
notice or appreciate their efforts to care. In services with more limited resources, staff 
tended to assume that patients complained to manipulate improved access. In domicili-
ary care settings, in contrast to wards or clinics, the work demands of staff, and the rela-
tive needs of others, were often invisible to patients and so were often expected to be 
overlooked.
As previously noted, it was rare for a complaint raised by patients to be attended to ‘in 
and of’ itself: as legitimate knowledge or experience of care. Instances when patients’ 
complaints were taken at face value were reported only by staff, doctors, nurses and 
therapists, working in a haematology ward that fostered a distinctive and unorthodox 
 620 
Health 22(6)
vision of patients. His setting was exceptional for promoting a vision of patients that 
stressed the values of patient autonomy, self-care and expertise by experience. Here, 
complaints made by patients about services were harnessed as authoritative observations 
that required, or permitted, care professionals to work with managers to address their 
concerns in order to improve things.
Professionalism and patient criticism
At a more critical theoretical level, our findings offer insight into how contemporary 
healthcare professionals positioned themselves – affectively, socially and politically – in 
relation to the critical voices of their patients. In particular we suggest that professionals’ 
ongoing reflections on ‘underlying’ patients’ motives and so ‘what matters’ in term of 
their response resonates with wider socio-political realignments of professional power 
and authority in late modern healthcare systems.
Following Elston (2009) we note that, at least for front-line healthcare professionals, 
the restructuring of prevailing expertise and moral authority in response to consumer-
orientated regulation of their work is more complex than Freidson (1994) suggests. 
Indeed, professionals’ interpretations of patients’ complaints, as signs of breaches in 
patients’ trust or appreciation of them, evokes claims of liberal professional authority 
exercised by competent, ethical, conscientious and ever-reliable experts. Similarly, con-
siderations of patients’ motives for complaining were generally discussed in terms of 
mistake, irrationality or illegitimacy. Our interviewees indicate that recent ideological 
commitments to ‘patient partnership’ (Davies, 2003 in Elston, 2009) must often be 
trumped by the exercise of other knowledge claims, such as professional expertise and 
authority in technological, emotional or bureaucratic aspects of patient care. Thus, when 
a complaint about care was interpreted in terms of complainants’ ignorance of service 
complexities or clinical priorities, staff claimed moral authority over aspects of care that 
was more important than, and extended beyond, ‘front stage’ customer service delivery. 
Similarly, when complaints were rationalised as expressions of emotional distress over 
illness, care professionals positioned themselves as those who were able to placate and 
mediate patients’ upset and anguish, as an important part of their role as care-givers, but 
without having to acknowledge the grounds of their concerns (Mulcahy, 2003). Also, 
when complaints were rationalised as a means of seeking advantage in access to time or 
services, care professionals positioned themselves as the arbiters of resources for the 
benefit of the general patient community (Allen et al., 2015).
At the same time, however, front-line healthcare professionals were inevitably situ-
ated in the often contradictory popular and managerial expectations of contemporary 
professional work as a ‘system of service’. These include, as Davies (2003 in Elston, 
2009: 31) describes, ‘face work’ to sustain public trust in or avert popular criticism of, 
ever more friable systems well as the bureaucratic rationalisation of care in these sys-
tems. Concerns with, and repertoires for, patient motive for complaining indicate how 
healthcare professionals seek to interpret the expectations of professional healthcare at a 
time when ‘patients’ comprise complex political, legislative and administrative catego-
ries of contemporary healthcare recipients. Milewa (2009) and Mold (2012) trace the 
various framings of patients as citizens, experts, users or customers in NHS policy. Our 
 Adams et al. 
621
interviewees variously elaborated these perspectives on patients’ motives for complain-
ing (as service consumers; vulnerable patients; advantage-takers or as responsible citi-
zens) and thus exercised claim over appropriate moral position and expertise (as 
hard-pressed care providers; comforters; service gate-keepers or patient advocates).
Strengths and limitations of this study
A particular strength of this study is the in-depth investigation of healthcare profession-
als’ narratives of their experiences of, and attitudes towards, patients’ complaining about 
care. A range of healthcare professionals, of differing levels of seniority, were included 
in the study and the interpretation of findings drew from our wider study findings to 
understand how professionals’ experiences and attitudes were differently configured in 
eight local service areas. This approach provided a strong contextualisation of interview 
findings and new insights into the dynamics between patient-mediated quality improve-
ment work.
Since this study purposively sampled healthcare professionals who felt that the com-
plaining of patients affected their experiences of work or general relationships with 
patients, the resulting sample is not representative of, and does not indicate a prevalence 
in, the wider population of NHS healthcare professionals. Also our study only reports 
findings from the NHS staff interviews subgroup, perspectives of patients and families, 
researchers’ observations and other data sources are not considered here. A methodologi-
cal limitation of the study is that it is developed from a secondary phase of analysis of a 
study with broader aims and objectives. Specific questions about patients complaining 
were not included in the interview schedule; this topic emerged spontaneously. Therefore, 
the detail and breadth of data on this topic is not consistent across all service areas or for 
all interviewees. Notably, we were unable to explain why complaints about care was not 
considered significant to the work experience of staff in our maternity services case 
study (see Table 2). This gap in our data is significant given that NHS maternity services 
generally tend to have high incidences of poor satisfaction with care (Allen et al., 2015).
Conclusion
Our analysis offers novel and empirically grounded insights into how care professionals 
rationalise patients’ complaints about care. Drawing from interview data collected from 
different care settings, we have explored the particularities and contingencies of these 
rationalisations in terms of wider historical revisions in care professional, management 
and patient relationships, and in terms of local care structures, values and material con-
straints. We found that local workplace structures, values and experiences were more 
significant than fixed professional or disciplinary distinctions for understanding how our 
interviewees made sense of complaints made by patients in everyday care work.
These findings indicate some of the obstacles to using patient complaints for clinical 
team and organisational learning for improvements in the quality of care. We suggest that 
current consumer orientated/learning approaches that advise staff to ‘take complaints 
seriously’ or ‘receive them as gifts’ are unlikely, in themselves, to convince care profes-
sionals of the value of patient insight and experiential knowledge. The development of 
 622 
Health 22(6)
‘complaint management’ models requires research-informed awareness of how such 
approaches inform, revise or retrench subjects’ positions within the particularities of 
local service relationships.
More generally, our study indicates the potential for more sustained analyses of 
 
what happens to the critical voices of patients as these offer important insights into the 
dilemmas of virtue and of practice that accompany the rise of ‘new professionalism’ in 
healthcare. As Elston (2009) notes, this professionalism relies on the conditional and 
meritocratic quality of trustworthiness that is demonstrated in both expert judgements 
and in partnership with patients. At the same time, healthcare professionals work 
assumes ‘patient facing’ responsibilities for increasingly complex divisions of labour 
 
in patient care and for ever tighter rationing of care resources. In this sense, patients’ 
complaints about care articulate an uncomfortable contradiction in what it means to be 
a healthcare professional.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the healthcare staff and patients who participated in our study.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The views and opinions expressed are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NIHR SDO programme or the Department of 
Health.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article: This paper presents data collected as part of a project funded by 
the National Institute for Health Research Service Delivery and Organisation programme (project 
number 08/1819/213).
References
Aberbach JD and Christensen T (2005) Citizens and consumers: An NPM dilemma. Public 
Management Review 7(2): 225–246.
Allen HT, Odelius A, Hunter BJ, et al. (2015) Gatekeeping access to the midwifery unit: Managing 
complaints by bending the rules. Health 19: 652–669.
Annandale EC (1989) The malpractice crisis and the doctor-patient relationship. Sociology of 
Health & Illness 11(1): 1–23.
Care Quality Commission (CQC) (2014) Complaints Matter. Newcastle upon Tyne: CQC 
Publications.
Charmaz K (2006) Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative 
Analysis. London: SAGE.
Elston MA (2009) Remaking a trustworthy medical profession in twenty-first-century Britain? In: 
Gabe J and Calnan M (eds) The New Sociology of the Health Service. London; New York: 
Routledge, pp. 17–36.
Freidson E (1994) Professionalism Reborn: Theory, Prophecy and Policy. Cambridge: Polity 
Press.
 Adams et al. 
623
Gallagher TH and Mazor KM (2015) Taking complaints seriously: Using the patient safety lens. 
BMJ Quality & Safety 24(6): 352–355.
Giddens A (1990) The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Habermas J (1981) New social movements. Telos 49: 33–37.
Healthwatch (2013) Suffering in silence: Listening to consumer experience of the health and social 
care complaints system. Available at: http://www.healthwatch.co.uk/sites/healthwatch.co.uk/
files/final_complaints_large_print.pdf
Holstein JA and Gubrium JF (2011) Animating interview narratives. In: Silverman D (ed.) 
Qualitative Research. London: SAGE, pp. 149–167.
Hrisos S and Thomson R (2013) Seeing it from both sides: Do approaches to involving patients in 
improving their safety risk damaging the trust between patients and healthcare professionals? 
An interview study. PLoS ONE 8(11): pe80759.
Maben J, Peccei R, Adams M, et al. (2011) Patient experiences of care and the effect of staff moti-
vation, affect and wellbeing. Report no. SDO/213/2008. November 2011. London: Service 
Delivery and Organisation, National Institute of Health Research.
Mesman J (2008) Uncertainty in Medical Innovation: Experienced Pioneers in Neonatal Care. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Milewa T (2009) Health care, consumerism and the politics of identity. In: Gabe J and Calnan M 
(eds) The New Sociology of the Health Service. London; New York, Routledge, pp. 161–176.
Mold A (2012) Patients’ rights and the National Health Service in Britain,1960s–1980s. American 
Journal of Public Health 102(11): 2030–2038.
Mulcahy L (2003) Disputing Doctors: The Socio-Legal Dynamics of Complaints about Medical 
Care. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Potter SJ and McKinlay JB (2005) From a relationship to encounter: An examination of longitu-
dinal and lateral dimensions in the doctor–patient relationship. Social Science & Medicine 
61(2): 465–479.
Schlesinger M, Grob R and Shaller D (2015) Using patient-reported information to improve clini-
cal practice. Health Services Research 50(Suppl. 2): 2116–2154.
Silverman D (2009) Interpreting Qualitative Data. 3rd ed. London: SAGE.
Author biographies
Mary Adams PhD, BSc (Hons), PGCE, RN, RM is postdoctoral research fellow at the Centre for 
Implementation Science, King’s College, London. Her research focuses on healthcare profession-
als’ experiences and practices concerning patient safety and quality improvement interventions.
Jill Maben, OBE. Phd, MSc, BA (Hons); PGCE, RN, is a professor of Nursing Research, in the 
Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery at King’s College, London. Her research 
focuses on a range of healthcare organisation and workforce issues, particularly staff wellbeing 
and staff and patient experience.
Glenn Robert, PhD, MSc, BA (Combined Hons.) is a professor of Healthcare Quality and 
Innovation in the Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing & Midwifery at King’s College London. 
His research draws on the fields of organisational studies and organisational sociology, and incor-
porates the study of innovations in the organisation and delivery of health care services as well as 
quality improvement interventions.
