 without clinical findings consistent with congenital Zika syndrome 
who were born to mothers without laboratory evidence of possible 
Zika virus infection. Infants in the first two scenarios should receive 
further testing and evaluation for Zika virus, whereas for the third 
group, further testing and clinical evaluation for Zika virus are 
not recommended. Health care providers should remain alert for 
abnormal findings (e.g., postnatal-onset microcephaly and eye 
abnormalities without microcephaly) in infants with possible con-
genital Zika virus exposure without apparent abnormalities at birth.
* Possible Zika virus exposure includes travel to, or residence in an area with mosquitoborne 
Zika virus transmission or sex without the use of condoms with a partner who has 
traveled to or resides in an area with mosquitoborne Zika virus transmission.
† Laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy is defined 
as 1) Zika virus infection detected by a Zika virus RNA nucleic acid test (NAT) on 
any maternal, placental, or fetal specimen (referred to as NAT-confirmed), or 
2) diagnosis of Zika virus infection,  timing of infection cannot be determined or 
unspecified flavivirus infection, timing of infection cannot be determined by 
serologic tests on a maternal specimen (i.e., positive/equivocal Zika virus 
immunoglobulin M [IgM] and Zika virus plaque reduction neutralization test 
[PRNT] titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT value; or negative Zika virus 
IgM, and positive or equivocal dengue virus IgM, and Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, 
regardless of dengue virus PRNT titer). The use of PRNT for confirmation of Zika 
virus infection, including in pregnant women, is not routinely recommended in 
Puerto Rico (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.html).
CDC has updated its interim guidance for U.S. health care 
providers caring for infants with possible congenital Zika virus 
infection (1) in response to recently published updated guidance 
for health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible 
Zika virus exposure (2), unknown sensitivity and specificity of 
currently available diagnostic tests for congenital Zika virus infec-
tion, and recognition of additional clinical findings associated with 
congenital Zika virus infection. All infants born to mothers with 
possible Zika virus exposure* during pregnancy should receive a 
standard evaluation at birth and at each subsequent well-child visit 
including a comprehensive physical examination, age-appropriate 
vision screening and developmental monitoring and screening 
using validated tools (3–5), and newborn hearing screen at birth, 
preferably using auditory brainstem response (ABR) methodology 
(6). Specific guidance for laboratory testing and clinical evaluation 
are provided for three clinical scenarios in the setting of possible 
maternal Zika virus exposure: 1) infants with clinical findings 
consistent with congenital Zika syndrome regardless of maternal 
testing results, 2) infants without clinical findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome who were born to mothers with labo-
ratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection,† and 3) infants 
Update: Interim Guidance for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Management of Infants 
with Possible Congenital Zika Virus Infection — United States, October 2017
Tolulope Adebanjo, MD1,2; Shana Godfred-Cato, DO3; Laura Viens, MD4; Marc Fischer, MD5; J. Erin Staples, MD, PhD5;  
Wendi Kuhnert-Tallman, PhD6; Henry Walke, MD7; Titilope Oduyebo, MD8; Kara Polen, MPH9; Georgina Peacock, MD10;  
Dana Meaney-Delman, MD6; Margaret A. Honein, PhD9; Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD11; Cynthia A. Moore, MD, PhD9; Contributors
INSIDE
1100 HIV Testing, Linkage to HIV Medical Care, and 
Interviews for Partner Services Among Women — 
61 Health Department Jurisdictions, United States, 
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, 2015
1105 Tdap Vaccination Coverage During Pregnancy —  
Selected Sites, United States, 2006–2015
1109 Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices Related to 
Ebola Virus Disease at the End of a National 
Epidemic — Guinea, August 2015
1116 Reporting Deaths Among Children Aged <5 Years 
After the Ebola Virus Disease Epidemic — Bombali 
District, Sierra Leone, 2015–2016
1119 Notes from the Field: Counterfeit Percocet–Related 
Overdose Cluster — Georgia, June 2017
1121 Announcement
1122 QuickStats
Continuing Education examination available at  
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted_info.html#weekly. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Weekly / Vol. 66 / No. 41 
October 20, 2017
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
1090 
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Report title]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Brenda Fitzgerald, MD, Director 
William R. Mac Kenzie, MD, Acting Associate Director for Science  
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Weekly)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Jacqueline Gindler, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor 
Douglas W. Weatherwax, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Soumya Dunworth, PhD, Kristy Gerdes, MPH, Teresa M. Hood, MS,  
Technical Writer-Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Paul D. Maitland, Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang, 
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
the setting of laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection in 
the mother or infant, including eye findings in infants without 
microcephaly or other brain anomalies (16), postnatal-onset 
microcephaly in infants born with normal head circumfer-
ences (17), postnatal-onset hydrocephalus in infants born with 
microcephaly (18), abnormalities on sleep electroencephalo-
gram (EEG) in some infants with microcephaly who did not 
have recognized seizures (19), and diaphragmatic paralysis in 
infants born with microcephaly and arthrogryposis (20–22).
Zika Virus Laboratory Testing
Laboratory testing for Zika virus has a number of limitations. 
Zika virus RNA is only transiently present in body fluids; thus, 
negative nucleic acid testing (NAT) does not rule out infection. 
Serologic testing is affected by timing of sample collection: a 
negative immunoglobulin M (IgM) serologic test result does 
not rule out infection because the serum specimen might have 
been collected before the development of IgM antibodies, or 
after these antibodies have waned. Conversely, IgM antibod-
ies might be detectable for months after the initial infection; 
for pregnant women, this can make it difficult to determine 
if infection occurred before or during a current pregnancy. In 
addition, cross-reactivity of the Zika virus IgM antibody tests 
with other flaviviruses can result in a false-positive test result, 
especially in persons previously infected with or vaccinated 
against a related flavivirus, further complicating interpretation 
(23,24). Limitations of Zika virus IgM antibody assays that were 
Congenital Zika Virus Infection
Zika virus infection during pregnancy can cause serious 
fetal brain anomalies and microcephaly (7). Among infants 
with substantial loss of brain volume, severe microcephaly 
and partial collapse of the bones of the upper skull or cranium 
produce a distinctive physical appearance. Characteristic 
findings in the brain and spinal cord include thin cerebral 
cortices with enlarged ventricles and increased extra-axial fluid 
collections, intracranial calcifications particularly between 
the cortex and subcortex, abnormal gyral patterns, absent or 
hypoplastic corpus callosum, hypoplasia of the cerebellum or 
cerebellar vermis, and hypoplasia of the ventral cord (8–10). 
Reported anomalies of the anterior and posterior eye include 
microphthalmia, coloboma, intraocular calcifications, optic 
nerve hypoplasia and atrophy, and macular scarring with 
focal pigmentary retinal mottling (11–13). Some infants with 
suspected congenital Zika virus infection without structural 
eye lesions have cortical visual impairment, attributable to 
abnormalities in the visual system of the brain (13). Other 
reported neurologic sequelae include congenital limb con-
tractures, dysphagia, sensorineural hearing loss, epilepsy, 
and abnormalities of tone or movement, including marked 
hypertonia and signs of extrapyramidal involvement (14,15). 
Currently, there is no evidence suggesting that delayed-onset 
hearing loss occurs following congenital Zika virus infection. 
Since publication of the previous interim guidance in August 
2016 (1), additional clinical findings have been reported in 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41 
1091
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Management of Zika Virus 
Infection among Infants, with the goal of obtaining individual 
expert opinion to inform development of updated guidance 
for diagnosing, evaluating, and managing infants with possible 
congenital Zika virus infection and to identify strategies to 
enhance communication and coordination of care of mothers 
and infants affected by Zika virus. Experts from various medi-
cal specialties, professional organizations, public health agen-
cies, and federal agencies participated in the Forum (Box 1). 
Discussion focused on the diagnosis, evaluation, and manage-
ment of three groups of infants born to mothers with possible 
Zika virus exposure during pregnancy: 1) infants with clinical 
findings consistent with congenital Zika syndrome, regardless 
of maternal testing results, 2) infants without clinical findings 
consistent with congenital Zika syndrome who were born to 
mothers with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infec-
tion, and 3) infants without clinical findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome who were born to mothers without 
laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection (Figure).
This updated interim guidance is based on current, limited 
data about Zika virus infection, the interpretation of individual 
expert opinion collected during the Forum, and knowledge 
about other congenital infections, and reflects the information 
available as of September 2017. As more information becomes 
available, this guidance will be updated.
Diagnosis of Congenital Zika Virus Infection
The optimal assays, specimens, and timing of testing for 
congenital Zika virus infection are unknown. A few reports 
have described infants with clinical findings consistent with 
possible congenital Zika syndrome but with negative laboratory 
results (20,26). Recommended laboratory testing for congeni-
tal Zika virus infection includes evaluation for Zika virus RNA 
in infant serum and urine and Zika virus IgM antibodies in 
serum. In addition, if cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is obtained 
for other purposes, NAT and IgM antibody testing should be 
performed on CSF because CSF was the only sample that tested 
positive in some infants with congenital Zika virus syndrome 
(26). Testing of cord blood is not recommended because it 
can yield false-positive and false-negative test results (27,28).
Because levels of Zika virus RNA and IgM antibodies decline 
over time, laboratory testing of infants should be performed 
as early as possible, preferably within the first few days after 
birth, although testing specimens within the first few weeks to 
months after birth might still be useful (17,29,30). Diagnosis 
of congenital Zika virus infection is confirmed by a positive 
Zika virus NAT result (Table). If Zika virus IgM antibodies 
are detected in the infant with a negative NAT, the infant 
is considered to have probable congenital Zika virus infec-
tion. If neither Zika virus RNA nor Zika IgM antibodies is 
approved under an Emergency Use Authorization have been 
recognized; both false-positive and false-negative test results have 
occurred. CDC is updating the Emergency Use Authorization 
to improve assay performance and develop more standardized 
methods to improve precision (25). Recent epidemiologic data 
indicate a declining prevalence of Zika virus infection in the 
Americas; lower prevalence results in a lower pretest probability 
of infection and a higher probability of false-positive test results.
Updated Guidance for Testing of Pregnant 
Women with Possible Zika Virus Exposure
Given the decreasing prevalence of Zika virus infection cases in 
the Americas and emerging data regarding Zika virus laboratory 
testing, on July 24, 2017, CDC published updated guidance for 
testing of pregnant women with possible Zika virus exposure 
(2). Zika virus NAT testing should be offered as part of routine 
obstetric care to asymptomatic pregnant women with ongoing 
possible Zika virus exposure (residing in or frequently traveling 
to an area with risk for Zika virus transmission); serologic testing 
is no longer routinely recommended because of the limitations of 
IgM tests, specifically the potential persistence of IgM antibodies 
from an infection before conception and the potential for false-
positive results. Zika virus testing is not routinely recommended 
for asymptomatic pregnant women who have possible recent, 
but not ongoing, Zika virus exposure; however, guidance might 
vary among jurisdictions (2). The updated guidance for maternal 
testing (2) is intended to reduce the possibility of false-positive 
results in the setting of the lower pretest probability; however, 
there is a possibility that the lack of routine testing might delay 
identification of some infants without clinical findings apparent 
at birth, but who may have complications from congenital Zika 
virus infection. Communication regarding possible maternal 
exposures between pediatric health care providers and obstetric 
care providers is critical, and strategies to enhance coordination 
of care and communication of health information are being 
developed. For families of infants with possible congenital 
Zika virus infection, health care providers should ensure that 
psychosocial support is in place and that families have access to 
care. The long-term prognosis for infants with congenital Zika 
virus infection is not yet known; health care providers should 
strive to address families’ concerns, facilitate early identification 
of abnormal findings, and refer infants for neurodevelopmental 
follow-up and therapy when indicated.
Forum on the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and 
Management of Zika Virus Infection Among Infants
On August 30–31, 2017, CDC, in collaboration with the 
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, convened the Forum on 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1092 
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
detected on the appropriate specimens (e.g., serum or urine) 
obtained within the first few days after birth, congenital Zika 
virus infection is unlikely. Distinguishing between congenital 
and postnatal infection is difficult in infants who live in areas 
where there is ongoing transmission of Zika virus and who 
are not tested soon after birth. If the timing of infection can-
not be determined, infants should be evaluated as if they had 
congenital Zika virus infection.
The plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT), which mea-
sures virus-specific neutralizing antibodies, can be used to help 
identify false-positive results (24). In the United States and U.S. 
territories, if the infant’s initial sample is IgM nonnegative (non-
negative serology terminology varies by assay and might include 
“positive,” “equivocal,” “presumptive positive,” or “possible posi-
tive”) and NAT negative, but PRNT was not performed on the 
mother’s sample, PRNT for Zika and dengue viruses should be 
performed on the infant’s initial sample if the test is appropriate 
given the setting. A negative Zika virus PRNT suggests that the 
infant’s Zika virus IgM test was a false positive (23).
PRNT cannot distinguish between maternal and infant 
antibodies in specimens collected from infants at or near birth; 
however, based on what is known about other congenital infec-
tions, maternal antibodies are expected to become undetectable 
by age 18 months and might become undetectable earlier (31). 
For infants whose initial sample is IgM nonnegative and Zika 
virus neutralizing antibodies are detected on either the infant’s 
specimen at birth or the mother’s specimen, PRNT at age 
≥18 months might help confirm or rule out congenital Zika virus 
infection. However, PRNT cannot be used to determine timing 
of infection. If PRNT is positive in an infant at age ≥18 months, 
congenital Zika virus infection is presumed; however, for infants 
living in or traveling to areas with risk of Zika virus transmission, 
postnatal infection cannot be excluded. If PRNT is negative at 
age ≥18 months, congenital Zika virus infection is unlikely. For 
infants with clinical findings consistent with congenital Zika 
syndrome who have maternal laboratory evidence of possible 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy, PRNT at age ≥18 months 
could be considered if the infant testing results are negative (i.e., 
negative Zika virus NAT and IgM on infant serum and urine) 
or if the infant was not tested at birth.
Updated Recommendations for Diagnosis, 
Clinical Evaluation, and Management of Infants 
with Clinical Findings Consistent with Congenital 
Zika Syndrome Born to Mothers with Possible 
Zika Virus Exposure in Pregnancy
Laboratory testing. Zika virus testing is recommended for 
infants with clinical findings consistent with congenital Zika 
syndrome and possible maternal Zika virus exposure during 
BOX 1. Areas of expertise and organizations represented at the Forum 
on the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Management of Zika Virus Infection 
Among Infants — Atlanta, Georgia, August 30–31, 2017
Specialties represented
• Audiology
• Clinical genetics
• Developmental and behavioral pediatrics
• Infectious disease
• Maternal-fetal medicine
• Neonatology
• Neurology
• Obstetrics and gynecology
• Ophthalmology
• Pediatrics
• Pediatric rehabilitation and medicine
• Radiology
Professional organizations
• American Academy of Pediatrics (including 
representation from the Puerto Rico chapter)
• American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
• Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs
• Association of Public Health Laboratories
• Association of State and Territorial Health Officials
• Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists
• Family Voices
• March of Dimes
• National Association of County and City Health 
Officials 
• National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners
Public health organizations
• California Department of Public Health
• County of San Diego Health and Human Services 
Agency
• Department of Health of Puerto Rico
• Florida Department of Health
• New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
• Texas Department of State Health Services
Federal agencies
• Administration for Children and Families
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
• Centers for Medicare & Medicaid  Services
• Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources 
and Services Administration
• National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health
• Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and 
Response  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41 
1093
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Abbreviations: ABR= auditory brainstem response; CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; CZS = congenital Zika syndrome; IgM = immunoglobulin M; NAT = nucleic acid test; 
PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 * All infants should receive a standard evaluation at birth and at each subsequent well-child visit by their health care providers including 1) comprehensive physical 
examination, including growth parameters and 2) age-appropriate vision screening and developmental monitoring and screening using validated tools. Infants 
should receive a standard newborn hearing screen at birth, preferably using auditory brainstem response.
 † Automated ABR by age 1 month if newborn hearing screen passed but performed with otoacoustic emission methodology.
 § Laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy is defined as 1) Zika virus infection detected by a Zika virus RNA NAT on any maternal, placental, or fetal 
specimen (referred to as NAT-confirmed), or 2) diagnosis of Zika virus infection,  timing of infection cannot be determined or unspecified flavivirus infection, timing of infection 
cannot be determined by serologic tests on a maternal specimen (i.e., positive/equivocal Zika virus IgM and Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT value; 
or negative Zika virus IgM, and positive or equivocal dengue virus IgM, and Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT titer). The use of PRNT for confirmation 
of Zika virus infection, including in pregnant women, is not routinely recommended in Puerto Rico (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.html).
 ¶ This group includes women who were never tested during pregnancy as well as those whose test result was negative because of issues related to timing or sensitivity 
and specificity of the test. Because the latter issues are not easily discerned, all mothers with possible exposure to Zika virus during pregnancy who do not have 
laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection, including those who tested negative with currently available technology, should be considered in this group.
 ** Laboratory testing of infants for Zika virus should be performed as early as possible, preferably within the first few days after birth, and includes concurrent Zika virus NAT 
in infant serum and urine, and Zika virus IgM testing in serum. If CSF is obtained for other purposes, Zika virus NAT and Zika virus IgM testing should be performed on CSF.
 †† Laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus infection includes a positive Zika virus NAT or a nonnegative Zika virus IgM with confirmatory neutralizing 
antibody testing, if PRNT confirmation is performed.  
Ask about possible maternal Zika virus exposure
Possible Zika virus exposure 
Laboratory evidence of possible maternal 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
No laboratory evidence of possible 
maternal Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
Does infant have fndings consistent with CZS?
Initial evaluation:
• Standard evaluation*
• Zika virus NAT and IgM testing 
• Head ultrasound by age 1 month 
• Comprehensive ophthalmologic exam 
  by age 1 month
• Automated ABR by age 1 month
Is there laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus infection? 
Laboratory evidence of 
congenital Zika virus infection 
Testing and clinical evaluation for congenital 
Zika virus infection beyond a standard 
evaluation* is not routinely recommended. 
If fndings suggestive of CZS are identifed at 
any time, refer to appropriate specialists and 
evaluate for congenital Zika virus infection.  
• Congenital Zika virus infection is unlikely 
• Infant should continue to receive routine 
  care, and health care providers should remain 
  alert for any new fndings of congenital 
  Zika virus infection 
No laboratory evidence of  
congenital Zika virus infection
Yes
No
Is there laboratory evidence of possible maternal 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy?
No
Yes
Is initial evaluation normal?
If no maternal Zika virus exposure 
is identifed, routine pediatric care 
is recommended. 
Initial evaluation: 
• Standard evaluation*
• Zika virus NAT and IgM testing   
• Consider Zika virus NAT and IgM 
  testing on CSF    
• Head ultrasound by age 1 month 
• Comprehensive ophthalmologic exam 
  by age 1 month 
• Automated ABR by age 1 month 
• Evaluate for other causes of congenital 
  anomalies
Refer to developmental specialist and 
early intervention services
Provide family support services 
Consider additional consultations with: 
• Infectious disease specialist 
• Clinical geneticist 
• Neurologist 
• Other clinical specialists based on 
  clinical fndings of infant 
FIGURE. Recommendations for the evaluation of infants with possible congenital Zika virus infection based on infant clinical findings,*,† 
maternal testing results,§,¶ and infant testing results**,†† — United States, October 2017  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1094 
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
comprehensive neurologic examination and consideration for 
other evaluations, such as advanced neuroimaging and EEG. 
Consultations with other clinical specialists should be based on 
the infant’s clinical findings (Box 3). Health care providers and 
families might consider fewer consultations for the evaluation 
of severely affected infants who are receiving palliative care.
The initial clinical evaluation, including subspecialty consulta-
tions, can be performed before hospital discharge or as an outpatient, 
taking into account hospital capabilities and needs of the family. 
T
ransfer to a facility with access to pediatric subspecialty care typi-
cally is not necessary unless there is an urgent clinical need. Health 
care providers should maintain vigilance for the appearance of 
other clinical findings associated with congenital Zika syndrome. 
Diaphragmatic paralysis should be considered in an infant who 
develops respiratory distress or failure or who fails to wean from a 
ventilator. Infant feedings should be monitored closely, and if there 
are signs of swallowing dysfunction, such as difficulty breathing with 
feeding, coughing or choking during feeding, or extended feeding 
times, an assessment for dysphagia should be performed (32,33). 
Signs of increasing intracranial pressure (e.g., increasing head cir-
cumference, irritability, or vomiting) should prompt neuroimaging 
to assess for postnatal hydrocephalus.
The follow-up care of infants with findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome requires a multidisciplinary team and 
an established medical home to facilitate the coordination of care 
and ensure that abnormal findings are addressed (34). At each 
subsequent well-child visit, all infants should have a standard 
evaluation (Box 2) along with routine preventive pediatric care 
and immunizations (35), with decisions about further evaluation 
guided by clinical findings and made in consultation with the 
family. Follow-up visits with an ophthalmologist after the initial 
BOX 2. Standard evaluation recommended at birth and during each 
well visit for all infants with possible congenital Zika virus exposure 
during pregnancy — United States, October 2017  
• Comprehensive physical exam, including growth 
parameters
• Developmental monitoring and screening using 
validated screening tools recommended by the 
American Academy of Pediatrics (https://www.aap.
org/en-us/advocacy-and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/
Screening/Pages/Screening-Tools.aspx)
• Vision screening as recommended by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics Policy Statement “Visual 
System Assessment in Infants, Children, and Young 
Adults by Pediatricians” (http://pediatrics.
aappublications.org/content/137/1/e20153596)
• Newborn hearing screen at birth, preferably with 
automated auditory brainstem response  
§ Assessment of visual acuity (if able, responses to teller or grating tests), pupillary 
response, external examination, anterior segment examination, intraocular 
pressure measurement if indicated, and dilated fundus examination. After 
3–4 months of age, also assess ocular motility, cycloplegia refraction and 
accommodation by dynamic retinoscopy. If physical abnormalities are present, 
recommend photo documentation if resources are available. (https://www.aao.
org/preferred-practice-pattern/pediatric-eye-evaluations-ppp--september-
2012#sectionII.comprehensiveophthamalicexamination).  
pregnancy, regardless of maternal testing results (Figure). 
Testing CSF for Zika virus RNA and Zika virus IgM antibodies 
should be considered, especially if serum and urine testing are 
negative and another etiology has not been identified.
Clinical Evaluation and Management. In addition to a 
standard evaluation (Box 2), infants with clinical findings 
consistent with congenital Zika syndrome should have a head 
ultrasound and a comprehensive ophthalmologic exam§ per-
formed by age 1 month by an ophthalmologist experienced in 
assessment of and intervention in infants. Infants should be 
referred for automated ABR by age 1 month if the newborn 
hearing screen was passed using only otoacoustic emissions 
methodology (6). Because infants with clinical findings con-
sistent with congenital Zika syndrome are at risk for devel-
opmental delay and disabilities, referrals to a developmental 
specialist and early intervention service programs are recom-
mended, and family support services should be provided. In 
addition, the following consultations should be considered: 
1) infectious disease for evaluation of other congenital infec-
tions and assistance with Zika virus diagnosis, testing, and 
counseling; 2) clinical genetics for confirmation of the clinical 
phenotype and evaluation for other causes of microcephaly or 
congenital anomalies; and 3) neurology by age 1 month for 
TABLE. Interpretation of results of laboratory testing of infant’s 
blood, urine, and/or cerebrospinal fluid for evidence of congenital 
Zika virus infection
Infant test result*
Interpretation
NAT
IgM
Positive
Any result
Confirmed congenital Zika virus infection†
Negative
Nonnegative
Probable congenital Zika virus infection§,¶
Negative
Negative
Congenital Zika virus infection unlikely§,**
Abbreviations: IgM = immunoglobulin M; NAT = nucleic acid test.
 * Infant serum, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid.
 † Distinguishing between congenital and postnatal infection is difficult in infants 
who live in areas where there is ongoing transmission of Zika virus and who 
are not tested soon after birth. If the timing of infection cannot be determined, 
infants should be evaluated as if they had congenital Zika virus infection.
 § Laboratory results should be interpreted in the context of timing of infection 
during pregnancy, maternal serology results, clinical findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome, and any confirmatory testing with plaque 
reduction neutralization testing.
 ¶ If Zika virus plaque reduction neutralization test is negative, this suggests 
that the infant’s Zika virus IgM test is a false positive.
 ** Congenital Zika virus infection is unlikely if specimens are collected within 
the first few days after birth and the clinical evaluation is normal; however, 
health care providers should remain alert for any new findings of congenital 
Zika virus infection.  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41 
1095
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Zika syndrome born to mothers with laboratory evidence of 
possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy (Figure).
Clinical evaluation and management. In addition to a 
standard evaluation (Box 2), infants who do not have clini-
cal findings consistent with congenital Zika syndrome born 
to mothers with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy should have a head ultrasound 
and a comprehensive ophthalmologic exam performed by age 
1 month to detect subclinical brain and eye findings. Further 
follow-up visits with an ophthalmologist after the initial 
examination should be based on ophthalmology recommenda-
tions. Infants should also be referred for automated ABR by 
age 1 month if newborn hearing screen was passed using only 
otoacoustic emissions methodology.
Health care providers should perform a standard evaluation 
along with routine preventive pediatric care and immuniza-
tions (35) at each subsequent well-child visit, and they should 
be vigilant for signs that might be associated with congenital 
Zika virus infection. If findings consistent with congenital 
Zika syndrome (e.g., impaired visual acuity/function, hearing 
problems, developmental delay, or delay in head growth) are 
identified at any time, referrals to the appropriate specialists 
should be made and further evaluation should follow recom-
mendations for infants with clinical findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome (Figure).
Infants with laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus 
infection. Laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus infec-
tion includes a positive Zika virus NAT or a nonnegative Zika 
virus IgM with confirmatory neutralizing antibody testing, if 
PRNT confirmation is performed. Further clinical evaluation 
for infants with laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus 
infection should follow recommendations for infants with 
clinical findings even in the absence of clinically apparent 
abnormalities (Figure). As a change from the previous guidance 
(1), a diagnostic ABR at 4–6 months or behavioral audiology 
at age 9 months is no longer recommended if the initial hear-
ing screen is passed by automated ABR, because of absence of 
data suggesting delayed-onset hearing loss in congenital Zika 
virus infection.
Infants without laboratory evidence of congenital Zika 
virus infection. If adequate laboratory testing is performed 
(e.g., concurrent testing on infant serum and urine within the 
first few days after birth), there is no laboratory evidence of 
congenital Zika virus infection (i.e., negative NAT and IgM 
on infant samples), and the clinical evaluation is normal, then 
congenital Zika virus infection is unlikely. Infants should con-
tinue to receive routine pediatric care, and health care providers 
should remain alert for any new findings of congenital Zika 
virus infection.
eye examination should be based on ophthalmology recommen-
dations. As a change from the previous guidance (1), a diagnostic 
ABR is no longer recommended at age 4–6 months for infants 
who passed the initial hearing screen with automated ABR 
because of the absence of data suggesting delayed-onset hearing 
loss in infants with congenital Zika virus infection. Additional 
follow-up will depend on clinical findings in the infant.
Updated Recommendations for Diagnosis, 
Clinical Evaluation, and Management of Infants 
without Clinical Findings Consistent with 
Congenital Zika Syndrome Born to Mothers with 
Laboratory Evidence of Possible Zika Virus 
Infection During Pregnancy
Laboratory testing. Zika virus testing is recommended for 
infants without clinical findings consistent with congenital 
BOX 3. Consultations for infants with clinical findings consistent with 
congenital Zika syndrome — United States, October 2017   
Consider consultation with the following specialists:
• Infectious disease specialist for evaluation for other 
congenital infections (e.g., toxoplasmosis, syphilis, rubella, 
cytomegalovirus, or herpes simplex virus) and assistance 
with Zika virus diagnosis, testing, and counseling
• Neurologist by age 1 month for comprehensive 
neurologic examination and consideration for other 
evaluations such as advanced neuroimaging and EEG
• Ophthalmologist for comprehensive eye exam by age 
1 month
• Clinical geneticist for confirmation of the clinical 
phenotype and evaluation for other causes of 
microcephaly or congenital anomalies
• Early intervention and developmental specialists
• Family and supportive services
Additional possible consultations, based on clinical 
findings of the infant:
• Endocrinologist for evaluation of hypothalamic or 
pituitary dysfunction and consideration for thyroid 
testing
• Lactation specialist, nutritionist, gastroenterologist, or 
speech or occupational therapist for evaluation for 
dysphagia and management of feeding issues
• Orthopedist, physiatrist, or physical therapist for the 
management of hypertonia, clubfoot or 
arthrogrypotic-like conditions
• Pulmonologist or otolaryngologist for concerns about 
aspiration  
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1096 
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
identified at any time, referrals to the appropriate specialists 
should be made, and subsequent evaluation should follow 
recommendations for infants with clinical findings consistent 
with congenital Zika syndrome (Figure).
Special Considerations for the Prenatal Diagnosis 
of Congenital Zika Virus Infection
While much has been learned about congenital Zika syn-
drome, limitations of laboratory testing exist and the full 
spectrum of congenital Zika virus infection is not yet known. 
Similar to other congenital infections, prenatal diagnostic 
evaluation can inform the clinical evaluation of infants with 
possible Zika virus exposure.  Current CDC guidance regard-
ing prenatal diagnosis is reviewed below (2); as more data 
become available, understanding of the diagnostic role of 
prenatal ultrasound and amniocentesis in the clinical evalua-
tion of congenital Zika syndrome will improve and guidance 
will be updated.
Ultrasound. Routine screening for fetal abnormali-
ties is a component of prenatal care in the United States. 
Comprehensive ultrasound examination to evaluate fetal anat-
omy is recommended for all women at 18–22 weeks’ gestation 
(36). However, for the detection of abnormalities associated 
with congenital Zika virus infection, the sensitivity, specificity, 
and positive and negative predictive values of ultrasound are 
unknown. Prenatal ultrasound findings associated with con-
genital Zika virus infection include intracranial calcifications at 
the gray-white matter junction, ventriculomegaly, abnormali-
ties of the corpus callosum, microcephaly, and limb anomalies 
(10,37). The reliability of ultrasound detection for each of these 
abnormalities as isolated findings is unknown (37,38). Limited 
data suggest that a constellation of ultrasound abnormalities 
(e.g., microcephaly, ventriculomegaly, or abnormalities of 
the corpus callosum) identified prenatally in the context of 
maternal Zika virus exposure correlates with reported structural 
abnormalities in infants at birth (20,21,39–43).
Questions remain about optimal timing of ultrasound 
among pregnant women with possible maternal Zika virus 
exposure. Abnormalities have been detected anywhere from 
2 to 29 weeks after symptom onset (39,41,43,44); therefore, 
insufficient data are available to define the optimal timing 
between exposure and initial sonographic screening. Brain 
abnormalities associated with congenital Zika syndrome have 
been identified by ultrasound in the second and third trimes-
ters in published case reports (20,39,41,43,44). Currently, the 
negative predictive value of serial normal prenatal ultrasounds is 
unknown. Serial ultrasound monitoring can detect changes in 
fetal anatomy, particularly neuroanatomy, and growth patterns 
(39,41,44). CDC previously recommended serial ultrasounds 
every 3–4 weeks for women exposed during pregnancy with 
Updated Recommendations for Diagnosis, 
Clinical Evaluation, and Management of Infants 
without Clinical Findings Consistent with 
Congenital Zika Syndrome Born to Mothers with 
Possible Zika Virus Exposure in Pregnancy but 
without Laboratory Evidence of Possible Zika 
Virus Infection During Pregnancy
This heterogeneous group includes mothers who were never 
tested during pregnancy as well as those whose test result 
could have been negative because of issues related to timing or 
sensitivity and specificity of the test. Because the latter issues 
are not easily discerned, all mothers with possible exposure 
to Zika virus during pregnancy who do not have laboratory 
evidence of possible Zika virus infection, including those who 
tested negative with currently available technology, should be 
considered in this group.
Laboratory testing. Laboratory testing for congenital Zika 
virus infection is not routinely recommended for infants born 
to mothers in this category based on the unknown risk for 
infection; the lower likelihood of congenital Zika virus infec-
tion as a result of the declining prevalence of Zika virus infec-
tion; and limitations of infant laboratory testing. If abnormal 
findings are identified, these infants should receive further 
evaluation, including evaluation and testing for congenital 
Zika virus infection.
Clinical evaluation and management. Infants without 
clinical findings consistent with congenital Zika syndrome 
born to mothers without laboratory evidence of possible 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy should have a standard 
evaluation (Box 2) performed at birth and at each subsequent 
well-child visit along with routine preventive pediatric care 
and immunizations (35). Health care providers should be alert 
to the possibility of congenital infection, especially in infants 
born to mothers with ongoing possible Zika virus exposure 
during pregnancy.
Further clinical evaluation for congenital Zika virus infec-
tion beyond a standard evaluation and routine pediatric care 
is not routinely indicated. Health care providers can consider 
additional evaluation in consultation with families, taking 
into account the infant’s complete physical examination with 
emphasis on neurologic findings; risks of screening (e.g., identi-
fication of incidental findings); and maternal factors, including 
the presence and timing of symptoms, and type, location, and 
length of possible Zika virus exposure. Older infants in whom 
maternal Zika virus exposure was not assessed at birth and who 
are evaluated later might also have more clinical data available 
(e.g., neurologic status, development, visual/hearing impair-
ments, or head circumference trajectory) to guide the evalua-
tion. If findings consistent with congenital Zika syndrome are 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41 
1097
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
MPP
, Deloitte Consulting LLP; Madelyn A. Baez-Santiago, PhD, 
Philip Oppong-Twene, MBChB, Eagle Medical Services, LLC; 
Augustina Delaney, G2S Corporation.
Contributors
E. Oscar Alleyne, DrPH, National Association of County and 
City Health Officials; Martina Badell, MD, Emory University; 
James F. Bale Jr, MD, University of Utah School of Medicine; Wanda 
D. Barfield, MD, CDC, Richard Beigi, MD, Magee-Women’s 
Hospital of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center; Audina 
M. Berrocal, MD, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine; Carina Blackmore, DVM, PhD, 
Florida Department of Health; Eric C. Blank, DrPH, Association 
of Public Health Laboratories; Jennifer Bolden Pitre, JD, Family 
Voices, Inc; Coleen Boyle, PhD, CDC; Erin Conners, PhD, New 
York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Christine 
Curry, MD, PhD, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine; 
Richard N. Danila, PhD, Minnesota Department of Health, Council 
of State and Territorial Epidemiologists; Alberto De La Vega, MD, 
University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine; Roberta L. DeBiasi, 
MD, The George Washington University School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences; Gail J. Demmler-Harrison, MD, Baylor College 
of Medicine; Siobhan M. Dolan, MD, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine; Rita W. Driggers, MD, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine; Eric Dziuban, MD, CDC; John Eichwald, MA, 
CDC; Catherine Eppes, MD, Baylor College of Medicine; Nicole 
Fehrenbach, MPP
, CDC; Meg Fisher, MD, Unterberg Children’s 
Hospital at Monmouth Medical Center; Kimberly B. Fortner, MD, 
University of Tennessee Medical Center; Elizabeth Garbarczyk, 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; Francisco García, MD, 
Pima County Department of Health; Stephanie Gaw, MD, PhD, 
University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine; Valerie 
Godoshian, MPH, CDC; Ivan A. Gonzalez, MD, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine; Caitlin Green, MPH, CDC; Dixie 
D. Griffin, MD, Affinity Pediatrics, Tift Regional Health System; 
Manda Hall, MD, Texas Department of State Health Services, 
Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs; Amy Houtrow, 
MD, PhD, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine; Mark 
Hudak, MD, University of Florida College of Medicine-Jacksonville; 
Lisa L. Hunter, PhD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital; David 
Kimberlin, MD, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Linda M. 
Lawrence, MD, American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology 
and Strabismus; Ellen H. Lee, MD, New York City Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene; Rebecca Leeb, PhD, CDC; Deborah 
Levine, MD, Harvard Medical School; Claritsa Malave, MD, 
Health Resources and Services Administration, Puerto Rico Office; 
Yvonne (Bonnie) Maldonado, MD, Stanford University School of 
Medicine; Lynne Mofenson, MD, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS 
Foundation; Sarah B. Mulkey, MD, PhD, The George Washington 
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences; Flor M. Munoz, 
MD, Baylor College of Medicine; Scott Needle, MD, Healthcare 
Network of Southwest Florida; Chloe Oram, CDC; Cassandra 
G. Pasley, JD, Florida Department of Health; Maria Paz Carlos, 
DVM, PhD, Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources 
laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection, based upon exist-
ing fetal growth monitoring for other maternal conditions 
(e.g., hypertension or diabetes) (2). However, there are no 
data specific to congenital Zika virus infection to guide these 
timing recommendations; clinicians may consider extending 
the time interval between ultrasounds in accordance with 
patient preferences and clinical judgment. Women with pos-
sible exposure but without laboratory evidence of Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy should receive ultrasound screening 
as recommended for routine prenatal care. Future data will be 
used to inform the optimal timing and frequency of ultrasound 
in pregnant women with possible Zika virus infection.
Amniocentesis. The role of amniocentesis for the detection 
of congenital Zika virus infection is unknown. Data regarding 
the positive and negative predictive values and optimal timing 
for amniocentesis are not available. Reports of the correlation 
between positive Zika test results in amniotic fluid and clini-
cal phenotype or confirmatory infant laboratory testing are 
inconsistent (20,42,45,46). Zika virus RNA has been detected 
in amniotic fluid specimens; however, serial amniocenteses 
have demonstrated that Zika virus RNA might only be present 
transiently (45). Therefore, a negative test result on amniotic 
fluid cannot rule out congenital Zika virus infection. However, 
if amniocentesis is indicated as part of the evaluation for 
abnormal prenatal findings, NAT testing for Zika virus should 
be considered to assist with the diagnosis of fetal infection.
Summary of prenatal diagnosis of congenital Zika virus 
infection. Given the limitations in the available screen-
ing modalities and the absence of effective interventions to 
prevent and treat congenital Zika virus infection, a shared 
decision-making model is essential to ensure that pregnant 
women and their families understand the risks and benefits 
of screening in the context of the patient’s preferences and 
values. For example, serial ultrasound examinations might be 
inconvenient, unpleasant, and expensive, and might prompt 
unnecessary interventions; amniocentesis carries additional 
known risks such as fetal loss. These potential harms of prenatal 
screening for congenital Zika syndrome might outweigh the 
clinical benefits for some patients; therefore, these decisions 
should be individualized (47).
Acknowledgments
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP); American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG); Laura Aird, MS, Sean 
Diederich, Jennifer Frantz, MPH, Kate Klein, MA, MPH, AAP; 
Sarah Carroll, MPH, Amanda Guiliano, Debra Hawks, MPH, 
Lindsey Regallis, ACOG; Shannon Fleck-Derderian, MPH, 
Christina Hillard, MA, Sumaiya Khan, MPH, Karnesha Slaughter, 
MPH, Tanya Williams, MPH, CDC; Laurel Berryman, MA; Jennifer 
Camp, MBA; Darren Collins; Paul Decknick, MA; Brenda Duverce, 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1098 
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 4. Scharf RJ, Scharf GJ, Stroustrup A. Developmental milestones. Pediatr 
Rev 2016;37:25–37. https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.2014-0103
 5. Council on Children With Disabilities; Section on Developmental 
Behavioral Pediatrics; Bright Futures Steering Committee; Medical 
Home Initiatives for Children With Special Needs Project Advisory 
Committee. Identifying infants and young children with developmental 
disorders in the medical home: an algorithm for developmental 
surveillance and screening. Pediatrics 2006;118:405–20. https://doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2006-1231
 6. American Academy of Pediatrics, Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 
Year 2007 position statement: principles and guidelines for early hearing 
detection and intervention programs. Pediatrics 2007;120:898–921. 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-2333
 7. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus and 
birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
 8. Hazin AN, Poretti A, Di Cavalcanti Souza Cruz D, et al.; Microcephaly 
Epidemic Research Group. Computed tomographic findings in 
microcephaly associated with Zika virus. N Engl J Med 2016;374:2193–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc1603617
 9. de Fatima Vasco Aragao M, van der Linden V, Brainer-Lima AM, et al. 
Clinical features and neuroimaging (CT and MRI) findings in presumed 
Zika virus related congenital infection and microcephaly: retrospective case 
series study. BMJ 2016;353:i1901. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1901
10. Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld P
, Levine D, Melo AS, et al. Congenital 
brain abnormalities and Zika virus: what the radiologist can expect to 
see prenatally and postnatally. Radiology 2016;281:203–18. https://doi.
org/10.1148/radiol.2016161584
11. de Paula Freitas B, de Oliveira Dias JR, Prazeres J, et al. Ocular findings 
in infants with microcephaly associated with presumed Zika virus 
congenital infection in Salvador, Brazil. JAMA Ophthalmol 
2016;134:529–35. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.0267
12. Ventura CV, Maia M, Ventura BV, et al. Ophthalmological findings in 
infants with microcephaly and presumable intra-uterus Zika virus 
infection. Arq Bras Oftalmol 2016;79:1–3.
13. Verçosa I, Carneiro P
, Verçosa R, et al. The visual system in infants with 
microcephaly related to presumed congenital Zika syndrome. J AAPOS 
2017;21:300–304.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaapos.2017.05.024
14. Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al. Characterizing the pattern of 
anomalies in congenital Zika syndrome for pediatric clinicians. JAMA Pediatr 
2017;171:288–95. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.3982
15. Leal MC, Muniz LF, Ferreira TS, et al. Hearing loss in infants with 
microcephaly and evidence of congenital Zika virus infection—Brazil, 
November 2015–May 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:917–9. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6534e3
16. Zin AA, Tsui I, Rossetto J, et al. Screening criteria for ophthalmic 
manifestations of congenital Zika virus infection. JAMA Pediatr 
2017;171:847–54. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1474
17. van der Linden V, Pessoa A, Dobyns W, et al. Description of 13 infants 
born during October 2015–January 2016 with congenital Zika virus 
infection without microcephaly at birth— Brazil. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:1343–8. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6547e2
18. van der Linden V, Filho ELR, van der Linden A. Congenital Zika 
syndrome: clinical aspects. In: Vasco Aragão M, ed. Zika in focus. 
Postnatal clinical, laboratorial and radiological Aspects. Cham, 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing AG; 2017:33–46.
19. Carvalho MD, Miranda-Filho DB, van der Linden V, et al. Sleep EEG 
patterns in infants with congenital Zika virus syndrome. Clin Neurophysiol 
2017;128:204–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2016.11.004
20. Melo AS, Aguiar RS, Amorim MM, et al. Congenital Zika virus infection: 
beyond neonatal microcephaly. JAMA Neurol 2016;73:1407–16. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.3720
21. Meneses JDA, Ishigami AC, de Mello LM, et al. Lessons learned at the 
epicenter of Brazil’s congenital Zika epidemic: evidence from 87 confirmed 
cases. Clin Infect Dis 2017;64:1302–8. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix166
and Services Administration; Alyssa Pensirikul, MD, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine; Emily E. Petersen, MD, CDC; 
Lawrence Platt, MD, David Geffen School of Medicine at University 
of California, Los Angeles; S. Grace Prakalapakorn, MD, CDC, 
Duke University School of Medicine; Sarah Reagan-Steiner, MD, 
CDC; Jeannie Rodriguez, PhD, National Association of Pediatric 
Nurse Practitioners, Emory University; Elizabeth Rosenblum, MD, 
American Academy of Family Physicians, University of California 
San Diego; Pablo J. Sánchez, MD, Nationwide Children’s Hospital; 
Magdalena Sanz Cortes, MD, PhD, Baylor College of Medicine; 
David J. Schonfeld, MD, University of Southern California; Carrie K. 
Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD, CDC; Dean E. Sidelinger, MD, County of 
San Diego Health and Human Services Agency; V. Fan Tait, MD, 
American Academy of Pediatrics; Miguel Valencia-Prado, MD, 
Department of Health of Puerto Rico; Lisa F. Waddell, MD, March 
of Dimes; Michael D. Warren, MD, Association of Maternal and 
Child Health Programs, Tennessee Department of Health; Susan 
Wiley, MD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center; Eileen 
Yamada, MD, California Department of Public Health; Marshalyn 
Yeargin-Allsopp, MD, CDC; Fernando Ysern, MD, Puerto Rico 
Chapter, American Academy of Pediatrics; Christopher M. Zahn, 
MD, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 2Division of Bacterial Diseases, National 
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 3Eagle Medical 
Services, LLC; 4Chickasaw Nation Industries, Inc; 5Division of Vector-Borne 
Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC; 6Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, CDC; 7Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC; 8Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion; 9Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 
CDC; 10Division of Human Development and Disability, National Center on 
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 11Division of Public 
Health Information Dissemination, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology and 
Laboratory Services, CDC.
Corresponding author: Tolulope Adebanjo, zikamch@cdc.gov, 800-232-4636.
References
1. Russell K, Oliver SE, Lewis L, et al.; Contributors. Update: interim 
guidance for the evaluation and management of infants with possible 
congenital Zika virus infection—United States, August 2016. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:870–8. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6533e2
2. Oduyebo T, Polen KD, Walke HT, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure—United States (including U.S. territories), July 2017. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:781–93. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6629e1
3. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Practice and Ambulatory 
Medicine, Section on Ophthalmology, American Association of Certified 
Orthoptists, American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and 
Strabismus, American Academy of Ophthalmology. Visual system 
assessment in infants, children, and young adults by pediatricians. Pediatrics 
2016;137:e20153596. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2015-3596
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / October 20, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 41 
1099
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
35. Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine; Bright Futures 
Periodicity Schedule Workgroup. 2017 recommendations for preventive 
pediatric health care. Pediatrics 2017;139:e20170254. https://doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2017-0254
36. Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics and the American Institute 
of Ultrasound in Medicine. Practice bulletin no. 175: ultrasound in 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2016;128:e241–56. https://doi.org/10.1097/
AOG.0000000000001815
37. Vouga M, Baud D. Imaging of congenital Zika virus infection: the route 
to identification of prognostic factors. Prenat Diagn 2016;36:799–811. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.4880
38. Chibueze EC, Parsons AJQ, Lopes KDS, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 
ultrasound scanning for prenatal microcephaly in the context of Zika 
virus infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci Rep 
2017;7:2310. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-01991-y
39. Brasil P
, Pereira JP Jr, Moreira ME, et al. Zika virus infection in pregnant 
women in Rio de Janeiro. N Engl J Med 2016;375:2321–34. https://
doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1602412
40. Sarno M, Aquino M, Pimentel K, et al. Progressive lesions of central 
nervous system in microcephalic fetuses with suspected congenital Zika 
virus syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2016. https://doi.
org/10.1002/uog.17303
41. Parra-Saavedra M, Reefhuis J, Piraquive JP
, et al. Serial head and brain 
imaging of 17 fetuses with confirmed Zika virus infection in Colombia, 
South America. Obstet Gynecol 2017;130:207–12. https://doi.
org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002105
42. Besnard M, Eyrolle-Guignot D, Guillemette-Artur P
, et al. Congenital 
cerebral malformations and dysfunction in fetuses and newborns 
following the 2013 to 2014 Zika virus epidemic in French Polynesia. 
Euro Surveill 2016;21:30181 https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.
ES.2016.21.13.30181.
43. Carvalho FH, Cordeiro KM, Peixoto AB, et al. Associated ultrasonographic 
findings in fetuses with microcephaly because of suspected Zika virus 
(ZIKV) infection during pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 2016;36:882–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.4882
44. Schaub B, Gueneret M, Jolivet E, et al. Ultrasound imaging for 
identification of cerebral damage in congenital Zika virus syndrome: a 
case series. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2017;1:45–55. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S2352-4642(17)30001-9
45. Schaub B, Vouga M, Najioullah F, et al. Analysis of blood from Zika 
virus-infected fetuses: a prospective case series. Lancet Infect Dis 
2017;17:520–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30102-0
46. Herrera K, Bernasko J, Garry D, Vahanian S, Kaplan C. Vertical 
transmission of Zika virus (ZIKV) in early pregnancy: two cases, two 
different courses. Case Reports in Perinatal Medicine 2016;5:131–3. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/crpm-2016-0027
47. Grimes DA, Schulz KF. Uses and abuses of screening tests. Lancet 
2002;359:881–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(02)07948-5
22. Souza ASR, Cordeiro MT, Meneses JA, et al. Clinical and laboratory 
diagnosis of congenital Zika virus syndrome and diaphragmatic unilateral 
palsy: case report. Rev Bras Saude Mater Infant 2016;16:467–73. https://
doi.org/10.1590/1806-93042016000400007
23. Rabe IB, Staples JE, Villanueva J, et al.; MTS. Interim guidance for 
interpretation of Zika virus antibody test results. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:543–6. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6521e1
24. Calisher CH, Karabatsos N, Dalrymple JM, et al. Antigenic relationships 
between flaviviruses as determined by cross-neutralization tests with 
polyclonal antisera. J Gen Virol 1989;70:37–43. https://doi.
org/10.1099/0022-1317-70-1-37
25. Food and Drug Administration. Zika virus response updates from FDA. 
Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Food and Drug Administration; 2017 https://www.fda.gov/
EmergencyPreparedness/Counterterrorism/MedicalCountermeasures/
MCMIssues/ucm485199.htm
26. de Araújo TVB, Rodrigues LC, de Alencar Ximenes RA, et al.; 
Investigators from the Microcephaly Epidemic Research Group; Brazilian 
Ministry of Health; Pan American Health Organization; Instituto de 
Medicina Integral Professor Fernando Figueira; State Health Department 
of Pernambuco. Association between Zika virus infection and 
microcephaly in Brazil, January to May, 2016: preliminary report of a 
case-control study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;16:1356–63. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30318-8
27. Masuzaki H, Miura K, Miura S, et al. Labor increases maternal DNA 
contamination in cord blood. Clin Chem 2004;50:1709–11. https://
doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2004.036517
28. Workowski KA, Bolan GA. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment 
guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep 2015;64(No. RR-03).
29. Oliveira DB, Almeida FJ, Durigon EL, et al. Prolonged shedding of 
Zika virus associated with congenital infection. N Engl J Med 
2016;375:1202–4. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc1607583
30. Villamil-Gómez WE, Guijarro E, Castellanos J, Rodríguez-Morales AJ. 
Congenital Zika syndrome with prolonged detection of Zika virus RNA. 
J Clin Virol 2017;95:52–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2017.08.010
31. World Health Organization. WHO recommendations on the 
diagnosis of HIV infection in infants and children. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2010. http://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/10665/44275/1/9789241599085_eng.pdf
32. Arvedson JC. Assessment of pediatric dysphagia and feeding disorders: 
clinical and instrumental approaches. Dev Disabil Res Rev 
2008;14:118–27. https://doi.org/10.1002/ddrr.17
33. Leal MC, van der Linden V, Bezerra TP
, et al. Characteristics of dysphagia 
in infants with microcephaly caused by congenital Zika virus infection, 
Brazil, 2015. Emerg Infect Dis 2017;23:1253–9. https://doi.
org/10.3201/eid2308.170354
34. Kuo DZ, Houtrow AJ, Arango P
, Kuhlthau KA, Simmons JM, Neff JM. 
Family-centered care: current applications and future directions in 
pediatric health care. Matern Child Health J 2012;16:297–305. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10995-011-0751-7
