 Hypothesis
www.thelancet.com   Published online March 4, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00650-4 
1
Teratogenic eff
 ects of the Zika virus and the role of the 
placenta 
Jennifer J Adibi, Ernesto T A Marques Jr, Abigail Cartus, Richard H Beigi
The mechanism by which the Zika virus can cause fetal microcephaly is not known. Reports indicate that Zika is able 
to evade the normal immunoprotective responses of the placenta. Microcephaly has genetic causes, some associated 
with maternal exposures including radiation, tobacco smoke, alcohol, and viruses. Two hypotheses regarding the role 
of the placenta are possible: one is that the placenta directly conveys the Zika virus to the early embryo or fetus. 
Alternatively, the placenta itself might be mounting a response to the exposure; this response might be contributing 
to or causing the brain defect. This distinction is crucial to the diagnosis of fetuses at risk and the design of therapeutic 
strategies to prevent Zika-induced teratogenesis.
Introduction
Over the last 6 months, thousands of microcephalic 
babies have been delivered in Brazil, the country that is 
experiencing the highest Zika virus infection rates 
worldwide. Given the apparent pronounced eff
 ects of this 
vector-borne viral pathogen on the developing fetus, there 
is a rush to ascertain whether and how Zika virus might 
be causing microcephaly, as well as the need to address 
concerns regarding potential biases in the reporting of 
cases, or historic under-reporting of cases in Brazil and in 
other Zika virus-aff
 ected countries. Knowledge of 
mechanism could lead us to early detection methods and 
therapeutic responses to this new apparent teratogen and 
enhance preparedness for the next viral epidemic. We 
make a case for epidemiologists, virologists, pathologists, 
obstetricians, toxicologists, and developmental biologists 
to rigorously consider and test the role of the placenta as a 
mediator of the viral exposure and the cause of the fetal 
brain defects associated with Zika virus infection. 
Direct transfer hypothesis
One possibility is that the virus has neurotropic 
properties and, via the placenta, is directly accessing and 
damaging the developing brain. This hypothesis implies 
the presence of the virus within the embryo at the earliest 
developmental stages of the cerebral cortex. However, in 
this early period, the embryo or fetus is fairly well 
shielded from maternal circulation. Maternal blood fl
 ow 
into the placenta only begins at 10 weeks gestation 
(fi
 gure).1 The routes of entry for the virus would be 
uterine 
gland 
secretions, 
leakage 
through 
the 
trophoblastic plugs that block maternal blood fl
 ow, or 
diff
 usion of preconceptional viral concentrations into the 
amniotic and yolk sacs as they form. Once the virus 
reaches the trophoblast barrier, the virus as part of an 
immunocomplex with non-neutralising antibodies could 
be carried through the placenta with the help of Fc 
gamma receptors.2,3 However, this process is less likely to 
be the case before 16 weeks.4,5 Similar to the dengue 
virus,6,7 Zika virus might work through the endoplasmic 
reticulum of the trophoblast to become a sort of cargo of 
placental exosomes. Those exosomes might then be 
targeting embryonic or fetal neuroepithelium. The virus 
could be causing localised reactions at the interface of 
the placenta that can allow free virus to pass through.8 
Zika virus might also be transmitted through semen, 
potentially giving the virus access to the early embryo.9 
Tissue samples at this stage are not yet available to test 
these assumptions directly. Most of the signs of infection 
in women delivering microcephalic babies in Brazil are 
reported from 8–16 weeks gestation (Marques ETA, 
unpublished),9 which could mean that the virus is 
reaching the fetus at a later stage in brain development, 
and possibly precisely at this point when maternal blood 
fl
 ow into the placenta begins. A recent case report 
presents novel cross-sectional evidence that the cause of 
microcephaly in a fetus was direct transfer.10 The fetus 
was exposed to maternal Zika virus infection late in the 
fi
 rst trimester (based on maternal symptoms) and the 
authors measured higher viral titres in the brain tissue at 
autopsy relative to other tissues. In two cases, the viral 
DNA was measured in amniotic fl
 uid at 28 weeks, but 
not in maternal serum or urine.11 Additional evidence for 
direct transfer and brain damage by Zika virus is the 
detection of IgM against viral antigen (but not the viral 
mRNA) in the cerebral spinal fl
 uid of 30 of the 31 samples 
analysed of the babies born with microcephaly (Marques 
ETA, unpublished). Although still sparse, these data are 
crucial towards an understanding of the teratogenic 
mechanism of Zika virus. Hopefully, additional data will 
continue to provide answers to questions central to a 
complete understanding of the relationship between 
Zika virus and microcephaly: does the virus reach the 
fetal brain in all cases? Can this process be measured 
within the developmental timeframe that matters most 
for the development of primary microcephaly?
Because these measurements have been made late in 
or at the end of pregnancy, whether the virus is able to 
cross the placenta in the early period, which is most 
relevant to the risk of microcephaly, remains unclear. 
The ultimate proof would be a positively correlated metric 
of virus exposure in maternal and fetal tissues that 
coincides with the timing of the fetal defect. Alternatively, a 
cohort analysis (currently ongoing in Brazil) can 
statistically confi
 rm the temporal ordering of prenatal 
maternal infection, fetal brain development, and increased 
Published Online
March 4, 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)00650-4
Department of Epidemiology, 
Graduate School of Public 
Health (J J Adibi ScD), 
Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology and Reproductive 
Sciences (J J Adibi, R H Beigi MD), 
Center for Vaccine Research 
(E T A Marques Jr MD), 
University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 
The Research Center Aggeu 
Magalhães (CPqAM)/Oswaldo 
Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), 
Recife, Brazil (E T A Marques Jr); 
and Epidemiology, Human 
Genetics and Environmental 
Sciences, School of Public 
Health, University of Texas 
Health Sciences Center, 
Houston, TX, USA (A Cartus BS) 
Correspondence to:
Jennifer J Adibi, Department of 
Epidemiology, Graduate School 
of Public Health, Department of 
Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Sciences, 
University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
adibij@pitt.edu
 Hypothesis
2 
www.thelancet.com   Published online March 4, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00650-4
risk of delivering a microcephalic infant. In-vitro models 
in which embryonic neuronal cells are directly exposed to 
Zika virus might generate useful information. However, 
these cells might also misrepresent conditions during 
early pregnancy in vivo, in which the virus must traverse 
fl
 uid and tissue layers to reach the developing brain.
Interestingly, no information to date points to global 
eff
 ects of Zika virus on placental function such as smaller 
birth size (excluding the head), reduced trophoblast 
invasion (higher incidences of pre-eclampsia or growth 
restriction), or preterm birth—all of which are tightly 
linked to the health and function of the placenta. Again, 
this observation suggests that the virus works through a 
more specifi
 c molecular pathway instead of outright 
destruction of the placenta and fetus. 
The pathology of placentas infected with cyto-
megalovirus might off
 er some foresights while data for 
Zika virus placental pathology evolves.12,13 The most 
frequent symptom in placentas infected with cyto-
mega 
lovirus was chronic villitis, or wide-scale infl
 am-
mation of the cell layers of the chorionic villi. The 
degree of placental infl
 ammation has been correlated 
with the severity of the fetal eff
 ects that include 
microcephaly.12,13 The placenta, through a microRNA-
Placental molecules and exosomes
Trophoblasts (placental cell type)
Zika virus
Placental exosomes containing Zika virus
Umbilical
cord
Embryo
Chorionic villi
Yolk sac fluid
Chorion
Maternal arteries
Maternal decidua 
(uterus)
Intervillous space fluid
Exocoelomic
cavity
fluid
Amniotic
cavity fluid
Amnion
Figure: The gestational sac in the fi
 rst trimester before the onset of maternal–placental blood fl
 ow
The placenta consists of the chorion and the chorionic villi which encircle the embryo and carry out synthesis and secretion of molecules that can enter into the 
embryo. Diff
 erent scenarios include: direct transfer of free virus through the trophoblast layers, placental exosome-mediated transfer, or minimal to no transfer.
 Hypothesis
www.thelancet.com   Published online March 4, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00650-4 
3
mediated response, might be blocking or enhancing 
replication of the Zika virus as has been shown with 
other viruses.14 
Placental mediation hypothesis 
An alternative and potential complement to the previous 
hypothesis of direct viral eff
 ect is that the placental 
response is the main cause of the brain defect. If the 
infected pregnancy is not spontaneously miscarried, 
then the virus is probably disrupting molecular synthesis 
in the outer layers of the placenta (fi
 gure). This change 
might happen before 10 weeks, when primary 
microcephaly occurs. Disruption of placental signals to 
the developing brain might cause or contribute to 
microcephaly. A model for this type of eff
 ect has been 
shown in the case of murine herpesvirus, in which the 
fetal eff
 ects occurred in the absence of the virus.15 The 
investigators off
 ered an explanation that the placental 
response invoked a change in the profi
 le of infl
 ammatory 
markers within fetal organs. Whether the fetus itself 
expressed the infl
 ammatory molecules, or if these 
molecules were delivered from the placenta, is not 
yet clear.
Primary microcephaly, which appears to be the 
dominant type of microcephaly described in reports from 
Brazil (Marques ETA, unpublished), originates during 
early neurogenesis. The main features are fewer neurons 
at birth, simpler gyral surfaces, and smaller brains.16–19 
Microcephaly has various biological causes; Zika virus 
might be correlated with a specifi
 c type but evidence to 
defi
 nitively know is not yet available. Without or prior to 
making contact with the embryo proper, the virus might 
be able to perturb the synthesis or secretion of molecules 
(ie, proteins, neuropeptides, non-coding RNAs, or 
cytokines) within the placental chorionic villi. The 
chorionic villi have greater exposure to maternal blood 
than the early embryo, which is embedded within two 
fl
 uid sacs and shielded by two membranes from maternal 
(but not placental) circulation. The perturbation in the 
synthesis and secretion of placental molecules by Zika 
virus itself or by some other process as a result of Zika 
virus infection might be a key component of virally 
induced fetal defects. One theory and modest data suggest 
that the placenta synthesises and secretes molecules that 
are essential for normal fetal brain development.20 
Although largely unexplored, evolutionary hypotheses 
might provide a theoretical basis for linking placental 
functions (and dysfunction) to brain development. 
Our group can conceptualise two scenarios that 
support the idea of placental mediation of Zika virus-
induced microcephaly. In one scenario, a general pro-
infl
 ammatory response of the placenta might be 
disrupting embryonic brain development. This idea 
might unify the diverse maternal exposures linked to 
higher risk of microcephaly (eg, radiation exposure, 
tobacco smoke, cocaine use, cytomegalovirus, alcohol 
con 
sumption, or α-haemolytic streptococci).21–25 
In another scenario, specifi
 c molecules or pathways 
synthesised by the early placenta are being disrupted, 
such as the microcephaly genes (ie, MCPH1-12, CEP63, 
and CASC5). Mutations in these genes have been 
causally related to microcephaly.16,18,19 The simultaneous 
under or over expression of these genes in the placenta 
and the fetus (ie, defi
 cient vs toxic levels of a particular 
protein) might contribute to fetal defects. Even though 
the expression of the microcephaly proteins has been 
characterised as intracellular, their placental analogues 
might be packaged and secreted within placental 
exosomes—an important mechanism for intercellular 
communication.26
Two places should be studied to identify candidate 
molecules in the placental and fetal tissue of Zika virus-
infected pregnancies. The fi
 rst is the medical literature 
on genetic causes of microcephaly.18,19,27 Are these same 
genes causally related to microcephaly in the case of viral 
infection? If so, how and in which cell type are these 
genes being disrupted as a result of Zika virus infection? 
This fi
 nding could mean that the placenta, being fetal 
tissue, expresses the same genes but under diff
 erent 
conditions and for diff
 erent reasons. Or this fi
 nding 
could indicate some placental participation in these early 
phases of embryonic or fetal development.
The second is the set of molecules causally related to 
Zika virus transfer across the epidermis.28 The 
trophoblast, like the epidermis, is an epithelial cell type. 
Hence, analogies might exist between genes involved in 
the response of the epidermis (ie, AXL, DDX58, IFIH1, 
and MX1) and the placental response to the virus. Inquiry 
into this area might uncover shared mechanisms for 
receptor-mediated transmission, pattern recognition, 
and interferon stimulation. The chorionic villi are 
considered to be like the skin of the placenta. These villi 
are the primary interface between components of 
maternal blood and fetal circulation.
Discussion
Why does it matter if the apparent teratogenic eff
 ects of 
Zika virus are placentally or directly mediated? As more 
data are collected, we might fi
 nd that either or both 
hypotheses prove true depending on the timing of 
exposure and the stage of brain development.
The placental mediation hypothesis holds appeal as we 
can easily and non-invasively measure an early placental 
response, whereas we cannot easily access the embryo. 
The placenta is an eff
 ective broadcaster of information on 
placental and fetal exposures and developmental 
consequences.29 Secreted placental molecules and vesicles 
can be measured in maternal circulation and used by 
clinicians to diagnose a fetus at risk. Real-time monitoring 
of changes in concentrations of secreted molecules over 
the fi
 rst trimester, linked to imaging of the morphology of 
the gestational sac, could establish temporality and 
provide clues as to how these relationships shift before 
and after the onset of maternal–placental circulation.
 Hypothesis
4 
www.thelancet.com   Published online March 4, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00650-4
12 
Mostoufi
 -zadeh M, Driscoll SG, Biano SA, Kundsin RB. 
Placental evidence of cytomegalovirus infection of the fetus and 
neonate. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1984; 108: 403–06.
13 
Gabrielli L, Bonasoni MP, Lazzarotto T, et al. Histological fi
 ndings 
in foetuses congenitally infected by cytomegalovirus. J Clin Virol 
2009; 46 (suppl 4): S16–21.
14 
Delorme-Axford E, Donker RB, Mouillet JF, et al. Human placental 
trophoblasts confer viral resistance to recipient cells. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110: 12048–53.
15 
Cardenas I, Means RE, Aldo P, et al. Viral infection of the placenta 
leads to fetal infl
 ammation and sensitization to bacterial products 
predisposing to preterm labor. J Immunol 2010; 185: 1248–57
.
16 
Gilmore EC, Walsh CA. Genetic causes of microcephaly and lessons 
for neuronal development. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 2013; 
2: 461–78.
17 
Sun T, Hevner RF. Growth and folding of the mammalian cerebral 
cortex: from molecules to malformations. Nat Rev Neurosci 2014; 
15: 217–32.
18 
Homem CC, Repic M, Knoblich JA. Proliferation control in neural 
stem and progenitor cells. Nat Rev Neurosci 2015; 16: 647–59.
19 
Pulvers JN, Journiac N, Arai Y, Nardelli J. MCPH1: a window into 
brain development and evolution. Front Cell Neurosci 2015; 9: 92.
20 Montiel JF, Kaune H, Maliqueo M. Maternal-fetal unit interactions 
and eutherian neocortical development and evolution. 
Front Neuroanat 2013; 7: 22.
21 
Hadeed AJ, Siegel SR. Maternal cocaine use during pregnancy: 
eff
 ect on the newborn infant. Pediatrics 1989; 84: 205–10.
22 Dekaban AS. Abnormalities in children exposed to x-radiation 
during various stages of gestation: tentative timetable of radiation 
injury to the human fetus. I. J Nucl Med 1968; 9: 471–77
.
23 Kennedy LA. The pathogenesis of brain abnormalities in the fetal 
alcohol syndrome: an integrating hypothesis. Teratology 1984; 
29: 363–68.
24 
Leviton A, Kuban K, Allred EN, et al. Antenatal antecedents of a 
small head circumference at age 24-months post-term equivalent in 
a sample of infants born before the 28th post-menstrual week. 
Early Hum Dev 2010; 86: 515–21.
25 Mostoufi
 -zadeh M, Driscoll SG, Biano SA, Kundsin RB. 
Placental evidence of cytomegalovirus infection of the fetus and 
neonate. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1984; 108: 403–06.
26 Sabapatha A, Gercel-Taylor C, Taylor DD. Specifi
 c isolation of 
placenta-derived exosomes from the circulation of pregnant women 
and their immunoregulatory consequences. Am J Reprod Immunol 
2006; 56: 345–55.
27 
Garcez PP, Diaz-Alonso J, Crespo-Enriquez I, Castro D, Bell D, 
Guillemot F. Cenpj/CPAP regulates progenitor divisions and 
neuronal migration in the cerebral cortex downstream of Ascl1.
Nat Commun 2015; 6: 6474.
28 Hamel R, Dejarnac O, Wichit S, et al. Biology of Zika virus infection 
in human skin cells. J Virol 2015; 89: 8880–96.
29 Adibi JJ, Lee MK, Naimi AI, et al. Human chorionic gonadotropin 
partially mediates phthalate association with male and female 
anogenital distance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015; 100: E1216–24.
30 Blazquez AB, Escribano-Romero E, Merino-Ramos T, Saiz JC, 
Martin-Acebes MA. Stress responses in fl
 avivirus-infected cells: 
activation of unfolded protein response and autophagy. 
Front Microbiol 2014; 5: 266.
Similarly, understanding any contribution of placental 
inputs to the teratogenic eff
 ect might clear the path for 
developing pharmacological methods to block terato-
genesis. In the case of West Nile virus (a mosquito-
transmitted fl
 avivirus like Zika virus), treatments to 
pharmacologically stimulate autophagy were eff
 ective in 
reducing the neurotoxic eff
 ects in non-pregnant 
individuals.30 
While the world awaits the epidemiology and pathology 
of this unique viral infection to help to explain the 
current epidemic in Brazil, now is the time to update our 
thinking and approaches to studying teratology and the 
role of the placenta. Doing so might provide large 
scientifi
 c rewards for this outbreak as well as future 
similar epidemics. 
Contributors
JJA conducted the literature search and drafted the manuscript. ETAM 
contributed unpublished data, participated in the discussion of ideas, 
and helped with the writing. AC contributed to the discussion of ideas 
and helped with the writing. RHB contributed to the discussion of ideas 
and the writing.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
References
1 
Burton GJ, Hempstock J, Jauniaux E. Nutrition of the human fetus 
during the fi
 rst trimester—a review. Placenta 2001; 22: S70–S6.
2 
Halstead SB. Dengue antibody-dependent enhancement: knowns 
and unknowns. Microbiol Spectr 2014; 2(6).
3 
Toth FD, Mosborg-Petersen P, Kiss J, et al. Antibody-dependent 
enhancement of HIV-1 infection in human term syncytiotrophoblast 
cells cultured in vitro. Clin Exp Immunol 1994; 96: 389–94.
4 
Saji F, Samejima Y, Kamiura S, Koyama M. Dynamics of 
immunoglobulins at the feto-maternal interface. Rev Reprod 1999; 
4: 81–89.
5 
Fuchs R, Ellinger I. Endocytic and transcytotic processes in villous 
syncytiotrophoblast: role in nutrient transport to the human fetus.
Traffi
  c 2004; 5: 725–38.
6 
Zhang Q, Hunke C, Yau YH, et al. The stem region of premembrane 
protein plays an important role in the virus surface protein 
rearrangement during dengue maturation. J Biol Chem 2012; 
287: 40525–34.
7 
Chahar HS, Bao X, Casola A. Exosomes and their role in the life 
cycle and pathogenesis of RNA viruses. Viruses 2015; 7: 3204–25.
8 
Nascimento EJM, Hottz ED, Garcia-Bates TM, Bozza F, 
Marques ETA, Barratt-Boyes SM. Emerging concepts in dengue 
pathogenesis: interplay between plasmablasts, platelets, and 
complement in triggering vasculopathy. Crit Rev Immunol 
2014; 34: 227–40.
9 
Foy BD, Kobylinski KC, Chilson Foy JL, et al. Probable 
non-vector-borne transmission of Zika virus, Colorado, USA. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2011; 17: 880–82.
10 
Mlakar J, Korva M, Tul N, et al. Zika virus associated with 
microcephaly. N Engl J Med 2016; published online Feb 10. 
DOI:10.1056/NEJMoa1600651.
11 
Calvet G, Aguiar RS, Melo AS, et al. Detection and sequencing of 
Zika virus from amniotic fl
 uid of fetuses with microcephaly in 
Brazil: a case study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; published online Feb 17
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)00095-5.
