 By Julia Adler-Milstein and Ashish K. Jha
HITECH Act Drove Large Gains In
Hospital Electronic Health Record
Adoption
ABSTRACT The extent to which recent large increases in hospitals’
adoption of electronic health record (EHR) systems can be attributed to
the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health
(HITECH) Act of 2009 is uncertain and debated. Because only short-term
acute care hospitals were eligible for the act’s meaningful-use incentive
program, we used national hospital data to examine the differential effect
of HITECH on EHR adoption among eligible and ineligible hospitals in
the periods before (2008–10) and after (2011–15) implementation of the
program. We found that annual increases in EHR adoption rates among
eligible hospitals went from 3.2 percent in the pre period to 14.2 percent
in the post period. Ineligible hospitals experienced much smaller annual
increases of 0.1 percent in the pre period and 3.3 percent in the post
period, a significant difference-in-differences of 7.9 percentage points.
Our results support the argument that recent gains in EHR adoption can
be attributed specifically to HITECH, which suggests that the act could
serve as a model for ways to drive the adoption of other valuable
technologies.
T
he Health Information Technology
for Economic and Clinical Health
(HITECH) Act of 2009 was an
ambitious policy effort to increase
the adoption of electronic health
records (EHRs). It was prompted by evidence
that the use of EHRs can substantially improve
the quality and efficiency of care delivered.1 And
while the act passed with strong bipartisan
support, whether it has achieved its primary goal
is debated. Proponents argue that before the
act’s passage, EHR adoption rates were low
and increasing very slowly. Without a policy in-
tervention, it might have taken many years, if not
decades, for EHR adoption to reach nationwide
scale.2 Furthermore, in response to the reces-
sion, hospitals’ planned investments in EHRs
could have been delayed if it had not been for
the act. Critics disagree, arguing that EHR adop-
tion rates were already increasing on their own
and that the act’s centerpiece—financial incen-
tives for providers demonstrating “meaningful
use” of EHRs—simply substituted public money
for private funds.3 That is, adoption rates might
have been quite similar had the federal govern-
ment not intervened, because hospitals and
ambulatory practices would have adopted EHRs
on their own in response to market pressures.
The evidence to support either side of the de-
bateis limited.While weknowthatEHR adoption
rates have risen substantially since the enact-
ment of HITECH,4 it is unclear how hospital
EHR adoption rates would have risen had HI-
TECH incentives not been put into place. A study
in the ambulatory care setting found that basic
EHR adoption was not significantly altered by
HITECH incentives,5 but whether that was also
the case for hospitals is unknown. It is critical to
understand the extent to which HITECH directly
increased EHR adoption for two reasons. First,
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1651
HEALTH AFFAIRS 36,
NO. 8 (2017): 1416–1422
©2017 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Julia Adler-Milstein (juliaam@
umich.edu) is an associate
professor in the School of
Information and School of
Public Health (health
management and policy) at
the University of Michigan, in
Ann Arbor.
Ashish K. Jha is the K. T. Li
Professor of International
Health at the Harvard T. H.
Chan School of Public Health
in Boston, and director of the
Harvard Global Health
Institute in Cambridge, both in
Massachusetts.
1416
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Hospital EHRs
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 the federal government has spent more than
$30 billion of taxpayers’ money implementing
HITECH provisions,6 and it is important to as-
sess whether the public has received a key com-
ponent of what it was promised: incentive-driven
adoption of EHRs. Second, HITECH is an unusu-
al type of incentive program in that it pays
hospitals and physicians not for outcomes or
engagement in care processes, but for infrastruc-
ture (having and using an EHR). Understanding
the impact of HITECH is therefore a rare oppor-
tunity to learn whether incentives can drive
adoption of technology infrastructure, and it
should inform policy makers in other countries
planning similar programs.7
Because it wasnot feasible to use a randomized
trial to test the impact of HITECH, we used an
alternative approach. The financial incentives
for meaningful use of EHRs were made available
to a certain group of hospitals (short-term acute
carefacilities) and not to others (long-term acute
care, psychiatric, or rehabilitation facilities),
which created a natural division to analyze.8
These two groups of hospitals should be compa-
rably motivated to pursue EHR adoption, as the
clinical care benefits have been shown to be sim-
ilar for both groups.9–11 Therefore, using ineligi-
ble hospitals as our control group, we sought to
assess whether HITECH incentives increased the
trajectory of EHR adoption among eligible hos-
pitals to a greater degree than was observed
among ineligible hospitals. We also examined
whether certain types of eligible hospitals, such
as smaller or for-profit hospitals, were more like-
ly than other types to respond to the incentives.
Study Data And Methods
Data Sources And Sample We used data for the
period 2008–15 from the Annual Health Infor-
mation Technology (IT) Supplemental Survey of
the American Hospital Association. This period
included three years before and five years after
the initiation of the meaningful-use program.
The AHA IT survey is sent to the CEO of every
hospital in the United States. These executives
are asked to complete the survey or delegate its
completion to the most knowledgeable person in
the organization. All nonrespondents receive
multiple mailings and follow-up phone calls to
achieve a high response rate. Hospitals are given
the option of completing the survey online or by
mail. Survey questions capture the extent of
adoption of individual computerized clinical
functions and—when linked to the AHA’s full
Annual Survey—additional hospital demograph-
ic characteristics. We included data for all non-
federal US hospitals from all of the years in
which they responded to the AHA ITsupplement
survey. After we merged eight years of data, our
sample consisted of 25,210 total observations
and 5,119 unique hospitals that responded to
one or more years of the AHA IT supplement
survey between 2008 and 2015 (for more details
about the sample, see online Appendix Ex-
hibit A1).12
Measures We considered general and medi-
cal-surgical acute care hospitals as eligible for
meaningful-use incentives, and long-term acute
care, psychiatric, and rehabilitation hospitals as
ineligible.We used the AHA service code to iden-
tify the appropriate category for each hospital,
which resulted in 4,268 eligible hospitals and
851 ineligible hospitals.
Our primary measure was whether or not each
hospital had adopted at least a basic EHR in each
year. Using a definition from a previous study,4
we considered a hospital to have at least a basic
EHR if it reported full implementation of the
following ten computerized functions in at
least one clinical unit of the hospital: recording
patient demographic information, physician
notes, nursing assessments, patient problem
lists, patient medication lists, and discharge
summaries; viewing laboratory reports, radio-
logic reports, and diagnostic test results; and
ordering medications.
We captured hospital characteristics, includ-
ing system affiliation, ownership (private for-
profit, private not-for-profit, or public), size
(based on the number of beds), region, teaching
status (nonteaching or minor teaching, since
no ineligible hospitals were major teaching
hospitals—that is, members of the Council of
Teaching Hospitals), rural or urban location,
and proportion of Medicaid admissions. We
hypothesized that system-affiliated, private for-
profit, small, rural, and nonteaching hospitals
would respond more strongly to meaningful-use
incentives.
Analytic Approach We conducted a differ-
ence-in-differences of slope analysis in which
we compared the difference between slopes of
EHR adoption rates before (2008–10) and after
(2011–15) implementation of meaningful-use in-
centives for eligible versus ineligible hospitals.
As a robustness test, we limited the ineligible
hospital comparison group to only long-term
acute care hospitals, since—compared to psychi-
atric and rehabilitation hospitals—they are argu-
ably more similar to general acute-care hospitals.
As a second robustness test, we compared adop-
tion rates among the subset of eligible and ineli-
gible hospitals that did not have a basic EHR in
the period 2008–10. Since four of the ten basic
EHR functions were widely adopted in 2008 (re-
cording patient demographic information and
patient medication lists, and viewing laboratory
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1417
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 reports and radiologic reports), we considered
hospitals not to have a basic EHR if they lacked
one or more of the remaining six basic EHR
functions: recording physician notes, nursing
assessments, discharge summaries, and patient
problem lists; viewing diagnostic test results;
and ordering medications. As a third robustness
test, we included hospital margins (as reported
on Medicare cost reports) to adjust for differenc-
es between eligible and ineligible hospitals in
terms of resources that might be available to
purchase an EHR.
Our final robustness tests sought to address
the potential for overestimating the impact of
HITECH by failing to adjust for hospitals that
were working toward EHR adoption before im-
plementation of meaningful-use incentives and
completed adoption after the incentives were
available. Hospital EHR adoption typically oc-
curs incrementally over multiple years,13 and
our main analytic approach gave HITECH credit
for all hospitals that first reached the basic EHR
threshold in the period after implementation of
the incentives—even if reaching that threshold
was the continuation of plans made before im-
plementation.
We therefore created a new measure that cap-
tured both basic EHR adoption and basic EHR
implementation if a hospital either reported full
implementation of the ten computerized func-
tions in at least one clinical unit or reported that
it was “beginning to implement” one or more
functions “in at least one unit” or “have resourc-
es to implement in the next year.” We then reran
our primary model, substituting this variable in
the years before the meaningful-use incentive
program (2008–10) so that HITECH did not re-
ceive credit for hospitals that completed imple-
mentationof an EHR after the incentive program
began but had already planned to implement the
EHR before the incentives became available. We
used a second approach to address this concern
by running our primary model again but shifting
the pre-post date forward one year (that is, we
compared 2008–11 to 2012–15). This approach
requires the strong assumption that all new basic
EHR adoption in the one year following mean-
ingful use incentives’ availability would have oc-
curred on its own.
To
determine
the
differential
impact
of
HITECH on EHR adoption based on hospital
type, we conducted stratified analyses by system
affiliation, ownership, size, teaching status, and
urban versus rural location. We then compared
the differences between slopes of EHR adoption
rates before and after implementation of mean-
ingful-use incentives for eligible and ineligible
hospitals within each category.
All models used ordinary least squares regres-
sions, with hospital-level clustering to account
for repeated observations. We chose ordinary
least squares regression over logistic regression
to enable us to directly interpret results in terms
of percentages of EHR adoption. Models were
adjusted for nonresponse bias by using weights
derived from a regression model that predicted
the likelihood of responding to the AHA IT sur-
vey based on hospital characteristics.We also ran
an unweighted set of results.
Limitations Our study had several important
limitations. First, ineligible hospitals are differ-
ent from eligible hospitals in terms of their
patient populations and the care they deliver.
Therefore, ineligible hospitals are not the perfect
control group. However, because meaningful
use is a national program, we lacked alternative
comparison groups. Furthermore, given that all
hospitals need to perform basic clinical tasks
such as medication ordering and problem track-
ing, we expected that the two groups of hospitals
would be similarly motivated to pursue EHR
adoption.
Second, although the overall response rates
for the AHA ITsupplement are high for a nation-
al institutional survey, nonresponders may have
differed from responders.We used the statistical
technique described above to account for this
potential bias. However, these adjustments were
not perfect.
Finally, we were not able to disentangle the
effect of the various individual components of
HITECH on EHR adoption. While the meaning-
ful-use incentive program was the centerpiece of
HITECH, complementary programs such as the
Regional Extension Center program and the
EHR certification program—alone or in combi-
nation with the meaningful-use program—could
have driven an increase in EHR adoption.
Study Results
Compared to eligible hospitals, ineligible hospi-
tals were more likely to be small (72 percent
versus 50 percent), located in the South (50 per-
centversus38percent),nonteaching(86percent
versus 75 percent), for profit (63 percent versus
17 percent), urban (84 percent versus 45 per-
cent), and affiliated with a health care system
(71 percent versus 59 percent) (Exhibit 1). Ineli-
gible hospitals also had a slightly lower percent-
age of admissions from Medicaid, compared to
eligible hospitals.
Adoption Among Eligible Versus Ineligi-
ble Hospitals Among eligible hospitals, EHR
adoption rates increased by an averageof 3.2 per-
cent annually in the period before implementa-
tion of the meaningful-use incentives (Exhibits 2
and 3). In the period after implementation, the
Hospital EHRs
1418
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 average annual increase was 14.2 percent, re-
flecting a change of 11.1 percentage points. In
comparison, among ineligible hospitals, the in-
crease before implementation was 0.1 percent,
and the increase after implementation was
3.3 percent. The difference-in-differences of
the slope was 7.9 percentage points.
When we compared eligible hospitals only
to long-term acute care hospitals, our results
were similar: The change from pre- to post-im-
plementation among eligible hospitals was 11.1
percentage points (from 3.1 percent to 14.3 per-
cent; p < 0:001), while the change among long-
term acute care hospitals was 2.9 percentage
points
(from
1.9
percent
to
4.8
percent;
p ¼ 0:156) (Appendix Exhibit A2).12 The differ-
ence-in-differences of the slope was 8.3 percent-
age points (p < 0:001).
When we compared only eligible and ineligible
hospitals that did not have an EHR before imple-
mentation of the meaningful-use incentives, we
found that the EHR adoption rate for eligible
hospitals increased by 16.5 percent per year,
on average, compared to 5.5 percent for ineligi-
ble hospitals (Appendix Exhibit A3).12 This re-
flects a difference-in-differences of 10.9 percent-
age points (p < 0:001).
Both our model that included hospital margins
as a control and our unweighted model produced
results that were almost identical to our primary
results, with differences-in-differences of 7.97
percentage points and 7.60 percentage points,
respectively (p < 0:001 for both) (Appendix Ex-
hibits A4 and A5).12
Finally, in our model that substituted basic
EHR adoption for either basic EHR adoption
or planned implementation in the period before
meaningful-use incentives, the difference-in-
differences decreased to 3.86 percentage points
(p < 0:05) (Appendix Exhibit A6).12 In our mod-
el that shifted the pre-post date forward by one
year, the difference-in-differences decreased to
4.9 percentage points (p < 0:001) (Appendix
Exhibit A7).12
Adoption Among Eligible Versus Ineligi-
ble Hospitals, By Hospital Type When we ex-
amined whether the difference-in-differences of
slope varied based on system affiliation, owner-
ship type, size, urban or rural location, and
teaching status, the only significant difference
that we observed was for ownership type (Exhib-
it 4). Among private for-profit hospitals, the dif-
ference-in-differences of the slope was 13.3 per-
centage points, significantly greater than the
1.8-percentage-point
difference-in-differences
among private not-for-profit hospitals.
Exhibit 1
Hospitals eligible and ineligible for meaningful-use incentives to adopt at least a basic
electronic health record, by selected characteristics
Characteristic
Eligible hospitals
Ineligible hospitals
Size
Small
50.2%
72.4%
Medium
39.8
24.8
Large
9.9
2.7
Region
Northeast
12.3
14.8
Midwest
30.1
20.5
South
38.4
50.4
West
19.8
14.3
Teaching status
Major
5.6
0.0
Minor
19.9
13.7
Nonteaching
74.6
86.3
Ownership
For profit
17.3
62.9
Not for profit
59.9
18.9
Public
22.8
18.2
Location
Urban
44.8
83.9
Rural
55.2
16.1
System affiliated
No
41.3
29.3
Yes
58.7
70.7
Medicaid admissions as percent of
total admissions
16.9%
10.9%
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2013 from the American Hospital Association’s Annual Health
Information Technology Supplemental Survey. NOTES There were 4,268 hospitals in our data eligible
to participate in the program of meaningful-use incentives, and 851 hospitals ineligible to
participate. All comparisons were significant (p < 0:001) using chi-square tests for differences
across categories.
Exhibit 2
Percentages of hospitals that adopted at least a basic electronic health record system in
2008–15, by eligibility for meaningful-use incentives
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2008–15 from the American Hospital Association’s Annual
Health Information Technology Supplemental Survey.
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1419
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 Discussion
HITECH is a unique policy intervention that
offered hospitals financial incentives in the form
of bonus payments to speed the rate of EHR
adoption. Even though the large observed in-
crease in EHR adoption among eligible hospitals
after meaningful-use incentives were introduced
is compelling evidence of HITECH’s effective-
ness, it is possible that many hospitals would
have adopted EHRs without the policy interven-
tion. By using ineligible hospitals as a control
group, we found that HITECH can be credited
with increasing the rate of EHR adoption by 8
percentage points per year. A conservative esti-
mate that did not give HITECH credit for any
adoption that was planned before implementa-
tion of the incentive program reduced the effect
size to 4 percentage points per year. For policy
makers, our results are good news and suggest
that HITECH could serve as a model for driving
the adoption and use of other valuable technolo-
gies. However, our results do not imply that
HITECH has been an unqualified success. Real
challenges remain, particularly in the domains
of interoperability and usability. Nonetheless,
speeding the national timeline of hospitals’
EHR adoption was a key first step toward digi-
tizing the health care system and facilitating the
transition to paying for value.
Our results raise the question of whether the
annual 8-percentage-point increase attributable
to HITECH is substantial and reflects good value
for the $20.9 billion that was paid to hospitals
through 2015 (with additional funding paid to
eligible professionals)6 as a result of their meet-
ing meaningful-use criteria. Given that the level
of EHR adoption among eligible hospitals in
2010 was 15 percent, an increase of 8 percentage
points per year suggests that in five years the
incentives moved US hospitals past the half-
way mark. There are likely very few other policies
that have driven such substantial change in such
a short period. It is also worth noting that the
incentive amount covers only a small fraction of
the total cost for hospitals to adopt an EHR
(10 percent, according to the American Hospital
Association),14 which suggests that the incentive
was efficient. However, there were also incen-
tives available for eligible professionals (who
are largely ambulatory providers) that could
have increased hospitals’ responsiveness by
cross-subsidizing hospital costs and thereby
could have contributed to the results that we
observed. Ultimately, a comprehensive assess-
ment of the value of HITECH requires quantify-
ing the gains in terms of quality and efficiency of
Exhibit 3
Average annual increase in the percentages of hospitals adopting at least a basic
electronic health record system, by eligibility status, before and after implementation of
meaningful-use incentives
Before
meaningful use
(2008–10)
After
meaningful use
(2011–15)
Difference
(percentage
points)
Eligible hospitals
3.2%
14.2%
11.1
Ineligible hospitals
0.1%
3.3%
3.2
Difference-in-differences
7.87
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2008–15 from the American Hospital Association’s Annual
Health Information Technology Supplemental Survey. NOTE All differences and differences-
in-differences were significant (p < 0:001) from ordinary least squares regression.
Exhibit 4
Differences in changes over time by eligibility for
meaningful-use incentives between percentages of
hospitals that adopted at least a basic electronic health
record system, by hospital characteristics
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data for 2008–15 from the American
Hospital Association’s Annual Health Information Technology
Supplemental Survey. NOTES The exhibit shows the results of
a difference-in-differences analysis that compared adoption of
electronic health record (EHR) systems by hospitals eligible to
participate in the meaningful use of EHRs incentive program (im-
plemented in 2011 under the Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health [HITECH] Act of 2009) and those
ineligible to participate, before and after the program’s imple-
mentation. For example, among system-affiliated eligible hospi-
tals, compared to system-affiliated ineligible hospitals, eligible
hospitals had 7.9 percent point greater adoption in 2011–15,
compared to in 2008–10. Small is fewer than 100 beds. Medium
is 100–499 beds. Large is 500 or more beds. “Minor teaching sta-
tus” is hospitals approved to participate in residency or intern-
ship training by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education. The error bars show 95% confidence intervals. The on-
ly category in which the difference-in-differences were different
from each other was ownership, with for-profit private signifi-
cantly greater than not-for-profit private (p < 0:001).
Hospital EHRs
1420
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 care, where the evidence to date has been
mixed.15–17
Another important consideration in the value
assessment is that HITECH did not target incen-
tives only to hospitals that otherwise would not
have adopted an EHR.18 Thus, at least some of the
hospitals that received incentives already had an
EHR or would have adopted one on their own
during the HITECH period even if the HITECH
incentive program had not existed, which was a
suboptimal use of public dollars. The results of
our robustness tests that did not give HITECH
credit for basic EHR adoption among hospitals
that reported plans to adopt before 2011 suggest
a 50 percent reduction in effect size (from
8 percentage points to 4 percentage points).
However, our finding that, compared to private
not-for-profit hospitals, private for-profit insti-
tutions responded much more strongly to the
incentives bolsters the argument that the incen-
tives were successful at moving nonadopters.
We would expect private for-profit hospitals to
behave in ways that help the institutions achieve
their financial goals. Thus, their low EHR adop-
tion rate in the period before the meaningful-use
incentives and the large increase in that rate after
the incentives became available suggest that the
program was largely effective in targeting hospi-
tals that would not have otherwise adopted an
EHR.While a more efficient use of public dollars
would have created an incentive program that
targeted only nonadopters, such an approach
would have equity implications: It would unfairly
penalize hospitals that took a risk in investing in
a technology with compelling patient benefits,
particularly in the safety domain, but with an
uncertain return on investment. Furthermore,
it could have dampened hospitals’ willingness
to invest in technology in the future because of
concern about missing out on potential govern-
ment incentives.
Policy Implications
Our findings have implications for future policy
efforts that seek to spur technology adoption.
They suggest that financial incentives tied to
technology adoption are likely to substantially
speed uptake across a range of hospital types.
However, given that previous analyses of ambu-
latory care departments failed to find an effect of
HITECH,5 it is not clear which mechanisms are at
play. It may be that hospitals have organizational
capabilities to understand and react to complex
incentive programs such as meaningful-use in-
centives that are lacking in ambulatory practices.
It is also possible that the different results are
explained by the increasing maturity of the EHR
market. In 2009, when HITECH was passed, the
ambulatory EHR market was less mature than
the hospital EHR market; there were several
thousand certified ambulatory EHR products
from which to choose—which could have made
it more difficult for ambulatory care providers to
respond.
More broadly, our results raise the question of
why HITECH was successful in driving change
among hospitals when many other policy efforts
that seek to change hospitals’ and ambulatory
providers’ behavior have not succeeded. In
particular, there is mixed evidence on the effec-
tiveness of pay-for-performance programs in
improving quality of care.19 We suspect that a
primary reason is the sense of inevitability:
EHR adoption was likely in many hospitals’
long-term plans, and the availability of incen-
tives may have simply moved it up on the priority
list. In contrast, many hospitals might not have
been aware of the magnitude of issues such as
hospital-acquired infections or avoidable read-
missions until they became the focus of national
policies. It is also possible that hospitals felt
more confident that they could be successful
in responding to the meaningful-use incentive
program, compared to in reducing hospital-
acquired infections or avoidable readmissions,
because implementing an EHR system was per-
ceived as easier than meaningfully improving
patient outcomes. While adopting an EHR is a
complex undertaking, the process’s individual
steps (for example, selecting a vendor and plan-
ning for implementation) may seem more
straightforward than those related to improving
clinical outcomes.
Conclusion
We sought to determine the extent to which
HITECH should be credited with the large in-
crease in EHR adoption among hospitals that
occurred following its passage. We found that
HITECH drove annual gains in EHR adoption
Speeding the national
timeline of hospitals’
EHR adoption was a
key first step toward
digitizing the health
care system.
August 2017
36:8
Health Affairs
1421
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 of 8 percentage points in the five years after
implementation of the act’s meaningful-use in-
centive program (with 4 percentage points as a
conservative lower bound). Given the complexi-
ty of large-scale change in hospitals, this result is
dramatic and suggests that HITECH can serve as
a model for other countries seeking to increase
EHR adoption among hospitals and for other
policy efforts seeking to promote technology
adoption more generally. ▪
This work was presented at the
AcademyHealth Annual Research
Meeting, Minneapolis, MN, June 16,
2015. The corresponding author had full
access to the data in the study and
takes responsibility for the integrity of
the data and the accuracy of the data
analysis.
NOTES
1 Blumenthal D. Stimulating the
adoption of health information
technology. N Engl J Med. 2009;
360(15):1477–9.
2 Blumenthal D. Health information
technology: what is the federal gov-
ernment’s role? [Internet]. New
York (NY): Commonwealth Fund;
2006 Mar [cited 2017 Mar 13].
(Publication No. 907). Available
from: http://www.commonwealth
fund.org/~/media/files/
publications/fund-report/2006/
mar/health-information-
technology–what-is-the-federal-
governments-role/blumenthal_
hit_907-pdf.pdf
3 Woskie LR, Adler-Milstein J. Chap-
ter 7: coordinator’s corner. In:
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Health information technology in
the United States, 2015: transition to
a post-HITECH world [Internet].
Princeton (NJ): RWJF; [cited 2017
Mar 13]. p. 108. Available from:
http://www.rwjf.org/content/dam/
farm/reports/reports/2015/
rwjf423440
4 Adler-Milstein J, DesRoches CM,
Kralovec P, Foster G, Worzala C,
Charles D, et al. Electronic health
record adoption in US hospitals:
progress continues, but challenges
persist. Health Aff (Millwood).
2015;34(12):2174–80.
5 Mennemeyer ST, Menachemi N,
Rahurkar S, Ford EW. Impact of the
HITECH Act on physicians’ adoption
of electronic health records. J Am
Med Inform Assoc. 2016;23(2):
375–9.
6 CMS.gov. EHR incentive programs:
data and program reports [Internet].
Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medi-
care and Medicaid Services; [last
modified 2017 Mar 1; cited 2017 Mar
13]. Available from: https://
www.cms.gov/regulations-and-
guidance/legislation/ehrincentive
programs/dataandreports.html
7 NHS England. Harnessing the in-
formation revolution: Wachter Re-
view [Internet]. London: NHS Eng-
land; 2016 [cited 2017 Jun 26].
Available from: https://www
.england.nhs.uk/digitaltechnology/
info-revolution/wachter-review/
8 Walker D, Mora A, Demosthenidy
MM, Menachemi N, Diana ML.
Meaningful use of EHRs among
hospitals ineligible for incentives
lags behind that of other hospitals,
2009–13. Health Aff (Millwood).
2016;35(3):495–501.
9 Field TS, Rochon P, Lee M, Gavendo
L, Baril JL, Gurwitz JH. Computer-
ized clinical decision support during
medication ordering for long-term
care residents with renal insuffi-
ciency. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2009;16(4):480–5.
10 Judge J, Field TS, DeFlorio M,
Laprino J, Auger J, Rochon P, et al.
Prescribers’ responses to alerts dur-
ing medication ordering in the long
term care setting. J Am Med Inform
Assoc. 2006;13(4):385–90.
11 Gurwitz JH, Field TS, Rochon P,
Judge J, Harrold LR, Bell CM, et al.
Effect of computerized provider or-
der entry with clinical decision sup-
port on adverse drug events in the
long-term care setting. J Am Geriatr
Soc. 2008;56(12):2225–33.
12 To access the Appendix, click on the
Appendix link in the box to the right
of the article online.
13 Adler-Milstein J, Everson J, Lee SY.
Sequencing of EHR adoption among
US hospitals and the impact of
meaningful use. J Am Med Inform
Assoc. 2014;21(6):984–91.
14 American Hospital Association.
Statement of the American Hospital
Association to the U.S. Senate
Committee on Health, Education,
Labor and Pensions: America’s
health IT transformation: translat-
ing the promise of electronic health
records into better care. [Internet].
Washington (DC): AHA; 2015 Mar 17
[cited 2017 Mar 14]. Available from:
http://www.aha.org/advocacy-
issues/testimony/2015/150317-
statement-helpit.pdf
15 Adler-Milstein J, Everson J, Lee SY.
EHR adoption and hospital perfor-
mance: time‐related effects. Health
Serv Res. 2015;50(6):1751–71.
16 Furukawa MF, Eldridge N, Wang Y,
Metersky M. Electronic health rec-
ord adoption and rates of in-hospital
adverse events. J Patient Saf. 2016
Feb 6. [Epub ahead of print].
17 Jones SS, Rudin RS, Perry T,
Shekelle PG. Health information
technology: an updated systematic
review with a focus on meaningful
use. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160(1):
48–54.
18 Dranove D, Garthwaite C, Ody C, Li
B. Investment subsidies and the
adoption of electronic medical rec-
ords in hospitals [Internet]. Cam-
bridge (MA): National Bureau of
Economic Research; 2014 Oct [cited
2017 Jul 5]. (NBER Working Paper
No. 20553). Available for download
(fee required) from: http://www
.nber.org/papers/w20553
19 Van Herck P, De Smedt D,
Annemans L, Remmen R, Rosenthal
MB, Sermeus W. Systematic review:
effects, design choices, and context
of pay-for-performance in health
care. BMC Health Serv Res. 2010;
10(1):247.
Hospital EHRs
1422
Health Affairs
August 2017
36:8
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
