 Review
Crossing the health IT chasm: considerations and policy
recommendations to overcome current challenges and
enable value-based care
Julia Adler-Milstein,1 Peter J Embi,2 Blackford Middleton,3 Indra Neil Sarkar,4 and
Jeff Smith5
1School of Information, Department of Health Management and Policy, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Ar-
bor, MI, USA, 2Regenstrief Institute, Indianapolis, IN, USA, 3Apervita Inc., Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA,
USA, 4Center for Biomedical Informatics, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA and 5American Medical Informatics Association,
Bethesda, MD, USA
And participants in the 2015 AMIA Policy Invitational
Corresponding Author: Julia Adler-Milstein, School of Information, Department of Health Management and Policy, School
of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Phone: 734-615-7435. E-mail: juliaam@umich.edu
Received 21 December 2016; Revised 5 February 2017; Accepted 13 February 2017
ABSTRACT
While great progress has been made in digitizing the US health care system, today’s health information technol-
ogy (IT) infrastructure remains largely a collection of systems that are not designed to support a transition to
value-based care. In addition, the pursuit of value-based care, in which we deliver better care with better out-
comes at lower cost, places new demands on the health care system that our IT infrastructure needs to be able
to support. Provider organizations pursuing new models of health care delivery and payment are finding that
their electronic systems lack the capabilities needed to succeed. The result is a chasm between the current
health IT ecosystem and the health IT ecosystem that is desperately needed.
In this paper, we identify a set of focal goals and associated near-term achievable actions that are critical to pursue in
order to enable the health IT ecosystem to meet the acute needs of modern health care delivery. These ideas emerged
from discussions that occurred during the 2015 American Medical Informatics Association Policy Invitational Meeting.
To illustrate the chasm and motivate our recommendations, we created a vignette from the multistakeholder perspec-
tives of a patient, his provider, and researchers/innovators. It describes an idealized scenario in which each stake-
holder’s needs are supported by an integrated health IT environment. We identify the gaps preventing such a reality
today and present associated policy recommendations that serve as a blueprint for critical actions that would enable
us to cross the current health IT chasm by leveraging systems and information to routinely deliver high-value care.
Key words: policy, health reform, AMIA
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE
While great progress has been made in digitizing the US health care
system, today’s health information technology (IT) infrastructure re-
mains largely a collection of systems that are not designed to support
a transition to value-based care. Indeed, the vast majority of hospitals
and ambulatory providers have electronic health record (EHR) sys-
tems, yet many continue to use fax and phone to exchange health in-
formation across the care continuum.1 In addition, the pursuit of
value-based care, in which we deliver better care with better out-
comes at lower cost, places new demands on the health care system
V
C The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association.
All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
1036
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 24(5), 2017, 1036–1043
doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocx017
Advance Access Publication Date: 5 April 2017
Review
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 that our IT infrastructure needs to be able to support. Provider orga-
nizations pursuing new models of health care delivery and payment
are finding that their electronic systems lack the capabilities needed
to succeed. The result is a chasm between the current health IT eco-
system and the health IT ecosystem that is needed. Both the technol-
ogies themselves and the application of those technologies and the
data they contain urgently need improvement to support the transi-
tion to value-based care. The existing obstacles are largely not
knowledge barriers, but execution barriers. That is, we know what
needs to be done but not necessarily how best to do it in terms of
which specific actions should be pursued by which specific stake-
holders. And while the barriers to successful execution are consider-
able and require coordinated multistakeholder action, they could,
and should, be tackled with concerted, nonheroic efforts.
In this paper, we identify a set of focal goals for which near-term
achievable actions to meet those goals would enable the health IT
ecosystem to better meet the acute needs of modern health care de-
livery. These goals were identified in discussions that occurred dur-
ing the 2015 American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA)
Policy Invitational Meeting, held September 17–18, 2015. In this pa-
per, we advance these goals by making high-level policy recommen-
dations that could serve as a blueprint for future policymaking. We
purposefully avoided consideration of a long-term vision made pos-
sible with breakthrough advances in technology, a major policy
overhaul, or other changes that are either uncertain or very difficult.
Instead, goals and associated policy recommendations are presented
in 3 sets that reflect the differing needs of stakeholder groups essen-
tial to the delivery of value-based care.
To illustrate the chasm and set the stage for our recommendations,
we created a vignette from the multistakeholder perspectives of a pa-
tient, his provider, and researchers/innovators; the vignette is included
as a Supplementary Appendix to the paper. It describes an idealized
scenario in which each stakeholder’s needs are supported by an inte-
grated health IT environment that is ubiquitous. That is, aspects of the
idealized scenario exist today in certain places within our delivery sys-
tem (and these demonstrations informed development of the scenario),
but they are typically confined to a given provider or delivery system
rather than widespread across our delivery system. We identify the
gaps that prevent the idealized scenario from being a widespread real-
ity today, and present associated goals and actionable policy recom-
mendations that should be urgently pursued to help cross the current
health IT chasm by leveraging systems and information to improve
care processes and outcomes within a value-based framework.
SECTION 1: PATIENT PERSPECTIVE
In the vignette, patients have full and ready access to their data, can
actively contribute to their care, and can easily participate in re-
search. Despite progress in patient-centered care and participant en-
gagement in research, key gaps remain between the vignette and our
current health IT ecosystem (Table 1).
Policy recommendations
Due in large part to federal requirements under the EHR Incentive
Program, also known as Meaningful Use, >96% of hospitals4 and
>50% of physicians5 have some informatics tools they need to en-
able patient access to health information, contribute to their care,
and engage in research. Additional functionalities will be required
beginning in 2018 for hospitals participating in Meaningful Use
(MU) and for eligible clinicians participating in the merit-based
incentive payment system, such as requirements meant to spur more
contribution of patient-generated health data (PGHD) and patient
access to data through application programming interfaces (APIs).
While API efforts hold promise, they are nascent and uncertainties
remain about how their technical specifications and governance will
inhibit or facilitate patient data access.
Similarly, efforts such as OpenNotes are helping patients access
and contribute to their own records and have been found to improve
care quality and patient engagement,6 but standards for PGHD are
generally nonexistent. Facilitation of patient participation in research
is also lacking. Most commercial EHRs lack key functionality required
by a registrar-based consent process,7 and they do not readily allow
for prospective clinical trial participation based on patient characteris-
tics. The ability to reuse data and biospecimens for research presents a
great opportunity to advance biomedical science at relatively lower
cost to patients and society. However, this too remains challenging, as
it is unknown what percentage of hospitals participate in biobanks or
what percentage of patients are asked to participate.3
To cross the health IT chasm from a patient perspective, policy
development and coordinated policy execution is necessary to (1)
improve patients’ access to data created at the point of care as well
as data generated by mHealth and related technologies, (2) enable
patient participation in and contribution to care delivery and health
management, (3) more readily engage patients in research, and (4)
positively identify, authenticate, and match patients with their data.
Improve patient access to clinical data
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
grants patients the right to electronic copies of their health informa-
tion. To date, federal policy has encouraged use of patient portals and
“Blue Button” functionality, which provide patients with select infor-
mation usually covering medications, allergies, and some labs and
claims information.8 An emerging set of policies will soon encourage
the use of APIs to provide access to patients.9 However, these
approaches presuppose what data patients want and will need for
health maintenance, wellness, and research.10 HIPAA should be mod-
ified or clarified to state that patients have a right to all data main-
tained by a covered entity’s designated record set11 or, alternatively,
digital copies of their legal medical record.12 Further, EHR certifica-
tion and health care system accreditation should be tied to making it
easy for patients not only to obtain their data, but to obtain the data
in a manner that preserves “computability” and standardization such
that the data can be readily transferred to and consumed by other
health IT systems with little or no need for further processing.
Improve patient access to data generated by mHealth and related
technologies
A new framework is needed to fit today’s highly connected world.
HIPAA should be strengthened and extended, in particular to ac-
commodate the broader set of data and stakeholders that are rele-
vant to patient health, such as data from the use of Fitbit and Apple
Watch. A recent government report indicated that a burgeoning sec-
tor of technology applications routinely handle patient data without
being considered covered entities or business associates, and that
such “non-covered entities” (NCEs) “may collect, share, or use
health information about individuals in ways that may put such
data at risk of being shared improperly.”13
Indeed, better understanding and enforcement of HIPAA, which
emphasizes the patient’s right to data access, could help shift today’s
paradigm away from one that makes data access difficult. However,
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
1037
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 it is likely that new federal policy is needed for NCEs commensurate
with policies for covered entities and business associates, with strict,
enforceable, and substantial penalties for noncompliance. Absent
congressional action on NCEs, efforts to develop industry codes of
conduct should be reconsidered and prioritized.13
Achieving an environment in which access to a broad scope of
health-related data, facilitated by appropriate privacy and security
protections, will not be sufficient to ensure that data are also accu-
rate and usable. Indeed, broader access, even if secure, could intro-
duce new risks, especially for technology that is not regulated. While
accuracy issues exist for data both within EHRs and generated by
consumer devices,14–16 the resulting harm is not yet known. Policy-
makers should therefore monitor these issues and identify areas
where market forces may not be sufficiently strong to protect
consumers.
Enable patient participation in and contribution to care delivery and
health management
PGHD can come in many forms, and federal policy has thus far
rightly been vague in prescribing specific kinds of PGHD to be re-
ported. This approach should continue until a set of technologies
and data types takes hold in the market and is proven to improve
care outcomes. However, the government is in a position to help
lower barriers to entry by encouraging development of harmonized
standards for various classes of PGHD, such as PGHD emanating
from wearables that transmit disease-specific data. Should such
standards be deemed sufficiently mature, they could be incorporated
into a future edition of certified health IT so that all EHRs can read-
ily accept such data. Additionally, the federal government could
help advance patient participation in and contribution to care by en-
suring that patients have minimum-level assurance of privacy pro-
tections
and
addressing
emergent
risks
associated with
data
inaccuracy and poor usability, as described in the mHealth recom-
mendation above.
Table 1. Overview of vignette and associated gaps from the patient
perspective
Typical patient experience in the
not-too-distant future
Gaps between the current patient
experience and the future
1. Patient schedules an appoint-
ment with his primary care
provider online via the
patient portal. The patient
can access and transfer medi-
cal history and records from
his previous provider online
prior to the scheduled visit.
1. Most health care providers
have not enabled patients to
schedule appointments
online1 or provide past medi-
cal records electronically.
2. Patient receives an e-mail
prior to the appointment that
directs him to update his
active medication list, family
and past medical history, and
allergy information. The
patient completes an online
health risk assessment and
enters the issues he wants to
discuss with the provider.
2a. Most health care providers
have not enabled functional-
ity to allow patients to submit
patient-generated data
online.1
2b. Standards for patient-
generated health data are
immature or, in many instan-
ces, nonexistent.
3a. After the provider sees the
patient and sends him to a
specialist, the patient meets
with a patient navigator, who
asks about his interest in par-
ticipating in a clinical trial.
3a. Only a small proportion of
patients receive clinical trial
information from their pri-
mary physician.2
3b. The patient navigator asks
the patient about granting
permission for storage of his
information and residual
blood for researchers devel-
oping new diagnostic tests
and treatments.
3b. It is rare for health care pro-
viders to participate in bio-
banks.3
Table 2. Goals and policy recommendations to address gaps in the
patient domain
Domain
Goal
Policy recommendations
Patient
Improve patient access to
clinical data
Clarify HIPAA to state that
patients have a right to all data
maintained by a covered
entity’s designated record set
or to a digital copy of their
legal medical record through
guidance by the Office for
Civil Rights.
Include in EHR certification and
provider accreditation that
patient data is transmitted in a
manner that preserves comput-
ability.
Improve patient access to
data generated by
mHealth and related
technologies
Extend HIPAA or HIPAA-like
requirements to noncovered
entities. If not politically via-
ble, convene industry stake-
holders to develop coordinated
“codes of conduct.”
Monitor widespread and persis-
tent market failures to address
data inaccuracy and poor
usability that put patients at
risk.
Enable patient participa-
tion and contribution
to care delivery and
health management
As the market for mHealth and
other consumer-facing applica-
tions matures, encourage mul-
tistakeholder coordination of
standards within classes of
patient-generated health data
and eventually incorporate
into health IT certification
standards.
More readily engage
patients in research
Through public-private collabo-
ration, pursue a digital infra-
structure, including
commercial EHRs, that ena-
bles machine-readable consent
and specimen tracking and
alerts clinicians and patients
about available research
opportunities.
Incentivize clinicians and health
care systems to partner with
researchers to identify poten-
tial clinical research candidates
using tools such as phenotyp-
ing algorithms.
1038
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 More readily engage patients in research
Widespread adoption of EHRs has reinvigorated a conversation
over how best to engage patients as participants in research and en-
sure that they have information on potentially relevant clinical trials.
Indeed, the Precision Medicine Initiative17 seeks to enroll 1 million
patients within the next 2 years, and several efforts at the National
Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug Administration have
sought to improve access to clinical trial information and opportuni-
ties to engage in research.18 Additionally, the federal government
has proposed modifying current human subject protections for use
of biospecimens and patient data for research.19 These proposals,
when finalized, must streamline participation, not complicate it.
Consent management should be facilitated by a digital infrastructure
that enables machine-readable consent and specimen tracking.20
Further, more emphasis should be placed on developing and testing
ways to alert clinicians and patients about available research oppor-
tunities. Approaches such as clinical trial alerts, analogous to clinical
decision support mechanisms that can identify when a patient’s
EHR aligns with clinical research eligibility criteria, are now sup-
ported by some EHRs and have been shown to be effective, but are
underused.18–23 Both of these informatics challenges are ripe for
public-private collaboration. Large-scale initiatives, including those
directed by Sage Bionetworks, the Genetic Alliance, and the Global
Alliance for Genomic Health, are piloting various approaches to
electronic consent.24 The federal government should seek to high-
light the most promising approaches and to understand how com-
mercial EHRs could perform such functionality. Additionally, the
federal government should consider ways to incentivize clinicians
and health care systems to partner with researchers to identify po-
tential clinical research candidates using tools such as phenotyping
algorithms, in order to make generation of evidence a routine part
of practice.25–28
SECTION 2: PROVIDER PERSPECTIVE
In the vignette, providers have full and ready access to patient data,
spend
minimal
time
on
documentation,
and
easily
consult
knowledge-based tools through APIs to facilitate patient care.
Despite progress in clinical decision support and efforts to stream-
line quality reporting, significant gaps remain between the vignette
and our current health IT ecosystem (Table 3).
Policy recommendations
A networked health care system does not yet exist, and as a result,
clinicians do not have access to prior information about their pa-
tients or the ability to draw on the ever-expanding knowledge bases
relevant to clinical decisions. Adding to the clinician burden is the
fact that uncoordinated demands are put on clinical documentation
for an ever-expanding number of purposes.31 To cross the health IT
chasm from a provider perspective, policy development and coordi-
nated policy execution are necessary to (1) enable interoperability
within an API context, (2) develop and implement a documentation-
simplification framework, and (3) pursue a documentation-relevant
reimbursement redesign.
Enable interoperability within an API context
Multiple stakeholders have argued that APIs are necessary for the
next evolution of health IT to enable access to health information by
patients and clinicians and improve interoperability. Policymakers
have heeded this advice by requiring federally certified health IT to
develop and publish APIs as part of the 2015 edition. In the near
term, federal officials must ensure that APIs are standards-based and
published in the public domain, so that they do not carry forward
the siloed legacy of EHR systems. Second, APIs certified by the fed-
eral government should include a core set of data elements, similar
to the MU clinical dataset, for example. This core needs to be pro-
filed by groups that capture clinical data in practice and use the data
in research and clinical decision support, extended over time
through a community-endorsement process. Such a process should
solicit input from clinical societies to determine the minimum data-
set appropriate for associated clinical conditions, such as querying
an institution for pediatric data with an American Academy of
Pediatrics–endorsed standard dataset. In the context of care deliv-
ery, specialty societies are well positioned to describe the data that
matter to their constituencies and could therefore work with the in-
formatics community to play a critical role in specifying the data ele-
ments that APIs should expose. Of particular value is to establish
forums for proactive conversations between specialty societies, in-
formatics experts, standards developers, and health IT vendors. Sub-
sequently, a federal partner, such as the National Library of
Medicine, should house and manage metadata crosswalks once stan-
dardization across clinical societies for common datasets has been
established. Both of these tasks, ensuring that APIs “work” in prac-
tice and defining core data elements, are substantial and challenging.
APIs are early in the hype cycle, and many nontechnical challenges
need to be addressed for them to deliver on their potential.32 In
terms of core data elements, as both the scope and depth of data
grow, it will be increasingly hard to identify a core set of data needed
for clinical care. Instead of being daunted by these challenges, we need
Table 3. Overview of provider-perspective vignette and associated
gaps
Typical provider experience in
the not-too-distant future
Gaps between the current pro-
vider experience and the future
1. Prior to the patient visit, the
provider can access critical
new test results and reports,
relevant biomedical literature,
and all patient information
provided by the patient and
previous providers within the
EHR.
1. Lack of standardized APIs lim-
its clinician access to external
data and knowledge, advanced
analytics, and other tools to
provide patient-specific cogni-
tive assistance integrated into
the clinical workflow.29
2. Upon conducting the physical
exam, the provider completes
the note before leaving the
exam room, using a template
based on the patient’s profile
and containing prepopulated
information. The provider
then generates an online spe-
cialist referral.
2. Providers typically must com-
plete substantial documenta-
tion and abstraction to meet
external requirements, in par-
ticular reporting of clinical
quality measures.
3. Prompted by review of the
patient note, the specialist
wants further information
about the patient’s risk based
on family history. The special-
ist consults an online pheno-
typing algorithm, which
returns a predictive analytic
result indicating patient risk.
3. Knowledge-based tools using
standard APIs are not widely
available, and it is rare for
health systems to encode and
implement the required clinical
knowledge in the form of clini-
cal decision support.30
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
1039
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 to recognize their magnitude and be willing to pursue the associated
ambitious policies that may be required to address them, in particu-
lar, applying more aggressively constraining data standards and en-
suring adherence to those standards across health IT products.
Develop and implement a documentation-simplification framework
If poor interoperability and usability are symptoms of our current
health care system, a primary component of the disease must be doc-
umentation requirements, driven by reimbursement, legal, quality,
research, and public health purposes that do not directly contribute
to point-of-care encounters. To address this unsustainable para-
digm, we need an empirically based regulatory compliance frame-
work for documentation simplification. This framework should
inform a drastic overhaul and simplification of quality measure-
ment, ensure availability of coded clinical data from EHRs for qual-
ity assessment and clinical decision support, and guide a redesign of
reimbursement requirements.
The 2011 AMIA Policy Invitational focused on clinical docu-
mentation, and it was the consensus at that meeting that “in the
move to a technology-enabled healthcare environment, the main
purpose of documentation should be to support patient care and im-
proved outcomes for individuals and populations and that documen-
tation for other purposes should be generated as a byproduct of care
delivery.”33 A set of guiding principles for clinical data capture and
documentation was produced along with other relevant recommen-
dations as an output; these should further define the parameters and
scope of a documentation-simplification framework.33
Develop and implement quality measure simplification
One of the primary aims of the documentation-simplification frame-
work should be quality measurement. Therefore, we should begin to
pursue
quality
measurement
simplification,
informed
by
the
documentation-simplification framework. This could be done by de-
constructing quality measures in an electronic environment by devel-
oping
common
data
elements
(CDEs)
required
for
quality
measurement, resource use, and research. Examples include the
National Library of Medicine CDE Resource Portal34 and the Cen-
ters for Medicaid and Medicare Services Assessment Data Element
Library.35 CDEs will enable data collection, extraction, and report-
ing using a common data model in which each element is deemed as
high value to multiple stakeholders. A potential goal could be to
make gathering >95% of the data elements for quality reporting au-
tomatic or a byproduct of clinical documentation.36 This approach
could also inform measures beyond quality. Measures required un-
der the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act should simi-
larly be held to a standard of high levels of evidence and value.
Specifically, measures associated with the Advancing Care Informa-
tion performance category and Clinical Practice Improvement Activ-
ities represent additional opportunities to simplify data collection
using common data elements.
Pursue documentation-relevant reimbursement redesign
Another function for which the framework could be leveraged is to
address what is referred to as general “note bloat.” The initial focus
could be on evaluation and management guidelines to address ineffi-
ciencies for clinicians at the point of care. The Centers for Medicaid
and Medicare Services should focus on evaluation and management
coding guidelines as a way to revise and simplify documentation and
consider removing, or clarifying, the prescriptive components sur-
rounding time-based billing. As we move to value-based care, the
justification for detailed documentation guidelines should become
less important to payers. The US Department of Health and Human
Services should encourage using different approaches to documenta-
tion, such as a “delta” note, care team note, or interdisciplinary
treatment plan. These efforts could be funded through Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Information demonstration projects and
could initially use requirements outlined by the Medicare Modern-
ization Act of 2003 as a blueprint.37
Table 4. Goals and policy recommendations to address gaps in the
provider domain
Domain
Goal
Policy recommendations
Provider
Enable interoper-
ability within
an API context
Federal officials work to ensure
that APIs are standards-based
and published in the public
domain as a component of the
federal Health IT Certification
Program.
APIs include core data elements
that have received community
endorsement resulting from col-
laborations between specialty
societies, informatics experts,
standards developers, and health
IT vendors.
The National Library of Medicine
should house and manage meta-
data crosswalks once standard-
ization across clinical societies
for common datasets has been
established.
Develop and
implement a
documentation
simplification
framework
Develop an empirically based regu-
latory compliance framework
for documentation simplification
that assesses costs and benefits
of standardizing and collecting
specific data elements, places
higher value on elements with
minimal collection burden, and
places higher value on documen-
tation that supports patient care
and improved outcomes.
Develop and
implement
quality measure
simplification
Deconstruct quality measures in
the electronic environment by
developing common data ele-
ments required for quality meas-
urement, resource use, and
research.
Collect, extract, and report use of a
common data model of elements
that are of high value to multiple
stakeholders.
Pursue documen-
tation-relevant
reimbursement
redesign
Revise evaluation and management
coding guidelines and consider
removing prescriptive compo-
nents of time-based billing.
Aggressively pursue alternative
payment models that have dem-
onstrated benefits to cost and
quality.
1040
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 SECTION 3: RESEARCHER AND INNOVATOR
PERSPECTIVES
In the vignette, researchers and innovators can readily access com-
plete patient data and engage patients by integrating research and in-
novations into clinical care. Today, clinical care, research, and
innovation typically occur in silos without integrated data or pro-
cesses, resulting in substantial gaps between the vignette and our
current health IT ecosystem (Table 5).
Policy recommendations
The federal government has invested, and continues to invest, sub-
stantial sums to build research networks, such as PCORnet,39 the
National Center for Biomedical Computing,40 the Clinical and
Translational Science Awards Program,41 and the Precision Medi-
cine Initiative Cohort Program.42 However, smaller-scale research
embedded in provider organizations faces burdensome regulatory
requirements as well as challenges in integrating research require-
ments into clinical care processes. We have also not yet created an
environment that can foster an expanding ecosystem of innovative
health applications and analytics that are both safe and effective.
Most innovators develop applications absent clear standards or pro-
tocols, or a sustainable pathway for retrieval of patient data. To
cross the health IT chasm from the researcher and innovator per-
spectives, policy development and coordinated policy execution are
necessary to create a policy framework for research and innovation
and to develop and implement an app-vetting process for safety and
effectiveness.
Create a policy framework for research and innovation
First, we need collaboration among federal agencies to create a pol-
icy framework that will assure all stakeholders that the appropriate
data are being used for appropriate reasons, under actively agreed-
upon terms or circumstances with appropriate patient consent. As
described in Table 6, the framework should include policies to aid
data access, to enable more research conducted by HIPAA-covered
entities19 and provide necessary standardization. Developing a pol-
icy framework supported by technical standards will help sustain
“big data” research, which is often dependent on discovery absent a
clear hypothesis, and will allow patients to participate with the in-
novation community in developing effective and usable technolo-
gies.
Develop and implement an app-vetting process for safety and effec-
tiveness
Second, we recommend that federal officials and private-sector
stakeholders develop a process for vetting health applications to en-
sure a minimum level of privacy, security, safety, and effectiveness
while not hampering innovation. To speed progress, specialty socie-
ties or medical colleges could play a role in maintaining trusted sour-
ces of the knowledge base (eg, clinical guidelines) used for
development of applications and algorithms by innovators, absent
or alongside more rigid government regulation. This could be part
of a clinical practice improvement activity under the merit-based in-
centive payment system, which incentivizes novel approaches to im-
prove care.43 In the future, broadening consideration beyond apps
Table
5.
Overview
of
researcher-
and
innovator-perspective
vignette and associated gaps
Typical researcher and innovator
experience in the not-too-distant
future
Gaps between the current
researcher and innovator experi-
ence and the future
1. A researcher within the health
system receives an alert that a
patient met the criteria for a
clinical study, and the patient
agrees to participate after
going through the informed
consent process with the
patient navigator. Pertinent
historical patient data are
accessed for the study.
1. Access to patients and their
clinical data to support
research is rarely well inte-
grated into clinical care.
2. When the patient is later
admitted to the emergency
department for a condition
that disqualifies him from the
study, the emergency depart-
ment physician and study
coordinator communicate
about the case and the patient
is removed from the study.
2. Patients typically lack the abil-
ity to learn about and decide
how they want their data to
support research and then exe-
cute on those decisions in a
scalable way.
3. The patient is directed to a
new health system–approved
app that helps him track and
report key health data
intended to improve congestive
heart failure management. The
app not only provides data to
the patient’s care team, but is
also connected to a knowledge
cloud that delivers personal-
ized analytics and enables him
to donate it for research as
part of the Precision Medicine
Initiative Participant Technol-
ogies Center.38
3. The health app environment is
immature, with few safeguards
for safety and effectiveness
and limited integration of apps
into clinical care or research.
Table 6. Goals and policy recommendations to address gaps in the
researcher and innovator domain
Domain
Goal
Policy recommendations
Researcher
Create a policy frame-
work for research
and innovation
Create a cross-agency collabora-
tion to produce a framework
that includes “common rule”
updates to facilitate secondary
use of data for research, com-
mon Data Use and Reciprocal
Support Agreements, common
enforced technical functional-
ities and specifications based
on standard APIs, and data
portability from
HIPAA-covered entities.
Develop and imple-
ment an app vetting
process
Create a public-private collabo-
ration to develop a process
that ensures a minimum level
of privacy, security, safety,
and effectiveness while not
hampering innovation.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
1041
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 to enable integration of algorithms and other analytics tools/outputs
along with shareable knowledge will help ensure that vetted technol-
ogies are widely available and their future iterations improve from a
solid foundation.
CONCLUSION
There is little doubt that a chasm exists between the health IT eco-
system we have today and the one we need to routinely deliver high-
value care. In this paper, we argue that we know how to cross the
chasm in a way that meets the distinct needs of diverse stakeholders
who are essential to health system transformation. Importantly, the
key goals that would enable such a transformation are shared across
stakeholders, and they center on minimally burdensome capture, ac-
cess, and use of standardized data. It is therefore imperative that
substantial new policy efforts are targeted at these goals. Our spe-
cific policy recommendations offer a blueprint to guide future poli-
cymaking to achieve these goals. However, after almost a decade of
policy-driven efforts to drive adoption and use of EHRs, the desire
for another ambitious set of policy efforts is limited. Thus, the real
challenge in front of us is a simple one: recognizing that our work to
build a value-enabling health IT ecosystem is only half done and
that incremental progress is not a viable option.
CONTRIBUTORS
Based on content from the 2015 AMIA Policy Invitational, all authors
contributed to development of the vignette and policy recommendations.
FUNDING
This project was supported by grant number R13HS023969 from the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
COMPETING INTERESTS
There are no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is available at Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association online.
REFERENCES
1.
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.
U.S. hospital adoption of patient engagement functionalities. Health IT
Quick-Stat #24. September 2016. http://dashboard.healthit.gov/quick
stats/pages/FIG-Hospital-Adoption-of-Patient-Engagement-Functional
ities.php. Accessed December 20, 2016.
2.
Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Cancer Clinical Trials and the
NCI Cooperative Group Program; Nass SJ, Moses HL, Mendelsohn J,
eds. A National Cancer Clinical Trials System for the 21st Century: Rein-
vigorating the NCI Cooperative Group Program. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2010. 4, Physician and Patient Participation in
Cancer
Clinical
Trials.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK220370/. Accessed November 8, 2016.
3.
Henderson G, Cadigan R, Edwards T, et al. Characterizing biobank orga-
nizations in the U.S.: results from a national survey. Genome Med.
2013;5:3.
4.
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.
Percent of Hospitals, by Type, that Possess Certified Health IT. Health
IT Quick-Stat #52. May 2016. dashboard.healthit.gov/quickstats/pages/
certified-electronic-health-record-technology-in-hospitals.php.
Accessed
February 28, 2017.
5.
Jamoom E, Yang N, Hing E. Percentage of office-based physicians us-
ing any electronic health records or electronic medical records, physi-
cians that have a basic system, and physicians that have a certified
system, by state: United States, 2014 (table). Bethesda, MD: NCHS/
CDC; 2015.
6.
Esch T, Mejilla R, Anselmo M, et al. Engaging patients through Open
Notes: an evaluation using mixed methods. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e010034.
7.
Marsolo K, Corsmo J, Barnes M, et al. Challenges in creating an opt-in
biobank with a registrar-based consent process and a commercial EHR. J
Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012;19:1115–18.
8.
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.
About Blue Button. https://www.healthit.gov/patients-families/blue-but
ton/about-blue-button. Accessed November 7, 2016.
9.
Authenticated
US
Government
Information:
GPO.
45
CFR
§170.316(g)(7).
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2011-title45-
Vol02405/pdf/CFR-2011-title45-Vol02405-part170.pdf.
Accessed
No-
vember 8, 2016.
10. Authenticated US Government Information: GPO. 45 CFR 170.102, 2015
Edition Common Clinical Data Set. 2016. https://www.healthit.gov/sites/de
fault/files/2015Ed_CCG_CCDS.pdf. Accessed November 7, 2016.
11. Authenticated US Government Information: GPO. 45 CFR § 164.501.
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2011-title45-Vol02405/pdf/CFR-2011-
title45-Vol02405-sec164-501.pdf. Accessed November 8, 2016.
12. American Health Information Management Association. Fundamentals
of the legal health record and designated record set. J AHIMA.
2011;82:2.
13. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Examining Oversight of
the Privacy & Security of Health Data Collected by Entities not Regulated
by HIPAA. Washington, DC: US Dept of HHS; July 2016.
14. Yadav S, Kazanji N, K C N, et al. Comparison of accuracy of physical ex-
amination findings in initial progress notes between paper charts and a
newly implemented electronic health record. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2016;24(1):140–44.
15. Valikodath NG, Newman-Casey P, Lee PP, et al. Agreement of ocular symp-
tom reporting between patient-reported outcomes and medical records.
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2017. Published online January 26, 2017. doi:10.1001/
jamaophthalmol.2016.5551.
16. Murakami H, Kawakami R, Nakae S, et al. Accuracy of wearable devices
for estimating total energy expenditure: Comparison with metabolic chamber
and doubly labeled water method. JAMA Int Med. 2016;176(5):702–03.
17. Collins F, Varmus H. A new initiative on precision medicine. New Engl J
Med. 2015;372:793–95.
18. Hudson K, Michael L, Collins F. Towards a new era of trust and transpar-
ency in clinical trials. JAMA. 2016;316(13):1353–54.
19. Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, 80 Fed. Reg. 173. Fe-
deral Register. 2015;80 FR 53931:53931–4061.
20. Tenenbaum J, Avillach P, Benham-Hutchins M, et al. An informatics re-
search agenda to support precision medicine: seven key areas. J Am Med
Inform Assoc. 2016;23:791–95.
21. Embi PJ, Leonard Ac. Evaluating alert fatigue over time to EHR-based
clinical trial alerts: findings from a randomized controlled study. J Am
Med Inform Assoc. 2012;19(e1):e145–48.
22. Embi PJ, Jain A, Harris CM. Physicians’ perceptions of an electronic
health record–based clinical trial alert approach to subject recruitment: a
survey. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2008;8:13.
23. Embi PJ, Jain A, Clark J, et al. Effect of a clinical trial alert system on
physician
participation
in
trial
recruitment.
Arch
Intern
Med.
2005;165(19):2272–77.
24. Global Alliance for Genomics and Health. Global Alliance for Genomics
and Health: Consent Policy. Version 27, 2015. https://genomicsand
health.org/work-products-demonstration-projects/consent-policy.
Accessed November 8, 2016.
1042
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
 25. Teixeira P, Wei W, Cronin R, et al. Evaluating electronic health record
data sources and algorithmic approaches to identify hypertensive individ-
uals. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2017;24(1):162–71.
26. Lowes LP, Noritz GH, Newmeyer A, et al. “Learn from every patient”
study group. “Learn from every patient”: implementation and early re-
sults of a learning health system. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016. (Epub
ahead of print, doi: 10.1111/dmcn.13227.)
27. Embi PJ, Payne PR. Evidence generating medicine: redefining the research-
practice relationship to complete the evidence cycle. Med Care. 2013;51(8
Suppl):S87–91.
28. Embi PJ, Tsevat J. Commentary: the relative research unit: providing in-
centives for clinician participation in research activities. Acad Med.
2012;87(1):11–14.
29. Kawamoto K, Hongsermeier T, Wright A, et al. Key principles for a na-
tional clinical decision support knowledge sharing framework: synthesis
of insights from leading subject matter experts. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2013;20(1):199–207.
30. Goldberg HS, Paterno MD, Rocha BH, et al. A highly scalable, interopera-
ble
clinical
decision
support
service.
J
Am
Med
Inform
Assoc.
2014;21(e1):e55–62.
31. Casalino LP, Gans D, Weber R, et al. US physician practices spend more
than $15.4 billion annually to report quality measures. Health Aff (Mill-
wood). 2016;35(3):401–06.
32. Huckman R, Uppaluru M. The untapped potential of health care APIs.
Harvard Business Rev. 2015;93(12):1–7.
33. Cusack C, Hripcsak G. The future state of clinical data capture and docu-
mentation: a report from AMIA’s 2011 Policy Meeting. J Am Med Inform
Assoc. 2013;20:134–40.
34. U.S. National Library of Medicine. Common Data Element (CDE) Resource
Portal. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/cde/. Accessed November 8, 2016.
35. Tablar P. CMS to launch code set library for assessment data standardiza-
tion. Long-Term Living. 2014. http://www.ltlmagazine.com/article/cms-
launch-code-set-library-assessment-data-standardization. Accessed No-
vember 8, 2016.
36. Henry SB, Lenert L, Middleton B, et al. Linking process and outcome with
an integrated clinical information management system knowledge sys-
tems. Proc HIMSS. 1993:57–81.
37. Berenson R, Basch P, Sussex A. Revisiting E&M visit guidelines: a missing
piece of payment reform. New Engl J Med. 2011;364:1892–95.
38. Participant Technologies Center. Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort
Program, National Institutes of Health. https://www.nih.gov/precision-
medicine-initiative-cohort-program/participant-technologies-center.
Accessed November 8, 2016.
39. The National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network. PCORnet.
http://www.pcornet.org/. Accessed November 8, 2016.
40. National Centers for Biomedical Computing. http://www.ncbcs.org/.
Accessed November 8, 2016.
41. National Institutes of Health. National Center for Advancing Transla-
tional Sciences. https://ncats.nih.gov/ctsa. Accessed November 8, 2016.
42. National Institutes of Health. All of Us Research Program: About the Pre-
cision Medicine Initiative. https://www.nih.gov/precision-medicine-initia
tive-cohort-program. Accessed November 8, 2016.
43. Medicare Program; Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) and
Alternative Payment Model (APM) Incentive Under the Physician Fee
Schedule, and Criteria for Physician-Focused Payment Models, 81 Fed.
Reg. 28209. Federal Register. 2016;81 FR 28161:28161–586.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2017, Vol. 24, No. 5
1043
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-abstract/24/5/1036/3072328 by guest on 02 June 2019
