 Dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome: mechanisms and 
treatment
Shipra Agrawal1, Joshua J. Zaritsky2, Alessia Fornoni3, and William E. Smoyer1
1Center for Clinical and Translational Research, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s 
Hospital, and Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, 700 Children’s Drive, 
Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA
2Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for 
Children,1600 Rockland Road, Wilmington, Delaware 19803, USA
3Katz Family Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Peggy and Harold Katz Drug Discovery 
Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 1580 NW 10th Avenue, Miami, Florida 
33133, USA
Abstract
Nephrotic syndrome is a highly prevalent disease that is associated with high morbidity despite 
notable advances in its treatment. Many of the complications of nephrotic syndrome, including the 
increased risk of atherosclerosis and thromboembolism, can be linked to dysregulated lipid 
metabolism and dyslipidaemia. These abnormalities include elevated plasma levels of cholesterol, 
triglycerides and the apolipoprotein B containing lipoproteins VLDL and IDL; decreased 
lipoprotein lipase activity in the endothelium, muscle and adipose tissues; decreased hepatic lipase 
activity; and increased levels of the enzyme PCSK9. In addition, there is an increase in the plasma 
levels of immature HDL particles and reduced cholesterol efflux. Studies from the past few years 
have markedly improved our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of nephrotic syndrome 
associated dyslipidaemia, and also heightened our awareness of the associated exacerbated risks of 
cardiovascular complications, progressive kidney disease and thromboembolism. Despite the 
absence of clear guidelines regarding treatment, various strategies are being increasingly utilized, 
including statins, bile acid sequestrants, fibrates, nicotinic acid and ezetimibe, as well as lipid 
apheresis, which seem to also induce partial or complete clinical remission of nephrotic syndrome 
in a substantial percentage of patients. Future potential treatments will likely also include 
inhibition of PCSK9 using recently developed anti PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies and small 
inhibitory RNAs, as well as targeting newly identified molecular regulators of lipid metabolism 
that are dysregulated in nephrotic syndrome.
Correspondence to W.E.S. william.smoyer@nationwidechildrens.org. 
Author contributions
All authors contributed to researching data for the article, and writing, reviewing and editing the article before submission.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Nephrol. 2018 January ; 14(1): 57–70. doi:10.1038/nrneph.2017.155.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nephrotic syndrome is one of the most common kidney diseases in children and adults, and 
is characterized by massive proteinuria, oedema and hypoalbuminaemia1. The annual 
incidence and prevalence of nephrotic syndrome in children are 2–7 new cases and 16 cases 
per 100,000 children, respectively, and in adults the yearly incidence is three new cases per 
100,000 adults 2–5. It is difficult to establish the prevalence of nephrotic syndrome in adults, 
as it usually results from an underlying disease. Although the majority of children and adults 
respond to initial treatment with glucocorticoids by entering into clinical remission, a 
substantial proportion of patients (~20% of children and 50% of adults) either present with 
or subsequently develop clinical steroid resistance during the course of their disease6,7. 
Failure to enter clinical remission greatly increases a patient’s risk of various complications. 
These complications may result from persistence of the nephrotic state and/or from exposure 
to the relatively toxic alternative therapies that are used to induce remission.
The primary pathology associated with nephrotic syndrome is injury to podocytes and the 
glomeruli1,8. However, the complications of both the disease and its treatment are far-
reaching. Major complications include infections, acute kidney injury (AKI) and 
thromboembolisms9–12. A 2015 study found that AKI occurred in ~58% of 336 children 
admitted to hospital for nephrotic syndrome and in ~50% of 615 hospitalized children with 
nephrotic syndrome12. After infections and AKI, thromboembolism is also considered to be 
the most common, major complication of nephrotic syndrome13–16. Children with nephrotic 
syndrome develop thromboembolism at a rate of 2.8%, whereas adults have a much higher 
rate of 26.7%. Thromboembolism is particularly prevalent in patients with membranous 
nephropathy, affecting as many as 37% of adults and 25% of children14. Thromboembolism 
in patients with nephrotic syndrome is thought to be due to increased urinary loss of 
antithrombotic factors and increased hepatic production of prothrombotic factors13,14,16.
Dysregulated lipid metabolism leading to dyslipidaemia is an often under-recognized, but 
nearly universal, complication of persistent nephrotic syndrome. Although elevated serum 
levels of cholesterol and triglycerides have been noted since the early descriptions of 
nephrotic syndrome, the long-term consequences of prolonged dyslipidaemia in nephrotic 
syndrome remain relatively poorly understood. Whereas adults with nephrotic syndrome 
have a markedly increased risk of both myocardial infarction and coronary death compared 
with that of healthy individuals, very few data are available regarding these risks in children. 
Consequently, the dyslipidaemia of nephrotic syndrome is probably often under-treated, 
particularly in children, of whom very few would have pre-existing hyperlipidaemia from 
other causes. However, hyperlipidaemia has been associated with an increased risk of both 
accelerated cardiovascular disease and progressive kidney disease, and persistent nephrotic 
syndrome is characteristically accompanied by moderate to severe dyslipidaemia. In this 
Review, we summarize recent advances in our understanding of the characteristics, 
molecular pathogenesis and consequences of dyslipidaemia in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome, as well as the evidence supporting current and potential future treatments of 
nephrotic syndrome-associated dyslipidaemia.
Agrawal et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome
Characteristics of dyslipidaemia
Lipoproteins are the major carriers of lipids in the blood and they participate in three major 
pathways that are responsible for the generation and transport of lipids within the body 
(TABLE 1) — namely, the exogenous pathway, the endogenous pathway and the reverse 
cholesterol transport pathway (FIG. 1). Lipid and lipoprotein metabolism is altered in 
nephrotic syndrome, with or without chronic kidney disease (CKD)17 (FIG. 2). The extent of 
altered lipid metabolism in nephrotic syndrome correlates with the magnitude of proteinuria. 
In particular, the plasma concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides and apolipoprotein B 
(ApoB)-containing lipoproteins (including very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), 
intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL) and lipoprotein(a)) are all elevated in nephrotic 
syndrome. The concentration of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol17 and the 
content of ApoA-I and ApoA-II apolipoproteins18 are very similar in healthy individuals and 
in patients with nephrotic syndrome. However, the efficiency of HDL particles in causing 
cholesterol efflux from peripheral tissues has yet to be studied in nephrotic syndrome, but is 
of interest as cholesterol efflux has been shown to be impaired in patients with diabetic 
nephropathy19. In fact, not only the total amount, but also the composition and function of 
lipoproteins are markedly altered in patients with nephrotic syndrome, with substantial 
increases in the levels of ApoA-I, ApoA-IV, ApoB, ApoC and ApoE, as well as in the ratio 
of ApoC-III to ApoC-II18. These changes in serum lipids and lipoproteins in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome are primarily a result of their impaired clearance and, to a lesser extent, 
their altered biosynthesis. In fact, although nephrotic syndrome can affect LDL synthesis20, 
the levels of most ApoB-containing lipoproteins are altered owing to decreased clearance21. 
Albumin metabolism was originally thought to be linked to hyperlipidaemia in nephrotic 
syndrome; however, the link between hepatic lipogenesis and albumin synthesis has been 
challenged by data from elegant studies suggesting that proteinuria, and not albumin 
synthesis, is linked to hyperlipidaemia in nephrotic rats22. The composition of lipoproteins 
can also be affected in nephrotic syndrome associated with CKD, because the activity of 
enzymes such as lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) is reduced, whereas enzymes 
such as plasma cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) are activated, resulting in the 
production of immature HDL23.
Severe hypertriglyceridaemia is another important lipid abnormality in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome, and recent discoveries have identified angiopoietin-related protein 4 
(ANGPTL4) and the extent of its sialylation as attractive therapeutic targets for reducing 
proteinuria and hypertriglyceridaemia in these patients24. In addition, the presence of other 
diseases, as well as the use of treatments to reduce proteinuria and the progression of CKD, 
might worsen dyslipidaemia in affected patients. The lipid abnormalities observed in 
patients with proteinuric disorders who are in the early stages of CKD are clinically relevant, 
as they might actively contribute to the increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality of 
these patients, and therefore early identification and treatment of these lipid abnormalities is 
important25.
Agrawal et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pathogenesis of dyslipidaemia
Triglycerides, VLDL and fatty acid metabolism—VLDL is an important vehicle for 
the delivery of fatty acids to several tissues, primarily muscle and adipose tissue, where the 
fatty acids serve as an energy source (FIG. 1). On arrival in peripheral tissues, removal of 
fatty acids from VLDL by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) results in the formation of IDL, which is 
then cleared from the circulation by LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1)-mediated 
endocytosis by hepatocytes. In addition to LRP1, the LDL receptor, liver proteoglycans and 
plasminogen receptor contribute to catabolism of lipoprotein(a) and hepatic uptake of ApoB 
and ApoA26,27. Furthermore, differences in the affinity of ApoE proteins for the receptors 
responsible for lipoprotein clearance owing to different APOE genotypes affects 
lipoprotein(a) catabolism, possibly owing to competition between lipoprotein(a) and ApoE 
for the same receptors28. The levels of both IDL and VLDL are increased in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome, primarily owing to defective LPL activity and decreased hepatic lipase 
activity21. For decades, the dogma was that LPL, which contains positively charged heparin-
binding domains, binds to negatively charged heparin sulfate proteoglycans in the 
glycocalyx coating of blood vessels29,30. However, it is now established that the binding of 
LPL to heparan sulfate proteoglycans on endothelial cells occurs via endothelium-derived 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored HDL-binding protein 1 (GPIHBP1)31. Interestingly, 
GPIHBP1 is downregulated in patients with nephrotic syndrome32. Furthermore, the loss of 
LPL activators in patients with nephrotic syndrome is associated with increased glomerular 
basement membrane permeability, resulting in hyperlipidaemia33. In addition to 
downregulation of LPL activity, nephrotic syndrome is also characterized by downregulation 
of hepatic lipase activity, which contributes to decreased clearance of IDL and 
hypertriglyceridaemia. Furthermore, upregulation of ANGPTL4 levels in nephrotic 
syndrome, which is driven primarily by circulating free fatty acids34, may inactivate LPL by 
converting active LPL dimers into inactive monomers35 or by acting as a reversible 
noncompetitive inhibitor of LPL36. The reduced plasma clearance of VLDL in nephrotic 
syndrome may be linked to suppression of VLDL receptor expression, as was described in a 
rat model of nephrotic syndrome37. Fatty acid metabolism is also altered in nephrotic 
syndrome, as there is increased expression of key enzymes involved in fatty acid 
biosynthesis, including acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthase, and downregulation 
of fatty acid catabolism in the liver38. Triglyceride-rich, ApoB-containing lipoproteins, such 
as VLDL, may have atherogenic properties and increase the risk of coronary events 
independently of LDL39. The levels of ApoC-II and ApoC-III are elevated in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome40, although they return to normal within 4 weeks after normalization of 
the levels of urinary protein, suggesting that the elevated ApoC-II and ApoC-III levels are 
unlikely to contribute to the development of nephrotic syndrome41. However, the finding 
that ApoC-II may contribute to a new form of amyloidosis that primarily affects the kidney 
in humans is once more challenging the cause and effect relationship between ApoC-II and 
nephrotic syndrome42. A potential role for ApoA-V in nephrotic syndrome should also be 
investigated further, as the level of ApoA-V is higher in patients with diabetes and 
proteinuria than in patients with diabetes without proteinuria43.
Cholesterol metabolism: the role of LDL and HDL—Both enhanced production and 
impaired catabolism of LDL contribute to the increased LDL and cholesterol levels observed 
Agrawal et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in patients with nephrotic syndrome. In addition, increased expression of proprotein 
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) results in increased degradation of the LDL 
receptor and decreased LDL uptake by the liver44,45. Genetic ablation of podocytes in mice 
and treatment of mice with nephrotoxic serum cause hypercholesterolaemia and lead to 
increased levels of PCSK9 (REFS 45,46). Interestingly, hepatocyte-specific deletion of 
PCSK9 protects mice from nephrotoxic serum-induced hyperlipidaemia47. Furthermore, the 
elevated plasma levels of both cholesterol and PCSK9 detected in patients with active 
nephrotic syndrome have been reported to return to normal levels upon remission of 
disease47. Hypercholesterolaemia and increased LDL levels occur in conjunction with 
upregulation of the expression and activity of liver acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase 2 (ACAT2), 
which results in enhanced esterification of cholesterol and a reduction in the level of 
intracellular free cholesterol48. Cholesterol synthesis via 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA 
(HMG-CoA) reductase is also increased in experimental models of nephrotic syndrome49. 
Evidence also suggests that LDL oxidation in nephrotic syndrome might be augmented by 
lipoprotein(a)50, the level of which is increased in nephrotic syndrome51. Accumulation of 
oxidized LDL, IDL and chylomicron remnants stimulates monocytes and macrophages to 
release proin ammatory cytokines and chemokines and accelerates in ammation52, which 
may in turn promote the progression of CKD.
Patients with nephrotic syndrome can present with variable levels of HDL cholesterol, 
although the ratio of HDL cholesterol to total cholesterol is frequently decreased53. HDL is 
the main lipoprotein involved in cholesterol efflux from peripheral organs, as well as in the 
delivery of cholesterol to hepatocytes to be converted into bile acids (FIG. 1). The principal 
role of HDL is to promote cholesterol efflux, primarily via the membrane-associated 
transporters ATP-binding cassette subfamily A member 1 (ABCA1) and ATP-binding 
cassette subfamily G member 1 (ABCG1)54. In addition to the induction of reverse 
cholesterol transport, HDL also has antioxidant activities and anti-inflammatory 
properties55,56, and protects against endothelial dysfunction by binding to scavenger 
receptor B1 to activate endothelial nitric oxide synthase57. In nephrotic syndrome, in 
addition to a change in the HDL cholesterol:total cholesterol ratio, the maturation of 
cholesterol ester-poor HDL3 to cholesterol ester-rich HDL2 is often impaired58, suggesting 
impaired reverse cholesterol transport could be a key component of nephrotic syndrome and 
contribute to its associated vascular complications. Although extensively reviewed 
elsewhere59, new experimental studies suggest that improvement in cholesterol efflux via 
ABCA1 is also associated with improved proteinuria and renal failure in experimental 
models of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis60. Of note, this last study challenges the long-
held idea that impaired HDL function is a consequence, rather than a cause, of proteinuria in 
nephrotic syndrome.
Lipoid nephrosis and foamy podocytes—Although the association between altered 
lipid metabolism and proteinuria has been extensively studied, it remains unclear whether 
dyslipidaemia actually contributes to kidney disease (FIG. 3). Similar to atherosclerosis, the 
effect of dyslipidaemia on decreased kidney function was first advocated as the ‘lipid 
nephrotoxicity’ hypothesis by Moorhead et al. in 1982 (REF. 33). In fact, minimal change 
disease was also originally defined as ‘lipoid nephrosis’, based on the presence of foamy 
Agrawal et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells in kidney biopsy samples61, although the identity of these cells (infiltrating 
macrophages or resident glomerular cells) has never been established. In addition, data from 
studies in experimental models of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis support the concept 
that lipid infiltration and accumulation in primary glomerular cells might contribute to the 
pathogenesis of proteinuria60.
It is important to consider the evidence suggesting that altered lipid metabolism might have 
a pathophysiologic role in nephrotic syndrome. In fact, LDL apheresis has been reported to 
be an effective measure to reduce proteinuria and podocyte loss or excretion in patients with 
refractory nephrotic syndrome62, suggesting that renal cholesterol uptake via LDL and/or 
inflammatory responses to oxidized LDL might contribute to the development of 
proteinuria. With regard to reverse cholesterol transport, the notion that impaired cholesterol 
efflux and/or production of a non-functioning HDL is a cause, rather than a consequence, of 
proteinuria remains to be established, but is the subject of intense research. In the general 
population, elevated plasma concentrations of HDL cholesterol are associated with 
atheroprotective properties63–65, although raising the plasma HDL cholesterol concentration 
does not necessarily reduce cardiovascular risk66,67. However, the effects of HDL quantity 
and function were not discriminated in these studies. In addition, genetic variants associated 
with a higher HDL cholesterol concentration are not associated with a reduced risk of 
cardiovascular disease68. The failure to observe cardiovascular protection in multiple trials 
with inhibitors of cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) should not discourage additional 
research in the field, as CETP inhibitors were developed to raise HDL levels, and not to 
increase the functionality of HDL. However, a clinical trial (NCT01841684)69 showed that 
the CETP inhibitor anacetrapib met its primary end point of reducing cardiovascular events 
in patients at risk of cardiac events who were already receiving a statin, compared with 
placebo70. Further research is also necessary to determine if agents capable of increasing 
cholesterol efflux, such as HDL mimetic peptides or recombinant ApoA-I, might represent 
novel therapeutic strategies to treat patients with proteinuric kidney diseases and the 
atherosclerosis associated with these diseases. The fact that LCAT deficiency in fish eye 
disease results in a renal lipidosis that is associated with nephrotic range proteinuria strongly 
suggests that the elevated ratio of plasma unesterified cholesterol:total cholesterol observed 
in LCAT deficiency might contribute to the development of proteinuria71. Lipoprotein X, an 
abnormal cholesterol-rich particle, might also contribute to renal disease in patients with 
LCAT deficiency72. Although more subtle than LCAT deficiency, the phenotype of patients 
with ABCA1 deficiency (Tangier disease) is also characterized by early atherosclerosis, very 
low HDL levels and mild proteinuria with foamy podocytes in kidney biopsy samples73. 
Therefore, novel therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing the acquired LCAT defect could 
potentially be effective in both reversing dyslipidaemia and slowing disease progression in 
patients with CKD.
Finally, the finding that a mutation in the enzyme sphingosine 1 phosphate lyase causes 
nephrotic syndrome74, together with the observation that enzymes involved in sphingolipid 
metabolism, such as acid sphingomyelinase-like phosphodiesterase 3b (SMPDL3b), might 
serve as modulators of lipid raft-dependent signalling75 and might cause proteinuria, raises 
the important question of the potential role of sphingolipid modulators in causing podocyte 
injury in nephrotic syndrome.
Agrawal et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 An important consideration in the treatment of nephrotic syndrome is that many of the 
treatments themselves contribute to abnormal lipid metabolism. Data on the efficacy of 
glucocorticoids for the treatment of dyslipidaemia are inconclusive — some observational 
data in adults suggest that glucocorticoids have only a minimal effect on serum lipid 
levels76, whereas several cross-sectional studies in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus demonstrated that administration of high doses of corticosteroids (>10 mg per 
day) is associated with elevated LDL and triglyceride levels77,78; however, the interpretation 
of these studies is complicated by the fact that many of the patients also had renal 
involvement. Glucocorticoids also increase VLDL levels directly (via increased hepatic 
production) and indirectly (via increased peripheral insulin resistance)79. Furthermore, 
inhibition of calcineurin activity using immunosuppressive drugs can lead to 
hypercholesterolaemia, and this effect is more prominent with ciclosporin treatment than 
with tacrolimus treatment80,81.
Clinical consequences of dyslipidaemia
There are numerous clinical consequences of dyslipidaemia in general, and in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome in particular (FIG. 2; TABLE 2). Dyslipidaemia can result in 
acceleration of atherosclerosis, as well as an increased risk of myocardial infarction or 
cerebrovascular accident (stroke). Furthermore, dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome might 
have a causative role in the established increased risk of thrombosis associated with this 
disease. Dyslipidaemia is one of the dominant risk factors associated with atherothrombotic 
disorders. Atherosclerosis is usually accompanied by hyperreactive platelets that increase the 
risk of thrombosis, which is further exacerbated by dyslipidaemia82. Furthermore, the 
products of LDL oxidation enhance platelet activation and thrombus formation83. 
Dyslipidaemia during nephrotic syndrome is also clearly associated with an increased risk of 
nephrotoxicity, which can manifest as progressive kidney disease33,82. This progressive 
kidney disease might result from the development of glomerulosclerosis, owing to podocyte 
injury and/or mesangial cell proliferation, as well as from proximal tubular cell injury (FIG. 
3).
Of note, the presence of CKD, which often develops and/or progresses in patients with 
refractory nephrotic syndrome, further increases the risk of many of the complications, 
including dyslipidaemia (TABLE 2), as discussed below.
Lipid nephrotoxicity
The lipid nephrotoxicity hypothesis was proposed more than three decades ago, and 
proposes that hyperlipidaemia, in addition to proteinuria and hypoalbuminaemia, lead to 
adverse and injurious effects in kidneys and may cause glomerulosclerosis33,84. This 
hypothesis is supported by a number of observations, leading to the theory that the renal 
toxicity of filtered albumin is dependent on its lipid moiety85,86. Cholesterol and lipoprotein 
uptake are essential for the development, survival and growth of mammalian cells. In fact, in 
podocytes, lipid rafts contain many elements that are essential for the normal spatial 
organization and regulation of the slit diaphragm87. Excess accumulation of cellular 
cholesterol and lipids might, however, adversely affect cellular function and lead to toxicity 
and injury in podocytes as well as other cell types. In addition, during hyperlipidaemia, 
Agrawal et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specific anatomical features of the glomeruli and renal interstitium probably make these the 
preferred locations for lipid deposition in the kidney84.
Mesangial cell proliferation—Within the kidney, the mesangial cells and the 
extracellular matrix within the glomerulus are most accessible to plasma lipoproteins such as 
LDL, as they are not separated from the capillary wall by an intervening basement 
membrane. Under normal conditions, mesangial cells take up LDL via a specific LDL 
receptor, and LDL is metabolized in a regulated manner. However, during hyperlipidaemia 
or extracellular matrix expansion, excess LDL is trapped in the extracellular matrix, where it 
is subject to oxidation, especially under conditions of mesangial cell stress, such as 
inflammatory, mechanical or ischaemic injury88,89. The oxidized LDL is taken up by 
receptors on mesangial cells, leading to the production of prostaglandin E2 and other 
cytotoxic agents, such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF), which further damage glomerular 
epithelial and endothelial cells, leading to sclerosis88,89. In addition to LDL and oxidized 
LDL, triglyceride-rich lipoproteins such as VLDL and IDL are also taken up by mesangial 
cells, leading to their proliferation and the release of several cytokines, such as IL-6, platelet 
derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ)89. In addition, the 
uptake of lipoproteins by both mesangial and endothelial cells is increased in the presence of 
lipoprotein lipase, which is localized to the glomerulus90,91. Furthermore, increased lipid 
accumulation owing to experimentally induced inflammatory stress results in the production 
of reactive oxygen species and increased expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
markers, both in the kidneys in vivo and in mesangial cells in vitro92.
Podocyte injury—The podocyte is the primary target of cellular injury in nephrotic 
syndrome8, both in minimal change disease and in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, and 
podocyte loss and hypertrophy have a crucial role in the progression to end-stage renal 
disease. Lipids and the proteins that regulate lipids have a direct role in podocyte biology 
and pathophysiology via several different mechanisms, some of which we highlight here. 
Variants of APOL1, which encodes an important component of HDL and is expressed by 
podocytes, are widely associated with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and 
podocytopathies93–95. Furthermore, antibodies directed against secretory phospholipase A2 
receptor (PLA2R), which is also expressed by podocytes, have been detected in many 
patients with membranous nephropathy96,97. In addition, decreased expression of SMPDL3b 
has been observed in podocytes exposed to the sera of patients with recurrent focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis75,98.
Several different free fatty acids bound to albumin have been shown to increase podocyte 
injury, by stimulating enhanced macropinocytosis by podocytes via lipid-binding G-protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs)99,100. GPCR signalling leads to the triggering of the Gβ/Gγ 
subunits and their dissociation, which in turn activate the RHO GTPases RAC1 and CDC42, 
leading to disruption of the actin cytoskeleton and dramatic changes in podocyte 
morphology. Furthermore, compared to mice fed control chow, those fed a high-fat diet 
develop elevated levels of free fatty acids and an increased susceptibility to adriamycin-
induced proteinuria, which underscores the effect of free fatty acids on podocyte 
function99,100. In addition, exposure of podocytes to albumin and its associated factors, such 
Agrawal et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 as fatty acids, has been shown to induce cell death, disruption of the cytoskeleton and 
injurious molecular responses, such as increased production of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) 
and several cytokines101. However, these injury responses are attenuated when podocytes are 
instead exposed to fatty acid-free albumin. Of note, the role of arachidonic acid in causing 
podocyte injury is highlighted by its ability to increase COX2 production when conjugated 
to fatty acid-free albumin. The marked reduction in proteinuria in a protein-overload model 
of renal injury in rats when the administered albumin was devoid of free fatty acids and 
other associated factors further demonstrates the in vivo relevance of albumin-bound fatty 
acids and other associated factors101. In particular, palmitic acid induces ER stress, 
apoptosis and necrosis in podocytes in a dose-dependent manner, which is enhanced by fatty 
acid oxidation102,103. Furthermore, the lipotoxic effects of palmitic acid accelerate 
glomerular disease through inflammation, oxidative stress and derangements of the actin 
cytoskeleton and decrease in the expression of the NPHS1 gene, which encodes the slit 
diaphragm protein nephrin, in podocytes104. In addition, stimulation of podocytes with TNF 
results in free cholesterol-mediated cell injury in a nuclear factor of activated T cells 
cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1)-dependent manner60. Furthermore, this cholesterol-mediated injury 
is also dependent on ABCA1, which, as mentioned earlier, is a transporter responsible for 
cholesterol efflux from podocytes60. Together, these findings support a role for direct lipid-
induced podocyte injury in the pathogenesis of nephrotic syndrome resulting from 
dyslipidaemia. In light of these results, future therapeutic interventions to reduce the effects 
of hyperlipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome should not only include interventions to lower 
lipid levels and prevent lipid oxidation, but also those to reduce lipid uptake by glomerular 
cells.
Tubulointerstitial disease—Nephrotic syndrome is associated with the development of 
renal tubular cell injury, and acute interstitial nephritis has been demonstrated in animal 
models of nephrotic syndrome105,106. This tubulointerstitial injury in nephrotic syndrome is 
characterized by the infiltration of macrophages and T lymphocytes into the tubulointerstitial 
space105. Of note, fatty acids bound to albumin might be the main contributors to 
tubulointerstitial injury in a protein-overload model of proteinuria85. Furthermore, several 
studies have reported lipotoxic effects of saturated fatty acids in proximal tubular cell 
injury107–110 and stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD), an enzyme involved in free fatty acid 
metabolism, mediates the desaturation of saturated fatty acids and reduces the formation of 
lipid droplets and their lipotoxicity to cultured proximal tubule cells107. In addition, the 
renin–angiotensin system plays an important part in mediating ER stress in proximal tubule 
cells by saturated fatty acids108. Another study has demonstrated that the peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPARα) agonist fenofibrate protects proximal tubule cells 
by inhibiting fatty acid toxicity mediated by nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)109. Furthermore, 
circulating fatty acids bound to albumin can change the redox environment in the tubules, 
thus inducing a peroxide-mediated, redox-sensitive apoptosis in tubular cells110. Thus, these 
findings collectively provide evidence supporting a substantial role for direct lipid-induced 
cellular injury to both renal tubular cells and podocytes resulting from dyslipidaemia in 
nephrotic syndrome.
Agrawal et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Importance of dyslipidaemia treatment
Lipid abnormalities in the general population are associated with a reduction in kidney 
function. In addition, a strong relationship exists between hypercholesterolaemia and the risk 
of coronary artery disease, and multiple clinical trials have shown that a reduction in 
cholesterol or LDL in high-risk patients is associated with statistically and clinically 
significant reductions in cardiovascular mortality111,112. Hyperlipidaemia is also known to 
escalate the progression of glomerular injury, in part owing to accelerated atherosclerosis in 
the renal vascular system (TABLE 2). Consistent with accelerated atherosclerosis, patients 
with CKD have an increased prevalence of hyperlipidaemia and an increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Similarly, adults with nephrotic syndrome are at increased risk of 
myocardial infarction (relative risk (RR) 5.5) and coronary death (RR 2.8), compared to that 
of the general population113–118. By contrast, although myocardial infarction is extremely 
rare in children, a few case studies have reported myocardial infarctions in children with 
nephrotic syndrome119,120. Given the high morbidity associated with dyslipidaemia and the 
severity of the dyslipidaemia that occurs in patients with nephrotic syndrome, a clear need 
exists to prioritize aggressive treatment of dyslipidaemia in patients with chronic forms of 
nephrotic syndrome who do not enter remission. Below, we detail the available evidence for 
the efficacy of various treatments for dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome in both adults 
and children, as well as future directions for treatment (TABLE 3).
Treatment of dyslipidaemia
Lifestyle changes to treat dyslipidaemia
Unfortunately, little evidence exists to guide the optimal treatment of dyslipidaemia in 
patients with nephrotic syndrome. Typically, the initial recommended treatment includes 
lifestyle changes that focus on diet, which is based on a study of 20 adult patients with long-
standing severe proteinuria121. Compared with their values on the baseline diet, a soya-based 
vegetarian diet low in both fat and protein resulted in reductions in serum levels of 
cholesterol and apolipoprotein, but not in triglyceride levels, in these patients. Interestingly, 
proteinuria also decreased on the soya-based vegetarian diet. In a follow-up trial, 20 patients 
consumed either a soya-based diet or soya-based diet that included fish oil, for 2 months, 
followed by a crossover to the other treatment group122. The introduction of the soya-based 
diet again resulted in a decrease in hyperlipidaemia as well as proteinuria, without any 
measurable effect of fish oil supplementation. Despite the promising results from these 
trials, these results have not been replicated, and there is some question of whether the 
decrease in serum lipids in patients who consumed the soya-based vegetarian diet was the 
result of the lower dietary protein or the lower lipid intake.
Other lifestyle changes to combat hyperlipidaemia include weight loss in patients who are 
overweight, and increased aerobic exercise. However, these recommendations have never 
been formally studied in patients with nephrotic syndrome and are based largely on studies 
of healthy individuals. Dietary supplements, such as fish oils (discussed above) and 
policosanol, have been poorly studied in patients with nephrotic syndrome. Data supporting 
the best-studied supplement, omega-3 fatty acids, in patients with nephrotic syndrome have 
shown a small decrease in serum triglycerides, with mixed effects on LDL levels123. 
Agrawal et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Another study examining omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome demonstrated a decrease in postprandial chylomicrons124. Although promising, 
these results are based on studies with a small number of patients and with limited follow-
up.
Pharmacological treatment of dyslipidaemia Statins—Statins are the most common 
pharmacological intervention to treat dyslipidaemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome. 
The mechanism of action of statins has been well characterized; statins competitively inhibit 
HMG-CoA reductase, reducing hepatic production of cholesterol, which in turn leads to 
increased uptake of LDL cholesterol from the blood. However, it is important to note that 
this class of drugs has been studied most extensively in patients with other diseases, with 
several large randomized controlled trials showing compelling reductions in the incidence of 
cardiovascular disease112.
The use of statins for the treatment of patients with nephrotic syndrome has been less well-
studied. Early studies found significant reductions in the serum levels of total cholesterol 
and LDL cholesterol, with lesser effects on the levels of triglycerides and 
apolipoproteins125,126. Pilot trials of atorvastatin treatment in children with nephrotic 
syndrome and pravastatin treatment in adults with nephrotic syndrome have been 
undertaken, but the results of these trials are not yet available (TABLE 3). However, a meta-
analysis that included four randomized controlled trials comparing statin versus placebo 
versus no treatment showed limited effectiveness of statins in reducing dyslipidaemia127–131. 
Only one of these trials showed a significant increase in HDL levels after statin treatment127, 
and no differences were seen in total serum cholesterol, LDL or triglyceride levels. 
Fortunately, as noted in other studies, statins seem to be very well tolerated in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome and have a low adverse effect profile. Unfortunately, however, very few 
data have described the effects of statins on cardiovascular end points. Although statin 
treatment improved cardiovascular outcomes among patients with CKD who were not 
undergoing dialysis132, there are no studies showing a similar benefit in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome.
Second-line agents—In addition to statins, second-line agents that have been studied for 
the treatment of dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome include bile acid sequestrants, fibrates, 
nicotinic acid and ezetimibe. Bile acid sequestrants, such as colestipol and cholestyramine, 
work by blocking the normal enterohepatic circulation of bile acids by preventing their 
enteral reabsorption. This inhibition in turn causes the upregulation of several hepatic 
enzymes responsible for bile acid synthesis. The end result is increased liver cholesterol 
catabolism and a compensatory increase in LDL absorption from the blood. Studies of bile 
acid sequestrants in the treatment of patients with other diseases have shown an 
approximately 25% reduction in serum levels of LDL cholesterol, with occasional increases 
in levels of triglycerides112. One study of colestipol treatment found a 30% decrease in 
serum levels of LDL cholesterol in patients with nephrotic syndrome133. Another small 
crossover trial of 10 patients with nephrotic syndrome compared treatment with 
cholestyramine versus simvastatin, and found a decrease in LDL cholesterol levels of 19% 
Agrawal et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 versus 39%, respectively125. Unfortunately, the bile sequestrants have a high rate of 
gastrointestinal adverse effects, which often limits their use.
Fibrates, such as gemfibrozil, clofibrate and fenofibrate, are another class of agents that are 
used as a second-line therapy for treatment of dyslipidaemia in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome. Their mechanism of action is to increase LPL activity, which decreases 
triglyceride synthesis and lowers serum triglyceride levels by 30–50%. Fibrates have a much 
more modest effect on serum LDL levels than that induced by other agents, with typical 
reductions of approximately 10%112. Unfortunately, data describing the effectiveness of 
fibrates in patients with nephrotic syndrome are rather limited. A randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial with a 6-week treatment with gemfibrozil showed a small reduction 
in cholesterol and LDL levels, and a marked reduction in triglyceride levels, in 11 patients 
with nephrotic syndrome134. Another small study of 12 paediatric patients with nephrotic 
syndrome who were randomly assigned to receive either gemfibrozil or placebo also showed 
lowering of serum cholesterol, LDL and triglyceride levels with gemfibrozil treatment135. 
However, a meta-analysis did not support the findings of that study131.
Nicotinic acid (also known as niacin) and ezetimibe are two additional agents that are used 
to treat hyperlipidaemia. Nicotonic acid inhibits diacylglycerol acyltransferase 2 in the liver, 
resulting in reduced triglyceride synthesis136, which in turn leads to decreased secretion of 
VLDL and LDL. In addition, nicotinic acid stimulates hepatic ApoA-I production, leading to 
increased HDL levels. Ezetimibe has a unique mechanism of action — it decreases enteric 
cholesterol absorption, resulting in markedly lower LDL cholesterol137. Ezetimibe is often a 
last-line agent for treatment of hyperlipidaemia in patients who are intolerant to statins, due 
to its limited vascular and clinical benefits138. However, neither nicotinic acid nor ezetimibe 
have been studied in patients with nephrotic syndrome.
Pharmacological treatments in children—In comparison to adults, the data describing 
the treatment of dyslipidaemia in paediatric patients with nephrotic syndrome are very 
limited. In fact, this dearth of data, together with the lack of FDA approval for use of lipid-
lowering agents in paediatric patients and a lack of long-term safety data, have led to a lower 
utilization of lipid-lowering agents in children with chronic nephrotic syndrome compared to 
adults. Most studies of paediatric patients have focused on statin therapy, with the exception 
of the above-described study of gemfibrozil135. One 12-month prospective, uncontrolled 
study of seven paediatric patients with nephrotic syndrome compared the use of dietary 
interventions before, or in combination with, simvastatin treatment139. This study reported a 
30% reduction in cholesterol and a 36% reduction in triglyceride levels from combination 
treatment. Another prospective, uncontrolled study of 12 paediatric patients with nephrotic 
syndrome who were treated with either lovastatin or simvastatin found decreases in 
cholesterol, LDL and triglyceride levels after 12 months of treatment with either statin140.
Lipid apheresis—Lipid apheresis is a novel treatment for dyslipidaemia in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome and is a well-established extracorporeal technique that is used to treat 
patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. A study utilizing lipid apheresis 
in combination with prednisone in children with treatment-resistant nephrotic syndrome 
found reductions in both cholesterol and triglyceride levels141, similar to previous reports 
Agrawal et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 using lipid apheresis in adults142. However, the outcomes of this combination treatment in 
children with nephrotic syndrome were notable in that the majority of patients went into 
either complete or partial remission of their nephrotic syndrome141 — five of 11 patients 
(45%) went into complete remission, and two of 11 patients (18%) went into partial 
remission. Remarkably, all of the patients that responded to therapy remained in remission at 
10 year follow-up. The mechanism by which lipid apheresis leads to remission remains 
unclear, but possible explanations include direct effects associated with improved 
dyslipidaemia, the removal of pathogenic vascular permeability factors and/or enhancement 
of the response to immunosuppressants62. One potential but unexplored hypothesis is that 
lipid apheresis, by lowering the level of free fatty acids, could reduce or prevent podocyte 
damage and reduce proteinuria99.
The prospective multicentre POLARIS trial in Japan assessed the efficacy of lipid apheresis 
for treating dyslipidaemia and inducing remission in patients with nephrotic syndrome. 
Initial results demonstrated nearly 50% reductions in both total cholesterol and LDL 
cholesterol levels during treatment143. A follow-up paper144 demonstrated complete 
remission in 25% of the 44 patients enrolled in the study, and reported that an additional 
23% of patients had partial remission (defined as <1 g of urinary protein per day). 
Furthermore, a case report demonstrated the induction of remission by lipid apheresis in an 
adult with rituximab-resistant nephrotic syndrome145.
Future treatment directions
PCSK9 has a vital role in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis and has thus gained 
considerable attention in the context of lipid-lowering strategies44. Furthermore, PCSK9 
levels are elevated in patients with nephrotic syndrome, and are directly correlated with 
proteinuria45–47. Of interest, remission in patients with nephrotic syndrome correlated with 
decreases in plasma levels of both cholesterol and PCSK9 (REF. 47). Inhibitors of PCSK9, 
in the form of monoclonal antibodies targeting PCSK9, have been developed as a new class 
of drug to treat dyslipidaemia, and have been shown to markedly lower LDL cholesterol 
levels when provided either as a monotherapy or in combination with statins44,45. PCSK9 
promotes degradation of the LDL receptor in the liver, resulting in elevated LDL levels in 
the blood. However, the monoclonal anti-PCSK9 antibodies bind to and inactivate PCSK9, 
resulting in an increase in the level of LDL receptors on the surface of liver cells, thus 
promoting LDL uptake by the liver and its metabolism, which ultimately results in decreased 
LDL levels in the blood. A small inhibitory RNA (siRNA) inhibitor of PCSK9 has also been 
tested in a phase I trial to lower LDL cholesterol in healthy individuals (NCT02314442 
(REF. 146)). The early results indicate that treatment with this siRNA had no serious adverse 
events, and induced significant reductions in the levels of PCSK9 and LDL cholesterol147.
Given their efficacy in treating dyslipidaemia and the potential link between an acquired 
LDL receptor deficiency and the pathogenesis of nephrotic syndrome148, future trials to 
explore the use of PCSK9 inhibitors in treating dyslipidaemia in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome are warranted. One such trial in adult patients with nephrotic syndrome, 
comparing the hypolipidaemic effects of statin monotherapy to those of a PCSK9 inhibitor 
in combination with a statin, is ongoing (NCT03004001 (REF. 149); TABLE 3). 
Agrawal et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Interestingly, successful treatment of a patient with refractory nephrotic syndrome using a 
PCSK9 inhibitor has also been reported for the first time150. A practical obstacle in utilizing 
these agents is their tremendous cost, which is estimated at US$14,000 per patient per 
year151.
Acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (ACAT) inhibitors are another novel class of agents for the 
treatment of dyslipidaemia. Studies using low-dose therapy with ACAT inhibitors in animal 
models of nephrotic syndrome suggest that these inhibitors are also able to reduce 
proteinuria while improving dyslipidaemia152. However, enthusiasm for these agents has 
been tempered by a large randomized controlled trial of avasimibe, which did not 
demonstrate a favourable outcome in slowing coronary atherosclerosis153.
The high cost and the need in most cases for central venous access might limit the potential 
adoption of lipid apheresis. One system of lipid apheresis, the Liposorber LA-15 (Kaneka), 
is being utilized in a prospective study for the treatment of focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis in children (NCT02235857 (REF. 154)). This study is a post-approval 
trial mandated by the FDA after the LA-15 system received a humanitarian device 
exemption for the treatment of paediatric patients with drug-resistant focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis.
Despite the potential benefit of treating dyslipidaemia, it is important to note that no agreed 
criteria exist for a threshold of dyslipidaemia at which treatment should be initiated for 
patients with nephrotic syndrome. The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes 
guidelines for management of glomerular disease state “treatment of hyperlipidemia in 
patients with glomerular disease should usually follow the guidelines that apply to those at 
high risk for the development of cardiovascular disease.” (REF. 155). No definitive data are 
available about when an intervention should take place. Instead, the potential benefits and 
risks of intervention or treatment of dyslipidaemia need to be considered on a case-by-case 
basis. Most nephrologists would consider the institution of lipid-lowering interventions in 
patients who remain overtly nephrotic for several months. Interestingly, one small study of 
40 adult patients who had relapsing nephrotic syndrome as children showed that the 
occurrence of cardiovascular disease in this cohort was similar to that of the general 
population, suggesting that relapsing nephrotic syndrome during childhood does not portend 
an increased risk of cardiovascular disease as an adult156. As discussed above, although 
dietary interventions do not carry much risk, they also do not seem to be very effective in 
treating dyslipidaemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome. Statins have shown good 
efficacy in the treatment of other disease states, and are generally well tolerated in patients 
with nephrotic syndrome, but few, reliable outcome data exist for this patient population. 
Finally, although it is tempting to extrapolate findings from adults to children, it is important 
to note that very few data exist regarding the efficacy or, perhaps more importantly, the risks 
of pharmacological intervention among children with nephrotic syndrome.
Conclusions
The dyslipidaemia that accompanies nephrotic syndrome unfortunately remains one of the 
least understood yet most severe complications of nephrotic syndrome. Dyslipidaemia 
Agrawal et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 probably plays a part in the increased rate of atherosclerosis in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome, which in turn increases the risks of multiple cardiovascular morbidities, including 
stroke, myocardial infarction and thrombosis. More importantly, dyslipidaemia itself causes 
renal injury, which, if not interrupted, contributes to progressive CKD and, ultimately, the 
development of end-stage renal disease in some patients. Despite improved understanding of 
how nephrotic syndrome leads to altered lipid metabolism, including the origin of 
hypertriglyceridaemia and direct injury of podocytes, we still do not fully understand its 
molecular pathogenesis. In addition, many of the standard therapies for dyslipidaemia have 
not yet been studied in well-controlled trials of patients with nephrotic syndrome. This lack 
of clinical trials contributes to delays in the adoption of many newer therapies, including 
PCSK9 inhibitors, which, despite their cost, seem to be quite effective in other patient 
populations. Furthermore, many of these novel therapies, such as lipid apheresis using the 
Liposorber LA-15, if shown to be successful, could also enhance our understanding of the 
molecular pathogenesis of dyslipidaemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the expert assistance of L. Feurer (Center for Clinical and Translational Research, The 
Research Institute at Nationwide Childrens Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA) in creating initial drafts of the figures 
in this manuscript.
Glossary
Sialylation
Addition of sialic acid groups onto molecules such as 
oligosaccharides and carbohydrates
Glycocalyx,
Layer of glycoproteins and sugar moieties surrounding the 
outer surface of the cell membrane of some bacteria, 
epithelia and other cells
Tangier disease
A rare inherited disorder characterized by significantly 
reduced levels of HDL in the blood
Lipid raft
A subdomain of the plasma membrane that contain high 
concentrations of cholesterol and glycosphingolipids
Lipid apheresis
A non-surgical therapy and a form of apheresis that 
removes LDL from a patient’s blood
References
1. Greenbaum LA, Benndorf R, Smoyer WE. Childhood nephrotic syndrome — current and future 
therapies. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012; 8:445–458. [PubMed: 22688744] 
2. Hull RP, Goldsmith DJ. Nephrotic syndrome in adults. BMJ. 2008; 336:1185–1189. [PubMed: 
18497417] 
3. Clark, AG., Barratt, TM. Pediatric Nephrology. Barratt, TM.Avner, ED., Harmon, WE., editors. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1998. p. 731-747.
4. McEnery PT, Strife CF. Nephrotic syndrome in childhood. Management and treatment in patients 
with minimal change disease, mesangial proliferation, or focal glomerulosclerosis. Pediatr Clin 
North Am. 1982; 89:875–894.
Agrawal et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 5. Nash, MA., Edelmann, CMJ., Bernstein, J., Barnett, HL. Pediatric Kidney Disease. Edelmann, 
CMJ., editor. Little; 1992. p. 1247-1266.
6. Ponticelli C, et al. Can prolonged treatment improve the prognosis in adults with focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis? Am J Kidney Dis. 1999; 34:618–625. [PubMed: 10516340] 
7. MacHardy N, et al. Management patterns of childhood-onset nephrotic syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol. 
2009; 24:2193–2201. [PubMed: 19672630] 
8. Ding WY, Saleem MA. Current concepts of the podocyte in nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Res Clin 
Pract. 2012; 31:87–93. [PubMed: 26889414] 
9. Harris RC, Ismail N. Extrarenal complications of the nephrotic syndrome. Am J Kidney Dis. 1994; 
23:477–497. [PubMed: 8154483] 
10. Cameron JS. The nephrotic syndrome and its complications. Am J Kidney Dis. 1987; 10:157–171. 
[PubMed: 3307394] 
11. Llach F. Hypercoagulability, renal vein thrombosis, and other thrombotic complications of 
nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int. 1985; 28:429–439. [PubMed: 3906225] 
12. Rheault MN, et al. AKI in children hospitalized with nephrotic syndrome. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2015; 10:2110–2118. [PubMed: 26450933] 
13. Al-Azzawi HF, Obi OC, Safi J, Song M. Nephrotic syndrome-induced thromboembolism in adults. 
Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci. 2016; 6:85–88. [PubMed: 27308257] 
14. Kerlin BA, Ayoob R, Smoyer WE. Epidemiology and pathophysiology of nephrotic syndrome-
associated thromboembolic disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012; 7:513–520. [PubMed: 
22344511] 
15. Kerlin BA, Haworth K, Smoyer WE. Venous thromboembolism in pediatric nephrotic syndrome. 
Pediatr Nephrol. 2014; 29:989–997. [PubMed: 23812352] 
16. Loscalzo J. Venous thrombosis in the nephrotic syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368:956–958. 
[PubMed: 23465106] 
17. Vaziri ND. Disorders of lipid metabolism in nephrotic syndrome: mechanisms and consequences. 
Kidney Int. 2016; 90:41–52. [PubMed: 27165836] 
18. Joven J, et al. Abnormalities of lipoprotein metabolism in patients with the nephrotic syndrome. N 
Engl J Med. 1990; 323:579–584. [PubMed: 2381443] 
19. Zhou H, Tan KC, Shiu SW, Wong Y. Cellular cholesterol efflux to serum is impaired in diabetic 
nephropathy. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2008; 24:617–623. [PubMed: 18802933] 
20. de Sain-van der Velden MG, et al. Increased VLDL in nephrotic patients results from a decreased 
catabolism while increased LDL results from increased synthesis. Kidney Int. 1998; 53:994–1001. 
[PubMed: 9551409] 
21. Garber DW, Gottlieb BA, Marsh JB, Sparks CE. Catabolism of very low density lipoproteins in 
experimental nephrosis. J Clin Invest. 1984; 74:1375–1383. [PubMed: 6480830] 
22. Davies RW, Staprans I, Hutchison FN, Kaysen GA. Proteinuria, not altered albumin metabolism, 
affects hyperlipidemia in the nephrotic rat. J Clin Invest. 1990; 86:600–605. [PubMed: 2384606] 
23. Vaziri ND. Dyslipidemia of chronic renal failure: the nature, mechanisms, and potential 
consequences. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2006; 290:F262–F272. [PubMed: 16403839] 
24. Mace C, Chugh SS. Nephrotic syndrome: components, connections, and angiopoietin-like 4-related 
therapeutics. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014; 25:2393–2398. [PubMed: 24854282] 
25. Keith DS, Nichols GA, Gullion CM, Brown JB, Smith DH. Longitudinal follow-up and outcomes 
among a population with chronic kidney disease in a large managed care organization. Arch Intern 
Med. 2004; 164:659–663. [PubMed: 15037495] 
26. Yeang C, Gordts PL, Tsimikas S. Novel lipoprotein(a) catabolism pathway via apolipoprotein(a) 
recycling: Adding the plasminogen receptor PlgRKT to the list. Circ Res. 2017; 120:1050–1052. 
[PubMed: 28360338] 
27. Sharma M, Redpath GM, Williams MJ, McCormick SP. Recycling of apolipoprotein(a) after 
PlgRKT-mediated endocytosis of lipoprotein(a). Circ Res. 2017; 120:1091–1102. [PubMed: 
28003220] 
Agrawal et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 28. Moriarty PM, Varvel SA, Gordts PL, McConnell JP, Tsimikas S. Lipoprotein(a) mass levels 
increase significantly according to APOE genotype: an analysis of 431 239 patients. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol. 2017; 37:580–588. [PubMed: 28062489] 
29. Merkel M, Eckel RH, Goldberg IJ. Lipoprotein lipase: genetics, lipid uptake, and regulation. J 
Lipid Res. 2002; 43:1997–2006. [PubMed: 12454259] 
30. Allan CM, et al. Mobility of “HSPG-bound” LPL explains how LPL is able to reach GPIHBP1 on 
capillaries. J Lipid Res. 2017; 58:216–225. [PubMed: 27811232] 
31. Davies BS, et al. GPIHBP1 is responsible for the entry of lipoprotein lipase into capillaries. Cell 
Metab. 2010; 12:42–52. [PubMed: 20620994] 
32. Vaziri ND, Yuan J, Ni Z, Nicholas SB, Norris KC. Lipoprotein lipase deficiency in chronic kidney 
disease is accompanied by down-regulation of endothelial GPIHBP1 expression. Clin Exp 
Nephrol. 2012; 16:238–243. [PubMed: 22009636] 
33. Moorhead JF, Chan MK, El-Nahas M, Varghese Z. Lipid nephrotoxicity in chronic progressive 
glomerular and tubulo-interstitial disease. Lancet. 1982; 2:1309–1311. [PubMed: 6128601] 
34. Clement LC, et al. Circulating angiopoietin-like 4 links proteinuria with hypertriglyceridemia in 
nephrotic syndrome. Nat Med. 2014; 20:37–46. [PubMed: 24317117] 
35. Sukonina V, Lookene A, Olivecrona T, Olivecrona G. Angiopoietin-like protein 4 converts 
lipoprotein lipase to inactive monomers and modulates lipase activity in adipose tissue. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:17450–17455. [PubMed: 17088546] 
36. Lafferty MJ, Bradford KC, Erie DA, Neher SB. Angiopoietin-like protein 4 inhibition of 
lipoprotein lipase: evidence for reversible complex formation. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:28524–
28534. [PubMed: 23960078] 
37. Liang K, Vaziri ND. Acquired VLDL receptor deficiency in experimental nephrosis. Kidney Int. 
1997; 51:1761–1765. [PubMed: 9186864] 
38. Zhou Y, et al. Expression profiling of hepatic genes associated with lipid metabolism in nephrotic 
rats. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008; 295:F662–F671. [PubMed: 18614621] 
39. O’Donnell MP. Mechanisms and clinical importance of hypertriglyceridemia in the nephrotic 
syndrome. Kidney Int. 2001; 59:380–382. [PubMed: 11135095] 
40. Kashyap ML, et al. Apolipoprotein CII and lipoprotein lipase in human nephrotic syndrome. 
Atherosclerosis. 1980; 35:29–40. [PubMed: 7370086] 
41. Ohta T, Matsuda I. Lipid and apolipoprotein levels in patients with nephrotic syndrome. Clin Chim 
Acta. 1981; 117:133–143. [PubMed: 6796292] 
42. Nasr SH, et al. Novel type of renal amyloidosis derived from apolipoprotein-CII. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2017; 28:439–445. [PubMed: 27297947] 
43. Tentolouris N, et al. High postprandial triglyceridemia in patients with type 2 diabetes and 
microalbuminuria. J Lipid Res. 2007; 48:218–225. [PubMed: 17018886] 
44. Di Bartolo B, Scherer DJ, Brown A, Psaltis PJ, Nicholls SJ. PCSK9 inhibitors in hyperlipidemia: 
current status and clinical outlook. BioDrugs. 2017; 31:167–174. [PubMed: 28424973] 
45. Morris AW. Nephrotic syndrome: PCSK9: a target for hypercholesterolaemia in nephrotic 
syndrome. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2016; 12:510. [PubMed: 27425160] 
46. Pavlakou P, Liberopoulos E, Dounousi E, Elisaf M. PCSK9 in chronic kidney disease. Int Urol 
Nephrol. 2017; 49:1015–1024. [PubMed: 28084558] 
47. Haas ME, et al. The role of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 in nephrotic syndrome-
associated hypercholesterolemia. Circulation. 2016; 134:61–72. [PubMed: 27358438] 
48. Warwick GL, et al. Low-density lipoprotein metabolism in the nephrotic syndrome. Metabolism. 
1990; 39:187–192. [PubMed: 2299990] 
49. Vaziri ND, Liang KH. Hepatic HMG-CoA reductase gene expression during the course of 
puromycin-induced nephrosis. Kidney Int. 1995; 48:1979–1985. [PubMed: 8587261] 
50. Tsimikas S, et al. Oxidized phospholipids, Lp(a) lipoprotein, and coronary artery disease. N Engl J 
Med. 2005; 353:46–57. [PubMed: 16000355] 
51. Wanner C, et al. Elevated plasma lipoprotein(a) in patients with the nephrotic syndrome. Ann 
Intern Med. 1993; 119:263–269. [PubMed: 8328733] 
Agrawal et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 52. Glass CK, Witztum JL. Atherosclerosis: the road ahead. Cell. 2001; 104:503–516. [PubMed: 
11239408] 
53. Gherardi E, Rota E, Calandra S, Genova R, Tamborino A. Relationship among the concentrations 
of serum lipoproteins and changes in their chemical composition in patients with untreated 
nephrotic syndrome. Eur J Clin Invest. 1977; 7:563–570. [PubMed: 415877] 
54. Yvan-Charvet L, Wang N, Tall AR. Role of HDL, ABCA1, and ABCG1 transporters in cholesterol 
efflux and immune responses. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010; 30:139–143. [PubMed: 
19797709] 
55. Birjmohun RS, et al. High-density lipoprotein attenuates inflammation and coagulation response 
on endotoxin challenge in humans. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007; 27:1153–1158. 
[PubMed: 17303780] 
56. Murphy AJ, et al. High-density lipoprotein reduces the human monocyte inflammatory response. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008; 28:2071–2077. [PubMed: 18617650] 
57. Yuhanna IS, et al. High-density lipoprotein binding to scavenger receptor-BI activates endothelial 
nitric oxide synthase. Nat Med. 2001; 7:853–857. [PubMed: 11433352] 
58. Muls E, Rosseneu M, Daneels R, Schurgers M, Boelaert J. Lipoprotein distribution and 
composition in the human nephrotic syndrome. Atherosclerosis. 1985; 54:225–237. [PubMed: 
3986019] 
59. Vaziri ND. HDL abnormalities in nephrotic syndrome and chronic kidney disease. Nat Rev 
Nephrol. 2016; 12:37–47. [PubMed: 26568191] 
60. Pedigo CE, et al. Local TNF causes NFATc1-dependent cholesterol-mediated podocyte injury. J 
Clin Invest. 2016; 126:3336–3350. [PubMed: 27482889] 
61. Jao W, Lewy P, Norris SH, Pollak VE, Pirani CL. Lipoid nephrosis: a reassessment. Perspect 
Nephrol Hypertens. 1973; 1:183–198. [PubMed: 4620918] 
62. Muso E. Beneficial effect of LDL-apheresis in refractory nephrotic syndrome. Clin Exp Nephrol. 
2014; 18:286–290. [PubMed: 24535024] 
63. Gordon T, Castelli WP, Hjortland MC, Kannel WB, Dawber TR. High density lipoprotein as a 
protective factor against coronary heart disease: the Framingham study. Am J Med. 1977; 62:707–
714. [PubMed: 193398] 
64. Rye KA, Barter PJ. Cardioprotective functions of HDLs. J Lipid Res. 2014z; 55:168–179. 
[PubMed: 23812558] 
65. Boden WE, et al. Niacin in patients with low HDL cholesterol levels receiving intensive statin 
therapy. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:2255–2267. [PubMed: 22085343] 
66. Barter PJ, et al. Effects of torcetrapib in patients at high risk for coronary events. N Engl J Med. 
2007; 357:2109–2122. [PubMed: 17984165] 
67. Brunzell JD, Zambon A, Deeb SS. The effect of hepatic lipase on coronary artery disease in 
humans is influenced by the underlying lipoprotein phenotype. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012; 
1821:365–372. [PubMed: 21986251] 
68. Voight BF, et al. Plasma HDL cholesterol and risk of myocardial infarction: a mendelian 
randomisation study. Lancet. 2012; 380:572–580. [PubMed: 22607825] 
69. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01841684
70. Brooks, M. REVEAL: CETP inhibitor anacetrapib meets primary end point. Medscape 
Nephrology. 2017. http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/882173
71. Faraggiana T, Churg J. Renal lipidoses: a review. Hum Pathol. 1987; 18:661–679. [PubMed: 
3297993] 
72. Ossoli A, et al. Lipoprotein X causes renal disease in LCAT deficiency. PLoS ONE. 2016; 
11:e0150083. [PubMed: 26919698] 
73. Ferrans VJ, Fredrickson DS. The pathology of Tangier disease. A light and electron microscopic 
study. Am J Pathol. 1975; 78:101–158. [PubMed: 162820] 
74. Lovric S, et al. Mutations in sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase cause nephrosis with ichthyosis and 
adrenal insufficiency. J Clin Invest. 2017; 127:912–928. [PubMed: 28165339] 
Agrawal et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 75. Fornoni A, et al. Rituximab targets podocytes in recurrent focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Sci 
Transl Med. 2011; 3:85ra46.
76. Choi HK, Seeger JD. Glucocorticoid use and serum lipid levels in US adults: the Third National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Arthritis Rheum. 2005; 53:528–535. [PubMed: 
16082633] 
77. Leong KH, Koh ET, Feng PH, Boey ML. Lipid profiles in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. J Rheumatol. 1994; 21:1264–1267. [PubMed: 7966068] 
78. MacGregor AJ, et al. Fasting lipids and anticardiolipin antibodies as risk factors for vascular 
disease in systemic lupus erythematosus. Ann Rheum Dis. 1992; 51:152–155. [PubMed: 1550394] 
79. Macfarlane DP, Forbes S, Walker BR. Glucocorticoids and fatty acid metabolism in humans: 
fuelling fat redistribution in the metabolic syndrome. J Endocrinol. 2008; 197:189–204. [PubMed: 
18434349] 
80. Vincenti F, Jensik SC, Filo RS, Miller J, Pirsch J. A long-term comparison of tacrolimus (FK506) 
and cyclosporine in kidney transplantation: evidence for improved allograft survival at five years. 
Transplantation. 2002; 73:775–782. [PubMed: 11907427] 
81. Mayer AD, et al. Multicenter randomized trial comparing tacrolimus (FK506) and cyclosporine in 
the prevention of renal allograft rejection: a report of the European Tacrolimus Multicenter Renal 
Study Group. Transplantation. 1997; 64:436–443. [PubMed: 9275110] 
82. Jackson SP, Calkin AC. The clot thickens — oxidized lipids and thrombosis. Nat Med. 2007; 
13:1015–1016. [PubMed: 17828215] 
83. Podrez EA, et al. Platelet CD36 links hyperlipidemia, oxidant stress and a prothrombotic 
phenotype. Nat Med. 2007; 13:1086–1095. [PubMed: 17721545] 
84. Gyebi L, Soltani Z, Reisin E. Lipid nephrotoxicity: new concept for an old disease. Curr Hypertens 
Rep. 2012; 14:177–181. [PubMed: 22290079] 
85. Thomas ME, Harris KP, Walls J, Furness PN, Brunskill NJ. Fatty acids exacerbate tubulointerstitial 
injury in protein-overload proteinuria. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002; 283:F640–F647. 
[PubMed: 12217854] 
86. Kamijo A, et al. Urinary free fatty acids bound to albumin aggravate tubulointerstitial damage. 
Kidney Int. 2002; 62:1628–1637. [PubMed: 12371963] 
87. Schermer B, Benzing T. Lipid-protein interactions along the slit diaphragm of podocytes. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2009; 20:473–478. [PubMed: 19244577] 
88. Schlondorff D. Cellular mechanisms of lipid injury in the glomerulus. Am J Kidney Dis. 1993; 
22:72–82. [PubMed: 8322798] 
89. Nishida Y, Oda H, Yorioka N. Effect of lipoproteins on mesangial cell proliferation. Kidney Int 
Suppl. 1999; 71:S51–S53. [PubMed: 10412737] 
90. Stevenson FT, Shearer GC, Atkinson DN. Lipoprotein-stimulated mesangial cell proliferation and 
gene expression are regulated by lipoprotein lipase. Kidney Int. 2001; 59:2062–2068. [PubMed: 
11380807] 
91. Shearer GC, et al. Hypoalbuminemia and proteinuria contribute separately to reduced lipoprotein 
catabolism in the nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int. 2001; 59:179–189. [PubMed: 11135070] 
92. Zhong S, et al. Inflammatory stress exacerbated mesangial foam cell formation and renal injury via 
disrupting cellular cholesterol homeostasis. Inflammation. 2015; 38:959–971. [PubMed: 
25387652] 
93. Kopp JB, et al. APOL1 genetic variants in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and HIV-associated 
nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011; 22:2129–2137. [PubMed: 21997394] 
94. Genovese G, et al. Association of trypanolytic ApoL1 variants with kidney disease in African 
Americans. Science. 2010; 329:841–845. [PubMed: 20647424] 
95. Freedman BI, et al. The apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) gene and nondiabetic nephropathy in African 
Americans. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010; 21:1422–1426. [PubMed: 20688934] 
96. Debiec H, Ronco P. PLA2R autoantibodies and PLA2R glomerular deposits in membranous 
nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:689–690. [PubMed: 21323563] 
97. Beck LH Jr , et al. M-Type phospholipase A2 receptor as target antigen in idiopathic membranous 
nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2009; 361:11–21. [PubMed: 19571279] 
Agrawal et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 98. Fornoni A, Merscher S, Kopp JB. Lipid biology of the podocyte — new perspectives offer new 
opportunities. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2014; 10:379–388. [PubMed: 24861084] 
99. Chung JJ, et al. Albumin-associated free fatty acids induce macropinocytosis in podocytes. J Clin 
Invest. 2015; 125:2307–2316. [PubMed: 25915582] 
100. Allison SJ. Free fatty acid-induced macropinocytosis in podocytes. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015; 
11:386. [PubMed: 25963589] 
101. Agrawal S, Guess AJ, Chanley MA, Smoyer WE. Albumin-induced podocyte injury and 
protection are associated with regulation of COX-2. Kidney Int. 2014; 86:1150–1160. [PubMed: 
24918154] 
102. Sieber J, et al. Regulation of podocyte survival and endoplasmic reticulum stress by fatty acids. 
Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010; 299:F821–F829. [PubMed: 20668104] 
103. Kampe K, Sieber J, Orellana JM, Mundel P, Jehle AW. Susceptibility of podocytes to palmitic 
acid is regulated by fatty acid oxidation and inversely depends on acetyl-CoA carboxylases 1 and 
2. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014; 306:F401–F409. [PubMed: 24338821] 
104. Martinez-Garcia C, et al. Renal lipotoxicity-associated inflammation and insulin resistance affects 
actin cytoskeleton organization in podocytes. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0142291. [PubMed: 
26545114] 
105. Eddy AA, Michael AF. Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis associated with aminonucleoside 
nephrosis. Kidney Int. 1988; 33:14–23. [PubMed: 3258389] 
106. Eddy AA, McCulloch L, Liu E, Adams J. A relationship between proteinuria and acute 
tubulointerstitial disease in rats with experimental nephrotic syndrome. Am J Pathol. 1991; 
138:1111–1123. [PubMed: 2024704] 
107. Iwai T, et al. Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 protects cells against lipotoxicity-mediated apoptosis in 
proximal tubular cells. Int J Mol Sci. 2016; 17:E1868. [PubMed: 27834856] 
108. Li C, et al. Intrarenal renin-angiotensin system mediates fatty acid-induced ER stress in the 
kidney. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2016; 310:F351–F363. [PubMed: 26672616] 
109. Zuo N, Zheng X, Liu H, Ma X. Fenofibrate, a PPARα agonist, protect proximal tubular cells from 
albumin-bound fatty acids induced apoptosis via the activation of NF-kB. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 
2015; 8:10653–10661. [PubMed: 26617775] 
110. Ruggiero C, et al. Albumin-bound fatty acids but not albumin itself alter redox balance in tubular 
epithelial cells and induce a peroxide-mediated redox-sensitive apoptosis. Am J Physiol Renal 
Physiol. 2014; 306:F896–F906. [PubMed: 24500687] 
111. Sacks FM, et al. The effect of pravastatin on coronary events after myocardial infarction in 
patients with average cholesterol levels. N Engl J Med. 1996; 335:1001–1009. [PubMed: 
8801446] 
112. Reiner Z, et al. ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias: the Task Force for 
the management of dyslipidaemias of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the 
European Atherosclerosis Society (EAS). Eur Heart J. 2011; 32:1769–1818. [PubMed: 
21712404] 
113. Bagga A, Sharma A, Srivastava RN. Inefficacy of pefloxacin in steroid-responsive nephrotic 
syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol. 1995; 9:793–794. [PubMed: 8747133] 
114. Keane WF. Lipids and the kidney. Kidney Int. 1994; 46:910–920. [PubMed: 7996813] 
115. Culleton BF, et al. Cardiovascular disease and mortality in a community-based cohort with mild 
renal insufficiency. Kidney Int. 1999; 56:2214–2219. [PubMed: 10594797] 
116. Falk, RJ. Acute Renal Failure: A Companion to Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney. Molitoris, BA., 
Finn, W., editors. Saunders; 2001. 
117. Kasiske BL. Hyperlipidemia in patients with chronic renal disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998; 
32:S142–S156.
118. Ordonez JD, Hiatt RA, Killebrew EJ, Fireman BH. The increased risk of coronary heart disease 
associated with nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int. 1993; 44:638–642. [PubMed: 8231039] 
119. Suryawanshi SP, Das B, Patnaik AN. Myocardial infarction in children: two interesting cases. 
Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2011; 4:81–83. [PubMed: 21677815] 
Agrawal et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 120. Silva JM, et al. Premature acute myocardial infarction in a child with nephrotic syndrome. Pediatr 
Nephrol. 2002; 17:169–172. [PubMed: 11956853] 
121. D’Amico G, et al. Effect of vegetarian soy diet on hyperlipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome. 
Lancet. 1992; 339:1131–1134. [PubMed: 1349366] 
122. Gentile MG, et al. Treatment of proteinuric patients with a vegetarian soy diet and fish oil. Clin 
Nephrol. 1993; 40:315–320. [PubMed: 8299238] 
123. Bell S, Cooney J, Packard CJ, Caslake MJ, Deighan CJ. The effect of omega-3 fatty acids on the 
atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype in patients with nephrotic range proteinuria. Clin Nephrol. 
2012; 77:445–453. [PubMed: 22595386] 
124. Hall AV, et al. Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in primary nephrotic syndrome: effects on 
plasma lipids and coagulopathy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1992; 3:1321–1329. [PubMed: 1477328] 
125. Rabelink AJ, Hene RJ, Erkelens DW, Joles JA, Koomans HA. Effects of simvastatin and 
cholestyramine on lipoprotein profile in hyperlipidaemia of nephrotic syndrome. Lancet. 1988; 
2:1335–1338. [PubMed: 2904053] 
126. Thomas ME, et al. Simvastatin therapy for hypercholesterolemic patients with nephrotic 
syndrome or significant proteinuria. Kidney Int. 1993; 44:1124–1129. [PubMed: 8264145] 
127. MS, et al. Evaluation of effects of lovastatin on hyercholesterolaemia and renl functions in 
nephrotic syndrome. Indian Acad Clin Med. 2004; 5:143–146.
128. Gheith OA, et al. Impact of treatment of dyslipidemia on renal function, fat deposits and scarring 
in patients with persistent nephrotic syndrome. Nephron. 2002; 91:612–619. [PubMed: 
12138263] 
129. Gheith O, Sheashaa H, Abdelsalam M, Shoeir Z, Sobh M. Efficacy and safety of Monascus 
purpureus Went rice in subjects with secondary hyperlipidemia. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2008; 
12:189–194. [PubMed: 18363032] 
130. Olbricht CJ, Wanner C, Thiery J, Basten A. Simvastatin in nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int Suppl. 
1999; 71:S113–S116. [PubMed: 10412752] 
131. Kong X, et al. Lipid-lowering agents for nephrotic syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013; 
12:CD005425.
132. Baigent C, et al. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with simvastatin plus ezetimibe in 
patients with chronic kidney disease (Study of Heart and Renal Protection): a randomised 
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2011; 377:2181–2192. [PubMed: 21663949] 
133. Valeri A, Gelfand J, Blum C, Appel GB. Treatment of the hyperlipidemia of the nephrotic 
syndrome: a controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis. 1986; 8:388–396. [PubMed: 3544820] 
134. Groggel GC, Cheung AK, Ellis-Benigni K, Wilson DE. Treatment of nephrotic 
hyperlipoproteinemia with gemfibrozil. Kidney Int. 1989; 36:266–271. [PubMed: 2779095] 
135. Buyukcelik M, et al. The effects of gemfibrozil on hyperlipidemia in children with persistent 
nephrotic syndrome. Turk J Pediatr. 2002; 44:40–44. [PubMed: 11858378] 
136. Kamanna VS, Kashyap ML. Mechanism of action of niacin. Am J Cardiol. 2008; 101:20B–26B. 
[PubMed: 18157959] 
137. Phan BA, Dayspring TD, Toth PP. Ezetimibe therapy: mechanism of action and clinical update. 
Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2012; 8:415–427. [PubMed: 22910633] 
138. Kastelein JJ, et al. Simvastatin with or without ezetimibe in familial hypercholesterolemia. N 
Engl J Med. 2008; 358:1431–1443. [PubMed: 18376000] 
139. Coleman JE, Watson AR. Hyperlipidaemia, diet and simvastatin therapy in steroid-resistant 
nephrotic syndrome of childhood. Pediatr Nephrol. 1996; 10:171–174. [PubMed: 8703704] 
140. Sanjad SA, al-Abbad A, al-Shorafa S. Management of hyperlipidemia in children with refractory 
nephrotic syndrome: the effect of statin therapy. J Pediatr. 1997; 130:470–474. [PubMed: 
9063427] 
141. Hattori M, et al. A combined low-density lipoprotein apheresis and prednisone therapy for 
steroid-resistant primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in children. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003; 
42:1121–1130. [PubMed: 14655182] 
Agrawal et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 142. Muso E, et al. Low density lipoprotein apheresis therapy for steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. 
Kansai-FGS-Apheresis Treatment (K-FLAT) Study Group. Kidney Int Suppl. 1999; 71:S122–
S125. [PubMed: 10412754] 
143. Muso E, et al. Immediate therapeutic efficacy of low-density lipoprotein apheresis for drug-
resistant nephrotic syndrome: evidence from the short-term results from the POLARIS Study. 
Clin Exp Nephrol. 2015; 19:379–386. [PubMed: 24934117] 
144. Muso E, et al. A prospective observational survey on the long-term effect of LDL apheresis on 
drug-resistant nephrotic syndrome. Nephron Extra. 2015; 5:58–66. [PubMed: 26557843] 
145. Suzuki H, Tsukamoto T, Muso E. Rituximab-resistant nephrotic syndrome with successful 
induction of remission by low-density lipoprotein apheresis. Ther Apher Dial. 2017; 21:295–296. 
[PubMed: 28661090] 
146. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2015. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02314442
147. Fitzgerald K, et al. A highly durable RNAi therapeutic inhibitor of PCSK9. N Engl J Med. 2017; 
376:41–51. [PubMed: 27959715] 
148. Liu S, Vaziri ND. Role of PCSK9 and IDOL in the pathogenesis of acquired LDL receptor 
deficiency and hypercholesterolemia in nephrotic syndrome. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2014; 
29:538–543. [PubMed: 24166456] 
149. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2017. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT03004001
150. Awanami Y, et al. Successful treatment of a patient with refractory nephrotic syndrome with 
PCSK9 inhibitors: a case report. BMC Nephrol. 2017; 18:221. [PubMed: 28683788] 
151. Kazi DS, et al. Cost-effectiveness of PCSK9 inhibitor therapy in patients with heterozygous 
familial hypercholesterolemia or atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. JAMA. 2016; 316:743–
753. [PubMed: 27533159] 
152. Vaziri ND, Liang KH. Acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase inhibition ameliorates 
proteinuria, hyperlipidemia, lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase, SRB-1, and low-denisty 
lipoprotein receptor deficiencies in nephrotic syndrome. Circulation. 2004; 110:419–425. 
[PubMed: 15262831] 
153. Tardif JC, et al. Effects of the acyl coenzyme A: cholesterol acyltransferase inhibitor avasimibe on 
human atherosclerotic lesions. Circulation. 2004; 110:3372–3377. [PubMed: 15533865] 
154. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2016. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02235857
155. Chapter 2: General principles in the management of glomerular disease. Kidney Int Suppl. 2012; 
2:156–162. [No authors listed.]. 
156. Lechner BL, Bockenhauer D, Iragorri S, Kennedy TL, Siegel NJ. The risk of cardiovascular 
disease in adults who have had childhood nephrotic syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol. 2004; 19:744–
748. [PubMed: 15085419] 
157. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2017. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT00004466
158. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. 2017. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT01845428
Agrawal et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key points
•
Prolonged hyperlipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome is a major risk factor for 
multiple disease complications, including accelerated atherosclerosis, 
myocardial infarction, stroke, chronic kidney disease and thrombosis
•
Direct lipid-induced cellular injury to podocytes, mesangial cells and, 
potentially, renal tubular cells as a result of dyslipidaemia increasingly seems 
to have a role in the pathogenesis of nephrotic syndrome
•
Given the available evidence, we suggest that statins should be the first-line 
treatment for prolonged hyperlipidaemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome, 
given their efficacy in the treatment of other diseases and the fact that they are 
well tolerated
•
Alternative, less supported treatments include LDL apheresis, cholesterol 
absorption inhibitors, nicotinic acid and bile acid sequestrants; targeting 
proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 is another potential treatment for 
hyperlipidaemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome
•
Treatment recommendations in children are limited by a lack of data for both 
the efficacy and the risk of pharmacological interventions
Agrawal et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. The major pathways of lipid metabolism
Lipoproteins are the major carriers of lipids in the circulation and they participate in three 
major pathways that are responsible for the generation and transport of lipids within the 
body. The two major forms of circulating lipid in the body, triglycerides and cholesterol, are 
packaged with apolipoproteins and phospholipids to form lipoproteins. The major forms of 
lipoproteins are chylomicrons, very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), intermediate density 
lipoprotein (IDL), low density lipoprotein (LDL) and high density lipoprotein (HDL), and 
they differ in their size, density, composition and functions (detailed in TABLE 1). In the 
exogenous pathway, dietary lipids, which consist mainly of triglycerides (95%) and some 
phospholipids, free fatty acids and cholesterol, are packaged into chylomicrons by intestinal 
mucosal cells. These chylomicrons enter the lymphatic system and then the circulation, 
where triglycerides are released as free fatty acids by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity on the 
capillary endothelium. These free fatty acids are taken up by the muscle, adipose and other 
peripheral tissues, whereas the remnants of chylomicrons are cleared by the liver. In the 
endogenous pathway, the liver produces VLDL, which interacts with LPL in the circulation 
to form IDL, with the release of triglyceride and free fatty acids. IDL is rapidly removed by 
the liver via the interaction of its apolipoprotein E component with LDL receptor (LDLR). 
Furthermore, IDL forms LDL upon removal of triglyceride by hepatic lipase. LDL, which is 
very high in cholesterol content, is in turn removed from the circulation by binding to LDLR 
in the liver and in extrahepatic tissues. HDL is an anti-atherogenic lipoprotein or ‘good 
cholesterol’, as it captures the cholesterol from peripheral tissues or other lipoproteins and 
transports it back to liver by the third pathway, which is termed reverse cholesterol transport.
Agrawal et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Pathophysiology of dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome
Alterations of lipid and lipoprotein metabolism in nephrotic syndrome result in ‘lipid 
nephrotoxicity’ and other complications, such as atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease and 
thromboembolism. The major lipoproteins, including intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL), 
very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and cholesterol are 
increased in the plasma of patients with nephrotic syndrome, owing mainly to impaired 
clearance and, to a lesser extent, increased biosynthesis. Impaired clearance is a direct result 
of decreased hepatic lipase activity and decreased lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity in the 
endothelium and peripheral tissues, such as muscle and adipose. In addition, hepatic levels 
of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) are increased in patients with 
nephrotic syndrome; PCSK9 degrades the LDL receptor (LDLR), and is thus a major 
therapeutic target for lipid lowering. Furthermore, the composition and function of the 
lipoproteins are also altered, with substantial increases in the plasma levels of apolipoprotein 
A I (ApoA I), ApoA IV, ApoB, ApoC and ApoE, and in the ApoC III/ApoC II ratio. The 
level of immature HDL in the plasma is also increased, resulting in reduced cholesterol 
efflux, which occurs mainly via ATP binding cassette subfamily A member 1 (ABCA1), in 
peripheral organs, including in podocytes. Another major lipid abnormality in nephrotic 
syndrome is hypertriglyceridaemia, as well as increased production and sialylation of 
ANGPTL4, which is driven primarily by increased circulating free fatty acids. ANGPTL4 in 
turn suppresses LPL activity by either preventing its dimerization or by inhibiting its activity 
noncompetitively. Hypercholesterolaemia and increased LDL levels occur in conjunction 
with upregulation of the expression and activity of liver acetyl CoA acetyltransferase 2 
(ACAT2), which results in enhanced esterification of cholesterol and a reduction in the level 
of intracellular free cholesterol. Cholesterol synthesis via 3 hydroxy 3 methylglutaryl CoA 
(HMG CoA) reductase is also increased in experimental models of nephrotic syndrome. 
Evidence also exists that LDL oxidation in nephrotic syndrome may be augmented by 
Agrawal et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lipoprotein(a), the level of which is also increased in patients with nephrotic syndrome. 
Accumulation of oxidized LDL, IDL and chylomicron remnants stimulates monocytes and 
macrophages to release proin ammatory cytokines and chemokines, and accelerates in 
ammation, which may in turn promote the progression of chronic kidney disease.
Agrawal et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Mechanisms and consequences of lipid nephrotoxicity
The direct effects of dyslipidaemia on decreased kidney function are referred to as ‘lipid 
nephrotoxicity’, although the role of altered lipid metabolism in the molecular 
pathophysiology of nephrotic syndrome is not well understood. During dyslipidaemia, 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, such as very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and intermediate 
density lipoprotein (IDL) as well as oxidized LDL, are taken up by mesangial cells, leading 
to the production of cytotoxic agents, cytokines and reactive oxygen species, which further 
damage the glomerular epithelial and endothelial cells, resulting in sclerosis. Furthermore, 
levels of free fatty acids are increased in patients with nephrotic syndrome, which have been 
reported to have toxic effects in the kidney, especially in glomeruli and podocytes, but also 
in the tubulointerstitium. Free fatty acids bound to albumin cause podocyte damage by 
enhancing macropinocytosis and activating G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signalling, 
leading to disruption of the podocyte actin cytoskeleton and podocyte morphology. In 
addition, these albumin bound free fatty acids cause loss of podocyte viability and increased 
production of several cytokines. Moreover, free cholesterol-mediated injury is another 
pathway of cellular injury in podocytes, and involves the ATP binding cassette sub family A 
member 1 (ABCA1) cholesterol transporter. Furthermore, the role of free fatty acids, and 
saturated fatty acids in particular, is well documented in causing damage to proximal tubule 
cells and tubulointerstitial injury.
Agrawal et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Agrawal et al.
Page 28
Table 1
Classes of lipoproteins
Lipoprotein
Composition
Apolipoproteins and enzymes
Function in normal physiology
High-density lipoprotein (HDL)
• Apolipoproteins (45%)
• Cholesterol (25%)
• Triglycerides (30%)
• ApoA I, ApoA II, ApoC II, ApoC 
III, ApoE, ApoL I
• CETP, LCAT
Reverse cholesterol transport 
from tissues to the liver
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
• Apolipoproteins (25%)
• Cholesterol (45%)
• Triglycerides (30%)
ApoB-100
Major cholesterol carrier
Intermediate density lipoprotein 
(IDL)
Mostly triglycerides and 
some cholesterol
ApoB-100
Intermediate between LDL and 
VLDL
Very low-density lipoprotein 
(VLDL)
Mostly triglycerides
ApoB 100, ApoC II, ApoC III, ApoE
Major triglyceride carrier
Chylomicrons
• Apolipoproteins (2%)
• Cholesterol (3%)
• Triglycerides (93%)
ApoB 48, ApoC II, ApoC III, ApoE
Transport of dietary (exogenous) 
triglycerides to the systemic 
circulation and to adipose tissue 
and the liver
ApoA I, apolipoprotein A I; CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; LCAT, lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase.
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Agrawal et al.
Page 29
Table 2
Consequences of dyslipidaemia in nephrotic syndrome or CKD
Complications associated with dyslipidaemia in 
nephrotic syndrome
Estimates of individual and additive risk for complications occurring in different 
disease states
Nephrotic syndrome
CKD
Nephrotic syndrome and 
CKD
Cardiovascular disease
Atherosclerosis
++
+
+++
Myocardial infarction
++
+
+++
Cerebrovascular accident (stroke)
++
+
+++
Progressive kidney disease
Glomerulosclerosis
++
+
+++
• Mesangial cell proliferation
+
±
+
• Podocyte injury
+
+
++
Tubulointerstitial disease
++
+
+++
• Proximal tubular cell injury
+
+
++
Other
Thromboembolism
++
±
++
±, minimal risk; +, low risk; ++, moderate risk; +++, high risk; CKD, chronic kidney disease.
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Agrawal et al.
Page 30
Table 3
Clinical trials and studies of dyslipidaemia treatments in patients with nephrotic syndrome
Treatment
Action
Outcomes
Limitations
Refs or trials
Conservative lifestyle 
changes (diet, weight, 
exercise)
• ↓ Cholesterol
• ↓ Apolipoproteins (small 
reduction)
• ↓ Triglycerides
• ↓ Hyperlipidaemia
• ↓ Proteinuria
Implementation and 
patient compliance
121–123
Statins
• ↓ HMG CoA
• ↓ LDL
• ↓ Cholesterol
• ↓ Triglycerides
• ↑ HDL
• Few adverse effects
• Improved cardiovascular 
outcome in CKD
Limited number of 
studies
125–131,139*,140*, 
NCT00004466* 
(REF. 157), 
NCT01845428 (REF. 
158)
Bile acid sequestrants
• ↓ Enterohepatic bile acid 
circulation
• ↓ LDL
• Gastrointestinal 
adverse effects
• Less effective than 
statins
133
Fibrates
• ↑ Lipoprotein lipase activity
• ↓ Triglycerides
• ↓ LDL
• ↓ Cholesterol
Meta-analysis found a 
lack of support for 
fibrate efficacy
112,134,135
LDL-apheresis
• ↓ LDL
• ↓ Cholesterol
• ↓ Triglycerides
• ↑ Response to 
immunosuppressants
• Complete or partial 
remission of nephrotic 
syndrome
• Few adverse effects
Requires central 
venous access
141*,142–144, 
NCT02235857* 
(REF. 154)
• Anti PCSK9 antibodies
• PCSK9 RNA 
interference
• Inactivation of PCSK9
• Degradation of PCSK9 
mRNA
• ↑ Hepatic LDLR
• ↓ LDL
Very expensive
44‡, NCT03004001 
(REF. 149), 
NCT02314442‡ 
(REF. 146)
*Studies or trials with paediatric patients.
‡Not in nephrotic syndrome setting. CKD, chronic kidney disease; HDL, high density lipoprotein; HMG CoA, 3 hydroxy 3 methyl glutaryl 
coenzyme A; LDL, low density lipoprotein; LDLR, LDL receptor; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9.
Nat Rev Nephrol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 16.
