 Noninvasive Targeted Transcranial Neuromodulation via Focused
Ultrasound Gated Drug Release from Nanoemulsions
Raag D. Airan,*,†,‡,§
Randall A. Meyer,‡,∥ Nicholas P. K. Ellens,† Kelly R. Rhodes,‡ Keyvan Farahani,†,⊥
Martin G. Pomper,†,∥,#
Shilpa D. Kadam,∇,○
and Jordan J. Green*,‡,∥,#,◆
†Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231,
United States
‡Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, United States
§Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
∥Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, United States
⊥National Cancer Institute/National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United States
#Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, United States
∇Neuroscience Laboratory, Hugo Moser Research Institute, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, United States
○Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, United States
◆Departments of Neurosurgery, Ophthalmology, and Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, United States
*
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Targeted, noninvasive neuromodulation of the brain of
an otherwise awake subject could revolutionize both basic and clinical
neuroscience. Toward this goal, we have developed nanoparticles that
allow noninvasive uncaging of a neuromodulatory drug, in this case the
small molecule anesthetic propofol, upon the application of focused
ultrasound. These nanoparticles are composed of biodegradable and
biocompatible constituents and are activated using sonication
parameters that are readily achievable by current clinical transcranial
focused ultrasound systems. These particles are potent enough that
their activation can silence seizures in an acute rat seizure model.
Notably, there is no evidence of brain parenchymal damage or blood-
brain barrier opening with their use. Further development of these
particles promises noninvasive, focal, and image-guided clinical
neuromodulation along a variety of pharmacological axes.
KEYWORDS: Neuromodulation, focused ultrasound, nanoparticles, gated drug release
A
long sought after goal of both clinical and basic
neuroscience is the ability to focally modulate the activity
of a spatially delimited region of the brain, noninvasively, and in
a safe and reversible manner.1 Recent advances in MR-guided
focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) suggest that this modality could
meet this challenge and enable clinically translatable neuro-
modulation.2−7 However, the mechanism by which focused
ultrasound (FUS) may directly induce changes in neural
activity is unknown and is a matter of debate.6 Additionally,
different studies describe divergent effects of FUS on neural
activity with some describing net stimulatory effects3 and others
describing net inhibitory effects.2,5 Despite the excellent
robustness and reliability of focused ultrasound techniques it
is unclear how FUS alone impacts neural activity.
We propose an alternate strategy for FUS-mediated neuro-
modulation via FUS-gated drug delivery to the brain. This
would combine the predictability of the FUS-induced pressure
field with the robustness of pharmacology. Recent application
of FUS for central nervous system (CNS) drug delivery has
enabled advances in the local delivery of nanoparticle-based
therapeutics for varied applications including glioma treat-
ment,8 neurological disorders,9 and neuroregeneration.10
Although promising, all of these prior nanoparticle-based
strategies depend on the transient physical opening of the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) via ultrasound-induced cavitation of
microbubbles. Additionally, a recent set of studies has tried to
enable robust pharmacological neuromodulation via FUS-
Received:
August 21, 2016
Revised:
January 5, 2017
Published: January 17, 2017
Letter
pubs.acs.org/NanoLett
© 2017 American Chemical Society
652
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits
copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.
 mediated BBB opening.7 The BBB is a crucial component of
the CNS as it maintains the optimal microenvironment for
neuronal activity and protects the neurons from many
endogenous and exogenous neurotoxins that are commonly
found in circulation.11,12
We therefore focus on delivery of agents that may readily
cross the blood-brain barrier and propose to use focused
ultrasound-mediated drug uncaging from nanoparticle carriers
with the ultrasound focusing providing a limit on the spatial
extent of the drug-based neuromodulation. We then rely upon
metabolism and redistribution of the drug to limit the temporal
extent of this activity. While this limits us to small molecule
lipophilic agents that are known to cross the blood brain barrier
passively without the need for disruption,13 many if not most
drugs of neurological and psychiatric interest fall under this
umbrella. In practice, after an intravenous infusion of the
nanoparticles inertly labels the blood pool of the subject, FUS
application releases the drug in the vascular bed of the tissue of
interest in a region that is spatially limited by the size of the
ultrasound focus. The drug would then cross the intact blood-
brain barrier and act upon the brain parenchyma during a first-
pass of perfusion. Given the availability of FDA-approved
clinical MRgFUS systems that allow noninvasive transcranial
focal sonication of millimeter-sized regions of the brain,14,15 this
strategy could potentially allow focal, noninvasive, and safe
neuromodulation with an immediate path toward clinical
translation.
We have generated ultrasound-gated nanoparticle carriers of
the small molecule anesthetic propofol. These particles are
modified forms of prior described ultrasound-gated “phase-
change” particles that were originally designed for chemo-
therapeutic delivery.16 These particles are made of a
biodegradable, biocompatible polyethylene glycol-b-polycapro-
lactone block copolymer matrix encapsulating a liquid
perfluorocarbon core and the drug of interest. Under
sonication, the perfluorocarbon core undergoes a liquid to
gas phase transition, thereby releasing the drug cargo (Figure
1). Perfluoropentane was chosen for the perfluorocarbon core
given its relatively high boiling point while encapsulated that
would prevent spontaneous phase change.17 This amphiphilic
polyester block copolymer was chosen for the emulsifying agent
as polymer perfluorocarbon nanoemulsions have been demon-
strated to be more stable in general than analogous lipid
nanoemulsions.18 We have established the efficacy of drug
release from these particles in vitro (Figure 2), as well as the in
vivo biodistribution and clearance kinetics of the nanoparticles
(Figure 3). As a proof-of-principle, we have further
demonstrated the potency of the nanoparticles to modulate
Figure 1. Schematic of focused ultrasound-gated drug delivery nanoparticles’ preparation and use. (A) To produce the propofol-loaded
nanoemulsions, first the block copolymer (yellow and blue lines) and drug (red circles) are dissolved into THF, which is followed by a solvent
extraction into PBS to produce propofol-loaded polymeric micelles. These micelles then emulsify liquid perfluoropentane (PFP; light blue) through
sonication at 20 kHz. (B) In use, the propofol-loaded nanoemulsions with a liquid PFP core are sonicated at a higher frequency such as 1 MHz in
these experiments. That sonication induces a liquid to gas phase transition of the PFP which thins the encoated drug-loaded polymer shell, inducing
drug release.
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
653
 neural activity in vivo by using them to inducibly silence seizure
activity in an acute rat seizure model (Figures 4). We have then
demonstrated the safety of this technique by observing no
appreciable injury nor BBB opening within the sonicated brain
(Figure 5). As the components of these particles have been
regarded as safe when utilized in other clinical applications,19
these particles may be able to be readily combined with existent
clinical transcranial MRgFUS systems14,15 to enable clinical
translation. Overall, this strategy provides a neuromodulation
approach that has an immediate pathway to clinical translation,
has a well-defined mechanism of action via the drug being
delivered, does not rely upon invasive neurosurgery, gene
therapy, or a deleterious action upon the brain, and is
generalizable for neuromodulation via any drug that these
particles could encapsulate. Indeed, this approach provides a
pathway for clinical neuromodulation that is noninvasive,
image-guided, and targeted to spatially compact regions of the
brain with the patient otherwise able to participate in a
neuropsychological assessment.
Particles that encapsulated propofol with a liquid perfluor-
ocarbon core and a biodegradable, biocompatible polymer
coating were produced (Figure 1) and sized via nanoparticle
tracking analysis (Figure 2C). There was a single nanoscale
peak of 320 ± 150 nm (mean ± SD). Encapsulation efficiency
of the propofol was 11.8% ± 1.2% (mean ± SD) yielding an
encapsulated 177 μg ± 19 μg propofol per mL of particles. In
vitro particle release efficacy was assessed by focused ultrasound
applied at 1 MHz center frequency in short continuous bursts
with 0.5 Hz burst frequency for a total of 2 min with varying
peak in situ pressure and the individual burst length, that is, the
short amount of time that sonication is applied continuously.
The amount of released propofol was assessed by extraction
into a hexane sink (Figure 2A) and quantified via UV
fluorescence. There was a dose response evident for propofol
release with peak in situ pressures past a threshold of 0.5 MPa.
For burst length, a release threshold of 10 ms was present with
saturation of a dose response between 50 and 100 ms (Figure
2B). Particles kept in storage and in vivo-like conditions for 2 h
followed by sonication at room temperature showed intact
release ability, although release efficacy was reduced after 2 h of
incubation at room and in vivo temperatures (Figure 2D)
possibly due to diffusion of the perfluoropentane (PFP) from
the core of the particles with higher temperature incubation.
To evaluate the in vivo biodistribution and intravascular
residence time of the nanoparticles, the particles were initially
doped with a custom synthesized hydrophobic dye. Following
intravenous administration of these doped nanoparticles, timed
blood samples demonstrated that the whole-blood fluorescence
has a decay profile that is faithfully characterized with a double
exponential decay model (Figure 3A). The initial phase decay
half-life was 8.8 min and the second phase decay half-life was
270 min. Notably, the whole blood samples were expected to
Figure 2. Schematic and in vitro characterization of nanoparticles enabling ultrasound-gated release of propofol for targeted neuromodulation. (A)
Schematic of in vitro testing apparatus. A PCR tube containing the aqueous particle sample (green) was held at the focal spot of the FUS transducer.
A layer of hexane was applied on top of the sample (yellow) to serve as a chemical sink for the released propofol. (B) Sonication induces release of
propofol from particles into the medium with a dose response after a threshold peak in situ pressure of 0.5 MPa (left) and after a threshold burst
length of 10 ms (right). The response to burst length saturates at 50−100 ms. N = 3−4 samples/group. (C) Histogram of particle sizes assessed by
direct particle tracking demonstrates a single nanoscale peak centered at 317.6 ± 148.2 nm (mean ±SD). (D) After 2 h of incubation, particles were
tested for release with 1.5 MPa peak in situ pressure and 50 ms burst lengths (N = 4 samples/group). There was intact release ability after
incubation, although release efficacy is relatively reduced at room (25 °C) and in vivo (37 °C) temperatures.
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
654
 contain both intact particles and free and micelle-bound
portions of the dye. In contrast, the serum of these samples
would contain free dye or potentially PEG−PCL micelle-bound
dye after high-speed centrifugation pellets the cellular and
nanoparticle constituents. The serum fractions showed a
markedly lower fluorescence that cleared more rapidly than
the whole-blood fluorescence signal, with no appreciable serum
fluorescence by 2 h. The serum sample fluorescence decayed
with a monoexponential profile with a half-life calculated as 8
min, notably similar to the short half-life component of the
whole blood samples. After 24 h from particle administration,
there was no remnant intravascular signal above background.
End organ fluorescence demonstrated no evidence of non-
specific particle binding to the brain (Figure 3B,C). Instead, the
nanoparticles were principally taken up by the liver, spleen, and
to a lesser extent the lungs, with minimal amounts in the kidney
and heart.
To demonstrate and assess the functional potency of particle
release in vivo, an acute pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)-induced
status epilepticus protocol20 was developed for adult male
Fischer 344 rats (Figure 4A,B). We specifically chose this
protocol and preparation as prior groups have used this system
to assess the degree to which FUS may directly modulate neural
activity.21 Following seizure induction and particle admin-
istration, there was no significant difference in baseline EEG
power between animals receiving propofol-loaded particles and
particles generated with no drug (“Blank”; see Supporting
Information). Importantly, following FUS administration first
at 1.0 MPa estimated peak in situ pressure and then at 1.5 MPa,
immediate statistically significant declines of total and theta
band EEG power were seen in the animals receiving propofol-
loaded particles, but not in the animals receiving blank particles
(Figure 4C−F).
Ex vivo 17.6 T MRI, in vivo 11.7 T MRI, and histology
confirmed that no deleterious effect of FUS and particle
administration was visible (Figure 5). In particular, given the
high susceptibility dependence of the MRI protocol used here
(note the blooming artifact from microscopic air bubbles along
the brain periphery in Figure 5A), the lack of any noted
susceptibility artifact or brain parenchymal signal change within
the sonicated region confirms the lack of petechial hemorrhage
or other cavitation induced damage to the brain parenchyma.
Notably, the 17.6 T MRI evaluation covered the entire brain in
both axial and coronal planes, without interslice gaps, ensuring
that a complete evaluation of the parenchyma was completed
for each brain. All MRI images were reviewed by a board-
certified neuroradiologist. In vivo MRI also confirmed no
damage to the brain parenchyma of particle administration and
sonication, and no evidence of blood-brain barrier opening with
this technique (Figure 5B). Whole-brain histological sections
and more focused evaluation of the sonicated dorsal dentate
gyrus in comparison with the nonsonicated ventral dentate
gyrus showed no evidence of parenchymal damage and
certainly no damage that could be attributed to sonication
(Figure 5C).
We have therefore described nanoparticles that allow focused
ultrasound-induced uncaging of the small molecule anesthetic
agent propofol (Figure 1) and demonstrated the in vitro and in
Figure 3. Biodistribution and clearance in vivo of the propofol-loaded nanoparticles. (A) Time course of the amount of an initial bolus of particles
found in the intravascular space, as assessed by fluorescence of timed whole-blood samples after administration of propofol-loaded particles doped
with an infrared fluorescent dye, compared to assessment of the serum fluorescence to determine the unbound dye kinetics. Presented are mean ±
SD, normalized by the initial whole-blood sample fluorescence (N = 4 rats). (B) Organ distribution of particle uptake at 24 h (mean ± SD for 4 rats)
show that particles are sequestered in expected organs such as liver, spleen, and lung with minimal amounts seen in kidney and heart that may
represent blood pool activity. No significant uptake is seen in the brain. Values are presented as their percentage of the total fluorescence across the
harvested organs. (C) Sample bright field (left), fluorescence (middle), and bright field/fluorescence merged (right) images for the spleen (S),
kidney (K), liver (Li), heart (H), lung (Lu), and brain (B) after harvest from a single rat.
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
655
 vivo efficacy of the nanoparticles as a proof-of-principle. Given
that these particles have a hydrodynamic diameter of
approximately 320 nm and that similar perfluorocarbon-based
phase-change particles have been shown to increase diameter
up to 5−6 times during sonication,16,22 the maximal diameter of
these particles after activation would be <2 μm, suggesting no
substantial risk of embolization of capillaries with these
nanoparticles and their use. These particles release their drug
cargo with dose responses with both peak in situ pressure and
with sonication burst length (Figure 2). The threshold peak in
situ pressure of 0.5 MPa and the maximal pressure of 1.5 MPa
that were used here are both achievable by current clinical
transcranial MRgFUS systems.14,15 Additionally, the dynamic
range of the burst length dose response between 10 ms and
50−100 ms is also achievable with these clinical transcranial
MRgFUS systems. These burst lengths and duty cycles are
unlikely to induce substantial heating of the brain parenchyma,
especially given heat dissipation by cerebral perfusion.
Figure 4. Focused ultrasound-gated propofol release is potent enough to silence seizure activity. (A) Schematic of rat positioning for this
demonstration of in vivo efficacy. After removal of the dorsal scalp fur, rats were placed supine on the bed of a focused ultrasound transducer,
coupled to the transducer via degassed water (light blue), a Kapton membrane filled with degassed water (orange-brown), and ultrasound gel (not
pictured). Rats underwent seizure induction using the chemoconvulsant PTZ. A sonication focus (red ellipse) was developed at one target within
each hemisphere, 2.5 mm lateral to midline, and 15 mm caudal to the eye center, which equals ∼5 mm caudal to bregma. Expected location of the
two sonication foci are overlaid onto ex vivo MRI images with the red ellipse indicating the fwhm of the sonication focus. (B) Schematic of
experiment timing for seizure induction, particle administration, and FUS application. (C) Sample traces of EEG voltage from one rat receiving
propofol-loaded particles before and after seizure-induction and focused ultrasound application at the indicated pressures. (D) Total EEG power
normalized by baseline averaged across rats receiving particles loaded with either propofol (blue) or no drug (blank, red) across experiment time (N
= 7 propofol, 5 blank). Gray bars indicate time of FUS application at the indicated estimated in situ peak pressures in 50 ms bursts applied every 1 s
for 60 s. An electrical artifact precluded EEG analysis during FUS applications. (E) Mean ± SD of normalized total (left) and theta band (right) EEG
power in the indicated time period across rats receiving propofol-loaded particles or blank particles (N = 7 propofol, 5 blank). Two-way ANOVA
across animals receiving both FUS treatments demonstrates significant differences with FUS application (p < 0.01) and with particle content (p <
0.05). Posthoc multiple comparison corrected tests show significant (p < 0.01) differences of EEG power between baseline and each of the post FUS
application periods for the propofol particle treated rats only. (F) Mean ± SD of the HPLC-quantified serum propofol concentration of samples
from N = 4 rats taken immediately after propofol-loaded particle administration, immediately after sonication, and 10 min post sonication, compared
to a blank serum sample. There was no appreciable serum propofol peak for the post sonication samples.
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
656
 We were able to use particles doped with an IR fluorescent
dye as a surrogate marker of particle intravascular residence and
distribution (Figure 3). The serum fluorescence, which would
contain the unbound free dye fraction, showed a much more
rapid clearance from the blood pool than the whole-blood
samples that represent both the particle-bound and unbound
fractions. The whole-blood fluorescence particle elimination
profile showed two phases: an initial rapid (9 min half-life)
phase that likely corresponds to the unbound dye fraction of
the sample, and a slower (270 min half-life) phase that more
represents the particle decay profile itself (Figure 3A). This
half-life would allow enough time for a clinically relevant
intervention with these particles, but not so long of a particle
vascular residence time that it would preclude repeat particle
administration or would suggest a potential toxicity of extended
particle residence in the body. The lack of particle uptake in the
brain (Figure 3B,C) confirms that our results are unlikely to be
due to particle crossing of the blood brain barrier, particle
binding to the brain, or some other nonspecific action of the
particles upon the brain. The finding that the liver and spleen
primarily take up these particles is expected as the
reticuloendothelial system generally sequesters nanoscale
material.23
The ability of focused ultrasound to activate the intravascular
propofol-loaded particles and yield silencing of seizure activity
in vivo (Figure 4) indicates that these particles indeed can
enable a potent neuromodulatory effect upon focused ultra-
sound application. Crucially, given that there was no significant
effect of sonication in rats receiving the blank particles and
seeing as the blank particles were otherwise constructed exactly
the same as the propofol-loaded particles, the effects seen here
are specifically related to the release of propofol in this system
and not a nonspecific effect of ultrasound or particle interaction
with neural tissue or of the individual polymer or
perfluorocarbon particle constituents. Given that our total
encapsulation efficiency of 177 μg/mL translates to ∼1 mg/kg
in these experiments and that a normal loading dose for
anesthetic effect in rats is an order of magnitude higher at 10
mg/kg,24 it is unlikely that our results are due to a nonspecific
leak of the propofol from the particles. Indeed, serum propofol
concentrations taken immediately and 10 min after sonication
showed no appreciable propofol above the background (Figure
4F), indicating that this propofol release was likely limited to
the brain, without nonspecific systemic delivery. The detectable
serum propofol seen immediately following particle admin-
istration likely reflects a small amount of free propofol in the
particle batch given our method of production, although this
level of ∼0.6 μg/mL is an order of magnitude less than the
typical serum concentrations of propofol thought to be
necessary for an anesthetic effect. Taken together, these results
suggest that these particles indeed yield a higher local drug
concentration in the brain following FUS application than
might be suggested by the raw total amount of drug delivered
in the bolus intravenous dose. Additionally, given the fast 2−3
min distribution half-life of propofol from the blood-pool,25
given that we waited 5−10 min from particle administration to
FUS application, and given that we did not see significant
differences in the baseline EEG power between propofol and
blank treated rats, it is unlikely that free or loosely bound
propofol in the particle solution could have substantially
contributed to our results. Notably, the EEG power was seen to
decrease immediately following FUS application suggesting that
the kinetics of this neuromodulatory effect are rapid (Figure
4D). Additionally, we did not observe any deleterious
consequence to the brains with ex vivo MRI, in vivo MRI, or
post hoc histology (Figure 5), suggesting that these effects are
Figure 5. MRI and histological evaluation of brains following focused-
ultrasound gated propofol release. (A) Sample whole-brain ex vivo
17.6 T MRI of rats treated with either propofol-loaded particles or
blank particles and that underwent the seizure model and FUS
application of Figure 4. Red ellipses in the left images indicate the
expected location and fwhm of the sonication foci, overlaid onto the
“Blank” images. Black spots at the periphery of the brain on the MRI
images are microscopic air bubbles that show a susceptibility related
blooming artifact. Notably no such findings are present near the
expected sonication field to indicate tissue damage due to either
particle administration or sonication. (B) The 11.7 T in vivo MRI
images taken presonication (T2 and T1 weighted images left and
center) and postparticle administration, postsonication, and post-
contrast administration (right) show no evidence of parenchymal
damage or blood-brain barrier opening due to particle administration
and sonication. (C) Cresyl violet histology shows no evidence of
parenchymal damage on either wide-field views (top, 4×) or magnified
views (bottom, scale bar 40 μm) for either propofol-loaded or blank
particle-treated animals that received the full sonication protocol of
Figure 4. The more medial dorsal dentate gyrus (DG) was within the
sonication trajectory. The more lateral ventral dentate gyrus was not
within the sonication trajectory and serves as a negative control for
assessment of damage.
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
657
 not due to a nonspecific damage of the brain parenchyma.
Indeed, the lack of blood-brain barrier opening with this
technique (Figure 5B) confirms the safety of this technique and
the distinction of this technique between it and other proposed
methods of FUS-mediated neuromodulation.7,21
In this study, we have not directly visualized the particle
activation in vivo to assess the effective spatial resolution of this
technique. Additionally, the volume conduction effect of EEG
signals, particularly for subdermal EEG, and the nature of the
generalized status epilepticus model used for this study limits
our ability to spatially resolve this signal in this in vivo
preparation. Similarly, given the acute nature of PTZ-induced
seizures that may not recur substantially once they are aborted,
this study protocol is limited in ability to determine over what
time interval the action of the gated propofol persists. Those
limitations said, the in situ ultrasound focus induced by the
particular ultrasound transducer used in this study is known to
have a fwhm of ∼1.5 mm transaxially and ∼5 mm longitudinally
at 1 MHz (personal communication with the vendor, FUS
Instruments, Toronto, CA), providing an effective initial spatial
extent for the action of the particles in this preparation.
Additionally, we saw no substantial systemic propofol load with
sonication (Figure 4F), confirming that the propofol release
was likely limited to the brain. While groups have shown that
activated perfluorocarbon particles may induce further
activation of unsonicated particles in static solutions,16 we
would expect cerebral perfusion to rapidly clear the activated
particles from the sonication field, especially given the lack of
particle binding to the brain (Figure 3), thereby limiting this
potential confound. Additionally, the temporal residence of
propofol in the brain and its time of action is known to be rapid
on the order of minutes or even tens of seconds26 and similar
to the time-scales used in this experiment. This time of action
would be clinically practical for neuropsychological assessment,
as evidenced by the current protocol of the Wada test,27 which
is used for clinical mapping of the laterality of brain functions.
Given the size of the rat cerebrum (∼15 × 15 × 10 mm28) and
the technical limitations of signal volume conduction in
subdermal EEG, further characterization of the spatial and
temporal resolution of this technique will necessitate experi-
ments that assess baseline nonseizure neural activity, likely in
larger animal models, and potentially with a different measure
of neural activity, such as fMRI or PET. Nonetheless, our
results provide a proof-of-principle that these nanoparticles
yield potent inducible neuromodulation using noninvasive
focused ultrasound and that this approach has the potential to
enable precise spatial (mm) and temporal (min) control of
brain activity, with a pathway to clinical translation.
With regard to clinical translation, each component of these
particles has been previously approved for clinical use in
different contexts.19 Additionally, the sonication pressures and
burst lengths used in this study are well achievable by FDA-
approved transcranial MRgFUS systems that are currently in
clinical use.14 Taken together, this provides a pathway toward
clinical translation that is otherwise unavailable to other
targeted molecular neuromodulation strategies. Further, the
chemistry that enables these particles to encapsulate a given
drug relies mainly upon the lipophilicity of the drug in
question, so that it may bind the hydrophobic domains of the
encapsulating block copolymer and the hydrophobic polymer−
perfluorocarbon interface. Given that most molecules that
passively cross the blood-brain barrier are highly lipophilic, this
suggests that the nanotechnology strategy presented here could
be adapted for focal and targeted delivery of most any small
molecule that naturally crosses the blood-brain barrier,
including imaging agents as well as compounds that act directly
upon the adrenergic, serotonergic, or dopaminergic systems, in
addition to the excitation/inhibition axis that propofol
modulates. This opens the door to a wide variety of potential
nanotechnological tools for targeted clinical modulation of
brain activity.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.nano-
lett.6b03517.
Supplementary methods including nanoemulsion for-
mulation, in vivo biodistribution methods, in vivo efficacy
methods, and MRI/histology methods (PDF)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: (R.D.A.) rairan@stanford.edu,.
*E-mail: (J.J.G.) green@jhu.edu.
ORCID
Raag D. Airan: 0000-0001-5259-5606
Martin G. Pomper: 0000-0001-6753-3010
Shilpa D. Kadam: 0000-0001-5136-9594
Jordan J. Green: 0000-0003-4176-3808
Author Contributions
Overall design of the experiments (R.D.A., R.A.M., N.P.K.E.,
K.F., M.G.P., S.D.K., J.J.G.); nanoparticle generation and
characterization (R.D.A., R.A.M., J.J.G.); focused ultrasound
system modification and use (R.D.A., R.A.M., N.P.K.E., K.F.);
seizure model development, EEG acquisition and analysis, and
histology (R.D.A., S.D.K.); ex vivo and in vivo MRI (R.D.A.,
N.P.K.E.); HPLC serum analysis (R.A.M., K.R.R., J.J.G.). The
manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All
authors have given approval to the final version of the
manuscript. R.D.A. and R.A.M. contributed equally.
Funding
This work was funded via grant support from the NIH (NIBIB
R01EB016721
and
R01EB022148,
J.J.G.;
NICHD
R21HD073105, S.D.K.; NCI P50CA058236, M.G.P.; NCI
F31CA214147, R.A.M.), Philips Inc., the Foundation of the
American Society for Neuroradiology, and the Walter and Mary
Ciceric Foundation. R.A.M. thanks that Achievement Rewards
for College Scientists Metro-DC Chapter for fellowship
support. K.R.R. thanks the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship Program (DGE-1232825) for
fellowship support.
Notes
The authors declare the following competing financial
interest(s): Dr. Nicholas Ellen has worked in the past as a
paid consultant for FUS Instruments, Inc.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are incredibly indebted to Dr. Jonathan Lewin (Emory) for
the advice, support, and mentorship he provided during the
planning and execution of this work. Dr. Andrew Neice
(OHSU) and Dr. Michael P. Bokoch (UCSF) provided critical
discussions during the exploratory phase of this work. We
greatly appreciate the helpful assistance of Qiuyin Ren, Callie
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
658
 Deng, David Wilson, and Brandon Carter (JHU) in the
completion of these experiments. We additionally appreciate
the thorough reviews and critical comments provided by the
reviewers.
■ ABBREVIATIONS
FUS, focused ultrasound; BBB, blood-brain barrier; CNS,
central nervous system; MRgFUS, magnetic resonance guided
focused ultrasound; EEG, electroencephalography; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; fwhm, full width at half-
maximum; PFP, perfluoropentane; PTZ, pentylenetretrazol
■ REFERENCES
(1) Jorgenson, L. A.; et al. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London B. Biol. Sci.
2015, 370, 214−222.
(2) Kim, H.; Park, M. Y.; Lee, S. D.; Lee, W.; Chiu, A.; Yoo, S.-S.
NeuroReport 2015, 26, 211−215.
(3) King, R. L.; Brown, J. R.; Newsome, W. T.; Pauly, K. B.
Ultrasound Med. Biol. 2013, 39, 312−331.
(4) King, R. L.; Brown, J. R.; Pauly, K. B. Ultrasound Med. Biol. 2014,
40, 1512−1522.
(5) Legon, W.; Sato, T. F.; Opitz, A.; Mueller, J.; Barbour, A.;
Williams, A.; Tyler, W. J. Nat. Neurosci. 2014, 17, 322−329.
(6) Sassaroli, E.; Vykhodtseva, N. J. Ther. Ultrasound 2016, 4, 17.
(7) McDannold, N.; Zhang, Y.; Power, C.; Arvanitis, C. D.;
Vykhodtseva, N.; Livingstone, M. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 16253.
(8) Oberoi, R. K.; Parrish, K. E.; Sio, T. T.; Mittapalli, R. K.;
Elmquist, W. F.; Sarkaria, J. N. Neuro. Oncol. 2016, 18, 27−36.
(9) Lin, C. Y.; Hsieh, H. Y.; Chen, C. M.; Wu, S. R.; Tsai, C. H.;
Huang, C. Y.; Hua, M. Y.; Wei, K. C.; Yeh, C. K.; Liu, H. L. J.
Controlled Release 2016, 235, 72−81.
(10) Samiotaki, G.; Acosta, C.; Wang, S.; Konofagou, E. E. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 2015, 35, 611−622.
(11) Abbott, N. J.; Patabendige, A. A. K.; Dolman, D. E. M.; Yusof, S.
R.; Begley, D. J. Neurobiol. Dis. 2010, 37, 13−25.
(12) Persidsky, Y.; Ramirez, S. H.; Haorah, J.; Kanmogne, G. D. J.
Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2006, 1, 223−236.
(13) Sharma, G.; Lakkadwala, S.; Modgil, A.; Singh, J. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2016, 17, 806.
(14) Ghanouni, P.; Pauly, K. B.; Elias, W. J.; Henderson, J.; Sheehan,
J.; Monteith, S.; Wintermark, M. AJR, Am. J. Roentgenol. 2015, 205,
150−159.
(15) McDannold, N.; Clement, G. T.; Black, P.; Jolesz, F.; Hynynen,
K. Neurosurgery 2010, 66, 323−332.
(16) Rapoport, N. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol.
2012, 4, 492−510.
(17) Sheeran, P. S.; Dayton, P. A. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2012, 18, 2152−
2165.
(18) Rapoport, N. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2016, 880, 221−241.
(19) Kamaly, N.; Xiao, Z.; Valencia, P. M.; Radovic-Moreno, A. F.;
Farokhzad, O. C. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 2971.
(20) Lüttjohann, A.; Fabene, P. F.; van Luijtelaar, G. Physiol. Behav.
2009, 98, 579−586.
(21) Min, B. K.; Bystritsky, A.; Jung, K. I.; Fischer, K.; Zhang, Y.;
Maeng, L. S.; Park, S. I.; Chung, Y. A.; Jolesz, F. A.; Yoo, S. S. BMC
Neurosci. 2011, 12, 23.
(22) Gao, Z.; Kennedy, A. M.; Christensen, D. A.; Rapoport, N. Y.
Ultrasonics 2008, 48, 260−270.
(23) Sadauskas, E.; Wallin, H.; Stoltenberg, M.; Vogel, U.; Doering,
P.; Larsen, A.; Danscher, G. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 2007, 4, 10.
(24) Gaertner, D. J.; Hallman, T. M.; Hankenson, F. C.; Batchelder,
M. A. Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory Animals 2008, 239−297.
(25) Kanto, J.; Gepts, E. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 1989, 17, 308−326.
(26) Upton, R. N.; Ludbrook, G. L. Br. J. Anaesth. 1997, 79, 497−
504.
(27) Baxendale, S. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 2009, 22, 185−189.
(28) Paxinos, G.; Watson, C. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates;
Elsevier: San Diego, CA, 2007; pp 1−78.
Nano Letters
Letter
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03517
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 652−659
659
