 Choosing a career specialty is one of the most important
decisions that medical students will make and one that will
shape the rest of their working lives. Some students decide
early on, or even come into medical school with a good idea
of what career they would like to pursue,1 yet for most
students the specialty choice is made during medical
school,2 with some remaining unsure into their final year
and even as foundation year doctors.3 This choice is
influenced by many factors, in particular the teachers the
students encounter,4 experience during clinical placements,5
desired work-life balance,6 and also by gender3 and
personality.7
Psychiatry continues to face a worldwide problem with
recruitment. In the UK, the Royal College of Psychiatrists
has maintained an active recruitment programme for
several years, but rates of students interested in psychiatry
as a career remain low at 4-5%,8 which is insufficient to
meet future needs. A variety of approaches have been used
to improve recruitment. Time and effort has gone into
promoting psychiatry, and the misperceptions that put
students off, such as that people ‘don’t get better’9 or
psychiatry ‘isn’t proper medicine’,10 have been successfully
challenged. As psychiatrists, we constantly strive to improve
our profile, our teaching and our support and mentorship of
students who are interested in psychiatry. But even though
psychiatrists
become
involved
in
setting
the
medical
curriculum and integrating psychiatry into mainstream
medical teaching, it is not so easy to control what else is
going on in the, now long-recognised, ‘hidden’ curriculum.11
One aspect of this hidden curriculum is the apparent
hierarchy between different specialties, with specialists
making
disparaging
comments
and
‘badmouthing’
or
‘bashing’ each
other’s
specialty.12,13
A
stable
prestige
hierarchy exists among medical specialties, with certain
ones, such as surgery and cardiology, consistently ranked at
the top and others, such as dermatology and psychiatry,
consistently resting at the bottom.14,15 This has led to
many enduring stereotypes of ‘macho surgeons’, ‘fluffy
psychiatrists’, ‘lazy dermatologists’ and ‘useless general
practitioners’.12,16 Should these be regarded as just some
fun and perhaps part of the medical tradition to which
succeeding generations of medical students are inducted?
Or do these attitudes actually have a detrimental effect on
the students’ perception and choice of some specialties?
In one large US study,17 76% of students had heard
badmouthing of their career choice specialty and 17% stated
that this had made them alter their career choices. In a
more recent survey of third-year US students,18 family
medicine was the most ‘bashed’ specialty, but psychiatry was
not far behind, with 39% of students stating that they had
heard disparaging comments about psychiatry. There are no
data available on how common this practice is in UK
medical schools and whether it affects our students’ career
choices. We thus undertook an online questionnaire study
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Ajaz et al Badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation in healthcare
BJPsych Bulletin (2016), 40, 97-102, doi: 10.1192/pb.bp.115.053140
1East London NHS Foundation Trust;
2Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry
Correspondence to Ania Korszun
(a.korszun@qmul.ac.uk)
First received 18 Nov 2015, final
revision 31 Jan 2016, accepted 1 Feb
2016
B 2016 The Authors. This is an open-
access article published by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists and distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http:/
/
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work
is properly cited.
Aims and method
We used an online questionnaire to investigate medical students’
perceptions of the apparent hierarchy between specialties, whether they have
witnessed disparaging comments (‘badmouthing’ or ‘bashing’) against other
specialists and whether this has had an effect on their career choice.
Results
In total, 960 students from 13 medical schools completed the questionnaire;
they ranked medical specialties according to the level of badmouthing and answered
questions on their experience of specialty bashing. Psychiatry and general practice
attracted the greatest number of negative comments, which were made by academic
staff, doctors and students. Twenty-seven per cent of students had changed their
career choice as a direct result of bashing and a further 25.5% stated they were more
likely to change their specialty choice. Although 80.5% of students condemned
badmouthing as unprofessional, 71.5% believed that it is a routine part of practising
medicine.
Clinical implications
Bashing of psychiatry represents another form of
stigmatisation that needs to be challenged in medical schools. It not only has an
impact on recruitment into the specialty, but also has the wider effect of stigmatising
people with mental health disorders.
Declaration of interest
None.
BASH: badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation
in healthcare as experienced by medical students
Ali Ajaz,1 Rhodri David,1 Damien Brown,2 Melanie Smuk,2 Ania Korszun2
97
 to measure: (a) how frequently British medical students
encounter badmouthing of different specialties and (b)
whether witnessing badmouthing affects their choice of
career specialty. Ethics approval was obtained from the
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry
and the Research Ethics Committee
at Queen Mary
University of London (Ref: QMREC 0987).
Method
We
conducted
a
nationwide
questionnaire
survey
of
students at UK medical schools. An invitation letter and
weblink to the online survey was sent to the relevant
administrators at all 32 UK medical schools asking for it to
be distributed to all their students (years 1-5 and students
intercalating degrees), with a reminder email sent 2 weeks
later. The
survey
remained
open
for
6
months
and
participation was entirely on a voluntary basis. Students
were informed in the invitation letter that the responses
would be anonymous and all data were also stored
anonymously as stipulated in the ethics approval.
The questionnaire
The online questionnaire was made available through the
Survey
Monkey
website
(www.surveymonkey.com)
and
questions
were
based
on
previous
studies.18
In
the
instructions for completing the questionnaire badmouthing
and bashing were defined as: ‘distinctly negative feedback
and comments directed by members of one medical
specialty toward other specialties’. Participants were asked
to complete demographic items (age, gender, medical school
and year of study). Students were then asked: (a) to rank a
list
of
medical
specialties
according
to
the
level
of
badmouthing or negative comments that they attract
(most negative comments to fewest negative comments);
(b) how often the students themselves had made negative
comments about these specialties (very frequently to
never); and (c) to indicate the frequency of negative
comments about other specialties that had been made by
specific groups of individuals (academic staff, non-academic
staff, doctors during clinical placement and other medical
students).
Participants
were
encouraged
to
provide
examples
of
such
statements
in
the
free-text
boxes.
Participants were also asked to rank their level of agreement
with ten statements relating to future career choice (Box 1).
Although this was not a qualitative study, participants
also had the opportunity to make any additional comments
on the topic of specialty badmouthing in a free-text box.
These responses were reviewed to explore whether any
specific patterns emerged. These were categorised and
combined into overarching themes to provide further
understanding of the quantitative data.
The data contained missing observations. We explored
the missing data patterns and looked at predictors for being
missing using logistic regression models. No strong patterns
or predictors were found, which suggested that we could use
complete case analysis without introducing bias. Analysis
was undertaken using Fisher’s exact test, Friedman test and
Spearman’s rank correlation to handle the ordinal nature of
the data.
Results
A total of 960 medical students completed the survey.
Although every medical school in the UK was invited to
take part, there was no mechanism for checking whether
the administrator had forwarded the survey link to students
and replies were received from students attending 13
universities. The distribution of students throughout the
undergraduate medical course is shown in Table 1.
The survey did not force students to rank specialties as
described in the accompanying instructions to this item.
Thus, not all students followed the instructions, and the
sample size for analysis for this item was decreased to 483
for students who had ranked correctly. Demographics were
similar for correctly and incorrectly ranking students. The
other analyses kept the cohort at n = 960.
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Ajaz et al Badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation in healthcare
98
Box 1
Questionnaire statements relating to students’
career choice
1
I’ve changed my career option due to hearing negative
comments being made about my specialty of choice.
2
When asked about my specialty choice, I’ve avoided the
question or misled others to avoid being treated differently.
3
I’d be more likely to change my specialty choice if I
witnessed it being badmouthed.
4
Badmouthing wouldn’t affect my specialty choice.
5
I think badmouthing other specialties is unprofessional.
6
Badmouthing other specialties is just a bit of fun and is part
of working as a doctor.
7
I think badmouthing would affect whether somebody
chooses a certain specialty.
8
Badmouthing other specialties is always going to be a part
of practising medicine.
9
Doctors that badmouth other specialties are insecure about
their own career choice.
10
There’s an unspoken hierarchy of specialties in medicine.
Table 1
Respondent demographics (n = 960)
n (%)
Gender
Male
Female
346 (36.0)
614 (64.0)
Age, years
18-20
21-29
30-39
Over 40
248 (25.8)
673 (70.1)
34 (3.5)
5 (0.5)
Year of study
1
2
3
4
5
Intercalated BSc
Other
146 (15.2)
131 (13.6)
145 (15.1)
254 (26.5)
227 (23.6)
23 (2.4)
34 (3.5)
 From the list of eight medical specialties provided,
students reported that both psychiatry and general practice
attracted the greatest number of negative comments. The
difference in ranking over all groups was statistically
significant (Friedman test P50.001) and the mean ranking
for each was as follows (1 attracts the most negative
comments, 8 attracts the fewest negative comments):
general practice 2.20, psychiatry 2.29, radiology 4.04,
surgery 4.55, anaesthetics 5.08, obstetrics and gynaecology
5.13, emergency medicine 6.35 and hospital medicine 6.37.
Psychiatry was significantly different (Wilcoxon signed rank
test P50.001) from all specialties except general practice.
Participants
reported
hearing
negative
comments
about different specialties made by other medical students,
academic staff members (both clinical and non-clinical)
whom they had encountered at university, and doctors of all
grades during their clinical placements (Table 2). The
highest frequency of negative comments was attributed to
other medical students.
Students were asked how frequently they themselves
had made comments against other specialties. Psychiatry,
general practice and surgery attracted the most critical
comments from the student respondents. Examples of
disparaging comments were: ‘psychiatrists are not actual
doctors’, ‘psychiatry - not real medicine’, ‘psychiatrists are
crazy themselves’, ‘you don’t need a medical degree to be a
GP’, ‘people become GPs when they fail all other exams’.
The association between the frequency of students
hearing negative comments and the frequency of students
making negative comments was explored with a Spearman’s
rank correlation. Students significantly (P50.001) reported
higher frequencies of making more negative comments with
higher frequencies of hearing negative comments.
Participant gender was not associated with making or
hearing negative comments about specialties. However,
there was a significant association (Fisher’s exact test)
between
age
and
negative
perceptions
of
psychiatry
(P = 0.03), surgery (P = 0.037) and anaesthetics (P = 0.004),
namely negative perceptions decreased with increasing age.
There was a significant association (Fisher’s exact test)
between year of study at medical school and ranking
badmouthing for psychiatry (P = 0.001), general practice
(P = 0.02), surgery (P = 0.008) and anaesthetics (P = 0.001).
For psychiatry, negative perceptions were least frequent in
the first year of medical school and most frequent in the
fifth year, whereas for anaesthetics the opposite was true.
Although 80.5% of students condemned badmouthing
as being unprofessional, 71.5% believed that it is an ever-
present part of practising medicine; 57.3% viewed it as ‘just
a bit of fun’; 27.1% agreed with the statement that doctors
who ‘badmouth’ other specialties ‘are insecure in their own
career choice’; and 74.0% agreed that there is an unspoken
hierarchy of specialties in medicine.
When exploring the influence of badmouthing on
career choice, 27.0% of students agreed that they had
changed their career choice as a direct result of negative
comments made about them and a further 25.5% said that
they were more likely to change their specialty choice if
they had witnessed it being ‘badmouthed’. Over a third
(36.8%) had feared being treated differently by others when
asked about their specialty choice and therefore resorted to
either
avoiding
the
question
or
providing
misleading
answers. Two-thirds (66.2%) agreed that badmouthing
against a particular specialty would affect a student’s
decision to choose it as a career.
Thematic review of comments
The final question of the survey asked students to make any
additional statements related to specialty badmouthing. A
total of 146 students made comments and these were
reviewed by two researchers (A.A. and A.K.) and grouped
into four main categories according to identified themes.
1. Acceptance of badmouthing
The majority of comments (40.4%), either directly or
indirectly, minimised any negative connotations associated
with badmouthing other specialties or the impact on
students’
future
career
choices.
The
most
frequent
comments
stated
that
badmouthing
was
nothing
but
harmless
fun
and
was
done
without
any
maleficent
intentions. There was a real sense among some students
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Ajaz et al Badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation in healthcare
Table 2
Negative comments about specialties (n = 960)
Frequently, %
Sometimes, %
Never, %
How often do you hear people make negative comments about other specialties?
Medical students
44.7
52.1
3.2
Consultants during placements
32.8
57.1
10.2
Registrars during placements
26.8
63.1
10.2
Junior doctors during placements
20.1
70.0
9.9
Academic staff
Medical (e.g. professors, clinical lecturers)
Non-medical (e.g. non-clinical lecturers)
19.6
10.5
72.8
75.4
7.6
14.1
How often do you personally make negative comments about the following specialties?
Surgery (e.g. ENT, orthopaedics)
9.6
56.4
34.1
General practice
9.1
59.3
31.6
Psychiatry
7.3
57.0
35.7
Radiology
3.8
50.6
45.5
Obstetrics and gynaecology
3.2
46.8
50.1
Anaesthetics
2.8
44.5
52.7
Hospital medicine (e.g. cardiology, respiratory medicine)
1.5
43.2
55.3
Emergency medicine
1.1
35.6
63.4
ENT, ear, nose and throat.
99
 that badmouthing was beneficial as a source of conversation
and
bonding
within
clinical
teams. There
was
some
recognition that some medical students might be influenced
by the negative comments about certain specialties, but this
was dismissed as being due to their own insecurities about
their career choice rather than being affected by the
remarks.
‘Almost every specialty badmouths at least one other- in a way
this is good as it allows us as medical students to make an
informed choice.’
‘Playful banter between different specialties . . . can be a topic
of conversation which bonds medical staff together.’
‘I feel that if you like a specialty enough, what people say is
never going to change how you feel.’
‘Harmless bit of fun . . . more like teasing than anything,
although it could offend someone who is insecure about their
career choice.’
2. Negative effects of badmouthing
Some students admitted to having rejected certain special-
ties as career options because of experiencing negative
comments, either about the nature of the work or personal
qualities of doctors who choose that field. The most
commonly mentioned specialties were psychiatry, general
practice and dermatology. Other students reported that they
purposefully kept their career choice to themselves because
of fear of discrimination by their peers or clinicians at their
clinical placements. Some participants condemned all types
of badmouthing and believed it to be unprofessional.
‘Badmouthing of GPs has put me off going into it as much as it
seems less respected professionally and doctors don’t give as
much credit to [the GPs’] findings as they should.’
‘I have heard consultants refer to GPs like idiots . . . It makes it
a really difficult career to feel good about going into and is
making me wonder whether after all the hard work at medical
school I want to go into a career where I’m not respected and
I’m almost a level below hospital doctors.’
‘If I am asked by a clinical member of staff . . . I very often do
not tell them that I have an interest in psychiatry, as I feel that
this may mean that I am judged automatically about my
knowledge, skills and attitude towards medicine in general.’
‘It’s unethical and therefore fundamentally undermines a
health professional’s code of conduct.’
3. Grey area of acceptability
Some students raised the issue of distinguishing degrees of
badmouthing that are acceptable. Some believed that there
was a ‘fine line’ between comments made in jest and those
that were damaging to other specialties. There were some
views that badmouthing at undergraduate level was nothing
but
‘harmless
banter’,
whereas
similar
comments
by
qualified doctors were considered to hold more weight and
be more influential and therefore unprofessional. Others
stated that any badmouthing was both harmless and
acceptable in medical
circles, however, anything that
extended to (or was overheard by) members of the general
public was inappropriate. One student stated that medical
students were relatively immune to the negative effects of
badmouthing because they were still ‘explorers’ (on the path
of choosing a career specialty) and that doctors in training
were the ones who were more vulnerable to changing their
choice of career in response to badmouthing by their more
senior colleagues.
‘Most of the badmouthing heard within the student generation
is usually a bit of fun and not meant in seriousness. The
genuine badmouthing is heard at higher levels, i.e. senior
registrar or consultant.’
‘I think it is important to distinguish between badmouthing
which can be unprofessional and banter between specialties
which is part of the job - there is a fine line.’
4. Addressing bashing
There were comments that specialty badmouthing is an
ingrained and accepted part of the culture in medicine for
students and doctors. Thus, there was an element of
helplessness expressed by some students in considering
how to overcome this practice. The main suggestions
focused on raising awareness of its negative effects and
the need to educate students and doctors of the value of each
specialty and how any form of badmouthing (regardless of the
intention) is a breach of medical professionalism.
‘ . . . badmouthing is so much part of what doctors and
surgeons talk about that it would be difficult to stop it
completely, but maybe raising awareness that it does affect
which specialty students may go into in the future would make
them think about what they say and how they say it more.’
‘I don’t see a way it can be altered. It’s tradition - hard to
change.’
‘There ought to be efforts made to challenge the mentality of
the ‘‘hierarchy of specialties’’ and broaden the horizons of what
medical students think about different specialties.’
Discussion
The sample of students taking part in this study came from
13 medical schools and included students from all medical
school years, with a representative age range. The larger
proportion
of
women
in
the
sample
makes
it
less
representative of the student population but is consistent
with generally greater participation of women in online
surveys.19
In this sample of UK medical students, the specialties
significantly attracting the most negative comments were
psychiatry and general practice, similar to the findings in a
group of third-year US students.18 The more senior the
students, the more likely they were to have encountered
psychiatry bashing and fifth-year medical students reported
the highest levels. This may just reflect the fact that they
have been around longer so have had more opportunities to
come across this, but it could also indicate that this
behaviour becomes more ingrained as students progress
through medical school. There was no gender difference
found in this sample.
Making disparaging comments was not limited to any
particular group and students reported university academic
staff (both clinical and non-clinical) and doctors of all
grades during their
clinical placements
bashing their
colleagues from other specialties. However, it was other
medical students that were reported to make the most
comments. This could be just because students encounter
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Ajaz et al Badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation in healthcare
100
 many more students than they do senior doctors and
academics, but, nevertheless, this supports the fact that
bashing is alive and well among our next generation of
doctors.
Survey
participants
also
admitted
that
they
themselves had made negative comments about certain
specialties and there was a significant association between
making and hearing badmouthing. Although career choice is
obviously an important topic for discussion, it would be
disappointing if this consists only of a bashing competition.
Psychiatry and general practice were the most bashed
specialties, but other specialties also attracted an array of
disparaging comments that reflect the stereotyping that still
exists within medicine, such as ‘surgery - workaholic and
rubbish with patients’, ‘radiology - boring’, ‘surgeons
lacking social skills, being obsessed with cutting, thinking
they were God’s gift’, ‘dermatology - derma-holiday’. Clearly,
students show some confusion about this behaviour: 81%
condemned it as unprofessional, but 72% believed that it is
an integral part of medicine and over half thought that it is
‘just a bit of fun’. In the free-text remarks, students talked
about the need to take part in bashing to ‘bond within
clinical
teams’,
suggesting
that
part
of
the
hidden
curriculum involves social coercion to ‘bash’ others. There
are further justifications of this behaviour in that it only
affects those who are ‘insecure about their choice of
specialty’ - the latter of course applies to anyone who is
still in the process of choosing.
But what is a bit of fun to some students clearly has a
major impact on others (27%) who reported that they had
changed their career choice as a direct result of negative
comments. Over a third of students avoided disclosing their
choice as they feared being treated differently and two-
thirds agreed that bashing could affect students’ decisions
about careers. It is clearly unacceptable for students not to
feel able to be open about their career choice in medical
school. But students also highlighted the grey area between
degrees of badmouthing with a ‘fine line’ existing between
comments that are made as ‘harmless banter’ and those that
could be damaging to other specialties. An important
question is where should that line be drawn? Also, are
there certain specialties that are more prone to bashing,
preventing students from disclosing their interest in them
because of attached stigma or perceived low status? It was
clear that disparaging comments made by qualified doctors
held more weight than those made by students.
It is well known that there is stigma associated with
psychiatry
and
psychiatrists.20,21
But
the
disparaging
comments
made
about
the
specialty
(e.g.
‘not
real
medicine’) are not just stigmatising to psychiatrists, but
have the wider effect of stigmatising people with mental
health disorders (e.g. ‘psychiatry - worse than their
patients’,
‘psychiatrists
are
crazy
themselves’).
Both
psychiatry and general practice are currently experiencing
a crisis of low recruitment. Mental health disorders are
highly prevalent in our population and this will have a
profound effect on those affected. If mental health services
are unavailable because there is a shortage of psychiatrists,
then further burden will fall on general practice, which is in
turn suffering a recruitment crisis and widespread bashing.
At a time when public support is growing for challenging the
stigma associated with psychiatric conditions and the
government has stated its commitment to achieving parity
of services for people with mental health disorders, it is
disheartening that we still have to overcome the stereo-
typing and stigmatisation of psychiatry by our colleagues
from other medical specialties.
Study limitations
There could have been bias in the students who responded.
Because ethics allowed us only to send the link to the
named administrator at each medical school office, we could
not make sure that the link was forwarded to all available
students. We are therefore unable to say accurately what the
response rate was. However, the spread in age and year of
study was good and 64% women in the sample, although also
a limitation, is typical of such online surveys. Furthermore,
there is a possibility that students could have responded to
the questionnaire more than once, although there was no
incentive for them to do so.
The questionnaire contained a short explanation of
what is meant by bashing but different students may
interpret this term differently.
Only some of the respondents gave free-text responses
and other than identifying the four thematic groupings
there was no formal qualitative analysis of these responses.
However, the identification of the themes is useful in
interpreting the quantitative findings and to inform future
studies.
Conclusions and future work
Despite the limitations of this initial study examining the
prevalence and effects of specialty bashing on career choice,
there is clear evidence of bashing throughout the medical
school course by all groups of students and teachers.
Although some students see it as an integral part of medical
school life, a third are put off their career choices. More
work needs to be done to look in detail at the effects of
bashing
and
to
confirm
whether
these
findings
are
generalisable. But there is clearly no time to lose in
challenging bashing, which represents another form of
stigmatisation of psychiatry and those with psychiatric
disorders.
We need to find an effective means of challenging the
belief that this behaviour is an ingrained and accepted part
of our medical culture. The fact that it is mainly students
who are engaging in it presents an immediate opportunity
for us to have a grassroots campaign that addresses these
questions and challenges the perception that it is fine to
disparage certain specialties. This can only be achieved
through open discussion and by raising awareness of the
detrimental effects of bashing. Where should the line be
drawn between friendly banter and abuse? How does
bashing fit in with medical professionalism that requires
showing respect for all patients and for all colleagues in our
own and other specialties? Most importantly, how should
students challenge bashing when they come across it?
Students need to feel empowered to challenge this because
there is clear and open condemnation of this behaviour by
their medical school.
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Ajaz et al Badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation in healthcare
101
 About the authors
Ali Ajaz is a consultant forensic psychiatrist and Rhodri David is a
consultant psychiatrist at East London NHS Foundation Trust. Damien
Brown is a year 5 medical student at Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry. Melanie Smuk is a research fellow in medical
statistics and Ania Korszun is Professor of Psychiatry and Education at the
Centre for Psychiatry, Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts and
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London.
References
1
Goldacre MJ, Turner G, Lambert TW. Variation by medical school in
career choices of UK graduates of 1999 and 2000. Med Edu 2004; 38:
249-58.
2
Halder N, Hadjidemetriou C, Pearson R, Farooq K, Lydall GJ, Malik A, et
al. Student career choice in psychiatry: findings from 18 UK medical
schools. Int Rev Psychiatry 2013; 25: 438-44.
3
Goldacre MJ, Goldacre R, Lambert TW. Doctors who considered but did
not pursue specific clinical specialties as careers: questionnaire surveys.
J R Soc Med 2012; 105: 166-76.
4
Lunn B. Recruitment into psychiatry: an international challenge. Aus NZ
J Psychiatry 2011; 45: 805-7.
5
Farooq K, Lydall GJ, Malik A, Ndetei DM, Bhugra D. Why medical
students choose psychiatry- a 20 country cross-sectional survey. BMC
Med Edu 2014; 14: 12.
6
Goldacre MJ, Kurina LM, Wotton CJ, Yeates D, Seagroat V.
Schizophrenia and cancer: an epidemiological study. Br J Psychiatry
2005; 187: 334-8.
7
Markert RJ, Rodenhauser P, El-Baghdadi MM, Juskaite K, Hillel AT,
Maron BA. Personality as a prognostic factor for specialty choice: a
prospective study of 4 medical school classes. Medscape J Med 2008;
10: 49.
8
Goldacre MJ, Fazel S, Smith F, Lambert T. Choice and rejection of
psychiatry as a career: surveys of UK medical graduates from 1974 to
2009. Br J Psychiatry 2013; 202: 228-34.
9 Calvert S, Sharpe M, Power M, Lawrie S. Does undergraduate education
have an effect on Edinburgh medical students’ attitudes to psychiatry
and psychiatric patients? J Nerv Ment Dis 1999; 187: 757-61.
10 Rajagopal S, Singh Rehill K, Godfrey E. Psychiatry as a career choice
compared with other specialities: a survey of medical students. Psychiatr
Bull 2004; 28: 444-6.
11 Hafferty FW. Beyond curriculum reform: confronting medicine’s hidden
curriculum. Acad Med 1998; 73: 403-7.
12 Creed PA, Searle J, Rogers ME. Medical specialty prestige and lifestyle
preferences for medical students. Soc Sci Med 2010; 71: 1084-8.
13 Mahood S. Medical education: beware the hidden curriculum. Can Fam
Physician 2011; 57: 983-5.
14 Oxtoby K. Do the classic specialty stereotypes still hold true for today’s
doctors? BMJ Careers 2013, 17 Dec.
15 Bellodi PL. The general practitioner and the surgeon: stereotypes and
medical specialties. Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo 2004; 59: 15-24.
16 Album D, Westin S. Do diseases have a prestige hierarchy? A survey
among physicians and medical students. Soc Sci Med 2008; 66: 182-8.
17 Hunt DD, Scott C, Zhong S, Goldstein E. Frequency and effect of
negative comments (badmouthing) on medical students’ career
choices. Acad Med 1996; 71: 665-9.
18 Holmes D, Tumiel-Berhalter LM, Zayas LE, Watkins R. Bashing of
medical specialties: students’ experiences and recommendations. Fam
Med 2008; 40: 400-6.
19 Smith WG. Does Gender Influence Online Survey Participation? A Record-
Linkage Analysis of University Faculty Online Survey Response Behavior. San
Jose State University, 2008 (http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/
ED501717.pdf).
20 Gaebel W, Zaske H, Zielasek J, Cleveland HR, Samjeske K, Stuart H, et
al. Stigmatization of psychiatrists and general practitioners: results of an
international survey. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2015; 265: 189-97.
21 Sartorius N, Gaebel W, Cleveland HR, Stuart H, Akiyama T, Arboleda-
Florez J, et al. WPA guidance on how to combat stigmatization of
psychiatry and psychiatrists. World Psychiatry 2010; 9: 131-44.
EDUCATION & TRAINING
Ajaz et al Badmouthing, attitudes and stigmatisation in healthcare
102
