 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 0 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Introduction
It has been recently established that bone acts as an endocrine 
organ that secretes at least 3 hormones: fibroblast growth fac-
tor 23 (FGF23), lipocalin 2 (LCN2), and osteocalcin (OCN). 
Bone-forming osteoblasts are the cells that produce OCN, a hor-
mone implicated, among other functions, in the regulation of glu-
cose and energy metabolism (1). Accordingly, when fed a normal 
diet, Ocn-deficient mice (Ocn–/–) exhibit reduced glucose toler-
ance, insulin sensitivity, and circulating insulin levels, as well as 
decreased energy expenditure and increased fat mass (2). Mecha-
nistic studies conducted in cell cultures and mice showed that OCN 
improves glucose handling by promoting insulin secretion from 
β cells (3, 4), by favoring glucose uptake in myofibers (5), and by 
 
increasing energy expenditure (6). Studies in mice demonstrated 
that OCN function in β cells and myofibers is mediated through 
its binding to the G protein–coupled receptor family C group 6 
member A (GPRC6A) (3, 5). This pathway appears to be conserved 
in humans, since human OCN can bind and activate human GPR-
C6A (7), while mutations or polymorphisms in human GPRC6A 
are associated with insulin resistance (8, 9).
OCN is a small protein (46 aa in mice and 49 aa in humans) 
that is uniquely produced by osteoblasts and γ-carboxylated on 3 
glutamic acid residues (Glu) before it is secreted. γ-Carboxylation 
of OCN occurs in the ER and is mediated by γ-glutamyl carboxy-
lase (GGCX), which requires reduced vitamin K as an essential 
cofactor (10). This posttranslational modification increases the 
affinity of OCN for hydroxyapatite, the mineral component of 
bone extracellular matrix (ECM). Hence, the vast majority of OCN 
secreted by osteoblasts is trapped in bone ECM, in which it con-
stitutes the most abundant noncollagenous polypeptide. Although 
both γ-carboxylated (Gla) and undercarboxylated (ucOCN) forms 
of OCN are detected in serum, most in vitro and in vivo studies 
concur to indicate that the endocrine function of OCN is fulfilled 
by ucOCN in mice and humans (3, 4, 11). This has been recently 
confirmed genetically through the inactivation of Ggcx specifically 
 
in osteoblasts, which resulted in increased circulating levels of 
ucOCN and improved glucose tolerance in mice (12). Additional 
 
studies showed that osteoclasts, the bone-resorbing cells, are 
responsible for the partial decarboxylation and activation of OCN 
present in bone ECM (13, 14). Altogether, these observations sug-
gested a model in which hormonally inactive γ-carboxylated OCN 
is produced by osteoblasts and stored in the bone ECM, before 
being activated and released as ucOCN by osteoclasts during the 
process of bone resorption.
As is the case for many other peptide hormones, the sequence of 
Ocn cDNA predicts that it is first synthesized as a pre-prohormone 
composed of a signal peptide, a propeptide, and a mature hormone 
(Figure 1A). The propeptide of other γ-carboxylated proteins such 
as prothrombin and profactor IX are characterized by a recognition 
signal for the γ-glutamyl carboxylase (15). However, the importance 
of the propeptide for the γ-carboxylation and secretion of OCN has 
never been addressed in vivo. Moreover, it is currently unknown 
whether removal of the OCN propeptide depends on the γ-carbox-
Osteocalcin (OCN) is an osteoblast-derived hormone that increases energy expenditure, insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion, 
and glucose tolerance. The cDNA sequence of OCN predicts that, like many other peptide hormones, OCN is first synthesized 
as a prohormone (pro-OCN). The importance of pro-OCN maturation in regulating OCN and the identity of the endopeptidase 
responsible for pro-OCN cleavage in osteoblasts are still unknown. Here, we show that the proprotein convertase furin is 
responsible for pro-OCN maturation in vitro and in vivo. Using pharmacological and genetic experiments, we also determined 
that furin-mediated pro-OCN cleavage occurred independently of its γ-carboxylation, a posttranslational modification that 
is known to hamper OCN endocrine action. However, because pro-OCN is not efficiently decarboxylated and activated during 
bone resorption, inactivation of furin in osteoblasts in mice resulted in decreased circulating levels of undercarboxylated OCN, 
impaired glucose tolerance, and reduced energy expenditure. Furthermore, we show that Furin deletion in osteoblasts reduced 
appetite, a function not modulated by OCN, thus suggesting that osteoblasts may secrete additional hormones that regulate 
different aspects of energy metabolism. Accordingly, the metabolic defects of the mice lacking furin in osteoblasts became more 
apparent under pair-feeding conditions. These findings identify furin as an important regulator of bone endocrine function.
Proprotein convertase furin regulates osteocalcin  
and bone endocrine function
Omar Al Rifai,1,2 Jacqueline Chow,1 Julie Lacombe,1 Catherine Julien,1 Denis Faubert,3 Delia Susan-Resiga,4 Rachid Essalmani,4 
John W.M. Creemers,5 Nabil G. Seidah,4,6,7 and Mathieu Ferron1,2,6,7
1Integrative and Molecular Physiology Research Unit, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Québec, Canada. 2Molecular Biology Programs of the Faculty of Medicine, Université 
de Montréal, Québec, Canada. 3Proteomics Discovery Platform and 4Biochemical Neuroendocrinology Research Unit, IRCM, Québec, Canada. 5Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
6Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada. 7Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: February 15, 2017; Accepted: August 15, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(11):4104–4117. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI93437.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 0 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
other proteins, either activating or inactivating them, and have been 
implicated in the regulation of a myriad of biological processes (18). 
In particular, the PCs of the subtilisin/kexin type include proprotein 
convertase 1 (PC1), proprotein convertase 2 (PC2), furin, proprotein 
convertase 4 (PC4), proprotein convertase 5A and B (PC5A and 
PC5B), paired basic aa–cleaving enzyme 4 (PACE4), and proprotein 
convertase 7 (PC7) and play critical functions in several endocrine 
cells by regulating the maturation and secretion of numerous pep-
tide hormones such as insulin, glucagon, adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH), glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), and parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) (18, 19).
Here, we identified furin, using cell-based and genetic argu-
ments, as the endopeptidase responsible for pro-OCN process-
ing in osteoblasts. We also showed in cell culture and in vivo that 
γ-carboxylation and processing of OCN are 2 independent pro-
cesses in osteoblasts. The study of mice lacking furin specifically 
in osteoblasts revealed that proteolysis of pro-OCN is critical for 
the activation of this hormone. We also found that furin may mod-
ulate energy metabolism through OCN-independent pathway(s) 
affecting appetite.
Results
Pro-OCN is cleaved by an intracellular PC. The putative mouse 
OCN propeptide exhibits a C-terminal motif consisting of 3 basic 
residues: Arg-Leu-Arg-Arg (RLRR49), which is highly conserved 
throughout bony vertebrates (Figure 1A). Because this type of basic 
residue–containing motif represents a consensus recognition site 
for PCs that is found in many secreted proteins (18), we hypothe-
sized that pro-OCN may be cleaved by 1 or more PCs in osteoblasts. 
In support of this hypothesis, mutation of the RLRR sequence into 
ALAA resulted in a molecular shift of the OCN secreted in the cul-
ture medium of osteoblast cultures, consistent with retention of 
the propeptide in the mutated protein (Figure 1B). Furthermore, 
treatment of primary osteoblast cultures with decanoyl-RVKR– 
chloromethyl ketone (Dec-RVKR-CMK), a cell-permeable inhibi-
tor that blocks all 7 subtilisin/kexin-like PCs, resulted in a similar 
molecular shift of either endogenous OCN secreted from primary 
osteoblast cultures or a V5-tagged version transfected in osteo-
blasts or in CHO-ldlD cells (Figure 1, C–E). That Dec-RVKR-CMK 
treatment and the ALAA mutation induced an identical migration 
shift by SDS-PAGE suggests that the RLRR motif is the main, if not 
only, sequence present in pro-OCN that is recognized and cleaved 
by a PC (Figure 1E). Last, treatment of osteoblasts with hexa-D- 
arginine (D6R), a nonpermeable inhibitor that blocks only extra-
cellular or cell-surface PCs (20), had no impact (Figure 1E). Alto-
gether, these results suggest that an intracellular PC in osteoblasts 
contributes to the conversion of pro-OCN to OCN.
Furin is the PC responsible for pro-OCN cleavage in osteoblasts. 
In an effort to identify the PC responsible for pro-OCN cleavage 
in osteoblasts, we first assessed the expression of the 8 subtilisin/
kexin-like PCs in this cell type. As shown in Figure 2A, mRNAs 
encoding furin (Furin) and PACE4 (Pcsk6) were expressed at high 
levels in this cell type, while mRNAs encoding PC7 (Pcsk7) and 
PC5A (Pcsk5a) were detected at lower levels. Pcsk1, Pcsk2, Pcsk5b, 
and Pcsk4 mRNAs were either not detectable or expressed at very 
low levels in osteoblasts. Of note, the expression of both Furin and 
Pcsk5a was induced during osteoblast differentiation. Given these 
ylation process. It should be noted that OCN is unique among all 
known γ-carboxylated proteins, as it is the only one known to be effi-
ciently γ-carboxylated in vitro in the absence of its propeptide (16). 
These observations raise the question of the function of the OCN 
propeptide. Last, and as important, the identity of the endopepti-
dase responsible for processing the OCN prohormone (pro-OCN) 
and its importance in bone endocrine function remain unknown.
We therefore embarked on a search for the pro-OCN–converting 
enzyme. For that purpose, we focused on the proprotein convertases 
(PCs), a series of serine endoproteases that target specific motifs 
comprising basic residues, such as di-arginine or di-lysine, that are 
frequently observed in prohormone sequences (17). These enzymes 
function within the secretory pathway or outside the cell to cleave 
Figure 1. A PC cleaves pro-OCN at the RXRR motif in osteoblasts. (A) 
Schematic representation of the pre-pro-OCN protein including the 
approximate positions of the Gla residues, and amino acid alignment of 
OCN propeptide sequences from various vertebrate species: the conserved 
RX(R/K)R motif is highlighted in yellow. Consensus symbols are included 
below the alignment. A single asterisk indicates a fully conserved residue; 
a colon indicates a strongly conserved residue; a period indicates moderate 
or weak conservation. (B) Western blot analysis of cell supernatant from 
primary osteoblasts transfected with OCN-V5 or an R46A/R48A/R49A 
OCN mutant (OCNAAA-V5), both tagged at the C-terminal with the V5 epi-
tope. (C) Western blot analysis of endogenous OCN in the cell supernatant 
from differentiated mouse calvaria osteoblasts treated or not with 50 μM 
Dec-RVKR-CMK (RVKR). (D) Western blot analysis of cell supernatant and 
cell extracts of CHO-ldlD cells transfected with OCN-V5 and treated or not 
with 50 μM Dec-RVKR-CMK. (E) Western blot analysis of the supernatant 
of primary osteoblasts transfected with OCN-V5 or OCNAAA-V5 and treated 
or not with 50 μM Dec-RVKR-CMK or 20 μM D6R. IB, immunoblot.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 0 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
releasing mature OCN (Figure 2B). We noticed, however, that 
furin was reproducibly more efficient than were PC5A and PACE4 
at cleaving pro-OCN when the incubation was performed for a 
short period, i.e., 15 minutes (Figure 2B). In addition, further test-
ing revealed that furin could cleave more than 80% of pro-OCN 
 
within 30 minutes and in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 2, 
C and D). Since PC5A and PACE4 are known to act primarily on 
extracellular or plasma membrane–bound substrates, whereas 
furin acts mainly intracellularly in the secretion pathway (18), 
these results, combined with the observation that pro-OCN cleav-
age in osteoblasts was inhibited by Dec-RVKR-CMK, but not D6R 
(Figure 1E), suggest that pro-OCN is primarily a substrate for furin. 
Importantly, mutation of the RLRR motif to RLAA completely 
results, we next tested the capacity of furin, PC5A, PC7, and PACE4 
to cleave pro-OCN in vitro. Recombinant GST–pro-OCN protein 
produced in bacteria was incubated with the conditioned media of 
HEK293 cells transfected with either an empty vector or a vector 
expressing the soluble extracellular enzymatic domains of furin, 
PC5A, or PC7, or with recombinant soluble PACE4 expressed and 
purified from insect cells (20, 21). The PC activity of each condi-
tioned media or recombinant PC was measured using an artificial 
tetrapeptide substrate prior to the assay to ensure that an equal 
number of enzymatic units was used (see Methods and Supple-
mental Figure 1A; supplemental material available online with 
this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI93437DS1). Furin, PC5A, 
and PACE4, but not PC7, were able to cleave GST–pro-OCN, 
Figure 2. Furin cleaves pro-OCN in vitro. (A) Relative mRNA expression levels of kexin-like PCs in mouse nondifferentiated and differentiated osteoblasts 
analyzed by qPCR. Copy numbers were calculated from a standard curve prepared from mouse genomic DNA, and samples were normalized using Actb as a 
reference gene (n = 3). (B) In vitro processing assay of GST–pro-OCN incubated for 0 or 15 minutes with equal numbers of enzymatic units of furin, PC5A, PC7, 
and PACE4; released OCN was assessed by Western blotting, and the relative ratio of OCN/GST–pro-OCN from 3 independent experiments was quantified 
(graph). (C) Time course for processing of GST–pro-OCN by furin, as assessed by Western blotting. (D) In vitro processing assay of GST–pro-OCN with increas-
ing amounts of furin for 60 minutes, as assessed by Western blotting. (E and F) In vitro processing assay of GST–pro-OCN and the R48A/R49A OCN mutant 
(GST-RR/AA–pro-OCN) by furin for 30 minutes (E) or for various incubation durations (F), as assessed by Western blotting. In B–F, GST-OCN and mature OCN 
proteins are shown as separate Western blot exposures due to the reduced transfer efficiency of mature OCN (5 kDa) compared with that of GST–pro-OCN 
(36 kDa). (G) Western blot analyses of furin protein expression in the indicated tissues and cell lines. Osb calv, calvaria-derived osteoblasts; Osb BM, bone 
marrow–derived osteoblasts; HEK293 + furin, HEK293 cells transfected with human full-length Furin cDNA. Results represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 0 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
tion of pro-OCN with furin. However, the FLAG–pro-OCNAAA 
was more abundant intracellularly than was the FLAG–pro-OCN 
construct (Figure 4A, middle and bottom panels). Quantification 
of the FLAG–pro-OCN immunofluorescence signal intensity and 
Western blotting confirmed an increase in the intracellular lev-
els of pro-OCN when the furin cleavage site was mutated (Figure 
4, B and C). Consistent with the observations made using furin- 
deficient osteoblasts (Figure 3B), FLAG–pro-OCNAAA was still 
secreted (Figure4C), indicating that retention of the propeptide 
does not prevent secretion of the protein. Altogether, these in vitro 
and cell biology experiments support the notion that furin is the 
primary, if not sole, PC responsible for pro-OCN processing in 
osteoblasts.
Pro-OCN γ-carboxylation and its processing are uncoupled in 
osteoblasts. In hepatocytes, the cell type in which γ-carboxylation 
has been the most extensively studied, this posttranslational mod-
ification of proteins occurs in the ER (10). Yet furin was shown to 
be active mainly in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and beyond in 
several cell types (25, 26), thus suggesting that pro-OCN γ-carboxyl-
ation and cleavage by furin might occur sequentially in osteoblasts. 
To test whether these 2 processes interfere with each other, differen-
tiated osteoblasts were treated with either warfarin, which inhibits 
 
γ-carboxylation by blocking vitamin K reduction (10), or with Dec-
RVKR-CMK, and pro-OCN processing and γ-carboxylation were 
assessed. As shown in Figure 5A, warfarin efficiently blocked OCN 
γ-carboxylation, but did not influence its processing. Converse-
ly, treatment with Dec-RVKR-CMK efficiently blocked pro-OCN 
processing, but had no significant impact on its γ-carboxylation 
(Figure 5B). Similarly, mutation of the 3 OCN glutamic acid (E) 
residues targeted by γ-carboxylation to aspartic acid (D), a muta-
tion known to prevent this posttranslational modification in pro-
thrombin (27), did not affect the maturation of pro-OCN to OCN 
abrogated the activity of furin toward pro-OCN in vitro (Figure 2, 
E and F), thus demonstrating that furin is cleaving pro-OCN spe-
cifically at this dibasic site.
Consistent with the possibility that it may play an important 
role in osteoblasts, furin was detected in primary osteoblasts at 
comparable or higher levels than those observed in  hepato-
cytes, thymus, and MIN6 β cells, where this enzyme is known 
to have nonredundant functions (Figure 2G) (22–24). We there-
fore next assessed the requirement for furin in pro-OCN mat-
uration in osteoblasts. To that end, Furinfl/fl primary osteoblasts 
were infected with adenovirus expressing either GFP (Ad-GFP) 
or Cre-GFP (Ad-Cre) to generate control and Furin-deficient 
osteoblasts (hereafter referred to as Furin–/– osteoblasts), respec-
tively. Furin expression was significantly reduced in osteoblasts 
infected with Ad-Cre compared with expression levels in the 
control (Figure 3A). Remarkably, the inactivation of Furin in 
primary osteoblasts was sufficient to induce a molecular shift in 
the secreted OCN (Figure 3B). In contrast, the deletion of Pcsk5, 
the gene encoding PC5A and PC5B, in primary osteoblasts had 
no impact on the apparent molecular weight of OCN (Figure 
3, C and D). Moreover, neither Dec-RVKR-CMK nor D6R fur-
ther affected the apparent molecular weight of OCN in Furin- 
deficient osteoblast cultures (Figure 3E), suggesting that secret-
ed OCN retained its propeptide.
To visualize the interaction between furin and pro-OCN, 
mouse osteoblasts were transfected with a pro-OCN construct 
in which the propeptide of OCN was tagged with a 3X FLAG 
epitope at its N-terminus, and the intracellular localization of 
pro-OCN and furin were assessed by immunofluorescence. As 
shown in Figure 4A, both the FLAG–pro-OCN and the noncleav-
able mutant (FLAG–pro-OCNAAA) signals overlapped with the 
furin signal (middle and bottom panels), suggesting colocaliza-
Figure 3. Furin but not PC5 is necessary for pro-OCN process-
ing in osteoblasts. (A) Cre-mediated inactivation of Furin in 
Furinfl/fl osteoblasts infected with either Ad-GFP (i.e., control 
osteoblasts) or Ad-Cre (i.e., Furin–/– osteoblasts) was assessed 
by qPCR (n = 3). (B) Western blot analysis of secreted OCN from 
differentiated Furinfl/fl osteoblasts infected with either Ad-GFP 
or Ad-Cre. (C) Cre-mediated inactivation of Pcsk5 in Pcsk5fl/fl 
osteoblasts infected with either Ad-GFP or Ad-Cre was assessed 
by qPCR (n = 3). (D) Western blot analysis of secreted OCN from 
differentiated Pcsk5fl/fl osteoblasts infected with either Ad-GFP 
or Ad-Cre. (E) Western blot analysis of secreted OCN from differ-
entiated Furinfl/fl mouse calvaria osteoblasts infected with either 
Ad-GFP or Ad-Cre and treated or not with 50 μM Dec-RVKR-CMK 
or 20 μM D6R. Results represent the mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01 
and ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 0 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
into its mature form in vivo, even in the absence of 
γ-carboxylation (Figure 5D).
Finally, we sought to determine more pre-
cisely which form(s) of OCN is/are secreted by 
osteoblasts under normal conditions and when 
furin-dependent cleavage or γ-carboxylation is 
inhibited. For that purpose, OCN from differenti-
ated osteoblasts was analyzed by liquid chroma-
tography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) 
after treatment with vehicle, Dec-RVKR-CMK, or 
warfarin. Secreted proteins were collected, con-
centrated, and subjected to digestion by Arg-C, 
which cleaves proteins following any arginine 
residues. Hence, if pro-OCN was present in the 
medium, Arg-C would release an OCN propep-
tide lacking its last 3 residues, i.e., KPSGPESD-
KAFMSKQEGNKVVNR. Interestingly, we did not 
detect this peptide in the supernatant of vehicle- or 
warfarin-treated osteoblasts, but only in superna-
tant from osteoblasts treated with the PC inhibi-
tor, together with several N-terminally truncated 
fragments of OCN propeptide (Table 1 and Figure 
5E). These data further indicate that pro-OCN 
cleavage is independent of OCN γ-carboxylation 
and that pro-OCN processing is fully efficient in 
osteoblasts, as pro-OCN is virtually absent in the 
medium of vehicle-treated osteoblasts. Last, since 
OCN propeptide is not detected in the supernatant 
of osteoblasts in normal conditions, this suggests 
that the cleaved propeptide is degraded intracel-
lularly and is not secreted. This is consistent with 
an early study reporting that OCN propeptide was 
undetectable by radioimmunoassay in human sera 
or in human osteosarcoma cell supernatant (28).
Inactivation of Furin in osteoblasts results in 
impaired pro-OCN processing and decarboxyl-
ation in vivo. Our cell culture data indicating that 
furin is responsible for pro-OCN processing in 
osteoblasts raised the question of whether furin 
is also required for pro-OCN processing in vivo. 
To address this question, we generated mice 
lacking furin specifically in osteoblasts (Furinfl/fl 
OCN-Cre mice; hereafter referred to as Furinosb–/– 
mice), since mice lacking furin in all cell types died 
in utero before skeletogenesis was initiated (29). 
For this purpose, Furinfl/fl mice (30) were bred with 
OCN-Cre–transgenic mice, which express the Cre 
recombinase under the control of the human OCN 
promoter in differentiated osteoblasts (31).
Furinosb–/– mice were born at the expected Mendelian ratios 
and displayed no overt developmental abnormalities. We con-
firmed by PCR that recombination at the Furin locus occurred 
only in bone tissues (Figure 6A) and that the expression of furin 
was appreciably reduced in osteoblast cultures derived from 
bone marrow mesenchymal cells from Furinosb-/- mice compared 
with control osteoblast cultures, both at the mRNA and pro-
tein levels (Figure 6, B and C, and Supplemental Figure 1B). As 
in primary osteo 
blasts (Figure 5C). We also assessed the impact 
of pro-OCN γ-carboxylation on its processing in vivo by study-
ing mice lacking Ggcx only in osteoblasts (Ggcxfl/fl OCN-Cre mice, 
hereafter referred to as Ggcxosb–/– mice) (12). Since the absence of γ- 
carboxylation prevents OCN from accumulating in the bone ECM 
in these mice, we eval 
uated OCN processing in the serum by immu-
noprecipitation and Western blotting. Although circulating OCN 
was not γ-carboxylated in Ggcxosb–/– mice, its migration was similar to 
that of OCN from control serum, indicating that OCN is processed 
Figure 4. Furin and pro-OCN colocalize in osteoblasts. (A) Representative images of 
immunofluorescence analyses of primary osteoblasts transfected with FLAG–pro-OCN or the 
R46A/R48A/R49A FLAG–pro-OCN mutant (FLAG–pro-OCNAAA) expressed from the p3xFLAG-
Myc-CMV-23 vector. Furin is shown in green, FLAG (i.e., pro-OCN) in red, and DNA (DAPI) 
in blue. Scale bar: 10 μm. (B) Quantification of the red signal area in primary osteoblasts 
transfected with either FLAG–pro-OCN (n = 9 cells) or FLAG–pro-OCNAAA (n = 7 cells). Results 
represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test. (C) Western blot 
analysis of cell supernatant and cell extract from primary osteoblasts transfected with either 
FLAG–pro-OCN or FLAG–pro-OCNAAA.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 0 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
shown in Figure 6D, the inactivation of Furin resulted in accu-
mulation of pro-OCN and an absence of mature OCN in bones. 
Accordingly, OCN was only present in its proform in the serum 
of Furinosb–/– mice (Figure 6E). Importantly, and confirming in 
vivo the observations made in osteoblast cultures, the absence 
of furin did not affect the level of γ-carboxylation of pro-OCN 
in the bone ECM, whether it was assessed by Western blotting 
or ELISA (Figure 6, D and F). The insulin receptor precursor 
(pro-INSR), another protein cleaved by furin and PACE4 in cell 
culture (32) and involved in the regulation of energy metabolism 
by osteoblasts (33), was still processed in the bones of Furinosb–/– 
mice and in Furin–/– osteoblasts (Supplemental Figure 1, C and 
D). In addition, OCN was still processed when PC5, another PC 
known to be expressed in osteoblasts (34) and implicated in skel-
etal development (35), was inactivated in this cell type (Supple-
mental Figure 1E).
Interestingly, although total bone OCN content was not 
reduced in Furinosb–/– mice, circulating levels of total and ucOCN 
were decreased by almost 2-fold when assessed using ELISAs 
 
recognizing both OCN and pro-OCN (Figure 6G). These reduc-
tions were not caused by a difference in the specificity of the 
antibodies used in the ELISAs, since they similarly recognized 
pro-OCN or mature OCN under nondenaturing conditions 
(Supplemental Figure 1F). Because carboxylated OCN pres-
ent in the bone ECM is converted to active ucOCN during 
the process of bone resorption (14), we hypothesized that in 
 
Furinosb–/– mice, pro-OCN was less efficiently decarboxylated 
and released during bone resorption compared with mature 
OCN. To test this possibility, RAW 264.7 preosteoclastic cells 
were cultured on devitalized calvaria bones isolated from con-
trol or Furinosb–/– mice in the presence or absence of RANKL to 
induce osteoclast differentiation. When osteoclasts were differ-
entiated on control bones, we could detect the release of both 
total OCN and ucOCN, whereas when differentiated on bones 
isolated from Furinosb–/– mice, osteoclasts released less total OCN 
and an undetectable quantity of ucOCN (Figure 7A). Impor-
tantly, upon tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) stain-
ing, osteoclast differentiation did not appear to be impaired on 
 
Furinosb–/– calvaria compared with control calvaria (Figure 7, 
B and C), and the expression levels of the osteoclast-specific 
markers Acp5 and Clcn7 remained unchanged in the bones of 
Figure 5. Pro-OCN processing and γ-carbox-
ylation occur independently of each other in 
osteoblasts. (A and B) Western blot analysis of 
endogenous total OCN (OCN) and γ-carboxylat-
ed OCN (Gla OCN) of cell supernatant and cell 
extract from differentiated mouse osteoblasts 
treated or not with 50 μM warfarin (A) or 50 
μM Dec-RVKR-CMK (RVKR) (B). (C) Western 
blot analysis of supernatant from osteoblasts 
transfected with OCN-V5 or the E13D/E17D/E20D 
OCN-V5 mutant (OCNDDD-V5) and treated or not 
with 50 μM Dec-RVKR-CMK. (D) Western blot 
analysis of OCN immunoprecipitated from the 
serum of control mice (Ggcxfl/fl) and mice lacking 
γ-carboxylase in osteoblasts (Ggcxosb–/–). Total 
OCN and γ-carboxylated OCN were assessed by 
Western blotting. (E) LC-MS/MS analyses of cell 
supernatant of differentiated mouse osteo-
blasts treated or not with 50 μM Dec-RVKR-CMK 
or 50 μM warfarin. Quantification of the OCN 
propeptide area relative to the total peptide area 
in 3 independent experiments is shown (see also 
Table 1). Results represent the mean ± SEM.
Table 1. LC-MS/MS analyses of cell supernatant of differentiated 
mouse osteoblasts treated or not with 50 μM Dec-RVKR-CMK 
(RVKR) or 50 μM warfarin
Peptide sequences
Exclusive spectrum count
Average Mascot 
ion score
Vehicle
RVKR
Warfarin
KPSGPESDKAFMSKQEGNKVVNR
0
3
0
35.9
SGPESDKAFMSKQEGNKVVNR
0
7
0
41.8
PESDKAFMSKQEGNKVVNR
0
1
0
29.2
ESDKAFMSKQEGNKVVNR
0
2
0
45.2
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Furinosb–/– mice compared with levels in their control littermates 
(Supplemental Figure 1G), suggesting that the absence of furin 
in osteoblasts does not overtly impact osteoclast differentiation.
Previous studies have shown that the acidic pH generated 
 
during the process of bone resorption is responsible for OCN 
decarboxylation (13). Hence, we compared the decarboxylation 
of mature OCN and pro-OCN following incubation at a pH com-
parable to that found in the osteoclast resorption lacuna (i.e., pH 
4.3). While the OCN contained in control mouse bone extracts was 
efficiently decarboxylated at pH 4.3, the pro-OCN contained in 
 
Furinosb–/– mouse bone extracts was not (Figure 7D and Supplemental 
Figure 1H). Importantly, anti–Gla OCN and anti–total OCN antibod-
ies could detect mature OCN in control bone extracts, pro-OCN in 
the Furinosb–/– mouse bone extracts, and mature OCN generated fol-
lowing the addition of recombinant furin to the latter extracts (Sup-
plemental Figure 1I). Collectively, these results suggest that, in the 
absence of furin, osteoblasts secrete γ-carboxylated pro-OCN, which, 
like mature γ-carboxylated OCN, accumulates in the bone ECM. 
However, pro-OCN is poorly decarboxylated and released during 
bone resorption, resulting in reduced circulating levels of ucOCN.
Furin in osteoblasts is required to maintain glucose and energy 
homeostasis. To determine how the absence of pro-OCN cleavage 
impacts OCN endocrine functions, we next studied glucose metab-
olism in Furinosb–/– mice. Glucose tolerance and serum insulin levels 
were normal in Furinosb–/– mice at 3 and 6 months of age (Supple-
mental Figure 2, A–E). However, at 6 and 9 months of age, there 
was a significant increase in blood glucose levels under fed condi-
tions in Furinosb–/– mice compared with levels in littermate controls 
(Supplemental Figure 2F and Figure 8A). In addition, at 9 months 
of age, Furinosb–/– mice also showed reduced glucose tolerance when 
challenged with a glucose load (Figure 8B). Furthermore, in agree-
ment with the fact that ucOCN normally favors insulin secretion by 
β cells, serum insulin levels were significantly reduced in the fed 
state in Furinosb–/– mice compared with levels in control littermates, 
while fasting levels were not affected (Figure 8C). These results are 
consistent with higher blood glucose levels in Furinosb–/– mice only in 
fed conditions or during a glucose tolerance test (GTT) (Figure 8, A 
and B). Moreover, and in line with the previously reported positive 
effect of ucOCN on insulin synthesis by β cells, pancreatic insulin 
content was also reduced in Furinosb–/– mice compared with that 
Figure 6. Impaired pro-OCN processing in Furinosb–/– mice. (A) Detection of the deleted allele (ΔPCR) of Furin by PCR on genomic DNA extracted from dif-
ferent tissues. Flox PCR was used as a loading control. WAT, white adipose tissue; BAT, brown adipose tissue. (B) Furin expression in bone marrow–derived 
osteoblasts from Furinfl/fl or Furinosb–/– mice assessed by Western blotting. (C) Quantification of furin protein levels relative to β-actin expressed as a percent-
age of Furinfl/fl. (D) Western blot analysis of total OCN and γ-carboxylated OCN in bone extracts from 9-month-old Furinfl/fl and Furinosb–/– mice. (E) Western 
blot analysis of OCN immunoprecipitated from the serum of Furinfl/fl or Furinosb–/– mice. (F) Total and γ-carboxylated OCN ELISA measurements in bone 
homogenates from 9-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 7) and Furinosb–/– (n = 8) mice. (G) Total and ucOCN ELISA measurements in serum from 9-month-old Furinfl/fl  
(n = 16) and Furinosb–/– (n = 17) mice. The ELISAs used in F and G quantify both pro-OCN and mature OCN. Results indicate the mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01 and 
***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
clusion that pro-OCN processing by furin is required for the com-
plete activation of this hormone.
Furin regulates appetite through its expression in osteoblasts. 
Furinosb–/– mice are characterized by normal glucose tolerance at 3 
and 6 months of age when fed a regular chow diet (Supplemental 
Figure 2, A and D). Moreover, insulin sensitivity, as assessed by 
insulin tolerance tests (ITTs), was normal in Furinosb–/– mice in all 
the age groups tested (Supplemental Figure 2, G–I). This contrasts 
with Ocn inactivation that results in both glucose intolerance and 
insulin resistance as early as 3 months of age in mice fed a chow 
diet (2). Likewise, on a chow diet, Furinosb–/– mice had lower fat 
accumulation than did Ocn–/– mice (Figure 9F and ref. 2). Hence, 
the metabolic phenotypes are delayed or milder in Furinosb–/– mice 
compared with Ocn–/– mice.
Although several possibilities could explain these differences, 
 
one of them is that furin negatively modulates other aspects of 
energy metabolism independently of OCN. In support of this 
hypothesis, we observed a significant reduction of approximately 
 
30% in food intake by 6-month-old Furinosb–/– mice during the 
dark phase (Figure 9G). Accordingly, cumulative food intake was 
reduced by approximately 20% over a 3-day period (Figure 9H). 
We found that cumulative food intake was also reduced by approx-
imately 15% in 3-month-old Furinosb–/– mice (Supplemental Figure 
3, E and F). In contrast, Ocn–/– animals of the same age (6 months) 
and genetic background (i.e., C57BL/6J) had normal food intake 
compared with their WT littermates (Figure 9, I and J). Circulating 
detected in control mice (Figure 8D). Insulin sensitivity remained 
normal in Furinosb–/– mice at 3, 6, and 9 months of age (Supplemen-
tal Figure 2, G–I). Finally, challenging 4-week-old Furinosb–/– mice 
with a high-fat, high-sucrose diet for 10 weeks was sufficient to 
reduce glucose tolerance in younger animals (Figure 8E).
Since OCN also increases energy expenditure, we assessed 
the energy balance in control and Furinosb–/– mice through indirect 
calorimetry. At 3 and 6 months of age, chow-fed Furinosb–/– mice 
displayed reduced O2 consumption and CO2 production in the 
dark phase, i.e., when the mice were more active (Figure 9, A and 
B, and Supplemental Figure 2, J and K), which resulted in a sig-
nificant decrease in global energy expenditure (Figure 9C  and 
Supplemental Figure 2L). We observed no decrease in physical 
activity in Furinosb–/– mice during the dark and light phases (Figure 
9, D and E), suggesting that the reduced energy expenditure of 
the Furinosb–/– mice was not caused by a diminution in the volun-
tary movements of these animals. The lower energy expenditure 
in Furinosb–/– mice was associated with an increased epididymal fat 
pad weight and whole-body fat tissue percentage at 12 months of 
age compared with control mice, although their body weight was 
not significantly changed compared with that of their littermate 
controls, whether the mice were fed a normal chow diet or a high-
fat diet (Figure 9F and Supplemental Figure 3, A–D). Overall, the 
phenotypic characterization of Furinosb–/– mice revealed that furin, 
through its expression in osteoblasts, plays a role in regulating glu-
cose and energy metabolism. Our findings also support the con-
Figure 7. Pro-OCN is not efficiently decarboxylated by osteoclasts. (A and B) In vitro resorption assay of devitalized calvaria from Furinfl/fl mice (n = 3) and 
Furinosb–/– mice (n = 3) in the presence of osteoclast-like RAW 246.7 cells, with or without 10 ng/ml RANKL. (A) Total OCN and ucOCN ELISA measurements 
in the cell culture supernatant. ND, not detected. (B) Representative image of TRAP staining of calvaria. Scale bar: 500 μm. (C) Percentage of area with 
TRAP-positive staining (n = 3). (D) Western blot analysis of bone extracts from Furinfl/fl and Furinosb–/– mice incubated in phosphate-buffered solution at pH 
7.5 or pH 4.3 for 14 days at 37°C. Graph shows quantification of the Gla OCN/OCN ratio (representative result from 3 independent experiments). The ELISAs 
used in A quantify both pro-OCN and mature OCN. Results represent the mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001, by 1-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s 
multiple comparisons test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Discussion
In this study, we identified furin as the PC responsible for the con-
version of pro-OCN to mature OCN in osteoblasts. Our results show 
that pro-OCN processing regulates the circulating levels of active 
unOCN, since pro-OCN is less efficiently released and decarbo-
xylated from the bone ECM during the process of bone resorption. 
Accordingly, mice in which the Furin gene is inactivated in osteo-
blasts only are characterized by metabolic anomalies similar to those 
reported in Ocn-deficient animals. Together, we believe this work 
identifies a previously undescribed regulatory mechanism of bone 
endocrine function and shows that OCN activation, as with several 
other peptide hormones, is dependent on the activity of a specific PC.
Pro-OCN processing is dependent on furin in osteoblasts. With the 
use of a variety of approaches, we established that, in osteoblasts, 
pro-OCN maturation is exclusively performed by furin and not by 
the other members of the PC family. First, in vitro assays showed 
that pro-OCN is most efficiently processed by furin compared with 
the 3 other PCs expressed by osteoblasts. Second, inactivation of 
Furin in cultured osteoblasts completely abrogates pro-OCN pro-
cessing. Third, in mice lacking Furin only in osteoblasts, pro-OCN 
failed to be processed and accumulated in the bone ECM. PC5 
is another PC that is required for normal patterning of the axial 
skeleton through the processing of progrowth differentiation fac-
tor 11 (pro-GDF11) (35). PC5 has been reported to be expressed in 
osteoblasts and osteocytes, where it may process FGF23, another 
bone-derived hormone regulating phosphate homeostasis (34). 
However, our data show that, although PC5A is expressed in pri-
mary osteoblasts and cleaves pro-OCN in vitro, the inactivation in 
this cell type of Pcsk5, encoding PC5A and PC5B isoforms, does 
not affect pro-OCN processing in cell culture or in vivo. PC5A and 
pro-OCN may not colocalize to the same cellular compartment, as 
PC5A is activated only after it reaches the cell surface (18).
Since furin deficiency leads to lethality between E10.5 
and E11.5, this PC has been implicated in a limited number of 
leptin levels were not changed in Furinosb–/– mice (Supplemental 
Figure 3G). Collectively, these observations suggest that Furinosb–/– 
mice do not develop insulin resistance as robustly as do Ocn–/– 
mice, in part because of a reduction in calorie intake, a condition 
shown previously to improve insulin sensitivity in mice (36).
To test this possibility directly, we pair fed 4-month-old con-
trol and Furinosb–/– mice for 2 to 4 weeks to ensure similar calorie 
intake in both groups (Supplemental Figure 3H) before assessing 
their glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. As shown in Figure 
10A, Furinosb–/– mice were significantly heavier than the pair-fed 
control mice, and this was associated with an increase in the per-
centage of whole-body fat tissue (Figure 10B). When pair fed with 
their control littermates, Furinosb–/– mice showed higher feeding 
blood glucose levels and a glucose intolerance phenotype (Figure 
10, C and D). Finally, under these conditions, the Furinosb–/– mice 
were found to be insulin resistant in comparison with the control 
mice, as assessed by an ITT (Figure 10E). Importantly, most of 
these phenotypes were not observed at the same age when control 
and Furinosb–/– mice were fed ad libitum (Supplemental Figures 2 
and 3). Since LCN2 was recently identified as a bone-derived hor-
mone regulating appetite (37), we tested whether furin regulates 
appetite by processing LCN2. However, we found that furin was 
unable to cleave recombinant LCN2 in vitro and that the apparent 
molecular weight of LCN2 on Western blotting was not changed 
in bone extracts from Furinosb–/– mice compared with that observed 
in control bone extracts (Supplemental Figure 4, A and B). Finally, 
following refeeding, we found that circulating levels of LCN2 were 
the same in control and Furinosb–/– mice (Supplemental Figure 4C). 
Together, these results support the notion that inactivation of furin 
in osteoblasts produces two distinct effects on energy metabolism: 
it reduces energy expenditure, glucose tolerance, and insulin sen-
sitivity on one hand, and it decreases appetite on the other hand. 
The first effect is most likely OCN dependent, while the second 
one occurs through an OCN- and LCN2-independent mechanism.
Figure 8. Reduced glucose tolerance in Furinosb–/– mice. (A) Fasting and fed blood glucose levels in 
9-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 12) and Furinosb–/– (n = 10) mice. (B) GTT results for 9-month-old Furinfl/fl  
(n = 21) and Furinosb–/– (n = 16) mice. Mice were fasted for 16 hours and injected i.p. with 2 g/kg 
glucose. (C) Fasting and fed serum insulin levels in 9-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 12) and Furinosb–/–  
(n = 10) mice. (D) Pancreas insulin content in 9-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 10) and Furinosb–/– (n = 10) 
mice. (E) GTT results for 4-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 8) and Furinosb–/– (n = 7) mice after 10 weeks on a 
high-fat, high-sucrose diet (HFD). Mice were fasted for 6 hours and then injected i.p. with  
1 g/kg glucose. Metabolic assessments were performed on male mice fed a normal chow diet 
(A–D) or a HFD (E). Results represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01, by 2-way ANOVA 
for repeated measurements with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test (A–C and E) or by 
unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test (D).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
PTH) conversion (41) and in the stepwise generation of growth 
hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) together with PC1 (42), 
our study is the first to our knowledge to reveal the sole require-
ment for furin in the activation of a specific peptide hormone 
and to imply that furin has a role in endocrine regulation in vivo.
Processing of OCN is not dependent on its γ-carboxylation. The 
precursors of other γ-carboxylated proteins, such as thrombin and 
factor IX, also contain a propeptide that consists of a recognition 
signal for the γ-glutamyl carboxylase as well as a dibasic motif (RR) 
in their C-terminus (15). It is thought that processing of the pro-
peptide in γ-carboxylated proteins could depend on their efficient 
γ-carboxylation (43). Although the OCN propeptide appears to 
contain a putative γ-glutamyl carboxylase recognition motif (44), 
mature OCN can be γ-carboxylated in vitro in the absence of its 
propeptide (16). Through several approaches, including mass spec-
trometry, we showed that preventing pro-OCN γ-carboxylation, 
either pharmacologically or genetically, did not affect its process-
ing by furin, thereby establishing that these 2 posttranslational 
postnatal functions so far. Furin was shown to be essential for 
the maintenance of peripheral immune tolerance through its 
expression in T lymphocytes (24), to play a role in the granular 
acidification of pancreatic β cells (23), and to be required for 
cardiac development through its expression in endothelial cells 
(38). In contrast, studies of furin functions in liver showed that 
it might act redundantly with other PCs in this tissue (22, 30). In 
the present study, we show that furin is the cognate PC for pro-
OCN activation in osteoblasts, providing genuine in vivo evi-
dence for a nonredundant role of furin in this cell type. In classi-
cal endocrine cells, prohormones (e.g., proglucagon, proinsulin, 
and pro-opiomelanocortin) are generally converted to active 
hormones by either PC1 and/or PC2 (39, 40). Consistent with 
the notion that the osteoblast is a nonclassical endocrine cell, 
our data show that both PC1 and PC2 are not expressed in osteo-
blasts and that instead furin is responsible for pro-OCN con-
version. Consequently, although furin was previously shown in 
cell culture to be responsible for proparathyroid hormone (pro-
Figure 9. Reduced energy expenditure and food intake in Furinosb–/– mice. (A–E) Metabolic parameters of 6-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 11) and Furinosb–/–  
(n = 9) mice. O2 consumption (A), CO2 release (B), heat production (energy expenditure) (C), and activity on the x axis (D) and y axis (E). (F) Epididymal fat pad 
weight normalized to the body weights of 12-month-old Furinfl/fl (n = 12) and Furinosb–/– (n = 12) mice fed a normal chow diet. (G–J) Food intake by 6-month-
old Furinfl/fl (n = 11), Furinosb–/– (n = 9), Ocn+/+ (n = 8), and Ocn–/– (n = 8) mice. (G and I) Food intake during the light and dark periods. (H and J) Cumulative food 
intake over a 3-day period. Results represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, by 2-way ANOVA for repeated measurements with 
Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test (A–E and G–J) or by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test (F).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
detected in the Furinosb–/– mice. A recent study identified LCN2 as 
an osteoblast-derived hormone that regulates appetite (37), how-
ever, our data suggest that furin does not modulate LCN2 process-
ing or serum levels. Hence, further work will be required to iden-
tify the additional osteoblast-derived factor involved in appetite 
control and to determine how furin regulates its function.
Pro-OCN is less efficiently released during the process of bone 
resorption. Our cellular and in vivo experiments establish that, in 
the absence of furin, pro-OCN is not converted to mature OCN, 
but is still efficiently γ-carboxylated and secreted. These observa-
tions suggest that pro-OCN processing is not required for OCN to 
be secreted. Similarly, it was previously shown that profactor IX, 
which can be processed in vitro by furin, is normally secreted in 
its γ-carboxylated proform in heterologous cells. However, in con-
trast to mature factor IX, profactor IX was found to be unable to 
bind phospholipid vesicles in the presence of Ca2+ (48). We have 
previously demonstrated that γ-carboxylation of OCN is abso-
lutely required for its binding to bone ECM, since in mice lacking 
Ggcx in osteoblasts, bones are depleted of OCN (12). In contrast, 
pro-OCN does accumulate normally in the bones of Furinosb–/– 
mice, suggesting that the propeptide does not prevent binding of 
the OCN Gla residues to the mineral component of bone ECM. 
Hence, retention of the propeptide has different effects on the cal-
cium-binding properties of pro-OCN and profactor IX.
Although bone OCN content was normal in Furinosb–/– mice, the 
circulating levels of total and ucOCN were reduced. γ-carboxylated 
OCN was shown to be partially decarboxylated and activated during 
the process of bone resorption in a nonenzymatic reaction requiring 
the acidic pH of the resorption lacuna generated by the osteoclasts 
(13, 14). Other data presented here show that pro-OCN is less effi-
ciently decarboxylated than is mature OCN during bone resorption 
and following incubation at pH 4.3, suggesting that the retention of 
the propeptide protects OCN Gla residues from the effect of the low 
pH generated by osteoclasts.
modifications occur independently of each other. In line with our 
findings, earlier studies reported that inhibition of γ-carboxylation 
using warfarin in the ROS 17/2.8 rat osteosarcoma cell line caused 
the intracellular accumulation of pro-OCN, but also the release of 
mature decarboxylated OCN (45, 46).
Furin in osteoblasts regulates whole-body energy metabolism in 
part through OCN. Beyond 9 months of age, Furinosb–/– mice display 
reduced glucose tolerance, decreased serum insulin levels, lower 
 
energy expenditure, and increased white adipose tissue mass 
compared with their control littermates. These phenotypes are 
consistent with those of Ocn–/– mice and support the conclusion 
that pro-OCN processing by furin is required for the activation 
of this hormone. Nonetheless, some metabolic anomalies in 
 
Furinosb–/– mice were delayed or not detected (e.g., insulin resis-
tance) as compared with Ocn-deficient mice (2).
Furinosb–/– mice also exhibit reduced food intake, which was not 
observed in Ocn–/– mice. Because reduced calorie intake was shown 
to improve insulin sensitivity (36), this could explain why glu-
cose intolerance and insulin sensitivity phenotypes are milder in 
 
Furinosb–/– mice than in Ocn–/– mice. Accordingly, pair feeding 
revealed a more severe glucose intolerance and insulin sensitivity 
 
phenotype in the Furinosb–/– mice. Interestingly, although OCN 
appears to be a major mediator of bone endocrine action on ener-
gy metabolism, recent findings suggest the existence of addi-
tional bone-derived factor(s) implicated in the control of glucose 
metabolism. For instance, partial ablation of osteoblasts in adult 
mice resulted in reduced glucose tolerance, hypoinsulinemia, 
and decreased insulin sensitivity, as observed in Ocn–/– mice (47). 
However, unlike OCN deficiency, osteoblast ablation also results 
in increased food intake. This earlier work supports the existence 
of at least 1 additional osteoblast-derived factor negatively reg-
ulating appetite and insulin sensitivity. Whether such an osteo-
blast-derived factor could be processed and possibly inactivated 
by furin is a possibility with regard to the reduced food intake 
Figure 10. Pair feeding reveals a more severe metabolic 
phenotype in Furinosb–/– mice. Metabolic phenotyping of 
4-month-old pair-fed Furinfl/fl (n = 12) and Furinosb–/–  
(n = 7) mice. (A) Body weight before initiation of pair 
feeding (week 0) and after 2 and 4 weeks of pair feeding. 
(B) Percentage of total fat mass over body weight after 
4 weeks of pair feeding. (C) Fed blood glucose measure-
ment after 3 weeks of pair feeding. (D) GTT results after 
4 weeks of pair feeding. Mice were fasted for 16 hours 
and injected i.p. with 2 g/kg glucose. (E) ITT results after 
4 weeks of pair feeding. Mice were fasted for 5 hours and 
injected i.p. with 0.3 U/kg of insulin. Results represent 
the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001,  
by 2-way ANOVA for repeated measurements with 
Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test (A, D, and E) or by 
unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test (B and C).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
injected i.p. with 1 g/kg glucose for the GTT. To measure pancreatic 
insulin content, pancreas was collected, and insulin was extracted in 
acid-ethanol as previously described (13). Serum insulin and pancreatic 
insulin levels were assessed using a commercial insulin ELISA (Mer-
codia). Serum leptin and LCN2 levels were measured using a mouse 
leptin ELISA kit (EZML-82K; EMD Millipore) and a mouse lipocalin-2 
ELISA kit (MLCN20; R&D Systems), respectively. In the pair-feeding 
experiment, each mouse was housed in a separate cage. Furinosb–/– mice 
were fed a normal chow diet ad libitum, and food intake was measured 
and averaged daily. The corresponding amount of food was given to the 
Furinfl/fl mice. Metabolic tests were performed between the third and 
fourth weeks of pair feeding.
Mouse O2 consumption, CO2 release, activity, and food intake 
were assessed using an 8-chamber Promethion Continuous Metabolic 
 
System (Sable Systems International). After a 48-hour acclimation 
period, O2 consumption (VO2) and CO2 production (VCO2) data were 
collected for 72 hours. Heat production was calculated by indirect calo-
rimetry using the following formulas: heat in kcal/hr = 60 × (0.003941 
× VO2 + 0.001106 × VCO2), where VO2 and VCO2 are in units of ml/
min. Physical activity was measured using infrared beams connected 
to the system. Total body fat was measured using a body composition 
analyzer (echo-MRI) and normalized to body weight.
DNA construct, cell culture, and transfection. Mouse pro-OCN 
cDNA was cloned into a pIRES2-EGFP-V5 plasmid in EcoRI and 
AgeI restriction sites. Different OCN mutants were generated by site- 
directed mutagenesis using specific primers (Supplemental Table 1). 
Primary osteoblasts or Chinese hamster ovary ldlD cells (CHO-ldlD; 
originating from the M. Krieger laboratory [ref. 54]) were transfected 
with jetPRIME Reagent (Polypus transfection). Following an over-
night incubation, media were changed to secretion media (FBS-free 
αMEM plus 2mM L-glutamine for osteoblasts or FBS-free DMEM/F12 
for CHO-ldlD cells) supplemented with 22 μM vitamin K1 (Sandoz). 
Twenty-four hours later, media were collected, and cells were lysed 
in protein lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HC, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM 
EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton, 1 mM PMSF, and 1× protease inhibitor 
cocktail) and analyzed by Western blotting. In some experiments, war-
farin (50 μM; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), D6R (20μM; Calbiochem), 
or Dec-RVKR-CMK (50 μM; Tocris) was added to the secretion media.
Osteoblast preparation. Primary mouse osteoblasts were isolated 
from 3-day-old mouse calvariae through serial collagenase (Worthing-
ton Biochemical Corp.) digestions as previously described (12). To gen-
erate Furin−/− or Pcsk5−/− osteoblasts, Furinfl/fl or Pcsk5fl/f osteoblasts were 
infected with Cre-GFP–expressing adenovirus (University of Iowa) 
at 200 MOI per cell. Control osteoblasts were obtained by infecting 
 
Furinfl/fl or Pcsk5fl/fl osteoblasts with GFP-expressing adenovirus. Osteo-
blast differentiation was induced by supplementing osteoblast culture 
media (αMEM plus 10% FBS and 2mM L-glutamine) with 5 mM β- 
glycerophosphate and 100 μg/ml L-ascorbic acid for 21 days. Bone mar-
row–derived osteoblasts were prepared as previously described (12). Brief-
ly, long bones of 3 week-old-mice were dissected, and bone marrow cells 
were flushed with αMEM. Cells were then plated in 6-well plates at a den-
sity of 5 × 106 cells per well. After 7 days, media were changed to differen-
tiation media (osteoblast media supplemented with 100 μg/ml L-ascorbic 
acid, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 10−8 M dexamethasone). After 14 
days of differentiation, cells were used for mRNA or protein analysis.
Biochemical studies. For OCN immunoprecipitation, Furinfl/fl or 
Furinosb–/– serum was diluted 1:50 with 1× PBS containing 1 mM PMSF, 
What is the role of OCN propeptide if it is not required for 
OCN γ-carboxylation? The propeptide domain might facilitate the 
entry of the 96-aa-long pre–pro-OCN in the ER, its cleavage by the 
signal peptidase, the exit of the 72-aa-long pro-OCN from the ER, 
and its transport through the secretory pathway until it reaches 
 
the TGN, where furin is active (26). In support of this notion, 
expression of OCN without its propeptide sequence in osteoblasts 
greatly reduces the amount of mature OCN secreted in the media 
(El-Rifai and Ferron, unpublished observations). Finally, it was 
reported that a polypeptide must have a minimum size of at least 
50 aa in order to be recognized by the signal recognition particle 
and threaded through the membrane of the ER (49), making the 
46-aa-long OCN too small to be efficiently secreted on its own.
The lumen of the TGN is characterized by an acidic pH, i.e., as 
low as pH 5.9 in HeLa cells (50). Interestingly, consistent with its 
preferential action in the TGN, furin is more active in vitro at pH 
6 than at pH 7.5 (51). Hence, we can also speculate that the normal 
function of OCN propeptide could be to protect OCN from under-
going premature decarboxylation while it is transiting through the 
TGN and the constitutive secretory pathway. Alternatively, the 
presence of the propeptide may prevent OCN from premature 
folding in the TGN, since it was reported that OCN can fold in the 
absence of calcium ions at pH 6 and below (52). Further investiga-
tion will be needed to specifically address these possibilities.
In summary, this work provides in vitro and in vivo evidences 
that the processing of the OCN prohormone  by furin regulates the 
activation and endocrine function of OCN. Moreover, we estab-
lished that furin in osteoblasts plays an important role in the reg-
ulation of energy metabolism by bone through OCN-dependent 
and -independent mechanisms.
Methods
Animal models. The Furinfl/fl mice were generated by introducing loxP 
sites upstream and downstream of exon 2 of the Furin gene (30). Ggcxfl/fl 
mice were generated by introducing a loxP site upstream of exon 1 and 
a loxP site downstream of exon 2 of the Ggcx gene (12). Pcsk5fl/fl mice 
were generated by introducing loxP sites on each side of Pcsk5 exon 1 
(35). Each of these strains was crossed with OCN-Cre–transgenic mice, 
which express Cre recombinase under the control of a fragment of the 
human OCN promoter (31) and which were previously shown not to dis-
play any metabolic anomalies, in order to generate, respectively, Furinfl/fl 
OCN-Cre (Furinosb–/–), Ggcxfl/fl OCN-Cre (Ggcxosb–/–), and Pcsk5fl/fl OCN-Cre 
(Pcsk5osb–/–) mice. Ocn–/– mice were generated by replacing Ocn1 (Bglap1) 
and Ocn2 (Bglap2) genes in the mouse Ocn cluster with a neomycin resis-
tance cassette through homologous recombination (53). All strains used 
were backcrossed on a C57BL/6J genetic background more than 10 
times and maintained in an IRCM specific pathogen–free animal facility 
(SPF) under 12-hour dark/12-hour light cycles. Male mice fed a normal 
chow diet were used in all experiments, unless otherwise noted. Tissue 
DNA was extracted by standard procedure, and PCR was performed 
with the genotyping PCR primers listed in Supplemental Table 1.
Metabolic analysis. For GTTs, adult male mice fed a normal chow 
diet were fasted overnight for 16 hours. Blood glucose levels were mea-
sured after fasting and at 15, 30, 60, and 120 minutes following i.p. 
injection with 2 g/kg glucose. In some experiments, mice were fed a 
60% high-fat diet (D12331-5I; Research Diets) for 10 weeks starting 
from 4 weeks of age. In this case, mice were fasted for 6 hours and 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
were reverse transcribed using M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitro-
gen, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) 
was performed using SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (BiMake) and 
gene-specific primers (see Supplemental Table 1). Expression levels 
were normalized to Actb expression levels.
Additional details on the methods used in this study are provided 
in the supplemental material.
Statistics. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad 
Prism software version 7.03. Results are shown as the mean ± SEM. 
For single measurements, an unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test was 
used, while 1-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post test was used 
for comparison of more than 2 groups. For repeated measurements 
(e.g., GTTs and ITTs), a repeated-measures 2-way ANOVA followed 
by Bonferroni’s post test was used. A P value of less than 0.05 was con-
sidered statistically significant. All experiments were repeated at least 
3 times or performed on at least 3 independent animals.
Study approval. All animal use complied with the guidelines of 
the Canadian Committee for Animal Protection and was approved by 
IRCM Animal Care Committee.
Author contributions
MF and JL designed experiments. OER performed most exper-
iments, with crucial help from JC (genetic and pharmacological 
studies with primary osteoblasts), JL (metabolic cages and meta-
bolic tests), CJ (in vitro PC assay), DF (LC-MS/MS analysis), and 
DSR (PC activity). RE and NGS provided Pcsk5fl/fl mice and plas-
mids. JWC provided Furinfl/fl mice. MF and OER wrote the man-
uscript with suggestions from JL, JWC, and NGS. All authors dis-
cussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to T.L. Clemens (Johns Hopkins School of Medi-
cine, Baltimore, MD, USA) for providing OCN-Cre mice; S. Kousteni 
(Columbia University, New York, NY, USA) for providing recombi-
nant LCN2; R. Day (Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Cana-
da) for providing recombinant PACE4; and A. Prat (IRCM, Mon-
tréal, Canada) for her critical reading of the manuscript.This work 
was supported by funding from the Canada Research Chair program 
(to MF and NGS); the Fondation J.A. DeSève (to MF); the Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research (MOP-133652, to MF, and Foundation 
Scheme Grant 148263, to NGS); and the Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada (RGPIN-2016-05213, to MF). 
OER received scholarships from the IRCM and the Université de 
Montréal. JL is a fellow of the Canadian Diabetes Association.  
Address correspondence to: Mathieu Ferron, Institut de Rech-
erches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins O., Montréal, 
Quebec, H2W 1R7, Canada. Phone: 514.987.5754; Email: mathieu. 
ferron@ircm.qc.ca.
and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail and incubated overnight at 4°C in the 
presence of the OCN antibodies indicated in Figure 5D, Figure 6E, and 
in Supplemental Figure 1F. Protein G agarose beads prewashed with 
1× PBS were added and incubated for 4 hours at 4°C. Beads were spun 
down and washed 4 times with 1× PBS before Western blot analysis. 
Proteins were resolved on 15% Tris-tricine SDS-PAGE gel for OCN 
detection, whereas 7.5% Tris-glycine gel was used for the detection of 
furin and the insulin receptor. The antibodies used in this study were: 
anti-OCN (total) polyclonal goat antibody, which recognize aa 26–46 
corresponding to mature mouse OCN (55); anti-Gla OCN polyclonal 
 
goat antibody, which recognize Gla13 OCN aa 11–26 correspond-
ing to carboxylated mature OCN (55); anti–β-actin (mouse, clone 
AC-15, A5441; Sigma-Aldrich); anti-V5 (mouse, clone V5-10, V8012; 
 
Sigma-Aldrich); anti-furin (rabbit, PA1-062; Thermo Fisher Scientif-
ic); anti–insulin receptor β (mouse, clone L55B10, 3020; New England 
BioLabs); and anti-LCN2 (goat, AF1857; R&D Systems). Serum and cell 
supernatant levels of carboxylated, undercarboxylated, and total OCN 
were measured using ELISAs as described previously (55). Briefly, the 
Gla ELISA detects OCN only when it is carboxylated on the Glu13 res-
idue. The Glu ELISA quantifies the uncarboxylated form of OCN. The 
total ELISA detects OCN, whether it is carboxylated or not. OCN mea-
surements in bone homogenate were normalized to total protein con-
tent, as assessed by Bradford assay.
GST pro-OCN preparation and in vitro digestion assay. Mouse pro-
OCN cDNA (WT or R48A/R49A, i.e., RR/AA mutant) was cloned into 
pGEX4T3 in BamHI and EcoRI restriction sites (Supplemental Table 
1). Plasmids were transformed in Rosetta (DE3) pLys S competent bac-
teria (EMD Millipore), and recombinant GST proteins were purified 
using glutathione resin (Genscript). Recombinant full-length LCN2 
protein was provided by S. Kousteni (Columbia University, New York, 
NY, USA). The cDNA of the soluble form of various PCs were cloned 
into the pIRES2-EGFP plasmid and transfected into HEK293 cells 
(ATCC) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies, Thermo Fish-
er Scientific). Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were allowed 
to secrete in serum-free media for twenty-four hours, and supernatant 
was harvested. PCs were concentrated using centrifugal filters (50-
kDa MWCO Amicon; EMD Millipore) and stored in 20% glycerol at 
–80ºC. Kexin-like protease activity was assessed by in vitro cleavage 
of 100 μM Pyr-RTKR-AMC (Tocris) in PC buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 
pH 7.0, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol). Soluble extracellular 
PACE4 expressed in HEK293 cells revealed no enzymatic activity (data 
not shown); hence, recombinant soluble PACE4 expressed and puri-
fied from insect cells (provided by R. Day, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, Canada [ref. 21]) was used for the assay. Pro–GST-OCN 
or LCN2 in vitro digestions were performed in PC buffer with 200 ng 
substrate and 0.7 units of PC, and mature OCN was detected by West-
ern blotting using anti-OCN antibodies.
Gene expression. Osteoblasts and calvaria total RNA were isolated 
using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). RNAs 
 1. Karsenty G, Olson EN. Bone and muscle endocrine 
functions: unexpected paradigms of inter-organ 
communication. Cell. 2016;164(6):1248–1256.
 2. Lee NK, et al. Endocrine regulation of 
energy metabolism by the skeleton. Cell. 
2007;130(3):456–469.
 3. Pi M, Wu Y, Quarles LD. GPRC6A medi-
ates responses to osteocalcin in β-cells in 
vitro and pancreas in vivo. J Bone Miner Res. 
2011;26(7):1680–1683.
 4. Sabek OM, Nishimoto SK, Fraga D, Tejpal N, 
Ricordi C, Gaber AO. Osteocalcin Effect on 
Human β-Cells Mass and Function. Endocrinology. 
2015;156(9):3137–3146.
 5. Mera P, et al. Osteocalcin Signaling in Myofibers Is 
Necessary and Sufficient for Optimum Adaptation 
to Exercise. Cell Metab. 2016;23(6):1078–1092.
 6. Ferron M, McKee MD, Levine RL, Ducy P, 
Karsenty G. Intermittent injections of osteocalcin 
improve glucose metabolism and prevent type 2 
diabetes in mice. Bone. 2012;50(2):568–575.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 1 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
 
7. De Toni L, et al. Osteocalcin and sex hor-
mone binding globulin compete on a specific 
binding site of GPRC6A. Endocrinology. 
2016;157(11):4473–4486.
 8. Oury F, et al. Osteocalcin regulates murine and 
human fertility through a pancreas-bone-testis 
axis. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(6):2421–2433.
 9. Di Nisio A, et al. The rs2274911 polymorphism 
in GPRC6A gene is associated with insulin resis-
tance in normal weight and obese subjects. Clin 
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2017;86(2):185–191.
 10. Stafford DW. The vitamin K cycle. J Thromb Hae-
most. 2005;3(8):1873–1878.
 11. Bonneau J, et al. Association between osteocalcin 
gamma-carboxylation and insulin resistance in 
overweight and obese postmenopausal women.  
J Diabetes Complicat. 2017;31(6):1027–1034.
 12. Ferron M, Lacombe J, Germain A, Oury F, 
Karsenty G. GGCX and VKORC1 inhibit 
osteocalcin endocrine functions. J Cell Biol. 
2015;208(6):761–776.
 13. Ferron M, et al. Insulin signaling in osteoblasts 
integrates bone remodeling and energy metabo-
lism. Cell. 2010;142(2):296–308.
 14. Lacombe J, Karsenty G, Ferron M. In vivo analysis 
of the contribution of bone resorption to the con-
trol of glucose metabolism in mice. Mol Metab. 
2013;2(4):498–504.
 15. Jorgensen MJ, Cantor AB, Furie BC, Brown CL, 
Shoemaker CB, Furie B. Recognition site direct-
ing vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylation 
resides on the propeptide of factor IX. Cell. 
1987;48(2):185–191.
 16. Houben RJ, et al. Osteocalcin binds tightly to the 
gamma-glutamylcarboxylase at a site distinct from 
that of the other known vitamin K-dependent  
proteins. Biochem J. 1999;341( Pt 2):265–269.
 17. Chrétien M, Mbikay M. 60 YEARS OF POMC: From 
the prohormone theory to pro-opiomelanocortin 
and to proprotein convertases (PCSK1 to PCSK9). 
 J Mol Endocrinol. 2016;56(4):T49–T62.
 18. Seidah NG, Prat A. The biology and therapeutic 
targeting of the proprotein convertases. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov. 2012;11(5):367–383.
 19. Stijnen P, Ramos-Molina B, O’Rahilly S, Creem-
ers JW. PCSK1 mutations and human endocr-
inopathies: from obesity to gastrointestinal disor-
ders. Endocr Rev. 2016;37(4):347–371.
 20. Susan-Resiga D, et al. Furin is the major process-
ing enzyme of the cardiac-specific growth factor 
bone morphogenetic protein 10. J Biol Chem. 
2011;286(26):22785–22794.
 21. Fugère M, et al. Inhibitory potency and specificity 
of subtilase-like pro-protein convertase (SPC) pro-
domains. J Biol Chem. 2002;277(10):7648–7656.
 22. Essalmani R, et al. Furin is the primary in 
vivo convertase of angiopoietin-like 3 and 
endothelial lipase in hepatocytes. J Biol Chem. 
2013;288(37):26410–26418.
 23. Louagie E, et al. Role of furin in granular 
acidification in the endocrine pancreas: iden-
tification of the V-ATPase subunit Ac45 as a 
candidate substrate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2008;105(34):12319–12324.
 24. Pesu M, et al. T-cell-expressed proprotein 
convertase furin is essential for maintenance 
of peripheral immune tolerance. Nature. 
2008;455(7210):246–250.
 25. Liu G, et al. Cytoskeletal protein ABP-280 directs 
the intracellular trafficking of furin and mod-
ulates proprotein processing in the endocytic 
pathway. J Cell Biol. 1997;139(7):1719–1733.
 26. Bresnahan PA, et al. Human fur gene encodes 
a yeast KEX2-like endoprotease that cleaves 
pro-beta-NGF in vivo. J Cell Biol. 1990;111(6 Pt 
2):2851–2859.
 27. Ratcliffe JV, Furie B, Furie BC. The importance of 
specific gamma-carboxyglutamic acid residues 
in prothrombin. Evaluation by site-specific muta-
genesis. J Biol Chem. 1993;268(32):24339–24345.
 28. Gundberg CM, Clough ME. The osteocalcin pro-
peptide is not secreted in vivo or in vitro. J Bone 
Miner Res. 1992;7(1):73–80.
 29. Roebroek AJ, et al. Failure of ventral closure 
and axial rotation in embryos lacking the 
proprotein convertase Furin. Development. 
1998;125(24):4863–4876.
 30. Roebroek AJ, et al. Limited redundancy of the 
proprotein convertase furin in mouse liver. J Biol 
Chem. 2004;279(51):53442–53450.
 31. Zhang M, et al. Osteoblast-specific knockout 
of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) receptor 
gene reveals an essential role of IGF signaling 
in bone matrix mineralization. J Biol Chem. 
2002;277(46):44005–44012.
 32. Kara I, et al. The paired basic amino acid-cleaving 
enzyme 4 (PACE4) is involved in the maturation 
of insulin receptor isoform B: an opportunity to 
reduce the specific insulin receptor-dependent 
effects of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2). J Biol 
Chem. 2015;290(5):2812–2821.
 33. Fulzele K, et al. Insulin receptor signaling in osteo-
blasts regulates postnatal bone acquisition and 
body composition. Cell. 2010;142(2):309–319.
 34. Yamamoto H, et al. Posttranslational processing 
of FGF23 in osteocytes during the osteoblast to 
osteocyte transition. Bone. 2016;84:120–130.
 35. Essalmani R, et al. In vivo functions of the pro-
protein convertase PC5/6 during mouse develop-
ment: Gdf11 is a likely substrate. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2008;105(15):5750–5755.
 36. Gazdag AC, Dumke CL, Kahn CR, Cartee GD. 
Calorie restriction increases insulin-stimulated 
glucose transport in skeletal muscle from IRS-1 
knockout mice. Diabetes. 1999;48(10):1930–1936.
 37. Mosialou I, et al. MC4R-dependent suppression 
of appetite by bone-derived lipocalin 2. Nature. 
2017;543(7645):385–390.
 38. Kim W, et al. Loss of endothelial furin leads to 
cardiac malformation and early postnatal death. 
Mol Cell Biol. 2012;32(17):3382–3391.
 39. Zhu X, et al. Disruption of PC1/3 expression in 
mice causes dwarfism and multiple neuroendo-
crine peptide processing defects. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2002;99(16):10293–10298.
 40. Furuta M, et al. Defective prohormone processing 
and altered pancreatic islet morphology in mice 
lacking active SPC2. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 1997;94(13):6646–6651.
 41. Hendy GN, Bennett HP, Gibbs BF, Lazure C, Day 
R, Seidah NG. Proparathyroid hormone is pref-
erentially cleaved to parathyroid hormone by the 
prohormone convertase furin. A mass spectromet-
ric study. J Biol Chem. 1995;270(16):9517–9525.
 42. Posner SF, Vaslet CA, Jurofcik M, Lee A, Seidah 
NG, Nillni EA. Stepwise posttranslational pro-
cessing of progrowth hormone-releasing hor-
mone (proGHRH) polypeptide by furin and PC1. 
Endocrine. 2004;23(2-3):199–213.
 43. Himmelspach M, et al. Recombinant human fac-
tor X: high yield expression and the role of furin 
in proteolytic maturation in vivo and in vitro. 
Thromb Res. 2000;97(2):51–67.
 44. Pan LC, Price PA. The propeptide of rat bone 
gamma-carboxyglutamic acid protein shares 
homology with other vitamin K-dependent 
protein precursors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1985;82(18):6109–6113.
 45. Pan LC, Williamson MK, Price PA. Sequence 
of the precursor to rat bone gamma-carboxy-
glutamic acid protein that accumulates in war-
farin-treated osteosarcoma cells. J Biol Chem. 
1985;260(25):13398–13401.
 46. Nishimoto SK, Price PA. The vitamin K-de-
pendent bone protein is accumulated within 
cultured osteosarcoma cells in the presence of 
the vitamin K antagonist warfarin. J Biol Chem. 
1985;260(5):2832–2836.
 47. Yoshikawa Y, et al. Genetic evidence points to 
an osteocalcin-independent influence of osteo-
blasts on energy metabolism. J Bone Miner Res. 
2011;26(9):2012–2025.
 48. Bristol JA, Freedman SJ, Furie BC, Furie B. 
Profactor IX: the propeptide inhibits binding to 
membrane surfaces and activation by factor XIa. 
Biochemistry. 1994;33(47):14136–14143.
 49. Okun MM, Eskridge EM, Shields D. Truncations 
of a secretory protein define minimum lengths 
required for binding to signal recognition particle 
and translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum 
membrane. J Biol Chem. 1990;265(13):7478–7484.
 50. Demaurex N, Furuya W, D’Souza S, Bonifacino 
JS, Grinstein S. Mechanism of acidification of 
the trans-Golgi network (TGN). In situ mea-
surements of pH using retrieval of TGN38 
and furin from the cell surface. J Biol Chem. 
1998;273(4):2044–2051.
 51. Anderson ED, VanSlyke JK, Thulin CD, Jean F, 
Thomas G. Activation of the furin endoprotease 
is a multiple-step process: requirements for acidi-
fication and internal propeptide cleavage. EMBO 
J. 1997;16(7):1508–1518.
 52. Isbell DT, Du S, Schroering AG, Colombo G, 
Shelling JG. Metal ion binding to dog osteocalcin 
studied by 1H NMR spectroscopy. Biochemistry. 
1993;32(42):11352–11362.
 53. Ducy P, et al. Increased bone formation 
in osteocalcin-deficient mice. Nature. 
1996;382(6590):448–452.
 54. Kingsley DM, Kozarsky KF, Hobbie L, Krieger 
M. Reversible defects in O-linked glycosylation 
and LDL receptor expression in a UDP-Gal/
UDP-GalNAc 4-epimerase deficient mutant. 
Cell. 1986;44(5):749–759.
 55. Ferron M, Wei J, Yoshizawa T, Ducy P, Karsenty 
G. An ELISA-based method to quantify osteocal-
cin carboxylation in mice. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 2010;397(4):691–696.
