  
Percutaneous coronary intervention in stable angina 
(ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled trial 
Rasha Al-Lamee, David Thompson, Hakim-Moulay Dehbi, Sayan Sen, Kare Tang, John Davies, Thomas Keeble, Michael 
Mielewczik,Raffi Kaprielian, Iqbal S Malik, Sukhjinder S Nijjer, Ricardo Petraco, Christopher Cook, Yousif Ahmad, James 
Howard, Christopher Baker, Andrew Sharp, Robert Gerber, Suneel Talwar, Ravi Assomull, Jamil Mayet, Roland Wensel, 
David Collier, Matthew Shun-Shin, Simon A Thom, Justin E Davies, Darrel P Francis, on behalf of the ORBITA 
investigators* 
 
Summary 
Background Symptomatic relief is the primary goal of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in stable 
angina and is commonly observed clinically. However, there is no evidence from blinded, placebo-
controlled randomised trials to show its efficacy. 
 
Methods ORBITA is a blinded, multicentre randomised trial of PCI versus a placebo procedure for angina 
relief that was done at five study sites in the UK. We enrolled patients with severe (≥70%) single-vessel 
stenoses. After enrolment, patients received 6 weeks of medication optimisation. Patients then had pre-
randomisation assessments with cardiopulmonary exercise testing, symptom questionnaires, and 
dobutamine stress echocardiography. Patients were randomised 1:1 to undergo PCI or a placebo procedure 
by use of an automated online randomisation tool. After 6 weeks of follow-up, the assessments done before 
randomisation were repeated at the final assessment. The primary endpoint was difference in exercise time 
increment between groups. All analyses were based on the intention-to-treat principle and the study 
population contained all participants who underwent randomisation. This study is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02062593. 
 
Findings ORBITA enrolled 230 patients with ischaemic symptoms. After the medication optimisation phase 
and between Jan 6, 2014, and Aug 11, 2017, 200 patients underwent randomisation, with 105 patients 
assigned PCI and 95 assigned the placebo procedure. Lesions had mean area stenosis of 84·4% (SD 10·2), 
fractional flow reserve of 0·69 (0·16), and instantaneous wave-free ratio of 0·76 (0·22). There was no 
significant difference in the primary endpoint of exercise time increment between groups (PCI minus 
placebo 16·6 s, 95% CI –8·9 to 42·0, p=0·200). There were no deaths. Serious adverse events included four 
pressure-wire related complications in the placebo group, which required PCI, and five major bleeding 
events, including two in the PCI group and three in the placebo group. 
 
Interpretation In patients with medically treated angina and severe coronary stenosis, PCI did not increase 
exercisetime by more than the effect of a placebo procedure. The efficacy of invasive procedures can be 
assessed with a placebo control, as is standard for pharmacotherapy. 
 
Funding NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Foundation for Circulatory Health, Imperial College 
Healthcare Charity, Philips Volcano, NIHR Barts Biomedical Research Centre. 
 
Introduction 
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was originally 
introduced to treat stable angina.1 More than 500000 PCI 
procedures are done annually worldwide for stable 
angina. The Clinical Outcomes Utilizing 
Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation 
(COURAGE) trial showed no difference in myocardial 
infarction and death rates between patients with stable 
coronary artery disease who underwent PCI and 
controls.2 Meta-analyses have shown similar results.3 
 
Angina relief remains the primary reason for PCI in 
stable coronary artery disease.4 Guidelines recommend 
antianginal medication as first line therapy, with PCI 
reserved for the many patients who remain symptomatic.5 
 
Data from unblinded randomised trials have shown 
significant exercise time improvement, angina relief, and 
quality of life improvement from PCI.6–8  However, 
symptomatic responses are subjective and include both a 
 
 
 
true therapeutic effect and a placebo effect.9 
Moreover, in an open trial, if patients 
randomised to no PCI have an expectation that 
PCI is advantageous, this might affect 
their reporting (and their physician’s 
interpretation) of symptoms, artifactually 
increasing the rate of unplanned 
revascularisation in the control group.4,10 
 
Placebo effects are known to be larger for 
invasive than non-invasive treatments.11 
Interventional cardiologists and patients with 
stable angina often think that PCI offers 
symptomatic relief.12 Additionally, 
cardiologists present a decisive approach to 
diagnosis and treatment, which can lead to an 
enhanced placebo effect.13 In the absence of 
blinding, the effect size of PCI on 
symptomatic endpoints can be overestimated 
because of the addition of the placebo effect to 
the true physiological effect of intervention.14 
In all previous trials, both investigators and 
patients were aware of the treatment 
allocation.2,8,10 
Published Online 
November 2, 2017 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(17)32714-9 
See Online/Comment 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
*ORBITA investigators listed 
at the end of the Article. 
 
Imperial College London, 
London, UK  
(R Al-Lamee MRCP, D 
Thompson MRCPI, S Sen 
MRCP, M Mielewczik PhD, 
R Petraco MRCP, C Cook 
MRCP, Y Ahmad MRCP, J 
Howard MRCP, Prof J Mayet 
FRCP, R Wensel MRCP, M 
Shun-Shin MRCP, Prof S A 
Thom FRCP, J E Davies 
MRCP, Prof D P Francis 
FRCP);  
Imperial College Healthcare 
NHS Trust, London, UK (R 
Al-Lamee, D Thompson, S 
Sen, R Kaprielian FRCP, I S 
Malik FRCP, S S Nijjer 
MRCP, R Petraco, C Cook,Y 
Ahmad, J Howard, C Baker 
FRCP, R Assomull MRCP, 
Prof J Mayet, M Shun-Shin, 
Prof S Thom, J E Davies, and 
Prof D P Francis FRCP); 
Cancer Research UK & 
UCL Cancer Trials 
Centre, University College 
London, London, UK 
(H-M Dehbi PhD);  
Essex Cardiothoracic 
Centre, Basildon, UK (K 
Tang FRCP, J Davies MRCP, 
T Keeble MRCP);  
Royal Devon and Exeter 
NHS Trust, Exeter, UK 
(A Sharp FRCP);  
East Sussex Healthcare 
NHS Trust, Hastings, UK ( 
R Gerber FRCP);  
Royal Bournemouth and 
Christchurch NHS Trust, 
Bournemouth, UK 
(S Talwar MRCP);  
and William Harvey 
Research Institute, Queen 
Mary University of London, 
London, UK 
(D Collier PhD) 
 
Correspondence to: 
Dr Justin E Davies, Imperial 
College Healthcare NHS 
Trust, London W12 0HS, UK 
 
ORBITA.trial@gmail.com 
 Research in context 
Evidence before this study 
More than 500 000 percutaneous coronary interventions 
(PCIs) are done annually worldwide for the relief of 
angina but no placebo-controlled trials have been done 
on the subject. Unblinded PCI is reported to increase 
exercise time by 96 s more than medical therapy. Single 
antianginal agents typically increase exercise time by 
more than 45 s compared with placebo so ORBITA was 
designed conservatively to detect an effect size of 30 s. 
 
Added value of this study 
ORBITA investigated the efficacy of PCI versus placebo 
to improve exercise capacity in patients with severe 
coronary disease who were receiving guideline-directed 
optimum medical therapy. The coronary stenoses were 
severe and had large haemodynamic effects. Despite PCI 
markedly improving haemodynamic and imaging 
indices, PCI did not improve exercise time compared  
with placebo. 
 
 
Implications of all the available evidence 
The common clinical perception is that patients with 
stable angina will receive substantial symptom relief 
from PCI. The results of ORBITA, the only blinded, 
randomised placebo-controlled trial of PCI, show that 
even with severe coronary stenosis, exercise capacity and 
symptoms are not improved significantly compared with 
a placebo intervention. Physicians advising patients on 
interventional treatment choices for symptom relief 
should favour placebo-controlled data. ORBITA shows 
this approach to be feasible and informative.
Cardiologists have so far been resistant to the idea of 
a placebo-controlled trial of angina relief from PCI for 
two main reasons. The first is the widespread perception 
that PCI unquestionably improves angina,15 a 
perception that is based on unblinded clinical 
experience. The second reason is that it might be 
unethical to expose patients to an invasive placebo 
procedure. However, no evidence of harm to placebo 
groups was found in a systematic review of placebo-
controlled surgical trials.16 
 
When offering an invasive intervention for symptomatic 
relief, it is essential to know the true efficacy of the 
intervention, particularly when the patient could choose 
to continue conservative treatment instead. Moreover, 
although PCI has become progressively safer, there 
remains a complication rate of 1–2%.17 
 
Evidence from placebo-controlled randomised 
controlled trials shows that single antianginal therapies 
provide improvements in exercise time of 48–55 s.18,19 
The Objective Randomised Blinded Investigation with 
optimal medical Therapy of Angioplasty in stable angina 
(ORBITA) trial was designed to assess the effect of PCI 
versus placebo on exercise time in patients with stable 
ischaemic symptoms, Given the previous evidence, 
ORBITA was conservatively designed to be able to 
detect an effect size of 30 s. 
 
Methods 
Study design and participants 
ORBITA was a multicentre, randomised trial done at 
five study sites in the UK: Imperial College Healthcare 
NHS Trust, Essex Cardiothoracic Centre, Royal 
Bournemouth and Christchurch Hospitals NHS Trust, 
East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust, and Royal Devon 
and Exeter NHS Trust. The London Central Research 
Ethics Committee (reference 13/LO/1340) approved the 
study and written consent was obtained from all patients 
prior to their enrolment. The trial steering committee 
provided overall supervision of the trial with an 
independent chairperson leading the committee. 
Independent data monitoring was done. The 
independent data safety monitoring board adjudicated 
all study adverse events and had the authority to 
terminate the trial if necessary. The protocol summary 
is available online and the full protocol is included in 
the appendix. 
 
Patients eligible for the trial were aged 18−85 years with 
angina or equivalent symptoms and at least one 
angiographically significant lesion (≥70%) in a single 
vessel that was clinically appropriate for PCI. Exclusion 
criteria were angiographic stenosis greater than or equal 
to 50% in a non-target vessel, acute coronary syndrome, 
previous coronary artery bypass graft surgery, left main 
stem coronary disease, contraindications to drug-eluting 
stents, chronic total coronary occlusion, severe valvular 
disease, severe left ventricular systolic impairment, 
moderate-to-severe pulmonary hypertension, life 
expectancy less than 2 years, and inability to give 
consent. Eligible patients were approached after 
diagnostic angiography. They were enrolled after giving 
written informed consent. 
 
After enrolment, the study consisted of two consecutive 
phases (figure 1). The first was the 6-week medical 
optimisation phase, which focused on the initiation and 
up-titration of guideline directed antianginal therapy. 
Patients then had baseline pre-randomisation assessment, 
followed by the randomised blinded procedure. The 
second phase was the 6-week post-randomisation blinded 
period after which patients underwent the follow-up 
assessment. 
 
At enrolment, patients completed the Seattle Angina 
Questionnaire20 and 5 level version of the EuroQol 5 
dimensions (EQ-5D-5L) questionnaire.21 Patients had 
baseline electrocardiograph (ECG), pulse, and blood 
pressure measurements recorded, as well as height and 
weight to calculate body-mass index. 
 
After enrolment, patients spent the first 6 weeks in the 
medical therapy optimisation phase of the protocol in 
which they had telephone consultations with a consultant 
cardiologist one to three times per week, supported by 
home measurements of pulse and blood pressure using 
equipment provided by the investigators (Omron M6 
monitor, Omron, Kyoto, Japan). Medications were 
introduced and up-titrated in accordance with the trial 
 protocol. The up-titration focused on antianginal therapy, 
aiming for at least two antianginal therapies per patient 
(appendix). Medication side-effects were recorded and 
patients had direct access at any time to the consultant 
cardiologist to make dose adjustments. 
 
Patients attended Imperial College London for 
pre-randomisation research assessment of symptom 
burden by Canadian Cardiovascular Society Class and 
the Seattle Angina Questionnaire, functional capacity 
with cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET), 
myocardial ischaemic burden with dobutamine stress 
echocardiography, and quality of life assessment with the 
EQ-5D-5L questionnaire. The clinical team, including all 
staff present at the randomised blinded procedure, were 
blinded to the results of the symptom burden and quality 
of life assessments. 
 
All patients were pretreated with dual antiplatelet 
therapy. In both groups, the duration of dual antiplatelet 
therapy was the same and continued until the final 
(unblinding) visit. Coronary angiography was done via a 
radial or femoral arterial approach with auditory isolation 
achieved by placing over-the-ear headphones playing 
music on the patient throughout the procedure. 
 
Randomisation and masking 
In all patients, a research invasive physiological 
assessment of fractional flow reserve (FFR) and 
instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) was done. After the 
administration of intracoronary nitrate, a pressure wire 
was placed in the distal vessel at least three vessel 
diameters beyond the most distal stentable stenosis. The 
physiology display was only visible to a separate 
research interventional cardiologist (RA-L) who 
informed the clinical operator of signal quality but not 
the physiology values. The clinical operator was blinded 
to the physiology values and therefore did not use them 
to guide treatment. Intravenous adenosine was 
administered for FFR via a femoral venous 
line or antecubital fossa vein at 140 µg/kg per min. 
Normalisation was documented before each 
measurement. After each measurement, the wire was 
checked for drift and, if present, the wire was 
renormalised and measurements were repeated. After 
physiological assessment, incremental doses of sedatives 
(benzodiazepines and opiates) were administered until 
sedation was achieved. 
 
After sedation was established, auditory isolation was 
continued, and the patient was randomised 1:1 to 
undergo PCI or the placebo procedure by use of a 
validated automated online randomisation tool (SRUB, 
Imperial College London, London, UK). The 
randomisation sequence was computer generated at 
Imperial College London and no stratification or 
blocking was used. 
 
No information about the nature of the procedure 
(whether PCI or placebo) was transferred from the 
catheter laboratory staff to the recovery staff. The 
recovery staff were well rehearsed in their role of 
maintenance of blinding. Patients and subsequent 
medical caregivers were also blinded to treatment 
allocation. The study physicians present during the 
procedure had no further contact with the patient 
during the study. Details of blinding and testing of its 
efficacy are available in the appendix. 
 
Procedures 
For patients allocated PCI, the clinical operator used 
drugeluting stents to treat all lesions that were deemed to 
be angiographically significant, with a mandate to 
achieve angiographic complete revascularisation. Stent 
optimisation with post-dilatation was recommended. 
Intravascular ultrasound or optical coherence 
tomography were used as necessary. After PCI, iFR and 
FFR were measured again. The clinical operator 
remained blinded to both pre-PCI and post-PCI values. 
 
In the placebo group, patients were kept sedated for at 
least 15 min on the catheter laboratory table and the 
coronary catheters were withdrawn with no intervention 
having been done. 
 
After a follow-up period of 6 weeks, patients re-attended 
Imperial College London for a follow-up assessment, at 
which the same tests were done as at the pre-
randomisation assessment. 
 
All cardiopulmonary exercise tests were done with the 
QUARK CPET breath-by-breath metabolic measurement 
system (COSMED, Rome, Italy). A physician (DT) and a 
physiologist, both blinded to treatment assignment, did 
all tests. The test was continued until the development of 
limiting symptoms (angina, dyspnoea, or fatigue), heart 
rhythm or blood pressure abnormalities, or marked 
ST-segment deviation (≥0·20 mV associated with typical 
angina or in the first stage of exercise). The 
cardiopulmonary exercise test endpoints were double 
reported by two physicians (DPF and RW) blinded to 
treatment allocation and timepoint. The Duke treadmill 
score was calculated with methods that have been 
described previously.22 
 
Rest and stress cardiac regional wall motion was 
assessed with dobutamine stress echocardiography. 
Investigations were done by a physician (DT) and 
echosonographer blinded to treatment group. The 
17-wall segment model was used for reporting 
dobutamine stress echocardiography and was double 
reported with an online reporting tool by two imaging 
cardiology consultants (RA and DPF) who were blinded 
to treatment allocation and timepoint. Wall motion was 
scored at rest, during peak and at recovery by use of a 
quantitative score (normal scored as 1, hypokinetic 
scored as 2, akinetic scored as 3, dyskinetic scored as 4, 
and aneurysmal scored as 5). Rest and stress wall motion 
score indices were then calculated with the 17-segment 
model, with scores averaged between the reporters. 
 
Intracoronary nitrate was administered to achieve 
vasodilatation before performing any fluoroscopic run. 
Fluoroscopic images from two angles at least 30° apart 
were acquired before the physiological assessment. 
Quantitative coronary angiography (QCA) measurements 
were made offline with the McKesson Cardiology 14.0 
QCA software system. Quantitative coronary 
angiography was double reported by two interventional 
cardiologists, blinded to treatment allocation, with scores 
averaged between the reporters. 
 
After the follow-up assessments, study participation 
was complete, and patients and physicians were then 
 unblinded to the treatment group allocation. Patients 
who had the placebo procedure had the opportunity to 
choose to undergo PCI after consultation with their 
physician. 
 
Outcomes 
The prespecified primary endpoint of this study was the 
difference in exercise time increment between the 
groups. Secondary endpoints were change in peak 
oxygen uptake (peak VO2); change in exercise time to 1 
mm ST segment depression; angina severity as assessed 
by Canadian Cardiovascular Society class; physical 
limitation, angina stability, and angina frequency as 
assessed with the Seattle Angina Questionnaire; quality 
of life as assessed with the EQ-5D-5L questionnaire; 
Duke Treadmill score, and change in dobutamine stress 
echocardiography wall motion score index. 
 
Statistical analysis 
The primary endpoint of ORBITA was the difference 
between PCI and placebo groups in the change in 
treadmill exercise time. Single antianginal agents have 
been found to increase treadmill exercise time by 
48–55 s more than placebo.18,19 We designed ORBITA 
conservatively, to detect an effect size from invasive PCI 
of 30 s, smaller than that of a single antianginal agent. 
We calculated that, from the point of randomisation, a 
sample size of 100 patients per group had more than 
80% power to detect a between-group difference in the 
increment of exercise duration of 30 seconds, at the 
5% significance level, using the two-sample t test of the 
difference between groups. This calculation assumed 
a between-patient standard deviation of change in 
exercise time of 75 s. There have been no previous 
placebo-controlled trials of PCI. We therefore initially 
allowed for a one-third dropout rate in the 6-week period 
of medical optimisation between enrolment 
and randomisation and therefore planned to enrol 
300 patients. In fact, the dropout rate was much lower 
so only 230 patients had to be enrolled before 
200 participants had been randomised. 
 
We analysed the continuous endpoints with the 
two-sample t test of the difference between groups, and 
reported them as the difference in mean change between 
study groups with 95% CIs and p values. Analyses 
calculated the difference as PCI minus placebo. We 
described changes within study groups between 
pre-randomisation and follow-up using a paired approach 
as the mean and 95% CI of the change. The comparison 
between groups for time to 1 mm ST depression was 
made by a test of proportions between those showing 
an improvement versus those showing deterioration. 
Improvement was defined as a lengthening of time to ST 
depression, or having 1 mm ST depression before 
randomisation but not at follow-up. Deterioration was 
defined as shortening of the time to 1 mm ST depression, 
or having ST depression at follow-up but not before 
randomisation. 
 
We compared angina severity between study groups 
with the χ² test of independence at enrolment, before 
randomisation, and follow-up. The analysis of change in 
angina severity between timepoints was based on the 
proportions of patients whose Canadian Cardiovascular 
Society class deteriorated or stayed the same, improved 
by one class, or improved by two classes. We compared 
these proportions between groups using the χ² test of 
independence. 
 
The Seattle Angina Questionnaire scales were derived 
from the patients’ answers in accordance with the 
published guidelines.20 For the EQ-5D-5L, the calculation 
of the overall health state value was based on the 
five individual EQ-5D-5L questions using the value set 
for England.21 
 
We calculated blinding indices in the two study groups, 
for both the patients and the blinded medical team, using 
the method by Bang and colleagues.23 We applied the 
recommended threshold of 20% to interpret the success 
or failure of blinding. 
 
All analyses were done on the basis of the intention-
totreat principle. The study population comprised all 
randomised participants. We deemed a p value less than 
0·05 to be significant. 
 
This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number 
NCT02062593. The protocol for this study was peer-
reviewed and accepted by The Lancet; a summary of the 
protocol was published on the journal’s website. 
 
Role of funding source 
The funders of the study had no role in study design, 
data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or 
writing of the report. The first, corresponding, and last 
authors had full access to all the data in the study and 
had final responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication. 
 
Results 
Between Dec 18, 2013, and July 26, 2017, 368 patients 
with angina and single vessel coronary disease were 
assessed for eligibility (figure 2). Of these patients, 230 
were enrolled and entered the medical therapy 
optimisation phase. Details of patients who were enrolled 
but later withdrew are shown in figure 2 and the 
appendix. 
 
200 patients (table 1) were randomised to either PCI 
or the placebo procedure between Jan 6, 2014, and 
Aug 11, 2017. There were no substantial differences in 
the baseline demographics of the two groups. Almost all 
(195 [98%]) patients were in Canadian Cardiovascular 
Society class II or III at enrolment. 
 
Medical therapy in the two periods, enrolment to pre-
randomisation, and pre-randomisation and followup are 
shown in the appendix. By the time of randomisation, in 
the PCI group, 103 (98%) of 105 patients were taking 
aspirin, 103 (98%) were taking a second antiplatelet, and 
99 (94%) were taking a statin, compared to 93 (98%), 94 
(99%), and 91 (96%) of 95 patients, respectively, in the 
placebo group. At the same timepoint, in the whole study 
population, 156 (78%) of 200 patients were taking β 
blockers and 182 (91%) were taking calcium channel 
antagonists. The mean number of antianginal 
medications in the PCI group was 0·90 (SD 0·8) at 
enrolment, 2·8 (1·2) at pre-randomisation, 
and 2·9 (1·1) at follow-up, compared to the placebo 
group in which the mean number of medications was 
1·0 (0·9; p=0·357), 3·1 (0·9; p=0·097), and 2·9 (1·1; 
 p=0·891), respectively. 
 
Both blood pressure and heart rate were reduced 
between the enrolment and pre-randomisation 
measurements, and subsequently rose at the follow-up 
measurement. There were no differences between the 
trial groups in these values or in the changes between 
timepoints (appendix). 
 
Fasting lipids, which were measured at the 
prerandomisation timepoint, showed mean total 
cholesterol of 3·4 mmol/L (SD 1·0) in the PCI group and 
3·3 mmol/L (0·9) in the placebo group and LDL of 
1·8 mmol/L (0·7) in the PCI group and 1·8 mmol/L 
(0·8) in the placebo group (appendix). 
 
Procedural characteristics are shown in table 2. Most 
lesions were in the left anterior descending artery 
(138 [69%] of 200 patients). The coronary stenoses were 
angiographically and haemodynamically severe. Images 
of the coronary lesions of the first 12 patients to undergo 
randomisation are shown in figure 3, and images from 
all 200 randomised patients are shown in the appendix. 
Across all patients, the mean area stenosis by 
quantitative coronary angiography was 84·4% (SD 10·2), 
mean FFR was 0·69 (0·16), and mean iFR was 0·76 
(0·22). 57 (29%) patients had FFR greater than 0·80 and 
64 (32%) had iFR greater than 0·89. Lesion location and 
lesion distribution by quantitative coronary angiography 
are shown in the appendix. 
 
All PCI was done with drug-eluting stents. The 
median length of stent implanted was 24 mm 
(IQR 18−33). Post-dilatation with a new balloon was 
done in 103 (75%) of 138 stents. After PCI, the mean 
FFR improved to 0·90 (SD 0·06; p<0·0001) and iFR to 
0·95 (0·04; p<0·0001). 
 
Complete pre-randomisation and follow-up data for 
exercise time were available in 104 patients in the PCI 
group and 90 patients the placebo group (dataset for all 
randomised patients and reasons for missing data are 
shown in the appendix). For the primary endpoint, 
there was no significant difference between groups in 
terms of increment in exercise time (table 3). Secondary 
endpoint analysis showed no significant difference 
between the groups in the change in the time to 1 mm 
ST depression (p=0·164) or change in peak oxygen 
uptake (–12·9 mL/min, 95% CI –90·2 to 64·3, p=0·741). 
The results of cardiopulmonary testing are shown in 
table 3. 
 
Angina grade was assessed at all three timepoints in 
all patients (table 4 and appendix). There was no 
significant difference between the groups in the 
proportion of patients with improvements of one class or 
two or more classes from enrolment to prerandomisation 
(p=0·916), and from pre-randomisation 
to follow-up (p=0·633). 
 
Symptoms were assessed with the Seattle Angina 
Questionnaire and EQ-5D-5L questionnaire (table 3). 
During the randomised blinded period there were no 
significant differences between groups in the change 
from pre-randomisation to follow-up in Seattle physical 
limitation score (2·4, 95% CI –3·5 to 8·3, p=0·420), 
Seattle angina frequency (3·5, –2·6 to 9·6, p=0·260), 
and Seattle angina stability score (0·9, –8.4 to 10.2, 
p=0·851). There was also no significant difference 
between the groups in the change in EQ-5D-5L (0·00, 
95% CI –0·04 to 0·04, p=0·994) 
 
The change in Duke treadmill score (table 3) was also 
not significantly different between groups (1·12, 95% CI 
–0·23 to 2·47, p=0·104). However, the dobutamine 
stress echocardiography peak stress wall motion score 
index (table 3) improved more with PCI than with 
placebo (–0·07, 95% CI –0·11 to –0·04, p<0·0001). 
Periprocedural and other serious adverse events are 
described the appendix. No patients died. There were 
three periprocedural major bleeding events (two with 
PCI and one with placebo). In four patients in the 
placebo group, PCI was needed for a pressure-wire 
related complication. During the follow-up phase, in 
the placebo group, one patient developed an acute 
coronary syndrome and two patients had major 
bleeding on dual antiplatelet therapy. 
 
The primary assessment of blinding was before 
discharge from the randomisation procedure (appendix). 
At this timepoint, the blinding index was perfect in the 
patients (all responded “don’t know”) in the placebo 
group and nearly perfect in the PCI group (two of 
105 guessed, both correctly, blinding index 0·02, 95% CI 
–0·003 to 0·04). After the patients completed the 6-week 
follow-up period, 80 of 105 patients who had PCI felt 
able to guess their treatment allocation, of whom 50 
guessed correctly and 30 incorrectly (blinding index 
0·19, 0·05 to 0·33). In the placebo group 69 of 91 
patients felt able to guess, of whom 34 guessed correctly 
and 35 incorrectly (blinding index –0·01, –0·16 to 0·14). 
In the medical teams, there was no evidence of 
unblinding at either timepoint (appendix). 
 
Discussion 
In ORBITA, the first blinded, placebo-controlled trial of 
PCI for stable angina, PCI did not improve exercise time 
beyond the effect of the placebo. This was despite the 
patients having ischaemic symptoms, severe coronary 
stenosis both anatomically (84·4% area reduction) and 
haemodynamically (on-treatment FFR 0·69 and iFR 
0·76), and objective relief of anatomical stenosis, 
invasive pressure, and non-invasive perfusion indices 
(FFR p<0·0001, iFR p<0·0001, stress wall motion score 
index p<0·0001). There was also no improvement 
beyond placebo in the other exercise and patient-centred 
endpoints, including Canadian Cardiovascular Society 
class and the metrics of the Seattle Angina Questionnaire 
and EQ-5D-5L questionnaire. 
 
This result might seem to contradict the real-world 
experience that patients report relief of angina after 
PCI. However, real-world data inevitably mix physical 
effects with placebo effects. Forgetting this point, or 
denying it, causes overestimation of the physical effect. 
 
The necessity for placebo-controlled trials has been 
rediscovered several times in cardiology, typically to 
considerable surprise.24 Often a therapy is thought to be 
so beneficial that a placebo-controlled trial is deemed 
unnecessary and perhaps unethical. However, 40 years 
after the first PCI, ORBITA’s findings show that 
placebo-controlled randomised trials remain necessary. 
 
 ORBITA has implications for our clinical understanding 
of stable angina. The concept of a simple linear link 
between a tight stenosis and angina is attractive to 
patients, easily explained by physicians, and biologically 
plausible. Moreover, since relieving the 
anatomical and haemodynamic features of stenosis by 
unblinded PCI is followed by the patient reporting 
angina relief, it is understandable that this link becomes 
generally accepted. 
 
However, forgetting the potential magnitude of 
placebo effects prevents exploration of the inevitably 
complex relationship between anatomy, physiology, and 
symptoms. Clinicians have hoped there might be a 
simple entity named ischaemia, which manifests as 
positive tests and clinical symptoms, and that treatment 
by PCI would eliminate all these manifestations 
concordantly. Perhaps this notion is too optimistic. 
 
Nevertheless the findings of ORBITA do not mean 
that patients should never undergo PCI for stable 
angina. Not all patients would be satisfied with taking 
multiple antianginal agents forever. They might prefer 
an invasive procedure with a small procedural risk for 
the potential to need fewer medications. 
 
The ORBITA protocol had specific features. The 
medical therapy optimisation phase was intentionally 
intensive, consisting of one to three telephone 
consultations per week with a consultant cardiologist 
supported by home blood pressure and heart rate 
measurements. This phase ensured a high level of 
antianginal therapy within just 6 weeks and facilitated 
the enrolment and retention of patients with severe 
coronary disease. 
 
The trial was designed to achieve good quality 
background antianginal therapy, as is recommended.25,26 
To minimise the period of deferral of PCI, which could 
have been a barrier to participation, the medical 
optimisation phase was designed to be more intensive 
than routine clinical practice. Patients were up-titrated 
to an average of three antianginal agents during the 
initial 6 weeks before randomisation. Achieving this 
required several consultations per week with a 
consultant cardiologist. The longest half-life of the 
drugs introduced was 40 h for amlodipine. Because 
amlodipine was second-line therapy, it was never added 
in the final 2 weeks and therefore no patient had 
pharmacokinetically insufficient time for therapeutic 
effect. The changes in heart rate and blood 
pressure between baseline and randomisation confirm 
physiological effects. 39 of 230 enrolled patients had 
become free of angina at the pre-randomisation timepoint 
with antianginal therapy, perhaps due to the 
antianginal therapy or self-restriction of physical 
activity. 17 of these patients left the trial at this time but 
22 went forward for randomisation. The other 178 (89%) 
patients randomised had angina despite antianginal 
therapy. Of the patients who underwent randomisation, 
most were taking at least two antianginal drugs.25,26 
 
The ORBITA patients had ischaemia as evidenced by 
anginal symptoms and severe coronary disease, with 
haemodynamic severity similar to unblinded trials of 
PCI. In ORBITA the mean FFR was 0·69, similar to 
the means of 0·71 in FAME and 0·68 in FAME-2.27,28 
The 2017 guidelines state that PCI is appropriate for 
this cohort of patients with single-vessel coronary 
disease and angina who are on at least two antianginals, 
with no requirement for any further tests.29 
Angiographic images of all 200 patients are shown in 
the appendix for comparison with other trials. 
 
A placebo-controlled trial of PCI involves two major 
risks for participants, which need to be included in 
the informed consent process. First, dual antiplatelet 
therapy can cause major bleeding. Indeed, two patients 
in the placebo group had major bleeding from erosive 
gastritis. Both patients subsequently underwent 
clinical stenting on proton pump inhibitor and dual 
antiplatelet therapy without further bleeding. Second, 
passing a pressure wire through tight lesions can 
disrupt the intima. Four patients in the placebo group 
had this problem and therefore underwent unplanned 
stenting. Despite these events, there were no long-term 
clinical sequelae for any of the participants. While 
placebo-controlled trials have some risks, PCI also has 
some risk. 
 
ORBITA was designed to detect a clinically relevant 
effect size. Contemporary placebo-controlled trials of 
single-agent antianginal therapies have reported 
improvements in exercise time of 48–55 s.18,19 ORBITA 
was designed to be able to detect an effect size of 30 s 
(55–63% of the effect of a single antianginal agent), 
which is a relatively conservative goal for an invasive 
therapy that has a small but non-negligible risk. In 
practice the variability in exercise time increments was 
slightly larger than predicted and therefore the trial 
could in retrospect be considered to be powered for a 
34 s effect. ORBITA is comparable in size to the 
MARISA trial of single-agent antianginal therapy, 
which had 191 patients.19 
 
ORBITA only investigated PCI for stable angina 
and the results have no implications for patients 
undergoing PCI for acute coronary syndrome, including 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction for which 
morbidity and mortality advantages from PCI have 
been proven.30 
 
Although the participants had anatomically and 
physiologically severe lesions, we did not enrol patients 
with multivessel disease. Patients with more extensive 
territories of coronary disease might receive a larger 
physiological benefit from PCI and have no obvious 
reason for a larger placebo effect. 
 
In the four-decade history of PCI, decision making 
has been primarily based on symptoms and 
angiographic appearance, and patients and their 
clinicians have been reporting angina relief after PCI. 
ORBITA’s design reflects much historical and current 
clinical practice of PCI for stable angina. Whether a 
future blinded trial with different entry criteria (eg, 
restricting entry according to invasive coronary 
pressure measurements) would have different results 
remains unknown. 
 
This trial set an objective and continuous variable as 
the primary endpoint: difference in exercise time 
increment between PCI and placebo. There are many 
other possible symptom-based variables, but exercise 
time has proved to be a discriminating test for 
 many antianginal therapies and is recommended 
for this purpose by both the US Food and Drug 
Administration and the European Medicines Agency. 
 
The follow-up time was only 6 weeks, so that patients 
and physicians would not be deterred by the prospect 
of remaining indefinitely without the option of PCI. 
The anatomic and haemodynamic effects of stenting 
on the coronaries are immediate, and symptomatic and 
exercise test improvements from unblinded PCI are 
well documented at 30 days,6 37 days,31 and 6 weeks.32 
As a result of the limited duration of ORBITA, it 
cannot address long-term myocardial infarction and 
mortality endpoints. Other trials such ISCHEMIA 
(NCT01471522) will do this. 
 
In ORBITA, the extent of coronary disease (one vessel 
vs multivessel) was judged visually, as is common 
practice in diagnostic angiography. It is unlikely that 
the non-target vessels in the patients were entirely 
normal. 
 
Epicardial arteries are the focus of most clinical 
attention because they are visible and amenable to 
procedural intervention. However, patients might 
differ in microvascular physiology. Ischaemia from 
non-target vessel or from microvascular disease could 
have contributed to angina that the PCI procedure 
would not have improved. 
 
Any trial using exercise testing as an endpoint might 
experience a training effect. However, the combination 
of randomisation, placebo-control, and blinding should 
distribute this effect equally between groups. 
 
ORBITA made a blinded comparison of PCI and a 
placebo procedure in patients with stable angina and 
anatomically and haemodynamically severe coronary 
stenosis. The primary endpoint of exercise time 
increment showed no difference between groups. This 
first placebo-controlled trial of PCI for stable angina 
suggests that the common clinical observation of 
symptomatic improvement from PCI might well contain 
a large placebo component. Placebo-controlled efficacy 
data could be just as important for assessing invasive 
procedures, where the stakes are higher, as for assessing 
pharmacotherapy where it is already standard practice. 
 
Contributors 
RA-L, DT, RW, JED, SAT, DPF (principal investigator), and DC 
(independent chairman) were members of the steering committee. 
RA-L, DPF, JED, and SAT were on the writing committee. H-MD, MM, 
MS-S, and JH were part of the data analysis committee. RA-L, DT, RW, 
JED, SAT, and DPF were responsible for the conception and design of 
the study. RA-L, SS, KT, JD, TK, RK, ISM, SSN, RP, CC, YA, CB, AS, 
RG, and ST were responsible for data acquisition in the cardiac catheter 
laboratory. DT, RA, JM, and DPF were responsible for data acquisition in 
the echocardiography laboratory, and DT, RW, and DPF were responsible 
for data acquisition in the exercise laboratory. H-MD was the study 
statistician. RA-L, DPF, JED, and SAT were responsible for the data 
interpretation and writing of the report. 
 
ORBITA study investigators 
Rasha Al-Lamee, David Thompson, Sayan Sen, Ricardo Petraco, 
Christopher Cook, Yousif Ahmad, James Howard, Matthew Shun-Shin, 
Jamil Mayet, Jaspal Kooner, Simon Thom, Justin Davies, Darrel Francis, 
and Ramzi Khamis (Imperial College London, London, UK and Imperial 
College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK); Kare Tang, John Davies, 
and Thomas Keeble (Essex Cardiothoracic Centre, Basildon, UK); 
Raffi Kaprielian, Iqbal Malik, Sukhjinder Nijjer, Amarjit Sethi, 
Christopher Baker, Punit Ramrakha, Ravi Assomull, Rodney Foale, 
Nearchos Hadjiloizou, Masood Khan, Michael Bellamy, Ghada Mikhail, 
and Piers Clifford (Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, 
UK); Andrew Sharp (Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Trust, Exeter, UK); 
Robert Gerber (East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust, Hastings, UK); 
Suneel Talwar, Peter O’Kane, Terry Levy, and Rosie Swallow (Royal 
Bournemouth and Christchurch NHS Trust, Bournemouth, UK); and 
Roland Wensel (Imperial College London, London, UK). 
Declaration of interests 
JED and JM hold patents pertaining to the iFR technology. JED and AS 
are consultants for Philips Volcano. RA-L, SS, RP, CC, and SSN have 
received speaker’s honoraria from Philips Volcano. JED and TK have 
received research grants from Philips Volcano. All other authors declare 
no competing interests. 
 
Acknowledgments 
ORBITA was an investigator-led trial sponsored by Imperial College 
London. The trial was funded by grants from NIHR Imperial Biomedical 
Research Centre, Foundation for Circulatory Health, and Imperial 
College Healthcare Charity. Philips Volcano supplied the coronary 
pressure wires. We acknowledge the support of the NIHR Clinical 
Research Network (NIHR CRN). NIHR Barts Biomedical Research 
Centre is the employer of the independent chair of the trial steering 
committee (DC). We thank all participants and their families for their 
dedication to this research. Special thanks go to Nina Bual for all her 
help in the acquisition of dobutamine stress echocardiography data. We 
thank the independent data safety monitoring board committee 
members Ajay Gupta and Neil Chapman and the independent study 
monitor Jane Field for all their hard work. We also thank 
Yasutsugu Shiono and Yuetsu Kikuta for their assistance. We thank the 
research and administrative teams at Imperial College Healthcare NHS 
Trust, Essex Cardiothoracic Centre, East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust, 
Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Trust, and Royal Bournemouth and 
Christchurch NHS Trust for their dedication and support. 
 
References 
1 Gruntzig A. Transluminal dilatation of coronary-artery stenosis. 
Lancet 1978; 1: 263. 
2 Boden WE, O’Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy 
with or without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2007; 
356: 1503−16. 
3 Stergiopoulos K, Boden WE, Hartigan P, et al. Percutaneous 
coronary intervention outcomes in patients with stable obstructive 
coronary artery disease and myocardial ischemia: a collaborative 
meta-analysis of contemporary randomized clinical trials. 
JAMA Intern Med 2013; 174: 232–40. 
4 Spertus JA, Maron DJ, Cohen DJ, et al. Frequency, predictors, and 
consequences of crossing over to revascularization within 
12 months of randomization to optimal medical therapy in the 
Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug 
Evaluation (COURAGE) trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2013; 
6: 409−18. 
5 Windecker S, Kolh P, Alfonso F, et al. 2014 ESC/EACTS guidelines 
on myocardial revascularization: the Task Force on Myocardial 
Revascularization of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and 
the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) 
developed with the special contribution of the European Association 
of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI). 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2014; 46: 517–92. 
6 Weintraub WS, Spertus JA, Kolm P, et al. Effect of PCI on quality of 
life in patients with stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2008; 
359: 677−87. 
7 Wijeysundera HC, Nallamothu BK, Krumholz HM, Tu JV, Ko DT. 
Meta-analysis: effects of percutaneous coronary intervention versus 
medical therapy on angina relief. Ann Intern Med 2010; 152: 370–79. 
8 Parisi AF, Folland ED, Hartigan P. A comparison of angioplasty 
with medical therapy in the treatment of single-vessel coronary 
artery disease. Veterans Affairs ACME Investigators. N Engl J Med 
1992; 236: 10–16. 
9 Ernst E, Resch KL. Concept of true and perceived placebo effects. 
BMJ 1995; 311: 551–53. 
10 De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional flow 
reserve-guided PCI for stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med 
2014; 371: 1208−17. 
11 Kaptchuk TJ, Goldman P, Stone DA, Stason WB. Do medical 
devices have enhanced placebo effects? J Clin Epidemiol 2000; 
53: 786−92. 
12 Rothberg MB, Sivalingam SK, Kleppel R, Schweiger M, Hu B, 
Sepucha KR. Informed decision making for percutaneous coronary 
intervention for stable coronary disease. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 
175: 1199−206. 
13 Thomas KB. General practice consultations: is there any point in 
being positive? Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1987; 294: 1200–02. 
14 Schulz KF, Chalmers I, Hayes RJ, Altman DG. Empirical evidence 
of bias. Dimensions of methodological quality associated with 
estimates of treatment effects in controlled trials. JAMA 1995; 
273: 408−12. 
15 Goff SL, Mazor KM, Ting HH, Kleppel R, Rothberg MB. 
 How cardiologists present the benefits of percutaneous coronary 
interventions to patients with stable angina: a qualitative analysis. 
JAMA Intern Med 2014; 174: 1614−21. 
16 Wartolowska K, Judge A, Hopewell S, et al. Use of placebo controls 
in the evaluation of surgery: systematic review. BMJ 2014; 348: g3253. 
17 Means G, End C, Kaul P. Management of percutaneous coronary 
intervention complications. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med 2017; 
19: 25. 
18 Borer JS, Fox K, Jaillon P, Lerebours G, for the Ivabradine 
Investigators Group. Antianginal and antiischemic effects of 
ivabradine, an I(f) inhibitor, in stable angina: a randomized, 
double-blind, multicentered, placebo-controlled trial. Circulation 
2003; 107: 817−23. 
19 Chaitman BR, Skettino SL, Parker JO, et al. Anti-ischemic effects 
and long-term survival during ranolazine monotherapy in patients 
with chronic severe angina. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 43: 1375−82. 
20 Garratt AM, Hutchinson A, Russell I, in collaboration with the 
Network for Evidence-Based Practice in Northern and Yorkshire. 
The UK version of the Seattle Angina Questionnaire (SAQ-UK): 
reliability, validity and responsiveness. J Clin Epidemiol 2001; 
54: 907−15. 
21 Devlin NJ, Shah KK, Feng Y, Mulhern B, van Hout B. 
Valuing health-related quality of life: an EQ-5D-5L value set for 
England. Health Econ 2017; published online Aug 22. DOI:10.1002/ 
hec.3564. 
22 Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, Lee KL, Califf RM, Pryor DB. 
Exercise treadmill score for predicting prognosis in coronary artery 
disease. Ann Intern Med 1987; 106: 793−800. 
23 Bang H, Ni L, CE. Assessment of blinding in clinical trials. 
Control Clin Trials 2004; 25: 143−56. 
24 Shun-Shin MJ, Howard JP, Francis DP. Removing the hype from 
hypertension. BMJ 2014; 348: g1937. 
25 NICE. Stable angina: management. NICE Clinical Guidance CG126. 
London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2016. 
26 Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/ 
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of 
patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American 
College of Physicians, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012; 60: e44–164. 
27 De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional flow 
reserve-guided PCI versus medical therapy in stable coronary 
disease. N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 991−1001. 
28 Tonino PA, De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional flow reserve 
versus angiography for guiding percutaneous coronary 
intervention. N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 213−24. 
29 Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ 
ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017 appropriate use criteria for coronary 
revascularization in patients with stable ischemic heart disease: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use 
Criteria Task Force, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
American Heart Association, American Society of 
Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of 
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017; 69: 2212−41. 
30 Bavry AA, Kumbhani DJ, Rassi AN, Bhatt DL, Askari AT. Benefit of 
early invasive therapy in acute coronary syndromes: a meta-analysis 
of contemporary randomized clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 
48: 1319–25. 
31 Barmeyer A, Meinertz T. Anaerobic threshold and maximal oxygen 
uptake in patients with coronary artery disease and stable angina 
before and after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. 
Cardiology 2002; 98: 127−31. 
32 Williams SG, Stables RH, Wright DJ, Taylor S, Thompson D, 
Tan LB. Relationship of serum cardiac markers following successful 
percutaneous coronary intervention and subsequent exercise 
capacity in patients with chronic stable angina: a pilot study. 
Cardiology 2005; 103: 63–67 
