 National trends in drinking water quality violations
Maura Allairea,1, Haowei Wub, and Upmanu Lallb,c
aDepartment of Urban Planning and Public Policy, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; bColumbia Water Center, Columbia University, New York,
NY 10027; and cDepartment of Earth and Environmental Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
Edited by Susan Hanson, Clark University, Worcester, MA, and approved January 9, 2018 (received for review November 16, 2017)
Ensuring safe water supply for communities across the United
States is a growing challenge in the face of aging infrastructure,
impaired source water, and strained community finances. In the
aftermath of the Flint lead crisis, there is an urgent need to assess
the current state of US drinking water. However, no nationwide
assessment has yet been conducted on trends in drinking water
quality violations across several decades. Efforts to reduce viola-
tions are of national concern given that, in 2015, nearly 21 million
people relied on community water systems that violated health-
based quality standards. In this paper, we evaluate spatial and
temporal patterns in health-related violations of the Safe Drinking
Water Act using a panel dataset of 17,900 community water
systems over the period 1982–2015. We also identify vulnerability
factors of communities and water systems through probit regres-
sion. Increasing time trends and violation hot spots are detected in
several states, particularly in the Southwest region. Repeat viola-
tions are prevalent in locations of violation hot spots, indicating
that water systems in these regions struggle with recurring issues.
In terms of vulnerability factors, we find that violation incidence in
rural areas is substantially higher than in urbanized areas. Mean-
while, private ownership and purchased water source are associ-
ated with compliance. These findings indicate the types of
underperforming systems that might benefit from assistance in
achieving consistent compliance. We discuss why certain violations
might be clustered in some regions and strategies for improving
national drinking water quality.
drinking water | water quality | violations | Safe Drinking Water Act |
regulatory compliance
E
nsuring access to safe drinking water poses a challenge for
US water systems in the face of aging infrastructure, im-
paired source water, and strained community finances. Com-
munities across the country have been impacted by recent cases
of impaired water quality. The Flint crisis exposed as many as
98,000 residents to elevated levels of lead, disinfection by-
products (DBPs), and Escherichia coli and Legionella bacteria.
In addition, substantial populations have coped with interrup-
tions to potable water supply due to the Elk River chemical spill
in West Virginia and unregulated toxins formed during algal
blooms near Toledo, Ohio. These well-publicized events motivate
the need to assess the current state of US drinking water quality.
How widespread are violations? Are violations more prevalent in
vulnerable communities, such as low-income and rural areas? Do
utility characteristics, such as private ownership and origin of
source water, influence the likelihood that violations occur?
Identifying threats and potential improvements to water ser-
vices are needed, given that an estimated 16.4 million cases of
acute gastroenteritis each year in the United States are attrib-
uted to community water systems (CWSs) (1). Equity concerns
are also gaining recognition as evidence builds regarding lower-
income and minority communities receiving poor quality water
(2, 3). Generally, water systems in the United States provide
reliable and high-quality drinking water. Violations tend to be
infrequent. However, in a given year, about 7–8% of CWSs re-
port at least one health-based violation. While this rate is rela-
tively low, improved compliance is needed to ensure safe drinking
water nationwide. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
a strategic objective to achieve consistent compliance for 91% of the
population served by CWSs (4). However, from 1993 to 2009, com-
pliance with Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) health-based regu-
lations ranged from 79 to 94% of the population served by CWSs (4).
Targeting utilities that are underperforming is one approach
to improve compliance and consistently provide safe drinking
water. Currently, state enforcement agencies lack a systematic
procedure to select systems for additional monitoring and in-
spection. Routine quality monitoring is specified at the federal
level and allows for more frequent sampling at systems with re-
cent violations. However, no guidelines exist for identifying sys-
tems without recent reported violations that could benefit from
additional oversight. Identifying hot spots and vulnerability fac-
tors associated with violations could better direct enforcement
activity to struggling utilities and allow for increased compliance
across the country.
This paper presents a national assessment of trends in drinking
water quality violations across several decades. Currently, there
is not a good understanding of quality violations and few peer-
reviewed studies have been done on SDWA compliance. Past
analyses of the association between water system characteristics
and violations have generally been limited in terms of geographic
area and/or study period. Several studies focus on a single state
(e.g., refs. 3 and 5–7). The two studies in the peer review liter-
ature that address SDWA violations nationwide have study pe-
riods limited to a single year (8) or 7 y (9). Rubin (8) describes
summary statistics of violations for four SDWA rules for the year
2011. A key finding is that similar proportions of small and large
systems incur health-based violations. However, given that only
Significance
Drinking water contaminants pose a harm to public health.
Some can cause immediate illness, such as the 16 million cases
of acute gastroenteritis that occur each year at US community
water systems. Here, we show that health-based drinking
water quality violations are widespread, with 9–45 million
people possibly affected during each of the past 34 years.
While relatively few community water systems (3–10%) incur
health-based violations in a given year, improved compliance is
needed to ensure safe drinking water nationwide. Currently,
state enforcement agencies lack a systematic procedure to se-
lect systems for additional inspection and monitoring. We
identify hot spots and vulnerability factors associated with
violations, which can allow public policies to target under-
performing water systems.
Author contributions: M.A. and U.L. designed research; M.A. and H.W. performed re-
search; M.A. and H.W. analyzed data; and M.A. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: Data associated with this research is available at Dataverse (https://
dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/allaire).
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: maura.allaire@uci.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1719805115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online February 12, 2018.
2078–2083
|
PNAS
|
February 27, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 9
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1719805115
 summary statistics are presented, results do not isolate the as-
sociation between violations and specific utility characteristics.
Meanwhile, Wallsten and Kosec (9) develop count regressions
that relate community and water system characteristics to
SDWA violations from 1997 to 2003. The study found that pri-
vate ownership does not generally affect compliance.
In this study, we assess spatial and temporal trends in health-
based violations as well as vulnerability factors that may influ-
ence violation occurrence. We assemble a panel dataset that
includes 17,900 CWSs in the United States from 1982 to 2015.
We combine demographic information from the US Census with
data on SDWA violations and CWS characteristics from the
EPA Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS). Spatial
trends and hot spots are assessed via local spatial autocorrela-
tion. Vulnerability factors, which include CWS and demographic
characteristics, are assessed using probit regressions. Our main
research objectives are to (i) characterize the extent and severity
of drinking water quality violations across the United States, and
(ii) identify characteristics of water systems and communities
associated with violations that can be used to better target
enforcement activity.
Background
The SDWA, passed in 1974, authorizes the EPA to regulate
drinking water quality. Standards are set at the federal level and
states have primary responsibility for enforcement. When a water
system fails to meet an EPA-mandated drinking water standard,
a drinking water violation can be issued. Violation occurrence
and reporting may differ across states due to differences in en-
forcement, financial resources, source water quality, and treat-
ment costs (10). In addition, states are able to set stricter
standards than federal SDWA rules.
Not all violations pose immediate health concerns. This study
focuses on health-based violations, which include maximum
contaminant levels (MCLs), maximum residual disinfectant lev-
els, and treatment techniques. Standards for contaminants that
can trigger health-based violations are specified by the National
Primary Drinking Water Regulations. We exclude monitoring
and reporting violations, which have poor data quality since only
a small portion of these violations (9–23%) are reported to
the national SDWIS database (11). Both naturally occurring
and manmade contaminants can trigger health-based violations.
These contaminants or contaminant indicators include total co-
liform, turbidity, DBPs, radionuclides, and organic and inorganic
chemicals.
Materials and Methods
Data. We construct a balanced panel dataset that includes CWSs with con-
sistent reporting to the EPA SDWIS over the study period, 1982–2015. To be
included in the study, a public water system must be classified as a CWS,
serve over 500 people, begin reporting violations in 1982 or prior, and be
located within the continental United States. Violation records and CWS
characteristics were obtained from the SDWIS. Community characteristics at
the county level were obtained from the US Census. The unit of analysis in
this study is the utility year.
Violation records from the SDWIS indicate whether or not a MCL was
exceeded or a treatment technique was not met. Contaminant concentra-
tions or sampling results for regular monitoring are not available. Another
limitation of the SWDIS is underreporting of some violations. To address
underreporting, we emphasize the regression results for total coliform vio-
lations, which are more accurately reported than other types of violations
(12). Also, we exclude very small systems serving fewer than 500 people since
these are more likely to have inadequate reporting practices (8). Overall,
these violations data represent the best national information that is cur-
rently available for drinking water quality.
Water system characteristics include type of source water, service pop-
ulation, and ownership type. County-level locations of each CWS are defined
based on the CWS address provided in the SDWIS. Community characteristics
are county-level variables from the US Census and represent annual values for
the 1982–2015 study period. Characteristics include household income,
housing density, and percent nonwhite population. Since CWSs are not re-
quired to collect demographic information about customers, census in-
formation can provide some insight into possible association between water
quality violations and community characteristics. Data availability was suf-
ficient to interpolate values for intercensus years. A more detailed de-
scription of the data is provided in SI Data.
Hot-Spot Analysis of Violations. We use spatial autocorrelation to describe and
map spatial clusters of SDWA violations. The local Gi*(d) statistic (local Getis–
Ord statistic) is used to test the statistical significance of local clusters (13).
For each county, we estimate a local Getis–Ord statistic as a function of
distance between neighboring counties and violation occurrence. Further
description is provided in SI Materials and Methods.
Vulnerability Factors Associated with Violations. Probit regression is used to
assess the relationship between drinking water quality violations and char-
acteristics of water systems and communities. The likelihood of a water
supplier incurring a health-based quality violation is modeled as follows:
Prðyit = 1jXÞ = Φ
�
β0 + βxxi + γjtCjt + αtTt + ϕkSk
�
,
[1]
where yit is a binary indicator of violation occurrence for water supplier i in
year t. The probability of a CWS having a violation is estimated as a function
of time-invariant water supplier characteristics (xi) and county-level com-
munity characteristics (Cjt) for county j in year t. Each water supplier i is as-
sociated with a county j and state k. The model includes dummy variables for
each year (Tt) and state (Sk). Year dummy variables control for changes in
federal regulations or compliance over time. Meanwhile, controlling for
state-level effects is important because the SDWA is enforced primarily at
the state level. State-level enforcement can differ due to variation in sam-
pling protocols, technical capacity, and financial resources. The coefficient
for the state dummy will then indicate the average propensity for water
quality violations being reported in a state due to either water quality
violations or enforcement effort. Covariates included in the probit model
were selected based on a careful review of the literature, lasso regression,
and specification tests.
Models are specified for total violations and for total coliform violations.
The total coliform models may provide more accurate estimates of associa-
tions between violations and covariates since (i) total coliform is regulated in
a consistent manner throughout the study period and (ii) Total Coliform
Rule (TCR) violations are reported more accurately than other types of MCL
violations (12). We estimate coefficient values and average marginal effects.
Average marginal effects are useful for interpretation; they provide a single
estimate of the effect of each covariate on Pr(Y = 1). For more detail on our
regression analysis and calculation of average marginal effects, see SI Ma-
terials and Methods.
Results
Summary Statistics. We find that water quality concerns extend
well beyond Flint. In 2015, 9% of CWSs in our study sample
violated health-based water quality standards, affecting nearly
21 million people. During each of the past 34 y, 9–45 million
people were affected, representing 4–28% of US population.
Our balanced panel dataset contains 34 y and 17,900 CWSs,
which serve 87% of the population supplied by CWSs in the
continental United States. Full summary statistics and variable
definitions are provided in Table S1. About 8.0% of the
608,600 utility-year observations had some type of health-based
violation, while 4.6% had a total coliform violation. In total,
there were 95,754 health-based violations and total coliform was
the most prevalent type of violation, representing about 37% of
all violations (Fig. 1). Fecal coliform violations are relatively
rare; only 2,138 occurred during our study period. Violations
categorized as “other” contaminants were also prevalent, rep-
resenting about 36% of violations. DBPs comprised the majority
of other violations. Violations of treatment rules and nitrate are
much less common (21% of total). Descriptions of violation
categories are provided in Table 1 and SI Data.
Differences in the rate of violation occurrence exist across
characteristics of CWSs and communities (Table S2), as dis-
cussed in SI Results.
Allaire et al.
PNAS
|
February 27, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 9
|
2079
SUSTAINABILITY
SCIENCE
 Time Trends. We find that significant time trends exist for some
states. State trends are estimated as deviations from the national
time trend (Table S5). Twenty states deviate above the national
trend, including Nebraska, Arkansas, North Carolina, and
Southwest states—New Mexico, Texas, and Oklahoma (Fig. S4).
Only three states are below the national time trend—Wash-
ington, Iowa, and Illinois (Fig. S4A). Similar results are found for
time trends of total coliform violations, except more states have a
declining trend (Fig. S4B). At the national level, the linear time
trend of violations is insignificant once we control for the year
dummy variables (Table S5).
Violation occurrence has fluctuated over the history of the
SDWA. Fluctuations in number of violations can be attributed to
a variety of factors, including regulatory changes, enforcement
capacity, raw water quality, and treatment capabilities. Fig. 2
depicts the number of health-based violations across the CWSs
included in the analysis. Total violations more than double over
the 34-y study period. This increase is partially driven by new
regulations. The number of regulated contaminants has dra-
matically increased from 22 (in 1974) to 91 (at present). Table 1
provides a list of EPA rules and enforcement dates.
Spikes in violations appear to occur immediately after new
federal regulations. Utilities might undergo a learning and ad-
justment process when coping with new regulations. For exam-
ple, violation counts of DBPs and other chemicals dramatically
rose after 2002, when the Stage 1 DBPs Rule became enforce-
able. The time dummy variables in our regression analysis cap-
ture federal rule changes, as evidenced by positive and significant
coefficient values after major regulation changes (Fig. S3).
Substantial differences across time also exist between rural
and urban areas, in terms of number of violations per CWS (Fig.
3). Furthermore, low-income rural areas have a larger compli-
ance gap than higher-income rural areas. DBP violations account
for much of this gap. Differences between rural and suburban
areas became pronounced and statistically significant after new
DBP rules in the early 2000s.
Spatial Trends. Violations also vary considerably across geographic
locations. Fig. 4A shows a map of the total number of violations
(1982–2015) per CWS in a given county. Some of the counties with
the highest prevalence of violations are rural, located in Texas,
Oklahoma, and Idaho. Total coliform violations (Fig. 4B) are es-
pecially prevalent in the West and Midwest. A variety of factors
could contribute to differences across counties, including the
quality of source water and state-level enforcement.
Fig. 4 depicts high violation prevalence throughout Oklahoma
and parts of Idaho. In some areas, total coliform comprises
a large portion of total violations. This is especially true in
Nebraska (56% of all violations during the study period are total
coliform), Missouri (42%), New Hampshire (35%), and Mas-
sachusetts (81%). There are several locations that have high
prevalence of total violations, but not total coliform, such as
Texas and Kansas. The proportion of total coliform violations
has implications for interpreting regression results from models
specified for total coliform and total violations.
Spatial differences in violation incidence vary considerably
across time. This is particularly true for the Southwest region
(includes Arizona, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Texas), which
had similar violation incidence as other regions until the early
2000s. After the Stage 1 DBP rule in the early 2000s, violation
incidence dramatically increased and is more than triple that of
other regions (Fig. S1). DBPs account for the vast majority of
violations in the Southwest. This region might be particularly
susceptible to DBP violations due to high summer temperatures
(14) and high levels of total organic carbon in source water.
Furthermore, Oklahoma requires a high level of minimum dis-
infectant residual (1.0 mg/L total chlorine). This could cause
Fig. 1.
Number of health-based violations, 1982–2015, by contaminant
type.
Table 1.
Description of categories of drinking water quality violations
Study category
Contaminants
SDWA rules
Total coliform
Fecal coliform (E. coli)
NIPDWR, TCR, RTCR
Total coliform
Treatment rules plus nitrate
Nitrate
NIPDWR
Nitrite
Phase II
Turbidity
NIPDWR, SWTR, IESW, LT1ESW
Cryptosporidium
IESW, LT1ESW, LT2ESW
Giardia lamblia
SWTR, GWR
Viruses
SWTR, GWR
Arsenic
Arsenic
NIPDWR, Arsenic
Lead plus copper
Lead, copper
NIPDWR, LCR, RLCR
Other
DBPs
Trihalomethanes, Stage 1 DBPs, Stage 2 DBPs
Radionuclides
NIPDWR, Radionuclides
Inorganic and organic chemicals
NIPDWR, Phase I, Phase II, Phase V
Notes: SDWA rule names and enforcement dates are as follows: Arsenic, Arsenic Rule (2006); GWR, Ground Water Rule (2009); IESW,
Interim Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule (2002); LCR, Lead and Copper Rule (1992); LT1ESW, Long Term 1 Enhanced Surface
Water Treatment Rule (2005); NIPDWR, National Interim Primary Drinking Water Regulations (1977); Phase I Rule (1989); Phase II Rule
(1992); Phase V Rule (1994); Radionuclides, Radionuclides Rule (2003); RLCR, Revised Lead and Copper Rule (2007); RTCR, Revised Total
Coliform Rule (2016); Stage 1 DBPs, Stage 1 Disinfectants and Disinfection By-products Rule (2002–2004); Stage 2 DBPs, Stage 2
Disinfectants and Disinfection By-products Rule (2012–2013); SWTR, Surface Water Treatment Rule (1993); TCR, Total Coliform Rule
(1990); and Trihalomethanes, Total Trihalomethanes (1981–1983).
2080
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1719805115
Allaire et al.
 DBP issues during high temperatures, when effective chlorine
levels decline and additional disinfectant might be needed.
Violation Hot Spots. Intense hot spots of SDWA violations are
identified in Oklahoma and parts of Texas, based on local spatial
autocorrelation (Fig. 5). While these findings are somewhat
similar to Fig. 4A, the hot-spot analysis offers the advantage of
determining whether clusters of violations are significant. Similar
spatial clusters are found for violation counts per CWS and for
binary indicators of violation occurrence. Hot-spot locations
tend to include water systems with repeat violations. In our
overall sample, only 11% of the CWSs have repeat violations,
which involve two or more subsequent years of a violation. The
states with the greatest proportion of CWSs with repeat viola-
tions are Oklahoma (43% of CWSs in the state), Nebraska
(35%), and Idaho (33%).
When assessing hot spots over time, we find that spatial clusters
of violations have shifted during the 34-y study period (Fig. S2). In
the earliest decade of the study period (1982–1992), significant hot
spots of violation counts are present in the Northwest, southern
California, and Pennsylvania. Meanwhile, in the following decade
(1993–2003), the magnitude and significance of the estimated
z-scores increases in Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Idaho. Finally,
in more recent years (2004–2015), significant hot spots appear
in Texas and increase in parts of Oklahoma.
Regression Results. Regression results are presented both as co-
efficient estimates (Table S3) and average marginal effects
(Table S4). Our major findings are that violation occurrence is
significantly associated with less urbanized areas and lag viola-
tions, while compliance is associated with purchased water
source and private ownership.
Violations in the prior year are significantly associated with
current year violations. This provides further evidence that re-
curring violations at a given water system are a concern. Repeat
violations are prevalent in locations of spatial clustering of viola-
tions, as previously discussed in the section on violation hot spots.
Water systems that purchase treated water from other utilities
show a lower propensity for violations. Wholesale water providers
may have greater capacity to achieve regulatory compliance (9).
The probability of a total coliform violation for a utility purchasing
water is 0.9% lower than a utility with a groundwater source (Table
S4). Similar results are found for total violations, although the
estimated marginal effects are smaller in magnitude.
Privately owned utilities appear to be less vulnerable to vio-
lations than public ownership, which agrees with previous find-
ings (5, 9, 15). The probability of a total coliform violation for a
privately owned utility is 0.5% lower than a government-owned
utility. A larger association was found for total violations (1.0%).
This result might be attributable to private firms facing the
possibility of takeover by a municipal government, which could
lead to greater compliance (15). Large private utilities in particular
have considerable resources at stake should they deliver poor-
quality water and face lawsuits or takeover. Our coefficient esti-
mates suggest that the interaction term between private and large
firms is significantly associated with fewer violations (Table S3).
Less urbanized areas are associated with greater likelihood of
violation occurrence (Table S6). Meanwhile, our indicator of mi-
nority, low-income populations is associated with higher likelihood
of total coliform violations. These findings might indicate envi-
ronmental justice concerns for rural areas and minority commu-
nities. Further research is warranted to understand environmental
justice issues and which communities are particularly at risk.
Utilities in more rural, less urbanized areas tend to have less
capacity to comply with quality regulations and face financial
strain due to declining populations and lower incomes (16).
Furthermore, small, rural CWSs might especially struggle, given
that we estimate the highest predicted probability of violation
occurs at small, rural CWSs relying on surface water sources
(Fig. S5). Last, we find larger negative associations for total
Fig. 2.
Number of health-based violations, 1982–2015. Gray bars represent dates that major components of rules became enforceable.
Fig. 3.
Total violations per water system, by housing density category and
income group. Low-income counties have median household income below
75% of national median household income. In year 2015, national median
household income was $55,775 and 45% of rural CWSs are located in
counties defined as low-income.
Allaire et al.
PNAS
|
February 27, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 9
|
2081
SUSTAINABILITY
SCIENCE
 violations, compared with total coliform. This might be partly
attributable to rural systems facing challenges in complying with
DBP rules. Lower housing density and water flows through dis-
tribution networks can lead to older “water age,” which enables
DBP formation (17). Rural systems may also have less technical
capacity and financial resources to implement infrastructure
upgrades or frequent flushing of the system.
In our analysis, urbanization is the combination of housing
density, median household income, and percent nonwhite pop-
ulation. It is not informative to interpret the individual co-
efficient estimates of these three variables since they are
moderately correlated. The correlation matrix of coefficient es-
timates for model 2 indicates correlations between housing
density and median income (r = −0.54) as well as housing density
and nonwhite population (r = −0.37). Therefore, we conduct
principal-component regression to address these correlations, as
described in SI Results. In this way, the association between vi-
olations and these three correlated variables can be better un-
derstood since the variables are transformed intro uncorrelated
components. We interpret the first principal component (PC) as
an indicator of urbanization; it represents the average effect of
all three variables. Meanwhile, the second PC represents the
contrasting effect, and we interpret it to be an indicator of mi-
nority, low-income populations.
In all models, the P value of the likelihood ratio χ2 is less than
0.01, which indicates that each model as a whole is statistically
significant. For all model specifications, bootstrapped estimates
produce similar results. Our preferred specifications are the total
coliform models with interaction terms (models 4 and 6), since total
coliform violations have more accurate reporting and are regulated
more consistently than other violations during the study period.
Discussion
Targeting utilities that are underperforming is one approach to
improve compliance and consistently provide safe drinking water.
Identifying hot spots and vulnerability factors associated with vio-
lations could better direct enforcement activity and inform the
allocation of federal grant funds that assist state-level enforcement.
Intense hot spots of SDWA violations and increasing time
trends are detected in some states, especially Southwest states
such as Oklahoma and Texas. Notably, repeat violations are
prevalent in locations of intense spatial clustering of violations.
Water systems in these locations are prone to recurring issues, as
evidenced by our regression analysis that found violations in the
prior year are significantly associated with current year viola-
tions. Repeat violations have been a focus of EPA regulation in
recent years.
Beyond temporal and spatial trends, we also find major vul-
nerability factors. Violation occurrence is found to be associated
with rural areas, while compliance is associated with purchased
water source and private ownership. These findings indicate the
types of communities that might benefit from greater regulatory
oversight and assistance in achieving consistent compliance with
water quality standards.
Regulatory compliance can be a challenge for rural systems
due to limited financial resources and technical expertise. A
smaller customer base can mean less revenue for infrastructure
improvements, repayment of debt, and salaries to attract tech-
nically skilled operators. Small systems also face restricted access
to loans and outside financing, compared with larger systems
with higher credit ratings (18). This presents a challenge for
complying with stricter standards, especially those that require
capital modifications or new operational procedures. A new rule
for DBPs in the early 2000s led to a dramatic increase in viola-
tions in rural areas. The compliance gap was especially large
between low-income rural areas and more urban counties. We
also find that low-income, minority communities may face higher
likelihood of certain violations, such as total coliform.
Meanwhile, water systems that rely on purchased water show a
lower propensity for violations. Purchased water is produced by
wholesale water providers, which may have greater capacity to
achieve regulatory compliance (9). In addition, privately owned
utilities are found to be less vulnerable to violations than gov-
ernment ownership. In particular, large private firms are associated
with lower likelihood of violation. This might be attributable to
large private firms having considerable resources at stake should
they deliver poor-quality water and face lawsuits or takeover by
a municipal government.
Several policy implications emerge from our findings. First,
prioritization of technical guidance and financial assistance
could benefit underperforming systems. Expansion of training
and assistance could address a variety of operational issues, in-
cluding source water protection and development of procedures
for monitoring and maintenance, which are the most common
system deficiencies (19). Second, merging and consolidation of
systems, where feasible, could provide a way to achieve econo-
mies of scale for adequate treatment technologies. Feasibility of
consolidation will be influenced by existing infrastructure, dis-
tance, and liability concerns. The electricity sector has undergone
substantial restructuring since the mid-1990s, through consolida-
tion and separation of generation and delivery. Third, purchased
water contracts might provide a cost-effective way for utilities to
comply with regulations, especially small water systems.
Fig. 4.
Number of violations per CWS, 1982–2015, by county. (A) Total vi-
olations. (B) Total coliform violations. Intervals in legend are selected based
on the Jenks natural breaks classification method.
Fig. 5.
Spatial clusters (hot spots) of health-based violations, 1982–2015.
Hot spots for number of total violations per CWS, by county. Intervals in
legend are selected based on the Jenks natural breaks classification method.
2082
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1719805115
Allaire et al.
 These findings are relevant for larger questions regarding
national-level water quality regulations: (i) How can regulatory
rules consider linkages between the SDWA and the Clean Water
Act?, (ii) Should drinking water standards be set at a subnational
level?, and (iii) What strategies can improve data collection and
monitoring of violations?
Regulation and enforcement activities that better consider the
linkages between the SDWA and the Clean Water Act could
address concerns over impaired source water. Vulnerable com-
munities may face the additional challenge of rising compliance
cost that is driven by source water impairment. Further research
is needed regarding the extent to which treatment costs at public
water systems might be affected by emerging contaminants and
potential changes to Clean Water Act standards or enforcement.
Considering the interactions of state and federal regulations is
also crucial. For example, the combined effects of state-level
residual disinfectant requirements, poor quality source water,
and high summer temperatures might cause the Southwest re-
gion to be particularly susceptible to DBP violations.
National SDWA rules ensure that all water systems share the
same minimum water quality standards. However, variation in
standards across states or municipalities might increase effi-
ciency since this would reflect local preferences for trade-offs
between risk reduction and intervention cost (20). Subnational
standards might allow net benefits to be realized in specific lo-
cations, since net benefits will vary based on compliance cost, con-
taminant prevalence, vulnerable populations, and other factors. In
addition, subnational rules might allow a broader range of contam-
inants to be regulated, especially those that only affect specific lo-
calities. At present, the SDWA only regulates contaminants that
frequently occur at harmful levels across the country. An important
area for future research is assessing the welfare implicates of uni-
form, national-level standards compared with subnational standards.
Last, there is a nationwide need for improved data collection
and monitoring of violations. Underreporting of SDWA viola-
tions deserves attention, given that an estimated 26–38% of
health-based violations are either not reported or inaccurately
reported to the national SDWIS database. Capturing a more
complete record of violations is crucial for addressing potential
public health concerns. A major barrier to improved reporting is
substantial reductions in state and federal funding for enforcement
activities. State funding declined a third from 2001 to 2011, while
workloads have increased due to newly promulgated rules (21).
Beyond restored funding, technology developments could en-
able improved monitoring and data management. In-pipe sensors
may offer a game-changing way to continuously monitor water
quality within a distribution system. However, sensors are in the
early stages of development and their use is rare in practice due
to low accuracy and high costs of capital and operation. A more
immediate development is improved data management. A new
cloud-based reporting system, SDWIS Prime, might allow greater
consistency in reporting across states. Currently, each state main-
tains its own database, which can lead to inaccuracies during data
transfer from utilities to the state to the federal SDWIS. This new
system also automates compliance determination, which can re-
duce labor expense. In combination with cloud-based reporting,
algorithms should be developed that can automatically check for
outliers. This will facilitate analytics on large volumes of data and
allow emerging problems to be identified at an individual utility or
across a region.
Overall, this study informs a more directed approach to increase
compliance with drinking water quality regulations. While quality
violations are generally infrequent, some do reflect a risk to human
health. Identifying hot spots and vulnerability factors associated
with violations can allow public policies to target underperforming
water systems. Reducing water quality violations can lead to im-
proved health outcomes and less disparity in water service.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The manuscript has benefited from helpful discus-
sion and comments from Katherine Alfredo, William Becker, Alan Roberson,
two anonymous referees, and the associate editor. Financial support is
gratefully acknowledged from a NatureNet Science Fellowship, National
Science Foundation Award 1360446, and an Earth Institute Summer Grant.
1. Messner M, et al. (2006) An approach for developing a national estimate of water-
borne disease due to drinking water and a national estimate model application.
J Water Health 4:201–240.
2. Stillo F, MacDonald Gibson J (2017) Exposure to contaminated drinking water and
health disparities in North Carolina. Am J Public Health 107:180–185.
3. Balazs C, Morello-Frosch R, Hubbard A, Ray I (2011) Social disparities in nitrate-contaminated
drinking water in California’s San Joaquin Valley. Environ Health Perspect 119:1272–1278,
and erratum (2011) 119:A509.
4. US Environmental Protection Agency (2009) Factoids: Drinking water and ground
water statistics for 2009 (US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC), EPA-
816-K-09-004.
5. Rahman T, Kohli M, Megdal S, Aradhyula S, Moxley J (2010) Determinants of environ-
mental noncompliance by public water systems. Contemp Econ Policy 28:264–274.
6. Guerrero-Preston R, Norat J, Rodríguez M, Santiago L, Suárez E (2008) Determinants
of compliance with drinking water standards in rural Puerto Rico between 1996 and
2000: A multilevel approach. P R Health Sci J 27:229–235.
7. Pike W (2004) Modeling drinking water quality violations with Bayesian networks.
J Am Water Res Assoc 40:1563–1578.
8. Rubin S (2013) Evaluating violations of drinking water regulations. J Am Water Resour
Assoc 105:E137–E147.
9. Wallsten S, Kosec K (2008) The effects of ownership and benchmark competition: An
empirical analysis of U.S. water systems. Int J Ind Organ 26:186–205.
10. Noll R (2002) The economics of urban water systems. Thirsting for Efficiency: The Economics
and Politics of Urban Water System Reform, ed Shirley M (Pergamon, Amsterdam), pp 43–63.
11. US Environmental Protection Agency (2004) EPA claims to meet drinking water goals
despite persistent data quality shortcomings (US Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, DC), Report No. 2004-P-0008.
12. US Environmental Protection Agency (2002) Data reliability analysis of the EPA safe
drinking water information system/federal version (SDWIS/FED) (US Environmental
Protection Agency, Washington, DC), EPA 816-R-00-020.
13. Getis A, Ord J (1992) The analysis of spatial association by use of distance statistics.
Geogr Anal 24:189–206.
14. Rodriguez MJ, Sérodes JB (2001) Spatial and temporal evolution of trihalomethanes
in three water distribution systems. Water Res 35:1572–1586.
15. Konisky D, Teodoro M (2016) When governments regulate governments. Am J Pol Sci
60:559–574.
16. National Research Council (1997) Ensuring small water supply system sustainability.
Safe Water from Every Tap: Improving Water Service to Small Communities (National
Academy Press, Washington, DC), p 153.
17. Al-Jasser AO (2007) Chlorine decay in drinking-water transmission and distribution
systems: Pipe service age effect. Water Res 41:387–396.
18. US Environmental Protection Agency (2001) 1999 Drinking Water Infrastructure Needs
Survey Modeling the Cost of Infrastructure (US Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, DC).
19. Oxenford J, Barrett J (2016) Understanding small water system violations and defi-
ciencies. J Am Water Works Assoc 108:31–37.
20. Dinan T, Cropper M, Portney P (1999) Environmental federalism: Welfare losses from
uniform national drinking water standards. Environmental and Public Economics, eds
Panagariya A, Portney P, Schwab R (Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK), pp 13–31.
21. Association of State Drinking Water Administrators (2013) An analysis of state drinking
water programs’ resources and needs (Association of State Drinking Water Adminis-
trators, Arlington, VA).
Allaire et al.
PNAS
|
February 27, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 9
|
2083
SUSTAINABILITY
SCIENCE
