 Original Article
An observational feasibility study of a new anaesthesia drug
storage tray
D. S. Almghairbi,1 L. Sharp,2 R. Griffiths,3 R. Evley,4 S. Gupta5 and I. K. Moppett6,7
1 PhD student, 4 Senior Research Fellow, 6 Professor, 7 Honorary Consultant Anaesthetist, Division of Clinical
Neuroscience, Anaesthesia and Critical Care, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
2 Consultant Anaesthetist, Pilgrim Hospital, Boston, UK
3 Consultant Anaesthetist, Peterborough City Hospital, Peterborough, UK
5 Senior Pharmacist, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, UK
Summary
Drug errors in the anaesthetic domain remain a serious cause of iatrogenic harm. To help reduce this issue, we
explored the potential safety impact of using a simple colour-coded tray for anaesthetic drug preparation and storage.
Over a six-month period, three different trained researchers observed 30 cases at three NHS Trusts. Ten observations
involved standard drug trays in ‘normal’ practice, and 20 observations, involved ‘Rainbow trays’ before and after
their introduction. We conducted 20 semi-structured interviews immediately after completing the Rainbow tray
observation with the anaesthetists involved. All discussions and detailed notes taken were transcribed, qualitatively
analysed using line-by-line coding and then synthesised into narrative themes. We found that using standard, single
compartment trays enabled quick, cheap, and portable drug preparation and storage, but was linked to potential or
actual harmful errors, such as syringe swaps. Rainbow trays were perceived to be easy to use and effective at all three
sites, aiding drug identification and separation, and hence likely to reduce drug error and increase patient safety. We
have demonstrated that it is feasible to introduce a new colour-coded compartmentalised Rainbow drugs tray into
clinical practice at three NHS hospitals in England. Further research is needed into their effect on the prevalence of
drug error.
.................................................................................................................................................................
Correspondence to: I. K. Moppett
Email: iain.moppett@nottingham.ac.uk
Accepted: 21 November 2017
Keywords: drug-checking; drug errors; drug preparation; patient safety
Introduction
Drug preparation and administration in the operating
theatre presents a particular challenge, distinct from
other
hospital
settings
[1].
Anaesthetists routinely
choose, prepare, administer and record several potent
intravenous drugs in a relatively short period, on
their own, sometimes while stressed or fatigued [2].
Most developed countries have attempted to improve
the prescription, preparation and administration of
medications to help reduce the inherent difficulty of
this process [3], but it remains a serious cause of iatro-
genic harm [2, 4]. A recent prospective observational
study examined the rate of medication errors and
adverse drug events [1], finding that approximately
one out of every 20 peri-operative drug administra-
tions and every second operation resulted in drug
errors or adverse drug events. More than one-third of
these incidents led to observed patient harm; the other
356
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
doi:10.1111/anae.14187
 two thirds had the possibility of patient harm. This is
markedly higher than the rates observed in previous
publications, wherein the incidence of drug errors
ranged from 1:131 to 1:5475 ‘anaesthetic administra-
tions’ [5–8]. The lower incidence observed in the past
is perhaps due to operators’ unwillingness to self-
report errors or the lack of awareness that an error
occurred [1].
There
are
several
practices
employed
within
anaesthesia that help mitigate the risk of drug error.
International colour coding of drug labels ensures that
drug labels used by anaesthetists follow a standard col-
our design, reducing the risk of selecting the wrong
class of drug. There are restrictions on the contents of
the anaesthetic room drug cupboard to only those
drugs that are frequently used or must be adminis-
tered on an urgent basis. Pre-filled syringes help
reduce the risk of the wrong drug being drawn up.
Some hospitals use a double-checking system (either
two-person double-check or machine-checking) dur-
ing drug preparation [9, 10]. Nevertheless, several
researchers have argued that the types of medication
errors made, the most common drug errors and the
main factors contributing to drug errors in anaesthesia
have remained relatively unchanged for more than
20 years [1, 5, 11, 12]. However, novel solutions do
not always work in practice. This may be due to a
combination of lack of efficacy, unintended negative
consequences or barriers to implementation. It is,
therefore, appropriate to determine whether even
apparently small or simple alterations in practice serve
to reduce the risk of errors.
The original motivation for developing Rainbow
trays resulted from anaesthetic (LS) and pharmacy
(SG) dissatisfaction with current practice, in the con-
text of serious drug errors and their consequences [13]
and the frequency of clinical distractions [14]. Syringe
swaps have consistently been cited as a major contrib-
utor to medication errors, with the potential and actual
serious adverse consequences [7, 15].
The present study aimed to explore the potential
impact of a simple adjunct to drug preparation and
storage on safe drug administration during anaesthesia.
The study aimed to investigate both the theory and
process of introducing a Rainbow tray, and any per-
ceived barriers and drivers to its use in daily practice.
Methods
We performed a multi-centre qualitative study, adopt-
ing an interpretive paradigm, utilising observation and
semi-structured
interviews.
We
used
a
pragmatic
approach of convenience sampling within three NHS
Trusts
in
England.
Approval
for
this
study
was
obtained from the NHS Research Ethics Committee,
and local research governance approval was granted at
all sites. Twenty different anaesthetists participated in
the study. We sent each participant a letter of invita-
tion and an information sheet and sought written con-
sent from each before taking part.
Over a six-month period, three different trained
researchers observed 30 drug preparations, 10 of which
involved the standard trays in ‘normal’ practice and 20
of which involved new ‘Rainbow trays’. The sample
size of the observation was intended to achieve the-
matic saturation [16].
Standard practice at all three institutions is for
anaesthetists to collect and transport their prepared
drugs in one or more disposable, single-colour, uni-
compartmental paper trays.
In comparison, the Rainbow trays comprise three
separate trays, one for non-emergency drugs, one for
emergency drugs and another for local anaesthetic drugs
(Fig. 1). Each compartment has a specific disposable
insert with rounded edges to aid syringe retrieval and
has a colour-coded base, matching ISO 26825:2008 [17].
We introduced the Rainbow trays to each anaes-
thetist after completing an initial observation with the
standard trays. At least two weeks later, we carried out
a second observation of drug preparation using the
Rainbow trays.
We collected data using a standard, pre-tested
observation schedule at all three sites, to promote reli-
ability. We recorded any additional comments pro-
vided
by
anaesthetists,
trainees
or
operating
department practitioners (ODPs). We observed and
recorded our observations in real time, focusing on the
drug preparation, administration and use of the trays
from
throughout
the
case.
All
observations
and
detailed notes taken during the observation period
were typed up immediately afterwards. The key themes
of each observation are summarised in Fig. 2.
We conducted a total of 20 semi-structured inter-
views in order to reach theoretical saturation [18]. Each
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
357
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
 interview lasted 20–30 min commencing immediately
after observing anaesthetists using the Rainbow tray. We
used an interview guide as a prompt for each interview
to ensure key questions were asked to all participants
(Appendix 1). We digitally recorded and transcribed all
discussions within one day of the interview.
During the interviews, we supplemented discus-
sions using the observation notes to help elaborate
topics that arose. Before beginning the interviews, we
gave a brief outline of the format of the questions to
participants to ensure that all questions were under-
standable and to mitigate any possible anxiety. The final
transcripts were independently read through by DA and
double-checked alongside the original records by the
investigators (DA, RE, IM) for reliability and integrity.
Any additional comments were included at this phase.
We analysed data from both the observations and
interviews using thematic analysis to identify themes
and subthemes. The interview and observation data
were sufficiently in-depth to be coded line-by-line, as
described by Charmaz [19]. Throughout the analysis,
the transcripts were repeatedly revisited to compare
categories and to look for ‘negative’ or contradictory
themes, which could then be explored further during
the study period both within the observations and the
interviews. We used NVivo-11 (QSR International Pvt.
Figure 1 The Rainbow tray.
Key themes
Setting
Staff and teams
Drug preparation 
and administration
Feasibility of 
use
Description 
anaesthetic room, 
working space 
Drug storage
Grade of 
Anaesthetist 
observed
Level of 
support staff
Communication 
between staff 
Methods are 
used to check 
syringe before 
administration
Separation 
of drugs
Does the new tray 
hinder practice? 
The new tray 
effective in 
preventing errors or 
near misses 
Methods are 
used to check 
drugs before 
preparation
Syringe 
labelled 
How are drug 
syringes managed 
How needles and 
sharp stuff are 
managed 
What happens to 
drug ampoules? 
When are 
drugs 
prepared 
Figure 2 Key themes of the observations.
358
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
 Ltd.; Melbourne, Australia) [20] to organise and man-
age the data. DA and RE carried out the initial analy-
sis and coding, separately, and then met to discuss the
coding and to agree or revise the thematic categories
before discussing the results with the IM. Open coding
generated 98 codes, which we synthesised into three
thematic categories using focused coding, two of which
we separated into three subcategories.
Results
Three thematic categories emerged from the data:
standard practice (subcategorised into preparation,
benefits and risks); Rainbow trays (subcategorised into
preparation, benefits and disadvantages); and syringe
labelling.
Standard practice
Anaesthetic induction was routinely carried out in an
adjoined anaesthetic room at all three Trusts; we
observed no cases of induction within the operating
room. In Trust A and C we found that drugs were
prepared sequentially before the patient arrived in the
anaesthetic room, whereas at Trust B, drugs were
prepared in advance for the whole operation list.
Standard practice in all three sites was to keep
prepared syringes on a grey, disposable, compressed
paper tray.
In all three NHS Trusts, the anaesthetist prepared
drugs before the patient entered the anaesthetic room.
Several reasons were given for this practice (Table 1).
In all three Trusts, 10 out of 20 anaesthetists read
aloud the drug label, including the name of the drug, its
concentration and expiry date, before the drug was drawn
up. Once the drug was drawn up, we found that all anaes-
thetists labelled the syringe, but did not observe any occa-
sions where the anaesthetist reconfirmed the drug in the
syringe corresponded to the drug in the ampoule.
We observed that when drugs were checked by
another individual after preparation, this was always by
an anaesthetist, not an ODP or nurse. At Trust C, we did
not observe any second-person double-check being per-
formed, including when emergency drugs were prepared.
At Trust C, emergency drugs were prepared on an
individual patient basis, whereas at Trusts A and B
emergency drugs were prepared in advance for the
whole theatre list. In Trusts A and C, empty ampoules
were kept until the end of the operation; in Trust B
they were discarded immediately after drawing up.
Table 1 Quotes about standard practice, by subcategory theme.
Subcategory
Quote
Preparation
‘I like to draw up my drugs before the patient enters the anaesthetic room, so that I am not being
distracted when I am doing it’ [Trust C, anaesthetist 1]
‘Normally I would like to prepare anticipate drugs before patient arrived because it takes reasons to
avoid having wrong drug and to reduce risk of mistakes’ [C, 4]
‘I can give my undivided attention to the patient, and not delay the time before induction to minimise
the anxiety levels of the patient.’ [B, 2]
‘I think once the patient is in the anaesthetic room, [making sure] the drugs [are] ready at that point
means the patient is waiting for less time’ [A, 9]
Benefit
‘A very cheap method of drug trays’ [C, 1; A, 5]
‘They are simple, cheap, and ecological, and are quick and easy to use’ [B, 2]
‘It doesn’t take up as much room on the anaesthetic machine work surface; the space is
limited at the anaesthetic workstation’ [B, 3]
‘I can use a number of trays my practice uses a lot of local anaesthetic drugs to separate the
local drugs from the other drugs I use’ [A, 7]
‘It is useful and just keeps drugs together, and if a couple of different types of drugs are used it is
helpful, as I do not confuse my emergency drugs with other drugs’ [A, 9]
‘We use the grey tray to collect some other discarded ampules’ [A, 9]
Risks
‘Drug error is a risk and is not big enough, and all drugs are mixed up’ [C, 1]
‘It is easy to fail and choose the wrong drugs’ [A, 4]
‘Drugs may still fall out if tilted’ [B, 3]
‘Drug error is a risk’ [B, 1]
‘Obviously, in terms of the syringes all going together in the tray, we do have to be careful to pick
up the right drug before we give it’ [A, 7]
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
359
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
 Across all three trusts, multiple drug syringes were
held in the hand by the anaesthetist at the same time
during induction; we did not observe any two-person
double-check before their administration. We were not
able
to
determine
how
precisely
the
anaesthetist
checked each syringe before administration of its con-
tents, for instance, whether the label colour and/or
inscription was checked internally and explicitly against
the anaesthetist’s mental model of the correct drug.
Prepared drug syringes were placed in grey trays
at all three Trusts. We observed that anaesthetists
sometimes used more than one tray to separate the
syringes containing ‘emergency drugs’ (typically metar-
aminol and/or ephedrine) from induction drugs. We
found that the trays containing induction drug syr-
inges were routinely placed on the anaesthetic machine
during induction, whereas trays containing emergency
drug syringes were left where they had been prepared.
On transfer to the operating room, the emergency
drug tray (if used) was generally placed on top of the
anaesthetic machine, whereas the induction drug tray
was placed on the anaesthetic machine work surface.
At Trust B, both drug trays were placed routinely on
top of the anaesthetic machine, with an anaesthetic
drug trolley moved to the operating room and placed
behind the patient.
We found that there was no ‘standard’ practice for
drug preparation, with considerable variation in the
timing of drug preparation, the process of drug/syringe
checking and the separation of emergency drugs.
Frequent, perceived benefits of the grey trays were
ease of use, size and cost, together with the ability to
separate the multiple drugs used during the anaesthetic
pathway (Table 1). However, we observed that using a
single tray made reading labels more difficult, the more
syringes were used, and there was uniform acknowl-
edgement that a crowded tray could lead to error, par-
ticularly when used ampoules were retained in the tray.
Rainbow trays
Introduction of the Rainbow trays did not appear to
change the way drugs were prepared for anaesthesia.
However, it did impact on the storage of syringes
while in use, consistent with its intended purpose.
All anaesthetists cleaned the main body of the
Rainbow tray with sanitising wipes before use, even
though the tray includes a disposable insert as part of
its design.
Once a drug was drawn up into a syringe and
labelled, it was placed consistently into the correct col-
our-coded compartment within the Rainbow tray. This
was observed for both the induction drugs and the
emergency drugs.
Anaesthetists placed Rainbow trays in similar posi-
tions to grey trays in the anaesthetic room, but no longer
held multiple syringes at the same time during induc-
tion, instead removing syringes from the tray individu-
ally and rechecking the label before administration.
Similarly, anaesthetists placed Rainbow trays on the
anaesthetic machine work surface in the operating
room. At the end of each operation, the Rainbow trays
were taken back to the anaesthetic room, their inserts
discarded and were cleaned in preparation for the next
case.
Rainbow
trays
were
considered
easy
to
use
(Table 2), and appeared to aid drug identification
through
colour-coded
compartmentalisation,
which
reinforced individual syringe labelling.
We found that introducing the Rainbow trays
appeared to increase anaesthetists’ awareness of the
potential for drug errors.
However, some anaesthetists commented on the
Rainbow trays being too large (occupying too much
anaesthetic machine worktop space) and/or their com-
partments being too small (Table 2).
Several anaesthetists identified a latent risk of syr-
inge swap using the Rainbow tray, due to unrecog-
nised, incorrect compartmentalisation.
Most of the participants were concerned about the
cost effectiveness of Rainbow trays.
Fourteen out of 20 of the participants labelled syr-
inges around the barrel at the neck of the syringe, pre-
dominantly to permit the accurate reading of syringe
markings (Table 3) while enabling easy identification
of the label colour no matter how the syringe was
placed in whichever tray.
Discussion
We found that anaesthetists thought their current
standard drug storage system was easy to use, low cost
and portable, but had the potential for syringe swap
errors, particularly when trays were crowded. They
360
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
 readily accepted Rainbow trays into clinical practice,
preferred them to standard trays and thought they had
the potential to reduce drug errors.
We developed this ergonomic study to conceptu-
alise how the Rainbow trays might work (or not),
rather than to demonstrate any impact on the preva-
lence of drug errors per se. Ergonomics is concerned
with the interaction between humans and their (work-
ing) environment. Understanding both how work is
actually done (as opposed to how work is imagined to
occur) and the impact of change on behaviour and atti-
tude is the key to changing practice successfully [14].
We found no clear ‘standard’ practice for drug
preparation and handling, despite this being a fun-
damental
component
of
safe
anaesthetic
practice.
This is perhaps more surprising to those outside
anaesthesia than those within. Although there are
legitimate debates about the balance between stan-
dardisation, clinical variation and professional auton-
omy, drug preparation and handling is a repeated,
low-variability,
high-risk
task.
Published
literature
describes drug preparation as a potentially high-risk
clinical activity, and several factors could reduce the
potential for error [2, 4, 21]. However, there is still
Table 2 Quotes about Rainbow tray usage, by subcategory theme.
Subcategory
Quote
Preparation
‘They do not change my practice, I prepare my drugs as I normally do with standard practice’ [B, 4]
‘They do not completely change my system of preparing the drug for the case. Except I have to
separate and label the syringes’. [C, 1]
Benefit
‘I did like it; it does not come with a lot of problems’ [Trust A, anaesthetist 4; C, 5]
‘I like it, it is straightforward; I like the colour code and how it’s organised, and it is easy to use’ [A, 8]
‘I like using rainbow trays. I find it a good way of storing drugs; I think they are safer than the
cardboard trays if used properly’ [B, 4]
‘I liked that they were tidy and they follow the normal order we use in the theatre’ [A, 1]
‘It is easy to find drugs and follow the normal sequences’ [A, 2]
‘I like the way that local anaesthetic drug are separate from the emergency drugs’ [A, 1]
‘I can see there is a benefit for [them] in [an] emergency’ [A, 7]
‘It is easy to identify syringes, especially in emergency situations’ [B, 2]
‘I like the way they ensure that you think about which drugs you might need and the way of separating
drugs very carefully, although syringes in colour coded trays does not mean that the right syringe will
get to the patient. Still, it is good and does add additional safety’ [A, 4]
‘It adds to the safety, as it is less likely to pick up the wrong syringe and the more likely to put the right
drug in the syringe in the right compartment’ [A, 8]
‘I would think that the risk of administering the wrong drug is reduced’ [B, 3]
Risks
‘There are a number of drugs that go in the white compartment so I think that means you could potentially
have a collection of drugs in that space that are potentially mixed up’ [A, 9]
‘In terms of layout of the tray, some compartments needed to be slightly larger, such as the other
agents’ compartment coloured white, as the variety of different drugs that would be placed in it’ [C, 5]
‘The size again was a drawback when regular drugs went to the patient, while the core trainee
managed the airway’ [B, 2]
‘Once you have used most of the drugs in the tray, it takes up a lot of room on the anaesthetic
machine table and made it more awkward to complete the anaesthetic chart’ [B, 2]’
‘It is a very bulky container that does not fit on the anaesthetic machine if everything is in the tray’ [B, 1]
‘There is potential for making the mistake of putting drugs in the wrong compartment’ [A, 2]
‘You might suddenly put drugs in the wrong compartment and pick them up without reading the label’ [A, 8]
Table 3 Subcategories, key emerging themes and quotes for syringe labelling.
Subcategory
Quote
Reasons
‘Around the barrel at the end does not cover any gradations’ [Trust A, anaesthetist 4]
‘I like be able to see the ml gradation and the labelling at the same time, and I think the
advantage is that the colour is visible’ [A, 8]
‘By labelling around the syringes, you can obviously see the label whichever way the syringe lays’ [A, 7]
‘The biggest problem was that the labelling stickers did not stick very well along the barrel, so
around it is the only way to make them stick’ [A, 5]
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
361
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
 no
definitive
consensus
on
the
best
method
for
preparing drugs.
The Rainbow trays were designed according to
Reason’s recommendation for reducing complexity and
in line with recommendations about the formal organ-
isation of an anaesthetic workspace and the handling
of drugs [21, 22]. Prototyping and informal user feed-
back improved various aspects of the design, including
compartment sizes, incorporation of a reusable base
and recyclable, disposable insert, and the separation of
similar colours.
Study participants identified that current practice
using relatively small, single compartment trays could
facilitate drug error through misidentification, but
noted that this could also be a problem using the col-
our-coded compartmentalised Rainbow tray. We do
not suggest that any system which involves humans
identifying labels will be error-free.
Introduction of the Rainbow tray appeared to have
benefits beyond the design itself, with participants
identifying an increased awareness of drug safety.
Exhortations to vigilance in response to drug errors
are perceived to be common practice within health-
care, with scant evidence of benefit [23]. In our study,
the Rainbow tray appeared to act as an ‘in the
moment’ reminder ‘making it easy to do the right
thing’. Cardboard trays remain freely available at the
three Trusts and yet anaesthetists continue to choose
to separate routine, emergency and local anaesthetic
drugs with the Rainbow tray system. Similarly, chang-
ing induction behaviour, from holding drug syringes
in one hand to selecting them individually, appears to
be a response to introducing the Rainbow tray.
We found it interesting how anaesthetists also
changed their practice in another, unpredicted way.
The coloured Rainbow tray inserts are designed, and
clearly labelled, as disposable. However, anaesthetists
routinely cleaned them after use. Clearly, this suggests
further design changes and/or education are necessary.
Related to this, further life cycle analysis is required to
clarify the environmental and cost consequences of
using Rainbow rather than cardboard trays.
Similarly, feedback indicated concerns about size
and workspace availability, due to the increased spatial
footprint of the compartmentalised Rainbow tray. The
relative size of the compartments themselves was also
challenged by some anaesthetists, who found the white
(miscellaneous) section too small in some cases to
safely contain antibiotic syringes and saline flushes
without overcrowding, suggesting that further, iterative
redesign of the Rainbow tray is necessary.
Another unexpected finding was that some anaes-
thetists continued to ‘cap’ syringes with filler needles,
despite this practice not being recommended [24, 25]
and the Rainbow trays being deliberately designed
not to accommodate a capped syringe. This repre-
sents a mismatch between ‘work-as-imagined’ and
‘work-as-done’ [26], and indicates an area for further
education.
Participants correctly identified that the Rainbow
trays
themselves
neither
prevent
incorrect
syringe
preparation, nor correct compartmentalisation (which
could lead to drug error). These are legitimate con-
cerns, and suggest that further education is needed
about using the trays to aid drug selection rather than
replace precise identification.
We identified considerable variation in how drugs
were prepared and labelled, irrespective of which trays
were used. Between Trusts and anaesthetists, syringes
were variably prepared before lists or before each case,
and/or the syringes labelled before or after preparation,
and/or the label applied circumferentially to or longi-
tudinally along the syringe barrel. We accept that there
is little consensus in these areas [8, 27, 28] but suggest
that there is a need to standardise these relatively basic
tasks to prevent potential error.
Merry et al. have designed an integrated drug
administration system in which anaesthetic drug trol-
leys are arranged to complement the process of anaes-
thesia. The bases of each drawer are divided into
colour-coded sections that match the class of drug
stored in each compartment [28]. However, they did
not quantify the effect of the system’s introduction on
drug error rates. Evley et al. examined the feasibility of
introducing either two-person or bar-coded drug con-
firmation in seven UK hospitals [9], but identified
workarounds and other concerns that might limit the
efficacy of each approach. The Rainbow trays may rep-
resent a pragmatic approach to introducing Merry’s
system into UK practice, where drugs are typically
stored in locked cupboards rather than in trolleys.
Pragmatic
approaches
to
safety
are
common
in
362
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
 anaesthetic practice. Pin index systems on gas cylin-
ders, colour coding and universal connectors, for
example, have all been introduced after considered dis-
cussion between anaesthetists, manufacturers and regu-
lators. This often requires an iterative process, to
overcome design imperfections identified during devel-
opment [29].
We have demonstrated that it is feasible to intro-
duce a new colour-coded compartmentalised Rainbow
tray into clinical practice at three NHS Trusts in Eng-
land. The trays were readily accepted into practice and
facilitated drug identification, as intended. Their intro-
duction also appeared to remind anaesthetists of the
potential for drug error and the need to check syringes
before drug administration. There were few negative
comments about the Rainbow tray. Further research is
now needed to determine both the best strategies for
ensuring continued use of the Rainbow trays, and their
effect on the prevalence of drug error. Ultimately,
introduction to other hospitals will inevitably depend
on drivers such as national recommendations [30, 31],
institutional policies, education [23] and cost, and we
intend to report on how these challenges can be over-
come in future papers.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly funded by the Association of
Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (AAGBI):
‘Evaluation of benefits, risks and barriers to implemen-
tation of an ISO 26825 colour coded anaesthetic drug
tray’, 2015. DA is a PhD student funded by Libyan
Ministry of Higher Education. LS and SG conceived
and co-designed the initial concept of the Rainbow
tray. The Rainbow tray is commercially available and
was purchased from the company using grant funding.
None of the authors have any financial interest in sales
of the tray. The company selling the trays (Uvamed,
Leicester, UK) provided free protoyping and samples
of the tray during development before the study was
started. Uvamed had no involvement in the design,
analysis or interpretation of this study.
References
1. Nanji KC, Patel A, Shaikh S, Seger DL, Bates DW. Evaluation of
perioperative medication errors and adverse drug events.
Anesthesiology 2016; 124: 25–34.
2. McClelland L, Holland J, Lomas J, Redfern N, Plunkett E. A
national survey of the effects of fatigue on trainees in anaes-
thesia in the UK. Anaesthesia 2017; 72: 1069–77.
3. Murianni L, Marano C. Building a safer NHS for patient.
Improving medication safety. Italian Journal of Public Health
2012; 2: 3–4.
4. World Health Organisation. WHO launches global effort to
halve medication-related errors in 5 years. 2017. http://
www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/medication-
related-errors/en/ (accessed 25/10/2017).
5. Webster CS, Merry AF, Larsson L, McGrath KA, Weller J. The fre-
quency and nature of drug administration error during anaes-
thesia. Anaesthesia and Intensive Care 2001; 29: 494–500.
6. Llewellyn RL, Gordon PC, Wheatcroft D, et al. Drug administration
errors: a prospective survey from three South African teaching
hospitals. Anaesthesia and Intensive Care 2009; 37: 93.
7. Fasting S, Gisvold SE. Adverse drug errors in anesthesia, and
the impact of coloured syringe labels. Canadian Journal of
Anesthesia 2000; 47: 1060–7.
8. Orser BA, Chen RJ, Yee DA. Medication errors in anesthetic
practice: a survey of 687 practitioners. Canadian Journal of
Anesthesia 2001; 48: 139–46.
9. Evley R, Russell J, Mathew D, Hall R, Gemmell L, Mahajan RP
.
Confirming the drugs administered during anaesthesia: a fea-
sibility study in the pilot National Health Service sites, UK. Bri-
tish Journal of Anaesthesia 2010; 105: 289–96.
10. Merry AF, Shipp DH, Lowinger JS. The contribution of labelling
to safe medication administration in anaesthetic practice. Best
Practice and Research Clinical Anaesthesiology 2011; 25:
145–59.
11. Cooper L, DiGiovanni N, Schultz L, Taylor AM, Nossaman B.
Influences observed on incidence and reporting of medication
errors in anesthesia. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia 2012;
59: 562–70.
12. Chopra V, Bovill J, Spierdijk J. Accidents, near accidents and
complications during anaesthesia A retrospective analysis of
a 10-year period in a teaching hospital. Anaesthesia 1990;
45: 3–6.
13. Westbrook JI, Woods A, Rob MI, Dunsmuir WT, Day RO. Associ-
ation of interruptions with an increased risk and severity of
medication administration errors. Archives of Internal Medi-
cine 2010; 170: 683–90.
14. Jothiraj H, Howland-Harris J, Evley R, Moppett IK. Distractions
and the anaesthetist: a qualitative study of context and direc-
tion of distraction. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2013; 111:
477–82.
15. Cooper JB, Newbower RS, Long CD, McPeek B. Preventable
anesthesia mishaps: a study of human factors. Anesthesiology
1978; 49: 399–406.
16. Starks H, Trinidad SB. Choose your method: a comparison of
phenomenology, discourse analysis, and grounded theory.
Qualitative Health Research 2007; 17: 1372–80.
17. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 26825:2008.
Anaesthetic and respiratory equipment - user-applied labels for
syringes containing drugs used during anaesthesia - colours,
design
and
performance.
https://www.iso.org/standard/
43811.html (accessed 25/10/2017).
18. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are
enough? An experiment with data saturation and variability.
Field Methods 2006; 18: 59–82.
19. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide
through qualitative analysis. London: SAGE Publications, 2006.
20. NVivo 11. Qualitative data analysis software. London, UK:
QSR International Limited, 2015.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
363
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
 21. Pandit JJ, Andrade J, Bogod DG, et al. 5th National Audit Pro-
ject (NAP5) on accidental awareness during general anaes-
thesia: summary of main findings and risk factors. British
Journal of Anaesthesia 2014; 113: 549–59.
22. Reason J. Human error: models and management. British
Medical Journal 2000; 320: 768–70.
23. Safe Anaesthesia Liaison Group (SALG). Patient safety update.
https://www.rcoa.ac.uk/sites/default/files/PSU-January-2017.
pdf (accessed 25/10/2017).
24. Bergman IJ, Kluger MT, Short TG. Awareness during general
anaesthesia: a review of 81 cases from the Anaesthetic Inci-
dent Monitoring Study. Anaesthesia 2002; 57: 549–56.
25. Currie M, Mackay P
, Morgan C, et al. The ‘wrong drug’ prob-
lem in anaesthesia: an analysis of 2000 incident reports.
Anaesthesia and Intensive Care 1993; 21: 596–601.
26. Moppett IK, Shorrock S. Working out wrong site blocks.
Anaesthesia 2018; 73: https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.14165.
27. The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland.
Syringe labelling in critical care areas review 2014 (updated
November 2016). https://www.aagbi.org/sites/default/files/
SYRINGE_LABELLING_2014_updated_20November_2016_0.pdf
(accessed 25/10/2017).
28. Merry
AF,
Webster
CS,
Mathew
DJ.
A
new,
safety-
oriented,
integrated
drug
administration
and
automated
anesthesia record system. Anesthesia and Analgesia 2001;
93: 385–90.
29. Cook TM, Payne S, Skryabina E, Hurford D, Clow E, Georgiou A.
A simulation-based evaluation of two proposed alternatives
to Luer devices for use in neuraxial anaesthesia. Anaesthesia
2010; 65: 1069–79.
30. Patil V, Joachim S, Banerjee A, Connor D, Kumar M. Guidelines
for the provision of Anaesthesia services for intra-operative
care 2017. https://www.rcoa.ac.uk/document-store/guidelines-
the-provision-of-anaesthesia-services-intra-operative-care-2017
(accessed 25/10/2017).
31. Souter A. Syringe labelling in critical care areas. Anaesthesia
2003; 58: 713.
Appendix 1 – Interview questions
1
What is your current practice for drug preparation
and storage?
2
Do you find any benefit of current practice?
3
Do you find any risks of current practice?
4
How
do
you
feel
about
using
a
standard-
ised/colour-coded drug tray?
5
Do you find any benefits of using the new rainbow
tray?
6
Do you find any risk of using the new rainbow
tray?
7
What do you feel should be best practice?
364
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 356–364
Almghairbi et al. | Feasibility study of new anaesthesia drug storage tray
