 The perfect storm: incarceration and the high-risk environment 
perpetuating transmission of HIV, hepatitis C virus, and 
tuberculosis in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
Prof Frederick L Altice, MD, Lyuba Azbel, MSc, Jack Stone, MMathStat, Ellen Brooks-
Pollock, PhD, Pavlo Smyrnov, MPH, Sergii Dvoriak, MD, Prof Faye S Taxman, PhD, Prof 
Nabila El-Bassel, PhD, Natasha K Martin, DPhil, Prof Robert Booth, PhD, Prof Heino Stöver, 
PhD, Prof Kate Dolan, PhD, and Prof Peter Vickerman, DPhil
School of Medicine and School Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA (Prof F L 
Altice MD); Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK 
(L Azbel MSc); School of Social and Community Medicine, Bristol University, Bristol, UK (J Stone 
MMathStat, E Brooks-Pollock PhD, N K Martin, Prof P Vickerman DPhil); ICF International 
Alliance for Public Health, Kiev, Ukraine (P Smyrnov MPH); Ukrainian Institute on Public Health 
Policy, Kiev, Ukraine (S Dvoriak MD); Department of Criminology, Law and Society, George 
Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA (Prof F S Taxman PhD); School of Social Work, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA (Prof N El-Bassel PhD); Division of Global Public Health, 
University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA (N K Martin DPhil); Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA (Prof R Booth PhD); Institute of Addiction 
Research, Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences, Frankfurt, Germany (Prof H Stöver PhD); and 
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia (Prof K Dolan PhD)
Abstract
Despite global reductions in HIV incidence and mortality, the 15 UNAIDS-designated countries of 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia (EECA) that gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 
constitute the only region where both continue to rise. HIV transmission in EECA is fuelled 
primarily by injection of opioids, with harsh criminalisation of drug use that has resulted in 
extraordinarily high levels of incarceration. Consequently, people who inject drugs, including 
those with HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis, are concentrated within prisons. Evidence-
based primary and secondary prevention of HIV using opioid agonist therapies such as methadone 
Correspondence to: Prof Frederick L Altice, School of Medicine and School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 
06510-2283, USA, frederick.altice@yale.edu. 
See Online for appendix
Contributors
FLA, LA, JS, PV, NKM, EB-P, HS, SD, FST, PS, RB, NE-B, and KD contributed shared responsibility in developing initial drafts and 
writing this manuscript. LA, PS, and FLA analysed the initial Ukraine datasets. PV, NKM, JS, FLA, and EB-P performed the 
modelling and were responsible for initial and final drafts of the modelling sections and the development of figures. LA and FLA 
performed the initial literature search. FLA, LA, JS, PV, NKM, EB-P, HS, SD, FST, PS, RB, NE-B, and KD revised each draft of this 
work critically for important intellectual content. All authors made substantial contributions to the design and approach, and approve 
the final version to be published.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet. 2016 September 17; 388(10050): 1228–1248. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30856-X.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and buprenorphine is available in prisons in only a handful of EECA countries (methadone or 
buprenorphine in five countries and needle and syringe programmes in three countries), with none 
of them meeting recommended coverage levels. Similarly, antiretroviral therapy coverage, 
especially among people who inject drugs, is markedly under-scaled. Russia completely bans 
opioid agonist therapies and does not support needle and syringe programmes—with neither 
available in prisons—despite the country’s high incarceration rate and having the largest burden of 
people with HIV who inject drugs in the region. Mathematical modelling for Ukraine suggests that 
high levels of incarceration in EECA countries facilitate HIV transmission among people who 
inject drugs, with 28–55% of all new HIV infections over the next 15 years predicted to be 
attributable to heightened HIV transmission risk among currently or previously incarcerated 
people who inject drugs. Scaling up of opioid agonist therapies within prisons and maintaining 
treatment after release would yield the greatest HIV transmission reduction in people who inject 
drugs. Additional analyses also suggest that at least 6% of all incident tuberculosis cases, and 75% 
of incident tuberculosis cases in people who inject drugs are due to incarceration. Interventions 
that reduce incarceration itself and effectively intervene with prisoners to screen, diagnose, and 
treat addiction and HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis are urgently needed to stem the 
multiple overlapping epidemics concentrated in prisons.
Introduction
The negative and mutually reinforcing nature of incarceration, substance use disorders, and 
blood-borne viruses such as HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis is especially 
problematic in the 15 UNAIDS-designated countries of Eastern Europe and Central Asia 
(EECA), and results in a concentration and deleterious interaction between these comorbid 
health and social conditions.1,2 EECA is now the only region where the number of new HIV 
infections has increased annually, from 120 000 to 190 000 between 2010 and 2015, 
resulting in the number of people with HIV increasing from 1.0 million to 1.5 million in the 
same period.3 Although new WHO guidelines recommend treatment for all people living 
with HIV irrespective of CD4 count, coverage with antiretroviral therapy in the region is less 
than 10%4 and is compounded both by suboptimal screening for diseases and low coverage 
of evidence-based HIV prevention strategies (eg, opioid agonist therapies with methadone or 
buprenorphine, or needle and syringe programmes).5,6
In EECA, proscriptive policies that promote arrest of socially vulnerable individuals at 
increased risk of HIV, viral hepatitis, and tuberculosis (eg, people who inject drugs, men 
who have sex with men, and sex workers) result in a concentration of risk within prisons, 
which amplifies disease and leads to onwards transmission in the community after release.7 
These epidemics converge in the EECA region, where abrupt and far-reaching social, 
economic, and political transitions since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 have 
resulted in poor public health consequences. Where such negatively reinforcing 
comorbidities exist, effective HIV prevention and treatment must address all problems 
simultaneously to have a noticeable effect.1 Yet, the HIV response remains inadequate as 
HIV incidence and mortality continue to increase in EECA, despite reductions worldwide.3
Altice et al.
Page 2
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Although EECA countries are culturally and religiously distinct and have undergone 
different political, economic, and social trajectories since independence, they share 
sociopolitical, philosophical, and organisational vestiges of the former Soviet Union, which 
now shape the evolving synergistic epidemics (also known as syndemics) of mass 
incarceration, substance use disorders, HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis. Aside from 
the high-income countries of Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia, the 12 other EECA countries 
are low-income or middle-income countries. Following the Soviet Union’s collapse, in this 
setting of political and economic instability, heroin entered through new trade routes from 
Afghanistan.8,9 Use of injected heroin increased and led to explosive HIV transmission 
among people who inject drugs, where the epidemic remains mostly concentrated today. 
Harsh drug policies and criminalisation laws ensued targeting people who inject drugs, with 
resultant mass incarceration, prison overcrowding10 and high incarceration rates (five of the 
highest ten globally).11 The concentration of people who inject drugs, people living with 
HIV with compromised immune systems, and individuals with tuberculosis in criminal 
justice systems creates especially high-risk environments for HIV and tuberculosis 
transmission.12–14 The unresponsive health authorities, unaccustomed to implementing HIV 
and tuberculosis prevention and treatment in prison settings, did not meet human rights 
recommendations.
Data have not, however, been comprehensively synthesised to understand how the criminal 
justice system contributes to the expanding HIV and related epidemics in EECA. In this 
Series paper, we apply the risk environment framework to describe how incarceration, HIV, 
hepatitis C virus, tuberculosis, and substance use disorders converge to produce drug-related 
harm and clarify how individual HIV risk behaviours are embedded within social processes, 
specifically incarceration within EECA.15,16 Further, mathematical modelling and statistical 
analyses are used to estimate the degree to which incarceration contributes to HIV and 
tuberculosis transmission among people who inject drugs in Ukraine, and analyse the 
effectiveness of evidence-based HIV prevention strategies in reducing the harms of 
incarceration.
Methods
Analytical framework
In this comprehensive review, we aimed to review the historical features occurring during a 
devastating transitional period after the dissolution of the Soviet Union that now shape the 
concurrent epidemics of incarceration, HIV, viral hepatitis, and tuberculosis in EECA; 
present a theoretical framework—termed the “risk environment”—for understanding how 
the criminal justice system, including policing and incarceration practices, influences the 
evolving HIV and tuberculosis epidemics; provide an analysis of up-to-date legal, criminal 
justice, and epidemiological data from the 15 countries of EECA; use detailed data from 
Ukraine to estimate the degree to which incarceration contributes to HIV transmission 
among people who inject drugs (using dynamic mathematical modelling) and tuberculosis 
transmission among people who inject drugs and the general population (using statistical 
analyses); and recommend new directions for prevention, treatment, and research.
Altice et al.
Page 3
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here, we examine how the risk environment within the criminal justice system 
synergistically reinforces, concentrates, and amplifies the effect of several medical 
conditions (eg, HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis). This is not only affected by social 
conditions (eg, incarceration, poverty) but also includes the policing practices that influence 
arrest and entry into the criminal justice system and the experiences within the prison 
environment itself, which result in the syndemic of social and medical comorbidities. The 
amplification of drug-related harm in prisons17–19 is best understood using the risk 
environment framework.15 This conceptual model posits that individual decisions about 
disease prevention and treatment are rooted in structural risk such as spaces (in this case, 
prisons) that, while exogenous to the individual, independently contribute to risk-taking and 
health-seeking behaviours. Hierarchical social structures within the criminal justice system, 
interpersonal violence, and the lack of safety, stigma, privacy, and autonomy often limit 
decision making by prisoners, including choices about health-care engagement and drug 
use.16,20 Access to prison-Wbased HIV and other health-care services (eg, opioid agonist 
therapy), and the capacity to reduce drug-related harm, is affected by these environmental 
factors at the social, economic, and political levels.21
Survey methods
In most EECA countries, access to accurate prison-related data and formal and informal 
operations of the penitentiary systems is limited. We therefore aimed to compile data about 
prisoner health and access to health services focusing on drug-related and comorbid 
conditions, and to compile supplemental survey information from prison medical 
departments with assistance from the United Nations Office on Drug Control (UNODC) 
using official governmental requests in each country. Among 15 surveys requested, 11 
responded, with findings included in tables 1 and 2.
Modelling the contribution of incarceration to HIV and tuberculosis transmission
We conducted dynamic HIV transmission modelling to assess the long-term contribution of 
incarceration to HIV transmission among people who inject drugs in Ukraine, and assessed 
the impact of eliminating incarceration and scaling up of prison-based opioid agonist 
therapy. Additional statistical analyses were used to estimate the contribution of current or 
recent incarceration on yearly tuberculosis transmission both in people who inject drugs and 
in the general population in Ukraine. Modelling and epidemiological methods and results are 
described in the Ukraine case study, with further details and model equations included in 
boxes 1 and 2 and the appendix.
Box 1
Modelling the impact of incarceration and scale-up of opioid agonist 
therapies in prisons on HIV transmission among people who inject drugs in 
Ukraine
We developed a national, dynamic model of incarceration and HIV transmission through 
drug injection that stratified people who inject drugs by incarceration state (never, 
current, recently released within the past 12 months, and past incarceration more than 12 
months ago), and HIV infection state (susceptible, initial acute and chronic HIV 
Altice et al.
Page 4
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 infection, and receiving antiretroviral therapy). Within a Bayesian framework,22 the 
model was calibrated to detailed national data about the incarceration of people who 
inject drugs (appendix p 3),23–25 and HIV prevalence (appendix p 4) among people who 
inject drugs who are never-incarcerated (11.9–13.6%), currently incarcerated (22.2–
35.4%), and previously incarcerated (26.6–29.7%).23,24,26 Based on the same national 
data, this calibration assumed elevated injection-related risk of HIV transmission among 
previously incarcerated people who inject drugs (relative risk 1.9–3.3 within 12 months 
after release and 1.4–2.0 thereafter; appendix p 5) compared with never-incarcerated 
individuals. Sensitivity analyses relaxed this assumption. Due to insufficient data, a non-
informative prior was used for the transmission risk among incarcerated people who 
inject drugs.
To estimate the long-term population-attributable fraction (PAF) due to incarceration, the 
relative decrease in new HIV infections over 15 years was projected when the 
transmission risk among currently incarcerated and previously incarcerated people who 
inject drugs was set to the same as never-incarcerated individuals. A conservative PAF 
assumed the transmission risk among recently released individuals to be the same as 
previously incarcerated—but not recently incarcerated—people who inject drugs. We 
also examined how scale-up of opioid agonist therapy to 50% of incarcerated people who 
inject drugs, with 12-month continuity of opioid agonist therapy after release, could 
reduce HIV transmission. The appendix pp 1–7 provides more methodological details.
When assuming heightened HIV transmission risk in previously incarcerated individuals 
who inject drugs, the model (figures 1, 2) suggests that community HIV incidence and 
prevalence would decrease dramatically by 2030 (incidence by 75% [95% credibility 
interval (CrI) 64–87], prevalence by 56% [95% CrI 42–66]) if the HIV transmission risk 
among currently and previously incarcerated individuals were set equal to that of never-
incarcerated individuals. Additionally, 55.1% (95% CrI 40.2–68.2) of new HIV infections 
would be prevented, mainly due to reduction in the heightened risk among recently-
released people who inject drugs. Indeed, 28.2% (95% CrI 13.6–41.1) of HIV infections 
would be averted if this heightened risk was only partly reduced to the same as non-
recently incarcerated individuals.
These findings were robust to less restrictive assumptions about the relative transmission 
risk among previously incarcerated individuals (appendix p 9). By contrast, if people who 
inject drugs had no new incarcerations after 2015, only 12.8% (95% CrI −4.7 to 24.6) of 
new HIV infections would be averted thereafter. If prison-based opioid agonist therapies 
were initiated in Ukraine, however, our modelled scenario suggests 19.8% (95% CrI 
14.6–24.5) of HIV infections would be averted during 2015–30, and community coverage 
of opioid agonist therapy would increase by 8.3%. Much of this effect is due to benefits 
of retaining prisoners on opioid agonist therapies after release, with only 5.6% (95% CrI 
1.6–8.3) of HIV infections being averted without continuation of opioid agonist therapy. 
Further projections suggest that community coverage levels of opioid agonist therapy 
(without prison-based opioid agonist therapies) of 28% (95% CrI 20–33), 48% (95% CrI 
43–50), or 16% (95% CrI 12–21) would be required to achieve the same impact as 
scaling up of prison-based opioid agonist therapy, depending on whether this community 
therapy was untargeted or targeted to never-incarcerated or previously incarcerated 
Altice et al.
Page 5
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 individuals, respectively. Considering the prevention benefit per person of opioid agonist 
therapy, the scenario of prison-based opioid agonist therapy is as efficient as targeting 
opioid agonist therapy to previously incarcerated people who inject drugs in the 
community, but is 1.6 times more efficient than untargeted community opioid agonist 
therapy and 3.2 times more efficient than opioid agonist therapy targeted to never-
incarcerated individuals.
These analyses suggest incarceration is a driver of HIV transmission among people who 
inject drugs in Ukraine, with 55.1% (95% CrI 40.2–68.2) of incident HIV infections 
possibly attributable to incarceration if we assume all the elevated risk among previously 
incarcerated people who inject drugs results from incarceration, or 28.2% (95% CrI 13.6–
41.1) if we conservatively assume only the additional risk among recently released 
individuals is due to incarceration.
Importantly, increases in risk behaviours after incarceration fuel the HIV epidemic in 
Ukraine’s injection drug users, highlighting the need to strategically target HIV 
prevention interventions to previously incarcerated individuals. Findings here, and 
confirmed elsewhere, suggest that expansion of prison-based opioid agonist therapy with 
effective community transition after release could be an effective strategy of achieving 
this.27–30 Strategies that reduce incarceration, such as alternatives to incarceration (eg, 
probation, drug courts), community policing that promotes treatment over arrest, and 
changes in drug criminalisation policies should also be considered, although the HIV 
benefits may be less.
Our analyses have limitations (detailed in the appendix p 10), most specifically related to 
whether the elevated transmission risk among previously incarcerated people who inject 
drugs is due to incarceration or higher-risk individuals being incarcerated frequently; 
future studies should examine longitudinal changes in risk before, during, and after 
incarceration.
Box 2
Statistical analyses of the impact of incarceration on tuberculosis 
transmission in people who inject drugs and more broadly to the general 
population in Ukraine
Statistical analyses were performed using national survey data to assess the short-term 
yearly contribution of incarceration to recent and lifetime tuberculosis transmission 
among both people who inject drugs and the general public in Ukraine. Detailed methods 
are provided in the appendix pp 12–13. Data sources included countrywide data from 
1612 people who inject drugs in the 2015 ExMAT survey and 402 prisoners in the 2011 
PUHLSE survey (appendix pp 12–13).23,25 ExMAT provided individual-level data about 
incarceration (ever, total time), HIV status, drug injection duration, tuberculosis status in 
the past 12 months, and ever. PUHLSE provided individual-level data for age, total time 
incarcerated, HIV status, ever injected drugs, and ever tuberculosis status. Self-reported 
tuberculosis status was used for all analyses using a validated survey question.31
Altice et al.
Page 6
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Using both datasets, linear regression models were firstly developed to evaluate the 
relationship between ever and recent tuberculosis status and ever being incarcerated or 
total duration of incarceration. Two survival models were then fitted to data for 
cumulative tuberculosis risk as a function of time in prison. Using the estimated hazard, 
an average tuberculosis incidence rate was estimated for each year of incarceration 
among prisoners (PUHLSE) or previously incarcerated people who inject drugs 
(ExMAT). The estimated incidence rate among prisoners (PUHLSE) and data for self-
reported recent risk of tuberculosis (ExMAT) were then used to estimate the relative risk 
of tuberculosis among incarcerated people who inject drugs or prisoners overall 
compared with non-incarcerated individuals who inject drugs or the community as a 
whole,32 and the population-attributable fraction (PAF) of incarceration to overall 
tuberculosis risk and tuberculosis risk among people who inject drugs was estimated 
using standard formula.
Our analyses consistently suggest that incarceration contributes substantially to 
tuberculosis transmission in Ukraine. After controlling for age, injecting duration, and 
other variables, we estimate that for every additional year of incarceration there is a 13% 
(95% CI 8–17) relative increase in tuberculosis prevalence among the overall population 
and a 6% (95% CI 3–10) relative increase in tuberculosis prevalence among people who 
inject drugs (figure 3).
Although only 0.5% of the adult population was incarcerated, we estimate that 6.2% 
(95% CI 2.2–13.4) of all incident tuberculosis cases result from incarceration. 
Conversely, among people who inject drugs this increases to 75% (95% CI 51–94) for 
HIV-infected people who inject drugs and 86% (95% CI 56–98) among HIV-negative 
people who inject drugs (appendix pp 13–14).
Our analyses from Ukraine indicate that the contribution of incarceration to tuberculosis 
in the general population was similar to findings from Russia,33 and provides new 
insights that suggest a markedly higher PAF of incarceration to tuberculosis transmission 
among people who inject drugs. Although data suggest the importance of incarceration 
for tuberculosis,12,33–35 there is a paucity of data surrounding the contribution of prison 
to tuberculosis incidence in low-income and middle-income countries, especially in 
EECA where tuberculosis incidence is high. Nevertheless, other studies and data 
presented here suggest that prisons contribute substantially to tuberculosis epidemics 
broadly, but especially in people who inject drugs in this region (panel 1). Although 
strategies that reduce incarceration for people who inject drugs would have the greatest 
impact, these findings also underscore the need to develop cost-effective interventions to 
diagnose, treat, and prevent tuberculosis transmission among incarcerated populations. 
Azerbaijan has emerged as a regional leader in implementing such programmes,36 where 
the government has adopted tuberculosis prevention activities within prison (screening, 
early detection and treatment, case isolation, and preventive therapy for latent 
tuberculosis infection). Such strategies, especially if focused on people who inject drugs, 
should address the increased tuberculosis transmission risk associated with current or 
previous incarceration. Such strategies, including HIV prevention and treatment, are 
Altice et al.
Page 7
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 urgently needed to control the HIV and tuberculosis epidemics in Ukraine and other 
EECA settings.
Panel 1
Sasha* and the ravages of incarceration
“Prisons here in Russia are places where people like me go to die. Though arrested often, 
I went there three times where I watched many people like me die. My first time occurred 
after police stopped me for a bribe. I had no money so he searched me, found a syringe 
he said contained heroin, and locked me up. When I got sick from withdrawal symptoms 
and was most vulnerable, they promised shirka [liquid poppy straw extract] if I admitted 
to stealing something that I didn’t. I refused, spent a year in SIZO awaiting trial, but was 
finally convicted for 2 more years because drug users like me don’t stand a chance. I was 
shocked to learn that drug injection in SIZO and prison was worse than on the streets of 
Gatchina, where I lived. The guards helped supply drugs and prison leaders made sure we 
remained addicted. Many of us paid with our lives. Some guys overdosed, others became 
HIV-infected like me and tuberculosis finished off the rest of us. Even though all of us 
were sick, seeing a doctor and getting care was nearly impossible. The bosses controlled 
everything. I swear the doctors were even worse than the guards. They just sent us back 
to our dorms to die.”
“I was luckier than most and survived my first incarceration. I tried to be strong and 
avoid drugs. I cut back, but I had money and connections so I still used. I was weak and 
the prison bosses made sure I could get high and keep their pockets full. Within a week of 
release, I was back at it again. The police knew it too! They stayed on top of me, 
extracting their bribes, but once I ran out of money, I was arrested and back in SIZO and 
prison for another 3 years. This time, they sent me to a colony for seasoned criminals.”
“I developed fevers and lost a lot of weight. I was sure I would die. My family had money 
and I was able to bribe my way and eventually saw a doctor. Without money, I would 
have died like everyone else. After 6 months of coughing and 15 pounds lost, my money 
bought me a fluorogram that was suggestive of tuberculosis, and I was shipped to a 
specialty tuberculosis colony. It seemed like everyone with tuberculosis also had HIV. I 
survived the scariest place I had ever been. We were 36 men in a closet with only 12 
beds. We stood, coughed on each other, while others slept in shifts. Most guys, including 
me, would stop or dispose of our tuberculosis medications so that we could get sick and 
move from our closet to the infirmary where we’d get our own bed. Many who went to 
the infirmary never left except in a pine box because their medications didn’t work 
anymore.”
“I must be really strong. As soon as I got out, my parents took me to the local 
tuberculosis dispensary. Even though I told the doctors about what happened, they didn’t 
believe me and I went through the entire process again of confirming tuberculosis. I 
received no medications for several months, developed fevers, drenching night sweats, 
*Sasha is not his real name.
Altice et al.
Page 8
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and weight loss again before they would prescribe medications. I told them the 
medications had stopped working before, but they started me on the same ones I took 
before. It was no surprise that medications didn’t work.”
“I got sicker and my parents drove me to St Petersburg to a special hospital, and paid a lot 
of money for the doctors to find me a bed, prescribe new tuberculosis medications, and 
for the first time assessed my HIV with a CD4 count. Thankfully, my HIV was not a 
problem, but they said the tuberculosis might kill me. A doctor from the AIDS Centre 
said that he would bring me HIV medications if my parents would ‘donate’ some money 
for the convenience. I remained connected to an intravenous drip for 2 months and 
received many tuberculosis medications that my parents bought. The tuberculosis and 
HIV medications began to work. My cough and fevers went away, I gained weight, but I 
went home taking an entire cup of pills every day for almost 2 years.”
“I know I almost died. Daily, I crave shirka! My mother knows me and never lets me out 
of her sight. Even when I try to make excuses to get some time alone, she never leaves 
my side. She knows me. I know me too! One minute alone and I know I will find shirka. 
If I do, I know I will get another free ticket to prison or to heaven. Either way, I am in 
prison. I prefer the prison in my house over the one where I know nobody cares.”
*Sasha is not his real name.
Historical framework, organisation of criminal justice, and its influence on 
EECA
Various governmental ministries other than the Ministry of Health administratively oversee 
the criminal justice system, including health-care delivery, in all EECA countries (figure 4, 
table 2). The Ministry of Interior oversees the police, including arrest and short-term 
detention in lock-up facilities. Health care in pre-trial detention and prisons falls under 
various ministries, although international organisations such as WHO and UNODC support 
the separation of oversight of investigations and prosecution from the execution and 
supervision of criminal sanctions. Although there are various organisational structures for 
prison health-care delivery across EECA countries, none comply with recommendations by 
the UN and WHO,37 now known as the Mandela Rules, that stipulate that health care should 
be equal to that provided within the community and be continuous from prison to 
community. Some countries, however, have created separate ministries devoted specifically 
to specialised prisoner supervision.
The criminal justice system in all EECA countries (figure 4), derived from the Soviet 
system, includes pre-trial detention centres, similar to jails and referred to as SIZO, where 
detainees remain for up to 2 years while awaiting sentencing. After sentencing, treatment is 
interrupted by transitional supervision for up to 2 weeks in etap, while awaiting 
transportation to prison, which is overseen by the Ministry of Interior, followed by 
placement in penal colonies (including lower-security settlement colonies, and colonies for 
juvenile offenders) or prisons with cell blocks after sentencing. The separate ministries 
responsible for oversight at various stages within the criminal justice system, however, often 
Altice et al.
Page 9
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 have policies that conflict with each other (eg, regarding allowance or provision of various 
services). Table 1 compares the prevalence of infectious diseases and harm reduction 
coverage in prisons and communities in each country. Table 2 and its expanded version in 
the appendix provide an overview of criminal justice system facilities in each country based 
on our survey and published reports. Sentenced prisoners are generally divided into 
minimum-security, medium-security, and maximum-security facilities, which we 
collectively term “prisons”. Prisoners with HIV are not segregated, but those with 
tuberculosis are isolated in specialised medical wards.
The legacy of Soviet-style addiction treatment, termed “narcology”,38 prevails in EECA 
countries and includes ineffective measures such as use of antidepressants, anxiolytics, 
antipsychotics, excessive physical exercise, neurosurgery, and kinesiotherapy to treat 
addiction. In Russia, the only criterion of successful addiction treatment is complete 
abstinence from any psychoactive substance, including from medically prescribed 
methadone and buprenorphine (which—despite being included on the WHO list of essential 
medications—remain banned throughout the country). These measures follow the Soviet-era 
models of repressive psychiatry, contrary to international standards,39 and often amount to 
suffering, discrimination, and humiliation for drug-dependent people (panel 1). 
Consequently, prison staff often harbour negative attitudes towards opioid agonist therapy 
and consider drug dependence to be a social and moral problem that contributes to criminal 
behaviour, rather than a chronic, recurring illness.40 Despite elevated HIV prevalence within 
prisons, the legal framework across EECA often falls short of human rights mandates for 
ensuring access to evidence-based services for addiction and HIV within the criminal justice 
system. Opioid agonist therapy with methadone or buprenorphine is internationally 
recognised as the most effective treatment for chronic opioid dependence, and is also among 
the most effective primary and secondary strategies for HIV prevention available.1,41 
Moreover, mathematical modelling suggests that expansion of opioid agonist therapy is the 
single most cost-effective means to control the HIV epidemic in EECA,42 although when 
combined with antiretroviral therapy scale-up, is more effective but also more costly.43 
Regional policies (tables 1, 2) vary on whether opioid agonist therapy is provided 
throughout the entire incarceration (Moldova, Armenia, and Kyrgyzstan; panel 2), upon 
entry to police lock-up with supervised withdrawal from opioids (Georgia, Lithuania, Latvia, 
Estonia, and Ukraine), only in the community (Belarus, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, and 
Kazakhstan), or not at all (Russia, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan). Moreover, contradictory 
legal mandates lead to an uneven distribution of care. In Ukraine, although national drug 
policies necessitate harm reduction programmes (including opioid agonist therapy and 
needle and syringe programmes) for all people who inject drugs, the medical guidelines 
require current signs of physical dependence, which are not always evident after a detainee 
completes withdrawal in police lock-up or in SIZO, disqualifying convicted prisoners from 
treatment.
Altice et al.
Page 10
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Panel 2
Candles burning in the night
Despite its well documented efficacy in both prisons and communities, three countries in 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia (EECA)—Russia, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan—
legislatively ban any type of opioid agonist therapy, while the remainder provide it in the 
community. Harsh criminalisation policies that result in high incarceration rates and large 
numbers of people who use drugs in EECA prisons—compounded by high levels of 
documented within-prison drug injection in the region—extraordinarily high levels of 
HIV, viral hepatitis, and tuberculosis and multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) 
persist. Despite these poor prognostic indicators, a few countries have prevailed over the 
misaligned ideological policies espoused by Russia that favour punishment over 
rehabilitation and implemented internationally recognised evidence-based HIV 
prevention and treatment for prisoners. For example, small and financially vulnerable 
countries such as Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, and Armenia have introduced all 15 
internationally recommended strategies for HIV prevention in prisons,44 including both 
opioid agonist therapy and needle and syringe programmes. These three countries have 
emerged as welcomed beacons in the region because they have boldly overcome regional 
pressures to ban these HIV prevention strategies. Without international funding from 
international donors, however, such programmes would not exist, even though they 
remain suboptimally scaled. These successful programmes, however, may soon be 
jeopardised by anticipated loss of funding from international donors. Moreover, because 
Russia considers itself a leader in the EECA region and bans both opioid agonist 
therapies and does not fund needle and syringe exchange programmes, it continues to 
exert its pressure on other countries within the region by creating new political and trade 
alliances. By combining their ideological principles to ban HIV prevention programmes 
within both communities and prisons with financial support through these trade alliances, 
they could potentially undermine achievements made thus far by some countries in the 
EECA region that have aligned their HIV prevention strategies with those recommended 
by the UN based on public health and human rights mandates. It is conservatively 
estimated that a third of all prisoners in Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, and Armenia are people 
who use drugs (approximately 6900), mostly of opioids. However, only 802 (12%) 
individuals are prescribed opioid agonist therapy. Introduction and even scale-up of this 
therapy is minimally restricted by cost, since methadone is extremely inexpensive. 
Although its efficacy is well substantiated, policy around opioid agonist therapy is shaped 
more by ideology and prejudices than by scientific evidence.45,46 Despite these 
ideological influences in the region, five countries (Armenia, Moldova, Kyrgyzstan, 
Latvia, and Estonia) have successfully introduced and expanded opioid agonist therapy 
throughout their criminal justice systems, including in pre-trial detention (table 2). 
Recent findings from Moldova, which may be emblematic of prison-based methadone 
problems in the region, suggest that myths about and prejudices towards opioid agonist 
therapy are amplified within prisons, resulting in bullying and ostracism of patients 
potentially undermining expansion efforts.47 In nearby Ukraine, where opioid agonist 
therapy is not available within prison, extremely negative attitudes toward it prevail 
among prison personnel, although recent findings40,48 suggest that provision of accurate 
Altice et al.
Page 11
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 information and training could partly overcome these myths. The within-prison risk 
environment is shaped by prisoners who use drugs, those who do not use drugs, prison 
personnel, and real and enacted policies for the setting; the next generation of efforts to 
expand opioid agonist therapies will therefore need to address multiple factors, including 
these myths and prejudices, and the within-prison drug economy, which probably 
propagates such myths to both incarcerated people who use drugs and to prison personnel 
who may view it as competition for the illicit drug trade. Continued support for opioid 
agonist therapy and needle and syringe programmes must therefore not only address 
service delivery itself, but also include strategies that combat misinformation and 
prejudices. Continued funding and provision of comprehensive prevention strategies are 
crucial for sustainability and should be coupled with shared best practices with other 
EECA countries that seek to align human rights and public health mandates in both 
community and criminal justice settings.
The confluence of mass incarceration, substance use disorders, HIV, 
hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis infections
Mass incarceration
The dramatic rise and inter-relationship between incarceration, HIV, hepatitis C virus, and 
tuberculosis in EECA is multifactorial.49–52 The Soviet collapse gave rise to many factors 
that independently and collectively contributed to unprecedented mass incarceration in all 
EECA, partly as a result of decreasing industrial output, living standards, and life 
expectancy.4 EECA, with 1.1 million prisoners, has some of the highest incarceration rates 
globally,11 giving rise to the term “criminological transitions” for EECA countries.53 
Although incarceration rates have decreased modestly over the past decade, 13 of the 15 
EECA countries still have rates that exceed the world average of 146 prisoners per 100 000 
population, with ten exceeding 200: Turkmenistan (583), Russia (455), Belarus (335), 
Lithuania (315), Georgia (281), Kazakhstan (275), Latvia (264), Azerbaijan (236), Estonia 
(218), and Moldova (212); Ukraine recently plummeted from 324 to 195 due to regional 
conflicts.11 This mass incarceration is the result of several intersecting factors, which have 
converged to result in some of the highest general-population prevalences of HIV,54 hepatitis 
C virus,55 and tuberculosis (including multidrug-resistant tuberculosis [MDR-TB])12 in the 
world,49,51 concentrated further within prisons where rates are substantially higher.
Substance use disorders
After 1991, injectable opioid use increased substantially due to changes in drug routes from 
Afghanistan and the contribution of economic collapse to a new drug economy.8,56 
Consequently, volatile opioid injection and HIV epidemics followed.10 Many harsh criminal 
sanctions towards people who inject drugs ensued, resulting in escalating incarceration rates, 
especially of those who either had or were at high risk for HIV. Moreover, with the backdrop 
of economic instability and low wages for public servants such as police, these individuals 
became targets for bribes and other forms of corruption. Inability to pay resulted in arrest, 
detention, and imprisonment.57,58 Consequently, people who inject drugs represent more 
Altice et al.
Page 12
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 than a third of prisoners in EECA, but the level could be as high as 50–80% in some EECA 
countries.23,59–61
Explosive dynamics of HIV transmission accompanied the growing rates of injection drug 
use and incarceration in EECA, with HIV incidence and HIV-related mortality remaining 
volatile and increasing. Although HIV is concentrated among people who inject drugs and 
their sexual partners in EECA countries, there is also evidence of transmission among sex 
workers and men who have sex with men.62 By the end of 2013, there were more than 1.4 
million people living with HIV in EECA, with more than 85% of these residing in Russia 
and Ukraine.63 Despite recent evidence of modestly expanded prevention programmes for 
HIV in some EECA countries, coverage with antiretroviral therapy (especially among those 
who inject drugs), opioid agonist therapy, and needle and syringe programmes remains 
low.5,6 Additionally, extensive migration between and within some EECA countries results 
in lack of access to HIV prevention on the basis of citizenship or official registration for 
governmental health care.59,62
HIV infections
Prisons are structural risk environments for transmission of infectious diseases (figure 5) 
because of the high concentration of people who inject drugs, have HIV, or have hepatitis C 
virus.54 HIV prevalence in prisoners is high throughout EECA. Although no reliable data 
exist for Turkmenistan and Belarus, HIV prevalence in prisons exceeds 10% in four 
countries—Latvia (20.4%), Ukraine (19.4%), Estonia (14.1%), and Kyrgyzstan (10.3%)—
and remains markedly higher than in the community in Uzbekistan (4.7%), Lithuania 
(3.4%), Kazakhstan (3.9%), Azerbaijan (3.7%), Armenia (2.4%), Tajikistan (2.4%), 
Moldova (2.6%), and Georgia (0.9%). In nationally representative prison surveillance 
studies, HIV prevalence is 22 times, 19 times, and 34 times higher in prisons than in 
surrounding communities in Ukraine,23,24 Azerbaijan,59 and Kyrgyzstan,60 respectively. 
Factors contributing to this increased concentration include harsh policies, laws, and 
policing targeted at people who inject drugs, and high levels of within-prison drug injection. 
In Russia, nearly all drug-related convictions are for drug use rather than drug trafficking.64
Estimates of the prevalence of within-prison drug injection range from 3% to 53%,17,18,65,66 
and have contributed to volatile HIV transmission within prisons in the region,67 a sobering 
consequence of the over-representation of people who inject drugs and have untreated 
substance use disorders within prison. Evidence suggests that people who inject drugs do so 
more frequently within the community than they do within prisons, but HIV transmission 
risks are substantially elevated within prisons because injection equipment is scarce and 
results in more frequent sharing of contaminated injecting equipment.18 This situation may, 
in part, contribute to findings that previous incarceration is independently associated with 
HIV among people who inject drugs in community settings,68 which we also found in our 
Ukraine case study. Moreover, few studies have examined within-prison drug injection in 
EECA, but data from HIV-infected Ukrainian prisoners, the only individuals who can 
transmit HIV, showed extraordinarily high levels of injection drug use within prisons (54%), 
with many syringe-sharing partners.17
Altice et al.
Page 13
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Effective HIV treatment with antiretroviral therapy is an effect method to prevent HIV 
transmission and must include prisoners,69 many of whom are people who inject drugs.70 
Achieving the UNAIDS 90-90-90 targets of identifying 90% of people living with HIV, 90% 
of these initiating and remaining on antiretroviral therapy, and 90% achieving viral 
suppression, requires more effective HIV screening, treatment, and optimal medication 
adherence71 in EECA countries, including in prisons. Despite National AIDS Centres in 
some countries reporting high coverage levels with antiretroviral therapy in prisoners who 
are diagnosed,61,72 most people living with HIV within EECA prisons remain undiagnosed. 
Only half of people living with HIV in Ukrainian and Kyrgyz prisons are diagnosed before 
leaving prison.23,24,60 In Ukraine, fewer than 12% of people living with HIV were aware of 
having HIV, with another 40% being diagnosed during incarceration, leaving almost half 
still not aware of their status.24 In Azerbaijan, however, HIV diagnosis approaches 75% of 
cases.59 Although both Azerbaijan and Kyrgyzstan provide high coverage of antiretroviral 
therapy for people living with HIV who are diagnosed within prison,59,60 fewer than 4% of 
people living with HIV in Ukrainian prisons receive it.23,24 No EECA country has data for 
antiretroviral therapy coverage after release, but even data from high-income countries 
suggest that the transition period from prison is one of heightened vulnerability, when 
antiretroviral therapy coverage falls precipitously and HIV risk is high,73 especially for 
women.74,75
Hepatitis C virus infections
One review55 reported hepatitis C virus prevalence among prisoners ranging from 3.1% to 
38.0%, with the highest in central Asia.76 Representative prison biosurveillance studies 
show hepatitis C prevalence to be substantially higher in Ukraine (60.2%),23 Kyrgyzstan 
(49.7%),60 and Azerbaijan (38.2%),59 even though self-reported lifetime prevalence of 
injection drug use was substantially lower. These data suggest that drug injection is often 
under-reported in surveys. Hepatitis C infection in people living with HIV, when left 
untreated, complicates HIV treatment1 and is associated with accelerated liver fibrosis.77 
New direct-acting antiviral treatments are costly, but have low toxicity, short treatment 
durations, and can cure hepatitis C virus in more than 90% of patients, irrespective of HIV 
status.78 An internationally funded hepatitis C elimination strategy in Georgia has allowed 
prisoners to access this treatment, but it is not accessible elsewhere in EECA prisons due to 
cost constraints.79
Tuberculosis infections
Prisons generally, and especially in EECA, promote tuberculosis transmission (particularly 
drug-resistant strains), primarily because of crowding that increases contact between large 
numbers of high-risk individuals in poorly ventilated facilities over extended periods.12,13 
Furthermore, tuberculosis control is complicated by low cure rates due to delayed diagnosis, 
ineffective control policies (ie, screening, isolation, and treatment) in prisons, and perverse 
environmental disincentives to start or continue treatment (eg, better housing, treatment, or 
food, being excused from harsh work, and profiting from the sale of tuberculosis 
medications; panel 1).80–82 Incarcerated individuals often have risk factors which increase 
their susceptibility to tuberculosis (eg, poverty, substance use disorders, homelessness, 
Altice et al.
Page 14
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 malnutrition, and HIV infection) and are often released to the community before treatment 
completion, without effective transitional care.12,83–85
Factors contributing to tuberculosis transmission include overcrowding, high prisoner 
turnover, limited access to health-care services, delayed case detection and poor contact 
detection, lack of recommended rapid diagnostic methods such as Xpert MTB/RIF, and 
suboptimal treatment of infectious cases and implementation of tuberculosis infection 
control measures.83–85 MDR-TB is disproportionately prevalent in EECA prisons86,87 
because of high prevalence in the community88–91 and large numbers of HIV-infected 
people who inject drugs (who are more susceptible to tuberculosis due to being 
immunocompromised), and low treatment completion rates for tuberculosis.92 The Ukraine 
case study illustrates the large degree to which incarceration contributes to tuberculosis 
transmission in EECA, with tuberculosis incidence rates directly correlated with increasing 
mass incarceration.12 Additionally, MDR-TB incidence in EECA after independence was 
directly correlated with increasing mass incarceration.12
The Soviet Union collapse resulted in inadequate funding and supply of first-line 
tuberculosis regimens and extended confinement that facilitated transmission within 
prisons.93 In Belarus, MDR-TB strains represent 35.3% of new and 76.5% of previously 
treated tuberculosis cases, meaning that half of all tuberculosis cases are MDR-TB.87,94 
Incarceration and HIV are independent contributors to the risk of patients having MDR-TB 
strains.87 Remarkably high levels of MDR-TB also exist in Russia,95,96 Lithuania and 
Latvia,96 and Ukraine.97 International guidance for tuberculosis screening and treatment98 is 
inconsistently deployed in prisons throughout EECA, with resultant poor outcomes.83,85 
One notable exception is Azerbaijan, which reduced both tuberculosis and MDR-TB cases 
through the effective implementation of the WHO’s Stop TB Strategy in the penitentiary 
sector, which involved routine screening, specialty tuberculosis hospitals, new infection 
control measures, rapid diagnostic testing, and training of prison personnel who now train 
prison staff elsewhere in EECA.36
Case study: evaluating the impact of HIV and tuberculosis transmission in 
Ukraine—a country in conflict
Ukraine, a middle-income country of 45 million people, is in the midst of conflict and has 
the highest prevalence of HIV in adults among EECA countries (1.2%), with tuberculosis 
and MDR-TB contributing the most to HIV-related mortality.3 Before Russia’s invasion of 
Crimea and the Donbas region, Ukraine’s incarceration rate per 100 000 population was 
324, but recently dropped to 195 per 100 000 in 2014 with large numbers of prisoners 
rapidly released to the community, increasing numbers of arrests and initiation of a new 
probation system that now supervises 70 000 people in the community. Incarceration among 
people who inject drugs in national surveys, however, does not appear to have decreased 
from 2011 to 2015.99,100 HIV prevention services in Ukraine are under-scaled with only 
2.7% of 310 000 people who inject drugs prescribed opioid agonist therapy and only 20% of 
people living with HIV prescribed antiretroviral therapy. Globally and within EECA, people 
who inject drugs experience high levels of incarceration (lifetime: 40–85%),101,102 and 
Altice et al.
Page 15
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 current or previous incarceration is associated with heightened injecting risks and increased 
transmission of HIV and hepatitis C virus.103–105 In Ukraine, at least 52% of people who 
inject drugs have been incarcerated,25,26,106 with previously incarcerated people who inject 
drugs reporting an average of five incarcerations, each a year in duration.23,25,26
Data from three recent national surveys among people who inject drugs25,26 and current 
prisoners23 in Ukraine were used for the epidemiological analyses and HIV transmission 
modelling, described briefly in boxes 1 and 2 and further in the appendix. These data 
suggest that previously incarcerated people who inject drugs have a significantly higher HIV 
prevalence than never-incarcerated people who inject drugs (28% vs 13%; appendix figure p 
25), even after controlling for injecting duration (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 1.8, 95% CI 1.6–
2.1). Additionally, they have heightened HIV risk behaviours, with previously incarcerated 
people who inject drugs reporting 3.9 (95% CI 2.8–5.0) more injections per month,26 and a 
1.5 times (95% CI 1.3–1.9) greater chance of sharing syringes26 than never-incarcerated 
people who inject drugs, even after controlling for injecting duration. Recently released 
people who inject drugs (in the past year) had an even greater likelihood of syringe sharing 
(aOR 2.2, 95% CI 1.6–3.0).26 Similarly, currently incarcerated people who inject drugs have 
more than twice the HIV prevalence of never-incarcerated people who inject drugs (28.5% 
vs 12.8%)23,24,26 and high rates of syringe sharing.17,57 Together, these data suggest that 
incarceration and the post-release period are important contributors to HIV transmission 
among people who inject drugs in Ukraine and forms the basis for our HIV modelling (box 
1). This modelling suggests that incarceration, and specifically the heightened injecting risks 
after incarceration, could contribute 55% of new HIV infections among people who inject 
drugs in Ukraine over the next 15 years if we assume all this elevated risk is attributable to 
incarceration, or 28% if we conservatively assume that only the heightened risk among 
recently released people who inject drugs is due to incarceration. Conversely, reduced 
incarceration of people who inject drugs is unlikely to substantially decrease new HIV 
infections over the 15-year period because of the remaining elevated risk among previously 
incarcerated people who inject drugs. Scaling up and continuing prison-based opioid agonist 
therapy after release, however, could avert 19.8% of HIV infections over 15 years because it 
directly reduces the heightened post-release risk (figures 1, 2).
Tuberculosis incidence across EECA is high (nearly all more than 100 per 100 000 
population), and is positively correlated with country-level incarceration rates,12 
highlighting the importance of within-prison tuberculosis transmission to the countrywide 
epidemics. An ecological analysis12 estimated that across EECA, each percentage point 
increase in a country’s incarceration rate corresponded to a 0.34% increase in tuberculosis 
incidence (95% CI 0.10–0.58). Findings from a systematic review33 suggested that 
tuberculosis incidence in low-income and middle-income countries is ten to more than 30 
times greater within prison than in the community. Few studies, however, have estimated the 
contribution of incarceration to the tuberculosis epidemic in EECA, with the systematic 
review estimating that between 5% and 17% of tuberculosis cases in Russia could be due to 
exposure within prison.33 We therefore conducted in-depth statistical analyses with the 
datasets used for the HIV modelling23,25,26 to evaluate the role of incarceration for 
increasing tuberculosis disease risk among the general population and in people who inject 
drugs in Ukraine (box 2). These analyses suggest that incarceration is an important 
Altice et al.
Page 16
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contributor to tuberculosis transmission (figure 3), and could be responsible for three-
quarters of new yearly tuberculosis infections among people who inject drugs and 6.2% of 
all yearly tuberculosis infections in Ukraine.
Risk environment framework for criminal justice settings in the region
Overview
Figure 5 provides an overview of the risk environment factors in both the community and 
criminal justice system that contribute to onward disease transmission in EECA. The high 
prevalence of these infections in the community, coupled with both micro-level and macro-
level factors embedded within the physical, social, economic, and policy and legal 
framework, result in the concentration of high-risk key populations such as those who inject 
drugs and sex workers in the criminal justice system. Incarceration, a physical factor, further 
amplifies these conditions by concentrating individuals with these infections. It also disrupts 
injection and social networks, a social factor, by creating new and riskier networks that 
develop as a survival tactic during incarceration.107 HIV prevalence in Ukrainian prisons is 
high (19.4%),23 but policy factors forbidding opioid agonist therapy or needle and syringe 
programmes, poor HIV detection, and low antiretroviral therapy coverage24 facilitate 
frequent sharing of injecting equipment17 and probably fuel HIV and hepatitis C virus 
transmission.17,23,24,60 Similarly, individuals released from prison are highly stigmatised 
(social factor), relapse to drug use quickly (policy factor), develop new injection networks 
(social factor), and policing efforts target people who inject drugs and former prisoners due 
to registration of people who inject drugs in the community (policy factor).57 Our analyses 
from our Ukraine case study suggest that the prison risk environment contributes to both 
HIV and tuberculosis transmission in people who inject drugs and tuberculosis transmission 
more generally to the community. Moreover, our findings suggest that introducing opioid 
agonist therapy to 50% of people who inject drugs within prison and retaining them in 
treatment for 12 months post-release would be the most effective strategy to reduce HIV 
incidence over the next 15 years, suggesting that this risk environment can be greatly 
influenced by the introduction of evidence-based addiction treatment with continuity into the 
community after release.
Drug-related policies
Key populations face many legal barriers that simultaneously contribute to incarceration and 
access to essential HIV programmes and services.108,109 Drug policies vary considerably. In 
seven EECA countries (Russia, Uzbekistan, Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Lithuania, and 
Latvia) official names-based registration of people who inject drugs is required to receive 
treatment, including opioid agonist therapy. Registration, however, often results in 
restrictions in employment, loss of privileges (eg, driver’s licence), and targeting by 
police.57,110–112 Moreover, a passport and an official address is required for employment in 
Ukraine, undermining economic stability.111 Collectively, these restrictions perpetuate re-
incarceration,113 especially given that alternatives to incarceration are uncommon in any 
EECA country. Addiction experts are required to report anyone accessing services, including 
for diagnosis confirmation, registration, and treatment. In most registries, there is little 
guidance or criteria to remove names from the registry or to define recovery from addiction. 
Altice et al.
Page 17
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In Moldova and Uzbekistan, people who inject drugs are monitored for 3 years before 
removal from the registry is considered. In Uzbekistan, removal from the registry occurs 
upon incarceration. Otherwise, name-based registries persist for life.
Six countries have a mix of administrative and criminal penalties for drug possession. In 
Kazakhstan, administrative procedures can be deployed twice annually for drug possession, 
after which arrest and criminal sanctions ensue. In Kyrgyzstan, these penalties differ based 
on the quantity of illicit drugs found. Elsewhere, administrative procedures are used for 
individuals caught in possession of limited amounts for personal use, although the amount 
varies. In all countries, the criminal code defines the purchase of illicit drugs as an 
incarcerable criminal offence.
Punitive drug laws restrict access to HIV testing and treatment for people who inject drugs. 
Criminalisation of drug use and discriminatory practices restrict access to needle and syringe 
programmes and community agencies where these services are located. Harm reduction 
services are often legally restricted to adults. Police in some countries arrest people who 
inject drugs who access harm reduction services and confiscate drugs and syringes, or 
extract bribes for the possession of syringes or needles.57,58,114,115 In one Russian survey of 
people who inject drugs, more than 60% had been arrested for needle possession or had 
drugs planted on them by the police.116
Sexual activity policies
Although many EECA countries have repealed laws prohibiting same-sex relationships, 
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan continue to enforce them. Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Ukraine, 
and Armenia have laws that criminalise sex acts between consenting adults of the same 
gender, sodomy, and cross-dressing or gender impersonation. Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan 
have legislation where the age of consent differs for homosexual and heterosexual sex; 
Kyrgyzstan has laws or policing practices criminalising or preventing condom distribution 
yet supplies them within prison. Although transparent in its intent to target and stigmatise 
men who have sex with men, Russia’s legislation prohibiting dissemination of “propaganda 
of non-traditional sexual relations [ie, LGBT] among minors” is ostensibly to protect so-
called traditional family values. These laws result in arrest of individuals promoting HIV 
prevention for men who have sex with men. Similar but harsher legislation is being 
considered in Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan.62
All EECA countries prohibit sex work, but police enforce it variably and especially target 
sex workers who use drugs. Kyrgyzstan, Azerbaijan, and Uzbekistan have laws or policies 
allowing mandatory HIV testing of key populations. Some countries (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Uzbekistan, Ukraine, and Armenia) have laws that protect against human rights violations, 
but they are not specific to HIV or key populations.
Community supervision
Community sanctions such as probation or drug courts are not widely available, and 
probation is not generally linked to treatment. Several countries have limited community-
based supervision, including Russia (supervision by former military or prison personnel), 
Ukraine (new in 2015), Moldova (started 2002), Latvia (started in 2005), Estonia (started in 
Altice et al.
Page 18
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1998 with expansion in 2013), Lithuania, Georgia, and Kazakhstan. Pilot projects are 
underway in Armenia to guide probation service initiation. Some probation programmes 
refer cases to drug treatment agencies or psychiatric hospitals. Many of the probation 
programmes emerged from the prison service and therefore reflect the prison culture. In 
most instances, probation is in its infancy.
Coverage with opioid agonist therapies
Many prisoners in EECA not only initiate drug injection within prison, but continue to share 
injecting equipment during incarceration17,60 and especially after release.17 Five countries 
(Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Latvia, and Estonia) have opioid agonist therapy in 
prisons, with coverage being extremely low. Georgia has a pilot programme in SIZO and 
four others offer it only in police lock-up (table 1, figure 6). Emblematic of the region, 
Ukraine’s prison personnel have especially negative attitudes towards opioid agonist therapy, 
although this is improved when they are sufficiently knowledgeable about its benefits;40 
prisoners, meanwhile, often have high expectations about recovery that diminish after 
release in the absence of opioid agonist therapy.48 In Moldova, opioid agonist therapy and 
needle and syringe programmes exist within communities and prisons, but treatment 
coverage is disproportionately lower in the community than in prisons, reducing access after 
release and necessitating many patients to discontinue therapy before release. In Moldova, 
prisoners receiving opioid agonist therapy are often ostracised by other prisoners, perhaps 
due to illicit drug economies within prisons that compete with opioid agonist therapy.40,47 
Thus, effective and essential scale-up of opioid agonist therapies must coincide with 
education and motivation of both prisoners and prison personnel.
HIV diagnosis
The first step to achieving the UNAIDS 90-90-90 strategy is HIV testing.71 Most EECA 
prisons deploy risk-based opt-in testing within prisons. One of the major challenges in 
EECA prisons is low HIV detection; more than half of HIV-infected prisoners do not know 
their HIV status.23,24,60,61 For those that do, however, most are tested within 
prison.23,24,59,60 Notable exceptions in which expanded HIV testing has greatly improved 
HIV diagnosis include Estonia117 and Azerbaijan.59 Required name-based HIV registries 
often undermine voluntary testing efforts and treatment engagement.98,108 Officially 
reported HIV data therefore underestimate true prevalence,118 with restriction of access to 
HIV treatment due to mandatory registration combined with stigma, discrimination, and 
criminalisation of key populations.6,110,119 Similarly, patients receiving opioid agonist 
therapy must be officially registered before receiving it in all EECA countries, which can 
lead to restrictions on employment opportunities, limitations in housing, and revocation of 
drivers’ licences, further compounding economic disparities.119
Conclusions
The 1990 United Nations Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners state that prisoners 
“shall have access to the health services available in the country without discrimination on 
the grounds of their legal situation”.120 This basic principle has been expanded in the case of 
HIV to also include preventive services, but has been infrequently applied, especially in 
Altice et al.
Page 19
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 many EECA countries where prisoners derive less benefit from prevention and treatment 
services than other citizens.121 Structural aspects of the criminal justice system in EECA 
concentrate most at-risk populations, which, taken together, probably contribute heavily to 
disease amplification and transmission within prison and to the community after release. 
These structural impediments also limit access to prevention and treatment services for HIV, 
hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis. Our findings suggest that the high-risk prison 
environment, including the immediate period after release (for HIV), is an important 
contributor to HIV and tuberculosis transmission in people who inject drugs and more 
broadly for tuberculosis transmission in the general population. Strategies that reduce 
incarceration overall (especially for people who inject drugs) and greatly expand the 
availability of opioid agonist therapy within prison, ensuring effective continuation of this 
therapy after release, will probably have the greatest impact on HIV and tuberculosis 
transmission in people who inject drugs interfacing with the criminal justice system. 
Strategies that reduce incarceration for the entire population, but especially for people who 
inject drugs, are also likely to reduce tuberculosis cases. Not only are policy reforms 
necessary to abrogate this trajectory, but further epidemiological, qualitative, modelling, 
cost-effectiveness, and implementation science research are crucial to help ensure that both 
prisoner and public health are optimised and consistent with human rights mandates (panel 
3). Such approaches could reduce the transmission of HIV, hepatitis C virus, and 
tuberculosis in these settings, especially if they also ensure continuity of care after release 
from prison.
Panel 3
Recommendations for prevention and treatment policies
Develop strategies to reduce incarceration rates in key populations
Laws and policies that criminalise personal drug use and sex work should be changed. 
New strategies should be developed that directly aim to reduce incarceration, especially 
to address tuberculosis transmission in people who use drugs. Modelling and statistical 
analyses here confirm the negative contributions of incarceration, especially on people 
who inject drugs, on perpetuating the HIV and tuberculosis epidemics. For example, 
current policing policies target high-risk individuals (ie, people who use drugs, registered 
drug users, sex workers, etc) and few provide community policing that focuses on 
engagement of drug users in evidence-based treatment for addition or harm reduction 
services in the community. Development of community policing efforts, pre-booking 
diversion programmes, alternatives to incarceration such as drug courts, or community 
supervision in probation that favours rehabilitation and treatment over incarceration are 
needed. Quality community supervision in probation that engages people living with or at 
risk for HIV in community settings where supportive social networks remain, and 
prevention and treatment is uninterrupted, is crucial.
Improve HIV testing and treatment strategies
In order to meet UNAIDS policies for 90% detection, coverage of antiretrovirals, and 
viral suppression (90-90-90), prisons in Eastern Europe and Central Asia (EECA) must 
improve HIV testing strategies because HIV identification falls far lower than UNAIDS 
Altice et al.
Page 20
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 targets. Although some countries meet mandates for antiretroviral therapy coverage, 
room for improvement remains. Identifying HIV and increasing antiretroviral therapy 
coverage within prisons must, however, be linked to continuity of therapy after release, 
including linkage to opioid agonist therapy.
Reduce gap between prison and community health-care services
Prisoners with comorbid conditions have a right to the same standard of prevention and 
treatment services as those in community settings.122 Substance use disorders should be 
addressed as chronic, recurring health conditions, and should be screened for and treated 
in accordance with the UN Mandela Rules that support similar standards in both prisons 
and the community. Opioid agonist therapy programmes are substantially less expensive 
than imprisonment; modelling findings suggest that the most effective strategy to reduce 
HIV transition is to increase coverage of opioid agonist therapy to people who use drugs 
within prison and effectively transition them to opioid agonist therapy after release. When 
international donors fund HIV treatment and prevention (eg, Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria; President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief), these agencies 
should stipulate that such prison-based programmes are both introduced and scaled-to-
need as part of a national strategy as a requirement for continued funding.
Introduce and expand opioid agonist therapy, needle and syringe programmes, and 
antiretroviral therapy in the criminal justice system
Modelling of HIV transmission suggests that scaling up of opioid agonist therapy 
coverage to 50%, combined with retention after release during the heightened risk period, 
would reduce new infections in people who inject drugs the most. National guidelines for 
HIV prevention and treatment should specifically stipulate equivalence of treatment in 
the community and the criminal justice system. International agencies support 15 
evidence-based practices in criminal justice systems. Where such stipulations exist, 
implementation and monitoring should specifically address criminal justice settings. 
Despite the existence of national guidelines, there is a failure to implement a 
comprehensive drug policy in prisons that includes psychological support, needle and 
syringe programmes, opioid agonist therapy, and antiretroviral therapy. Crucially, the 
scale-up of these interventions in criminal justice systems should coincide with improved 
continuity of care and prevention after release, which could have substantial benefits for 
HIV prevention.
Access to integrated care
Compared with individuals in the community, prisoners carry a higher burden of disease 
and often have multiple medical and social comorbidities—eg, HIV, hepatitis C virus, 
tuberculosis, and sexually transmitted infections, as well as psychiatric and substance use 
disorders—that require a comprehensive strategy to be addressed. Although policies that 
favour alternatives to incarceration are preferred, for those who do interface with the 
prison environment, such settings provide an opportunity to screen, treat, and provide 
continuity of care after release to individuals who have otherwise been missed by 
community prevention and treatment services.
Align prisoner health with international HIV prevention and treatment goals
Altice et al.
Page 21
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The 90-90-90 UNAIDS HIV prevention and treatment goal to diagnose, treat, and 
achieve viral suppression in 73% of all people living with HIV should be extended to 
prisoners where the HIV continuum of care in EECA is poorly characterised. To achieve 
this goal, innovations in HIV testing (eg, routine testing that has been successful in other 
settings where it was linked to treatment), provision of antiretroviral therapy to all people 
living with HIV, and achieving viral suppression through optimal adherence to 
antiretroviral therapy will require changes not only in prison-based services, but also in 
transitional programmes to the community. Our modelling suggests that transitional care, 
especially provision of opioid agonist therapy during incarceration and sustaining it after 
release, will be crucial to reduce HIV prevalence in the long run.
Continuity of care
Prison prevention and treatment should be embedded within a national framework for 
providing continuous care within SIZO and prison and after community release. Our 
modelling suggests that providing continuity of interventions such as opioid agonist 
therapy post-release is key to achieve large HIV prevention benefit among people who 
inject drugs. The criminal justice system is a crucial setting to provide treatment and 
prevention services where many diseases are concentrated, especially in people with 
comorbid conditions. Partnerships with non-governmental organisations should be 
encouraged to ensure that prevention and treatment services are maintained.
Education
To successfully implement evidence-based screening and treatment for substance use 
disorders, HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis, continuing education is essential to 
directly address and reduce negative attitudes towards people with these conditions to 
reduce both stigma and discrimination. Such professional development should target not 
only medical personnel, but also custodial staff to better align efforts to engage to 
promote health and wellness in prisoners.
Implementation of organisational strategies
Administrators and staff within the criminal justice system need to understand that 
provision of health care, especially to people who use drugs, is the best strategy to reduce 
recidivism and improve public health. The success of many international efforts to 
expand harm reduction strategies has been accompanied with efforts to help staff 
understand the value of providing health care. This is a long-term strategy to better 
integration of health and safety policies.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge funding from the National Institutes on Drug Abuse (K24 DA017072 and R01 DA025943 for 
FLA; R01 DA033679 and R01 DA029910 for FLA, SD, and LA; R01 DA037773 for NKM and PV; R01 
DA029010 for FST and R01 DA030768 for FLA and FST; and R01 DA026739 for RB), the University of 
California San Diego Center for AIDS Research (P30 AI036214 for NKM), the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
HIV Modelling Consortium (PV), the National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, University of New South Wales, 
Australia (KD), the National Institute for Health Research Health Protection Research Unit (NIHR HPRU) in 
Evaluation of Interventions at University of Bristol (EB-P and PV), and a PhD scholarship from the Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research Council (JS). The authors would also like to acknowledge Ehab Salah and Signe 
Rotberga from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for assisting with the international survey of HIV 
Altice et al.
Page 22
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prevention programmes in prisoners in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Chris Beyrer from Johns Hopkins 
University for this support and guidance, and Paula Dellamura for administrative support.
References
1. Altice FL, Kamarulzaman A, Soriano VV, Schechter M, Friedland GH. Treatment of medical, 
psychiatric, and substance-use comorbidities in people infected with HIV who use drugs. Lancet. 
2010; 376:367–87. [PubMed: 20650518] 
2. Singer, M. introduction to syndemics: a systems approach to public and community health. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2009. 
3. Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). [accessed May 28, 2016] Global AIDS 
Update 2016. http://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/global-AIDS-update-_en.pdf
4. WHO. Global update on HIV treatment 2013: results, impact and opportunities. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2013. 
5. Degenhardt L, Mathers BM, Wirtz AL, et al. What has been achieved in HIV prevention, treatment 
and care for people who inject drugs, 2010–2012? A review of the six highest burden countries. Int 
J Drug Policy. 2014; 25:53–60. [PubMed: 24113623] 
6. Wolfe D, Carrieri MP, Shepard D. Treatment and care for injecting drug users with HIV infection: a 
review of barriers and ways forward. Lancet. 2010; 376:355–66. [PubMed: 20650513] 
7. Awofeso N. Prisons as social determinants of hepatitis C virus and tuberculosis infections. Public 
Health Rep. 2010; 125(suppl 4):25–33. [PubMed: 20626190] 
8. Latypov A. Introduction: illicit drugs in Central Asia. Int J Drug Policy. 2014; 25:1154. [PubMed: 
25223246] 
9. Zabransky T, Mravcik V, Talu A, Jasaitis E. Post-Soviet Central Asia: a summary of the drug 
situation. Int J Drug Policy. 2014; 25:1186–94. [PubMed: 24954816] 
10. Jolley E, Rhodes T, Platt L, et al. HIV among people who inject drugs in Central and Eastern 
Europe and Central Asia: a systematic review with implications for policy. BMJ Open. 2012; 
2:e001465.
11. Walmsley, R. World prison population list. 10. London: University of Essex; 2014. 
12. Stuckler D, Basu S, McKee M, King L. Mass incarceration can explain population increases in TB 
and multidrug-resistant TB in European and central Asian countries. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2008; 105:13280–85. [PubMed: 18728189] 
13. Stuckler D, King LP, Basu S. International Monetary Fund programs and tuberculosis outcomes in 
post-communist countries. PLoS Med. 2008; 5:e143. [PubMed: 18651786] 
14. Basu S, Stuckler D, McKee M. Addressing institutional amplifiers in the dynamics and control of 
tuberculosis epidemics. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2011; 84:30–37. [PubMed: 21212197] 
15. Rhodes T. The ‘risk environment’: a framework for understanding and reducing drug-related harm. 
Int J Drug Policy. 2002; 13:85–94.
16. Rhodes T, Singer M, Bourgois P, Friedman SR, Strathdee SA. The social structural production of 
HIV risk among injecting drug users. Soc Sci Med. 2005; 61:1026–44. [PubMed: 15955404] 
17. Izenberg JM, Bachireddy C, Wickersham JA, et al. Within-prison drug injection among HIV-
infected Ukrainian prisoners: prevalence and correlates of an extremely high-risk behaviour. Int J 
Drug Policy. 2014; 25:845–52. [PubMed: 24951025] 
18. Dolan K, Moazen B, Noori A, Rahimzadeh S, Farzadfar F, Hariga F. People who inject drugs in 
prison: HIV prevalence, transmission and prevention. Int J Drug Policy. 2015; 26(suppl 1):S12–15. 
[PubMed: 25727258] 
19. Culbert GJ, Waluyo A, Iriyanti M, Muchransyah AP, Kamarulzaman A, Altice FL. Within-prison 
drug injection among HIV-infected male prisoners in Indonesia: a highly constrained choice. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2015; 149:71–79. [PubMed: 25659895] 
20. Culbert GJ, Earnshaw VA, Wulanyani NMS, Wegman MP, Waluyo A, Altice FL. Correlates and 
experiences of HIV stigma in prisoners living with HIV in Indonesia: a mixed-method analysis. J 
Assoc Nurses AIDS Care. 2015; 26:743–57. [PubMed: 26304049] 
21. Rhodes T. The ‘risk environment’: a framework for understanding and reducing drug-related harm. 
Int J Drug Policy. 2002; 13:85–94.
Altice et al.
Page 23
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Toni T, Welch D, Strelkowa N, Ipsen A, Stumpf MP. Approximate Bayesian computation scheme 
for parameter inference and model selection in dynamical systems. J R Soc Interface. 2009; 6:187–
202. [PubMed: 19205079] 
23. Azbel L, Wickersham JA, Grishaev Y, Dvoryak S, Altice FL. Burden of infectious diseases, 
substance use disorders, and mental illness among Ukrainian prisoners transitioning to the 
community. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e59643. [PubMed: 23527238] 
24. Azbel L, Wickersham JA, Grishaev Y, Dvoryak S, Altice FL. Correlates of HIV infection and being 
unaware of HIV status among soon-to-be-released Ukrainian prisoners. J Int AIDS Soc. 2014; 
17:19005. [PubMed: 25216073] 
25. Makarenko J, Mazhnaya A, Polonsky M, et al. Determinants of willingness to enroll in opioid 
agonist treatment among opioid dependent people who inject drugs in Ukraine. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2016; published online June 17. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.06.011
26. International HIV/AIDS Alliance of Ukraine. [accessed Sept 14, 2015] Integrated behavioral and 
biological assessment 2013—national survey of PWID (n=9502). 29 cities 2013http://
www.aidsalliance.org.ua/ru/library/our/2014/arep14/zvitIDU_obl_eng.pdf
27. Wickersham JA, Zahari MM, Azar MM, Kamarulzaman A, Altice FL. Methadone dose at the time 
of release from prison significantly influences retention in treatment: implications from a pilot 
study of HIV-infected prisoners transitioning to the community in Malaysia. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2013; 132:378–82. [PubMed: 23414931] 
28. Kinlock TW, Gordon MS, Schwartz RP, Fitzgerald TT, O’Grady KE. A randomized clinical trial of 
methadone maintenance for prisoners: results at 12 months postrelease. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2009; 
37:277–85. [PubMed: 19339140] 
29. Dolan KA, Shearer J, MacDonald M, Mattick RP, Hall W, Wodak AD. A randomised controlled 
trial of methadone maintenance treatment versus wait list control in an Australian prison system. 
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2003; 72:59–65. [PubMed: 14563543] 
30. Rich JD, McKenzie M, Larney S, et al. Methadone continuation versus forced withdrawal on 
incarceration in a combined US prison and jail: a randomised, open-label trial. Lancet. 2015; 
386:350–59. [PubMed: 26028120] 
31. Sprinson JE, Lawton ES, Porco TC, Flood JM, Westenhouse JL. Assessing the validity of 
tuberculosis surveillance data in California. BMC Public Health. 2006; 6:217. [PubMed: 
16930492] 
32. The World Bank. [accessed Sept 12, 2015] Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people). 2015. 
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.TBS.INCD
33. Baussano I, Williams BG, Nunn P, Beggiato M, Fedeli U, Scano F. Tuberculosis incidence in 
prisons: a systematic review. PLoS Med. 2010; 7:e1000381. [PubMed: 21203587] 
34. Getahun H, Gunneberg C, Sculier D, Verster A, Raviglione M. Tuberculosis and HIV in people 
who inject drugs: evidence for action for tuberculosis, HIV, prison and harm reduction services. 
Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2012; 7:345–53. [PubMed: 22678489] 
35. Sacchi FP, Praca RM, Tatara MB, et al. Prisons as reservoir for community transmission of 
tuberculosis, Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015; 21:452–55. [PubMed: 25642998] 
36. WHO. [accessed Sept 9, 2015] Azerbaijan brings quality tuberculosis care to prisons. 2015. http://
www.who.int/features/2015/azerbaijan-tb/en/
37. UNODC, WHO Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. A policy brief on the 
organization of prison health. Copenhagen: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and World 
Health Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2013. Good governance for prison health in the 
21st century. 
38. Elovich R, Drucker E. On drug treatment and social control: Russian narcology’s great leap 
backwards. Harm Reduct J. 2008; 5:23. [PubMed: 18577225] 
39. Rhodes T, Sarang A, Vickerman P, Hickman M. Policy resistance to harm reduction for drug users 
and potential effect of change. BMJ. 2010; 341:c3439. [PubMed: 20627977] 
40. Polonsky M, Azbel L, Wickersham JA, et al. Challenges to implementing opioid substitution 
therapy in Ukrainian prisons: personnel attitudes toward addiction, treatment, and people with 
HIV/AIDS. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015; 148:47–55. [PubMed: 25620732] 
Altice et al.
Page 24
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 41. MacArthur GJ, Minozzi S, Martin N, et al. Opiate substitution treatment and HIV transmission in 
people who inject drugs: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2012; 345:e5945. [PubMed: 
23038795] 
42. Kim SW, Pulkki-Brannstrom AM, Skordis-Worrall J. Comparing the cost effectiveness of harm 
reduction strategies: a case study of the Ukraine. Cost Eff Res Alloc. 2014; 12:25.
43. Alistar SS, Owens DK, Brandeau ML. Effectiveness and cost effectiveness of expanding harm 
reduction and antiretroviral therapy in a mixed HIV epidemic: a modeling analysis for Ukraine. 
PLoS Med. 2011; 8:e1000423. [PubMed: 21390264] 
44. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Policy Brief: HIV prevention, treatment and 
care in prisons and other closed settings: a comprehensive package of interventions. Vienna, 
Austria: 2013. http://www.unodc.org/documents/hiv-aids/
HIV_comprehensive_package_prison__eBook.pdf [accessed Sept 29, 2013]
45. Sarang A, Stuikyte R, Bykov R. Implementation of harm reduction in Central and Eastern Europe 
and Central Asia. Int J Drug Policy. 2007; 18:129–35. [PubMed: 17689355] 
46. Torrens M, Fonseca F, Castillo C, Domingo-Salvany A. Methadone maintenance treatment in 
Spain: the success of a harm reduction approach. Bull World Health Organ. 2013; 91:136–41. 
[PubMed: 23554526] 
47. Polonsky M, Azbel L, Wickersham JA, et al. Accessing methadone within Moldovan prisons: 
prejudice and myths amplified by peers. Int J Drug Policy. 2016; 29:91–95. [PubMed: 26809933] 
48. Polonsky M, Rozanova J, Azbel L, et al. Attitudes toward addiction, methadone treatment, and 
recovery among HIV-infected Ukrainian prisoners who inject drugs: incarceration effects and 
exploration of mediators. AIDS Behav. 2016 published online March 24. 
49. Schluger NW, El-Bassel N, Hermosilla S, et al. Tuberculosis, drug use and HIV infection in 
Central Asia: an urgent need for attention. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013; 132(suppl 1):S32–36. 
[PubMed: 23928052] 
50. Walsh N, Maher L. HIV and HCV among people who inject drugs in Central Asia. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2013; 132(suppl 1):S37–40. [PubMed: 23906997] 
51. Kazatchkine M. Drug use, HIV, HCV and TB: major interlinked challenges in Eastern Europe and 
Central Asia. J Int AIDS Soc. 2014; 17(4 suppl 3):19501. [PubMed: 25394010] 
52. Pokrovskiy V. HIV epidemic in Russia and neighbouring countries. J Int AIDS Soc. 2014; 17(4 
suppl 3):19502. [PubMed: 25394011] 
53. Pridemore W. Criminological Transition? Change and stability in homicide characteristics during 
rapid social change. Br J Criminol. 2007; 47:331–45. [PubMed: 19122789] 
54. World Health Organization (WHO). [accessed Aug 7, 2015] HIV in Prisons. 2015. http://
www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/communicable-diseases/hivaids/policy/policy-guidance-for-
key-populations-most-at-risk2/hiv-in-prisons
55. Larney S, Kopinski H, Beckwith CG, et al. Incidence and prevalence of hepatitis C in prisons and 
other closed settings: results of a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hepatology. 2013; 
58:1215–24. [PubMed: 23504650] 
56. Latypov A, Grund JP, El-Bassel N, Platt L, Stover H, Strathdee S. Illicit drugs in Central Asia: 
what we know, what we don’t know, and what we need to know. Int J Drug Policy. 2014; 25:1155–
62. [PubMed: 25449055] 
57. Izenberg JM, Bachireddy C, Soule M, Kiriazova T, Dvoryak S, Altice FL. High rates of police 
detention among recently released HIV-infected prisoners in Ukraine: Implications for health 
outcomes. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013; 133:154–60. [PubMed: 23769160] 
58. Mimiaga MJ, Safren SA, Dvoryak S, Reisner SL, Needle R, Woody G. We fear the police, and the 
police fear us”: structural and individual barriers and facilitators to HIV medication adherence 
among injection drug users in Kiev, Ukraine. AIDS Care. 2010; 22:1305–13. [PubMed: 20640954] 
59. Azbel L, Wickersham JA, Wegman MP, et al. Burden of substance use disorders, mental illness, 
and correlates of infectious diseases among soon-to-be released prisoners in Azerbaijan. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2015; 151:68–75. [PubMed: 25861943] 
60. Azbel L, Polonsky M, Wegman M, et al. Intersecting epidemics of HIV, HCV, and syphilis among 
soon-to-be released prisoners in Kyrgyzstan. Int J Drug Policy. in press. 
Altice et al.
Page 25
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 61. Vagenas P, Azbel L, Polonsky M, et al. A review of medical and substance use co-morbidities in 
Central Asian prisons: implications for HIV prevention and treatment. Drug Alcohol Depend. 
2013; 132(suppl 1):S25–31. [PubMed: 23932844] 
62. Thoreson R. From child protection to children’s rights: rethinking homosexual propaganda bans in 
human rights law. Yale Law J. 2015; 124:1327–44.
63. UNAIDS. Global Report: UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic 2013. Geneva: Joint 
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS); 2013. 
64. Stöver, H.; Teltzrow, R. Treatment systems in prisons in Eastern and Southeastern Europe. 
Strasbourg: Council of Europe/Pompidou Group; 2016. 
65. Jurgens R, Ball A, Verster A. Interventions to reduce HIV transmission related to injecting drug 
use in prison. Lancet Infect Dis. 2009; 9:57–66. [PubMed: 19095196] 
66. Kinner SA, Jenkinson R, Gouillou M, Milloy MJ. High-risk drug-use practices among a large 
sample of Australian prisoners. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2012; 126:156–60. [PubMed: 22658284] 
67. Caplinskiene I, Caplinskas S, Griskevicius A. Narcotic abuse and HIV infection in prisons. 
Medicina (Kaunas). 2003; 39:797–803. (in Lithuanian). [PubMed: 12960460] 
68. Lucas GM, Solomon SS, Srikrishnan AK, et al. High HIV burden among people who inject drugs 
in 15 Indian cities. AIDS. 2015; 29:619–28. [PubMed: 25715105] 
69. Milloy MJ, Montaner JS, Wood E. Incarceration of people living with HIV/AIDS: implications for 
treatment-as-prevention. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep. 2014; 11:308–16. [PubMed: 24962285] 
70. McNairy ML, Deryabina A, Hoos D, El-Sadr WM. Antiretroviral therapy for prevention of HIV 
transmission: potential role for people who inject drugs in Central Asia. Drug Alcohol Depend. 
2013; 132(suppl 1):S65–70. [PubMed: 23880248] 
71. Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. [accessed March 12, 2015] 90-90-90—an 
ambitious treatment target to help end the AIDS epidemic. http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/
documents/4/90-90-90
72. DeHovitz J, Uuskula A, El-Bassel N. The HIV epidemic in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. Curr 
HIV/AIDS Rep. 2014; 11:168–76. [PubMed: 24652411] 
73. Iroh PA, Mayo H, Nijhawan AE. The HIV care cascade before, during, and after incarceration: a 
systematic review and data synthesis. Am J Public Health. 2015; 105:e5–16.
74. Meyer JP, Zelenev A, Wickersham JA, Williams CT, Teixeira PA, Altice FL. Gender disparities in 
HIV treatment outcomes following release from jail: results from a multicenter study. Am J Public 
Health. 2014; 104:434–41. [PubMed: 24432878] 
75. Meyer JP, Cepeda J, Taxman FS, Altice FL. Sex-related disparities in criminal justice and HIV 
treatment outcomes: a retrospective cohort study of HIV-infected inmates. Am J Public Health. 
2015; 105:1901–10. [PubMed: 26180958] 
76. Zampino R, Coppola N, Sagnelli C, Di Caprio G, Sagnelli E. Hepatitis C virus infection and 
prisoners: epidemiology, outcome and treatment. World J Hepatol. 2015; 7:2323–30. [PubMed: 
26413221] 
77. Lin W, Weinberg EM, Chung RT. Pathogenesis of accelerated fibrosis in HIV/HCV co-infection. J 
Infect Dis. 2013; 207(suppl 1):S13–18. [PubMed: 23390300] 
78. Bednasz CJ, Sawyer JR, Martinez A, et al. Recent advances in management of the HIV/HCV 
coinfected patient. Future Virol. 2015; 10:981–97. [PubMed: 26877758] 
79. Mitruka K, Tsertsvadze T, Butsashvili M, et al. Launch of a nationwide hepatitis C elimination 
program. MMWR Morb Mort Wkly Rep. 2015; 64:753–57.
80. Gelmanova IY, Ahmad Khan F, Becerra MC, et al. Low rates of recurrence after successful 
treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in Tomsk, Russia. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2015; 
19:399–405. [PubMed: 25859994] 
81. Gelmanova IY, Keshavjee S, Golubchikova VT, et al. Barriers to successful tuberculosis treatment 
in Tomsk, Russian Federation: non-adherence, default and the acquisition of multidrug resistance. 
Bull World Health Organ. 2007; 85:703–11. [PubMed: 18026627] 
82. Müller-Nordhorn J, Holmberg C, Dokova KG, et al. Perceived challenges to public health in 
Central and Eastern Europe: a qualitative analysis. BMC Public Health. 2012; 12:311. [PubMed: 
22537389] 
Altice et al.
Page 26
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 83. Acosta CD, Dadu A, Ramsay A, Dara M. Drug-resistant tuberculosis in Eastern Europe: challenges 
and ways forward. Public Health Action. 2014; 4(suppl 2):S3–12. [PubMed: 26393095] 
84. Lange C, Abubakar I, Alffenaar JWC, et al. Management of patients with multidrug-resistant/
extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis in Europe: a TBNET consensus statement. Eur Respir J. 
2014; 44:23–63. [PubMed: 24659544] 
85. Efsen AMW, Schultze A, Post FA, et al. Major challenges in clinical management of TB/HIV 
coinfected patients in Eastern Europe Compared with Western Europe and Latin America. PLoS 
One. 2015; 10:e0145380. [PubMed: 26716686] 
86. Migliori GB, Dara M, de Colombani P, Kluge H, Raviglione MC. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
in Eastern Europe: still on the increase? Eur Respir J. 2012; 39:1290–91. [PubMed: 22654003] 
87. Skrahina A, Hurevich H, Zalutskaya A, et al. Alarming levels of drug-resistant tuberculosis in 
Belarus: results of a survey in Minsk. Eur Respir J. 2012; 39:1425–31. [PubMed: 22005924] 
88. WHO. [accessed Dec 13, 2013] Global Tuberculosis Report 2013. http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/91355/1/9789241564656_eng.pdf
89. WHO. Prisons and Health. Copenhagen: Regional Office of Europe; 2014. 
90. Dara M, Chadha SS, Vinkeles Melchers NV, et al. Time to act to prevent and control tuberculosis 
among inmates. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2013; 17:4–5. [PubMed: 23231999] 
91. Abubakar I, Dara M, Manissero D, Zumla A. Tackling the spread of drug-resistant tuberculosis in 
Europe. Lancet. 2012; 379:e21–23. [PubMed: 21924489] 
92. El-Bassel N, Shaw SA, Dasgupta A, Strathdee SA. Drug use as a driver of HIV risks: re-emerging 
and emerging issues. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2014; 9:150–55. [PubMed: 24406532] 
93. Arinaminpathy N, Dye C. Health in financial crises: economic recession and tuberculosis in 
Central and Eastern Europe. J R Soc Interface. 2010; 7:1559–69. [PubMed: 20427332] 
94. Skrahina A, Hurevich H, Zalutskaya A, et al. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in Belarus: the size 
of the problem and associated risk factors. Bull World Health Organ. 2013; 91:36–45. [PubMed: 
23397349] 
95. Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation. An analytical review of the TB statistical indicators 
used in the Russian Federation. Moscow: Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation; 2009. 
Tuberculosis in the Russian Federation, 2009. http://www.mednet.ru/images/stories/files/static/
VOZ_tub_09_eng.pdf [accessed Sept 16, 2015]
96. WHO. Towards universal access to diagnosis and treatment of multidrug-resistant and extensively 
drug-resistant tuberculosis by 2015. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. http://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/1/9789241501330_eng.pdf [accessed Sept 9, 2015]
97. Dubrovina I, Miskinis K, Lyepshina S, et al. Drug-resistant tuberculosis and HIV in Ukraine: a 
threatening convergence of two epidemics? Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2008; 12:756–62. [PubMed: 
18544200] 
98. Dara, M.; Grzemska, M.; Kimerling, ME.; Reyes, H.; Zagorskiy, X. Guidelines for control of 
tuberculosis in prisons. Geneva: Tuberculosis Coalition for Technical Assistance and International 
Committee of the Red Cross; 2009. 
99. International HIV/AIDS Alliance in Ukraine. Integrated behavioral and biological assessment 2015
—national survey of PWID. Kiev: International HIV/AIDS Alliance in Ukraine; 2015. 
100. International HIV/AIDS Alliance of Ukraine. [accessed Sept 14, 2015] Integrated behavioral and 
biological assessment 2011—national survey of PWID (n=9069). 26 cities 2011. http://
www.aidsalliance.org.ua/ru/library/our/2012/me/idu_en_2011.pdf
101. Grau LE, White E, Niccolai LM, et al. HIV disclosure, condom use, and awareness of HIV 
infection among HIV-positive, heterosexual drug injectors in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. 
AIDS Behav. 2011; 15:45–57. [PubMed: 20700645] 
102. Li L, Assanangkornchai S, Duo L, McNeil E, Li J. Risk behaviors, prevalence of HIV and 
hepatitis C virus infection and population size of current injection drug users in a China-
Myanmar border city: results from a Respondent-Driven Sampling Survey in 2012. PLoS One. 
2014; 9:e106899. [PubMed: 25203256] 
103. Allen EJ, Palmateer NE, Hutchinson SJ, Cameron S, Goldberg DJ, Taylor A. Association between 
harm reduction intervention uptake and recent hepatitis C infection among people who inject 
Altice et al.
Page 27
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 drugs attending sites that provide sterile injecting equipment in Scotland. Int J Drug Policy. 2012; 
23:346–52. [PubMed: 22940142] 
104. Cepeda JA, Niccolai LM, Lyubimova A, Kershaw T, Levina O, Heimer R. High-risk behaviors 
after release from incarceration among people who inject drugs in St. Petersburg, Russia. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2015; 147:196–202. [PubMed: 25496706] 
105. Milloy MJS, Buxton J, Wood E, Li K, Montaner JSG, Kerr T. Elevated HIV risk behaviour among 
recently incarcerated injection drug users in a Canadian setting: a longitudinal analysis. BMC 
Public Health. 2009; 9:156. [PubMed: 19473508] 
106. Booth RE, Kwiatkowski CF, Brewster JT, Sinitsyna L, Dvoryak S. Predictors of HIV sero-status 
among drug injectors at three Ukraine sites. AIDS. 2006; 20:2217–23. [PubMed: 17086062] 
107. Maru DS, Basu S, Altice FL. HIV control efforts should directly address incarceration. Lancet 
Infect Dis. 2007; 7:568–69. [PubMed: 17714668] 
108. Baral S, Todd CS, Aumakhan B, Lloyd J, Delegchoimbol A, Sabin K. HIV among female sex 
workers in the Central Asian Republics, Afghanistan, and Mongolia: contexts and convergence 
with drug use. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013; 132(suppl 1):S13–16. [PubMed: 23954072] 
109. Ancker S, Rechel B. Policy responses to HIV/AIDS in Central Asia. Glob Public Health. 2015; 
10:817–33. [PubMed: 26189875] 
110. Izenberg J, Altice FL. Next steps for Ukraine—abolition of HIV registries, implementation of 
routine HIV testing and expansion of services. Addiction. 2010; 105:569–70. [PubMed: 
20403006] 
111. Bojko MJ, Mazhnaya A, Makarenko I, et al. “Bureaucracy & beliefs”: assessing the barriers to 
accessing opioid substitution therapy by people who inject drugs in Ukraine. Drugs (Abingdon 
Engl). 2015; 22:255–62. [PubMed: 27087758] 
112. Scutelniciuc, O.; Bivol, S.; Plamadeala, D.; Slobozian, V. Moldova Ministry of Health. Behavioral 
surveillance survey among IDUs who are beneficiaries of harm reduction programs. European 
Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA); 2009. http://
www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/countryoverviews/md [accessed Sept 7, 2015]
113. Mazhnaya A, Bojko MJ, Makarenko I, et al. In their own voices: breaking the vicious cycle of 
addiction, treatment and criminal justice among people who inject drugs in Ukraine. Drugs Educ 
Prev Policy. 2016; 23:163–75.
114. Spicer N, Harmer A, Aleshkina J, et al. Circus monkeys or change agents? Civil society advocacy 
for HIV/AIDS in adverse policy environments. Soc Sci Med. 2011; 73:1748–55. [PubMed: 
22036298] 
115. Booth RE, Dvoryak S, Sung-Joon M, et al. Law enforcement practices associated with HIV 
infection among injection drug users in Odessa, Ukraine. AIDS Behav. 2013; 17:2604–14. 
[PubMed: 23754613] 
116. Lunze K, Raj A, Cheng DM, et al. Punitive policing and associated substance use risks among 
HIV-positive people in Russia who inject drugs. J Int AIDS Soc. 2014; 17:19043. [PubMed: 
25014321] 
117. Kivimets K, Uuskula A. HIV testing and counselling in Estonian prisons, 2012 to 2013: aims, 
processes and impacts. Euro Surveill. 2014; 19:20970. [PubMed: 25443037] 
118. Cakalo JI, Bozicevic I, Vitek C, Mandel JS, Salyuk T, Rutherford GW. Misclassification of men 
with reported HIV infection in Ukraine. AIDS Behav. 2015; 19:1938–40. [PubMed: 26070886] 
119. Bojko MJ, Dvoriak S, Altice FL. At the crossroads: HIV prevention and treatment for people who 
inject drugs in Ukraine. Addiction. 2013; 108:1697–99. [PubMed: 23745777] 
120. United Nations. [accessed March 12, 2010] 45/111. Basic principles for the treatment of 
prisoners. 1990. http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/45/a45r111.htm
121. Bretschneider W, Elger BS. Expert perspectives on Western European prison health services: do 
ageing prisoners receive equivalent care? J Bioeth Inq. 2014; 11:319–32. [PubMed: 24965437] 
122. Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. [accessed July 29, 2009] CESCR General 
Comment No. 14: the Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health. (Art. 12) http://
www.refworld.org/pdfid/4538838d0.pdf
Altice et al.
Page 28
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Search strategy and selection criteria
We conducted a comprehensive review of peer-reviewed publications and reports related 
to addiction, HIV, hepatitis C virus, and tuberculosis treatment and prevention in the 
criminal justice systems in the 15 countries of Eastern Europe and Asia (Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan). Keywords and 
MeSH headings related to incarceration (ie, “inmate”, “prison”, “prisoner”, “detainee”, 
“criminal justice”, “pre-trial”, “detention”, “jail”, “SIZO”, “correctional”) were cross-
referenced with citations pertaining to each of the focus infectious diseases (“HIV”, 
“AIDS”, “HCV”, “tuberculosis”) or substance use disorders (“heroin”, “opioids”, “drug 
use”, “methadone”, “buprenorphine”, “substance ab/use”, “addiction”). We limited our 
search to articles that were published in English and Russian on PubMed and Google 
Scholar between Jan 1, 2012, and July 20, 2015. We retrieved and reviewed 1837 unique 
citations, and selected 449 for inclusion. Additional information from other sources was 
also included. We reviewed grey literature from websites in English, Ukrainian, and 
Russian, including government-reported health status of prisoners in each country.
Altice et al.
Page 29
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key messages
•
Incarceration rates in Eastern Europe and Central Asia are among the 
highest in the world due to policies that concentrate people who inject 
or otherwise use drugs and others at high risk for HIV, viral hepatitis, 
and tuberculosis
•
Due to policies within this region, the prevalence of HIV, hepatitis C 
virus, and tuberculosis infection is several times higher than in the 
surrounding community
•
Analyses from Ukraine suggest that incarceration could be contributing 
to up to half of all new HIV infections among people who inject drugs, 
and scaling up of opioid agonist therapy within prisons and effectively 
maintaining them on treatment within the community after release 
would markedly reduce HIV transmission within this group
•
Similarly, strategies that reduce incarceration of people who inject 
drugs in Ukraine would greatly reduce the number of new tuberculosis 
cases, especially among people who inject drugs, underscoring the 
importance of screening, treatment, and continuity of care for prisoners 
with or at risk for tuberculosis
•
Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, and Moldova have successfully introduced all 15 
of the HIV prevention strategies recommended by the UN, including 
provision of opioid agonist therapy with methadone and needle and 
syringe programmes—albeit inadequately scaled to need
Altice et al.
Page 30
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Projected HIV trends among people who inject drugs in Ukraine
Figure shows projected median trends for people who inject drugs. (A) HIV prevalence 
among individuals in the community (both never-incarcerated and previously incarcerated). 
(B) HIV prevalence among incarcerated individuals. (C) HIV incidence among individuals 
in the community (both never-incarcerated and previously incarcerated). (D) HIV incidence 
among incarcerated individuals. Scenarios shown are for the status quo, and if there was 
either: no effect of incarceration on transmission risk after 2015; no further incarceration 
after 2015; or initiation of opioid agonist therapy in prisons with 50% coverage among 
incarcerated people who have ever injected drugs who are maintained on therapy for a year 
after release. Data points with 95% CIs are shown for comparison and shading represents the 
95% credibility intervals for the status quo projection (light blue shading) and if 
incarceration had no effect on transmission risk after 2015 (pink shading).
Altice et al.
Page 31
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Prevention of new HIV infections
Figure shows percentage of new HIV infections that would be averted over 15 years (from 
2015 and 2030) under the following scenarios: if incarceration no longer elevated 
transmission risk (full and conservative projections); if there was no further new 
incarceration of people who inject drugs; or if prison opioid agonist therapy was scaled up 
with or without retention after release. Bars show the median projections, while error bars 
show the 95% credibility intervals. Text above the error bars are the median projections and 
the corresponding 95% credibility interval. OAT=opioid agonist therapy.
Altice et al.
Page 32
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Association between number of years incarcerated and prevalence of ever having 
tuberculosis among prisoners (A) and people who inject drugs in the community (B) in Ukraine
The points are the mean proportion of prisoners or people who inject drugs in the 
community reporting ever having tuberculosis for different reported years in prison; the error 
bars are 95% bootstrapped CIs about the mean. The solid green line is the best logistic fit to 
the data, and the green shaded area is bounded by the best logistic fits to the lower and upper 
confidence bounds of the data. Data for prisoners are derived from a 2011 PUHLSE national 
prison survey.23,24 Data for those in the community are derived from a multi-site ExMAT 
survey of people who inject drugs in Ukraine in 2015.25
Altice et al.
Page 33
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. An overview of the criminal justice system in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
*Anyone arrested may be sentenced and bypass SIZO if convicted immediately.
Altice et al.
Page 34
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Relationship of the risk environment in community and criminal justice settings in 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia
OAT=opioid agonist therapy. NSP=needle and syringe programmes. ART=antiretroviral 
therapy. MDR-TB=multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.
Altice et al.
Page 35
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Incarceration in EECA countries and availability of opioid agonist therapies and 
needle and syringe programmes
EECA=Eastern Europe and Central Asia. OAT=opioid agonist therapy. NSP=needle and 
syringe programme.
Altice et al.
Page 36
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Altice et al.
Page 37
Table 1
Overview of prison populations in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Turk-
menistan
Uzbekistan
Russia
Ukraine
Belarus
Moldova
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Armenia
Georgia
Prison population
16 500*
44 893
7961
9000*
30 568
42 000*
656 618
57 396
31 700
5329
6634
3276
2775
3894
9724
Estimated number of people who inject drugs
 Community
71 283
116 840
25 000
25 000
..
80 000
1.8 million
332 500
75 000
30 200
5403
10 034
9000
3310
45 000
 Prison
31.9%
..
30.4%
..
..
..
..
48.7%
..
..
..
..
..
5.5%
..
Antiretroviral therapy coverage
 Community
14%
4639
13%
10%
..
24%
178 711
26%
21%
17%
542
1055
2998
16%
39%
 Prison
63.2%
34.3%
69.9% of those registered
59.1%
..
..
5.0%
6.4%
..
63.1%
23.2%
19.3%
..
77.3%
87.5%
HIV prevalence
 Community
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0.4%
<0.2%
0.2%
1.1%
1.2%
0.5%
0.6%
0.1%
0.7%
1.0%
0.2%
0.3%
 Prison
3.7%
3.9%
10.3%
2.4%
0
4.7%
6.5%
19.4%
..
2.6%
3.4%
20.4%
14.1%
2.4%
0.90%
Tuberculosis incidence or prevalence per 100 000
 Community
77
99
142
91
64
82
84
94
58
153
62
49
20
45
106
 Prison
152
2110
145
162
184
58
69
56
Opioid-dependent individuals
 Community
1.5%
1.0%
0.80%
0.54%
..
0.80%
2.3%
0.91%
0.59%
..
0.24%
0.66%
..
0.16%
1.36%
 Prison
32.5%
3.0%‡
13.7%
5.0%
..
..
..
44.3%
..
6.6%†
7.6%
30.0%
..
..
..
Number of opioid agonist therapy sites
 Community
2
10
23
6
..
..
..
169
19
3
23
10
9
10
21
 Prison
..
..
7
..
..
..
..
..
..
9
..
9
4
9
2‡
Number of individuals receiving opioid agonist treatments
 Community
137
205
1227
677
..
..
..
8264
1066
392
930
424
919
430
2600
 Prison
..
..
400
..
..
..
..
..
..
68
..
26
56
151
..
All values are from the survey administered for this study in collaboration with UNODC and refer to 2015, unless otherwise specified in the appendix. UNODC=United Nations Office on Drug Control.
*Approximate number.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Altice et al.
Page 38
†Present only as a pilot programme in SIZO (pre-trial detention) for detoxification and not for maintenance therapy.
‡Refers only those officially registered as opioid dependent with the National Narcological Registry.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Altice et al.
Page 39
Table 2
Policies and practices related to HIV infection and harm reduction services in prisons of Eastern Europe and Central
Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Russia
Ukraine
Belarus
Moldova
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Armenia
Georgia
Ministry overseeing prisoner health
Justice
Interior
Prison
Justice
Interior
Interior
Prison
Prison
Interior
Justice
Justice
Justice
Justice
Justice
Prison
Number of prisons
35
76
11
13
14
42
..
146
..
12
7
11
..
12
15
 Male
16
69
10
12
12
39
..
131
..
10
6
10
..
11
11
 Female
1
6
1
1
1
1
..
15
..
1
1
1
..
1
1
Number of prisoners
16 500*
44 893
7961
9000*
30 568
42 000*
656 618
57 396
31 700
5329
6643
3276
2775
3894
9724
Proportion female
2.8%†
7.7%
4.0%
3.3%
6.5%
3.0%
..
5.6%
..
6.6%
3.7%
7.4%
..
4.5%
3.3%
Incarceration rate‡
236
231
181
130
583
152
446
193
306
215
268
239
218
132
274
Occupancy
81.4%
71.8%
55.5%
61.5%
85.0%
80.0%
94.2%
120.24%
96.8%
102.9%
83.1%
59.5%
96.3%
89.3%
47.8%
Needle and syringe programmes in prison
No
No
Yes (2005)
Yes (2010)
No
No
..
No
..
Yes (1999)
No
No
..
Yes (2004)
No
 Number of facilities
..
..
10
1
..
..
..
..
..
10
..
..
..
9
..
Opioid agonist therapy
No
No
Yes (2008)
No
No
No
..
No
..
Yes (2005)
No
Yes (2012)
..
Yes (2011)
No
 Number of facilities
..
..
7
..
..
..
..
..
..
9
..
9
..
9
..
 Number of patients
..
..
400
..
..
..
..
..
..
68
..
26
..
151
..
Detoxification with methadone or buprenorphine
No
No
No
No
No
No
..
No
..
Yes
No
No
..
No
Yes
Non-pharmacological detoxification
Yes
No
Yes
No
..
No
..
Yes
..
No
Yes
Yes
..
Yes
No
HIV testing and counselling (year)
Yes
Yes (1997)
Yes (2001)
Yes (2003)
Yes
Yes (2003)
..
Yes (2006)
..
Yes (2008)
Yes
Yes (1994)
..
Yes (2004)
Yes (2004)
Condom provision (year)
Yes (2011)
Yes (2002)
Yes (2005)
Yes (2003)
No
No
..
Yes (2008)
..
Yes (1999)
Yes (2004)
No
..
..
Yes (2004)
Antiretroviral therapy (year)
Yes (2007)
Yes (2005)
Yes
Yes (2007)
No
Yes (2008)
..
Yes (2008)
..
Yes (2004)
Yes
Yes (1998)
..
Yes (2005)
Yes (2005)
Tuberculosis fluorography (year)
Yes (1995)
Yes (1998)
Yes (1997)
Yes
Yes
Yes (1991)
..
Yes
..
Yes (1996)
Yes
Yes (2011)
..
Yes (2004)
Yes (1998)
TB treatment (year)
Yes (1995)
Yes
Yes (1998)
Yes
Yes§
Yes (2004)
..
Yes
..
Yes (1996)
Yes (1998)
Yes
..
Yes
Yes (1998)
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Altice et al.
Page 40
Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Russia
Ukraine
Belarus
Moldova
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Armenia
Georgia
HCV diagnostics (year)
Yes (2006)
Yes
Yes (2005)
Yes (2015)¶
..
Yes
..
No
..
Yes (2004)
Yes
Yes
..
No
Yes (2014)
Treatment of HCV
No
No
No
No
..
No
..
No
..
No
Yes (acute only)
No
..
No
Yes
HBV diagnostics
No
Yes
Yes
..
..
Yes
..
No
..
Yes
No
Yes
..
No
Yes
Treatment of HBV
No
No
No
..
..
Yes
..
No
..
No
No
Yes
..
No
No
HBV vaccination
No
No
No
..
..
No
..
No
..
No
No
No
..
No
No
Programmes on prevention of physical and sexual 
violence
Yes
Yes
No
..
..
Yes
..
No
..
No
..
No
..
Yes
Staff protection programme against HIV as an 
occupational hazard
No
Yes
Yes
..
..
Yes
..
Yes
..
Yes
Yes
Yes
..
No
Yes
Post-exposure prophylaxis
No
Yes
Yes (2010)
Yes
..
Yes
..
No
..
Yes
No
No
..
Yes
No
Diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted 
infections
Yes
Yes
Yes
..
..
Yes
..
Yes
..
Yes
..
Yes
..
Yes
Yes
All values are from the survey administered for this study in collaboration with UNODC and refer to 2015, unless otherwise specified. Start date is listed in brackets when available. HCV=hepatitis C virus. HBV=hepatitis B virus. UNODC=United Nations Office on Drug 
Control.
*Approximate number.
†Number of prisoners per 100 000 population.
‡People, treated, and tested refer to the total number of people receiving service in 2014.
§Available only as a pilot project.
¶Women and juveniles housed in the same facility.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 31.
