 Dynamic corticostriatal activity biases social bonding in 
monogamous female prairie voles
Elizabeth A. Amadei1,2,3,*, Zachary V. Johnson1,4,5,*, Yong Jun Kwon1,3,4, Aaron C. 
Shpiner3,6, Varun Saravanan3,4, Wittney D. Mays1,3, Steven J. Ryan1,5, Hasse Walum1,5, 
Donald G. Rainnie1,5, Larry J. Young1,4,5, and Robert C. Liu1,3,4
1Silvio O. Conte Center for Oxytocin and Social Cognition, Center for Translational Social 
Neuroscience, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA
2Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and 
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
3Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA
4Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA
5Yerkes National Primate Research Center (YNPRC), Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA
6Undergraduate Program in Neuroscience and Behavioral Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322, USA
Summary paragraph
Adult pair bonding involves dramatic changes in the perception and valuation of another 
individual1. One key change is that partners come to reliably activate the brain's reward system2-6, 
though the precise neural mechanisms by which partners become rewarding during sociosexual 
interactions leading to a bond remain unclear. Using a prairie vole model of social bonding7, we 
show how a functional circuit from medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) to nucleus accumbens 
(NAcc) is dynamically modulated to enhance females' affiliative behavior towards a partner. 
Individual variation in the strength of this functional connectivity, particularly after the first mating 
encounter, predicts how quickly animals begin affiliative huddling with their partner. Rhythmically 
activating this circuit in a social context without mating biases later preference towards a partner, 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding author: Robert Liu (robert.liu@emory.edu), Rollins Research Building, Rm. 2006, 1510 Clifton Rd. NE, Atlanta, GA 
30322.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author Contributions: E.A.A. adapted the Neurologger to a vole preparation and designed and performed in vivo electrophysiology 
experiments, which motivated an optogenetics approach; Optogenetics experiments were designed and performed by E.A.A. and 
Z.V.J., assisted by Y.K.; Z.V.J. validated viral techniques and performed optogenetics surgeries and histology; S.J.R. and E.A.A. 
designed slice electrophysiology experiments; Z.V.J. performed all surgeries and histology for slice electrophysiology experiments; 
S.J.R. performed slice electrophysiology experiments, assisted and supervised by E.A.A and D.G.R, respectively. E.A.A., Z.V.J., Y.K., 
S.J.R., H.W., A.C.S., V.S. and W.D.M. analyzed data; E.A.A. drafted the manuscript; Z.V.J., A.C.S., Y.K., S.J.R., H.W. and V.S. 
contributed to the writing; R.C.L. and L.J.Y. edited the manuscript and supervised all aspects of the study.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 June 08; 546(7657): 297–301. doi:10.1038/nature22381.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 indicating that this circuit's activity is not just correlated with how quickly animals become 
affiliative but causally accelerates it. These results provide the first dynamic view of corticostriatal 
activity during bond formation, revealing how social interactions can recruit brain reward systems 
to drive changes in affiliative behavior.
Main
The formation of socially monogamous relationships, or pair bonds, is a complex 
phenomenon occurring in less than 5% of mammalian species8. In the monogamous prairie 
vole, neurochemicals (e.g. oxytocin, dopamine)7 act in two anatomically-connected9,10 
corticostriatal areas, the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and nucleus accumbens (NAcc), to 
establish a selective preference towards a partner3,4. Individual variation in neurochemical 
receptors within this circuit explains differences in affiliative behavior4,5. However, little is 
known about how mPFC and NAcc are dynamically activated during sociosexual 
interactions. mPFC-NAcc communication is more generally implicated in an animal's ability 
to effectively coordinate its behavior to obtain rewards11,12, including gaining new 
behavioral strategies13. We therefore hypothesized that mPFC-NAcc functional connectivity 
helps to switch animals to express affiliative behavior towards a partner.
To examine the neural and behavioral specificity of this hypothesis, we developed an 
electrophysiological recording paradigm for freely-moving females during sociosexual 
interactions (Extended Data Fig. 1a-c). Electrodes were chronically implanted (Extended 
Data Fig. 2) in the mPFC and NAcc (hit animals) or an off-target area posterior to NAcc 
(within or bordering the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST); non-hit animals). 
Synchronized local field potentials (LFPs) and video were acquired during a 6-hour 
cohabitation with a male. Mating, which accelerates bond formation15, and side-by-side 
huddling, an index of bond expression16, were assessed as measures of affiliative behaviors 
during cohabitation. Self-grooming was assessed as a self-directed, high-motion control 
behavior.
Behaviors were variable from individual to individual, yet not different overall between hit 
and non-hit animal groups (Extended Data Fig. 3a). In particular, individuals varied in how 
quickly they began huddling (huddling “latency”), with those that started earlier going on to 
huddle more (Fig. 1a-c). Accelerated huddling latencies were not simply explained by the 
quantity or timing of mating or self-grooming (Extended Data Fig. 3b), motivating us to ask 
whether mPFC-NAcc circuit activation could better explain variability in the timing of a 
switch towards more huddling.
Low-frequency drive from mPFC to NAcc can alter behavioral responses to environmental 
stimuli18,19, so we analyzed whether mPFC-NAcc connectivity increases during social 
behaviors that promote more affiliative responses to a partner. Low-frequency coherence, a 
common measure of functional connectivity, was significantly higher during mating 
compared to self-grooming and huddling (Fig. 1d, e). Non-hit animals also showed 
significantly higher low-frequency coherence during mating compared to huddling (Fig. 1f, 
g), indicating that mating generally enhances low-frequency connectivity across multiple 
brain areas, consistent with a previous Fos study in males6.
Amadei et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To assess how this low-frequency connectivity modulates local activity within brain areas, 
we measured the interaction between low- and high (gamma)-frequency oscillations across 
brain areas (Fig. 2a). Gamma oscillations reflect local network activation20, including 
entrainment of fast-spiking interneurons within the ventral striatum21-23. In contrast, lower-
frequency rhythms (e.g. delta, theta) can regulate gamma oscillations by phase modulating 
their amplitude24, a phenomenon observed across brain areas25. In both hit and non-hit 
groups, phase-amplitude coupling (“net modulation”, Fig. 2b, c) over the full cohabitation 
was maximal when low-frequency mPFC activity (5-6 Hz) modulated high gamma (80-84 
Hz) activity in either the NAcc or non-hit area, motivating our focus below on this specific 
oscillatory channel for communication between regions.
Net modulation during the cohabitation and a pre-cohabitation solo baseline period were 
dynamically modulated, most prominently in hit animals (Fig. 2d, g and Extended Data Fig. 
4). Positive values were consistent with Granger causality estimates showing elevated low-
frequency drive from mPFC to NAcc (versus the reverse) during mating (Extended Data Fig. 
5). Net modulation varied significantly with behaviors in hit animals only (Fig. 2e, f). Net 
modulation during huddling was low and comparable to its level during baseline (Fig. 2e), 
implying that huddling does not elevate functional connectivity between mPFC and NAcc. 
Low net modulation was not likely from motionlessness, since animals were active and 
investigative when alone. In contrast, average net modulation during cohabitation outside of 
huddling (nonhuddling net modulation), while highly variable across animals, was 
significantly enhanced compared to both baseline and huddling. In the hit group only, 
individuals' nonhuddling net modulation over the full cohabitation significantly correlated 
with how quickly they began accumulating huddling (huddling latency, Fig. 3a, b), while 
huddling net modulation itself was uncorrelated with huddling latency (Extended Data Fig. 
6a, b; no correlation between huddling and nonhuddling net modulations, Fig. 2h, i). 
Animals' nonhuddling net modulation was not explained by electrode placement (Extended 
Data Fig. 6c, d), nor the amount or timing of mating or self-grooming (Extended Data Fig. 
6e, f). Therefore, mPFC's specific modulation of NAcc activity throughout the full 
cohabitation, with the exception of during huddling, explained how quickly individuals 
became affiliative.
To determine the temporal emergence of this correlation, we next averaged net modulation 
over increasing time windows from the start of cohabitation. Baseline net modulation was 
moderately, albeit non-significantly, correlated with huddling latency in hit animals (Fig. 3a, 
left), potentially reflecting an individual's affiliative predisposition. No predisposition was 
found in non-hit animals where the correlation was low and non-significant, both at baseline 
and across time over cohabitation (Fig. 3b, c), where R2 values were non-overlapping with 
those of hit animals. In contrast, in hit animals, nonhuddling net modulation became 
increasingly correlated with huddling latency by 60 minutes into the cohabitation (Fig. 3a, 
c), before most animals began huddling, but after experiencing their first mating bout 
(Extended Data Fig. 3c). Hence, even if a weak affiliative predisposition was reflected in the 
mPFC-NAcc circuit's baseline activation, early cohabitation experience further strengthened 
this specific circuit's correlation with huddling.
Amadei et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We next considered which early cohabitation behaviors could drive this strengthening. 
Mating typically occurred quickly (first bout range demarcated in Fig. 3c and Extended Data 
Fig. 3c), and its net modulation rose during cohabitation in hit animals, unlike self-
grooming, another high net-modulation, early behavior (Extended Data Fig. 7). Given that 
mating promotes bond formation15, we tested whether early mating improved the circuit's 
correlation with huddling. In hit animals only, the change in net modulation from 
immediately before to after the first mating bout predicted the latency to huddle from the 
end of the bout. Animals with larger increases in net modulation around first mating, but not 
first self-grooming, more quickly began accumulating huddling (hits: Fig. 3d, e and 
Extended Data Fig. 8a, b, non-hits: Fig. 3j, k and Extended Data Fig. 8g, h). Animals' 
change in net modulation was not simply explained by behaviors during and around mating 
(Extended Data Fig. 8m, o), and it specifically correlated with the latency to subsequent 
huddling (as opposed to subsequent mating or self-grooming, Extended Data Fig. 8n, p).
This mating-triggered change in net modulation augmented the circuit's correlation with 
huddling latency beyond predisposed levels. The magnitude of the change was not correlated 
with baseline levels (Extended Data Fig. 8q, r), suggesting a separate effect from any 
predisposition. Moreover, the correlation between local net modulation values (averaged 
over 1 minute) and huddling latency noticeably increased from the minute just before to up 
to ∼2 minutes after mating (Fig. 3f). Subtracting out individuals' baseline mean net 
modulation confirmed a significant augmentation (Fig. 3g, h). No improvement was 
observed around self-grooming (Extended Data Fig. 8c-e), nor in non-hit animals around 
either mating or self-grooming (Fig. 3l, m, o and Extended Data Fig. 8i, j, l). In hit animals 
only, net modulation changes around mating, but not self-grooming, correlated with the 
subsequent net modulation, averaged up to the shortest huddling latency (i.e. 15 minutes 
after behavior) (Fig. 3i, n and Extended Data Fig. 8f, k). Hence, mating specifically altered 
both the temporally local and more sustained post-mating mPFC-to-NAcc circuit activation 
in a way that predicted subsequent huddling behavior: animals whose mPFC's modulation of 
NAcc was more strongly boosted went on to huddle faster, thereby pointing to a new 
physiological source of individual variability in affiliative behavior.
To causally test the mPFC-NAcc circuit's sufficiency to accelerate huddling even without 
mating, we activated the circuit during a restricted cohabitation that prevented mating. This 
paradigm does not typically lead to pair bonding, as assessed in the laboratory by a later 
partner preference test (PPT)16. We virally expressed Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) or a 
control fluorophore (EYFP) in mPFC projection neurons. During the cohabitation, when the 
female entered a “social zone” containing a caged male, we optically stimulated (up to 1 
hour) the mPFC-NAcc pathway at 5 or 6 Hz (Fig. 4a-c and Extended Data Fig. 1d, e, 9-10), 
consistent with the frequency of peak mating coherence and net modulation. The ChR2 and 
EYFP groups showed comparable optical stimulation and time spent in each zone (Fig. 4d), 
indicating that ChR2 activation did not induce coarse behavioral differences during the 
restricted cohabitation. However, in the PPT the following day, the ChR2 group showed 
significantly greater preference for the partner compared to the stranger (Fig. 4e). Thus, low-
frequency oscillatory drive from mPFC to NAcc was sufficient to bias the emergence of 
affiliative behavior.
Amadei et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our data demonstrate a previously unknown mechanism by which a corticostriatal circuit 
can shift female prairie voles towards increasing social affiliation (huddling). These brain 
areas play a role in non-social paradigms in which animals acquire new behavioral strategies 
to obtain reward13,26. We speculate that the rhythmic action of mPFC on NAcc, which is 
enhanced by mating, could engage oscillatory-based plasticity mechanisms27,28 to alter how 
NAcc responds to partner representations (e.g. transmitted from amygdala29 and 
hippocampus30). Future testing of this hypothesis, and whether the mPFC-NAcc circuit is 
not only sufficient but also necessary for increasing affiliative behavior, will further elucidate 
this circuit's endogenous contribution to bond formation. Neurochemicals (e.g. oxytocin, 
dopamine7) released by sociosexual interactions10 modulate these brain areas in both 
females and males3,4,6, raising the possibility that individual differences in neurochemical 
receptor densities4,5 could underlie how strongly this circuit is activated to promote an 
enduring bond.
Methods
Animals
All procedures were approved by the Emory University Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee. Experimental subjects (in in vivo electrophysiology, in vivo optogenetics, slice 
recording) were adult, sexually naive female prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) 76 to 154 
days of age at the start of experiments. Animals were taken from our laboratory-bred colony 
derived from wild-caught Illinois stock. When possible, they were socially housed in same-
sex duos or trios until implant surgeries (if performed), at which time they were separated 
and housed individually. Food (Lab Rabbit Diet HF #5326, LabDiet) and water were given 
ad libitum during a 14:10 hour light/dark cycle. Stimulus males used in behavioral 
experiments were adult, sexually experienced males under 1.5 years of age. Partners and 
strangers used in partner preference tests (PPTs; see below) were matched by age (within 61 
days) and weight (within approximately 5 grams) for each female. Stimulus females used to 
prepare strangers were adult, sexually naive, socially housed females under 1 year of age.
Since this is the first study to our knowledge to apply in vivo electrophysiology and 
optogenetic approaches in behaving prairie voles, the target number of experimental subjects 
was chosen based on published studies in rodents using similar methods5,19,31.
Surgeries
All surgeries were done under isoflurane anesthesia. Anterior/posterior coordinates were 
referenced to Bregma, and dorsal/ventral coordinates were referenced to the top of the skull.
In in vivo electrophysiology experiments, females were ovariectomized to homogenize their 
hormonal state and chronically implanted with electrodes 10 to 20 days later. Electrodes 
were individual tungsten microelectrodes (1 MΩ, FHC) stereotaxically targeted to the left 
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC, anterior 2.3 to 2.4 mm (median (M): 2.35 mm), lateral 0.2 
to 0.5 (M: 0.3) mm, ventral 2.5 to 2.7 (M: 2.6) mm) and either nucleus accumbens (NAcc, 
anterior 1.8 to 2.0 (M: 1.9) mm, lateral 0.8 to 0.9 (M: 0.8) mm, ventral 4.6 to 4.8 (M: 4.6) 
mm) or bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST, anterior 1.05 to 1.9 (M: 1.1) mm, lateral 
Amadei et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 0.8 to 1.0 (M: 0.95) mm, ventral 4.45 to 4.6 (M: 4.5)), which receives direct mPFC 
projections in rodents32,33. Electrodes were positioned in a fixed implant design (Extended 
Data Fig. 1a) that interfaced with a connector sitting on top of the skull. The connector in 
turn interfaced with the Neurologger recording device during experiments (see 
Experiments). A stainless steel ground screw (F000CE094, JI Morris) was placed in the 
right posterior cortex (anterior -2.6 mm, lateral -2.5 mm).
In in vivo optogenetics experiments, females underwent virus injection and optical fiber 
implant surgeries. Animals were bilaterally injected with an adeno-associated virus serotype 
5 carrying either Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) tagged with yellow fluorescent protein under 
the control of calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha promoter (AAV5-CaMKIIa-
hChR2(H134R)-EYFP-WPRE-PA, 4-8.5×1012 viral molecules/mL, UNC Vector Core) or a 
control fluorophore lacking ChR2 (AAV5-CaMKIIa-EYFP, 4.4-5.2×1012 viral 
molecules/mL, UNC Vector Core) to the mPFC (anterior 2.4 mm, medial ± 0.3 mm, ventral 
2.7 mm). Injection parameters were 500 nL per side, 5 min injection time and 5 min wait 
time between the end of injection and retraction of the injector to allow the virus to 
sufficiently diffuse from the injector needle. Animals were assigned to the ChR2 and control 
groups by randomly selecting the number of animals in a given cage that would receive 
ChR2 (either 1 or 2 in cages of 3; cages of 2 had 1 animal in each group by constraint) and 
counterbalancing across cages to produce as equal number of animals in each group as 
possible.
Approximately five weeks after virus injection, animals were implanted with a bilateral 
optical cannula (200 μm core diameter, 240 μm outer diameter, 0.22 NA, 4.5 mm fiber 
length, 1.5 mm pitch, flat tip, Doric Lenses) targeting the medial NAcc (anterior 1.9 mm, 
medial ± 0.75 mm, ventral 4.5 mm). The light transmission efficiency of the optical cannula 
was measured prior to implantation (S140C or S121C, PM100D, ThorLabs). Experiments 
started 6 weeks (42.0 ± 1.9 days (mean ± st. deviation)) following virus injection to allow 
for virus expression in mPFC afferents at the NAcc.
In slice electrophysiology experiments, females underwent the same virus injection surgery 
as described above, but received only ChR2 virus. Recording experiments in the mPFC and 
NAcc started 15 and 40-43 days following virus injection, respectively. A longer waiting 
time was used for NAcc recordings to allow for virus expression in mPFC afferents at the 
NAcc.
Experiments
Prior to behavioral experiments, all females (experimental subjects, stimulus females) were 
primed with estradiol benzoate (17-β-Estradiol-3-Benzoate, Fisher Scientific, daily 
injections of 1-2 μg dissolved in sesame oil starting 3 to 4 days prior to experiments) to 
induce sociosexual interest in males34. The following experiments were performed once on 
independent experimental subjects.
1. Local field potential (LFP) recording in behaving females during 
cohabitation with a male—LFPs were recorded from the mPFC and NAcc of behaving 
females using a battery-powered Neurologger35 chip (1-GB model, New Behavior AG). The 
Amadei et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neurologger has 8 channels (4 neural data, 2 reference, 1 accelerometer, 1 infrared 
synchronization) and samples up to 500 Hz. We chose this over a higher-sampling rate, 
multichannel, tethered system due to the social nature and long recording duration of our 
paradigm, and the need to minimize the chance that the partner would interfere with 
recordings.
Prior to experiments, the Neurologger was programmed with sampling rate and data storage 
parameters and secured onto the connector on top of the animal's skull (Extended Data Fig. 
1a). The device recorded and stored data during the experiment. It was disconnected at the 
end of the experiment to download data onto a computer for analysis. The sampling rate was 
199.805 Hz for all subjects except Subject 3 (489.075 Hz). Both sampling rates covered an 
adequate frequency range for data analysis. Subjects were habituated to the device for at 
least one hour on the day before experiments.
On the morning of experiments, the female was briefly anesthetized under isoflurane to 
secure the Neurologger and then transferred to a clean cage in the testing room to habituate 
for at least 10-15 minutes (up to 1 hour). A stimulus male was also brought in to the testing 
room to habituate. This solo habituation period is referred to as the baseline period. At the 
end of the baseline, the male was added to the female's cage and the animals were 
cohabitated for 6 hours. Neural and video recording were performed throughout the baseline 
and cohabitation and synchronized using periodic timestamps delivered every 100 frames 
(3.3 seconds) from a Cleversys Topscan system running on a 32-bit Dell Precision T3500 
computer. These timestamps were transmitted as infrared and visible light (LED) pulses that 
were registered in the Neurologger synchronization channel (samples) and the video 
recording (frames). The sample and frame indexes of these timestamps were detected and 
matched using custom-written code in MATLAB (MathWorks). Experiments were 
performed under a Faraday cage to block 60-Hz electrical noise.
2. Optogenetic stimulation in behaving females during suboptimal 
cohabitation with a male—A combined video tracking and optical stimulation system 
was used to stimulate mPFC afferents in the NAcc of socially behaving female voles 
(Extended Data Fig. 1d, e). This consisted of a custom-designed, three-chambered Plexiglas 
arena divided into “social” (6” × 6”), “neutral” (center; 6” × 5.5”), and “non-social” (6” × 
6”) zones. The social and non-social zones contained overturned perforated cups housing a 
male or remaining empty, respectively. A commutator (1×2 FC-FC, 0.22 NA, Doric Lenses) 
and video camera (Prosilica GC, Allied Vision Technologies) were positioned over the 
neutral zone. The commutator interfaced the laser (100 mW, 473 nm, fixed wavelength diode 
module, Cobolt) and a dual fiberoptic patch cable (200 μm core, 220 μm cladding, 900 μm 
jacket, Doric Lenses) that plugged into the optical cannula on the female, who had free 
access to the three zones. The female was tracked using an automated video tracking system 
(RV2 Video Processor, Tucker Davis Technologies) that detected a red marker positioned 
directly above her head on the patch cable. Optical stimulation was automatically triggered 
each time she entered the social zone (RV2 Video Processor and RZ5D Bioamp Processor, 
Tucker Davis Technologies, see Extended Data Fig. 1d, e) and occurred at a frequency of 5 
or 6 Hz with pulse duration of 5 ms for as long as she remained in the social zone. Output 
from the optical cannula was approximately 30 mW (approximately 15 mW per implanted 
Amadei et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fiber) based on the output from the patch cable and the transmission efficiency of the optical 
cannula (measured prior to implantation). The tracking accuracy for time spent in the social 
zone (tracked time in social zone compared to human scoring) was at least 86.8% over 
subjects (tracking data for one subject excluded due brief power outage causing data loss 
during cohabitation, see also Statistics).
On the day of experiments, the female was briefly anesthetized under isoflurane to connect 
the patch cable. She was then transferred to the three-chambered arena in the testing room, 
connected to the commutator, and allowed to habituate for 1 hour. At the same time, a non-
implanted stimulus female was placed in a second, identical three-chambered arena in the 
same room and allowed to habituate. Two stimulus males were also brought into the room to 
habituate. At the end of the habituation, one stimulus male (“partner”) was placed and 
contained in the social zone of the implanted female's cage, and the other male (“stranger”) 
was placed and contained in the social zone of the non-implanted female's cage. This 
procedure was performed to ensure that the partner and stranger stimulus males received the 
same experience prior to partner preference testing.
Animals were cohabitated for 2.5 to 3 hours total. Within that period, stimulation was 
available for 1 hour starting from the first entrance of the implanted female into the social 
zone (laser disconnected at the end of this period). All subjects could therefore receive up to 
1 hour of light stimulation, although the majority of animals spent some time outside of the 
social zone during this period and thus were not stimulated for the full hour (see Fig. 4d, 
top). At the end of the cohabitation, the males and non-implanted stimulus female were 
removed and brought back to the colony. The implanted female was briefly anesthetized to 
disconnect the patch cable, placed in a clean cage, and returned to the colony. Because two 
cohabitation experiments were often run in a given day (typically starting in morning or 
early afternoon), the ordering of start times was counterbalanced within each experimental 
group to have similar number of animals starting in the morning and early afternoon.
The following day, the implanted female was tested in a 3-hour PPT with her partner from 
cohabitation and a stranger stimulus male. In this test, which was performed in a different 
room and cage from the cohabitation, the partner male was tethered with a plastic leash to 
one side of a three-chambered cage and the stranger male was tethered to the opposite side, 
as described previously16. The female, not connected to any optical cabling, was free to 
move around the cage and spend time with the partner and stranger. The amount of time the 
female spent in low-motion social contact (huddling) with the partner and stranger was 
measured with a Cleversys Topscan automated tracking system (movement criterion of < 
0.0416 for all subjects) and used to assess the female's preference for the partner (see 
Statistics). The side of the PPT cage on which the partner was tethered was counterbalanced 
within each experimental group to control for the partner's location in the testing room. 
Fresh bedding (Bed-o'Cobs Laboratory Animal Bedding ⅛”, The Andersons) was used in 
each test.
3. Combined electrophysiological recording and optogenetic stimulation in 
slice preparations of mPFC and NAcc neurons of females—Fifteen to 43 days 
following ChR2 virus injection, brain slices containing mPFC and/or NAcc were prepared as 
Amadei et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 previously described36. Briefly, animals were decapitated under isoflurane anesthesia and 
brains rapidly removed and immersed in ice cold cutting solution perfused with 95% 
oxygen-5% carbon dioxide. Two-hundred μm-thick coronal sections containing mPFC 
and/or NAcc were then cut using a VTS-1000 vibrating blade microtome (Leica 
Microsystems). Slices were kept in oxygenated cutting solution at 32° C for 1 hour before 
being transferred to a recording chamber with regular artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF). 
Slices were imaged using a Leica DM-LFS microscope (Leica Microsystems) captured with 
SimplePCI software (Hamamatsu Corp.) for areas of strong fluorescence within the target 
region of interest (mPFC or NAcc), and recordings performed as follows:
3a. NAcc: Putative medium spiny neurons were visually identified, patched with a thin-
walled borosilicate glass-patch electrode, and held at -70 mV with either DC current 
injection in current clamp (n = 4 cells) or voltage clamp (n = 3 cells) configuration. 
Recording techniques and equipment were as previously described36. Excitatory post-
synaptic potentials (or currents) were then evoked with optical stimulation via an optical 
fiber connected to a solid-state laser (Shanghai Laser & Optics Century Co.) and oriented 
towards the cell (200 μm core, 488 nm, 0.9-3.4 mW measured at end of fiber). Stimulus 
trains were either 5 Hz (6 pulses at 5 Hz, 1 ms pulse duration, repeated every 4 seconds for a 
total of 5 pulse trains) or individual light pulses (1 ms pulse duration, repeated every 4 
seconds for a total of 5 pulses) used to compute an average electrophysiological response.
Drugs were applied by gravity perfusion at the required concentration in the circulating 
aCSF. Drugs used were the GABAa receptor antagonist picrotoxin (Picro; 10 μM) and the 
AMPA/kainate receptor antagonist 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (DNQX; 20 μM). All 
drugs were acquired from Tocris and stored frozen as concentrated stock solutions in 
distilled water (dH2O) except DNQX, which was made in 50% dimethyl sulfoxide. In 
recordings in the NAcc, Picro and DNQX were added serially, in that order, with recordings 
between applications. Following experiments, mPFC slices from the same subjects were 
stored for histological verification of virus expression (see Histology).
3b. mPFC: Recordings in prelimbic mPFC were performed as described above, with the 
exception that the recorded cells were putative pyramidal neurons and maintained at a 
membrane potential of -60 mV. Cells were recorded from in the presence of tetrodotoxin 
(TTX; 1 μM). TTX was acquired from Tocris and stored frozen as a concentrated stock 
solution in dH2O.
Histology
1. In vivo electrophysiology—At the end of experiments, electrode-implanted females 
were deeply anesthetized under isoflurane and an electrolytic lesion performed at each 
electrode site (10 μA for 40-45 seconds, Midgard Precision Current Source, Stoelting Co.). 
The animals were then euthanized with carbon dioxide. The brain was removed, stored 1 to 
2 days in 1× phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 4° 
C, and transferred to 1× PBS containing 30% sucrose at 4° C until fully fixed. Forty μm-
thick sections were prepared on a freezing sliding microtome (Microm). Sections were 
stored in cryoprotectant, mounted on slides and Cresyl Violet-stained. Slides were 
Amadei et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 coverslipped and then imaged on an Eclipse E800 light microscope (Nikon Instruments). 
Lesion sites were identified and the section was matched to the most anatomically similar 
plate in the Paxinos and Watson Rat Brain Atlas14. Anatomical landmarks used to match the 
sections to the atlas included the morphology and position of the corpus callosum and 
anterior commissure. Subjects with electrodes within or on the medial border of the NAcc 
were included as hit subjects (n = 9; see Extended Data Fig. 2a). Subjects with electrodes 
posterior to the NAcc (within or bordering BNST) were included as non-hit subjects (n = 6; 
see Extended Data Fig. 2c).
2. In vivo optogenetics—Tissue processing: At the end of experiments, subjects were 
deeply anesthetized under isoflurane and transcardially perfused with 40 mL 1× PBS 
followed by 40 mL 4% PFA in 1× PBS at a rate of approximately 4 mL per minute. 
Following perfusion, brains were rapidly extracted and post-fixed overnight in 4% PFA in 1× 
PBS and were then transferred to 1× PBS containing 30% sucrose and 0.5% sodium azide. 
Forty μm-thick coronal sections were collected using a freezing sliding microtome (Microm) 
and were stored in 1× PBS containing 0.5% sodium azide until immunohistochemical 
staining.
Immunohistochemistry: All sections from both treatments were subjected to fluorescent 
immunohistochemical labeling for EYFP. Sections were washed in 1× PBS and blocked with 
1× PBS containing 2% normal goat serum (NGS, Fitzgerald) for 1 hour before primary 
incubation with anti-GFP primary antibody (1:1,000, chicken polyclonal, Abcam ab13970) 
in 1× PBS containing 0.2% Triton-X (1× PBST) and 2% NGS for 48 hours at 4° C. 
Following primary incubation, sections were washed in 1× PBST and incubated in 
secondary antibody conjugated to a green fluorophore (1:1,000, goat polyclonal anti-
chicken, Alexa Fluor 488, ab150169) for 4.5 hours in 1× PBST containing 2% NGS. 
Sections then underwent final washes in 1× PBS before being mounted onto slides. Slides 
were allowed to dry overnight and were then coverslipped with Vectashield Antifade 
Mounting Medium with DAPI (H-1200, Vector Labs).
Fluorescent Microscopy: Confocal images were collected using an Orca R2 cooled CCD 
camera (Hamamatsu Photonics) mounted on a Leica DM 5500B microscope (Leica 
Microsystems) equipped with a CSU10B Spinning Disk (Yokagawa Electronic Corp.) and 
captured with Simple PCI imaging software (Hamamatsu Photonics). Additional fluorescent 
images were captured using a QI Imaging Fast 1394 12-bit camera mounted on an Eclipse 
E800 fluorescent microscope (Nikon Instruments) and captured using MCID Imaging 
software.
3. Slice electrophysiology—Tissue processing: Following electrophysiological 
recordings in NAcc, 200 μm-thick coronal sections containing the recorded slice as well as 
sections from the same subject containing mPFC were stored 1 to 2 days in 1× PBS 
containing 4% PFA at 4° C, and transferred to 1× PBS containing 30% sucrose at 4° C until 
fully fixed. Immediately prior to mounting, sections were transferred into and washed in 
0.1× PBS and were directly mounted onto slides. Mounted sections were allowed to dry 
overnight and were then coverslipped using Vectashield HardSet Antifade Mounting 
Medium with DAPI (Vector Labs; H-1500). Dense expression of the ChR2-EYFP transgene 
Amadei et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in both the mPFC and the NAcc was used as a criterion for inclusion and was confirmed at 
60× magnification using an Eclipse E800 fluorescent microscope (Nikon Instruments) for all 
subjects. acquired from Tocris and stored frozen as a concentrated stock solution in dH2O.
Data Analysis
Following electrophysiology experiments, subject records (n = 15 total; 9 hit subjects, 6 non-
hit subjects) were added to a custom relational database (Microsoft Excel) used to index 
animals during analysis. Cohabitation videos were then behaviorally scored and the 
corresponding neural data extracted and analyzed. Subjects were labeled as hits (1 through 
9) or non-hits (10 through 15). They were ordered by the relative anterior/posterior position 
of their mPFC recording electrode, with “1” being the most anterior of the hit group, and 
“10” being the most anterior of the non-hit group.
1. Behavioral scoring—An ethogram was developed to define mating, self-grooming and 
huddling behaviors occurring in these experiments (see Extended Data Fig. 1c). These were 
then scored in experimental videos (Observer XT10) and matched to neural data using linear 
regression to the most adjacent timestamps (see synchronization procedure described above). 
For consistency and reliability in scoring, two individuals trained on a test video and scored 
the experimental videos blindly to each other. The percent agreement between the two 
scoring records of a given behavior, calculated as the percentage of total frames scored 
consistently for that behavior (i.e. occurring or not), was at least 97.9% for mating, 94.6% 
for self-grooming and 92.3% for huddling over all hit subjects and 99.5% for mating, 95.8% 
for self-grooming and 91.1% for huddling over all non-hit subjects. Therefore, we used the 
intersection of each behavior's scoring within the two records as the measure of that 
behavior. Contiguous segments of intersected scoring are referred to as “epochs” and are 
used in the following analyses of behavioral scoring.
1a. Trials: Trials were extracted from behavior epochs that were at least 5 seconds long and 
for which the individual scoring records started within 1 second of each other (with the 
exception of huddling, which used a criterion of starting within 5 seconds due to a slower 
onset of the behavior). Trials were defined as the first 5 seconds of the behavior epochs. 
Trials were further restricted to be within the 6-hr cohabitation. The number of 5-second 
trials of mating for all subjects were (ordered by ID) 46, 72, 22, 15, 55, 26, 12, 89, 21, 47, 
23, 48, 21, 21 and 24. The number of 5-second trials of self-grooming were 47, 37, 59, 19, 
21, 37, 57 ,17, 34, 49, 73, 58, 42, 42 and 11. The number of 5-second trials of huddling were 
45, 24, 24, 37, 26, 48, 41, 13, 4, 51, 27, 57, 44, 14 and 25.
1b. Rasters: For cross-frequency coupling analyses, the cohabitation was broken into 2-s 
non-overlapping time segments. Time segments fully overlapping within an epoch of 
mating, self-grooming or huddling were labeled as that behavior. All remaining time 
segments were labeled as “other-cohab.” Time samples labeled as mating, self-grooming and 
other-cohab together made up “nonhuddling” time samples.
1c. Bouts: To capture sequences of a given behavior, the distances between adjacent 
behavior epochs were computed and pooled to create a distribution of distances. A single- or 
Amadei et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 two-term natural exponential function was fit to this distribution. With a and b as the initial 
value and decay constant (- sign) of the first term, respectively, and c and d the initial value 
and decay constant of the second term, respectively, the fitted values for each behavior were 
as follows. The values of a for mating, self-grooming and huddling were 23320, 15222 and 
5347 minutes, respectively. The values of b were 5.315, 3.089 and 3.481 minutes, 
respectively. The values of c were 0, 472.6 and 21.17 minutes, respectively. The values of d 
were 0, 0.433 and 0.133 minutes, respectively. For each behavior, the decay constant of the 
largest contributor to the fitted function (5.315, 3.089, 3.481 minutes for mating, self-
grooming and huddling, respectively) was used as the threshold distance between epochs for 
inclusion within a given bout.
1d. Latency: Latency was calculated for each behavior as the delay from a given reference 
point within the experiment (e.g. start of cohabitation) to a later reference point within a 
behavior (e.g. bout start).
1e. Duration: For each behavior, epochs within a given time window (e.g. full cohabitation, 
smaller time windows) were pooled to compute the duration of that behavior.
2. Local field potential data—LFP data were extracted for trials of each behavior and 
inspected for data quality. We had previously observed in early testing of the Neurologger 
that, due to its fixed amplification settings, data traces could sometimes hit the upper or 
lower bounds of the visualization range and become clipped at these bounds. Therefore, as a 
pre-determined criterion for inclusion in LFP analyses using windowed data (i.e. trials in 
Granger causality and coherence analyses; moving windows in cross-frequency coupling 
analyses, as described below), only those windows whose values were contained within the 
visualization range were used. Further, subject 7 had a brief, 12.7-second disruption in data 
recording and so this data segment was excluded from LFP analyses. In coherence and 
Granger causality analyses, the total number of 5-second trials excluded for mating (ordered 
by ID) were 31, 16, 0, 4, 19, 6, 11, 10, 44, 4, 0, 16, 1, 4 and 17 (median of 18.8% of original 
number of mating trials). The total number of 5-second trials excluded for self-grooming 
were 19, 8, 35, 32, 39, 9, 21, 22, 23, 36, 41, 30, 70, 28 and 67 (median of 40.0% of original 
number of self-grooming trials). The total number of 5-second trials excluded for huddling 
were 2, 1, 4, 4, 6, 2, 0, 0, 2, 0, 5, 0, 0, 0 and 2 (median of 4.0% of original number of 
huddling trials). In cross-frequency coupling analyses, the percentage of 2-second windows 
excluded were 10.9, 9.9, 11.5, 24.4, 28.0, 15.4, 11.6, 15.5, 23.5, 20.1, 13.8, 9.0, 15.8, 12.0 
and 27.7% (median of 15.4% of original number of windows). The original number of 
windows ranged from 11,176 to 12,642 (median of 12,613).
Coherence, Granger causality and cross-frequency coupling were computed between brain 
regions. All analyses were done in MATLAB unless otherwise noted.
2a. Coherence: Coherence analyses were performed using multitaper methods37 
implemented in Chronux (http://chronux.org)38. This consisted of multiplying each data 
segment by a set of orthogonal Slepian tapers39 that specify a spectral concentration 
bandwidth ± W. W and the segment duration (T) constrain the maximum number of 
effectively-concentrating tapers to be less than or equal to 2TW-1. Parameters used here 
Amadei et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were W = 2 Hz, T = 1 second, and 3 tapers. Coherence was then calculated as the magnitude 
of the coherency40. Coherence ranges from 0 to 1, where a value of 1 represents a perfectly 
consistent phase and amplitude relationship across tapers and trials.
Coherence estimates were sampled at 1-Hz resolution from 3 Hz to 242 Hz (Subject 3) or 3 
Hz to 97 Hz (remaining subjects). This range represents the nearest integer above W that is 
consistent across subjects to the nearest integer below the (Nyquist frequency - W).
Inter-behavior comparisons: Coherence was compared between 5-s trials of mating, self-
grooming and huddling (number of trials listed in Data Analysis, 1a.). To address the 
possibility of non-stationarity in the data, each trial was split into 40, 1-second segments 
stepped by 0.1 seconds. Coherence was calculated across trials for each time segment, 
giving 40 estimates for a given behavior. These estimates were transformed and bias-
corrected, as described in Statistics. They were then averaged to give full-trial estimates of a 
given behavior. Statistical testing was performed on these averages. In addition, the 2.5 to 
97.5 percentile range of the 40 estimates was extracted as a measure of variability (prctile 
function in MATLAB).
2b. Cross-frequency coupling: Cross-frequency coupling was computed using the 
Modulation Index (MI)41 metric (code courtesy of Dr. Adriano Tort and Dr. Teresa Madsen). 
The MI quantifies the extent to which low-frequency phase of one signal modulates higher-
frequency amplitude of another. Briefly, the two signals are filtered in low and high-
frequency bands and then Hilbert transformed to obtain the phase and amplitude envelope, 
respectively. This gives matched phase and amplitude values that are then binned into 20° 
phase bins. Amplitudes are averaged within each phase bin, giving a distribution of 
amplitudes over phase bins. This distribution is normalized to the sum of averaged 
amplitudes. The MI is computed as the normalized Kullback-Leibler distance of this 
distribution from a uniform (flat/unmodulated) distribution.
The MI was computed over the course of the experiment for each subject (“MI raster”). The 
baseline and cohabitation periods were broken into 5-s or 2-s non-overlapping time 
segments. 5-s segments were used to analyze the spectrum of the MI, and 2-s segments were 
used to relate the MI to behavior (see below). The MI was computed on each segment in two 
directions: 1) mPFC low-frequency phase modulating NAcc (or off-target) gamma 
amplitude and 2) NAcc (or off-target) low-frequency phase modulating mPFC gamma 
amplitude. This consisted of switching which signals were low- or high-frequency filtered 
(filtering done using EEGLAB42 package for MATLAB, eegfilt function).
5-s time segments (MI spectrum): MI was computed at multiple combinations of phase and 
amplitude frequencies. Phase frequencies ranged from 3 to 21 Hz, with integer spacing and 
bandwidth ± 0.5 Hz. Amplitude frequencies ranged from 32 to 84 Hz, with spacing of 4 Hz 
and bandwidth ± 2 Hz. To measure the relative strength of MI in the mPFC-to-NAcc 
direction (“net modulation”) at a given phase/amplitude frequency combination, the MI 
computed for the NAcc-to-mPFC direction was subtracted from that of the mPFC-to-NAcc 
direction. The net modulation was averaged across all time segments and hit animals to 
Amadei et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 identify the frequency combination producing maximal net modulation. The same analysis 
was performed on non-hit animals.
2-s time segments (MI and behavior): Net modulation was computed at a phase frequency 
of 5 Hz and amplitude frequency of 80 Hz. These time segments were matched to raster time 
samples coded as specific behaviors (see Data Analysis, 1b.) and averaged across values 
coded as the same behavior to estimate the net modulation during that behavior. Averages 
were taken over the full cohabitation as well as shorter time segments (e.g. within first or last 
mating bout).
2c. Granger causality: Granger causality was computed with parametric methods43,44 
implemented in code by Dr. Stijn de Waele and Dr. Nathan J. Killian and adapted to use by 
V.S. and E.A.A. Granger causality tests the degree to which previous values of one time 
series improve the prediction of a different time series45 and was used here to assess the 
directional influence of one brain area over another's activity46 during mating. Granger 
causality can be formulated in the frequency domain by fitting and frequency-transforming a 
bivariate autoregressive model to the two time series43 (here, mPFC and NAcc LFPs during 
mating). The power of each time series can then be estimated and decomposed into an 
intrinsic component and a causal component contributed by the other time series. Granger 
causality is computed as the natural log of the ratio of the total power (intrinsic + causal) to 
the intrinsic power.
To fit the autoregressive model, the average values of the time series were subtracted out to 
produce means of 0 and model parameters estimated using the Nuttall-Strand method. The 
model order was selected using the Combined Information Criterion47.
Granger causality was compared in the mPFC-to-NAcc and NAcc-to-mPFC directions 
during mating (see Statistics). As in the coherence estimates, 5-second trials of mating were 
split into 40, 1-second segments shifted by 0.1 seconds. Granger causality was computed on 
each segment (see below) at integer frequencies from 0 Hz to 244 Hz (Subject 3) or to 99 Hz 
(all other subjects), and then averaged over segments to get a full-trial estimate. The 2.5 to 
97.5 percentile range of the 40 estimates was extracted as a measure of variability. The upper 
bound of the frequency range represents the nearest integer below the Nyquist frequency.
Granger causality was calculated using a bootstrapping procedure. Briefly, for a subject with 
n trials of mating, n segments matched in time were extracted from the trials. 1000 artificial 
sets of n segments were generated by randomly selecting with replacement from possible 
segments. Autoregressive model parameters were averaged across segments in each set, and 
these average values used to compute Granger causality in the two directions. The actual 
Granger causality values were defined as the mean over all sets.
2d. Code availability: MATLAB code written to analyze local field potential data in this 
study is available from the corresponding author (R.C.L.) upon reasonable request.
Amadei et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Statistics
Statistical tests used a significance level α = 0.05 (* P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001). 
Statistical analyses were performed separately on hit (n = 9) and non-hit (n = 6) groups.
Correlation analyses used the Pearson correlation (corr in MATLAB) and report R2 and P-
values. Linear regression was performed using the polyfit function in MATLAB.
In tests of paired samples, a two-sided Lilliefors test (lillietest in MATLAB) was used to test 
the normality of the difference between samples. This test was also used to test the normality 
of individual groups for ANOVAs. Since this test is less sensitive to small sample sizes, data 
were also visually inspected for any obvious skew. Parametric (two-tailed t- and ANOVA) 
tests were used when justified by these analyses.
The Bonferroni method was used to correct for multiple comparisons. The number of 
corrections and other figure-specific statistical methods are described below. P-values are 
not corrected unless otherwise specified.
Fig. 1—To compare mPFC-NAcc coherence between mating, self-grooming and huddling, 
the 40 within-trial coherence estimates for each of these behaviors were first Fisher-
transformed. They were then bias-corrected for different sample sizes (here: number of trials 
of each behavior), as described48. Upon averaging these 40 estimates to get a full-trial 
estimate, the peak frequency of mating coherence was determined for each subject (ranged 
from 4 to 6 Hz), and the mode of these frequencies across subjects (5 Hz) was used for inter-
subject comparisons. The effect of behavior on coherence was tested using a one-way 
repeated measures ANOVA with behavior as the within-subject factor (SPSS). Sphericity 
was verified using Mauchly's Test (SPSS, W = 0.60, P = 0.167). The difference in coherence 
between 1) mating and self-grooming, 2) mating and huddling coherence and 3) self-
grooming and huddling at 5 Hz was tested for significance using a post hoc two-tailed paired 
t-test (ttest in MATLAB), with correction for 3 comparisons.
The same analysis was performed on non-hit animals, with coherence evaluated at 5 Hz. 
Sphericity was verified using Mauchly's Test (W = 0.62, P = 0.380).
Fig. 2—The effect of behavior (huddling, baseline, nonhuddling) on mPFC-NAcc net 
modulation was tested using a one-way repeated measures ANOVA with behavior as the 
within-subject factor (SPSS). Sphericity was violated (Mauchly's Test; W = 0.36, P = 0.028) 
and so the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied. The difference in net modulation 
between 1) nonhuddling and huddling, 2) nonhuddling and baseline and 3) huddling and 
baseline was tested for significance using a post hoc two-tailed paired t-test (ttest in 
MATLAB), with correction for 3 comparisons. The same ANOVA analysis was performed 
on non-hit animals, with Greenhouse-Geisser correction applied due to violation of 
sphericity (Mauchly's Test; W = 0.05, P = 0.003).
Fig. 3—Correlations between huddling latency and nonhuddling net modulation during the 
baseline period, first 60 minutes of cohabitation and full cohabitation were corrected for 3 
comparisons.
Amadei et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A permutation test was used to test whether the correlation between huddling latency and 
nonhuddling net modulation significantly improved from before to after mating. The before 
time point was that immediately before mating. The after time point was that which 
produced the highest correlation between net modulation and huddling latency within 3.5 
min after mating (see Fig. 3g, o; bracket indicates before and after points). Briefly, at both 
before and after time points, net modulation values were randomized across subjects (using 
datasample in MATLAB; same randomized IDs used in before and after time points) and 
then correlated with the huddling latency (kept in subject order). The difference in R2 (abs. 
value) between these two correlations was then computed. This re-sampling procedure was 
repeated 1×106 times to produce a permuted (null) distribution of R2 differences. A two-
sided P-value was obtained as the proportion of shuffled R2 differences that were greater 
than the observed value.
Fig. 4—In optogenetics analyses, the relative time spent with the partner in the PPT (partner 
time minus stranger time) was compared between treatment (expressing ChR2) and control 
(expressing control fluorophore lacking ChR2) groups using a permutation test. This test 
was chosen due to normality violations in group and residual values (discouraging an 
ANOVA approach). The permutation test involved calculating the effect size (Cohen's d49 
(abs. value)) of the difference between treatment and control groups in the relative time 
spent with the partner. This observed Cohen's d was then compared to a permuted 
distribution of Cohen's d values created by randomly assigning data values without 
replacement to treatment and control groups (using randperm in MATLAB). The re-
sampling procedure was performed 1×106 times. A two-sided P-value was obtained as the 
proportion of shuffled Cohen's d values that were greater than the observed value.
The same permutation approach was used to compare the total duration of optical 
stimulation as well as time spent in the social, neutral and non-social zones (see Extended 
Data Fig. 1d) during cohabitation between treatment and control groups. Due to a brief 
power outage after the optical stimulation period for one control animal, video and tracking 
data for that subject was lost even though it received normal stimulation. Therefore, the 
number of control subjects used in the optical stimulation and zone analyses is one less than 
that used in the PPT analyses described above (n = 10 as opposed to 11).
Extended Data Fig. 3—The number of bouts, duration and latency of mating, self-
grooming and huddling were compared between hit and non-hit groups using Wilcoxon 
signed-rank tests (signrank in MATLAB). P-values were corrected for 9 comparisons.
Correlations between huddling latency and mating and self-grooming duration and latency 
parameters were corrected for 8 comparisons.
The effect of behavior on latency was tested using a Friedman Test due to violations of 
normality. The difference in latency between 1) mating and self-grooming, 2) mating and 
huddling and 3) self-grooming and huddling was tested for significance using a post hoc 
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, with correction for 3 comparisons.
Amadei et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Fig. 5—To compare Granger causality in the mPFC-to-NAcc and NAcc-
to-mPFC directions, Granger causality values in each direction were obtained for each 
subject at 5 Hz, the same frequency used in coherence comparisons. The difference of the 
two directions (mPFC-to-NAcc - NAcc-to-mPFC) across subjects was tested for significance 
using a two-tailed paired t-test.
Extended Data Fig. 7—To calculate the mean net modulation during early and late 
mating for each subject, net modulation values coded as mating were taken from that 
subject's first and last mating bouts, respectively, and then averaged. The number of values 
within the first bout were (in subject order): 19, 41, 38, 25, 62, 24, 22, 101, 84, 36, 20, 22, 
10, 21 and 31. The number of values within the last bout were (in subject order): 48, 52, 24, 
26, 70, 34, 35, 57, 38, 45, 33, 33, 20, 24 and 25. To calculate the mean net modulation 
during early and late self-grooming for each subject, net modulation values coded as self-
grooming were taken from that subject's start (moving forward) or end (moving backward) 
of the cohabitation. The number of self-grooming values were matched to that subject's first 
and last mating bout (listed above), respectively. The difference of early and late mean net 
modulation for each behavior across subjects was performed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank 
test and Bonferroni-corrected for 2 comparisons.
Extended Data Fig. 8—The same permutation test described for Fig. 3 was used to test 
whether the correlation between huddling latency and nonhuddling net modulation 
significantly improved from before to after self-grooming (panels e, i).
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
(R.C.L.) upon reasonable request. Source data for all figures with graphical representations 
are provided with the paper.
Amadei et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Preparations for electrophysiological and optogenetic experiments
a, Neurologger recording device secured to a female during cohabitation with a male. 
Neurologger interfaces with a chronic electrode implant targeting mPFC and NAcc. b, 
Schematic of experimental setup. Simultaneous video and neural recording is synchronized 
by periodic timestamps. c, Summarized ethogram definitions of mating, self-grooming and 
huddling used to score experimental videos. d, Arena used for cohabitation in optogenetics 
Amadei et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments. Arena is divided into social, neutral, and non-social zones. Food is placed in 
the center of the neutral zone. Male is contained under a cup in the social zone, and female, 
implanted with optical fibers, is allowed to freely explore the arena. Optical stimulation is 
triggered whenever she is in the social zone (green hatched area; red circle is visualization of 
tracking) for up to 1 hour within the cohabitation period. Social zone is defined as 
consistently as possible across experiments based on physical features of arena. e, Schematic 
of cohabitation setup, additionally showing how laser is controlled by video recording to 
automatically deliver optical stimulation when female is in the social zone.
Extended Data Figure 2. Placement of local field potential electrodes in all subjects
a, Electrodes in hit subjects (n = 9) targeting mPFC and NAcc, b, verified with electrolytic 
lesions (scale bar, 500 μm). Anterior/posterior locations of brain sections (units of rat brain 
atlas; see Methods) are indicated. c, Electrodes in non-hit subjects (n = 6) targeting mPFC 
and posterior to NAcc (within/bordering BNST). SHy: septohypothalamic nucleus. The rat 
brain in this and other figures has been reproduced with permission from [14].
Amadei et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Behavioral characterization of hit and non-hit subjects
a, Number of bouts, total duration, and latency for mating, self-grooming and huddling in hit 
(n = 9) and non-hit (n = 6) subjects. No significant differences exist between subject groups 
(all P > 0.05). b, Measures of mating and self-grooming duration and latency do not 
correlate with huddling latency (n = 15; all P > 0.05). “Percent M [or SG] before Hud 
latency” refers to percentage of time each animal spent mating or self-grooming prior to 
reaching its huddling latency. c, Latency is modulated across behaviors (n = 15; χ2(2) = 
18.53, P < 0.001, Friedman Test), with mating and self-grooming showing shorter latencies 
Amadei et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compared to huddling but similar latencies to each other (SG vs. Hud, P < 0.001; M vs. Hud, 
P = 0.001; M vs. SG, P = 0.454, Wilcoxon signed-rank). Reported P-values in a-c are 
Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons (see Methods). Boxplots show median and 
interquartile range.
Extended Data Figure 4. Net modulation data for all subjects
Net modulation values (2-s, non-overlapping windows) sampled over a baseline solo period 
(gold points) and 6-hr cohabitation for all hit (#1-9) and non-hit (#10-15) subjects. Values 
Amadei et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that temporally overlap with mating, self-grooming and huddling behaviors (top hashes) are 
color-coded accordingly. All non-scored values are indicated as “other-cohab,” which 
together with mating and self-grooming represent “nonhuddling” values. Cumulative 
distributions of net modulation values coded by behavior are shown in right panel for each 
subject.
Extended Data Figure 5. Granger causality in mPFC-NAcc circuit during mating
a, Granger causality spectra in the mPFC-to-NAcc and NAcc-to-mPFC directions for 
example subject. Solid lines and shaded regions show mean and mid-95 percentile range, 
respectively, of the n = 40 Granger causality estimates for a given brain-area direction (see 
Methods). b, Comparison of Granger causality at 5 Hz in the two directions across hit 
subjects (n = 9). Granger causality is significantly higher in the mPFC-to-NAcc direction (t8 
= 3.29, P = 0.011). Error bars show mean ± s.e.m.
Amadei et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Specificity of correlation between nonhuddling net modulation and 
huddling latency
a, Mean huddling net modulation is uncorrelated with huddling latency in hits and (b) non-
hits (all P > 0.05). c, Mean nonhuddling net modulation is uncorrelated with electrode 
placement (mPFC anterior (A)-posterior (P) location or NAcc/non-hit medial (M)-lateral (L) 
location; units of rat brain atlas) in both hits (n = 9) and (d) non-hits (n = 6) (all P > 0.05). e, 
Mean nonhuddling net modulation is uncorrelated with mating and self-grooming latency 
and total duration in hits and (f) non-hits (all P > 0.05).
Amadei et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Net modulation during early and late mating and self-grooming
a, Mean net modulation during mating increases over time in hits (n = 9, P = 0.008) but not 
(b) non-hits (n = 6, P = 0.438). c, Mean net modulation during self-grooming shows no 
significant change in either hits (P = 0.406) or (d) non-hits (P = 0.438). P-values in a-d are 
Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons (see Methods). Mean early and late values 
for mating are derived from the first and last mating bouts. Mean values for self-grooming 
are derived from early and late self-grooming samples matched in number to the first and 
last mating bouts (see Methods). Boxplots show median and interquartile range.
Amadei et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Behavioral specificity of correlation between local change in net 
modulation around mating and huddling latency
a, Mean nonhuddling (NHud) net modulation values within 1 min moving windows (stepped 
by 0.1 min) before (SG-) and after (SG+) the first self-grooming bout of hits (n = 9) and (h) 
non-hits (n = 6). Each subject's values are color-coded by that subject's latency to huddle 
from the end of the self-grooming bout (latencySG+). b, Change in mean net modulation 
from immediately before to after the first self-grooming bout (indicated by line segments in 
a) is uncorrelated with huddling latencySG+ in hits (R2 = 0.01, P = 0.787) and (g) non-hits 
(R2 = 0.27, P = 0.290; line segments in h). c, Strength of correlation between mean net 
Amadei et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 modulation and huddling latencySG+ shows no consistent increase in either hits or (j) non-
hits. d, e, Subtracting out the mean baseline net modulation from the local values around 
self-grooming confirms no significant increase in correlation strength in either hits (P = 
0.164; permutation test on difference in R2 (0.27) between bracketed time points) or (i, l) 
non-hits (P = 0.655, observed R2 difference of 0.07). f, Change in mean net modulation from 
immediately before to after first self-grooming bout is uncorrelated with mean NHud net 
modulation in the 15 min after self-grooming in hits (R2 = 0.24, P = 0.180) and (k) non-hits 
(R2 = 0.55, P = 0.090). m, Change in net modulation around first mating bout (Fig. 3e, j x-
axis) is uncorrelated with local behavioral parameters (change in self-grooming duration 
around bout and mating duration within bout) in hits and (o) non-hits (all P > 0.05). It is 
further uncorrelated with the latency to next mating or self-grooming bouts (n, p) and the 
mean net modulation during the baseline solo period (q, r) in hits and non-hits (all P > 0.05).
Amadei et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Validation of virus injection and optical implant locations
a, Representative coronal sections showing estimated centers of bilateral virus injection and 
(b) optical implant placement for in vivo optogenetics subjects. Virus injection localization 
was based on minor tissue damage at dorsal-most surface of the coronal section where 
injection syringe initially entered the brain, the densest concentration of fluorescence and 
physical tracts of damage left by injection syringe. Optical implant localization was based 
on physical tracts of damage left by optical implant. Morphology of corpus callosum was 
used to determine anterior/posterior position of injections and implants. c, Virus injection 
Amadei et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and (d) optical implant locations for all in vivo optogenetics subjects. ChR2-expressing 
subjects (n = 12) are indicated by circles with dotted centers. Control subjects (n = 11) are 
indicated by circles with empty centers. Each color is a separate subject, with two circles per 
subject (bilateral injection and optical implant). All injection center locations fall within the 
prelimbic cortex and all optical implant locations fall within the medial NAcc. In a-d, the 
anterior/posterior location of each section (units of rat brain atlas) is indicated on left-hand 
side of section. IL: infralimbic cortex; MO: medial orbital cortex.
Amadei et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. Validation of light-induced electrophysiological responses in mPFC 
and NAcc
a, Representative image of whole-cell patch clamp recording from a prelimbic mPFC neuron 
cell body in slice preparation. Recording electrode (tip denoted with white arrowhead) is 
patched onto a cell, and an optical fiber is oriented towards the cell for optogenetic 
stimulation. b, Example light-evoked potential (average response to 5, 1 ms light pulses; see 
Methods) in a prelimbic mPFC neuron in the presence of tetrodotoxin (TTX; 1 μM) to show 
a direct effect of light stimulation. c, Whole-cell patch clamp recordings were obtained from 
n= 7 putative medium spiny neurons (from 4 subjects) in NAcc. Anterior/posterior location 
of each section (units of rat brain atlas) indicated on bottom-right of section. d, Average 
electrophysiological responses (excitatory post-synaptic potentials (EPSPs; cells 1-4) or 
currents (EPSCs; cells 5-7)) to 5, 1 ms light pulses delivered onto the cell. Application of 
Picro (second column) had no consistent effect on electrophysiological responses, whereas 
DNQX (third column) disrupted them, indicating that electrophysiological responses were 
due to glutamatergic transmission. cc: corpus callosum.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Hans-Peter Lipp for Neurologgers; Dr. Frank Lin for initial testing of Neurologgers; Dr. Joseph 
Manns, Dr. Gordon Berman and Dr. Teresa Madsen for methodological feedback and fruitful discussions on the 
manuscript; Gerald Wong for behavioral scoring; Mengqi Zhang, Rasika Tangutoori and Rachel Stanford for 
assistance with implant design and construction; the Liu, Young and Rainnie laboratories for training, manuscript 
feedback and helpful discussions; Lorra Matthews and the Yerkes animal care and veterinary staff for vole 
husbandry and care; Garrett Feldpausch for custom cage design and machining; and Dr. Jamie LaPrairie and Li-
Ling Shen for their assistance. This work was funded by an Emory Neuroscience Initiative grant (R.C.L., L.J.Y.), 
NIMH R21MH97187 (R.C.L.), NIMH P50MH100023 (L.J.Y., R.C.L.), NINDS R90DA033462 (V.S.), Emory 
University Biology Graduate Student Award (E.A.A.) and Office of Research Infrastructure Programs' Primate 
centers P51OD11132 (YNPRC).
References
1. Hazan C, Shaver P. Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process. J Pers Soc Psychol. 
1987; 52:511–524. [PubMed: 3572722] 
2. Bartels A, Zeki S. The neural basis of romantic love. Neuroreport. 2000; 11:3829–3834. [PubMed: 
11117499] 
3. Young LJ, Lim MM, Gingrich B, Insel TR. Cellular mechanisms of social attachment. Horm Behav. 
2001; 40:133–138. [PubMed: 11534973] 
4. Aragona BJ, et al. Nucleus accumbens dopamine differentially mediates the formation and 
maintenance of monogamous pair bonds. Nat Neurosci. 2006; 9:133–139. [PubMed: 16327783] 
5. Ross HE, et al. Variation in oxytocin receptor density in the nucleus accumbens has differential 
effects on affiliative behaviors in monogamous and polygamous voles. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:1312–
1318. [PubMed: 19193878] 
6. Johnson ZV, et al. Central oxytocin receptors mediate mating-induced partner preferences and 
enhance correlated activation across forebrain nuclei in male prairie voles. Horm Behav. 2016; 
79:8–17. [PubMed: 26643557] 
7. Young LJ, Wang Z. The neurobiology of pair bonding. Nat Neurosci. 2004; 7:1048–1054. [PubMed: 
15452576] 
8. Kleiman DG. Monogamy in mammals. Q Rev Biol. 1977; 52:39–69. [PubMed: 857268] 
9. Christie MJ, Summers RJ, Stephenson JA, Cook CJ, Beart PM. Excitatory amino acid projections to 
the nucleus accumbens septi in the rat: a retrograde transport study utilizing D[3H]aspartate and 
[3H]GABA. Neuroscience. 1987; 22:425–439. [PubMed: 2823173] 
10. Ross HE, et al. Characterization of the oxytocin system regulating affiliative behavior in female 
prairie voles. Neuroscience. 2009; 162:892–903. [PubMed: 19482070] 
Amadei et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11. Nicola SM. The nucleus accumbens as part of a basal ganglia action selection circuit. 
Psychopharmacology. 2007; 191:521–550. [PubMed: 16983543] 
12. Floresco SB. The nucleus accumbens: an interface between cognition, emotion, and action. Annu 
Rev Psychol. 2015; 66:25–52. [PubMed: 25251489] 
13. Block AE, Dhanji H, Thompson-Tardif SF, Floresco SB. Thalamic–prefrontal cortical–ventral 
striatal circuitry mediates dissociable components of strategy set shifting. Cereb Cortex. 2007; 
17:1625–1636. [PubMed: 16963518] 
14. Paxinos, G., Watson, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Compact 6th. Academic Press; 
2009. 
15. Williams JR, Catania KC, Carter CS. Development of partner preference in female prairie voles: 
the role of social and sexual experience. Horm Behav. 1992; 26:339–349. [PubMed: 1398553] 
16. Ahern TH, Modi ME, Burkett JP, Young LJ. Evaluation of two automated metrics for analyzing 
partner preference tests. J Neurosci Methods. 2009; 182:180–188. [PubMed: 19539647] 
17. Lim MM, et al. Enhanced partner preference in a promiscuous species by manipulating the 
expression of a single gene. Nature. 2004; 429:754–757. [PubMed: 15201909] 
18. Bagot RC, et al. Ventral hippocampal afferents to the nucleus accumbens regulate susceptibility to 
depression. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7062. [PubMed: 25952660] 
19. Britt JP, et al. Synaptic and behavioral profile of multiple glutamatergic inputs to the nucleus 
accumbens. Neuron. 2012; 76:790–803. [PubMed: 23177963] 
20. Buzsáki G, Wang XJ. Mechanisms of gamma oscillations. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2012; 35:203–225. 
[PubMed: 22443509] 
21. Kalenscher T, Lansink CS, Lankelma JV, Pennartz CMA. Reward-associated gamma oscillations in 
ventral striatum are regionally differentiated and modulate local firing activity. J Neurophysiol. 
2010; 103:1658–1672. [PubMed: 20089824] 
22. van der Meer MA, Redish AD. Low and high gamma oscillations in rat ventral striatum have 
distinct relationships to behavior, reward, and spiking activity on a learned spatial decision task. 
Front Integr Neurosci. 2009; 3:9. [PubMed: 19562092] 
23. Berke JD. Fast oscillations in cortical-striatal networks switch frequency following rewarding 
events and stimulant drugs. Eur J Neurosci. 2009; 30:848–859. [PubMed: 19659455] 
24. Lakatos P, et al. An oscillatory hierarchy controlling neuronal excitability and stimulus processing 
in the auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol. 2005; 94:1904–1911. [PubMed: 15901760] 
25. Tort AB, et al. Dynamic cross-frequency couplings of local field potential oscillations in rat 
striatum and hippocampus during performance of a T-maze task. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 
105:20517–20522. [PubMed: 19074268] 
26. Ragozzino ME, Kim J, Hassert D, Minniti N, Kiang C. The contribution of the rat prelimbic-
infralimbic areas to different forms of task switching. Behav Neurosci. 2003; 117:1054–1065. 
[PubMed: 14570554] 
27. Jutras MJ, Buffalo EA. Synchronous neural activity and memory formation. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 
2010; 20:150–155. [PubMed: 20303255] 
28. Trimper JB, Stefanescu RA, Manns JR. Recognition memory and theta–gamma interactions in the 
hippocampus. Hippocampus. 2014; 24:341–353. [PubMed: 24227610] 
29. Stuber GD, et al. Excitatory transmission from the amygdala to nucleus accumbens facilitates 
reward seeking. Nature. 2011; 475:377–380. [PubMed: 21716290] 
30. Okuyama T, Kitamura T, Roy DS, Itohara S, Tonegawa S. Ventral CA1 neurons store social 
memory. Science. 2016; 353:1536. [PubMed: 27708103] 
31. Gruber AJ, Hussain RJ, O'Donnell P. The nucleus accumbens: a switchboard for goal-directed 
behaviors. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e5062. [PubMed: 19352511] 
32. Vertes RP. Differential projections of the infralimbic and prelimbic cortex in the rat. Synapse. 
2004; 51:32–58. [PubMed: 14579424] 
33. Gutman DA, et al. A DTI tractography analysis of infralimbic and prelimbic connectivity in the 
mouse using high-throughput MRI. NeuroImage. 2012; 63:800–811. [PubMed: 22796992] 
Amadei et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. Donaldson ZR, Spiegel L, Young LJ. Central vasopressin V1a receptor activation is independently 
necessary for both partner preference formation and expression in socially monogamous male 
prairie voles. Behav Neurosci. 2010; 124:159–163. [PubMed: 20141291] 
35. Etholm L, Arabadzisz D, Lipp HP, Heggelund P. Seizure logging: a new approach to synchronized 
cable-free EEG and video recordings of seizure activity in mice. J Neurosci Methods. 2010; 
192:254–260. [PubMed: 20708034] 
36. Ryan SJ, et al. Spike-timing precision and neuronal synchrony are enhanced by an interaction 
between synaptic inhibition and membrane oscillations in the amygdala. PLoS ONE. 2012; 
7:e35320. [PubMed: 22563382] 
37. Mitra PP, Pesaran B. Analysis of dynamic brain imaging data. Biophys J. 1999; 76:691–708. 
[PubMed: 9929474] 
38. Mitra, P., Bokil, H. Observed Brain Dynamics. Oxford Univ. Press; 2008. 
39. Slepian D, Pollack HO. Prolate spheroidal wave functions, Fourier analysis and uncertainty - I. 
Bell Syst Tech J. 1961; 40:43–63.
40. Jutras MJ, Fries P, Buffalo EA. Gamma-band synchronization in the macaque hippocampus and 
memory formation. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:12521–12531. [PubMed: 19812327] 
41. Tort AB, Komorowski R, Eichenbaum H, Kopell N. Measuring phase-amplitude coupling between 
neuronal oscillations of different frequencies. J Neurophysiol. 2010; 104:1195–1210. [PubMed: 
20463205] 
42. Delorme A, Makeig S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG 
dynamics including independent component analysis. J Neurosci Methods. 2004; 134:9–21. 
[PubMed: 15102499] 
43. Brovelli A, et al. Beta oscillations in a large-scale sensorimotor cortical network: Directional 
influences revealed by Granger causality. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004; 101:9849–9854. 
[PubMed: 15210971] 
44. Dhamala, M. Encyclopedia of Computational Neuroscience. Jaeger, D., Jung, R., editors. Springer; 
2014. p. 2789-2793.
45. Granger CWJ. Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods. 
Econometrica. 1969; 37:424–438.
46. Gregoriou GG, Gotts SJ, Zhou H, Desimone R. High-frequency, long-range coupling between 
prefrontal and visual cortex during attention. Science. 2009; 324:1207–1210. [PubMed: 19478185] 
47. de Waele S, Broersen MT. Order selection for vector autoregressive models. IEEE T Signal Proces. 
2003; 51:427–433.
48. Bokil H, Purpura K, Schoffelen JM, Thomson D, Mitra P. Comparing spectra and coherences for 
groups of unequal size. J Neurosci Methods. 2007; 159:337–345. [PubMed: 16945422] 
49. Cohen J. A power primer. Psychol Bull. 1992; 112:155–159. [PubMed: 19565683] 
Amadei et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Mating enhances low-frequency coherence across multiple brain areas
a, Cumulative huddling trajectories of hit and (c) non-hit subjects during cohabitation; 
huddling latencies are indicated by dots color-coded by subject. b, Huddling latency 
negatively correlates with total huddling duration over full cohabitation (n = 15; R2 = 0.63, P 
< 0.001). d, Coherence spectra for example hit and (g) non-hit subjects, with insets 
indicating low-frequency peaks during mating (5 Hz). Solid lines and shaded regions show 
mean and mid-95 percentile range, respectively, of the n = 40 coherence estimates for a 
given behavior (see Methods). e, 5 Hz coherence is significantly modulated by behavior in 
both hits (F2, 16 = 35.10, P < 0.001; post-hoc, M vs. SG, t8 = 4.65, P = 0.005; M vs. Hud, t8 
= 6.73, P < 0.001; SG vs. Hud, t8 = 5.10, P = 0.003) and (f) non-hits (F2, 10 = 12.43, P = 
0.002; post-hoc, M vs. SG, t5 = 2.44, P = 0.176; M vs. Hud, t5 = 4.08, P = 0.029; SG vs. 
Hud, t5 = 3.08, P = 0.082). Reported coherence P-values are Bonferroni-corrected for 
multiple comparisons (see Methods). Error bars show mean ± s.e.m. Image of huddling 
voles adapted from [17].
Amadei et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. mPFC-NAcc cross-frequency coupling is dynamically modulated and behavior-
dependent
a, Example raw LFP from mPFC (top) and NAcc (upper middle), filtered into low-frequency 
(lower middle) and gamma-frequency (bottom) bands, shows gamma amplitude modulation 
by low-frequency phase. b, Modulation Index (MI) of phase-amplitude coupling for example 
hit subject showing mPFC-to-NAcc (left) and NAcc-to-mPFC (middle) directions during 
cohabitation. “Net modulation” (right) is difference in MI between directions. c, Mean net 
modulation for hit (left, n = 9), non-hit (middle, n = 6), or pooled (right, n = 15) subjects 
shows peaks when mPFC low-frequency phase modulates NAcc (or non-hit) gamma 
amplitude (indicated by black rectangle). d, Net modulation values (2-s, non-overlapping 
windows) sampled over a baseline solo period (gold points) and 6-hr cohabitation for 
example hit and (g) non-hit subjects. Values that temporally overlap with mating, self-
grooming and huddling behaviors (top hashes) are color-coded accordingly. All non-scored 
values are indicated as “other-cohab,” which together with mating and self-grooming 
represent “nonhuddling” values. e, Mean net modulation across subjects during huddling, 
baseline and nonhuddling behaviors in all hits and (f) non-hits. Net modulation varies with 
behavior in hits (F1.219, 9.754 = 9.44, P = 0.010, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected; post-hoc, 
NHud vs. B, t8 = 3.39, P = 0.028; NHud vs. Hud, t8 = 3.17, P = 0.040; Hud vs. B, t8 = 1.81, 
P = 0.322) but not non-hits (F1.027, 5.133 = 3.94, P = 0.102, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected). 
h, Nonhuddling and huddling net modulations are not correlated in either hits (R2 = 0.10, P 
Amadei et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 = 0.417) or (i) non-hits (R2 = 0.06, P = 0.630). Reported P-values in e, f are Bonferroni-
corrected for multiple comparisons (see Methods). Error bars show mean ± s.e.m.
Amadei et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. mPFC-NAcc cross-frequency coupling correlates with huddling latency
a, Correlations between huddling latency and mean nonhuddling (NHud) net modulation 
during baseline, first 60 minutes and full cohabitation in hits (R2 = 0.51, P = 0.096; R2= 
0.74, P = 0.008; R2 = 0.76, P = 0.007, respectively) and (b) non-hits (R2 = 0.21, P > 0.99; R2 
= 0.05, P > 0.99; R2 = 0.12, P > 0.99, respectively). Significant correlations occur for hits at 
60 minutes and full cohabitation. c, Correlation strength (R2) between huddling latency and 
mean NHud net modulation increases for larger time windows from start of cohabitation in 
hits (squares) but not non-hits (triangles). Shaded regions and dashed bars indicate range and 
median of latencies to first mating (purple) and self-grooming (green) across all subjects (n 
= 15). d, Mean net modulation values within 1 min moving windows (stepped by 0.1 min) 
before (M-) and after (M+) the first mating bout of hits and (k) non-hits. Each subject's 
values are color-coded by that subject's latency to huddle from the end of the mating bout 
(latencyM+). e, Change in mean net modulation from immediately before to after the first 
mating bout (indicated by line segments in d) negatively correlates with huddling latencyM+ 
in hits (R2 = 0.72, P = 0.004) but not (j) non-hits (R2 = 0.02, P = 0.766; line segments in k). 
f, Strength of correlation between mean net modulation and huddling latencyM+ increases 
from before to after mating and is sustained for ∼2 min in hits but not (m) non-hits. g, h, 
This increase in hits is maintained, and significant (P = 0.002, permutation test on difference 
in R2 (0.75) between bracketed time points), when subtracting out the mean baseline net 
Amadei et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 modulation from the local values around mating. (l, o) Non-hits show no significant increase 
in correlation strength (P = 0.233, observed R2 difference of 0.39). i, Change in mean net 
modulation from immediately before to after first mating bout correlates with mean NHud 
net modulation in the 15 min after mating in hits (R2 = 0.84, P < 0.001) but not (n) non-hits 
(R2 = 0.58, P = 0.080). All mating results in hit subjects (e, h, i) remain significant even 
without Subject 4 (black dot, n = 8). Reported P-values in a, b are Bonferroni-corrected for 
multiple comparisons (see Methods).
Amadei et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Low-frequency stimulation of mPFC-to-NAcc projections biases behavioral preference 
towards a partner
Example immunohistochemistry showing a, ChR2 expression in mPFC (injection site, top 
image) and b, fibers projecting to NAcc (stimulation site; middle and bottom images; bottom 
image is magnified view of boxed area). ChR2 tagged with enhanced yellow fluorescent 
protein (EYFP) for visualization. DAPI counterstain shows cell nuclei. c, Light-evoked 
excitatory post-synaptic currents in example putative NAcc medium spiny neuron during 
whole-cell patch recording in presence of Picrotoxin (Picro; top). Excitatory transmission 
confirmed using AMPA/kainate receptor antagonist 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione 
(DNQX; bottom). Top and bottom traces each represent average response to n = 5 light-
pulse trains at 5 Hz (see Methods). d, (Top) total optical stimulation and (bottom) time spent 
in each zone during cohabitation do not significantly differ between ChR2-expressing (n = 
12) and control subjects (expressing EYFP only, n = 10; one subject missing due to data loss 
during cohabitation) (Stim, Cohen's d = 0.46, P = 0.298; Social, d = 0.41, P = 0.345; 
Neutral, d = 0.20, P = 0.698; Non-social, d = 0.68, P = 0.102). e, (Top) time spent with 
partner (P) versus stranger (S) during PPT for ChR2 (n = 12) and EYFP (n = 11) subjects. 
(Bottom) ChR2 subjects spent significantly greater relative time with the partner compared 
to stranger (d = 0.94, P = 0.034). Boxplots show median and interquartile range. Data points 
indicated by red cross refer to values whose distance from top or bottom of the box is greater 
than 1.5 times the interquartile range. Cg1: anterior cingulate cortex (area 1); PL: prelimbic 
cortex.
Amadei et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
