   83
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
Myths, facts and controversies in the diagnosis and 
management of anaphylaxis
Katherine Anagnostou,1,2 Paul J Turner3
To cite: Anagnostou K, 
Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 
2019;104:83–90.
1Department of Pediatrics, 
Section of Immunology, Allergy 
and Rheumatology, Texas 
Children’s Hospital, Houston, 
Texas, USA
2Pediatrics, Section of 
Immunology, Allergy and 
Rheumatology, Baylor college of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
3Section of Paediatrics, Imperial 
College London, London, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Katherine Anagnostou, 
Department of Pediatrics, 
Section of Immunology, Allergy 
and Rheumatology, Texas 
Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX 
77030, USA;  
 
Aikaterini. 
Anagnostou@ 
bcm. 
edu
Received 4 March 2018
Revised 29 May 2018
Accepted 30 May 2018
Published Online First 
16 June 2018
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2019. Re-use 
permitted under CC BY. 
Published by BMJ.
AbsTRACT
Anaphylaxis is a serious systemic allergic reaction that is 
rapid in onset and may cause death. Despite numerous 
national and international guidelines and consensus 
statements, common misconceptions still persist in terms 
of diagnosis and appropriate management, both among 
healthcare professionals and patient/carers. We address 
some of these misconceptions and highlight the optimal 
approach for patients who experience potentially life-
threatening allergic reactions.
InTRoduCTIon
Anaphylaxis is a serious systemic allergic reac-
tion that is rapid in onset and may cause death.1 
Recent data suggest that the incidence is increasing, 
particularly to food.2–4 The lifetime prevalence of 
anaphylaxis is estimated to be between 0.5% and 
2%.5 Despite numerous national and international 
guidelines, misconceptions continue to persist 
among both healthcare professionals and patients/
carers, which result in under-recognition and 
suboptimal management of this medical emergency. 
In this review, we address some of these misconcep-
tions and highlight areas of best practice.
Myth 1: ‘Anaphylaxis often results in death’
Anaphylaxis can be life-threatening, but in reality 
the majority of reactions do not result in severe 
outcomes.6 7 Many reactions are not treated appro-
priately (discussed below), yet fatal anaphylaxis is 
(fortunately) a rare event, with a case fatality rate 
under 0.001%.8 Severe anaphylaxis, however, is 
unpredictable, and severe reactions may mimic 
more mild anaphylaxis reactions in the first 
instance.9 Delay in appropriate treatment almost 
certainly contributes to fatalities.10 Therefore, it is 
critical that all anaphylaxis reactions are treated as 
a medical emergency.
While hospitalisations in the UK and elsewhere 
due to anaphylaxis have increased over the last 
two decades, there has been no increase in fatal-
ities.2 11–14 For the food-allergic individual, the 
incidence of fatal anaphylaxis is 1.81 per million 
person years—less than death due to accidental 
causes or murder.7 15 Nonetheless, this needs to be 
interpreted appropriately: allergic individuals (and 
their parents) perceive risk very differently: a ‘one 
in a million’ risk may be acceptable in terms of 
public health but with respect to their own child, 
parents will consider their child to be the ‘one in a 
million’ who will die from anaphylaxis.16 Indeed, 
the adverse impact of a diagnosis of food allergy 
on health-related quality of life is greater than that 
seen in diabetes and other chronic diseases. These 
data are perhaps best framed in the context of safe-
ty-netting: just as we manage everyday risks (such as 
driving, with safety standards on cars, airbags and 
crumple zones, adhering to a highway code), can 
we help our patients and their families take a similar 
approach to the food allergy, with safety-netting 
allowing affected individuals to lead as normal a 
life as possible?
dIAgnosIs of AnAphylAxIs
Anaphylaxis has been defined as a systemic or multi-
organ allergic reaction; however, not all systemic 
reactions are anaphylaxis. For example, many 
reactions have only cutaneous manifestations (eg, 
generalised urticaria)—clearly a systemic phenom-
enon, but (in the absence of other symptoms) not 
anaphylaxis according to most guidelines. In prac-
tice, anaphylaxis in the UK (and also Australia) is 
characterised by the presence of ‘Airway/Breathing/
Circulation’ (respiratory or cardiovascular) symp-
toms as part of an allergic reaction. Skin or mucosal 
changes alone are not a sign of an anaphylactic 
reaction.
There are two areas of potential controversy: 
the most common criteria to diagnose anaphylaxis 
are those developed by the National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and subse-
quently adopted by the World Allergy Organisation 
(box 1),1 which were designed to capture 95% of 
cases. However:
1. According to criterion 2, skin and gut symptoms 
together constitute anaphylaxis. However, the 
prevailing consensus in the UK (and Australia) 
with respect to food-induced reactions is that 
skin and gut symptoms, in the absence of respi-
ratory or cardiovascular symptoms, are not ana-
phylaxis.17 For food, gastrointestinal symptoms 
are caused by the presence of local allergen in 
the gut rather than a systemic reaction. This is in 
contrast to venom-induced reactions, where the 
presence of gastrointestinal symptoms (eg, vom-
iting) would constitute anaphylaxis (as the gut 
is remote from the site of allergen exposure).17 
There is also no consensus as to what consti-
tutes persistent gut symptoms. This distinction 
is important, as many food-induced reactions 
are classified as anaphylaxis in the USA (and 
therefore should be treated with epinephrine), 
but not in the UK and Australia, something im-
portant to consider when making comparisons 
to US data.
2. Fatal (and in our experience, near-fatal) anaphy-
laxis reactions often present as acute bronchoc-
onstriction without any other symptoms being 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 84
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
box 1 Clinical criteria for the diagnosis of anaphylaxis1
Anaphylaxis is highly likely when any one of the following three 
criteria is fulfilled:
1. Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) 
with involvement of the skin, mucosal tissue or both 
(eg, generalised urticaria, itching or flushing, swollen 
lips–tongue–uvula)
And at least one of the following:
a. Respiratory compromise (eg, dyspnoea, wheeze-
bronchospasm, stridor, reduced peak flow, hypoxaemia)
b. Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms of end-
organ dysfunction (eg, hypotonia (collapse), syncope, 
incontinence) OR
2. Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after 
exposure to a likely allergen for that patient (minutes to 
several hours):
a. Involvement of the skin–mucosal tissue
b. Respiratory compromise
c. Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms
d. Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (eg, crampy 
abdominal pain, vomiting) OR
3. Reduced blood pressure after exposure to known allergen for 
that patient (minutes to several hours)
present (which often leads to uncertainty as to whether some 
fatalities are due to anaphylaxis or severe asthma).18 19 Such 
reactions, according to the NIAID criteria, do not constitute 
anaphylaxis.
Respiratory symptoms are far more common than cardiovas-
cular symptoms in food-induced anaphylaxis, especially in those 
with asthma.20 In a retrospective study from Sweden, children 
with asthma presenting with anaphylaxis were more likely to 
have lower airway symptoms and wheeze than children without 
an underlying diagnosis of asthma (OR 2.7).21
Myth 2: ‘There are no hives so it can’t be anaphylaxis’
Cutaneous symptoms (most commonly urticaria or ‘hives’) 
are absent in around 10% of anaphylaxis reactions and where 
present may be delayed in onset.8 This is consistent with a case 
series of six paediatric fatalities due to food anaphylaxis, where 
only one child had evidence of skin involvement: the lack of 
skin signs may have delayed diagnosis and appropriate treat-
ment with epinephrine, contributing to the fatal outcome.22 
The Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy 
(ASCIA) recently issued new guidelines,17 which define anaphy-
laxis as:
 
►
Any acute onset illness with typical skin features (urticarial 
rash or erythema/flushing, and/or angio-oedema), PLUS 
involvement of respiratory and/or cardiovascular and/or 
persistent severe gastrointestinal symptoms; or
 
►
Any acute onset of hypotension or bronchospasm or upper 
airway obstruction where anaphylaxis is considered possible, 
even if typical skin features are not present.
These criteria better reflect increasing recognition that cuta-
neous manifestations are often absent or appear late in near-fatal 
and fatal anaphylaxis.
The safe management of anaphylaxis depends on early recog-
nition and treatment with intramuscular epinephrine. The 
British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology (BSACI), 
in conjunction with the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, has recently updated its Allergy Management Plans for 
children (figure 1), highlighting the potential for skin symptoms 
to be absent in anaphylaxis.
Myth 3: ‘no trigger for the reaction is identified, therefore it 
is not anaphylaxis’
Anaphylaxis is a clinical diagnosis. The most common trigger in 
young people is food: symptoms typically begin within 15–30 
min 
of exposure and progress rapidly.23 Other triggers, such as medi-
cation or insect stings, are far less common in children.8 24 In 
around 20% of cases, no trigger is identified; this is known 
as idiopathic anaphylaxis. Many such reactions will be due to 
undisclosed or ‘hidden’ food allergens. Identifying the culprit 
allergen can be challenging and referral to an allergy specialist 
is advised: a thorough review of the circumstances surrounding 
the reaction including a detailed dietary history supported by 
ingredients lists is likely to be required. Of note, if a child is 
consuming a food regularly without problem, it is unlikely to be 
the cause. This might seem obvious, but dietary manipulation 
along these lines are often recommended by non-specialists for 
idiopathic, non-anaphylaxis reactions presenting with only skin 
symptoms: such episodes are generally due to immune activation 
(often viral-triggered) rather than allergen exposure.
The most common food trigger for fatal anaphylaxis in children 
in the UK is milk, followed by peanut and tree nuts.2 While there 
is broad public recognition of the risks posed by nuts, cow’s milk 
allergy is often perceived as being less severe. However, milk 
allergy persisting into school age is often associated with other 
coexisting atopies (such as asthma) and more severe reactions, 
particularly in the 30%–40% of milk-allergic children who are 
unable to tolerate milk in well-baked foods (such as biscuits or 
cakes).9 Such exposure often results in delayed reactions which 
mimic asthma; under such circumstances, it may not be obvious 
that the child has been exposed to milk. Therefore, always 
consider anaphylaxis in someone with a known food allergy who 
has sudden breathing difficulty.
Laboratory tests (such as mast cell tryptase, MCT) may 
support a diagnosis of anaphylaxis, but these are not specific for 
anaphylaxis, nor are results available quick enough to impact 
on acute management.25 Measuring MCT may be helpful where 
the cause of the reaction is unclear: a serum sample should be 
collected within 15–180 
min of symptom onset, with a further 
convalescent sample at least 6 
hours later.25 However, MCT is 
often not raised in food-induced reactions, even in the most 
severe and fatal reactions.26 In a Canadian study, only 19.2% 
of children presenting with anaphylaxis had elevated MCT; 
even with severe reactions (cyanosis, hypoxia, respiratory arrest, 
hypotension, loss of consciousness), MCT was only raised in 
50% of cases.27 A negative MCT does not, therefore, rule out 
anaphylaxis.
ACuTe MAnAgeMenT
Epinephrine is the first-line treatment for anaphylaxis according 
to all guidelines.10 It has both α-sympathomimetic and β-sym-
pathomimetic actions, causing peripheral vasoconstriction, 
increased cardiac output and bronchodilation; importantly, it is 
the only drug that inhibits the further release of inflammatory 
mediators from mast cells and basophils.
Myth 4: ‘epinephrine is dangerous’
Epinephrine given by intramuscular injection into the outer 
mid-thigh is very safe and starts to work within minutes. 
Epinephrine can either be injected using a needle–syringe (using 
1:1000 epinephrine, which results in a lower volume, less painful 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 85
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
figure 1 Allergy Action Plan from the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology/Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (available at 
www.sparepensinschools.uk or http://www.bsaci.org/about/pag-allergy-action-plans-for-children).
injection than if using 1:10 000) or by autoinjector device (eg, 
Emerade, EpiPen, Jext). Where an autoinjector is used, note that 
both EpiPen and Jext are only available in 150 µg and 300 µg 
doses, which means that the 300 µg is effectively an underdose 
in someone over 30 
kg (this may explain why some patients 
require a second epinephrine dose). Younger children should 
be transitioned to a 300 µg dose when their body weight is 
>25 
kg, and some centres advocate doing so from 20 
kg. Around 
10%–20% of patients report transient effects including pallor, 
anxiety, palpitations, dizziness and headache (although these 
symptoms may also be due to the reaction and/or the patient’s 
own endogenous epinephrine production).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 86
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
figure 2 Acute management of anaphylaxis. (A) Current UK Resuscitation Council algorithm. (B) Suggested amended algorithm by the authors, 
which emphasises the need for further doses of intramuscular epinephrine in the event of ongoing anaphylaxis symptoms and incorporates a low-
dose epinephrine infusion protocol used widely in Australia and Spain (with permission, from Brown SG, Emerg Med Australas. 2006;18:155–69).
Epinephrine is underused in the treatment of anaphylaxis, both 
prehospital and in emergency departments.6 10 21 23 28 Further 
intramuscular doses of epinephrine should be administered in 
the event of persisting respiratory or cardiovascular symptoms. 
Epinephrine can and should be repeated after 5 
min; the admin-
istration of other medication such as antihistamines or steroids 
must not cause delay or distraction, as these are not first-line (or 
even second-line) treatments for anaphylaxis24 (figure 2A). An 
alternative summary of anaphylaxis treatment, consistent with 
national and international guidelines, is shown in figure 2B.
Myth 5: ‘Antihistamines can be used to treat anaphylaxis 
initially; epinephrine is only needed if symptoms worsen’
Histamine is only one of many inflammatory mediators released 
during anaphylaxis. Oral antihistamines take around 30 
min for 
onset of effect; intravenous chlorphenamine has a faster onset, 
but can cause hypotension. Antihistamines are not effective 
against anaphylaxis: their prophylactic use during controlled 
immunotherapy does not prevent anaphylaxis, and any apparent 
response during acute management of reactions is most likely due 
to the patient’s own endogenous epinephrine.29 Antihistamines 
have now been relegated to third-line therapy in international 
guidelines; their use is limited to the relief of cutaneous symp-
toms and should never delay the administration of epinephrine 
or fluid resuscitation during patient stabilisation.10
Myth 6: ‘Corticosteroids prevent delayed or biphasic 
reactions in anaphylaxis’
Historically, corticosteroids have been used to prevent protracted 
and biphasic reactions (the latter defined as a recurrence of 
symptoms within 72 
hours of initial anaphylaxis, without re-ex-
posure to the trigger). However, this has never been tested in a 
randomised clinical trial; more recent evidence has cast doubt 
over their efficacy.30 A recent systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis included 27 studies with 4114 anaphylaxis cases, of whom 
192 (4.7%) had biphasic reactions.31 Steroid administration 
did not affect the likelihood of a late phase reaction (OR 1.52, 
95% 
CI 0.96 to 2.43). In fact, there was a non-significant trend 
towards increased risk, although this is probably because steroid 
use was more common with severe reactions. Biphasic reactions 
were more common where hypotension was present at initial 
reaction (OR 2.18, 95% 
CI 1.14 to 4.15), but this is unusual in 
food-induced anaphylaxis. The median time to onset of biphasic 
symptoms was 11 (range 0.2–72) 
hours, that is, 50% of reac-
tions occurred >11 
hours after initial reaction. This is relevant 
because current guidance from the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence recommends patients over 16 
years are 
observed for 6–12 
hours after anaphylaxis (children under 16 
should be admitted).32 In reality, it is generally accepted that 
prolonged observation may not be required following a straight-
forward reaction in someone who already has a comprehensive 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 87
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
figure 3 Risk factors for severe reactions. Reproduced with permission from Dubois et al.34 BHR, bronchial hyperresponsiveness; NSAID, non 
steroidal anti-inflamatory drugs; OIT, oral immunotherapy; EMS, emergency medical services. 
management plan and rescue medication (including epinephrine 
autoinjectors) in place.
MAnAgIng ChIldRen AT RIsk of AnAphylAxIs
Although research in ongoing into potential treatments for food 
allergy, the mainstay of management remains dietary avoidance 
and provision of a management plan/rescue medication in the 
event of accidental reactions.
Myth 7: ‘only children who have had anaphylaxis need an 
epinephrine autoinjector’
Allergy skin prick tests and/or allergen-specific IgE blood tests 
do not predict reaction severity, and anaphylaxis can occur in 
patients with high, low and even negative tests. A recent Euro-
pean Consensus concluded that it is very difficult if not impos-
sible to accurately predict who is at risk of severe anaphylaxis: 
a number of risk factors acting together are involved (figure 3).9
Clearly someone with previous anaphylaxis is at risk of 
subsequent anaphylaxis. However, most children who present 
with anaphylaxis as their initial reaction do not experience 
further anaphylaxis. Ewan and Clark followed up 747 allergic 
children, of whom 220 had initial anaphylaxis to peanut/tree 
nuts; 25% had further accidental reactions over a median 
3-year follow-up, with only one experiencing further anaphy-
laxis.33 Other studies report a higher rate of anaphylaxis in 
those with initial mild reactions. In a UK survey of 969 young 
people attending allergy clinics, 48% had experienced an acci-
dental reaction in the previous year, with 245 (25%) having 
anaphylaxis.6 However, the occurrence of anaphylaxis is likely 
to depend on a number of factors, including dose or level of 
exposure34 (figure 3). In a unique study of 89 children with 
suspected peanut allergy, Wainstein et al demonstrated that up 
to 75% will have anaphylaxis if exposed to sufficient peanut 
at challenge.35 Thus, lack of prior anaphylaxis is more likely 
due to insufficient exposure rather than some inherent lack of 
predisposition. Importantly, there are no data indicating that 
allergic reactions get worse with each subsequent exposure. Nor 
is there any evidence to suggest that anaphylaxis risk ‘runs in 
the family’.
Various risk factors for severe anaphylaxis have been proposed, 
based on limited case series of fatal anaphylaxis. Interestingly, 
food-induced anaphylaxis is most common in the 0–5 age group, 
but death from anaphylaxis in this age group is rare.2 Teenagers 
and young adults appear to have an age-dependent predisposi-
tion towards severe outcomes, which cannot be easily explained 
by risk-taking behaviours.2 Asthma is considered a risk factor; 
however, in the UK Fatal Anaphylaxis Registry, 22% of cases did 
not have a prior diagnosis of asthma.2 Around 50% of children 
with food allergies have asthma: the vast majority will never have 
a severe allergic reaction, thus asthma has poor predictive value 
for severe reactions (although this does not negate the impera-
tive to improve asthma control in food-allergic individuals as a 
means of reducing risk).9
Delays in treating with epinephrine are a risk factor for 
fatal outcome10 36: it is this, as well as our inability to predict 
severe reactions, which drives the provision of epinephrine 
autoinjectors. A summary of recent guidelines on who should 
be prescribed autoinjectors is summarised in table 1. Health-
care professionals must consider the patient/family preference: 
if prescription boosts patient confidence and allows them to 
lead a less restrictive life, then autoinjectors should be part of 
the management plan. However, this requires actual carriage: 
the autoinjectors need to be available at all times, otherwise 
prescription is pointless.
Controversy exists over the number of autoinjectors to be 
prescribed. The BSACI and ASCIA in general recommend one 
device (for school children, one device for home and a second for 
school, while in the USA, physicians will generally prescribe two 
devices).10 17 In 2014, following an extensive review of epinephrine 
autoinjectors prompted by a coronial inquest, the Medicines and 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 88
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
Table 1 Factors to be considered as part of the risk assessment on whether to prescribe epinephrine autoinjectors
uk (bsACI)48
europe (eAACI)10
Australia (AsCIA)17
evidence
Previous history
 
► Anaphylaxis and at risk of 
ongoing exposure
 
► Mild reaction to ‘trace’ amount 
of allergen
 
► History of cofactors (eg, 
exercise) impacting on reaction 
severity
 
► Anaphylaxis
 
► Mild reaction to ‘trace’ amount 
of allergen
 
► Venom allergy in adults with 
systemic symptoms
 
► Anaphylaxis and at ongoing 
risk of exposure
 
► Generalised urticaria alone 
without anaphylaxis due to 
insect sting in adults
Previous anaphylaxis indicates potential 
for future reactions, although risk of fatal 
anaphylaxis remains low.7 15
No evidence that individuals who react 
to very low amounts of allergen are more 
likely to experience severe anaphylaxis.9
Children with local or generalised skin 
rashes only to venom are at very  
low risk of anaphylaxis with subsequent 
stings.10 48
Allergen-specific 
risk factors
 
► High-risk allergens, for 
example, nuts
 
► Allergen difficult to avoid
 
► High-risk allergens, for example, 
nuts
 
► High-risk allergens, for example, 
nuts, seafood
In the UK, cow’s milk and peanut/tree nuts 
are the most common cause of fatal 
anaphylaxis.2
Patient-specific risk 
factors
 
► Teenage/young adults
 
► Food allergy* to high-risk 
allergens (eg, nuts) and other 
risk factors (eg, asthma)
 
► Raised baseline serum tryptase
 
► Limited access to emergency 
medical care, for example, 
remote location, social factors
 
► Teenager or young adult with a 
food allergy*
 
► food allergy* and coexisting 
unstable or moderate–
severe, persistent asthma
 
► underlying mast cell 
disorders or raised baseline 
serum tryptase
 
► Remote from medical help
 
► Teenagers and young adults with 
food allergy
 
► food allergy*and coexisting 
unstable or moderate–severe, 
persistent asthma
 
► underlying mast cell 
disorders (eg, systemic 
mastocytosis or raised 
baseline serum tryptase)
 
► Limited access to emergency 
medical care, for example, 
remote location, foreign travel
 
► Cardiovascular disease
Data suggests a specific vulnerability 
to severe outcomes from food-induced 
allergic reactions in teenagers and young 
adults.2 9
Poor asthma control increases risk of 
severe reactions; most cases of fatal 
food-induced anaphylaxis have asthma, 
but asthma itself is poorly predictive of 
severe outcomes as it is so prevalent in 
food-allergic individuals.9
Underlying mast cell disorders are 
a known risk factor for venom and 
idiopathic anaphylaxis.10 17 48
Remote access to medical support causes 
delays in emergency treatment.
Factors in bold are specified as ‘absolute’ (EAACI) or ‘recommended’ (ASCIA) indications.
*Excluding pollen food allergy syndrome.
ASCIA, Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy; BSACI, British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology; EAACI, European Academy of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology.
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) issued guidance 
that individuals at risk of anaphylaxis should carry two epineph-
rine autoinjectors at all times due to ‘uncertainties about the site 
of drug delivery and the speed of epinephrine action within the 
body’, which, together with device misuse or malfunction, might 
result in a second dose being needed.37 The BSACI guidance (issued 
after the 2014 statement) recommends a single device on the basis 
that one dose is usually effective for most reactions. The MHRA 
recently reiterated its policy,38 in line with new Department of 
Health guidance for school children at risk of anaphylaxis39 The 
MHRA review also addressed a concern that in some individuals 
(predominantly adolescent and adult women), the needle length 
in some autoinjectors may be insufficient to deliver an intramus-
cular (rather than subcutaneous) injection, although data to inform 
this are limited. At the current time, prescribing practice remains 
divided among UK healthcare professionals.
Myth 8: ‘epinephrine autoinjectors are overprescribed and 
overused in anaphylaxis’
Autoinjectors are underused to treat anaphylaxis in the commu-
nity. In a study of infants aged 3–15 
months with anaphylaxis (US 
definition), epinephrine was administered in under one-third, 
most commonly because the caregiver did not recognise the 
severity of reaction or the autoinjector was not available.40 In a 
UK study, only 16.7% of young people used an autoinjector to 
treat anaphylaxis, the most common reason being they did not 
recognise that the reaction needed treatment with epinephrine.6 
A Scottish study among adolescents with previous anaphylaxis 
reported a number of barriers to the effective use of autoinjec-
tors, including failure to recognise anaphylaxis, uncertainty and 
fear over how and when to use the autoinjector, and lack of 
carriage due to size/design.41 In the USA, these issues have led 
to some management plans (by FARE) offering the suggestion 
to use an epinephrine autoinjector for all reactions regardless 
of severity, but this remains controversial and is not accepted 
as standard practice among many healthcare professionals.42 It 
must be noted that anaphylaxis morbidity/mortality is no lower 
in the USA compared with UK and Australia where epinephrine 
is only recommended for reactions with respiratory or cardio-
vascular involvement36
Myth 9: ‘prescription of an epinephrine autoinjector in 
isolation is life-saving’
Optimal management of food-allergic patients and treatment 
of anaphylaxis has many facets and is not limited to a prescrip-
tion for an epinephrine autoinjector. Improving patient/carer 
knowledge on the recognition and treatment of anaphy-
laxis, and addressing the complex psychosocial dimensions 
of allergic emergencies, form the cornerstone of successful 
anaphylaxis management.6 41 One-third of fatalities in the UK 
occur despite timely epinephrine administration.20 Epineph-
rine autoinjectors potentially buy valuable minutes while an 
emergency medical response is summonsed. Such devices need 
to be prescribed as part of a comprehensive management plan, 
which includes advice on dietary avoidance and on when to 
administer epinephrine. Patients and their families need to be 
told to use their autoinjector in the event of any respiratory 
symptoms, where anaphylaxis might the cause, irrespective 
of severity. Patients with asthma may not realise the impor-
tance of this; they may perceive mild wheezing following food 
allergen exposure as equivalent to their routine symptoms. 
Patients and their families ‘need to be provided with more 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 89
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
Table 2 Common misconceptions in anaphylaxis and what current evidence reveals
Common ‘myths’
What evidence tells us
Myth 1: Anaphylaxis often results in death
Anaphylaxis can be life-threatening, but the majority of reactions do not result in severe 
outcomes
Myth 2: There are no hives so it can’t be anaphylaxis
Cutaneous symptoms (most commonly urticaria or ‘hives’) are absent in around 10% of 
anaphylaxis reactions
Myth 3: No trigger for the reaction is identified, therefore it is not anaphylaxis
In around 20% of cases, no trigger is identified; this is known as idiopathic anaphylaxis
Myth 4: Epinephrine is dangerous
Epinephrine given by intramuscular injection into the outer mid-thigh is very safe
Myth 5: Antihistamines can be used to treat anaphylaxis initially; epinephrine is only 
needed if symptoms worsen
Epinephrine, not antihistamines, is the first-line treatment for anaphylaxis
Myth 6: Corticosteroids prevent delayed or biphasic reactions in anaphylaxis
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of corticosteroids prevent delayed or 
biphasic reactions in anaphylaxis
Myth 7: Only children who have had anaphylaxis need an epinephrine autoinjector
It is very difficult—if not impossible—to accurately predict who is at risk of severe 
anaphylaxis
Myth 8: Epinephrine autoinjectors are overprescribed and overused in anaphylaxis
Autoinjectors are underused to treat anaphylaxis in the community
Myth 9: Prescription of an epinephrine autoinjector in isolation is life-saving
Optimal management of food allergic patients and treatment of anaphylaxis has many 
facets and is not limited to a prescription for an epinephrine autoinjector
Myth 10: MMR and influenza vaccination are contraindicated in patients with previous 
anaphylaxis to egg
Both vaccines are safe to administer in egg-allergic children, including those with 
previous anaphylaxis
constructive strategies and support’ than merely being told to 
‘use your pen’.42
The BSACI management plans are available for download 
online 
(http://www. 
bsaci. 
org/ 
about/ 
pag- 
allergy- 
action- 
plans- 
for- 
children) and were recently updated to take into account 
changes in UK-wide legislation allowing the use of ‘spare’ 
epinephrine autoinjectors in schools. The BSACI plans, correctly 
completed, meet the requirements of the legislation and UK 
healthcare professionals are encouraged to use these plans where 
possible. Further information is available online ( 
www. 
sparepen-
sinschools. 
uk).
Correct positioning of the patient is important in anaphy-
laxis,8 25 something highlighted in MHRA guidance. Case 
series have highlighted the potential for a change in posture 
(eg, from sitting or lying to standing) to trigger decompensa-
tion and fatal event in some patients. Lying the patient supine 
with the lower limbs elevated will increase venous return and 
cardiac output. Patients with respiratory symptoms can be 
allowed to sit if this improves comfort, with their lower limbs 
elevated where possible. Sudden standing must be avoided, and 
patients with anaphylaxis must not be instructed to walk to a 
first aid room to use their autoinjector, as this may increase the 
risk of death.8 25 36
Myth 10: ‘MMR and influenza vaccination are contraindicated 
in patients with previous anaphylaxis to egg’
A common misconception is that the influenza and measles, 
mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccines cannot be given to egg-allergic 
children, in particular those with previous anaphylaxis. The 
MMR vaccine is grown in chick fibroblast cell lines and does 
not contain detectable egg protein. Egg allergy, however severe, 
is not a contraindication.43 Influenza vaccines are prepared from 
viruses grown in embryonated hen’s eggs and can contain very 
low levels of ovalbumin. However, recent data have confirmed 
that both injected and intranasal forms of the vaccine are safe 
in egg-allergic children, including those with previous anaphy-
laxis.44 45 The ‘Green Book’46 and US guidelines44 now advise 
that these vaccines can be administered in primary care (or, 
in the case of the intranasal vaccine, schools), with the usual 
precautions taken for any vaccination. The only exception is 
those with previous life-threatening reactions to egg requiring 
intensive care, in whom there is little safety data (such reactions 
to egg are vanishingly rare); in any event, these patients (and 
their carers) may be better reassured if the vaccine is adminis-
tered in hospital.
In contrast, yellow fever vaccine does contain small amounts 
of egg protein and has been reported to trigger anaphylaxis in 
some egg-allergic individuals. Desensitisation protocols for use 
in specialist centres are available,47 but administration is compli-
cated by the need for such centres to be authorised to provide 
WHO certification. Currently, the authors are aware of only one 
UK paediatric centre (Evelina Hospital, London) where WHO 
certification can be issued following successful administration.
ConClusIons
Anaphylaxis is a severe, potentially life-threatening systemic 
allergic reaction, which constitutes a clinical emergency. 
Common misconceptions regarding anaphylaxis are summarised 
in table 2. Prompt assessment and management are essential, as 
delays in treatment are associated with fatal outcomes. Anaphy-
laxis is primarily a clinical diagnosis: patients/carers and health 
professionals must be appropriately trained to recognise and 
institute appropriate treatment with intramuscular epinephrine, 
as part of a comprehensive management plan. Epinephrine is the 
first-line treatment for anaphylaxis, but is underused. Changes in 
posture have been documented as a trigger for decompensation 
and fatal anaphylaxis. New management plans incorporating 
this advice, and which allow the use of ‘spare’ autoinjectors in 
schools, are available from the BSACI and via www. 
sparepensin-
schools. 
uk website.
Correction notice This paper has been corrected since it was published Online 
First. The BSACI/RCPCH has just updated its Allergy Plans and so figure 1 has been 
replaced with the new plan.
Contributors KA and PJT jointly wrote the manuscript and approved the final 
version.
funding PJT is in receipt of a Clinician Scientist award funded by the UK Medical 
Research Council (reference MR/K010468/1).
Competing interests PJT co-led a taskforce of healthcare professionals (including 
the RCPCH) and representatives of patient support organisations, which worked 
with the UK Departments of Health to introduce legislation allowing the provision of 
’spare’ emergency adrenaline autoinjectors in schools, and helped develop guidance 
around this including the www. 
sparepensinschools. 
uk website. 
patient consent Not required.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 90
Anagnostou K, Turner PJ. Arch Dis Child 2019;104:83–90. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867
Review
provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any 
purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given, 
and indication of whether changes were made. See: https:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/.
RefeRences
 1 Sampson HA, Muñoz-Furlong A, Campbell RL, et al. Second symposium on the 
definition and management of anaphylaxis: summary report—Second National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network 
symposium. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:391–7.
 2 Turner PJ, Gowland MH, Sharma V, et al. Increase in anaphylaxis-related 
hospitalizations but no increase in fatalities: an analysis of United Kingdom national 
anaphylaxis data, 1992–2012. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:956–63.
 3 Lee S, Hess EP, Lohse C, et al. Trends, characteristics, and incidence of anaphylaxis in 
2001–2010: a population-based study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;139.
 4 Rudders SA, Arias SA, Camargo CA. Trends in hospitalizations for food-induced 
anaphylaxis in US children, 2000–2009. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:960–2.
 5 Lieberman P, Camargo CA, Bohlke K, et al. Epidemiology of anaphylaxis: findings 
of the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology Epidemiology of 
Anaphylaxis Working Group. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2006;97:596–602.
 6 Noimark L, Wales J, Du Toit G, et al. The use of adrenaline autoinjectors by children 
and teenagers. Clin Exp Allergy 2012;42:284–92.
 7 Umasunthar T, Leonardi-Bee J, Hodes M, et al. Incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis 
in people with food allergy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 
2013;43:1333–41.
 8 Muraro A, Roberts G, Worm M, et al. Anaphylaxis: guidelines from the European 
Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. Allergy 2014;69:1026–45.
 9 Turner PJ, Baumert JL, Beyer K, et al. Can we identify patients at risk of life-
threatening allergic reactions to food? Allergy 2016;71:1241–55.
 
10 Muraro A, Halken S, Arshad SH, et al. Primary prevention of food allergy. Allergy Eur J 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2014.
 
11 Ma L, Danoff TM, Borish L. Case fatality and population mortality associated with 
anaphylaxis in the United States. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:1075–83.
 
12 Jerschow E, Lin RY, Scaperotti MM, et al. Fatal anaphylaxis in the United States, 
1999–2010: temporal patterns and demographic associations. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2014;134:1318–28.
 
13 Mullins RJ, Wainstein BK, Barnes EH, et al. Increases in anaphylaxis fatalities in 
Australia from 1997 to 2013. Clin Exp Allergy 2016;46:1099–110.
 
14 Motosue MS, Bellolio MF, Van Houten HK, et al. Outcomes of emergency 
department anaphylaxis Visits from 2005 to 2014. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 
2018;6.
 
15 Umasunthar T, Leonardi-Bee J, Turner PJ, et al. Incidence of food anaphylaxis in 
people with food allergy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy 
2015;45:1621–36.
 
16 Hu W, Grbich C, Kemp A. When doctors disagree: a qualitative study of doctors’ and 
parents’ views on the risks of childhood food allergy. Health Expect 2008;11:208–19.
 
17 ASCIA. Acute management of anaphylaxis. 2017 www. 
allergy. 
org. 
au/ 
health- 
professionals/ 
papers/ 
acute- 
management- 
of- 
anaphylaxis- 
guidelines
 
18 Rainbow J, Browne GJ. Fatal asthma or anaphylaxis? Emerg Med J 2002;19:415–7.
 
19 Siddiqui S, Gonem S, Wardlaw AJ. Advances in the management of severe asthma. 
Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2014;33:666–84.
 
20 Pumphrey R. Anaphylaxis: can we tell who is at risk of a fatal reaction? Curr Opin 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;4:285–90.
 
21 Vetander M, Helander D, Flodström C, et al. Anaphylaxis and reactions to foods in 
children—a population-based case study of emergency department visits. Clin Exp 
Allergy 2012;42:568–77.
 
22 Sampson HA, Mendelson L, Rosen JP. Fatal and near-fatal anaphylactic reactions to 
food in children and adolescents. N Engl J Med 1992;327:380–4.
 
23 Grabenhenrich LB, Dölle S, Moneret-Vautrin A, et al. Anaphylaxis in children 
and adolescents: The European Anaphylaxis Registry. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2016;137:1128–37.
 
24 Soar J, Pumphrey R, Cant A, et al. Emergency treatment of anaphylactic reactions—
guidelines for healthcare providers. Resuscitation 2008;77:157–69.
 
25 Simons FE, Ardusso LR, Bilò MB, et al. 2012 update: World Allergy Organization 
guidelines for the assessment and management of anaphylaxis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2012;12:389–99.
 
26 Francis A, Fatovich DM, Arendts G, et al. Serum mast cell tryptase measurements: 
sensitivity and specificity for a diagnosis of anaphylaxis in emergency department 
patients with shock or hypoxaemia. Emerg Med Australas 2017.
 
27 De Schryver S, Halbrich M, Clarke A, et al. Tryptase levels in children presenting 
with anaphylaxis: temporal trends and associated factors. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
2016;137:1138–42.
 
28 Tejedor Alonso MA, Moro Moro M, Múgica García MV, et al. Incidence of 
anaphylaxis in the city of Alcorcon (Spain): a population-based study. Clin Exp Allergy 
2012;42:578–89.
 
29 Gorska L, Chelminska M, Kuziemski K, et al. Analysis of safety, risk factors and 
pretreatment methods during rush hymenoptera venom immunotherapy. Int Arch 
Allergy Immunol 2008;147:241–5.
 
30 Alqurashi W, Ellis AK. Do corticosteroids prevent biphasic anaphylaxis? J Allergy Clin 
Immunol Pract 2017;5:1194–205.
 
31 Lee L, Bellolio MF, Hess EP, et al. 34 time of onset and predictors of biphasic 
anaphylactic reactions: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. Ann 
Emerg Med 2014;64:S13.
 
32 NICE. Anaphylaxis Guideline. www. 
nice. 
org. 
uk/ 
guidance/ 
CG134
 
33 Ewan PW, Clark AT. Efficacy of a management plan based on severity assessment in 
longitudinal and case-controlled studies of 747 children with nut allergy: proposal for 
good practice. Clin Exp Allergy 2005;35:751–6.
 
34 Dubois AEJ, Turner PJ, Hourihane J, et al. How does dose impact on the severity of 
food-induced allergic reactions, and can this improve risk assessment for allergenic 
foods?: report from an ILSI Europe Food Allergy Task Force Expert Group and 
Workshop. Allergy 2018.
 
35 Wainstein BK, Studdert J, Ziegler M, et al. Prediction of anaphylaxis during peanut 
food challenge: usefulness of the peanut skin prick test (SPT) and specific IgE level. 
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2010;21(4 Pt 1):603–11.
 
36 Turner PJ, Jerschow E, Umasunthar T, et al. Fatal anaphylaxis: mortality rate and risk 
factors. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2017;5:1169–78.
 
37 MHRA. Adrenaline auto-injectors : a review of clinical and quality considerations. Med 
Healthc Prod Regul Agency 2014.
 
38 Gov.UK. Adrenaline auto-injectors: updated advice after European review. https://
www. 
gov. 
uk/ 
drug- 
safety- 
update/ 
adrenaline- 
auto- 
injectors- 
updated- 
advice- 
after- 
european- 
review
 
39 Gov.UK. Using emergency adrenaline auto-injectors in schools. https://www. 
gov. 
uk/ 
government/ 
publications/ 
using- 
emergency- 
adrenaline- 
auto- 
injectors- 
in- 
schools
 
40 Fleischer DM, Perry TT, Atkins D, et al. Allergic reactions to foods in preschool-
aged children in a prospective observational food allergy study. Pediatrics 
2012;130:e25–e32.
 
41 Gallagher M, Worth A, Cunningham-Burley S, et al. Epinephrine auto-injector use in 
adolescents at risk of anaphylaxis: a qualitative study in Scotland, UK. Clin Exp Allergy 
2011;41:869–77.
 
42 Turner PJ, DunnGalvin A, Hourihane JO. The Emperor has no symptoms: the risks of a 
blanket approach to using epinephrine autoinjectors for all allergic reactions. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol Pract 2016;4:1143–6.
 
43 UK Medicines Information. Update to Chapter 6 of the green book—egg allergy 
(41–48). 2017 http://www. 
medicinesresources. 
nhs. 
uk/ 
en/ 
Medicines- 
Awareness/ 
Guidance- 
and- 
Advice/ 
Drug- 
Prescribing/ 
Update- 
to- 
Chapter- 
6- 
of- 
the- 
green- 
book-- 
egg- 
allergy/
 
44 Greenhawt M, Turner PJ, Kelso JM. Administration of influenza vaccines to egg 
allergic recipients: a practice parameter update 2017. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 
2018;120:49–52.
 
45 Turner PJ, Southern J, Andrews NJ, et al. Safety of live attenuated influenza vaccine in 
atopic children with egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:376–81.
 
46 Gov.UK. Chapter 19: Influenza. https://www. 
gov. 
uk/ 
government/ 
uploads/ 
system/ 
uploads/ 
attachment_ 
data/ 
file/ 
663694/ 
Greenbook_ 
chapter_ 
19_ 
Influenza_. 
pdf
 
47 Rutkowski K, Ewan PW, Nasser SM. Administration of yellow fever vaccine in patients 
with egg allergy. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2013;161:274–8.
 
48 Ewan P, Brathwaite N, Leech S, et al. BSACI guideline: prescribing an adrenaline auto-
injector. Clinical & Experimental Allergy 2016;46:1258–80.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2018-314867 on 16 June 2018. Downloaded from 
