 Astrocyte scar formation aids CNS axon regeneration
Mark A. Anderson*,1,ˆ, Joshua E. Burda*,1, Yilong Ren1,#, Yan Ao1, Timothy M. O’Shea1, Riki 
Kawaguchi2, Giovanni Coppola2, Baljit S. Khakh3, Timothy J. Deming4, and Michael V. 
Sofroniew1
1Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095,USA
3Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095,USA
4Departments of Bioengineering, Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles CA 90095, USA
Summary
Transected axons fail to regrow in the mature central nervous system (CNS). Astrocyte scars are 
widely regarded as causal in this failure. Here, using three genetically targeted loss-of-function 
manipulations in adult mice, we show that preventing astrocyte scar formation, attenuating scar-
forming astrocytes, or deleting chronic astrocyte scars all failed to result in spontaneous regrowth 
of transected corticospinal, sensory or serotonergic axons through severe spinal cord injury (SCI) 
lesions. In striking contrast, sustained local delivery via hydrogel depots of required axon-specific 
growth factors not present in SCI lesions, plus growth-activating priming injuries, stimulated 
robust, laminin-dependent sensory axon regrowth past scar-forming astrocytes and inhibitory 
molecules in SCI lesions. Preventing astrocyte scar formation significantly reduced this stimulated 
axon regrowth. RNA sequencing revealed that astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions 
express multiple axon-growth supporting molecules. Our findings show that contrary to prevailing 
dogma, astrocyte scar formation aids rather than prevents CNS axon regeneration.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.V.S (sofroniew@mednet.ucla.edu).
*contributed equally
ˆPresent Address: School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), SV BMI UPCourtine, Station 19, CH-1015 
Lausanne, Switzerland
#Present Address: Department of Spine Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China
Author contributions M.A.A., J.E.B., B.S.K., T.J.D., M.V.S. designed experiments; M.A.A., J.E.B., Y.R., Y.A. conducted 
experiments; M.A.A., J.E.B., Y.A., T.M.O’S, R.K., G.C, M.V.S. analyzed data. M.A.A., J.E.B., T.M.O’S, B.S.K, T.J.D., M.V.S. 
prepared the manuscript.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author information Raw and normalized genomic data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible 
through GEO Series accession number GSE76097 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE76097).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 April 14; 532(7598): 195–200. doi:10.1038/nature17623.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Transected axons fail to regrow spontaneously across severe tissue lesions in the mature 
mammalian central nervous system (CNS). Potential mechanisms include (i) reduced 
intrinsic growth capacity of mature CNS neurons1–3, (ii) absence of external growth 
stimulating and supporting factors1,4,5, and (iii) presence of external inhibitory factors 
associated with myelin6,7, fibrotic tissue8 or astrocyte scars9. Alleviating cellular and 
molecular mechanisms underlying axon regeneration failure is fundamental to improving 
CNS repair after traumatic injury, stroke or degenerative disease.
Astrocyte scars have been regarded as barriers to CNS axon regrowth since the mid 20th 
century based on their appearance and early reports that attenuating astrocyte scar formation 
enabled spontaneous axon regrowth10,11. Although axon growth promoting effects of early 
scar attenuators proved illusory, reports correlating failed axon regrowth with presence of 
mature astrocytes12 or astrocyte scars9, plus evidence that astrocytes produce chondroitin 
sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) that inhibit axon growth in vitro9, led to widespread views 
that astrocyte scars are critical inhibitors of CNS axons and that nullifying this inhibition 
will lead to spontaneous axon regeneration.
Here, we tested the hypothesis that astrocyte scar formation plays a causal role in the failure 
of transected mature CNS axons to regenerate across severe tissue lesions. We used multiple 
transgenic loss-of-function strategies to either ablate scar-forming astrocytes, genetically 
attenuate scar-forming astrocytes or delete chronic astrocyte scars after severe spinal cord 
injury (SCI) in adult mice. We quantified the effects of these manipulations on (i) 
spontaneous regeneration of three major types of CNS axons, (ii) total CSPG levels, (iii) 
genome-wide expression by astrocytes and non-astrocytes in SCI lesions of molecules 
associated with axon growth, and (iv) axon regeneration stimulated by conditioning lesions 
plus delivery via synthetic hydrogel depots of known axon-required growth factors missing 
from SCI lesions.
Results
No axon regrowth after preventing scars
We first determined effects of preventing astrocyte scar formation on the potential for 
spontaneous unstimulated axon regeneration through severe CNS lesions. After focal 
traumatic tissue damage, CNS lesions comprise central areas of non-neural lesion core tissue 
surrounded by narrow astrocyte scar borders13,14. Astrocyte scar formation is complete by 
two weeks after adult murine SCI and is critically dependent on astrocyte proliferation and 
STAT3 signaling15–18. We prevented astrocyte scar formation with two loss-of-function 
transgenic mouse models that either (i) selectively kills proliferating scar-forming 
astrocytes15,16 or (ii) deletes STAT3 signaling selectively from astrocytes17,18, referred to 
respectively as TK+GCV or STAT3-CKO mice (Supplementary Information).
After severe crush SCI, wild-type (WT) mice formed dense astrocyte scars by two weeks 
that persisted for eight weeks, whereas TK+GCV, and STAT3-CKO mice failed to form 
scars and instead exhibited larger areas of non-neural tissue around lesion centers that were 
Anderson et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 essentially devoid of astrocytes from two to eight weeks after SCI (Fig. 1b–d; Extended Data 
Fig. 1; Supplementary Information).
Effects of preventing astrocyte scar formation on axon regeneration were quantified in three 
axonal systems, (i) descending corticospinal tract (CST), (ii) ascending sensory tract (AST) 
and (iii) descending serotonergic (5HT) tract, visualized either by axonal tract tracing or 
immunohistochemistry (Fig. 1c,e–i; Supplementary Information). As expected after severe 
SCI in adult WT mice, transected CST and AST axons both exhibited moderate dieback 
away from lesion centers (Fig. 1c,e,g,h). Preventing astrocyte scar formation in both TK
+GCV or STAT3-CKO mice failed to result in spontaneous regrowth of transected CST or 
AST axons through SCI lesions, and instead significantly increased axonal dieback (Fig. 
1c,e,g,h). As expected19,20, transected 5HT axons exhibited little dieback from lesion 
centers (Fig. 1f,i). Preventing scar formation in TK+GCV mice or STAT3-CKO mice did not 
exacerbate dieback of 5HT axons. Nevertheless, although many 5HT axons remained in 
lesion centers devoid of astrocytes, they also failed to regrow (Fig. 1f,i).
Thus, in spite of the essential absence of scar-forming astrocytes from SCI lesions for eight 
weeks after SCI in TK+GCV mice or STAT3-CKO mice, there was no spontaneous 
regeneration of transected CST, AST or 5HT axons through the lesions. This regrowth 
failure was particularly apparent for AST and 5HT axons whose axonal tips were often 
present along or within large areas devoid of astrocytes but did not regrow spontaneously 
through such areas (Fig. 1e,f).
No axon regrowth after deleting chronic scars
Acute astrocyte scar formation restricts inflammation and preserves neural tissue14–16,18. It 
has been proposed that after inflammation has resolved, chronic astrocyte scars are 
expendable and detrimental because they continually prevent axon regeneration. To test this 
hypothesis, we deleted chronic astrocyte scars five weeks after SCI with genetically targeted 
diphtheria toxin receptor and ultralow doses of diphtheria toxin21 (Fig.2; Supplementary 
Information). Distribution and specificity of targeting to mature astrocyte scars was verified 
with the genetic reporter, tdTomato (Fig. 2b; Extended Data Fig. 1c; Supplementary 
Information). GFAP immunohistochemistry verified efficient deletion of chronic astrocyte 
scars (Fig. 2c). Axon quantitation ten weeks after SCI showed that transected CST, AST or 
5HT axons all failed to regrow spontaneously through areas depleted of chronic astrocyte 
scars (Fig. 2d–i). Again, this failure was particularly striking for AST and 5HT axons in or 
along areas devoid of scar-forming astrocytes that did not regrow through these areas (Fig. 
2e,f). We also deleted chronic astrocyte scars and adjacent astrocytes over larger areas to 
reach ‘died-back’ CST and AST axons, but this approach caused pronounced tissue 
degeneration and large lesions (Extended Data Fig. 1e) that contained essentially no 
detectable CST, AST or 5HT axons. These findings show that deleting chronic astrocyte 
scars fails to result in spontaneous regrowth of CST, AST or 5HT axons through SCI lesions, 
and that chronic astrocyte scars remain critical for sustaining tissue integrity.
Anderson et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Multicellular CSPG production
We next looked for molecular mechanisms that might explain why ablating or attenuating 
astrocyte scars failed to enable spontaneous axon regrowth through severe lesions. CSPGs 
produced by astrocyte scars are regarded as principal inhibitors of axon regeneration9. Total 
CSPG levels determined by dot blot with CS56 antibody9,22 were, as expected9, 
significantly higher in our WT SCI lesions, but were not significantly reduced by transgenic 
ablation or disruption of astrocyte scar formation (Fig. 3a). Because diverse cells in SCI 
lesions including pericytes, fibroblast lineage cells and inflammatory cells13 can produce 
CSPGs23, we examined cellular production of CSPG and GFAP and quantified 
immunohistochemically stained tissue areas. In SCI lesions of TK+GCV and STAT3-CKO 
mice, GFAP area was significantly reduced in both grey and white matter compared with 
WT, whereas CSPG area was not significantly reduced in lesion core tissue or in regions of 
ablated astrocyte scar, which were filled with CSPG-positive, GFAP-negative, cells (Figs. 
3b,c; Extended Data Fig. 2; Supplementary Information). These findings show that non-
astrocyte cells in SCI lesions produce substantive CSPGs and that preventing astrocyte scar 
formation fails to reduce total CSPG production in SCI lesions.
Genomic Dissection of SCI lesions
Numerous molecules attract, repel, support or inhibit axon growth during development, and 
many of these are present in CNS lesions7,24,25. To look broadly at molecules produced by 
astrocytes or non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions that might impact on axon regrowth, we 
conducted genome-wide RNA sequencing of (i) astrocyte-specific ribosome-associated RNA 
(ramRNA) precipitated via a hemagglutinin tag26 transgenically targeted to either WT or 
STAT3-CKO astrocytes, and (ii) non-precipitated (flow-through) RNA deriving from non-
astrocyte cells in the same tissue samples (Fig. 4; Extended Data Fig. 4; Supplementary 
Information).
At two weeks after SCI, astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions exhibited 
significantly altered expression of many genes in both WT and STAT3-CKO mice, and WT 
astrocytes exhibited expected known changes28 (Extended Data Fig. 4a–d; Supplementary 
Information). Notably, 63% of genes significantly regulated by WT astrocytes were not 
significantly altered by STAT3-CKO astrocytes after SCI, and STAT3-CKO SCI astrocyte 
transcriptomes clustered more similarly towards uninjured astrocytes than towards WT SCI 
astrocytes (Fig. 4c,d).
We analyzed 59 molecules reported to negatively or positively modulate axon growth in SCI 
lesions (Extended Data Table 1). In SCI lesions from WT mice, both astrocytes and non-
astrocyte cells expressed a majority not only of 28 known axon inhibitors, including specific 
CSPGs, ephrins, netrins, neuropillins, plexins, slits and others, but also a majority of 31 
known axon permissive molecules, including specific CSPGs, laminins, syndecans, 
glypicans, decorin and others (Fig. 4e). Remarkably, both astrocytes and non-astrocytes 
down-regulated more axon inhibitory molecules than were upregulated, and upregulated 
more than three times the number of axon permissive molecules than were downregulated. 
Preventing astrocyte scar formation in STAT3-CKO mice (i) did not significantly decrease 
the expression by astrocytes or non-astrocytes of a single reported inhibitor, whereas eleven 
Anderson et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were upregulated, and (ii) significantly increased the expression of two permissive 
molecules, and decreased three, compared to WT SCI (Fig. 4e).
In agreement with our immunoblot and immunohistochemical CSPG findings (above), 
various individual CSPG ramRNAs were expressed by both astrocytes and non-astrocyte 
cells in SCI lesions (Fig. 4e). Interestingly, aggrecan, the prototypical CSPG used in axon 
growth inhibition studies in vitro9,29, was not detectably expressed by scar-forming 
astrocytes at either the ramRNA or immunohistochemistry of protein levels (Fig. 4e; 
Extended Data Fig. 5a). Other axon inhibitory CSPGs, brevican, neurocan, versican and 
phosphacan, were all expressed by both scar-forming astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in 
SCI lesions as revealed by RNA analysis (Fig. 4e) and confirmed by immunohistochemistry 
of protein for brevican and neurocan (Extended Data Figs. 5b,6a).
CSPGs are diverse with respect to inhibiting or supporting axon growth at both protein and 
sugar-epitope levels30,31. Of the five growth-inhibitory CPSGs, WT scar-forming astrocytes 
increased only versican ramRNA, and significantly decreased neurocan and phosphacan 
(Fig. 4e). In contrast, ramRNAs of two axon growth-supportive CSPGs, Cspg4 (NG2) and 
Cspg5 (neuroglycan C) (Extended Data Table 1), were significantly upregulated by scar-
forming astrocytes (Fig. 4e) and both NG2 and CSPG5 clearly decorated scar-forming 
astrocytes as revealed by immunohistochemistry (Extended Data Fig. 6b,c).
Our genomic findings show that (i) STAT3-CKO prevents or attenuates a majority of 
genome-wide changes in astrocytes associated with astrogliosis and scar formation in WT 
mice; (ii) astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions express a large, diverse mix of 
axon inhibitory and permissive molecules; (iii) non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions 
substantively express CSPGs; (iv) preventing astrocyte scar formation with STAT3-CKO 
does not reduce expression of CSPGs or other inhibitory molecules in SCI lesions; (v) scar-
forming astrocytes upregulate and substantively express axon growth supporting CSPGs, 
indicating that CS56 immune detection of total CSPG levels22 need not indicate a purely 
axon-inhibitory environment; and (vi) scar-forming astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI 
lesions upregulate multiple axon growth permissive matrix molecules, including laminins.
Axon regrowth in spite of scar formation
We next stimulated axon growth after SCI in the presence or absence of astrocyte scar 
formation. Developing axons do not grow by default but require stimulatory cues32. This 
requirement may apply also to regrowth of transected mature axons. Some transected mature 
AST axons can be stimulated to regrow in severe SCI lesions by activating neuron intrinsic 
growth programs with peripheral conditioning lesions33–35, and this regrowth can be 
significantly augmented by cell grafts that provide supportive matrix plus the neurotrophic 
factors NT3 and BDNF that attract AST axon growth during development36. We noted the 
essential absence of Nt3 and Bdnf expression in our WT SCI lesions, combined with 
expression of permissive matrix molecules including laminins known to support developing 
AST axons37 (Fig. 4e; Extended Data Table 1). We therefore tested effects of conditioning 
lesions plus local delivery of NT3 and BDNF on AST axon regeneration stimulated in the 
presence or absence of astrocyte scar formation (Fig. 5; Extended Data Figs. 7–9). Because 
cell grafts modify astrocyte scars36 and provide permissive substrates for regrowing axons, 
Anderson et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 we delivered NT3 and BDNF via synthetic hydrogel depots that do not modify astrocyte scar 
formation and provide prolonged neurotrophin delivery38–40 (Fig. 5d; Supplementary 
Information).
No AST fibers regrew past astrocyte scars into lesion cores after SCI alone or with hydrogel 
without growth factors (Fig. 5a,h; Extended data Fig. 7c). Small numbers of AST axons 
regrew into lesion cores in mice with SCI plus conditioning lesions alone, or SCI plus NT3 
and BDNF without conditioning lesions (Fig. 5h,i; Extended data Fig. 7c). In striking 
contrast, mice receiving both conditioning lesions plus NT3 and BDNF exhibited robust 
axon regrowth through and beyond astrocyte scars, and the number of axon intercepts 
counted at lesion centers averaged over 45% of that in intact sensory tracts three mm 
proximal to lesions (Fig. 5b,h,i; Extended data Fig. 7c). Remarkably, these stimulated AST 
axons regrew profusely through, and past, dense astrocyte scars in spite of substantial CSPG 
(Figs. 5b,e, Extended Data Figs. 7b,c,8). AST axons stimulated to regrow in SCI lesions 
were thin and uniformly tracked along laminin surfaces, turning and even reversing direction 
along these surfaces as expected of regenerating axons41, whereas AST axons in intact 
gracile-cuneate tracts were coarsely beaded and were not in direct contact with laminin 
(Figs. 5f; Extended Data Fig. 9a–f). Hydrogel delivery of anti-CD29 laminin-integrin 
function-blocking antibodies37 together with NT3 and BDNF significantly reduced AST 
axon regrowth in lesion cores by 73%, demonstrating that laminin interactions were critical 
for stimulated AST axon regrowth (Figs. 5g–h; Extended Data Fig. 9g–I; Supplementary 
Information). Lastly, preventing astrocyte scar formation did not augment AST axon 
regrowth stimulated by conditioning lesions plus NT3 and BDNF, but instead significantly 
attenuated axon regrowth in both TK+GCV mice and STAT3-CKO mice (Fig. 5c,h,i), 
demonstrating that astrocyte scar formation aids, rather than inhibits appropriately 
stimulated AST axon regeneration after SCI.
Discussion
Our findings show that contrary to prevailing dogma, astrocyte scar formation is not a 
principal cause for the failure of injured mature CNS axons to regrow across severe CNS 
lesions and that scar-forming astrocytes permit and support robust amounts of appropriately 
stimulated CNS axon regeneration. Although our observations with stimulated AST axon 
regeneration needs extension to other axonal systems, our findings are consistent with 
evidence that (i) astrocytes can support growth of different CNS axons in vivo during 
development42,43 or after mature CNS injury19,44, (ii) genetic activation of axonal growth 
programs by mature neurons leads to axon regeneration across CNS lesions only when scar-
forming astrocyte bridges are present2,45, and (iii) grafts of progenitor-derived astrocytes 
support axon regeneration through non-neural SCI lesion cores46,47.
The predominant mechanistic proposal for astrocyte scar inhibition of axon regeneration is 
CSPG production9. However, specific CSPGs can support or repel axon growth (see 
Extended Data Table 1). We show that scar-forming astrocytes upregulate growth supportive 
CSPG4 and CSPG5, and that both astrocytes and non-astrocytes in SCI lesions express 
multiple axon-growth supportive molecules, including laminins. Axon growth and guidance 
depend both on intrinsic growth potential2,3,32,33,48 and on a balance of extrinsic regulatory 
Anderson et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cues that modulate one another’s effects on growth cones25. Our findings show that (i) 
sustained delivery of required axon-specific growth factors not adequately expressed in SCI 
lesions, combined with activation of neuron-intrinsic growth programs, can stimulate robust 
regrowth of transected axons along specifically required supportive matrix cues in spite of 
the presence of inhibitory cues, and (ii) this stimulated axon regrowth can occur either in 
direct contact with scar-forming astrocyte processes or independently of astrocyte processes. 
These observations provide direct evidence that the requirements for achieving axon 
regeneration across severe CNS lesions, where transected axons lack intrinsic and extrinsic 
conditions for long distance regrowth, are fundamentally different from requirements to 
achieve local neurite outgrowth in perilesion intact but reactive grey matter, where 
conditions compatible with axon terminal growth and remodeling are present and where 
blocking inhibitory regulators such as CSPGs and others produced by astrocytes and other 
cells may be sufficient to promote axon sprouting that might also improve 
function9,15,24,29,41,49. Our findings have important implications for CNS repair strategies by 
demonstrating that rather than being hostile to axon growth, newly generated immature scar-
forming astrocytes derived after SCI from endogenous progenitors18,42,45, and potentially 
from grafted progenitors46,47, aid axon regeneration and may represent exploitable bridges 
for regrowing axons across severe CNS lesions.
METHODS
Mice
All non-transgenic, transgenic and control mice used in this study were derived from in 
house breeding colonies backcrossed >12 generations onto C57/BL6 backgrounds. All mice 
used were young adult females between two and four months old at the time of spinal cord 
injury. All transgenic mice used have been previously well characterized or are the progeny 
of crossing well-characterized lines: (1) mGFAP-TK transgenic mice line 7.115,16,50. (2) 
mGFAP-Cre-STAT3-loxP mice generated by crossing STAT3-loxP mice with loxP sites 
flanking exon 22 of the STAT3 gene51 with mGFAP-Cre mice line 73.1217,18. (3) loxP-
STOP-loxP-DTR (diphtheria toxin receptor) mice21. (4) mGFAP-Cre-RiboTag mice 
generated by crossing mice with loxP-STOP-loxP-Rpl22-HA (RiboTag)26 with mGFAP-Cre 
mice line 73.1217,18. (5) mGFAP-tdT reporter mice generated by crossing loxP-STOP-loxP-
tdT (td-tomato) reporter mice52 with mGFAP-Cre mice line 73.1217,18. All mice were 
housed in a 12-hour light/dark cycle in a specific pathogen-free facility with controlled 
temperature and humidity and were allowed free access to food and water. All experiments 
were conducted according to protocols approved by the Animal Research Committee of the 
Office for Protection of Research Subjects at University of California Los Angeles.
Surgical procedures
All surgeries were performed under general anesthesia with isoflurane in oxygen-enriched 
air using an operating microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany), and rodent stereotaxic 
apparatus (David Kopf, Tujunga, CA). Laminectomy of a single vertebra was performed and 
severe crush SCI were made at the level of T10 using to expose the spinal cord. For severe 
spinal cord injury (SCI), No. 5 Dumont forceps (Fine Science Tools, Foster City, CA) 
without spacers and with a tip width of 0.5mm were used to completely compress the entire 
Anderson et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spinal cord laterally from both sides for 5 seconds16–18. For pre-conditioning lesions, sciatic 
nerves were transected and ligated one week prior to SCI. Hydrogels were injected 
stereotaxically into the center of SCI lesions 0.6 mm below surface at 0.2μl per minute using 
glass micropipettes (ground to 50 to 100 μm tips) connected via high-pressure tubing (Kopf) 
to 10μl syringes under control of microinfusion pumps, two days after SCI53. Tract-tracing 
was performed by injection of (i) biotinylated dextran amine 10,000 (BDA, Invitrogen) 10% 
wt/vol in sterile saline injected 4 × 0.4μl into the left motor cerebral cortex 14 days prior to 
perfusion to visualize corticospinal tract (CST) axons, or (ii) choleratoxin B (CTB) (List 
Biological Laboratory, Campbell, CA) 1μl of 1% wt/vol in sterile water injected into both 
sciatic nerves three days prior to perfusion to visualize ascending sensory tract (AST) 
axons34. AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre (see below) was injected either 3 or 6 × 0.4μl (1.29 × 
1013 gc/ml in sterile saline) into and on either side of mature SCI lesions two weeks after 
SCI, or into uninjured spinal cord after T10 laminectomy. All animals received analgesic 
prior to wound closure and every 12 hours for at least 48 hours post-injury. Animals were 
randomly assigned numbers and evaluated thereafter blind to genotype and experimental 
condition.
AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre
Adeno-associated virus 2/5 (AAV) vector with a minimal Gfap promoter (AAV2/5 
GfaABC1D) was used to target Cre-recombinase expression selectively to astrocytes54–56.
Hydrogel with growth factors and antibodies
Diblock co-polypeptide hydrogel (DCH) K180L20 was fabricated, tagged with blue 
fluorescent dye (AMCA-X) and loaded with growth factor and antibody cargoes as 
described39,40,53. Cargo molecules comprised: Human recombinant NT3 and BDNF were 
gifts (Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA, (NT3 Lot#2200F4; BDNF Lot#2142F5A) or were 
purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, NJ; NT3 405-03, Lot#060762; BDNF 405-02 
Lot#071161). Function blocking anti-CD29 mouse monoclonal antibody was purchased 
from BD Bioscience (San Diego, CA) as a custom order at 10.25mg/ml (product 
#BP555003; lot#S03146). Freeze dried K180L20 powder was reconstituted on to 3.0% or 
3.5% wt/vol basis in sterile PBS without cargo or with combinations of NT3 (1.0μg/μl), 
BDNF (0.85μg/μl) and anti-CD29 (5μg/μl). DCH mixtures were prepared to have G′ 
(storage modulus at 1Hz) between 75 and 100 Pascal (Pa), somewhat below that of mouse 
brain at 200 Pa39,40.
Ganciclovir (GCV), BrdU or DTX injections
GCV (Cytovene-IV ® Hoffman LaRoche, Nutley, NJ), 25mg/kg/day dissolved in sterile 
physiological saline was administered as single daily subcutaneous injections starting 
immediately after surgery and continued for the first 7 days after SCI. Bromodeoxyuridine 
(BrdU, Sigma), 100 mg/kg/day dissolved in saline plus 0.007N NaOH, was administered as 
single daily intraperitoneal injections on days 2 through 7 after SCI. Diphtheria toxin A 
(DTX, Sigma #DO564) 100ng in 100μl in sterile saline was administered twice daily as 
intraperitoneal injections for 10 days starting three weeks after injection of AAV2/5-
GfaABC1D-Cre to loxP-DTR mice (which was 5 weeks after SCI) (see timeline in Extended 
Data Fig. 1d).
Anderson et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hindlimb locomotor evaluation, animal inclusion criteria, randomization and blinding
Two days after SCI, all mice were evaluated in open field and mice exhibiting any hindlimb 
movements were not studied further. Mice that passed this pre-determined inclusion criterion 
were randomized into experimental groups for further treatments and were thereafter 
evaluated blind to their experimental condition. At 3,7,14 days and then weekly after SCI, 
hindlimb movements were scored using a simple six-point scale in which 0 is no movement 
and 5 is normal walking17.
Histology and immunohistochemistry
After terminal anesthesia by barbiturate overdose mice were perfused transcardially with 
10% formalin (Sigma). Spinal cords were removed, post-fixed overnight, and cryoprotected 
in buffered 30% sucrose for 48 hours. Frozen sections (30μm horizontal) were prepared 
using a cryostat microtome (Leica) and processed for immunofluorescence as 
described16–18. Primary antibodies were: rabbit anti-GFAP (1:1000; Dako, Carpinteria, CA); 
rat anti-GFAP (1:1000, Zymed Laboratories); goat anti-CTB (1:1000, List Biology Lab); 
rabbit anti-5HT (1:2000, Immunostar); goat anti-5HT (1:1000, Immunostar); mouse anti-
CSPG22 (1:100, Sigma); rabbit-anti hemagglutinin (HA) (1:500 Sigma); mouse-anti HA 
(1:3000 Covance); sheep anti-BrdU (1:6000, Maine Biotechnology Services, Portland, ME); 
rabbit anti-laminin (1:80, Sigma, Saint Louis, MO); guinea pig anti-NG2 (CSPG4) (Drs. 
E.G. Hughes and D.W. Bergles57, Baltimore, MA); goat anti-aggrecan (1:200, NOVUS); 
rabbit anti-brevican (1:300, NOVUS); mouse anti-neurocan (1:300, Milipore); mouse anti-
phosphacan (1:500, Sigma); goat anti-versican (1:200, NOVUS); rabbit anti-neurglycan C 
(CSPG5) (1:200, NOVUS). Fluorescence secondary antibodies were conjugated to: Alexa 
488 (green) or Alexa 350 (blue) (Molecular Probes), or to Cy3 (550, red) or Cy5 (649, far 
red) all from (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories). Mouse primary antibodies were 
visualized using the Mouse-on-Mouse detection kit (M.O.M. ®, Vector). BDA tract-tracing 
was visualized with streptavidin-HRP plus TSB Fluorescein geen or Tyr-Cy3 (Jackson 
Immunoresearch Laboratories). Nuclear stain: 4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole 
dihydrochloride (DAPI; 2ng/ml; Molecular Probes). Sections were coverslipped using 
ProLong Gold anti-fade reagent (InVitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Sections were examined 
and photographed using deconvolution fluorescence microscopy and scanning confocal laser 
microscopy (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).
Axon quantification
Axons labeled by tract tracing or immunohistochemistry were quantified using image 
analysis software (NeuroLucida®, MicroBrightField, Williston, VT) operating a computer-
driven microscope regulated in the x, y and z axes (Zeiss) by observers blind to experimental 
conditions. Using NeuroLucida ®, lines were drawn across horizontal spinal cord sections at 
SCI lesion centers and at regular distances on either side (Fig. 1a) and the number of axons 
intercepting lines was counted at 63× magnification under oil immersion by observers blind 
to experimental conditions. Similar lines were drawn and axons counted in intact axon tracts 
three mm proximal to SCI lesions and the numbers of axon intercepts in or near lesions were 
expressed as percentages of axons in the intact tracts in order to control for potential 
variations in tract-tracing efficacy or intensity of immunohistochemistry among animals. 
Anderson et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Two sections at the level of the CST or AST, and three sections through the middle of the 
cord for 5HT, were counted per mouse and expressed as total intercepts per location per 
mouse. To determine efficacy of axon transection after SCI, we examined labeling three mm 
distal to SCI lesion centers, with the intention of eliminating mice that had labeled axons at 
this location on grounds that these mice may have had incomplete lesions. However, all mice 
that had met the strict behavioral inclusion criterion of no hindlimb movements two days 
after severe crush SCI, exhibited no detectable axons three mm distal to SCI lesions 
regardless of treatment group.
Quantification of immunohistochemically stained areas
Sections stained for GFAP, CSPG or laminin were photographed using constant exposure 
settings. Single channel immunofluorescence images were converted to black and white and 
thresholded (Fig. 1d; Extended Data Figure 2b) and the amount of stained area measured in 
different tissue compartments using NIH Image J software.
Statistics, power calculations and group sizes
Statistical evaluations of repeated measures were conducted by ANOVA with post hoc, 
independent pair wise analysis as per Newman-Keuls (Prism®, GraphPad, San Diego, CA). 
Power calculations were performed using G*Power Software V 3.1.9.258. For quantification 
of histologically-derived neuroanatomical outcomes such as numbers of axons or percent of 
area stained for GFAP or CSPG, group sizes were used that were calculated to provide at 
least 80% power when using the following parameters: probability of type I error (alpha) = .
05, a conservative effect size of 0.25, 2–8 treatment groups with multiple measurements 
obtained per replicate. Using main Figure 5h as an example, evaluation of n = 5 biological 
replicates (with multiple measurements per replicate) in each of 8 treatment groups provided 
greater than 88% power.
Dot blot
For dot blot immunoassay of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPG), spinal cord tissue 
blocks were lysed and homogenized in standard RIPA (radio-immunoprecipitation-assay) 
buffer. LDS (lithium dodecyl sulfate) buffer (Life Technologies) was added to the post-
mitochondrial supernatant and 2μL containing 2μg/uL protein was spotted onto a 
nitrocellulose membrane (Life Technologies), set to dry and incubated overnight with mouse 
anti-chondroitin sulfate antibody (CS56, 1:1000, Sigma Aldrich), an IgM-monoclonal 
antibody that detects glyco-moieties of all CSPGs22. CS56 immunoreactivity was detected 
on X-ray film with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated secondary antibody and 
chemiluminescent substrate (Life Technologies). Densitometry measurements of CS56 
immunoreactivity were obtained using ImageJ software (NIH) and normalized to total 
protein (Poncau S) density59.
Isolation, sequencing and analysis of RNA from astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells
Two weeks after SCI, spinal cords of wild type control (GFAP-RiboTag) and STAT3-CKO 
(GFAP-STAT3CKO-RiboTag) mice were rapidly dissected out of the spinal canal. The 
central 3mm of the lower thoracic lesion including the lesion core and 1mm rostral and 
Anderson et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 caudal were then rapidly removed and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Hemagglutinin (HA) 
immune-precipitation (HA-IP) of astrocyte ribosomes and ribosome-associated mRNA 
(ramRNA) was carried out as described26. The non-precipitated flow through (FT) from 
each IP sample was collected for analysis of non-astrocyte total RNA. HA and FT samples 
underwent on-column DNA digestion using the RNase-Free Dnase Set (Qiagen) and RNA 
purified with the RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen). Integrity of the eluted RNA was analyzed by a 
2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent) using the RNA Pico chip, mean sample RIN = 8.0±0.95. RNA 
concentration determined by RiboGreen RNA Assay kit (Life Technologies). cDNA was 
generated from 5ng of IP or FT RNA using the Nugen Ovation® 2 RNA-Seq Sytstem V2 kit 
(Nugen). 1 ug of cDNA was fragmented using the Covaris M220. Paired-end libraries for 
multiplex sequencing were generated from 300 ng of fragmented cDNA using the Apollo 
324 automated library preparation system (Wafergen Biosystems) and purified with 
Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). All samples were analyzed by an 
Illumina NextSeq 500 Sequencer (Illumina) using 75-bp paired-end sequencing. Reads were 
quality controlled using in-house scripts including picard-tools, mapped to the reference 
mm10 genome using STAR60, and counted using HT-seq61 with mm10 refSeq as reference, 
and genes were called differentially expressed using edgeR62. Individual gene expression 
levels in the Figure 4e histogram are shown as mean FPKM (Mean fragments per kilobase of 
transcript sequence per million mapped fragments). Additional details of differential 
expression analysis are described in figure legends of Figure 4 and Extended Data Figures 3 
and 4. Raw and normalized data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus 
and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE76097 (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE76097).
Anderson et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended data figure 1. SCI model schematic, locomotor behavioral effects, and AAV vector 
targeting specificity and effects
(a) Schematic of severe lateral crush SCI at thoracic level T10 that generates a large lesion 
core (LC) of non–neural tissue surrounded by an astrocyte scar (AS) and completely 
transects descending and ascending axons. (b) Open field hindlimb locomotor score at 
various times after SCI assessed using a 5 point scale where 5 is normal and 0 is no 
movement of any kind17. No significant differences were observed among any of the 
experimental groups at any time point. n = 6 ns at all time points p>0.5 (ANOVA with 
Anderson et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Newman-Keuls post hoc analysis). (c) Horizontal sections through a severe SCI lesion of a 
representative tdT reporter mouse52 injected with an AAV vector with a minimal Gfap 
promoter regulating Cre (AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre) into the lesion at two weeks after SCI 
and perfused at three weeks. tdT labeling demonstrates that this AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre 
efficiently and specifically targets GFAP-positive astrocytes. In this mouse, the amount 
AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre injected was intentionally titrated on the basis of previous trial and 
error to target primarily the astrocyte scar border in an approximately 500μm zone 
immediately abutting the SCI lesion core (LC). High magnification analysis of individual 
fluorescence channels stained for tdT plus various cell markers shows the specificity of Cre-
activity targeting to cells expressing the astrocyte marker, GFAP, but not to cells expressing 
either the neuronal marker, NeuN, or the mature oligodendrocyte marker, GSTπ. AAV2/5-
GfaABC1D-Cre was prepared using a previously described and well-characterized cloning 
strategy54. (d) Open field hindlimb locomotor scores at various times after SCI. There was 
no difference in scores of control mice and loxP-DTR mice that received AAV2/5-
GfaABC1D-Cre prior to injections of DTX. Five weeks after DTX injections, loxP-DTR 
mice that received AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre exhibited a slightly, but significantly, lower 
locomotor score. Hindlimb locomotion was assessed using a 5 point scale where 5 is normal 
and 0 is no movement of any kind17. n = 6 per group, * p<0.05 versus WT (ANOVA with 
Newman-Keuls). (e) GFAP immunohistochemistry of a sagittal section after ablation of a 
chronic astrocyte scar plus adjacent astrocytes. DTX was administered to a transgenic mouse 
expressing DTR targeted selectively to astrocytes around a severe SCI. In this case, the 
amount of AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre injected was titrated to target not only primarily the 
astrocyte scar border but also adjacent astrocytes spread over approximately two mm on 
either side of the center (Cn) of the SCI lesion core (LC). Note the profound degeneration of 
neural tissue resulting from the selective ablation of the chronic astrocyte scar plus adjacent 
astrocytes after SCI.
Anderson et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended data figure 2. Single channel CSPG and GFAP immunofluorescence and stained area 
quantification
(a) Individual fluorescence channels of CS56 and GFAP immunohistochemistry from 
horizontal sections of uninjured mice and at two weeks after severe SCI shown in main text 
figure 3b. Sections are taken from WT mice and mice with transgenic ablation (TK+GCV) 
or attenuation (STAT3-CKO) of astrocyte scar formation. (b) Example of black and white 
thresholding of single channels of immunofluorescence staining for image analysis to 
quantify (using NIH Image J software) the amount of CSPG or GFAP stained area in 
different tissue compartments in SCI lesions. Boxes denote areas quantified to obtain values 
Anderson et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for lesion core (LC) and grey (g) or white (w) matter in astrocyte scar (AS) or equivalent 
regions in uninjured tissue. Graphs show percent of areas stained for CSPG or GFAP 
determined using Image J. n = 4 WT, n = 6 TK+GCV and STAT3-CKO; # p<0.05 versus 
uninjured white matter, * p<0.05 versus uninjured grey matter in same experimental group 
(ANOVA with Newman-Keuls); ˆ p<0.05 versus equivalent anatomical region in WT 
(ANOVA with Newman-Keuls).
Extended data figure 3. Specificity of HA-targeting to astrocytes and enrichment of HA-IP for 
astrocyte specific RNA transcripts
Anderson et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (a) Individual fluorescence channels of immunohistochemistry for transgenically-targeted 
hemagglutinin (HA) plus various cell markers showing the specificity of HA targeting to 
cells expressing the astrocyte marker, GFAP, and not to cells expressing either the neuronal 
marker, NeuN, or the mature oligodendrocyte marker, GSTπ, in uninjured grey and white 
matter and in astrocyte scar at 2 weeks after SCI. (b) CNS cell type-specific gene transcript 
enrichment of ribosome-associated mRNA (ramRNA) isolated from WT uninjured spinal 
cord by HA immune-precipitation (HA-IP). Differential expression analysis by RNA-
sequencing (RNA-Seq) indicates significant enrichment (red) for astrocyte-specific gene 
transcripts, and de-enrichment (green) for gene transcripts enriched in other CNS cell types, 
FDR<0.1. A log2 scale is used so that positive and negative differences are directly 
comparable. The mean numerical enrichment of three quintessential astrocyte genes, Gfap, 
Aldh1l1 and Aqp4, is 25 fold greater in HA samples than in flow through samples. (c) Gene 
transcript enrichment of HA-IP ramRNA relative to P7 mouse primary cortical astrocytes27. 
Of the 200 most highly expressed genes previously described27 for post-natal mouse cortical 
astrocytes, 71.5% (red line) are at least 4-fold enriched (blue line) in HA-IP ramRNA 
isolated from uninjured spinal cord relative to flow through RNA from non-astrocyte cells. 
(d) Pearson correlation plots of total normalized RNA-Seq reads from individual biological 
replicates for each treatment condition. Correlation coloring indicates little (white) to high 
(red) similarity. n = 4 for uninjured controls and wild type SCI (SCI-WT); n = 3 for STAT3-
CKO SCI (SCI-STAT3). FDR<0.1 for differential expression and enrichment analysis. Raw 
and normalized data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus and are 
accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE76097 (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE76097).
Anderson et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended data figure 4. Comparison of genomic data from astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells 
from WT and STAT3-CKO mice after SCI
(a) Heat maps depicting all significantly differentially expressed genes (DEG), as 
determined by RNA-Seq, for WT and STAT3-CKO astrocytes and non-astrocytes from 
independent biological replicates two weeks after SCI relative to uninjured WT control. Red 
upregulated, green downregulated. (b) Total numbers and Venn diagrams of significant 
DEGs in WT and STAT3-CKO astrocytes and non-astrocytes two weeks after SCI relative to 
uninjured control. Red and green numerical values indicate significantly upregulated and 
Anderson et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 downregulated genes, respectively. (c) Comparison of altered gene expression in our SCI-
reactive astrocytes and previously reported forebrain stroke-reactive astrocytes28. Of the 200 
most highly elevated genes in forebrain astrocytes 1 week following stroke28, 58.5% (red 
line) are also significantly elevated in astrocytes after SCI, relative to uninjured. (d) 
Comparison of expression by WT SCI and STAT3-CKO SCI reactive astrocytes of a selected 
cross-section of genes that are highly regulated after SCI by WT reactive astrocytes. Many 
of the regulated genes exhibit changes that are expected and implicated in WT reactive 
astrogliosis mechanisms and roles, and some of the changes appear to be newly identified in 
this context. Note that many of the genes are not regulated or exhibit attenuated changes in 
STAT3-CKO SCI astrocytes. n = 4 for uninjured and WT SCI; n = 3 for STAT3-CKO SCI 
(SCI-STAT3). FDR<0.1 for differential expression and enrichment analysis.
Anderson et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended data figure 5. Immunohistochemistry of specific CSPGs
(a) Absence of aggrecan (ACAN) production by scar-forming astrocytes. Images show 
individual fluorescence channels of ACAN and GFAP immunohistochemistry from 
horizontal sections two weeks after severe SCI in a representative WT mouse. Boxes denote 
areas of astrocyte scar (AS) or uninjured tissue (Uninj) shown at higher magnification. Note 
that ACAN (i) is heavily present in the perineuronal nets that surround neurons in uninjured 
tissue, (ii) is almost absent from AS and lesion core (LC), and (iii) is not detectably 
produced by newly generated scar-forming astrocytes (arrows). (b) Brevican (BCAN) 
Anderson et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 production by scar-forming astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells. Images show individual 
fluorescence channels of BCAN and GFAP immunohistochemistry from horizontal sections 
two weeks after severe SCI, in WT mice and mice with transgenic ablation (TK+GCV) or 
attenuation (STAT3-CKO) of astrocyte scar formation. Note that BCAN is produced both by 
GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes (arrowheads) and by non-astrocyte cells (arrows).
Extended data figure 6. Immunohistochemistry of specific CSPGs
Anderson et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (a) Neurocan (NCAN) production by scar-forming astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells. 
Images show individual fluorescence channels of NCAN and GFAP immunohistochemistry 
from horizontal sections two weeks after severe SCI, in a representative WT mouse. Box 
denotes area of lesion core (LC) and astrocyte scar (AS) shown at higher magnification. 
Note that NCAN is produced both by GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes and by non-
astrocyte cells (arrows) in the lesion core (LC). (b) NG2 (CSPG4) production by newly 
proliferated scar-forming astrocytes. Images show individual channels and various 
combinations of immunofluorescence staining for NG2, GFAP, tdT, BrdU (proliferation 
marker) and DAPI showing astrocytes in a mature SCI scar. The images are representative of 
findings from tdT-reporter mice52 injected with AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre vector54 into 
multiple sites of the uninjured spinal cord to label mature astrocytes. Three weeks after 
AAV2/5-GfaABC1D-Cre injection, the mice received a severe SCI and were administered 
BrdU from days 2–7 after SCI. The mice were perfused after two weeks after SCI. Images 
comparing individual fluorescence channels show that astrocytes labeled 1 and 3: (i) 
incorporated BrdU and thus are newly proliferated after SCI, (ii) express tdT reporter, (iii) 
express GFAP, the prototypical marker of reactive and scar-forming astrocytes, and (iv) 
express NG2 both intracellularly and along their cell surfaces. In contrast, astrocyte number 
2 is also BrdU-labeled and expresses both tdT and GFAP, but does not appear to express 
detectable levels of NG2. (c) CSPG5 (Neuroglycan C) production by scar-forming 
astrocytes. Images show individual channels and various combinations of 
immunofluorescence staining for CSPG5 or GFAP. Note that CSPG5 is present within and 
along the processes of GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes (arrows).
Anderson et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended data figure 7. Specificity and effects of treatments to stimulate AST axon regrowth 
after SCI
(a) BDNF and NT3 treatment does not alter the appearance or density of astrocyte scars in 
WT or STAT3-CKO mice. Images show horizontal sections of mice at two weeks after SCI 
or after SCI followed by delayed injection of hydrogel only (as a control) or hydrogel 
releasing NT3 and BDNF. Top images show GFAP immunofluorescence; boxed area 
denotes size of areas taken from multiple locations in the astrocyte scar (AS) for GFAP area 
quantification shown in graph. n = 5 mice per group, ns p>0.05 (ANOVA with Newman-
Anderson et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keuls). Bottom images show brightfield immunohistochemistry simultaneously of GFAP
+TK to stain both astrocyte cell processes (GFAP) and cell bodies (TK) in mGFAP-TK 
transgenic mice for quantification of astrocyte cell numbers shown in graph. For these 
experiments the transgene derived TK is used as a reporter protein that efficiently labels 
astrocyte cell bodies and thereby improves cell quantification18 and the mice were not given 
GCV. n = 4 mice per group, * p<0.05 versus uninjured (ANOVA with Newman-Keuls); ns 
p>0.05 (ANOVA with Newman-Keuls). (b) AST axon regrowth through scar-forming 
astrocytes and CSPGs in SCI lesions. Images show individual channels and various 
combinations of immunofluorescence staining for CTB, GFAP and CS56 to detect total 
CSPGs from a WT mouse after SCI followed by delayed injection of a hydrogel depot 
releasing NT3 and BDNF, shown as multichannel image in main text figure 5e1. Arrows 
denote robust regrowth of many AST axons along, through and past scar-forming astrocytes 
into and through the lesion core. Note that the stimulated axons are regrowing through 
CSPG containing areas in the astrocyte scar and lesion core. Boxed area is shown at higher 
magnification in Extended data figure 8. (c) Graph shows numbers of AST axons at various 
distances past the proximal border of the astrocyte scar under different conditions. n = 5 per 
group. * p<0.001 significant difference SCI+CL+BDNF+NT3 versus all other groups 
(ANOVA with post-hoc Newman-Keuls).
Anderson et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended data figure 8. AST axon regrowth through scar-forming astrocytes and CSPGs in SCI 
lesions
(a,b) Images show individual channels and various combinations of immunofluorescence 
staining for CTB, GFAP and CS56 to detect total CSPGs from a WT mouse after SCI 
followed by delayed injection of a hydrogel depot releasing NT3 and BDNF, shown as 
multichannel images in main text Figures 5e2 and 5e3. Arrows in (a) denote robust regrowth 
of many AST axons along, through and past scar-forming astrocytes into and through the 
lesion core; note that the stimulated axons are regrowing through CSPG containing areas in 
Anderson et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the astrocyte scar and lesion core. (b) High magnification orthogonal images of axons in 
three visual planes. Arrows in (b) denote AST regrowing axons tracking along CSPG-
positive and GFAP-negative structures. Arrowheads in (b) denote AST axons tracking along 
GFAP-positive and CSPG-positive astrocyte processes, passing from one astrocyte process 
to another.
Extended data figure 9. AST axon regrowth in SCI lesions is dependent on laminin
(a–g) Tract-tracing for of AST axons using CTB and laminin immunohistochemistry. (a–c) 
Same fields imaged for CTB alone (a1–c1), or CTB plus laminin (a2–c2). (a,d) Intact gracile 
cuneate tract (GCT). (b) SCI only. (c,f) SCI plus conditioning lesion (CL) plus hydrogel 
with growth factors. (e) SCI plus conditioning lesion. (g) SCI plus conditioning lesion plus 
hydrogel with growth factors and anti-CD29. (d–g) High magnification orthogonal images 
of axons in three visual planes. Arrows indicate regrowing axons in direct contact with 
laminin. Arrowheads indicate axons not in direct contact with laminin in the intact GCT (d) 
Anderson et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or with anti-CD29 treatment (g). Note the difference in appearance of axons in the intact 
gracile cuneate tract (GCT), which are independent of laminin, compared with regrowing 
axons in lesion core (LC), which track along laminin. (h) Axon length per tissue volume in 
intact GCT or in SCI lesions under different conditions. (Intact GCT values were not 
included in ANOVA comparison of other 3 groups.) (i) Percent of AST axon length in direct 
contact with laminin under different conditions. n = 5 per group. * p<0.001 (ANOVA with 
post-hoc Newman-Keuls); ns non-significant (ANOVA with post-hoc Newman-Keuls).
Extended data Table 1
Axon growth inhibitory molecules and axon growth 
permissive molecules
This table lists the gene abbreviations and full names and of the 59 axon growth modulating 
molecules whose gene expression levels are presented in figure 4. The table also summarizes 
literature providing evidence for the axon growth inhibitory or permissive effects of each 
molecule.
Gene abbreviation
Molecule name
References for function
Axon growth inhibitory 
molecule
Acan
Aggrecan
9,29
Bcan
Brevican
9,29
Ncan
Neurocan
9,29,62,63
Vcan
Versican
9,29
Ptprz1
Phosphacan
9,63
Xylt1
Xylosyltransferase 1
64
Tnr
Tenascin R
65
Epha4
Ephrin A4
7,66
Ephb2
Ephrin B2
7,66
Efnb3
Ephrin B3
7,66
Ntn1
Netrin 1
7,66,67
Sema3a
Semaphorin 3a
7,66
Sema3f
Semaphorin 3f
7,66
Plxna1
Plexin A1
7,68
Plxnb1
Plexin B1
7,69
Nrp1
Neuropilin 1
7,70
Unc5b
Netrin receptor Unc5b
7,66,71
Dcc
Deleted in Colorectal Cancer
7,72,73
Neo1
Neogenin 1
7,74
Rgma
Repulsive guidance molecule A
7,75
Rgmb
Repulsive guidance molecule B
7,75
Slit1
Slit 1
7,66
Slit2
Slit 2
7,66
Slitrk1
SLIT and NTRK-like family, 
member 1
76
Robo1
Robo 1
7,66
Anderson et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gene abbreviation
Molecule name
References for function
Robo2
Robo 2
7,66
Robo3
Robo 3
7,66
Draxin
Draxin
73,77
Axon growth permissive 
molecule
Cspg4
NG2
78–81
Cspg5
Neuroglycan C
82
Tnc
Tenascin C
83,84
Sdc1
Syndecan 1
85,86
Sdc2
Syndecan 2
85,86
Sdc3
Syndecan 3
85,86
Sdc4
Syndecan 4
85,86
Bdnf
Brain derived neurotrophic factor
35,87
Ntf3
Neurotrophin 3
35,88
Gdnf
Glial derived neurotrophic factor
89
Lif
Leukemia inhibitory factor
90,91
Cntf
Ciliary neurotrophic factor
92
Igf1
Insulin-like growth factor-1
93
Fgf2
Fibroblast growth factor 2
94
Tgfa
Transforming growth factor alpha
95
Lama1
Laminin A1
36
Lama2
Laminin A2
36
Lama4
Laminin A4
36
Lama5
Laminin A5
36
Lamb1
Laminin B1
36
Lamc1
Laminin C1
36
Col4a1
Collagen 4a1
8
Fn1
Fibronectin 1
96
Hspg2
Perlecan
86,97
Gpc1
Glypican 1
86,98
Gpc3
Glypican 3
86,98
Gpc5
Glypican 5
86,98
Dcn
Decorin
99
Lgals1
Galectin 1
100
Ncam1
Neural cell adhesion molecule 1
101
Matn2
Matrilin
102
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Anderson et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. D.W. Bergles for NG2 antibody, and the Microscopy Core Resource of the UCLA Broad Stem Cell 
Research Center-CIRM Laboratory. This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (NS057624 
and NS084030 to M.V.S.; and NS060677, MH099559A, MH104069 to B.S.K.), and the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. 
Adelson Medical Foundation (M.V.S. and T.J.D.), and Wings for Life (M.V.S.).
References
1. Ramon, Y., Cajal, S. Degeneration and regeneration of the nervous system. Oxford University Press; 
1928. 
2. Sun F, et al. Sustained axon regeneration induced by co-deletion of PTEN and SOCS3. Nature. 
2011; 480:372–375. [PubMed: 22056987] 
3. Liu K, Tedeschi A, Park KK, He Z. Neuronal intrinsic mechanisms of axon regeneration. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2011; 34:131–152. [PubMed: 21438684] 
4. Richardson PM, McGuinness UM, Aguayo AJ. Axons from CNS neurons regenerate into PNS 
grafts. Nature. 1980; 284:264–265. [PubMed: 7360259] 
5. David S, Aguayo AJ. Axonal elongation into peripheral nervous system “bridges” after central 
nervous system injury in adult rats. Science. 1981; 214:931–933. [PubMed: 6171034] 
6. Schwab ME. Functions of Nogo proteins and their receptors in the nervous system. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2010; 11:799–811. [PubMed: 21045861] 
7. Harel NY, Strittmatter SM. Can regenerating axons recapitulate developmental guidance during 
recovery from spinal cord injury? Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 7:603–616. [PubMed: 16858389] 
8. Klapka N, Muller HW. Collagen matrix in spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma. 2006; 23:422–435. 
[PubMed: 16629627] 
9. Silver J, Miller JH. Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nature Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:146–156. 
[PubMed: 14735117] 
10. Windle WF, Clemente CD, Chambers WW. Inhibition of formation of a glial barrier as a means of 
permitting a peripheral nerve to grow into the brain. J Comp Neurol. 1952; 96:359–369. [PubMed: 
14938473] 
11. Windle WF. Regeneration of axons in the vertebrate central nervous system. Physiol Rev. 1956; 
36:427–440. [PubMed: 13370344] 
12. Liuzzi FJ, Lasek RJ. Astrocytes block axonal regeneration in mammals by activating the 
physiological stop pathway. Science. 1987; 237:642–645. [PubMed: 3603044] 
13. Burda JE, Sofroniew MV. Reactive gliosis and the multicellular response to CNS damage and 
disease. Neuron. 2014; 81:229–248. [PubMed: 24462092] 
14. Sofroniew MV. Astrocyte barriers to neurotoxic inflammation. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015; 16:249–
263. [PubMed: 25891508] 
15. Bush TG, et al. Leukocyte infiltration, neuronal degeneration and neurite outgrowth after ablation 
of scar-forming, reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice. Neuron. 1999; 23:297–308. 
[PubMed: 10399936] 
16. Faulkner JR, et al. Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury. 
J Neurosci. 2004; 24:2143–2155. [PubMed: 14999065] 
17. Herrmann JE, et al. STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord 
injury. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:7231–7243. [PubMed: 18614693] 
18. Wanner IB, et al. Glial scar borders are formed by newly proliferated, elongated astrocytes that 
interact to corral inflammatory and fibrotic cells via STAT3-dependent mechanisms after spinal 
cord injury. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:12870–12886. [PubMed: 23904622] 
19. Lee JK, et al. Combined genetic attenuation of myelin and semaphorin-mediated growth inhibition 
is insufficient to promote serotonergic axon regeneration. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:10899–10904. 
[PubMed: 20702718] 
20. Hawthorne AL, et al. The unusual response of serotonergic neurons after CNS Injury: lack of 
axonal dieback and enhanced sprouting within the inhibitory environment of the glial scar. J 
Neurosci. 2011; 31:5605–5616. [PubMed: 21490201] 
Anderson et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. Buch T, et al. A Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin receptor mediates cell lineage ablation after toxin 
administration. Nature methods. 2005; 2:419–426. [PubMed: 15908920] 
22. Avnur Z, Geiger B. Immunocytochemical localization of native chondroitin-sulfate in tissues and 
cultured cells using specific monoclonal antibody. Cell. 1984; 38:811–822. [PubMed: 6435883] 
23. Mikami T, Kitagawa H. Biosynthesis and function of chondroitin sulfate. Biochimica et biophysica 
acta. 2013; 1830:4719–4733. [PubMed: 23774590] 
24. Mironova YA, Giger RJ. Where no synapses go: gatekeepers of circuit remodeling and synaptic 
strength. Trends Neurosci. 2013; 36:363–373. [PubMed: 23642707] 
25. Lin AC, Holt CE. Local translation and directional steering in axons. The EMBO journal. 2007; 
26:3729–3736. [PubMed: 17660744] 
26. Sanz E, et al. Cell-type-specific isolation of ribosome-associated mRNA from complex tissues. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:13939–13944. [PubMed: 19666516] 
27. Zhang Y, et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and 
vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:11929–11947. [PubMed: 25186741] 
28. Zamanian JL, et al. Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:6391–6410. 
[PubMed: 22553043] 
29. Lang BT, et al. Modulation of the proteoglycan receptor PTPsigma promotes recovery after spinal 
cord injury. Nature. 2015; 518:404–408. [PubMed: 25470046] 
30. Yamaguchi Y. Lecticans: organizers of the brain extracellular matrix. Cellular and molecular life 
sciences: CMLS. 2000; 57:276–289. [PubMed: 10766023] 
31. Miller GM, Hsieh-Wilson LC. Sugar-Dependent Modulation of Neuronal Development, 
Regeneration, and Plasticity by Chondroitin Sulfate Proteoglycans. Exp Neurol. 2015
32. Goldberg JL, et al. Retinal ganglion cells do not extend axons by default: promotion by 
neurotrophic signaling and electrical activity. Neuron. 2002; 33:689–702. [PubMed: 11879647] 
33. Richardson PM, Issa VM. Peripheral injury enhances central regeneration of primary sensory 
neurones. Nature. 1984; 309:791–793. [PubMed: 6204205] 
34. Neumann S, Woolf CJ. Regeneration of dorsal column fibers into and beyond the lesion site 
following adult spinal cord injury. Neuron. 1999; 23:83–91. [PubMed: 10402195] 
35. Omura T, et al. Robust Axonal Regeneration Occurs in the Injured CAST/Ei Mouse CNS. Neuron. 
2015; 86:1215–1227. [PubMed: 26004914] 
36. Alto LT, et al. Chemotropic guidance facilitates axonal regeneration and synapse formation after 
spinal cord injury. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:1106–1113. [PubMed: 19648914] 
37. Plantman S, et al. Integrin-laminin interactions controlling neurite outgrowth from adult DRG 
neurons in vitro. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008; 39:50–62. [PubMed: 18590826] 
38. Nowak AP, et al. Rapidly recovering hydrogel scaffolds from self-assembling diblock 
copolypeptide amphiphiles. Nature. 2002; 417:424–428. [PubMed: 12024209] 
39. Yang CY, et al. Biocompatibility of amphiphilic diblock copolypeptide hydrogels in the central 
nervous system. Biomaterials. 2009; 30:2881–2898. [PubMed: 19251318] 
40. Song B, et al. Sustained local delivery of bioactive nerve growth factor in the central nervous 
system via tunable diblock copolypeptide hydrogel depots. Biomaterials. 2012; 33:9105–9116. 
[PubMed: 22985994] 
41. Tuszynski MH, Steward O. Concepts and methods for the study of axonal regeneration in the CNS. 
Neuron. 2012; 74:777–791. [PubMed: 22681683] 
42. Brosius Lutz A, Barres BA. Contrasting the glial response to axon injury in the central and 
peripheral nervous systems. Developmental cell. 2014; 28:7–17. [PubMed: 24434136] 
43. Mason CA, Edmondson JC, Hatten ME. The extending astroglial process: development of glial cell 
shape, the growing tip, and interactions with neurons. J Neurosci. 1988; 8:3124–3134. [PubMed: 
3171670] 
44. Kawaja MD, Gage FH. Reactive astrocytes are substrates for the growth of adult CNS axons in the 
presence of elevated levels of nerve growth factor. Neuron. 1991; 7:1019–1030. [PubMed: 
1684900] 
45. Zukor K, et al. Short hairpin RNA against PTEN enhances regenerative growth of corticospinal 
tract axons after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:15350–15361. [PubMed: 24068802] 
Anderson et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Shih CH, Lacagnina M, Leuer-Bisciotti K, Proschel C. Astroglial-derived periostin promotes 
axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:2438–2443. [PubMed: 
24523534] 
47. Zhang S, et al. Thermoresponsive copolypeptide hydrogel vehicles for CNS cell delivery. ACS 
Biomat Sci Eng. 2015; 1:705–717.
48. Ruschel J, et al. Systemic administration of epothilone B promotes axon regeneration after spinal 
cord injury. Science. 2015
49. Cafferty WB, McGee AW, Strittmatter SM. Axonal growth therapeutics: regeneration or sprouting 
or plasticity? Trends Neurosci. 2008; 31:215–220. [PubMed: 18395807] 
50. Bush TG, et al. Fulminant jejuno-ileitis following ablation of enteric glia in adult transgenic mice. 
Cell. 1998; 93:189–201. [PubMed: 9568712] 
51. Takeda K, et al. Stat3 activation is responsible for IL-6-dependent T cell proliferation through 
preventing apoptosis: generation and characterization of T cell-specific Stat3-deficient mice. J 
Immunol. 1998; 161:4652–4660. [PubMed: 9794394] 
52. Madisen L, et al. A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the 
whole mouse brain. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:133–140. [PubMed: 20023653] 
53. Zhang S, et al. Tunable diblock copolypeptide hydrogel depots for local delivery of hydrophobic 
molecules in healthy and injured central nervous system. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:1989–2000. 
[PubMed: 24314556] 
54. Shigetomi E, et al. Imaging calcium microdomains within entire astrocyte territories and endfeet 
with GCaMPs expressed using adeno-associated viruses. The Journal of general physiology. 2013; 
141:633–647. [PubMed: 23589582] 
55. Jiang R, Haustein MD, Sofroniew MV, Khakh BS. Imaging Intracellular Ca2+ Signals in Striatal 
Astrocytes from Adult Mice Using Genetically-encoded Calcium Indicators. J Vis Exp. 2014
56. Tong X, et al. Astrocyte Kir4.1 ion channel deficits contribute to neuronal dysfunction in 
Huntington’s disease model mice. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:694–703. [PubMed: 24686787] 
57. Kang SH, et al. Degeneration and impaired regeneration of gray matter oligodendrocytes in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:571–579. [PubMed: 23542689] 
58. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power analysis program 
for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior research methods. 2007; 39:175–191. 
[PubMed: 17695343] 
59. Romero-Calvo I, et al. Reversible Ponceau staining as a loading control alternative to actin in 
Western blots. Analytical biochemistry. 2010; 401:318–320. [PubMed: 20206115] 
60. Dobin A, et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:15–21. 
[PubMed: 23104886] 
61. Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W. HTSeq–a Python framework to work with high-throughput sequencing 
data. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:166–169. [PubMed: 25260700] 
62. Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential 
expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:139–140. [PubMed: 
19910308] 
63. Friedlander DR, et al. The neuronal chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan neurocan binds to the neural 
cell adhesion molecules Ng-CAM/L1/NILE and N-CAM, and inhibits neuronal adhesion and 
neurite outgrowth. J Cell Biol. 1994; 125:669–680. [PubMed: 7513709] 
64. Sango K, et al. Phosphacan and neurocan are repulsive substrata for adhesion and neurite extension 
of adult rat dorsal root ganglion neurons in vitro. Exp Neurol. 2003; 182:1–11. [PubMed: 
12821372] 
65. Hurtado A, Podinin H, Oudega M, Grimpe B. Deoxyribozyme-mediated knockdown of 
xylosyltransferase-1 mRNA promotes axon growth in the adult rat spinal cord. Brain. 2008; 
131:2596–2605. [PubMed: 18765417] 
66. Becker CG, Schweitzer J, Feldner J, Becker T, Schachner M. Tenascin-R as a repellent guidance 
molecule for developing optic axons in zebrafish. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:6232–6237. [PubMed: 
12867507] 
67. Dickson BJ. Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance. Science. 2002; 298:1959–1964. [PubMed: 
12471249] 
Anderson et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 68. Masuda T, et al. Netrin-1 acts as a repulsive guidance cue for sensory axonal projections toward the 
spinal cord. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:10380–10385. [PubMed: 18842897] 
69. Winberg ML, et al. Plexin A is a neuronal semaphorin receptor that controls axon guidance. Cell. 
1998; 95:903–916. [PubMed: 9875845] 
70. Hu H, Marton TF, Goodman CS. Plexin B mediates axon guidance in Drosophila by 
simultaneously inhibiting active Rac and enhancing RhoA signaling. Neuron. 2001; 32:39–51. 
[PubMed: 11604137] 
71. He Z, Tessier-Lavigne M. Neuropilin is a receptor for the axonal chemorepellent Semaphorin III. 
Cell. 1997; 90:739–751. [PubMed: 9288753] 
72. Lu X, et al. The netrin receptor UNC5B mediates guidance events controlling morphogenesis of 
the vascular system. Nature. 2004; 432:179–186. [PubMed: 15510105] 
73. Keino-Masu K, et al. Deleted in Colorectal Cancer (DCC) encodes a netrin receptor. Cell. 1996; 
87:175–185. [PubMed: 8861902] 
74. Ahmed G, et al. Draxin inhibits axonal outgrowth through the netrin receptor DCC. J Neurosci. 
2011; 31:14018–14023. [PubMed: 21957262] 
75. Rajagopalan S, et al. Neogenin mediates the action of repulsive guidance molecule. Nature cell 
biology. 2004; 6:756–762. [PubMed: 15258590] 
76. Monnier PP, et al. RGM is a repulsive guidance molecule for retinal axons. Nature. 2002; 419:392–
395. [PubMed: 12353034] 
77. Kajiwara Y, Buxbaum JD, Grice DE. SLITRK1 binds 14-3-3 and regulates neurite outgrowth in a 
phosphorylation-dependent manner. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 66:918–925. [PubMed: 19640509] 
78. Islam SM, et al. Draxin, a repulsive guidance protein for spinal cord and forebrain commissures. 
Science. 2009; 323:388–393. [PubMed: 19150847] 
79. Yang Z, et al. NG2 glial cells provide a favorable substrate for growing axons. J Neurosci. 2006; 
26:3829–3839. [PubMed: 16597737] 
80. Hossain-Ibrahim MK, Rezajooi K, Stallcup WB, Lieberman AR, Anderson PN. Analysis of axonal 
regeneration in the central and peripheral nervous systems of the NG2-deficient mouse. BMC 
neuroscience. 2007; 8:80. [PubMed: 17900358] 
81. Lu P, Jones LL, Tuszynski MH. Axon regeneration through scars and into sites of chronic spinal 
cord injury. Exp Neurol. 2007; 203:8–21. [PubMed: 17014846] 
82. Busch SA, et al. Adult NG2+ cells are permissive to neurite outgrowth and stabilize sensory axons 
during macrophage-induced axonal dieback after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:255–265. 
[PubMed: 20053907] 
83. Nakanishi K, et al. Identification of neurite outgrowth-promoting domains of neuroglycan C, a 
brain-specific chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, and involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
and protein kinase C signaling pathways in neuritogenesis. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:24970–24978. 
[PubMed: 16803884] 
84. Gotz B, et al. Tenascin-C contains distinct adhesive, anti-adhesive, and neurite outgrowth 
promoting sites for neurons. J Cell Biol. 1996; 132:681–699. [PubMed: 8647898] 
85. Andrews MR, et al. Alpha9 integrin promotes neurite outgrowth on tenascin-C and enhances 
sensory axon regeneration. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:5546–5557. [PubMed: 19403822] 
86. Edwards TJ, Hammarlund M. Syndecan promotes axon regeneration by stabilizing growth cone 
migration. Cell reports. 2014; 8:272–283. [PubMed: 25001284] 
87. Farhy Tselnicker I, Boisvert MM, Allen NJ. The role of neuronal versus astrocyte-derived heparan 
sulfate proteoglycans in brain development and injury. Biochemical Society transactions. 2014; 
42:1263–1269. [PubMed: 25233401] 
88. Lu P, Jones LL, Tuszynski MH. BDNF-expressing marrow stromal cells support extensive axonal 
growth at sites of spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol. 2005; 191:344–360. [PubMed: 15649491] 
89. Grill R, Murai K, Blesch A, Tuszynski MH. Cellular delivery of neurotrophin-3 promotes 
coricospinal axonal growth and partial functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 
1997; 17:5560–5572. [PubMed: 9204937] 
Anderson et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 90. Blesch A, Tuszynski MH. Cellular GDNF delivery promotes growth of motor and dorsal column 
sensory axons after partial and complete spinal cord transections and induces remyelination. J 
Comp Neurol. 2003; 467:403–417. [PubMed: 14608602] 
91. Blesch A, et al. Leukemia inhibitory factor augments neurotrophin expression and corticospinal 
axon growth after adult CNS injury. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:3556–3566. [PubMed: 10212315] 
92. Cafferty WB, et al. Leukemia inhibitory factor determines the growth status of injured adult 
sensory neurons. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:7161–7170. [PubMed: 11549727] 
93. Muller A, Hauk TG, Fischer D. Astrocyte-derived CNTF switches mature RGCs to a regenerative 
state following inflammatory stimulation. Brain. 2007; 130:3308–3320. [PubMed: 17971355] 
94. Ozdinler PH, Macklis JD. IGF-I specifically enhances axon outgrowth of corticospinal motor 
neurons. Nat Neurosci. 2006; 9:1371–1381. [PubMed: 17057708] 
95. Szebenyi G, et al. Fibroblast growth factor-2 promotes axon branching of cortical neurons by 
influencing morphology and behavior of the primary growth cone. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:3932–
3941. [PubMed: 11356881] 
96. White RE, Yin FQ, Jakeman LB. TGF-alpha increases astrocyte invasion and promotes axonal 
growth into the lesion following spinal cord injury in mice. Exp Neurol. 2008; 214:10–24. 
[PubMed: 18647603] 
97. Tom VJ, Doller CM, Malouf AT, Silver J. Astrocyte-associated fibronectin is critical for axonal 
regeneration in adult white matter. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:9282–9290. [PubMed: 15496664] 
98. Qin J, Liang J, Ding M. Perlecan antagonizes collagen IV and ADAMTS9/GON-1 in restricting the 
growth of presynaptic boutons. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:10311–10324. [PubMed: 25080592] 
99. Hill JJ, Jin K, Mao XO, Xie L, Greenberg DA. Intracerebral chondroitinase ABC and heparan 
sulfate proteoglycan glypican improve outcome from chronic stroke in rats. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2012; 109:9155–9160. [PubMed: 22615373] 
100. Minor K, et al. Decorin promotes robust axon growth on inhibitory CSPGs and myelin via a 
direct effect on neurons. Neurobiol Dis. 2008; 32:88–95. [PubMed: 18638554] 
101. Horie H, et al. Galectin-1 regulates initial axonal growth in peripheral nerves after axotomy. J 
Neurosci. 1999; 19:9964–9974. [PubMed: 10559404] 
102. Walsh FS, Doherty P. Neural cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily: role in 
axon growth and guidance. Annual review of cell and developmental biology. 1997; 13:425–456.
103. Malin D, et al. The extracellular-matrix protein matrilin 2 participates in peripheral nerve 
regeneration. Journal of cell science. 2009; 122:995–1004. [PubMed: 19295126] 
Anderson et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Preventing astrocyte scar formation does not lead to spontaneous regrowth of CST, 
AST, or 5HT axons after SCI
(a) Experiment summary schematic. Horizontal view of lesion core (LC) and astrocyte scar 
(AS) after SCI. Intercepts of CST, AST or 5HT axons with lines drawn at various distances 
from lesion center (Cn) were counted and expressed as a percent of axons 3mm proximal. 
(b,c,e,f) Dotted lines demarcate Cn and 500μm on either side. (b,d) Area occupied by 
GFAP-positive scar-forming astrocytes within 500μm on either side of Cn at 2 or 8 weeks 
after SCI. n = 6; (c, e) Arrows depict most caudal CST axons (BDA-tracing) or most rostral 
AST axons (CTB-tracing). (f) Arrows in top images depict most caudally penetrating 5HT 
axons, boxed areas are shown below. In WT mice, 5HT axons are surrounded by AS 
(arrowheads). In TK+GCV and STAT3-CKO mice, many 5HT axons are not in contact with 
AS (arrows), but have not regrown. (g–i) Numbers of CST (g), AST (h) and 5HT (i) axons at 
various distances from the SCI lesion center (Cn) as a percent of the number of axons 
Anderson et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 present 3mm proximal. n = 6 CST; n = 5 AST and 5HT; * p<0.05 versus WT (ANOVA with 
Newman-Keuls).
Anderson et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. No spontaneous regrowth of CST, AST or 5HT axons after deleting chronic astrocyte 
scars
(a) Experiment summary schematic. (b) Selective targeting of tdT reporter to GFAP-positive 
scar-forming astrocytes in 500μm zone occupied by astrocyte scar (see Extended Data 
Figure 1c). (c) DTR-DTX mediated ablation of chronic astrocyte scar after severe SCI. 
Dotted lines indicate Cn and 500μm on either side normally occupied by scar-forming 
astrocytes in WT mice. Boxes show locations of d–f in adjacent sections. (d) CST axons are 
found only among GFAP-positive astrocytes proximal to ablated scar. (e) AST axons at 
margins of large area depleted of scar but have not regrown (arrows). (f) 5HT axons are 
within area depleted of scar but have not regrown (arrows). (g–i) Numbers of CST (F), AST 
(G), or 5HT (H) axons at various distances from SCI lesion centers as a percent of the 
number of axons present at 3mm proximal. n = 6 CST; n = 5 AST and 5HT; * p<0.05 versus 
WT (ANOVA with Newman-Keuls).
Anderson et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. CSPG production by non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions after ablation or attenuation of 
astrocyte scars
(a) Dot blots and quantitation of total CSPG detected by CS56 antibody relative to total 
protein (Ponceau). n = 4; * p<0.05 versus uninjured (ANOVA with Newman-Keuls). (b) 
CS56 and GFAP immunohistochemistry (see Extended Data Fig. 2). (c) Details of boxed 
areas in b showing CSPG production by GFAP-negative cells.
Anderson et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Genomic dissection of astrocytes and non-astrocyte cells in SCI lesions
(a) Schematic of tissue harvested for RNA-sequencing. (b) Transgenically-targeted HA-
tagged ribosome clusters (arrows) among GFAP filaments in scar-forming astrocytes (see 
Extended Data Fig. 3a). (c) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering dendrogram based on 
Pearson correlations shows that transcriptome profiles of STAT3-CKO SCI astrocytes cluster 
nearer to (and are more similar to) those of uninjured as compared to WT SCI astrocytes. (d) 
Numbers and heat map of significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in WT 
astrocytes after SCI and the comparative differential expression profile of that specific 
Anderson et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cohort of genes in STAT3-CKO SCI astrocytes. Differential expression relative to uninjured, 
FDR<0.1. (e) Histogram of astrocyte and non-astrocyte expression of axon inhibitory or 
permissive molecules after SCI shown as mean FPKM. * significant difference astrocytes 
versus non-astrocytes, FDR<0.1. Numbers show Log2 fold significant differences. Red 
upregulated, green downregulated, ns non-significant.
Anderson et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure. 5. Robust regrowth of AST axons can be stimulated after WT SCI and is significantly 
attenuated by preventing astrocyte scar formation
(a1–c1) AST axons (CTB-tracing) plus GFAP immunohistochemistry. (a2–c2) AST axons 
alone. (a) WT mouse, SCI and hydrogel only (no growth factors). Arrowhead denotes most 
rostrally penetrating axons that do not pass beyond AS. (b) WT mouse, SCI plus 
conditioning lesions (CL) and hydrogel depot (D) with NT3+BDNF. Arrows denote robust 
regrowth of AST axons past AS into LC and along, but not into, the depot that releases 
NT3+BDNF but provides no adhesive matrix. (c) STAT3-CKO mouse, SCI plus CL and 
Anderson et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NT3+BDNF depot. Arrows denote regrowth of AST axons into LC. (d) Experiment 
summary schematic. (e–f) WT mice. (e1–e3) AST plus GFAP and CSPG (CS56) 
immunohistochemistry. Box in e1 is shown in e2. (e1 and e2) Arrows denote robust regrowth 
of stimulated AST axons past AS into LC through CSPG. (e3) Regrowing AST axons track 
along CSPG-positive GFAP-negative structures (arrows) or along CSPG-positive GFAP-
positive astrocyte processes (arrowheads) (See Extended Data Figures 7,8). (f,g) AST axons 
plus laminin immunohistochemistry. (f) Arrows denote regrowing stimulated AST axons 
tracking along laminin. (g) Arrowheads denote stimulated AST axons exposed to anti-CD29 
antibody and failing to maintain contact with laminin. (h,i) Numbers of AST axons at SCI 
Cn (h) or on either side (i) expressed as percent of axons 3mm proximal. n = 5; * p<0.05 
versus all other groups, ˆ p<0.05 versus all groups except STAT3-CKO (ANOVA with 
Newman-Keuls).
Anderson et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
