 P A T I E N T E N G A G E M E N T
On the path to a science of patient input
Margaret Anderson* and K. Kimberly McCleary*
It is early days in the creation of a science of patient input. Participants are establishing rig-
orous methods to better integrate patient perspectives, needs, and priorities throughout bio-
medical and bioengineering R&D and care delivery to patients. To assess progress and unmet
needs, FasterCures tracked more than 70 collaborative initiatives clustered in six categories
that are defining and shaping this developing field. No longer is patient engagement a fanciful
notion as it was at the start of our journey in 2003, and the rush of activity is welcome and vital.
In the 21st century, market research is a business
imperativeformostindustries.In2011—decades
after Steve Jobs famously said, “A lot of times,
people don’t know what they want until you
show it to them”—Apple started a market re-
search group that sends anonymous surveys to
inviteduserstofindout exactly whatthey want
from their devices. In January 2016, IBM for-
mally launched a company-wide process to shift
its culture to focus on users’ needs (1). Health
care and the research and development (R&D)
of biomedical products have lagged behind other
technology sectors in moving toward consumer-
centered practices. Now, as a result of multiple
cultural influences and pragmatic factors, the
mindset of these stakeholders is changing, and
the patient’s role is expanding (2). Momentum
is building to incorporate patient preferences
intothebiomedicalR&Dsystemsothatproducts
and services better align with patient needs, im-
prove individual and public health, and reduce
time and spending on unproductive care.
With its broad network of stakeholders—
patient organizations, industry, academia, gov-
ernment, and funding agencies—FasterCures
has a distinct vantage point into this landscape
of new patient-centered activities; such infor-
mation is crucial to the creation of a new field:
The science of patient input. The goals of this
new field are to develop rigorous methods so as
to better integrate patient perspectives, needs,
and priorities across the translational research
continuum. In this Perspective, we summarize
and encourage broad use of resources that are
already available, and we capture a baseline as-
sessment to benchmark growth and identify
areas of unmet need. We don’t want a minute
wasted on duplicating efforts.
WHO’S ON FIRST?
Through an environmental scan, we tracked
more than 70 collaborative initiatives, clustered
in six categories, that are further defining and
shaping patient-centered practice and policy
(Tables 1 and 2). Within these 70 initiatives,
nearly 40 discrete supporting entities are
assembling resources, providing direction,
and tracking milestones. Each entity approaches
this fieldfroma different vantage point, which is
whatmakestheeffortssopromising:Itisnatural—
and essential—that the work required to create
the field of patient input be performed through
strong collaborations composed of highly
interactive, diverse organizations.
FORMING SOLID PLATFORMS:
FRAMEWORKS AND MODELS
Some of the first formal efforts to outline the
science of patient input borrow, from software
development, the use of frameworks to pro-
vide a logical structure for organizing infor-
mation, identifying sources of the information,
andsuggestingwaysit might beusedandviewed
by distinct parties (3).
Frameworks serve different purposes, with
varied approaches and audiences. It is impor-
tant to be familiar with these frameworks be-
cause they lay the groundwork for much of the
ongoing and future work in this space. The
Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI)
created perhaps the most recognizable tool, and
itsworkhasbecomeaguidepost.CTTIisapublic-
private partnership supported by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and member
pharmaceutical companies and patient organi-
zations and has popularized a visual chevron-
based framework that identifies points at which
clinical trial sponsors and regulators might en-
gage patients along the R&D continuum for
pharmaceuticals (4). A companion framework
for medical devices was developed by another
public-private partnership, the Medical Device
Innovation Consortium (MDIC), which built
detailed considerations into an FDA Center for
DevicesandRadiologicalHealth(CDRH)diagram
of places in the total product life cycle of med-
ical devicesatwhichpatient-preference informa-
tion might enhance product development (5).
The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research
Institute (PCORI) requires that all its funded
investigators partner with patients from the
beginning of the application process through
completion of the study and dissemination of
its results. To guide formation of meaningful
engagements with patients, PCORI developed
a Patient Engagement Rubric (6) and a com-
pensation framework (7) that now guide ap-
plicants, reviewers, and awardees at every
step. The engagement principles outlined in
therubric—reciprocalrelationships,colearning,
partnership, trust, transparency, and honesty—
have become the essential characteristics of
patient-centeredness in R&D and health-care de-
livery. These initiatives, like most of the others
identified here, use the U.S. regulatory system
as a foundation. Composed of industry and pa-
tient groups, the Patient-Focused Medicines
Development partnership is leading an effort
to develop a comprehensive global framework
for patient engagement.
Recently, we have seen a surge in frame-
works being used by a number of organiza-
tions to help define the value of certain drugs
and medical products for insurance coverage
decisions. Frameworks assessing the value of
medicines have been put forward by the
American Society for Clinical Oncology, Insti-
tute for Clinical and Economic Review, Na-
tional Comprehensive Cancer Network, and
others; however, most efforts to date have
FasterCures, Washington, DC 20005, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: manderson@fastercures.
org (M.A.); kmccleary@fastercures.org (K.K.M.)
Stakeholders are fashioning of a new field
of patient input, which has already begun
to take flight.
CREDIT: PAPER BOAT CREATIVE/GETTY IMAGES
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
27 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 336 336ps11
1
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 not incorporated substantial input from pa-
tients or patient advocates, so we have not in-
cluded them among the patient-centered
effortsin Table 1andTable 2.To provide more
of a patient perspective, FasterCures and Ava-
lere are partnering to lead a collaborative,
multistakeholder process to develop a patient-
centered framework for assessing the value of
care (www.fastercures.org/reports/view/56).
SOLIDIFYING THE SCIENCE: METHODS
AND TOOLKITS
The science of patient input has roots in mul-
tiple disciplines. Patient advocacy builds on
the principles of political activism and commu-
nity organizing. On the academic side, this new
science is attracting individuals trained in health
economics, outcomes research, epidemiology,
social sciences, and marketing sciences. As a re-
sult, there are language barriers among the
sectors. There is even disagreement on whether
theterm“patient”meansonlytheindividualwith
a diagnosis or is meant to include caregivers, ad-
vocates, and patient organization representa-
tives. Several initiatives are starting to develop
shared definitions, standards, and methods and
are collecting toolssuchasguidelines,principles,
checklists, model provisions, and templates.
Over the past 5 years, PCORI has made a
substantial investment through its Methodolo-
gy Committee to create or endorse cross-
cuttingstandardsforpatient-centeredoutcomes
research for 11 topic areas, including stan-
dards for 47 areas such as patient-centeredness,
formulating research questions, and pre-
venting or handling missing data (7). Many
of these standards can be applied to other
fields beyond comparative effectiveness
research.
Research on patient preferences is getting
attention in part as a result of the draft gui-
dance issued by CDRH in 2015, which
spelled out how patient input might inform
benefit-risk assessments in premarket appli-
cations for medical devices. To help guide in-
dustry and other stakeholders on what
methods exist for studying patient prefer-
ences and when they might be most appro-
priately used, the MDIC framework includes
as a substantial appendix entitled “Catalog
of methods for assessing patient preferences
for benefits and harms of medical technol-
ogies.” This catalog is crucial because many
believe that there is only one way to do a pa-
tient preference study, and the catalog sorts
multiple methods. Similarly, the Biotech-
nology Innovation Organization (BIO) is
working with Parent Project Muscular
Dystrophy (PPMD) and a panel of expert
reviewers to produce a new resource, “As-
sessing and integrating patient views into
drug development: Patient preference study
considerations,” which is due to be released
in spring 2016.
Two separate repositories of toolkits aim
to help patient organizations standardize
some practices and benefit from others’ suc-
cesses. FasterCures’ TRAIN (The Research
Acceleration and Innovation Network)
program (8) collects resources from leading
venture philanthropy organizations, and
Global Genes’ Rare Toolkits (9) is designed
for use by rare-disease stakeholders. In ad-
dition, FasterCures held a workshop on 17
February 2016 with key thought leaders from
patient organizations, industry, government,
and academia in order to identify tools that
would enhance the science of patient input,
and FasterCures will be leading collaborative
efforts to prioritize and produce these tools
in 2016 and beyond (10).
The National Quality Forum (NQF) an-
nounced early this year that it will lead a
multi-stakeholder process in 2016 to develop
internationalstandards for patient decision aids
(11). NQF standards have a potent influence
Table 1. Resources for the science of patient input. Shown is a selected sample; please visit:
www.fastercures.org/patients-count-resources for a listing of and links to more than 70 resources.
Organization
Frameworks
Methods and
toolkits
Regulatory
and legislative
Training
programs
AmericanInstitutes
for Research
Roadmap for
patient and family
engagement health
care
BIO
Lifecycle approach to
FDA’s structured
benefit-risk assess-
ment
BIO annual
patient and
health advocacy
summit
CTTI
Patient engagement
across the R&D
continuum
Patient group
organizational
expertise and assets
evaluation tool
U.S. Congress
21st Century
Cures Act
Patient-focused
impact assessment
of 2015
DIA
Visual model of pa-
tient engagement in
benefit-risk assessment
through the medical
product life cycle
Patient
advocate fellow-
ship program
European Patients’
Academy on
Therapeutic
Innovation
The A to Z of how
medicines are
developed
Food and Drug
Law Institute
Introduction to
drug law and
regulation
Global Genes
RARE toolkits
MDIC
Framework for
incorporating info on
patient preferences
Catalog of methods
for assessing patient
preferences
NHC
Advancing meaning-
ful patient engage-
ment (with Genetic
Alliance)
Patient info tool
Reagan Udall
Big data 4
patients
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
27 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 336 336ps11
2
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 on the health-care delivery system, and its stan-
dards can have far-reaching impact.
ANECDOTAL TO ACTIONABLE:
SOURCES OF PATIENT DATA
The power of the science of patient input lies in
the data, but two key challenges are locating
sources of relevant and robust patient data
and determining how best to apply them. Data
can have limitations and tend to be collected at
a single point in time. There has already been
enormous investment in standardizing, linking,
and mining electronic health records (EHRs),
and the promise that EHRs hold for research
has been deliberated for years. With U.S.
President Barack Obama highlighting the
centrality of data sharing for the Precision
Medicine Initiative, and related announce-
ments by major EHR vendors to develop open
datastandards,progressisbeingmade.Butmore
work is needed to make EHRs reflect the needs
of developers, health-care professionals, and
patients.
To develop a more holistic picture of the
patient journey, new data sources are being
identified and leveraged (Table 2). More af-
fordable and prevalent communication and
data storage technology has opened up
possibilities for patient registries, online data-
sharing communities, smart phones, wearable
devices, and social media to be used as tools for
capturing patient insights longitudinally.
Conventionalapproaches—suchaspatient ad-
visory boards, focus groups, surveys, and
structured interviews—continue to be main-
stays. Capturing dynamic data about domains
of high interest to patients will be key to devel-
oping better endpoints and outcome measures
and understanding benefit expectations, risk
tolerance, and attitudes toward uncertainty.
New initiatives are taking shape to fill the
need. For instance, in implementing require-
ments of the 2012 FDA Safety and Innovation
Act, FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research is conducting a series of 24 patient-
focused drug development meetings to be
completed by the end of 2017. Each meeting
is focused on a particular disease or condition
and is structured to hear directly from patients
and caregivers about the impact of the disease
on their daily lives and goals. These sessions
also obtain perspectives on how well available
therapies meet patients’ needs. For most of the
meetings held so far, patient organizations
have voluntarily assisted FDA in publicizing
the meeting and helping prepare participants
by holding, in advance, educational webinars
about FDA’s mission and conducting surveys
tocollectinputfromabroadpatientpopulation.
After eachmeeting, the agency postsa “Voice of
the Patient” report (12) as a resource for FDA
review teams, industry, patients, and other
interested stakeholders. The program’s success
led FDA to announce guidelines and an
application process for scaling the model with
help from other parties to organize and host
meetings with the benefit of participation from
relevant FDA staff (13).
These FDA-convened meetings have ex-
posed stakeholders to real-world concerns of
patients and have allowed FDA reviewers to
engage directly with patients about their
symptoms and their impact on daily life. This
process showcases how patients have compli-
cated and narrowed lives as a result of living
with these conditions, and FDA has witnessed
tremendous unmet need in a new and power-
ful way.
Another new source of patient data are pa-
tient registries, the explosion of which was
documented by FasterCures in a February
2016 report, “Expanding the science of patient
input: Building smarter patient registries” (14).
Adaptable and affordable technology platforms
offered by organizations such as Genetic Alli-
ance, the National Organization for Rare Dis-
orders, PatientCrossroads, and Unitio have
made it feasible for patient organizations of all
sizesto launchregistriesto study the naturalhis-
tory of disease, burden of disease, expectations
Table 2. Science of patient input resources with patient data sources and measurement/
metrics. Shown is a selected sample; please visit www.fastercures.org/patients-count-resources
for a listing of and links to more than 70 resources.
Organization
Frameworks
Methods and
toolkits
Sources of
patient
data
Training
programs
Measurement
and metrics
FasterCures
From anecdote
to actionable:
The case
for patient
perspective
data
TRAIN Central
Station
Expanding
the science
of patient
input:
Building
smarter
patient
registries
FDA
Draft Guidance
for Submitting
Patient
Preference
Information
“Voice of the
patient”
reports
Patient
representative
program
Genetic
Alliance
PEER platform
NCATS
CTSA consortium
principles of
community en-
gagement
Global rare
disease
registries
NORD
Natural
histories
patient registry
platform
PCORI
Patient-
engagement
rubric
Methodology
standards
PCORnet:
The national
patient-
centered
clinical
research
network
PCORI
ambassadors
program
Patient engagement
rubric and
evaluation
framework
M-CERSI
Assessing
meaningful patient
engagement in
drug development:
A definition,
framework, and
rubric
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
27 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 336 336ps11
3
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 fortreatmentbenefits,andperspectivesontoler-
able harms and risks. These tools can go a long
way to de-risking the science for academia and
industry and incenting further study into a par-
ticular disease state.
FDA’s Office of Surveillance and Epidemi-
ology is leveraging the insights of nearly
400,000 patients who participate on the health
data–sharing platform PatientsLikeMe in
order to better understand medication side
effects and other potential safety issues with
approved medications (15). The National
Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network
(PCORnet), sponsored by PCORI, links 20
patient-powered registry networks with 13
clinical-data research networks at leading
academic medical centers, creating apotent in-
frastructure to compare patient-reported data
with data collected in clinical care settings (16).
Later in 2016, the U.S. National Institutes of
Health (NIH) will announce details for amas-
sing a cohort of 1 million research volunteers
through the Precision Medicine Initiative (17).
It is anticipated that some of the existing infra-
structure supported by PCORnet, NIH’s Clini-
cal and Translational Science Awards, and the
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Million
Veteran Program will be tapped to recruit par-
ticipants, along with direct public outreach in
order to achieve a broadly representative cohort.
BUILDING A CULTURE OF
ENGAGEMENT: REGULATORY AND
LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITIES
In our 2015 article (2), we described a “perfect
storm” of policy initiatives that were generat-
ing momentum for patient-centered initiatives
in government, the private sector, and philan-
thropies. A year later, these have matured, and
new activities are multiplying.
In the U.S. Congress, the 21st Century
Cures Act (H.R. 6) sailed through the U.S.
House of Representatives with rare bipartisan
support, passing by a vote of 344 to 77. The bill
contains several provisions that amplify pa-
tients’ voices throughout the continuum of
discovery, development, and delivery of med-
ical solutions. The Senate is advancing a series
of smaller bills that address some of the same
issues as H.R. 6. The biomedical ecosystem is
encouraged by the dialogues from these efforts
and looks forward to seeing what will come of
them.
In the Executive Branch, the positive expe-
rience with FDA’s Patient-Focused Drug De-
velopment initiative has contributed to the
agency’s having made a new generation of
patient-focused activities among the top
priorities for the sixth authorization of the
Prescription Drug User Fee Act (18). Industry,
represented by BIO and the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America
(PhRMA), were reportedly in agreement with
the high priority attached to advancing patient-
focused drug development, although details
about the specific accord reached are still being
ratified through the approval processes.
The burgeoning science of patient input
has advanced a meaningful culture of patient
engagement. For example, CDRH’s 2016–
2017 Strategic Priorities outline specific mile-
stonessuchas,“byDecember31,2017,90percent
of CDRH employees will interact with patients
as part of their job duties” (19). This is a strong
signaltothemedicaldeviceindustryofCDRH’s
commitment. Although work remains to de-
fine the purpose and means to meet CDRH’s
target, we believe it will be a transforming force
forthe agency and also will spur new initiatives
in industry. CDRH has also championed pa-
tient centricity in its negotiations with in-
dustry trade organizations over the fourth
authorization of the Medical Device User
Fee Agreement, but it is not yet clear how
well that priority aligns with industry’s top
concerns.
Collective success in the science of patient
input depends on incorporating new regula-
tory tools in this field. Unless FDA has capac-
ity both in terms of appropriate methods and
expertise to evaluate patient input as well as
patient-centered tools and instruments sub-
mitted by sponsors, the field might wither. Sim-
ilarly, industry and patient groups crave more
direction from FDA about how it will use the
patient input they provide and tools they de-
velop to reflect patients’ priorities. Collabora-
tion and communication are vital.
In that vein, a new opportunity for patient
organizations to influence regulatory decision–
making arose as a result of pioneering work
led by PPMD to assemble a large and diverse
multistakeholder group to draft regulatory
guidance to submit to FDA. The agency used
the comprehensive draft as a template, and a
yearlaterissued formalguidance to informdrug
development for Duchenne muscular dystrophy
(20). Thissuccesshasspurredsimilarinitiatives,
including one to stimulate drug development
for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) led by
the ALS Association and another to define a
“safe harbor” for engagement between patients
and industry and the means by which the pa-
tient perspective can be better integrated in
drug development (led by the National Health
Council and Genetic Alliance).
BUILDING CADRES OF EQUIPPED
PATIENTS AND PRACTITIONERS:
TRAINING PROGRAMS
As the momentum for the science of patient
input builds, we must address the demand
for training. Several initiatives have been or-
ganized to develop formal curricula and
focused professional trainings designed to ex-
pand the capacity of stakeholders to partici-
pate effectively in advancing the science of
patient input.
The most comprehensive of these efforts is
theEuropeanPatientsAcademy on Therapeutic
Innovation, a consortium of 33 partners funded
under the ambitious Innovative Medicines Ini-
tiative. Two cycles of an in-depth Patient Expert
Training Course conducted over a 14-month
periodhavesofartrainedabout150participants
(21). An educational toolkit of online materials
available in seven languages is intended to reach
12,000 patient advocates across Europe so that
they are educated in clinical trial design and
health technology assessment.
In the United States, disease-specific pro-
grams provide a useful foundation for broader-
based efforts sponsored by PCORI through its
Ambassador program and FDA’s Patient Rep-
resentative Program. As a follow-up to its late
2015 call to action (22) for more training re-
sources, Friends of Cancer Research is develop-
ing a program to facilitate patient involvement
in clinicaltrialdesign andbenefit-risk decisions.
The Reagan-Udall Foundation, with funding
support from PCORI, has begun a new
program, “Big Data 4 Patients,” which will cre-
ate a state-of-the-art patient training program
(23). Drug Information Association (DIA) has
created a competitive Patient Fellowship pro-
gram as part of its annual convention to expose
patient leaders to topics covered at one of the
world’s largest gatherings of life science profes-
sionals and has designed intensive multiday
sessions to foster colearning by life science pro-
fessionals and patient advocates.
MEASURING PROGRESS: METRICS
To maintain momentum, those dedicating hu-
man and financial resources to patient input
initiatives feel a pressing need to establish me-
trics and show a return on investment. A co-
operative process led by the University of
Maryland Center for Excellence in Regulatory
Science and Innovation (M-CERSI) proposes
a simple system to assess meaningful engage-
ment in drug development; a rubric that scores
engagement is used on several dimensions of
activity at different points along the develop-
ment pipeline (24). CTTI is developing tools
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
27 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 336 336ps11
4
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to measure the return on investment of patient
engagement in clinical trials, and DIA has
partnered with the Tufts Center for the Study
of Drug Development to use selected case
studies as a basis for quantifying the adoption
and impact of patient-centered initiatives.
The American Institutes for Research ini-
tiated a process early this year to identify mea-
surement principles that are meaningful to
patients and their families.
By far, the most advanced measurement
system has been developed by PCORI. Its mul-
tipart evaluation is designed to assess the over-
all impact of PCORI, the extent of engagement
in research, and the effect of engagement (25).
The evaluation system includes visual models,
sets of questions, metrics, methods, and sources
of data. It incorporates new data collection
tools,suchastheWaysofEngaging-Engagement
Activity Tool (WE-ENACT), in each funded
project.
TODAY’S LANDSCAPE AND BEYOND
On the basis of our research, we have noted
some overarching trends and unmet needs.
Avoid duplication and make your work
easy to find
The long-ignored area of patient engagement
has quickly become crowded with activity.
However, the useful frameworks, models, rub-
rics, tools, and guidelines that already exist are
often hidden from plain view. If you cannot
quickly and easily find resources on your
own website, it’s safe to assume that others
outside your organization cannot either. Bring-
ingbettervisibilitytoone’scompletedworkand
products ready to be used is a low-cost, high-
return action step that would help newcomers
get started and seasoned practitioners identify
where more work is needed. We have created a
fully linked version on our website of the
resources listed in Tables 1 and 2 to help estab-
lish a patient-centricity library.
We need evidence
Even informal efforts can build an evidence
base and document what is working and what
is not. It is challenging at this stage to know
which efforts are demonstrating positive
change and can then be scaled and built into
standard operating procedures. We are getting
better at incorporating real-world success
stories into the narrative of patient centricity,
but we need more formal ways to document
and share experiences. We must also report
failures or speed bumps so that we can all learn
from them.
Help wanted
Although the initiatives we have described in
this article are spread among many different
organizations and involve scores of partners,
a closer look reveals that a small group of ex-
pert trailblazers is at the core of many. There is
a shortage of academic researchers prepared to
hone techniques and methods for turning the
patient experience into usable data. We ignore
this at our own collective peril. The ranks of
well-informed and available patient and advo-
cate experts are also thin compared with the
heavy demand for their participation. These
shortages place undue demands on the pio-
neers and could result in burnout, lack of con-
tinuity, and, possibly, insularity. We also need
to better integrate physicians and other health-
care professionals into the dialogue.
This is not a one-size-fits-all effort;
customization is required
Much of the early experimentation with patient-
centered action has been rooted in rare dis-
ease communities, where there are tightly
linked patient networks and highly creative
and agile nonprofit organizations. As best
practices are established to gather and convert
insights into actionable data, it is likely that
we’ll need to tailor practices to the special
features of each affected community, taking
into account whether the condition is chronic,
acute, or terminal; its prevalence or rarity in
the population; the stage of scientific under-
standing about its cause or pathogenesis; and
social dimensions such as how connected or
dispersedpatientsare andwhethertheremight
be harmony or discord among the groups that
serve the patients’ needs.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. L. Stinson, IBM’s got a plan to bring design thinking to big
business. WIRED 21 January 2016; www.wired.com/2016/01/
ibms-got-a-plan-to-bring-design-thinking-to-big-business.
2. M. Anderson, K. K. McCleary, From passengers to co-pilots:
Patient roles expand. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 291fs25 (2015).
3. J. A. Zachman, ZachmanFramework (ZachmanInternational,
2008); www.zachman.com/about-the-zachman-framework.
4. PG Engagement across the Research & Development
Continuum (Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative,
2015); www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/what-we-do/investigational-
plan/patient-groups.
5. Medical Device Innovation Consortium (MDIC) patient-
centered benefit-risk project report: A framework for
incorporating information on patient preferences regard-
ing benefit and risk into regulatory assessments of new
medical technology (MDIC, St. Louis Park, MN, 2015);
http://mdic.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/MDIC_
PCBR_Framework_Web1.pdf.
6. L. Frank, L.Forsythe, L. Ellis, S. Schrandt, S. Sheridan, J. Gerson,
K.Konopka,S.Daugherty,Conceptualandpracticalfoundations
of patient engagement in research at the patient-centered
outcomesresearchinstitute.Qual.LifeRes.24,1033–1041(2015).
7. PCORI Methodology Standards (Patient-Centered Outcomes
Research Institute, 2013); www.pcori.org/research-results/
research-methodology/pcori-methodology-standards.
8. The Research Acceleration and Innovation Network (FasterCures,
2016); http://train.fastercures.org/.
9. RARE Toolkits, (Global Genes, Aliso Viejo, CA, 2016);
https://globalgenes.org/toolkits.
10. K. Schneeman, Patient engagement in medical R&D: Na-
vigating the “teen years” (FasterCures, 3 March 2016);
http://fastercures.tumblr.com/post/140402836399/patient-
engagement-in-medical-rd-navigating-the.
11. NQF to develop national standards, measurement for pa-
tient decision aids (National Quality Forum, 2016); www.
qualityforum.org/News_And_Resources/Press_Releases/
2016/NQF_to_Develop_National_Standards,_Measurement_
for_Patient_Decision_Aids.aspx.
12. The voice of the patient: A series of reports from FDA’s Patient-
FocusedDrugDevelopmentInitiative(FDA,2015);www.fda.gov/
ForIndustry/UserFees/PrescriptionDrugUserFee/ucm368342.htm.
13. Externally-led patient-focused drug development meet-
ings (FDA, 2015); www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/UserFees/
PrescriptionDrugUserFee/ucm453856.htm.
14. K. K. McCleary, S. Mayberry, Expanding the science of pa-
tient input: Building smarter patient registries (FasterCures,
Washington, DC, 2016); www.fastercures.org/assets/Uploads/
PDF/Patient-Registries.pdf.
15. M. Carlson Delogne, PatientsLikeMe and the FDA sign re-
search collaboration agreement (PatientsLikeMe, 2015);
http://news.patientslikeme.com/press-release/patientslikeme-
and-fda-sign-research-collaboration-agreement.
16. PCORnet, the National Patient-Centered Clinical Research
Network; http://pcornet.org.
17. Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort Program—Frequently
asked questions (National Institutes of Health, 2016); www.
nih.gov/precision-medicine-initiative-cohort-program/precision-
medicine-initiative-cohort-program-frequently-asked-questions.
18. V. I. Prescription Drug User Fee Act, Fiscal Years 2018–2022
(FDA, Washington, DC, 2016); www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/
UserFees/PrescriptionDrugUserFee/ucm446608.htm.
19. FDA, 2016–2017 Strategic Priorities: Center for Devices and
Radiological Health (FDA, 2016); www.fda.gov/downloads/
AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/
CDRH/CDRHVisionandMission/UCM481588.pdf.
20. FDA, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and related dystrophino-
pathies: Developing drugs for treatment—draft guidance
for industry (FDA, Washington, DC, 2015); www.fda.gov/
downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/
guidances/UCM450229.pdf.
21. EuropeanPatients’AcademyonTherapeuticInnovationTraining
Course, (EUPATI, Germany, 2015); www.patientsacademy.
eu/index.php/en/edu.
22. R. Hohman, M. Shea, M. Kozak, S. Roberts, J. Allen, E. Sigal,
Regulatory decision-making meets the real world. Sci.
Transl. Med. 7, 313fs46 (2015).
23. Reagan-Udall Foundation, Big data for patients (FDA, 2015);
www.reaganudall.org/our-work/building-scientific-capacity/bd4p/.
24. E. M. Perfetto, E. M. Oehrlein, Assessing meaningful patient
engagement in drug development: A definition, framework,
and rubric (University of Maryland Center of Excellence in
Regulatory Science and Innovation, 2015); www.pharmacy.
umaryland.edu/media/SOP/wwwpharmacyumarylandedu/
centers/cersievents/pfdd/mcersi-pfdd-framework-rubric.pdf.
25. Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute Evaluation
Framework 2.0 (Patient-Centered Outcomes Research In-
stitute, 2015); www.pcori.org/sites/default/files/PCORI-
Evaluation-Framework-2.0.pdf.
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf6730
Citation: M. Anderson, K. K. McCleary, On the path to a
science of patient input. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 336ps11 (2016).
P E R S P E C T I V E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
27 April 2016
Vol 8 Issue 336 336ps11
5
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 On the path to a science of patient input
Margaret Anderson and K. Kimberly McCleary
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf6730
, 336ps11336ps11.
8
Sci Transl Med 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/336/336ps11
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/379/eaam7203.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/371/eaaf1001.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/347/347ed10.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/344/344ed9.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/341/341ps12.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/339/339ed7.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/315/315ps22.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/129/129ed3.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/3/69/69cm3.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/313/313ed12.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/291/291fs25.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/336/336ps11#BIBL
This article cites 3 articles, 2 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
