 Predictive minds in Ouija board sessions
Marc Andersen1,2,3
& Kristoffer L. Nielbo2,3,4 &
Uffe Schjoedt1,2,3 & Thies Pfeiffer5,6 &
Andreas Roepstorff1,3 & Jesper Sørensen1,2,3
# The Author(s) 2018
Abstract Ouija board sessions are illustrious examples of how subjective feelings of
control – the Sense of Agency (SoA) - can be manipulated in real life settings. We
present findings from a field experiment at a paranormal conference, where Ouija
enthusiasts were equipped with eye trackers while using the Ouija board. Our results
show that participants have a significantly lower probability at visually predicting
letters in a Ouija board session compared to a condition in which they are instructed
to deliberately spell out words with the Ouija board planchette. Our results also show
Phenom Cogn Sci
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-018-9585-8
* Marc Andersen
mana@cas.au.dk
Kristoffer L. Nielbo
knielbo@sdu.dk
Uffe Schjoedt
us@cas.au.dk
Thies Pfeiffer
thies.pfeiffer@uni-bielefeld.de
Andreas Roepstorff
andreas.roepstorff@cas.au.dk
Jesper Sørensen
jsn@cas.au.dk
1
School of Culture and Society, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
2
Religion, Cognition and Culture, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
3
Interacting Minds Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
4
Department of History, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
5
Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany
6
Cognitive Interaction Technology Center of Excellence (CITEC), Bielefeld University, Bielefeld,
Germany
 that Ouija board believers report lower SoA compared to sceptic participants. These
results support previous research which claim that low sense of agency is caused by a
combination of retrospective inference and an inhibition of predictive processes. Our
results show that users in Ouija board sessions become increasingly better at predicting
letters as responses unfold over time, and that meaningful responses from the Ouija
board can only be accounted for when considering interactions that goes on at the
participant pair level. These results suggest that meaningful responses from the Ouija
board may be an emergent property of interacting and predicting minds that increas-
ingly impose structure on initially random events in Ouija sessions.
Keywords Senseofagency.Ouijaboard.Predictiveminds.Eyetracking.Religiousand
paranormal belief
1 Introduction
Sense of agency (SoA) refers to the feeling of generating and controlling actions in
order to influence external events (Haggard and Tsakiris 2009; Haggard and Chambon
2012; Moore and Fletcher 2012; Moore and Obhi 2012). SoA is essential to ideas of
responsibility, and plays a pivotal role in justice systems, where the accused’s aware-
ness of having committed a criminal act is of great importance for sentencing (Haggard
and Chambon 2012). SoA also seems to play an important role in many mental
illnesses. In schizophrenia, for example, patients will sometimes report that their
actions result from control by some external entity or person (Blakemore et al. 2002),
and in depression, patients often report feelings of helplessness and loss of agency
(Haggard and Chambon 2012). Researchers have frequently gestured toward Ouija
boards sessions to exemplify how SoA can be convincingly manipulated to the extent
that participants will spell out words with a planchette but collectively claim that an
invisible third party is actually producing the movements (e.g. Moore and Fletcher
2012; Wegner and Wheatley 1999; Carruthers 2010; Coyle et al. 2012; Dewey and Carr
2013; Olson et al. 2016). Despite frequent references to the Ouija board phenomenon,
however, there is a striking absence of empirical studies investigating SoA in real life
Ouija board sessions.
The Ouija board is normally used by two or more participants who place their hands
lightly on top of a triangular planchette. The planchette is then moved around a board
with the alphabet, numbers from 0 to 9, and the words BYES^, BNO^ and
BGOODBYE^ printed on it. Typically, participants will ask the board a question, to
which the board will often supply with a coherent and meaningful ‘response’ (Wegner
2002). Responses are usually believed to issue from supernatural agents; in many cases
these are deceased relatives or former residents of the area where the Ouija session is
taking place. Importantly, such beliefs are facilitated by participants’ subjective expe-
rience of not moving the planchette themselves, i.e. their diminished SoA.
One influential theory claims that SoA mainly arises from processes that serve motor
control (Blakemore et al. 2002). According to this account, the brain predicts the
sensory consequences of an action, and then compares this prediction to the actual
consequences. When prediction and consequence match, the result is the feeling that BI
did that^. Mismatches, however, precipitate a decrease in experienced SoA (Haggard
M. Andersen et al.
 and Chambon 2012; Blakemore et al. 2002). In Ouija boards sessions, the low SoA
reported by participants may therefore be caused by difficulty predicting the board’s
responses. This, however, seems like a paradox: how can participants on the one hand
produce coherent and meaningful responses through the board while on the other hand
be unable to predict those very same responses?
The Ouija board phenomenon is often explained by analogy to facilitated commu-
nication (FC) (Burgess et al. 1998; Wegner et al. 2003). FC is a now discredited
technique that was claimed to help communicatively-impaired clients to communicate
through a human ‘facilitator’. In FC, the facilitator will typically hold the hands of the
impaired client and try to detect what the client is trying to communicate on a keyboard
or spelling board. Several studies have shown, however, that the facilitators, unbe-
knownst to themselves, are really doing the communicating (e.g. Wegner et al. 2003;
Cabay 1994). In a particularly renowned example, Wheeler and colleagues gave
separate questions through headphones to clients and facilitators, and the answers
turned out to match the questions posed to the facilitators (Wheeler et al. 1993).
Because of obvious structural and functional similarities between Ouija board sessions
and FC, these phenomena have at times been collectively explained by proponents of a
‘retrospective’ account of SoA in which a general-purpose mechanism retrospectively
infers the causal origins of actions and their effects by relying primarily on external,
situational cues and beliefs about the situation (Wegner 2002; Wegner et al. 2003). This
account argues that beliefs about the Ouija board and FC are pivotal in determining
SoA in participants. However, while evidence suggests that both predictive and
retrospective processes are important for SoA (Moore and Fletcher 2012; Moore and
Obhi 2012), it remains unclear from both accounts how meaningful responses emerge
in the contexts of FC and Ouija sessions.
In what follows, we present data from the first field study on predictive
behaviour and SoA. In this exploratory study, we used mobile eye tracking
technology to compare predictive gaze behaviour in Ouija Board sessions with
a voluntary action condition in which participants in pairs were asked to
voluntarily spell words on the board with the planchette. Because we assume
that vision is crucially involved in the construction of meaningful responses
from the Ouija board (albeit potentially unbeknownst to the participants them-
selves), we operationalised predictive behaviour through manual annotation of
participants’ gaze data. Similarly, we operationalised motor outcome by manu-
ally annotating responses from the Ouija board (i.e. which letters the planchette
would point to). Finally, we investigated the effects of belief on SoA through
the administration of a questionnaire, asking questions about participants’ belief
in the Ouija board and their SoA during the Ouija board sessions.
2 Methods
2.1 Ethics and informed consent
The methods in the following study were carried out in accordance with all relevant
guidelines and regulations issued by the National Committee on Health Research
Ethics, Denmark. Informed consent was obtained from all participants.
Predictive minds in Ouija board sessions
 2.2 Participants
Forty American volunteers (25 females; age: M = 42.5, SD = 9.7, Range = 25–67) were
recruited in pairs on site at a Ouija board conference. The majority of participants had
experience with using the Ouija Boards (BDo you consider yourself an experienced
Ouija Board user^, 5-point Likert scale, −2 to +2, Mean = 0.7, SD = 1.2). Twenty-eight
participants owned a Ouija board themselves. The sample size was based on the
number of participants that were willing to participate in the study during the
conference.
2.3 Procedure
Sitting in front of each other with a Ouija board on a table between them (see Fig. 1),
the participants were informed about the experimental procedure and equipped with
mobile eye trackers which were then calibrated (see 2.4 Equipment).
Participants went through two conditions,1 here referred to as the ‘voluntary action
condition’ and the ‘Ouija condition’ In the ‘Ouija condition’ participants were
instructed to use the Ouija board as they normally would, and participants were free
to ask the Ouija Board anything they liked. Questions often resulted in the Ouija board
‘responding’ to the participants. The ‘Ouija condition’ lasted approximately 10 min,
after which the participants were asked to stop. In the ‘voluntary action condition’
participants were asked to deliberately move the planchette to ‘YES’, deliberately move
Fig. 1 The experimental setup
1 Participants also went through a third condition which is not reported in the present article. Briefly,
participants repeated five predetermined questions from the experimenter. Four questions invited YES/NO
responses from the board, one invited an open-ended response. Only four pairs produced a meaningful
message in the open-ended task. Further, it became clear to us that participants needed not rely on vision to
locate BYES^/BNO^, and therefore this condition could not be used for the purpose of the study. Importantly,
while Ouija board users may move the planchette to BYES^ and BNO^ without looking, spelling words using
the alphabet on the Ouija board, requires visual guidance. This is mainly because BYES^ and BNO^ are both
spatially isolated far from the letters and numbers on the Ouija board, but also because responses of BYES^
and BNO^ will generally be accepted as such even in cases where the planchette is in the near vicinity of
BYES^ and BNO^ and not directly on them. For the reasons above, we did conduct any data analysis on this
condition.
M. Andersen et al.
 the planchette to ‘NO’, and deliberately use the planchette to spell ‘BALTIMORE’. The
order of the sessions was counterbalanced.
Following the experimental session participants were asked to fill in a questionnaire
on demographics and experiences in the Ouija condition. Items included experienced
sense of agency; amount of push they felt from the other player; the degree to which
they deliberately pushed the planchette; and experience of a supernatural entity.
Participants were asked about their beliefs in the Ouija board, their previous experience
with Ouija boards, their impression of their partner, and their levels of religiosity and
spirituality. Most questionnaire items were included for exploratory purposes and was
not included in the final data analysis (but see 2.7 Data Availability).
2.4 Equipment
Two low-cost (self-made) mobile eye trackers (6IR940nm eye camera, 520TVL
940 nM LED scene camera) were used to record participants’ eye movements during
Ouija board sessions. Tracking was done using the open source software Haytham
(Mardanbegi 2009) on Fujitsu E754 Lifebooks with Windows 7. This system provided
a monocular sampling procedure at a 720 × 480 pixel resolution with a sampling rate of
15 Hz for the eye tracking. A single user controlled calibration procedure with 4
calibration points was used. Finally, an overview camera was placed approximately
1 m above the Ouija board.
2.5 Eye movement data & manual annotation
For each pair of participants, eye gaze recordings of both participants were
synchronised with video footage from the overview camera. In this way, a video
containing eye gaze from both participants and their interaction with the Ouija board
was produced for each condition (see Fig. 2).
Two independent blind coders manually annotated the videos in the annotation
software ELAN (Lausberg and Sloetjes 2009). In the ‘Voluntary action condition’,
the coders annotated time periods in which the experimenter instructed participants to
deliberately move the planchette (on sentence level), and time periods when partici-
pants deliberately moved the planchette as instructed by the experimenter (on sentence
level and letter level). In the ‘Ouija Condition’, the coders annotated time periods in
which participants posed questions to the Ouija board (on sentence level) and time
periods of the responses from the Ouija board (on sentence level and letter level). In
both conditions, time periods were annotated in which participants (1) looked at the
planchette and (2) looked at the upcoming letter (prediction). With respect to the latter,
coders were instructed that focal gaze had to fall on the exact letter that the planchette
would subsequently reach. Any amount of time looking on the exact letter would
qualify as a prediction. On average, it took around one and a half hours for the coders to
annotate 1 min of video. The coders manually annotated 3–4 h of video in total.
A data set was constructed from the annotations in order to explore eye gaze within
and across conditions. In this data set, participant eye behaviour in each condition was
split into a series of discrete responses on the board, so that each response could be
separately analysed. This allowed us to evaluate the data quality of eye movements in
each response as opposed to the data quality of an entire condition. For each response,
Predictive minds in Ouija board sessions
 it was noted whether or not participants predicted each individual letter. In addition to
coding this individual eye behaviour, we also added a ‘pair level’ to the data frame,
where we coded whether or not at least one of the participants in the pair predicted the
letters in the responses. This allowed us to compare the ability to predict letters in
individuals seen in isolation with pairs of participants.
2.6 Data anlysis
Recordings from one pair in the ‘Ouija board session’ and one pair in the ‘Voluntary
action condition’ were lost due to technical issues. Before conducting any analyses, we
removed all responses with only 1 semantic unit from the data after learning that Ouija
board users do not need to rely on their vision to locate BYES^, BNO^, and
BGOODBYE^. Responses with poor data quality2 (below 60%) were removed.
This left us with a total of 176 responses suitable for statistical analysis (data quality
(DQ): M = 83.7%, SD = 11.5%). Of these, 33 responses were from the ‘Voluntary
action session’, where participants were instructed to deliberately spell the word
BBALTIMORE^ (DQ: M = 83.0%, SD = 11.5%), and 143 responses were from the
‘Ouija condition’, where participants interacted with the board in a natural manner
(DQ: 87.3%, SD = 11.7%). Out of the 143 responses in the ‘Ouija condition’, 67
responses were meaningful (e.g. Participant: BWould you like to spell your first
name?^, Ouija board: BHENRY^) and 76 responses were not meaningful (e.g. Partic-
ipant: BWhere did you pass away?^, Ouija Board: BSTACW^).
To test the hypothesis that low sense of agency in Ouija Board Sessions results from
difficulty predicting the responses ‘picked’ by the planchette, we performed a mixed
effects logistic regression with ‘predicts upcoming letter’ as outcome and ‘condition’ as
a fixed effect (M1). Because a significant difference between conditions in the
ability to predict letters could be driven by non-meaningful Ouija board re-
sponses, we also performed the same analysis with only meaningful responses
from the Ouija board (M1b).
To test the hypothesis that low SoA is related to participants’ beliefs about the Ouija
board, we performed a bivariate analysis of 6 questionnaire items reported by the 40
2 Data quality was obtained through a software that estimated the percentage of time during a response where
the participant’s eye gaze was captured by the eye tracker (i.e. the percentage of time that the horizontal and
vertical red line was present in the eye tracking videos).
Fig. 2 Example of video for coders
M. Andersen et al.
 participants. Two of these items were questions related to the participants’ belief about
the Ouija board and four of these items where related to whom or what the participants
attributed the planchette’s movement. We corrected for multiple comparisons using a
Bonferroni-Holm test (Holm 1979).
To explore how participants in each condition predicted letters over time in mean-
ingful responses, we performed a mixed effects logistic regression, with ‘predicts
upcoming letter’ as outcome and ‘condition’, ‘letter number’ and ‘individual level
/pair level’ as fixed effects (M2).
In all the mixed effect models we used a maximal random structure with participants
nested within pairs as intercept and the fixed effects as random slopes. Due to
convergence issues we removed pairs from the random structure in two models (M1b
& M2), and ‘letter number’ and ‘individual level /pair level’ from one model (M2). In
case of significant interactions, we performed post hoc tests. Visual inspection of
residual plots revealed only minimal or no obvious deviations from homoscedasticity
or normality. To perform the analyses, we used lmerTest 2.0–30 (Kuznetsova et al.
2016) ‘psych’ 1.6.8, (Revelle 2016), and R 3.2.4 (R Core Team 2016).
2.7 Data availability
The data generated and analyzed during the current study are available through the
Open Science Framework (link: https://osf.io/hcb83/) ([Dataset] Andersen et al. 2017).
3 Results
Results revealed a significant effect of the ‘Ouija condition’, indicating that participants
had a 37.9% lower chance of predicting each letter in the ‘Ouija condition’ compared to
the ‘Voluntary action condition’ (ß = −1.88, SE = 0.224, p < 0.001, R2m = 0.17, R2c =
0.34). Because this difference between conditions in the ability to predict letters could
be driven by non-meaningful Ouija board responses, which intuitively would seem
harder to predict than meaningful responses, we also performed the same analysis with
only meaningful responses from the Ouija board. Looking only at meaningful re-
sponses, results still revealed a significant effect of the ‘Ouija condition’, indicating
that participants had a 21.3% lower chance of predicting each letter in the ‘Ouija
condition’ compared to the ‘Voluntary action condition’ (ß = −1.19, SE = 0.347,
p < 0.001, R2m = 0.09, R2c = 0.19).
Results revealed significant correlations between all questionnaire items. Generally,
believers reported that the planchette moved by itself; that the other participant did not
push the planchette; that they themselves did not push the planchette; and that they
experienced contact with a supernatural agent (see Table 1). Conversely, scep-
tics in general reported that the planchette did not move by itself; that the other
participant pushed the planchette; that they themselves, although to a lesser
extent, also pushed the planchette; and that they did not experience contact
with a supernatural being (see Table 1).
In our holistic model, where we looked at the effects of condition, letter number and
individual level vs. pair level on the ability to predict upcoming letters, results revealed
a significant effect of the ‘Ouija Condition’ indicating that participants had a 38.0%
Predictive minds in Ouija board sessions
 lower chance of predicting letters in the ‘Ouija condition’ compared with the ‘Voluntary
action condition’ (ß = −1.655, SE = 0.411, p < 0.001). Furthermore, there was a signif-
icant effect of pair level, indicating that there was a 15.5% higher chance in the
‘Voluntary action condition’ and a 31.0% higher chance in the ‘Ouija condition’ that
at least one of the participants in a pair would predict upcoming letters compared to a
single participant seen in isolation (ß = 1.293, SE = 0.148, p < 0.001). In other words,
there was a significant higher chance that at least one out of two participants in a pair
would predict upcoming letters compared to a single participant seen in isolation,
which in not surprising. Finally, we found a significant interaction between ‘letter
number’ and ‘Ouija condition’, indicating that participants in the ‘Ouija condition’
became better at predicting upcoming letters as a response from the board unfolded
over time (ß = −0.180, SE = 0.081, p = 0.026). In other words, while participants
exhibited a stable ability to predict upcoming letters in the ‘Voluntary action condition’,
their ability to predict upcoming letters in the ‘Ouija board condition’ steadily became
better and better. Post hoc test revealed that on average, participants’ chance of
predicting upcoming letters in the ‘Ouija Condition’ increased by roughly 5% by each
consecutive letter in the meaningful responses (See Fig. 3). The model explained 17.9%
of the variance in the data without the random factors (R2m) and 29.6% of the variance
with the random factors (R2c).
4 Discussion
For the first time in a natural setting, we provide evidence for why Ouija board users
exhibit a reduced Sense of Agency. In our field experiment, participant pairs were
equipped with mobile eye trackers and went through two conditions: 1) the ‘Voluntary
Table 1 Correlations between questionnaire items
Did you feel as if
the planchette
moved on its own
during the
session?
(9-point Likert
scale)
Did you feel
as if the other
participant
deliberately
pushed
the planchette?
(9-point Likert
scale)
Did you
deliberately
push the
planchette?
(9-point Likert
scale)
Did it feel as if you
made contact with
an entity other than
the persons involved
in the experiment
(e.g. a spirit, a ghost,
a demon, an alien,
etc.)?
(9-point Likert scale)
The Ouija board can be
used to contact entities
such as spirits, ghost,
demons, angels etc.
(5-point Likert scale)
r = 0.526
p < 0.001
r = −0.423
p = 0.007
r = −0.463
p = 0.003
r = 0.638
p < 0.001
The Ouija board is really
driven by the
subconscious
mind of its users (i.e.
the ideomotor effect)
(5-point Likert scale)
r = −0.481
p = 0.002
r = 0.442
p = 0.004
r = 0.339
p = 0.033
r = −0.658
p < 0.001
M. Andersen et al.
 action condition’ in which participants were asked to deliberately make responses on
the Ouija board and 2) the ‘Ouija condition’ in which participants were asked to use the
Ouija board as they normally would see fit. Participants then filled out a questionnaire
about their experiences in the Ouija condition. Our paradigm operationalised predictive
behaviour through eye gaze and participants’ belief about the board through question-
naire items. This allowed us to explore theoretical accounts which suggest that both
predictive and retrospective processes are important with respect to SoA (Moore and
Fletcher 2012). When looking at the predictive gaze behaviour of individual partici-
pants, participants in the ‘Ouija board condition’ exhibited significant difficulties in
predicting which letters would be ‘picked’ by the planchette compared to the ‘Volun-
tary action condition’ (see Fig. 3). This is also true when we only consider meaningful
responses, where participants logically would have to predict letters in order to
spell the response. In other words, the decreased ability to predict letters in the
‘Ouija condition’ cannot be fully accounted for by non-meaningful responses
which are likely harder to predict. Overall, these findings are in accord with
predictive accounts of SoA, in which the low SoA in Ouija board sessions
arises from a mismatch between the predicted and actual sensory consequences
of an action (Haggard and Chambon 2012; Blakemore et al. 2002).
We found a strong relationship between beliefs about the Ouija board and the
reported experience of the ‘Ouija condition’. Participants who agreed with the state-
ment, BThe Ouija board can be used to contact entities such as spirits, ghost, demons,
angels etc.^, typically also agreed that it felt as if the planchette moved on its own; that
neither they nor the other participants pushed the planchette; and that contact was made
Fig. 3 Probability of predicting letters in meaningful responses as a function of letter number on individual
and pair level
Predictive minds in Ouija board sessions
 with a supernatural agent. Conversely, participants who agreed with the statement,
BThe Ouija board is really driven by the subconscious mind of its users (i.e. the
ideomotor effect)^, typically reported the opposite, namely that it did not feel as if
the planchette moved on its own; that the other participant and, albeit to a lesser degree,
they themselves pushed the planchette deliberately; and that no contact was made with
a supernatural agent. Although our bivariate analysis cannot be used to infer causality,
these finding are nevertheless in accord with a retrospective account of SoA, in which a
general-purpose mechanism retrospectively infers the causal origins of actions and their
effects by relying primarily on external, situational cues and beliefs about the situation
(Wegner 2002; Wegner et al. 2003). In sum, our results accord with recent research
which suggests that both predictive and retrospective processes are important aspects of
SoA (Moore and Fletcher 2012).
Overall, it appears that participants in the ‘Ouija condition’ generally underestimate
their own contribution to the joint interaction. While those who believe in the possi-
bility that the Ouija board can be used to communicate with supernatural agents to a
very large degree attribute agency to something outside the immediate dyad, partici-
pants who believe in the opposite generally report that the other player pushed the
planchette more than they did themselves. This finding accords with recent work on
force escalation. In an experiment, Shergill et al. (2003) instructed participants in pairs
to alternately apply pressure though a force transducer on each other’s hands. Although
participants were instructed to apply the same amount of pressure as had just been
exerted on them, results showed that the forces applied rapidly escalated. As such, these
findings suggest that self-generated forces are generally perceived as weaker than
external forces of the same magnitude (Shergill et al. 2003).
As in the case of Shergill and colleagues, some patterns and dynamics first become
visible when looking at how pairs of participants perform as opposed to individuals in
isolation. In our study, in addition to coding if participants seen in isolation predicted
letters in responses, we also coded predictions on pair level, to see if at minimum one of
the two participants in a pair predicted letters in responses. Individuals seen in isolation
have a much lower probability on average of predicting the letters in the ‘Ouija
condition’ compared to the ‘voluntary action condition’ (Fig. 3). However, when we
look at the pair level, we see that pairs in the ‘Ouija condition’ on average predict the
letters of meaningful responses as well as isolated individuals do when purposely
spelling responses in the ‘voluntary action condition’. In other words, a pair that moves
the Ouija planchette in a predominantly non-deliberate way collectively predict letters
as well as an individual seen in isolation that is moving the planchette on purpose.
While the ability to predict letters remains stable over time on an individual and pair-
based level in the ‘voluntary action condition’, this is not the case in the ‘Ouija
condition’. Although individual participants do not at any point seem to predict letters
as well in this condition as the deliberately produced responses in the ‘Voluntary action
condition’, individuals in the ‘Ouija condition’ do steadily get better at predicting the
letters as meaningful responses unfold over time. The same is true when looking at the
pair level in this condition; while pairs in the ‘Ouija condition’ are less able to predict
the beginnings of meaningful responses from the board compared to individuals in the
‘Voluntary action condition’, they steadily become better at predicting to the point
where, in many cases, they are able to predict letters as well as pairs in the ‘voluntary
action condition’ (see Fig. 3).
M. Andersen et al.
 Our study suggests that successful Ouija board sessions critically depend on joint
action. It also suggests an answer to the apparent paradox of how Ouija users on the one
hand can exhibit difficulties in predicting letters in responses, while on the other hand
are assumed to produce those very same responses themselves. It seems that meaning-
ful responses from the Ouija board are an emergent property of interacting predictive
minds that increasingly impose structure on initially random events in the sessions.
While early letters in a meaningful Ouija board response appear to occur at random,
meaningful word options available to the participants decrease as the response from the
Ouija board unfolds. This, in turn, makes it easier for a pair of participants to
collectively predict (and unconsciously construct) the responses from the Ouija board.
These findings are compatible with research on divinatory practices that claim that such
practices are universally characterised by humans imposing meaning and structure on
random events (Morgan 2016). Our results add to this by showcasing just how
predictive minds in interaction achieve the feat of creating meaningful sensations of
external agency.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the great amount of help and assistance in facilitating data
collection from Robert Murch, chairman of the Talking Boards Historical Society. We would also like to
extend our thanks to Sissel Louise Jørgensen and Cecilie Cedergreen for manually annotating large amounts of
gaze data, and to Cecilie Cedergreen for her additional assistance during the field experiment.
Author contributions
M. Andersen developed the concept of the study. All authors contributed to the study
design. M. Andersen build the eye-tracking equipment and collected the data. T. Pfeiffer wrote software for
data quality extraction. K.L. Neilbo and M. Andersen analysed the data. M. Andersen drafted the manuscript
and U. Schjoedt, A. Roepstorff, and J. Sørensen provided critical revisions.
Funding
This project has been supported by seed funding from the Interacting Minds Centre at Aarhus
University.
Compliance with ethical standards
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and repro-
duction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
[Dataset] Andersen, M., Nielbo, K. L., Schjoedt, U., Pfeiffer, T., Roepstorff, A. & Sørensen, J. (2017).
OuijaCon Dataset, Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/hcb83/). https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.
IO/HCB83
Blakemore, S. J., Wolpert, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2002). Abnormalities in the awareness of action. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6(6), 237–242.
Burgess, C. A., Kirsch, I., Shane, H., Niederauer, K. L., Graham, S. M., & Bacon, A. (1998). Facilitated
communication as an ideomotor response. Psychological Science, 9(1), 71–74.
Predictive minds in Ouija board sessions
 Cabay, M. (1994). Brief report: a controlled evaluation of facilitated communication using open-ended and
fill-in questions. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 24(4), 517–527.
Carruthers, G. (2010). A problem for Wegner and colleagues’ model of the sense of agency. Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences, 9(3), 341–357.
Coyle, D., Moore, J., Kristensson, P. O., Fletcher, P., & Blackwell, A. (2012). I did that! Measuring users'
experience of agency in their own actions. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 2025–2034).
Dewey, J. A., & Carr, T. H. (2013). When dyads act in parallel, a sense of agency for the auditory
consequences depends on the order of the actions. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 155–166.
Haggard, P., & Chambon, V. (2012). Sense of agency. Current Biology, 22(10), R390–R392.
Haggard, P., & Tsakiris, M. (2009). The experience of agency: feelings, judgments, and responsibility. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 18(4), 242–246.
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics,
65–70.
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P.B., & Christensen, R. H. B. (2016). lmerTest: Tests in linear mixed effects
models. R package version 2.0–30. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lmerTest
Lausberg, H., & Sloetjes, H. (2009). Coding gestural behavior with the NEUROGES-ELAN system. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 41(3), 841–849 URL: http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/.
Mardanbegi, D. (2009). Haytham gaze tracker. (https://sourceforge.net/projects/haytham/?source=navbar).
Moore, J. W., & Fletcher, P. C. (2012). Sense of agency in health and disease: a review of cue integration
approaches. Consciousness and Cognition, 21(1), 59–68.
Moore, J. W., & Obhi, S. S. (2012). Intentional binding and the sense of agency: a review. Consciousness and
Cognition, 21(1), 546–561.
Morgan, D. (2016). Divination, material culture, and chance. Material Religion, 12(4), 502–504.
Olson, J. A., Landry, M., Appourchaux, K., & Raz, A. (2016). Simulated thought insertion: influencing the
sense of agency using deception and magic. Consciousness and Cognition, 43, 11–26.
R Core Team. (2016). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/.
Revelle, W. (2016) psych: Procedures for Personality and Psychological Research, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Illinois, USA, https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=psych Version = 1.6.12.
Shergill, S. S., Bays, P. M., Frith, C. D., & Wolpert, D. M. (2003). Two eyes for an eye: the neuroscience of
force escalation. Science, 301(5630), 187–187.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. Cambridge: MITPress.
Wegner, D. M., & Wheatley, T. (1999). Apparent mental causation: sources of the experience of will.
American Psychologist, 54(7), 480–492.
Wegner, D. M., Fuller, V. A., & Sparrow, B. (2003). Clever hands: uncontrolled intelligence in facilitated
communication. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(1), 5–19.
Wheeler, D. L., Jacobson, J. W., Paglieri, R. A., & Schwartz, A. A. (1993). An experimental assessment of
facilitated communication. Mental Retardation, 31(1), 49–59.
M. Andersen et al.
