 Blood-brain barrier permeability is regulated by lipid transport-
dependent suppression of caveolae-mediated transcytosis
Benjamin J. Andreone1, Brian Wai Chow1, Aleksandra Tata1, Baptiste Lacoste1,4, Ayal Ben-
Zvi1,5, Kevin Bullock3, Amy A. Deik3, David D. Ginty1,2, Clary B. Clish3, and Chenghua Gu1,6
1Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 220 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, 
U.S.A
2Howard Hughes Medial Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, U.S.A
3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, U.S.A
Summary
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) provides a constant homeostatic brain environment that is essential 
for proper neural function. An unusually low rate of vesicular transport (transcytosis) has been 
identified as one of the two unique properties of central nervous system (CNS) endothelial cells, 
relative to peripheral endothelial cells, that maintain the restrictive quality of the BBB. However, it 
is not known how this low rate of transcytosis is achieved. Here we provide a mechanism whereby 
the regulation of CNS endothelial cell lipid composition inhibits specifically the caveolae-
mediated transcytotic route readily used in the periphery. An unbiased lipidomic analysis reveals 
significant differences in endothelial cell lipid signatures from the CNS and periphery, which 
underlie a suppression of caveolae vesicle formation and trafficking in brain endothelial cells. 
Furthermore, lipids transported by Mfsd2a establish a unique lipid environment that inhibits 
caveolae vesicle formation in CNS endothelial cells to suppress transcytosis and ensure BBB 
integrity.
Keywords
blood-brain barrier; transcytosis; CNS endothelial cells; caveolae; DHA; lipid transport; Mfsd2a; 
Cav-1; blood vessels; lipidomic mass spectrometry
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to: Chenghua Gu, (chenghua_gu@hms.harvard.edu), Department of 
Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, U.S.A., (Ph) 617-432-6364 (Fax) 617-432-1639.
4Present address: Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, The University of Ottawa Brain and Mind Research Institute, 
Ottawa, Canada.
5Present address: Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research. The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
6Lead Contact.
Author Contributions
B.J.A. and C.G. conceived the project and designed experiments. K.B., A.A.D., and C.C. performed lipidomic mass spectrometry. 
B.J.A., A.T., and B.L. performed all other experiments. A.B.Z. initiated lipidomic experiments. D.D.G. provided experimental 
resources. B.J.A. and B.C. analyzed all data. B.J.A. and C.G. wrote the manuscript, with input from all authors.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2017 May 03; 94(3): 581–594.e5. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.03.043.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Vascular beds throughout the body have developed structural and functional heterogeneity to 
meet the demands of particular organs (Aird, 2007). The central nervous system (CNS) 
requires a constant homeostatic microenvironment that is free of blood-borne toxins, 
allowing for proper synaptic transmission and information processing. The endothelial cells 
that line the walls of CNS blood vessels form a continuous, non-fenestrated vasculature. 
These cells constitute the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which regulates solute flux between 
blood circulation and the brain parenchyma (Andreone et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2015). BBB 
disruption has been implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases (Zhao et 
al., 2015; Zlokovic, 2008). Since BBB functionality is essential for normal brain activity, the 
impermeable nature of the BBB prevents brain uptake of most neurotherapeutic agents 
(Pardridge, 2012). This signifies a major obstacle to drug treatment of CNS diseases.
Pioneering electron microscopy (EM) work by Brightman, Reese, and Karnovsky 
(Brightman and Reese, 1969; Reese and Karnovsky, 1967) identified two structural features 
of CNS endothelial cells that underlie the restrictive properties of the BBB. First, specialized 
tight junctions prevent the paracellular passage of water-soluble molecules from the 
circulatory system to the brain parenchyma. Second, CNS endothelial cells exhibit unusually 
low levels of vesicle trafficking, a phenomenon that has generally been assumed to limit 
transcellular transport (transcytosis). While conventional wisdom has emphasized the 
importance of tight junctions, recent advances have highlighted the regulation of transcytosis 
as a crucial factor in limiting BBB permeability under physiological conditions and after 
pathological assaults (Armulik et al., 2010; Ben-Zvi et al., 2014; Daneman et al., 2010b; 
Knowland et al., 2014). However, the mechanism by which the suppression of transcytosis is 
achieved in CNS endothelial cells is completely unknown. An understanding of how 
transcytosis is regulated to maintain BBB integrity is not only fundamental to understanding 
BBB function, but also to developing therapeutic strategies to open transiently the BBB for 
CNS drug delivery.
Transcytotic pathways in epithelial and endothelial cells fall into two categories: clathrin-
mediated and non-clathrin-mediated (Mayor et al., 2014). The mechanisms of clathrin-
mediated vesicle trafficking are the most-studied; these studies have identified the transferrin 
receptor-mediated transcytosis of iron as a key pathway that has been targeted for 
manipulation at the BBB for drug delivery (Bien-Ly et al., 2014; Niewoehner et al., 2014). 
Non-clathrin-mediated vesicle trafficking pathways utilize a broad range of large- and small-
scale membrane invaginations that harness diverse cellular machinery, including dynamin, 
coat proteins, small GTPases, and RhoGAP proteins (Mayor et al., 2014). Among the many 
non-clathrin-mediated pathways, caveolae-mediated vesicle trafficking predominates as a 
transcytotic route used in the endothelial cells of peripheral organs, including heart and lung, 
to transport solutes from the blood to underlying tissue (Oh et al., 2007; Oh et al., 2014; 
Predescu et al., 1997; Schubert et al., 2001). Caveolae are 50–100 nm invaginations in the 
plasma membrane (Bastiani and Parton, 2010). The plasma membrane domains that form 
caveolae vesicles are highly ordered and enriched in saturated phospholipids, sphingolipids, 
ethanolamine plasmalogens (PE-p), and cholesterol (Parton and del Pozo, 2013; Pike et al., 
2002). Additionally, the formation of caveolae vesicles requires the activity of both caveolin 
Andreone et al.
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 coat proteins and cytosolic adaptor proteins belonging to the cavin family (Bastiani and 
Parton, 2010). Although diverse functions have been identified for caveolae, their 
physiological role in different cell types and tissues is not fully understood (Cheng and 
Nichols, 2015).
Previously, we established that Major facilitator superfamily domain containing 2a (Mfsd2a) 
is a key regulator for BBB function (Ben-Zvi et al., 2014). Mfsd2a is specifically expressed 
in CNS endothelial cells. Genetic ablation of Mfsd2a in mice results in a leaky BBB, as 
extravasation of several intravenously injected tracers, including 10kD- and 70kD-dextrans, 
NHS-biotin, and horseradish peroxidase (HRP), into the brain parenchyma is observed in 
Mfsd2a−/− mice from embryonic stages through adulthood. EM examination of brain 
endothelial cells from Mfsd2a−/− mice reveals increased transcytosis, as the intracellular 
vesicle number significantly increases. Additionally, HRP-injected mutants exhibit HRP-
filled vesicles invaginating from the luminal plasma membrane, within the endothelial cell 
cytoplasm, and exocytosing at the abluminal plasma membrane. While these Mfsd2a−/− 
mice have transcytotic defects, their tight junctions are normal. These findings demonstrate 
that Mfsd2a is specifically required to regulate transcytosis in CNS endothelial cells of the 
BBB and that the tracer extravasation observed in Mfsd2a−/− mice is solely due to increased 
levels of transcytotic vesicles within these cells. Therefore, Mfsd2a may serve as an ideal 
molecular handle to understand the mechanism by which transcytosis is regulated at the 
BBB.
There are several potential mechanisms whereby Mfsd2a regulates transcytosis in CNS 
endothelial cells, such as affecting transcytotic machinery via direct or indirect physical 
interactions or via controlling plasma membrane tension. Interestingly, in addition to its role 
in BBB function, Mfsd2a has been identified as a lipid transporter at the luminal plasma 
membrane of CNS endothelial cells to deliver the essential omega-3 fatty acid 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) into the brain (Nguyen et al., 2014). However, how DHA 
travels from the CNS endothelial cell plasma membrane to neurons is undetermined. DHA is 
heavily implicated in brain development (Innis, 2007), and indeed, Mfsd2a−/− mice have 
reduced total brain levels of DHA species and exhibit microcephaly (Nguyen et al., 2014). 
Therefore, although there is no existing example of lipids in endothelial cells playing a role 
in BBB function, examining if Mfsd2a’s lipid transport function is related to BBB integrity 
will help narrow down the possible mechanisms of Mfsd2a-mediated regulation of 
transcytosis.
In this study, we show how transcytosis is suppressed in CNS endothelial cells to ensure 
proper BBB function by focusing on Mfsd2a. Using a combination of mouse genetics, 
lipidomic mass spectrometry, and EM analysis, we elucidate a pathway underlying the 
cellular mechanism of BBB function: lipids transported by Mfsd2a create a unique lipid 
composition of CNS endothelial cells that inhibits specifically caveolae-mediated 
transcytosis to maintain BBB integrity. Moreover, unbiased lipidomic analyses reveal that 
the lipid signatures of endothelial cells from the CNS and the periphery exhibit significant 
differences, which underlie the suppression of caveolae vesicle formation and trafficking in 
brain endothelial cells. Thus, this study establishes that lipid composition of CNS 
Andreone et al.
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 endothelial cells serves as a key new player in the regulation of transcytosis and barrier 
permeability.
Results
Mfsd2a Cell-Autonomously Suppresses Vesicular Pit Formation and Cargo Uptake at the 
Plasma Membrane
To understand how transcytosis is regulated at the BBB, we first asked whether Mfsd2a is 
sufficient to suppress endocytic vesicle formation, the first step of all transcytotic pathways. 
Mfsd2a was expressed using lentivirus with high efficiency in the immortalized mouse brain 
endothelial cell line bEnd.3, in which endogenous Mfsd2a expression was not detectable 
(Figure 1A). Exogenous expression of Mfsd2a displayed cell surface localization in bEnd.3 
cells (Figure 1B), as well as cytoplasmic puncta, as seen in other cell lines (Nguyen et al., 
2014; Reiling et al., 2011). Electron microscopy revealed a reduction in the number of apical 
(analogous to luminal) micro-invaginations (pits) in cells expressing Mfsd2a compared to 
mock infected control cells (Figures 1C–1E, Table S4A). A similar reduction in vesicular pit 
number was observed in a human pancreatic cancer cell line, PANC-1, stably transfected 
with human MFSD2A-GFP, compared to control cells stably transfected with GFP alone 
(Figures 1F–1H, Table S4A). These findings suggest that Mfsd2a expression is sufficient to 
inhibit vesicle formation.
To further assess whether Mfsd2a can directly inhibit cargo uptake, we next loaded 
confluent bEnd.3 cell cultures with a fluorescent cholera toxin subunit-B (CTB) tracer 
(Figures 1I and 1J). Cells that express mouse Mfsd2a-GFP exhibited a 50% reduction in 
CTB uptake, as quantified by fluorescence intensity (Figure 1L), compared to cells that 
express GFP alone (Figure 1K). Use of the GFP-tagged constructs did not affect Mfsd2a 
protein localization (Reiling et al., 2011) (data not shown), and allowed for identification of 
positively transfected cells without quenching of the CTB fluorescence due to 
immunostaining protocol. These gain-of-function results are consistent with previous in vivo 
loss-of-function data (Ben-Zvi et al., 2014), and together demonstrate that Mfsd2a is 
necessary and sufficient for the suppression of vesicle formation and cargo uptake, cellular 
processes underlying transcytosis. Furthermore, they suggest that Mfsd2a acts via a direct 
mechanism to suppress CNS endothelial cell transcytosis in a cell-autonomous manner.
Mfsd2a Lipid Transport Function is Required for Suppression of Transcytosis and BBB 
Integrity
To investigate how Mfsd2a may act directly at the CNS endothelial cell plasma membrane to 
regulate vesicle trafficking, we first asked whether the reported lipid transport function of 
Mfsd2a is required to suppress transcytosis. Although there is no known role of lipids in 
CNS endothelial cells for BBB function, answering this question will help to narrow down 
and pinpoint Mfsd2a’s precise mechanism of action. Specifically to address this question, 
we generated a transporter-dead Mfsd2a knock-in mouse as an in vivo tool. Asp96 is a 
conserved amino acid required for the cation binding that is crucial for transporter activity in 
MFS family members (Ethayathulla et al., 2014), and the D96A aspartic acid to alanine 
point mutation abolishes Mfsd2a transport function in vitro (Nguyen et al., 2014; Reiling et 
Andreone et al.
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 al., 2011). A mouse line harboring the Mfsd2aD96A mutation in the endogenous Mfsd2a 
locus was generated via CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Specifically, one amino acid change 
resulting in the D96A missense mutation was introduced into exon 3 of Mfsd2a (Figures 2A, 
S1B, and S1C). Importantly, there was no observable difference in Mfsd2a expression 
pattern in Mfsd2aD96A/D96A (hereafter denoted as Mfsd2aD96A) mutants compared to 
Mfsd2a+/+ littermates by immunohistochemistry of neocortex and cerebellum (Figures 2B, 
2C, S1D, and S1E). No difference in Mfsd2a expression was observed by Western blot 
analysis of brain lysate (Figures 2F and 2G), indicating that Mfsd2aD96A mutants express 
normal levels of Mfsd2a protein. Finally, Mfsd2a expression was restricted to BBB-
containing CNS vasculature in Mfsd2aD96A mutants, and was absent in non-BBB-containing 
vasculature of peripheral organs, including the lung and liver (Figures 2E and S1G), similar 
to Mfsd2a+/+ littermates (Figures 2D and S1F).
To examine the effect of the Mfsd2aD96A mutation on the lipid transport function of Mfsd2a 
in vivo, we performed lipidomic mass spectrometry on brain lysate at postnatal stages. 
Lipidomic analysis of brain lysate revealed an altered lipid profile in Mfsd2aD96A mutants 
(Figure S2A), with the level of a broad range of phospholipid species changed at postnatal 
day 4 (P4), including but not limited to DHA-containing species. Importantly, the lipid 
profile of Mfsd2aD96A mutant brains closely mimicked that of Mfsd2a−/− mice, as the 
Mfsd2a−/−/Mfsd2a+/+ log-ratio was very similar to the Mfsd2aD96A/Mfsd2a+/+ log-ratio of 
phospholipid levels measured by mass spectrometry (Figures 2H, S2A, and S2B, Tables S1 
and S2). Together, these data demonstrate that the Mfsd2aD96A mutation abolishes the lipid 
transport function of Mfsd2a in vivo without affecting protein expression, resulting in a lipid 
profile similar to that observed through global loss of Mfsd2a. Finally, Mfsd2aD96A mutants 
exhibited microcephaly at P4 (Figure 2I), recapitulating the phenotype observed in 
Mfsd2a−/− mice (Nguyen et al., 2014) and confirming that Mfsd2a lipid transport function is 
required for brain development.
With this new genetic tool, we next asked if Mfsd2a lipid transport function is necessary for 
suppression of transcytosis and control of BBB permeability. Previously, it was shown that 
Mfsd2a−/− mice exhibit BBB leakage that is due to increased levels of transcytosis in CNS 
endothelial cells (Ben-Zvi et al., 2014). As an increased vesicle number in CNS endothelial 
cells is the hallmark of the increased transcytosis phenotype observed in Mfsd2a−/− mice, we 
examined vesicle number in Mfsd2aD96A mutants at P4 using EM (Figures 3A–3D). 
Mfsd2aD96A mutants exhibited a significant increase in density of both luminal and 
abluminal membrane-connected vesicles (Figures 3E, 3F, Table S4B), similar to the 
phenotype observed in Mfsd2a−/− mice, indicating an up-regulation of transcytosis. We next 
injected HRP into adult Mfsd2aD96A mutants and Mfsd2a+/+ littermates and examined sub-
cellular tracer localization. While HRP tracer was confined to the vessel lumen in Mfsd2a+/+ 
mice (Figures 3G and 3H), tracer in Mfsd2aD96A mutants was observed being taken up into 
intracellular vesicles at the luminal plasma membrane, within the cytoplasm, and at the 
abluminal plasma membrane (Figures 3I and 3J), indicating that the upregulated vesicles in 
Mfsd2aD96A mutants act as transcytotic carriers. In both Mfsd2a+/+ wild-type littermates and 
Mfsd2aD96A mice, HRP tracer entered the space between CNS endothelial cells but was 
sharply halted at tight junction “kissing points” (Figures 3K and 3L), indicating that tight 
junctions are functional. Together, these data demonstrate that loss of Msfd2a transport 
Andreone et al.
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 function results in increased CNS endothelial cell transcytosis, without impacting tight 
junction integrity.
To determine whether the observed increased transcytosis results in BBB leakage in 
Mfsd2aD96A mutants, we performed intravenous injection of fluorescent tracer at P4 and 
examined tracer localization as a metric of BBB integrity. We chose 10kD-dextran tracer for 
analysis, as robust extravasation of this tracer was previously observed in Mfsd2a−/− mice 
(Ben-Zvi et al., 2014). While tracer was completely confined within the vasculature of 
Mfsd2a+/+ littermate control animals (Figure 3M), tracer extravasation was observed 
throughout the brain of Mfsd2aD96A mutants (Figure 3N), with tracer diffused into the brain 
parenchyma and taken up by non-vascular cells. Permeability index quantification (defined 
as area of tracer/area of vessels) revealed a statistically significant increase of BBB leakage 
in Mfsd2aD96A mutants compared to Mfsd2a+/+ controls (Figure 3O). BBB leakage in 
Mfsd2aD96A mutants persisted into adulthood, as HRP tracer extravasation into the forebrain 
parenchyma was observed at P90 (Figures S3A and S3B). Taken together, these data 
demonstrate that BBB leakage occurs in Mfsd2aD96A mice via increased transcytosis, 
similar to Mfsd2a−/− mice. Furthermore, they strongly implicate the lipid transport function 
of Mfsd2a in the suppression of vesicle trafficking.
Brain Capillaries Possess a Lipid Signature Underlying Suppression of Caveolae
Our results demonstrate that Mfsd2a cell-autonomously suppresses vesicle trafficking via a 
lipid transport-dependent mechanism. This raises the possibility that lipid transport directly 
affects the membrane lipid composition of CNS endothelial cells, which in turn may result 
in the suppression of transcytosis at the BBB. To further understand the link between lipids 
and vesicle trafficking, we next asked whether the lipid composition of CNS endothelial 
cells, a previously unexplored facet of BBB function, shows any differences compared to 
peripheral endothelial cells. To investigate this possibility, we performed lipidomic mass 
spectrometry analysis on acutely isolated capillaries from brain and lung of wild-type mice 
at P4. Lung vasculature does not possess the restrictive barrier properties of CNS 
vasculature, and lung endothelial cells are enriched in transcytotic vesicles, which have been 
shown to transport cargo from the circulation to the lung parenchyma (Ghitescu et al., 1986; 
Oh et al., 2007; Schubert et al., 2001). Western blot analysis showed that this capillary 
preparation is highly enriched in endothelial cells in both brain and lung, indicated by an 
abundance of VE-cadherin protein compared to total tissue lysate (Figure S4B). Residual 
pericytes were present in both brain and lung capillary preparations, and importantly, the 
brain capillary preparation was free of both neurons (NeuN) and astrocyte endfeet 
(Aquaporin-4) (Figures S4A and S4B).
Lipidomic analysis revealed that although most lipid species were found at similar levels in 
isolated brain and lung capillaries, significant differences in several lipid species were 
observed (Figures 4A and S4C, Table S3). Remarkably, one of the most significantly 
enriched lipid populations in brain capillaries was DHA-containing phospholipid species in 
lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine 
(PE), and phosphatidylserine (PS) subclasses, ranging from 1.9– to 5.1-fold enrichment 
(Figure 4B). Significant enrichment of a few non-DHA-containing lipids, such as C34:0 PC 
Andreone et al.
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and C38:4 PE was also observed in brain capillaries (Figure 4A). On the other hand, modest 
decreases in several ethanolamine plasmalogen (PE-p) species were observed in brain 
capillaries compared to lung capillaries (Figure S5A). Although both the acutely isolated 
brain and lung capillary preparations retained residual pericytes, it unlikely that these cells 
contribute to the observed differences in lipid signature, as pericytes do not express Mfsd2a 
(Ben-Zvi et al., 2014), the only known DHA transporter in the brain, there is no evidence 
that pericytes are able to synthesize DHA de novo, and both brain and lung capillary 
preparations were highly enriched in endothelial cells.
Notably, lung endothelial cells have abundant caveolae vesicles that can act as transcytotic 
carriers (Ghitescu et al., 1986; Oh et al., 2007; Schubert et al., 2001). The formation and 
functionality of caveolae membrane domains can be affected by plasma membrane lipid 
composition (Lingwood and Simons, 2010; Parton and del Pozo, 2013). In particular, DHA 
is a highly unsaturated fatty acid that disrupts liquid-ordered caveolae domains, normally 
enriched in saturated phospholipids, sphingolipids, PE-p species, and cholesterol. DHA 
displaces Caveolin-1 (Cav-1), a coat protein of the caveolin family that is obligatory for 
caveolae vesicle formation, from the plasma membrane. Thus, enrichment of DHA in the 
plasma membrane renders caveolae membrane domains less capable of forming caveolae 
vesicles (Chen et al., 2007; Li et al., 2007; Ma et al., 2004). Therefore, the lipid composition 
of brain capillaries enriched in DHA species and low in PE-p species may reflect a plasma 
membrane microenvironment in CNS endothelial cells that is unfavorable for the assembly 
of functional caveolae domains and subsequent vesicle formation. Together, these analyses 
reveal significant differences in the lipid signature of BBB-containing brain capillaries 
versus non-BBB-containing lung capillaries, some of which may contribute to the 
suppression of transcytosis at the BBB by inhibiting caveolae vesicle formation and 
trafficking in CNS endothelial cells.
Significantly reduced levels of several triglycerides (TAG), and cholesteryl esters (CE) 
species were observed in brain capillaries versus lung capillaries (Figures S5B and S5C). 
TAG and CE are stored in intracellular lipid droplets (Guo et al., 2009), and both in vitro and 
in vivo evidence suggests that the storage of these lipids depends on caveolae vesicle 
trafficking (Cohen et al., 2004; Martin and Parton, 2005; Pol et al., 2004). Therefore, low 
levels of TAG and CE in brain capillaries may reflect a low level of caveolae trafficking. 
Together these observations raise the possibility that caveolae vesicles may be the subtype 
increased in CNS endothelial cells that accounts for the leaky BBB in Mfsd2a−/− mice.
Caveolae Vesicle Trafficking is Upregulated in Mfsd2a−/− Mice
To test this hypothesis, we performed Cav-1 immuno-electron microscopy labeling in brains 
of Mfsd2a−/− mice and control littermates (Figures 5A–5H). Cav-1 immunoreactivity (gold 
particles) was seen along the luminal plasma membrane in CNS endothelial cells of 
Mfsd2a+/+ control mice, whereas immunoreactivity in Mfsd2a−/− mice was observed along 
the luminal and abluminal plasma membranes (Figure 5G), and surrounding vesicle 
structures in the cytoplasm (Figure 5H). Additionally, there was a significant increase in the 
number of Cav-1-positive vesicles in CNS endothelial cells of Mfsd2a−/− mice compared to 
controls (Figure 5I, Table S4C). These data suggest that caveolae vesicle trafficking is 
Andreone et al.
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 upregulated in mice lacking Mfsd2a, and that Mfsd2a may normally act to suppress 
caveolae-mediated transcytosis in CNS endothelial cells.
Caveolae-mediated Transcytosis is Specifically Suppressed Downstream of Mfsd2a 
Function at the BBB in vivo
To directly test the idea that the caveolae-mediated transcytosis pathway is suppressed 
downstream of Mfsd2a function at the BBB, we performed a genetic rescue experiment by 
crossing Mfsd2a−/− with Cav-1−/− mice, as Cav-1 is obligatory for caveolae formation. 
While Cav-1−/− mice are viable, they are unable to form caveolae vesicle structures and 
display defects in cargo uptake in vivo (Razani et al., 2001; Schubert et al., 2001). If the 
caveolae pathway is downstream of Mfsd2a in vivo, then crossing Cav-1−/− mice with 
Mfsd2a−/− mice should reverse the upregulated transcytosis seen in Mfsd2a−/− mice, as CNS 
endothelial cells of Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− double knockouts will no longer be able to form 
caveolae vesicles to act as transcytotic carriers. Alternatively, if Mfsd2a suppresses other 
transcytotic pathways, increased transcytosis will still be observed in Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− 
double knockouts.
Similar to previous results (Ben-Zvi et al., 2014), EM analysis revealed occasional vesicles 
in Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1+/+ wild-type CNS endothelial cells at P5 (Figures 6A and 6B), with an 
over 2.5-fold increase in total luminal and abluminal membrane-connected vesicle density in 
Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ single knockouts (Figures 6C–6D and 6I–6J). Consistent with the 
finding that Cav-1−/− mice are unable to form caveolae vesicles, we observed a nearly 2-fold 
decrease in vesicle density in Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− single knockouts compared to wild-type 
levels (Figures 6E–6F and 6I–6J). However, in Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− double knockouts, a 
complete reversal of the Mfsd2a−/− single mutant phenotype was evident, with vesicle 
density mimicking that of Cav-1−/− single mutants (Figures 6G–6J, Table S4D). Therefore, 
the caveolae-mediated transcytosis pathway is the one that is normally suppressed by 
Mfsd2a. In contrast, no significant difference in the density of clathrin-coated pits, identified 
under EM by the presence of an electron dense clathrin coat (Figure S6A), was observed in 
Mfsd2a−/−, Cav-1−/−, Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/−, or Mfsd2aD96A mutants compared to their 
littermate controls (Figure S6B–S6E, Tables S4E and S4F). Together, these data demonstrate 
that Mfsd2a acts upstream of Cav-1 specifically to suppress the caveolae vesicle trafficking 
pathway at the BBB.
Finally, we asked if caveolae-mediated transcytosis is required for regulating BBB 
permeability by examining whether genetic loss of Cav-1 is able to rescue the BBB leakage 
observed in the brains of Mfsd2a−/− mice. To evaluate BBB permeability, we again 
examined 10kD-dextran tracer localization in the brain after intravenous injection at P5. 
Tracer was confined within the brain vasculature of Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1+/+ wild-type and 
Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− single knockouts, indicating no BBB leakage in these mice (Figures 6K 
and 6M). Tracer extravasation was observed in Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ single knockouts, as 
tracer diffused into the brain and was taken up by non-vascular parenchymal cells (Figure 
6L). A significant increase in the permeability index quantification of Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ 
single knockouts was observed, compared to both Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1+/+ wild-type and 
Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− single knockouts (Figure 6O). However, no leakage was observed in 
Andreone et al.
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− double knockouts, as tracer was confined within the brain vasculature 
and the permeability index quantification revealed no significant difference to that of both 
Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1+/+ wild-type and Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− single knockouts (Figures 6N, 6O). 
This observed rescue of BBB leakage was also evidenced at adult stages, as extravasation of 
HRP tracer into the forebrain parenchyma was observed in Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ single 
knockouts (Figure S3D), but not wild-type, Cav-1−/− single knockout, or Mfsd2a−/−; 
Cav-1−/− double knockout mice at P90 (Figures S3C, S3E, and S3F). Consistent with 
previous findings (Knowland et al., 2014), we found that tight junctions were functional in 
Cav-1−/− mice, as HRP tracer was halted at tight junction “kissing points” in both Cav-1 
mutants (Figures S7C and S7D) and wild-type littermates (Figures S7A and S7B) under EM. 
Together with our vesicle density analysis, these data indicate that increased caveolae vesicle 
trafficking results in the BBB leakage observed in Mfsd2a−/− mice, as genetic loss of Cav-1 
was able to rescue tracer extravasation. Furthermore, of the numerous vesicular trafficking 
pathways currently known, these data demonstrate that Mfsd2a maintains BBB integrity by 
specifically suppressing the caveolae-mediated transcytotic pathway.
Caveolae-mediated Transcytosis is Not Required for Mfsd2a-mediated Transport of DHA 
into the Brain Parenchyma for Brain Development
Interestingly, although Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− double knockouts were able to rescue the BBB 
defects seen in Mfsd2a−/− mice, they were unable to rescue the microcephaly phenotype 
(Figure 7). Thus, the caveolae pathway downstream of Mfsd2a in CNS endothelial cells 
specifically controls transcytosis and BBB function, but is not required for Mfsd2a-mediated 
transport of DHA into the brain parenchyma for proper brain development. Our analysis of 
the Mfsd2aD96A mouse together with the comparative brain and lung capillary lipidomic 
profiling indicate that the suppression of the caveolae pathway requires the transport of 
lipids, notably DHA-containing phospholipids, by Mfsd2a to regulate CNS endothelial cell 
plasma membrane composition and inhibit caveolae vesicle formation.
Discussion
While it was observed nearly 50 years ago that CNS endothelial cells exhibit unusually low 
levels of transcytotic vesicles (Brightman and Reese, 1969; Reese and Karnovsky, 1967), it 
has remained poorly understood whether this low rate of transcytosis is important for BBB 
function, what type of vesicles are involved, and how vesicle formation and transcytosis are 
maintained at low levels in brain endothelial cells. In this study, we reveal that the unique 
membrane lipid composition of CNS endothelial cells regulates BBB permeability by 
suppressing caveolae-mediated transcytosis. Our findings support a model in which Mfsd2a-
mediated transport of DHA controls the luminal plasma membrane DHA lipid composition 
of CNS endothelial cells such that it actively prevents the formation of functional caveolae 
membrane domains (Figures 8A and 8B). Thus, unlike lung endothelial cells, which have 
low levels of DHA and display high levels of transcytotic caveolae vesicles, Mfsd2a-
mediated lipid transport into CNS endothelial cells renders them less capable of forming 
caveolae vesicles to act as transcytotic carriers. As a result, the BBB is functional. Together, 
these findings uncover a mechanism for the suppression of transcytosis in CNS endothelial 
Andreone et al.
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells to maintain BBB integrity, and reveal an essential role for the precise control of 
membrane lipid composition in the regulation of BBB permeability.
The Unique Lipid Composition of CNS Endothelial Cells Underlies BBB Function
Although the field has successfully identified several key gene and protein regulators for 
BBB function (Ben-Zvi et al., 2014; Chow and Gu, 2015; Daneman et al., 2010a; Junge et 
al., 2009; Liebner et al., 2008; Sohet et al., 2015; Tam et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2014), the 
question of whether lipids can regulate BBB function has yet to be examined. Our 
demonstration of the in vivo requirement of the lipid transport function of Mfsd2a for the 
suppression of transcytosis and BBB permeability, coupled with our result of lipidomic 
profiling of capillaries from brain versus lung, reveal lipid composition of CNS endothelial 
cells as a key regulator for BBB function. Previous work on Mfsd2a has focused on the 
deleterious consequences of decreased DHA levels in brain parenchymal cells, such as 
behavioral abnormalities and microcephaly (Alakbarzade et al., 2015; Guemez-Gamboa et 
al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2014). Our results demonstrate an additional direct functional role 
of DHA transport at the CNS endothelial cell luminal plasma membrane, the site of Mfsd2a 
expression in the brain, for suppression of caveolae transcytosis and maintenance of BBB 
integrity. Besides DHA species, C34:0 PC and C38:4 PE are also significantly enriched in 
brain capillaries relative to lung capillaries, and their function at the BBB remains to be 
determined. Together, our Mfsd2aD96A mouse model and brain versus lung lipidomic 
profiling illuminate a previously unknown role of CNS endothelial cell lipid composition in 
BBB integrity. These findings may usher in new lines of research into how the metabolomic, 
in addition to the proteomic, signature of CNS endothelial cells regulates BBB function.
Suppression of Caveolae-Mediated Transcytosis is Essential for BBB Function
Compared to the relatively well-studied mechanisms of clathrin-mediated vesicle trafficking, 
the physiology of caveolae is less understood. Caveolae have multiple putative functions at 
the plasma membrane, including cell signal transduction, mechanosensation, lipid 
metabolism, and plasma membrane organization, and their physiological role in different 
cell types and tissues is not fully clear (Cheng and Nichols, 2015; Parton and del Pozo, 
2013). While endothelial cells in peripheral organs, such as the lung and heart, are enriched 
in caveolae, and previous studies have demonstrated that caveolae vesicles act as transcytotic 
carriers in these peripheral organ endothelial cells (Ghitescu et al., 1986; Oh et al., 2007; Oh 
et al., 2014; Schubert et al., 2001), there remains a long-standing debate as to what role, if 
any, caveolae play in transcytosis. In particular, recent in vitro studies have challenged the 
notion that caveolae significantly contribute to endocytic or transcytotic flux (Bitsikas et al., 
2014; Shvets et al., 2015). Our genetic rescue experiments demonstrate that the presence of 
transcytotic caveolae vesicles account for BBB leakage in the absence of Mfsd2a, and thus 
assign a physiological role to caveolae-mediated transcytosis in CNS endothelial cells to 
regulate BBB permeability.
Regulated Lipid Composition Suppresses Caveolae-Mediated Transcytosis for BBB 
Function
The mutation of a single amino acid caused Mfsd2aD96A transporter-dead mice to 
phenocopy the increased transcytosis and BBB leakage defects observed in Mfsd2a−/− 
Andreone et al.
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 global knockout mice. Our unbiased lipidomic analysis showing DHA species as one of the 
most significantly enriched lipid populations in brain capillaries compared to lung capillaries 
further point to a direct role of DHA in the suppression of caveolae vesicles. How does DHA 
inhibit caveolae vesicles? Caveolae formation depends on both Cav-1 and cholesterol 
(Lingwood and Simons, 2010; Parton and del Pozo, 2013). Our findings support previous 
studies that have shown that DHA treatment of human retinal endothelial cells and human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells resulted in a significant depletion of cholesterol in the 
membrane as well as the displacement of Cav-1 and several signaling proteins resident in 
caveolae (Chen et al., 2007; Li et al., 2007). Moreover, in vivo studies show that feeding 
mice with omega 3 fatty acid enriched diet resulted in a concomitant reduction of cholesterol 
and Cav-1 in mouse colon epithelium (Ma et al., 2004). Therefore, it is likely that in CNS 
endothelial cells, Mfsd2a acts as a lipid flippase (Quek, et al., 2016), transporting 
phospholipids, including DHA-containing species, from the outer to the inner plasma 
membrane leaflet. The increased levels of DHA in the inner plasma membrane leaflet 
subsequently cause the displacement of cholesterol and Cav-1, thereby inhibiting caveolae 
formation. It is plausible that DHA enrichment in the plasma membranes results in higher 
membrane fluidity and low membrane curvature that is not favorable for caveolae formation.
In light of the emerging evidence in both the normal and diseased brain that transcytosis 
represents a major mechanism for BBB function (Armulik et al., 2010; Ben-Zvi et al., 2014; 
Chow and Gu, 2017; Daneman et al., 2010b; Haley and Lawrence, 2016; Knowland et al., 
2014), our work provides a mechanistic understanding of how transcytotic pathways are 
suppressed in the CNS to ensure this function. Future studies, including examining the effect 
of acute removal of Mfsd2a function in adult mice and the effect of dietary manipulation of 
lipids on transcytosis and BBB permeability will shed new light on the development of new 
therapeutic strategies. It has been postulated that Mfsd2a may serve to modulate transcytotic 
mechanisms in CNS endothelial cells for therapeutic purposes (Betsholtz, 2014; Zhao and 
Zlokovic, 2014). By pinpointing the specific transcytotic route that Mfsd2a suppresses, and 
by illuminating a novel role of membrane lipid metabolism in BBB function, this work may 
prompt the development of new strategies to deliver drugs to the diseased CNS, potentially 
via the use of lipid-based biologics to “de-repress” the caveolae pathway.
STAR Methods
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Chenghua Gu (chenghua_gu@hms.harvard.edu)
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Animal Models—All mice were group housed in standard vivarium conditions, with ad 
libitum access to diet and water. Mfsd2a-null mice (MMRRC strain 032467-UCD; RRID: 
MGI:5755244) were maintained on a mixed B6/129 background and were used to test the 
involvement of Mfsd2a in transcytosis and BBB permeability. Cav-1-null mice (JAX: 
004585; RRID:IMSR_JAX:004585, mixed B6/129 background) were used to test the 
involvement of caveolae-mediated transcytosis in BBB permeability.
Andreone et al.
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mfsd2aD96A mice were generated at HHMI Janelia Farm. The D96A mutation was 
generated using the following: gRNA sequence 5′-
GCCTTCACTGACCCTCTGGTGGG-3′, donor oligonucleotide sequence 5′-
TGCTTCTTCCCCATGGCAGGTGGAACCACTTCCTGCTTCCATTATCCTTTTTGT 
GGGCCGAGCCTGGGATGCCTTCACTGCCCCACTAGTGGGCTTCTGCATTAGC 
AAGTCCTCCTGGACCCGCCTGGGCCGCCTCATGCCCTGGTAAGTAGAGACGC 
TCCTTCGAAG-3′, and cas9 protein (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #NC0789474 ), with an 
injection concentration: Cas9/gRNA/donor oligonucleotide = 100ng/100ng/20ng/μl. The 
mouse strain B6SJF1/J (JAX: 100012) was used for injection, with an injection efficiency of 
62.5% (20/32). Founder Mfsd2aD96A mice were backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice (Charles 
River) for three generations prior to analysis. The open-access online tool, CCTop (Stemmer 
et al., 2015) was used to analyze the possibility of off-target DSBs in Mfsd2aD96A mice. The 
possibility of off-target mutations was experimentally assessed by Sanger sequencing of 
genomic DNA flanking top potential off-target sequences, with no mutations found in 
Mfsd2aD96A genomic DNA. A 250 bp PCR product containing Mfsd2a exon 3 was 
amplified using the following primers: 5′-TTGGTGGTTCAGCTGTGCCA-3′ and 5′-
GACACCAGAAGCCTGCCTTT-3′, and Sanger sequenced with 5′-
ATGCTCCGCTAAGGCAATGA-3′ to confirm generation of the D96A point mutation and 
SpeI restriction site. For genotyping, PCR products were digested with SpeI and run on 
agarose gels to test for the presence of the Mfsd2aD96A allele.
No animal randomization was performed and both male and female mice were used for 
experiments and no sex-based differences in phenotype were observed. Animals were 
genotyped via allele-specific PCR reactions and experiments were performed with observer 
not blinded to genotype. Information regarding the age of mice used for each specific 
experiment can be found in the Results and Figure Legends.
All animals were treated according to institutional and US National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) guidelines approved by the International Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) 
at Harvard Medical School.
Cell lines—HEK293T (ATCC, #CRL-3216) and bEnd.3 (ATCC, #CRL-2299) cells were 
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin in 5% CO2 
at 37°C. Cell lines were obtained directly from ATCC, with no additional cell authentication 
performed. PANC-1 cells stably transfected with human MFSD2A-GFP (Reiling et al., 
2011) we a obtained from Dr. David Sabatini and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 
10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 2μg/ml puromycin in 5% CO2 at 37°C.
Method Details
Lipid profiling—Lipids from whole brain, and brain and lung isolated capillary lysates 
were profiled using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) method 
operated on a Nexera X2 U-HPLC (Shimadzu Scientific Instruments) coupled to an Exactive 
Plus orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, tissue samples were homogenized in a 
weight proportional volume of water (4μl/mg of tissue) using a TissueLyser II (QIAGEN). 
Equal starting amounts of tissue homogenate were used as starting material for all mass 
Andreone et al.
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spectrometry. Lipids were extracted from homogenates (10 μl) using 190 μl of isopropanol 
containing 1,2-didodecanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine as an internal standard (Avanti 
Polar Lipids). After centrifugation (10 min, 10,000 x g, ambient temperature), supernatants 
(2 μl) were injected directly onto a 100 × 2.1 mm ACQUITY BEH C8 column (1.7 μm; 
Waters). The column was eluted at a flow rate of 450 μL/min isocratically for 1 minute at 
80% mobile phase A (95:5:0.1 vol/vol/vol 10 mM ammonium acetate/methanol/formic 
acid), followed by a linear gradient to 80% mobile-phase B (99.9:0.1 vol/vol methanol/
formic acid) over 2 minutes, a linear gradient to 100% mobile phase B over 7 minutes, and 
then 3 minutes at 100% mobile-phase B. MS analyses were carried out using electrospray 
ionization in the positive ion mode using full scan analysis over m/z 200–1100 at 70,000 
resolution and 3 Hz data acquisition rate. Additional MS settings were: ion spray voltage, 
3.0 kV; capillary temperature, 300°C; probe heater temperature, 300 °C; sheath gas, 50; 
sweep gas, 5; and S-lens RF level 60. Raw data were processed using TraceFinder 3.2 
software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to integrate extracted ion chromatograms for 
approximately 240 lipids characterized by headgroup and total acyl chain carbon and double 
bound content. For data analysis, all individual lipid levels (integrated peak area) were 
normalized to internal standard values prior to statistical testing. Average values of 
integrated peak area were used for comparisons between conditions for each lipid species.
Immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry—Mouse tissues were fixed by 
immersion in 4% PFA/PBS overnight at 4°C, cryopreserved in 30% sucrose, and frozen in 
TissueTek OCT (Sakura). Tissue sections were blocked with 10% goat serum/5% BSA/
PBST (0.5% Triton X-100) and stained overnight at 4°C with the following primary 
antibodies: α-Mfsd2a (1:200, Cell Signaling Technologies; RRID:AB_2617168), α-
PECAM (1:200, BD Biosciences #553370; RRID:AB_394816), α-Claudin-5-488 conjugate 
(1:300, Thermo Fisher Scientific #352588; RRID:AB_2532189), isolectin B4 Alexa-488 
conjugate (1:200, Thermo Fisher Scientific #I21411), followed by corresponding Alexa 
Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sections were 
mounted with ProLong Gold for imaging. bEnd.3 cells were fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 15 
minutes at room temperature as processed as described above.
BBB permeability assay
Postnatal: P4–P5 pups were anaesthetized with isoflurane and 10-kDa dextran 
tetramethylrhodamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #D1817, 10 mg/ml, 10 μl per g body 
weight) was injected into the left heart ventricle with a Hamilton syringe. After five minutes 
of circulation, brains were dissected and fixed by immersion in 4% PFA/PBS at 4°C 
overnight, cryopreserved in 30% sucrose, and frozen in TissueTek OCT (Sakura). Sections 
of 14 μm were collected and co-stained with α-Claudin-5-488 conjugate (1:300, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific #352588; RRID:AB_2532189) or isolectin B4 Alexa-488 conjugate (1:200, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific #I21411) to visualize blood vessels. Adult: Adult P90 mice were 
briefly anaesthetized with isoflurane and HRP type II (Sigma Aldrich, Cat #P8250-50KU, 
0.5 mg/g body weight dissolved in 0.4 ml PBS) was injected bi-laterally into the retro-orbital 
sinus. After 30 minutes of circulation, brains were dissected and fixed by immersion in 
4%PFA/PBS at 4°C overnight. Following fixation, brains were washed in PBS and forebrain 
vibratome free-floating sections of 50 μm were collected, processed in a standard DAB 
Andreone et al.
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reaction for 35 minutes, and mounted on 3% gelatin-coated slides. Slides were dehydrated 
through an ethanol series and mounted with Permount for brightfield imaging.
Transmission electron microscopy
In vivo: Brains from P4–P5 pups were dissected and fixed by immersion in 5% 
glutaraldehyde/4% PFA/0.1 M sodium-cacodylate for 10–14 days at room temperature. P90 
mice were anaesthetized and HRP type II (Sigma Aldrich, Cat #P8250-50KU, 0.5 mg/g 
body weight dissolved in 0.4 ml PBS) was injected bilaterally into the retro-orbital sinus. 
After 30 minutes of circulation, brains were dissected and fixed by immersion, first in 5% 
glutaraldehyde/4% PFA/0.1 M sodium-cacodylate for 1 hour at room temperature, then 
overnight at 4°C in 4% PFA/0.1 M sodium-cacodylate. Following fixation, brains were 
washed overnight in 0.1 M sodium-cacodylate. Coronal vibratome free-floating sections of 
50 μm were collected, post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide and 1.5% potassium ferrocyanide, 
dehydrated, and embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections of 80 nm were then cut from 
the block surface, collected on copper grids, and counter-stained with Reynold’s lead citrate. 
In vitro. Experiments on bEnd.3 cells were performed 5 days post-infection with lentivirus. 
bEnd.3 and PANC-1 confluent cell cultures on aclar coverslips were fixed in a 2.5% 
paraformaldehyde/5% glutaraldehyde/0.06% picric acid/0.2 M sodium-cacodylate mixer 
diluted 1:1 in culture media for 15 minutes at room temperature. Cultures were processed for 
TEM, as described above.
Immunogold labeling for electron microscopy—Adult P90 mice were anaesthetized 
and perfused through the heart with 30 ml PBS, followed by first 150 ml of a 5% 
glutaraldehyde/4% PFA/0.1 mM phosphate buffer fixative solution, then a 4% PFA/0.1 mM 
phosphate buffer fixative solution. Brains were dissected and post-fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 
30 minutes at 4°C. Coronal vibratome free-floating sections of 50 μm were collected and 
immersed in 0.1% sodium borohydride/PBS for 20 minutes at room temperature, blocked 
with 10% goat serum/0.5% gelatin/PBST (0.01% Triton X-100), and incubated with α-
Cav-1 (1:100, Cell Signaling Technologies #3267; RRID:AB_2275453) overnight at room 
temperature. Sections were then incubated with gold-labeled goat α-rabbit IgG (1:50, 
Nanoprobes) overnight at room temperature, washed with PBS and sodium acetate, and 
silver-enhanced prior to processing for TEM.
Isolation of capillary fragments—Capillary isolation procedure was adapted from a 
combination of previously described protocols (Goldstein et al., 1984). P4 mouse brains 
were dissected and homogenized in PBS. Homogenates were centrifuged for 30 minutes on 
a density gradient of 16% dextran (Sigma Aldrich). The tissue pellet containing capillary 
fragments was resuspended in PBS and filtered through a 35 μm cell strainer to remove red 
blood cells and cell-type contaminates. P4 mouse lungs were processed as described above, 
with an additional tissue dissociation step using Collagenase/Dispase (Roche) for 30 minutes 
at 37°C prior to centrifugation on a dextran gradient. Isolated capillary fragments were 
either snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for lipid extraction or lysed and processed for Western 
blotting.
Andreone et al.
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Western blotting—Protein lysate samples were boiled at 95°C, run on 6–12% 
polyacrylamide gels, and electrophoretically transferred onto PVDF membranes. 
Membranes were blocked with 5% BSA/TBST (0.1% Tween-20) or 5% non-fat milk/TBST 
and incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: α-Mfsd2a (1:1000, 
Cell Signaling Technologies; RRID:AB_2617168), α-NeuN (1:2000, Millipore #MAB377; 
RRID:AB_2298772), α-VE-Cadherin (1:1000, Abcam #ab33168; RRID:AB_870662), α-
Aquaporin-4 (1:1000, Millipore #ABN411; RRID:AB_2637077), α-PDGFR-β (1:1000, 
Cell Signaling Technologies #3169; RRID:AB_2162497), α-β-Actin (1:5000, Sigma 
Aldrich #A2228; RRID:AB_476697), and α-Tubulin (1:8000, Sigma Aldrich #T5168; 
RRID:AB_477579). Membranes were then incubated with the appropriate HRP-conjugated 
secondary antibody (1:10000, Southern Biotech) and developed with regular or super ECL 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). The intensity of individual bands was quantified using ImageJ.
Lentivirus production—HEK293T cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the pHAGE-PGK_IZsGreen lentiviral plasmid containing 
full-length mouse Mfsd2a CDS, along with Δ-vpr and vsv-g packaging plasmids. 
Supernatant was harvested after three days and concentrated overnight at 4°C with Lenti-X 
Concentrator (Clontech). Lentivirus was stored fresh at 4°C for up to 24 hours prior to use.
In vitro cholera toxin subunit-B uptake assays—Uptake procedure was adapted 
from a combination of previously described protocols (Kirkham et al., 2005). Confluent 
bEnd.3 cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 
either pCAG-GFP or pCAG-mMfsd2a-GFP for two days and serum-starved for two hours 
prior to experiments. Cultures were then incubated with cholera toxin subunit-B (CTB) 
Alexa-555 conjugate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #C34776, 150 μg/ml) for ten minutes at 
37°C, washed several times with cold PBS, fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 15 minutes at room 
temperature, washed with PBS, and mounted with ProLong Gold for imaging.
Imaging—An Olympus FluoView FV1000 or FV1200 laser scanning confocal microscope 
was used to image dextran tracer permeability assays and expression analyses. A Nikon Ti 
spinning disk confocal microscope was used to image the in vitro CTB uptake assay. An 
Olympus VS120-SL 5 slide scanner was used to image adult HRP tracer permeability 
assays. A 1200EX electron microscope (JOEL) equipped with a 2k CCD digital camera 
(AMT) was used for all TEM studies. Images were processed using ImageJ (NIH) and 
Adobe Photoshop.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Quantification of BBB leakage
Postnatal dextran tracer permeability assay: All quantification was performed blind 
using a custom ImageJ (NIH) macro (see Data S1). 6–8 images per animal were obtained 
from 14 μm thick coronal forebrain sections of the same rostrocaudal position using a 40x 
oil immersion objective. The same forebrain regions were imaged among littermate pairs. 
The same background subtraction and auto threshold parameters were applied to max z-
projections of both Isolectin/Claudin-5 (endothelium vessel markers), and dextran (tracer) 
channels. Masks of both channels were generated and the permeability index of leakage was 
Andreone et al.
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 defined as the area of tracer mask divided by area of vessels mask. A leakage value of 1 
signifies no tracer extravasation, while significantly higher values signify tracer 
extravasation.
TEM Quantification—For all TEM quantifications, mean vesicular pit/vesicular density 
values were calculated from the number of vesicles per μm of membrane for each image 
collected. All images were collected at 12000x magnification. Density values for each cell 
source/genotype reflect the average of mean density values obtained from each individual 
experiment/animal and are expressed as mean ± s.e.m.
Statistical Analysis—All statistical analyses were performed using Prism 7 (GraphPad 
Software). Two group comparisons were analyzed using an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-
test. Multiple group comparisons were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA, followed by a 
post-hoc Tukey’s test. Sample size for all experiments was determined empirically using 
standards generally employed by the field, and no data was excluded when performing 
statistical analysis. Standard error of the mean was calculated for all experiments and 
displayed as errors bars in graphs. Statistical details for specific experiments, including exact 
n values and what n represents, precision measures, statistical tests used, and definitions of 
significance can be found in the Figure Legends.
Data and Software Availability
A custom ImageJ macro was used to quantify postnatal dextran tracer permeability assays, 
as described in the Method Details. For script, see Data S1.
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal α-Mfsd2a
Cell Signaling Technologies
Under Development; Cat#Mfsd2a14-87; RRID:AB_2617168
Mouse monoclonal α-Claudin-5-488 conjugate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat #352588; RRID:AB_2532189
Rat polyclonal α-PECAM
BD Biosciences
Cat #553370; RRID:AB_394816
Rabbit polyclonal α-Cav-1
Cell Signaling Technologies
Cat #3267; RRID:AB_2275453
Rabbit polyclonal α-NeuN
Millipore
Cat #MAB377; RRID:AB_2298772
Rabbit polyclonal α-VE-cadherin
Abcam
Cat #ab33168; RRID:AB_870662
Rabbit polyclonal α-PDGFR-β
Cell Signaling Technologies
Cat #3169; RRID:AB_2162497
Rabbit polyclonal α-Aquaporin-4
Millipore
Cat #ABN411; RRID:AB_2637077
Mouse monoclonal α-β-Actin
Sigma
Cat #A2228; RRID:AB_476697
Mouse monoclonal α-Tubulin
Sigma
Cat# T5168; RRID:AB_477579
Bacterial and Virus Strains
Biological Samples
Andreone et al.
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Isolectin GS-IB4, from Griffonia simplicifolia
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat #I21411
10-kDa Dextran-tetramethylrhodamine conjugate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat #D1817
Horseradish peroxidase, type II
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat #P8250-50KU
Cholera toxin subunit B, Alexa Fluor 555 conjugate
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat #C34776
PNA Bio Cas9 protein
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Cat #NC0789474
Critical Commercial Assays
Deposited Data
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Human: HEK293T cells
ATCC
CRL-3216
Mouse: bEnd.3 cells
ATCC
CRL-2299
Human: PANC-1-MSFD2A-GFP
Dr. David Sabatini; (Reiling 
et al., 2011)
N/A
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: Mfsd2a KO: B6;129S5-Mfsd2atm1Lex/Mmucd
Mouse Biology Program, 
University of California, 
Davis
MMRRC strain 032467-UCD; RRID: MGI:5755244
Mouse: Cav-1 KO: STOCK Cav1tm1Mls/J
Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 004585; RRID:IMSR_JAX:004585
Mouse: Mfsd2aD96A
This paper
N/A
Oligonucleotides
Mfsd2aD96A gRNA:
GCCTTCACTGACCCTCTGGTGGG
Integrated DNA Technologies
N/A
Mfsd2aD96A Donor Oligonucleotide:
TGCTTCTTCCCCATGGCAGGTGGAACCACTTCCTGCT
TCCATTATCCTTTTTGTGGGCCGAGCCTGGGATGCCT
TCACTGCCCCACTAGTGGGCTTCTGCATTAGCAAGTC
CTCCTGGACCCGCCTGGGCCGCCTCATGCCCTGGTAA
GTAGAGACGCTCCTTCGAAG
Integrated DNA Technologies
N/A
Genotyping Primers: Mfsd2aD96A:
(Fwd): TTGGTGGTTCAGCTGTGCCA
(Rev): GACACCAGAAGCCTGCCTTT
(Sequencing): ATGCTCCGCTAAGGCAATGA
Integrated DNA Technologies
N/A
Genotyping Primers: Mfsd2a:
(WT Fwd): CCTGGTTTGCTAAGTGCTAGC
(WT Rev): GTTCACTGGCTTGGAGGATGC
(KO Fwd): CACTTCCTAAAGCCTTACTTC
(KO Rev): GCAGCGCATCGCCTTCTATC
Integrated DNA Technologies
N/A
Genotyping Primers: Cav1:
(WT Fwd): GCACACCAAGGAGATTGACC
(KO Fwd): CTCCAGACTGCCTTGGGAAAA
(Rev): CTTGGCTGTCACCACACAC
Integrated DNA Technologies
N/A
Recombinant DNA
pCAG-GFP
Matsuda and Cepko, 2004
Addgene Plasmid #11150
pHAGE-PGK_IZsGreen
Harvard Medical School, 
Jeng-Shin Lee
https://plasmid.med.harvard.edu/PLASMID/GetVectorDetail.do?vectorid=251
Plasmid: pCAG-mMfsd2a-GFP
This paper
N/A
Plasmid: pHAGE-PGK_mMfsd2a-IZsGreen
This paper
N/A
Andreone et al.
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Software and Algorithms
Prism 7
GraphPad
https://www.graphpad.com/scientificsoftware/prism/
CCTop – CRISPR/Cas9 target online predictor
Center for Organismal 
Studies Heidelberg; 
(Stemmer et al., 2015)
http://crispr.cos.uni-heidelberg.de/
TraceFinder 3.2
Thermo Fisher Scientific
http://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/manuals/
Man-XCALI-97598-TraceFinder-32-User-Clinical-ManXCALI97598-A-EN.pdf
Custom ImageJ macro for quantifying BBB permeability
This paper
Data S1
Other
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Jonathan Cohen, Tom Schwartz, Christopher Harvey, Bob Datta, Chuck Weitz, and members of the 
Gu laboratory for comments on the manuscript; Dr. Radu Stan (Dartmouth University) for discussions; Dr. David 
Sabatini (MIT) for providing the PANC-1 cell line (Reiling et al., 2011); Dr. Christine Mössinger (Karolinska 
Institute) for advice regarding lipid biology; Roberto Rosa for technical assistance; the HMS Electron Microscopy 
Core Facility, the HMS Neurobiology Imaging Facility, and the Nikon Imaging Center at Harvard Medical School; 
Drs. Roberto Polakiewicz and Jianxin Xie (Cell Signaling Technologies) for generating the Mfsd2a antibody. This 
work was supported by NIH NRSA Award F31NS090669 (B.J.A.), the Mahoney postdoctoral fellowship (B.L.), the 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (D.G), the Kaneb Fellowship (C.G.), Fidelity Biosciences Research Initiative 
(C.G.), and Harvard Blavatnik Biomedical Accelerator (C.G.), and the NIH DP1 NS092473 Pioneer Award (C.G.). 
The research of C.G. was also supported in part by a Faculty Scholar grant from the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute.
References
Aird WC. Phenotypic heterogeneity of the endothelium: I. Structure, function, and mechanisms. 
Circulation research. 2007; 100:158–173. [PubMed: 17272818] 
Alakbarzade V, Hameed A, Quek DQ, Chioza BA, Baple EL, Cazenave-Gassiot A, Nguyen LN, Wenk 
MR, Ahmad AQ, Sreekantan-Nair A, et al. A partially inactivating mutation in the sodium-
dependent lysophosphatidylcholine transporter MFSD2A causes a non-lethal microcephaly 
syndrome. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:814–817. [PubMed: 26005865] 
Andreone BJ, Lacoste B, Gu C. Neuronal and vascular interactions. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2015; 38:25–
46. [PubMed: 25782970] 
Armulik A, Genove G, Mae M, Nisancioglu MH, Wallgard E, Niaudet C, He L, Norlin J, Lindblom P, 
Strittmatter K, et al. Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature. 2010; 468:557–561. 
[PubMed: 20944627] 
Bastiani M, Parton RG. Caveolae at a glance. Journal of cell science. 2010; 123:3831–3836. [PubMed: 
21048159] 
Ben-Zvi A, Lacoste B, Kur E, Andreone BJ, Mayshar Y, Yan H, Gu C. Mfsd2a is critical for the 
formation and function of the blood-brain barrier. Nature. 2014; 509:507–511. [PubMed: 24828040] 
Betsholtz C. Physiology: Double function at the blood-brain barrier. Nature. 2014; 509:432–433. 
[PubMed: 24828036] 
Andreone et al.
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bien-Ly N, Yu YJ, Bumbaca D, Elstrott J, Boswell CA, Zhang Y, Luk W, Lu Y, Dennis MS, Weimer 
RM, et al. Transferrin receptor (TfR) trafficking determines brain uptake of TfR antibody affinity 
variants. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2014; 211:233–244. [PubMed: 24470444] 
Bitsikas V, Correa IR Jr, Nichols BJ. Clathrin-independent pathways do not contribute significantly to 
endocytic flux. eLife. 2014; 3:e03970. [PubMed: 25232658] 
Brightman MW, Reese TS. Junctions between intimately apposed cell membranes in the vertebrate 
brain. The Journal of cell biology. 1969; 40:648–677. [PubMed: 5765759] 
Chen W, Jump DB, Esselman WJ, Busik JV. Inhibition of cytokine signaling in human retinal 
endothelial cells through modification of caveolae/lipid rafts by docosahexaenoic acid. 
Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 2007; 48:18–26. [PubMed: 17197511] 
Cheng JP, Nichols BJ. Caveolae: One Function or Many? Trends Cell Biol. 2015
Chow BW, Gu C. The molecular constituents of the blood-brain barrier. Trends in neurosciences. 
2015; 38:598–608. [PubMed: 26442694] 
Chow BW, Gu C. Gradual suppression of transcytosis governs functional blood-retinal barrier 
formation. Neuron. 2017; 93:1325–1333. [PubMed: 28334606] 
Cohen AW, Razani B, Schubert W, Williams TM, Wang XB, Iyengar P, Brasaemle DL, Scherer PE, 
Lisanti MP. Role of caveolin-1 in the modulation of lipolysis and lipid droplet formation. Diabetes. 
2004; 53:1261–1270. [PubMed: 15111495] 
Daneman R, Zhou L, Agalliu D, Cahoy JD, Kaushal A, Barres BA. The mouse blood-brain barrier 
transcriptome: a new resource for understanding the development and function of brain endothelial 
cells. PloS one. 2010a; 5:e13741. [PubMed: 21060791] 
Daneman R, Zhou L, Kebede AA, Barres BA. Pericytes are required for blood-brain barrier integrity 
during embryogenesis. Nature. 2010b; 468:562–566. [PubMed: 20944625] 
Ethayathulla AS, Yousef MS, Amin A, Leblanc G, Kaback HR, Guan L. Structure-based mechanism 
for Na(+)/melibiose symport by MelB. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3009. [PubMed: 24389923] 
Ghitescu L, Fixman A, Simionescu M, Simionescu N. Specific binding sites for albumin restricted to 
plasmalemmal vesicles of continuous capillary endothelium: receptor-mediated transcytosis. The 
Journal of cell biology. 1986; 102:1304–1311. [PubMed: 3007533] 
Goldstein GW, Betz AL, Bowman PD. Use of isolated brain capillaries and cultured endothelial cells 
to study the blood-brain barrier. Federation proceedings. 1984; 43:191–195. [PubMed: 6692938] 
Guemez-Gamboa A, Nguyen LN, Yang H, Zaki MS, Kara M, Ben-Omran T, Akizu N, Rosti RO, Rosti 
B, Scott E, et al. Inactivating mutations in MFSD2A, required for omega-3 fatty acid transport in 
brain, cause a lethal microcephaly syndrome. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:809–813. [PubMed: 26005868] 
Guo Y, Cordes KR, Farese RV Jr, Walther TC. Lipid droplets at a glance. Journal of cell science. 2009; 
122:749–752. [PubMed: 19261844] 
Haley MJ, Lawrence CB. The blood-brain barrier after stroke: Structural studies and the role of 
transcytotic vesicles. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : official journal of the 
International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. 2016
Innis SM. Dietary (n-3) fatty acids and brain development. The Journal of nutrition. 2007; 137:855–
859. [PubMed: 17374644] 
Junge HJ, Yang S, Burton JB, Paes K, Shu X, French DM, Costa M, Rice DS, Ye W. TSPAN12 
regulates retinal vascular development by promoting Norrin- but not Wnt-induced FZD4/beta-
catenin signaling. Cell. 2009; 139:299–311. [PubMed: 19837033] 
Kirkham M, Fujita A, Chadda R, Nixon SJ, Kurzchalia TV, Sharma DK, Pagano RE, Hancock JF, 
Mayor S, Parton RG. Ultrastructural identification of uncoated caveolin-independent early 
endocytic vehicles. The Journal of cell biology. 2005; 168:465–476. [PubMed: 15668297] 
Knowland D, Arac A, Sekiguchi KJ, Hsu M, Lutz SE, Perrino J, Steinberg GK, Barres BA, 
Nimmerjahn A, Agalliu D. Stepwise recruitment of transcellular and paracellular pathways 
underlies blood-brain barrier breakdown in stroke. Neuron. 2014; 82:603–617. [PubMed: 
24746419] 
Li Q, Zhang Q, Wang M, Liu F, Zhao S, Ma J, Luo N, Li N, Li Y, Xu G, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid 
affects endothelial nitric oxide synthase in caveolae. Archives of biochemistry and biophysics. 
2007; 466:250–259. [PubMed: 17662956] 
Andreone et al.
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liebner S, Corada M, Bangsow T, Babbage J, Taddei A, Czupalla CJ, Reis M, Felici A, Wolburg H, 
Fruttiger M, et al. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling controls development of the blood-brain barrier. The 
Journal of cell biology. 2008; 183:409–417. [PubMed: 18955553] 
Lingwood D, Simons K. Lipid rafts as a membrane-organizing principle. Science. 2010; 327:46–50. 
[PubMed: 20044567] 
Ma DW, Seo J, Davidson LA, Callaway ES, Fan YY, Lupton JR, Chapkin RS. n-3 PUFA alter caveolae 
lipid composition and resident protein localization in mouse colon. FASEB journal : official 
publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology. 2004; 18:1040–
1042. [PubMed: 15084525] 
Martin S, Parton RG. Caveolin, cholesterol, and lipid bodies. Seminars in cell & developmental 
biology. 2005; 16:163–174. [PubMed: 15797827] 
Matsuda T, Cepko CL. Electroporation and RNA interference in the rodent retina in vivo and in vitro. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:16–22. [PubMed: 14603031] 
Mayor S, Parton RG, Donaldson JG. Clathrin-independent pathways of endocytosis. Cold Spring Harb 
Perspect Biol. 2014:6.
Nguyen LN, Ma D, Shui G, Wong P, Cazenave-Gassiot A, Zhang X, Wenk MR, Goh EL, Silver DL. 
Mfsd2a is a transporter for the essential omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid. Nature. 2014; 
509:503–506. [PubMed: 24828044] 
Niewoehner J, Bohrmann B, Collin L, Urich E, Sade H, Maier P, Rueger P, Stracke JO, Lau W, Tissot 
AC, et al. Increased brain penetration and potency of a therapeutic antibody using a monovalent 
molecular shuttle. Neuron. 2014; 81:49–60. [PubMed: 24411731] 
Oh P, Borgstrom P, Witkiewicz H, Li Y, Borgstrom BJ, Chrastina A, Iwata K, Zinn KR, Baldwin R, 
Testa JE, et al. Live dynamic imaging of caveolae pumping targeted antibody rapidly and 
specifically across endothelium in the lung. Nat Biotechnol. 2007; 25:327–337. [PubMed: 
17334358] 
Oh P, Testa JE, Borgstrom P, Witkiewicz H, Li Y, Schnitzer JE. In vivo proteomic imaging analysis of 
caveolae reveals pumping system to penetrate solid tumors. Nat Med. 2014; 20:1062–1068. 
[PubMed: 25129480] 
Pardridge WM. Drug transport across the blood-brain barrier. Journal of cerebral blood flow and 
metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. 
2012; 32:1959–1972.
Parton RG, del Pozo MA. Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors, protectors and organizers. Nature 
reviews Molecular cell biology. 2013; 14:98–112. [PubMed: 23340574] 
Pike LJ, Han X, Chung KN, Gross RW. Lipid rafts are enriched in arachidonic acid and 
plasmenylethanolamine and their composition is independent of caveolin-1 expression: a 
quantitative electrospray ionization/mass spectrometric analysis. Biochemistry. 2002; 41:2075–
2088. [PubMed: 11827555] 
Pol A, Martin S, Fernandez MA, Ferguson C, Carozzi A, Luetterforst R, Enrich C, Parton RG. 
Dynamic and regulated association of caveolin with lipid bodies: modulation of lipid body motility 
and function by a dominant negative mutant. Molecular biology of the cell. 2004; 15:99–110. 
[PubMed: 14528016] 
Predescu SA, Predescu DN, Palade GE. Plasmalemmal vesicles function as transcytotic carriers for 
small proteins in the continuous endothelium. Am J Physiol. 1997; 272:H937–949. [PubMed: 
9124458] 
Quek DQ, Nguyen LN, Fan H, Silver DL. Structural Insights into the Transport Mechanism of the 
Human Sodium-dependent Lysophosphatidylcholine Transporter MFSD2A. The Journal of 
biological chemistry. 2016; 291:9383–9394. [PubMed: 26945070] 
Razani B, Engelman JA, Wang XB, Schubert W, Zhang XL, Marks CB, Macaluso F, Russell RG, Li 
M, Pestell RG, et al. Caveolin-1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and 
vascular abnormalities. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2001; 276:38121–38138. [PubMed: 
11457855] 
Reese TS, Karnovsky MJ. Fine structural localization of a blood-brain barrier to exogenous 
peroxidase. The Journal of cell biology. 1967; 34:207–217. [PubMed: 6033532] 
Andreone et al.
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Reiling JH, Clish CB, Carette JE, Varadarajan M, Brummelkamp TR, Sabatini DM. A haploid genetic 
screen identifies the major facilitator domain containing 2A (MFSD2A) transporter as a key 
mediator in the response to tunicamycin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:11756–11765. 
[PubMed: 21677192] 
Schubert W, Frank PG, Razani B, Park DS, Chow CW, Lisanti MP. Caveolae-deficient endothelial cells 
show defects in the uptake and transport of albumin in vivo. The Journal of biological chemistry. 
2001; 276:48619–48622. [PubMed: 11689550] 
Shvets E, Bitsikas V, Howard G, Hansen CG, Nichols BJ. Dynamic caveolae exclude bulk membrane 
proteins and are required for sorting of excess glycosphingolipids. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6867. 
[PubMed: 25897946] 
Sohet F, Lin C, Munji RN, Lee SY, Ruderisch N, Soung A, Arnold TD, Derugin N, Vexler ZS, Yen FT, 
et al. LSR/angulin-1 is a tricellular tight junction protein involved in blood-brain barrier formation. 
The Journal of cell biology. 2015; 208:703–711. [PubMed: 25753034] 
Stemmer M, Thumberger T, del Sol Keyer M, Wittbrodt J, Mateo JL. CCTop: an intuituve, flexible and 
reliable CRISPR/Cas9 target prediciton tool. PLOS ONE. 2015:10.
Tam SJ, Richmond DL, Kaminker JS, Modrusan Z, Martin-McNulty B, Cao TC, Weimer RM, Carano 
RA, van Bruggen N, Watts RJ. Death receptors DR6 and TROY regulate brain vascular 
development. Developmental cell. 2012; 22:403–417. [PubMed: 22340501] 
Zhao Z, Nelson AR, Betsholtz C, Zlokovic BV. Establishment and Dysfunction of the Blood-Brain 
Barrier. Cell. 2015; 163:1064–1078. [PubMed: 26590417] 
Zhao Z, Zlokovic BV. Blood-brain barrier: a dual life of MFSD2A? Neuron. 2014; 82:728–730. 
[PubMed: 24853933] 
Zhou Y, Wang Y, Tischfield M, Williams J, Smallwood PM, Rattner A, Taketo MM, Nathans J. 
Canonical WNT signaling components in vascular development and barrier formation. The Journal 
of clinical investigation. 2014; 124:3825–3846. [PubMed: 25083995] 
Zlokovic BV. The blood-brain barrier in health and chronic neurodegenerative disorders. Neuron. 
2008; 57:178–201. [PubMed: 18215617] 
Andreone et al.
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Mfsd2a expression suppresses plasma membrane vesicular pit formation and cargo 
uptake in multiple cell types. See also Table S4
(A–B) Expression of Mfsd2a via lentivirus infection in bEnd.3 cells, in which endogenous 
Mfsd2a expression was not detectable. Mfsd2a (green) in bEnd.3 cells displays cell surface 
localization and co-localization with PECAM (red), a cell surface marker (arrows). Scale 
bar, 50 μm. (C–H) Electron microscopy images showing the apical plasma membrane of 
bEnd.3 cells expressing mouse Mfsd2a (D) or PANC-1 cells expressing human MFSD2A-
GFP (G). Mfsd2a-expressing cells show reduced vesicular pit density (arrows) in both cell 
types, compared to mock infected control bEnd.3 cells (C) or PANC-1 cells expressing GFP 
alone (F). n = 3, 25 image profiles from at least 15 cells per experiment. Scale bar, 150 nm. 
(I–J) Mfsd2a-expressing cells exhibit reduced cholera toxin subunit-B (CTB) uptake. 
Uptake of CTB (gray; middle panels) in bEnd.3 cells expressing either soluble GFP (I) or 
Mfsd2a-GFP (J) (green, GFP fluorescence; blue, DAPI; lefts panels.). Scale bar, 20 μm. (K–
L) CTB uptake quantified as corrected total cell fluorescence (CTCF) per transfected cell 
compared to CTCF of at least 2 untransfected cells per image. n = 4, at least 15 transfected 
cells per experiment. All data are mean ± s.e.m.; n.s., not significant, * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01 
(Student’s t-test).
Andreone et al.
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. A novel Mfsd2aD96A mouse abolishes the lipid transport function of Mfsd2a and 
displays microcephaly. See also Figures S1 and S2; Tables S1 and S2
(A) Gene targeting strategy for the generation of Mfsd2aD96A mice. Magnified view of the 
genomic region that contains residue D96 in exon 3 of Mfsd2a. CRISPR/cas9 genome 
editing introduces the D96A point mutation (red box), as well as two additional silent 
mutations in codons 97/98 that generate a SpeI restriction site (black underline) for 
screening purposes. For additional details, see STAR methods. (B–C) Immunostaining at P4 
of Mfsd2a protein (green) reveals vascular expression (purple, PECAM) in the neocortex of 
both Mfsd2a+/+ control (B) and Mfsd2aD96A mutants (C). n = 3 animals per genotype. Scale 
bar, 100 μm. (D–E) Immunostaining at P4 reveals absence of Mfsd2a protein expression in 
non-BBB-containing lung vasculature (purple, PECAM) of both Mfsd2a+/+ control (D) and 
Mfsd2aD96A mutants (E). n = 3 animals per genotype. Scale bar, 100 μm. (F) Western blot 
from P4 brain lysate of Mfsd2aD96A mutants and littermate Mfsd2a+/+ controls. (G) 
Quantification shows equal Mfsd2a protein levels between Mfsd2aD96A mutants and 
littermate Mfsd2a+/+ controls. Tubulin (loading control). n = 3 littermate pairs per genotype. 
Data are mean ± s.e.m.; n.s., not significant (Student’s t-test). (H) The lipid profile of 
Mfsd2aD96A mutant brains closely mimics that of Mfsd2a−/− mutant brains at P4. Dot plot 
representation of Mfsd2a−/−/Mfsd2a+/+ log-ratio (x-axis), compared to Mfsd2aD96A/
Mfsd2a+/+ log-ratio (y-axis) of phospholipid levels measured by mass spectrometry. Each 
dot represents a single lipids species; red line: y=x; R2 = 0.898. Mfsd2aD96A experiment: n = 
6 animals per genotype; Mfsd2a−/− experiment: n = 4 animals per genotype. (I) Mfsd2aD96A 
mutants exhibit microcephaly. Quantification of brain weight at P4. n = 5 animals per 
genotype. Data are mean ± s.e.m.; ** P < 0.01 (Student’s t-test).
Andreone et al.
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. The lipid transport function of Mfsd2a is required for the suppression of transcytosis 
and maintenance of BBB integrity in vivo. See also Figures S3 and S6; Table S4
(A–D) Increased vesicular density in CNS endothelial cells of Mfsd2aD96A mutants (C–D) 
compared to their littermate controls (A–B). Electron microscopy analysis at P4 reveals 
increased number of vesicles in Mfsd2aD96A mutants along the luminal (arrows) and 
abluminal (Ab; black arrowheads) plasma membranes. Scale bar, 150 nm. (E–F) 
Quantification of vesicular density along the luminal (E) and abluminal (F) plasma 
membranes. n = 3 animals per condition, 20 capillary cross-sections per animal. (G–J) 
Increased transcytosis is evident in CNS endothelial cells of HRP-injected Mfsd2aD96A 
mutants at P90. HRP tracer (black) is confined with the vessel lumen (L) of littermate 
control animals (G–H). Tracer-filled vesicles are observed invaginating from the luminal 
plasma membrane (arrows), within the cytoplasm (asterisks), and along to abluminal plasma 
membrane (arrowheads) in Mfsd2aD96A mutants (I–J). n = 3 animals per condition. Scale 
bar, 100 nm. (K–L) Tight junctions are functional in CNS endothelial cells of HRP-injected 
Mfsd2aD96A mutants. HRP tracer fills the vessel lumen (L) and enters intercellular clefts but 
is sharply halted at tight junction “kissing points” (yellow arrows) in both Mfsd2aD96A 
mutants (L) and Mfsd2a+/+ littermate control animals (K) at P90. n = 3 animals per 
Andreone et al.
Page 24
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 condition. Scale bar, 100 nm. (M–N) Mfsd2aD96A mutants display BBB leakage. 10kD 
TMR-dextran tracer (red) is completely confined within vessels (green, Isolectin B4 (IB4)) 
(arrows) in Mfsd2a+/+ littermate control animals (M) at P4. Tracer-filled parenchyma cells 
(arrowheads) surround vessels in the brain of Mfsd2aD96A mutants (N). Scale bar, 50 μm. 
(O) Permeability index of tracer leakage in brain, as quantified by area of tracer divided by 
area of vessels per image (value = 1 signifying no leakage). n = 4 animals per genotype. All 
data are mean ± s.e.m.; * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01 (Student’s t-test).
Andreone et al.
Page 25
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Lipidomic profiling of brain versus lung capillaries reveals different lipid signatures, 
including changes in DHA-containing phospholipid species. See also Figures S4 and S5; Table S3
(A) Dot plot representation of lipidomic profiling of brain versus lung capillaries from P4 
wild-type mice. Dots represent average lipid level in the brain (x-axis) and lung (y-axis) for 
each metabolite tested, expressed as mass spectrometry integrated peak area. Red dots 
indicate DHA-containing phospholipid species. (B) DHA-containing phospholipid levels are 
increased in brain capillaries. Lipidomic analysis of DHA-containing phospholipid species 
from brain and lung capillaries of P4 wild-type mice. Value for each species is normalized to 
internal standard and expressed as integrated mass spectrometry peak area. (LPE, lyso-
phosphatidylethanolamine; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PS, 
phosphatidylserine). * P < 0.004 (Student’s t-test, with Bonferroni correction for multiple 
comparisons). For all data, n = 6 groups per organ, 8 animals pooled per group.
Andreone et al.
Page 26
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Mfsd2a−/− mice display an increased number of Cav-1-positive vesicles in CNS 
endothelial cells. See also Table S4
(A–H) Cav-1 immunoreactivity in CNS endothelial cells of Mfsd2a+/+ and Mfsd2a−/− mice 
under electron microscopy. Electron microscopy analysis with immuno-gold labeling of 
Cav-1 protein in CNS endothelial cells of Mfsd2a+/+ (A–D) and Mfsd2a−/− mice (E–H) at 
P90. Gold particles (black puncta) are visualized along the luminal (arrows) and abluminal 
(Ab; black arrowheads) plasma membranes, as well as within the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic 
particles are seen associated with vesicular structures (white arrowheads). All scale bars, 500 
nm. (I) Quantification of Cav-1-positive vesicles in Mfsd2a+/+ and Mfsd2a−/− mice. n = 3 
animals per genotype, 10 capillary cross-sections per animal. Data are mean ± s.e.m.; * P < 
0.05 (Student’s t-test).
Andreone et al.
Page 27
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Genetic inhibition of the caveolae pathway rescues both the increased vesicular density 
and BBB leakage phenotypes of Mfsd2a−/− mice. See also Figures S3, S6, and S7; Table S4
(A–H) Genetic inhibition of the caveolae pathway rescues increased vesicular density in 
Mfsd2a−/− animals. Electron microscopy examination of BBB integrity in Mfsd2a+/+; 
Cav-1+/+ (A–B), Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ (C–D), Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− (E–F), and Mfsd2a−/−; 
Cav-1−/− (G–H) mice at P5. Increased vesicular pit density in Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ single 
mutant CNS endothelial cells is observed along the luminal (arrows) and abluminal (Ab; 
arrowheads) plasma membranes. Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1+/+ wild-type, Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− single 
mutant and Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− double mutant cells exhibited very few vesicles. Scale bar, 
150 nm. (I–J) Quantification of vesicular pit density at the luminal (I) and abluminal (J) 
plasma membranes. n = 4 animals per genotype, 20 capillary cross-sections per animal. (K–
N) Genetic inhibition of the caveolae pathway rescues BBB leakage defects in Mfsd2a−/− 
animals. 10kD-dextran tracer (red) was injected into the circulation of Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1+/+ 
(K), Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ (L), Mfsd2a+/+; Cav-1−/− (M), and Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1−/− (N) mice 
at P5. Tracer diffuses into the brain parenchyma in Mfsd2a−/−; Cav-1+/+ single mutants (L), 
Andreone et al.
Page 28
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with tracer-filled parenchyma cells (arrowheads) surrounding vessels (green, Claudin-5). 
Tracer is confined to the vasculature (arrows) in all other tested genotypes. Scale bar, 50 μm. 
(O) Permeability index of tracer leakage in brain, as quantified by area of tracer divided by 
area of vessels per image (value = 1 signifying no leakage). n = 4 animals per genotype. All 
data are mean ± s.e.m.; n.s., not significant, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001 (one-way ANOVA, 
post-hoc Tukey test).
Andreone et al.
Page 29
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Genetic inhibition of the caveolae pathway fails to rescue the microcephaly defect seen 
in Mfsd2a−/− mice
Quantification of brain weight at P90. n = 5 animals per genotype. Data are mean ± s.e.m.; 
n.s., not significant, *** P < 0.001 (one-way ANOVA, post-hoc Tukey test).
Andreone et al.
Page 30
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Model for the suppression of caveolae-mediated transcytosis via regulated membrane 
lipid composition at the BBB
(A) Non-BBB containing lung endothelial cells do not express Mfsd2a, display low levels of 
DHA, and display high levels of transcytotic caveolae vesicles, characterized by the 
presence of Cav-1 coat protein (purple). (B) BBB-containing brain endothelial cells express 
Mfsd2a (green). Mfsd2a acts as a lipid flippase, transporting phospholipids, including DHA-
containing species (orange), from the outer to inner plasma membrane leaflet. The increased 
levels of DHA, and presumably other lipid changes, alter the plasma membrane composition 
such that caveolae vesicles are unable to form and act as transcytotic carriers. Thus, brain 
endothelial cells display low levels of caveolae vesicles. This suppression of caveolae 
formation and trafficking subsequently ensures BBB integrity under normal conditions.
Andreone et al.
Page 31
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
