 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
1
Review
published: 12 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01605
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Yongsheng Li, 
Army Medical University, China
Reviewed by: 
Andras Perl, 
 
Upstate Medical University, 
 
United States 
 
Dalil Hannani, 
 
UMR5525 Techniques de l’Ingénierie 
Médicale et de la Complexité 
Informatique, Mathématiques 
et Applications, Grenoble 
 
(TIMC-IMAG), France
*Correspondence:
Ming Tan 
mtan@health.southalabama.edu
†These authors have contributed 
equally to this work.
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Molecular Innate Immunity, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 01 March 2018
Accepted: 27 June 2018
Published: 12 July 2018
Citation: 
Angajala A, Lim S, Phillips JB, 
Kim J-H, Yates C, You Z and Tan M 
(2018) Diverse Roles of Mitochondria 
in Immune Responses: Novel Insights 
Into Immuno-Metabolism. 
Front. Immunol. 9:1605. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01605
Diverse Roles of Mitochondria in 
immune Responses: Novel insights 
into immuno-Metabolism
Anusha Angajala1,2†, Sangbin Lim1†, Joshua B. Phillips1, Jin-Hwan Kim1, Clayton Yates2, 
Zongbing You3 and Ming Tan1*
1 
Center for Cell Death and Metabolism, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, United States, 
2 
Department of Biology, Center for Cancer Research, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, AL, United States, 3 
Department of 
Structural and Cellular Biology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, United States
Lack of immune system cells or impairment in differentiation of immune cells is the 
basis for many chronic diseases. Metabolic changes could be the root cause for this 
immune cell impairment. These changes could be a result of altered transcription, cyto-
kine production from surrounding cells, and changes in metabolic pathways. Immunity 
and mitochondria are interlinked with each other. An important feature of mitochondria 
is it can regulate activation, differentiation, and survival of immune cells. In addition, it 
can also release signals such as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and mitochondrial ROS 
(mtROS) to regulate transcription of immune cells. From current literature, we found that 
mitochondria can regulate immunity in different ways. First, alterations in metabolic path-
ways (TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, and FAO) and mitochondria induced tran-
scriptional changes can lead to entirely different outcomes in immune cells. For example, 
M1 macrophages exhibit a broken TCA cycle and have a pro-inflammatory role. By con-
trast, M2 macrophages undergo β-oxidation to produce anti-inflammatory responses. 
In addition, amino acid metabolism, especially arginine, glutamine, serine, glycine, and 
tryptophan, is critical for T cell differentiation and macrophage polarization. Second, 
mitochondria can activate the inflammatory response. For instance, mitochondrial anti-
viral signaling and NLRP3 can be activated by mitochondria. Third, mitochondrial mass 
and mobility can be influenced by fission and fusion. Fission and fusion can influence 
immune functions. Finally, mitochondria are placed near the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
in immune cells. Therefore, mitochondria and ER junction signaling can also influence 
immune cell metabolism. Mitochondrial machinery such as metabolic pathways, amino 
acid metabolism, antioxidant systems, mitochondrial dynamics, mtDNA, mitophagy, and 
mtROS are crucial for immune functions. Here, we have demonstrated how mitochon-
dria coordinate to alter immune responses and how changes in mitochondrial machinery 
contribute to alterations in immune responses. A better understanding of the molecular 
components of mitochondria is necessary. This can help in the development of safe 
and effective immune therapy or prevention of chronic diseases. In this review, we have 
presented an updated prospective of the mitochondrial machinery that drives various 
immune responses.
Keywords: oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid oxidation, TCA cycle, regulatory T cell, memory T cell
 FiguRe 1 | Mitochondria roles in immune responses: mitochondrial components are involved in immune functions. (1) Metabolic pathways such as TCA cycle, 
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), and fatty acid oxidation (FAO) are important for macrophage polarization and T cell differentiation. (2) Amino acid metabolism 
(Tryptophan metabolism is shown here.) also contributes to mitochondrial immune functions. Tryptophan depletion can cause immune tolerance. NAD+ is 
synthesized from tryptophan. NAD+ contributes to SIRT3-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis. In addition, NAD+ is required for metabolic pathways and CD4+ T cell 
differentiation. (3) Mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) control immune cell transcription, metabolism, and NLRP3 mediated inflammation. Antioxidants such as glutathione 
balance mtROS. SIRT3 is involved in regulating many mitochondrial proteins such as IDH2 (TCA cycle), MnSOD [reactive oxygen species (ROS) balance], and 
FOXO3. SIRT3 inhibits mtROS. (4) Mitophagy is crucial for removing damaged mitochondria. Damaged mitochondria are a source of mtROS so mitophagy balances 
mtROS. Pink1, localized on the mitochondrial outer membrane, binds to parkin and initiates mitophagy. Parkin mutations can increase the susceptibility to the 
intracellular bacteria Mycobacterium leprae and Salmonella enterica. Decreased mitophagy results in increased ROS which further increases the susceptibility to 
infections. Hepatitis B and C viruses use mitophagy to their benefit. These viruses protect themselves from mitochondria induced apoptosis by activating mitophagy. 
(5) Mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) in the mitochondria membrane initiates the inflammatory response. Upon viral infections, viral RNA is sensed by RIG-I. 
RIG-I activates MAVS (located on the outer membrane of mitochondria). MAVS signaling can activate NLRP3 inflammasome and NF-κB/IRF transcription. (6) NLRP3 
inflammasome contributes to the activation of caspase-1 and leads to NF-κB signaling and production of IL-1β and IL-18. (7) Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) can be 
released from mitochondria into the cytosol and activate the NLRP3 inflammasome and production of IL-1β and IL-18. Also, mtROS can induce mtDNA mutation. 
(8) Mitochondrial dynamics, fission (OPA-1) and fusion (Drp1), is associated with activated T cells and memory T cells, respectively. (9) ER and mitochondria junction: 
in CD8+ memory T cells, mitochondria are placed near the ER. HK-1 (hexokinase-1, an important enzyme in glycolysis) in conjunction with pAKT, mammalian target 
of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2), and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β) mediated signaling cascades regulate CD8+ memory T cell metabolism. (10) 
Uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2), a mitochondrial membrane protein, allows protons to enter the mitochondrial matrix, thereby decreasing mitochondrial membrane 
potential which further decreases mtROS.
2
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
iNTRODuCTiON
Mitochondria have many fundamental functions such as 
energy production, providing metabolites for building mac-
romolecules, and aiding in differentiation, apoptosis, and cell 
cycle. After reviewing recent literature, two mitochondrial 
functions appeared to be intriguing. First, mitochondria and 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) communicate with each 
other through signaling molecules (1). Second, mitochondria 
are associated with NLRP3 inflammasome activation (2). 
Mitochondria are localized near the ER to supply energy for 
protein and lipid synthesis. For example, Bantug et al. have 
highlighted that ER and mitochondria junction signaling is 
critical in CD8+ memory T cells. Mechanistically, this happens 
in crosstalk between ER and mitochondria by mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 2, AKT (protein kinase B), and 
glycogen synthase kinase 3β mediated signaling which pro-
motes respiration (Figure 1.9) (3).
Immune response and metabolism are closely dependent on 
each other. During immune response, immune cells transition 
from metabolic quiescence to active phase. This transition is 
associated with a metabolic shift from catabolic to anabolic state. 
During the quiescence state, macromolecules undergo catabolic 
pathways to produce energy and support long-term survival. 
During the anabolic state, macromolecules are synthesized and 
support a balance between the need for ATP and required metab-
olites. Depending on the need, immune cells choose a specific 
pathway such as β-oxidation to generate more ATP than glycolysis. 
 
 FiguRe 2 | Metabolic regulation in macrophages and T cells: (A) metabolism during macrophage polarization: polarization of monocytes to M1 or M2 phenotypes 
is controlled by the cytokines produced by other immune cells. M1 macrophages are activated by IFN-γ produced by Th1 cells. M1 macrophages tend to store 
surplus FA as triacyclglycerols and cholesteryl esters in lipid droplets, and they exhibit higher aerobic glycolysis and lower oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). 
Nitric oxide production is higher in M1. Uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) expression is decreased in M1 macrophages. Contrarily, M2 macrophages are activated by IL-4 
or IL-13 to regulate anti-inflammation and promote Th2 response and tissue repair. M2 macrophages adopt a metabolic program dominated by fatty acid-fueled 
OXPHOS and channel FA toward re-esterification and β-oxidation. Silencing UCP2 impairs M2 macrophage activation by IL-4. High adenosine monophosphate-
activated protein kinase (AMPK) and low NO is the reason for high OXPHOS in M2 macrophages. (B) Metabolism during T cells differentiation: naïve T cells are 
dependent on OXPHOS as their primary metabolic pathway. By contrast, activated T cells exhibit higher glycolysis than OXPHOS. After differentiation, Th1, Th2,  
and Th17 have higher glycolysis than OXPHOS and high mTORC1 activity. Memory T cells and regulatory T cells undergo AMPK-dependent FAO and have  
variable mTORC1.
3
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
Thus, ATP and metabolic intermediates provide the signals to 
activate immune responses (4–6).
Hence, mitochondria, the chief organelle for metabolism, have 
emerged to play crucial roles in the maintenance and establish-
ment of immune responses. Mitochondrial machinery such as 
metabolic pathways, amino acid metabolism, antioxidant sys-
tems, mitochondrial dynamics, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), 
mitophagy, and mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) are crucial for 
immune functions. In this review, we have presented an updated 
prospective of the mitochondrial machinery that drives various 
immune responses.
MeTABOLiC PATHwAYS ARe TigHTLY 
CONTROLLeD iN iMMuNe CeLLS
Mitochondrial metabolic events can have tremendous impact on 
immune cell function. These metabolic events could be guided 
by the internal signals from the cell itself or influenced by other 
surrounding cells. Here, we have pointed out how oxidative 
phosphorylation (OXPHOS), fatty acid metabolism, and amino 
acid metabolism in mitochondria influence immune cell activity 
(Figure 1.1).
OXPHOS Affects immune Cell Activity
M1 and M2 Polarization
There are two categories of macrophages—M1 (classically acti-
vated) and M2 (alternatively activated). Polarization of monocytes 
to M1 or M2 phenotypes is controlled by the cytokines produced 
by other immune cells. M1 macrophages are activated by IFN-γ 
produced by Th1 cells and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Plus, M1 
exhibits nitric oxide (NO) production (7) and a pro-inflammatory 
phenotype. Contrarily, M2 macrophages are activated by IL-4 or 
IL-13 to regulate anti-inflammation and promote Th2 response 
and tissue repair (Figure 2A) (8).
Uncoupling Protein 2 (UCP2) and Macrophage 
Polarization
Mitochondrial UCP2 is localized in the mitochondrial inner 
membrane and shuttle protons toward the matrix (Figure 1.10). 
There is increasing evidence supporting that UCP2 controls 
mitochondria derived reactive oxygen species (ROS). UCP2 
can also influence polarization of macrophages. UCP2 expres-
sion is decreased in M1 macrophages. By blocking UCP2, there 
is a decrease in IL-4 induced M2 macrophage activation (9). 
However, how UCP2 is regulated in other immune cells is not 
well elucidated.
 FiguRe 3 | Metabolism in M1 macrophages. (A) M1 macrophage metabolic regulation: M1 macrophages are prevalent in obese adipose tissue. Glucose uptake is 
increased in M1 macrophages. Importantly, the TCA cycle exhibits two breaks. The first break involves the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) which results in 
increased levels of citrate and itaconic acid. Citrate feeds fatty acid (FA) synthesis for prostaglandin (PG) and nitric oxide (NO) production while itaconic acid has 
anti-bacterial properties. The second break happens with the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) which causes increased succinate levels. Succinate stabilizes 
HIF-1α which binds to the interleukin (IL)-1β promoter boosting IL-1β production and inflammation. Increased flow through the aspartate arginosuccinate shunt 
(AASS) replenishes the TCA cycle which further increases citrate levels and feeds the urea cycle which contributes to NO production. Glutamine is converted into 
glutamate by glutamate synthase (GS). Glutamate can further be converted into α-ketoglutarate (αKG). Low αKG/succinate ratio strengthens M1 macrophage 
activation. Glutamine-synthetase inhibition skews M2-polarized macrophages toward the M1-like phenotype characterized by reduced intracellular glutamine and 
increased succinate with enhanced glucose flux through glycolysis which is partly related to HIF-1α activation. (B) M1 macrophage transcriptional regulation: in M1 
macrophages, the TCA cycle is broken. As a result, citrate is converted to free fatty acids (FFAs). FFAs activate macrophage IKK and JNK1 signaling molecules to 
induce M1 polarization. Activation of IKK and JNK1 in macrophages produces IL-1β and TNFα which can initiate inflammatory response. Adiponectin is released 
from adipose tissue and is involved in the breakdown of fatty acids. Adiponectin signaling inhibits M1 programming.
4
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
TCA Cycle in M1 Macrophages
Metabolic events are tightly controlled in M1 and M2 mac-
rophages. Mechanistically in M1 macrophages, TCA (tricarbo-
xylic acid) cycle exhibits two breaks (Figure 3A) (10, 11). First 
break occurs in the enzymatic step involving isocitrate dehy-
drogenase (IDH). This results in increased citrate and itaconic 
acid levels. Citrate is the precursor for fatty acid (FA) synthesis, 
prostaglandin (PG), and nitric oxide (NO) production. Itaconic 
acid has anti-bacterial properties which supports the notion that 
M1 macrophages have inflammatory function. Interestingly, 
IDH1 and IDH2 are the enzymes that catalyze decarboxylation of 
isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate outside and inside of the mitochon-
dria, respectively (12). IDH2 plays a vital role in the formation of 
NADPH which is critical for ROS balance in the mitochondria 
(13). Second break occurs in the enzymatic step involving suc-
cinate dehydrogenase. This causes an increase in the expression of 
succinate. Succinate stabilizes HIF-1α. HIF-1α binds to the IL-1β 
promoter and promotes IL-1β production. Increased aspartate 
arginosuccinate shunt will further increase the flow of the TCA 
cycle. Therefore, this will increase citrate levels and the urea 
cycle that contribute to NO production. Inhibition of aspartate 
aminotransferase inhibits NO and IL-6 in M1 macrophages. 
Thus, the production of NO, IL-1β, and itaconic acid can promote 
inflammatory functions (14). Also, glutamine metabolism also 
impacts TCA cycle in M1 macrophages.
TCA Cycle in M2 Macrophages
M2 macrophages adopt a metabolic program fueled by fatty 
acids and OXPHOS. Low NO production and high adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) can be the 
reason for the high rate of OXPHOS in M2 macrophages 
(Figure 4A) (15). Knockdown of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 
1 diminishes M1 activation whereas it enhances M2 activation 
of macro 
phages (16).
OXPHOS in Adaptive Immune Cells
Naïve and regulatory T cells exhibit OXPHOS as their primary 
method of respiration while activated T cells depend on glycoly-
sis. Naïve T cells depend on OXPHOS as their primary metabolic 
pathway. By contrast, activated T cells exhibit higher glycolysis 
than OXPHOS. After differentiation, Th1, Th2, and Th17 have 
higher glycolysis than OXPHOS and high mTORC1 activity. 
 
 FiguRe 4 | Metabolism in M2 macrophages. (A) M2 macrophage metabolic regulation: M2 macrophages adopt a metabolic program fueled by fatty acids and 
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). M2 macrophages are seen in lean adipose tissue and lipid uptake is increased in M2 macrophages (8). Both OXPHOS and 
FAO are important for the anti-inflammatory function of M2 macrophages. In M2 macrophages, glycolysis is impaired due to low HIF-1α activity and low expression 
of the active 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 1 (PFKFB1). Also, high α-KG/succinate ratio promotes the M2 phenotype. This could be due to 
the high flow of the TCA cycle or glutamine metabolism. M2 macrophages will channel FA toward re-esterification and β-oxidation. β-oxidation is channeled through 
carinitine palmitoyl transferase 1 (CPT1) (9). The high rates of OXPHOS in M2 macrophages are caused by low nitric oxide (NO) production and high adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity. (B) M2 macrophage transcriptional regulation: omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) undergo 
enzymatic transformation by 12/15-LO (lipoxygenase) and other enzymes in the production of specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs) and intermediate 
metabolites that are potent PPAR ligands. M2-inducing cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 promote STAT6 phosphorylation to induce transcription of PPARs (γ and δ) and 
their coactivator PPARγ-coactivator-1β (PGC-1β). M2 exhibit enhanced PPAR-γ activity. PPAR-γ forms a heterodimer with RXR to induce OXHOS regulating 
proteins. PGC-1β promotes the STAT6 transcription complex and expression of M2 proteins such as arginase-1 and the pattern-recognition/endocytic receptor 
CD206. The STAT6 transcription complex further increases transcription of TCA cycle enzymes such as citrate synthase, CD36 (fatty acid transporter), ATP 
synthase, 12/15 lipoxygenase (converts omega-3 PUFA to SPMs), and LCAD (long chain acyl dehydrogenase, an enzyme for β-oxidation). Adiponectin activates 
PPARs in M2 macrophages and consequently increases β-oxidation.
5
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
By contrast, memory T cells and regulatory T cells undergo 
AMPK-dependent FAO and have variable mTORC1 (Figure 2B) 
(17). Interestingly, glutamine is required for T cell proliferation. 
Thus, glutamine can provide the intermediate metabolites of the 
TCA cycle after being converted into α-ketoglutarate in a process 
called glutaminolysis. These metabolites are important for prolif-
eration. In addition, CD4+ T cells can grow in glucose depleted 
media supplemented with sodium pyruvate (18). This suggests 
that pyruvate can be utilized, and it is adequate for the survival of 
T cells in the absence of glucose. In addition, it has been reported 
that mitochondria undergo rapid changes during T cell activation 
including increasing mitochondrial mass, number, and mtDNA. 
This further suggests that mitochondrial metabolism may be 
crucial for T cell activation and proliferation.
Lactate Can Act as a Substrate for Mitochondrial 
Respiration
Lactate dehydrogenase controls a reversible reaction involving 
the conversion of lactate to pyruvate (19). Lactate is secreted 
from tumor cells to the tumor microenvironment (TME). This 
causes acidification of the TME known as acidosis. Acidosis can 
suppress the proliferation and cytokine production of cytotoxic 
T cells (20). Along with cytotoxic T cells, macrophages can be 
influenced by lactic acid through HIF-1α (21). Furthermore, T cell 
activation requires activation of nuclear factor of activated T cell 
(NFAT). High concentrations of lactate can inhibit production 
of the cytokine interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and transcription of 
NFAT in both NK cells and T cells. Moreover, genetically tar-
geting LDHA in tumors helps to restore T cell infiltration and 
function (22). Similarly, umbilical cord derived mesenchymal 
stromal cells can produce a large amount of lactate. This leads 
to decreased OXPHOS and mitochondrial mass. Ultimately, this 
can alter the phenotype and function of dendritic cells (DCs) by 
inducing M2-type gene signature (23). This indicates that lactate 
concentration affects activation and survival of the immune cells.
In brief, metabolic changes in immune cells are primarily 
caused by alterations in metabolic pathways induced by tran-
scriptional changes and TME. In M1 macrophages, the TCA cycle 
is broken with a decrease in OXPHOS. On the other hand, M2 
TCA cycle is fueled by β-oxidation with an increase in OXPHOS. 
Furthermore, mitochondrial metabolism is important for activa-
tion of T cells. Acidification due to lactate production can sup-
press the T cell proliferation and cytokine production. Therefore, 
this evidence supports that remodeling OXPHOS in immune 
cells may be an essential component for developing more efficient 
therapy for autoimmune disease and cancer.
Fatty Acid Oxidation (FAO) in immune 
Cells
FAO in Macrophages
M1 macrophages are prevalent in obese adipose tissue (24). 
Unsaturated fatty acids (nitrosylated fatty acid and omega-3 
 6
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
derived fatty acids) polarize macrophages toward the M1 
phenotype (25). In addition, glucose uptake is increased in 
M1 macrophages (10). Hence due to their broken TCA cycle, 
 
M1 macrophages tend to store surplus fatty acid (FA) as triacyl-
glycerol and cholesteryl esters in lipid droplets. By contrast, M2 
macrophages are seen in lean adipose tissue (24), and their lipid 
uptake is increased (8). Both OXPHOS and FAO are important 
for the anti-inflammatory function of M2 macrophages. In M2 
macrophages, glycolysis is impaired due to low HIF-1α activity 
and low expression of the active 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/
fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 1. Also, high α-KG/succinate ratio 
promotes the M2 phenotype. This could be due to high flow of 
the TCA cycle or glutamine metabolism. M2 macrophages will 
channel FA toward re-esterification and β-oxidation (Figure 4A) 
 
(11, 26–28). β-oxidation is channeled through carinitine pal-
mitoyl transferase 1 (CPT1), but there are not enough studies 
supporting how CPT1 is regulated in different macrophages.
FAO Controls Transcription of M1 Proteins
In M1 macrophages, the TCA cycle is broken. As a result, citrate 
is converted to free fatty acids (FFAs). Th1 type cytokines and 
saturated FFAs activate macrophage IKK and JNK1 signaling 
molecules to induce M1 polarization. Activation of IKK and 
JNK1 in macrophages produce IL-1β and TNFα which can initi-
ate inflammatory responses. In addition, IL-1β and TNFα can 
also activate adipocyte IKK and JNK to block insulin signaling 
resulting in insulin insensitivity (Figure 3B) (11). Adiponectin is 
released from adipose tissue and involved in glucose metabolism 
and break down of fatty acids (29). Adiponectin signaling inhibits 
M1 programming.
FAO Controls Transcription of M2 Proteins
Transcriptional changes in M2 can be the root cause for high FAO. 
Mechanistically, M2-inducing cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 promote 
STAT6 phosphorylation to induce transcription of PPARs (γ and δ) 
and their coactivator PPARγ-coactivator-1β (PGC-1β) (30). PGC-
1β promotes the STAT6 transcription complex and expression 
of M2 proteins such as arginase-1 and the pattern recognition/
endocytic receptor CD206 (Figure 4B). Subsequently, STAT6 
transcription complex further increases transcription of TCA 
cycle enzymes such as citrate synthase, CD36 (fatty acid trans-
porter), ATP synthase, 12/15 lipoxygenase (converts omega-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids to SPMs), and LCAD (long chain 
acyl dehydrogenase, an enzyme for β-oxidation) (11). Also, adi-
ponectin activates PPARs in M2 macrophages and consequently 
increase β-oxidation. In this way, the M2 program is activated. It 
supports insulin sensitivity by lowering FFA and promoting lean 
phenotype. Most importantly, these transcriptional changes lead 
to β-oxidation in M2 macrophages (Figure 4B).
FAO in Memory T Cell Development
Memory T cells are critical for long-term immune response 
against re-infection by the same pathogen which mainly depends 
on FAO (31, 32). CD8+ T cells play a crucial role in immune 
responses. Upon antigen stimulation, these cells differentiate into 
T effector and memory cells for long-term immunity. This differ-
entiation process is closely associated with FAO through AMPK, 
lipolysis, and IL-7. AMPK is a key regulator of FAO. Metformin 
activates AMPK which enhances memory T cell development 
in tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6)-
deficient CD8+ T cells (31). AMPK activation is an important 
factor for memory T cell development. In addition, lipolysis is 
the hydrolysis process through which stored lipids are converted 
into FA. Lysosomal acid lipase catalyzes this process. Memory 
T cells rely on the expression of lysosomal acid lipase to mobilize 
FA for FAO (32). IL-7 is required for memory T cell activation 
as well. Glycerol channel aquaporin 9 (AQP9) is utilized for 
glycerol transport and triglyceride synthesis, and IL-7 induces the 
expression of AQP9 in virus-specific memory CD8+ T cells (33). 
AQP9-deficient memory T cells showed less survival because of 
decreased glycerol import, reduced triglyceride synthesis, and 
consequently limited FAO. This suggests that IL-7-mediated tri-
glyceride synthesis is important for memory T cell development.
FAO in Regulatory T Cell Activation
Stimulated CD4+ T lymphocytes can differentiate into effector 
T cells or inducible regulatory T cell. Michalek et al. found that 
FAO is required for regulatory T cells differentiation. Glucose 
metabolism is required for effector T cells and is selectively 
suppressed by FAO (34). Also, AMPK and mTOR-mediated 
FAO supports Treg differentiation (Figure 2B). Also, de novo 
synthesized fatty acids are important for FAO and OXPHOS in 
activated plasmocytoid DCs (35).
In brief, M1 macrophages prefer storing FA while β-oxidation 
is increased in M2 macrophages. In adipose tissue, M2 mac-
rophages are associated with lean and insulin sensitive phenotype 
(through regulation of STAT6 and PPARs), whereas M1 mac-
rophages are linked to obese and insulin insensitive phenotype 
(through regulation of IKK and JNK-1). Current evidence sup-
ports that adipose tissue activity is linked to M1 or M2 program 
activation and obesity. Activated memory T cells (through AMPK 
and AQP9) and pDCs also support FAO. Concisely, the activation 
of immune cells is closely related to FAO and the cytokines pro-
duced by immune cells which also affect transcriptional changes 
in the surrounding cells.
Amino Acid Metabolism in immune Cells
Amino acid metabolism provides the metabolites needed for 
immune cells growth. l-Arginine supplementation in activated 
naïve T cells promotes OXPHOS, limits IFN-γ production, and 
most importantly helps to express memory T cell markers lead-
ing to longer cellular survival (36). Similarly, M1 macrophage 
polarization also requires amino acid metabolism. For example, 
arginosuccinate synthase is strongly upregulated in M1 macro-
phages (14). Inhibition of the aspartate–arginosuccinate shunt 
enzyme GOT1 (glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase) decreases 
NO production, and IL-6 production which is characteristic of 
M1 macrophages.
SHMT2 (serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2) catalyzes 
glycine synthesis from serine in mitochondria 
SHMT2 is upregulated in activated CD4+ T cells (37). SHMT2-
deficient activated T cells have decreased purine levels compared 
with wild-type controls as well as increased DNA damage and 
 FiguRe 5 | Tryptophan metabolism mediated immune cell response. L-tryptophan (Trp) can only be obtained in the human body from dietary sources. It is 
catabolized by the enzyme indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO-1) to L-kynurenine (Kyn). Interferon-γ produced by Th1 cells stimulates IDO-1 production in antigen-
presenting cells (APCs). Tumor cells are also known to have increased production of IDO-1. Increases in IDO-1 cause conversion of Trp to Kyn resulting in lower  
Trp and higher Kyn in plasma. Kyn is a ligand for aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Mitochondrial AhR (MitoAhR) is localized in the inner membrane space of 
mitochondria and is also affected by Kyn. (1) Immune tolerance by kynurenine: increased Kyn causes immune tolerance by inhibiting proliferation of both T cells and 
NK cells by inhibiting maturation of dendritic cells and increasing proliferation of immune suppresser cells (Treg and MDSC). Tryptophan depletion also causes 
apoptosis of T cells due to nutrient deficiency. (2) NAD+ mediated immune function: in addition, Trp is one of the sources for NAD+ biosynthesis. NAD+ is an 
important metabolite for metabolic processes [glycolysis, TCA cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)] and production of NADPH. During oxidative burst in 
macrophages, NAPPH is oxidized in the presence of NADPH oxidase to produce superoxide which is utilized to kill pathogens. NAD+ contributes to CD4+ T cell 
differentiation and SIRT3-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis. (3) mTOR inhibitor rapamycin can be used to treat systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and 
mitochondrial disease: T cell dysfunction is associated with SLE. In SLE, an increase in kynurenine and kynurenine mediated mTOR stimulation was observed. In 
addition, accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) producing mitochondria and decreased Drp1 are associated with SLE. Rapamycin can increase Drp1 by 
inhibiting mTORC1. (4) Rapamycin inhibits mitochondrial ROS (mtROS): rapamycin inhibits mtROS through several mechanisms. Complex I in mitochondria is a 
source of ROS generation. Rapamycin can inhibit mtROS production by inhibiting complex I formation. In addition to this, rapamycin can inhibit mtROS by inducing 
autophagy and activating p62 and the NRF2 pathway.
7
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
impaired survival. Furthermore, SHMT-2 is the primary source 
for glycine which is important for glutathione synthesis.
Tryptophan Metabolism Is Important for Immune Cell 
Response
l-tryptophan (Trp) cannot be produced by the human body 
and must be obtained from dietary sources. It is catabolized by 
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO-1) to l-kynurenine (Kyn). 
Interferon-γ produced by Th1 cells stimulates IDO-1 production 
in antigen-presenting cells (APCs), and tumor cells are known 
to express high levels of IDO-1 (38, 39). Increased IDO-1 causes 
conversion of Trp to Kyn resulting in a decrease of Trp and an 
increase of Kyn in plasma. Kyn is a ligand for aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor (AhR). Increased Kyn causes immune tolerance by inhi-
biting proliferation of T cells and NK cells, inhibiting maturation 
of DCs, and increasing proliferation of immune suppresser cells 
(Treg and MDSC). Also, tryptophan depletion causes apoptosis of 
T cells due to nutrient deficiency (Figure 5) (40–43).
Tryptophan Also Affects Mitochondrial Function
Tryptophan metabolism partially occurs in mitochondria. Trp is 
one of the sources for NAD+ biosynthesis (Figure 5). NAD+ is an 
important metabolite for metabolic processes such as glycolysis, 
TCA cycle, and OXPHOS (44). During macrophage oxidative 
burst in the presence of NADPH oxidase, NADPH is oxidized to 
produce superoxide that is utilized to kill pathogens. Furthermore, 
NAD+ and AhR are also linked to mitochondria. Mitochondrial 
AhR is localized in the inner membrane space of mitochondria 
which is also affected by Kyn (45). NAD+ has recently gained much 
interest because CD4+ T cell differentiation is controlled by NAD+ 
(46). NAD-dependent deacetylase Sirtuin 3 (Sirt3) is localized 
in mitochondria. SIRT3 controls mitochondria biogenesis and 
 8
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
ATP production. Sirt3 can regulate IDH2 (TCA cycle), LCAD 
(β-oxidation), and MnSOD (mtROS balance) (Figure 9.1) (47). 
Furthermore, Sirt3 is dependent on NAD+ (Figure 1.2) (48). This 
suggests that tryptophan metabolism is important for immune 
response, immune tolerance, and metabolism in mitochondria 
(Figure 5).
mTOR Inhibitor Rapamycin Can Be Used to Treat 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) and 
Mitochondrial Disease
T cell dysfunction is associated with SLE. In SLE, an increase in 
kynurenine and kynurenine-mediated mTOR stimulation was 
observed (49). When SLE patients were treated with rapamycin 
(mTORC1 inhibitor), progressive improvement was observed 
after 12 months in the clinical trial (50). Rapamycin treatment 
was also effective for mitochondrial diseases such as mitochon-
drial myopathy (51). In addition, accumulation of ROS produc-
ing mitochondria and decreased Drp1 are associated with SLE. 
Rapamycin can increase Drp1 by inhibiting mTORC1.
Rapamycin Inhibits mtROS
Rapamycin inhibits mtROS through several mechanisms. 
Com 
plex I in mitochondria is a source of ROS generation. 
Proper assembly of various subunits of complex I is impor-
tant. Rapamycin can inhibit matrix subunits (NDUFS3 and 
NDUFV2) as well as prohibitin (PhB) from binding to other 
membrane subunits (NDUFA9 and NDUFB9). Thus, rapamycin 
can inhibit mtROS production by inhibiting complex I forma-
tion (52, 53). In addition to this, rapamycin can inhibit mtROS 
by inducing autophagy and activating p62 and the NRF2 
 
pathway (54).
Glutamine Metabolism Is Associated With 
Macrophage Polarization and T Cell Activation
α-Ketoglutarate is an intermediate product of the TCA cycle 
and is also produced by glutamine metabolism (Figure 3A). 
αKG is important for alternate M2 macrophage activation by 
FAO (Figure 4A). Low αKG/succinate ratio strengthens M1 
macrophage activation and high αKG/succinate ratio promotes 
the M2 phenotype (55). In addition, glutamine-synthetase 
inhibition skews M2-polarized macrophages toward the 
M1-like phenotype characterized by reduced intracellular 
glutamine and increased succinate with enhanced glucose flux 
through glycolysis which is partly related to HIF-1α activation 
(56). Glutamine is also implicated in T cell functions. SNAT1 
and SNAT2 (glutamine transporters) are increased in T cell 
activation (5). Lack of glutamine inhibits oxygen consumption 
in effector T cells and reduces ATP concentration. After LPS 
treatment of macrophages, glutamine metabolism was increased 
(15). Glutamine deficiency reduces lipid-induced lysosomal 
dysfunction, inflammasome activation, and cell death in mac-
rophages but boosts autophagy (57).
Taken together, amino acid metabolism especially l-arginine, 
l-glutamine, l-tryptophan, and SHMT-2 (serine/glycine 
metabolism) plays a decisive role in the activation of T cells and 
macrophages.
MiTOCHONDRiA ASSOCiATeD CeLL 
SigNALiNg iN THe iMMuNiTY
Mitochondria are a metabolic hub in the cell which functions to 
meet cellular needs. Obviously, this necessitates that mitochon-
dria receive signals to alter their functions. However, accumulat-
ing evidence suggests that mitochondria not only receive signals 
but also actively provide signals. Mitochondria release proteins, 
lipids, metabolites, and ROS which can be used as signaling 
molecules. This crosstalk may coordinate cell-fate decisions and 
metabolic capacity depending on the cellular environment. Thus, 
we propose that mitochondria are an integral part of the decision-
making process when cells receive immune cues.
Mitochondrial ROS
Mitochondria are hubs in cellular signaling and produce ROS 
that drive production of inflammatory cytokines and play a role 
in removing bacteria. Major sites of ROS production are complex 
I and III of electron transport chain (ETC) (Figure 9.1).
mtROS Contribute to Macrophage Polarization
H2O2 is released from mitochondria being the source for mtROS. 
He et al. reported that Cu-Zn SOD-mediated mtROS contribute 
to macrophage polarization (Figure 9.1). Cu-Zn SOD mediated 
H2O2 suppresses M1 phenotype and promotes M2 phenotype. 
This suggests that mtROS contribute to macrophage polarization 
(8, 15, 58).
mtROS Are Important for the Anti-Bacterial Activity 
of Immune Cells
Recent studies demonstrate that mtROS significantly contribute 
to the bactericidal activity and activation of M1 macrophages 
 
(59, 60). West et al. found that TRAF6 is recruited to mito-
chondria resulting in increased mitochondrial and cellular ROS 
generation. In addition, mitochondrial catalase functions as 
an antioxidant to control cellular ROS. Mitochondrial catalase 
transgenic macrophages are less effective at clearing bacteria. This 
evidence suggests that mtROS are important for the anti-bacterial 
functions of macrophages.
mtROS Contribute to NLRP3 Inflammasome 
Activation
The NLRP3 inflammasome is a cytosolic complex that plays a 
key role in innate immunity by participating in the production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18 
(Figure 6) (61). The role of the NOD-like receptor (NLR) family 
of cytoplasmic pattern-recognition receptors in the initiation of 
inflammatory responses is gathering clear evidence. Structurally, 
NLRs typically consist of a variable N-terminal effector domain 
(PYD), a constant central nucleotide binding and oligomeriza-
tion (NACHT) domain, and C-terminal leucine-rich repeats 
(Figure 1.6). Upon cellular stress, NLRP3 oligomerizes and 
exposes its effector domain for interaction with the adaptor 
protein ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing 
a caspase recruitment domain) and then the complex recruits 
pro-caspase-1. Pro-caspase-1 clustering leads to its activation 
 FiguRe 6 | Mitochondria related signal cascades to activate immunity. Mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) is activated by the viral RNA sensor RIG-I and 
promotes inflammatory and immune gene expression via transcription factor NF-κB and IRFs. MAVS receptors can be found in the mitochondrial outer membrane. 
Mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) are also able to activate MAVS independently of RNA. The NLRP3 inflammasome also signals from the outer mitochondrial membrane. 
Like MAVS, NLRP3 also responds to mtROS and can cause mitochondrial damage that promotes the generation of additional ROS. NLRP3 drives the production of 
IL-1β and IL-18. Mitochondrial DNA can also activate NLRP3. Finally, MAVS promotes oligomerization of NLRP3 at the mitochondria. Therefore, two major innate 
immune pathways (RIG-I/MAVS and NLRP3) are all dependent on mitochondria.
9
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
and then active caspase-1 cleaves a variety of cytoplasmic targets 
including IL-1β. In the last decade, several studies found that 
ROS supplied by mitochondria are essential in activating the 
inflammasome (2, 62). Nakahira et al. also found that damaged 
mitochondria in macrophages treated with NLRP3 activator 
produced high mtROS and then activated the NLRP3 inflamma-
some (62). In another study, inhibition of mitochondrial complex 
I- or III-mediated mtROS activated the NLRP3 inflammasome 
indicating mtROS can be a main source of NLRP3 inflamma-
some activation (Figure 1.3) (63). It suggests that mitochondria 
contribute to immune response via the NLRP3 inflammasome.
mtROS Are Important for T Cell Activation
Stimulation of the T cell receptor (TCR) drives T cells into rapid 
proliferation and differentiation. T cell activation induces a rapid 
increase in mtROS production (18). Sena et al. also found that 
mtROS from complex III are required for CD4+ T cell activation 
and mitochondrial targeted antioxidant mitovitamin E attenuates 
IL-2 production. An alternative source of mtROS in mitochondria 
is mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2 (GPD2). 
GPD2 oxidizes glycerol-3-phosphate to dihydroxyacetone pho-
sphate leading to a hyper-reduced state of ubiquinone called ubiqui-
nol in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Kamiński et al. found 
that GPD2 could directly produce ROS and accumulating ubiquinol 
could support ROS production at other ETC sites such as complex I 
(64). GPD2 depletion has been shown to inhibit mtROS production 
during T cell activation and decrease IL-2 expression. Mitochondrial 
and GPD2 induced ROS are important for T cell activation.
mtROS Also Function as a Signal in B Cell Activation 
and Antibody Production
Naïve B lymphocytes undergo diversification of their antigen 
receptor through somatic hyper-mutation, alteration of immu-
noglobulin function by class-switch recombination (CSR), and 
differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells (PCD) or 
memory B cells. Bach2 is a transcriptional factor which is required 
for antigen class switch in B cells. mtROS block heme synthesis in 
CSR, but it promotes heme synthesis in PCD. As a result, mtROS 
are promoted during CSR and suppressed during PCD. In sup-
port of this, mitochondrial mass and membrane potential are 
increased in CSR and decreased in PCD (65, 66). Hence, mtROS 
modulate B cell function by changing heme synthesis.
In short, mtROS are important for immune cell activities 
in T cells (mediated by GDP2), in macrophages (via TRAF6, 
ECSIT), and in B cells (via heme synthesis).
Mitophagy
Mitophagy is a form of autophagy that specifically eliminates 
damaged mitochondria for mitochondria quality control. Mito-
phagy is regulated by PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) 
and the ubiquitin ligase parkin (67). On the surface of mito-
chondria, PINK1 recruits parkin from the cytosol and activates 
parkin’s E3 ligase activity (Figure 1.4). Parkin leads the ubiquitin 
conjugation of various outer membrane proteins to induce 
mitochondrial engulfment by an autophagosome followed by 
subsequent fusion with a lysosome for the clearance of damaged 
 
mitochondria.
 10
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
Interruption in Mitophagy Leads to Increased 
Susceptibility to Pathogens
Roles for mitophagy during pathogen infection have been 
identified. Degradation of those mitochondria damaged by Pseu­
domonas aeruginosa-produced siderophores requires PINK1 
in C. elegans (68). On the other hand, parkin mutation showed 
increased susceptibility to the intracellular pathogenic bacteria 
Mycobacterium leprae and Salmonella enterica which causes 
leprosy and typhoid fever, respectively (69–71). In addition, 
parkin-deficient mice and flies showed increased susceptibility 
to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and bacteria proliferation was 
increased in macrophages (72).
Decreased Mitophagy in T Cell Increases ROS and Apoptosis. 
T cells utilize mitophagy to maintain their proper homeostasis. 
Autophagy-related protein 7 (Atg7) is required for the formation 
of autophagosomes.
Pua et al. found that Atg7-deficient T cells had enhanced mito-
chondrial content, increased ROS production, and expression of 
pro-apoptotic proteins like Bak, cytochrome c, and AIF (73).
In addition, vacuolar protein sorting 34 (Vps34) is a member 
of the class III PI3K family of lipid kinases. Vps34-deficient CD4+ 
and CD8+ T cells had increased amounts of ROS, mitochondrial 
mass, and impaired mitophagy (74).
Hepatitis B and C Viruses (HBV and HCV) Utilize 
Mitophagy to Their Benefit
Mitochondria also initiate apoptosis signals. HBV and HCV 
induce mitophagy to protect themselves from apoptotic signal-
ing. HCV induces parkin and PINK1 leading to mitophagy and 
mitochondrial dysfunction (75). HBV was found to promote its 
replication in the cells by promoting PINK1/parkin mitophagy 
and fission to prevent pro-apoptotic stimuli (76).
Hence, proteins such as PINK1, parkin, ATG7, ATG5, and 
Vaps34 are important for mitophagy and are implicated in 
immune cell function. Absence of these proteins may increase the 
susceptibility to microbial infections and apoptosis of immune 
cells. Targeting these proteins can benefit HPV and HCV related 
infections.
Mitochondrial DNA
NLRP3 inflammasome facilitates activation of caspase-1, secre-
tion of IL-1β and IL-18, and cell death (Figure 6). There are 
many factors that involve activation of NLRP3 inflammasome 
such as NF-κB, pathogen-associated molecular patterns, ATP, 
and potassium ion channels (77). Interestingly, mitochondrial 
apoptotic signaling can also activate the NLRP3 inflamma-
some. During mitochondrial dysfunction, mtDNA is released 
from mitochondria and into the cytosol. mtDNA can bind and 
activate the NLRP3 inflammasome (Figure 6) (62, 78). In addi-
tion, autophagic protein deficiency in macrophages promotes 
mitochondria dysfunction and consequent release of mtDNA 
into the cytosol and activation of the NLRP3 inflamasome. 
Collectively, this suggests that mtDNA mediated activation 
of NLRP3 is related to autophagy and immune responses. In 
contrast to this, Allam et al. found that mitochondrial apoptosis 
was not required for the NLRP3 inflammasome activation, but 
caspase-8-mediated apoptosis is required for its activation. 
Nevertheless, this report supports that dysfunctional mito-
chondria cause mtDNA release and activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome (Figure 1.7) (79). This gives the indication 
that mtDNA is necessary for NLRP3 inflammasome activation 
and mitochondrial apoptosis. In addition, high frequency of 
polymorphisms in the D loop region of mtDNA is observed in 
lymphocytes of immune-related pancytopenia patients (80). 
This suggests that mtDNA contribute to red and white blood cell 
development. How mtDNA is controlled in the case of leukemia 
or other blood cancers is still not clear.
Mitochondrial Antiviral Signaling
Mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) is a signaling protein 
located on the outer membrane of mitochondria. It is activated by 
a viral RNA sensor called retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) 
(Figure 6). It activates pathways that regulate NF-κB and inter-
feron regulatory transcription factors (IRFs) to promote gene 
expression (81). mtROS can drive MAVS oligomerization and 
production of type I interferon (82) highlighting that MAVS 
might be a key sensor of mtROS. Furthermore, MAVS associ-
ates with NLRP3 and promotes its oligomerization leading to 
caspase-1 activation (83). Recently, Hee and Cresswell found 
that MAVS directly interacts with the antiviral protein viperin 
acting as an immune defense mechanism against RNA viruses in 
macrophages (84). These studies support that MAVS is activated 
upon viral infections, induces immunogenic signaling/apoptosis, 
and mediates the effects of mtROS (Figure 1.5).
MiTOCHONDRiAL DYNAMiCS PLAYS  
A KeY ROLe iN iMMuNe CeLL 
MeTABOLiSM
Mitochondrial fission and fusion controls mitochondrial mass 
(85). Nutrient deprivation induces an increase in mitochon-
drial fusion and suppression of mitophagy. On the other hand, 
prolonged DNA damage leads to mitochondrial fission (86, 87). 
Mechanistically, fusion is controlled by two dynamin-like 
GTPases: mitofusin (Mfn1 and Mfn2) for the outer membrane 
and optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) for the inner membrane. Outer 
membrane fission is regulated by dynamin-related protein-1 
(Drp1), mitochondria fission factor (MFF), Mid49, and mid52 
(Figure 7) (88).
The mitochondrial fission and fusion process can have three 
cellular functions. First, it allows mixing of mtDNA content. 
Each individual mitochondrion has mtDNA that encodes for 
respiratory complexes, but DNA containing harmful mutations 
can be pathogenic. A high load of pathogenic DNA can attenuate 
respiratory function. Fission and fusion can compensate for this 
problem by mixing mtDNA in different compartments until the 
pathogenic content becomes too overwhelming. Second, smaller 
particles can move more efficiently so mitochondrial fission can 
promote mitochondrial mobility inside the cell, and fusion can 
promote tethering to other cellular structures such as the ER 
(89). Third, mitochondrial fusion can increase cristae formation 
and can provide more surface area for OXPHOS and FAO while 
 FiguRe 7 | Mitochondrial fission and fusion contribute to immune responses. Mitochondrial fission and fusion controls mitochondrial mass. Nutrient deprivation 
induces an increase in mitochondrial fusion and suppression of mitophagy. On the other hand, prolonged DNA damage leads to mitochondrial fission. Fusion 
(tubular mitochondria) is controlled by two dynamin-like GTPases for the outer membrane proteins (mitofusin MFN1 and MFN2) and inner membrane proteins 
(OPA1). Fission (fragmented mitochondria) is coordinated by four outer membrane proteins (Drp1, Mff, Mid49, and mid52). Fusion and fission of mitochondria 
contribute to immune response. (1) Memory T cells have increased fusion generating more oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and FAO. (2) Clearance of apoptotic 
cells by phagocytes is known as efferocytosis. Resting macrophages have displayed tubular mitochondria. (3) Fission contributes to mitochondria mobility. During 
antigen-specific T cell and NK cell activation, mitochondria fission increased, and mitochondria move toward the immune synapse (IS) and facilitate ATP production 
at the IS. (4) Uptake of apoptotic cells by macrophages during efferocytosis requires fission and increased Drp1. (5) In mouse-derived bone marrow macrophages, 
knocking down Drp1 initiates NLRP3 inflammasomal activation, and inducing mitochondrial fission attenuated NLRP3 inflammasomal assembly and activation.  
(6) Activated effector T cells have increased mitochondrial fission and exhibit higher rates of glycolysis.
11
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
fission eliminates dysfunctional mitochondria and is an adapta-
tion for increased aerobic glycolysis.
During antigen-specific T cell and NK cell activation, mito-
chondria mobilize toward the immune synapse (IS) (Figure 7). 
Drp1, a fission factor, is required for translocation of the mito-
chondria (90, 91). Polarization of cytoskeletal structures, proteins, 
cell organelles, and transport of ions across membranes at the IS 
all require energy. This energy is provided by mitochondria. In 
addition, ATP is also released locally at the IS contributing to 
T cell function (92). Mitochondrial tethering is also associated 
with STIM-1 membrane trafficking from the ER to the plasma 
membrane in mast cells (93). Clearance of apoptotic cells by 
phagocytes is known as efferocytosis. Resting macrophages have 
displayed tubular mitochondria. Uptake of apoptotic cells by 
macrophages requires fission and increased Drp1 (Figure 7) (94). 
However, there is need of more research to know how fusion and 
fission regulate macrophage polarization.
Drp1 influences ROS Production
Interestingly, Opa1 is deactivated upon ROS increase. Drp1 
is activated and causes the fragmentation of mitochondria in 
neuronal cells (95). This is linked to iron overload, AMPK activa-
tion, MFF (96), and ubiquitination of A-kinase anchor protein 
121 (97). Conversely, ROS induced mitophagy is suppressed by 
depleting Drp1 (98). In addition, accumulation of mitochondria 
and decreased Drp1 is associated with T cell dysfunction in 
SLE (SLE → T cell dysfunction → mitochondria accumula-
tion → Drp1 depletion) (99). Rapamycin can increase Drp1 by 
inhibiting mTORC1 (100). This means that Drp1 can be targeted 
in ROS producing mitochondria and other immune diseases.
Fusion and Fission in Diverse immune 
Cells
Activated effector T cells have an increase in mitochondrial fis-
sion and mitochondrial mass but less cristae formation to support 
aerobic glycolysis. Memory T cells have an increase in fusion 
which consequently causes OXPHOS and FAO to be increased 
(Figure 1.8) (101). The receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 
(RIPK3) plays a crucial role in natural killer T cell (NKT cell)-
mediated immune response via activation of the mitochondrial 
phosphatase phosphoglycerate mutase 5 (PGAM5). RIPK3-
mediated PGAM5 promotes nuclear translocation of NFAT and 
dephosphorylating Drp1 in NKT cells (102). In addition, there 
is some evidence that mitochondrial dynamics is also related to 
inflammasomal activation. Obese rats have increased expression 
of Drp1 and NLRP3 and decreased fusion-relative protein optic 
 12
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
atropy-1 (OPA1) (103). In mouse bone marrow-derived mac-
rophages, knocking down Drp1 initiates NLRP3 inflammasomal 
activation, and inducing mitochondrial fission attenuated NLRP3 
inflammasomal assembly and activation (104).
In addition to mtDNA mixing, mobility, and metabolic regula-
tion, mitochondrial dynamics also control the inflammasomal 
activation. However, how the genes for fusion and fission are 
controlled is still unknown.
MiTOCHONDRiA ARe A NODe FOR ROS, 
AND ANTiOXiDANTS ARe iMPORTANT 
FOR THe NeuTRALiZATiON OF ROS
Antioxidants Play an important Role in 
Neutralizing mtROS
In mitochondria, superoxide O2
−
(
) is released from complex I (into 
the matrix) and III (into both the matrix and intermembrane 
space). This is converted to H2O2 in the presence of SOD. 
Catalase converts H2O2 to H2O. H2O2 can also be converted to 
HOCl in the presence of myeloperoxidase. HOCl is produced by 
neutrophils to damage macromolecules of pathogens and 
ultimately kill the pathogens. H2O2 can also go through the 
fenton reaction to produce highly reactive OH−. This can react 
with different components of the cell and cause damage. 
Glutathione converts OH− to H2O to reduce the cellular damage. 
Superoxide, OH−, and H2O2 generated in mitochondria are the 
main sources of ROS. Hence, antioxidants such as catalase, 
Mn-SOD (manganese dismutase in mitochondria matrix), Cu/
Zn-SOD (in the intermembrane space and cytosol), and 
glutathione play a crucial role by neutralizing the ROS 
(Figure 9.1) (105).
ROS Are Important to Maintain Cellular Homeostasis
Low or moderate concentrations of ROS help cells maintain 
healthy conditions. For example, oxidative burst in macrophages 
generated using NADPH oxidase releases H2O2 during phagocy-
tosis to kill pathogens. H2O2 is converted into HOCl to kill patho-
gens by damaging macromolecules. H2O2 influences mtDNA and 
nuclear DNA transcription of antioxidant genes (NRF2, AP-1). 
However, it can lead to pathological conditions in the case of 
excess of ROS. Excess levels of ROS inhibit glucose transporter 
proteins and cause alterations in cellular signaling and oxidative 
damage to macromolecules. Antioxidants neutralize the ROS and 
maintain healthy conditions (Figure 9.2).
Glutathione Metabolism and Function
Glutathione can be considered “mother of the antioxidant defense 
system.” Glutathione is synthesized from amino acids in a two-
step reaction. In the presence of γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase, 
glutamic acid and cysteine are converted into γ-glutamylcysteine. 
Glycine is then added in the presence of glutathione synthetase 
to make glutathione. γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase regulates 
glutathione synthesis. Oxidative stress influences the function 
of γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase. Glutathione is oxidized and 
reduced to glutathione disulfide (GSSG) in a reversible reaction. 
NADPH from the pentose phosphate pathway reduces GSSG to 
form glutathione pathway (GSH). GSH is important for conver-
sion of OH− to H2O. Mitochondrial GSH also contributes to 
detoxification of harmful lipids (lipids-OOH) and deglutathio-
nylation of mitochondrial proteins (106).
Other Antioxidant Proteins Present in Mitochondria
In addition to glutathione, other antioxidants (Co-Q, SIRT3, 
FOXOs) also influence ROS. Coenzyme Q (Co-Q) is an essential 
antioxidant that carries electrons from complex I–II and III. 
Co-Q is synthesized in mitochondria requiring proteins coded 
in 12 genes. Mutations in Co-Q genes cause CoQ10 deficiency 
which leads to an increase in ROS and ATP depletion (107). 
Sirtuin 3 (SIRT 3) coordinates FAO and superoxide detoxifica-
tion to control cellular ROS levels by deacetylation of acytyl co-A 
dehydrogenase, Mn-SOD, and FOXO3 (108).
glutathione Depletion Leads to 
impairment of immune Cell Function
Glutathione and APCs
Antigen-presenting cells display MHC on their surface which 
interacts with TCRs on T cells to drive immune function and 
cytokine production. Glutathione levels within APCs and 
immune cells regulate their function. GSH depletion in APCs 
correlates with reduced secretion of Th1 cytokines. Increased 
intracellular GSH content stimulates IL-12 or IL-27 which in 
turn differentiates CD4+ T cells to Th1 cells (109). In addition, 
activated macrophages and DCs secrete antioxidant precursors 
such as cysteine. Cysteine is taken up by T cells. This allows T cells 
to be protected from harm during antigen presentation.
Glutathione in Other Immune Cells
In support of this, glutathione depletion was observed in other 
immune cells. Decreased GSH/GSSG ratio in CD8+ memory T cell 
leads to an increase in ROS and impairment of CD8+ memory 
T cells (50). IL-17-producing γδ T cells (γδ17 T cells) have recently 
been found to promote tumor growth and metastasis. Low levels 
of glutathione are also observed in γδ17 T cells (110). These factors 
suggest that decreased GSH can disrupt immune cell function.
Glutathione During HIV Infection
It is well known that HIV suppresses the immune system. HIV 
infection is associated with elevated levels of ROS and decreased 
GSH. However, increasing GSH levels in NK cells reduces intracel-
lular survival of pathogens in macrophages (111). HIV infection 
destroys CD4+ T cells. Supplementation of L-GSH to HIV-positive 
patients with low CD4+ T cell counts resulted in an increase in IL-12, 
IL-2, and IFN-γ and a decrease in IL-6, IL-10, and free radicals as 
well as stabilization of the levels of TGF-β, IL-1, and IL-17 (112). 
This implies that glutathione can impact cytokine production.
Glutathione and Post-Translational Modification of 
Proteins in Immune Cells
Glutathione can also reverse ROS-mediated post-translational 
modifications. Increased H2O2 production results in increased 
protein S-glutathionylation in both monocytes and differentiated 
macrophages. Protein S-glutathionylation can be prevented either by 
 FiguRe 8 | Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated cell signaling in T cells: low/moderate levels of ROS promote mTOR, Myc, and nuclear factor of activated 
T cell (NFAT) activation which is associated with increased glycolysis and inflammatory response in T cells. ROS levels are regulated by the glutathione pathway 
(GSH) and NRF2–Keap1–Cul3 trimeric complex. Abrogation of GSH and the trimeric complex, which may cause high levels of ROS, impairs the inflammatory 
response of T cells. In addition, high ROS and high adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) levels inhibit mTOR. It is reported that naïve T cells, 
CD4+ regulatory T cells, and chronically stimulated T cells depend on OXPHOS as their primary metabolism method while CD8+ effector and CD4+ Th1 cells mainly 
depend on glycolysis. This metabolic switching is controlled by ROS.
13
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
the activity of antioxidant enzymes at the level of ROS scavenging or 
reversed by glutaredoxin-mediated deglutathionylation (113, 114).
In short, glutathione plays a vital role in APCs and T cell dif-
ferentiation, the function of NK cells and macrophages, cytokine 
production in immune cells, and post-translational modifications 
of proteins in immune cells.
Antioxidants Regulate ROS-Mediated Cell 
Signaling Pathways in immune Cells
Antioxidants neutralize the cellular ROS levels while also influ-
encing transcription of antioxidant genes and post-translational 
modifications of proteins involved in antioxidant pathways. 
Transcription factors such as NRF2 and Keap1 control expression 
of antioxidant genes. Therefore, ROS levels are regulated by the 
GSH and NRF2–Keap1–Cul3 trimeric complex. T cell-mediated 
autoimmune disease is mediated by dysregulation of these path-
ways and elevated levels of ROS (Figure 8) (115).
T cell metabolism is highly dynamic. Proper T cell activa-
tion and differentiation is critical (116). It is reported that naïve 
T cells, CD4 Treg, and chronically stimulated T cells depends on 
OXPHOS as the primary metabolism method while CD8 effec-
tor and CD4 Th1 cells mainly depend on glycolysis (117). This 
metabolic switching may be controlled by ROS.
During activation, CD4+ T cells must transition metabolically 
from OXPHOS to aerobic glycolysis to support proliferation and 
effector function. Low/moderate levels of ROS promote mTOR 
(Figure 8) (118), Myc, and NFAT activation. mTOR activation 
leads to increased glycolysis in T cells. Abrogation of GSH, which 
may cause high levels of ROS, impairs the inflammatory response 
of T cells. High AMPK levels inhibit mTOR and increase ROS 
(17, 119, 120). High ROS and diminished mTOR activation lead 
to decreased Myc and reduced transition to aerobic glycolysis 
in diabetogenic splenocytes. These results suggest that ROS 
are required for the metabolic transition (121). High levels of 
ROS and low GSH can lead to improper cellular signaling and 
post-translational modifications of proteins which can impact 
metabolic outcome.
Antioxidants influence Mitochondrial 
Membrane Potential (MMP)
Mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) is generated as 
protons are pumped outward from the matrix, a process that 
depends on substrate utilization and electron transport. This 
is a critical check point for cell death and ATP synthesis. Loss 
of membrane potential may result from any processes wherein 
protons move back toward the matrix. UCP2 acts like an anti-
oxidant to reduce ROS by moving protons back to the matrix 
(122). Sirt3 and FOXO activation decrease mtROS. Similarly, 
mitophagy through activation of BNIP3 or NIX decreases 
mtROS by decreasing the number of damaged mitochondria 
that produce more ROS. ΔΨm plays a decisive role by driv-
ing ATP synthesis. ΔΨm is regulated by glutathione which 
depends on thioredoxin and NADPH generated in the pentose 
phosphate pathway (123). There is still a need for more research 
on potassium and calcium channels that also have an impact on 
MMP (124).
Antioxidants Impact on MMP
, mtDNA, and ATP 
Synthesis
T cell activation and proliferation depend on the production of 
reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs). Mitochondrial hyperpo-
larization (MHP) is associated with increased ROI, decreased 
GSH, and ATP depletion. This MHP is crucial for T cell activation 
(125–127). In cancer cells, mitochondrial H+-ATP synthase is 
increased and ATPase inhibitory factor 1 is decreased when com-
pared with normal tissues. This in turn promotes ROS production 
 FiguRe 9 | Antioxidants neutralize mitochondrial ROS (mtROS). (1) Antioxidants in mitochondria: superoxide O2
−
(
) is released from complex I (into the matrix) and III 
(into both the matrix and intermembrane space). This is converted to H2O2 in the presence of superoxide dismutase (SOD). Mn-SOD (manganese dismutase) is 
localized in mitochondria matrix and Cu/Zn-SOD (in the intermembrane space and cytosol). SIRT3 is involved in deacetylation of MnSOD. Catalase converts H2O2 to 
H2O. Catalase is also localized in mitochondria (MCAT). Glutathione converts OH− to H2O to reduce the cellular damage. Glutathione (GSH) is oxidized and reduced 
to glutathione disulfide (GSSG) in a reversible reaction. NADPH from the pentose phosphate pathway reduces GSSG to form GSH in presence of glutathione 
peroxidase (Gpx). (2) Antioxidants play an important role in neutralizing mtROS. Uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) (mitochondrial uncoupler protein), which helps to 
shuttle H+ ions from the intermembrane space to the mitochondria matrix, decreases the membrane potential to inhibit excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
production. Excessive ROS production can impact ATP synthesis, cytokine production, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation, and post-translational modification  
of cellular proteins by S-nitosylation or glutathionylation.
14
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
and ATP depletion and further decreases the antioxidant defense 
system (128).
Excess ROS Can Lead to mtDNA Mutation
Reactive oxygen species can also cause mutations in mtDNA and 
further change MMP and ATP synthesis. mtDNA contains 37 
genes. 12 proteins are encoded by mtDNA as structural proteins 
of mitochondrial enzyme complexes (I-IV). Nuclear genes encode 
about 1,500 mitochondrial proteins. Changes in cellular ROS levels 
can cause mutations in mtDNA which further disturbs the normal 
functions of mitochondrial proteins (105). Mutation load in the 
ATP6 gene leads to a defect in mitochondrial ATP synthase which 
can further increase MMP and ATP synthesis depletion (129).
DOeS MiTOCHONDRiAL iMMuNe 
ReguLATiON HAve ANY THeRAPeuTiC 
iMPORTANCe?
Based on previous evidence, mitochondria are important for auto-
immune disease, mitochondrial disorders, and cancer. Selectively 
targeting OXPHOS can be effective for advanced melanoma (130). 
Also, altering mitochondrial machinery in sepsis can increase 
patient survival by 30% (131). From this, a new field has emerged 
called “mitochondrial medicine.” Drugs can be developed selec-
tively by targeting them to mitochondria causing a switch in 
immune programing (132, 133). Here, we have highlighted how 
antioxidants can be delivered into mitochondria and how it can 
be useful during ischemia reperfusion.
Role of Antioxidants in Mitochondria
Antioxidants can be targeted selectively to mitochondria to reduce 
oxidative stress (134, 135). Natural antioxidants (vitamin E, cur-
cumin, ginko biloba, melatonin) in addition to targeted TPP-based 
antioxidants (MitoQ, Mito-VitE, Mito-α-lipoic acid, Mito-PBN), 
small peptide-based molecules (SS31, SS02, SS19, SS20), choline 
esters of glutathione, and N-acetyl-l-cysteine neutralize mtROS 
which further maintains normal MMP (136, 137). These molecules 
are preferentially taken up by mitochondria due to differential charge 
(negative charge in mitochondria and positive charge on the mol-
ecules). Antioxidant SS31 has been shown to inhibit fission proteins 
 15
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
(Drp1 and Fis1). Antioxidants can be used as targeted therapy for 
mitochondrial disorders (138). Also, TPP conjugated antioxidants 
have shown to potently inhibit cancer cell proliferation (139).
Mitochondrial Components Are Modified 
by Antioxidants During ischemia/
Reperfusion (iR)
Ischemia/reperfusion injury is the tissue damage caused by the 
return of blood supply after a period of ischemia leading to a state 
of hypoxia. ROS are known as the primary cause of ischemic tissue 
injury. In mitochondria, several protein complexes are modified by 
S-nitrosylation and S-glutathinylation (140). Complex I is modified 
by both processes. Complex I has two transitional states: active (A) 
and deactive (D). Complex I is S-nitrosylated during D state which 
can be reversed by thiol reductants. Reperfusion of ischemic tissue 
rapidly activates complex I and increases the generation of ROS 
which leads to cell death. The presence of MitoSNO (S-nitrosothiol) 
or S-nitrosylated agents during reperfusion selectively target the 
ND3 subunit of complex I at Cys39 to keep the complex in low 
activity and decrease ROS production. In this way, S-nitrosylation 
of ND3 at Cys39 in complex I protects against IR injury (141–143).
Other mitochondrial components have been shown to treat 
 
diseases. However, whether these can also be implicated in immune- 
related functions is still not known. For example, coenzyme 
Q10 in mitochondria can be utilized as a potential treatment for 
heart failure (144). Genipin is a UCP2 inhibitor that is useful 
for anticancer therapy (145). Circulating mtDNA can be used as 
potential biomarkers for chemotherapy induced cardiac damage 
(146). Whether circulating mtDNA and genipin can be useful 
for leukemia or other immune diseases is still unknown.
CONCLuDiNg ReMARKS
The importance of mitochondria in immunity has become clearer. 
Besides controlling cell fate, mitochondria provide signaling plat-
forms generated by MAVS, ROS, and mtDNA. Mitochondria bal-
ance redox status to fine-tune NLRP3 inflammasome activation. 
Maintenance of mitochondrial fidelity by mitophagy is important 
for cell fate and immunity. The protective role of mitophagy has 
the potential to treat inflammatory diseases with excess ROS 
and mitochondrial dysfunction. This idea is supported by the 
observation that mitochondrial antioxidants help ameliorate 
symptoms (147, 148). In addition, targeting this pathway can 
be a therapeutic strategy because defective mitophagy has been 
implicated in Parkinson’s disease.
In addition, mutations in mitochondrial proteins have gained 
clinical importance. For instance, apoptosis inducing factor 
mitochondria associated-1 (AIFM-1) is related to mitochondria 
function and immune system regulation. Mutations in AIFM-1 
are related to fatal encephalomyopathy in infants (149). Recurrent 
mutations in IDH2 are associated with angioimmunoblastic 
T cell lymphoma (150). Polymorphisms in MnSOD can lead to 
abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy (151). This evi-
dence supports the conclusion that immunodeficiency is related 
to disrupted mitochondrial components. However, there is still 
need of more research to know what leads to these types of muta-
tions/polymorphisms and how they affect immune cell functions.
For immunologists, mitochondria can be the powerhouse of 
immunity along with their roles as the powerhouse of the cell. 
After many decades of hard work, remarkable developments in 
immunology research have improved our understanding of the 
immune system, and immunologists are now better equipped 
with modern knowledge and techniques to cross over into other 
disciplines. Future work will continue to reveal the functions of 
mitochondria in immunity. For example, “What are the roles of 
mitochondrial fission and fusion as well as cristae remodeling in 
immunity?” or “Do mitochondria affect other innate immune 
cells such as innate lymphoid cells and granulocytes?” We hope 
this review will inspire research into many questions that remain 
to be explored. Coupling the unique benefits of studying mito-
chondria and immunity is beneficial for the enormous clinical 
relevance in human health and diseases.
AuTHOR CONTRiBuTiONS
This manuscript was conceived by MT, designed and written by 
SL, AA, CY, and MT, and revised by JP, J-HK, and ZY. MT super-
vised development of this paper as the principal investigator.
FuNDiNg
This work was supported by The Vincent F. Kilborn, Jr. Cancer 
Research Foundation (MT), NIH grants R01CA149646 (MT), 
R01CA174714 (ZY), U54-MD007585-26 (CY), and U54 
CA118623 (NIH/NCI) (CY).
ReFeReNCeS
1. Grimm S. The ER-mitochondria interface: the social network of cell 
death. Biochim Biophys Acta (2012) 1823(2):327–34. doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr. 
2011.11.018 
2. Zhou R, Yazdi AS, Menu P, Tschopp J. A role for mitochondria in NLRP3 
inflammasome activation. Nature (2011) 469(7329):221–5. doi:10.1038/
nature09663 
3. Bantug GR, Fischer M, Grählert J, Balmer ML, Unterstab G, Develioglu L, 
 
et al. Mitochondria-endoplasmic reticulum contact sites function as immu-
nometabolic hubs that orchestrate the rapid recall response of memory CD8(+) 
T cells. Immunity (2018) 48(3):542–555.e6. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2018.02.012 
4. Pearce EL, Pearce EJ. Metabolic pathways in immune cell activation and qui-
escence. Immunity (2013) 38(4):633–43. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2013.04.005 
5. Carr EL, Kelman A, Wu GS, Gopaul R, Senkevitch E, Aghvanyan A, et al. 
Glutamine uptake and metabolism are coordinately regulated by ERK/
MAPK during T lymphocyte activation. J Immunol (2010) 185(2):1037–44. 
doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0903586 
6. Le A, Lane AN, Hamaker M, Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J, et al. Glucose-
independent glutamine metabolism via TCA cycling for proliferation and 
survival in B cells. Cell Metab (2012) 15(1):110–21. doi:10.1016/j.cmet. 
2011.12.009 
7. Wynn TA, Chawla A, Pollard JW. Macrophage biology in development, 
homeostasis and disease. Nature (2013) 496(7446):445–55. doi:10.1038/
nature12034 
8. He C, Carter AB. The metabolic prospective and redox regulation of 
macrophage polarization. J Clin Cell Immunol (2015) 6(6):371. doi:10.4172/ 
2155-9899.1000371 
 16
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
9. De Simone R, Ajmone-Cat MA, Pandolfi M, Bernardo A, De Nuccio C, 
Minghetti L, et al. The mitochondrial uncoupling protein-2 is a master 
regulator of both M1 and M2 microglial responses. J Neurochem (2015) 
135(1):147–56. doi:10.1111/jnc.13244 
10. Mills EL, O’Neill LA. Reprogramming mitochondrial metabolism in macro-
phages as an anti-inflammatory signal. Eur J Immunol (2016) 46(1):13–21. 
doi:10.1002/eji.201445427 
11. Shapiro H, Lutaty A, Ariel A. Macrophages, meta-inflammation, and immuno- 
metabolism. ScientificWorldJournal (2011) 11:2509–29. doi:10.1100/2011/ 
397971 
12. Phan K, Ng W, Lu VM, McDonald KL, Fairhall J, Reddy R, et al. Association 
between IDH1 and IDH2 mutations and preoperative seizures in patients 
with low-grade versus high-grade glioma: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. World Neurosurg (2018) 111:e539–45. doi:10.1016/j.wneu.2017. 
12.112 
13. Kong MJ, Han SJ, Kim JI, Park JW, Park KM. Mitochondrial NADP(+)-
dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase deficiency increases cisplatin-induced 
oxidative damage in the kidney tubule cells. Cell Death Dis (2018) 9(5):488. 
doi:10.1038/s41419-018-0537-6 
14. Jha AK, Huang SC, Sergushichev A, Lampropoulou V
, Ivanova Y, Loginicheva E, 
 
et al. Network integration of parallel metabolic and transcriptional data 
reveals metabolic modules that regulate macrophage polarization. Immunity 
(2015) 42(3):419–30. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2015.02.005 
15. Tannahill GM, Curtis AM, Adamik J, Palsson-McDermott EM, McGettrick AF, 
 
Goel G, et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1beta through 
HIF-1alpha. Nature (2013) 496(7444):238–42. doi:10.1038/nature11986 
16. Tan Z, Xie N, Cui H, Moellering DR, Abraham E, Thannickal VJ, et al. 
Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 participates in macrophage polarization 
via regulating glucose metabolism. J Immunol (2015) 194(12):6082–9. 
doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1402469 
17. Coe DJ, Kishore M, Marelli-Berg F. Metabolic regulation of regulatory 
T cell development and function. Front Immunol (2014) 5:590. doi:10.3389/
fimmu.2014.00590 
18. Sena LA, Li S, Jairaman A, Prakriya M, Ezponda T, Hildeman DA, et al. 
Mitochondria are required for antigen-specific T cell activation through reac-
tive oxygen species signaling. Immunity (2013) 38(2):225–36. doi:10.1016/j.
immuni.2012.10.020 
19. Arora R, Schmitt D, Karanam B, Tan M, Yates C, Dean-Colomb W. Inhibition 
of the Warburg effect with a natural compound reveals a novel measurement 
for determining the metastatic potential of breast cancers. Oncotarget (2015) 
6(2):662–78. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.2689 
20. Fischer K, Hoffmann P, Voelkl S, Meidenbauer N, Ammer J, Edinger M, et al. 
Inhibitory effect of tumor cell-derived lactic acid on human T cells. Blood 
(2007) 109(9):3812–9. doi:10.1182/blood-2006-07-035972 
21. Colegio OR, Chu NQ, Szabo AL, Chu T, Rhebergen AM, Jairam V, 
et al. Functional polarization of tumour-associated macrophages by 
tumour-derived lactic acid. Nature (2014) 513(7519):559–63. doi:10.1038/ 
nature13490 
22. Buck MD, Sowell RT, Kaech SM, Pearce EL. Metabolic instruction of immu-
nity. Cell (2017) 169(4):570–86. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.04.004 
23. Selleri S, Bifsha P, Civini S, Pacelli C, Dieng MM, Lemieux W, et al. Human 
mesenchymal stromal cell-secreted lactate induces M2-macrophage differ-
entiation by metabolic reprogramming. Oncotarget (2016) 7(21):30193–210. 
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.8623 
24. Marino A, Menghini R, Fabrizi M, Casagrande V, Mavilio M, Stoehr R, 
et al. ITCH deficiency protects from diet-induced obesity. Diabetes (2014) 
63(2):550–61. doi:10.2337/db13-0802 
25. Adamson S, Leitinger N. Phenotypic modulation of macrophages in response 
to plaque lipids. Curr Opin Lipidol (2011) 22(5):335–42. doi:10.1097/
MOL.0b013e32834a97e4 
26. Rombaldova M, Janovska P, Kopecky J, Kuda O. Omega-3 fatty acids promote 
fatty acid utilization and production of pro-resolving lipid mediators in alter-
natively activated adipose tissue macrophages. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
(2017) 490(3):1080–5. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.06.170 
27. Ayers S, Switnicki MP, Angajala A, Lammel J, Arumanayagam AS, Webb P. 
Genome-wide binding patterns of thyroid hormone receptor beta. PLoS One 
(2014) 9(2):e81186. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081186 
28. Lammel Lindemann JA, Angajala A, Engler DA, Webb P, Ayers SD. Thyroid 
hormone induction of human cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1) 
in vitro. Mol Cell Endocrinol (2014) 388(1–2):32–40. doi:10.1016/j.mce. 
2014.02.003 
29. Zubair H, Azim S, Srivastava SK, Ahmad A, Bhardwaj A, Aslam Khan M, 
et al. Glucose metabolism reprogrammed by overexpression of ikkepsilon 
promotes pancreatic tumor growth. Cancer Res (2016) 76(24):7254–64. 
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-1666 
30. Vats D, Mukundan L, Odegaard JI, Zhang L, Smith KL, Morel CR, et al. 
Oxidative metabolism and PGC-1beta attenuate macrophage-mediated 
inflammation. Cell Metab (2006) 4(1):13–24. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2006. 
08.006 
31. Pearce EL, Walsh MC, Cejas PJ, Harms GM, Shen H, Wang LS, et al. 
Enhancing CD8 T-cell memory by modulating fatty acid metabolism. Nature 
(2009) 460(7251):103–7. doi:10.1038/nature08097 
32. O’Sullivan D, van der Windt GJ, Huang SC, Curtis JD, Chang CH, Buck MD, 
 
et al. Memory CD8(+) T cells use cell-intrinsic lipolysis to support the 
metabolic programming necessary for development. Immunity (2014) 
41(1):75–88. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.005 
33. Cui G, Staron MM, Gray SM, Ho PC, Amezquita RA, Wu J, et al. IL-7-
induced glycerol transport and TAG synthesis promotes memory CD8+ 
T cell longevity. Cell (2015) 161(4):750–61. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.021 
34. Michalek RD, Gerriets VA, Jacobs SR, Macintyre AN, MacIver NJ, Mason EF, 
et al. Cutting edge: distinct glycolytic and lipid oxidative metabolic programs 
are essential for effector and regulatory CD4+ T cell subsets. J Immunol 
(2011) 186(6):3299–303. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1003613 
35. Wu D, Sanin DE, Everts B, Chen Q, Qiu J, Buck MD, et al. Type 1 interferons 
induce changes in core metabolism that are critical for immune function. 
Immunity (2016) 44(6):1325–36. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2016.06.006 
36. Geiger R, Rieckmann JC, Wolf T, Basso C, Feng Y, Fuhrer T, et al. L-arginine 
modulates T cell metabolism and enhances survival and anti-tumor activity. 
Cell (2016) 167(3):829–842.e13. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.031 
37. Ron-Harel N, Santos D, Ghergurovich JM, Sage PT, Reddy A, Lovitch SB, 
et al. Mitochondrial biogenesis and proteome remodeling promote one- 
carbon metabolism for T cell activation. Cell Metab (2016) 24(1):104–17. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.06.007 
38. Gostner JM, Becker K, Kofler H, Strasser B, Fuchs D. Tryptophan metabo-
lism in allergic disorders. Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2016) 169(4):203–15. 
doi:10.1159/000445500 
39. Soliman H, Mediavilla-Varela M, Antonia S. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase: 
is it an immune suppressor? Cancer J (2010) 16(4):354–9. doi:10.1097/
PPO.0b013e3181eb3343 
40. Strong MJ, Xu G, Coco J, Baribault C, Vinay DS, Lacey MR, et al. Differences 
in gastric carcinoma microenvironment stratify according to EBV infection 
intensity: implications for possible immune adjuvant therapy. PLoS Pathog 
(2013) 9(5):e1003341. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1003341 
41. Ma N, Guo P, Zhang J, He T, Kim SW, Zhang G, et al. Nutrients mediate 
intestinal bacteria-mucosal immune crosstalk. Front Immunol (2018) 9:5. 
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00005 
42. Vera JF, Brenner MK, Dotti G. Immunotherapy of human cancers using gene 
modified T lymphocytes. Curr Gene Ther (2009) 9(5):396–408. doi:10.2174/ 
156652309789753338 
43. Jürgens B, Raberger J, Fuchs D, Heitger A. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in 
human hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Int J Tryptophan Res (2010) 
3:77–90. doi:10.4137/IJTR.S4076 
44. Rodriguez Cetina Biefer H, Vasudevan A, Elkhal A. Aspects of tryptophan 
and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide in immunity: a new twist in an 
old tale. Int J Tryptophan Res (2017) 10:1178646917713491. doi:10.1177/ 
1178646917713491 
45. Hwang HJ, Dornbos P, Steidemann M, Dunivin TK, Rizzo M, LaPres JJ. 
 
Mitochondrial-targeted aryl hydrocarbon receptor and the impact of 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on cellular respiration and the mito-
chondrial proteome. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol (2016) 304:121–32. doi:10.1016/ 
j.taap.2016.04.005 
46. Tullius SG, Biefer HR, Li S, Trachtenberg AJ, Edtinger K, Quante M, et al. 
NAD+ protects against EAE by regulating CD4+ T-cell differentiation. Nat 
Commun (2014) 5:5101. doi:10.1038/ncomms6101 
47. Duan W. Sirtuins: from metabolic regulation to brain aging. Front Aging 
Neurosci (2013) 5:36. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2013.00036 
48. Wakino S, Hasegawa K, Itoh H. Sirtuin and metabolic kidney disease. Kidney 
Int (2015) 88(4):691–8. doi:10.1038/ki.2015.157 
 17
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
49. Perl A, Hanczko R, Lai ZW, Oaks Z, Kelly R, Borsuk R, et al. Comprehensive 
metabolome analyses reveal N-acetylcysteine-responsive accumulation of 
kynurenine in systemic lupus erythematosus: implications for activation of 
the mechanistic target of rapamycin. Metabolomics (2015) 11(5):1157–74. 
doi:10.1007/s11306-015-0772-0 
50. Lai ZW, Kelly R, Winans T, Marchena I, Shadakshari A, Yu J, et al. 
Sirolimus in patients with clinically active systemic lupus erythematosus 
resistant to, or intolerant of, conventional medications: a single-arm, 
open-label, phase 1/2 trial. Lancet (2018) 391(10126):1186–96. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(18)30485-9 
51. Khan NA, Nikkanen J, Yatsuga S, Jackson C, Wang L, Pradhan S, et al. 
mTORC1 regulates mitochondrial integrated stress response and mitochon-
drial myopathy progression. Cell Metab (2017) 26(2):419–428.e5. doi:10.1016/j.
cmet.2017.07.007 
52. Miwa S, Jow H, Baty K, Johnson A, Czapiewski R, Saretzki G, et al. Low 
abundance of the matrix arm of complex I in mitochondria predicts longevity 
in mice. Nat Commun (2014) 5:3837. doi:10.1038/ncomms4837 
53. Mimaki M, Wang X, McKenzie M, Thorburn DR, Ryan MT. Understanding 
mitochondrial complex I assembly in health and disease. Biochim Biophys 
Acta (2012) 1817(6):851–62. doi:10.1016/j.bbabio.2011.08.010 
54. Ko JH, Yoon SO, Lee HJ, Oh JY. Rapamycin regulates macrophage activation 
by inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome-p38 MAPK-NFkappaB pathways in 
autophagy- and p62-dependent manners. Oncotarget (2017) 8(25):40817–31. 
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.17256 
55. Liu PS, Wang H, Li X, Chao T, Teav T, Christen S, et al. alpha-ketoglutarate 
orchestrates macrophage activation through metabolic and epigenetic repro-
gramming. Nat Immunol (2017) 18(9):985–94. doi:10.1038/ni.3796 
56. Palmieri EM, Menga A, Martín-Pérez R, Quinto A, Riera-Domingo C, De 
Tullio G, et al. Pharmacologic or genetic targeting of glutamine synthetase 
skews macrophages toward an M1-like phenotype and inhibits tumor 
metastasis. Cell Rep (2017) 20(7):1654–66. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.054 
57. He L, Weber KJ, Schilling JD. Glutamine modulates macrophage lipotoxicity. 
Nutrients (2016) 8(4):215. doi:10.3390/nu8040215 
58. He C, Ryan AJ, Murthy S, Carter AB. Accelerated development of pulmonary 
fibrosis via Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase-induced alternative activation 
of macrophages. J Biol Chem (2013) 288(28):20745–57. doi:10.1074/jbc.
M112.410720 
59. West AP
, Brodsky IE, Rahner C, Woo DK, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P
, 
 
et al. TLR signalling augments macrophage bactericidal activity through mito-
chondrial ROS. Nature (2011) 472(7344):476–80. doi:10.1038/nature09973 
60. Rousset S, Emre Y, Join-Lambert O, Hurtaud C, Ricquier D, Cassard- 
Doulcier AM. The uncoupling protein 2 modulates the cytokine balance in 
innate immunity. Cytokine (2006) 35(3–4):135–42. doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2006. 
07.012 
61. Dostert C, Pétrilli V, Van Bruggen R, Steele C, Mossman BT, Tschopp J. Innate 
immune activation through Nalp3 inflammasome sensing of asbestos and 
silica. Science (2008) 320(5876):674–7. doi:10.1126/science.1156995 
62. Nakahira K, Haspel JA, Rathinam VA, Lee SJ, Dolinay T, Lam HC, et al. 
Autophagy proteins regulate innate immune responses by inhibiting the 
release of mitochondrial DNA mediated by the NALP3 inflammasome. Nat 
Immunol (2011) 12(3):222–30. doi:10.1038/ni.1980 
63. Li N, Ragheb K, Lawler G, Sturgis J, Rajwa B, Melendez JA, et al. Mitochon-
drial complex I inhibitor rotenone induces apoptosis through enhancing 
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production. J Biol Chem (2003) 
278(10):8516–25. doi:10.1074/jbc.M210432200 
64. Kamiński MM, Sauer SW, Kamiński M, Opp S, Ruppert T, Grigaravičius P, 
et al. T cell activation is driven by an ADP-dependent glucokinase linking 
enhanced glycolysis with mitochondrial reactive oxygen species generation. 
Cell Rep (2012) 2(5):1300–15. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2012.10.009 
65. Watanabe-Matsui M, Muto A, Matsui T, Itoh-Nakadai A, Nakajima O, 
Murayama K, et al. Heme regulates B-cell differentiation, antibody class 
switch, and heme oxygenase-1 expression in B cells as a ligand of Bach2. 
Blood (2011) 117(20):5438–48. doi:10.1182/blood-2010-07-296483 
66. Jang KJ, Mano H, Aoki K, Hayashi T, Muto A, Nambu Y, et al. Mitochondrial 
function provides instructive signals for activation-induced B-cell fates. Nat 
Commun (2015) 6:6750. doi:10.1038/ncomms7750 
67. Narendra DP, Jin SM, Tanaka A, Suen DF, Gautier CA, Shen J, et al. PINK1 is 
selectively stabilized on impaired mitochondria to activate Parkin. PLoS Biol 
(2010) 8(1):e1000298. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000298 
68. Kirienko NV, Ausubel FM, Ruvkun G. Mitophagy confers resistance to 
siderophore-mediated killing by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A (2015) 112(6):1821–6. doi:10.1073/pnas.1424954112 
69. Mira MT, Alcaïs A, Nguyen VT, Moraes MO, Di Flumeri C, Vu HT, et al. 
Susceptibility to leprosy is associated with PARK2 and PACRG. Nature 
(2004) 427(6975):636–40. doi:10.1038/nature02326 
70. Malhotra D, Darvishi K, Lohra M, Kumar H, Grover C, Sood S, et al. 
Association study of major risk single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 
common regulatory region of PARK2 and PACRG genes with leprosy in 
an Indian population. Eur J Hum Genet (2006) 14(4):438–42. doi:10.1038/
sj.ejhg.5201563 
71. Ali S, Vollaard AM, Widjaja S, Surjadi C, van de Vosse E, van Dissel JT. 
PARK2/PACRG polymorphisms and susceptibility to typhoid and paraty-
phoid fever. Clin Exp Immunol (2006) 144(3):425–31. doi:10.1111/j.1365- 
2249.2006.03087.x 
72. Manzanillo PS, Ayres JS, Watson RO, Collins AC, Souza G, Rae CS, et al. The 
ubiquitin ligase parkin mediates resistance to intracellular pathogens. Nature 
(2013) 501(7468):512–6. doi:10.1038/nature12566 
73. Pua HH, Guo J, Komatsu M, He YW. Autophagy is essential for mitochon-
drial clearance in mature T lymphocytes. J Immunol (2009) 182(7):4046–55. 
doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0801143 
74. Willinger T, Flavell RA. Canonical autophagy dependent on the class III 
phosphoinositide-3 kinase Vps34 is required for naive T-cell homeostasis. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012) 109(22):8670–5. doi:10.1073/pnas. 
1205305109 
75. Kim SJ, Syed GH, Siddiqui A. Hepatitis C virus induces the mitochondrial 
translocation of Parkin and subsequent mitophagy. PLoS Pathog (2013) 
9(3):e1003285. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1003285 
76. Kim SJ, Khan M, Quan J, Till A, Subramani S, Siddiqui A. Hepatitis B virus 
disrupts mitochondrial dynamics: induces fission and mitophagy to atten-
uate apoptosis. PLoS Pathog (2013) 9(12):e1003722. doi:10.1371/journal.
ppat.1003722 
77. Shao BZ, Xu ZQ, Han BZ, Su DF, Liu C. NLRP3 inflammasome and its 
inhibitors: a review. Front Pharmacol (2015) 6:262. doi:10.3389/fphar.2015. 
00262 
78. Shimada K, Crother TR, Karlin J, Dagvadorj J, Chiba N, Chen S, et al. 
Oxidized mitochondrial DNA activates the NLRP3 inflammasome during 
apoptosis. Immunity (2012) 36(3):401–14. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2012. 
01.009 
79. Allam R, Lawlor KE, Yu EC, Mildenhall AL, Moujalled DM, Lewis RS, et al. 
Mitochondrial apoptosis is dispensable for NLRP3 inflammasome activation 
but non-apoptotic caspase-8 is required for inflammasome priming. EMBO 
Rep (2014) 15(9):982–90. doi:10.15252/embr.201438463 
80. Zhou QF, Xu SM, Wang HQ, Xing LM, Fu R, Shao ZH. [Single nucleotide 
polymorphism of mitochondrial DNA D-LOOP region in peripheral 
blood lymphocytes of immuno-related pancytopenia patients]. Zhongguo 
Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi (2017) 25(1):186–91. doi:10.7534/j.issn.1009- 
2137.2017.01.033 
81. Seth RB, Sun L, Ea CK, Chen ZJ. Identification and characterization 
of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates 
NF-kappaB and IRF 3. Cell (2005) 122(5):669–82. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2005. 
08.012 
82. Buskiewicz IA, Montgomery T, Yasewicz EC, Huber SA, Murphy MP, 
 
Hartley RC, et al. Reactive oxygen species induce virus-independent 
MAVS oligomerization in systemic lupus erythematosus. Sci Signal (2016) 
9(456):ra115. doi:10.1126/scisignal.aaf1933 
83. Park S, Juliana C, Hong S, Datta P, Hwang I, Fernandes-Alnemri T, et al. The 
mitochondrial antiviral protein MAVS associates with NLRP3 and regulates 
its inflammasome activity. J Immunol (2013) 191(8):4358–66. doi:10.4049/
jimmunol.1301170 
84. Hee JS, Cresswell P. Viperin interaction with mitochondrial antiviral sig-
naling protein (MAVS) limits viperin-mediated inhibition of the interferon 
response in macrophages. PLoS One (2017) 12(2):e0172236. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0172236 
85. Chao T, Wang H, Ho PC. Mitochondrial control and guidance of cellular 
activities of T cells. Front Immunol (2017) 8:473. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2017. 
00473 
86. Westermann B. Molecular machinery of mitochondrial fusion and fission. 
J Biol Chem (2008) 283(20):13501–5. doi:10.1074/jbc.R800011200 
 18
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
87. Zorzano A, Sebastián D, Segalés J, Palacín M. The molecular machinery of 
mitochondrial fusion and fission: an opportunity for drug discovery? Curr 
Opin Drug Discov Devel (2009) 12(5):597–606. 
88. Khan M, Syed GH, Kim SJ, Siddiqui A. Mitochondrial dynamics and viral 
infections: a close nexus. Biochim Biophys Acta (2015) 1853(10 Pt B):2822–33. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.12.040 
89. Quintana A, Hoth M. Mitochondrial dynamics and their impact on T cell 
function. Cell Calcium (2012) 52(1):57–63. doi:10.1016/j.ceca.2012.02.005 
90. Baixauli F, Martín-Cófreces NB, Morlino G, Carrasco YR, Calabia-Linares C, 
 
Veiga E, et al. The mitochondrial fission factor dynamin-related protein 1 
modulates T-cell receptor signalling at the immune synapse. EMBO J (2011) 
30(7):1238–50. doi:10.1038/emboj.2011.25 
91. Abarca-Rojano E, Muñiz-Hernández S, Moreno-Altamirano MM, Mondragón-
Flores R, Enriquez-Rincón F, Sánchez-García FJ. Re-organization of mito-
chondria at the NK cell immune synapse. Immunol Lett (2009) 122(1):18–25. 
doi:10.1016/j.imlet.2008.10.008 
92. Junger WG. Immune cell regulation by autocrine purinergic signalling. Nat 
Rev Immunol (2011) 11(3):201–12. doi:10.1038/nri2938 
93. Singaravelu K, Nelson C, Bakowski D, de Brito OM, Ng SW, Di Capite J, et al. 
Mitofusin 2 regulates STIM1 migration from the Ca2+ store to the plasma 
membrane in cells with depolarized mitochondria. J Biol Chem (2011) 
286(14):12189–201. doi:10.1074/jbc.M110.174029 
94. Wang Y, Subramanian M, Yurdagul A Jr, Barbosa-Lorenzi VC, Cai B, de Juan-
Sanz J, et al. Mitochondrial fission promotes the continued clearance of apop-
totic cells by macrophages. Cell (2017) 171(2):331–345.e22. doi:10.1016/j.
cell.2017.08.041 
95. Cid-Castro C, Hernandez-Espinosa DR, Moran J. ROS as regulators of mito-
chondrial dynamics in neurons. Cell Mol Neurobiol (2018) 38(5):995–1007. 
doi:10.1007/s10571-018-0584-7 
96. Zheng Q, Zhao Y, Guo J, Zhao S, Fei C, Xiao C, et al. Iron overload pro-
motes mitochondrial fragmentation in mesenchymal stromal cells from 
myelodysplastic syndrome patients through activation of the AMPK/MFF/
Drp1 pathway. Cell Death Dis (2018) 9(5):515. doi:10.1038/s41419-018- 
0552-7 
97. Tsushima K, Bugger H, Wende AR, Soto J, Jenson GA, Tor AR, et al. 
Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species in lipotoxic hearts induce post- 
translational modifications of AKAP121, DRP1, and OPA1 that promote mito-
chondrial fission. Circ Res (2018) 122(1):58–73. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA. 
117.311307 
98. Li N, Wang H, Jiang C, Zhang M. Renal ischemia/reperfusion-induced 
mitophagy protects against renal dysfunction via Drp1-dependent-pathway. 
Exp Cell Res (2018) 369(1):27–33. doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2018.04.025 
99. Caza TN, Fernandez DR, Talaber G, Oaks Z, Haas M, Madaio MP, et al. 
HRES-1/Rab4-mediated depletion of Drp1 impairs mitochondrial homeo-
stasis and represents a target for treatment in SLE. Ann Rheum Dis (2014) 
73(10):1888–97. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203794 
100. Oaks Z, Winans T, Caza T, Fernandez D, Liu Y, Landas SK, et al. Mitochondrial 
dysfunction in the liver and antiphospholipid antibody production precede 
disease onset and respond to rapamycin in lupus-prone mice. Arthritis 
Rheumatol (2016) 68(11):2728–39. doi:10.1002/art.39791 
101. Buck MD, O’Sullivan D, Klein Geltink RI, Curtis JD, Chang CH, Sanin DE, 
 
et al. Mitochondrial dynamics controls T cell fate through metabolic pro-
gramming. Cell (2016) 166(1):63–76. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.035 
102. Kang YJ, Bang BR, Han KH, Hong L, Shim EJ, Ma J, et al. Regulation of 
NKT cell-mediated immune responses to tumours and liver inflammation 
by mitochondrial PGAM5-Drp1 signalling. Nat Commun (2015) 6:8371. 
doi:10.1038/ncomms9371 
103. Liu P, Xie Q, Wei T, Chen Y, Chen H, Shen W. Activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome induces vascular dysfunction in obese OLETF rats. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun (2015) 468(1–2):319–25. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2015. 
10.105 
104. Park S, Won JH, Hwang I, Hong S, Lee HK, Yu JW. Defective mitochondrial 
fission augments NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Sci Rep (2015) 5:15489. 
doi:10.1038/srep15489 
105. Zapico SC, Ubelaker DH. mtDNA mutations and their role in aging, 
diseases and forensic sciences. Aging Dis (2013) 4(6):364–80. doi:10.14336/
AD.2013.0400364 
106. Ribas V, Garcia-Ruiz C, Fernandez-Checa JC. Glutathione and mitochondria. 
Front Pharmacol (2014) 5:151. doi:10.3389/fphar.2014.00151 
107. Acosta MJ, Vazquez Fonseca L, Desbats MA, Cerqua C, Zordan R, Trevisson E, 
 
et al. Coenzyme Q biosynthesis in health and disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 
(2016) 1857(8):1079–85. doi:10.1016/j.bbabio.2016.03.036 
108. Quijano C, Trujillo M, Castro L, Trostchansky A. Interplay between oxidant 
species and energy metabolism. Redox Biol (2016) 8:28–42. doi:10.1016/j.
redox.2015.11.010 
109. Fraternale A, Brundu S, Magnani M. Glutathione and glutathione deriva-
tives in immunotherapy. Biol Chem (2017) 398(2):261–75. doi:10.1515/
hsz-2016-0202 
110. Mensurado S, Rei M, Lança T, Ioannou M, Gonçalves-Sousa N, Kubo H, et al. 
Tumor-associated neutrophils suppress pro-tumoral IL-17+ gammadelta 
T cells through induction of oxidative stress. PLoS Biol (2018) 16(5):e2004990. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2004990 
111. Allen M, Bailey C, Cahatol I, Dodge L, Yim J, Kassissa C, et al. Mechanisms of 
control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by NK cells: role of glutathione. Front 
Immunol (2015) 6:508. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2015.00508 
112. Valdivia A, Ly J, Gonzalez L, Hussain P, Saing T, Islamoglu H, et al. Restoring 
cytokine balance in HIV-positive individuals with low CD4 T cell counts. 
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses (2017) 33(9):905–18. doi:10.1089/AID.2016.0303 
113. Short JD, Downs K, Tavakoli S, Asmis R. Protein thiol redox signaling in 
monocytes and macrophages. Antioxid Redox Signal (2016) 25(15):816–35. 
doi:10.1089/ars.2016.6697 
114. Allen EM, Mieyal JJ. Protein-thiol oxidation and cell death: regulatory role 
of glutaredoxins. Antioxid Redox Signal (2012) 17(12):1748–63. doi:10.1089/
ars.2012.4644 
115. Yarosz EL, Chang CH. The role of reactive oxygen species in regulating 
T cell-mediated immunity and disease. Immune Netw (2018) 18(1):e14. 
doi:10.4110/in.2018.18.e14 
116. Gerriets VA, Rathmell JC. Metabolic pathways in T cell fate and function. 
Trends Immunol (2012) 33(4):168–73. doi:10.1016/j.it.2012.01.010 
117. Beckermann KE, Dudzinski SO, Rathmell JC. Dysfunctional T cell metab-
olism in the tumor microenvironment. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev (2017) 
35:7–14. doi:10.1016/j.cytogfr.2017.04.003 
118. Franchina DG, Dostert C, Brenner D. Reactive oxygen species: involvement 
in T cell signaling and metabolism. Trends Immunol (2018) 39(6):489–502. 
doi:10.1016/j.it.2018.01.005 
119. Fracchia KM, Pai CY, Walsh CM. Modulation of T cell metabolism and func-
tion through calcium signaling. Front Immunol (2013) 4:324. doi:10.3389/
fimmu.2013.00324 
120. Kouidhi S, Elgaaied AB, Chouaib S. Impact of metabolism on T-cell differ-
entiation and function and cross talk with tumor microenvironment. Front 
Immunol (2017) 8:270. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2017.00270 
121. Previte DM, O’Connor EC, Novak EA, Martins CP, Mollen KP, Piganelli JD. 
Reactive oxygen species are required for driving efficient and sustained aerobic 
glycolysis during CD4+ T cell activation. PLoS One (2017) 12(4):e0175549. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0175549 
122. Sivitz WI, Yorek MA. Mitochondrial dysfunction in diabetes: from molec-
ular mechanisms to functional significance and therapeutic opportunities. 
Antioxid Redox Signal (2010) 12(4):537–77. doi:10.1089/ars.2009.2531 
123. Perl A, Gergely P Jr, Puskas F, Banki K. Metabolic switches of T-cell activa-
tion and apoptosis. Antioxid Redox Signal (2002) 4(3):427–43. doi:10.1089/ 
15230860260196227 
124. Laskowski M, Augustynek B, Kulawiak B, Koprowski P, Bednarczyk P, 
Jarmuszkiewicz W, et al. What do we not know about mitochondrial potas-
sium channels? Biochim Biophys Acta (2016) 1857(8):1247–57. doi:10.1016/j.
bbabio.2016.03.007 
125. Gergely P Jr, Grossman C, Niland B, Puskas F, Neupane H, Allam F, et al. 
Mitochondrial hyperpolarization and ATP depletion in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum (2002) 46(1):175–90. 
doi:10.1002/1529-0131(200201)46:1<175::AID-ART10015>3.0.CO;2-H 
126. Perl A, Gergely P Jr, Nagy G, Koncz A, Banki K. Mitochondrial hyperpolar-
ization: a checkpoint of T-cell life, death and autoimmunity. Trends Immunol 
(2004) 25(7):360–7. doi:10.1016/j.it.2004.05.001 
127. Fernandez D, Perl A. Metabolic control of T cell activation and death in SLE. 
Autoimmun Rev (2009) 8(3):184–9. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2008.07.041 
128. Esparza-Molto PB, Cuezva JM. The role of mitochondrial H(+)-ATP syn-
thase in cancer. Front Oncol (2018) 8:53. doi:10.3389/fonc.2018.00053 
129. Vojtísková A, Jesina P, Kalous M, Kaplanová V, Houstek J, Tesarová M, 
et al. Mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP production in primary 
 19
Angajala et al.
Mitochondria Role in Immune Responses
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1605
disorders of ATP synthase. Toxicol Mech Methods (2004) 14(1–2):7–11. 
doi:10.1080/15376520490257347 
130. Barbi de Moura M, Vincent G, Fayewicz SL, Bateman NW
, Hood BL, Sun M, 
 
et al. Mitochondrial respiration – an important therapeutic target in mela-
noma. PLoS One (2012) 7(8):e40690. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0040690 
131. Park DW, Zmijewski JW. Mitochondrial dysfunction and immune cell 
metabolism in sepsis. Infect Chemother (2017) 49(1):10–21. doi:10.3947/
ic.2017.49.1.10 
132. Sheu SS, Nauduri D, Anders MW. Targeting antioxidants to mitochondria: 
a new therapeutic direction. Biochim Biophys Acta (2006) 1762(2):256–65. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2005.10.007 
133. D’Souza GG, Wagle MA, Saxena V, Shah A. Approaches for targeting mito-
chondria in cancer therapy. Biochim Biophys Acta (2011) 1807(6):689–96. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbabio.2010.08.008 
134. Adlam VJ, Harrison JC, Porteous CM, James AM, Smith RA, Murphy MP
, 
 
et al. Targeting an antioxidant to mitochondria decreases cardiac ischemia- 
reperfusion injury. FASEB J (2005) 19(9):1088–95. doi:10.1096/fj.05-3718com 
135. Dare AJ, Bolton EA, Pettigrew GJ, Bradley JA, Saeb-Parsy K, Murphy MP. 
 
Protection against renal ischemia-reperfusion injury in vivo by the mitochon-
dria targeted antioxidant MitoQ. Redox Biol (2015) 5:163–8. doi:10.1016/j.
redox.2015.04.008 
136. Reddy PH, Tripathi R, Troung Q, Tirumala K, Reddy TP, Anekonda V, et al. 
Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration as early events 
in Alzheimer’s disease: implications to mitochondria-targeted antioxidant 
therapeutics. Biochim Biophys Acta (2012) 1822(5):639–49. doi:10.1016/j.
bbadis.2011.10.011 
137. Wu X, Cheng J, Wang X. Dietary antioxidants: potential anticancer agents. 
Nutr Cancer (2017) 69(4):521–33. doi:10.1080/01635581.2017.1299872 
138. Kim HK, Han J. Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants for the treatment of 
cardiovascular disorders. Adv Exp Med Biol (2017) 982:621–46. doi:10.1007/ 
978-3-319-55330-6_32 
139. Kalyanaraman B, Cheng G, Hardy M, Ouari O, Lopez M, Joseph J, et al.  
A review of the basics of mitochondrial bioenergetics, metabolism, and 
related signaling pathways in cancer cells: therapeutic targeting of tumor 
mitochondria with lipophilic cationic compounds. Redox Biol (2018) 14: 
316–27. doi:10.1016/j.redox.2017.09.020 
140. Mailloux RJ, Treberg JR. Protein S-glutathionlyation links energy metabolism 
to redox signaling in mitochondria. Redox Biol (2016) 8:110–8. doi:10.1016/j.
redox.2015.12.010 
141. Chen CL, Chen J, Rawale S, Varadharaj S, Kaumaya PP, Zweier JL, et al. 
Protein tyrosine nitration of the flavin subunit is associated with oxidative 
modification of mitochondrial complex II in the post-ischemic myocardium. 
J Biol Chem (2008) 283(41):27991–8003. doi:10.1074/jbc.M802691200 
142. Espinosa-Diez C, Miguel V, Mennerich D, Kietzmann T, Sánchez-Pérez P, 
Cadenas S, et al. Antioxidant responses and cellular adjustments to oxidative 
stress. Redox Biol (2015) 6:183–97. doi:10.1016/j.redox.2015.07.008 
143. Chouchani ET, Methner C, Nadtochiy SM, Logan A, Pell VR, Ding S, et al. 
Cardioprotection by S-nitrosation of a cysteine switch on mitochondrial 
complex I. Nat Med (2013) 19(6):753–9. doi:10.1038/nm.3212 
144. Bhatt KN, Butler J. Myocardial energetics and heart failure: a review of recent 
therapeutic trials. Curr Heart Fail Rep (2018) 15(3):191–7. doi:10.1007/
s11897-018-0386-8 
145. Shanmugam MK, Shen H, Tang FR, Arfuso F, Rajesh M, Wang L, et al. 
Potential role of genipin in cancer therapy. Pharmacol Res (2018) 133: 
195–200. doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2018.05.007 
146. Quryshi N, Norwood Toro LE, Ait-Aissa K, Kong A, Beyer AM. 
Chemotherapeutic-induced cardiovascular dysfunction: physiological effects, 
early detection-the role of telomerase to counteract mitochondrial defects and 
oxidative stress. Int J Mol Sci (2018) 19(3):E797. doi:10.3390/ijms19030797 
147. Dashdorj A, Jyothi KR, Lim S, Jo A, Nguyen MN, Ha J, et al. Mitochondria-
targeted antioxidant MitoQ ameliorates experimental mouse colitis by 
suppressing NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated inflammatory cytokines. BMC 
Med (2013) 11:178. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-11-178 
148. Cordero MD, Alcocer-Gómez E, Culic O, Carrión AM, de Miguel M, Díaz-
Parrado E, et al. NLRP3 inflammasome is activated in fibromyalgia: the effect 
of coenzyme Q10. Antioxid Redox Signal (2014) 20(8):1169–80. doi:10.1089/
ars.2013.5198 
149. Morton SU, Prabhu SP, Lidov HGW, Shi J, Anselm I, Brownstein CA, 
et al. AIFM1 mutation presenting with fatal encephalomyopathy and 
mitochondrial disease in an infant. Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud (2017) 
3(2):a001560. doi:10.1101/mcs.a001560 
150. Fukumoto K, Nguyen TB, Chiba S, Sakata-Yanagimoto M. Review of the 
biologic and clinical significance of genetic mutations in angioimmuno-
blastic T-cell lymphoma. Cancer Sci (2018) 109(3):490–6. doi:10.1111/cas. 
13393 
151. Moshtaghi A, Vaziri H, Sariri R, Shaigan H. Polymorphism of MnSOD 
(Val16Ala) gene in pregnancies with blighted ovum: a case-control study. 
Int J Reprod Biomed (Yazd) (2017) 15(8):503–8. doi:10.29252/ijrm.15. 
8.503 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Angajala, Lim, Phillips, Kim, Yates, You and Tan. This is an 
open­access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the 
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
