 STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1955
ABSTRACT: Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor 
is the treatment of choice for the prevention of atherothrombotic events 
in patients with acute coronary syndromes and for those undergoing 
percutaneous coronary interventions. The availability of different oral 
P2Y12 inhibitors (clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor) has enabled physicians 
to contemplate switching among therapies because of specific clinical 
scenarios. The recent introduction of an intravenous P2Y12 inhibitor 
(cangrelor) further adds to the multitude of modalities and settings 
in which switching therapies may occur. In clinical practice, it is not 
uncommon to switch P2Y12 inhibitor, and switching may be attributed 
to a variety of factors. However, concerns about the safety of switching 
between these agents have emerged. Practice guidelines have not fully 
elaborated on how to switch therapies, leaving clinicians with limited 
guidance on when and how to switch therapies when needed. This 
prompted the development of this expert consensus document by 
key leaders from North America and Europe with expertise in basic, 
translational, and clinical sciences in the field of antiplatelet therapy. This 
expert consensus provides an overview of the pharmacology of P2Y12 
inhibitors, different modalities and definitions of switching, and available 
literature and recommendations for switching between P2Y12 inhibitors.
D
ual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and a platelet P2Y12 receptor antagonist 
(P2Y12 inhibitor) is the treatment of choice for the prevention of athero-
thrombotic events in patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS) and for 
those undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).1,2 Clopidogrel, prasu-
grel, and ticagrelor are the most commonly used oral platelet P2Y12 inhibitors; the 
use of ticlopidine, the first available P2Y12 inhibitor, has been largely abandoned.3 
Clopidogrel is the only oral P2Y12 inhibitor indicated for the treatment of patients 
with stable coronary artery disease.1,2 Although all 3 agents have an indication 
for use in ACS, current guidelines support the preferential use of prasugrel and 
ticagrelor over clopidogrel because of their superior net clinical benefits.1,2,4–6 Nev-
ertheless, clopidogrel remains widely prescribed.7,8
The availability of different oral P2Y12 inhibitors has enabled physicians to con-
template switching among therapies because of specific clinical scenarios.9 The 
recent introduction of an intravenous P2Y12 inhibitor (ie, cangrelor) further adds to 
the multitude of modalities and settings in which switching therapies may occur.6 
A variety of factors may contribute to the decision to switch, including the clinical 
setting, patient characteristics, concomitant therapies, costs, social issues, devel-
opment of side effects, medication adherence, and patient/physician preference.9 
Dominick J. Angiolillo, 
 MD, PhD  
et al
WHITE PAPER
International Expert Consensus on 
Switching Platelet P2Y12 Receptor–
Inhibiting Therapies
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Correspondence to: Dominick 
J. Angiolillo, MD, PhD, University 
of Florida College of Medicine–
Jacksonville, 655 West 8th Street, 
Jacksonville, FL 32209. E-mail 
dominick.angiolillo@jax.ufl.edu
Key Words: drug 
interactions ◼ hemorrhage 
◼ pharmacodynamics ◼ platelet 
aggregation inhibitors ◼ P2Y12 
receptor inhibitors ◼ thrombosis
The full author list is available on 
page 1969.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1956
Therefore, it is not uncommon to change P2Y12 inhibi-
tor. However, concerns about the safety of switching 
between these agents have emerged.
At present, data from large-scale clinical studies to 
guide the optimal approach to switching P2Y12 inhibitors 
are limited, and most data are derived from pharmacody-
namic studies. In turn, practice guidelines have not fully 
elaborated on how to switch therapies, leaving clinicians 
with limited guidance on when and how to switch thera-
pies when needed, which prompted the development 
of this expert consensus document. Key leaders from 
North America and Europe with expertise in basic, trans-
lational, and clinical sciences in the field of antiplatelet 
therapy who have contributed to the scientific literature 
of switching antiplatelet therapies were identified by the 
document chairs (D.J.A. and M.J.P
.). All invited experts 
agreed to partake in the development of this document 
and endorse the recommendations provided. This was an 
academic collaboration between the identified experts 
and was free from any type of industry support. This ex-
pert consensus provides an overview of the pharmacolo-
gy of P2Y12 inhibitors, different modalities and definitions 
of switching, available literature, and recommendations 
for switching between P2Y12 inhibitors.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
Concerns surrounding the safety of switching between 
P2Y12 inhibitors have emerged because of the potential 
for drug-drug interactions (DDIs). A DDI is defined as a 
modification of the effect of a drug when administered 
with another drug. In particular, because of a DDI, the 
effects of a P2Y12 inhibitor can be decreased, leading to 
inadequate platelet inhibition and increasing the risk for 
thrombotic complications; alternatively, there may be a 
potential for overdosing as a result of an overlap in drug 
therapy that could lead to excessive platelet inhibition 
and predispose to bleeding complications. Although to 
date no studies have shown a clinical impact of DDIs oc-
curring as a result of switching, there is robust evidence 
associating different levels of platelet reactivity with ad-
verse clinical outcomes.10,11 The potential for DDIs when 
switching P2Y12 inhibitors rests on differences in their 
pharmacological properties. Key pharmacological proper-
ties to consider include drug half-life, the site and mecha-
nism of P2Y12 receptor binding, and the speeds of onset 
and offset of pharmacodynamic effects (Table 1).3,6,9
Clopidogrel, a second-generation thienopyridine, is a 
prodrug that is largely (up to 85%) hydrolyzed into an 
inactive metabolite by human carboxylesterase-1 after 
intestinal absorption.12 The remaining prodrug (≈15%) 
requires a 2-step oxidation process with multiple hepatic 
cytochrome P-450 (CYP) isoenzymes, mainly CYP2C19, 
to generate the active thiol metabolite that irreversibly 
blocks the ADP-binding site on the P2Y12 receptor (Fig-
ure 1). Prasugrel is a third-generation thienopyridine and 
is also a prodrug. However, the generation of the ac-
tive metabolite of prasugrel is more efficient compared 
with clopidogrel because ultrarapid hydrolysis by human 
Table 1. Pharmacological Properties of P2Y12 Receptor Inhibitors
 
Clopidogrel
Prasugrel
Ticagrelor
Cangrelor
Receptor blockade
Irreversible
Irreversible
Reversible
Reversible
Prodrug
Yes
Yes
No
No
Half-life of parent drug
≈6 h
<5 min
6–12 h
3–6 min
Half-life of active metabolite 
30 mins
Distribution half-life, 30–60 
mins
8–12 h
NA
 
Elimination half-life, 2–15 h
 
Binding site
ADP-binding site
ADP-binding site
Allosteric binding site
Undetermined*
Administration route
Oral
Oral
Oral
Intravenous
Frequency
Once daily
Once daily
Twice daily
Bolus plus infusion
Onset of action†
2–8 h
30 min–4 h
30 min–4 h
≈2 min
Offset of action
5–10 d
7–10 d
3–5 d
60 min
CYP drug interaction‡
CYP2C19
No
CYP3A
No
Approved settings
ACS (invasive and 
noninvasively managed), 
stable CAD, PCI, PAD, and 
ischemic stroke
ACS undergoing PCI
ACS (invasive or 
noninvasively managed) or 
history of MI
PCI in patients with or 
without ACS
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; CAD, coronary artery disease; CYP
, cytochrome P450; MI, myocardial infarction; PAD, peripheral arterial disease; and PCI, 
percutaneous coronary intervention.
*The binding site of cangrelor at the P2Y12 receptor level is not clearly defined; nevertheless, cangrelor is associated with high levels of receptor occupancy, 
preventing ADP signaling.
†Indicates times after loading dose and bolus administration for oral and intravenous agents, respectively. Times for oral agents refer to clinically stable subjects 
and may be prolonged in patients with ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarction or treated with opioids.
‡Indicates clinically significant drug interactions.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1957
carboxylesterase-2 forms an intermediate metabolite, 
which subsequently requires only a single-step hepatic 
CYP oxidation to generate its active metabolite. The 
active metabolite of prasugrel also irreversibly blocks 
the ADP-binding site on the P2Y12 receptor.12 Although 
the active metabolite of prasugrel is equipotent to that 
derived from clopidogrel, its plasma concentration is 
higher, which translates into more prompt, potent, and 
predictable platelet inhibitory effects compared with 
clopidogrel.12 The active metabolite of clopidogrel is un-
stable, has a very short half-life (≈30 minutes), and is 
rapidly eliminated from the circulation if it does not bind 
to the P2Y12 receptor. The active metabolite of prasugrel 
is more stable, but plasma levels fall rapidly as a result of 
distribution to extravascular compartments (distribution 
half-life, 30–60 minutes), after which levels may be in-
sufficient to achieve effective levels of P2Y12 blockade.12 
These low levels of active metabolite are detectable in 
the circulation for an extended time compared with 
clopidogrel as a result of the much longer elimination 
half-life (2–15 hours).12 Given the irreversible binding 
of the active metabolites, recovery time after treatment 
discontinuation approximates the life span of platelets. 
Although subject to variability, this is longer after prasu-
grel (7–10 days) compared with clopidogrel (5–7 days) 
discontinuation because of the enhanced level of plate-
let inhibition achieved (Figure 2A).13,14
Ticagrelor is an oral cyclopentyl-triazolopyrimidine 
that reversibly binds the P2Y12 receptor.15 It is a direct-
acting agent and does not require hepatic metabolism 
Figure 1. Mechanisms of action and binding properties of P2Y12 inhibitors.  
Left, Mechanism of action. Activation of the P2Y12 receptor inhibits adenylyl cyclase, causing a decrease in cAMP and phos-
phorylated (P) vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) levels, and activation of P2Y12 causes an increase in intracellular 
Ca2+ levels. These changes promote platelet aggregation by altering the ligand-binding properties of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
receptor. Inhibition of the P2Y12 receptor therefore suppresses platelet activation. Clopidogrel and prasugrel are oral prodrugs 
requiring hepatic metabolism to generate an active metabolite that irreversibly inhibits the P2Y12 receptor. Ticagrelor is a direct-
acting (no metabolism required) oral agent that reversibly inhibits the P2Y12 receptor. Cangrelor is a direct-acting intravenous 
agent that reversibly inhibits the P2Y12 receptor. Right, Binding properties. A, ADP binds to the P2Y12 receptor, which (B) leads 
to a conformational change of the receptor and to G-protein activation. C, The active metabolite of thienopyridines occupies 
the ADP-binding site on the P2Y12 receptor. Binding is irreversible, which renders the receptor nonfunctional for the life of the 
platelet. D, Ticagrelor binds reversibly to the P2Y12 receptor at a site that is distinct from the ADP-binding site. CYP indicates 
cytochrome P450; PGR, prostaglandin receptor; and PKA, protein kinase A. Adapted from Rollini et al9 with permission. Copy-
right ©2016, Mcmillan Publishers Ltd. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1958
to exert its effect. However, ≈30% of the antiplatelet ef-
fect of ticagrelor derives from an active metabolite (AR-
C124910XX) generated through CYP3A4/5 enzymes. 
This active metabolite has pharmacological properties 
similar to those of the parent compound.15 Ticagrelor 
requires twice-daily dosing because of its reversible re-
ceptor binding and half-life of 6 to 12 hours. Ticagrelor 
reversibly binds to a distinct site on the P2Y12 receptor 
and acts through a noncompetitive, allosteric mecha-
nism to prevent G-protein–mediated signal transduc-
tion after ADP binding.15 The pharmacodynamic effects 
of ticagrelor are more prompt, potent, and predictable 
compared with those of clopidogrel. However, because 
of its reversible binding and relatively short half-life, ti-
cagrelor has a faster offset of antiplatelet effect (3–5 
days) compared with thienopyridines16 (Figure 2B).
Cangrelor is an intravenous ATP analog that directly 
and reversibly inhibits ADP binding to the P2Y12 receptor 
in a dose-dependent manner, achieving immediate potent 
platelet inhibition after a bolus dose.6,17 Although its bind-
ing site at the P2Y12 receptor level is not clearly defined, 
cangrelor is associated with high levels of receptor occu-
pancy and prevents ADP binding. Cangrelor is promptly 
inactivated through dephosphorylation by ectonucleotid-
ase and has a very short plasma half-life (3–6 minutes). 
Therefore, recovery of platelet function is rapid (≈60 min-
utes) after discontinuation of cangrelor infusion.6,17
SWITCHING MODALITIES AND 
DEFINITIONS
This expert consensus provides uniform definitions to 
describe the various modalities of switching of P2Y12 
inhibitors. In particular, switching can occur between 
the oral agents and between the oral agents and an 
intravenous agent. Moreover, the timing of switching 
with respect to the index event that led to the initia-
tion of P2Y12 inhibitor therapy may also vary. Ultimate-
ly, switching may occur between different classes of 
P2Y12 inhibitors, which may have potential implications 
for the occurrence of DDI between the 2 overlapped 
Figure 2. Offset of antiplatelet effects of oral P2Y12 inhibitors.  
A, Cumulative proportion of patients returning to baseline reactivity after thienopyridine discontinuation: the RECOVERY trial 
(Recovery of Platelet Function Following Discontinuation of Prasugrel or Clopidogrel Maintenance Dosing in Aspirin-Treated 
Subjects With Stable Coronary Disease). Baseline platelet reactivity defined as within 60 P2Y12 reaction units (PRUs) of the reac-
tivity measured before study drug exposure. Adapted from Price et al14 with permission. Copyright ©2012, American College 
of Cardiology. B, Offset of inhibition of platelet aggregation (IPA) on ticagrelor, clopidogrel, and placebo: the ONSET/OFFSET 
study (A Study of the Onset and Offset of Antiplatelet Effects Comparing Ticagrelor, Clopidogrel, and Placebo With Aspirin). 
IPA after 20 μmol/L ADP (final extent) measured after last ticagrelor, clopidogrel, and placebo maintenance dose (day 0) and 
followed up for 10 days. Adapted from Gurbel al16 with permission. Copyright ©2009, American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1959
agents. Switching modalities between P2Y12 inhibitors 
and their potential for DDI are summarized in Table 2.
Switching Between Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors
Prasugrel and ticagrelor are characterized by enhanced 
pharmacodynamic effects compared with clopido-
grel.3,6,12–16 Therefore, switching between oral P2Y12 in-
hibitors may result in a variation from a less intensive to 
a more intensive agent (ie, clopidogrel to prasugrel or 
ticagrelor) or vice versa from a more intensive to a less 
intensive agent (ie, prasugrel or ticagrelor to clopidogrel). 
These modalities of switching are defined as escalation 
and de-escalation, respectively. Although studies com-
paring the pharmacodynamic effects of prasugrel versus 
ticagrelor have yielded some inconsistent findings, the 
overall levels of P2Y12 inhibition are markedly reduced 
and not that dissimilar between these agents.18 Switching 
between prasugrel and ticagrelor is referred to as change. 
Such terminology (escalation, de-escalation, and change) 
should be considered only when referring to the pharma-
codynamic effects associated with switching and should 
not imply any clinical correlate (efficacy or safety).
Switching may be also classified according to the 
P2Y12 inhibitor class. Two different classes of oral P2Y12 
inhibitors are available for clinical use: thienopyridine 
(ie, clopidogrel or prasugrel) and cyclopentyl-triazo-
lopyrimidine (ie, ticagrelor).3,6 In some circumstances, 
an interclass switch (ie, between agents from 2 dif-
ferent classes) may lead to a DDI, which is unlikely to 
occur from an intraclass switch (ie, between 2 differ-
ent agents of the same class). Overall, escalation of 
therapy has not been associated with DDI, regardless 
of class. However, there is a potential for a DDI with 
de-escalation therapy, particularly when switching from 
ticagrelor to clopidogrel.9,19 A DDI, with an increase in 
platelet reactivity, has been suggested when switching 
from ticagrelor to prasugrel but not from prasugrel to 
ticagrelor.20,21
Switching may occur at different times from the in-
dex event that led to initiation of oral P2Y12-inhibiting 
treatment. A main concern with switching oral P2Y12-
inhibiting therapy is that if this is associated with inad-
equate platelet inhibition, it may lead to stent throm-
bosis.10,11 Because thrombotic risk is highest in the early 
weeks after an ACS or PCI, the timing of switching from 
the index event may have therapeutic implications. Def-
initions from the Academic Research Consortium have 
been provided to define stent thrombosis according to 
timing of occurrence.22 In line with the therapeutic im-
plications associated with switching according to the 
time from PCI, this expert consensus believes that incor-
porating well-known and established definitions would 
be practical. Accordingly, the timing of switching with 
respect to the duration since the initiating event may 
be defined as acute (<24 hours), early (1–30 days), late 
(>30 days–1 year), or very late (>1 year).
Switching to and From an Intravenous 
P2Y12 Inhibitor
Cangrelor, the only available intravenous P2Y12 inhibi-
tor, provides more prompt and greater P2Y12 inhibition 
than any of the oral agents.17,23–27 Switching may occur 
from an oral agent to cangrelor or vice versa. Patients 
are typically switched from an oral P2Y12 inhibitor to 
cangrelor while awaiting cardiac or noncardiac surgery. 
This modality of switching is defined as bridging. Pa-
tients are typically switched from cangrelor to an oral 
P2Y12 inhibitor in the setting of PCI when cangrelor is 
used to achieve immediate potent platelet inhibition 
during the peri-PCI period. Because of the need to con-
tinue P2Y12 inhibition with an oral agent after discon-
tinuation of cangrelor, this type of switching is defined 
as transition. Because cangrelor is of a different class 
from all oral P2Y12 inhibitors, all switches involving can-
grelor are by definition interclass. Bridging from oral to 
intravenous P2Y12-inhibiting therapy with cangrelor is 
associated with sustained P2Y12 inhibitory effects and 
does not lead to a DDI.28 However, transitioning from 
cangrelor to a thienopyridine (clopidogrel and prasug-
rel), but not ticagrelor, can be associated with a DDI.26–31
Table 2. Modalities of Switching Between P2Y12 
Receptor Inhibitors and Potential for DDI
Type of Pharmacodynamic Switch
Type of Drug 
Class Switch
Potential 
for DDI
Oral*
 Escalation
 
 
  Clopidogrel to prasugrel
Intraclass
No
  Clopidogrel to ticagrelor
Interclass
No
 De-escalation
  Prasugrel to clopidogrel
Intraclass
No
  Ticagrelor to clopidogrel
Interclass
Yes
 Change
  Prasugrel to ticagrelor
Interclass
No
  Ticagrelor to prasugrel
Interclass
Yes
Intravenous
 Bridge
  Clopidogrel to cangrelor
Interclass
No
  Prasugrel to cangrelor
Interclass
No
  Ticagrelor to cangrelor
Interclass
No
 Transition
  Cangrelor to clopidogrel
Interclass
Yes
  Cangrelor to prasugrel
Interclass
Yes
  Cangrelor to ticagrelor
Interclass
No
DDI indicates drug-drug interaction. 
*Switching between oral agents may be classified according to relationship 
from the index event a defined as acute (<24 hours), early (1–≤30 days), late 
(>30 days–1 year), and very late (>1 year).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1960
SWITCHING BETWEEN ORAL P2Y12 
INHIBITORS
In this section, a summary of the available data from 
clinical trials, registries, and pharmacodynamic studies 
on escalation, de-escalation, and change in oral P2Y12 
inhibitors is provided.
Escalation (Switching From Clopidogrel 
to Prasugrel or Ticagrelor)
Escalating from clopidogrel to prasugrel or ticagrelor 
therapy commonly occurs in patients presenting with 
an ACS, above all those undergoing PCI, who may have 
been pretreated with clopidogrel at the time of clinical 
presentation. This is particularly frequent among pa-
tients who get transferred to a PCI-capable center. Oc-
currence of an ACS while on clopidogrel is also a reason 
for escalating therapy. To date, most data on escalation 
therapy derive from subgroup analyses of large clinical 
trials, registries. and pharmacodynamic studies.
The TRITON-TIMI 38 trial (Therapeutic Outcomes by 
Optimizing Platelet Inhibition With Prasugrel–Throm-
bolysis in Myocardial Infarction 38) demonstrated the 
superiority of prasugrel over clopidogrel in reducing 
ischemic events, albeit at the expense of increased 
bleeding, including fatal bleeding, in patients with ACS 
undergoing PCI. However, this trial cannot address the 
impact of switching from clopidogrel to prasugrel be-
cause patients with previous exposure to a P2Y12 inhibi-
tor were excluded.5 On the contrary, the ACCOAST trial 
(Comparison of Prasugrel at the Time of Percutaneous 
Coronary Intervention or as Pretreatment at the Time 
of Diagnosis in Patients With Non–ST Elevation Myo-
cardial Infarction), which tested the effects of admin-
istering prasugrel 30 mg at the time of diagnosis plus 
30 mg after coronary angiography versus administering 
60 mg after coronary angiography if PCI was indicated 
in patients with non–ST-segment–elevation myocardial 
infarction, allowed patients receiving a 75-mg mainte-
nance dose (MD) of clopidogrel at the time of random-
ization to be enrolled.32 However, pretreatment with 
prasugrel increased major bleeding complications with-
out any ischemic benefit, with consistent findings re-
gardless of clopidogrel pretreatment. The TRILOGY-ACS 
trial (Targeted Platelet Inhibition to Clarify the Optimal 
Strategy to Medically Manage ACS) assessed the im-
pact of long-term use of prasugrel compared with clop-
idogrel in patients with non–ST-segment–elevation ACS 
selected for medical management without revascular-
ization. Prasugrel was initiated with an MD, without a 
loading dose (LD), in ≈95% of the population; ≈70% 
of patients randomized to prasugrel had received clopi-
dogrel administered as an LD. Although there were no 
differences in major bleeding complications between 
treatment groups, these results need to be interpreted 
with caution because the trial did not reach its primary 
efficacy end point.33
The PLATO trial (Study of Platelet Inhibition and 
Patient Outcomes) demonstrated the superiority of ti-
cagrelor over clopidogrel in reducing ischemic events 
without an increase in the rate of overall major bleed-
ing but with an increase in non–coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery–related bleeding across the spectrum of 
patients with ACS regardless of the planned manage-
ment strategy (invasive or noninvasive).4 Approximately 
50% of patients randomized to ticagrelor were previ-
ously treated with clopidogrel, and the efficacy and 
safety of ticagrelor 180-mg LD followed by an MD of 
90 mg twice daily were consistent regardless of previ-
ous clopidogrel exposure.4 In the ATLANTIC trial (Ad-
ministration of Ticagrelor in the Cath Laboratory or in 
the Ambulance for New ST Elevation Myocardial Infarc-
tion to Open the Coronary Artery), which showed that 
prehospital administration of ticagrelor in patients with 
acute ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarction ap-
peared to be safe but did not improve pre-PCI coronary 
reperfusion, patients who were on clopidogrel at the 
time of presentation were excluded.34 The PEGASUS tri-
al (Prevention of Cardiovascular Events in Patients With 
Prior Heart Attack Using Ticagrelor Compared to Pla-
cebo on a Background of Aspirin) evaluated the safety 
and efficacy of a long-term MD of ticagrelor 60 or 90 
mg twice daily, initiated without an LD, compared with 
placebo in patients with a myocardial infarction in the 
previous 1 to 3 years. Treatment with ticagrelor signifi-
cantly reduced ischemic events, albeit at the expense of 
increased major bleeding.35 Approximately one third of 
patients were on a P2Y12 inhibitor (mostly clopidogrel) 
at the time of randomization.
A number of registries have evaluated escalating 
from clopidogrel to prasugrel or ticagrelor, showing a 
prevalence that varied from 5% to 50%, depending 
on the clinical setting and the period of observation 
(in-hospital versus after discharge; Table I in the online-
only Data Supplement).36–47 The reasons for switching 
included primarily clinical factors such as ST-segment–
elevation myocardial infarction presentation, in-hospi-
tal reinfarction, high-risk angiographic characteristics, 
younger age, higher body weight, sex, and socioeco-
nomic factors. In the majority of cases, the switch oc-
curred in the catheterization laboratory at the time of or 
immediately after PCI. Although registries did not iden-
tify any major safety concerns associated with switch-
ing, these findings should be interpreted with caution 
because the studies were not designed or powered to 
assess clinical outcomes.
Many studies have been specifically conducted to 
provide insights into levels of platelet reactivity asso-
ciated with switching from clopidogrel to prasugrel 
or ticagrelor (Figure 3). In the SWAP study (Switching 
Antiplatelet), conducted in patients receiving mainte-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1961
nance clopidogrel therapy after an ACS event, esca-
lation from clopidogrel to prasugrel was associated 
with further reduction in platelet reactivity within 2 
hours with the administration of a 60-mg prasugrel 
LD and by 1 week with 10-mg prasugrel as an MD 
(Figure 3A).48 In the RESPOND study (Response to Ti-
cagrelor in Clopidogrel Nonresponders and Respond-
ers and the Effect of Switching Therapies), conducted 
among patients with stable coronary artery disease, 
ticagrelor therapy (180-mg LD followed by MD) over-
came nonresponsiveness to clopidogrel, and its anti-
platelet effect was the same in clopidogrel responders 
and nonresponders (Figure 3B).49 Many other studies 
exploring the pharmacodynamic profiles of switch-
ing from clopidogrel to prasugrel or ticagrelor have 
been conducted (Tables II and III in the online-only 
Data Supplement).18,48–66 All studies have consistently 
shown enhanced platelet inhibition when escalating 
from clopidogrel to prasugrel or ticagrelor, regardless 
of clinical setting, as well as a reduction in rates of high 
on-treatment platelet reactivity (HPR),18,48–70 a well-de-
fined marker of risk of ischemic recurrences, including 
stent thrombosis.10,11 These effects are achieved more 
promptly after administration of an LD compared with 
an MD regimen. These pharmacodynamic studies did 
not suggest any type of DDI or concerns of overdos-
ing. This may be attributed to the fact that in patients 
treated with clopidogrel, even after an LD, a substan-
tial number of P2Y12 receptors remain uninhibited, al-
lowing additional blockade by the administration of 
an LD of prasugrel or ticagrelor. The degree of P2Y12 
receptor blockade after prasugrel or ticagrelor admin-
istration is similar regardless of previous exposure to 
clopidogrel.
Figure 3. Escalating P2Y12 inhibiting therapy (switching from clopidogrel to prasugrel or ticagrelor).  
A, Pharmacodynamic profile of switching from clopidogrel to prasugrel therapy: the SWAP study (Switching Antiplatelet). Time 
course of platelet inhibition as measured with maximum platelet aggregation in response to 20 μmol/L ADP in patients with 
an acute coronary syndrome whose therapy was switched from clopidogrel to prasugrel. Patients were randomly assigned to 
1 of the 3 study groups. *P<0.0001 vs results with 75-mg maintenance dose (MD) of clopidogrel. ‡P<0.0001 vs results with 
10-mg MD of prasugrel. B, Pharmacodynamic profile of switching between clopidogrel and ticagrelor therapy: results from the 
RESPOND study (Response to Ticagrelor in Clopidogrel Nonresponders and Responders and the Effect of Switching Therapies). 
P2Y12 reaction units in clopidogrel-nonresponsive patients before and after crossover. Patients treated with ticagrelor in period 
1 received a 600-mg clopidogrel loading dose (LD) followed by 75-mg daily maintenance therapy in period 2; patients treated 
with clopidogrel in period 1 received a 180-mg ticagrelor LD followed by 90-mg twice-daily maintenance therapy in period 2. 
*P<0.0001. ‡P<0.05. Adapted from Rollini et al9 with permission. Copyright ©2016, Mcmillan Publishers Ltd.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1962
De-escalation (Switching From Prasugrel 
or Ticagrelor to Clopidogrel)
Despite the evidence for the sustained efficacy and 
safety of prasugrel and ticagrelor with long-term treat-
ment, many physicians limit treatment duration with 
these agents to the early weeks or months after the 
index event.36–41 Reduced costs associated with a ge-
neric formulation of clopidogrel and concerns about 
increased risk of bleeding with prasugrel and ticagrelor 
remain the most important reasons for de-escalation. 
Nonbleeding side effects such as dyspnea also repre-
sent a potential reason for interrupting ticagrelor ther-
apy.4,35,71,72
Overall, registry data indicate that the prevalence of 
in-hospital de-escalation ranges from 5% to 14% (Ta-
ble I in the online-only Data Supplement).36–41 These pa-
tients are less likely to be privately insured and have risk 
factors associated with increased bleeding risk such as 
older age, lower body weight, previous transient isch-
emic attack/stroke, in-hospital treatment with coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery, atrial fibrillation/flutter, and 
use of oral anticoagulants (OACs).36–41 Switching be-
tween P2Y12 inhibitors after hospital discharge occurs 
in 5% to 8% of patients, with most cases represented 
by de-escalation.45 The SCOPE registry (Switching From 
Clopidogrel to New Oral Antiplatelet Agents During 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) showed that de-
escalation of P2Y12 inhibitors early after the index event 
in patients with ACS was associated with an increased 
risk of recurrent ischemic events with no differences in 
bleeding.47 These findings are likely attributed to the in-
crease in platelet reactivity and HPR rates, with patients 
being particularly vulnerable if de-escalation occurs too 
soon after the acute event.
Recently, randomized trials of de-escalation have 
been reported (Table I in the online-only Data Supple-
ment).73,74 The randomized TOPIC trial (Timing of Opti-
mal Platelet Inhibition After Acute Coronary Syndrome) 
showed that in patients who have been event free for 
the first month after an ACS on a combination of aspi-
rin plus a new-generation P2Y12 inhibitor, de-escalation 
to aspirin plus clopidogrel was associated with reduced 
bleeding complications, mostly minor.73 Although this 
study did not show any differences in ischemic events 
between groups, play of chance cannot be ruled out 
given the limited sample size of the trial. The TROP-
ICAL-ACS trial (Testing Responsiveness to Platelet In-
hibition on Chronic Antiplatelet Treatment for ACS) 
randomized patients with ACS undergoing PCI to ei-
ther standard treatment with prasugrel for 12 months 
or a de-escalation regimen (1 week of prasugrel fol-
lowed by 1 week of clopidogrel and platelet function 
testing–guided maintenance therapy with clopidogrel 
or prasugrel from day 14 after hospital discharge).74 
The trial showed that a strategy of guided de-escala-
tion of antiplatelet treatment was noninferior to stan-
dard treatment with prasugrel at 1 year in terms of net 
clinical benefit. The strategy did not show any increase 
in ischemic events, although there was a numeric but 
not statistically significant reduction in bleeding. The 
moderate impact on bleeding risk reduction could be 
explained by the considerably high percentage of pa-
tients (40%) who required escalation back to prasugrel 
therapy because of developing HPR after de-escalation. 
Thus far, TROPICAL-ACS is the only randomized trial 
using results of platelet function testing to adjust an-
tiplatelet therapy (escalation or de-escalation) to meet 
its primary end point.53,75–77 There are limited data as-
sessing the clinical impact of escalation and de-escala-
tion of antiplatelet therapy on the basis of the results 
of genetic testing, which is currently being evaluated 
in several randomized trials, including the use of rapid 
genetic testing.78
Overall, there is a paucity of studies assessing the 
pharmacodynamic effects associated with de-escalation 
to clopidogrel therapy that have consistently shown an 
increase in platelet reactivity and HPR rates, with some 
reporting lower bleeding events (Table IV in the online-
only Data Supplement).19,49,51,52,56,79,80 However, these 
findings, as well as the absence of increased thrombot-
ic events despite a higher rate of patients developing 
HPR, should be interpreted with caution because none 
of these studies were powered for clinical outcomes. 
It is important to note that although switching from 
prasugrel or ticagrelor to clopidogrel is intuitively asso-
ciated with an increase in platelet reactivity and HPR 
rates, the different speed of offset of the drugs may 
have important therapeutic implications, particularly 
with regard to the timing of clopidogrel administration 
and whether it should be given as an LD.9,19 The ratio-
nale for switching should further influence whether an 
LD should be given, especially if there are concerns for 
bleeding.
Change (Switching Between Prasugrel 
and Ticagrelor)
To date, there is limited information on switching be-
tween the newer-generation P2Y12 inhibitors prasugrel 
and ticagrelor. The few available registry data indicate 
that the rate of switching between these agents ranges 
from 2% to 4% (Table I in the online-only Data Sup-
plement).36–39 Although ticagrelor can be administered 
in patients with ACS upstream before the coronary 
anatomy is known, physicians might consider switching 
to prasugrel because of its once-daily administration, 
which may improve adherence. Another reason to con-
sider switching from ticagrelor to prasugrel is ticagre-
lor-associated dyspnea. Data from real-world clinical 
practice show that some patients may be treated with 
prasugrel despite having a relative or absolute contra-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1963
indication but are candidates for ticagrelor therapy and 
may therefore switch treatment. These include patients 
with ACS who are pretreated with prasugrel before 
their coronary anatomy is defined but do not undergo 
PCI and those who have a previous cerebrovascular 
event.36,39,41
There are limited studies on the pharmacodynamic 
effects associated with change between newer P2Y12 
inhibitors.20,21 The SWAP-2 study investigated the phar-
macodynamic effects of switching from ticagrelor to 
prasugrel. In this study, patients were switched to pra-
sugrel (with or without a 60-mg LD) 12 hours after the 
last MD of ticagrelor.20 Platelet reactivity was higher 
in patients treated with prasugrel compared with pa-
tients treated with ticagrelor at 7 days, not meeting 
the noninferiority primary end point. Moreover, at 24 
hours and even more so at 48 hours, platelet reactivity 
increased in patients switched to prasugrel compared 
with preswitch levels, and the use of an LD of prasu-
grel appeared to be essential to mitigate the increase 
in platelet reactivity after switching (Figure 4A).20 The 
mechanisms for these observations remain unknown 
but might be the result of prolonged binding of ti-
cagrelor and its major metabolite to the P2Y12 receptor 
after plasma levels have fallen, which may potentially 
impede the active metabolites of thienopyridines to ac-
cess their binding site. These changes may also explain 
why, despite being a reversible agent with an 8- to 12 
hour half-life, ticagrelor has effects that may persist for 
several days after drug discontinuation.16 For these rea-
sons, it has been suggested that switching at a later 
time after MD (eg, after 24 hours) should limit increases 
in platelet reactivity by providing more time for P2Y12 
receptor blockade by ticagrelor to decline.
The SWAP-3 study investigated the pharmacody-
namic effects of switching from prasugrel to ticagre-
lor.21 The study showed that in patients who were on 
maintenance prasugrel therapy, changing to ticagrelor 
was associated with a transient reduction in platelet 
reactivity. These pharmacodynamic findings were ob-
served as early as 2 hours after switching therapy, with-
out any signs of DDI during the entire study time course 
and with no increase in HPR rates. Of note, these find-
ings were observed when switching to ticagrelor with 
the 90-mg (not 60-mg) dosing regimen and occurred 
regardless of the use of an LD (Figure 4B).21
SWITCHING BETWEEN INTRAVENOUS 
AND ORAL P2Y12 INHIBITORS
Bridging From Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors 
to Cangrelor
Although cangrelor is being used in real-world clinical 
practice as a bridging strategy, there are limited data to 
support the safety and efficacy of this approach.81 The 
BRIDGE trial (Maintenance of Platelet Inhibition With 
Cangrelor After Discontinuation of Thienopyridines in 
Patients Undergoing Surgery) showed that among pa-
tients who discontinue thienopyridine therapy before 
cardiac surgery, the use of cangrelor compared with 
placebo resulted in a higher rate of maintenance of 
platelet inhibition.28 The dose of cangrelor used for 
bridging (0.75–μg·kg−1·min−1 infusion without a bolus) 
derives from a dose-finding study that identified levels 
of platelet inhibition similar to those achieved in pa-
tients with a good response to clopidogrel and is sub-
stantially lower than that used in PCI (30–μg/kg bolus 
and 4–μg·kg−1·min−1 infusion). The pharmacodynamic 
results from the BRIDGE study do not suggest any type 
of DDI, likely because there are still unoccupied recep-
tors in patients treated with oral P2Y12 inhibitors that 
can be bound and inhibited by cangrelor. This is in line 
with in vitro and ex vivo investigations showing no 
interaction when cangrelor is administered on top of 
thienopyridines or ticagrelor and is associated with en-
hanced antiplatelet effects.24–27,30,82
Transition From Cangrelor to Oral P2Y12 
Inhibitors
Cangrelor was approved for clinical use on the basis of 
the results of the CHAMPION PHOENIX trial (Cangrelor 
versus Standard Therapy to Achieve Optimal Manage-
ment of Platelet Inhibition), which showed that can-
grelor significantly reduced the rate of ischemic events, 
driven by a reduction in stent thrombosis and myocar-
dial infarction, with no significant increase in severe 
bleeding in patients undergoing PCI.83 In patients treat-
ed with cangrelor, a clopidogrel LD was administered 
immediately after discontinuation of cangrelor infusion. 
This approach was used because pharmacodynamic 
studies with cangrelor demonstrated a rapid platelet 
inhibitory effect during cangrelor infusion and a rapid 
offset of action after treatment discontinuation.23 The 
approach of administering clopidogrel after cangrelor 
was stopped was used across the cangrelor trial devel-
opment program to avoid a potential DDI between can-
grelor and clopidogrel, as described later. To date, no 
clinical outcomes study has investigated the safety and 
efficacy of cangrelor in patients subsequently treated 
with prasugrel or ticagrelor, although single-center ob-
servational data have been published.84,85
Given the different pharmacological properties of 
cangrelor and the oral P2Y12 inhibitors, several stud-
ies have investigated the potential for DDI when these 
agents are concomitantly administered (Supplemental 
Table V in the online-only Data Supplement).23–31 These 
potential DDIs are concerning because they can result 
in reduced platelet inhibition and subsequent lack of 
protection from thrombotic complications in the peri-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1964
PCI period. In a study conducted in healthy volunteers, 
clopidogrel administration during cangrelor infusion 
was associated with an impaired antiplatelet effect of 
clopidogrel after cangrelor discontinuation.30 This re-
flects the fact that the clopidogrel active metabolite, 
like the prasugrel active metabolite, cannot bind to 
the P2Y12 receptors if already largely occupied by can-
grelor.86 In turn, the plasma concentrations of the un-
bound thienopyridine active metabolites fall rapidly to 
subtherapeutic levels as a result of distribution to other 
Figure 4. Change between newer-generation oral P2Y12 inhibitors (switching between prasugrel and ticagrelor).  
A, Pharmacodynamic profile of switching from ticagrelor to prasugrel: the SWAP-2 study (Switching Antiplatelet 2). Time 
course of platelet inhibition as measured with P2Y12 reaction units (PRUs) in patients with stable coronary artery disease. After 
the run-in phase with ticagrelor was completed, patients were randomly assigned to 1 of 3 regimens. *P<0.001 for change 
from prerandomization baseline for prasugrel maintenance dose (MD) at 24 and 48 hours. ɸP=0.002 for change from preran-
domization baseline for prasugrel loading dose (LD) at 24 hours. †P<0.001 at 48 hours. ¥P<0.001 for the difference between 
the prasugrel MD group and the prasugrel LD group at 24 and 48 hours. Adapted from Angiolillo et al20 with permission. 
Copyright ©2014, American College of Cardiology. B, Pharmacodynamic profile of switching from prasugrel to ticagrelor: the 
SWAP-3 study. Time course of platelet inhibition as measured with PRUs in patients with a recent acute coronary syndrome 
on maintenance prasugrel therapy. Patients were randomly assigned to 1 of 3 regimens. *P<0.001 for the comparison of ti-
cagrelor combined vs prasugrel 10 mg. The box in the top right corner represents the primary end point: 1-week PRU absolute 
difference and 2-sided 95% confidence interval between ticagrelor combined and prasugrel 10 mg (tinted area indicates zone 
of noninferiority. Adapted from Franchi et al21 with permission. Copyright ©2016, American College of Cardiology.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1965
compartments and systemic clearance. Therefore, after 
cangrelor infusion is stopped, when receptors become 
available for binding, most of the active metabolite of 
thienopyridines has already been eliminated from the 
circulation. In contradistinction, the antiplatelet effects 
of clopidogrel are not diminished when it is adminis-
tered after cangrelor infusion because of the very fast 
offset of action of cangrelor and subsequent availability 
of P2Y12 receptors for binding by clopidogrel active me-
tabolite.23,30,31 The transition from cangrelor to prasugrel 
is associated with transient recovery of platelet reactiv-
ity, in particular within 1 hour after cangrelor discon-
tinuation.27 However, it was observed that recovery of 
platelet function was attenuated when prasugrel was 
administered 30 minutes before the cangrelor infusion 
was stopped.27 Conversely, administration of clopidogrel 
30 minutes or 1 hour before cangrelor infusion discon-
tinuation did not prevent recovery of platelet reactivity 
more effectively than administration at the end of the 
infusion.31 Similar findings were observed when plate-
lets were incubated with cangrelor before the addition 
of the active metabolites of either prasugrel or clopi-
dogrel, when the ability of thienopyridines to inhibit 
platelet aggregation was strongly reduced.82 However, 
the ExcelsiorLOAD2 study (Impact of Extent of Clopi-
dogrel-Induced Platelet Inhibition During Elective Stent 
Implantation on Clinical Event Rate–Advanced Loading 
Strategies) showed that a 60-mg LD of prasugrel given 
at the start of a 2-hour infusion of cangrelor was as-
sociated with sufficient platelet inhibition after cangre-
lor, with only rare cases of HPR.87 These observations 
may be attributed to the relatively higher concentration 
and longer half-life of the active metabolite of prasugrel 
compared with that of clopidogrel.12 However, whether 
similar findings would be observed with longer infusions 
of cangrelor (eg, up to 4 hours) is unknown.
Unlike that observed with thienopyridines, no inter-
action was shown for the transition from cangrelor to 
ticagrelor, allowing more versatile use of ticagrelor with 
respect to timing of administration in relation to the 
start of cangrelor therapy.26 The presence of an interac-
tion between thienopyridines, in particular clopidogrel, 
and cangrelor, but not between ticagrelor and cangre-
lor, is probably the result of the different half-lives of 
these drugs, as well as the different sites and types of 
binding to the P2Y12 receptor.6,12,15,17 Ticagrelor revers-
ibly binds the P2Y12 receptor at a site distinct from the 
ADP-binding site and has a half-life of 6 to 12 hours. Al-
though it is unknown whether ticagrelor can bind with 
the P2Y12 receptor during cangrelor infusion, its half-life 
(which exceeds that of the duration of cangrelor infu-
sion) is such that drug is still systemically available to 
bind with the P2Y12 receptor after discontinuation of 
cangrelor infusion. On the basis of these observations, 
ticagrelor can be administered before, during, or after 
cangrelor infusion.26
P2Y12 INHIBITORS: EXPERT 
CONSENSUS RECOMMENDATIONS ON 
SWITCHING
This expert consensus group developed recommenda-
tions on when and how to switch between P2Y12 in-
hibitors, taking into consideration the pharmacological 
profiles of oral and intravenous P2Y12 inhibitors; data 
from clinical trials, registries, and pharmacodynamic 
studies; and the potential for thrombotic complications 
based on the time elapsed from the index event lead-
ing to initiation of P2Y12-inhibiting therapy. In line with 
the limited safety and efficacy data in this field, these 
recommendations are to be considered mostly con-
sensus based rather than evidence based. In general, 
switching approaches that have shown to be associ-
ated with DDI should be avoided or minimized unless 
clinically necessary. The provided recommendations are 
to be considered as guidance for the practicing clini-
cian, who may consider alternative approaches based 
on the clinical context of the patient. The consider-
ations made here are proposed under the assumption 
that these patients are also, for the most part, treated 
with concomitant low-dose aspirin in line with guide-
line recommendations. The expert consensus recom-
mendations on switching P2Y12 inhibitors are described 
in detail in the following sections and summarized in 
Figures 5 and 6.
Switching Between Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors
Escalation (Switching From Clopidogrel to Prasugrel or 
Ticagrelor)
Escalation from clopidogrel to prasugrel or ticagrelor in 
the early, particularly acute, phase of treatment should 
occur with the use of a 60- or 180-mg LD, respectively. 
Administration of an LD regimen may occur regardless 
of the timing of the last dose of clopidogrel. This should 
be followed by standard MD regimens (prasugrel 10 mg 
daily or ticagrelor 90 mg twice-daily). Beyond the early 
phase, it is reasonable to escalate with a 10-mg daily or 
90-mg twice-daily MD regimen of prasugrel or ticagre-
lor, respectively, without an LD. It is also reasonable and 
practical for the patient to start the new MD regimen at 
the time of the next scheduled dose of P2Y12-inhibiting 
therapy (eg, ≈24 hours from last dose of clopidogrel). 
Similar considerations on timing of switching should 
apply for elderly or low-body-weight patients in whom 
a 5-mg MD of prasugrel is being used.
De-Escalation (Switching From Prasugrel or Ticagrelor to 
Clopidogrel)
There was a lack of group consensus on the appropriate 
approach to de-escalate from prasugrel to clopidogrel 
in the acute/early phase (ie, with an MD or an LD) given 
the limited data on therapy de-escalation. The pro-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1966
longed offset of prasugrel (7–10 days) has the advan-
tage of allowing clopidogrel to reach its full antiplatelet 
effects during this time even if initiated with a 75-mg 
MD regimen. Moreover, because of the high receptor 
occupancy rates induced by prasugrel, it may be argued 
that administration of an LD of clopidogrel would not 
provide further pharmacodynamic effects. These phar-
macological considerations suggest that de-escalation 
with an MD might be appropriate. Switching from pra-
sugrel to clopidogrel with a 75-mg MD is also a reason-
able option in patients in whom switching occurs as a 
result of a bleeding event or concerns about bleeding. 
Therefore, defining the reason for de-escalation may 
have an impact on the strategy (LD versus MD) used. 
Figure 5. Consensus recommendations on switching between oral P2Y12 inhibitors.  
A, Switching between oral agents in the acute/early phase. In the acute/early phase (≤30 days from the index event), switch-
ing should occur with the administration of a loading dose (LD) in most cases, with the exception of patients who are de-
escalating therapy because of bleeding or bleeding concerns, in whom a maintenance dose (MD) of clopidogrel (C) should be 
considered. Timing of switching should be 24 hours after the last dose of a given drug, with the exception of when escalating 
to prasugrel (P) or ticagrelor (T), when the LD can be given regardless of the timing and dosing of the previous clopidogrel 
regimen. *Consider de-escalation with clopidogrel 75-mg MD (24 hours after last prasugrel or ticagrelor dose) in patients with 
bleeding or bleeding concerns. B, Switching between oral agents in the late/very late phase. In the late/very late phase (>30 
days from the index event), switching should occur with the administration of an MD 24 hours after the last dose of a given 
drug, with the exception of patients changing from ticagrelor to prasugrel therapy, for whom an LD should be considered. 
De-escalation from ticagrelor to clopidogrel should occur with administration of an LD 24 hours after the last dose of ticagre-
lor (but in patients in whom de-escalation occurs because of bleeding or bleeding concerns, an MD of clopidogrel should be 
considered). *Consider de-escalation with clopidogrel 75-mg MD (24 hours after last prasugrel or ticagrelor dose) in patients 
with bleeding or bleeding concerns.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1967
However, it may also be argued that in the acute phase 
of treatment of patients with ACS, recovery of platelet 
function after discontinuation of prasugrel therapy may 
be shortened given their high platelet turnover rates, 
which may potentially not allow clopidogrel to reach 
its full platelet inhibitory effects before washout of 
prasugrel-mediated inhibition has been completed. Re-
covery of 37% and 63% of platelet function has been 
shown after 5 and 6 days, respectively, in patients with 
stable coronary artery disease.14 Moreover, the onset of 
clopidogrel effect is variable, unpredictable, and often 
delayed. Therefore, in the early and, in particular, the 
acute phases of de-escalation, it may be also reason-
able to administer a 600-mg LD of clopidogrel. This 
clopidogrel LD should be given at the time of the next 
scheduled dose of P2Y12-inhibiting therapy (eg, ≈24 
hours from last dose of prasugrel) for practical reasons 
and because this would allow some offset of the ef-
fects of prasugrel and allow new uninhibited platelets 
to be released into circulation. Beyond the early phase 
or in more stabilized patients, the use of a 75-mg MD 
of clopidogrel (without an LD) at the time of the next 
scheduled dose (eg, ≈24 hours from last dose of prasu-
grel) should be considered.
Because ticagrelor has a relatively fast offset of ac-
tion, the use of a clopidogrel 600-mg LD should be con-
sidered when de-escalating from ticagrelor to avoid any 
significant gap in platelet inhibition, regardless of the 
timing of switching (ie, acute, early, or late), However, 
de-escalation to clopidogrel with an MD is a reason-
able option, particularly in patients in whom switching 
occurs as a result of bleeding. Although the optimal 
timing of switching after the last dose of ticagrelor is 
unknown, waiting 24 hours after the last dose of ti-
Figure 6. Consensus recommendations on switching between oral and intravenous P2Y12 inhibitors.  
A, Bridging from oral to intravenous agents. For both cardiac and noncardiac surgery, if withdrawal of P2Y12-inhibiting therapy 
is needed, clopidogrel and ticagrelor should be discontinued for 5 days and prasugrel for 7 days. It is reasonable to start 
cangrelor bridging up to 3 to 4 days after prasugrel discontinuation and 2 to 3 days of clopidogrel and ticagrelor discontinua-
tion. Platelet function testing may be considered to help guide timing of starting cangrelor infusion. After surgery, regardless 
of bridging strategy, clopidogrel should be resumed with a loading dose (LD) as soon as oral administration is possible and the 
risk of severe bleeding is acceptable (prasugrel and ticagrelor administration should be discouraged). If the use of oral P2Y12-
inhibiting therapy is not possible, postsurgery bridging with an intravenous agent should be considered. B. Transition from 
intravenous to oral agents. An LD should always be used when transitioning from cangrelor to an oral agent. In the case of 
thienopyridines (clopidogrel or prasugrel), this should be administered immediately after discontinuation of cangrelor infusion. 
Ticagrelor can be administered before, during, or immediately after cangrelor infusion, although earlier administration (eg, 
at the time of percutaneous coronary intervention) should be considered. *According to the package insert of the European 
Medical Agency, but not that of the US Food and Drug Administration, prasugrel may also be administered 30 minutes before 
infusion is stopped. Preliminary studies have shown that prasugrel given at the start of a 2-hour infusion of cangrelor results in 
sufficient platelet inhibition, but this strategy cannot be routinely recommended until more data are available. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1968
cagrelor should be considered because this not only 
exceeds the half-life of ticagrelor but also allows new 
platelets to be released into circulation and exposed to 
the active metabolite of clopidogrel, thus preventing a 
potential DDI. Furthermore, the level of platelet inhibi-
tion 24 hours after discontinuation of ticagrelor therapy 
is similar to the average level of inhibition provided by 
MD clopidogrel,14 so a significant window of under-
treatment is unlikely with this approach.
Change (Switching Between Prasugrel and Ticagrelor)
On the basis of pharmacodynamic data suggesting a 
potential DDI, a 60-mg LD of prasugrel should always 
be used when changing from ticagrelor to prasugrel, 
regardless of timing (early or late), and switching with a 
10-mg MD should be avoided.20 Waiting 24 hours after 
the last MD of ticagrelor to administer the 60-mg LD 
of prasugrel should be considered because this allows 
more time for ticagrelor and its metabolite to be elimi-
nated and new platelets to enter into systemic circu-
lation. Pharmacodynamic studies do not suggest DDI 
when changing from prasugrel to ticagrelor therapy.19 
Therefore, this change can be performed with a stan-
dard 90-mg twice-daily MD dose regimen, without the 
need for an LD, which should be started at the time of 
the next scheduled dose (eg, ≈24 hours from last dose 
of prasugrel), particularly in stabilized patients. Howev-
er, the use of an LD administered 24 hours after the last 
dose of prasugrel can be considered when the change 
occurs in the acute phase of patients with ACS.
Switching Between Intravenous and Oral 
P2Y12 Inhibitors
Bridging From Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors to Cangrelor
Because the effects of the oral agents persist with 
meaningful levels of P2Y12 inhibition after drug dis-
continuation, it is reasonable to wait to start cangrelor 
bridging (0.75–μg·kg−1·min−1 infusion without a bolus) 
for up to 3 to 4 days after prasugrel discontinuation 
and 2 to 3 days of clopidogrel and ticagrelor discon-
tinuation to minimize the duration of infusion. Platelet 
function testing might also help time the initiation of 
cangrelor bridging in an efficient fashion. For example, 
cangrelor infusion can be started once the pharmaco-
dynamic effect is close to the threshold of HPR. This 
may also have cost implications linked to hospitaliza-
tion and the drug and potentially may minimize the risk 
of bleeding complications associated with prolonged 
treatment with parenteral therapies.
Transition From Cangrelor to Oral P2Y12 Inhibitors
In patients undergoing PCI, cangrelor (30–μg/kg bolus 
and 4–μg·kg−1·min−1 infusion) should be initiated be-
fore PCI and continued for ≥2 hours or for the dura-
tion of the procedure, whichever is longer; the infusion 
can be continued for up to 4 hours at the discretion of 
the physician. Infusions up to 4 hours might be consid-
ered particularly in patients treated with opiates such as 
morphine (terminal half-life varies from 1.5–4.5 hours) 
and possibly in patients undergoing primary PCI, which 
are settings known to reduce the pharmacodynamic 
onset of oral antiplatelet agents.88–91 These observa-
tions are likely attributed to impaired gastrointestinal 
motility and drug absorption, which can be accentu-
ated in patients undergoing primary PCI.92
In the transition from cangrelor to a thienopyridine, 
the thienopyridine should be administered immediately 
after discontinuation of cangrelor with an LD (clopido-
grel 600 mg or prasugrel 60 mg) to avoid a potential 
DDI.93,94 According to the package insert of the European 
Medical Agency, but not that of the US Food and Drug 
Administration, prasugrel may also be administered 30 
minutes before the infusion is stopped.93,94 Although 
preliminary studies have shown that prasugrel given at 
the time a 2-hour infusion of cangrelor is started results 
in sufficient platelet inhibition,87 this strategy cannot be 
routinely recommended until more data are available. 
Although cangrelor is approved for use in patients who 
have not received an oral P2Y12 inhibitor before the PCI 
procedure, for those patients who have been pretreated 
with a thienopyridine, if the pretreatment was shortly 
before the initiation of cangrelor or unknown, an LD at 
the end of the infusion should be considered.
The US Food and Drug Administration indicates that 
ticagrelor can be administered before, during, or im-
mediately after cangrelor infusion,93,94 whereas the Eu-
ropean Medical Agency indicates that ticagrelor should 
be administered immediately after discontinuation of 
cangrelor infusion or up to 30 minutes before the end 
of the infusion, Ticagrelor should be administered as 
a 180-mg LD. This expert consensus recommends that 
earlier administration of ticagrelor (eg, at the time of 
PCI) should be considered over administration at the 
end of cangrelor infusion because it would minimize 
the potential gap in platelet inhibition during the transi-
tion phase.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
A number of settings represent clinical conundrums 
with regard to the management of antithrombotic 
therapy. Accordingly, there are a number of scenarios in 
which there may be a need to switch antiplatelet ther-
apy but the modality to do this has not been studied. 
This expert consensus recognizes that there are some 
settings that may be unique and require specific recom-
mendations.
• Patients undergoing cardiac and noncardiac sur-
gery. Preoperative and postoperative manage-
ment of antiplatelet therapy is described in detail 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1969
elsewhere.95 The decision to withdraw P2Y12-
inhibiting therapy should take into account the 
thrombotic and bleeding risks of the individual 
patient according to the specific surgery being 
performed and timing from PCI.96 Similarly, the 
need for bridging should be individualized as 
described previously.95,96 For patients with ACS 
requiring coronary artery bypass surgery, unless 
recent PCI was conducted, P2Y12-inhibiting ther-
apy should be withdrawn before surgery but 
restarted postoperatively if the bleeding risk is 
low. For both cardiac and noncardiac surgery, if 
withdrawal of P2Y12-inhibiting therapy is war-
ranted, clopidogrel and ticagrelor should be dis-
continued for 5 days and prasugrel for 7 days. If 
bridging with cangrelor, it is reasonable to wait 
up to 3 to 4 days after prasugrel discontinuation 
and 2 to 3 days after clopidogrel and ticagrelor 
discontinuation to minimize duration of cangrelor 
infusion. After noncardiac surgery, regardless of 
bridging strategy, clopidogrel should be resumed 
with an LD as soon as oral administration is pos-
sible and the risk of severe bleeding is acceptable. 
Prasugrel and ticagrelor administration should be 
discouraged in the early period after major non-
cardiac surgery when there is an ongoing risk of 
serious bleeding. If oral administration of clopido-
grel is not possible, postsurgery bridging with an 
intravenous agent should be considered.
• Patients with bleeding or at high risk for bleed-
ing complications. Management of bleeding 
complications in patients on dual antiplatelet 
therapy goes beyond the scope of this document 
and is described elsewhere.97 In dual antiplatelet 
therapy–treated patients who develop a bleed-
ing complication, there is commonly a desire 
for de-escalation therapy. This should start with 
an MD regimen (ie, clopidogrel 75 mg), unless 
there has been a gap of therapy for ≥5 days, in 
which case a 300-mg LD might be used. Similar 
approaches should be considered for patients at 
high risk for bleeding complications such as those 
who have or develop thrombocytopenia, patients 
who develop a cerebrovascular event, and elderly 
patients, among others.
• Switching after thrombolysis. Clopidogrel ther-
apy is the standard of care in patients treated 
with thrombolytics who require P2Y12 inhibitor 
therapy. Escalation of P2Y12 inhibitors is discour-
aged within 24 hours of thrombolysis because 
the combination of lytics with potent plate-
let inhibitors (ie, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors) 
increases bleeding98; after this duration, any 
escalation to a more potent regimen should 
occur with an LD regimen (prasugrel 60 mg or 
ticagrelor 180 mg).
• Patients requiring OAC. In patients requiring 
OAC who also undergo PCI requiring dual anti-
platelet therapy, clopidogrel should be the P2Y12 
inhibitor of choice.99,100 If patients are already on 
a newer-generation P2Y12 inhibitor (eg, patients 
who already had PCI and develop atrial fibrillation 
requiring OAC), de-escalation therapy is recom-
mended, and clopidogrel should be started with a 
75-mg MD regimen. If patients are P2Y12 inhibitor 
naïve, clopidogrel should be initiated with a 600-
mg LD regimen (eg, patients with atrial fibrillation 
already on OAC who undergo PCI). Details of the 
management of PCI patients requiring OAC are 
given elsewhere.99,100
• Patients undergoing very late (>1 year) switch. 
De-escalation should occur with an MD regimen 
(no LD). Recently, a ticagrelor 60-mg twice-daily 
dosing regimen has been approved for post–
myocardial infarction patients >1 year from their 
index event. When ticagrelor therapy is initiated 
for post–myocardial infarction patients >1 year 
from their index event, a switch should be made 
directly to 60-mg twice-daily MD (no LD) regard-
less of the prior P2Y12 inhibitor used.35
• Patients on unknown therapy. It is not uncommon 
that patients are referred with unknown medica-
tion status. These patients should be treated as 
naïve, and an LD should be used.
CONCLUSIONS
The current availability of a variety of P2Y12 inhibitors 
provides clinicians with flexibility to optimize antiplate-
let therapy for the individual patient. Although clini-
cal data support the initiation and treatment of anti-
platelet therapy with specific P2Y12 inhibitors, clinical 
circumstances often arise that require the clinician to 
switch among the available therapies. Robust clini-
cal outcomes data for specific switching strategies are 
lacking, but strategies can be guided by the different 
pharmacological profiles of these inhibitors, which may 
lead to DDIs that have potential implications for safety 
and efficacy. Therefore, this expert consensus docu-
ment provides recommendations derived largely from 
pharmacodynamic and registry data, integrated with an 
understanding of the pharmacological principles of the 
agents involved. Ongoing dedicated studies will provide 
important insights into this topic.
AUTHORS
Dominick J. Angiolillo, MD, PhD; Fabiana Rollini, MD; Robert 
F. Storey, MD; Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, MPH; Stefan James, MD, 
PhD; David J. Schneider, MD; Dirk Sibbing, MD; Derek Y.F. So, 
MD; Dietmar Trenk, PhD; Dimitrios Alexopoulos, MD; Paul A. 
Gurbel, MD; Willibald Hochholzer, MD; Leonardo De Luca, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1970
MD; Laurent Bonello, MD; Daniel Aradi, MD, PhD; Thomas 
Cuisset, MD, PhD; Udaya S. Tantry, PhD; Tracy Y. Wang, MD, 
MHS, MSc; Marco Valgimigli, MD, PhD; Ron Waksman, MD; 
Roxana Mehran, MD; Gilles Montalescot, MD; Francesco 
Franchi, MD; Matthew J. Price, MD
DISCLOSURES
Dr Alexopoulos discloses the following relationships: lec-
turing honoraria: AstraZeneca, Bayer; advisory board fees: 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, The Medicines 
Company, and Medtronic. Dr Angiolillo reports receiving 
payments as an individual for consulting fee or honorarium 
from Amgen, Aralez, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biosensors, Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Chiesi, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Mer-
ck, PLx Pharma, Pfizer, Sanofi, and The Medicines Company; 
fees for participation in review activities from CeloNova and 
St. Jude Medical; as well as institutional payments for grants 
from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biosensors, CeloNova, 
CSL Behring, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, Eli-Lilly, Gilead, Janssen, 
Matsutani Chemical Industry Co, Merck, Novartis, Osprey 
Medical, and Renal Guard Solutions. In addition, Dr Angio-
lillo is the recipient of a funding from the Scott R. MacKenzie 
Foundation, National Institutes of Health/National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences Clinical and Translational 
Science Award to the University of Florida (UL1 TR000064), 
and National Institutes of Health/NHGRI U01 HG007269. Dr 
Aradi has received lecture fees from DSI/Lilly, Roche Diag-
nostics, AstraZeneca, Bayer AG, Pfizer, and MSD Pharma. Dr 
Bhatt discloses the following relationships: Advisory Board: 
Cardax, Elsevier Practice Update Cardiology, Medscape Car-
diology, and Regado Biosciences; Board of Directors: Bos-
ton VA Research Institute, Society of Cardiovascular Patient 
Care; chair: American Heart Association Quality Oversight 
Committee; Data Monitoring committees: Cleveland Clinic, 
Duke Clinical Research Institute, Harvard Clinical Research 
Institute, Mayo Clinic, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, and 
Population Health Research Institute; honoraria: American 
College of Cardiology (senior associate editor, Clinical Tri-
als and News, ACC.org), Belvoir Publications (editor-in-chief, 
Harvard Heart Letter), Duke Clinical Research Institute (clini-
cal trial steering committees), Harvard Clinical Research In-
stitute (clinical trial steering committee), HMP Communica-
tions (editor-in-chief, Journal of Invasive Cardiology), Journal 
of the American College of Cardiology (guest editor; asso-
ciate editor), Population Health Research Institute (clinical 
trial steering committee), Slack Publications (chief medical 
editor, Cardiology Today’s Intervention), Society of Cardio-
vascular Patient Care (secretary/treasurer), WebMD (CME 
steering committees); other: Clinical Cardiology (deputy 
editor), NCDR-ACTION Registry Steering Committee (chair), 
VA CART Research and Publications Committee (chair); re-
search funding: Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Chiesi, Eisai, Ethicon, Forest Laboratories, Ironwood, 
Ischemix, Lilly, Medtronic, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, and 
The Medicines Company; royalties: Elsevier (editor, Cardio-
vascular Intervention: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart 
Disease); site coinvestigator: Biotronik, Boston Scientific, 
and St. Jude Medical (now Abbott); trustee: American Col-
lege of Cardiology; and unfunded research: FlowCo, Merck, 
PLx Pharma, and Takeda. Dr Bonello reports the following 
relationships: research grants from AstraZeneca, Boston, 
Abbott, and Biosensors; and lecture fees from AstraZene-
ca, Medtronic, and Abbott. Dr Cuisset reports the follow-
ing relationships: personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boston 
Scientific, Biotronik, Eli Lilly, Medtronic, Sanofi-Aventis, and 
Terumo. Dr De Luca discloses the following relationships: 
personal fees from Abbott Vascular, Amgen, Aspen, Astra-
Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Chiesi, Eli Lilly, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Pharmevo, Menarini, and The Medicines Company. 
Dr Gurbel discloses the following relationships: grants from 
Haemonetics, DCRI, Medicure, Merck, National Institutes 
of Health, Bayer, Abbott, Medimmune, and Coramed, and 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer, Merck, Jans-
sen, Bayer, Medicure, Haemonetics, and UptoDate; in ad-
dition, Dr Gurbel has a patent platelet function testing is-
sued. Dr Hochholzer reports receiving consulting and lecture 
fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi San-
kyo, and The Medicines Company. Dr James discloses the 
following relationships: institutional research grants from 
AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, The Medicines Company, and Jansen, 
and honoraria from AstraZeneca, The Medicines Company, 
and Bayer. Dr Mehran reports the following relationships: 
grant/research support (institutional) from The Medicines 
Company, BMS, AstraZeneca, Lilly/Daiichi Sankyo. She has 
sat on the advisory board for Janssen (J+J) and has received 
consulting fees/honoraria from Abbott Vascular, AstraZen-
eca, Boston Scientific, Covidien, CSL Behring, Janssen (J+J), 
and Merck. Dr Montalescot discloses the following rela-
tionships: research grants to the institution or consulting/
lecture fees from Actelion, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Beth Israel Dea-
coness Medical, Brigham Women’s Hospital, Cardiovascular 
Research Foundation, CCC, Celladon, CME Resources, Dai-
ichi-Sankyo, Eli-Lilly, Europa, Elsevier, Fédération Française 
de Cardiologie, Gilead, ICAN, INSERM, Lead-Up, Menarini, 
Medtronic, MSD, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, Servier, The Medi-
cines Company, TIMI Study Group, and WebMD. Dr Price 
reports the following relationships: grants from Daiichi-San-
kyo (to institution); consulting and speaking honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Medtronic, The Medicines Company, St. Jude 
Medical, and Boston Scientific; and speaking honoraria from 
Chiesi USA and Abbott Vascular. Dr Schneider reports the 
following relationships: grants and honoraria from The Med-
icines Company, AstraZeneca, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. 
Dr Sibbing reports the following relationships: speaker fees 
and honoraria for consulting from Eli Lilly, MSD, Pfizer, Dai-
ichi Sankyo, Bayer Vital, AstraZeneca, and Roche Diagnos-
tics, and research grants from Roche Diagnostics and Dai-
ichi Sankyo. Dr So discloses the following relationships: Eli 
Lilly Canada, unrestricted grant support (physician-initiated 
grant); Astra Zeneca Canada, Advisory Board/honoraria; and 
Spartan Biosciences, unrestricted grant support (physician-
initiated grant). Dr Storey discloses the following relation-
ships: research grants, consultancy fees, and honoraria from 
AstraZeneca; research grants and consultancy fees from Pla-
queTec; and consultancy fees from Actelion, Avacta, Bayer, 
Bristol Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Novartis, The Medicines Com-
pany, and ThermoFisher Scientific. Dr Tantry discloses the 
following relationships: honoraria from AstraZeneca, Upto-
Date, and Medicure. Dr Trenk discloses the following rela-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1971
tionships: consulting fees or paid advisory board fees and 
lecture fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Berlin Che-
mie, Boehringer Ingelheim KG, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Pfizer, and Sanofi. Dr Valgimigli discloses the follow-
ing relationships: grants from Terumo Medical, AstraZeneca, 
and Medicure, and lecture fees from AstraZeneca, Terumo 
Medical, Cordis, and Biosensors. Dr Waksman reports the 
following relationships: consulting fees and research grants 
from Biotronik AG, Boston Scientific, Medtronic Vascular, 
and Abbott Vascular; consulting fees from Biosensors, Med 
Alliance, Volcano Philips, Abbott Vascular, and Amgen; and 
Speakers’ Bureau for AstraZeneca and Chiesi. Dr Wang re-
ports the following disclosures: research grants to the Duke 
Clinical Research Institute from AstraZeneca, Boston Scien-
tific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead Sci-
ences, Novartis, Pfizer, and Regeneron, as well as consulting 
or honoraria from Merck, Gilead, and Pfizer. Drs Franchi and 
Rollini report no conflicts.
AFFILIATIONS
Division of Cardiology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Jacksonville (D.J.A., F.R., F.F.). Department of 
Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease, University 
of Sheffield, United Kingdom (R.F.S.). Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital Heart & Vascular Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA (D.L.B.). Department of Medical Sciences, 
Cardiology and Uppsala Clinical Research Center, Uppsala 
University, Sweden (S.J.). Department of Medicine, Cardiology 
Unit, Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Vermont, 
Burlington (D.J.S.). Department of Cardiology, Ludwig-
Maximilians-Universität München, Germany (D.S.). DZHK 
(German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner site 
Munich Heart Alliance, Germany (D.S.). Division of Cardiology, 
University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ontario, Canada 
(D.Y.S.F.). Department of Cardiology & Angiology II, University 
Heart Center Freiburg-Bad Krozingen, Germany (D.T., W.H.). 
Second Department of Cardiology, National and Capodistrian 
University of Athens, Attikon University Hospital, Greece (D. 
Alexopoulos). Inova Center for Thrombosis Research and 
Drug Development, Inova Heart and Vascular Institute, Falls 
Church, VA (P
.A.G., U.S.T.). Division of Cardiology, Laboratory 
of Interventional Cardiology, San Giovanni Evangelista 
Hospital, Tivoli-Rome, Italy (L.D.L.). Assistance Publique-
Hôpitaux de Marseille, Department of Cardiology, Hôpital 
Nord, Marseille, France (L.B.). Mediterranean Academic 
Association for Research and Studies in Cardiology, Marseille, 
France (L.D.L.). Aix-Marseille University, INSERM UMRS 
1076, Marseille, France (L.D.L.). Heart Center Balatonfüred 
and Semmelweis University Budapest, Hungary (D. Aradi). 
Department of Cardiology, CHU Timone, and Aix-Marseille 
Université, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France (T.C.). 
Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC (T.Y.W.). Swiss Cardiovascular Center 
Bern, Bern University Hospital, Switzerland (M.V.). Section 
of Interventional Cardiology, MedStar Washington Hospital 
Center, DC (R.W.). Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York City, NY (R.M.) Sorbonne Université Paris 6, ACTION 
Study Group, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, France (G.M.). Division 
of Cardiovascular Diseases, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA (M.J.P
.).
FOOTNOTES
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article 
at http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIR-
CULATIONAHA.117.031164/-/DC1.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
REFERENCES
 1. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Bailey SR, Bittl JA, Cercek B, Cham-
bers CE, Ellis SG, Guyton RA, Hollenberg SM, Khot UN, Lange RA, Mauri 
L, Mehran R, Moussa ID, Mukherjee D, Nallamothu BK, Ting HH. 2011 
ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Car-
diovascular Angiography and Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–
e651. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823ba622.
 2. Valgimigli M, Bueno H, Byrne RA, Collet JP
, Costa F, Jeppsson A, Jüni P
, 
Kastrati A, Kolh P
, Mauri L, Montalescot G, Neumann FJ, Petricevic M, Rof-
fi M, Steg PG, Windecker S, Zamorano JL. 2017 ESC focused update on 
dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery disease developed in collabo-
ration with EACTS: the Task Force for dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary 
artery disease of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and of the 
European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) [published on-
line ahead of print August 26, 2017]. Eur Heart J. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehx419. https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/
eurheartj/ehx419.
 3. Angiolillo DJ. The evolution of antiplatelet therapy in the treatment 
of acute coronary syndromes: from aspirin to the present day. Drugs. 
2012;72:2087–2116. doi: 10.2165/11640880-000000000-00000.
 4. Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, Cannon CP, Emanuelsson H, Held C, 
Horrow J, Husted S, James S, Katus H, Mahaffey KW, Scirica BM, Skene 
A, Steg PG, Storey RF, Harrington RA, Freij A, Thorsén M; PLATO In-
vestigators. Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coro-
nary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1045–1057. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa0904327.
 5. Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, Montalescot G, Ruzyllo W, Gottlieb 
S, Neumann FJ, Ardissino D, De Servi S, Murphy SA, Riesmeyer J, Weerak-
kody G, Gibson CM, Antman EM; TRITON-TIMI 38 Investigators. Prasugrel 
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J 
Med. 2007;357:2001–2015. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706482.
 6. Franchi F, Angiolillo DJ. Novel antiplatelet agents in acute coronary syn-
drome. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:30–47. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2014.156.
 7. Sherwood MW, Wiviott SD, Peng SA, Roe MT, Delemos J, Peterson ED, 
Wang TY. Early clopidogrel versus prasugrel use among contemporary 
STEMI and NSTEMI patients in the US: insights from the National Cardio-
vascular Data Registry. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000849.
 8. Bueno H, Sinnaeve P
, Annemans L, Danchin N, Licour M, Medina J, Po-
cock S, Sánchez-Covisa J, Storey RF, Jukema JW, Zeymer U, Van de Werf 
F; EPICOR Investigators. Opportunities for improvement in anti-throm-
botic therapy and other strategies for the management of acute coro-
nary syndromes: insights from EPICOR, an international study of current 
practice patterns. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2016;5:3–12. doi: 
10.1177/2048872614565912.
 9. Rollini F, Franchi F, Angiolillo DJ. Switching P2Y12-receptor inhibitors in 
patients with coronary artery disease. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2016;13:11–27. 
doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2015.113.
 10. Tantry US, Bonello L, Aradi D, Price MJ, Jeong YH, Angiolillo DJ, Stone GW, 
Curzen N, Geisler T, Ten Berg J, Kirtane A, Siller-Matula J, Mahla E, Becker 
RC, Bhatt DL, Waksman R, Rao SV, Alexopoulos D, Marcucci R, Reny JL, 
Trenk D, Sibbing D, Gurbel PA; Working Group on On-Treatment Plate-
let Reactivity. Consensus and update on the definition of on-treatment 
platelet reactivity to adenosine diphosphate associated with ischemia 
and bleeding. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:2261–2273. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2013.07.101.
 11. Aradi D, Kirtane A, Bonello L, Gurbel PA, Tantry US, Huber K, Freynhofer 
MK, ten Berg J, Janssen P
, Angiolillo DJ, Siller-Matula JM, Marcucci R, Patti 
G, Mangiacapra F, Valgimigli M, Morel O, Palmerini T, Price MJ, Cuisset 
T, Kastrati A, Stone GW, Sibbing D. Bleeding and stent thrombosis on 
P2Y12-inhibitors: collaborative analysis on the role of platelet reactivity 
for risk stratification after percutaneous coronary intervention. Eur Heart 
J. 2015;36:1762–1771. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv104.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1972
 12. Farid NA, Kurihara A, Wrighton SA. Metabolism and disposition of 
the thienopyridine antiplatelet drugs ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and 
prasugrel in humans. J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;50:126–142. doi: 
10.1177/0091270009343005.
 13. Bernlochner I, Morath T, Brown PB, Zhou C, Baker BA, Gupta N, Jakubows-
ki JA, Winters KJ, Schömig A, Kastrati A, Sibbing D. A prospective ran-
domized trial comparing the recovery of platelet function after loading 
dose administration of prasugrel or clopidogrel. Platelets. 2013;24:15–25. 
doi: 10.3109/09537104.2011.654003.
 14. Price MJ, Walder JS, Baker BA, Heiselman DE, Jakubowski JA, Logan DK, 
Winters KJ, Li W, Angiolillo DJ. Recovery of platelet function after dis-
continuation of prasugrel or clopidogrel maintenance dosing in aspirin-
treated patients with stable coronary disease: the recovery trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2012;59:2338–2343. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.02.042.
 15. Husted S, van Giezen JJ. Ticagrelor: the first reversibly binding oral 
P2Y12 receptor antagonist. Cardiovasc Ther. 2009;27:259–274. doi: 
10.1111/j.1755-5922.2009.00096.x.
 16. Gurbel PA, Bliden KP
, Butler K, Tantry US, Gesheff T, Wei C, Teng R, An-
tonino MJ, Patil SB, Karunakaran A, Kereiakes DJ, Parris C, Purdy D, Wilson 
V, Ledley GS, Storey RF. Randomized double-blind assessment of the ONSET 
and OFFSET of the antiplatelet effects of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in pa-
tients with stable coronary artery disease: the ONSET/OFFSET study. Circula-
tion. 2009;120:2577–2585. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.912550.
 17. Franchi F, Rollini F, Muñiz-Lozano A, Cho JR, Angiolillo DJ. Cangrelor: a 
review on pharmacology and clinical trial development. Expert Rev Cardio-
vasc Ther. 2013;11:1279–1291. doi: 10.1586/14779072.2013.837701.
 18. Rollini F, Franchi F, Cho JR, DeGroat C, Bhatti M, Muniz-Lozano A, Singh 
K, Ferrante E, Wilson RE, Dunn EC, Zenni MM, Guzman LA, Bass TA, An-
giolillo DJ. A head-to-head pharmacodynamic comparison of prasugrel 
vs. ticagrelor after switching from clopidogrel in patients with coronary 
artery disease: results of a prospective randomized study. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:2722–2730. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv744.
 19. Pourdjabbar A, Hibbert B, Chong AY, Le May MR, Labinaz M, Simard T, 
Ramirez FD, Lugomirski P
, Maze R, Froeschl M, Glover C, Dick A, Marquis 
JF, Bernick J, Wells G, So DY; CAPITAL Investigators. A randomised study 
for optimising crossover from ticagrelor to clopidogrel in patients with 
acute coronary syndrome: the CAPITAL OPTI-CROSS Study. Thromb Hae-
most. 2017;117:303–310. doi: 10.1160/TH16-04-0340.
 20. Angiolillo DJ, Curzen N, Gurbel P
, Vaitkus P
, Lipkin F, Li W, Jakubowski JA, 
Zettler M, Effron MB, Trenk D. Pharmacodynamic evaluation of switching 
from ticagrelor to prasugrel in patients with stable coronary artery disease: 
results of the SWAP-2 Study (Switching Anti Platelet-2). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1500–1509. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.032.
 21. Franchi F, Faz GT, Rollini F, Park Y, Cho JR, Thano E, Hu J, Kureti M, Aggarwal 
N, Durairaj A, Been L, Zenni MM, Guzman LA, Suryadevara S, Antoun P
, 
Bass TA, Angiolillo DJ. Pharmacodynamic effects of switching from prasug-
rel to ticagrelor: results of the prospective, randomized SWAP-3 study. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9:1089–1098. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2016.02.039.
 22. Cutlip DE, Windecker S, Mehran R, Boam A, Cohen DJ, van Es GA, Steg 
PG, Morel MA, Mauri L, Vranckx P
, McFadden E, Lansky A, Hamon M, Kru-
coff MW, Serruys PW; Academic Research Consortium. Clinical end points 
in coronary stent trials: a case for standardized definitions. Circulation. 
2007;115:2344–2351. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.685313.
 23. Angiolillo DJ, Schneider DJ, Bhatt DL, French WJ, Price MJ, Saucedo JF, 
Shaburishvili T, Huber K, Prats J, Liu T, Harrington RA, Becker RC. Phar-
macodynamic effects of cangrelor and clopidogrel: the platelet function 
substudy from the Cangrelor Versus Standard Therapy to Achieve Optimal 
Management of Platelet Inhibition (CHAMPION) trials. J Thromb Throm-
bolysis. 2012;34:44–55. doi: 10.1007/s11239-012-0737-3.
 24. Rollini F, Franchi F, Tello-Montoliu A, Patel R, Darlington A, Ferreiro JL, Cho 
JR, Muñiz-Lozano A, Desai B, Zenni MM, Guzman LA, Bass TA, Angiolillo 
DJ. Pharmacodynamic effects of cangrelor on platelet P2Y12 receptor-
mediated signaling in prasugrel-treated patients. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2014;7:426–434. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2013.11.019.
 25. Rollini F, Franchi F, Thano E, Faz G, Park Y, Kureti M, Cho JR, Been L, Bass 
TA, Angiolillo DJ. In vitro pharmacodynamic effects of cangrelor on plate-
let P2Y12 receptor-mediated signaling in ticagrelor-treated patients. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2017;10:1374–1375. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2017.04.027.
 26. Schneider DJ, Agarwal Z, Seecheran N, Keating FK, Gogo P
. Pharmacody-
namic effects during the transition between cangrelor and ticagrelor. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;7:435–442. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2013.08.017.
 27. Schneider DJ, Seecheran N, Raza SS, Keating FK, Gogo P
. Pharmacodynam-
ic effects during the transition between cangrelor and prasugrel. Coron 
Artery Dis. 2015;26:42–48. doi: 10.1097/MCA.0000000000000158.
 28. Angiolillo DJ, Firstenberg MS, Price MJ, Tummala PE, Hutyra M, Welsby 
IJ, Voeltz MD, Chandna H, Ramaiah C, Brtko M, Cannon L, Dyke C, Liu 
T, Montalescot G, Manoukian SV, Prats J, Topol EJ; BRIDGE Investigators. 
Bridging antiplatelet therapy with cangrelor in patients undergoing car-
diac surgery: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2012;307:265–274. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.2002.
 29. Steinhubl SR, Oh JJ, Oestreich JH, Ferraris S, Charnigo R, Akers WS. 
Transitioning patients from cangrelor to clopidogrel: pharmacodynamic 
evidence of a competitive effect. Thromb Res. 2008;121:527–534. doi: 
10.1016/j.thromres.2007.05.020.
 30. Schneider DJ, Agarwal Z, Seecheran N, Gogo P
. Pharmacodynamic effects 
when clopidogrel is given before cangrelor discontinuation. J Interv Car-
diol. 2015;28:415–419. doi: 10.1111/joic.12229.
 31. Schneider DJ. Transition strategies from cangrelor to oral platelet P2Y12 
receptor antagonists. Coron Artery Dis. 2016;27:65–69. doi: 10.1097/
MCA.0000000000000311.
 32. Montalescot G, Bolognese L, Dudek D, Goldstein P
, Hamm C, Tanguay 
JF, ten Berg JM, Miller DL, Costigan TM, Goedicke J, Silvain J, Angioli P
, 
Legutko J, Niethammer M, Motovska Z, Jakubowski JA, Cayla G, Visconti 
LO, Vicaut E, Widimsky P; ACCOAST Investigators. Pretreatment with pra-
sugrel in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J 
Med. 2013;369:999–1010. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1308075.
 33. Roe MT, Armstrong PW, Fox KA, White HD, Prabhakaran D, Goodman SG, 
Cornel JH, Bhatt DL, Clemmensen P
, Martinez F, Ardissino D, Nicolau JC, 
Boden WE, Gurbel PA, Ruzyllo W, Dalby AJ, McGuire DK, Leiva-Pons JL, 
Parkhomenko A, Gottlieb S, Topacio GO, Hamm C, Pavlides G, Goudev 
AR, Oto A, Tseng CD, Merkely B, Gasparovic V, Corbalan R, Cinteză M, 
McLendon RC, Winters KJ, Brown EB, Lokhnygina Y, Aylward PE, Huber 
K, Hochman JS, Ohman EM; TRILOGY ACS Investigators. Prasugrel versus 
clopidogrel for acute coronary syndromes without revascularization. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;367:1297–1309. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1205512.
 34. Montalescot G, van ‘t Hof AW, Lapostolle F, Silvain J, Lassen JF, Bolognese 
L, Cantor WJ, Cequier A, Chettibi M, Goodman SG, Hammett CJ, Huber 
K, Janzon M, Merkely B, Storey RF, Zeymer U, Stibbe O, Ecollan P
, Heutz 
WM, Swahn E, Collet JP
, Willems FF, Baradat C, Licour M, Tsatsaris A, 
Vicaut E, Hamm CW; ATLANTIC Investigators. Prehospital ticagrelor in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1016–
1027. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1407024.
 35. Bonaca MP
, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, Steg PG, Storey RF, Jensen EC, Mag-
nani G, Bansilal S, Fish MP
, Im K, Bengtsson O, Oude Ophuis T, Budaj 
A, Theroux P
, Ruda M, Hamm C, Goto S, Spinar J, Nicolau JC, Kiss RG, 
Murphy SA, Wiviott SD, Held P
, Braunwald E, Sabatine MS; PEGASUS-TIMI 
54 Steering Committee and Investigators. Long-term use of ticagrelor in 
patients with prior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1791–
1800. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1500857.
 36. Alexopoulos D, Xanthopoulou I, Deftereos S, Sitafidis G, Kanakakis I, 
Hamilos M, Angelidis C, Petousis S, Stakos D, Parissis H, Vavouranakis 
M, Davlouros P
, Goudevenos J, Stefanadis C. In-hospital switching of oral 
P2Y12 inhibitor treatment in patients with acute coronary syndrome un-
dergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: prevalence, predictors and 
short-term outcome. Am Heart J. 2014;167:68–76.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2013.10.010.
 37. Clemmensen P
, Grieco N, Ince H, Danchin N, Goedicke J, Ramos Y, Schmitt 
J, Goldstein P; MULTIPRAC study investigators. MULTInational non-inter-
ventional study of patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-
tion treated with PRimary Angioplasty and Concomitant use of upstream 
antiplatelet therapy with prasugrel or clopidogrel: the European MULTIP-
RAC Registry. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2015;4:220–229. doi: 
10.1177/2048872614547449.
 38. Bagai A, Peterson ED, Honeycutt E, Effron MB, Cohen DJ, Goodman 
SG, Anstrom KJ, Gupta A, Messenger JC, Wang TY. In-hospital switch-
ing between adenosine diphosphate receptor inhibitors in patients 
with acute myocardial infarction treated with percutaneous coronary 
intervention: insights into contemporary practice from the TRANSLATE-
ACS study. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2015;4:499–508. doi: 
10.1177/2048872614564082.
 39. Schiele F, Puymirat E, Bonello L, Meneveau N, Collet JP
, Motreff P
, Ravan R, 
Leclercq F, Ennezat PV, Ferrières J, Simon T, Danchin N. Switching between 
thienopyridines in patients with acute myocardial infarction and quality of 
care. Open Heart. 2016;3:e000384. doi: 10.1136/openhrt-2015-000384.
 40. De Luca L, Leonardi S, Cavallini C, Lucci D, Musumeci G, Caporale R, 
Abrignani MG, Lupi A, Rakar S, Gulizia MM, Bovenzi FM, De Servi S; EYE-
SHOT Investigators. Contemporary antithrombotic strategies in patients 
with acute coronary syndrome admitted to cardiac care units in Italy: the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1973
EYESHOT study. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2015;4:441–452. doi: 
10.1177/2048872614560505.
 41. Bagai A, Wang Y, Wang TY, Curtis JP
, Gurm HS, Shah B, Cheema AN, 
Peterson ED, Saucedo JF, Granger CB, Roe MT, Bhatt DL, McNamara 
RL, Alexander KP
. In-hospital switching between clopidogrel and prasu-
grel among patients with acute myocardial infarction treated with per-
cutaneous coronary intervention: insights into contemporary practice 
from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 
2014;7:585–593. doi: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.114.001555.
 42. De Luca G, Verdoia M, Schaffer A, Suryapranata H, Parodi G, Antoniucci 
D, Marino P
. Switching from high-dose clopidogrel to prasugrel in ACS pa-
tients undergoing PCI: a single-center experience. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 
2014;38:388–394. doi: 10.1007/s11239-013-1039-0.
 43. Loh JP
, Pendyala LK, Kitabata H, Torguson R, Chen F, Kent KM, Satler 
LF, Suddath WO, Pichard AD, Waksman R. Safety of reloading prasugrel 
in addition to clopidogrel loading in patients with acute coronary syn-
drome undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 
2013;111:841–845. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.11.058.
 44. Almendro-Delia M, Blanco Ponce E, Gomez-Domínguez R, Gonzalez-
Matos C, Lobo-Gonzalez M, Caballero-Garcia A, Hidalgo-Urbano R, Cruz-
Fernandez MJ, Garcia-Rubira JC. Safety and efficacy of in-hospital clopi-
dogrel-to-prasugrel switching in patients with acute coronary syndrome: 
an analysis from the “real world.” J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2015;39:499–
507. doi: 10.1007/s11239-014-1139-5.
 45. Zettler ME, Peterson ED, McCoy LA, Effron MB, Anstrom KJ, Henry TD, 
Baker BA, Messenger JC, Cohen DJ, Wang TY; TRANSLATE-ACS Investi-
gators. Switching of adenosine diphosphate receptor inhibitor after hos-
pital discharge among myocardial infarction patients: insights from the 
Treatment with Adenosine Diphosphate Receptor Inhibitors: Longitudinal 
Assessment of Treatment Patterns and Events after Acute Coronary Syn-
drome (TRANSLATE-ACS) observational study. Am Heart J. 2017;183:62–
68. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2016.10.006.
 46. Bagai A, Peterson ED, McCoy LA, Effron MB, Zettler ME, Stone GW, Henry 
TD, Cohen DJ, Schulte PJ, Anstrom KJ, Wang TY. Association of measured 
platelet reactivity with changes in P2Y12 receptor inhibitor therapy and 
outcomes after myocardial infarction: Insights into routine clinical practice 
from the TReatment with ADP receptor iNhibitorS: Longitudinal Assess-
ment of Treatment Patterns and Events after Acute Coronary Syndrome 
(TRANSLATE-ACS) study. Am Heart J. 2017;187:19–28. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2017.02.003.
 47. De Luca L, D’Ascenzo F, Musumeci G, Saia F, Parodi G, Varbella F, Mar-
chese A, De Servi S, Berti S, Bolognese L. Incidence and outcome of 
switching of oral platelet P2Y12 receptor inhibitors in patients with acute 
coronary syndromes undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: the 
SCOPE registry. EuroIntervention. 2017;13:459–466. doi: 10.4244/EIJ-
D-17-00092.
 48. Angiolillo DJ, Saucedo JF, Deraad R, Frelinger AL, Gurbel PA, Costigan 
TM, Jakubowski JA, Ojeh CK, Effron MB; SWAP Investigators. Increased 
platelet inhibition after switching from maintenance clopidogrel to pra-
sugrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes: results of the SWAP 
(SWitching Anti Platelet) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1017–1023. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.02.072.
 49. Gurbel PA, Bliden KP
, Butler K, Antonino MJ, Wei C, Teng R, Rasmussen 
L, Storey RF, Nielsen T, Eikelboom JW, Sabe-Affaki G, Husted S, Kereiakes 
DJ, Henderson D, Patel DV, Tantry US. Response to ticagrelor in clopido-
grel nonresponders and responders and effect of switching therapies: the 
RESPOND study. Circulation. 2010;121:1188–1199. doi: 10.1161/CIRCU-
LATIONAHA.109.919456.
 50. Payne CD, Li YG, Brandt JT, Jakubowski JA, Small DS, Farid NA, Salazar 
DE, Winters KJ. Switching directly to prasugrel from clopidogrel results 
in greater inhibition of platelet aggregation in aspirin-treated subjects. 
Platelets. 2008;19:275–281. doi: 10.1080/09537100801891640.
 51. Wiviott SD, Trenk D, Frelinger AL, O’Donoghue M, Neumann FJ, Michel-
son AD, Angiolillo DJ, Hod H, Montalescot G, Miller DL, Jakubowski JA, 
Cairns R, Murphy SA, McCabe CH, Antman EM, Braunwald E; PRINCIPLE-
TIMI 44 Investigators. Prasugrel compared with high loading- and main-
tenance-dose clopidogrel in patients with planned percutaneous coronary 
intervention: the Prasugrel in Comparison to Clopidogrel for Inhibition 
of Platelet Activation and Aggregation-Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarc-
tion 44 trial. Circulation. 2007;116:2923–2932. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULA-
TIONAHA.107.740324.
 52. Montalescot G, Sideris G, Cohen R, Meuleman C, Bal dit Sollier C, Barthé-
lémy O, Henry P
, Lim P
, Beygui F, Collet JP
, Marshall D, Luo J, Petitjean H, 
Drouet L. Prasugrel compared with high-dose clopidogrel in acute coro-
nary syndrome: the randomised, double-blind ACAPULCO study. Thromb 
Haemost. 2010;103:213–223. doi: 10.1160/TH09-07-0482.
 53. Trenk D, Stone GW, Gawaz M, Kastrati A, Angiolillo DJ, Müller U, Richardt 
G, Jakubowski JA, Neumann FJ. A randomized trial of prasugrel versus 
clopidogrel in patients with high platelet reactivity on clopidogrel after 
elective percutaneous coronary intervention with implantation of drug-
eluting stents: results of the TRIGGER-PCI (Testing Platelet Reactivity In 
Patients Undergoing Elective Stent Placement on Clopidogrel to Guide Al-
ternative Therapy With Prasugrel) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:2159–
2164. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.02.026.
 54. Diodati JG, Saucedo JF, French JK, Fung AY, Cardillo TE, Henneges C, Ef-
fron MB, Fisher HN, Angiolillo DJ. Effect on platelet reactivity from a pra-
sugrel loading dose after a clopidogrel loading dose compared with a pra-
sugrel loading dose alone: Transferring From Clopidogrel Loading Dose to 
Prasugrel Loading Dose in Acute Coronary Syndrome Patients (TRIPLET): a 
randomized controlled trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6:567–574. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.112.000063.
 55. Sardella G, Calcagno S, Mancone M, Palmirotta R, Lucisano L, Canali E, 
Stio RE, Pennacchi M, Di Roma A, Benedetti G, Guadagni F, Biondi-Zoccai 
G, Fedele F. Pharmacodynamic effect of switching therapy in patients with 
high on-treatment platelet reactivity and genotype variation with high 
clopidogrel dose versus prasugrel: the RESET GENE trial. Circ Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2012;5:698–704. doi: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.112.972463.
 56. Lhermusier T, Voisin S, Murat G, Mejean S, Garcia C, Bataille V, Lipinski MJ, 
Carrié D, Sié P
. Switching patients from clopidogrel to novel P2Y12 recep-
tor inhibitors in acute coronary syndrome: comparative effects of prasug-
rel and ticagrelor on platelet reactivity. Int J Cardiol. 2014;174:874–876. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.04.208.
 57. Alexopoulos D, Galati A, Xanthopoulou I, Mavronasiou E, Kassimis G, The-
odoropoulos KC, Makris G, Damelou A, Tsigkas G, Hahalis G, Davlouros P
. 
Ticagrelor versus prasugrel in acute coronary syndrome patients with high 
on-clopidogrel platelet reactivity following percutaneous coronary inter-
vention: a pharmacodynamic study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:193–199. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.03.050.
 58. Koul S, Andell P
, Martinsson A, Smith JG, Scherstén F, Harnek J, Götberg 
M, Norström E, Björnsson S, Erlinge D. A pharmacodynamic comparison 
of 5 anti-platelet protocols in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarc-
tion undergoing primary PCI. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014;14:189. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2261-14-189.
 59. Cuisset T, Gaborit B, Dubois N, Quilici J, Loosveld M, Beguin S, Loundou 
AD, Moro PJ, Morange PE, Alessi MC, Dutour A, Bonnet JL. Platelet reac-
tivity in diabetic patients undergoing coronary stenting for acute coronary 
syndrome treated with clopidogrel loading dose followed by prasugrel 
maintenance therapy. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:523–528. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2012.09.214.
 60. Nührenberg TG, Trenk D, Leggewie S, Ristau I, Amann M, Stratz C, Hochhol-
zer W, Valina CM, Neumann FJ. Clopidogrel pretreatment of patients with 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction does not affect platelet reactivity after 
subsequent prasugrel-loading: platelet reactivity in an observational study. 
Platelets. 2013;24:549–553. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2012.736045.
 61. Parodi G, De Luca G, Bellandi B, Comito V, Valenti R, Marcucci R, Carrabba N, 
Migliorini A, Ramazzotti RN, Gensini GF, Abbate R, Antoniucci D. Switching 
from clopidogrel to prasugrel in patients having coronary stent implantation. J 
Thromb Thrombolysis. 2014;38:395–401. doi: 10.1007/s11239-013-1040-7.
 62. Aradi D, Tornyos A, Pintér T, Vorobcsuk A, Kónyi A, Faluközy J, Veress G, 
Magyari B, Horváth IG, Komócsi A. Optimizing P2Y12 receptor inhibition 
in patients with acute coronary syndrome on the basis of platelet function 
testing: impact of prasugrel and high-dose clopidogrel. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1061–1070. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.12.023.
 63. Mayer K, Schulz S, Bernlochner I, Morath T, Braun S, Hausleiter J, Mass-
berg S, Schunkert H, Laugwitz KL, Kastrati A, Sibbing D. A comparative 
cohort study on personalised antiplatelet therapy in PCI-treated patients 
with high on-clopidogrel platelet reactivity: results of the ISAR-HPR regis-
try. Thromb Haemost. 2014;112:342–351. doi: 10.1160/TH13-10-0874.
 64. Lhermusier T, Lipinski MJ, Drenning D, Marso S, Chen F, Torguson R, 
Waksman R. Switching patients from clopidogrel to prasugrel in acute 
coronary syndrome: impact of the clopidogrel loading dose on platelet 
reactivity. J Interv Cardiol. 2014;27:365–372. doi: 10.1111/joic.12139.
 65. Caiazzo G, De Rosa S, Torella D, Spaccarotella C, Mongiardo A, Giampà 
S, Micieli M, Palella E, Gulletta E, Indolfi C. Administration of a loading 
dose has no additive effect on platelet aggregation during the switch from 
ongoing clopidogrel treatment to ticagrelor in patients with acute coro-
nary syndrome. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;7:104–112. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCINTERVENTIONS.113.000512.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Angiolillo et al
November 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164
1974
 66. Hibbert B, Maze R, Pourdjabbar A, Simard T, Ramirez FD, Moudgil R, 
Blondeau M, Labinaz M, Dick A, Glover C, Froeschl M, Marquis JF, So 
DY, Le May MR. A comparative pharmacodynamic study of ticagrelor 
versus clopidogrel and ticagrelor in patients undergoing primary percu-
taneous coronary intervention: the CAPITAL RELOAD study. PLoS One. 
2014;9:e92078. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092078.
 67. Michelson AD, Frelinger AL 3rd, Braunwald E, Downey WE, Angiolillo DJ, 
Xenopoulos NP
, Jakubowski JA, Li Y, Murphy SA, Qin J, McCabe CH, Antman 
EM, Wiviott SD; TRITON-TIMI 38 Investigators. Pharmacodynamic assess-
ment of platelet inhibition by prasugrel vs. clopidogrel in the TRITON-TIMI 38 
trial. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:1753–1763. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehp159.
 68. Saucedo JF, Angiolillo DJ, DeRaad R, Frelinger AL 3rd, Gurbel PA, Costi-
gan TM, Jakubowski JA, Ojeh CK, Duvvuru S, Effron MB; SWAP Investiga-
tors. Decrease in high on-treatment platelet reactivity (HPR) prevalence 
on switching from clopidogrel to prasugrel: insights from the Switching 
Anti-Platelet (SWAP) study. Thromb Haemost. 2013;109:347–355. doi: 
10.1160/TH12-06-0378.
 69. Bliden KP
, Tantry US, Storey RF, Jeong YH, Gesheff M, Wei C, Gurbel PA. 
The effect of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel on high on-treatment platelet 
reactivity: combined analysis of the ONSET/OFFSET and RESPOND studies. 
Am Heart J. 2011;162:160–165. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2010.11.025.
 70. Storey RF, Angiolillo DJ, Patil SB, Desai B, Ecob R, Husted S, Emanuels-
son H, Cannon CP
, Becker RC, Wallentin L. Inhibitory effects of ticagrelor 
compared with clopidogrel on platelet function in patients with acute 
coronary syndromes: the PLATO (PLATelet inhibition and patient Out-
comes) PLATELET substudy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1456–1462. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2010.03.100.
 71. Alexopoulos D, Xanthopoulou 
I, 
Perperis 
A, 
Goudevenos 
J, 
Hamilos 
M, 
Sitafidis 
G, Kanakakis I, Vavouranakis M, Giannopoulos G, Barampoutis N, Deftereos 
S, Lekakis J. Dyspnea in patients treated with P2Y12 receptor antagonists: 
insights from the GReek AntiPlatElet (GRAPE) registry. Platelets. 2017;2:1–7.
 72. Bonaca MP
, Bhatt DL, Oude Ophuis T, Steg PG, Storey R, Cohen M, Kuder 
J, Im K, Magnani G, Budaj A, Theroux P
, Hamm C, Špinar J, Kiss RG, Dalby 
AJ, Medina FA, Kontny F, Aylward PE, Jensen EC, Held P
, Braunwald E, Sa-
batine MS. Long-term tolerability of ticagrelor for the secondary preven-
tion of major adverse cardiovascular events: a secondary analysis of the 
PEGASUS-TIMI 54 Trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:425–432. doi: 10.1001/
jamacardio.2016.1017.
 73. Cuisset T, Deharo P
, Quilici J, Johnson TW, Deffarges S, Bassez C, Bon-
net G, Fourcade L, Mouret JP
, Lambert M, Verdier V, Morange PE, Alessi 
MC, Bonnet JL. Benefit of switching dual antiplatelet therapy after acute 
coronary syndrome: the TOPIC (Timing of Platelet Inhibition After Acute 
Coronary Syndrome) randomized study [published online ahead of print 
May 16, 2017]. Eur Heart J. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx175. https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/eurheartj/
ehx175/3827697/Benefit-of-switching-dual-antiplatelet-therapy?redirect
edFrom=fulltext.
 74. Sibbing D, Aradi D, Jacobshagen C, Gross L, Trenk D, Geisler T, Orban M, 
Hadamitzky M, Merkely B, Kiss RG, Komócsi A, Dézsi CA, Holdt L, Felix SB, 
Parma R, Klopotowski M, Schwinger RHG, Rieber J, Huber K, Neumann 
FJ, Koltowski L, Mehilli J, Huczek Z, Massberg S; TROPICAL-ACS Inves-
tigators. Guided de-escalation of antiplatelet treatment in patients with 
acute coronary syndrome undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-
tion (TROPICAL-ACS): a randomised, open-label, multicentre trial. Lancet. 
2017;390:1747–1757. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32155-4.
 75. Price MJ, Berger PB, Teirstein PS, Tanguay JF, Angiolillo DJ, Spriggs D, Puri 
S, Robbins M, Garratt KN, Bertrand OF, Stillabower ME, Stillablower ME, 
Aragon JR, Kandzari DE, Stinis CT, Lee MS, Manoukian SV, Cannon CP
, 
Schork NJ, Topol EJ; GRAVITAS Investigators. Standard- vs high-dose clopi-
dogrel based on platelet function testing after percutaneous coronary in-
tervention: the GRAVITAS randomized trial. JAMA. 2011;305:1097–1105. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.290.
 76. Collet JP
, Cuisset T, Rangé G, Cayla G, Elhadad S, Pouillot C, Henry P
, 
Motreff P
, Carrié D, Boueri Z, Belle L, Van Belle E, Rousseau H, Aubry P
, 
Monségu J, Sabouret P
, O’Connor SA, Abtan J, Kerneis M, Saint-Etienne 
C, Barthélémy O, Beygui F, Silvain J, Vicaut E, Montalescot G; ARCTIC 
Investigators. Bedside monitoring to adjust antiplatelet therapy for coro-
nary stenting. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2100–2109. doi: 10.1056/NEJ-
Moa1209979.
 77. Cayla G, Cuisset T, Silvain J, Leclercq F, Manzo-Silberman S, Saint-Etienne 
C, Delarche N, Bellemain-Appaix A, Range G, El Mahmoud R, Carrié D, 
Belle L, Souteyrand G, Aubry P
, Sabouret P
, du Fretay XH, Beygui F, Bon-
net JL, Lattuca B, Pouillot C, Varenne O, Boueri Z, Van Belle E, Henry P
, 
Motreff P
, Elhadad S, Salem JE, Abtan J, Rousseau H, Collet JP
, Vicaut 
E, Montalescot G; ANTARCTIC Investigators. Platelet function monitor-
ing to adjust antiplatelet therapy in elderly patients stented for an acute 
coronary syndrome (ANTARCTIC): an open-label, blinded-endpoint, ran-
domised controlled superiority trial. Lancet. 2016;388:2015–2022. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31323-X.
 78. Moon JY, Franchi F, Rollini F, Rivas Rios JR, Kureti M, Cavallari LH, An-
giolillo DJ. Role of genetic testing in patients undergoing percutaneous 
coronary intervention. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2017;Oct 12:1–14. doi: 
10.1080/17512433.2017.1353909.
 79. Kerneis M, Silvain J, Abtan J, Cayla G, O’Connor SA, Barthélémy O, Vig-
nalou JB, Beygui F, Brugier D, Martin R, Collet JP
, Montalescot G. Switch-
ing acute coronary syndrome patients from prasugrel to clopidogrel. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6:158–165. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2012.09.012.
 80. Deharo P
, Pons C, Pankert M, Bonnet G, Quilici J, Grosdidier C, Beguin 
S, Morange P
, Alessi MC, Bonnet JL, Cuisset T. Effectiveness of switch-
ing “hyper responders” from prasugrel to clopidogrel after acute coro-
nary syndrome: the POBA (Predictor of Bleeding with Antiplatelet drugs) 
SWITCH study. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:5004–5005. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2013.07.121.
 81. Vaduganathan M, Qamar A, Singh A, Venkateswaran RV, Szumita PM, 
Croce KJ, Mauri L, Leopold JA, Shah PB, Sobieszczyk P
, Faxon DP
, Bhatt 
DL. Cangrelor use since FDA approval: a single-center, real-world experi-
ence at a tertiary care hospital. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:463–464. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.11.017.
 82. Dovlatova NL, Jakubowski JA, Sugidachi A, Heptinstall S. The reversible 
P2Y antagonist cangrelor influences the ability of the active metabolites 
of clopidogrel and prasugrel to produce irreversible inhibition of platelet 
function. J Thromb Haemost. 2008;6:1153–1159. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-
7836.2008.03020.x.
 83. Bhatt DL, Stone GW, Mahaffey KW, Gibson CM, Steg PG, Hamm CW, 
Price MJ, Leonardi S, Gallup D, Bramucci E, Radke PW, Widimský P
, Tousek 
F, Tauth J, Spriggs D, McLaurin BT, Angiolillo DJ, Généreux P
, Liu T, Prats 
J, Todd M, Skerjanec S, White HD, Harrington RA; CHAMPION PHOENIX 
Investigators. Effect of platelet inhibition with cangrelor during PCI on 
ischemic events. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1303–1313. doi: 10.1056/NEJ-
Moa1300815.
 84. Badreldin HA, Carter D, Cook BM, Qamar A, Vaduganathan M, Bhatt DL. 
Safety and tolerability of transitioning from cangrelor to ticagrelor in pa-
tients who underwent percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 
2017;120:359–361. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.04.034.
 85. Franchi F, Rollini F, Park Y, Angiolillo DJ. A safety evaluation of cangrelor 
in patients undergoing PCI. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016;15:275–285. doi: 
10.1517/14740338.2016.1133585.
 86. Judge HM, Buckland RJ, Jakubowski JA, Storey RF. Cangrelor inhib-
its the binding of the active metabolites of clopidogrel and prasu-
grel to P2Y12 receptors in vitro. Platelets. 2016;27:191–195. doi: 
10.3109/09537104.2015.1069809.
 87. Hochholzer W, Kleiner P
, Younas I, Valina CM, Löffelhardt N, Amann M, 
Bömicke T, Ferenc M, Hauschke D, Trenk D, Neumann FJ, Stratz C. Ran-
domized Comparison of oral P2Y12-receptor inhibitor loading strategies 
for transitioning from cangrelor: the ExcelsiorLOAD2 Trial. JACC Cardio-
vasc Interv. 2017;10:121–129. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2016.10.004.
 88. Thomas MR, Morton AC, Hossain R, Chen B, Luo L, Shahari NN, Hua P
, 
Beniston RG, Judge HM, Storey RF. Morphine delays the onset of action of 
prasugrel in patients with prior history of ST-elevation myocardial infarc-
tion. Thromb Haemost. 2016;116:96–102. doi: 10.1160/TH16-02-0102.
 89. Silvain J, Storey RF, Cayla G, Esteve JB, Dillinger JG, Rousseau H, Tsatsaris 
A, Baradat C, Salhi N, Hamm CW, Lapostolle F, Lassen JF, Collet JP
, Ten 
Berg JM, Van’t Hof AW, Montalescot G. P2Y12 receptor inhibition and 
effect of morphine in patients undergoing primary PCI for ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction: the PRIVATE-ATLANTIC study. Thromb 
Haemost. 2016;116:369–378. doi: 10.1160/TH15-12-0944.
 90. Kubica J, Adamski P
, Ostrowska M, Sikora J, Kubica JM, Sroka WD, 
Stankowska K, Buszko K, Navarese EP
, Jilma B, Siller-Matula JM, Marszałł 
MP
, Rość D, Koziński M. Morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor ex-
posure and action in patients with myocardial infarction: the random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled IMPRESSION trial. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:245–252. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv547.
 91. Parodi G, Bellandi B, Xanthopoulou I, Capranzano P
, Capodanno D, Val-
enti R, Stavrou K, Migliorini A, Antoniucci D, Tamburino C, Alexopoulos D. 
Morphine is associated with a delayed activity of oral antiplatelet agents 
in patients with ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction undergoing pri-
mary percutaneous coronary intervention. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8: 
e001593. doi: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.114.001593.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Switching Antiplatelet Therapy
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;136:1955–1975. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031164 
November 14, 2017
1975
 92. Franchi F, Rollini F, Angiolillo DJ. Antithrombotic therapy for patients with 
STEMI undergoing primary PCI. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2017;14:361–379. doi: 
10.1038/nrcardio.2017.18.
 93. Cangrelor United States full prescribing information. https://resources.
chiesiusa.com/Kengreal/KENGREAL_US_PI.pdf. Accessed October 15, 
2017.
 94. Cangrelor European Medicines Agency full prescribing information. 
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_
Product_Information/human/003773/WC500188098.pdf. 
Accessed 
June 3, 2017.
 95. Capodanno D, Angiolillo DJ. Management of antiplatelet therapy 
in patients with coronary artery disease requiring cardiac and non-
cardiac surgery. Circulation. 2013;128:2785–2798. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.003675.
 96. Rossini R, Tarantini G, Musumeci G, Masiero G, Barbato E, Calabrò P
, 
Capodanno D, Leonardi S, Lettino M, Limbruno U, Menozzi A, Marchese 
A, Saia F, Valgimigli M, Ageno M, Falanga A, Corcione A, Locatelli A, 
Montorsi M, Piazza D, Stella A, Bozzani A, Parolari A, Carone R, Angiolillo 
DJ. Italian Society of Invasive Cardiology (SICI-GISE), Italian Society for 
Haemostasis and Thrombosis (SISET), Italian Society of Anesthesia and 
Intensive Care Medicine (SIAARTI), Italian Society of Surgery (SIC), 
Italian Society for Cardiac Surgery (SICCH), Italian Society of Vascular 
and Endovascular Surgery (SICVE), Italian Society of Urology (SIU), 
Italian Orthopaedic Society (SIOT), Italian Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
(SICT), Italian Federation of scientific Societies of Digestive System 
Diseases (FISMAD), Italian Society of Digestive Endoscopy (SIED), Italian 
Association of hospital Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy 
(AIGO), Italian Association of Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy 
(SIGE), Italian Society of Maxillofacial Surgery (SICMF), Italian Society of 
Reconstructive Plastic Surgery and Aesthetics (SICPRE), Italian Society of 
Ginecology and Obstetrics (SIGO), Italian Society of Neurosurgery (SINch), 
Italian Association of Hospital Pulmonologist (AIPO), Italian Society of 
Periodontology (SIdP), Italian Society of Ophthalmology (SOI), Italian 
Association of Hospital Otorhinolaryngologist (AOOI), Italian Association 
of Hospital Surgeons (ACOI), Association of Obstetricians Gynecologists 
Italian Hospital (AOGOI). A multidisciplinary approach on the periopera-
tive antithrombotic management of patients with coronary stents under-
going surgery: surgery after stenting 2. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2017; In 
press.
 97. Halim SA, Rao SV. Bleeding and acute coronary syndromes: defin-
ing, predicting, and managing risk and outcomes. Curr Drug Targets. 
2011;12:1831–1835. doi: 10.2174/138945011797635876.
 98. Muñiz-Lozano A, Rollini F, Franchi F, Angiolillo DJ. Update on platelet 
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors: recommendations for clinical practice. Ther 
Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;7:197–213. doi: 10.1177/1753944713487781.
 99. Angiolillo DJ, Goodman SG, Bhatt DL, Eikelboom JW, Price MJ, Moliterno 
DJ, Cannon CP
, Tanguay JF, Granger CB, Mauri L, Holmes DR, Gibson 
CM, Faxon DP
. Antithrombotic therapy in patients with atrial fibrilla-
tion undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: a North American 
perspective–2016 update. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9:e004395. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.116.004395.
 100. Lip GY, Windecker S, Huber K, Kirchhof P
, Marin F, Ten Berg JM, Haeusler 
KG, Boriani G, Capodanno D, Gilard M, Zeymer U, Lane D, Storey RF, 
Bueno H, Collet JP
, Fauchier L, Halvorsen S, Lettino M, Morais J, Mueller C, 
Potpara TS, Rasmussen LH, Rubboli A, Tamargo J, Valgimigli M, Zamorano 
JL. Management of antithrombotic therapy in atrial fibrillation patients 
presenting with acute coronary syndrome and/or undergoing percutane-
ous coronary or valve interventions: a joint consensus document of the 
European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Thrombosis, European 
Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), European Association of Percutaneous 
Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI) and European Association of Acute 
Cardiac Care (ACCA) endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) and 
Asia-Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3155–
3179. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu298.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
