 Special Articles
2078 
www.ccmjournal.org 
December 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 12
16 
Clinical Division and Laboratory of Intensive Care Medicine, Department 
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven University and Hospitals, 
Louvain, Belgium.
Dr. Djillali Annane and Dr. Stephen M. Pastores were co-chairs of the task 
force and contributed equally to this work.
Dr. Annane has been involved with research relating to this guide-
line. Dr. Pastores participates in the American College of Physicians: 
Speaker at ACP Critical Care Update Precourse, the American College 
of Chest Physicians (CHEST) (faculty speaker at Annual Congress), 
the American Thoracic Society (ATS): Moderator at Annual Meeting, 
the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (EISCM) (co-chair of 
Corticosteroid Guideline in collaboration with SCCM), and the Korean 
Society of Critical Care Medicine (co-director and speaker at Multipro-
fessional Critical Care Board Review Course). He has spoken on the 
topic of corticosteroid use in critical illness and specifically in sepsis 
at the International Symposium in Critical and Emergency Medicine in 
March 2017. Dr. Arlt participates in the Society for Endocrinology UK 
(Chair of the Clinical Committee, member of Council, member of the 
Nominations Committee) and the Endocrine Society USA (member, 
Publication Core Committee). Dr. Briegel participates in the European 
Society of Intensive Care Medicine, the Deutsche interdisziplinäre Ver-
einigung Intensivmedizin, and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Anästhesie 
und Intensivmedizin, and he has given lectures and talks on hydrocor-
tisone treatment of septic shock. Dr. Cooper participates in a range 
of specialist societies relating to endocrinology and bone disease. Dr. 
Meduri disclosed he is a government employee. Dr. Olsen participates 
in the American College of Clinical Pharmacy (grant review committee), 
and he represents the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists 
on the National Quality Forum for Surgery Measures. Dr. Rochwerg dis-
closed he is a methodologist for ATS, CBS, ESCIM, ASH. The remain-
ing authors have disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts 
of interest.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article which includes 
evidence profiles.
This article is being simultaneously published in Critical Care Medicine 
and Intensive Care Medicine. ICM DOI: 10.1007/s00134-017-4919-5
This article is linked to another article entitled “Critical Illness-Related Cor-
ticosteroid Insufficiency (CIRCI): A Narrative Review From a Multispecialty 
Copyright © 2017 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and European 
Society of Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved.
DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000002737
1General ICU Department, Raymond Poincaré Hospital (APHP), Health 
Science.
2Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
3Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
4Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research (IMSR), University of 
Birmingham and Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism 
(CEDAM), Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham, UK.
5Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Rush University Medi-
cal Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
6Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, 
Enschede, The Netherlands.
7Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Klinik für Anästhesiologie, 
Klinikum der Universität, Munich, Germany.
8Department of Critical Care Medicine and Pediatrics, University of Pitts-
burgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
9Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, Clinical 
Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
10 
Department of Endocrinology, Concord Hospital, University of Sidney, 
Sidney, NSW, Australia.
11 
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medi-
cal School, Norfolk, VA, USA.
12 
Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Memphis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
13 
College of Pharmacy, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR, USA.
14 
Clinical Adjunct Faculty, University of New Mexico and Sandoval 
Regional Medical Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
15 
Division of Critical Care Medicine, Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St. 
Paul’s Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of 
Critical Illness-Related Corticosteroid Insufficiency 
(CIRCI) in Critically Ill Patients (Part I): Society 
of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and European 
Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) 2017
Djillali Annane, MD, PhD1; Stephen M. Pastores, MD, FCCM2; Bram Rochwerg, MD3;  
Wiebke Arlt, MD, DSc, FRCP4; Robert A. Balk, MD, MCCM5; Albertus Beishuizen, MD, PhD6;  
Josef Briegel, MD, PhD7; Joseph Carcillo, MD, FCCM8; Mirjam Christ-Crain, MD, PhD9;  
Mark S. Cooper, MD10; Paul E. Marik, MD, FCCM11; Gianfranco Umberto Meduri, MD12;  
Keith M. Olsen, PharmD, FCCM13; Sophia C. Rodgers, RN, MSN, ACNP
, FCCM14; James A. Russell, MD15; 
Greet Van den Berghe, MD, PhD16
 Special Articles
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
2079
Task Force of the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and the Euro-
pean Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM)” published in parallel.
For more information about this article, Email: pastores@mskcc.org
Objective: To update the 2008 consensus statements for the 
diagnosis and management of critical illness-related corticoste-
roid insufficiency (CIRCI) in adult and pediatric patients.
Participants: A multispecialty task force of 16 international experts 
in critical care medicine, endocrinology, and guideline methods, 
all of them members of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and/
or the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine.
Design/Methods: The recommendations were based on the 
summarized evidence from the 2008 document in addition to 
more recent findings from an updated systematic review of rel-
evant studies from 2008 to 2017 and were formulated using the 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation (GRADE) methodology. The strength of each recom-
mendation was classified as strong or conditional, and the quality 
of evidence was rated from high to very low based on factors 
including the individual study design, the risk of bias, the con-
sistency of the results, and the directness and precision of the 
evidence. Recommendation approval required the agreement of 
at least 80% of the task force members.
Results: The task force was unable to reach agreement on a sin-
gle test that can reliably diagnose CIRCI, although delta cortisol 
(change in baseline cortisol at 60 min of < 9 μg/dL) after cosyn-
tropin (250 μg) administration and a random plasma cortisol of 
< 10 μg/dL may be used by clinicians. We suggest against using 
plasma-free cortisol or salivary cortisol level over plasma total corti-
sol (conditional, very low quality of evidence). For treatment of spe-
cific conditions, we suggest using IV hydrocortisone < 400 mg/
day for ≥ 3 days at full dose in patients with septic shock that 
is not responsive to fluid and moderate- to high-dose vasopres-
sor therapy (conditional, low quality of evidence). We suggest not 
using corticosteroids in adult patients with sepsis without shock 
(conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). We 
suggest the use of IV methylprednisolone 1 
mg/kg/day in patients 
with early moderate to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(PaO2/FiO2 < 200 and within 14 days of onset) (conditional, mod-
erate quality of evidence). Corticosteroids are not suggested for 
patients with major trauma (conditional, low quality of evidence).
Conclusions: Evidence-based recommendations for the use 
of corticosteroids in critically ill patients with sepsis and septic 
shock, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and major trauma 
have been developed by a multispecialty task force. (Crit Care 
Med 2017; 45:2078–2088)
Key Words: corticosteroids; glucocorticoids; critical illness; sepsis; 
septic shock; acute respiratory distress syndrome; major trauma
INTRODUCTION
Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI) is 
a concept that was first introduced in 2008 by an international 
multidisciplinary task force convened by the Society of Critical 
Care Medicine (SCCM) to describe impairment of the hypotha-
lamic pituitary axis (stress response) during critical illness (1). 
CIRCI is characterized by dysregulated systemic inflammation 
resulting from inadequate intracellular glucocorticoid-mediated 
anti-inflammatory activity for the severity of the patient’s criti-
cal illness. The putative symptoms of CIRCI are listed in Table 1. 
CIRCI is associated with increased circulating levels of biological 
markers of inflammation and coagulation over time, morbid-
ity, length of ICU stay, and mortality. Given the growing body of 
evidence that CIRCI occurs across a broad spectrum of critical 
illness, an understanding of the pathogenesis and treatment of 
CIRCI is important to all critical care providers.
Two emerging themes made it necessary to revisit the con-
cept, diagnosis, and management of CIRCI (1): the recognition 
of the importance of evidence-based approaches to patient care 
to enhance quality, improve safety, and establish a clear and 
transparent framework for service development and healthcare 
provision (2); the widespread use of corticosteroids in critically 
ill patients, highlighting the need for a valid, reliable, and trans-
parent process of evaluation to support key decisions.
Against this background, the SCCM and the European Society 
of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) have updated the 2008 guide-
lines for the diagnosis and treatment of CIRCI. In addition to 
rigorous application of GRADE (Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) methodology, the 
TABLE 1. Putative Signs and Symptoms 
of Critical Illness-Related Corticosteroid 
Insufficiency (CIRCI)
Clinical
 
General
Fever, asthenia
Neurological
Confusion
 
Delirium
 
Coma
Cardiovascular
Hypotension refractory to fluid resuscitation
 
Decreased sensitivity to catecholamines
 
High cardiac index
Digestive
Nausea
 
Vomiting
 
Intolerance to enteral nutrition
Respiratory
Persistent hypoxia
Laboratory
Hypoglycemia
 
Hyponatremia
 
Hyperkalemia
 
Metabolic acidosis
 
Hypereosinophilia
Imaging
Hemorrhage or necrosis in hypothalamus, 
pituitary gland or adrenal gland
 Annane et al
2080 
www.ccmjournal.org 
December 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 12
recommendations in this document focus on patient-important 
outcomes and utility to clinicians in everyday practice. It was not 
intended to define a standard of care, and should not be inter-
preted as such. As with any clinical practice guideline, it should not 
be interpreted as prescribing an exclusive course of management. 
The guideline covers CIRCI in critically ill children and adults. It 
does not cover chronic adrenal insufficiency and does not apply to 
neonates, because the guideline panel felt these areas represented 
separate fields of expertise. This guideline focuses on the three 
disorders that most clinicians associate with CIRCI: sepsis/septic 
shock, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and major trauma.
Composition of the Guideline Development Group
A multispecialty task force of international experts in critical 
care medicine, endocrinology, and guideline methods was con-
vened from the membership of the SCCM and the ESICM. The 
first in-person meeting was held during the SCCM Critical Care 
Congress in San Francisco, CA in January 2014, followed by 
several teleconferences and electronic-based discussion at regu-
lar intervals and another three in-person meetings during the 
annual SCCM Critical Care Congress in January 2015, Febru-
ary 2016, and January 2017. Members who were unable to par-
ticipate in the in-person meetings were given the opportunity to 
provide electronic input, and meeting updates were circulated.
Conflict of Interest Policy
We required all guideline task force members to fill out a detailed 
declaration of interest statement including all current and future 
financial conflicts of interest (COI) as well as past interests, 
restricted to the 2 years immediately before joining the guideline 
development process. No task force members reported any finan-
cial COI related to the development and writing of the guideline. 
All members were allowed to participate in all discussions and 
had equal weight in formulating the statements or in voting. All 
were allowed equal involvement in data extraction and writing 
the rationales. We also allowed members to exclude themselves 
from discussion and voting around specific questions if they felt 
significant academic COI. There was no input or funding from 
industry to produce this guideline. The COI forms are available 
from the SCCM and ESICM and are updated on a regular basis.
Question Development
The task force members developed a list of questions struc-
tured in the Population, Intervention, Comparison, and Out-
come (PICO) format regarding the diagnosis and treatment of 
CIRCI in various clinical conditions (Supplemental Digital 
Content 1, http://links.lww.com/CCM/C914). The methods 
chair (BR) assisted in developing the PICO questions, i.e., fram-
ing the clinical questions in a searchable format. This required 
careful specification of the patient group (P), the intervention 
(I), the comparator (C), and the outcomes (O) for interven-
tion questions and the patient group, index tests, reference 
standard, and target condition for questions of diagnostic test 
accuracy. For each question the task force agreed upon explicit 
review question criteria including study design features. Some 
of these questions had been previously addressed in the 2008 
guidelines (1) and required updates of the evidence summa-
ries, whereas others required de novo systematic reviews.
Assessment of Relative Importance of Outcomes
For each intervention question a list of outcomes was compiled, 
reflecting both benefits and harms of alternative management 
strategies. Outcomes (from the perspective of a patient) were 
ranked from “low” to “critical” importance and agreed by con-
sensus of the task force members (Supplemental Digital Con-
tent 2, http://links.lww.com/CCM/C915). Ranking outcomes 
by their relative clinical importance helps to focus on those that 
are most relevant to patients and may lead to improved clarifi-
cation during potential disagreements in decision making.
SEARCHING FOR EVIDENCE
Sources
The information technologists (based at McMaster Univer-
sity, Hamilton, Ontario) searched The Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, DARE, CENTRAL, and Medline for all 
PICO questions on diagnosis and treatment. All searches were 
updated through May 2017. The search strategies combined 
subject headings and text words for the patient population, 
index test and target condition for the diagnostic questions 
and subject headings and text words for the population and 
intervention for the intervention questions (Supplemental 
Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/CCM/C914).
If a previous meta-analysis of high quality was identified 
which addressed one of the PICO questions, this was used or 
updated to incorporate new evidence since its publication. 
Search and screening results were provided to the task force to 
ensure no important trials were missed or erroneously included.
Reference lists from the included publications were screened 
to identify additional papers. The methods chair also searched 
guideline databases and organizations including the National 
Guideline Clearinghouse, Guidelines International Network, 
Guidelines Finder, Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, and profes-
sional critical care and endocrinology societies for guidelines 
in order to screen the reference lists.
Selection of Studies for Inclusion
The information technologists screened all titles and abstracts to 
discard the clearly irrelevant articles. Task force members com-
pleted a second screening. References were allocated to pairs of 
reviewers for evaluation of eligibility. All abstracts that did not 
meet the inclusion criteria were discarded. Any discrepancies at 
this stage were resolved by group consensus. All pairs of review-
ers, with help from the methods support team, retrieved full texts 
of potentially relevant studies and examined them independently 
for eligibility. Any discrepancies were resolved by consensus.
Data Extraction and Critical Appraisal of Individual 
Studies
For each included study, we collected relevant information 
on design, conduct, risk of bias, and relevant results. For each 
 Special Articles
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
2081
question, the methodologist extracted all individual study data 
and produced (when pooling was judged to be appropriate) 
forest plots by outcome. All analysis was done using Review 
Manager (RevMan) software version 5.3 (Copenhagen: The 
Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014).
The risk of bias of the included studies was evaluated using 
various validated checklists, as recommended by the Cochrane 
Collaboration (2). These were AMSTAR for systematic reviews 
(3), the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool for randomized controlled 
trials (4), and the Newcastle-Ottawa scale for cohort and case-
control studies (5).
Evidence Profiles
Evidence summaries for each question were prepared by the 
methodologist following the GRADE approach (6), using 
the GRADEpro Guideline Development Tool online software 
(www.gradepro.org).
The evidence profiles include the summary—pooled or 
narrative—outcome data, an absolute measure of intervention 
effect when appropriate, the importance of the outcome, and 
the summary of quality of evidence for each outcome. Evidence 
profiles were constructed by the methodologist and reviewed 
and confirmed with the rest of the task force members.
Rating the Quality of the Evidence for Each Outcome 
Across Studies
In accordance with GRADE, the task force initially catego-
rized the quality of the evidence (certainty) for each outcome 
as high if it originated from randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) and low if it originated from observational data. We 
subsequently downgraded the quality of the evidence by one 
or two levels if results from individual studies were at serious 
or very serious risk of bias, there were serious inconsistencies 
in the results across studies, the evidence was indirect, the data 
were sparse or imprecise, or publication bias was thought to 
be likely. If evidence arose from observational data, but effect 
sizes were large, there was evidence of a dose-response gradi-
ent, or all plausible confounding would either reduce a demon-
strated effect or suggest a spurious effect when results showed 
no effect, we upgraded the quality of the evidence. By repeating 
this procedure, we obtained an overall quality of the evidence 
for each outcome and each intervention.
Formulating Statements and Grading 
Recommendations
Actionable recommendations. After the evidence summary tables 
and evidence profiles had been prepared, revised, and approved 
by the task force, the recommendations were finalized. All recom-
mendations were developed based on the GRADE evidence pro-
files for each recommendation. Each of the following factors was 
considered in recommendation development: the quality of the 
evidence, the balance of desirable and undesirable consequences 
of compared management options, the assumptions about the 
patient’s values and preferences associated with the decision, the 
implications for resource use and health equity, the acceptability of 
intervention to stakeholders, and the feasibility of implementation. 
Recommendations and their strength required the agreement of at 
least 80% of the task force members. Committee members unable 
to join the face-to-face meetings or teleconferences were provided 
opportunity for input electronically. The entire committee agreed 
on the final wording of each recommendation and rationale with 
further qualifications for each recommendation (e.g., subgroup 
considerations, justification, implementation considerations).
Each recommendation was designated either “strong” or 
“conditional” according to the GRADE approach (7). As out-
lined by GRADE, we used the phrasing “we recommend” for 
strong recommendations and “we suggest” for conditional (syn-
onymous with the older term ‘weak’) recommendations (Table 
2). The implications of the strength of the recommendations 
for patients, clinicians, and policy makers are shown in Table 3.
Writing Rationale. We collated the actionable recom-
mendations and the clinical advice for each of the clinical 
questions in separate chapters structured according to a 
specific format. Each question resulted in one or more spe-
cific boxed statements. Within each recommendation the 
strength was indicated as strong or conditional and the qual-
ity of the supporting evidence as high, moderate, low or very 
low (Table 2).
TABLE 2. Factors Determining Strong vs. Conditional Recommendation
What Should be Considered
Recommended Process
High or moderate evidence (Is there high or moderate quality 
evidence?)
The higher the quality of evidence, the more likely a strong 
recommendation
Certainty about the balance of benefits vs. harms and burdens 
(Is there certainty?)
The larger the difference between the desirable and undesir-
able consequences and the certainty around that difference, 
the more likely a strong recommendation. The smaller the net 
benefit and the lower the certainty for that benefit, the more 
likely a weak recommendation.
Certainty in or similar values (Is there certainty or similarity?)
The more certainty or similarity in values and preferences, the 
more likely a strong recommendation.
Resource implications (Are resources worth expected 
benefits?)
The lower the cost of an intervention compared to the alternative 
and other costs related to the decision—i.e., fewer resources 
consumed—the more likely a strong recommendation.
 Annane et al
2082 
www.ccmjournal.org 
December 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 12
All statements are followed by advice for clinical prac-
tice, where relevant, and the rationale. The rationale 
contains a brief section on the relevant background and 
justification of the topic, followed by a short narrative 
review of the evidence.
External Review
External peer review was provided through the Board of 
Regents of the American College of Critical Care Medi-
cine, the councils of the SCCM and ESICM, and the edi-
torial boards of Critical Care Medicine and Intensive Care 
Medicine. Two international experts in endocrinology 
(George P. Chrousos, MD and Stefan R. Bornstein, MD) 
also reviewed the final draft of the guideline and provided 
comments.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DIAGNOSIS OF 
CIRCI
1. Is total cortisol response to synthetic 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH; cosyntropin) 
superior to random plasma or serum total cortisol for 
the diagnosis of CIRCI?
Recommendation: The task force makes no recommendation 
regarding whether to use delta cortisol (change in baseline cor-
tisol at 60 min of < 9 μg/dL) after cosyntropin (250 μg) admin-
istration or a random plasma cortisol of < 10 μg/dL for the 
diagnosis of CIRCI.
Rationale: The 2008 guidelines suggested that the diagnosis 
of CIRCI is best made by a delta total serum cortisol of < 9 μg/
dL after IV cosyntropin (250 μg) administration or a random 
total cortisol of < 10 μg/dL (1). To date, however, clinicians 
have not adopted these diagnostic criteria in their routine prac-
tice. Moreover, the latest Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines 
suggest not using the ACTH stimulation test to select patients 
with septic shock that may be treated with hydrocortisone (8). 
Nevertheless, a recent guideline from the Endocrine Society 
confirmed that the high-dose (250-μg) ACTH stimulation test 
is superior to other existing diagnostic tests to establish the 
diagnosis of primary adrenal insufficiency, with peak cortisol 
levels below 18 μg/dL (assay dependent) at 30 or 60 min indi-
cating adrenal insufficiency (9).
We found one single-center randomized trial that com-
pared low-dose ACTH (1 μg) stimulation test with total 
random cortisol for diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency in 59 
adults with septic shock (10). Compared with total random 
cortisol, the low-dose ACTH test was better able to predict 
a longer duration of vasopressor requirement and hemo-
dynamic response to corticosteroids. Similarly, prospective 
cohort studies in adults with or without sepsis (11) and in 
patients with multiple trauma (12) found that patients with 
CIRCI, i.e., total cortisol levels < 10 μg/dL or delta corti-
sol < 9 μg/dL, had poorer outcomes than patients without 
CIRCI. Likewise, a large multicenter prospective cohort 
study found that critically ill children with a delta cortisol < 
9 μg/dL after the low-dose ACTH stimulation test required 
higher-dose and prolonged treatment with catecholamines, 
a higher amount of fluid, and had a higher mortality rate 
(13). See Supplemental Digital Content 3 (http://links.lww.
com/CCM/C916) for evidence profile.
Owing to the potential for risk of bias in study design, with 
only one single-center unblinded randomized trial and a small 
number of prospective cohort studies, and due to imprecision 
related to low numbers of patients included, we downgraded 
the quality of evidence to low. After two rounds of voting the 
task force members could not reach a consensus (> 80% agree-
ment) on whether the ACTH stimulation test is superior to 
random cortisol for the routine diagnosis of CIRCI. Due to the 
broad spectrum of abnormalities that may cause CIRCI, the 
task force thought it is unlikely that a single test can reliably 
diagnose CIRCI independent of its mechanisms, i.e., altered 
cortisol synthesis or metabolism, or tissue resistance to cortisol.
TABLE 3. Implications of the Strength of Recommendation
 
Strong Recommendation
Conditional Recommendation
For patients
Most individuals in this situation would want the 
recommended course of action and only a small 
proportion would not.
The majority of individuals in this situation would 
want the suggested course of action, but 
many would not.
For clinicians
Most individuals should receive the recommended 
course of action. Adherence to this recommenda-
tion according to the guideline could be used as a 
quality criterion or performance indicator. Formal 
decision aids are not likely to be needed to help 
individuals make decisions consistent with their 
values and preferences.
Different choices are likely to be appropriate 
for different patients, and therapy should be 
tailored to the individual patient’s circum-
stances. Those circumstances may include 
the patient or family’s values and preferences.
For policy makers
The recommendation can be adapted as policy in most 
situations including for the use as performance 
indicators.
Policy making will require substantial debates 
and involvement of many stakeholders. 
Policies are also more likely to vary between 
regions. Performance indicators would 
have to focus on the fact that adequate 
deliberation about the management options 
has taken place.
 Special Articles
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
2083
2. Is plasma or serum free cortisol level superior to 
plasma total cortisol level for the diagnosis of CIRCI?
Recommendation: We suggest against using plasma free cor-
tisol level rather than plasma total cortisol for the diagnosis 
of CIRCI (conditional recommendation, very low quality of 
evidence).
Rationale: Free cortisol is the bioactive form of cortisol. 
Critically ill patients often present with low serum concentra-
tions of cortisol-binding globulin (CBG) and hypoalbumin-
emia. In patients with low serum concentrations of cortisol 
binding proteins, serum total cortisol levels may not predict 
serum free cortisol levels, with a correlation between serum 
levels of free and total cortisol of only 50% to 60% (14).
We found no randomized trial that compared serum total 
versus free cortisol levels to diagnose CIRCI. A prospective 
study of 112 critically ill adults with treatment-insensitive 
hypotension, published after the 2008 recommendations, found 
a good correlation between serum concentrations of free and 
total cortisol before and after 250 μg ACTH stimulation test-
ing (15). These findings suggested that using total cortisol levels 
after ACTH testing is sufficient in critically ill adults. Another 
prospective cohort study of 69 critically ill patients to assess the 
time course of serum cortisol levels found that levels of both 
free and total cortisol predicted clinical outcomes (16). Another 
prospective cohort study of 29 adults with septic shock found 
remarkable differences between the serum concentrations of 
free and total cortisol levels both over time and in response to 
1 μg ACTH (17). See Supplemental Digital Content 3 (http://
links.lww.com/CCM/C916) for evidence profile.
Measurement of serum free cortisol levels involves cumber-
some techniques that are unlikely to be available in all hospital 
laboratories and unlikely to provide a rapid turnaround time. 
There were a small number of low-quality observational stud-
ies with inconsistent findings. Thus, the task force suggested 
against measuring plasma free cortisol level over plasma total 
cortisol level in patients with suspected CIRCI.
3. Is salivary free cortisol level superior to plasma 
total cortisol level for the diagnosis of CIRCI?
Recommendation: We suggest against using salivary rather 
than serum cortisol for diagnosing CIRCI (conditional recom-
mendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: In saliva, cortisol is found unbound. Thus, mea-
suring salivary cortisol levels may inform on free cortisol levels 
and adrenal function. However, salivary cortisol levels may be 
impacted by a number of confounding factors such as gender, 
age, time and site of sampling, and saliva volume (18). A few 
studies evaluated the use of salivary cortisol as a measure for 
adrenal insufficiency. In one study, free cortisol level was more 
strongly correlated with salivary than with serum total cortisol 
in 88 cirrhotic patients (Spearman coefficient 0.91 and 0.76, 
respectively; p < 0.001) (19). In contrast, in a study of 57 patients 
with septic shock, there was no significant difference between 
free serum cortisol and salivary cortisol levels (p = 0.28) (20). 
In addition, the correlation between salivary cortisol and total 
serum cortisol levels was very good (80%). Unbound plasma 
cortisol can be calculated using total serum cortisol and CBG 
measurements (21, 22). See Supplemental Digital Content 3 
(http://links.lww.com/CCM/C916) for evidence profile.
The evidence demonstrating any benefit of using salivary 
cortisol over serum cortisol is extremely limited. Although sali-
vary cortisol may be more closely correlated with free cortisol 
than total cortisol, no study has demonstrated that using sali-
vary cortisol to diagnose CIRCI in critically ill patients leads 
to improved patient outcomes. Furthermore, the practicality 
and feasibility of using salivary cortisol is questionable given 
that it is tested by enzyme immunoassay, which may not be 
routinely available at most centers. Additionally, there are 
implementation concerns: in the Estrada-Y-Martin study (20), 
for example, 19 of the 57 patients were excluded because three 
initial samples did not provide any saliva, and 16 were elimi-
nated owing to insufficient saliva or blood contamination. The 
task force therefore felt that using salivary cortisol would not 
be cost effective, practical, or feasible.
4. Is the 1-μg ACTH stimulation test superior to the 
250-μg ACTH test for the diagnosis of CIRCI?
Recommendation: We suggest that the high-dose (250-μg) 
rather than the low-dose (1-μg) ACTH stimulation test be 
used for the diagnosis of CIRCI (conditional recommenda-
tion, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: The high-dose (250-μg) ACTH stimulation 
test remains the most popular diagnostic test for adrenal 
insufficiency. However, this supraphysiologic dose of ACTH 
may result in significant stimulation of the adrenocortical 
cells in patients with proven adrenal insufficiency. Therefore, 
to increase the sensitivity of this diagnostic test, low-dose 
(1-μg) ACTH was suggested. The high-dose ACTH test is 
easy to perform and safe. The low-dose ACTH test requires 
some preparation at the bedside as the commercial ampoules 
contain 250 μg of ACTH.
A recent meta-analysis of 30 studies, involving 1209 adults 
and 228 children, found that for secondary adrenal insufficiency, 
the high- and low-dose ACTH tests had similar diagnostic accu-
racy (23). The likelihood ratio (LR) of a positive test was 9.1 and 
5.9 for the high- and low-dose ACTH test, respectively, for adults 
and 43.5 and 7.7, respectively, for children. However, both tests 
had low sensitivity as suggested by the suboptimal LR of a nega-
tive test (adults: 0.39 and 0.19 for the high- and low-dose ACTH 
test, respectively; children: 0.65 and 0.34, respectively). A pro-
spective cohort study of 74 adults with septic shock found that 
the delta cortisol using the low- and high-dose ACTH tests was 
equally accurate in predicting vasopressor dependency and mor-
tality (24). Likewise, in a prospective multicenter cohort study of 
critically ill children, the low- and high-dose ACTH tests showed 
similar accuracy in the prediction of clinical outcomes (13). See 
Supplemental Digital Content 3 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/
C916) for evidence profile.
Owing to easier practical modalities and the comparable 
accuracy of the low- and high-dose ACTH tests, the task force 
suggested using the high-dose rather than the low-dose ACTH 
test for the diagnosis of CIRCI.
 Annane et al
2084 
www.ccmjournal.org 
December 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 12
5. Is hemodynamic response to hydrocortisone 
(50–300 
mg) superior to the 250-μg ACTH stimulation 
test for the diagnosis of CIRCI?
Recommendation: We suggest the use of the 250-μg ACTH 
stimulation test rather than the hemodynamic response to 
hydrocortisone (50–300 mg) for the diagnosis of CIRCI (con-
ditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale: Early reports on low-dose corticosteroids 
in human septic shock hypothesized that hemodynamic 
improvement unmasks adrenocortical insufficiency (25, 26). 
Hydrocortisone was found to improve the vasopressor response 
to norepinephrine in septic patients, this effect being more 
marked in patients with CIRCI (27). Arterial hypotension may 
serve as a useful marker of inadequate corticosteroid activity, 
although not all patients with septic shock may have CIRCI (28).
No studies are presently available that directly address this 
specific question. CIRCI diagnosed with the 250-μg ACTH 
stimulation was associated with faster shock resolution in 
two studies (29, 30). In contrast, the CORTICUS trial found 
a similar hemodynamic response to corticosteroids in patients 
with or without CIRCI (31). The recent Hydrocortisone for 
Prevention of Septic Shock (HYPRESS) trial also did not find 
a difference in the development of septic shock in the presence 
or absence of CIRCI (32). However, in the HYPRESS trial only 
a limited number of patients were screened for CIRCI, affecting 
the reliability of these data. See Supplemental Digital Content 3 
(http://links.lww.com/CCM/C916) for evidence profile.
Earlier shock resolution has been shown to lead to lower 
mortality (33). However, no studies compared the prognostic 
value of hemodynamic response to hydrocortisone versus the 
250-μg ACTH test for the diagnosis of CIRCI. Meta-analyses 
examined only differences in mortality rates with corticoste-
roid treatment between those with and without documented 
CIRCI (34). Thus, the task force could only recommend the 
use of the 250-μg ACTH stimulation test to diagnose CIRCI.
6. Is corticotropin level superior to the 250-μg ACTH 
stimulation test for the diagnosis of CIRCI?
Recommendation: We suggest against using corticotropin lev-
els for the routine diagnosis of CIRCI (conditional recommen-
dation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: The plasma corticotropin level is determined by 
corticotropin release from the anterior pituitary gland into the 
systemic circulation. Normally, plasma concentrations of corti-
cotropin and cortisol change in opposite directions. In primary 
adrenal insufficiency, plasma cortisol level is low and plasma cor-
ticotropin level is high. In hypopituitarism, plasma corticol level 
is low and plasma corticotropin level is low or normal. During 
critical illness, plasma corticotropin levels have been variably 
found to be low, normal, or high and likely follow a dynamic 
pattern with transiently elevated levels and subsequent decline 
over a period of weeks after the initial insult (1). We did not find 
any study that compared the diagnostic accuracy of corticotro-
pin level with that of the ACTH stimulation test.
Owing to the complexity of measuring the plasma level of 
corticotropin, the task force deemed that it is not feasible in 
most institutions to obtain a corticotropin level with a suffi-
ciently short turnaround time to have an impact on the acute 
management of the critically ill.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CORTICOSTEROID 
USE IN CRITAL CARE CONDITIONS
Sepsis
A. Should corticosteroids be administered among hospital-
ized adult patients with sepsis without shock? 
Recommendation: We suggest against corticosteroid 
administration in adult patients with sepsis without shock 
(conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Rationale: Sepsis and septic shock are major healthcare 
problems: they affect millions of people worldwide annually 
and are associated with mortality rates of 25–30% and high 
direct and indirect costs (35–39). Pro-inflammatory cytokines 
have been demonstrated to either suppress cortisol response to 
ACTH or compete with intracellular glucocorticoid function, 
which can result in CIRCI in septic patients. Sepsis-related 
CIRCI may in turn precipitate organ failure and result in lack 
of response to vasopressor therapy in these patients (40, 41). 
Thus, the potential benefit of corticosteroids for the treatment 
of sepsis has been tested in dozens of observational studies and 
trials over a period of several decades.
Analysis of 27 RCTs (n = 3176) of patients with sepsis with 
and without shock revealed a 28-day mortality rate of 29.3% 
in patients receiving corticosteroids compared with 31.8% in 
those who received placebo (relative risk [RR] 0.87, 95% CI 
0.76–1.0) (42). The quality of evidence was considered low 
owing to inconsistency in the results and imprecision. See 
Supplemental Digital Content 4 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/
C917) for evidence profile.
A separate analysis of six RCTs (n = 826) of patients with 
sepsis without shock revealed a 28-day mortality rate of 33.8% 
in patients receiving corticosteroids compared with 30.6% in 
those who received placebo (RR 1.11, 95% CI 0.91–1.34) (42). 
Hyperglycemia was the most common adverse event, and corti-
costeroids did not increase the risk of secondary infections (RR 
1.02, 95% CI 0.87–1.20). The quality of evidence was consid-
ered moderate due to imprecision, given the wide confidence 
intervals. See Supplemental Digital Content 4 (http://links.lww.
com/CCM/C917) for evidence profile.
Most recently, the HYPRESS multicenter trial assigned 
patients with sepsis (excluding those with shock) to receive 
either a continuous infusion of 200 mg of hydrocortisone for 5 
days, followed by dose tapering until day 11 (n  =  190), or pla-
cebo (n  =  190) (33). The primary outcome was development 
of septic shock within 14 days. Patients who received hydro-
cortisone showed no difference in rates of progression to sep-
tic shock within 14 days from those given placebo (difference 
−1.8%; 95% CI −10.7% to 7.2%; p = 0.70). In addition, there 
were no significant differences between the hydrocortisone and 
placebo groups for the use of mechanical ventilation (53.2% vs 
59.9%), mortality at 28 days (8.8% vs 8.2%) or up to 180 days 
(26.8% vs 22.2%), ICU length of stay (median [interquartile 
 Special Articles
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
2085
range] 8 [5−15] vs 9 [6−17] days), or hospital length of stay 
(median [interquartile range] 26 [16−46] vs 25 [16−40] days). 
In the hydrocortisone versus placebo groups, 21.5% vs 16.9% 
had secondary infections, 8.6% vs 8.5% had ventilation wean-
ing failure, 30.7% vs 23.8% had muscle weakness, and 90.9% vs 
81.5% had hyperglycemia. Based on these results, the task force 
members agreed that corticosteroids may not be beneficial in 
adult patients with sepsis without shock.
B. Should corticosteroids be administered among hospitalized 
adult patients with septic shock? 
Recommendation: We suggest using corticosteroids in 
patients with septic shock that is not responsive to fluid and 
moderate- to high-dose vasopressor therapy (conditional rec-
ommendation, low quality of evidence).
C. What is the recommended dose and duration of treatment 
among hospitalized adult patients with septic shock treated 
with corticosteroids? 
Recommendation: If using corticosteroids for septic shock, 
we suggest using long course and low dose (e.g., IV hydrocor-
tisone < 400 mg/day for at ≥ 3 days at full dose) rather than 
high dose and short course in adult patients with septic shock 
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale: The latest Cochrane systematic review of the use 
of low-dose hydrocortisone for treating septic shock, including 
33 RCTs with a total of 4,268 patients (42), showed that cor-
ticosteroids significantly reduced the risk of death at 28 days 
compared with placebo. Three of these RCTs included children 
and the other 30 trials included only adults. Survival benefits 
were dependent on the dose of corticosteroids, with lower doses 
(< 400 mg of hydrocortisone or equivalent per day) for a longer 
duration of treatment (3 or more days at the full dose) found 
to be better, and on the severity of the sepsis. Furthermore, 
corticosteroids did not cause harm except for an increased 
incidence of hyperglycemia and hypernatremia; there was no 
increased risk of superinfection or gastrointestinal bleeding. 
See Supplemental Digital Content 4 (http://links.lww.com/
CCM/C917) for evidence profile.
A network meta-analysis of 22 trials suggested no clear evi-
dence for the superiority of one type of corticosteroids over 
another in adult patients with septic shock (43). However, 
hydrocortisone boluses and infusions were more likely than 
methylprednisolone boluses and placebo to reverse shock.
Given the consistent effect of corticosteroids on shock 
reversal and the low risk for superinfection with low-dose 
corticosteroids, the task force suggests the use of low-dose IV 
hydrocortisone < 400 mg/day for at least 3 days at full dose, or 
longer in adult patients with septic shock that is not respon-
sive to fluid and moderate to high-dose (> 0.1 μg/kg/min of 
norepinephrine or equivalent) vasopressor therapy. The task 
force panel was unable to comment on pediatric patients with 
septic shock as the meta-analyses we reviewed did not include 
enough patients in this age group. A small pilot RCT (Steroids 
in Fluid and/or Vasoactive Infusion Dependent Pediatric Shock, 
STRIPES) demonstrated the feasibility of a larger RCT to 
address the role of corticosteroids for the treatment of pediatric 
shock (44). Since the publication of the Cochrane meta-analy-
sis in 2015, a few small studies of early corticosteroid therapy 
in patients with pediatric septic shock and adult patients with 
sepsis-associated ARDS have been published (45−47) but the 
results are consistent with our current recommendations.
The Activated Protein C and Corticosteroids for Human 
Septic Shock (APROCCHSS) trial enrolled 1,241 adult patients 
with refractory septic shock from 35 centers in France (48). This 
trial commenced in 2008 and initially included the recombi-
nant form of human activated protein C (APC), drotrecogin 
alfa-activated. The study featured a 2 × 2 factorial design with 
patients assigned to placebo of hydrocortisone + placebo of 
fludrocortisones + placebo of APC; hydrocortisone + fludrocor-
tisone + placebo of APC; placebo of hydrocortisone + placebo 
of fludrocortisone + APC; or hydrocortisone + fludrocortisone 
+ APC. Hydrocortisone was administered as a 50-mg IV bolus 
every 6 h and fludrocortisone as a 50-μg tablet via a nasogastric 
tube once daily. In 2011, APC was withdrawn from the market 
after failing to demonstrate adequate efficacy in other clinical 
trials (49). Once APC was no longer available, the study contin-
ued without the APC arms; one arm then comprised placebo 
corticosteroids (n = 627) and the other arm comprised hydro-
cortisone and fludrocortisone combined (n = 614). Another 
large RCT (the ADRENAL study) conducted in Australia and 
New Zealand enrolled 3,800 patients either to hydrocortisone or 
to a placebo. Although enrolment is completed, results are not 
yet available (50). In this trial, no ACTH stimulation testing was 
performed. The final results of these two trials are still pending 
but once available may further define the role of corticosteroids 
in the setting of sepsis or septic shock. Our recommendations 
may have to be re-addressed once these results are available.
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Should corticosteroids be administered among hospitalized 
adult patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome? 
Recommendation: We suggest use of corticosteroids in 
patients with early moderate to severe acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (PaO2/FiO2 of < 200 and within 14 days of onset) 
(conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Rationale: Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) 
represents an important public health problem globally. 
Despite advances in supportive care, ARDS is associated with 
a high mortality rate (35%−45%) (51). ARDS is also associ-
ated with high costs of inpatient care and significant long-term 
morbidity and resource utilization (52). In ARDS, prolonged 
mechanical ventilation is associated with increased risk of dis-
ability and mortality at 1 year (53, 54).
Nine trials have investigated prolonged glucocorticoid treat-
ment in ARDS (46). One of these trials was in patients with 
ARDS due to community-acquired pneumonia (59) and 
another was a subgroup analysis of the initial corticosteroid trial 
in septic shock (60). These trials consistently found that gluco-
corticoid treatment was associated with a significant reduction 
in markers of systemic inflammation (inflammatory cytokines 
and/or C-reactive protein levels), reduction in the duration of 
mechanical ventilation by approximately 7 days, and probable 
 Annane et al
2086 
www.ccmjournal.org 
December 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 12
reduction in hospital mortality by approximately 7% and 11% 
in patients with mild and severe ARDS, respectively (moder-
ate certainty) (61). All but two trials (55, 56) investigated treat-
ment initiated in early ARDS. Compared with late (≥ 7 days) 
initiation, early (< 72 h) initiation of methylprednisolone treat-
ment–when fibroproliferation (62) is still in the early stage of 
development (cellular with predominant type III procollagen)–
shows response to a lower daily methylprednisolone dose (1 mg/
kg/day vs 2 mg/kg/day) and is associated with faster disease res-
olution (e.g., shorter time to unassisted breathing, shorter time 
to ICU discharge) (61). See Supplemental Digital Content 4 
(http://links.lww.com/CCM/C917) for evidence profile.
A recent individual patient data (IPD) analysis of the four 
largest trials (n = 322) investigating prolonged methylprednis-
olone treatment in early (57, 58) and late (on and after day 7 of 
onset) (55, 56) ARDS confirmed trial-level data demonstrat-
ing benefit with corticosteroids, with improved survival and 
decreased duration of mechanical ventilation (61).
With the exception of hyperglycemia (mostly within the 
36 h following an initial bolus), prolonged glucocorticoid treat-
ment was not associated with increased risk for neuromuscular 
weakness, gastrointestinal bleeding, or nosocomial infection 
(61). Hyperglycemia was not associated with increased mor-
bidity. Two trials reported a significant reduction in the risk for 
developing shock (56, 59).
The task force members believed that the quality of the evi-
dence for the effect of corticosteroids on mortality was mod-
erate, given the serious risk of imprecision related to small 
numbers of events and confidence intervals that approach no 
effect. Some of the included trials allowed blinded crossover, 
two trials were unblinded, and four trials had less than 60 
patients.
In summary, the task force suggested that methylpredniso-
lone be considered in patients with early (up to day 7 of onset; 
PaO2/FiO2 of < 200) in a dose of 1 mg/kg/day and late (after day 6 
of onset) persistent ARDS in a dose of 2 mg/kg/day followed by 
slow tapering over 13 days (Supplemental Digital Content 5, 
http://links.lww.com/CCM/C918). Methylprednisolone is sug-
gested because of its greater penetration into lung tissue and 
longer residence time (63). Furthermore, methylprednisolone 
should be weaned slowly (6−14 days) and not stopped rapidly 
(2−4 days) or abruptly as deterioration may occur from the 
development of a reconstituted inflammatory response. Finally, 
glucocorticoid treatment blunts the febrile response; therefore, 
infection surveillance is recommended to ensure prompt iden-
tification and treatment of hospital-acquired infections.
Major Trauma
Should corticosteroids be administered among hospitalized 
adult patients with major trauma? 
Recommendation: We suggest against the use of cortico-
steroids in major trauma (conditional recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
Rationale: Major trauma is the main cause of non-septic 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Tissue 
necrosis, hemorrhage and ischemia–reperfusion injury are the 
main factors that trigger the inflammatory cascade. CIRCI may 
be common in severe trauma patients, and is associated with 
uncontrolled inflammation, vasopressor dependency and poor 
clinical outcomes (64).
We found 19 trials (n = 12,269) that investigated the effects 
of corticosteroids on short-term mortality in adults with mul-
tiple trauma. There were 1,691/6,286 (26.9%) deaths in the 
corticosteroid group versus 1,401/5,983 (23.4%) deaths in 
the placebo group (RR = 1.00, 95% CI 0.89–1.13). Stratified 
analysis of mortality based on corticosteroid dose (low vs 
high) found no significant dose effect (test for interaction p 
= 0.73). The RR of dying was 1.03 (95% CI 0.86–1.22) in the 
10 trials that examined low-dose corticosteroid treatment and 
0.98 (95% CI 0.81–1.18) in the nine trials of high-dose cor-
ticosteroids. Corticosteroid therapy did not increase the risk 
of gastroduodenal bleeding (n = 12 trials; RR = 1.22, 95% CI 
0.90–1.65) or superinfection (n = 7 trials; RR=0.93, 95% CI 
0.80–1.08). Two trials examined the effects of hydrocortisone 
(65) and hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone (66) specifically 
in trauma-associated CIRCI, as defined by a change in base-
line cortisol at 60 min of < 9 μg/dL after cosyntropin (250 
μg) administration. In the first trial (n = 113 multiple trauma 
patients with CIRCI), hydrocortisone therapy prevented the 
development of hospital-acquired pneumonia by day 28 (haz-
ard ratio [HR] 0.47, 95% CI 0.25–0.86) and increased by 6 days 
(95% CI 2–11) the number of mechanical ventilation-free days. 
In the second trial (n = 267 head trauma patients with CIRCI), 
the HR for hospital-acquired pneumonia with corticosteroids 
versus placebo was 0·80 (95% CI 0.56–1.14). In this trial, there 
was no interaction between response to corticosteroid therapy 
and CIRCI status. See Supplemental Digital Content 4 (http://
links.lww.com/CCM/C917) for evidence profile.
The largest trials which primarily drive the signal for mor-
tality outcome were at low risk of bias, and stratified analysis 
found no dose effect. Although the type of patients and the 
formulation, dose, and duration of corticosteroids varied fairly 
widely across trials, there was no evidence for significant incon-
sistency in the results. Although it appears that corticosteroids 
have no effect on mortality in trauma patients, the impreci-
sion of pooled results does not allow exclusion of a potential 
for benefit or harm from corticosteroid therapy. The task force 
members judged the overall quality of evidence for this ques-
tion as low. Given the potential for clinically important side 
effects with treatment, the task force made a conditional rec-
ommendation against corticosteroids for major trauma until 
further data are available supporting its use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the assistance of Jean S. Maragno, Director, 
Library Services, Sherman Library, St. Joseph’s Healthcare 
Hamilton, Hamilton, Ontario and Lois Cottrell, Librarian, 
Library Services, Sherman Library, St. Joseph’s Healthcare 
Hamilton, Hamilton, Ontario. We are also grateful to the 
SCCM staff who helped us during the process of developing 
these guidelines, particularly Lori A. Harmon, RRT, MBA, 
Director, Quality and Sylvia Quintanilla, Guidelines Manager.
 Special Articles
Critical Care Medicine 
www.ccmjournal.org 
2087
REFERENCES
 1. Marik PE, Pastores SM, Annane D, et al: American College of Critical 
Care Medicine. Recommendations for the diagnosis and management 
of corticosteroid insufficiency in critically ill adult patients: consensus 
statements from an international task force by the American College 
of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med 2008; 36(6):1937−1949
 2. Cochrane Collaboration: Cochrane: Review Manager. Edition 5.2. 
Edited by Centre TNC. Copenhagen, Denmark, Cochrane Collabora-
tion, 2012
 3. Shea BJ, Grimshaw JM, Wells GA, et al: Development of AMSTAR: a 
measurement tool to assess the methodological quality of systematic 
reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol 2007; 7:10
 4. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, et al; Cochrane Bias Methods 
Group; Cochrane Statistical Methods Group: The Cochrane Collabo-
ration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ 2011; 
343:d5928
 5. Wells GA, Shea B, O’Connell D, et al: The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale 
(NOS) for assessing the quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-
analyses. Available at: www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical_epidemiology/
oxford.asp. Accessed November 21, 2016
 6. Whiting P, Rutjes AW, Reitsma JB, et al: The development of QUADAS: 
a tool for the quality assessment of studies of diagnostic accuracy 
included in systematic reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol 2003; 3:25
 7. Kavanagh BP: The GRADE system for rating clinical guidelines. PLoS 
Med 2009; 6:e1000094
 8. Andrews JC, Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, et al: GRADE guide-
lines: 15. Going from evidence to recommendation-determinants of 
a recommendation’s direction and strength. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 
66:726–735
 9. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis Campaign: 
International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 
2016. Intensive Care Med 2017 Mar; 43(3):304−377
 
10. Bornstein SR, Allolio B, Arlt W, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of pri-
mary adrenal insufficiency: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice 
Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016; 101(2):364−389
 
11. Marik PE, Zaloga GP: Adrenal insufficiency during septic shock. Crit 
Care Med 2003; 31(1): 141−145
 
12. de Jong MF, Molenaar N, Beishuizen A, et al: Erratum to: Diminished 
adrenal sensitivity to endogenous and exogenous adrenocortico-
tropic hormone in critical illness: a prospective cohort study. Crit Care 
2015; 19:313
 
13. Yang Y, Liu L, Jiang D, et al: Critical illness-related corticosteroid 
insufficiency after multiple traumas: a multicenter, prospective cohort 
study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2014; 76:1390–1396
 
14. Menon K, Ward RE, Lawson ML, et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group: A prospective multicenter study of adrenal function in critically 
ill children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 182:246–251
 
15. Hamrahian AH, Oseni TS, Arafah BM: Measurements of serum free 
cortisol in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:1629–1638
 
16. Molenaar N, Johan Groeneveld AB, Dijstelbloem HM, et al: Assess-
ing adrenal insufficiency of corticosteroid secretion using free ver-
sus total cortisol levels in critical illness. Intensive Care Med 2011; 
37:1986–1993
 17. Tarjányi Z, Montskó G, Kenyeres P, et al: Free and total cortisol levels 
are useful prognostic markers in critically ill patients: a prospective 
observational study. Eur J Endocrinol 2014; 171:751–759
 18. Jessop DS, Turner-Cobb JM: Measurement and meaning of salivary cor-
tisol: a focus on health and disease in children. Stress 2008; 11:1–14
 
19. Galbois A, Obadia E, Chalumeau-Lemoine L, et al: Using serum total 
cortisol assays overstates the adrenal insufficiency prevalence in cir-
rhotic patients. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2016; 20:3730–3731
 
20. Galbois A, Rudler M, Massard J, et al: Assessment of adrenal function 
in cirrhotic patients: salivary cortisol should be preferred. J Hepatol 
2010; 52:839–845
 
21. Estrada-Y-Martin RM, Orlander PR: Salivary cortisol can replace free 
serum cortisol measurements in patients with septic shock. Chest 
2011; 140(5):1216−1222
 
22. Coolens JL, Van Baelen H, Heyns W: Clinical use of unbound plasma 
cortisol as calculated from total cortisol and corticosteroid-binding 
globulin. J Steroid Biochem 1987; 26:197–202
 
23. Ho JT, Al-Musalhi H, Chapman MJ, et al: Septic shock and sepsis: a 
comparison of total and free plasma cortisol levels. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2006; 91:105–114
 
24. Ospina NS, Al Nofal A, Bancos I, et al: ACTH Stimulation Tests for 
the Diagnosis of Adrenal Insufficiency: Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016; 101:427–434
 
25. Moraes RB, Friedman G, Tonietto T, et al: Comparison of low and high 
dose cosyntropin stimulation tests in the diagnosis of adrenal insuffi-
ciency in septic shock patients. Horm Metab Res 2012; 44:296–301
 
26. Schneider AJ, Voerman HJ: Abrupt hemodynamic improvement in late 
septic shock with physiological doses of glucocorticoids. Intensive 
Care Med 1991; 17:436–437
 27. Baldwin WA, Allo M: Occult hypoadrenalism in critically ill patients. 
Arch Surg 1993; 128:673–676
 
28. Annane D, Bellissant E, Sebille V, et al: Impaired pressor sensitivity 
to noradrenaline in septic shock patients with and without impaired 
adrenal function reserve. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1998; 46:589–597
 
29. Marik PE, Zaloga GP: Adrenal insufficiency during septic shock. Crit 
Care Med 2003;31:141−145
 
30. Annane D, Sébille V, Charpentier C, et al: Effect of treatment with low 
doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on mortality in patients 
with septic shock. JAMA 2002; 288:862–871
 
31. Arabi YM, Aljumah A, Dabbagh O, et al: Low-dose hydrocortisone in 
patients with cirrhosis and septic shock: a randomized controlled trial. 
CMAJ 2010; 182:1971–1977
 
32. Sprung CL, Annane D, Keh D, et al; CORTICUS Study Group: 
Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 
2008; 358:111–124
 
33. Keh D, Trips E, Marx G, et al; SepNet–Critical Care Trials Group: 
Effect of Hydrocortisone on Development of Shock Among Patients 
With Severe Sepsis: The HYPRESS Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 
2016; 316:1775–1785
 
34. Wira CR, Dodge K, Sather J, Dziura J: Meta-analysis of protocolized 
goal-directed hemodynamic optimization for the management of 
severe sepsis and septic shock in the Emergency Department. West 
J Emerg Med 2014; 15:51−59
 
35. Annane D, Bellissant E, Bollaert PE, Briegel J, Keh D, Kupfer Y: Cor-
ticosteroids for treating sepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 
12:CD002243
 
36. Angus DC, Linde-Zwirble WT, Lidicker J, Clermont G, Carcillo J, Pin-
sky MR: Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States: analysis 
of incidence, outcome, and associated costs of care. Crit Care Med 
2001; 29(7):1303−1310
 37. Martin GS, Mannino DM, Eaton S, Moss M: The epidemiology of 
sepsis in the United States from 1979 through 2000. N Engl J Med 
2003;348(16): 1546−1554
 
38. Torio CM, Andrews RM: National Inpatient Hospital Costs: The Most 
Expensive Conditions by Payer, 2011: Statistical Brief #160. Health-
care Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) Statistical Briefs [Internet]. 
Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 
2006 Feb. 2013 Aug
 
39. Fleischmann C, Thomas-Rueddel DO, Hartmann M, et al: Hospi-
tal incidence and mortality rates of sepsis. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2016; 
113(10):159−166
 
40. Annane D, Bellisant E, Cavaillon JM: Septic shock. Lancet 2005; 
365(9453):63−78
 
41. Prigent H, Maxime V, Annane D: Clinical review: Corticotherapy in 
sepsis. Crit Care 2004; 8(2):122−129
 
42. Annane D, Bellissant E, Bollaert PE, Briegel J, Keh D, Kupfer Y: Cor-
ticosteroids for treating sepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 
12:CD002243
 
43. Gibbison B, López-López JA, Higgins JP, Miller T, Angelini GD, Light-
man SL, Annane D: Corticosteroids in septic shock: A systematic 
review and network meta-analysis. Crit Care 2017; 21(1):78
 
44. O’Hearn K, McNally D, Choong K, et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group: Steroids in fluid and/or vasoactive infusion dependent pediat-
ric shock: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 2016; 
17:238
 
45. Menon K, McNally D, O’Hearn K, et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Corticosteroids in Pediatric 
 Annane et al
2088 
www.ccmjournal.org 
December 2017 • Volume 45 • Number 12
Septic Shock: A Pilot Feasibility Study. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2017; 
18:505–512
 
46. Tongyoo S, Permpikul C, Mongkolpun W, et al: Hydrocortisone treat-
ment in early sepsis-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome: 
results of a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2016; 20:329
 47. El-Nawawy A, Khater D, Omar H, et al: Evaluation of Early Corticoste-
roid Therapy in Management of Pediatric Septic Shock in Pediatric 
Intensive Care Patients: A Randomized Clinical Study. Pediatr Infect 
Dis J 2017; 36:155–159
 
48. Annane D, Buisson CB, Cariou A, et al; APROCCHSS Investiga-
tors for the TRIGGERSEP Network: Design and conduct of the 
activated protein C and corticosteroids for human septic shock 
(APROCCHSS) trial. Ann Intensive Care 2016; 6:43
 
49. Ranieri VM, Thompson BT, Barie PS, et al: Drotrecogin alfa (activated) 
in adults with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2013; 366(22):2055−2064
 
50. Venkatesh B, Myburgh J, Finfer S, et al: The ADRENAL study pro-
tocol: adjunctive corticosteroid treatment in critically ill patients with 
septic shock. Crit Care Resusc 2013; 15(2):83−88
 
51. Bellani G, Laffey JG, Pham T, et al; LUNG SAFE Investigators; 
ESICM Trials Group: Epidemiology, Patterns of Care, and Mortality 
for Patients With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome in Intensive 
Care Units in 50 Countries. JAMA 2016; 315:788–800
 
52. Angus DC, Clermont G, Linde-Zwirble WT, et al; NO-06 Investiga-
tors: Healthcare costs and long-term outcomes after acute respiratory 
distress syndrome: A phase III trial of inhaled nitric oxide. Crit Care 
Med 2006; 34:2883–2890
 
53. Hill AD, Fowler RA, Burns KE, et al: Long-Term Outcomes and Health 
Care Utilization after Prolonged Mechanical Ventilation. Ann Am Tho-
rac Soc 2017; 14:355–362
 
54. Herridge MS, Chu LM, Matte A, et al; RECOVER Program Investi-
gators (Phase 1: towards RECOVER); Canadian Critical Care Trials 
Group: The RECOVER Program: Disability Risk Groups and 1-Year 
Outcome after 7 or More Days of Mechanical Ventilation. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2016; 194:831–844
 
55. Meduri GU, Headley AS, Golden E, et al: Effect of prolonged meth-
ylprednisolone therapy in unresolving acute respiratory distress syn-
drome: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998; 280:159–165
 
56. Steinberg KP, Hudson LD, Goodman RB, et al; National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) 
Clinical Trials Network: Efficacy and safety of corticosteroids for 
persistent acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2006; 
354:1671–1684
 57. Meduri GU, Golden E, Freire AX, et al: Methylprednisolone infusion 
in early severe ARDS: Results of a randomized controlled trial. Chest 
2007; 131(4):954−963
 
58. Rezk NA, Ibrahim AM. Effects of methylprednisolone in early ARDS. 
Egyptian J Chest Dis & Tuberc 2013; 6291:167−172
 
59. Confalonieri M, Urbino R, Potena A, et al: Hydrocortisone infusion 
for severe community-acquired pneumonia: a preliminary randomized 
study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005; 171:242–248
 
60. Annane D, Sébille V, Bellissant E; Ger-Inf-05 Study Group: Effect of low 
doses of corticosteroids in septic shock patients with or without early 
acute respiratory distress syndrome. Crit Care Med 2006; 34:22–30
 
61. Meduri GU, Bridges L, Shih MC, et al: Prolonged glucocorticoid 
treatment is associated with improved ARDS outcomes: analysis 
of individual patients’ data from four randomized trials and trial-level 
meta-analysis of the updated literature. Intensive Care Med 2016; 
42:829–840
 
62. Meduri GU, Eltorky MA: Understanding ARDS-associated fibroprolif-
eration. Intensive Care Medicine 2015; 41(3): 517−520
 
63. Greos LS, Vichyanond P, Bloedow DC, et al: Methylprednisolone 
achieves greater concentrations in the lung than prednisolone. A 
pharmacokinetic analysis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991; 144:586–592
 
64. Hoen S, Asehnoune K, Brailly-Tabard S, et al: Cortisol response to 
corticotropin stimulation in trauma patients: influence of hemorrhagic 
shock. Anesthesiology 2002; 97:807–813
 
65. Roquilly A, Mahe PJ, Seguin P, et al: Hydrocortisone therapy for 
patients with multiple trauma: the randomized controlled HYPOLYTE 
study. JAMA 2011; 305:1201–1209
 
66. Asehnoune K, Seguin P, Allary J, et al; Corti-TC Study Group: Hydro-
cortisone and fludrocortisone for prevention of hospital-acquired 
pneumonia in patients with severe traumatic brain injury (Corti-TC): 
a double-blind, multicentre phase 3, randomised placebo-controlled 
trial. Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2:706–716
