 A T H E R O S C L E R OS I S
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Detecting human coronary inflammation by imaging
perivascular fat
Alexios S. Antonopoulos,1* Fabio Sanna,1* Nikant Sabharwal,2 Sheena Thomas,1
Evangelos K. Oikonomou,1 Laura Herdman,1 Marios Margaritis,1,3 Cheerag Shirodaria,2
Anna-Maria Kampoli,1 Ioannis Akoumianakis,1 Mario Petrou,4 Rana Sayeed,4
George Krasopoulos,4 Constantinos Psarros,1 Patricia Ciccone,1 Carl M. Brophy,1 Janet Digby,1
Andrew Kelion,2 Raman Uberoi,5 Suzan Anthony,5 Nikolaos Alexopoulos,6 Dimitris Tousoulis,6
Stephan Achenbach,7 Stefan Neubauer,1,3,8 Keith M. Channon,1,3,8 Charalambos Antoniades1,3,8†
Early detection of vascular inflammation would allow deployment of targeted strategies for the prevention or
treatment of multiple disease states. Because vascular inflammation is not detectable with commonly used imaging
modalities, we hypothesized that phenotypic changes in perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT) induced by vascular
inflammation could be quantified using a new computerized tomography (CT) angiography methodology. We show
that inflamed human vessels release cytokines that prevent lipid accumulation in PVAT-derived preadipocytes in vitro,
ex vivo, and in vivo. We developed a three-dimensional PVAT analysis method and studied CT images of human ad-
ipose tissue explants from 453 patients undergoing cardiac surgery, relating the ex vivo images with in vivo CT scan
information on the biology of the explants. We developed an imaging metric, the CT fat attenuation index (FAI), that
describes adipocyte lipid content and size. The FAI has excellent sensitivity and specificity for detecting tissue inflam-
mation as assessed by tissue uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose in positron emission tomography. In a validation co-
hort of 273 subjects, the FAI gradient around human coronary arteries identified early subclinical coronary artery
disease in vivo, as well as detected dynamic changes of PVAT in response to variations of vascular inflammation,
and inflamed, vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques during acute coronary syndromes. Our study revealed that human
vessels exert paracrine effects on the surrounding PVAT, affecting local intracellular lipid accumulation in preadipo-
cytes,whichcanbe monitored using aCTimaging approach.This methodologycan be implemented inclinicalpractice
to noninvasively detect plaque instability in the human coronary vasculature.
INTRODUCTION
Inflammation is a key feature in atherogenesis (1), and modalities
that can accurately detect vascular inflammation would enable better
cardiovascular risk stratification and implementation of appropriate
preventive strategies. Inflammation also characterizes vulnerable ather-
osclerotic plaques, the rupture of which leads to major cardiovascular
events such as acute coronary syndromes and ischemic strokes (1).
Noninvasive detection of vascular inflammation has been hailed as
the “holy grail” in cardiovascular medicine, because it would allow
identification of patients at high risk for future cardiovascular events
and initiation of appropriate risk reduction strategies. Current tools to
assess vascular inflammation that rely on systemic plasma biomarkers
(high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and proinflammatory cytokines)
are not directly related to the process of atherogenesis, do not identify
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques, and provide very poor associations
with local vascular biological processes (2, 3). Moreover, existing in-
vasive (intravascular ultrasound and optical coherence tomography)
and noninvasive [computerized tomography angiography (CTA) or 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose (18FFDG)–positron emission tomography (PET)]
imaging tools cannot provide reliable information on vascular inflam-
mation in human coronary arteries (4). Coronary calcium scoring
(CCS) is the only established noninvasive imaging biomarker with
predictive value in primary prevention (5), but it describes nonreversible
structural changes of the vascular wall, and it is not altered by interven-
tions that reduce cardiovascular risk such as statins. An imaging bio-
marker that could overcome these limitations and noninvasively
detect vascular inflammation would be invaluable in clinical research,
risk stratification of coronary artery disease (CAD), and identification
of patients at high risk of future cardiovascular events (6).
Adipose tissue releases a wide range of bioactive molecules that
exert endocrine and paracrine effects on the vascular wall (7), and we
have recently shown that the communication between adipose tissue
and the vascular wall is bidirectional (3, 8). The biological properties
of adipose tissue are largely driven by the degree of differentiation of
small, immature preadipocytes to large, well-differentiated adipocytes
rich in intracellular lipid droplets (9). The differentiation of immature
preadipocytes is promoted by PPAR-g activation, but this mechanism is
suppressed by exogenous inflammation (10). Currently, there is no
established noninvasive method to monitor adipocyte lipid content in
human adipose tissue, although the correlation between adipocyte size
and the balance between the lipid and aqueous phases of adipose tissue
(11) may lend itself to detection by imaging modalities such as CT.
Hence, information about composition of tissues could provide indirect
information on adipocyte size, a concept that has not been explored.
We hypothesized that the phenotypic characterization of human
adipose tissue could be accomplished in a noninvasive manner by using
CT imaging to assess adipocyte lipid content and that coronary peri-
vascular adipose tissue (PVAT) would function as a sensor rather than
1Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2Cardiothoracic Directorate, Oxford University Hospitals National
Health System (NHS) Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK. 3Oxford Centre of Research Ex-
cellence, British Heart Foundation, Oxford, UK. 4Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK. 5Department
of Radiology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK. 61st De-
partment of Cardiology, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece. 7Medizi-
nische Klinik 2, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. 8Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre, National Institute of Health Research, Oxford, UK.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: antoniad@well.ox.ac.uk
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
1 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 a driver of coronary inflammation. We
further hypothesized that if vascular in-
flammation prevents lipid accumula-
tion in preadipocytes of PVAT through
paracrine signaling mechanisms, then it
may also lead to changes in tissue com-
position that could be detectable by high-
resolution CTA. This approach would
therefore permit detection of both inflamed
coronary arteries without atherosclerosis
and vulnerable atherosclerotic plaquesprone
to rupture, which would have important
ramifications for patient management.
RESULTS
Characterizing adipocyte size and
lipid content in different adipose
tissue depots
The study flow chart is presented in fig.
S1. We first studied the phenotypic dif-
ferences between epicardial (EpAT),
thoracic (ThAT), and subcutaneous
(ScAT) adipose tissue obtained from
453 patients undergoing cardiac surgery
(study arm 1; table S1). EpAT and ThAT
had smaller adipocytes and increased
adipocyte number compared to ScAT
(Fig. 1, A to E). In a proof-of-principle
experiment, we demonstrated that mat-
uration of adipocytes is directly linked to
lipid accumulation and down-regulation
of preadipocyte secreted factor (pref-1)
that inhibits adipogenesis (fig. S2), re-
sulting in increased adipocyte size that
canbereliablytrackedbyfattyacidbinding
protein-4 (FABP4) gene expression (Fig.
1F). Fat depots with larger adipocytes,
such as ScAT, had higher PPAR-g [an
adipocyte early-phase differentiation
marker (9)] (Fig. 1G), CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP) a [CEBPA, an
adipocyte late-phase differentiation mark-
er (9)] (Fig. 1H), and FABP4 (a marker of
terminal adipocyte differentiation/mature
adipocytes)geneexpression(Fig.1I).These
findings confirmed the notion that the expression of FABP4, CEBPA, and
PPAR-g genes could be used as markers of adipocyte size (12).
Effects of vascular inflammation on intracellular lipid
accumulation of preadipocytes in human pericoronary
adipose tissue
Our recent studies in humans (3, 8) and additional evidence from
animal studies (13) suggest that adipocytes in PVAT respond to
proatherogenic processes in the underlying vascular wall that modify
their biology. We assumed that inflammatory signals from the human
arterial wallmay diffuse into the PVAT to influence adipocyte lipid con-
tent by affecting biological processes such as adipocyte differentiation,
proliferation, and lipolysis (14). Because fresh samples of native human
coronary arteries are not easily obtained for research, we used aortic
tissue harvested during coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery
as our model. Aortic “buttons” obtained from the site of graft anasto-
mosis on the ascending aorta from patients in study arm 2 (table S1)
were cultured ex vivo for 1 week in the presence or absence of angio-
tensin II (100 nM) to induce vascular inflammation (Fig. 2A). Exposure
to angiotensin II for 1 week led to up-regulation of the proinflammatory
cytokines IL-6, TNF-a, and IFN-g in the aortic tissue (Fig. 2B). The
tissue was then washed to remove angiotensin II and cocultured with
preadipocytes collected from the same patients, followed by induc-
tion of adipocyte differentiation to mature adipocytes using a well-
established methodology (15). When cocultured with aortic tissue
that was pretreated with angiotensin II, preadipocytes showed less
Fig. 1. Phenotyping of human adipose tissue. Representative bright-field microscopic images of human (A) EpAT,
(B) ThAT, and (C) ScAT. (D) Adipocyte size (n = 5 patients) and (E) adipocytes per field (n = 6 patients), quantified from
tissue sections of EpAT, ThAT, and ScAT from the same patients. (F) Adipocyte size correlated with FABP4 expression
(n = 16). (G) Gene expression of PPAR-g, (H) CEBPA, (I) and FABP4 (samples from n = 433 patients). Ptrend derived from
repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni correction (D), Friedman’s test with Dunn’s post hoc
correction (E), or Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn’s post hoc correction (G to I) *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 versus ScAT.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
2 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 intracellularlipidaccumulationcomparedtopreadipocytesculturedin the
absence of aortic tissue, indicating slower differentiation to mature adi-
pocytes; preadipocytes cocultured with nonstimulated aortic tissue had
an intermediate amount of lipid accumulation (Fig. 2, C to F). This sug-
gests that mediators released from the inflamed human vascular wall
can exert paracrine effects on PVAT, altering its lipid content in part
by preventing the differentiation of preadipocytes to mature adipocytes.
To explore whether inflammatory mediators produced in the vascu-
lar wall directly modify lipid accumulation in PVAT, we exposed hu-
man preadipocytes collected from PVAT to recombinant interleukin-6
(IL-6) + tumor necrosis factor–a (TNF-a) + interferon-g (IFN-g) and
studied their differentiation in vitro. Exposure of preadipocytes to cyto-
kines had an inhibitory effect on preadipocyte differentiation, as ob-
served visually over time (fig. S3), and led to lower intracellular
accumulation of lipid droplets (Fig. 3, A to E). The same cytokines also
accelerated the proliferation of human preadipocytes, evaluated using
the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-
sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium (MTS) cell proliferation assay (Fig. 3F).
The impact of these cytokines on preadipocyte differentiation was con-
firmed by quantifying the expression of PPAR-g, CEBPA, and FABP4
during the differentiation time course (Fig. 3, G to I). These findings
supportthenotion thatvessel-derivedinflammatorycytokinesinhibitlip-
id accumulation in PVAT by inducing the proliferation and inhibiting the
differentiation of human preadipocytes in
a paracrine manner. Therefore, we hy-
pothesized that noninvasive imaging
tools, capable of monitoring these pheno-
typic changes of PVAT driven by the
underlying vascular inflammation, could
be used to identify vascular inflammation
in human coronary arteries.
Evaluating adipocyte lipid
accumulation using CT
The balance between the lipid and aqueous
phases of adipose tissue depends on adi-
pocyte size (11) with larger adipocytes hav-
ing increased lipid content and increased
expression of FABP4 (Fig. 1 and fig. S2).
Because the CT attenuation of adipose
tissue reflects the balance between lipid
and aqueous phases, we concluded that ad-
ipose tissue CT attenuation may serve as a
marker of adipocyte size/adipose tissue lip-
id content. To explore whether the average
CT attenuation of adipose tissue provides a
marker of average adipocyte size/adipose
tissuelipidcontent,wequantifiedthefatat-
tenuation index (FAI) in EpAT, ThAT,
and ScAT explants obtained from 453 pa-
tients undergoing cardiac surgery (study
arm1).Briefly,theFAIisthe average atten-
uation (reduction in signal) of adipose
tissue within a volume of interest as mea-
sured from reconstructed CT. There was
an inverse association between FAI and
the degree of adipocyte differentiation as
defined by the expression of CEBPA and
FABP4 in the same samples (Fig. 4, A to
F, and table S2). However, FAI in EpAT did not correlate with the gene
expression of CD68, a marker of macrophage infiltration (r = 0.180,
P = 0.096) or the ratio of CCR7 (macrophage marker of M1 polar-
ization)/MRC1 (macrophage marker of M2 polarization) (r =
−0.173, P = 0.109) (fig. S4). There was a weak but significant associ-
ation between FAI in ScAT and ThAT explants and the ratio of CCR7/
MRC1 gene expression in the same samples (r = 0.182, P = 0.007 for
ScAT and r = 0.191, P = 0.001 for ThAT), although there was no sig-
nificant correlation between FAI and CD68 gene expression in either
ScAT (r = −0.116, P = 0.065) or ThAT (r = −0.078, P = 0.166) (fig. S4).
In addition, there was an inverse association between FAI of adipose
tissue explants and adipocyte size quantified by histology (Fig. 4G). Ac-
cordingly,weestablishedthatFAImaybeusedasamarkerofthevariation
of adipocyte size/adipose tissue lipid content in different depots: The
greater the adipocyte differentiation/size, the more lipophilic the content
of the tissue, therefore the more negative the FAI. To address this hypoth-
esis in vivo, CT scans were performed in 105 patients (from study arm 1),
aiming to link in vivo scan data with those from adipose tissue explants
imaged ex vivo. We observed a correlation between the FAI obtained
in vivo and the respective FAI measured in the explants of the same tissue
that had been obtained from these patients (Fig. 4, H and I, and table S2).
To further validate the ability of FAI to estimate adipocyte lipid con-
tent in vivo, we correlated the in vivo FAI values for EpAT and ScAT
Fig. 2. Vascular inflammation blocks perivascular adipocyte differentiation through paracrine signals. (A) Exper-
imental design of the coculture experiments in study arm 2. Human aortic tissue (Ao) from 15 patients undergoing
CABG was harvested and cultured for 7 days ± angiotensin II (AngII; 100 nM). Preadipocytes isolated from PVAT
around the right coronary artery (RCA) were also cultured for this period. After 7 days, the aortic tissue was washed
to remove angiotensin II and was cocultured with the preadipocytes before a differentiation time course was in-
duced. (B) IL-6, TNF-a, and IFN-g gene expression in aortic tissue before and after stimulation with angiotensin II (n =
5 to 7 per group). (C) Quantification of oil red O in preadipocytes (control) or preadipocytes co-incubated with
aortic tissue or aortic tissue prestimulated with angiotensin II (n = 6 per group). (D to F) Representative images
of oil red O staining in preadipocytes co-incubated with aortic tissue as in (C). P values derived from Wilcoxon
signed-rank test (B) and repeated-measures ANOVA followed by individual comparisons using paired t test (C).
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.001 versus control.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
3 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 from CT scans of the 105 patients in study arm 1 who also underwent a
clinical CTA with the expression of adipocyte differentiation markers.
We observed that in vivo FAI (table S2) was inversely related to the ex-
pression of both CEBPA (Fig. 5, A and B) and FABP4 (Fig. 5, C and D)
in the respective adipose tissue depots from these patients. FAI in EpAT
(FAIEpAT) in vivo was higher compared to FAI in ScAT (FAIScAT) in
vivo (Fig. 5E), confirming that histologically demonstrated differences
in differentiation status of adipose tissue depots led to respective differ-
ences in FAI in vivo. Homeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin
Resistance (HOMA-IR), a marker of systemic insulin resistance that
has been associated with increased adipocyte size (16), was negatively
associated with FAIScAT in vivo but not with FAIEpAT (Fig. 5F), suggest-
ing that systemic metabolic status is linked
toadipocyte lipidaccumulation in isolated
adipose tissue depots such as ScAT but
not in EpAT or pericoronary adipose
tissue. In addition to systemic insulin
resistance, adipocyte lipid content was also
affected by the extent of tissue infiltration
by inflammatory cells such as activated
macrophages.Therewasaninversecorrela-
tion between CCR7/MRC1 gene expression
ratioandCEBPAexpressioninScAT(Fig.6A)
but not EpAT (Fig. 6B). In line with this
finding, CCR7/MRC1 ratio was positively
associated with FAI in ScAT but not in
EpAT (fig. S4), suggesting that FAI can
be used as a surrogate marker of adipose
tissue inflammation in isolated adipose
tissue depots such as ScAT but not in
EpAT where FAI seems to be regulated
by local stimuli from the coronary arteries.
To further explore the ability of FAI to
describe adipose tissue inflammation, we
validated it against 18FFDG uptake by adi-
pose tissue using PET-CT imaging, which is
the gold standard modality to noninvasively
assess tissue inflammation in vivo (4). In a
validation study undertaken in 40 subjects
who had 18FFDG PET-CT for a clinical in-
dication, we assessed 18FFDG uptake by
ScAT using the PET images and FAI using
the coupled CT images from the same
scans. We observed a positive association
between 18FFDG uptake and FAI in ScAT
(Fig. 6C), but there was no association be-
tween these two biomarkers in EpAT, a
finding in line with the gene expression
studies performed in the two adipose
tissue depots. FAIScAT had excellent diag-
nostic accuracy for adipose tissue inflam-
mation (defined using the median 18FFDG
uptake as acutoff, TBR= 0.200). Fora cut-
off value of FAIScAT = 113.3 HU (Hounsfield
units), high adipose tissue inflammation
(TBR > 0.200) was detected with a sensi-
tivity of 90% and a specificity of 100%
(Fig. 6D). Representative images from a
subject with high FAIScAT/high 18FFDG
uptake in ScAT and a subject with low FAIScAT/low 18FFDG uptake
in ScAT are presented in Fig. 6E.
Visualizing the changes in adipocyte size/adipose tissue
lipid content in coronary PVAT in vivo
To investigate the relationship between FAI and adipocyte lipid content
aroundthehumancoronaryarteries,wecomparedadiposetissueobtained
immediately adjacent to the RCA with adipose tissue obtained 2 cm away
from the RCA and not in proximity with any visible epicardial coronary
branch,frompatientsundergoingCABGinstudyarm2.Weobservedthat
the expression of PPAR-g, CEBPA, and FABP4 was down-regulated closer
to the RCA (Fig. 7, A to C), whereas there was no difference in the
Fig. 3. Cytokines trigger proliferation and block differentiation of perivascular adipocytes. In study arm 2,
human preadipocytes were isolated from PVAT around the RCA and differentiated in the presence or absence of
inflammatory cytokines [recombinant TNF-a (4 ng/ml) + IL-6 (25 ng/ml) + IFN-g (20 ng/ml)] until day 9 of differ-
entiation [(A and B) without cytokines and (C and D) with cytokines, oil red O staining at day 9 of differentiation].
(E) Oil red O photometric quantification of lipid accumulation in preadipocytes differentiated with and without
cytokines (n = 7). Effects of cytokines on (F) preadipocyte proliferation and gene expression of the differentiation
markers (G) PPAR-g, (H) CEBPA, and (I) FABP4 (n = 3 independent experiments in triplicate). P values derived from
Wilcoxon signed-rank test (E) or two-way ANOVA with “time × treatment” interaction (F to I).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
4 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 expression of inflammatory mediators within the tissue or macrophage
infiltration and polarization (fig. S5). This was in line with the observed
smaller adipocyte size in proximity to the RCA compared to an area 2 cm
away from the vascular wall (Fig. 7D). These observations confirmed
our findings from the ex vivo and in vitro experiments, suggesting that
paracrine inflammatory signals from the human coronary artery rather
than autocrine signals from within the tissue prevent lipid accumulation
in PVAT surrounding them, although these effects are less marked as
the distance from the RCA increases, even in the absence of obstructive
vascular disease. To examine whether we could track these morpholog-
ical changes of PVAT in response to coronary inflammation by non-
invasive CT imaging, we used imaging analysis tools developed for
the purpose of the study (UK Intellectual
Property Office, application number
1414496.8) to analyze the CTA images
of a clinical cohort of 273 subjects in study
arm3(156withand117withoutsignificant
coronary plaques). We quantified FAI
around the proximal segment of the RCA
in three-dimensional cylindrical layers of
1-mmthickness, starting from the layerim-
mediately adjacent to the vascular wall and
moving up to 20 mm away from it (Fig. 7, E
to G). FAI of PVAT (FAIPVAT) calculation
wasfeasible inallthreemajorepicardialcor-
onary arteries, but the RCA was used as a
model to validate our ex vivo findings given
the absence of major side branches and the
ability to define PVAT versus non-PVAT,
as well as the abundant amount of adipose
tissuesurroundingRCA,whichcanbeeasily
harvested without major bleeding risk, in
contrast to the other epicardial arteries.
We observed a progressive decrease of FAI
to more negative values as we moved away
from the RCA—from PVAT to non-PVAT
(Fig. 7, H and I), where adipocytes are larger
(Fig. 7D) and better differentiated (Fig. 7, A
to C). These findings suggest that the ob-
served changes of FAI could detect the de-
gree of vascular inflammation inside the
human coronaries using a noninvasive ap-
proach in vivo.
Validating FAI against established
imaging biomarkers and coronary
atherosclerotic plaque burden
To validate FAI against established im-
aging biomarkers with known clinical
predictive value, we quantified CCS in
the RCA alone and the entire coronary
vasculature, and atherosclerotic plaque
burden in the proximal RCA in the 273
individuals of study arm 3 (table S3). The
relationships between FAI and distance
from the vascular wall were significantly
(P = 0.001) different in patients with cor-
onary atherosclerosis compared to healthy
individuals (Fig. 7I), showing lower FAI
values close to the vascular wall of healthy individuals. FAI in PVAT
(FAIPVAT, defined as the average FAI within a distance from the perim-
eter of the vessel equal to the diameter of the vessel) varied between
patients even in the absence of coronary plaques (representative
examples in fig. S6). There was also a significant (P = 0.001) difference
in FAIPVAT between patients with and without CAD independent of the
presence of obstructive RCA disease (fig. S7), whereas there was no
difference in FAInon-PVAT (defined as the FAI of an adipose tissue layer
of 1-mm thickness, 2 cm away from the vascular wall) between CAD
and non-CAD groups (Fig. 8A). When we examined the relationship
between fat volumes and coronary atherosclerosis, we observed that
EpAT volume was associated with total CCS, whereas PVAT volume
Fig. 4. Ex vivo characterization of adipocyte size and adipogenesis using CT. Explants of EpAT, ThAT, and ScAT
from patients undergoing CABG (study arm 1) were scanned by CT to calculate FAI for each sample. Association of
FAI with the expression of (A to C) CEBPA (EpAT, n = 87; ThAT, n = 311; ScAT, n = 288) and (D to F) FABP4 (EpAT, n =
85; ThAT, n = 312; ScAT, n = 259) genes in all depots. (G) Correlation between adipocyte size and FAI (n = 44
biopsies). Association between FAI measured in vivo and in explants of (H) EpAT and (I) ScAT collected from
105 patients in study arm 1. P values by Kruskal-Wallis (A to F) and one-way ANOVA (H and I).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
5 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 around RCA was not associated with either the presence of CAD or the
RCA calcium burden (fig. S8). There was a weak association between
FAIPVAT and total CCS or RCA CCS (fig. S9, A and B). To study wheth-
er the gradient of FAI from PVAT around the RCA to non-PVAT
20 mm away from the RCA provides additional information to FAIPVAT,
we calculated the volumetric perivascular characterization index (VPCI =
[100 × (FAIPVAT − FAInon-PVAT)/|FAIPVAT|]). This index should not be
affected by systemic factors modifying global adipocyte size but would
be mostly driven by local stimuli. VPCI was weakly associated only with
the calcium burden in RCA but not total CCS (fig. S9, C and D). Nei-
ther FAIPVAT nor VPCI was correlated with calcification volume in the
underlying segment of the analyzed RCA (Fig. 8, B and C), suggesting
that these imaging indices describe biological processes not directly re-
lated with local vascular calcium deposition. Both FAIPVAT and VPCI
were related to atherosclerotic plaque burden in the underlying RCA
segment (Fig. 8, D and E), a finding which was similar for all major
epicardial coronary arteries (fig. S10, B to D). VPCI was superior to
FAIPVAT in identifying noncalcified (soft) atherosclerotic lesions in
the underlying coronary artery (Fig. 8F) but of moderate diagnostic val-
ue (fig. S11), suggesting that the current definition of vulnerable plaques
as those without calcium does not accurately reflect the biological pro-
cesses related to plaque rupture such as coronary plaque inflammation.
To examine whether FAIPVAT is related to the presence of CAD (defined
as >50% stenosis in any coronary artery) independently of CCS, we per-
formed multivariable linear regression in study arm 3, which showed
that FAIPVAT and CCS were related to the presence of CAD indepen-
dently of each other and independently of age, gender, and other
cardiovascular risk factors (table S4). Similarly, FAIPVAT (but not total
CCS in the entire coronary tree or CCS in the RCA) was positively re-
lated with atherosclerotic plaque burden of the RCA independently of
age, gender, and cardiovascular risk factors (table S4).
Exploring the capacity of FAI to detect vascular
inflammation and vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques
To further investigate the ability of FAI to detect dynamic changes
in PVAT in response to variations in vascular inflammation, we stud-
ied FAIPVAT around culprit lesions in patients with acute myocardial
infarction (MI) within the past 72 hours. The CTA scans were per-
formed immediately after percutaneous coronary intervention, where
both culprit and obstructive nonculprit coronary lesions were treated
in the same session. We observed that FAIPVAT was increased by 8.76 ±
2.87 HU around the culprit lesion compared to FAIPVAT proximal to
the lesion (Fig. 8G). Because the CTA was performed after stent im-
plantation in the culprit lesion, we then sought to examine whether the
observed result was due to a possible artifact from the stent. As con-
trols, we used the nonculprit lesions from the same patients where
stent implantation was performed simultaneously with the culprit
lesion, as well as stable patients who had received a coronary stent
more than 3 months before the scan. An increase in D[FAIPVAT] was
observed around ruptured culprit lesions compared to either the noncul-
prit lesions in acute MI patients or lesions in stable CAD patients treated
with a stent >3 months before the CTA (Fig. 8G); in the same patients,
in a pooled analysis of all lesions, D[FAIPVAT] was significantly (P <
0.001) increased around ruptured compared to stable plaques (Fig.
8H) and had high diagnostic accuracy for detecting these areas of vas-
cular inflammation (Fig. 8I).
To examine whether FAIPVAT around the culprit lesions of patients
with recent MI changes over time, a subgroup of patients from the same
cohort (n = 5) underwent further CTA 5 weeks post-MI. Patients with
stable CAD (n = 5) were also rescanned 5 weeks after the first scan to act
as a control group. There was a significant (P = 0.04) reduction in FAIPVAT
around the edges of the culprit lesion 5 weeks after the event, whereas
there was no change in FAIPVAT around the stable atherosclerotic pla-
ques (Fig. 8J). Representative examples of differences in FAIPVAT
around a culprit stented lesion, a nonculprit stented lesion, a nontreated
plaque, and a stent are provided (Fig. 8K).
DISCUSSION
Here, we present a method for detecting coronary inflammation by
characterizing the changes in pericoronary adipose tissue CT attenua-
tion. In a large cohort of patients undergoing cardiac surgery, we dem-
onstrate that the average attenuation of adipose tissue (FAI) is inversely
correlated with the expression of adipogenic genes and average adipocyte
Fig. 5. In vivo characterization of adipogenesis by CT. Association of in vivo
FAI for EpAT and ScAT of patients undergoing CT with gene expression of (A and
B) CEBPA and (C and D) FABP4 by the same adipose tissue samples collected from
the same patients during surgery (study arm 1). (E) Comparison of in vivo FAI
between EpAT and ScAT and (F) associations with systemic insulin resistance. P values
by Kruskal-Wallis (A to D) or Wilcoxon signed-rank test (E) or one-way ANOVA (F). NS,
Not significant. Studies were performed in the 105 patients from the in vivo CTA
group of study arm 1.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
6 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 size, which is driven by intracellular lipid
accumulation. We also show that the ex-
pression of adipogenic genes, the average
adipocyte size, and lipid accumulation in
PVAT are all driven by paracrine inflam-
matory signals from the vascular wall and
are highly influenced by the presence of
vascular disease. Using imaging tools de-
veloped for this purpose, we provide evi-
dence that these biological effects of
vascular inflammation on PVAT can be
tracked by analyzing standard imaging se-
quences obtained during CTA. This con-
cept is summarized in a schematic (Fig.
8L). On the basis of this approach, we pro-
vide imaging phenotyping that describes
the degree of coronary artery inflamma-
tion, discriminates ruptured from nonrup-
tured coronary atherosclerotic plaques
during acute coronary syndromes, and de-
scribes coronary atherosclerotic plaque
burden independently of CCS.
Adipose tissue contains adipocytes of
varying sizes and differentiation status
(9). Induction of adipocyte differentiation
in the adipose tissue includes postconflu-
ent mitosis and growtharrestof preadipo-
cytes, whichisessential for theirsubsequent
differentiationtomatureadipocytes.PPAR-g
and CEBPA are synergistically and coop-
eratively responsible for the early and
intermediate phases of differentiation of
preadipocytes and their subsequent entry
into the terminal differentiation phase to
mature adipocytes (9). In this latter phase,
mature adipocytes are characterized by
the expression of adipocyte-specific genes
and lipogenic enzymes (such as FABP4)
and by accumulation of intracellular lip-
ids, the amount of which determines the
adipocyte size (17). We (18) and others
(19) have shown that there are differences
in adipocyte size and tissue biology be-
tween different human adipose tissue de-
pots.Here,wedemonstratethattheaverage
adipocyte size is smaller in human EpAT
and ThAT compared to ScAT, partly due
to the presence of larger populations of im-
maturepreadipocytesidentifiedbythelower
expression of PPAR-g, CEBPA, and FABP4,
and possibly other ongoing biological
processes such as inflammation-induced
lipolysis (14).
It is widely accepted that the balance
between the lipid and aqueous phases of
adipose tissue is driven by adipocyte size,
due to the accumulation of intracellular
lipids in large, mature adipocytes (11).
Here, we demonstrate that this balance
Fig. 6. FAI for the detection of human adipose tissue inflammation by noninvasive imaging. Associations
between CEBPA gene expression and CCR7/MRC1 gene expression ratio in (A) ScAT (n = 267) or (B) EpAT (n =
207) adipose tissue in study arm 1. (C) Correlations between 18FFDG uptake of ScAT by PET/CT [determined as
the mean tissue-to-background ratio (TBR)] with FAI of the same tissue (n = 39) and (D) receiver operating
characteristic curves for identification of highly inflamed ScAT by FAI according to 18FFDG uptake measured by
PET/CT. (E) Representative examples of FAI and 18FFDG uptake heat maps in ScAT. P values by Kruskal-Wallis test
(A and B). SUV, standardized uptake value.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
7 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 between the lipid and aqueous phases of adipose tissue can be estimated
using CTA, by determining the average attenuation coefficient within a
predefined radiodensity window (−190 to −30 HU) (20). Previously, it
has been suggested that fat attenuation of visceral and ScAT depots pro-
vides important information, independently of fat volume or classic risk
factors, on cardiovascular risk prediction (20, 21). Now, we demonstrate
that the average attenuation of adipose tissue (FAI) measured either
ex vivoinadiposetissueexplantsorinvivoinpatientsundergoingclinical
CTA shows an inverse correlation with adipocyte size and the expres-
sion of adipogenic markers, such as FABP4, driven by the variations in
intracellular lipid accumulation. This imag-
ingphenotypingallowsnotonlythecharac-
terization of adipocyte size within each
adipose tissue depot but also the detection
of differences between different depots.
Furthermore, validation of FAIScAT against
in vivo 18FFDG uptake, visualized by PET
imaging, suggests that FAI can be used to
reliably quantify adipose tissue inflamma-
tion, at least in isolated depots, such as
ScAT, where adipocyte size is driven by
the infiltration of activated macrophages,
insulin resistance, or other local tissue biol-
ogy. FAI may have major applications in
endocrinology, because adipocyte size and
adipose tissue inflammation are important
features of metabolic syndrome, which at
present can only be assessed using adipose
tissue biopsies or PET/CT, respectively.
Inourrecentstudies(3,8),wehavedem-
onstrated a constant, bidirectional com-
munication between the human arterial
wallanditssurrounding PVAT,introduc-
ing the concept that reverse, “inside-to-
outside” signals originating from the
vascular wall can affect the biology of
PVAT in a paracrine manner. A previous
study in mice has also shown that endo-
vascular wire injury induces PPAR-g–
mediated phenotypic changes in PVAT,
dependent on vascular TNF-a expression
(13). On the basis of these findings, we
now postulate that vascular inflammation
may release inflammatory mediators that
induce PPAR-g–mediated structural
changes in the neighboring PVAT. Our
results show that the human arterial wall
expresses proinflammatory cytokines, and
the inflamed arterial tissue prevents lipid
droplet formation in PVAT adipocytes in
an ex vivo coculture system by interfering
with the ability of human preadipocytes to
differentiate, as well as by triggering their
proliferation.
Vascular inflammation is a key fea-
ture in atherogenesis, because it precedes
the formation of atherosclerotic plaques
(1). Despite the importance of vascular
inflammation as a therapeutic target
(22, 23), there are no reliable biomarkers to identify patients with high
coronary inflammatory burden, because circulating inflammatory
biomarkers are not specific and imaging modalities offer information
only on the structural changes of the vascular wall. Clinical association
studies have previously shown that inflammation of PVAT around the
coronary arteries is increased in the presence of atherosclerosis, and it
was conventionally believed that PVAT exerts a detrimental effect on
the human coronaries, inducing atherogenesis (24, 25). Attention was
also focused on linking volume (26) or inflammatory status (27) of
PVAT with the presence of atherosclerotic plaques, whereas recent
Fig. 7. Gradient of adipocyte size and FAI around the human coronaries in the presence or absence of cor-
onary atherosclerosis. (A) PPAR-g, (B) CEBPA, and (C) CEBPA4 gene expression and (D) adipocyte size in pericor-
onary adipose tissue samples attached to the RCA and paired samples ~20 mm away from it [n = 6 to 12 pairs for
(A) to (D)]. (E to G) In study arm 3, FAI around the RCA of patients undergoing CTA was calculated for each cylin-
drical 1-mm-thick layer of pericoronary tissue, whereas for a radial distance, FAI was calculated from RCA wall 1 to
20 mm. (H) FAI mapping of PVAT around the RCA. (I) FAI and radial distance from vascular wall in patients with CAD
(n = 149) versus healthy individuals (n = 117) [comparison of the area under the curve (AUC) using unpaired t test
and comparison of the curves using two-way ANOVA for repeated measures with “FAI × distance” interaction]. P values
by Wilcoxon signed-rank test (A to D).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
8 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 studies by Alam and co-workers (28)
have also linked EpAT thickness with
coronary microvascular function in pa-
tients with nonobstructive CAD and
EpAT volume with coronary calcifica-
tion and presence of noncalcified plaques
(29). However, if vascular inflammation
sends paracrine signals to PVAT to pre-
vent lipid accumulation in adipocytes
(3, 8, 13), then this could lead to increased
FAIPVAT around inflamed coronary ar-
teries, potentially detectable in vivo. First,
we have demonstrated that there is a gra-
dient in adipocyte size and the expression
of adipogenic genes (FABP4, CEBPA, and
PPAR-g) moving from PVAT adjacent to
the human coronary arteries to adipose tissue further away. Second, we
developed new imaging tools that enabled us to analyze FAIPVAT in
sequential cylindrical layers around the human coronary arteries,
showing a parallel shift of FAIPVAT to more negative values moving
away from the vascular wall, reflective of the increase in adipocyte
size/adipose tissue lipid content. FAIPVAT was positively related to
total atherosclerotic plaque burden and the presence of noncalcified
(inflamed) atherosclerotic plaques in the underlying coronary artery
because it flags the proinflammatory stimulation of pericoronary ad-
ipose tissue as the result of vascular inflammation. Furthermore, we
Fig. 8. FAIPVAT and VPCI as novel phenotyping
tools for vascular disease. (A) Associations be-
tween FAIPVAT/FAInon-PVAT and CAD. (B and C) Asso-
ciation between calcification volume and FAIPVAT or
VPCI. (D and E) Both FAIPVAT and VPCI are related
with atherosclerotic plaque burden in RCA [n = 267
for (A) to (E)]. (F) Comparisons of FAIPVAT and VPCI
between noncalcified plaques (n = 26) and mixed
or calcified plaques (n = 84) in CAD patients with
high atherosclerotic plaque burden in the RCA
(defined as >33rd percentile). (G) Changes in
FAIPVAT around ruptured (culprit) atherosclerotic
lesions (n = 10) of acute MI patients, nonculprit
lesions of the same patients (n = 7), or lesions
in stable CAD patients (n = 13); D[FAIPVAT] =
FAIPVAT(around lesion) – FAIPVAT(proximal segment).
(H) Comparison of D[FAIPVAT] between stable
and unstable plaques and (I) its diagnostic accu-
racy in receiver operator characteristic (ROC)
curve analysis for detection of unstable plaques
(culprit lesions). (J) Paired CT scans with 5 weeks
difference, to assess temporal changes of FAIPVAT
in acute MI and stable CAD patients (n = 5).
(K) Representative images of FAIPVAT color
maps around: (i) a culprit lesion (green arrow-
heads, identified by the presence of the stent,
upper left image), (ii) a nonculprit lesion from
the same patient (identified by the presence
of the stent implanted in the same session as
the culprit, upper right image), (iii) a stable
atherosclerotic lesion without a stent (lower
left image), and (iv) a stent implanted at least
3 months before imaging (lower right image);
green arrowheads flag the plaque/stent. (L) A
schematic representation of the study’s findings
that translate the inside-to-outside signal from
the human coronaries to their PVAT into an imag-
ing application. P values derived from unpaired
t test (A, F, and H), one-way ANOVA (B to E), two-
way ANOVA (G), or Wilcoxon signed-rank test (J).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
9 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 demonstrate that FAIPVAT is increased around ruptured coronary ath-
erosclerotic plaques of patients scanned during the acute phase of MI
after stenting, possibly also due to the contribution of inflammatory
cells infiltrating the perivascular space (30), a phenomenon that starts
to resolve 5 weeks after the event. This latter finding suggests that
FAIPVAT may be used to noninvasively detect vulnerable atherosclerotic
plaques, thereby enabling the identification of high-risk patients. Our
findings imply that the previously reported (20, 21) negative associa-
tions of CT attenuation of visceral adipose tissue or ScAT with cardio-
metabolic risk are explained by the fact that FAI in these depots
describes increased adipocyte lipid accumulation; therefore, it can be
driven by other cardiometabolic risk factors such as visceral obesity
and insulin resistance. On the contrary, FAIPVAT is positively associated
with atherosclerotic plaque burden but not with systemic insulin
resistance, suggesting that it is driven by local inflammatory stimuli
coming from the vascular wall, rather than systemic metabolic con-
ditions such as insulin resistance.
The main limitation of this study is the lack of data demonstrating a
predictive value of these imaging markers for clinical outcomes, which
falls beyond the scope of this current work. Moreover, the absolute
values of FAI need to be tested and validated across different CT scan-
ners in different centers before the markers described in this study be-
come clinical applications.
In conclusion, the existing biomarkers with predictive value in CAD,
such as CCS, have major weaknesses given that they do not change with
interventions that modify cardiovascular risk and that they represent
permanent structural changes in the vascular wall. To track vascular in-
flammation in early disease states, we now introduce the concept that
inflammation in the human coronaries drives changes in the surrounding
PVAT in a paracrine manner, leading to less perivascular lipid accumula-
tion closer to the vascular wall. We then describe a method and metrics of
imaging phenotyping (FAIPVAT and VPCI) that enable reliable tracking
of these changes in adipocyte lipid content/size around the human cor-
onary arteries. The ability of these imaging tools to describe coronary
atherosclerosis is independent of any cardiovascular risk factor or
other established imaging biomarkers. The FAIPVAT and VPCI
may enable early detection of vascular inflammation and have the
advantage of being dynamic (they alter with changes in vascular in-
flammation), which is a major advantage over CCS. We also provide a
tool that enables noninvasive detection of vulnerable (highly inflamed)
atherosclerotic plaques in the human coronary arteries. This approach
can be used to analyze historical CTAs that have previously been per-
formed in patients for diagnostic purposes. If the potential prognos-
tic value of this new imaging phenotyping approach of PVAT is
confirmed in clinical studies with prospective follow-up, then it
could have a major impact on risk stratification and clinical manage-
ment of individuals in both primary and secondary prevention.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Study design
The objective of this study was to develop a methodology for the detec-
tionof vascularinflammationinhumancoronaryarteries,byperforming
functional imaging of coronary PVAT using CTA. This study (i) links
molecular phenotyping of human PVAT with its CT imaging character-
isticsexvivo and in vivo, (ii) developsa methodthat linksCTattenuation
of human adipose tissue with lipid accumulation and tissue inflamma-
tion, and (iii) develops a method that uses molecular phenotyping and
CT attenuation of PVAT around the human coronaries, as a means to
quantify vascular inflammation related with atherosclerotic disease bur-
den and plaque vulnerability in clinical cohorts.
Study arm 1 consisted of 453 patients undergoing cardiac surgery at
the Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (table S1). Adi-
pose tissue samples (ThAT, n = 417; ScAT, n = 374; EpAT, n = 264)
were harvested during surgery for gene expression studies, histology,
and CT imaging as explants. A subgroup of 105 patients also underwent
CTA to link the histological and biological characteristics of the adipose
tissue biopsieswiththe imaging characteristicsof the same adipose tissue
depots in vivo and in vitro. Study arm 2 included 45 patients undergoing
CABG (table S1) for mechanistic experiments and PVAT phenotyping.
Study arm 3 included a clinical cohort of 273 patients who underwent
diagnostic coronary CTA (table S3) to validate the findings generated
from study arms 1 and 2 and translate them in a clinical setting. Study
arm 4 included 22 patients with CAD (table S3) undergoing CTA to
assess whether FAIPVAT can identify unstable coronary plaques.
The study was conducted according to Declaration of Helsinki
principles and approved by the local Research Ethics Committee
(Oxford REC C 11/SC/0140, Oxford REC C 15/SC/0545, and Hip-
pokration Hospital ID 2.2.15/1654 for study arm 4).
Blood sampling and measurements of
circulating biomarkers
Fasting venous blood samples were obtained from the patients in study
arm 1 before cardiac surgery. Serum insulin was measured by chemi-
luminescent microparticle immunoassay, and serum glucose was
measured by the hexokinase method using commercial kits (ABBOTT).
Insulin resistance was defined by HOMA-IR, calculated using the
formula (glucose × insulin)/405, with glucose measured in milligrams
per deciliter and insulin in milliunits per liter.
Imaging studies using CT and PET/CT
Details on CT and PET/CT imaging studies of adipose tissue, PVAT,
and coronary plaque characterization are presented in the Supplemen-
tary Materials. Technical considerations on the calculation of the new
imaging biomarkers FAIPVAT and VPCI are presented in fig. S12.
Adipose tissue characterization by CT
Adipose tissue was defined as all voxels with attenuation between −190
and −30 HU. Voxel attenuation histograms were plotted, and the FAI
was defined as the average attenuation of the adipose tissue volume of
interest (within the prespecified window of −190 to −30 HU; see the
Supplementary Materials for further details).
PVAT characterization
Perivascular tissue around the RCA was segmented into 20 concentric
cylindrical 1-mm-thick layers, extending between the first and fifth
centimeter from its ostium, and FAI was calculated for each layer.
The FAI curves of adipose tissue were plotted against the radial dis-
tance from the outer vascular wall (see the Supplementary Materials
for further details).
FAI of PVAT
FAIPVAT was defined as the FAI of adipose tissue in a layer of tissue
within a radial distance from the outer coronary artery wall equal
to the average diameter of the tracked RCA segment. Non-PVAT
FAI (FAInon-PVAT) was defined at the most distal concentric layer
of adipose tissue from RCA wall. VPCI was then calculated as the
% change in FAI from PVAT (FAIPVAT) to non-PVAT (2 cm away
from the RCA’s outer wall, FAInon-PVAT), as defined above (VPCI =
[100 × (FAIPVAT − FAInon-PVAT)/|FAIPVAT|]); see the Supplemen-
tary Materials for further details.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
10 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Coronary plaque analysis using CTA
Coronary plaques between 65 and 265 HU were described as fibrous,
and coronary plaques more than 465 HU were described as calcified.
Atherosclerotic plaque burden was calculated as the ratio of fibrous
plaque volume to total vessel volume (see the Supplementary Materials
for further details).
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were tested for normal distribution using the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Non-normally distributed variables are
presented as median (25th to 75th percentile) and whiskers (Tukey).
Normally distributed variables are presented as means ± SEM. Between-
group comparisons of continuous variables were performed using un-
paired t test (for two groups) or one-way ANOVA (or Kruskal-Wallis
as appropriate) for three groups followed by Bonferroni (or Dunn’s)
post hoc correction for multiple comparisons, as indicated. Paired com-
parisons were performed using paired t test (or Wilcoxon signed-rank
test), and for three or more groups, repeated-measures ANOVA (or
Friedman’s test as appropriate) was used. For between-group serial
changes, we used two-way ANOVA for repeated measures with interac-
tion terms as presented in the figure legends. Categorical variables were
compared by using c2 test. Correlations between continuous variables
were assessed by using bivariate analysis, and Pearson’s r or Spearman’s
r coefficient was estimated, as indicated in the figure legends.
To test whether FAIPVAT is related with the presence of CAD, we
performed multivariable logistic regression for predictors of obstructive
CAD (>50% stenosis of the lumen) and multivariate linear regression
for atherosclerotic plaque burden in the RCA (independent variables as
described in relevant text sections and table S4). The results of the re-
gression analysis are presented as standardized b and P values. All sta-
tistical tests were performed using SPSS version 20.0, and P < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant. Individual subject-level data are re-
ported in table S5.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/398/eaal2658/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Study flow chart.
Fig. S2. Adipocyte differentiation in vitro and lipid accumulation.
Fig. S3. Effects of proinflammatory cytokines on preadipocyte differentiation.
Fig. S4. FAI and macrophage infiltration and polarization status in adipose tissue
explants.
Fig. S5. Gene expression of inflammatory cytokines and markers of macrophage infiltration/
polarization in coronary PVAT versus non-PVAT.
Fig. S6. Variation in FAI mapping of pericoronary adipose tissue in the absence of vascular
disease.
Fig. S7. FAIPVAT and CAD.
Fig. S8. Associations between EpAT and PVAT volumes and coronary atherosclerosis/
calcification.
Fig. S9. Associations between coronary PVAT imaging phenotyping and coronary calcium
score.
Fig. S10. Correlations between FAIPVAT and coronary plaque burden in major epicardial
arteries.
Fig. S11. Detection of noncalcified plaques in human coronaries by CT imaging mapping
of pericoronary adipose tissue.
Fig. S12. Technical considerations related to calculation of FAI.
Table S1. Demographic characteristics of study participants.
Table S2. Range of FAI values in adipose tissue explants and in vivo.
Table S3. Demographic characteristics of study participants in study arms 3 and 4.
Table S4. Predictive value of FAIPVAT to describe CAD and atherosclerotic plaque burden
independently of coronary calcium score.
Table S5. Individual subject-level data.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. R. Ross, Atherosclerosis—an inflammatory disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 340, 115–126
(1999).
2. R. Lee, M. Margaritis, K. M. Channon, C. Antoniades, Evaluating oxidative stress in
human cardiovascular disease: Methodological aspects and considerations.
Curr. Med. Chem. 19, 2504–2520 (2012).
3. M. Margaritis, A. S. Antonopoulos, J. Digby, R. Lee, S. Reilly, P. Coutinho, C. Shirodaria,
R. Sayeed, M. Petrou, R. De Silva, S. Jalilzadeh, M. Demosthenous, C. Bakogiannis,
D. Tousoulis, C. Stefanadis, R. P. Choudhury, B. Casadei, K. M. Channon, C. Antoniades,
Interactions between vascular wall and perivascular adipose tissue reveal novel roles for
adiponectin in the regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase function in human
vessels. Circulation 127, 2209–2221 (2013).
4. T. Christen, Y. Sheikine, V. Z. Rocha, S. Hurwitz, A. B. Goldfine, M. Di Carli, P. Libby,
Increased glucose uptake in visceral versus subcutaneous adipose tissue revealed by PET
imaging. JACC Cardiovasc. Imaging 3, 843–851 (2010).
5. P. Greenland, L. LaBree, S. P. Azen, T. M. Doherty, R. C. Detrano, Coronary artery
calcium score combined with Framingham score for risk prediction in asymptomatic
individuals. JAMA 291, 210–215 (2004).
6. I. E. Hoefer, S. Steffens, M. Ala-Korpela, M. Bäck, L. Badimon, M.-L. Bochaton-Piallat,
C. M. Boulanger, G. Caligiuri, S. Dimmeler, J. Egido, P. C. Evans, T. Guzik, B. R. Kwak,
U. Landmesser, M. Mayr, C. Monaco, G. Pasterkamp, J. Tuñón, C. Weber; ESC Working
Group Atherosclerosis and Vascular Biology, Novel methodologies for biomarker
discovery in atherosclerosis. Eur. Heart J. 36, 2635–2642 (2015).
7. C. Antoniades, A. S. Antonopoulos, D. Tousoulis, C. Stefanadis, Adiponectin: From obesity
to cardiovascular disease. Obes. Rev. 10, 269–279 (2009).
8. A. S. Antonopoulos, M. Margaritis, P. Coutinho, C. Shirodaria, C. Psarros, L. Herdman,
F. Sanna, R. De Silva, M. Petrou, R. Sayeed, G. Krasopoulos, R. Lee, J. Digby, S. Reilly,
C. Bakogiannis, D. Tousoulis, B. Kessler, B. Casadei, K. M. Channon, C. Antoniades,
Adiponectin as a link between type 2 diabetes and vascular NADPH oxidase activity in the
human arterial wall: The regulatory role of perivascular adipose tissue. Diabetes 64,
2207–2219 (2015).
9. J. M. Ntambi, K. Young-Cheul, Adipocyte differentiation and gene expression. J. Nutr. 130,
3122S–3126S (2000).
10. J. Bassols, F. J. Ortega, J. M. Moreno-Navarrete, B. Peral, W. Ricart, J.-M. Fernández-Real,
Study of the proinflammatory role of human differentiated omental adipocytes.
J. Cell. Biochem. 107, 1107–1117 (2009).
11. M. DiGirolamo, J. L. Owens, Water content of rat adipose tissue and isolated adipocytes in
relation to cell size. Am. J. Physiol. 231, 1568–1572 (1976).
12. C. Farnier, S. Krief, M. Blache, F. Diot-Dupuy, G. Mory, P. Ferre, R. Bazin, Adipocyte
functions are modulated by cell size change: Potential involvement of an integrin/ERK
signalling pathway. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 27, 1178–1186 (2003).
13. M. Takaoka, H. Suzuki, S. Shioda, K. Sekikawa, Y. Saito, R. Nagai, M. Sata, Endovascular
injury induces rapid phenotypic changes in perivascular adipose tissue. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 30, 1576–1582 (2010).
14. R. W. Grant, J. M. Stephens, Fat in flames: Influence of cytokines and pattern
recognition receptors on adipocyte lipolysis. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 309,
E205–E213 (2015).
15. M.-J. Lee, Y. Wu, S. K. Fried, A modified protocol to maximize differentiation of human
preadipocytes and improve metabolic phenotypes. Obesity (Silver Spring) 20,
2334–2340 (2012).
16. N. Franck, K. G. Stenkula, A. Öst, T. Lindström, P. Strålfors, F. H. Nystrom, Insulin-
induced GLUT4 translocation to the plasma membrane is blunted in large compared
with small primary fat cells isolated from the same individual. Diabetologia 50,
1716–1722 (2007).
17. M. R. Kazemi, C. M. McDonald, J. K. Shigenaga, C. Grunfeld, K. R. Feingold, Adipocyte
fatty acid–binding protein expression and lipid accumulation are increased during
activation of murine macrophages by toll-like receptor agonists. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 25, 1220–1224 (2005).
18. A. S. Antonopoulos, M. Margaritis, P. Coutinho, J. Digby, R. Patel, C. Psarros, N. Ntusi,
T. D. Karamitsos, R. Lee, R. De Silva, M. Petrou, R. Sayeed, M. Demosthenous, C. Bakogiannis,
P. B. Wordsworth, D. Tousoulis, S. Neubauer, K. M. Channon, C. Antoniades, Reciprocal
effects of systemic inflammation and brain natriuretic peptide on adiponectin biosynthesis in
adipose tissue of patients with ischemic heart disease. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 34,
2151–2159 (2014).
19. C. Bambace, A. Sepe, E. Zoico, M. Telesca, D. Olioso, S. Venturi, A. Rossi, F. Corzato,
S. Faccioli, L. Cominacini, F. Santini, M. Zamboni, Inflammatory profile in subcutaneous
and epicardial adipose tissue in men with and without diabetes. Heart Vessels 29, 42–48
(2014).
20. K. J. Rosenquist, A. Pedley, J. M. Massaro, K. E. Therkelsen, J. M. Murabito, U. Hoffmann,
C. S. Fox, Visceral and subcutaneous fat quality and cardiometabolic risk.
JACC Cardiovasc. Imaging 6, 762–771 (2013).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
11 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 21. T. M. Abraham, A. Pedley, J. M. Massaro, U. Hoffmann, C. S. Fox, Association between
visceral and subcutaneous adipose depots and incident cardiovascular disease risk
factors. Circulation 132, 1639–1647 (2015).
22. D. Tousoulis, C. Psarros, M. Demosthenous, R. Patel, C. Antoniades, C. Stefanadis, Innate
and adaptive inflammation as a therapeutic target in vascular disease: The emerging
role of statins. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 63, 2491–2502 (2014).
23. A. S. Antonopoulos, M. Margaritis, R. Lee, K. Channon, C. Antoniades, Statins as anti-
inflammatory agents in atherogenesis: Molecular mechanisms and lessons from the
recent clinical trials. Curr. Pharm. Des. 18, 1519–1530 (2012).
24. S. N. Verhagen, M. P. Buijsrogge, A. Vink, L. A. van Herwerden, Y. van der Graaf,
F. L. J. Visseren, Secretion of adipocytokines by perivascular adipose tissue near
stenotic and non-stenotic coronary artery segments in patients undergoing CABG.
Atherosclerosis 233, 242–247 (2014).
25. S. N. Verhagen, F. L. J. Visseren, Perivascular adipose tissue as a cause of atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis 214, 3–10 (2011).
26. P. Maurovich-Horvat, K. Kallianos, L.-C. Engel, J. Szymonifka, C. S. Fox, U. Hoffmann,
Q. A. Truong, Influence of pericoronary adipose tissue on local coronary
atherosclerosis as assessed by a novel MDCT volumetric method. Atherosclerosis 219,
151–157 (2011).
27. M. Konishi, S. Sugiyama, Y. Sato, S. Oshima, K. Sugamura, T. Nozaki, K. Ohba, J. Matsubara,
H. Sumida, Y. Nagayoshi, K. Sakamoto, D. Utsunomiya, K. Awai, H. Jinnouchi,
Y. Matsuzawa, Y. Yamashita, Y. Asada, K. Kimura, S. Umemura, H. Ogawa, Pericardial fat
inflammation correlates with coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis 213, 649–655
(2010).
28. M. S. Alam, R. Green, R. de Kemp, R. S. Beanlands, B. J. W. Chow, Epicardial
adipose tissue thickness as a predictor of impaired microvascular function in
patients with non-obstructive coronary artery disease. J. Nucl. Cardiol. 20, 804–812
(2013).
29. N. Alexopoulos, D. S. McLean, M. Janik, C. D. Arepalli, A. E. Stillman, P. Raggi,
Epicardial adipose tissue and coronary artery plaque characteristics. Atherosclerosis 210,
150–154 (2010).
30. E. Henrichot, C. E. Juge-Aubry, A. Pernin, J.-C. Pache, V. Velebit, J.-M. Dayer, P. Meda,
C. Chizzolini, C. A. Meier, Production of chemokines by perivascular adipose tissue: A role
in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis? Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 25, 2594–2599
(2005).
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to M. N. Kararoudi for his support in the analysis of part of
the ex vivo images of adipose tissue explants. Funding: The study was funded by the British
Heart Foundation (BHF) (FS/16/15/32047 and PG/13/56/30383 to C.A.), the BHF Centre of
Research Excellence (Oxford) (RE/08/004 to M.M. and C.A.), the National Institute for Health
Research–Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, the European Commission (Marie Curie ITN
RADOX GA316738 and IF REDOXHEART GA656990), and the NovoNordisk Foundation
(NNF15CC0018486). Author contributions: A.S.A. participated in patient recruitment, clinical
data and biological sample collection, data analysis, statistical analysis, and writing of the
manuscript. F.S., M.M., C.P., and P.C. performed experiments and data analysis and reviewed
the manuscript. N.S. participated in clinical data collection. S.T. participated in clinical data
collection and data analysis. L.H. participated in patient recruitment and data analysis. I.A.
performed experiments. C.S. participated in clinical data collection and reviewed the
manuscript. E.K.O. participated in clinical data collection and image/data analysis. A.-M.K. and
C.M.B. participated in data analysis. M.P., R.S., and G.K. contributed to participant recruitment
and biological sample collection. A.K., R.U., S. Anthony, N.A., and D.T. contributed to clinical
data collection. J.D., S. Achenbach, S.N., and K.M.C. provided advice and discussed and reviewed
the manuscript. C.A. designed the study, raised the funding, coordinated and directed the project,
and wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: The method for analysis of perivascular FAI and
the VPCI described in this article is subject to a UK patent application, number 1414496.8. C.A., K.M.C.,
S.N., and C.S. are founders and shareholders of Caristo Diagnostics, a CT image analysis spinout
company of the University of Oxford. Data and materials availability: All data are included in the
paper or the Supplementary Materials. For any further information, please contact C.A.
Submitted 31 October 2016
Resubmitted 30 January 2017
Accepted 30 May 2017
Published 12 July 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aal2658
Citation: A. S. Antonopoulos, F. Sanna, N. Sabharwal, S. Thomas, E. K. Oikonomou, L. Herdman,
M. Margaritis, C. Shirodaria, A.-M. Kampoli, I. Akoumianakis, M. Petrou, R. Sayeed,
G. Krasopoulos, C. Psarros, P. Ciccone, C. M. Brophy, J. Digby, A. Kelion, R. Uberoi,
S. Anthony, N. Alexopoulos, D. Tousoulis, S. Achenbach, S. Neubauer, K. M. Channon,
C. Antoniades, Detecting human coronary inflammation by imaging perivascular fat. Sci.
Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Antonopoulos et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2658 (2017)
12 July 2017
12 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Detecting human coronary inflammation by imaging perivascular fat
Channon and Charalambos Antoniades
Uberoi, Suzan Anthony, Nikolaos Alexopoulos, Dimitris Tousoulis, Stephan Achenbach, Stefan Neubauer, Keith M. 
George Krasopoulos, Constantinos Psarros, Patricia Ciccone, Carl M. Brophy, Janet Digby, Andrew Kelion, Raman
Marios Margaritis, Cheerag Shirodaria, Anna-Maria Kampoli, Ioannis Akoumianakis, Mario Petrou, Rana Sayeed, 
Alexios S. Antonopoulos, Fabio Sanna, Nikant Sabharwal, Sheena Thomas, Evangelos K. Oikonomou, Laura Herdman,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aal2658
, eaal2658.
9
Sci Transl Med 
noninvasive method for monitoring vascular inflammation and the development of coronary artery disease.
FAI was greatest directly adjacent to the inflamed coronary artery. The perivascular FAI may be a useful, 
the
myocardial infarction revealed that unstable plaques had larger perivascular FAIs than stable plaques and that 
reduces lipid accumulation and slows preadipocyte differentiation. Imaging pericoronary fat in human patients after
mature adipocytes exhibit greater lipid accumulation, which is inversely associated with the FAI. Inflammation 
of adipose tissue surrounding the coronary arteries to assess adipocyte size and lipid content. Larger, more
an alternative metric called the perivascular CT fat attenuation index (FAI). The perivascular FAI uses CT imaging 
 developed
et al.
inflammation and subclinical coronary artery disease (soft, noncalcified plaques), Antonopoulos 
evaluated by coronary calcium scoring, which uses computerized tomography (CT) imaging. To detect 
To determine risk of future coronary artery disease, calcium content in vascular plaques is typically
Picturing plaques and imaging inflammation
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/398/eaal2658
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/07/10/9.398.eaal2658.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/363/6430/989.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/357/6354/855.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/358/358ra126.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/196/196ra100.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/333/333ra50.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/239/239sr1.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/398/eaal2658#BIBL
This article cites 30 articles, 11 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
