 422   
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
2018 International Olympic Committee consensus 
statement on prevention, diagnosis and management 
of paediatric anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries
Clare L Ardern,1,2 Guri Ranum Ekås,3,4,5 Hege Grindem,6 Håvard Moksnes,4 
Allen F Anderson,7 Franck Chotel,8 Moises Cohen,9 Magnus Forssblad,10 
Theodore J Ganley,11 Julian A Feller,12,13 Jón Karlsson,14 Minider S Kocher,15,16 
Robert F LaPrade,17,18 Michael McNamee,19 Bert Mandelbaum,20 Lyle Micheli,15,16,21 
Nicholas Mohtadi,22 Bruce Reider,23 Justin Roe,24 Romain Seil,25,26 Rainer Siebold,27,28 
Holly J Silvers-Granelli,29 Torbjørn Soligard,30,31 Erik Witvrouw,32 
Lars Engebretsen3,4,5,30 
Consensus statement
To cite: Ardern CL, 
Ekås GR, Grindem H, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2018;52:422–438.
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view, 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bjsports- 
2018- 
099060).
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Clare L Ardern, School 
of Allied Health, La Trobe 
University, Melbourne, VIC 
3086, Australia;  
 
c. 
ardern@ 
latrobe. 
edu. 
au
This article has been co-
published in the Journal of 
ISAKOS, Orthopaedic Journal 
of Sports Medicine and Knee 
Surgery Sports Traumatology 
Arthroscopy.
Accepted 23 January 2018
Published Online First 
24 February 2018
 
► http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bjsports- 
2018- 
099169
AbsTrACT
In October 2017, the International Olympic 
Committee hosted an international expert group 
of physiotherapists and orthopaedic surgeons 
who specialise in treating and researching 
paediatric ACL injuries. Representatives from the 
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine, 
European Paediatric Orthopaedic Society, European 
Society for Sports Traumatology, Knee Surgery & 
Arthroscopy, International Society of Arthroscopy 
Knee Surgery and Orthopaedic Sports Medicine, 
Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America 
and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Artroscopia, 
Rodilla y Deporte attended. Physiotherapists and 
orthopaedic surgeons with clinical and research 
experience in the field, and an ethics expert with 
substantial experience in the area of sports injuries 
also participated. Injury management is challenging 
in the current landscape of clinical uncertainty and 
limited scientific knowledge. Injury management 
decisions also occur against the backdrop of 
the complexity of shared decision-making with 
children and the potential long-term ramifications 
of the injury. This consensus statement addresses 
six fundamental clinical questions regarding the 
prevention, diagnosis and management of paediatric 
ACL injuries. The aim of this consensus statement 
is to provide a comprehensive, evidence-informed 
summary to support the clinician, and help children 
with ACL injury and their parents/guardians make 
the best possible decisions.
InTroduCTIon
The number of ACL injuries in children is 
rising.1 2 ACL injuries in children create a level 
of concern that is more significant than in any 
other population with ACL injury. Do children 
who rupture their ACL mature similarly to their 
uninjured peers? Do they continue with sport? 
Do they prioritise their education and other 
interests over sport? Does an ACL injury and 
treatment change their lives? These young indi-
viduals have to live with their knee problem for 
the rest of their life, which may compromise 
their quality of life and increase the risk for 
further injury, meniscal tears and early onset 
osteoarthritis.3 Compounding the problem is 
that there is very little high-quality evidence to 
guide decision-making in management of paedi-
atric ACL injuries.4 
Progress on these issues can only be made 
based on long-term follow-up in multicentre 
collaborations. Achieving progress requires a 
long-term commitment from those who have 
children’s interests close at heart. Therefore, in 
October 2017, the IOC hosted an international 
expert group of physiotherapists and ortho-
paedic surgeons who specialise in treating and 
researching paediatric ACL injuries. Represen-
tatives from the following societies attended: 
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medi-
cine (AOSSM), European Paediatric Ortho-
paedic Society, European Society for Sports 
Traumatology, Knee Surgery & Arthroscopy 
(ESSKA), International Society of Arthroscopy 
Knee Surgery and Orthopaedic Sports Medi-
cine (ISAKOS), Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of 
North America and Sociedad Latinoamericana 
de Artroscopia, Rodilla y Deporte (SLARD).
Clinicians are charged with the responsibility 
of providing accurate information and effective 
treatment to this vulnerable population. Sharing 
information about the potential consequences of 
ACL injury and treatment in childhood to long-
term knee health should be a central part of the 
shared decision-making process. Adult patients 
with ACL injury may develop symptoms and 
signs of osteoarthritis within 10 years of the 
index injury.5 Therefore, the clinical concern 
is that a child who is injured at the age of 10 
years could have symptomatic osteoarthritis by 
the age of 20. A quintessential question is what 
is the long-term prognosis after ACL injury in 
childhood? Having a definitive, evidence-based 
answer to this question would strengthen our 
confidence in clinical decision-making. Clearly, 
the answer to this question is not straightfor-
ward and depends on many factors, but one 
important point is that long-term outcomes 
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 423
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
after ACL injury in childhood, including the development 
of osteoarthritis, have not been studied. 
‘Long-term outcomes after ACL injury in 
childhood, including the development of 
osteoarthritis, have not been studied.’
Injury management is challenging in the current landscape 
of clinical uncertainty and limited scientific knowledge. 
Injury management decisions also occur against the backdrop 
of the complexity of shared decision-making with children 
and the potential long-term ramifications of the injury. This 
consensus statement addresses six fundamental clinical ques-
tions regarding the prevention, diagnosis and management 
of paediatric ACL injuries (box 1). By framing each topic 
around clinical questions, the aim of this consensus statement 
is to provide a comprehensive, evidence-informed summary 
to support the clinician, and help children with ACL injury 
and their parents/guardians make the best possible decisions.
Consensus meThods
A modified Delphi consensus process6–8 was used to identify the 
topics to be addressed in this consensus statement. Experts were 
contacted by email in June 2016, and invited to respond to an 
electronic survey. A mix of open and closed questions were used 
to gather expert opinion regarding the key issues in the field. 
These responses were summarised and formed the basis of 18 
statements regarding injury prevention, diagnosis, prognosis, 
surgical techniques, treatment decision-making, management 
and outcome measurement (see online supplementary file 1) .
A two-round consensus process was conducted, involving 19 
content experts. Respondents rated the importance of the 18 
predefined statements on an 11-point scale ranging from not 
important at all to of utmost importance. Consensus was defined 
as a mean ranking of at least eight points for each statement. 
After the first voting round, statements reaching consensus were 
removed, so that only statements that failed to reach consensus 
in the first voting round went through to the second voting 
round. The statements that finally reached consensus formed the 
topics that were discussed at the consensus meeting.
The IOC convened a consensus meeting of 21 experts in Laus-
anne, Switzerland in October 2017. The experts were identified 
by the IOC through the AOSSM, ESSKA, ISAKOS and SLARD 
member societies, and from physiotherapists and orthopaedic 
surgeons with clinical and research experience in the field. An 
ethics expert with substantial experience in the area of sports 
injuries also participated.
section 1: injury prevention
This section addresses the fundamental clinical question: how 
can the clinician prevent ACL injuries in children? Prevention 
of ACL injury is important because of the potential for serious 
long-term consequences in those who sustain the injury, and 
because of the increased risk of reinjury to either knee.9 There-
fore, it is paramount that the principles of injury prevention are 
incorporated in the treatment of the child with ACL injury.
Substantial advances have been made in the development and 
application of ACL injury prevention programs across numerous 
pivoting sports. There is compelling evidence that ACL injury 
prevention programs work in skeletally mature patients—they 
reduce the number of athletes who sustain a primary ACL injury, 
and reduce the number of new ACL injuries among athletes who 
return to sport after primary ACL injury.10–15
The athlete’s biomechanical movement patterns are a key 
modifiable risk factor for injury. Injury prevention programs 
target movement patterns by incorporating strength, plyometrics 
and sports-specific agility training.16 17 Coach and athlete educa-
tion on cutting/landing techniques (eg, wide foot position when 
cutting, flexed knee when landing) that avoid high-risk knee 
positions are also fundamental. Injury prevention programs are 
straightforward to implement because they require little to no 
equipment, and are performed as part of regular team training 
or physical education 2–3 times per week (figure 1).
'11+ For Kids' program
‘Injury prevention programs should also 
be implemented early in the athlete’s 
developmental process.’
Injury prevention programs should also be implemented early in 
the athlete’s developmental process. This will give the athlete the 
best opportunity to develop strong and favourable movement 
strategies. One well-established injury prevention program,18 
the 11+, has recently been modified (eg, adding falling tech-
niques, making partner-based exercises more play-oriented) to 
suit the paediatric population (FIFA '11+ For Kids'). Completing 
box 1 six fundamental clinical questions and relevant 
consensus statement topic(s)
section 1: how can the clinician prevent ACL injuries in 
children?
Relevant consensus statement topic:
 
► Injury prevention
section 2: how does the clinician diagnose ACL injuries in 
children?
Relevant consensus statement topic:
 
► Diagnostic tests and imaging
section 3: What are the treatment options for the child 
with an ACL injury?
Relevant consensus statement topics:
 
► High-quality rehabilitation
 
► Surgical techniques
 
► The paediatric ACL graft
section 4: What are the most important considerations 
when making treatment decisions?
Relevant consensus statement topics:
 
► Skeletal age assessment
 
► The decision for ACL reconstruction
 
► Risks associated with ACL reconstruction
 
► Management of associated injuries
section 5: how does the clinician measure outcomes that 
are relevant to the child with an ACL injury?
Relevant consensus statement topic:
 
► Paediatric patient-reported outcome measures
section 6: What are the clinician’s role and 
responsibilities?
Relevant consensus statement topic:
 
► Ethical considerations
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 424
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
the program can reduce football-related lower extremity injuries 
by over half.19 Children who complete the program also have 
improved motor control, balance tests and agility, compared 
with those who do not complete the program.20
Factors that might impact on injury prevention effectiveness
Well-designed injury prevention programs have the lowest 
injury rates and injury time loss.18 21 But the effect of a well-de-
signed injury prevention program is strongly influenced by how 
frequently athletes perform the training.22–24 Therefore, consis-
tent implementation and utilisation, and adherence across all 
levels of competitive play, is one of the biggest challenges facing 
the clinician. Those involved in youth sports, and clinicians who 
treat paediatric athletes with ACL injury have a responsibility to 
actively advocate for injury prevention in both a primary setting 
and for children who return to sport after an injury.
section 2: diagnosis, clinical tests and imaging
This section addresses the fundamental clinical question: how 
does the clinician diagnose ACL injury in children? High-quality 
injury prevention programs are the first-line defence against 
the potential negative short-term and long-term consequences 
of ACL injury. However, if injury prevention efforts fail, timely 
and accurate diagnosis is important, since diagnosis is the 
starting point for effective management planning and shared 
decision-making. The clinician combines information from the 
patient’s history, examination and clinical tests, and imaging to 
build the clinical picture that will inform diagnosis and treat-
ment. T
ypically, a thorough history and clinical examination will 
enable the clinician to make an accurate diagnosis.
Clinical pearl 1
Haemarthrosis (acute swelling in the knee within 24 
hours after 
a trauma due to intra-articular bleeding) following acute knee 
injury is an important clue suggesting structural knee injury.
Clinical pearl 2
Diagnosis can be more challenging than in adults because chil-
dren may be poor historians, they may have greater physiological 
joint laxity (be sure to examine both knees) and MRI interpre-
tation is more difficult given developmental variants in chil-
dren.25 26
Clinical pearl 3
Due to the immature skeleton, children may sustain different 
knee injuries (eg, sleeve fracture of the patella, epiphysiolysis) 
than adults.
Consider starting the assessment by ordering plain knee radio-
graphs for all paediatric patients with a haemarthrosis/suspected 
acute knee injury. This is because tibial eminence fractures 
and an ACL tear can present with a similar history and phys-
ical examination findings. It is also important to rule out other 
paediatric fractures (eg, epiphysial fracture, sleeve fracture of the 
patella). Perform an MRI to confirm the diagnosis of ACL injury 
and evaluate other soft tissue structures.27 In children with an 
ACL injury, MRI may yield additional information to identify 
meniscal tears, other ligament injury or osteochondral injury. In 
children with a locked knee, an acute MRI is warranted to assess 
the presence of a displaced bucket handle meniscal tear or an 
osteochondral injury that may need prompt surgical treatment.
measurement properties for clinical examination and mrI
‘No isolated question, test or image can 
accurately identify an ACL injury, every 
time.’
No isolated question, test or image can accurately identify an 
ACL injury, every time. The measurement tools available to the 
clinician are not perfect, but they do yield valuable information 
in the clinical context. Knowledge of the measurement proper-
ties of clinical tools helps the clinician balance the information 
gained from these tools. The negative predictive values of clinical 
examination and MRI for ACL tear and meniscal pathology are 
higher than the positive predictive values (table 1). This means 
that if the clinical examination and MRI are negative for injury, 
the chance of the patient having an injury is low. However, if the 
Figure 1 Injury prevention exercises incorporated into team training.
Table 1 Diagnostic accuracy of clinical examination and MRI in intra-articular knee disorders (adapted from Kocher et al27)
diagnosis
sensitivity (%)
specificity (%)
Positive predictive value (%)
negative predictive value (%)
Clinical 
examination
mrI
P value
Clinical 
examination
mrI
P value
Clinical 
examination
mrI
Clinical 
examination
mrI
ACL tear
81.3
75.0
0.55
90.6
94.1
0.39
49.0
58.6
97.8
97.1
Medial meniscus tear
62.1
79.3
0.15
80.7
92.0
0.03
14.5
34.3
97.6
98.8
Lateral meniscus tear
50.0
66.7
0.24
89.2
82.8
0.21
34.0
30.1
94.1
95.7
Clinical examination was patient history, physical examination and X-rays performed by a paediatric orthopaedic sports medicine specialist or a postresidency paediatric sports 
medicine fellow.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 425
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
tests are positive, it does not mean that the clinician can always 
reliably rule the diagnosis in.
section 3: treatment of ACL injuries in children
This section addresses the fundamental clinical question: what 
are the treatment options for the child with ACL injury? Once the 
clinician is certain of the injury diagnosis, he or she first needs to 
know the available treatment options, and discuss these options 
with the child and the child’s parents/guardian, so a shared deci-
sion can be made about how best to manage the knee injury.
The goals of treatment for the child with ACL injury are:
1. To restore a stable, well-functioning knee that enables a 
healthy, active lifestyle across the lifespan.
2. To reduce the impact of existing or the risk of further 
meniscal or chondral pathology, degenerative joint changes 
and the need for future surgical intervention.
3. To minimise the risk of growth arrest and femur and tibia 
deformity.
There are two treatment options that can help the child with 
ACL injury (with or without associated knee injuries) achieve 
these goals: high-quality rehabilitation alone (non-surgical treat-
ment) and ACL reconstruction plus high-quality rehabilitation. 
In this section, the key components of high-quality rehabilitation 
for the child with ACL injury, and the options for ACL recon-
struction surgical technique are described. Potential treatment 
decision modifiers are outlined in Section 4.
high-quality rehabilitation
High-quality rehabilitation is a critical component in the manage-
ment of ACL injury, and the principles of rehabilitation are the 
same, irrespective of whether the child has had an ACL recon-
struction or has elected for non-surgical treatment. Guidance for 
paediatric rehabilitation is extrapolated from clinical experience 
and research in adults, although it is uncertain whether adult 
principles apply to children.28 Rehabilitation must be performed 
in close collaboration with the child’s parents/guardians. Exer-
cises and functional goals must be modified, not simply copied 
from the adult-oriented rehabilitation protocols that may be 
more familiar to many clinicians. This is because children are not 
small adults—they cannot be expected to perform unsupervised 
training independently with perfect technique. Qualified reha-
bilitation clinicians must supervise rehabilitation for the child 
 
with ACL injury. 
‘Rehabilitation must be performed in close 
collaboration with the child’s parents/
guardians.’
‘Children are not small adults.’
Rehabilitation focus
Dynamic, multijoint neuromuscular control is the primary focus 
of ACL rehabilitation in children. For the youngest patients (with 
markedly open physes, aged <12 years), there is less emphasis 
on the development of muscular strength and hypertrophy. 
During maturation, and throughout the onset of puberty, reha-
bilitation strategies that more closely resemble those used with 
adult patients are appropriate, due to the increase in androgenic 
hormones.29 These strategies must include heavier and exter-
nally loaded strength training.
‘Rehabilitation must be thorough, and 
individualised to the child’s physiological and 
psychological maturity to achieve successful 
outcomes.’
Rehabilitation must be thorough, and individualised to the 
child’s physiological and psychological maturity to achieve 
successful outcomes. Emphasise exercises that facilitate dynamic 
Figure 2 Child demonstrating how to hold terminal knee extension 
during single limb stance. This is an important marker of quadriceps 
control in ACL rehabilitation and prehabilitation.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 426
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
lower limb alignment and biomechanically sound movement 
patterns. Although this has been successfully implemented in 
rehabilitation programs for adolescents and adults, it has not yet 
been documented as extensively in children. The exercises are 
gradually progressed through phases II and III of the paediatric 
ACL rehabilitation protocol (box 2; online supplementary file 2) 
as part of sport-specific rehabilitation. See online supplementary 
file 2 for examples of exercises to consider in each rehabilitation 
phase. Reinjury anxiety and the patient’s confidence in his or 
her injured knee impact on outcomes after ACL rehabilitation 
in adults.30 31 These psychological factors are also likely to be 
important in the paediatric population, but currently are insuf-
ficiently studied.
Following surgical treatment, the graft type used for ACL 
reconstruction, and associated injury or surgery to other liga-
ments, menisci or articular cartilage, necessitate specific adjust-
ments to the rehabilitation program. Rehabilitation programs 
should be designed to allow the child to participate in his or her 
team training sessions to maintain the social benefits of staying 
within the team. Parents or guardians should be active partici-
pants in the daily rehabilitation.32 This may include assisting the 
child in technical and functional exercises during team training 
(eg, short passes in football).
Rehabilitation phases
Rehabilitation for the child with an ACL injury is organised 
into four phases (box 2; online supplementary file 2), with an 
additional prehabilitation phase for those who choose ACL 
reconstruction. Specific clinical and functional milestones 
should be met before progressing from one phase to the next.33 
Throughout the first two phases, the child should be guarded 
from cutting and pivoting activities during sport, free play and 
physical education classes in school.
Rehabilitation progression
The framework for progression through functional milestones 
is similar for ACL reconstruction and non-surgical treatment. 
However, there are different expectations for progression and 
time to return to full participation in sport. For all patients, reha-
bilitation progression must be guided by clinical and functional 
milestones (box 2), and return to full participation34 is depen-
dent on successfully achieving the return to sport criteria (box 2). 
Non-surgical treatment should last for at least 3–6 months.35 
Postoperative rehabilitation should last for a minimum of 9 
months before return to full participation in preferred physical 
activities.36
Data from international registries suggest that young athletes 
are at high risk for a second ACL injury following an ACL recon-
struction,37 and the risk is highest in the first 12 postoperative 
months.36 38 Therefore, consider advising the  child  athlete not 
to return to pivoting sport until at least 12 months following 
ACL reconstruction. Rehabilitation is also an excellent opportu-
nity to train the uninjured leg, which might be important consid-
ering the risk of contralateral injury.38 Once the child returns to 
sport, a comprehensive injury prevention program, emphasising 
biomechanical alignment and landing/cutting technique should 
be integrated with usual training.
‘Consider advising the child athlete not to 
return to pivoting sport until at least 12 
months following ACL reconstruction.’
Five considerations when designing rehabilitation programmes for 
the prepubescent child
Children who are close to skeletal maturity may follow rehabil-
itation33 and return to sport guidelines36 39 intended for adults. 
There are five important considerations for the prepubescent 
child:
1. Consider a home-based program, with emphasis on playful 
exercises and variation (figure 3) to discourage boredom.
2. Single-leg hop tests and isokinetic strength tests have larger 
measurement errors in the prepubescent population, so use 
these tests with caution.40
box 2 recommended functional tests and return to sport 
criteria for the child and adolescent with ACL injury
For patients who choose ACL reconstruction
Prehabilitation 
 
► Full active extension and at least 120 degrees active knee 
flexion
 
► Little to no effusion
 
► Ability to hold terminal knee extension during single leg 
standing (figure 2)
 
► For adolescents: 90% limb symmetry on muscle strength 
tests
For patients who choose ACL reconstruction or non-
surgical treatment
Phase I to phase II
 
► Full active knee extension and 120 degrees active knee 
flexion
 
► Little to no effusion
 
► Ability to hold terminal knee extension during single leg 
standing
Phase II to phase III
 
► Full knee range of motion
 
► 80% limb symmetry on single-leg hop tests, with adequate 
landing strategies
 
► Ability to jog for 10 min with good form and no subsequent 
effusion
 
► For adolescents: 80% limb symmetry on muscle strength 
tests
Phase III to phase IV: sport participation (return to sport criteria), 
and continued injury prevention
 
► Single-leg hop tests: >90% of the contralateral limb (with 
adequate strategy and movement quality)
 
► Performed gradual increase in sport-specific training without 
pain and effusion
 
► Confident in knee function
 
► Knowledge of high injury-risk knee positioning, and ability to 
maintain low-risk knee positioning in advanced sport-specific 
actions
 
► Mentally ready to return to sport
 
► For adolescents: 90% limb symmetry on muscle strength 
tests
Muscle strength testing should be performed using isokinetic 
dynamometry or handheld dynamometry/one repetition maximum. The 
type of test and experience of the tester are highly likely to influence 
the results. If using handheld dynamometry/one repetition maximum, 
consider increasing the limb symmetry criterion cut-off by 10% (ie, 
90% limb symmetry becomes 100% limb symmetry). Clinicians who do 
not have access to appropriate strength assessment equipment should 
consider referring the patient elsewhere for strength evaluation.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 427
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
3. Focus on evaluating the quality of movements during 
single-leg hop testing, instead of the leg symmetry index 
measures.
4. Tests and criteria to assess movement quality are yet to be 
validated, so the responsible clinician needs to have skills and 
experience in this area.
5. Return to sport criteria were designed and scientifically 
tested in the skeletally mature patient and are recommended 
for the child who is close to maturity.36 41 The validity of 
these criteria in the prepubescent child is unknown.
Bracing
Many clinicians involved in non-surgical treatment of skel-
etally immature children recommend the child wear a 
protective brace during strenuous physical activities.42 The 
child who has had surgical treatment typically wears a brace 
during the prehabilitation phase, until ACL reconstruction 
is performed. Following surgery, it is recommended that the 
child wears a protective knee brace through the successful 
completion of the functional milestones in rehabilitation 
phase I (usually 2–6 weeks postoperative, depending on 
concomitant surgical procedures). However, the effective-
ness of bracing following ACL injuries or reconstruction in 
paediatric patients is unknown. Other considerations related 
to the use of a brace might be to prevent knee hyperextension 
or knee valgus/varus, to enhance the child’s awareness of his 
or her injury and as a protective signal to others the child 
might encounter (eg, at school).
Figure 4 Transphyseal ACL reconstruction. (A) Anterior view and 
(B) lateral view.
Figure 5 Physeal-sparing ACL reconstruction using an over-the-top 
technique with iliotibial band. (A) Anterior  view  and  (B)  lateral view.
Figure 3 One example of an exercise that could be incorporated into a home-based ACL rehabilitation program.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 428
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
surgical techniques
The general principles of ACL reconstruction in adults also apply 
to the paediatric patient: use a well-positioned (soft tissue) auto-
graft of adequate size, with adequate fixation to allow functional 
rehabilitation. Physeal damage should be minimised to avoid 
growth disturbance. Bone plugs and fixation devices should not 
cross the physis.43–45
Key indications for ACL reconstruction
There are three indications for paediatric ACL reconstruction:
1. The child has repairable associated injuries that require 
surgery (eg, bucket-handle meniscus tear, repairable meniscal 
lesion or osteochondral defect).
2. The child has recurrent, symptomatic knee giving way after 
completing high-quality rehabilitation.
3. The child experiences unacceptable participation restrictions 
(ie, an unacceptable modification of activity level to avoid 
knee giving way).
There are three possible techniques for paediatric ACL 
reconstruction.
Transphyseal ACL reconstruction
The transphyseal technique in the child is similar to the tech-
nique the surgeon would use for ACL reconstruction in adults. 
Single bundle transphyseal ACL reconstruction with a quadru-
pled hamstring graft is the most common (figure 4).46–51 
Therefore, because the surgeon is more likely to be familiar 
with the key elements of the procedure, it may reduce the risk 
of intraoperative complications. Ensure the diameter of the 
bone tunnels is as small as possible (<9 mm) to accommo-
date an appropriate size graft.52 Similarly, to minimise physeal 
damage, orient the tibial tunnel as vertically and as centrally 
as possible while maintaining the anatomical position of the 
graft. On the femoral side, the surgeon should take care to 
avoid the perichondral ring. Drilling via the anteromedial 
portal can result in a tunnel that has an elliptical trajectory 
through the physis. Consider a slightly more vertical orienta-
tion than might be used for an ACL reconstruction in an adult 
patient, or choose a different drilling approach.
Figure 6 Physeal-sparing ACL reconstruction using an all-epiphyseal 
technique. (A) Anterior view and (B) lateral view.
Figure 7 Partial transphyseal ACL reconstruction. (A) Anterior view, (B) lateral view and (C) posterior view.
box 3 Three different options for femoral tunnel 
trajectories
Tunnel option A: vertical transphyseal
Advantage: minimises physeal volume affected
Disadvantage: less than ideal coverage of ACL footprint
Tunnel option b: oblique transphyseal
Advantage: anatomical graft position covering the ACL footprint
Disadvantage: greater volume of physis negatively affected
Tunnel option C: horizontal all-epiphyseal
Advantage: appropriate placement at ACL footprint; no drilling 
through the physis
Disadvantage: requires precise tunnel placement to reduce the 
risk for physeal damage
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 429
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
Physeal-sparing ACL reconstruction
Physeal-sparing techniques avoid physeal damage in patients 
with markedly open physes. The techniques include an 
over-the-top technique with a strip of the iliotibial band 
(figure 5),53 and an all-epiphyseal procedure (figure 6).54 In 
the all-epiphyseal procedures, use fluoroscopic visualisation 
to reduce the risk of physeal damage. When using the over-
the-top technique, avoid femoral rasping to minimise the risk 
for damage to the perichondral ring.
Partial transphyseal ACL reconstruction
The partial transphyseal technique (figure 7) combines a trans-
physeal tibial tunnel with a physeal-sparing technique on the 
femoral side.55–57
surgical principles and techniques for growth disturbance 
risk reduction
Drill hole trajectory and location influence the degree of risk to 
the physes (box 3 and figure 8). Knowledge of three key princi-
ples will help the surgeon minimise the risk to the physes during 
transphyseal ACL reconstruction:
1. Drilling at the periphery of the physis and the perichondral 
ring increases the risk of growth disturbance. Drill holes may 
be placed in an all-epiphyseal manner to allow for drilling at 
the native ACL footprint, while avoiding the physis. Precise 
tunnel placement is required when performing this technique 
to avoid damage to the undulating distal femoral physis.
2. Bone tunnel drill holes should be as vertical as possible (while 
still maintaining anatomic graft position) and as central as 
possible. This is especially important when drilling through 
the anteromedial portal. Drilling an oblique tunnel rather 
than a more vertical tunnel increases the amount of physis 
removed and increases the risk for growth disturbance.
3. Do not cross the epiphysis with hardware, implants or bone 
blocks. Fill bone tunnels with soft tissue, rather than leaving 
the tunnels open.
Graft choice and fixation
Only soft tissue grafts (not allografts) should be used for ACL 
reconstruction in paediatric patients with open physes. The 
quadrupled hamstring graft is most common.47–51 A quad-
riceps tendon graft may be used.56 The patella tendon should 
not be harvested in paediatric patients with open physes to 
avoid damage to the tibial tubercle apophysis. Allografts are 
not indicated in paediatric patients in most cases, since  the use 
of allografts in paediatric ACL reconstruction has poor clinical 
outcomes.58–60
‘The use of allografts in paediatric ACL 
reconstruction has poor clinical outcomes.’
A novel technique involving the use of living-donor hamstring 
tendon allograft has been reported49 61 to avoid the varied ster-
ilisation techniques used in cadaveric soft-tissue allografts, and 
preserve of the neuromuscular unit of the growing patient.62 63 
However, long-term clinical outcomes are yet to be assessed.
Extracortical fixation of soft tissue grafts may be performed 
with a cortical button, suture, post or staple. Aperture fixation 
may be performed with interference screws, provided the screws 
do not cross the physis.
Graft incorporation
Data regarding ACL graft incorporation in children are scarce. 
Paediatric soft tissues have a greater biological growth potential 
compared with adults,64 65 and cell migration and proliferation 
of ACL-fibroblasts slows as the person grows older.66 The clin-
ical relevance of the growth potential to paediatric ACL recon-
struction is still unclear,67 although there is a rationale from 
animal models that the paediatric ACL graft may remodel faster 
than the adult ACL graft.68
Adaptations and remodelling in the growing child
The ACL graft must adapt as the child grows. The graft may 
increase in length as the bone grows, and the bone tunnels may 
reduce in relative size.69 70 It is uncertain whether the diameter of 
the intra-articular part of the graft becomes longer and thinner,71 
or not,70 as the child grows. The graft does not increase diameter 
as the child grows, but may increase in length.72
With longitudinal bone growth after transphyseal ACL recon-
struction, the graft may become more vertically oriented. This 
observation might be explained by the movement of the femoral 
fixation site with physeal growth or because the tibial tunnel 
aperture becomes relatively more posterior due to greater ante-
rior growth of the proximal tibia. Other changes occurring as 
the child grows are secondary intercondylar notch narrowing, 
distal migration of the tibial and/or proximal migration of the 
femoral extracortical fixations and verticalisation of the Blumen-
saat line.73 However, the long-term clinical significance of these 
growth-related changes is unclear.
section 4: treatment decision modifiers
This section addresses the fundamental clinical question: what 
are the most important considerations when making treatment 
decisions? The key issues addressed relate to assessment of skel-
etal maturity, the decision for surgery or not, management of 
injuries to other knee structures and potential adverse events 
Figure 8 Three different options for femoral tunnel trajectories.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 430
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
following treatment. These issues may alter the ACL injury 
management decision, depending on the decision-making team’s 
(which should include clinicians, the child and the child’s parent/
guardian(s)) risk tolerance.
skeletal age assessment
Assessing and documenting the child’s skeletal age, in addition 
to his or her chronological age, is necessary to individualising 
treatment of ACL injuries. The main goal with respect to skeletal 
age assessment is to define remaining knee growth. Protecting 
the physis and perichondral ring from damage during ACL recon-
struction is an important consideration45—an insult to a growth 
area that is near completion of growth can result in premature 
closure.
‘Estimating skeletal age and remaining 
growth are key considerations for treatment 
decision-making.’
Estimating skeletal age and remaining growth are key consider-
ations for treatment decision-making. These estimates will guide 
choice of treatment, timing of surgery and surgical method. 
Open physes in the child are vulnerable at surgery, and none of 
the current recommended surgical treatments for the child with 
an ACL injury can be guaranteed to protect the physis and avoid 
the potential complication of growth arrest or deformity (these 
risks are outlined below). The clinician might also consider long 
leg radiographs (hips to ankles) after injury to establish a base-
line for assessing the potential development of angular deformity 
and leg length discrepancy. Assessing skeletal age is also rele-
vant in research and may be beneficial for medicolegal reasons. 
If overgrowth, growth arrest or deformity occurs, presurgical 
documentation of skeletal age may be important (box 4).
Treating the child with ACL injury: to operate or not to 
operate?
Children who have repairable additional injuries at ACL injury 
diagnosis (eg, displaced bucket-handle meniscal tear) should be 
treated with early ACL reconstruction and meniscal repair.77 In 
those without additional injuries warranting surgery, there are 
conflicting opinions regarding the best treatment approach. 
These approaches range from early ACL reconstruction for all 
children, to primary non-surgical management (high-quality 
rehabilitation alone) with the option of late ACL reconstruction 
if the child has recurrent instability problems despite high-quality 
rehabilitation or if he or she sustains secondary intra-articular 
injuries.
A well-performed ACL reconstruction and preservation of 
the meniscus can restore knee stability.78 However, if the child 
receives inadequate (or no) rehabilitation, the chances of recov-
ering high-level function to safely participate in all aspects of life 
(including pivoting sports), for the rest of his or her life, might 
be slim. Similarly, high-quality rehabilitation will not salvage 
poor surgical treatment (eg, graft malposition).
Children who undergo ACL reconstruction after failed 
non-surgical management may have a higher number of 
meniscal and chondral injuries at the time of ACL reconstruc-
tion compared with those who undergo early ACL reconstruc-
tion.79–81 The number of instability episodes prior to surgery 
appears to be a more important factor than the length of time 
between injury and surgery.82 This consideration is the back-
ground for early surgery decisions. However, there are a lack 
of high-quality, prospective studies investigating the outcomes 
of surgical and non-surgical treatment for paediatric ACL tears.4
‘Non-surgical treatment is a viable and safe 
option in skeletally immature patients who 
do not have associated injuries or major 
instability problems.’
Non-surgical treatment is a viable and safe treatment option in 
skeletally immature patients who do not have associated inju-
ries or major instability problems.83 High-quality rehabilitation 
alone may stabilise the knee dynamically without compromising 
the physes, and is a focused training program supervised by a 
qualified rehabilitation clinician (see Section 3 for the key prin-
ciples of high-quality rehabilitation). Non-surgical treatment 
can be a permanent treatment option for those who do not 
develop functional instability, or a short-term option to delay 
ACL reconstruction until the child has reached skeletal maturity. 
Abandoning non-surgical treatment in favour of ACL reconstruc-
tion is an option if the child has recurrent instability problems 
despite completing high-quality rehabilitation, or if the child 
has a secondary intra-articular injury. Therefore, clinicians must 
work together to closely and frequently monitor the child with 
repeated MRI and clinical examination as appropriate, being 
alert to instability episodes and secondary injuries that require 
prompt assessment and treatment.82
risks associated with ACL reconstruction
Irrespective of the technique, surgical treatment of the ACL 
has inherent risks. Different ACL reconstruction techniques 
have different considerations to help avoid risk to the physes, 
articular surface and soft tissue structures of the knee. Here, we 
describe five key risks associated with surgical treatment for ACL 
injury of which clinicians, patients and their parents/guardians 
must be aware.
Risk 1: growth disturbance
Growth disturbances are a rare (approximately 2%)43 but 
serious risk of ACL reconstruction. Growth disturbances may 
be a result of hardware, bone plugs at the physis, extra-artic-
ular tenodesis or use of over-the-top femoral position. Most 
of the growth in the child’s lower extremities occurs from the 
physes of the distal femur and proximal tibia. Any surgical 
box 4 Five considerations for skeletal age assessment
1. Understand the difference between skeletal age and 
chronological age.
2. Use imaging of the knee to determine if the femoral and 
tibial physes, and the tibial tubercle apophysis are open. If the 
growth areas are closed, then, independent of chronological 
age, the child can be treated as an adult.
3. None of the specific methods for skeletal age determination 
in isolation is sufficient to accurately determine skeletal age.
4. Use a multifaceted clinical approach to determine skeletal 
age that includes whether or not the child has had an 
adolescent growth spurt, the relative heights of the child’s 
parents and Tanner staging.74
5. The most common method of skeletal age assessment is 
via posterior-anterior left hand and wrist X-ray. This can be 
compared with a skeletal atlas (eg, Gilsanz and Ratib75 or 
Greulich and Pyle76) or using a smart-phone application (eg, 
the Bone Age app for iPhone).
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 431
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
procedures where tunnels are drilled through or near the 
physis are associated with a risk of growth arrest, and associ-
ated angular deformity and/or leg length discrepancy. Trans-
physeal techniques have a higher rate of graft rupture and a 
lower rate of lower limb deformity or axis deviation. Physe-
al-sparing techniques have a lower rate of graft rupture, and 
a higher rate of lower limb deformity or axis deviation.
Highly tensioned soft tissue grafts placed across femoral 
physes have been associated with limb length discrepancy 
and angular deformity.84 Metaphyseal fixation techniques 
may pose an increased risk of femoral angulation and rota-
tion relative to other techniques. Epiphyseal techniques 
may increase the risk of rotational deformity and decrease 
the risk of angular deformity.85 Excessive growth may also 
be a problem, including symmetrical and asymmetrical 
overgrowth.86
Most patients with ACL rupture requiring surgical treatment 
are approaching skeletal maturity, and do not have substantial 
growth remaining. This means that angular deformities and limb 
length discrepancies are likely of relatively low clinical signifi-
cance. Therefore, it may be reasonable to perform transphyseal 
procedures when the child has minimal growth remaining.
regularly monitor the patient until skeletal maturity
Routine clinical and radiological follow-up within the first 12 
postoperative months can help the surgeon detect early clinical 
and radiographic evidence of leg length discrepancy, angular 
deformity or and physeal injury. For the child with markedly 
open physes, appropriate follow-up evaluation of leg length 
discrepancy might include annual clinical assessment and knee 
radiographs with long-leg alignment views until skeletal matu-
rity and physeal closure. Height should be monitored, and if 
growth exceeds 6 cm in 6 months, or if clinical findings warrant, 
the annual assessment should be brought forward.
Classifying growth disturbances
Growth disturbances can occur in several different forms 
(figure 9). The growth arrest may be due to:
 
►
Localised physis injury resulting in a bone bridge leading to 
growth arrest and possible malalignment (type A);
 
►
Overgrowth process potentially caused by hypervascularisa-
tion (type B);
 
►
Undergrowth process arising from a graft traversing a physis 
under tension during growth and leading to a tethering 
effect (type C).
Risk 2: secondary ACL rupture
Young age, returning to pivoting sport and receiving an allograft 
are important predictors of new ACL injury after index ACL 
reconstruction.58 87 One in four patients under 25 years who 
returned to pivoting sports after ACL reconstruction can be 
expected to sustain a new ACL injury (the pooled ipsilateral rein-
jury rate is approximately 10%; the pooled contralateral reinjury 
rate is approximately 12%).88
High rates of reinjury among young people with ACL 
reconstruction are concerning, although data regarding rein-
juries among children with ACL reconstruction are sparse in 
comparison to data from skeletally mature patients. The best 
available evidence suggests a graft rupture rate in children 
and adolescents (age range 6–19 years) of 13%, and a contra-
lateral ACL injury rate of 14%.89 It is reasonable to hypoth-
esise that high-quality rehabilitation with high adherence is 
likely an important step in reducing reinjury risk. The prin-
ciples of rehabilitation for the skeletally immature patient 
are addressed in Section 3. The ACL graft is also affected by 
the status of the other ligaments, menisci, cartilage surfaces, 
limb alignment, rotation and the dynamic muscle control of 
these structures—all factors that must be considered during 
treatment decision-making.
Figure 9 Three growth disturbances that may occur following ACL reconstruction. ‘p’ represents the physiological growth process; dashed lines 
represent the physiological growth arrest lines; continuous lines represent the observed pathological growth arrest line. Type A (arrest): growth arrest 
process (a) occurs after a localised injury to the physis and results in a bone bridge across the physis. The extent of deformity is proportional to the 
location and size of the initial physeal injury. Type B (boost): overgrowth process (indicated by p+) is probably caused by local hypervascularisation, 
stimulating the open physis (b). This growth disturbance is temporary and usually becomes apparent in a limited period of 2 years following ACL 
reconstruction. It primarily leads to leg length discrepancy. Type C (decelerate): undergrowth process (indicated by p–) due to a tenoepiphysiodesis 
effect (c). The graft tension across the open physis causes the deformity. Adapted from Chotel et al.86
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 432
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
Risk 3: poor long-term knee health
Meniscectomy is associated with an increased risk for osteo-
arthritis.90–92 Therefore, wherever possible, treatment of 
ACL injuries must emphasise preservation of the meniscus. 
Prior meniscectomy at the time of ACL reconstruction is 
associated with higher likelihood of chondral lesions, while 
prior meniscal repair is not associated with a higher likeli-
hood of chondral lesions.93 Because of the technical nature 
of performing ACL and concurrent meniscal surgery in 
smaller, younger patients with open physes, patients in whom 
meniscus repair is indicated should be treated by surgeons 
who (1) are experienced in treating patients with open physes 
and (2) perform a high volume of meniscal repairs.
Risk 4: knee stiffness
Knee stiffness may be due to the degree of injury to the 
ACL, disruption of the joint capsule and injury to structures 
other than the ACL. Knee stiffness may also be related to 
surgical interventions or inadequate rehabilitation. Knee 
stiffness is rare in children aged 13 years and younger, and 
less common in males and in those having surgery with an 
iliotibial band or hamstring autograft.94 Patients who have 
knee stiffness following ACL injury should aim for full active 
knee extension range of motion prior to undergoing ACL 
reconstruction. If the knee extension deficit persists beyond 
3 months postoperative, MRI to assess for anterior impinge-
ment (cyclops lesion) and subsequent arthroscopy (should 
the deficit continue to be unresolved despite focused rehabil-
itation attention) may be warranted.
Risk 5: infection
Data related to infection risks for paediatric patients are extrapo-
lated from literature that combines paediatric and adult patients. 
Infection rates in adult patients are generally low for ACL recon-
struction. The rate of deep infections after ACL reconstruction 
with autograft is 0.19%.95
management of associated injuries
Here we address the key issues for managing cartilage and 
meniscal injuries in combination with ACL rupture, and the 
multiligament-injured knee.
Associated meniscus and cartilage injuries in children with ACL 
injuries
The degree of vascular penetration of the menisci declines 
with age, with between 10% and 30% of the menisci receiving 
vascular inflow in adults.96 The more robust vascular distribu-
tion in the paediatric menisci is reflected by increased intrame-
niscal signal intensity on MRI. Globular and intrameniscal signal 
may be observed in children and may appear to be an intra-
substance meniscal tear. However, these findings are benign, and 
usually reflect the abundant vascularity of the paediatric menisci 
(figure 10).97
It is important to evaluate the MRI characteristics of the 
paediatric menisci to rule out meniscal injuries. In cases where 
the diagnosis is difficult, a diagnostic arthroscopy may be 
performed to clarify the diagnosis and ascertain the state of the 
meniscus. The clinician should also assess for a posterior medial 
meniscocapsular tear (ramp lesion).
‘The clinician should also assess for a posterior 
medial meniscocapsular tear (ramp lesion).’
Ramp lesions may be present in one in six adult patients with 
ACL injury, and the prevalence of ramp lesions in children with 
an ACL injury is similar to adults.98 The surgeon should be 
vigilant to verify the presence or absence of a medial meniscal 
ramp tear by visualising the posteromedial compartment. Use a 
posteromedial knee arthroscopic portal, if necessary, to probe 
the posteromedial meniscocapsular junction. Ramp lesions may 
place more stress on an ACL reconstruction if the lesion is not 
concurrently repaired.99
‘Meniscal 
repair 
should 
be 
performed 
whenever possible’
Meniscal repair should be performed whenever possible in the 
paediatric patient because of the deleterious effects of menis-
cectomy and the positive outcomes of meniscal repair (ie, the 
improved healing potential of the meniscus).79 100 101 This is 
especially important for bucket-handle, root and radial meniscal 
tears and ramp lesions. If the surgeon does not have the skills or 
equipment to repair the meniscus tear, he or she should consider 
referring to a surgeon who has the expertise and equipment. 
Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment of ACL injuries and 
meniscus tears is needed to provide the best chance of preserving 
meniscal tissue.
Articular cartilage injuries in combination with ACL injury 
are less common than meniscal tears.79 However, the clinician 
should have a higher degree of suspicion of articular cartilage 
injury in patients with combined ACL and meniscal injuries.102 
The medial femoral condyle may be particularly vulnerable.102 
Factors that may be associated with more severe chondral lesions 
are recurrent instability episodes and increased time between 
ACL injury and reconstruction.80 102 103 It is unclear whether 
non-surgical management of ACL injuries is associated with a 
higher incidence of new chondral and meniscal lesions than ACL 
reconstruction.104
Figure 10 Appearance of the highly vascular paediatric meniscus  
of a boy aged 10 years on 3.0 T  MRI (Signa HDxt 3.0 
T; GE Medical 
Systems).
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 433
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
Associated ligament injuries in children with ACL injuries
There is limited research on multiligament knee injuries and 
treatment in paediatric patients, and these injuries are less 
common in children than in adults.105 Therefore, consider 
referral to a specialist centre.
specific surgical treatment considerations
Combined ACL and fibular collateral ligament injuries
Use fluoroscopy prior to placing suture anchors for a repair, or 
for tunnel reaming for a concurrent ligament reconstruction, to 
evaluate tunnel position in relation to the physes.106
Combined ACL and posterior cruciate ligament injuries
Non-surgical treatment may be appropriate for partial posterior 
cruciate ligament (PCL) tears or non-displaced avulsion inju-
ries. PCL reconstruction is a relatively safe and viable treatment 
option in patients with multiligament injuries.107 Using a tibial 
inlay technique with a modified femoral tunnel location avoids 
transphyseal drilling,108 although there are no high-quality 
studies of this technique in children.
True knee dislocation
Perform a reduction by manipulating the tibia relative to the 
femur. Avoid forceful hypertension or rotation, to minimise 
the risk for damage to cartilaginous and/or neurovascular struc-
tures. Following reduction, a dynamic knee brace can be applied 
(for at least 12 weeks) to prevent further intra-articular damage 
and to help hold the knee reduced109 while further treatment 
is planned. Ultimately, reconstruction of the ACL and PCL in 
combination with repair/reconstruction of additional ligaments 
(as needed) is the appropriate treatment.
section 5: paediatric patient-reported outcome measures
This section addresses the fundamental clinical question: how does 
the clinician measure outcomes that are relevant to the child with 
an ACL injury? Assessing patient-reported outcome measures 
(PROMs) provides insights into aspects of the patient’s func-
tion that cannot be evaluated with clinical tests or imaging.110 
Because of this, evaluating PROMs is important when managing 
the child with an ACL injury, and when conducting research in 
this field.
Valid outcome instruments must have appropriate measure-
ment properties, including reliability, validity (content, criterion 
and construct) and responsiveness. Instruments that were devel-
oped for adults may not be valid for children and adolescents. 
Paediatric patients have different levels of comprehension (this 
age group includes a spectrum of comprehension abilities from 
younger children to older adolescents) and interpretation of 
instruments. Most importantly, paediatric patients may value 
different outcomes when evaluating their knee function, and 
instruments must reflect the issues that are important to children 
and adolescents.
Paediatric PROMs should be either developed or specifically 
validated in this population. The process of validation should 
include an assessment of comprehensibility, reliability, validity 
and responsiveness. Child-reported outcome assessment is typi-
cally valid in older children and adolescents (aged >10 years).111 
In younger children (aged <10 years), parent-proxy-reported 
outcome assessment may be more appropriate. However, there 
is potential for bias with proxy-reported outcomes.112
Paediatric PROMs (table 2) must be valid for children and 
adolescents with ACL injury. However, a paediatric-derived 
PROM is not currently available. Such an instrument would 
ensure the items covered issues that matter most to children 
and adolescents. The Pedi-IKDC and KOOS-Child were adapted 
from adult PROMs designed to assess self-reported knee func-
tion. The Pedi-IKDC has been correlated to the International 
Knee Documentation Committee subjective knee form—
providing preliminary evidence of construct validity.10 11 Given 
that patients with a history of ACL injury may develop symptoms 
and signs of osteoarthritis within 10 years of the index injury,5 
and the relationship between symptomatic osteoarthritis and 
poor quality of life,3 assessing quality of life and long-term knee 
function outcomes using valid PROMs may also be important.
Recommendations for using PROMs in clinical practice with 
paediatric patients:
 
►
Use a generic measure of health-related quality of life;
 
►
Use either the Pedi-IKDC or KOOS-Child to assess self-re-
ported knee function;
 
►
Use the Pediatric Functional Activity Brief Scale to assess 
self-reported activity level.
In research, it may be appropriate to include other PROMs 
depending on the research question. Researchers need to make 
decisions about the most appropriate outcome(s) when planning 
their study.
section 6: ethical considerations
This section addresses the fundamental clinical question: what 
are the clinician’s role and responsibilities? Treatment decisions 
that involve children are among the most difficult decisions the 
clinician faces, especially when scientific knowledge is limited. 
Striking a balance between ethical principles can be especially 
challenging when there is a conflict of opinion. In this section, 
we outline the relevant ethical considerations for the clinician 
who treats children with ACL injuries.
It is impossible to provide specific ethical guidance that applies 
to all sporting injuries in adolescents and children, given the 
varying individual circumstances. However, it is incontrovertible 
that it is in the best interests of all children not to have knee and 
associated injuries. Therefore, injury prevention programs are 
fundamental to the best interests of the child. Clinicians have 
an obligation to support policies and practices that encourage 
coaches, teams/clubs and (inter)national federations to prioritise 
injury prevention. All parties should be committed to protecting 
the long-term welfare of the growing child. Nevertheless, there 
may be exceptional cases where parents/guardians may, with the 
approval of their child, rationally prioritise short-term goals. 
One example could be that, despite inherent risks for reinjury, 
an early return to sport might be a high priority for a child who 
has exceptional talent in a given sport.
Protecting the integrity of the knee should be the clinician’s 
primary focus. Decisions regarding how to protect the integrity 
of the child’s knee must be shared between the child, parent/
guardian (surrogate decision maker) and clinician.113 Parents 
have an obligation to care for their children, and bring them up 
Table 2 Summary of appropriate PROMs for the child with ACL injury
Type of instrument
scale
Health-related quality of life
Child Health Questionnaire128
PedsQL129
Pediatric PROMIS130
Condition-specific or region-
specific
Pedi-IKDC131
KOOS-Child132
Activity level assessment
Pediatric Functional Activity Brief Scale133
IKDC, International Knee Documentation Committee; KOOS, Knee Injury and 
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score; PROM, patient-reported outcome.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 434
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
to live good lives.114 Nevertheless, parents have different percep-
tions of what constitutes ‘good living’.115 Most ethicists agree 
that parental influence is a positive thing.116 However, in high 
performance children’s sport, parents and coaches can pressure 
the child and clinician to focus on short-term athletic goals at the 
expense of long-term welfare.117
Issues related to consent and obtaining consent for treatment
Children are a vulnerable population.118 119 In the context of 
treatment of ACL injury, the child is doubly vulnerable given his 
or her developing, but uncertain, life plans120 and developmental 
stage. We can never be certain of all of the risks to normal devel-
opment of the individual child.121 It is difficult to gain legally 
legitimate informed consent from children in the treatment deci-
sion-making process. Therefore, the clinician needs to act as a 
cofiduciary on behalf of the child, while parents give consent.122
The clinician and/or parent(s) are obliged to serve the inter-
ests of the child above all other interests.122 123 This is what is 
meant by having a fiduciary duty to the patient. The clinician 
must talk with both the child and the surrogate decision makers 
in ways that are respectful of, and comprehensible by everyone 
involved.124 In addition to avoiding conflicts of interest, the 
clinician must always seek the approval or assent of the child, 
irrespective of the parents/guardians wishes, at a communication 
level that matches the child’s competence.125 The child should be 
present in all discussions concerning him or her, to respect his or 
her (emerging) autonomy.126
Arriving at a shared decision
There should be consensus between all parties when arriving at a 
decision. This consensus should be based on realistic assessments 
of risks and benefits and a proper consideration of the goals of 
the child and parent. The clinician’s responsibility is to guide 
this discussion with accurate information from the best quality 
research. There are several ethical standards that can help the 
clinician, child and parent(s) navigate the decision-making 
process, and arrive at ethically justified treatment decisions.
Some paediatric ethical standards are not identical—some 
aim at higher thresholds, while others accept a lower threshold 
of justification. There are six standards that can be helpful in 
different clinical scenarios in paediatric ACL injury (box 5).
The clinician has an important role in treatment deci-
sion-making, because he or she typically has superior knowl-
edge of treatment options, risk and benefits than children 
and parents. To best guide the child and his or her parent(s), 
the clinician must have a clear idea of the range of interven-
tions that are (1) optimal, (2) acceptable and (3) not desir-
able, and be able to justify this with reference to the best 
quality research and clinical experience. In many healthcare 
settings, parent(s) take responsibility for the ACL treatment 
decision, commensurate with the child’s assent. Where there 
is a lack of consensus in the decision-making process (eg, the 
parent decides for something that is not recommended by the 
clinician), the clinician may also consider whether he or she 
can defend a treatment recommendation based on one of the 
six ethical standards.
section 7: future research
Management of paediatric ACL injuries is strongly debated. 
Reflecting some of the concern and controversy is a high 
ratio of clinical commentaries and narrative reviews to 
original articles on this topic. The problem for the clini-
cian is that there is scarce high-quality evidence that he or 
she can look to, to help him or her best manage paediatric 
ACL injuries. The scientific literature is inconsistent and 
limited by inferior methods that carry a high risk of bias.4 127 
There are no randomised trials comparing different treat-
ment approaches or different surgical techniques. Most of 
the publications have only short-term follow-up; there are 
none with follow-up beyond 10 years. Therefore, long term 
knee-health (including osteoarthritis) and quality of life is 
unknown.
meThodoLoGICAL ConsIderATIons
There are five key issues that must be addressed by future studies:
1. Most clinical studies on paediatric ACL injury are of cross-
sectional or retrospective design, the study populations are 
often at high risk of selection bias and include small samples. 
This means there is a high risk that existing research does 
not reflect the typical paediatric patient with an ACL injury.
2. Many studies do not provide adequate descriptions of the 
treatments that the patients have received, and patient adher-
ence has not been reported. A meaningful interpretation 
of study outcomes is only possible with a detailed descrip-
tion of the surgical technique, rehabilitation, brace usage, 
return to sport clearance and recommendations of activity 
modification.
3. Many studies fail to assess the skeletal age of included partic-
ipants, and few report the remaining growth of participants. 
Chronological age alone is an unreliable indicator of skeletal 
maturity. Because of this, it is difficult to know to which skel-
etal age group these research results apply.
4. Patients aged up to 18 years are often included in paedi-
atric studies. This is a problem because it is likely that the 
patient population is a mix of skeletally mature and imma-
ture patients. Therefore, the literature may be biased towards 
the older patients. Having mixed populations also compli-
cates pooling or comparing results from skeletally immature 
patients across studies.
5. Knowledge of preinjury and post-treatment activity level 
gives important insight into a key risk factor for injury. 
The greater exposure a child has to potentially injurious 
situations (eg, playing pivoting sport), the greater the chance 
of (re)injury. Activity level is a key confounding factor that is 
box 5 six standards that can be helpful in different 
clinical scenarios in paediatric ACL injury
1. Best interests134: widely used, but it is difficult to predict what 
is in the best long-term interests of a child.
2. Harm principle135: a threshold below which the clinician 
should not acquiesce to parent-led decision, so that the child 
is not harmed.
3. Parental discretion136 137: parent-preference is accepted 
because it is not sufficiently harmful to the child for the 
clinician to dissent from the parent(s’) choice.
4. Costs/benefits138: involves risk assessment, but its application 
to the child means that the clinician may need to compare 
very different kinds of futures that may or may not eventuate.
5. Not unreasonable139: focuses only on the appropriateness of 
decisions and decision maker(s).
6. Reasonable choice140: a decision method that attempts to 
incorporate the previous five standards into a single model or 
intervention.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 435
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
rarely accounted for in statistical analyses. This means there 
is a risk that estimates of secondary injury incidence may be 
overestimated or underestimated in comparisons between 
studies or patient-groups.
reseArCh PrIorITIes
There are four research priority areas to improve prevention and 
outcomes of paediatric ACL injury:
1. Prospective injury surveillance studies to identify injury 
mechanisms and modifiable risk factors for ACL injury, 
combined injuries and knee reinjuries.
2. Prospective research on outcomes after surgical and non-sur-
gical treatment. Long-term follow-up (beyond 10 years) is 
essential to answer key questions of how an ACL injury in 
childhood impacts physical activity, future knee-health and 
quality of life.
3. Research on the efficacy of different surgical techniques and 
characteristics (eg, timing of surgery, graft types), and high-
quality rehabilitation programmes, knee brace usage and 
activity modification after injury and surgery.
4. Multicentre and registry studies should be prioritised. 
Because of smaller numbers of ACL injuries in paediatric 
patients than in skeletally mature patients, specialist 
treatment centres, expert clinicians and researchers must 
prioritise collaboration.
In memory oF dr ALLen F Anderson
An excellent clinician-scientist and a keen coworker in this 
project, Allen F Anderson, MD, died in a farming accident on 
Sunday, 12 November 2017. This tragedy occurred shortly after 
he had been an active participant in this IOC consensus meeting 
on the topic of his life-long clinical and research passion, paedi-
atric ACL injuries.
Born on 16 November 1949, Dr Anderson was a graduate of 
the University of Tennessee College of Medicine. He completed 
a residency in orthopaedics at Vanderbilt University and was 
board-certified by the American Board of Orthopaedic Surgery 
in general orthopaedics, with a certificate of added qualification 
for Sports Medicine.
Dr Anderson was a sports medicine specialist with an 
interest in knee injury and ligament reconstruction, and with 
special interest in children’s injuries. He published more 
than 100 peer-reviewed journal articles and 26 book chap-
ters, and received a patent for the invention of a paediatric 
ACL reconstruction system. Among numerous awards, three 
standouts were: being recognised as one of America’s Top 
Physicians 2004–2012 from Consumer’s Research Council, 
being elected to Best Doctors in America by his peers 2007–
2008 and being Nashville Business Journal Top Doctor 
2016–2017.
Dr Anderson had many prestigious positions through his life. 
He served as President of the American Orthopaedic Society for 
Sports Medicine from 2015 to 2016, and as an Associate Editor 
of The Orthopedic Journal of Sports Medicine and The American 
Journal of Sports Medicine.
Above all, he was a true friend and colleague whom you could 
go to with problems and challenges, not the least among our 
youngest patients. Allen will be greatly missed by us all.
Author affiliations
1Division of Physiotherapy, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
2School of Allied Health, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
3Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
4Oslo Sports Trauma Research Centre (OSTRC), Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, 
Oslo, Norway
5Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
6Department of Sports Medicine, Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, Oslo, Norway
7Tennessee Orthopaed Alliance, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
8Department of Pediatric Orthopaedic Surgery, Hôpital Femme Mere Enfant, Lyon, 
France
9Orthopedic Department, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
10Stockholm Sports Trauma Research Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
11Department of Orthopaedics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA
12OrthoSport Victoria Research Unit, Epworth Healthcare, Melbourne, Australia
13College of Science, Health & Engineering, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
14Department of Orthopaedics, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden
15Division of Sports Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, USA
16Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
17Steadman Philippon Research Institute, Vail, USA
18The Steadman Clinic, Vail, USA
19College of Engineering, Swansea University, Swansea, UK
20Santa Monica Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Group, Los Angeles, USA
21The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention, Waltham, USA
22University of Calgary Sports Medicine Centre, Calgary, Canada
23Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, USA
24North Sydney Orthopaedic & Sports Medicine Centre, Sydney, Australia
25Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Centre Hospitalier Luxembourg, Luxembourg
26Sports Medicine Research Laboratory, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Luxembourg
27Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg, 
Germany
28HKF International Center for Hip, Knee, Foot Surgery and Sports Traumatology, 
ATOS Klinik, Heidelberg, Germany
29FIFA Medical Center of Excellence, Velocity Physical Therapy, Los Angeles, USA
30Medical & Scientific Department, International Olympic Committee, Chateau de 
Vidy, Lausanne, Switzerland
31Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
32Department of Rehabilitation Sciences and Physiotherapy, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Science, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Correction notice This article has been updated since it was published Online 
First. The Competing Interests section has been updated.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Cherine Touvet-Fahmy 
and Fiona Trabelsi from the IOC Medical & Scientific Department for their help 
and support with all arrangements ahead of and during the Lausanne consensus 
meeting. The authors would like to thank Pontus Andersson from Pontus Art 
Production, Gothenburg, Sweden for the illustrations of surgical techniques. The 
authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution and support of the IOC Medical 
and Scientific Chair, Dr Uğur Erdener, during the consensus meeting, and the 
International Olympic Committee for funding the meeting. HM acknowledges 
Olympiatoppen Norway and Idrettens Helsesenter, Oslo, Norway. 
Contributors CLA, GRE, LE, HG and HM made substantial contributions to 
overall and detailed conception, planning, drafting and critically revising the 
manuscript. CLA, GRE and HG wrote the first draft. AFA, FC, MC, MF, TJG, JAF, 
JK, MSK, RFLaP, MMcM, BM, LM, NM, BR, JR, RSe, RSi, HJS-G, TS and EW made 
substantial contributions to drafting and critically revising the manuscript. LE chaired 
the Lausanne consensus meeting. CLA co-ordinated and administered the Delphi 
surveys. CLA, LE and HM constructed the Delphi survey.
Funding The IOC funded the consensus meeting, but did not influence the content 
of this consensus statement. 
Competing interests MC is a paid consultant for Arthrex. LE is the Head of 
Scientific Activities in the Medical and Scientific Department of the International 
Olympic Committee, has received fees for speaking from Smith & Nephew, has 
received research funding from Biomet and Smith & Nephew, has received funds for 
an employee from Arthrex and Smith & Nephew, has received royalties or fees for 
consulting from Arthrex and is an Editor of BJSM. MSK is a paid consultant for Best 
Doctors, OrthoPediatrics, Össur and Smith & Nephew, receives royalties, financial or 
material support from OrthoPediatrics, Össur, Saunders/Mosby-Elsevier and Wolters 
Kluwer Health–Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, is a paid member of the Steadman 
Philippon Research Institute, Scientific Advisory Committee, and is an unpaid 
board or committee member of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Harvard 
School of Public Health, Herodicus Society, Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North 
America and Pediatric Research in Sports Medicine. RLaP receives royalties from 
Össur, Arthrex and Smith & Nephew. BR receives royalties from Elsevier, salary from 
American Journal of Sports Medicine and Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine, 
and holds stock in Merck and Johnson and Johnson. RSe is an unpaid board member 
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 436
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
and President of the European Society of Sports Traumatology Knee Surgery and 
Arthroscopy (ESSKA). TS works as Scientific Manager in the Medical and Scientific 
Department of the International Olympic Committee. 
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits others 
to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, provided 
the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Werner BC, Yang S, Looney AM, et al. Trends in pediatric and adolescent anterior 
cruciate ligament injury and reconstruction. J Pediatr Orthop 2016;36:447–52.
 2 Shaw L, Finch CF. Trends in pediatric and adolescent anterior cruciate ligament 
injuries in Victoria, Australia 2005-2015. Int J Environ Res Public Health 
2017;14:599.
 3 Whittaker JL, Woodhouse LJ, Nettel-Aguirre A, et al. Outcomes associated with early 
post-traumatic osteoarthritis and other negative health consequences 3-10 years 
following knee joint injury in youth sport. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2015;23:1122–9.
 4 Moksnes H, Engebretsen L, Risberg MA. The current evidence for treatment 
of ACL injuries in children is low: a systematic review. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
2012;94:1112–9.
 5 Johnson VL, Roe JP, Salmon LJ, et al. Does age influence the risk of incident knee 
osteoarthritis after a traumatic anterior cruciate ligament injury? Am J Sports Med 
2016;44:2399–405.
 6 van der Horst N, Backx F, Goedhart EA, et al. Return to play after hamstring injuries 
in football (soccer): a worldwide Delphi procedure regarding definition, medical 
criteria and decision-making. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1583–91.
 7 Eubank BH, Mohtadi NG, Lafave MR, et al. Using the modified Delphi method to 
establish clinical consensus for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with rotator 
cuff pathology. BMC Med Res Methodol 2016;16:56.
 8 Donaldson A, Cook J, Gabbe B, et al. Bridging the gap between content and context: 
establishing expert consensus on the content of an exercise training program to 
prevent lower-limb injuries. Clin J Sport Med 2015;25:221–9.
 9 Paterno MV, Rauh MJ, Schmitt LC, et al. Incidence of second ACL injuries 2 
years after primary ACL reconstruction and return to sport. Am J Sports Med 
2014;42:1567–73.
 10 Soligard T, Myklebust G, Steffen K, et al. Comprehensive warm-up programme to 
prevent injuries in young female footballers: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ 
2008;337:a2469.
 11 Mandelbaum BR, Silvers HJ, Watanabe DS, et al. Effectiveness of a neuromuscular 
and proprioceptive training program in preventing anterior cruciate ligament injuries 
in female athletes: 2-year follow-up. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:1003–10.
 12 Sugimoto D, Myer GD, McKeon JM, et al. Evaluation of the effectiveness of 
neuromuscular training to reduce anterior cruciate ligament injury in female athletes: 
a critical review of relative risk reduction and numbers-needed-to-treat analyses. Br J 
Sports Med 2012;46:979–88.
 13 Waldén M, Atroshi I, Magnusson H, et al. Prevention of acute knee injuries in 
adolescent female football players: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ 
2012;344:e3042.
 14 Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, Braekken IH, et al. Prevention of anterior cruciate 
ligament injuries in female team handball players: a prospective intervention study 
over three seasons. Clin J Sport Med 2003;13:71–8.
 15 Silvers-Granelli H, Mandelbaum B, Adeniji O, et al. Efficacy of the FIFA 11+ 
injury prevention program in the collegiate male soccer player. Am J Sports Med 
2015;43:2628–37.
 16 Emery CA, Roy TO, Whittaker JL, et al. Neuromuscular training injury prevention 
strategies in youth sport: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 
2015;49:865–70.
 17 Lauersen JB, Bertelsen DM, Andersen LB. The effectiveness of exercise interventions 
to prevent sports injuries: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:871–7.
 18 Thorborg K, Krommes KK, Esteve E, et al. Effect of specific exercise-based football 
injury prevention programmes on the overall injury rate in football: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of the FIFA 11 and 11+ programmes. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:562–71.
 19 Rössler R, Junge A, Bizzini M, et al. A multinational cluster randomised controlled 
trial to assess the efficacy of ’11+ Kids’: a warm-up programme to prevent injuries 
in children’s football. Sports Med 2017.
 20 Rössler R, Donath L, Bizzini M, et al. A new injury prevention programme for 
children’s football--FIFA 11+ Kids--can improve motor performance: a cluster-
randomised controlled trial. J Sports Sci 2016;34:549–56.
 21 Attwood MJ, Roberts SP, Trewartha G, et al. Efficacy of a movement control injury 
prevention programme in adult men’s community rugby union: a cluster randomised 
controlled trial. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:368–74.
 22 Hägglund M, Atroshi I, Wagner P, et al. Superior compliance with a neuromuscular 
training programme is associated with fewer ACL injuries and fewer acute knee 
injuries in female adolescent football players: secondary analysis of an RCT. Br J 
Sports Med 2013;47:974–9.
 23 Soligard T, Nilstad A, Steffen K, et al. Compliance with a comprehensive warm-up 
programme to prevent injuries in youth football. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:787–93.
 24 Steffen K, Emery CA, Romiti M, et al. High adherence to a neuromuscular injury 
prevention programme (FIFA 11+) improves functional balance and reduces injury 
risk in Canadian youth female football players: a cluster randomised trial. Br J Sports 
Med 2013;47:794–802.
 25 Kaplan PA, Nelson NL, Garvin KL, et al. MR of the knee: the significance of high 
signal in the meniscus that does not clearly extend to the surface. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol 1991;156:333–6.
 26 Thapa MM, Chaturvedi A, Iyer RS, et al. MRI of pediatric patients: part 2, normal 
variants and abnormalities of the knee. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2012;198:W45
6–W465.
 27 Kocher MS, DiCanzio J, Zurakowski D, et al. Diagnostic performance of clinical 
examination and selective magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of 
intraarticular knee disorders in children and adolescents. Am J Sports Med 
2001;29:292–6.
 28 Yellin JL, Fabricant PD, Gornitzky A, et al. Rehabilitation following 
anterior cruciate ligament tears in children: a systematic review. JBJS Rev 
2016;4:e41–e415.
 29 Bergeron MF, Mountjoy M, Armstrong N, et al. International Olympic Committee 
consensus statement on youth athletic development. Br J Sports Med 
2015;49:843–51.
 30 Ardern CL, Österberg A, Tagesson S, et al. The impact of psychological readiness 
to return to sport and recreational activities after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1613–9.
 31 Ardern CL, Webster KE, Taylor NF, et al. Return to sport following anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the state 
of play. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:596–606.
 32 Podlog L, Dimmock J, Miller J. A review of return to sport concerns following injury 
rehabilitation: practitioner strategies for enhancing recovery outcomes. Phys Ther 
Sport 2011;12:36–42.
 33 van Melick N, van Cingel RE, Brooijmans F, et al. Evidence-based clinical 
practice update: practice guidelines for anterior cruciate ligament rehabilitation 
based on a systematic review and multidisciplinary consensus. Br J Sports Med 
2016;50:1506–15.
 34 Ardern CL, Glasgow P, Schneiders A, et al. Consensus statement on return to sport 
from the First World Congress in Sports Physical Therapy, Bern. Br J Sports Med 
2016;2016:853–64.
 35 Grindem H, Eitzen I, Engebretsen L, et al. Nonsurgical or surgical treatment of ACL 
injuries: knee function, sports participation, and knee reinjury: the Delaware-Oslo 
ACL Cohort Study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2014;96:1233–41.
 36 Grindem H, Snyder-Mackler L, Moksnes H, et al. Simple decision rules can reduce 
reinjury risk by 84% after ACL reconstruction: the Delaware-Oslo ACL cohort study. 
Br J Sports Med 2016;50:804–8.
 37 Kvist J, Kartus J, Karlsson J, et al. Results from the Swedish national anterior cruciate 
ligament register. Arthroscopy 2014;30:803–10.
 38 Dekker TJ, Godin JA, Dale KM, et al. Return to sport after pediatric anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction and its effect on subsequent anterior cruciate ligament 
injury. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2017;99:897–904.
 39 Kyritsis P, Bahr R, Landreau P, et al. Likelihood of ACL graft rupture: not meeting 
six clinical discharge criteria before return to sport is associated with a four times 
greater risk of rupture. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:946–51.
 40 Johnsen MB, Eitzen I, Moksnes H, et al. Inter- and intrarater reliability of four single-
legged hop tests and isokinetic muscle torque measurements in children. Knee Surg 
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2015;23:1907–16.
 41 Thomeé R, Kaplan Y, Kvist J, et al. Muscle strength and hop performance criteria prior 
to return to sports after ACL reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 
2011;19:1798–805.
 42 Moksnes H, Engebretsen L, Seil R. The ESSKA paediatric anterior cruciate ligament 
monitoring initiative. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2016;24:680–7.
 43 Frosch KH, Stengel D, Brodhun T, et al. Outcomes and risks of operative treatment 
of rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament in children and adolescents. Arthroscopy 
2010;26:1539–50.
 44 Kocher MS, Saxon HS, Hovis WD, et al. Management and complications of anterior 
cruciate ligament injuries in skeletally immature patients: survey of the Herodicus 
Society and The ACL Study Group. J Pediatr Orthop 2002;22:452–7.
 45 Seil R, Weitz FK, Pape D. Surgical-experimental principles of anterior cruciate 
ligament (ACL) reconstruction with open growth plates. J Exp Orthop 2015;2:11.
 46 Calvo R, Figueroa D, Gili F, et al. Transphyseal anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction in patients with open physes: 10-year follow-up study. Am J Sports 
Med 2015;43:289–94.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 437
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
 47 Cohen M, Ferretti M, Quarteiro M, et al. Transphyseal anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction in patients with open physes. Arthroscopy 2009;25:831–8.
 48 Fabricant PD, Kocher MS. Management of ACL injuries in children and adolescents.  
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2017;99:600–12.
 49 Hui C, Roe J, Ferguson D, et al. Outcome of anatomic transphyseal anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction in Tanner stage 1 and 2 patients with open physes. Am J 
Sports Med 2012;40:1093–8.
 50 Kocher MS, Smith JT, Zoric BJ, et al. Transphyseal anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction in skeletally immature pubescent adolescents. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
2007;89:2632–9.
 51 Siebold R, Takada T, Feil S, et al. Anatomical "C"-shaped double-bundle versus 
single-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in pre-adolescent children 
with open growth plates. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2016;24:796–806.
 52 Janarv PM, Wikström B, Hirsch G. The influence of transphyseal drilling and tendon 
grafting on bone growth: an experimental study in the rabbit. J Pediatr Orthop 
1998;18:149–54.
 53 Kocher MS, Garg S, Micheli LJ. Physeal sparing reconstruction of the anterior cruciate 
ligament in skeletally immature prepubescent children and adolescents. Surgical 
technique. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2006;88:283–93.
 54 Anderson AF. Transepiphyseal replacement of the anterior cruciate ligament using 
quadruple hamstring grafts in skeletally immature patients. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
2004;86-A:201–9.
 55 Andrews M, Noyes FR, Barber-Westin SD. Anterior cruciate ligament allograft 
reconstruction in the skeletally immature athlete. Am J Sports Med 1994;22:48–54.
 56 Henry J, Chotel F, Chouteau J, et al. Rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament in 
children: early reconstruction with open physes or delayed reconstruction to skeletal 
maturity? Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2009;17:748–55.
 57 Lo IK, Kirkley A, Fowler PJ, et al. The outcome of operatively treated anterior cruciate 
ligament disruptions in the skeletally immature child. Arthroscopy 1997;13:627–34.
 58 Kaeding CC, Pedroza AD, Reinke EK, et al. Risk factors and predictors of subsequent 
ACL injury in either knee after ACL reconstruction: prospective analysis of 
2488 primary ACL reconstructions from the MOON Cohort. Am J Sports Med 
2015;43:1583–90.
 59 Tejwani SG, Chen J, Funahashi TT, et al. Revision risk after allograft anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 2015;43:2696–705.
 60 Scheffler SU, Schmidt T, Gangéy I, et al. Fresh-frozen free-tendon allografts versus 
autografts in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: delayed remodeling and 
inferior mechanical function during long-term healing in sheep. Arthroscopy 
2008;24:448–58.
 61 Goddard M, Bowman N, Salmon LJ, et al. Endoscopic anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction in children using living donor hamstring tendon allografts. Am J 
Sports Med 2013;41:567–74.
 62 Zebis MK, Bencke J, Andersen LL, et al. The effects of neuromuscular training on 
knee joint motor control during sidecutting in female elite soccer and handball 
players. Clin J Sport Med 2008;18:329–37.
 63 Zebis MK, Andersen LL, Bencke J, et al. Identification of athletes at future risk of 
anterior cruciate ligament ruptures by neuromuscular screening. Am J Sports Med 
2009;37:1967–73.
 64 Fleming BC, Spindler KP, Palmer MP, et al. Collagen-platelet composites improve the 
biomechanical properties of healing anterior cruciate ligament grafts in a porcine 
model. Am J Sports Med 2009;37:1554–63.
 65 Murray MM. Current status and potential of primary ACL repair. Clin Sports Med 
2009;28:51–61.
 66 Magarian EM, Vavken P, Murray MM. Human anterior cruciate ligament fibroblasts 
from immature patients have a stronger in vitro response to platelet concentrates 
than those from mature individuals. Knee 2011;18:247–51.
 67 Proffen BL, Fleming BC, Murray MM. Histologic predictors of maximum failure loads 
differ between the healing ACL and ACL Grafts after 6 and 12 Months In Vivo. 
Orthop J Sports Med 2013;1:232596711351245.
 68 Meller R, Willbold E, Hesse E, et al. Histologic and biomechanical analysis of anterior 
cruciate ligament graft to bone healing in skeletally immature sheep. Arthroscopy 
2008;24:1221–31.
 69 Kopf S, Schenkengel JP, Wieners G, et al. No bone tunnel enlargement in patients 
with open growth plates after transphyseal ACL reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc 2010;18:1445–51.
 70 Bollen S, Pease F, Ehrenraich A, et al. Changes in the four-strand hamstring graft in 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in the skeletally-immature knee. J Bone 
Joint Surg Br 2008;90:455–9.
 71 Astur DC, Cachoeira CM, da Silva Vieira T, et al. Increased incidence of anterior 
cruciate ligament revision surgery in paediatric verses adult population. Knee Surg 
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2017.
 72 Astur DC, Arliani GG, Debieux P, et al. Intraarticular hamstring graft diameter 
decreases with continuing knee growth after ACL reconstruction with open physes. 
Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2016;24:792–5.
 73 Seil R, Weitz F, Menetrey J, et al. Anatomical and technical considerations for 
pediatric ACL reconstruction. Nakamura N, ed. Controversies in the technical aspects 
of ACL reconstruction. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2017:61–72.
 74 Tanner JM. Growth at adolescence. Springfield, IL: Thomas, 1962.
 75 Gilsanz V, Ratib O. Hand bone age: a digital atlas of skeletal maturity. Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2011.
 76 Greulich W, Pyle SI. Radiographic atlas of skeletal development of the hand and 
wrist. Stanford University Press: Stanford, CA, 1959.
 77 Krych AJ, Pitts RT, Dajani KA, et al. Surgical repair of meniscal tears with concomitant 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in patients 18 years and younger. Am J 
Sports Med 2010;38:976–82.
 78 Kocher MS, Garg S, Micheli LJ. Physeal sparing reconstruction of the anterior cruciate 
ligament in skeletally immature prepubescent children and adolescents. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am 2005;87:2371–9.
 79 Anderson AF, Anderson CN. Correlation of meniscal and articular cartilage injuries 
in children and adolescents with timing of anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. 
Am J Sports Med 2015;43:275–81.
 80 Lawrence JT, Argawal N, Ganley TJ. Degeneration of the knee joint in skeletally 
immature patients with a diagnosis of an anterior cruciate ligament tear: is there 
harm in delay of treatment? Am J Sports Med 2011;39:2582–7.
 81 Newman JT, Carry PM, Terhune EB, et al. Factors predictive of concomitant injuries 
among children and adolescents undergoing anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Am 
J Sports Med 2015;43:282–8.
 82 Funahashi KM, Moksnes H, Maletis GB, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament injuries 
in adolescents with open physis: effect of recurrent injury and surgical delay on 
meniscal and cartilage injuries. Am J Sports Med 2014;42:1068–73.
 83 Moksnes H, Engebretsen L, Eitzen I, et al. Functional outcomes following a non-
operative treatment algorithm for anterior cruciate ligament injuries in skeletally 
immature children 12 years and younger. A prospective cohort with 2 years follow-
up. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:488–94.
 84 Edwards TB, Greene CC, Baratta RV, et al. The effect of placing a tensioned graft 
across open growth plates. A gross and histologic analysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
2001;83-A:7725–34.
 85 Chudik S, Beasley L, Potter H, et al. The influence of femoral technique 
for graft placement on anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using a 
skeletally immature canine model with a rapidly growing physis. Arthroscopy 
2007;23:1309–19.
 86 Chotel F, Henry J, Seil R, et al. Growth disturbances without growth arrest after ACL 
reconstruction in children. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2010;18:1496–500.
 87 Andernord D, Desai N, Björnsson H, et al. Predictors of contralateral anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction: a cohort study of 9061 patients with 5-year follow-up. Am J 
Sports Med 2015;43:295–302.
 88 Wiggins AJ, Grandhi RK, Schneider DK, et al. Risk of secondary injury in younger 
athletes after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Am J Sports Med 2016;44:1861–76.
 89 Kay J, Memon M, Marx RG, et al. Over 90% of children and adolescents return to 
sport after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2018.
 90 Cohen M, Amaro JT, Ejnisman B, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction after 
10 to 15 years: association between meniscectomy and osteoarthrosis. Arthroscopy 
2007;23:629–34.
 91 Pujol N, Beaufils P. Healing results of meniscal tears left in situ during anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction: a review of clinical studies. Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc 2009;17:396–401.
 92 Wyatt RW, Inacio MC, Liddle KD, et al. Factors associated with meniscus repair in 
patients undergoing anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 
2013;41:2766–71.
 93 Brophy RH, Wright RW, David TS, et al. Association between previous meniscal 
surgery and the incidence of chondral lesions at revision anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 2012;40:808–14.
 94 Nwachukwu BU, McFeely ED, Nasreddine A, et al. Arthrofibrosis after anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction in children and adolescents. J Pediatr Orthop 
2011;31:811–7.
 95 Bansal A, Lamplot JD, VandenBerg J, et al. Meta-analysis of the risk of infections 
after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction by graft type. Am J Sports Med 
2017:036354651771445.
 96 Renström P, Johnson RJ. Anatomy and biomechanics of the menisci. Clin Sports Med 
1990;9:523–38.
 97 Crues JV, Mink J, Levy TL, et al. Meniscal tears of the knee: accuracy of MR imaging. 
Radiology 1987;164:445–8.
 98 Malatray M, Raux S, Peltier A, et al. Ramp lesions in ACL deficient knees in children 
and adolescent population: a high prevalence confirmed in intercondylar and 
posteromedial exploration. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2017.
 99 DePhillipo NN, Cinque ME, Chahla J, et al. Incidence and detection of meniscal ramp 
lesions on magnetic resonance imaging in patients with anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 2017;45:2233–7.
 
100 Krych AJ, McIntosh AL, Voll AE, et al. Arthroscopic repair of isolated meniscal tears in 
patients 18 years and younger. Am J Sports Med 2008;36:1283–9.
 
101 Shieh AK, Edmonds EW, Pennock AT. Revision meniscal surgery in children and 
adolescents: risk factors and mechanisms for failure and subsequent management. 
Am J Sports Med 2016;44:838–43.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 438
Ardern CL, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:422–438. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060
Consensus statement
 
102 Dumont GD, Hogue GD, Padalecki JR, et al. Meniscal and chondral injuries 
associated with pediatric anterior cruciate ligament tears: relationship of treatment 
time and patient-specific factors. Am J Sports Med 2012;40:2128–33.
 
103 Guenther ZD, Swami V, Dhillon SS, et al. Meniscal injury after adolescent anterior 
cruciate ligament injury: how long are patients at risk? Clin Orthop Relat Res 
2014;472:990–7.
 
104 Moksnes H, Engebretsen L, Risberg MA. Prevalence and incidence of new 
meniscus and cartilage injuries after a nonoperative treatment algorithm for ACL 
tears in skeletally immature children: a prospective MRI study. Am J Sports Med 
2013;41:1771–9.
 
105 Mayer S, Albright JC, Stoneback JW. Pediatric knee dislocations and physeal fractures 
about the knee. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2015;23:571–80.
 
106 Williams BT, James EW, LaPrade RF. A physeal-sparing fibular collateral ligament and 
proximal tibiofibular joint reconstruction in a skeletally immature athlete. Knee Surg 
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2016;24:661–5.
 
107 Kocher MS, Shore B, Nasreddine AY, et al. Treatment of posterior cruciate ligament 
injuries in pediatric and adolescent patients. J Pediatr Orthop 2012;32:553–60.
 
108 Warme WJ, Mickelson D. All-epiphyseal semitendinosus PCL reconstruction in a 
10-year-old child. J Pediatr Orthop 2010;30:465–8.
 
109 LaPrade RF, Smith SD, Wilson KJ, et al. Quantification of functional brace forces for 
posterior cruciate ligament injuries on the knee joint: an in vivo investigation. Knee 
Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2015;23:3070–6.
 
110 Davis JC, Bryan S. Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) have 
arrived in sports and exercise medicine: why do they matter? Br J Sports Med 
2015;49:1545–6.
 
111 Solans M, Pane S, Estrada MD, et al. Health-related quality of life measurement 
in children and adolescents: a systematic review of generic and disease-specific 
instruments. Value Health 2008;11:742–64.
 
112 Schmidt LJ, Garratt AM, Fitzpatrick R. Child/parent-assessed population health 
outcome measures: a structured review. Child Care Health Dev 2002;28:227–37.
 
113 Brock DW. The ideal of shared decision making between physicians and patients. 
Kennedy Inst Ethics J 1991;1:28–47.
 
114 Brighouse H, Swift A. Family values: the ethics of parent-child relationships. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014.
 
115 Buchanan AE, Brock DW. Deciding for others: the ethics of surrogate 
decisionmaking. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
 
116 Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of biomedical ethics. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, 2001.
 
117 Holt NL, Knight CJ. Parenting in youth sport: from research to practice. Abingdon: 
Routledge, 2014.
 
118 Archard D. Children: Rights and childhood. Abingdon: Routledge, 2014.
 
119 Gheaus A. Children’s vulnerability and legitimate authority over children. J Appl 
Philos 2017.
 
120 Langford G. Education, persons and society. London: Macmillan, 1985.
 
121 Malina RM. Growth. In: Mooren FC, ed. Encyclopedia of exercise medicine in health 
and disease. Heidelberg: Springer, 2012:376–8.
 
122 McCullough LB. Contributions of ethical theory to pediatric ethics: pediatricians 
and parents as co-fiduciaries of pediatric patients. Miller G, ed. Pediatric bioethics. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009:11–24.
 
123 Tamin J. Models of occupational medicine practice: an approach to understanding 
moral conflict in "dual obligation" doctors. Med Health Care Philos 
2013;16:499–506.
 
124 Alderson P. Children’s consent to surgery. Buckingham, England: Open University 
Press, 1993.
 
125 Gert B, Clouser KD, Culver C. Bioethics: a return to fundamentals. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997.
 
126 Wall J. Ethics in light of childhood. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 
2010.
 
127 Ekås GR, Ardern C, Grindem H, et al. New meniscal tears after ACL injury: what is 
the risk? A systematic review protocol. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:386.
 
128 Hullmann SE, Ryan JL, Ramsey RR, et al. Measures of general pediatric quality of life: 
Child Health Questionnaire (CHQ), DISABKIDS Chronic Generic Measure (DCGM), 
KINDL-R, Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) 4.0 Generic Core Scales, 
and Quality of My Life Questionnaire (QoML). Arthritis Care Res 2011;63(Suppl 
11):S420–S430.
 
129 Varni JW, Seid M, Rode CA. The PedsQL: measurement model for the pediatric 
quality of life inventory. Med Care 1999;37:126–39.
 
130 Irwin DE, Varni JW, Yeatts K, et al. Cognitive interviewing methodology in the 
development of a pediatric item bank: a patient reported outcomes measurement 
information system (PROMIS) study. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2009;7:3.
 
131 Kocher MS, Smith JT, Iversen MD, et al. Reliability, validity, and responsiveness of a 
modified International Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Form (Pedi-
IKDC) in children with knee disorders. Am J Sports Med 2011;39:933–9.
 
132 Örtqvist M, Roos EM, Broström EW, et al. Development of the knee injury and 
osteoarthritis outcome Score for children (KOOS-Child): comprehensibility and 
content validity. Acta Orthop 2012;83:666–73.
 
133 Fabricant PD, Robles A, Downey-Zayas T, et al. Development and validation 
of a pediatric sports activity rating scale: the Hospital for Special Surgery 
Pediatric Functional Activity Brief Scale (HSS Pedi-FABS). Am J Sports Med 
2013;41:2421–9.
 
134 Kopelman LM. The best-interests standard as threshold, ideal, and standard of 
reasonableness. J Med Philos 1997;22:271–89.
 
135 Diekema DS. Parental refusals of medical treatment: the harm principle as threshold 
for state intervention. Theor Med Bioeth 2004;25:243–64.
 
136 Gillam L. The zone of parental discretion: an ethical tool for dealing with 
disagreement between parents and doctors about medical treatment for a child. Clin 
Ethics 2016;11:1–8.
 
137 Kilham H, Isaacs D, Kerridge I. When refusal is only distantly or unpredictably life-
threatening. In: McDougall R, Delaney C, Gillam L, eds. When doctors and parents 
disagree: ethics, paediatrics and the zone of parental discretion. Sydney, Australia: 
Federation Press, 2016.
 
138 DeMarco JP, Powell DP, Stewart DO. Best interest of the child: surrogate decision 
making and the economics of externalities. J Bioeth Inq 2011;8:289–98.
 
139 Rhodes R, Holzman IR. The not unreasonable standard for assessment of surrogates 
and surrogate decisions. Theor Med Bioeth 2004;25:367–86.
 
140 Nair T, Savulescu J, Everett J, et al. Settling for second best: when should doctors 
agree to parental demands for suboptimal medical treatment? J Med Ethics 
2017;43:831–40.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099060 on 24 February 2018. Downloaded from 
