 Annual Research Review: The persistent and
pervasive impact of being bullied in childhood and
adolescence: implications for policy and practice
Louise Arseneault
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College of London, London, UK
Background: We have known for some time that being bullied was associated with children’s and adolescents’
adjustment difficulties and well-being. In recent years, we have come to recognise that the impact of childhood
bullying victimisation on the development of mental health problems is more complex. This paper aims to review the
evidence for an independent contribution of childhood bullying victimisation to the development of poor outcomes
throughout the life span, including mental, physical and socioeconomic outcomes, and discuss the implications for
policy and practice. Findings: Existing research indicates that (a) being bullied in childhood is associated with
distress and symptoms of mental health problems. This large body of evidence supports actions aimed at reducing
the occurrence of bullying behaviours; (b) the consequences of childhood bullying victimisation can persist up to
midlife and, in addition to mental health, can impact physical and socioeconomic outcomes. These new findings
indicate that interventions should also focus on supporting victims of bullying and helping them build resilience; (c)
research has identified some factors that predispose children to be targeted by bullying behaviours. These studies
suggest that public health interventions could aim at preventing children from becoming the target of bullying
behaviours from an early age. Conclusions: It is a truism to emphasise that further work is needed to understand
why and how young people’s aspirations are often cut short by this all too common adverse social experience. In
parallel, we must develop effective strategies to tackle this form of abuse and its consequences for the victims.
Addressing bullying in childhood could not only reduce children’s and adolescents’ mental health symptoms but also
prevent psychiatric and socioeconomic difficulties up to adulthood and reduce considerable costs for society.
Keywords: Bullying victimisation; mental health; physical health; socioeconomic outcomes; development; children;
adolescents; life course.
Introduction
There is little doubt today that being bullied is an
adverse and stressful experience that casts a shadow
on children’s and adolescents’ well-being and devel-
opment. But this has not always been the view. After
several years of general scepticism about the true
impact of bullying victimisation, it is only recently
that researchers, mental health professionals and
policy makers have started to pay attention to the
potentially harmful consequences of being bullied in
early life. This change in perception is reflected in
different ways. First, the number of publications on
the topic of bullying has grown exponentially since
the early 1990s (see Olweus, 2013). This accumu-
lating evidence indicates that young victims of bul-
lying are at risk of showing adjustment problems
and even developing severe mental health problems.
Second, another important consequence of increas-
ing concerns relating to the impact of childhood
bullying victimisation is the development of inter-
vention programmes designed specifically to limit
bullying behaviours at schools. The efficiency of
those programmes has been reviewed in meta-
analytic studies that have reported mixed results
(Ttofi & Farrington, 2011). Third, national policies
have also responded to society’s greater awareness of
bullying. In the United Kingdom, all schools have a
legal obligation to have measures in place to prevent
and handle forms of bullying among pupils and to
inform teachers, pupils and parents about these
measures (Department for Education, 2017). In the
United
States,
more
than
120
bills
related
to
antibullying policies were adopted between 1999
and 2010 and a total of 49 states have laws in place
to tackle bullying behaviours at school (Hatzen-
buehler,
Schwab-Reese,
Ranapurwala,
Hertz,
&
Ramirez, 2015). However, despite joint efforts to
reduce bullying and understand its consequences
for the victims, this behaviour remains frequent
among young people.
This review paper aims to summarise findings on
the impact of being bullied from population-based
samples with prospective measures of bullying vic-
timisation in childhood or early adolescence. It
emphasises
longitudinal
studies
that
examined
mental health and other outcomes up to adulthood,
and considers how these findings may influence
policy and practice. It also aims to provide pointers
for future research. This review paper does not
report on children who bully others or focus on the
Conflicts of interest statement: No conflicts declared.
The copyright line for this article was changed on 26 June
2018 after original online publication.
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 59:4 (2018), pp 405–421
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
PFI_12mmX178mm.pdf + eps format
 dyadic relationship between them and their victims.
It does not focus on bullying victimisation among
specific groups such as children with developmental
disorders or disabilities, for example. This paper
considers bullying as a global form of abuse and
does not distinguish specific types of bullying vic-
timisation. This review paper is timely in light of the
emphasis of current policies on youth mental health.
It summarises the body of evidence so far on one of
the most prevalent risk factors for mental health
problems in childhood and adolescence. It also
builds upon review papers published recently on
the long-term outcomes of being bullied (Brunstein
Klomek, Sourander, & Elonheimo, 2015; McDougall
& Vaillancourt, 2015; Wolke & Lereya, 2015) and
expands by raising important questions for policy
and practice: are we doing the right thing? Are we
doing enough? This review is also timely as we
immerse ourselves in a new digital age which allows
harassment and bullying to be more insidious, as
summarised by a previous review paper published in
this journal (Livingstone & Smith, 2014).
What is bullying?
Bullying victimisation is the repeated occurrence of
abuse between people from the same age group
where an imbalance of power makes it difficult for
the victims to defend themselves (Olweus, 1993,
2013). Bullying, a form of peer victimisation, can
take place between children, between adolescents or
between adults. It is not bullying when a parent or a
teacher is abusive towards a child. While the terms
peer victimisation and bullying are often used inter-
changeably, peer victimisation is not equivalent to
bullying. For example, it is not bullying when two
people of about the same strength quarrel or fight,
but it is peer victimisation. An especially important
feature of bullying is the power imbalance between
those who perpetrate bullying behaviours and their
victims. Strength, number or size of those involved
can place the victims at a disadvantage. The power
imbalance can also be more subjective and difficult
to capture, involving factors such as popularity,
intelligence or disabilities. It can also be determined
by the environment: a child who just joined a new
school may be at risk of being bullied by others, as
would a child belonging to a minority group. Dan
Olweus, the founder of research on bullying, argued
that the power imbalance is best determined by the
victims themselves (2013). Victims of bullying can
also bully other vulnerable youths. ‘Bully/victims’
represent a small but distinct group of children who
are involved in bullying both as a perpetrator and as
a victim. The distinction between bullying and peer
victimisation may appear trivial or pedantic but it is
important when investigating the consequences of
this form of abuse. By definition, victims of bullying
represent a group of individuals who, for various
reasons, are less likely to retaliate when confronted
with abusive behaviours from their peers. They
constitute a heterogeneous and vulnerable group
who might be likely to experience adversity, adjust-
ment difficulties or even mental health problems at
some point in their lives, despite the experience of
bullying.
It
is
therefore
reasonable
to
question
whether the sheer act of being bullied truly con-
tributes to poor outcomes among the victims, and if
so, how.
Determining the impact of childhood bullying
victimisation on children’s and adolescents’ mental
health and well-being, as well as reducing the
occurrence of bullying behaviours, are important
for several reasons. First, bullying is common world-
wide among children and adolescents. A survey of
children
in
nearly
40
countries
indicated
that
approximately 13% of 11-year-olds reported being
the victims of bullying (World Health Organisation,
2012). Prevalence rates vary greatly across coun-
tries, are commonly higher for boys compared to
girls, and decline with age. Rates across 11 Euro-
pean countries revealed a similar pattern: 20% of
youth from 8 to 18 reported being bullied (Analitis
et al., 2009); bullying victimisation was more preva-
lent among boys and tended to decline with age. In
the United Kingdom and in the United States,
bullying, including peer and sibling victimisation,
is the most prevalent form of abuse across all age
groups up to 24 years (Finkelhor, Ormrod, & Turner,
2007a; Radford, Corral, Bradley, & Fisher, 2013).
These prevalence rates reflect an increase in bullying
awareness which contrasts with early research when
bullying was studied almost exclusively in Scandi-
navian countries (Olweus, 1993). Second, bullying is
widespread across different environments. It most
commonly takes place in schools, but bullying can
also occur in other contexts, including in the neigh-
bourhood or at home between siblings (Wolke &
Skew, 2012a). Third, bullying can be persistent
across time and across settings (Sourander, Hel-
stel€
a, Helenius, & Piha, 2000). Chronic victimisation
is not infrequent, even despite the transition to
secondary school during the early teenage years: of
the children who were frequently bullied during
primary school in the United Kingdom, 43.1% of
boys and 40.1% of girls remained frequently bullied
during secondary school (Bowes et al., 2013). These
findings are in line with a previous study showing
that nearly half of age-11 young victims of bullying
(43%)
were
still
victims
3 years
later
(Scholte,
Engels, Overbeek, de Kemp, & Haselager, 2007). Of
the children who were not involved in bullying at the
first assessment, only 7% became victims later on.
Lower stability in bullying victimisation has also
been reported (Sch€
afer, Korn, Brodbeck, Wolke, &
Schulz, 2005). These contrasting findings are possi-
bly accounted for by the relatively short reporting
periods covered by the assessments. Fourth, bully-
ing can take various forms. It can be verbal such as
threatening, taunting, spreading rumours or it can
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
406
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 refer to physical actions including pushing and
kicking. It can be direct (e.g. verbal and physical
behaviours conducted in the context of face-to-face
interactions) or indirect (e.g. actions that do not
necessarily require the bullies and the victims to be
present,
like
spreading
rumours
and
excluding
others). Fifth, bullying has evolved with time. New
technologies
and
social
media
platforms,
easily
accessible via mobile phones or the Internet, provide
countless opportunities for young people to bully
and damage the reputations of their victims, in front
of large crowds of witnesses who may exacerbate the
abuse. Cyberbullying has been documented as a new
and harmful form of bullying, especially among
adolescents (Smith et al., 2008).
Adjustment problems associated with bullying
victimisation
As with victims of crimes or assaults, children and
adolescents are likely to get upset when targeted by
abusive behaviours. Young victims can manifest
signs of psychological distress such as being tearful
or irritable, losing motivation and experiencing sleep
problems. These could be considered as temporary
reactions to a stressful event and would normally
recede with appropriate support when exposure to
bullying behaviours cease. Documented reactions
associated with bullying victimisation include being
unhappy at school, difficulties in school adjustment
and poor school perceptions (Arseneault et al., 2006;
Glew, Fan, Katon, & Rivara, 2008; Juvonen, Gra-
ham, & Schuster, 2003; Nansel, Craig, Overpeck,
Saluja, & Ruan, 2004), facing social problems such
as being isolated and feeling lonely (Juvonen et al.,
2003; Kaltiala-Heino, Rimpel€
a, Rantanen, & Rim-
pel€
a, 2000; Nansel et al., 2001, 2004; Scholte et al.,
2007; Veenstra et al., 2005), and academic difficul-
ties (Bowes et al., 2013; Glew et al., 2008).
Victims of bullying can also manifest symptoms of
psychological distress commonly associated with
psychopathology. Studies have found that bullied
youth showed an increased risk of self-harm and
suicidal ideation (Barker, Arseneault, Brendgen,
Fontaine, & Maughan, 2008; Geoffroy et al., 2016;
Lereya, Winsper et al., 2013; Sibold, Edwards, Mur-
ray-Close, & Hudziak, 2015; Turner, Exum, Brame,
& Holt, 2013; Winsper, Leraya, Zanarini, & Wolke,
2012), and especially among those victims who
experienced mental health problems, felt rejected
at home or were maltreated by an adult, had parents
with emotional problems, or had a family history of
attempted or completed suicide (Fisher et al., 2012;
Herba et al., 2008). Severe symptoms of psycholog-
ical distress are thus concentrated among bullied
youth who show a range of risk factors for mental
health problems. While common signs of psycholog-
ical distress among victims of bullying may not
require clinical interventions, more severe manifes-
tations including self-harm and suicidal ideation
signal a profound impact among some of those
targeted by those who bully others. Such symptoms
necessitate prompt and adequate interventions by
mental
health
professionals.
These
also
point
towards a severe impact of bullying victimisation
on
mental
health
problems
in
childhood
and
adolescence.
Contribution of bullying victimisation to the
development of mental health problems in
childhood and adolescence
Longitudinal study designs are instrumental for
establishing the extent to which being the victim of
bullying is a contributing risk factor to the develop-
ment
of
mental
health
problems.
Establishing
temporal priority – what come first, bullying victim-
isation or poor mental health – is an essential first
step. Indeed, one important alternative hypothesis
that must be ruled out is that early mental health
symptoms account for both an increased risk for
being targeted by bullying behaviours and also for
later psychopathology. Findings so far have shown
that over and above early signs of poor mental health
prior to bullying victimisation, being bullied in
childhood or in adolescence is associated with new
symptoms/diagnoses of mental health problems,
and especially with later symptoms of anxiety and
depression (Arseneault et al., 2006; Bowes, Joinson,
Wolke, & Lewis, 2015; Kim, Leventhal, Koh, Hub-
bard,
&
Boyce,
2006;
Stapinski
et al.,
2014;
Zwierzynska, Wolke, & Leraya, 2013). These studies
are robust not only because they controlled for
symptoms prior to being bullied but they also
controlled for a range of other potential confounders,
including gender, parental socioeconomic status and
low IQ. Bullying victimisation has also been associ-
ated with symptoms of rare mental health problems
in adolescence such as psychotic experiences: bul-
lied youth, and especially those who were frequently
or severely bullied, have an increased risk for
reporting
psychotic
experiences
in
adolescence
(Arseneault et al., 2011; Cunningham, Hoy, & Shan-
non, 2016 for a review; Kelleher et al., 2013; Mackie,
Castellanos-Ryan, & Conrod, 2011; Schreier et al.,
2009). One exception is a study that reported no
association between bullying victimisation in ado-
lescence and psychotic experiences after controlling
for childhood behavioural problems and other forms
of victimisation (Boden, van Stockum, Horwood, &
Fergusson, 2016). This finding is possibly explained
by the relatively small number of youth who were
exposed to a ‘high level’ of bullying in this sample.
The extent to which being the victim of bullying
contributes to the development of mental health
problems in childhood and adolescence has critical
implications for prevention and intervention efforts.
Although these strategies are important to safeguard
the human rights of children, reducing bullying
behaviour could be an expensive and ineffective
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
407
 way of decreasing children’s early symptoms of poor
mental health if being bullied is spuriously associ-
ated with poor outcomes. Strong and robust tests
supporting the assumption that being bullied in
childhood can actually contribute to mental health
problems remain sparse. One reason for this is the
limits of observational studies most commonly used
to examine the outcomes associated with being
bullied in childhood and adolescence. Randomised
controlled trials would allow proper testing for a
possible causal role of bullying victimisation, but
randomly assigning children to bullied and nonbul-
lied conditions is not an option for obvious ethical
reasons. Researchers therefore have to resort to
using alternative study designs and statistical meth-
ods (Jaffee, Strait, & Odgers, 2012; Rutter, Pickles,
Murray, & Eaves, 2001) to strengthen the evidence
clarifying the role of bullying victimisation for the
development of mental health problems. The discor-
dant monozygotic (MZ) twin design offers a rigorous
control for confounders by contrasting genetically
identical individuals drawn from the same family
environment but who are exposed to distinct expe-
riences (Vitaro, Brendgen, & Arseneault, 2009).
Because many early family experiences are neces-
sarily the same within pairs of twins who grow up
together, shared environmental factors such
as
poverty, domestic violence or maternal depression
cannot account for the differences in the outcome
variables. Furthermore, because MZ twins are genet-
ically identical, variation in outcomes cannot be the
result of genetic variations between the two twins
either. Therefore, the discordant MZ twin design can
be used to test whether being bullied in childhood
has an environmentally mediated impact on the
development of mental health symptoms at a young
age, over and above shared environmental and
genetic confounds. When applied to longitudinal
data, the discordant MZ twin design is a powerful
methodological tool for investigating the pathway
from bullying victimisation to children’s develop-
mental outcomes.
Three longitudinal studies have used the discor-
dant MZ twin design to test the robustness of the
impact of being bullied in childhood on mental
health outcomes. A first study from the Environ-
mental Risk (E-Risk) Longitudinal Twin Study (Mof-
fitt, 2002) showed that MZ twins who had been
bullied by the age of 7 had more emotional problems
at age 10 years compared to their cotwins who had
not been bullied (Arseneault et al., 2008). This
difference remained significant even after controlling
for emotional problems assessed when the twins
were 5 years of age, prior to being bullied. A second
study from the Twins Early Development Study
(TEDS; Trouton, Spinath, & Plomin, 2002) found
similar findings using a measure of peer victimisa-
tion in early adolescence with a larger sample of
twins: MZ twin differences in peer victimisation were
associated with differences in anxiety over the course
of 2 years, even after controlling for prior anxiety,
but became nonsignificant over 5 years (Singham
et al., 2017). Differences remained significant, how-
ever, for measures of paranoid thoughts and cogni-
tive
disorganisation
(without
control
for
prior
measures). These findings may be taken to suggest
that the contribution of bullying victimisation to
mental health problems is not long-lasting. However,
the Virginia Twin Study of Adolescent Behavioral
Development (Eaves et al., 1997) indicated other-
wise, and extended others’ findings by examining
mental health outcomes both in childhood and in
young adulthood. Results revealed that compared
with their nonbullied cotwins, bullied MZ twins were
nearly twice as likely to have social anxiety and
separation anxiety in childhood and three times
more likely to report suicidal ideation in young
adulthood (Silberg et al., 2016). Psychiatric distur-
bances prior to being bullied did not differ between
the bullied and nonbullied twins in this sample and
therefore, could not account for differences in out-
comes. These three studies robustly demonstrate
that bullying victimisation contributes to later men-
tal health outcomes: overall, associations were not
explained by prior symptoms or difficulties, and the
associations
survived
strict
controls
for
con-
founders, including both family background and
genetic factors. This evidence suggests that if we
eliminate bullying behaviours, we should be suc-
cessful
at
reducing
mental
health
problems
in
youths.
Despite these strong findings, not all bullied
children end up developing mental health problems.
Studies testing the modifying effect of variables on
outcomes associated with bullying victimisation are
also important. First, this research may help disen-
tangle and characterise subgroups of youth who are
most likely to develop problems as a consequence of
being bullied. There are a few examples of such
studies focusing on biological factors. One study
showed that variation in the serotonin transporter
(5-HTTLPR) gene, involved in mood regulation and
depression, moderates children’s emotional prob-
lems in response to bullying victimisation: frequently
bullied children with the SS genotype were at greater
risk for developing emotional problems than were
children with the SL or LL genotypes (Sugden et al.,
2010). Another study indicated that peer victimisa-
tion predicted symptoms of depression 1 year later
specifically among participants who showed high
levels
of
anticipatory
salivary
cortisol
response
(Rudolph, Troop-Gordon, & Granger, 2011). This
heightened anticipatory cortisol response protected
participants from depressive symptoms when they
were exposed to low levels of peer victimisation.
Second, studies of social factors can help identify
targets for interventions aimed at reducing symp-
toms of mental health problems. One study demon-
strated that most bullied young adolescents do not
engage in self-harming behaviours, but those who
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
408
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 did were more likely to have a family member who
had
attempted/completed
suicide,
compared
to
those who did not self-harm (Fisher et al., 2012).
They were also more likely to have been physically
maltreated by an adult and to present with conduct
disorder,
borderline
personality
characteristics,
depression
and
psychotic
symptoms.
Another
study reported that while self-blaming was not
associated with a general measure of peer victim-
isation, children who showed an inclination to
blame themselves
also showed higher levels of
emotional problems if victimised by their peers
(Perren, Ettekal, & Ladd, 2013). A further study
showed that bullied children who had highly sup-
portive families had fewer emotional and beha-
vioural problems over time compared to those from
less supportive families (Bowes, Maughan, Caspi,
Moffitt, & Arseneault, 2010). Although maternal
warmth, sibling warmth and a positive atmosphere
at home were associated with positive adjustment
for both bullied and nonbullied children, the effects
of these protective family factors were significantly
stronger for bullied children compared to those
who had not been bullied. Findings from these last
two studies have especially important implications
for clinical efforts: interventions focusing on nega-
tive cognitions and involving families may have
greater chances of tackling symptoms of mental
health problems among bullied children.
The evidence reviewed thus far indicates that
being bullied in childhood is not only associated
with signs of psychological distress but also with
symptoms of mental health problems in childhood
and adolescence. These findings support actions to
stop bullying behaviours in order to reduce suffer-
ing
in
youth
and
prevent
the
development
of
mental health problems. Such actions are already
in place.
The persistent effect of childhood bullying
victimisation on mental health problems
To date, relatively little is known about the long-
term impact of bullying, as only a few longitudinal
studies with prospective measures of bullying vic-
timisation in childhood have followed participants
into adult life. ‘Long-term’ is characterised here not
only by the age of the participants when outcomes
were assessed, but also by the time lag between
exposure
to
bullying
victimisation
and
mental
health problems. So far, four longitudinal cohorts
have documented the adult outcomes of childhood
bullying victimisation, at least 10 years apart, with
adequate consideration for childhood mental health
problems and other confounders. The Epidemio-
logic
Multicenter
Child
Psychiatric
Study
is
a
prospective
nationwide
birth
cohort
study
from
Finland
(Almqvist
et al.,
1999).
Information
on
bullying victimisation was collected from parents,
teachers and children themselves in 1989, when
the participants were aged 8 years. Findings from
this cohort have indicated that girls who were
frequent
victims
of
childhood
bullying
had
increased rates of suicide attempts and completed
suicides up to age 25 (Brunstein Klomek et al.,
2009). Male participants who had been victims of
bullying
had
higher
rates
of
anxiety
disorders
between ages 18 and 23 years (Sourander, Jensen,
R€
onning, Niemel€
a et al., 2007), and increased risk
of heavy smoking (Niemel€
a et al., 2011). Most data
on young adult outcomes in these studies were
gathered from military call-up, national psychiatric
and hospital discharge registers, and thus may
underestimate distress, especially among females
and victims who did not seek treatment.
This limitation was addressed in an accelerated
population-based
study with
outcome
measures
collected during research-based assessments, the
Great Smoky Mountain Study from North Carolina
in the United States (Costello et al., 1996). Informa-
tion on bullying victimisation was collected on mul-
tiple
occasions
from
caregivers
and
children
themselves when the participants were between the
ages of 9 and 16. Compared to those who had not
been bullied in childhood, victims of bullying, and
especially bully/victims,
had increased
rates of
psychiatric
disorders
including
agoraphobia,
depression, anxiety and panic disorders in their
early to mid 20s, up to 14 years after exposure
(Copeland, Wolke, Angold, & Costello, 2013). Partic-
ipants who had been bullied in childhood also had
high
rates
of
suicidality,
but
not
of
antisocial
personality or substance use disorders.
The long-term impact of childhood bullying vic-
timisation
was
further
investigated
in
National
Child Development Study (NCDS), or the 1958
British Cohort Study, a 50-year prospective follow-
up of a UK birth cohort (Power & Elliott, 2006).
Information on bullying victimisation was collected
from parents when participants were aged 7 and
11, in 1965 and 1969. Analyses were undertaken
first to ensure that bullying victimisation assessed
in the mid-1960s referred to the same concept as
bullying
today:
reassuringly,
findings
indicated
that as shown by other contemporaneous studies,
bullying victimisation was associated with known
childhood correlates including low parental socioe-
conomic status, low IQ, as well as emotional and
behavioural
problems.
Supporting
the
findings
from the two other cohorts, but extending them
through the inclusion of outcomes at midlife, the
NCDS study showed that victims of bullying in
childhood
reported
high
levels
of
psychological
distress not only at age 23 but also, and most
importantly,
at
age
50,
nearly
40 years
after
exposure
(Takizawa,
Maughan,
&
Arseneault,
2014). Participants who had been victims of bul-
lying in childhood had higher prevalence of psy-
chiatric disorders in midlife, including depression
and anxiety, compared to participants who had
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
409
 not
been
bullied.
The
effects
were
small
but
similar to
those associated with
other adverse
childhood
exposures
measured
in
this
cohort
study such as placement in care or exposure to
multiple adversities within the family. Strikingly
similar to findings from the United States, partic-
ipants in NCDS who had been bullied in childhood
had
increased
rates
of
suicidality,
but
not
of
alcohol dependence.
The fourth birth cohort study partially corrobo-
rates the pattern of findings observed so far. The
Christchurch Child Development Study is a longitu-
dinal
examination
of
1265
individuals
born
in
Christchurch New Zealand, in 1977 (Fergusson,
Horwood, Shannon, & Lawton, 1989). Data on
bullying victimisation were collected when partici-
pants were aged 13, 14 and 15 by asking their
parents
whether
they
experienced
problems
at
school including ‘being teased, bullied by other
children’. Participants reported on mental health
outcomes at ages of 16–21, 21–25 and 25–30.
Bullying victimisation and outcome measures were
pooled across age periods and may blur the long-
term impact investigated here. Findings indicated
that victims of bullying had an increased risk for
anxiety disorder in later years (Gibb, Horwood, &
Fergusson, 2011). Further tests with other mental
health outcomes including depression, and suicidal
thoughts and attempts did not survive controls for
confounders. The small number of participants who
had been bullied (N = 30) and the reporting period
covering mostly the adolescent years, may explain
the dissimilarity in the conclusions.
The findings reported here are based on obser-
vational data and thus do not allow causal infer-
ences. The consistency of the findings across the
four cohorts is, however, compelling. These studies
(a) used prospective measures of bullying victimi-
sation in childhood and later outcomes in adult-
hood; (b) controlled for mental health problems in
childhood,
indicating
that
bullying
victimisation
contributes either to the onset or worsening of
mental
health
problems
in
later
years;
(c)
accounted for a range of confounders that might
also explain poor later outcomes in young victims
of bullying, including childhood IQ, parental SES,
other forms of adversities and gender; and (d) are
representative of the populations of four different
countries. Conclusions from these studies cannot
be ignored. Taken together, these findings suggest
that the impact of bullying on the young victims
may persist once the bullying has long stopped.
Tackling bullying behaviours may not only reduce
children’s and adolescents’ mental health symp-
toms and adjustment difficulties, but also prevent
psychiatric problems in adulthood. Furthermore, if
symptoms persist beyond the childhood and ado-
lescent
periods,
this
indicates
that
support
to
young victims, even after the bullying has stopped,
is necessary to reduce the long-term burden of
mental health difficulties among young victims of
bullying.
Beyond mental health problems: physical
health, criminal and socioeconomic outcomes
The
long-term
impact
of
bullying
victimisation
explored by the four longitudinal cohorts described
above was not limited to mental health problems.
Focusing on outcomes in the adult years opens up
the possibility of examining a range of life domains
more difficult to study in childhood or adolescence.
These are physical health, criminal and socioeco-
nomic domains.
Examining physical health outcomes associated
with bullying victimisation among children and ado-
lescents is challenging as most chronic diseases are
relatively rare at this young age and risk indicators
may still be latent. With higher prevalence rates of
diseases, the midlife period offers the possibility of
robustly exploring these long-term outcomes. Find-
ings from NCDS indicated that being bullied in
childhood was associated with self-ratings of poor
general health at age 50 (Takizawa et al., 2014) and
this finding provided the basis for investigating phys-
ical health in greater depth and detail. A follow-up
study indicated that men and women who had expe-
rienced bullying victimisation in childhood showed
higher inflammation levels than nonbullied peers,
while women who had been bullied were more likely to
be obese decades later (Takizawa, Danese, Maughan,
& Arseneault, 2015). Findings were consistent across
two different measures of inflammation (C-reactive
protein (CRP) and fibrinogen) and two different mea-
sures of adiposity (BMI and waist-hip ratio). Findings
were independent of the effects of correlated child-
hood risks (e.g. parental social class, participants’
BMI and psychopathology in childhood), and of key
adult risk factors targeted by current preventive
interventions for obesity or cardiovascular disease
(e.g. not only smoking, diet and exercise but also adult
social class). These markers of poor physical health
among victims of bullying were also observed at a
younger age in two studies. First, participants from
the Great Smoky Mountain Study who were bullied in
childhood showed a greater increase in low-grade
systemic inflammation (as indexed with CRP levels)
from childhood to adulthood (ages 19 and 21), com-
pared to those participants who had not been bullied
(Copeland et al., 2014). Second, children who were
chronically bullied from primary to secondary schools
were nearly twice as likely to be overweight at age 18
than nonbullied children, independently of co-occur-
ring maltreatment, child socioeconomic status, food
insecurity, mental health, cognition, pubertal devel-
opment, childhood weight, and genetic and fetal
liability (Baldwin et al., 2016).
Criminal outcomes have been associated with
bullying victimisation, but more specifically with
bully/victims. Boys who both were frequently bullied
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
410
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 by others and who also bullied others in childhood
had an increased risk for repeated offending when
they were aged 16–20 years according to the Finnish
National Police Register data (Sourander, Jensen,
R€
onning, Elonheimo et al., 2007). This risk was
concentrated among those who had psychiatric
problems, indicating that the likelihood of commit-
ting criminal behaviours in later life among victims of
bullying was limited to a minority who also bullied
others and who had mental health problems. A
follow-up study confirmed the associations between
bullying perpetration and criminal offenses between
23 and 26 years among men, but no increased risk
was found for those who were solely victims of
bullying (Sourander et al., 2011). Although bully/
victims did not have an increased risk of meeting
diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disor-
ders in their mid-20s (Copeland et al., 2013), they
were more likely to have received felony charges
according
to
courts
records
(Wolke,
Copeland,
Angold, & Costello, 2013). Bully/victims were not
examined in the Christchurch cohort, but findings
indicated that victims of bullying had an increased
risk of self-reported property offending (Gibb et al.,
2011). This finding is at odds with those of the
Finnish and the American cohorts which both found
that individuals who were solely victims of bullying
were not at increased risk of committing risky or
illegal behaviours in late adolescence or during their
adult years.
The impact of bullying victimisation has further
been found to extend to economic hardship, social
relationships and perceived quality of life in the adult
years. Individuals who had been bullied in childhood
had difficulties keeping jobs in young adulthood
(Wolke et al., 2013) and were more likely to be
unemployed at midlife (Takizawa et al., 2014). These
difficulties remaining active on the job market are
not surprising in light of victims’ academic problems.
Indeed, those who were frequently bullied had lower
educational levels at midlife (Brown & Taylor, 2008;
Takizawa et al., 2014). Young victims of bullying also
saw their social relationships affected in later years:
individuals who had been bullied in childhood had
problems making or keeping friends in their mid-
20s, and had poor relationships with their parents
(Wolke et al., 2013). They had an increased risk of
living without a spouse or partner at age 50, they
were less likely to have met up with friends in the
recent past, and were less likely to have access to
social support if they were sick (Takizawa et al.,
2014). Finally, bullying victimisation also affected
adult well-being: being bullied was associated with
lower perceived quality of life at age 50 and lower
satisfaction with life so far. Those who had been
frequently bullied also anticipated less life satisfac-
tion in the years to come (Takizawa et al., 2014).
The consistency of findings with regard to poor
physical
and
socioeconomic
outcomes
observed
among victims of bullying, across ages and across
cohorts, is again striking. It is important to note,
however,
that
poor
long-term
outcomes
were
observed especially for those who were frequently
or chronically bullied in childhood, and in the case of
criminal outcomes, more often among those who
were bully/victims. Taken together, these findings
suggest that childhood bullying victimisation is not
only associated with individual suffering but could
also be linked to considerable costs for society given
its
pervasive
impact
on
physical,
criminal
and
socioeconomic outcomes. Some studies have already
pointed out the consequences of childhood bullying
victimisation on the health care system. The Finnish
birth cohort showed that participants who were
frequently bullied in childhood were more likely to
have received psychiatric hospital treatment and
used psychiatric medications at age 24, over and
above psychopathology prior to bullying (Sourander
et al., 2009). These effects on service use were shown
to be persistent: being frequently bullied in child-
hood was associated with treatment for psychiatric
disorders at age 29, over and above family factors
and childhood psychiatric symptoms (Sourander,
Gyllenberg et al., 2016). Using data from NCDS, a
study reported that compared to participants who
were not bullied in childhood, those who were
frequently bullied were more likely to use mental
health services in childhood, adolescence and also in
midlife (Evans-Lacko et al., 2016). This disparity in
service use associated with childhood bullying vic-
timisation was explained both by new use of mental
health services up to age 33 by a subgroup of
participants, and also by persistent use up to
midlife.
Similar to children and adolescents who suffered
from maltreatment, young victims of bullying may
need support to overcome their difficulties facing
this stressful situation. Appropriate interventions
may be as simple as schools and families acknowl-
edging the impact of being bullied to prevent normal
reactions of distress from developing into mental
health problems (Leff & Waasdorp, 2013). Studies
have highlighted the important role of families in
building resilience among bullied victims (Bowes
et al., 2009, 2013; for a review see Lereya, Samara,
& Wolke, 2013). Increasing families and school
awareness of the damaging impact associated with
bullying victimisation is essential to detect early
signs of distress among young victims of bullying.
More targeted interventions by mental health pro-
fessionals may also be required in instances where
symptoms of mental health problems have emerged.
These symptoms should not be overlooked even if
the bullying behaviours have stopped. Interventions
in the adult years may also help with reversing the
harmful impact of bullying when the victims enter
adulthood. However, no studies have yet tested this
hypothesis.
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
411
 Mechanisms accounting for poor outcomes
among young victims of bullying: further
targets for building resilience
The evidence supporting the persistent impact of
bullying
victimisation
on
poor
outcomes
up
to
adulthood is intriguing. However, the developmen-
tal
processes
that
translate
childhood
bullying
victimisation into poor outcomes up to adulthood
remain unclear. How can abusive behaviours per-
petrated
by
other
pupils
and
classmates
leave
marks observable well into adult life? We need a
better understanding of these interactive processes
to identify specific targets for intervention pro-
grammes aimed at reducing the harmful outcomes
of being
bullied
and building
resilience among
young victims.
Two possible processes that have been examined
refer to hypotheses derived from theories of the
biological embedding of stress (Danese & McEwen,
2012). One such process relates to variation in the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis activity,
commonly
associated
with
the
neurobiology
of
stress. A study from the E-Risk cohort using a group
of MZ twins discordant on bullying victimisation
showed that bullying victimisation in childhood was
associated with a blunted salivary cortisol response
(Ouellet-Morin, Danese et al., 2011), which in turn,
was associated with problems with social interac-
tions and aggressive behaviours among children who
were victims of bullying or physical maltreatment
(Ouellet-Morin, Odgers et al., 2011). These findings
are in line with other studies showing an association
between bullying victimisation and daily hyposecre-
tion of cortisol among girls (Vaillancourt et al., 2008)
and also among adolescents following laboratory-
induced stressful situation (Calhoun et al., 2014).
But what processes might activate this reduction in
cortisol level after children have experienced violence
repeatedly over time? Using the same group of
discordant MZ twins from the E-Risk cohort, a
further study showed that the bullied twins had
higher methylation levels on 5-HTTLPR compared to
their nonbullied cotwins (Ouellet-Morin et al., 2013).
In addition, findings from this study showed that
higher levels of methylation were associated with
lower levels of cortisol response. Effects of this kind
may serve as an interface between childhood bully-
ing victimisation and later vulnerability to stress and
psychopathology. Interventions focussed on teach-
ing coping skills for dealing with stressful situations
and managing stress reactions could have a signif-
icant impact on reducing the risk of mental health
problems among young victims of bullying.
Another possibility refers to the fact that poor
adult health outcomes are a function of the persis-
tence of early symptoms that developed at the time of
the bullying exposure. For example, mental health
problems like depression and anxiety are likely to
persist, especially when they manifest early in life
(Costello, Mustillo, Erkanli, Keeler, & Angold, 2003).
Furthermore, most adult psychiatric disorders are
preceded by a juvenile history of mental health
problems: 75% of adults with a diagnosis for a
psychiatric disorder had met diagnostic criteria
before the age of 18, 50% prior to the age of 15
(Kim-Cohen et al., 2003). Untreated signs of psy-
chological distress that appear early in life could be
the precursors to a life of poor health, both mental
and physical. Early interventions targeting early
symptoms of mental health problems could success-
fully mitigate poor outcomes among bullied children
as these symptoms can become chronic and persist
into adulthood.
Although research findings show that being bul-
lied independently contributes to adjustment prob-
lems, it does not operate in isolation. Children who
are the victims of bullying are not only at risk of
developing early symptoms of mental health prob-
lems. They enter a cycle of violence and abuse that
may perpetuate itself over time and across settings
(Finkelhor,
Ormrod,
&
Turner,
2007b,
2007c).
Therefore, being bullied in childhood is often pre-
ceded by other forms of abuse at home, and followed
by further abuse from peers or adults, forming the
first stages in a cycle of victimisation that perpetu-
ates over time and across situations. Although
empirical evidence indicates that each different form
of abuse independently contributes to poor out-
comes, it may be the accumulation of various types
of violence exposure in childhood that is at the
source of physical and mental health problems in
later life, more so than only one type alone (Finkelhor
et al., 2007a, 2007b).
Psychological mechanisms including emotional
and social-cognitive processing have also been asso-
ciated with peer victimisation and bullying and could
account for the persistence of its associated poor
outcomes. For example, appraisals of control (Cat-
terson & Hunter, 2010), hostile attributions and
social
perspective
awareness
(Hoglund
&
Lead-
beater, 2007) and coping self-efficacy (Singh &
Bussey, 2010) have all been associated with peer
victimisation,
and
mediation
analyses
further
revealed that they accounted for various measures
of adjustment problems such as loneliness, social
anxiety and withdrawal during adolescence (Catter-
son & Hunter, 2010; Hoglund & Leadbeater, 2007;
Singh & Bussey, 2010). Furthermore, poorer emo-
tion recognition abilities have been observed among
victims of relational bullying, and especially for
emotions of anger and fear (Woods, Wolke, Nowicki,
& Hall, 2009). These findings suggest that interven-
tions aimed at changing such cognitive appraisals
could be helpful in preventing the development, and
perhaps also the persistence, of mental health prob-
lems among victims of bullying.
Being bullied in childhood has a pervasive impact
on victims’ lives. Another process through which
bullying may impact later outcomes refers to the
damaging effect of childhood bullying victimisation
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
412
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 on several domains and not only one aspect of
individuals’ development. Indeed, being bullied in
childhood has been shown to have a detrimental
effect on life opportunities for building the human
and social capital young children need to overcome
adversity and live successful and fulfilling lives. The
studies reviewed above show that bullied children
end up lacking social relationships, having poor
physical health and suffering from financial difficul-
ties as adults. These findings indicate that a lack of
resources and support may be a plausible pathway
to explain the persistence of poor health outcomes
among young victims of bullying.
Although described separately, these processes
are likely to operate together in contributing to
atypical
development.
Multidisciplinary
research
across different levels, from biological embedding of
stress to poly-victimisation, is essential to under-
stand the underpinning of mental health difficulties
among victims of bullying. Animal models may also
provide useful insight here because they allow for
direct manipulation of bullying exposure (or social
defeat) and offer an opportunity to explore biological
mechanisms in more depth. For example, an exper-
iment on mice demonstrated the role of brain-
derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) in the mesolimbic
dopamine pathway to explain social aversion among
mice exposed to repeated aggression (Berton et al.,
2006). Additional studies like this one will guide and
orient future human research aimed at understand-
ing the development of mental health difficulties in
young victims of bullying.
Antibullying policy
Considerable efforts are in place to reduce bullying
behaviours and limit its impact on the victims. The
UK Government’s approach to bullying is sum-
marised in a document which outlines the remit of
schools for tackling bullying, their legal obligations,
and some effective antibullying strategies (Depart-
ment for Education, 2017). It provides a definition of
bullying, reviews the safeguarding of children and
young people and the underpinnings of criminal law.
It also provides advices to teachers and school staff
on how to tackle and prevent bullying. Attention is
also given on how to attend to young victims of
bullying. Since the late 90s, all schools in the United
Kingdom must have in place an antibullying policy.
These policies include – among other information –
principles and values of the school, a definition of
bullying, and advice on how to record and report
bullying incidents. This document must be pre-
sented to and discussed with the pupils as well as
shared with parents and school staff. Each school
develops its own policy and framework for tackling
bullying with guidance from the Government. All
schools have the ownership of their policies, and as a
consequence, their content and implementation vary
considerably
from
one
school
to
another.
Furthermore, there has not been any evaluation for
determining the impact of this national initiative on
reducing
bullying
behaviours
and
their
conse-
quences on youth mental health and well-being.
Australia is one of the first countries to have
developed a national policy for the prevention and
management of bullying and other aggressive beha-
viours, the National Safe Schools Framework (NSSF).
This framework lists 11 principles to assist schools
in providing a safe environment to their pupils.
These include: promote care, respect and coopera-
tion and value diversity; recognise the critical impor-
tance
of
preservice
and
ongoing
professional
development in creating a safe and supportive school
environment; focus on policies that are proactive and
oriented towards prevention and intervention; and
take action to protect children from all forms of
abuse and neglect. Comparisons of cross-sectional
data across 4 years indicate that rates of bullying
have only moderately declined and reports from staff
suggest poor development and implementation of the
NSSF strategies (e.g. few received training, limited
funds invested in bullying) (Cross et al., 2011).
Findings from the United States are somewhat
more encouraging. A recent study examined the
effectiveness of the antibullying legislation using
data from 25 different states. Students living in a
state complying to at least one guideline recom-
mended by the Department of Education had a 24%
reduction in reporting of being bullied (Hatzen-
buehler et al., 2015). Findings further reported the
legal components that were consistently associated
with a reduction in bullying victimisation: statement
of scope, description of prohibited behaviours, and
requirements for districts to develop and implement
local policies. In other words, details, specificity and
clarity of the legislative components were all associ-
ated with greater success.
A study reported on the changes in bullying
behaviours, mental health and mental health service
use in Finland (Sourander, Lempinen, & Brunstein
Klomek, 2016). A compelling feature of this study is
that it capitalises on data collected before and
after the introduction of a nationwide school-based
antibullying programme in 2009 in this country.
Findings indicated no decrease in rates of bullying
behaviour between 2005 and 2013, despite the
implementation of antibullying programmes nation-
wide. The authors also noticed no increase in mental
health problems between 1989 and 2003, but an
increase in mental health service use during that
same period. The authors suggest that a combina-
tion of antibullying and mental health interventions
may offer better results. This is an interesting
conclusion that deserves further attention.
Antibullying interventions in schools
Numerous school-based prevention and intervention
programmes have emerged in recent years with the
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
413
 aim of reducing bullying behaviours. Such pro-
grammes vary widely with regard to their focus and
methods of delivery. For example, some interven-
tions target the implementation of new curriculum.
They commonly include videotapes, lectures and
discussions around the topic of bullying with the aim
of promoting attitudes against bullying and prosocial
behaviours. They are usually limited in time and in
outreach by involving mostly classrooms for a few
weeks. Instead, a whole-school approach imple-
ments
rules
and
sanctions
school
wide,
trains
teachers in methods for handling bullying, teaches
conflict resolution strategies and offers counselling
support. It also involves a wide range of people
including all pupils, teachers, school staff, families
and when possible, communities. Examples of such
programmes are the well-known Olweus Bullying
Prevention Program (Olweus, 1994) and the KiVa
Anti-Bullying Program (Salmivalli, Kaukiainen, &
Voeten, 2005). The KiVa programme, a whole-school
intervention based on social-cognitive theory, is one
of the most widely used interventions and one that
combines several elements offered by other pro-
grammes.
KiVa was built from two lines of research, one on
aggressive and bullying behaviours and one on the
participant roles of bullying (K€
arn€
a et al., 2011).
This intervention programme includes a combina-
tion of universal and indicated actions to prevent
and stop the occurrences of bullying incidents. The
universal actions focus at influencing youth’s reac-
tion
when
witnessing
bullying
instances
(by-
standers). The idea here is to change the attitude of
the classmates in order to reduce the reward and the
motivation of those who bully others. The emphasis
is on empathy, self-efficacy and antibullying atti-
tudes. The indicated actions focus on the victims and
the bullies more specifically. This programme is not
limited to implementing a school ethos and goes
beyond by providing staff practical tools such as
video films, computer games, and Internet forum.
This programme has been shown to be effective at
reducing all forms of bullying, including exclusion,
cyber and threats, between 21% up to 63% in older
pupils (Salmivalli, K€
arn€
a, & Poskiparta, 2011) and
also with younger pupils, both self- and peer-
reported (K€
arn€
a et al., 2011).
Systematic reviews have evaluated the effective-
ness of antibullying programmes more generally and
provide encouraging findings with slightly greater
reduction in bullying behaviours than bullying vic-
timisation and associated poor outcomes (Ttofi &
Farrington, 2009a, 2011; Vreeman & Carroll, 2007).
Overall,
school-based
antibullying
programmes
reduced victimisation on average by 17%–20% (Ttofi
& Farrington, 2011). Greater reduction in victimisa-
tion was found for intensive and holistic approaches
involving multiple groups of people and environ-
ments.
Factors
associated
with
better
results
included
parent
training,
improved
playground
supervision, disciplinary methods, school confer-
ences, videos, information for parents, work with
peers, classroom rules and management (Ttofi &
Farrington,
2009b).
Efficient
antibullying
pro-
grammes are important and should be developed
and supported as widely as possible. However, these
programmes are likely to be costly and challenging
for schools from deprived areas which deal with
several other important educational challenges. Fur-
thermore, evaluations of antibullying policies and
school programmes tend to suggest that the likeli-
hood of eradicating bullying behaviour is small and
despite such invaluable programmes, a considerable
proportion of young people will not escape this form
of abuse in their youth. While rigorous study designs
and methodology are needed to advance the exam-
ination of the efficiency of these important pro-
grammes
(Bradshaw,
2015),
efforts
and
funds
should also be invested in interventions focused on
limiting distress and adjustment difficulties among
young victims and possibly by the same token,
preventing long-lasting problems in later life.
Involving potential victims in prevention
programmes
It might be considered controversial to investigate
early factors that could increase the risk of children
and adolescents becoming victims of bullying. This
endeavour goes against a general assumption that
bullying has nothing to do with the unfortunate
victims, but all to do with the perpetrators of bullying
behaviours. However, the search for these predictors
is central to our understanding of the impact of being
bullied in childhood. It is crucial for research to
account for these factors when determining later
outcomes associated with being bullied in childhood.
From a prevention perspective, it is also imperative
to identify characteristics that render children vul-
nerable for bullying victimisation (Espelage, 2016).
Although prospective longitudinal studies remain
the exception in this line of research, findings indi-
cate that both contextual and individual factors are
associated with youths’ risk of being bullied. A meta-
analytic investigation and empirical studies have
reported that being the victim of bullying, including
being a bully/victim, is associated with a range of
factors including male gender, young age, low social
competence, difficulties solving social problems and
social
rejection/isolation
(Analitis
et al.,
2009;
Bowes et al., 2009; Cook, Williams, Guerra, Kim, &
Sadek, 2010). In line with the definition of bullying,
research has demonstrated that victims of bullying
are a vulnerable group who show difficulties prior to
being bullied. Some longitudinal studies report an
increased risk of being bullied in childhood asso-
ciated with early emotional problems, such as with-
drawal, anxiety or depression (Arseneault et al.,
2006; Bond, Carlin, Thomas, Rubin, & Patton,
2001; Kaltiala-Heino, Fr€
ojd, & Marttunen, 2010;
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
414
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 Lester, Dooley, Cross, & Shaw, 2012; Siegel, La
Greca, & Harrison, 2009). In addition, preschoolers
who display aggressive behaviours (Barker, Boivin
et al., 2008; Jansen, Veenstra, Ormel, Verhulst, &
Reijneveld, 2011; Snyder et al., 2003) and attention-
deficit/hyperactivity and oppositional defiant prob-
lems (Verlinden et al., 2015) are more likely to
experience peer victimisation and bullying in the
school years.
The role of families has also been emphasised as
an important factor associated with the risk of being
bullied (Beran & Violato, 2004; Jansen et al., 2011;
Lereya, Samara et al., 2013; Wolke & Skew, 2012b):
low parental educational level, negative parenting
such abuse and neglect, poor communication, mate-
rial deprivation, parental depression, lack of super-
vision and involvement, and low socioeconomic
status have all been associated with small to mod-
erate risks of being a victim of bullying and being a
bully/victim. Other contextual factors associated
with bullying victimisation include school character-
istics such as overcrowding and the number of
children receiving free school meals (Barnes, Belsky,
Broomfield, & Melhuish, 2006; Bowes et al., 2009).
Twins studies have pushed further the search for
factors associated with being bullied by showing it is
partly heritable. One study found that genetic influ-
ences accounted for over two-thirds of individual
differences in children’s bullying victimisation dur-
ing the first 2 years of their formal schooling (Ball
et al., 2008). This finding does not imply there is a
gene for being bullied in childhood. Rather, it sug-
gests that heritable symptoms such as emotional
and behavioural problems mediate these genetic
influences. Environmental factors not shared by
people in a family accounted for the remaining
variance in bullying victimisation, supporting a
study which has shown that the environment also
influences
children’s
risk
of
peer
victimisation
(Brendgen et al., 2008).
The mechanisms explaining how specific charac-
teristics and environments translate into a risk for
children being bullied are not fully understood:
anxious and depressed children may be perceived
as easy targets who will not retaliate when other
children are abusive towards them. Aggressive chil-
dren may attract hostility from other children. Con-
textual
factors
may
also
influence
child
characteristics, which in turn affect their risks for
being bullied. For example, one study has shown
that individual characteristics including aggressive-
ness, social isolation, academic performance, proso-
cial behaviour and dislikability accounted for the
effect of social circumstances on preadolescents’
risks for being bullied (Veenstra et al., 2005). How-
ever, another study indicated that despite control for
children’s
emotional
and
behavioural
problems,
physical
maltreatment
and
school
overcrowding
were independently associated with being bullied
(Bowes et al., 2009). Thus, factors in children’s
family and school environments may increase their
likelihood of being bullied, over and above their
personal characteristics.
There is no such thing as a profile for the typical
young victim of bullying. In addition to contextual
and individual factors, circumstances such as mov-
ing to a new school or starting to wear glasses may
also put some children at risk of being bullied.
However,
evidence
indicates
that
youths
from
deprived
socioeconomic
backgrounds,
who
have
previously experienced violence victimisation and
who already show a vulnerability for developing
mental health problems have an increased risk of
being bullied, via both genetic and environmental
pathways. This body of research has identified
individual and contextual factors among children
and adolescents that contribute at making them
potential victims of bullying. It is important for
prevention
strategies
to
consider
these
factors
because they could become targets of fruitful early
interventions to stop some children from being
bullied in the first place.
A public health approach aimed at preventing
vulnerable children from becoming the targets of
bullying may be an effective strategy to reduce
society’s burden related to bullying. For example,
instructing young children (and especially those at
risk of becoming the target of bullying) skills for
facing adversity and standing up to bullying may
contribute to reducing this form of abuse. Prevention
programmes aimed at building resilience could also
benefit young children likely to be exposed to this
form of abuse. Providing children with tips on how to
make and keep friends may be an example of such
intervention (van Harmelen et al., 2017) and this
may be especially important in this era of digital age
when children and adolescents are spending more
time on mobile devices. Involving families could also
be an additional asset of such programmes (Bowes
et al., 2010). However, it is important to remember at
this point that young children who are victims of
bullying already show signs of vulnerability and are
possibly at risk for developing difficulties despite
their experience with bullying. While prevention and
intervention programmes may improve the lives of
young victims by reducing the likelihood of one form
of abuse, it is unlikely that alone, they will solve all
youths’ problems.
What next?
The evidence reviewed above provides strong and
robust support for an independent contribution of
childhood bullying victimisation to the development
of poor outcomes throughout the life span, including
mental, physical and socioeconomic outcomes. How-
ever, several important questions remain unan-
swered. Here are a few.
First, there are increasing concerns about the
impact of cyberbullying and Internet harassment.
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
415
 This form of abuse deserves careful attention given
the widespread use of social media by young people
today. While it is not clear whether harassment on the
Internet and social media is a true form of bullying
(the perpetrator being sometimes anonymous, it may
not always be a form of peer victimisation where
power imbalance exist), it has been associated with
symptoms of mental health problems (for a review see
George & Odgers, 2015) and has even been found to
be more strongly associated with suicide ideation
compared to traditional forms of bullying by some
(van Geel, Vedder, & Tanilon, 2014) but not others
(Przybylski & Bowes, 2017). The anonymity conferred
by online interactions may further empower the
perpetrators because they know they are less likely
to face the consequences of their actions. Cyberbul-
lying remains, however, a less frequent form of
harassment compared to other types of bullying
(Olweus, 2013; Przybylski & Bowes, 2017; Smith
et al., 2008) and needs to be examined in the context
of other forms of victimisation to ensure its indepen-
dent contribution to poor outcomes.
Second, considerable attention has been focused on
bullying in the childhood and adolescent years. Bul-
lying also takes place among adults with potentially
damaging consequences, domestic violence poten-
tially being one such example. Some research has
been conducted among specific groups such as pris-
oners (Ireland, 2011) but this line of work could be
extended to representative population of adults. For
example, bullying in the workplace has gained con-
siderable interest recently. Institutional bullying
operates within an organisation’s rules and policies
and takes place, typically but not exclusively, during
the adult years. There are suggestions that this form of
bullying affect workers’ morale and productivity.
Research should determine whether it also con-
tributes to mental health problems among adults, as
this would also have an important economic impact.
Third,
the
role
of
genetic
factors
has
been
neglected
when
it
comes
to
understanding
the
impact of being bullied in childhood. It is important
to consider genetic influences to fully recognise the
extent to which bullying affects poor outcomes in
later years and identify most at-risk groups. It is also
important to explore the genetic influences that
contribute to the risk of being bullied. This may
provide fruitful avenues for preventing young chil-
dren from being bullied in the first place. As an
example, the use of polygenic risk scores could help
identify heritable characteristics associated with the
risk of being bullied at a young age.
Fourth, the examination of the outcomes associ-
ated with childhood bullying victimisation should
not be limited to individual consequences and could
be extended to societal impacts, including institu-
tions and systems. Emerging studies on the mental
health service use are good examples. Research
could include measures of the consequences of
bullying victimisation on health institutions, social
services and the education system. In addition,
studies could also include measures of economic
impact.
Fifth, developing new innovative and rigorous
research designs remains crucial despite the strong
evidence reviewed above showing that being bullied
in childhood can have a significant harmful impact.
The use of natural experiments and other innovative
study designs to support causal inferences of the
role of bullying victimisation could strengthen cur-
rent evidence. The use of animal models, where
researchers can exercise greater control over the
environment, can help unravel the mechanisms
behind poor outcomes associated with being bullied.
Modifications in animal social hierarchies are well
suited to examine the impact of bullying victimisa-
tion and easily allow the observation of associations
between changes in social status and changes in
outcomes. Natural experiments such as the discor-
dant monozygotic twin design also have the potential
to strengthen conclusions by controlling for a wide
range of confounding factors including genetic influ-
ences. Better control of confounding variables and
especially other forms of victimisation is also crucial.
The use of propensity score models (Jaffee et al.,
2012) could help strengthening the evidence accu-
mulated thus far.
Sixth, there is a lack of neuroimaging findings on
structural and functional brain differences among
children and adolescents’ victims of bullying. Based
on recent review of studies in youths who experi-
enced maltreatment (McCrory, De Brito, & Viding,
2010), we would expect an effect of bullying on some
brain structures and/or functioning. Seventh, inter-
vention programmes should be systematically eval-
uated to inform on the effectiveness of what we are
currently doing to stop bullying, what works and
what we need to change.
Conclusions
Based
on
existing
evidence
thus
far,
bullying
should be considered as another form of childhood
abuse
alongside
physical
maltreatment
and
neglect. Several rigorous studies reviewed above
provide strong and robust support for an indepen-
dent contribution of childhood bullying victimisa-
tion
to
the
development
of
poor
outcomes
throughout the life span, including mental, phys-
ical and socioeconomic outcomes. Further research
is needed to better understand the mechanisms
explaining the emergence and the persistence of
these
poor
outcomes.
In
the
meantime,
efforts
focusing on stopping bullying behaviours should
not only be supported but also be widened to
provide appropriate help to the young victims and
prevent children and adolescents from becoming
the target of bullying.
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
416
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 Acknowledgements
LA is the Mental Health Leadership Fellow of the UK
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). The
E-Risk Study is funded by the Medical Research
Council (MRC grants G9806489 and 61002190). She
thanks
Barbara
Maughan,
Andrea
Danese
and
Timothy Matthews for their helpful comments on an
earlier draft of this manuscript, and to Leah Wolsten-
holme
for
technical
assistance.
The
author
has
declared
that
she
has
no
competing
or
potential
conflicts of interest.
Correspondence
Louise Arseneault, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology
and Neuroscience, King’s College London, Box Number
P080, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, UK; Email:
louise.arseneault@kcl.ac.uk
Key points
• Research has shown that being bullied in childhood contributes to children’s and adolescents’ adjustment
problems and can lead to poor outcomes throughout the life span, including mental, physical and
socioeconomic difficulties.
• Efforts aimed at decreasing bullying behaviour should reduce associated problems among young victims.
• Current antibullying programmes have provided encouraging findings; however, it is unlikely they will
eradicate bullying behaviours. This leaves youths vulnerable to becoming targets of bullying behaviours, and
to experiencing difficulties associated with having been bullied.
• To reduce poor outcomes associated with childhood bullying victimisation, interventions could widen their
scope to focus on increasing resilience among young victims of bullying and on reducing the risk of
victimisation among vulnerable youth.
References
Almqvist, F., Ik€
aheimo, K., Kumpulainen, K., Tuompo-Johans-
son, E., Linna, S.-L., Puura, K., . . . & Piha, J. (1999). Design
and subjects of a Finnish epidemiological study on psychi-
atric disorders in childhood. European Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 8(Suppl 4), 3–6.
Analitis, F., Klein Velderman, M., Ravens-Sieberer, U., Detmar,
S., Erhart, M., Herdman, M., . . . & the European Kidscreen
Group (2009). Being bullied: Associated factors in children
and adolescents 8 to 18 years in 11 European countries.
Pediatrics, 123, 569–577.
Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., Fisher, H.L., Polanczyk, G.,
Moffitt, T.E., & Caspi, A. (2011). Childhood trauma and
children’s emerging psychotic symptoms: A genetically sen-
sitive longitudinal cohort study. American Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 168, 65–72.
Arseneault, L., Milne, B.J., Taylor, A., Adams, F., Delgado, K.,
Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T.E. (2008). Being bullied as an
environmentally mediated contributing factor to children’s
internalizing problems: A study of twins discordant for
victimization. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,
162, 145–150.
Arseneault, L., Walsh, E., Trzesniewski, K., Newcombe, R.,
Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T.E. (2006). Bullying victimization
uniquely contributes to adjustment problems in young
children: A nationally representative cohort study. Pedi-
atrics, 118, 130–138.
Baldwin, J.R., Arseneault, L., Odgers, C., Belsky, D.W.,
Matthews, T., Ambler, A., . . . & Danese, A. (2016). Childhood
bullying victimization predicts overweight in young adult-
hood: A cohort study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 78, 1094–
1103.
Ball, H., Arseneault, L., Taylor, A., Maughan, B., Caspi, A., &
Moffitt, T.E. (2008). Genetic and environmental influences
on victims, bullies and bully-victims in childhood. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49, 104–112.
Barker, E.D., Arseneault, L., Brendgen, M., Fontaine, N., &
Maughan, B. (2008). Joint development of bullying and
victimization in adolescence: Relationships to delinquency
and self-harm. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 1030–1038.
Barker, E.D., Boivin, M., Brendgen, M., Fontaine, N., Arse-
neault, L., Vitaro, F., . . . & Tremblay, R.E. (2008). Predictive
validity and early predictors of trajectories in preschool.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 65, 1185–1192.
Barnes, J., Belsky, J., Broomfield, K.A., Melhuish, E., & the
National Evaluation of Sure Start (NESS) Research Team
(2006). Neighbourhood deprivation, school disorder and
academic achievement in primary schools in deprived com-
munities in England. International Journal of Behavioral
Development, 30, 127–136.
Beran, T.N., & Violato, C. (2004). A model of childhood
perceived
peer
harassment:
Analyses
of
the
Canadian
National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth Data.
The Journal of Psychology, 138, 129–147.
Berton, O., McClung, C.A., DiLeone, R.J., Krishnan, V.,
Renthal, W., Russo, S.J., . . . & Nestler, E.J. (2006). Essential
role of BDNF in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway in social
defeat stress. Science, 311, 864–868.
Boden, J.M., van Stockum, S., Horwood, L.J., & Fergusson,
D.M. (2016). Bullying victimization in adolescence and
psychotic symptomatology in adulthood: Evidence from a
35-year study. Psychological Medicine, 46, 1311–1320.
Bond, L., Carlin, J.B., Thomas, L., Rubin, K., & Patton, G.
(2001). Does bullying cause emotional problems? A prospec-
tive study of young teenagers. British Medical Journal, 323,
480–484.
Bowes, L., Arseneault, L., Maughan, B., Taylor, A., Caspi, A., &
Moffitt, T.E. (2009). School, neighborhood and family factors
are
associated with children’s
bullying involvement: A
nationally-representative longitudinal study. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 48,
545–553.
Bowes, L., Joinson, C., Wolke, D., & Lewis, G. (2015). Peer vic-
timisation duringadolescence andits impact on depression in
early adulthood: Prospective cohort study in the United
Kingdom. British Medical Journal, 350, L2469.
Bowes, L., Maughan, B., Ball, H., Shakoor, S., Ouellet-Morin,
I., Caspi, A., . . . & Arseneault, L. (2013). Chronic bullying
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
417
 victimization across school transition: The role of genetic
and
environmental
influences.
Development
and
Psy-
chopathology, 25, 333–346.
Bowes, L., Maughan, B., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., & Arseneault,
L. (2010). Families promote emotional and behavioural
resilience to bullying: Evidence of an environmental effect.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51, 809–817.
Bradshaw, C.P. (2015). Translating research to practice in
bullying prevention. American Psychologist, 70, 322–332.
Brendgen, M., Boivin, M., Vitaro, F., Girard, A., Dionne, G., &
Perusse, D. (2008). Gene-environment interaction between
peer victimization and child aggression. Development and
Psychopathology, 20, 455–471.
Brown, S., & Taylor, K. (2008). Bullying, education and
earnings: Evidence from the National Child Development
Study. Economics of Education Review, 27, 387–401.
Brunstein Klomek, A., Sourander, A., & Elonheimo, H. (2015).
Bullying by peers in childhood and effects on psychopathol-
ogy, suicidality, and criminality in adulthood. Lancet Psy-
chiatry, 2, 930–941.
Brunstein Klomek, A., Sourander, A., Niemel€
a, S., Kumpu-
lainen, K., Piha, J., Tamminen, T., . . . & Gould, M.S. (2009).
Childhood bullying behaviors as a risk for suicide attempts
and completed suicides: A population-based birth cohort
study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 254–261.
Calhoun, C.D., Helms, S.W., Heilbron, N., Rudolph, K.D.,
Hastings, P.D., & Prinstein, M.J. (2014). Relational victim-
ization, friendship, and adolescents’ hypothalamic-pitui-
tary-adrenal axis responses to an in vivo social stressor.
Development and Psychopathology, 26, 605–618.
Catterson, J., & Hunter, S.C. (2010). Cognitive mediators of
the effect of peer victimization on loneliness. British Journal
of Educational Psychology, 81, 403–416.
Cook, C.R., Williams, K.R., Guerra, N.G., Kim, T.E., & Sadek,
S. (2010). Predictors of bullying and victimization in child-
hood and adolescence: A meta-analytic investigation. School
Psychology Quarterly, 25, 65–83.
Copeland, W.E., Wolke, D., Angold, A., & Costello, J.E. (2013).
Adult psychiatric outcomes of bullying and being bullied by
peers in childhood and adolescence. JAMA Psychiatry, 70,
419–426.
Copeland, W.E., Wolke, D., Leraya, T., Shanahan, L., Worth-
man, C., & Costello, J.E. (2014). Childhood bullying involve-
ment
predicts
low-grade
systemic
inflammation
into
adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 111, 7570–7575.
Costello, J.E., Angold, A., Burns, B.J., Stangl, D.K., Tweed,
D.L., Erkanli, A., & Worthman, C.M. (1996). The Great
Smoky Mountains study of youth: Goals, design, methods,
and the prevalence of DSM-III-R disorders. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 53, 1129–1136.
Costello, J.E., Mustillo, S., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold, A.
(2003). Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders
in childhood and adolescence. Archives of General Psychia-
try, 60, 837–844.
Cross, D., Epstein, M., Hearn, L., Slee, P., Shaw, T., &
Monks, H. (2011). National safe schools framework: Policy
and practice to reduce bullying in Australian schools.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 35, 398–
404.
Cunningham, T., Hoy, K., & Shannon, C. (2016). Does child-
hood bullying lead to the development of psychotic symp-
toms? A meta-analysis and review of prospective studies.
Psychosis, 8, 48–59.
Danese, A., & McEwen, B.S. (2012). Adverse childhood expe-
riences, allostasis, allostatic load, and age-related disease.
Physiology and Behavior, 106, 29–39.
Department for Education (2017). Preventing and tackling
bullying: Advice for headteachers, staff and governing bod-
ies. London, UK: Department for Education.
Eaves, L.J., Silberg, J.L., Meyer, J.M., Maes, H.H., Simonoff,
E., Pickles, A., . . . & Hewitt, J.K. (1997). Genetics and
developmental psychopathology: 2. The main effects of genes
and environment on behavioral problems in the Virginia
Twin Study of Adolescent Behavioral Development. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 38, 965–980.
Espelage, D.L. (2016). Leveraging school-based research to
inform bullying prevention and policy. American Psycholo-
gist, 71, 768–775.
Evans-Lacko, S., Takizawa, R., Brimblecombe, N., King, D.,
Maughan, B., Knapp, M., & Arseneault, L. (2016). Childhood
bullying victimisation is associated with use of mental
health services over 5 decades: A longitudinal nationally-
representative cohort study. Psychological Medicine, 47,
127–135.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., Shannon, F.T., & Lawton,
J.M. (1989). The Christchurch Child Development Study: A
review of epidemiological findings. Paediatric and Perinatal
Epidemiology, 3, 278–301.
Finkelhor, D., Ormrod, R.K., & Turner, H.A. (2007a). Poly-
victimization: A neglected component in child victimization.
Child Abuse and Neglect, 31, 7–26.
Finkelhor, D., Ormrod, R.K., & Turner, H.A. (2007b). Polyvic-
timization and trauma in a national longitudinal cohort.
Development and Psychopathology, 19, 149–166.
Finkelhor, D., Ormrod, R.K., & Turner, H.A. (2007c). Re-
victimization patterns in a national longitudinal sample of
children and youth. Child Abuse and Neglect, 31, 479–502.
Fisher, H.L., Moffitt, T.E., Houts, R.M., Belsky, D., Arseneault,
L., & Caspi, A. (2012). Bullying victimisation and risk of self
harm in early adolescence: Longitudinal cohort study.
British Medical Journal, 344, e2683.
Geoffroy, M.-C., Boivin, M., Arseneault, L., Turecki, G., Vitaro,
F., Brendgen, M., . . . & C^
ot�
e, S. (2016). Associations between
peer victimization and suicidal ideation and suicide attempt
during adolescence: Results from a prospective population-
based cohort. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 55, 99–105.
George, M.J., & Odgers, C.L. (2015). Seven fears and the
science of how mobile technologies may be influencing
adolescents in the digital age. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 10, 832–851.
Gibb, S.J., Horwood, J.L., & Fergusson, D.M. (2011). Bullying
victimization/perpetration in childhood and later adjust-
ment: Findings from a 30 year longitudinal study. Journal of
Aggression, Conflict, and Peace Research, 3, 82–88.
Glew, G.M., Fan, M.-Y., Katon, W., & Rivara, F. (2008). Bullying
and school safety. Journal of Pediatrics, 152, 123–128.
Hatzenbuehler, M.L., Schwab-Reese, L., Ranapurwala, S.I.,
Hertz, M.F., & Ramirez, M.R. (2015). Associations between
antibullying policies and bullying in 25 states. JAMA Pedi-
atrics, 169, 1–8.
Herba, C.M., Ferdinand, R.F., Stijnen, T., Veenstra, R., Olde-
hinkel, A.J., Ormel, J., & Verhulst, F.C. (2008). Victimisa-
tion and suicide ideation in the TRAILS study: Specific
vulnerabilities of victims. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 49, 867–876.
Hoglund, W.L., & Leadbeater, B.J. (2007). Managing threat: Do
social-cognitive processes mediate the link between peer
victimization and adjustment problems in early adoles-
cence? Journal of Research on Adolescence, 17, 525–540.
Ireland, J.L. (2011). Bullying in prisons: Bringing research up
to date. Bullying in different contexts (pp. 137–156). Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jaffee, S.R., Strait, L.B., & Odgers, C.l. (2012). From correlates
to causes: Can quasi-experimental studies and statistical
innovations bring us closer to identifying the causes of
antisocial behavior? Psychological Bulletin, 138, 272–295.
Jansen, D.E.M.C., Veenstra, R., Ormel, J., Verhulst, F.C., &
Reijneveld, S.A. (2011). Early risk factors for being a bully,
victims,
or
bully/victim
in
late
elementary
and
early
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
418
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 secondary
education:
The
longitudinal
TRAILS
study.
BioMed Central Public Health, 11, 1–7.
Juvonen, J., Graham, S., & Schuster, M.A. (2003). Bullying
among young adolescents: The strong, the weak, and the
troubled. Pediatrics, 112, 1231–1237.
Kaltiala-Heino, R., Fr€
ojd, S., & Marttunen, M. (2010). Involve-
ment in bullying and depression in a 2-year follow-up in
middle adolescence. European Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry, 19, 45–55.
Kaltiala-Heino, R., Rimpel€
a, M., Rantanen, P., & Rimpel€
a, A.
(2000). Bullying at school: An indicator of adolescents at risk
for mental disorders. Journal of Adolescence, 23, 661–674.
K€
arn€
a, A., Voeten, M., Little, T.D., Poskiparta, E., Kaljonen, A.,
& Salmivalli, C. (2011). A large-scale evaluation of the KiVa
Antibullying Program: Grades 4-6. Child Development, 82,
311–330.
Kelleher, I., Keeley, H., Corcoran, P., Ramsay, H., Wasserman,
C., Carli, V., . . . & Cannon, M. (2013). Childhood trauma and
psychosis in a prospective cohort study: Cause, effect, and
directionality. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 734–
741.
Kim, Y.S., Leventhal, B.L., Koh, Y.-J., Hubbard, A., & Boyce,
T.W. (2006). School bullying and youth violence: Causes or
consequences of psychopathologic behavior? Archives of
General Psychiatry, 63, 1035–1041.
Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., Harrington, H., Milne,
B.J., & Poulton, R. (2003). Prior juvenile diagnoses in adults
with
mental
disorder:
Developmental
follow-back
of
a
prospective-longitudinal cohort. Archives of General Psychi-
atry, 60, 709–717.
Leff, S.S., & Waasdorp, T.E. (2013). Effect of aggression and
bullying on children and adolescents: Implications for
prevention and intervention. Current Psychiatry Reports,
15, 343.
Lereya, T., Samara, M., & Wolke, D. (2013). Parenting behavior
and the risk of becoming a victim and a bully/victim: A meta-
analysis study. Child Abuse and Neglect, 37, 1091–1108.
Lereya, T., Winsper, C., Heron, J., Lewis, G., Gunnell, D.,
Fisher, H.L., & Wolke, D. (2013). Being bullied during
childhood and the prospective pathways to self-harm in late
adolescence. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 52, 608–618.
Lester, L., Dooley, J., Cross, D., & Shaw, T. (2012). Internal-
ising symptoms: An antecedent or precedent in adolescent
peer victimization. Australian Journal of Guidance and
Counselling, 22, 173–189.
Livingstone, S., & Smith, P.K. (2014). Research Review: Harms
experienced by child users of online and mobile technolo-
gies: The nature, prevalence and management of sexual and
aggressive risks in the digital age. Journal of Child Psychol-
ogy and Psychiatry, 55, 635–654.
Mackie, C.J., Castellanos-Ryan, N., & Conrod, P.J. (2011).
Developmental trajectories of psychotic-like experiences
across adolescence: Impact of victimization and substance
use. Psychological Medicine, 41, 47–58.
McCrory, E., De Brito, S.A., & Viding, E. (2010). Research
Review: The neurobiology and genetics of maltreatment and
adversity. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51,
1079–1095.
McDougall, P., & Vaillancourt, T. (2015). Long-term adult
outcomes of peer victimization in childhood and adoles-
cence. American Psychologist, 70, 300–310.
Moffitt, T.E., & the E-Risk Study Team (2002). Teen-aged
mothers in contemporary Britain. Journal of Child Psychol-
ogy and Psychiatry, 43, 727–742.
Nansel, T.R., Craig, W., Overpeck, M.F., Saluja, G., Ruan,
J.W., & the Health Behaviour in School-aged Children
Bullying Analyses Working Group (2004). Cross-national
consistency in the relationship between bullying behaviours
and psychosocial adjustment. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, 158, 730–736.
Nansel, T.R., Overpeck, M., Pilla, R.S., Ruan, J., Simons-
Morton, B., & Scheidt, P. (2001). Bullying behaviors among
US youth: Prevalence and association with psychosocial
adjustment. Journal of the American Medical Association,
285, 2094–2100.
Niemel€
a, S., Brunstein-Klomek, A., Sillanm€
aki, L., Helenius,
H., Piha, J., Kumpulainen, K., . . . & Sourander, A. (2011).
Childhood bullying behaviors at age eight and substance use
at age 18 among males: A nationwide prospective study.
Addictive Behaviors, 36, 256–260.
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school: What we know and what
we can do. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Olweus, D. (1994). Annotation: Bullying at School: Basic facts
and effects of a school based intervention program. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 35, 1171–1190.
Olweus, D. (2013). School bullying: Development and some
important challenges. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology,
9, 751–780.
Ouellet-Morin, I., Danese, A., Bowes, L., Shakoor, S., Ambler,
A., Pariante, C., . . . & Arseneault, L. (2011). A discordant MZ
twin design shows blunted cortisol reactivity among bullied
children. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 50, 574–582.
Ouellet-Morin, I., Odgers, C.L., Danese, A., Bowes, L., Sha-
koor, S., Papadopoulos, A.S., . . . & Arseneault, L. (2011).
Blunted cortisol responses to stress signal social and
behavioral problems among maltreated/bullied 12-year-old
children. Biological Psychiatry, 70, 1016–1023.
Ouellet-Morin, I., Wong, C.C.Y., Danese, A., Pariante, C.M.,
Papadopoulos, A.S., Mill, J., & Arseneault, L. (2013).
Increased SERT methylation is associated with bullying
victimization and blunted cortisol response to stress in
childhood: A longitudinal study of discordant MZ twins.
Psychological Medicine, 43, 1813–1823.
Perren, S., Ettekal, I., & Ladd, G. (2013). The impact of peer
victimization on later maladjustment: Mediating and mod-
erating effects of hostile and self-blaming attributions.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 46–55.
Power, C., & Elliott, J. (2006). Cohort profile: 1958 British
birth cohort (National Child Development Study). Interna-
tional Journal of Epidemiology, 35, 34–41.
Przybylski,
A.,
&
Bowes,
L.
(2017).
Cyberbullying
and
adolescent
well-being
in
England:
A
population-based
cross-sectional study. Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, 1,
19–26.
Radford, L., Corral, S., Bradley, C., & Fisher, H.L. (2013). The
prevalence and impact of child maltreatment and other
types of victimization in the UK: Findings from a population
survey of caregivers, children and young people and young
adults. Child Abuse and Neglect, 37, 801–813.
Rudolph, K.D., Troop-Gordon, W., & Granger, D.A. (2011). Indi-
vidual differences in biological stress responses moderate the
contribution of early peer victimization to subsequent depres-
sive symptoms. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 214, 209–219.
Rutter, M., Pickles, A., Murray, R., & Eaves, L. (2001). Testing
hypotheses on specific environmental causal effects on
behaviour. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 291–324.
Salmivalli, C., K€
arn€
a, A., & Poskiparta, E. (2011). Counteract-
ing bullying in Finland: The KiVa program and its effects on
different forms of being bullied. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 35, 405–411.
Salmivalli, C., Kaukiainen, A., & Voeten, M. (2005). Anti-
bullying intervention: Implementation and outcome. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 465–487.
Sch€
afer, M., Korn, S., Brodbeck, F.C., Wolke, D., & Schulz, H.
(2005). Bullying roles on changing contexts: The stability of
victim and bully roles from primary to secondary school.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 29, 323–
335.
Scholte, R.H.J., Engels, R.C.M.E., Overbeek, G., de Kemp,
R.A.T., & Haselager, G.J.T. (2007). Stability in bullying and
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
419
 victimization and its association with social adjustment in
childhood and adolescence. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 35, 217–228.
Schreier, A., Wolke, D., Thomas, K., Horwood, J., Hollis, C.,
Gunnell, D., . . . & Harrison, G. (2009). Prospective study of
peer victimization in childhood and psychotic symptoms in a
nonclinical population at age 12 years. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 66, 527–536.
Sibold, J., Edwards, E., Murray-Close, D., & Hudziak, J.J.
(2015). Physical activity, sadness, and suicidality in bullied
US adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 54, 808–815.
Siegel, R.S., La Greca, A.M., & Harrison, H.M. (2009). Peer
victimization and social anxiety in adolescents: Prospective
and reciprocal relationships. Journal of Youth and Adoles-
cence, 38, 1096–1109.
Silberg, J.L., Copeland, W., Linker, J., Moore, A.A., Roberson-
Nay, R., & York, T.P. (2016). Psychiatric outcomes of
bullying victimization: A study of discordant monozygotic
twins. Psychological Medicine, 46, 1875–1883.
Singh, P., & Bussey, K. (2010). Peer victimization and psycho-
logical maladjustment: The mediating role of coping self-
efficacy. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 420–433.
Singham, T., Viding, E., Schoeler, T., Arseneault, L., Ronald,
A., Cecil, C.M., . . . & Pingault, J-B. (2017). Concurrent and
longitudinal impact of peer victimisation on mental health:
A tale of vulnerability and resilience. JAMA Psychiatry.
Advanced
online
publication.
https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2017.2678.
Smith, P.K., Mahdavi, J., Carvalho, M., Fisher, S., Russell, S.,
& Tippett, N. (2008). Cyberbullying: Its nature and impact in
secondary school pupils. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 49, 376–385.
Snyder, J., Brooker, M., Patrick, R.M., Snyder, A., Schrepfer-
man, L., & Stoolmiller, M. (2003). Observed peer victimiza-
tion during early elementary school: Continuity, growth, and
relation to risk for child antisocial and depressive behaviour.
Child Development, 74, 1881–1898.
Sourander,
A.,
Brunstein-Klomek,
A.,
Kumpulainen,
K.,
Puustjarvi, A., Elonheimo, H., Ristkari, T., . . . & R€
onning,
J.A. (2011). Bullying at age eight and criminality in adult-
hood: Findings from the Finnish Nationwide 1981 Birth
Cohort Study. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiol-
ogy, 46, 1211–1219.
Sourander, A., Gyllenberg, D., Brunstein-Klomek, A., Sillan-
maki, L., Ilola, A.-M., & Kumpulainen, K. (2016). Association
of bullying behavior at 8 years of age and use of specialized
services for psychiatric disorders by 29 years of age. JAMA
Psychiatry, 73, 159–165.
Sourander, A., Helstel€
a, L., Helenius, H., & Piha, J. (2000).
Persistence of bullying from childhood to adolescence – A
longitudinal
8-year
follow-up
study.
Child
Abuse
and
Neglect, 24, 873–881.
Sourander, A., Jensen, P., R€
onning, J.A., Elonheimo, H.,
Niemel€
a, S., Helenius, H., . . . & Almqvist, F. (2007). Childhood
bullies and victims and their risk of criminality in late
adolescence: TheFinnish FromaBoyto aManStudy. Archives
of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 161, 546–552.
Sourander, A., Jensen, P., R€
onning, J.A., Niemel€
a, S., Hele-
nius, H., Sillanm€
aki, L., . . . & Almqvist, F. (2007). What is the
early adulthood outcome of boys who bully or are bullied in
childhood? The Finnish “From a Boy to a Man” Study.
Pediatrics, 120, 397–404.
Sourander, A., Lempinen, L., & Brunstein Klomek, A. (2016).
Changes in mental health, bullying behavior, and service
use among eight-year-old children during 24 years. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychia-
try, 55, 717–725.
Sourander, A., R€
onning, J., Brunstein-Klomek, A., Gyllenberg,
D., Kumpulainen, K., Niemel€
a, S., . . . & Almqvist, F. (2009).
Childhood bullying behaviour and later psychiatric hospital
and psychopharmacologic treatment. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 66, 1005–1012.
Stapinski, L.A., Bowes, L., Wolke, D., Pearson, R.M., Mahedy,
L., Button, K.S., . . . & Araya, R. (2014). Peer victimization
during adolescence and risk for anxiety disroders in adult-
hood: A prospective cohort study. Depression and Anxiety,
31, 574–582.
Sugden,K.,Arseneault,L.,Harrington,H.,Moffitt,T.E.,Williams,
B., & Caspi, A. (2010). Serotonin transporter gene moderates
the development of emotional problems among children fol-
lowingbullyingvictimization.JournaloftheAmericanAcademy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 830–840.
Takizawa, R., Danese, A., Maughan, B., & Arseneault, L.
(2015). Bullying victimization in childhood predicts mid-life
risks for cardiovascular disease: A 5-decade birth cohort
study. Psychological Medicine, 45, 2705–2715.
Takizawa, R., Maughan, B., & Arseneault, L. (2014). Adult
health outcomes of childhood bullying victimization: Evi-
dence from a 5-decade longitudinal British cohort. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 777–784.
Trouton, A., Spinath, F.M., & Plomin, R. (2002). Twins Early
Development Study (TEDS): A multivariate, longitudinal
genetic investigation of language, cognition and behavior
problems in childhood. Twin Research, 5, 444–448.
Ttofi, M.M., & Farrington, D.P. (2009a). Bullying prevention
programs: The importance of peer intervention, disciplinary
methods, and age variations. Journal of Experimental Crim-
inology, 8, 443–462.
Ttofi, M.M., & Farrington, D.P. (2009b). What works in
preventing bullying: Effective elements of anti-bullying pro-
grammes.
Journal
of
Aggression,
Conflict
and
Peace
Research, 1, 13–24.
Ttofi, M.M., & Farrington, D.P. (2011). Effectiveness of school-
based programs to reduce bullying: A systematic and meta-
analytic review. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7,
27–56.
Turner, M.G., Exum, L.M., Brame, R., & Holt, T.J. (2013).
Bullying victimization and adolescent mental health: Gen-
eral and typological effects across sex. Journal of Crime and
Justice, 41, 53–59.
van Geel, M., Vedder, P., & Tanilon, J. (2014). Relationship
between peer victimization, cyberbullying, and suicide in
children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatrics,
168, 435–442.
van Harmelen, A., Kievit, R.A., Konstantinos, I., Neufeld, S.,
Jones, P.B., Bullmore, E., . . . & Goodyer, I.M. (2017).
Adolescent friendships predict later resilient functioning
across
psychosocial
domains
in
a
healthy
community
cohort. Psychological Medicine, 47, 2312–2322.
Vaillancourt, T., Duku, E., Decatanzaro, D., Macmillan, H.,
Muir, C., & Schmidt, L.A. (2008). Variation in hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis activity among bullied and non-
bullied children. Aggressive Behavior, 34, 294–305.
Veenstra, R., Lindenberg, S., Oldehinkel, A.J., De Winter, A.F.,
Verhulst, F.C., & Ormel, J. (2005). Bullying and victimiza-
tion in elementary schools: A comparison of bullies, victims,
bully/victims, and uninvolved preadolescents. Developmen-
tal Psychology, 41, 672–682.
Verlinden, M., Jansen, P.W., Veenstra, R., Jaddoe, V.W.V.,
Hofman, A., Verhulst, F.C., . . . & Tiemeier, H. (2015).
Preschool attention-deficit/hyperactivity and oppositional
defiant problems as antecedents of school bullying. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychia-
try, 54, 571–579.
Vitaro, F., Brendgen, M., & Arseneault, L. (2009). The discor-
dant MZ-twin method: One step closer to the Holy Grail.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 33, 376–
382.
Vreeman, R.C., & Carroll, A.E. (2007). A systematic review of
school-based interventions to prevent bullying. Archives of
Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 161, 78–88.
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
420
Louise Arseneault
J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2018; 59(4): 405–21
 Winsper, C., Leraya, T., Zanarini, M., & Wolke, D. (2012).
Involvement in bullying and suicide-related behavior at
11 years: A prospective birth cohort study. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 51,
271–282.
Wolke, D., Copeland, W.E., Angold, A., & Costello, J.E. (2013).
Impactof bullyingin childhoodon adulthealth,wealth, crime,
and social outcomes. Psychological Science, 24, 1958–1970.
Wolke, D., & Lereya, T. (2015). Long-term effects of bullying.
Archives of Disease in Childhood, 100, 879–885.
Wolke, D., & Skew, A.J. (2012a). Bullying among siblings.
International Journal of Adolescent Medicine and Health, 24,
17–25.
Wolke, D., & Skew, A.J. (2012b). Family factors, bullying
victimisation and wellbeing in adolescents. Longitudinal and
Life Course Studies, 3, 101–119.
Woods, S., Wolke, D., Nowicki, S., & Hall, L. (2009). Emotion
recognition abilities and empathy of victims of bullying.
Child Abuse and Neglect, 33, 307–311.
World Health Organisation. (2012). Risk behaviours. In C.
Currie, C. Zanotti, A. Morgan, D. Currie, M. de Looze, C.
Roberts, O. Samdal, O.R.F. Smith & V. Barnekow (Eds.),
Social determinants of health and well-being among young
people. Health Behaviour in School-aged Children (HBSC)
study: International report from the 2009/2010 survey
[E-reader version] (pp. 191–200). Available from: http://
www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/163857/
Social-determinants-of-health-and-well-being-among-young-
people.pdf [last accessed 2 November 2017].
Zwierzynska, K., Wolke, D., & Leraya, T. (2013). Peer victim-
ization in childhood and internalizing problems in adoles-
cence: A prospective longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology, 41, 309–323.
Accepted for publication: 5 October 2017
First published online: 14 November 2017
© 2018 The Author. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12841
Impact of childhood and adolescence bullying victimisation
421
