 Polymeric nanofiber coating with tunable combinatorial
antibiotic delivery prevents biofilm-associated
infection in vivo
Alyssa G. Ashbaugha,1, Xuesong Jiangb,c,d,1, Jesse Zhenge, Andrew S. Tsaie, Woo-Shin Kima, John M. Thompsonf,
Robert J. Millera, Jonathan H. Shahbaziana, Yu Wanga, Carly A. Dillena, Alvaro A. Ordonezg,h, Yong S. Changg,h,
Sanjay K. Jaing,h, Lynne C. Jonesf, Robert S. Sterlingf, Hai-Quan Maob,c,d,i,2,3, and Lloyd S. Millera,b,f,j,2,3
aDepartment of Dermatology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231; bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; cTranslational Tissue Engineering Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; dInstitute for
NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; eDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
21218; fDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287; gDepartment of Pediatrics, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287; hCenter for Infection and Inflammation Imaging Research, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287; iWhitaker Biomedical Engineering Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; and jDivision of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287
Edited by Scott J. Hultgren, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and approved September 20, 2016 (received for review August 23, 2016)
Bacterial biofilm formation is a major complication of implantable
medical devices that results in therapeutically challenging chronic
infections, especially in cases involving antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
As an approach to prevent these infections, an electrospun compos-
ite coating comprised of poly(lactic-coglycolic acid) (PLGA) nanofibers
embedded in a poly(e-caprolactone) (PCL) film was developed to
locally codeliver combinatorial antibiotics from the implant surface.
The release of each antibiotic could be adjusted by loading each drug
into the different polymers or by varying PLGA:PCL polymer ratios. In
a mouse model of biofilm-associated orthopedic-implant infection,
three different combinations of antibiotic-loaded coatings were
highly effective in preventing infection of the bone/joint tissue and
implant biofilm formation and were biocompatible with enhanced
osseointegration. This nanofiber composite-coating technology could
be used to tailor the delivery of combinatorial antimicrobial agents
from various metallic implantable devices or prostheses to effectively
decrease biofilm-associated infections in patients.
nanofiber | biofilm | infection | antibiotic | delivery
I
nfection is a devastating complication and a major impediment
to the success of implanted medical devices (1), such as ortho-
pedic prostheses (2, 3) and cardiac implantable electrophysiolog-
ical devices (CIEDs) (4). For prosthetic joint infections (PJIs), the
reoperations and extended immobility during treatment result in
increased morbidity and mortality (5, 6) and CIED infections can
cause life-threatening endocarditis, septic shock, and pulmonary
septic emboli (4). Despite advances in aseptic surgical techniques
and prophylactic i.v. antibiotics, the incidence of these infections
has remained at 1–5% (7, 8), corresponding to ∼25,000 PJIs,
14,000 CIED infections, and 100,000 fracture-fixation device in-
fections per year in the United States (1, 7, 8). Moreover, the
number of these infections is rising dramatically along with the
increasing clinical demand for these devices (8, 9).
Medical device infections are associated with biofilm formation,
which occurs when bacteria adhere to the implants and become
embedded in a dense matrix of proteins, polysaccharides, and
DNA (10, 11). Biofilms block antibiotic penetration and host im-
mune defenses, resulting in chronic and difficult-to-treat infections
(10, 11), and provide a reservoir for antibiotic-resistance genes (12,
13). The treatment of biofilm-associated infections typically in-
volves reoperations to remove or replace the infected implants and
prolonged systemic antibiotic therapy (14–16), with inpatient costs
averaging ∼$100,000 per patient or an annual national healthcare
burden exceeding $4 billion in the United States (7, 17). Current
clinical guidelines for systemic antibiotic treatment of medical
device infections recommend combinatorial antibiotic therapy be-
cause it is more effective than single antibiotics and decreases the
potential development of antibiotic resistance while on therapy
(14–16).
Because most biofilm-associated infections are caused by in-
vading bacteria in the perioperative period, local antibiotic
therapy has been clinically used, including antibiotic-loaded ce-
ment, beads, spacers, or powder in orthopedic surgery (18–20)
and intraoperative lavage or application of antibiotics in CIED
implantation (4, 14). However, most of these approaches are only
designed for single antibiotic release, which increases the likeli-
hood of the development of antibiotic resistance while patients
are on therapy (21, 22). Therefore, we developed a conformal
implant coating capable of local delivery of combinatorial anti-
biotics with tailored release profiles for each drug to effectively
prevent biofilm formation and ensuing infectious complications.
Significance
Biofilm infections are a major complication associated with im-
plantable medical devices and prostheses, which are exceedingly
difficult to treat. To date, there has been no effective clinical
solution that combines antibacterial efficiency with excellent
osseointegration. Here, a nanofiber-based conformal coating ca-
pable of controlled and independent local delivery of two or
more combinatorial antibiotics was developed to provide optimal
antimicrobial activity for the prevention of biofilm-associated
infections. In a preclinical animal model of orthopedic-implant in-
fection, this technology demonstrated complete bacterial clear-
ance from the implant and surrounding bone/joint tissue while
promoting osseointegration. This tunable nanofiber composite
coating could be highly effective in preventing medical device
infections in patients.
Author contributions: A.G.A., X.J., J.Z., H.-Q.M., and L.S.M. designed research; A.G.A., X.J.,
J.Z., A.S.T., W.-S.K., J.M.T., R.J.M., J.H.S., Y.W., C.A.D., A.A.O., and Y.S.C. performed research;
A.G.A., X.J., J.Z., W.-S.K., J.M.T., R.J.M., J.H.S., A.A.O., Y.S.C., S.K.J., L.C.J., R.S.S., H.-Q.M.,
and L.S.M. analyzed data; A.G.A., X.J., J.Z., H.-Q.M., and L.S.M. conceived the technology;
and A.G.A., J.Z., J.M.T., S.K.J., L.C.J., R.S.S., H.-Q.M., and L.S.M. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: The work in this manuscript was included in a provisional patent
application submitted on February 8, 2016: “Compositions and Methods for Preparation of
Composite Polymer Coatings on Medical Implants, and Their Use for Co-delivery of Multiple
Antimicrobial Agents (Johns Hopkins Technology Ventures C13894_P13894-01; WS 111232-
00484) - pending.” L.S.M. reports grant support from Pfizer and MedImmune and consulting
fees from Nantworks and Noveome Biotherapeutics that are outside the submitted work.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1A.G.A. and X.J. contributed equally to this work.
2H.-Q.M. and L.S.M. contributed equally to this work.
3To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: lloydmiller@jhmi.edu or hmao@jhu.
edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1613722113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613722113
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2016
|
E6919–E6928
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 Results
Electrospinning to Generate a Nanofiber Composite Coating for
Implants. To develop an implant coating capable of combinatorial
antibiotic delivery, two antibiotic-loaded polymer solution jets were
simultaneously electrospun (23, 24) (i.e., cospinning) onto a medi-
cal-grade titanium Kirschner-wire (K-wire) implant (0.5-mm di-
ameter × 9-mm length). Poly(lactic-coglycolic acid) (PLGA) and
poly(e-caprolactone) (PCL) were selected because of their proven
track records of biocompatibility and bioresorbability in clinical use
of various suture and drug delivery devices (25, 26). The coated
implants were then heat treated in a continuous airflow of 65–70 °C
for 10–15 s to melt the PCL fibers to anneal the composite polymers
to produce a conformal coating (Fig. 1A). The coating could con-
form to both smooth and threaded K-wire surfaces (Fig. 1B).
This method creates two separate polymer matrices (PLGA
fibers and PCL film) that can be used to contain and control the
release rates of different antibiotics. The cospinning step allows
for sufficient mixing of the two fiber sets before landing onto the
K-wire followed by annealing to generate a composite coating with
good distribution of the PLGA fibers in PCL film. The coating
configuration could be modified by varying the weight ratio of
PLGA and PCL deposited to the K-wire. Higher PLGA:PCL ra-
tios resulted in more PLGA nanofibers exposed on the surface
and lower PLGA:PCL ratios resulted in the PLGA nanofibers
becoming fully embedded in a smooth PCL film (Fig. 1C). The
composite coating thickness (i.e., the total coating weight) could
be modified from ∼10–100 μm (∼0.2–2 mg/K-wire implant) by
varying the fiber deposition time and/or the flow rates of the
polymer solutions through the syringe pumps (Fig. S1 A and B).
Fig. 1.
PLGA/PCL composite implant coating loaded
with antibiotics. (A) The nanofiber-film coating was
prepared by coelectrospinning of antibiotic-loaded
PLGA and PCL fibers simultaneously onto the tita-
nium K-wire implants followed by heat treatment to
generate a conformal PCL film embedded with PLGA
fibers. (B) Micrographs of K-wire implants before
(Left) and after electrospinning (Middle) and anneal-
ing (Right) of the Van/Rif composite coating. (C) SEM
images of the surface topography of composite coat-
ings prepared with different weight ratios of PLGA:
PCL. (D) Fluorescent micrograph of a composite coat-
ing with two separate sets of PLGA fibers [FITC-loaded
(green) and rhodamine-loaded (red)] embedded in
PCL film (not visible). (E) Antibiotic composite coat-
ing configurations for sets 1–3. All implants have
the same 1:1 PLGA/PCL coating with different drug
combinations. (F–K) In vitro antibiotic release pro-
files (mean micrograms per milliliter ± SEM) measured
by placing the coated implants into a new solution of
PBS (200 μL) at 37 °C each day for 14 d (n = 10
coated implants per group). Horizontal dotted lines
show MIC of Xen36 for each antibiotic: Van (0.5 μg/mL),
Lin (2 μg/mL), Dap (0.25 μg/mL), and Rif (0.5 μg/mL). *P <
0.05, †P < 0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for combination antibiotic-
loaded coatings vs. single antibiotic coatings (two-
way ANOVA).
E6920
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613722113
Ashbaugh et al.
 Because the PLGA fibers are separately distributed in the PCL
film, it is possible to introduce more than one set of PLGA fibers
with different drugs if desired. To demonstrate this possibility, we
used two different fluorescent dyes as surrogates for antibiotics
and cospun a FITC-loaded PLGA jet, a rhodamine-loaded PLGA
jet, and a PCL jet followed by annealing. This process resulted in a
composite coating containing two different sets of PLGA fibers
with no observed mixing of the dyes (Fig. 1D). Because PLGA
fibers remained intact, single or combinatorial drugs could be
loaded into each distinct polymer fiber jet to tailor the release rate
and duration for each drug.
Loading Antibiotics into the Composite Implant Coating. The majority
of implanted medical device infections are caused by staphylo-
coccal species, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-
reus (MRSA) (1, 2, 4). Systemic administration of vancomycin
(Van) plus rifampin (Rif) is recommended in clinical practice
guidelines to treat these infections (14–16) because combinatorial
therapy with Rif has an added therapeutic benefit (27, 28). Newer
antistaphylococcal agents such as linezolid (Lin) and daptomycin
(Dap) are also used to cover MRSA (29). Although these four
antibiotics have different polarities, specific spinning conditions
were developed for encapsulating these drugs in either or both
compartments, affording flexibility to tailor the release profiles for
different drug configurations. Three sets of composite PLGA/PCL
coatings loaded with different antibiotic combinations were gen-
erated as examples of local combinatorial therapy, with Rif loaded
in PCL film and Van or Lin or Dap in PLGA fibers (Fig. 1E). To
aid in notation, “Van/−” is used to denote a coating configuration
where Van is loaded in PLGA fibers and no drug is loaded in PCL
film, and “Van/Rif” denotes a coating where Van is loaded in
PLGA fibers and Rif is loaded in PCL film. Similar notations are
used for other combinations. To increase the loading of Van, Lin,
and Dap in their respective coating configuration, another varia-
tion of the coating was generated with these antibiotics loaded in
both PLGA fibers and the PCL film, i.e., Van/Van + Rif, Lin/Lin +
Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif (Fig. 1E). Of note, there is well-known
development of Rif resistance by bacteria when Rif is present as a
single agent during therapy (14–16). Thus, a desired feature of the
antibiotic-loaded composite coatings was to have Rif released
faster than the other combinatorial antibiotic to ensure Rif was not
present as a single agent during the entire release period.
In Vitro Antibiotic Release Profiles from the Composite Coating. The
in vitro release concentrations of the antibiotics from the composite
coatings into PBS at 37 °C over 14 d was determined using reverse-
phase HPLC detected at specific absorbance wavelengths for each
antibiotic. For set 1, the Van release from the all Van composite
coatings (Van/−, Van/Rif, and Van/Van + Rif) remained above the
minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of S. aureus strain Xen36
for 3–5 d, whereas the Rif concentrations decreased below the MIC
by 3–5 d (Fig. 1 F and G). For set 2, the Lin release from all of the
composite coatings (Lin/−, Lin/Rif, and Lin/Lin + Rif) remained
above the MIC for up to 14 d, whereas the Rif concentrations
decreased below the MIC between 5 and 10 d (Fig. 1 H and I). For
set 3, the Dap release from the composite coatings (Dap/−, Dap/Rif,
and Dap/Dap + Rif) remained above the MIC for 5–10 d, whereas
the Rif concentrations decreased below the MIC by 3–5 d (Fig. 1
J and K). Thus, in all combinatorial coatings, Rif was released
faster than Van, Lin, or Dap.
The release profiles of the antibiotics in the different PLGA/PCL
coatings were also compared. In set 1, the concentration of Van
released from the Van/Van + Rif coating but not from the Van/Rif
coating was significantly greater than Van/− coating (Fig. 1F). The
concentration of Rif released from the Van/Rif coating was slightly
but significantly lower than the −/Rif coating (Fig. 1G). In set 2, the
concentrations of Lin and Rif released from the Lin/Lin + Rif
coating but not from the Lin/Rif coating were significantly greater
than the Lin/− or −/Rif coatings, respectively (Fig. 1 H and I). In set
3, there were no statistical differences in the concentrations of re-
leased Dap among the Dap coatings (Fig. 1J). However, the con-
centration of Rif released from Dap/Dap + Rif but not Dap/Rif
was significantly higher than the −/Rif coating (Fig. 1K). It is worth
noting that coloading Lin or Dap in PCL film with Rif slowed the
release rate of Rif from the composite coating.
Antimicrobial Activity of the Released Antibiotics from Composite
Coating. To measure in vitro antimicrobial activity against S. aureus
[strain Xen36 derived from American Type Culture Collection
(ATTC) 49525 (Wright)] (30, 31), zone of inhibition (ZOI) assays
were performed using the composite-coated K-wires. The greatest
ZOI in each set was observed with Van/Rif and Van/Van + Rif
(Fig. 2A), Lin/Lin + Rif (Fig. 2B), and Dap/Dap + Rif (Fig. 2C),
which were similar to the ZOI observed with −/Rif. The single
antibiotic coatings (i.e., Van/−, Lin/−, and Dap/−) had the smallest
ZOIs, which was not due to differences in release from PLGA or
PCL because there were no differences in ZOIs for Van, Lin, or
Dap when they were loaded into either PLGA or PCL (Fig. S2).
Thus, the smaller ZOI for these antibiotics was likely due to in-
herent properties of these particular antibiotics such as their hy-
drophobic nature and limited diffusion in agar.
Fig. 2.
In vitro antimicrobial activity. Representative ZOI images are shown
(Left) and ZOI diameter (mean millimeters ± SEM) were measured (Right) for
set 1 (A), 2 (B), and 3 (C) antibiotic composite coatings (antibiotics loaded
into PLGA and PCL are denoted as shown in Fig. 1E) after two replicate-
coated implants were placed on bacterial culture plates that produced a
S. aureus lawn. In vitro antimicrobial activity assays were performed by in-
cubating the drug release solutions from the composite-coated implants
collected on days 1, 3, 7, and 14, and mean cfu ± SEM (log scale) were
enumerated by absorbance (A600) with a cfu standard curve for the coatings
in set 1 (D), 2 (E), and 3 (F) (n = 5 coated implants per group). *P < 0.05, †P <
0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for antibiotic-loaded coatings vs. −/− control coating [two-
tailed Student’s t test (A–C) or two-way ANOVA (D–F)].
Ashbaugh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2016
|
E6921
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 The in vitro antimicrobial activity was also quantified by mixing
the antibiotic release solutions from days 1, 3, 7, and 14 with
S. aureus-containing broth (1 × 103 cfu/mL) at a 1:1 (vol/vol) ratio
and comparing cfu after an 18-h incubation at 37 °C (Fig. 2 D–F).
Day 1 drug release solutions from the composite coatings of sets 1
and 3 completely inhibited bacterial growth (Fig. 2 D and F). For
set 2, day 1 drug release solutions from the Lin/−, Lin/Rif, and Lin/
Lin + Rif composite coatings inhibited bacterial growth (Fig. 2E).
Some antimicrobial activity was observed with Van/Rif, Van/Van +
Rif, Lin/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, Dap/Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif combined
coatings through day 7 or longer (Fig. 2 D–F), whereas the −/Rif
coatings had variable antimicrobial activity on day 1 and minimal
activity on subsequent days. Taken together, the best-performing
coatings on inhibiting bacterial growth in vitro from each set were
Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif.
Tunability of the Antibiotic-Loaded Composite Coatings. By including
the antibiotics into PLGA fibers, PCL film or both PLGA and
PCL, this led to optimal release of the antibiotics (Fig. 1 F–K) and
antimicrobial activity (Fig. 2), suggesting that the antibiotic release
from the composite coatings can be tuned. To specifically de-
termine whether the antibiotic release could be tuned by loading
the antibiotic in either PLGA or PCL, Van, Lin, Dap, or Rif was
loaded into either PLGA or PCL and in vitro release concentra-
tions were determined. Van, Lin, or Rif had significantly slower
release from PLGA than from PCL (Fig. 3 A, B, and D), whereas
Dap had similar release from PLGA or PCL (Fig. 3C).
In addition, to determine whether the antibiotic release could be
tuned by varying PLGA:PCL polymer weight ratios, the loading of
the best-performing coatings from Fig. 2 (Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif,
and Dap/Dap + Rif) were changed from 1:1 to either 3:1 or 1:3
PLGA:PCL and in vitro release concentrations were determined
(Fig. 3 E–J). In comparing these two configurations, the released
concentration of Van, Lin, and Dap was significantly greater and
lasted longer in all 3:1 PLGA:PCL coatings than the 1:3 PLGA:
PCL coatings (with the exception of day 1 for Lin/Lin + Rif) (Fig. 3
E, G, and I), indicating that the higher PLGA:PCL ratio resulted in
a more sustained release of the antibiotics that were loaded into
PLGA (i.e., Van, Lin, and Dap). Conversely, the release concen-
tration of Rif from the 1:3 PLGA/PCL coatings were substantially
greater and lasted longer than the 3:1 PLGA:PCL coatings (Fig. 3
F, H, and J). In this scenario, Rif was only loaded into PCL and the
greater the ratio of PCL, the greater and longer the duration was
of Rif release. Taken together, these results indicate that varying
the weight ratio of the polymers is another approach that can be
used to modulate drug release.
To determine whether these in vitro findings corresponded to
differences in in vivo release, a near-infrared (NIR) dye was used as
a surrogate for the antibiotics. The NIR dye was loaded into either
PLGA (NIR/−) or PCL (−/NIR) at 1:1 ratios onto smooth K-wire
implants, which were subsequently surgically placed in a retrograde
manner in the right knee joints into the distal femoral intramedullary
canal, as in our prior orthopedic implant mouse model (30, 31). To
noninvasively monitor the in vivo release of the NIR dye, in vivo
fluorescence imaging was performed on the mice to determine the
NIR dye signals emitted (Fig. 3 K and L). The NIR/− coating had
significantly higher in vivo fluorescent signals that lasted longer than
the −/NIR coating. Thus, the NIR dye was released slower from
PLGA than PCL in vivo. These data confirmed that the release rate
and duration of the drug surrogate in vivo were dependent on the
polymer carrier (PLGA fibers vs. PCL film). Taken together, these in
vitro and in vivo data demonstrate that drug release from the PLGA/
PCL composite coatings can be tuned by loading the drugs into
either PLGA or PCL and by varying the PLGA:PCL weight ratios.
In Vivo Efficacy on Bacterial Burden. An in vivo model of PJI was
used to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of the antibiotic-eluting coatings.
The same surgical procedures for placing the composite-coated
K-wires into the right femoral intramedullary canal were used as in
Fig. 3 K and L, and S. aureus (Xen36; 1 × 103 cfu) was pipetted di-
rectly onto the protruding implant in the knee joint before closure (30,
31). This model recapitulates many features of human PJI
(2, 3), including biofilm formation on the implant, septic arthritis,
osteomyelitis, and periprosthetic osteolysis (30, 31). To noninvasively
monitor the bacterial burden, in vivo bioluminescence imaging
(BLI) was used to detect signals emitted from S. aureus strain
Xen36, which possesses a stable bioluminescent construct (30, 31).
On day 14, cfu from the homogenized bone/joint tissue samples and
from the sonicated implants were assayed.
The −/− coating had BLI signals that remained at least a log
higher than background through day 14 and correlated with ∼0.5–
1 × 106 cfu from the bone/joint tissue and >1 × 104 cfu from the
implants. In set 1, Van/Rif resulted in decreased BLI signals that
approached background levels and had <100 cfu in the bone/joint
tissue and no cfu detected from the implants (Fig. 4 A–C). Van/
Van + Rif had a trend for decreased in vivo BLI signals (P =
0.067) and had similar cfu in the bone/joint tissue and implants as
Van/Rif. In sets 2 and 3, Lin/Lin + Rif and Dap/Dap + Rif each
resulted in BLI signals that approached background levels, and
no cfu were detected from the bone/joint tissue or implants (Fig. 4
D–F and G–I, respectively). In contrast, the coatings containing a
single antibiotic Van/−, Lin/−, Dap/−, and −/Rif had variable ef-
fects on BLI signals and cfu from the implants, but all had cfu
readily detected from the bone/joint tissue. Taken together, the
best-performing coatings in vivo in each set were Van/Rif, Lin/Lin +
Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif. As a comparison with the current clinical
practice of using only perioperative i.v. antibiotic prophylaxis (15),
i.v. Van at the equivalent human exposure dose (32) was evaluated
in this model, which resulted in decreased BLI signals but had a
minimal reduction in cfu (Fig. S3).
To evaluate whether the best-performing coatings eradicated the
infection, ex vivo homogenized bone/joint tissue specimens and ex
vivo harvested implants were subsequently cultured in tryptic soy
broth (TSB) for 48 h. No bacteria were cultured from the tissue of
the Lin/Lin + Rif or Dap/Dap + Rif groups (Fig. 5A) or from the
implants of the Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, or Dap/Dap + Rif groups
(Fig. 5B). Finally, antibiotic blood levels at 8, 24, and 48 h and 7 d
after implantation were also measured for the best-performing
coatings in vivo (Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif). The
levels of all antibiotics were below the level of detection (200 ng/mL
for Van, 134 ng/mL for Rif, and 70 ng/mL for Lin and Dap in
serum samples at a signal-to-noise ratio of 2), indicating that sys-
temic exposure to the locally delivered antibiotics was negligible.
In Vivo Efficacy on Biofilm Formation. On day 14, the ex vivo har-
vested implants were processed for SEM analysis to evaluate bio-
film formation (Fig. 5C). The −/− coatings had biofilm formation
with coccoid bacteria characteristic of S. aureus within an extra-
cellular biofilm matrix (33). No biofilms were observed on implants
coated with Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, or Dap/Dap + Rif, demon-
strating the ability of the antibiotic-loaded composite coatings to
prevent biofilm formation.
In Vivo Efficacy on Osteolysis and Osseointegration. To determine
whether the antibiotic-eluting composite coatings could prevent re-
active bone expansion associated with the periprosthetic osteolysis
that progresses in this orthopedic implant infection model (30), high-
resolution X-rays were obtained on day 14 and femur width and area
were measured by image analysis (Fig. 6 A–C). The −/− coatings had
significantly increased femur width and area compared with un-
infected controls. The best-performing coatings, Van/Rif, Lin/Lin +
Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif, had smaller femur width and area than the
−/− control coatings and comparable femur width and area to −/−
coatings in uninfected (sterile) mice (Fig. 6 A–C). For the other
antibiotic-loaded composite coatings in sets 1–3, the femur widths
and areas were significantly decreased compared with the −/− con-
trol coating (with the exception of Van/– and Dap/–) and were
smaller or not significantly different than −/− coatings in uninfected
(sterile) mice (with the exception of Van/– and Lin/Rif, and Dap/–)
(Fig. S4). Thus, almost all of the antibiotic-loaded coatings had
some degree of efficacy in preventing infection-induced reactive
bone changes.
E6922
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613722113
Ashbaugh et al.
 In addition, μCT analysis demonstrated that femur density was
increased in the best-performing coating groups compared with the
−/− controls (Fig. 6 D and E). However, the femur density in each
of the best performing coating groups was significantly less than the
density of −/− coatings in uninfected (sterile) mice, indicating that
even though the infection was cleared, the bone density changes
induced by the infection did not completely resolve by the end of
the experiment on day 14.
To determine whether the composite coatings were bio-
compatible by facilitating osseointegration, the coatings were
evaluated on threaded K-wire implants using histomorphometry
and biomechanical pullout testing (Fig. 7). By histomorphometry,
the Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif coatings all had
increased new bone formation at the implant/coating interface
compared with the −/− coatings in infected mice (Fig. 7 A and B).
Mechanical pullout testing revealed that the −/− coatings in in-
fected implants had a threefold lower pullout force than uninfected
control mice (Fig. 7C). Of the best-performing coatings, Lin/Lin +
Rif and Dap/Dap + Rif coatings, but not the Van/Rif coating,
yielded pullout forces significantly greater than −/− coatings in
infected mice. None of the antibiotic coatings had pullout forces
that were statistically different from −/− coatings in uninfected
(sterile) mice.
Durability and Stability of Antibiotic-Loaded Coated Implants. To
evaluate durability of these implant coatings, the ability of the coat-
ings to withstand surgical implantation was evaluated by compar-
ing coatings without (cospun) and with (annealed) heat treatment.
Without heat treatment, the coating peeled back during insertion
into the femoral intramedullary canal (Fig. 8A). In contrast, with heat
treatment, the coated implant could be inserted and immediately
removed from the femoral intramedullary canal without damage to
the coating (Fig. 8B), indicating that the heat-treated coatings could
withstand typical surgical handling.
To evaluate the long-term stability, in vitro release of the anti-
biotics was performed on newly coated implants loaded with single
antibiotics and on the same implants stored after 6 wk at −20 °C or
room temperature. After storage at −20 °C or room temperature
for 6 wk, Van-, Lin-, and Dap-loaded coatings had release rates
that did not significantly differ from newly coated implants (Fig. 8
C–E). The Rif-loaded coating also maintained nearly the same
release profile when stored at −20 °C for 6 wk (Fig. 8F). However,
Rif release concentrations were significantly decreased when
Fig. 3.
Tunability of the composite coatings. In vitro antibiotic release profiles (mean micrograms per milliliter ± SEM) of the antibiotic composite coatings (antibiotics
loaded into PLGA and PCL are denoted as shown in Fig. 1E) were measured after varying polymer loading (A–D) and polymer weight ratios (E–J) during electrospinning
by placing the coated implants into a new solution of PBS (200 μL) at 37 °C each day for 14 d (n = 10 coated implants per group). Horizontal dotted lines show MIC of
Xen36 for each antibiotic: Van (0.5 μg/mL), Lin (2 μg/mL), Dap (0.25 μg/mL), and Rif (0.5 μg/mL). *P < 0.05, †P < 0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for combination antibiotic-loaded coatings
vs. single antibiotic coatings (two-way ANOVA) on data from all days (1–14), except D and G, which included data from days 2–14. In vivo release of a NIR fluorescent dye
(VivoTag-S 680) loaded into PLGA (NIR dye/−) or PCL (NIR dye/−) was examined in an orthopedic implant mouse model. (K) Representative in vivo fluorescence images.
(L) Mean percentage of total radiant efficiency ([p/s]/[μW/cm2]) signal on day 0 ± SEM †P < 0.01 for NIR dye/− vs. −/NIR dye (two-way ANOVA).
Ashbaugh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2016
|
E6923
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 stored at room temperature for 6 wk compared with newly
coated implants (Fig. 8F). In addition, in vitro antimicrobial
activity after storage was evaluated using ZOI assays as in Fig. 3
for the above groups as well for implants stored at −20 °C for 8
mo, and the ZOIs were not significantly decreased for any of the
stored implants compared with newly coated implants (Fig. 8G).
Taken together, storage at room temperature did not impact
Van, Lin, or Dap release but did result in slightly decreased Rif
release, and all storage conditions (−20 °C or room temperature
for 6 wk or −20 °C for 8 mo) did not significantly impact the in
vitro antimicrobial activity compared with newly coated implants.
Discussion
To prevent biofilm-associated infections during the perioperative
period, a nanofiber composite implant coating capable of local
and sustained delivery of combinatorial antibiotics was developed.
This coating used electrospinning techniques (34, 35), which
permitted the cospinning of two or more separate polymer fibers
with different compositions and release kinetics that were loaded
with two (or potentially more) antibiotics to provide a unique
approach to control and optimize local drug delivery from the
implant surface. The successful generation of this conformal coat-
ing was facilitated by the low annealing temperature, which was
high enough to melt the PCL fibers but low enough not to inflict
any potential effects on antibiotic activity.
This method offers a versatile composite coating on the implant
surface due to the wide range of PLGA polymeric compositions
(varying fractions of L-lactide, D,L-lactide, and glycolide) with dif-
ferent molecular weights and the various possible coating parame-
ters (fiber-to-film weight ratio, fiber diameters, coating thickness,
drug–polymer pairing, and drug-loading level). As a proof of prin-
ciple, here we chose only PLGA (75/25, 87 kDa) and PCL (45 kDa)
polymers for this study to encapsulate three sets of dual drug
combinations: Van + Rif (set 1), commonly used as a systemic
antibiotic combination to treat biofilm-associated infections (14–
16), Lin + Rif (set 2), and Dap + Rif (set 3), because Lin and Dap
also have excellent coverage against MRSA and are second-line
antibiotics to treat PJI (29). Additional sets of PLGA fibers can be
included in the PCL film through either sequential or simultaneous
electrospinning/annealing, so more complex antibiotic-loading
configurations can be constructed.
An important characteristic of this PLGA/PCL composite im-
plant coating is that the release of the antibiotic could be tuned by
loading the drug into PLGA or PCL, which generally resulted in
different release rates in these two polymer compartments. The
drug release could also be tuned by varying the polymer weight
ratio in the composite coating. The reason for the slower antibiotic
release from PLGA and faster antibiotic release from PCL re-
mains to be fully examined, but could be due to the higher solu-
bility of these drugs and thus faster diffusion in PCL film of the
composite coatings. Of note, the tunable antibiotic delivery was
taken advantage of in this study by loading Rif only into PCL for
faster release and shorter duration than the second combinatorial
antibiotics to ensure Rif was never present as a single agent to
prevent the known rapid development of Rif-resistance during
therapy (14–16). Van, Lin, or Dap was loaded in PLGA for more
sustained release.
It should be mentioned that coloading two different drugs in the
composite coating might cause interference in their release kinetics.
For example, even though the durations of Rif release were similar
for combinatorial coatings, antibiotic release was moderately im-
pacted by the presence of the second antibiotics in some of the
configurations. For example, the released concentrations of Rif
were increased when Lin and Dap were also coloaded into PCL
film and the released concentrations of Rif were decreased in the
Van/Rif coating (Fig. 1 G, I, and K). The reasons for these dif-
ferences are not entirely clear, but they underscore the importance
of performing in vitro release and antimicrobial studies particularly
Fig. 4.
In vivo efficacy on bacterial burden. Using a
mouse PJI model, the efficacy of the sets 1–3 anti-
biotic composite coatings (antibiotics loaded into
PLGA and PCL are denoted as shown in Fig. 1E) was
evaluated using in vivo BLI (n = 15–20 mice per
group) and ex vivo cfu counting on harvested bone/
joint tissue and implants on day 14 (n = 10–15 mice
per group). (A, D, and G) Representative in vivo BLI
images. (B, E, and H) Mean maximum flux (photons
per second) ± SEM (C, F, and I) mean cfu ± SEM *P <
0.05,
†P < 0.01,
‡P < 0.001 for antibiotic-loaded
coatings vs. −/− control coating [two-way ANOVA (B,
E, and H) or two-tailed Student’s t test (C, F, and I)].
n.d., not detected. Data represent two to three in-
dependent experiments.
E6924
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613722113
Ashbaugh et al.
 for combination antibiotic-loaded composite coatings. The release
results shown here collectively demonstrated that there is a wide
parameter space for tailoring the release profiles for different an-
tibiotic combinations. These analyses can help with further opti-
mization for designing composite coating on devices with different
geometries and sizes.
All three sets of composite coatings showed superior antimi-
crobial efficacy when combinatorial antibiotics were used. The
best-performing coatings in each set were Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif,
and Dap/Dap + Rif in the in vitro release and antimicrobial assays.
In an in vivo mouse model of a S. aureus PJI (30, 31), Lin/Lin + Rif
and Dap/Dap + Rif completely prevented bacterial infection. All
of the combinatorial antibiotic implant coatings outperformed i.v.
Van prophylaxis (32), which had only a minimal effect on reducing
cfu. In addition, Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, and Dap/Dap + Rif
inhibited biofilm formation on the implant and prevented in-
fection-induced bone changes. Of note, Lin/Lin + Rif and Dap/
Dap + Rif coatings were more effective at preventing infection,
reducing infection-associated bone changes, and promoting bone-
implant contact and osseointegration than the Van/Rif coating.
The particular efficacy of Lin + Rif or Dap + Rif combinations
might be due to added antibiofilm activity (32, 36–38), warranting
further investigation. Van acts by inhibiting cell wall synthesis, so
the inferior efficacy of Van/Rif (and Van/Van + Rif) could be due
to reduced Van activity against bacteria in biofilms that have in-
creased cell wall thickness (39). It should be mentioned that al-
though we used only a single S. aureus strain for this work, we
previously found that Xen36 resulted in a similar infectious course
in our mouse model of PJI as a community-acquired MRSA
isolate (USA300 LAC::lux) (32) as well as a human osteo-
myelitis isolate UAMS1 (Xen40) and it also expresses the
S. aureus-binding adhesion (cna) (31), which is important in
the pathogenesis of osteomyelitis, suggesting that the antimi-
crobial activity of these coatings on Xen36 could be relevant
to other clinical S. aureus isolates.
An important consideration for the clinical use of an antibiotic-
eluting implant coating is biocompatibility, which influences the
performance, stability, and longevity of the implant (40). PLGA
and PCL have long been known to be biocompatible and bio-
resorbable and can even promote cell and tissue adhesion (41, 42).
All of the best-performing coatings promoted bone-implant con-
tact, and the degree of osseointegration with Lin/Lin + Rif and
Dap/Dap + Rif coatings was the same as observed in the absence
of any bacterial infection.
Beyond the particular antibiotic combinations evaluated, this
PLGA/PCL composite coating could be used for the tunable delivery
of various combinations of these and other antibiotics, representing a
Fig. 5.
In vivo efficacy on eradication of infection and biofilm formation.
The percent of mice with infected bone/joint tissue (A) or ex vivo implants
(B) harvested on day 14 after surgical placement of the antibiotic composite
coatings (antibiotics loaded into PLGA and PCL are denoted as shown in Fig.
1E) was determined by evaluating the presence/absence of cfu after 48 h of
broth culture (n = 5 mice per group). *P < 0.05, †P < 0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for
antibiotic-loaded coatings vs. −/− control coating (one-tailed Fischer’s exact
test). (C) Biofilm formation was assessed by SEM on ex vivo implants har-
vested on day 7 and representative low (Top) and high (Bottom) magnifi-
cation of the boxed areas in the Top are shown (n = 3 mice per group).
Fig. 6.
In vivo analysis of bone changes around the composite implant. Using
an in vivo PJI model, high-resolution AP X-rays and μCT images of the distal
femurs were obtained on day 14 after placement of the antibiotic composite
coatings (antibiotics loaded into PLGA and PCL are denoted as shown in Fig.
1E) (n = 5 mice per group). (A) Representative X-ray images. (B) Mean femur
width (millimeters ± SEM). (C) Mean femur area (square millimeters ± SEM).
(D) Representative μCT images. (Scale bars, 1 mm.) (E) Mean femur density (HU ±
SEM). *P < 0.05, †P < 0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for antibiotic-loaded coatings vs. −/−
control coating (one-tailed unpaired Student’s t test).
Ashbaugh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2016
|
E6925
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 significant advance over existing antibiotic-releasing approaches
used clinically. Currently used antibiotic-loaded cement, beads,
and spacers or powder do not confer tunable release of multiple
antibiotics (18–20). This may compromise the treatment effi-
ciency and it increases the likelihood of the development of
antibiotic resistance while patients are on therapy (21, 22), which
has been seen in as high as 50% of patients with PJI treated with
gentamicin or tobramycin spacers (43). A recently approved dual
antibiotic release mesh envelope impregnated with minocycline
and rifampin has proven effective in preventing CIED infection
in patients (44, 45). However, although this approach uses two
antibiotics, it is not feasible for implants that require a secure fit
Fig. 7.
In vivo analysis on osseointegration. Using an in vivo PJI model, the
efficacy of the antibiotic composite coatings (antibiotics loaded into PLGA
and PCL are denoted as shown in Fig. 1E) in promoting osseointegration was
evaluated (n = 5 mice per group). (A) Representative histomorphometry
sections of undecalcified bone/implant specimens stained with Sanderson’s
rapid bone stain with an acid fuchsin counterstain. (Scale bar, 500 μm.)
(B) Mean percentage bone-implant contact ± SEM (red arrows denote ex-
amples of coating on the implants and white arrows denote examples of bone
contact to the coated implants) (n = 3 mice per group). (C) Biomechanical
pullout testing was used to measure the force (mean N ± SEM) required to pull
the threaded implants from the femurs (n = 5 mice per group). *P < 0.05, †P <
0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for antibiotic-loaded coatings vs. −/− control coating or −/−
coating in uninfected (sterile) mice (two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test).
Fig. 8.
Durability and stability. Representative photographs of implants
that were coated without (A) or with (B) heat treatment were surgically
implanted and immediately removed. (C–F) In vitro antibiotic release
profiles (mean micrograms per milliliter ± SEM) of antibiotic composite
coatings (antibiotics loaded into PLGA and PCL are denoted as shown in
Fig. 1E) that were newly coated (new) or stored at −20 °C or room tem-
perature (RT) for 6 wk were measured by placing the coated implants into
a new solution of PBS (200 μL) at 37 °C each day for 14 d (n = 10 coated
implants per group). Horizontal dotted lines show MIC of Xen36 for each
antibiotic: Van (0.5 μg/mL), Lin (2 μg/mL), Dap (0.25 μg/mL), and Rif (0.5 μg/mL).
(G) ZOI diameter (mean millimeters ± SEM) was measured for implants
that were newly coated (new) or stored at −20 °C for 6 wk, RT for 6 wk,
or −20 °C for 8 mo after two replicate-coated implants were placed on
bacterial culture plates that produced a S. aureus lawn. *P < 0.05, †P <
0.01, ‡P < 0.001 for stored vs. newly coated antibiotic-loaded coatings
[two-way ANOVA (C–F) or two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test (G)].
E6926
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613722113
Ashbaugh et al.
 within musculoskeletal or organ tissue. Furthermore, the com-
posite coating described here could be used to load agents other
than antibiotics such as various antimicrobial materials in early
stage development to prevent biofilm-associated infections (e.g.,
hydrophilic or zwitterionic polymers, surfactants, nanostructured
biomaterials, nitric oxide, antimicrobial peptides, or biofilm
dispersing agents) (46, 47).
This improved composite, conformal coating with tunable an-
tibiotic codelivery could have broad utility as it can conform to
complex metallic surfaces and thus be used to prevent infection of
many clinical prostheses, devices, or implants. The polymers and
antibiotics used to generate this implant coating have long track
records of clinical use, which could facilitate the rapid translation
of this technology to meet the urgent need to decrease biofilm-
associated infections in patients.
Methods
Electrospinning to Generate a Composite Implant Coating. PLGA (75:25, MW
66,000–107,000; Sigma) and PCL (MW 45,000; Sigma) solutions, each loaded
with different antibiotic(s) dissolved in the solution, were electrospun onto
medical-grade smooth or threaded titanium K-wires (0.5-mm diameter ×
9-mm length; Modern Grinding) using a cospinning process in which two sep-
arate, opposite injection streams were sprayed simultaneously onto the
implant. Polymer solutions were loaded into separate 1-mL syringes fitted
with a 27-gauge blunt-end needle. High-voltage power supplies were con-
nected to the needles through alligator clips and a voltage differential of 6–
7 kV was applied between the needle and the K-wire. Two syringe pumps
were used to feed the polymer solutions through the needle tips at a flow rate
of 0.5 mL/h. The nanofibers were collected simultaneously and directly onto
the grounded K-wire at a distance of 10 cm from both needle tips, over a
collection time of 1 min per K-wire. The coated K-wire were then heat treated
in a continuous airflow at 65–70 °C for 10–15 s to obtain a conformal coating.
The PLGA solution [10.0 (wt/wt%) in hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP); Sigma] was
loaded with either 1% (wt/wt%) Lin (Sigma), Van (Sigma), or Dap (EMD Mil-
lipore)]. The PCL solution [10.0 (wt/wt%) in dichloromethane/2-propanol; 4:1
(wt/wt); Sigma] was loaded with 1% (wt/wt%) Rif (Sigma) and/or Van, Lin, or
Dap. Van and Dap were first dissolved in 20 μL of DMSO before dispersion in
PCL or PLGA solutions. A composite coating on a K-wire without antibiotics
was used as the negative control group (−/−). To test the effect of polymer
weight ratio in the composite coating on antibiotic release, three specific
PLGA/PCL composite configurations loaded with Van/Rif, Lin/Lin + Rif, and
Dap/Dap + Rif, respectively, were prepared by electrospinning the same set of
polymer solutions (with the same drug and polymer concentrations as de-
scribed above), but the PLGA:PCL polymer weight ratio was changed from 1:1
to either 3:1 or 1:3 by adjusting the flow rates from the syringe pumps during
electrospinning to 0.75 mL/h PLGA and 0.25 mL/h PCL for 3:1 PLGA/PCL coating
and 0.25 mL/h PLGA and 0.75 mL/h PCL for 1:3 PLGA/PCL coating. As a result,
Van loading varied with the polymer weight ratio, whereas Lin and Dap
loadings were the same between these two coatings and with the 1:1 PLGA:
PCL weight ratio of the coatings.
In Vitro Release Profiles of Antibiotics from the Composite Coatings. Drug release
studies were conducted using coated pins created with the same loading pa-
rameters as detailed above. Release kinetics of antibiotics from the composite
coating were characterized by placing coated pins in 200 μL of PBS (pH 7.4) at
37 °C. Release media was changed daily over a period of 2 wk and stored at
−20 °C until analysis. Drug concentrations in release media were measured on
days 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 14 using a Waters Alliance 2690 HPLC system (Waters
Corporation) equipped with an Accucore RP-MS C18 column (100 mm ×
2.1 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Waters 2996 PDA detector. The elution
was carried out with a mobile phase of water and acetonitrile both mixed with
0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 1 mL/min at ambient temperature using a linear
gradient elution program of 85% water to 60% acetonitrile in 15 min. Con-
centrations of the drugs were quantified using wavelengths for Van (280 nm),
Lin (254 nm), Dap (224 nm), and Rif (263 nm).
S. aureus Bioluminescent Strain. S. aureus strain Xen36 (PerkinElmer) previously
derived from the clinical bacteremia isolate ATCC 49525 (Wright) was used in all
experiments (48). Xen36 possesses a bioluminescent construct that is integrated
on a stable plasmid that is maintained in all progeny without selection (48).
Xen36 was prepared for inoculation as previously described (30, 31).
In Vitro Zone of Inhibition Assay. Tryptic soy agar (TSA) bacterial plates were
inoculated with S. aureus to yield a bacterial lawn after overnight culture.
Before culturing the plates, two titanium K-wires each loaded with the same
combination of antibiotics from each set were placed in two separate areas on
the plate. After culturing at 37 °C for 24 h, the ZOI (diameter/millimeters) of
bacterial growth were measured.
In Vitro Antimicrobial Activity Assay. Midlogarithmic-phase Xen36 bacteria
were prepared as above and diluted to 1 × 103 cfu/mL in cation-adjusted
Mueller Hinton II broth (CAMHB) (Becton Dickinson) pH 7.3. Bacteria were
then cultured 1:1 with drug release solutions collected on days 1, 3, 7, and 14
at 37 °C for 18 h and cfu were enumerated by absorbance (A600) and a stan-
dard curve of cfu.
Mice. Ten-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were obtained from The Jackson
Laboratory. All animal experiments were approved by the Johns Hopkins
University Animal Care and Use Committee (ACUC Protocol no. MO15M421).
Mouse Surgical Procedures for K-Wire Implantation. An established orthopedic
implant mouse model was used as previously described (30, 31). Briefly, a
medial parapatellar arthrotomy on the right knee was performed and a femoral
intramedullary canal was manually reamed with a 25-gauge needle followed by
a 23-gauge needle. The coated K-wires were then surgically placed in a retro-
grade fashion with 1 mm protruding into the joint space. For experiments using
the PJI model, an inoculum of Xen36 (1 × 103 cfu in 2 μl PBS) was pipetted on
top of the protruding implant before closure. Sustained-release buprenorphine
(2.5 mg/kg) (ZooPharm) was administered s.c. at the time of surgery.
In Vivo BLI. Noninvasive and longitudinal measurements of the bacterial bur-
den were performed using in vivo BLI using the Lumina III IVIS (PerkinElmer).
Data were quantified as maximum radiance (photons/second/centimeter
squared/steradian) within a circular region of interest (1 × 103 pixels) using
Living Image software (PerkinElmer) as previously described (30, 31).
Quantification of Bacteria Counts (cfu) from Bone/Joint Tissue and Implants.
Mice were killed on day 14 and bacteria from the periimplant bone/joint tissue
and implants were isolated and enumerated as previously described (30, 31). In
some experiments, bone/tissue homogenates and implants were cultured in
TSB at 37 °C for 48 h in a shaking incubator at 240 rpm and plated on TSA
plates to determine whether the infection had been eradicated.
Scanning Electron Microscopy. K-wires were removed from the femur at 7 d after
the procedure and fixed in buffered 4% formaldehyde/2.5% glutaraldehyde
solution for 16 h. All samples were postfixed in 1% osmium tetraoxide in PBS for
2 h, followed by subsequent dehydration in a graded ethanol series. Samples
were then placed into transitional series of graded ethanol:hexamethyldisila-
zane (HMDS) mixtures (2:1, 1:1, and 1:2; each for 30 min), and finally to pure
HMDS (twice, 30 min each). Specimens were air dried under a chemical hood
before being sputter coated with a gold–palladium alloy and imaged under a
field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JSM-6700F FE-SEM; JEOL).
High-Resolution X-Ray Imaging. Mice were killed on postoperative day 14, and
the knee joints were visualized with anteroposterior (AP) radiographs using the
Faxitron MX-20 Specimen Radiography System (Faxitron Bioptics). AP femur
width (width in millimeters) was measured as the maximum femoral width in
the AP radiograph and the distal cortical area (area in millimeters squared) was
measured as the femoral cortical area distal to the midpoint of the K-wire using
the ImageJ analysis software program (imagej.nih.gov/ij/) as previously de-
scribed (30). X-rays were obtained and analyzed by an experienced orthopedic
surgeon who was blinded to the treatment groups.
μCT Imaging. Live mice were imaged on postoperative day 14 within a sealed
biocontainment device (Minerve) as previously described (49). A standard small
animal anesthesia machine was used to deliver an isoflurane (Henry Schein) and
oxygen mixture during transport and imaging. Each animal was imaged using the
NanoSPECT/CT small animal imager (Bioscan) with the following settings: X-ray
tube potential 55 kVp, intensity 0.143 mA, and integration time of 1,000 ms.
Images were reconstructed and visualized using VivoQuant 2.50 (inviCRO). Briefly,
the femur was aligned with the vertical axis and the femoral length was mea-
sured between the center of the femoral head and the center of the femoral
notch. The distal 25% of the femur was analyzed as most of the bone changes
were limited to this location. To compensate for the limitation of the image
artifacts from the titanium K-wire, a semiautomated approach of connected
thresholding was used, based on voxel density measured as Hounsfield units (HU).
The voxels within a range of 5,000–50,000 HU or 700–4,999 HU were selected for
the titanium K-wire implant or bone region of interest (ROI), respectively. Data
Ashbaugh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online October 24, 2016
|
E6927
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 were analyzed by two independent personnel who were blinded to the treat-
ments. Three dimensional images were obtained from contoured 2D images and
density measurements were reported as HU.
Statistical Analysis. Data for single comparisons were compared using a Stu-
dent’s t test or Fischer’s exact test (one or two tailed) and data for multiple
comparisons were compared using a two-way ANOVA, as specifically indicated
in the figure legends. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Values of P < 0.05
were considered statistically significant.
SI Methods describes the following methods: in vivo fluorescence imaging,
vancomycin i.v. prophylaxis, serum drug level analysis, biomechanical pullout
testing, and histomorphometry.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was funded in part by a Nexus Award (to
H.-Q.M. and L.S.M.), a program supported by the Johns Hopkins Institute
for Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR) funded in part by Grant
UL1TR001079 from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sci-
ences (NCATS) of the NIH and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research.
1. Darouiche RO (2004) Treatment of infections associated with surgical implants. N Engl
J Med 350(14):1422–1429.
2. Del Pozo JL, Patel R (2009) Clinical practice. Infection associated with prosthetic joints.
N Engl J Med 361(8):787–794.
3. Zimmerli W, Trampuz A, Ochsner PE (2004) Prosthetic-joint infections. N Engl J Med
351(16):1645–1654.
4. Baddour LM, Cha YM, Wilson WR (2012) Clinical practice. Infections of cardiovascular
implantable electronic devices. N Engl J Med 367(9):842–849.
5. Cram P, et al. (2012) Total knee arthroplasty volume, utilization, and outcomes
among Medicare beneficiaries, 1991-2010. JAMA 308(12):1227–1236.
6. Wolf BR, Lu X, Li Y, Callaghan JJ, Cram P (2012) Adverse outcomes in hip arthroplasty:
Long-term trends. J Bone Joint Surg Am 94(14):e103.
7. Kurtz SM, Lau E, Watson H, Schmier JK, Parvizi J (2012) Economic burden of peri-
prosthetic joint infection in the United States. J Arthroplasty 27(8, Suppl):61–5.e1.
8. Voigt A, Shalaby A, Saba S (2010) Continued rise in rates of cardiovascular implant-
able electronic device infections in the United States: Temporal trends and causative
insights. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 33(4):414–419.
9. Kurtz S, Ong K, Lau E, Mowat F, Halpern M (2007) Projections of primary and revision
hip and knee arthroplasty in the United States from 2005 to 2030. J Bone Joint Surg
Am 89(4):780–785.
10. Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP (1999) Bacterial biofilms: A common cause of
persistent infections. Science 284(5418):1318–1322.
11. Hall-Stoodley L, Costerton JW, Stoodley P (2004) Bacterial biofilms: From the natural
environment to infectious diseases. Nat Rev Microbiol 2(2):95–108.
12. Weigel LM, et al. (2007) High-level vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolates
associated with a polymicrobial biofilm. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 51(1):231–238.
13. Ma H, Bryers JD (2013) Non-invasive determination of conjugative transfer of plas-
mids bearing antibiotic-resistance genes in biofilm-bound bacteria: Effects of sub-
strate loading and antibiotic selection. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97(1):317–328.
14. Baddour LM, et al.; American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Ka-
wasaki Disease Committee; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in Young; Council on Car-
diovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Clinical
Cardiology; Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care; American Heart Association (2010)
Update on cardiovascular implantable electronic device infections and their management:
A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 121(3):458–477.
15. Osmon DR, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of America (2013) Diagnosis and man-
agement of prosthetic joint infection: Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 56(1):e1–e25.
16. Sandoe JA, et al.; British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy; British Heart
Rhythm Society; British Cardiovascular Society; British Heart Valve Society; British
Society for Echocardiography (2015) Guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention and
management of implantable cardiac electronic device infection. Report of a joint
Working Party project on behalf of the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemo-
therapy (BSAC, host organization), British Heart Rhythm Society (BHRS), British Car-
diovascular Society (BCS), British Heart Valve Society (BHVS) and British Society for
Echocardiography (BSE). J Antimicrob Chemother 70(2):325–359.
17. Greenspon AJ, et al. (2011) 16-year trends in the infection burden for pacemakers and
implantable cardioverter-defibrillators in the United States 1993 to 2008. J Am Coll
Cardiol 58(10):1001–1006.
18. Diefenbeck M, Mückley T, Hofmann GO (2006) Prophylaxis and treatment of implant-
related infections by local application of antibiotics. Injury 37(Suppl 2):S95–S104.
19. Hake ME, et al. (2015) Local antibiotic therapy strategies in orthopaedic trauma:
Practical tips and tricks and review of the literature. Injury 46(8):1447–1456.
20. Kang DG, Holekamp TF, Wagner SC, Lehman RA, Jr (2015) Intrasite vancomycin
powder for the prevention of surgical site infection in spine surgery: A systematic
literature review. Spine J 15(4):762–770.
21. ter Boo GJ, Grijpma DW, Moriarty TF, Richards RG, Eglin D (2015) Antimicrobial de-
livery systems for local infection prophylaxis in orthopedic- and trauma surgery.
Biomaterials 52:113–125.
22. Campoccia D, Montanaro L, Speziale P, Arciola CR (2010) Antibiotic-loaded bioma-
terials and the risks for the spread of antibiotic resistance following their prophylactic
and therapeutic clinical use. Biomaterials 31(25):6363–6377.
23. Lim SH, Mao HQ (2009) Electrospun scaffolds for stem cell engineering. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 61(12):1084–1096.
24. Chou SF, Carson D, Woodrow KA (2015) Current strategies for sustaining drug release
from electrospun nanofibers. J Control Release 220(Pt B):584–591.
25. Dash TK, Konkimalla VB (2012) Poly-є-caprolactone based formulations for drug de-
livery and tissue engineering: A review. J Control Release 158(1):15–33.
26. Jain RA (2000) The manufacturing techniques of various drug loaded biodegradable
poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) devices. Biomaterials 21(23):2475–2490.
27. Lora-Tamayo J, et al.; REIPI Group for the Study of Prosthetic Infection (2013) A large
multicenter study of methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
prosthetic joint infections managed with implant retention. Clin Infect Dis 56(2):182–194.
28. Senneville E, et al. (2011) Outcome and predictors of treatment failure in total hip/knee
prosthetic joint infections due to Staphylococcus aureus. Clin Infect Dis 53(4):334–340.
29. Liu C, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of America (2011) Clinical practice guidelines
by the Infectious Diseases Society of America for the treatment of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infections in adults and children. Clin Infect Dis 52(3):e18–e55.
30. Niska JA, et al. (2013) Vancomycin-rifampin combination therapy has enhanced efficacy
against an experimental Staphylococcus aureus prosthetic joint infection. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 57(10):5080–5086.
31. Pribaz JR, et al. (2012) Mouse model of chronic post-arthroplasty infection: Noninvasive
in vivo bioluminescence imaging to monitor bacterial burden for long-term study.
J Orthop Res 30(3):335–340.
32. Niska JA, et al. (2012) Daptomycin and tigecycline have broader effective dose ranges
than vancomycin as prophylaxis against a Staphylococcus aureus surgical implant
infection in mice. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 56(5):2590–2597.
33. Nishitani K, et al. (2015) Quantifying the natural history of biofilm formation in vivo
during the establishment of chronic implant-associated Staphylococcus aureus osteomy-
elitis in mice to identify critical pathogen and host factors. J Orthop Res 33(9):1311–1319.
34. Sridhar R, et al. (2015) Electrosprayed nanoparticles and electrospun nanofibers based
on natural materials: Applications in tissue regeneration, drug delivery and phar-
maceuticals. Chem Soc Rev 44(3):790–814.
35. Son YJ, Kim WJ, Yoo HS (2014) Therapeutic applications of electrospun nanofibers for
drug delivery systems. Arch Pharm Res 37(1):69–78.
36. LaPlante KL, Mermel LA (2007) In vitro activity of daptomycin and vancomycin lock
solutions on staphylococcal biofilms in a central venous catheter model. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 22(8):2239–2246.
37. Vergidis P, et al. (2011) Treatment with linezolid or vancomycin in combination with
rifampin is effective in an animal model of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
foreign body osteomyelitis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 55(3):1182–1186.
38. Gander S, Hayward K, Finch R (2002) An investigation of the antimicrobial effects of
linezolid on bacterial biofilms utilizing an in vitro pharmacokinetic model.
J Antimicrob Chemother 49(2):301–308.
39. Reipert A, Ehlert K, Kast T, Bierbaum G (2003) Morphological and genetic differences
in two isogenic Staphylococcus aureus strains with decreased susceptibilities to van-
comycin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 47(2):568–576.
40. Goodman SB, Yao Z, Keeney M, Yang F (2013) The future of biologic coatings for
orthopaedic implants. Biomaterials 34(13):3174–3183.
41. Fredenberg S, Wahlgren M, Reslow M, Axelsson A (2011) The mechanisms of drug re-
lease in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based drug delivery systems: A review. Int J Pharm
415(1–2):34–52.
42. Dash TK, Konkimalla VB (2012) Polymeric modification and its implication in drug
delivery: Poly-e-caprolactone (PCL) as a model polymer. Mol Pharm 9(9):2365–2379.
43. Corona PS, et al. (2014) Antibiotic susceptibility in gram-positive chronic joint ar-
throplasty infections: Increased aminoglycoside resistance rate in patients with prior
aminoglycoside-impregnated cement spacer use. J Arthroplasty 29(8):1617–1621.
44. Mittal S, et al. (2014) Cardiac implantable electronic device infections: Incidence, risk
factors, and the effect of the AigisRx antibacterial envelope. Heart Rhythm 11(4):595–601.
45. Kolek MJ, Dresen WF, Wells QS, Ellis CR (2013) Use of an antibacterial envelope is
associated with reduced cardiac implantable electronic device infections in high-risk
patients. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 36(3):354–361.
46. Bjarnsholt T, Ciofu O, Molin S, Givskov M, Høiby N (2013) Applying insights from biofilm
biology to drug development: Can a new approach be developed? Nat Rev Drug Discov
12(10):791–808.
47. Campoccia D, Montanaro L, Arciola CR (2013) A review of the biomaterials technol-
ogies for infection-resistant surfaces. Biomaterials 34(34):8533–8554.
48. Francis KP, et al. (2000) Monitoring bioluminescent Staphylococcus aureus infections
in living mice using a novel luxABCDE construct. Infect Immun 68(6):3594–3600.
49. Ordonez AA, et al. (2015) Radioiodinated DPA-713 imaging correlates with bactericidal
activity of tuberculosis treatments in mice. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 59(1):642–649.
50. Hegde SS, Reyes N, Skinner R, Difuntorum S (2008) Efficacy of telavancin in a murine
model of pneumonia induced by methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus.
J Antimicrob Chemother 61(1):169–172.
E6928
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613722113
Ashbaugh et al.
