 Factors Influencing Clinical Correlates of Chronic Traumatic 
Encephalopathy (CTE): A Review
Breton M. Asken, M.S., ATC,
Graduate Student, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Molly J. Sullan, M.S.,
Graduate Student, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Aliyah R. Snyder, M.S.,
Graduate Student. University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Zachary M. Houck, M.S.,
Graduate Student, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Vaughn E. Bryant, M.S.,
Graduate Student, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Loren P. Hizel, M.S.,
Graduate Student, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Molly E. McLaren, M.S.,
Graduate Student, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Duane E. Dede, Ph.D,
Clinical Professor, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Michael S. Jaffee, M.D.,
Associate Professor, Chief – Divison of Neurology, University of Florida, Department of Neurology
Steven T. DeKosky, M.D., and
Professor, Deputy Director of McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida, Department of 
Neurology
Russell M. Bauer, Ph.D, ABPP/CN
Professor, Graduate Program Director, University of Florida, Department of Clinical and Health 
Psychology
Abstract
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a neuropathologically defined disease reportedly 
linked to a history of repetitive brain trauma. As such, retired collision sport athletes are likely at 
heightened risk for developing CTE. Researchers have described distinct pathological features of 
CTE as well a wide range of clinical symptom presentations, recently termed traumatic 
encephalopathy syndrome (TES). These clinical symptoms are highly variable, non-specific to 
Correspoinding Author: basken8@phhp.ufl.edu, P: 717-608-1187. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuropsychol Rev. 2016 December ; 26(4): 340–363. doi:10.1007/s11065-016-9327-z.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 individuals described as having CTE pathology in case reports, and are often associated with many 
other factors. This review describes the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral changes associated 
with 1) developmental and demographic factors, 2) neurodevelopmental disorders, 3) normal 
aging, 4) adjusting to retirement, 5) drug and alcohol abuse, 6) surgeries and anesthesia, and 7) 
sleep difficulties, as well as the relationship between these factors and risk for developing 
dementia-related neurodegenerative disease. We discuss why some professional athletes may be 
particularly susceptible to many of these effects and the importance of choosing appropriate 
controls groups when designing research protocols. We conclude that these factors should be 
considered as modifiers predominantly of the clinical outcomes associated with repetitive brain 
trauma within a broader biopsychosocial framework when interpreting and attributing symptom 
development, though also note potential effects on neuropathological outcomes. Importantly, this 
could have significant treatment implications for improving quality of life.
Introduction
One decade ago, the first published case of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) in an 
American football player marked the beginning of a significant shift in the understanding, 
concern, and public awareness of the potential long-term effects of repetitive brain 
trauma. ”Punch drunk syndrome” appeared first in the medical literature in the late 1920’s 
(Martland 1928), and was renamed “dementia pugilistica” shortly thereafter (Millspaugh 
1937). These terms described the clinical syndrome of prominent cognitive, behavioral, and 
motor symptoms in boxers. More recently, the modern concept, now referred to as CTE, has 
garnered substantial attention, stimulated by case studies describing neuropathology 
identified during the autopsies of former professional football players (Omalu et al. 2011; 
Omalu et al. 2006; Omalu et al. 2005; Omalu et al. 2010), and followed by similar findings 
in professional wrestlers, hockey players, and others. The proposed mechanistic link 
between repetitive brain trauma and neurodegeneration is not well understood, but structural 
injuries, altered neural signaling, and an “immunoexcitotoxic” cascade have been postulated 
as likely candidates (Blaylock and Maroon 2011; Giza and Hovda 2014).
Lay interest in CTE has exploded in recent years as a result of coverage and attention paid to 
it in media, popular culture, and scientific literature. Public awareness of the relationship 
between repetitive brain trauma and CTE, while a desirable precursor to preventative efforts, 
may lead to a sense that more is known about this phenomenon than is actually the case. The 
absence of CTE pathological features in a neurodegenerative brain bank of individuals 
without documented exposure to repetitive head trauma, compared to presence of CTE 
pathology in approximately 30% (21 of 66) of individuals with such exposure, further 
supports the link between repetitive brain trauma and CTE neuropathology (Bieniek et al., 
2015). However, when the brain of a deceased athlete is shown to have CTE neuropathology, 
the temptation is to attribute all reported cognitive, behavioral, or neuropsychiatric problems 
that may be present in the athlete’s history to CTE neuropathology. We propose that such 
attributions are premature in that they may neglect other biological, psychological, and 
social factors that may produce some, or many, of the clinicopathological outcomes 
associated with in CTE (see Figure). Previous reviews have examined the available evidence 
linking repetitive brain trauma, neurodegenerative pathology, and late-life clinical outcomes, 
Asken et al.
Page 2
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 generally concluding the research remains in its infancy and firm support for cause-and-
effect relationships is lacking (McCrory, Meeuwisse, Kutcher, Jordan, & Gardner 2013; 
Iverson, Gardner, McCrory, Zafonte, & Castellani 2015; Randolph 2014). In this review, we 
highlight the importance of a broader, biopsychosocial perspective, and describe key factors 
that may play an important role in producing key behavioral aspects of the CTE phenotype. 
As efforts to understand, prevent, and treat both the clinical and pathological correlates of 
CTE advance, we should begin with as broad a conceptual base as possible.
The Nature of CTE
Pathological CTE is conceptualized as a tauopathy that leads to progressive, degenerative 
brain changes. Its association with repetitive brain trauma suffered in high-impact sport 
activities has focused the key question of how repetitive head injury can lead to progressive 
neurodegenerative disease. After the initial publication by Omalu et al of pathological 
findings in a deceased American football player (Omalu et al. 2005), there have been a series 
of publications describing the neuropathology of CTE (Mckee et al. 2009; Omalu et al. 
2011, McKee et al. 2013). Pathological studies indicated similar structural changes to those 
described by Geddes et al. in a small autopsy sample of young men with a recent history of 
mild chronic head injury; specifically, early presence of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the 
neocortex indicative of damaged blood vessels and perivasculature (Geddes, Vowles, Nicoll, 
& Revesz 1999). Recently, a consensus panel defined the neuropathological criteria for CTE 
and systematically identified the unique features differentiating CTE from other common 
tauopathies (McKee et al. 2016). The pathognomonic lesion of CTE includes 
phosphorylated tau (p-tau) aggregation in neurons, astrocytes, and cell processes around 
small vessels in an irregular pattern at the depth of the cortical sulci. Other observed 
pathologies included transactive response DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43), beta-amyloid 
plaques, and hippocampal neurofibrillary degeneration. P-tau and neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFTs) predominantly within neocortex layers II and III differentiated CTE from 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), where p-tau is typically found in layers III and V. Hippocampal 
p-tau deposition in areas CA2 and CA4, as opposed to CA1 and the subiculum, also 
appeared unique to CTE compared to traditional AD pathology. Defining CTE 
neuropathological criteria was an essential step towards developing an understanding of 
incidence rates and clinical correlates.
Of note, CTE is frequently discussed as a clinicopathological entity. Advances in our 
understanding of underlying postmortem neuropathology, while critically important, are 
constrained by our suboptimal understanding of a variable and poorly defined clinical 
symptom picture. Previously proposed clinical stages described progressively debilitating 
symptoms beginning with headaches and problems in concentration and other vague 
symptoms (Stage I), then involving depression, explosivity, and memory loss (Stage II), 
executive dysfunction (Stage III) and finally, dementia, aggression, and language disturbance 
(Stage IV).
The loci and described progression of pathology are accompanied by cognitive and 
emotional changes. Stern et al, based on posthumous interviews with 33 informants for cases 
of “pure CTE” determined to have no comorbid neuropathology, suggested that behavioral 
Asken et al.
Page 3
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and mood changes appear before the onset of neurocognitive decline (Stern et al. 2013). The 
most commonly-described behavioral features included explosivity, impulsivity, and 
physical and verbal abuse. The most prominent mood features were depression and 
hopelessness followed by suicidality and anxiety (Stern et al. 2013). The link between CTE 
and suicidality has been contested (Iverson 2014; Iverson 2016) and evidence suggests 
suicide mortality among retired NFL players is significantly lower than that of the general 
population (Lehman et al. 2016); however other researchers hypothesize that concussions 
alone appear to increase suicide risk (Fralick, Thiruchelvam, Tien, & Redelmeier 2016). 
Memory impairment, executive dysfunction (Gavett et al. 2011), and concentration 
difficulties are the most common cognitive deficits followed by language impairment and 
visuospatial difficulties (Stern et al. 2013).
Victoroff attempted to define the clinical signs and symptoms of CTE as “clinically probable 
traumatic encephalopathy” and “clinically possible traumatic encephalopathy” for research 
diagnostic purposes (Victoroff 2012). Montenigro et al later coined the term “traumatic 
encephalopathy syndrome” (TES) along with various TES subtypes (Montenigro et al. 2014) 
to differentiate the clinical syndromes from neuropathologically defined CTE (Jordan 2013; 
McKee et al. 2016). TES diagnostic criteria initially included five general criteria derived 
from calculated prevalence of cognitive and emotional deficits across reported cases of CTE, 
three core clinical features, and nine supportive features (Montenigro et al. 2014). Reams et 
al. proposed the most recent iteration of TES, but carefully note their diagnostic criteria are 
not intended to predict underlying CTE neuropathology and such criteria will likely change 
as research evolves (Reams et al. 2016). The Reams et al. criteria require persistence of 
symptoms for at least two years, a history of head trauma exposure, delayed onset following 
head trauma, progressive course, and formal neuropsychological testing corroborating self- 
or observer-report of cognitive dysfunction in the executive, visuospatial, memory, and/or 
language domain(s). The clinical features also cannot be better explained by another 
neurological disorder. Supportive features include emotional dysregulation, behavioral 
change, and motor disturbance. The researchers further delineate “possible” versus 
“probable” TES, stating “Possible TES does not require cognitive decline, repetitive head 
trauma exposure, or delayed onset of symptoms.” Individuals with symptoms better 
explained by another neurodegenerative or psychiatric disorder qualify for an “Unlikely 
TES” diagnosis.
The extensive symptom overlap between CTE/TES and other clinicopathological entities, as 
well as the variability in symptomatic presentation, highlights the need for understanding 
clinical changes following exposure to repetitive brain trauma within the broader landscape 
of biological, psychological, and social factors that influence cognitive and emotional 
changes in at-risk populations. One key question facing CTE researchers concerns why the 
clinical and pathological features of the disease affect some but not all individuals exposed 
to repetitive brain trauma. This fact suggests that the links among brain trauma, 
neuropathology, and clinical symptoms are not obligatory or simple, but that they may be 
mediated by other factors that, separately or together, elevate or mitigate risk for developing 
disease characteristics. In this review, we consider other risk factors and biopsychosocial 
factors that may be important contributors in the development of the CTE syndrome, or 
TES, and that may moderate the link between trauma, pathology, and clinical changes. We 
Asken et al.
Page 4
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 review the effects of 1) developmental and demographic factors, 2) neurodevelopmental 
disorders, 3) normal aging, 4) adjusting to retirement, 5) drug and alcohol abuse, 6) surgeries 
and anesthesia, and 7) sleep difficulties. We discuss how each of these factors can be 
associated with some CTE symptoms in the context of cognitive ability, mood and behavior, 
and risk for developing neurodegenerative disorders. Such factors may moderate the causal 
links between repetitive brain trauma and CTE clinicopathology and may themselves 
produce elements of the CTE clinical syndrome. While we do not detail the impact of 
genetics or epigenetics, we acknowledge such biological factors add another layer of 
complexity to the matter, particularly as it relates to degree of accumulated neuropathology, 
and likely serves as an important risk factor and treatment consideration. We conclude that 
an understanding of these complex relationships may contribute to our understanding of the 
mechanisms whereby some individuals develop clinicopathological changes following 
exposure to repetitive brain trauma and others do not.
Developmental Environment
While professional athletes are a diverse population overall, there are sport-specific 
demographic biases. Race is a commonly used proxy, albeit imperfect, for socioeconomic 
status (SES) (Braveman et al. 2005; Manly and Echemendia 2007). The Institute for 
Diversity and Ethics in Sport (TIDES) tracks and reports racial diversity among collegiate 
and professional sports leagues (“The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport,” 2015). 
From 1990 to 2014, African American athletes comprised between 60 and 70 percent of all 
National Football League (NFL) athletes with significant variability based on player position 
(e.g. quarterbacks versus running backs). African American and white athletes combined 
represented at least 97% of all NFL athletes each year during this time frame, indicating 
minimal overall diversity compared to the general population (“The National Football 
League Race and Gender Report Card” 2015). Conversely, between 1998 and 2014, Major 
League Soccer (MLS) consisted of a majority of white athletes (48–65 percent) with 
significant racial diversity including a growing number of international athletes (“Major 
League Soccer Racial and Gender Report Card” 2015). Considering both inter- and intra-
sport differences in demographic makeup, it would be an oversimplification to call 
“professional athletes” or “retired athletes” a singular group. Developmental environment 
and SES are components of a multidimensional construct that, from a methodological 
perspective, has been inconsistently defined. In addition to race, other commonly-used 
measures of SES are income, education, and occupation, either individually or in some 
combination. Studies attempting to covary for these influences or utilize appropriate control 
groups may benefit from incorporation of a composite variable such as the Hollingshead 
Four Factor Index, which takes both educational and occupational factors into account 
(Gottfried 1985). Braveman et al. (2005) provide a comprehensive review of the use of SES 
in health research, and conclude that observed racial/ethnic disparities in various health 
outcomes must be considered within the context of potentially “unmeasured aspects of 
SES,” and not as mutually exclusive constructs.
The relationship between developmental SES factors and expression of neuropsychiatric 
problems across the lifespan is complex (Dodge and Pettit 2003). Low SES has been linked 
to emotional and behavioral problems throughout childhood and adolescence (Bradley and 
Asken et al.
Page 5
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Corwyn 2002). Children exposed to economic hardship are more likely to exhibit poor 
conduct (Lahey et al. 1995). Disadvantaged SES predisposes to increased aggression and 
higher susceptibility to depression (McLoyd 1997). Some argue these associations are driven 
primarily by familial stresses and generally maladaptive reactions to adverse circumstances 
due to the chronic strain of the home environment (Amato and Zuo 1992). Stringaris et al. 
found the presence of childhood irritability carried a 1.3 to 1.8 times increased risk of 
developing depression or anxiety in adulthood (Stringaris et al. 2009). Evidence suggests 
irritability and impulsive aggression are prevalent and nonspecific amongst youth seeking 
mental health treatment (Van Meter et al. 2016). Considering the violent and aggressive 
nature of American football and other collision sports, in particular, it would be interesting 
to investigate how some individuals potentially predisposed to explosivity due to their 
developmental and early environmental circumstances are able to adapt their aggression 
when they are no longer able to utilize competitive athletics as a sanctioned outlet.
Demographic variables, and specifically SES, influence the development of cognition 
throughout the lifespan and represent the “environmental” aspect of the gene-environment 
interaction model of development. Research assessing the effects of prenatal care has 
identified conditions associated with low SES during pregnancy, including higher levels of 
maternal stress, higher infection rates, and poor nutrition, all of which compromise fetal 
growth and increases the likelihood of premature birth (Spencer et al. 1999). A longitudinal 
study by Jefferis et al. described an interaction of birth weight and social class such that 
children with higher birth weight who develop within a higher social class exhibit better 
math achievement throughout childhood and adolescence and attained higher educational 
qualifications in adulthood. However, children with lower birth weights developing in higher 
social classes still outperformed children with higher birth weights in lower social classes, 
suggesting a strong postnatal environmental influence (Jefferis et al. 2002). The prefrontal 
cortex, specifically, does not fully develop until early adulthood and is thought to play an 
important role in the maturation of higher order cognitive abilities such as attentional and 
inhibitory control (Casey et al. 1997). These results suggest that an interaction of SES and 
prenatal development, as well as delayed development, could affect cognitive and neural 
functioning into adulthood.
Further examination of the role of developmental environment on cognition, children from 
disadvantaged SES backgrounds tend to have poorer cognitive skills. Andersson et al. found 
both maternal SES and maternal IQ predicted their child’s verbal IQ, but that maternal IQ 
was nearly twice as strong a predictor when considering the relative beta-weights in their 
regression model (Andersson et al. 1996). A large and ethnically diverse sample studied by 
Duncan et al. revaled persistent poverty to be 60–80% more influential on childhood IQ than 
transient poverty, indicating a cumulative role of impoverished environmental conditions 
both within the family and the surrounding neighborhood. They also note black children 
have significantly increased likelihood of exposure to these environments. However, strong 
interactions of race and environmental poverty show that relying independently on race 
without accounting for family economic measures will overestimate racial and ethnic 
differences in intellect; specifically, the 10.7 point IQ-difference found between black and 
white children was significantly attenuated when considering maternal education, father 
presence, and individual family income-to-needs ratios (Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, & Klebanov 
Asken et al.
Page 6
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1994). A review by Evans concluded a child’s physical environment directly impacts 
development, and both parent-child and other interpersonal interactions are likely strong 
underlying mechanisms (Evans 2006).
Another explanation underlying SES effects on cognition is early-life cognitive stimulation, 
which is influenced by SES and likely mediates the association of SES and cognitive 
development (Conger and Donnellan 2007; Klerman 1991). For example, a lack of cognitive 
stimulation during childhood development predicts deficits in verbal learning, and math 
skills in low SES children (Korenman et al. 1995; Bradley and Corwyn 2002). Lower 
parental education can predict poorer performance on processing speed, verbal fluency, and 
nonverbal memory in adulthood, further suggesting an interaction of SES factors and 
cognitive functioning across the lifespan (Kaplan et al. 2001). These findings were 
corroborated by Turrell et al who indicated individuals between the ages of 58 and 64 from a 
disadvantaged socioeconomic position during childhood performed statistically worse on 
neuropsychological tests assessing multiple cognitive domains than those with higher SES 
backgrounds. However, examination of the study data shows clinically relevant childhood 
SES group differences for processing speed only, and, in general, broader and more robust 
differences when grouping subjects according to personal educational attainment and 
personal income (Turrell et al. 2002). A series of regression analyses based on almost 20,000 
adults aged 50 and older found racial and SES factors across the lifespan exerted the 
strongest influence on general cognitive functioning (R2 = 0.38) relative to other outcomes 
such as self-rated health (R2 = 0.17), functional limitations (R2 = 0.17), chronic conditions 
(R2 = 0.08), depressive symptoms (R2 = 0.11), or self-rated memory (R2 = 0.08). 
Importantly, the researchers found that inclusion of SES factors from the subjects’ adulthood 
(personally attained education and income) attenuated many of the effects of childhood SES 
(e.g. parental education levels, parental income), suggesting potential modifiability across 
the lifespan given appropriately stimulating environments (Luo and Waite 2005).
As individuals age, the quality of their developmental environments can ultimately manifest 
as differential susceptibility to cognitive difficulties such as mild cognitive impairment or 
dementia. The mechanism underlying these associations is broadly termed the “cognitive 
reserve” hypothesis, which states there are individual structural and functional differences 
that allow the brain to compensate differentially for age- or injury-related pathology (Stern 
2009). Variables affecting cognitive reserve are present throughout the lifespan but some of 
these processes may be particularly influential during development and early in life 
(Chugani 1998; Meck et al. 2007). Hall et al. examined a sample of African American 
subjects and the risk of clinically diagnosed AD based on their education level (more or less 
than seven years) and their childhood neighborhood SES (urban versus rural until age 19). 
Results showed the combination of both low education and rural childhood residency carried 
a 6.5 times greater risk of developing clinical AD compared to the high education/urban 
childhood residency reference group (Hall et al. 2000). Other SES factors such as lower 
income and bleak developmental environment are also associated with greater risk of 
cognitive impairment. Specifically, Lynch et al. determined older individuals were over four 
times more likely to report reduced cognitive functioning if they experienced consistent 
economic hardship beginning in young adulthood compared to those reporting no periods of 
economic hardship, and were three times as likely to meet criteria for clinical depression 
Asken et al.
Page 7
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Lynch et al. 1997). Growing up in a suburban neighborhood, compared to more rural or 
urban areas with potentially less enriching environments, reportedly carries a 55% reduced 
risk of developing AD (Moceri et al. 2000), while other findings indicate lower childhood 
household and community SES do not predict later-life AD (Wilson et al. 2005). Borenstein 
et al. contend SES risk factors for clinical expression of neurodegenerative conditions like 
AD are influential across the lifespan as gene-environment interactions consistently impact 
neurobehavioral development (Borenstein, Copenhaver, & Mortimer 2006). In this regard, it 
will be useful to know whether developmentally low SES predisposes athletes to expressing 
symptoms of CTE later in life.
The association between SES and late-life neurobehavioral function is complicated because 
parental or personal education and income level are often used as a proxy for SES, which 
may present a number of problems when considering the specific population of professional 
athletes. As it pertains to American football, this population is considered highly educated 
relative to the general population since three years removed from high school are required 
before entering the NFL and the majority who attend college will remain for their fourth or 
fifth years of eligibility. However, the quality of early education (Manly et al. 2002) and 
level of engagement in academics is likely variable for many athletes, particularly for those 
who anticipate playing professionally. Further, many professional athletes experience a 
drastic increase in income when they become professional relative to their familial income 
during development; education and income level are likely to be differentially relevant as a 
predictor of later impairment in this population. Consideration of childhood and 
developmental influences, such as parental education and income, may more accurately 
represent SES influence on clinical outcomes across the lifespan in professional athletes, 
specifically.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders likely to affect cognitive and behavioral functioning across 
the lifespan include (among others) learning disabilities (LD) and Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Chronologically, the presence of LD or ADHD would be 
one of the first neurobehavioral disorders to manifest. Shifrer et al found that several 
sociocultural factors predisposed some ethnic groups to be disproportionally diagnosed with 
learning disability (Shifrer et al. 2011). African American and Hispanic children were 1.5 
and 1.6 times more likely to be diagnosed, respectively, than European Americans, which is 
particularly relevant when considering the previously described demographic and racial 
makeup of professional athletes. Within the athletic community, LD diagnosis has been 
reported as high as 13.5% in a sample of male collegiate football players (Collins et al. 
1999). This percentage is significantly higher than the 5% prevalence of LD reported in both 
adolescent and college-aged individuals in the general population (Horn and Nevill 2006; 
Pastor and Reuben 2008). Nearly 10% of American children meet clinical criteria for ADHD 
(Barbaresi et al. 2004; Putukian et al. 2011). While ADHD prevalence has not been studied 
directly in collegiate or professional athletes, incidence in high school athletes is consistent 
with general population estimates (Iverson et al. 2015). Importantly, evidence suggests many 
symptoms of neurodevelopmental disorders persist across the lifespan (Biederman et al. 
2006; McCann and Roy-Byrne 2000).
Asken et al.
Page 8
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Emotional issues may arise as well. Individuals with learning disability and ADHD often 
develop anxiety and mood disorders consequent to academic difficulties, socialization 
problems, and poor emotional regulation (Barkley 2010). Females with these learning 
problems tend to internalize these challenges and develop anxiety disorders (Quinn 2005). 
However, young males are more likely to externalize and report higher rates of impulsivity, 
hyperactivity, and poor emotional regulation. Adults with ADHD report substantially higher 
rates of mood and behavioral problems. Findings from the National Comorbidity Survey – 
Replication (NCS-R) indicated adults with ADHD reported having a mood disorder 5.0 
times as often as adults without ADHD, an anxiety disorder 3.7 times as often, a substance 
use disorder 3.0 times as often, and intermittent explosive disorder 3.7 times as often 
(Kessler et al. 2006). Competitive sports provide a structure in which to channel these issues, 
but many athletes report maladjustment when they step away from the game (described in 
more detail below). This has been associated with legal issues as well as an increase in 
psychopathology. Rage, impulsivity, and mood disorders have been frequently associated 
with individuals later diagnosed with CTE. The relative contribution of repetitive brain 
trauma on the neurological systems associated with these behaviors is unknown, but the 
presence of these symptoms in an athletic population where LD and ADHD are common 
necessitates further investigation of their interaction.
Impaired cognition in individuals with LD is diagnosed based on manifest academic 
difficulties with reading, writing, and/or arithmetic. ADHD is characterized by chronic 
inattention and an inability to maintain focus relative to same-aged peers and expected 
development (“Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders”, 2003). Adults with 
ADHD perform poorly both on attentional and memory-based measures, presumably as a 
result of poor attention and reduced working memory negatively affecting their ability to 
encode information (Hervey et al. 2004). Individuals with LD-dyslexia also show significant 
working memory impairments (de Jong 1998). LD affecting both reading and arithmetic 
results in a broad range of cognitive deficiencies in adulthood. Goldstein et al. reported 
mean LD group performance one standard deviation below normative group means on 
assessments of vocabulary (WAIS-R Vocabulary), working memory (WAIS-R Digit Span), 
processing speed (WAIS-R Digit Symbol), and math skills (WAIS-R Arithmetic) (Goldstein 
et al. 2001). In athletes, specifically, LD and ADHD are associated with significantly lower 
scores on measures of verbal and visual memory, slower reaction time, worse impulse 
control, and more executive dysfunction than athletes without these diagnoses (White et al. 
2014; Zuckerman et al. 2013). When coupled with brain trauma, athletes with LD and 
ADHD who perform worse on cognitive measures at baseline then tend to take longer to 
recover pre-injury cognitive functioning and be cleared to return to athletic participation 
following concussion (Waljas et al. 2015).
Some evidence suggests the presence of ADHD predisposes to later diagnosis of 
neurodegenerative diseases like dementia. Golimstock et al. performed a case-control 
analysis examining rates of ADHD diagnosis among patients diagnosed with either dementia 
with Lewy Body (DLB) or AD dementia. They reported 47.8% of DLB cases had preceding 
ADHD symptoms compared to 15.2% of cases with AD dementia and 15.1% of the control 
group. Controlling for age, sex, and years of education, preceding ADHD symptoms carried 
a 5.1 times increased risk of developing DLB compared to controls, but no increased risk of 
Asken et al.
Page 9
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AD dementia (Golimstok et al. 2011). Lule et al proposed mechanisms of symptom overlap 
and pathophysiological links between ADHD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lule et al. 
2008). However, there are few studies directly relating neurodevelopmental disorders to 
subsequent risk of neurodegenerative disease. A significant reason is the difficulty in precise 
symptom attribution, particularly in individuals with previously undiagnosed LD or ADHD 
who only begin to complain of cognitive symptoms later in life (Ivanchak et al. 2012). While 
the progressive nature of neurodegenerative disease is considered an important 
differentiating factor, this is confounded by reports that some individuals with ADHD report 
progressive worsening of symptoms across the lifespan (Bramham et al. 2012).
Relating these findings to the construct of cognitive reserve initially postulated by Stern 
(Stern 2002), it is apparent that lifelong neurodevelopmental disorders like LD and ADHD, 
which conceivably began affecting neural development from an early age, may reduce an 
individual’s functional capacity to withstand age- or injury-related neurological insults likely 
to affect cognition. One study examined the effects of repetitive brain trauma during this 
early developmental window by comparing the neuropsychological profiles of retired 
American football players who began playing before age 12 to those who began organized 
play at a later age. Findings suggested those exposed to football before age 12 performed 
worse in reading accuracy, verbal memory, and executive functioning (Stamm et al. 2015). 
However, group differences in the reporting of learning disability make these results difficult 
to interpret and highlight the need for considering the substantial overlap in cognitive 
symptoms as well as potential interactions between repetitive brain trauma and other 
comorbid diagnoses. Additionally, the highly comorbid emotional and behavioral problems 
associated with neurodevelopmental disorders make it important to consider conditions like 
LD and ADHD when interpreting neurobehavioral change due to any cause across the 
lifespan.
Normal Aging
Structural brain changes associated with normal aging are well-known and include 
neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) development, decreased grey and white matter volume, 
increased ventricular volume, increased white matter hyperintensities on MRI, and default 
mode network (regions of highly correlated functional activity) dysfunction on MRI as well 
(Andrews-Hanna et al. 2007; Fjell and Walhovd 2010; Madden et al. 2009; Sambataro et al. 
2010). Longitudinal studies of age effects on brain volume have found volume reduction in 
the prefrontal cortex, caudate, cerebellum, hippocampus, and other associated regions (Fjell 
and Walhovd 2010). These brain changes presumably lead to age-related cognitive decline, 
including working memory deficits, behavioral dysregulation, reduced episodic memory, and 
reductions in procedural learning. Decreased white matter integrity is also associated with 
slowed processing speed and impaired executive function (Madden et al. 2009). However, 
aging studies indicate the relationship between clinical changes and underlying pathological 
changes is complicated. For example, findings from the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study showed 
only 25% of clinically diagnosed AD dementia patients had pathological confirmation of 
definite AD (Petrovitch et al. 2001). Beach et al. describe 87.3% sensitivity of a “clinically 
probable or possible AD” diagnosis to identifying severe AD neuropathology (Braak Stage 
V or VI), but only 44.3% specificity. Additionally, 39% of subjects without a clinical 
Asken et al.
Page 10
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diagnosis of either probable or possible AD met minimum histopathological criteria for AD 
(Beach, Monsell, Phillips, & Kukull 2012).
More recent studies have attempted to understand how repetitive brain trauma affects brain 
aging. While there are several highly publicized cases of young people who have committed 
suicide and were found to have CTE, it is thought to typically develop later in life for 
diagnosed former collision sport athletes. Pathologically, NFT deposition accompanies the 
normal aging process and the recently proposed “primary age-related tauopathy” (PART) 
describes the continuum of severities with and without associated cognitive changes (Crary 
et al. 2014). However, the unique distribution of tau deposition in the perivascular spaces of 
cortical sulci described in CTE differentiates CTE from PART, which is associated with NFT 
formation in the medial temporal lobe and several subcortical nuclei. Thus, there is strong 
evidence suggesting the pathological features of CTE do not represent normal or accelerated 
aging.
Increased cortical thinning and enlarged lateral ventricles have been reported in retired 
athletes with a history of concussion when compared to controls (Tremblay et al. 2013). 
Athletes with a history of severe concussion showed smaller hippocampal volumes later in 
life than both control participants and other athletes with less severe concussions (based on 
previously used severity grading scales) (Strain et al. 2015). Similar findings of reduced 
right hippocampal volume have been reported in retired NFL players compared to controls 
(Coughlin et al. 2015). Retired athletes with a history of concussion show more diffuse 
white matter abnormalities compared to similarly-aged older adults (Tremblay et al. 2014). 
These white matter changes were reportedly similar to but worse than those seen in normal 
aging, suggesting that a history of concussion may accelerate certain aspects of the normal 
aging process (Tremblay et al. 2014).
Cognitively, episodic memory and verbal fluency have both been reported to be lower in 
retired athletes with a history of concussion than controls with no concussion history (Strain 
et al. 2015; Tremblay et al. 2013). Other impairments include performance in delayed visual 
memory, increased retroactive interference on verbal learning measures (an indication of 
possible frontal lobe dysfunction), and reduced benefit from motor training on reaction time 
tasks (Tremblay et al. 2014). However, findings from these studies are qualified by the 
appropriateness of the control group comparisons. Control groups are often demographically 
different in racial makeup and age, and inadequate attention is given to neurodevelopmental 
disorders, such as learning disabilities, as well as premorbid intellectual abilities. These 
limitations are described later in more detail. In addition to age-equivalent controls with no 
history of repetitive head trauma, asymptomatic former professional players will be needed 
for comparison.
Normal aging also brings with it a number of psychosocial life stressors. External stress 
associated with changes in life roles, threats to competence, and increased negative 
stereotypes (in a “youth oriented” society) contribute to depression in older adults (Fiske et 
al. 2009). Late onset depression is associated with cognitive impairments in older adults 
including executive dysfunction, slowed processing speed, and episodic and semantic 
memory deficits (Herrmann et al. 2007). Chronic stress and depression can affect cognition 
Asken et al.
Page 11
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by affecting key brain systems. For example, chronic stress can lead to dysfunction in the 
hypothalamic-pituitary axis which, in turn, can lead to hippocampal atrophy and memory 
impairment (Butters et al. 2008). Depression is reportedly common in retired athletes, and 
its appearance may be correlated positively with concussion history (Guskiewicz et al. 2007; 
Kerr et al. 2012).
Studies have also examined differences between those with and without history of brain 
trauma on development of neurodegenerative disease or dementia. Pooled odds ratios from 
meta-analyses indicate a 1.6 to 1.8 times increased risk of developing clinically diagnosed 
AD, with significantly elevated risk apparently applying to males only (Mortimer et al. 
1991; Fleminger, Oliver, Lovestone, Rabe-Hesketh, & Giora 2003). Data also suggest a 1.4 
times increased risk of physician-diagnosed Parkinson’s disease (PD) (Jafari, Etminan, 
Aminzadeh, & Samii 2013). Mortimer et al. highlight the importance of meta-analyses for 
determining relative risk of developing dementia following brain injury by describing that 
the seven studies contained in their analysis were not sufficiently powered to address a risk 
factor hypothesis in isolation. Other large-scale chart review analyses have also examined 
subsequent risk of neurodegenerative disorder diagnosis following brain injury. Gardner et 
al. report a 1.46 times increased risk of subsequent dementia diagnosis following brain 
injury compared to non-brain injured trauma controls (Gardner et al., 2014), and Nordstrom 
et al. report 3.0 and 8.3 times increased risk following single or multiple mild TBI, 
respectively (Nordstrom, Michaelsson, Gustafson, & Nordstrom 2014). However, these 
relative risks are significantly attenuated after controlling for covariates such as depression, 
drug and alcohol abuse, SES, and other risk factors; the independent effect of brain injury 
history was rendered clinically negligible and comparatively less predictive than other 
covariates in both studies. Most recently, Crane et al. reported findings from 7,130 
participants across three large prospective datasets relating history of TBI with loss of 
consciousness to subsequent development of both neurodegenerative pathology and 
clinically diagnosed dementia. They found no association between TBI history and incident 
dementia or AD pathology. History of TBI was associated with 3.6 times elevated risk of PD 
pathology, and 1.6 to 5.7 times elevated risk of Lewy Body presence in various anatomical 
regions such as the substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, and frontal and temporal cortex (Crane, 
Gibbons, Dams-O’Connor, & et al. 2016).
The risk of neurodegenerative disorders following a history of repetitive brain trauma 
warrants separate consideration from history of single or isolated TBI events, and few 
studies have directly examined this (Gardner & Yaffe 2015). Lehman et al. reported that 
retired NFL athletes were at a lower risk of mortality compared to same-aged general 
population counterparts, but carried a three-fold increased risk of neurodegenerative 
mortality, particularly related to Alzheimer’s disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(Lehman, Hein, Baron, & Gesic 2012). Conversely, a history of participation high school 
American football did not predict increased risk of subsequent dementia, PD, or ALS 
diagnosis (Savica, Parisi, Wold, Josephs, & Ahlskog 2012). These competing results may 
suggest increased risk with longer playing careers and more exposure to repetitive brain 
trauma.
Asken et al.
Page 12
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In summary, normal aging is associated with both structural and functional brain 
consequences, but likely does not account for the specific neuropathology associated with 
CTE. Cortical and subcortical volume loss occurs naturally over time, as do cognitive 
changes, although the latter are milder and more subtle in normal aging compared to 
individuals who develop dementia. Multifactorial depressive symptoms are common in 
aging individuals and can impact cognition and brain functioning in older adults. It is 
important to consider the natural trajectory of these changes to better understand any 
modifying effects of repetitive brain trauma sustained by collision sport athletes on clinical 
outcomes across the lifespan. History of brain injury may confer increased risk of 
subsequent neurodegenerative disease diagnosis, but the clinical significance of the elevated 
risk in the context of multidimensional covariates is unclear.
Adjusting to Retirement
A career in professional athletics is an option afforded to few and achieved successfully by 
even fewer. This generally represents a lifetime dedication to a single craft with minimal 
deviation from childhood/adolescence through adulthood. As a result, professional athletes 
often possess strong personal identification with their jobs and, subsequently, are subject to 
many unique challenges upon retirement from athletic careers which often occurs quite early 
compared to most professions. The typical age of an NFL player, for example, at retirement 
is in his late 20’s or early 30’s (Ninomiya 2015). The literature on civilian adjustment to 
retirement in the general population is somewhat limited by reliance on self-reported quality 
of life measures as outcomes. Additionally, the typical subjects in these studies are 
significantly older upon retirement than most professional athletes and may face different 
transitional challenges.
For employed individuals and especially athletes, retirement is an inevitable but important 
life event that can have profound positive and negative effects on psychological, emotional, 
and cognitive adaptation. Individuals vary broadly in their ability to adjust to new, post-
career roles and there are several contributing and interacting factors that predict success in 
navigating this transition. A study of retirement community-dwelling adults in both 
independent and assisted living facilities found that engaging in higher levels of activity was 
the most substantial predictor of higher functioning based on the Medical Outcomes Study 
Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36) – being inactive had inverse, negative outcomes (Jenkins 
et al. 2002). Calvo et al. describe longitudinal findings from over 6,000 participants in the 
Health and Retirement Study using fixed and random effects regression models. Their 
results underscored the important influence of retirement timing on quality of life Such that 
early retirement (prior to age 62) significantly increases the risk of lower self-reported 
physical and emotional health. The authors observed “work clearly serves to promote better 
subjective physical and emotional health as it likely serves as a source of identity and 
resources (Calvo et al. 2013).” Wang et al. provide a comprehensive review of the theoretical 
and empirically-based influences that highlight the complexities of the retirement process as 
a dynamic development period in both the short and long term (Wang et al. 2014).
Many people maintain life satisfaction, physical health, self-esteem, and mood beyond 
retirement (Neuman 2008). However, several mediating relationships exist between 
Asken et al.
Page 13
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 retirement and adjustment that may alter these trajectories (Muratore et al. 2014). For 
example, Dave et al. also reported findings from the Health and Retirement Study showing 
complete retirement leads to a five to six percent decline in mental health, which is linked 
with declines in physical activity and social interactions. Further, evidence suggests 
involuntary retirement amplifies these negative effects (Dave et al. 2006). This is important 
to note for professional athletes, because retirement in this population is frequently 
determined by unanticipated events such as injuries or being cut from the team, necessitating 
a relatively quick retirement decision rather than a carefully planned process. Indeed, 
Lavallee et al. surveyed 48 elite Australian athletes and found those reporting involuntary 
retirement had greater difficulty with emotional and social adjustments after retirement 
(Lavallee, Grove, & Gordon 1997).
In the specific case of professional American football players, retirement from the NFL is 
vastly different from the retirement experience of most individuals. Compared to an average 
population retirement age of 62 (Riffkin 2014), NFL players retire on average at the age of 
28 (Campbell 2011) and are in surprisingly poor financial shape after retirement. As many 
as 78% of retired NFL players experience financial distress within two years after retirement 
(Torre 2009). A recent documentary examined the propensity for athletes to incur financial 
hardship and described lavish spending, questionable investments, poor financial advising, 
and feelings of personal responsibility to provide monetary support to many extended family 
and friends as well as the neighborhood where the athlete grew up (Corben 2012). Such 
financial stress and an associated lack of access to resources can have a significant negative 
impact on adjustment to retirement (Wang and Shi 2014).
Aspects of employment duration are likely to have an impact on psychological and cognitive 
functioning as well. Dufouil et al. performed a chart review of health and pension databases 
for over 400,000 retired self-employed workers in France and found each additional year of 
age at retirement was associated with a 3.2% lower risk of subsequent dementia diagnosis 
(Dufouil et al. 2014). Supporting data from the Health and Retirement Study indicates non-
working, retired, and partially retired individuals exhibit steeper declines in immediate 
memory performance than older adults working full-time (Wickrama and O’Neal 2013). 
While the effect size for changes in immediate memory performance in retirees is small, 
which may indicate minimal clinical significance (i.e. mean memory performance decreased 
by just small fractions of a single word on a 10 word-list retrieval test at each time point), 
these effects may become more meaningful if they continue to progress over more extended 
periods of time. The influence of retirement on cognition is particularly relevant for 
professional athletes since they retire at much earlier ages with variable reengagement in 
occupational activities. Additionally, the potential moderating effects of repetitive brain 
trauma history prior to retirement (e.g. a steeper negative change slope) is an important 
consideration in this population. The relationship between sustained employment and 
cognition is potentially explained by the “use it or lose it” principle (Vance and Crowe 
2006), and the combination of cognitive and social stimulation often provided by productive 
work activity. Given the average career span of an NFL player is less than four years 
(Ninomiya 2015) and the young age at retirement from athletics, subsequent career decisions 
and activity after retirement can significantly impact the quality of adjustment.
Asken et al.
Page 14
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In addition to financial impacts, a significant shift in personal identity accompanies sports 
retirement. Role theory has been applied to retirement to predict adjustment based on the 
extent to which an individual can successfully redefine his or her self-identity following a 
work-role transition and the control he or she feels over the process (Carter and Cook 1995). 
The immersive environment needed to succeed in an athlete’s chosen sport commonly 
results in social and work roles that are all strongly connected to athlete identity. Depression 
is reportedly a common outcome following retirement from the NFL (Trotter 2015). 
However, there is minimal recent or prospective research on athletic populations and their 
transition to retirement. Schwenk et al. (2007) investigated chronic pain and depression via 
survey of 3,377 retired members of the NFL Players’ Association, with approximately 50% 
response rate. Primary outcome questions focused on aspects of the retirement transition, 
and 27% of all respondents indicated having trouble with transition to life after professional 
football. Presence of chronic pain and depression exacerbated these difficulties and placed 
retirees at significantly elevated risk of reporting difficulty finding employment, being 
dissatisfied with their new employment, and loss of a sense of community and being “part of 
the team” (Schwenk, Gorenflo, Dopp, & Hipple 2007). Dimoula et al. describe a cohort of 
133 elite athletes in Greece and Spain who retrospectively detailed their experiences with 
leaving professional sports. From their study, the researchers concluded lack of retirement 
planning and high athletic identity after a sports career underlie difficulties with the 
retirement transition process (Dimoula, Torregrosa, Psychountaki, & Fernandez 2013). 
Other sports psychology researchers have proposed similar hypotheses for reduced quality 
of life in retired athletes (Werthner and Orlick 1986). For more comprehensive reviews 
specifically related to retirement transitions in athletic populations, we refer readers to Hill 
and Lowe (1974), Ogilvie and Howe (1986), Svoboda and Vanek (1982), and Lavallee and 
Wylleman (2000).
Relative to other modifiers described in this review, retirement exerts perhaps the strongest 
psychosocial influence relevant to the behavioral and emotional symptoms commonly 
associated with CTE; symptoms which can certainly have an indirect effect on cognitive 
functioning as well (Blair et al. 2007). As was noted earlier, a specific consideration for 
retired professional collision sport athletes is the loss of an outlet for aggressive and 
explosive behavior. Importantly, the wealth of research on retirement and lifestyle 
adjustments involves individuals who likely did not have careers where they sustained 
repetitive brain trauma. Exposure history, in combination with significant and abrupt 
fluctuations in financial status, short careers, loss of self-identity, poor planning, and 
variable resources conducive to sustained activity after retirement may leave professional 
athletes particularly vulnerable to reduced quality of life when forced to undergo this shift.
Drug and Alcohol Abuse
Overuse of prescription medications (often associated with chronic pain), alcohol abuse, and 
use of steroids may all have negative effects on the neurobehavioral profiles of active and 
aging athletes. Prescription and nonprescription drug use is highly prevalent at many levels 
of athletic participation (Alaranta et al 2008; Warner et al. 2002). Lawsuits were filed 
against the NFL pertaining to overprescribing medication in 2011 and 2014 (Belson 2011; 
“Ex-Players: NFL Illegally Used Drugs” 2014). Specifically, painkillers and anti-
Asken et al.
Page 15
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inflammatory drugs were reportedly prescribed very frequently and in large quantities so 
athletes could “play through the pain.” Lawsuits addressing overuse of Toradol, a non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug which became popular in athletics over the past two 
decades, have also been levied at the collegiate level (Miles 2012). The misuse of 
medications like Percocet and Toradol appear to be particularly prevalent in athletic 
populations. As a result, athletes are likely at greater risk for prolonged misuse which can 
extend into retirement, at which time chronic pain may persist.
Results from the U.S. National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) suggest that 
12.7% of the general population aged 26 and older report misuse of prescription pain 
relievers at some point in their lifetime (SAMHSA 2009). One study examined the rates of 
opioid use and abuse among retired NFL athletes and found that approximately half (52%) 
of NFL athletes used prescription opioids during the active portion of their professional 
career, and the majority of these athletes reported misuse (Cottler et al. 2011). The overall 
rate of misuse was 37% (238 of 644 athletes studied). The strongest predictors of opioid use 
during the active portion of the playing career were self-reported undiagnosed concussions, 
having three or more injuries, and being an offensive lineman.
Chronic pain warrants special consideration in retired athlete populations, and interacts with 
both substance use and neurobehavioral outcomes. A career in collision sports may have 
lasting negative effects on the body, predisposing to opioid use, as a staggering 80% of 
retired NFL athletes report persistent daily joint pain (Weir et al. 2009). Data from the 
previously described Schwenk et al. survey study found commonly reported retirement 
problems included difficulty with pain (48% of respondents), loss of fitness and lack of 
exercise (29%), weight gain (28%), trouble sleeping (28%), difficulty with aging (27%), and 
trouble transitioning to life after American football (27%). Respondents reporting difficulty 
with pain were 5.3 times more likely to report “very common” use of prescribed medication, 
alcohol, or other drugs, 3.0 times more likely to report difficulty transitioning to life after 
professional football, 4.9 times more likely to have trouble sleeping, 8.5 times more likely to 
report general difficulty with aging, and elevated risk of many other physical and 
psychosocial difficulties (Schwenk et al. 2007). These findings highlight the complex 
clinical outcomes associated with chronic pain and the interrelatedness to other factors 
described in this review, such as psychosocial adjustments during retirement and sleep 
disturbances. The contribution of repetitive brain trauma history and resulting CTE 
pathology must also be considered within the attributional framework. Thus, substance use, 
chronic pain, and history of repetitive brain trauma likely all confound the path to both 
neurodegenerative changes and associated clinical outcomes in retired professional athletes.
Relevant to lifelong pain management, individuals with opioid dependence report higher 
rates of depression, anxiety, apathy, and explosiveness than non-users (Ilyuk et al. 2013). 
Depression and opioid misuse may have bidirectional influences. Evidence suggests a 
comorbid diagnosis of depression is itself a risk factor for the development of opioid 
dependence in patients with chronic pain (Manchikanti et al. 2007). Additionally, Grattan et 
al. found patients with moderate and severe depression were 1.8 and 2.4 times more likely, 
respectively, to misuse opioid medication for non-pain symptoms. Presence of depression 
was also associated with 1.9 to 3.1 times higher likelihood of self-increasing opioid dosage 
Asken et al.
Page 16
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Grattan et al. 2012). Chronic opioid use can also lead to disordered sleep (Webster et al. 
2008), which is associated with a host of neurobehavioral problems outlined in more detail 
below (and is a side effect of concussive injury). Given the substantial number of retired 
professional athletes, specifically American football players, reporting daily pain, attention 
should be paid to current and past history of opioid use.
Acute opioid use has previously been associated with slower performance on timed 
psychomotor tasks (Chapman et al. 2002). Longer term effects of opioid use on cognition 
are less clear, but tend to suggest that impairment is stronger among individuals with 
significant pain compared to healthy volunteers (Chapman et al. 2002). The effects of opioid 
medication misuse and cognition are influenced by a number of factors including dosage, 
duration, and pain level. Since substance misuse (i.e. higher doses and prolonged use) is 
common among athletes, it is important to consider its effects on structural and functional 
brain changes as they age. Currently, there does not appear to be research that directly 
investigates opioid use as a risk factor for late-life cognitive impairment, and getting 
accurate information to do so may be difficult.
Alcohol is commonly misused among adults, and collegiate athletes are particularly at-risk. 
In 2013, 24.6 percent of people ages 18 or older reported that they engaged in binge drinking 
and 6.8 percent reported that they had engaged in heavy drinking in the past month 
(SAMHSA 2013). However, collegiate athletes reported more binge drinking and heavier 
alcohol use than non-athlete college students (Nelson and Wechsler 2001). Alcohol misuse 
is associated with a number of neurocognitive and other health consequences both acutely 
and in the long term. Direct neurotoxic effects of alcohol include depression of central 
nervous system activity, reduced cerebral blood flow, and blood-brain barrier dysfunction 
(Alexander et al. 2004; Haorah et al. 2005; Shih et al. 2001). Previous literature suggests 
that alcohol misuse patterns characterized by binge, heavy, harmful, or hazardous drinking 
patterns have been associated with executive dysfunction, reduced working memory, 
problem solving difficulties, and attention impairments (Grant 1987). These symptoms may 
be attributable to underlying changes to patterns of regional brain activation and reduced 
grey and white matter volumes (Beresford et al. 2006; Downer et al. 2015). Excessive 
drinking also exacerbates cognitive issues after a traumatic brain injury, as both pre- and 
post-injury alcohol use is negatively associated with different aspects of cognitive 
functioning, such as verbal learning and memory, processing speed, and executive function 
(Ponsford et al. 2013).
Late-life cognitive impairment is also related to alcohol use. While moderate alcohol intake 
(1–6 drinks per week) is actually associated with 54% decreased risk of dementia, heavier 
use (14 or more drinks per week) in an older population led to a 22% greater risk of 
developing dementia (Mukamal et al. 2003). Similar findings were noted in older males 
diagnosed with alcohol abuse (Thomas and Rockwood 2001). One possible theory is a 
reduction in muscarine-like receptors within the hippocampus in alcoholic older adults 
compared to controls (Nordberg et al. 1983). Lastly, though debate remains regarding the 
distinctness of its anatomical substrates, diencephalic amnesia associated with alcoholic 
Korsakoff’s disease, presumably resulting from nutrient deficiencies in chronic alcohol 
Asken et al.
Page 17
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 abusers selectively affecting the mammillary bodies and anterior nuclei of the thalamus, is 
characterized by prominent memory encoding deficits (Butters and Stuss 1989).
Acute and chronic alcohol use also negatively affect mood and behavior. Behaviorally, 
alcohol is linked strongly to many forms of violence (Hoaken and Stewart 2003). 
Intoxication is generally associated with sensation seeking and impulsivity as well as 
reactive aggression (Pihl and Peterson 1995). Similar to opioid dependence, chronic alcohol 
dependence is commonly comorbid with depression, anxiety, apathy, and explosiveness 
(Ilyuk et al. 2013). Interestingly, depression has been associated with a past history of 
alcohol dependence even in the absence of acute intoxication or withdrawal effects (Hasin 
and Grant 2002), suggesting potentially more complex and long-term interactions between 
mood regulation and substance use.
Anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS) are a group of hormones that include the natural male 
hormone, testosterone, along with synthetic testosterone. Since the 1980’s, there has been a 
growing use of AAS by healthy individuals in order to gain muscle and lose body fat 
(Yesalis and Bahrke 1995). Use of AAS in adults has an estimated lifetime prevalence of 
3.3%, with much higher use among men (6.4%) than women (1.2%) (Sagoe et al. 2014), and 
with even greater prevalence among professional football players (9.1%) (Horn et al. 2009). 
Pathologically, laboratory studies suggest neurotoxic effects of AAS use. Small amounts of 
testosterone exposure lead to apoptosis (cell death) of human neuroblastoma cells in vitro 
after only 6–12 hours of exposure (Estrada et al. 2006). AAS exposure has demonstrated 
neurotoxic effects on mammalian cells (Caraci et al. 2011). Cognitive neuroscience literature 
suggests that long term AAS use reduces right amygdala resting state functional connectivity 
with brain areas involved in spatial memory and cognitive control (Kaufman et al. 2015). 
Acute cognitive impairments like confusion, memory problems, and lack of inhibitory 
control are commonly reported (Hildebrandt et al. 2014). Longer-term effects of AAS use 
include reduced visuospatial skills compared to non-users, particularly regarding pattern 
recognition memory (Kanayama et al. 2013). As was the case with opioid use, there does not 
appear to be any research as of yet directly investigating chronic AAS use as a risk factor for 
developing late-life cognitive impairments such as dementia, though one preclinical study 
indicated no interaction between AAS use and number of beta-amyloid precursor protein-
positive axons within brainstem white matter tracts of rats following head injury (Mills et al. 
2012).
Acute and chronic AAS use can lead to mood and behavioral disturbances (Hall et al. 2005). 
Anabolic steroids acutely cause irritability, impulsivity, mood swings, aggression, and 
violence. Chronic steroid use is associated with increased aggression (Choi et al. 1990), and 
more severe psychiatric symptoms are seen with higher doses (Pope and Katz 1994). Other 
common features of chronic AAS use include depression and anhedonia (Kanayama et al. 
2003). More direct, longitudinal examinations of the effects of prolonged AAS use on 
neuropsychiatric symptoms are warranted particularly in the context of repetitive brain 
trauma.
Substance use and associated comorbidities may be common in athletic populations. 
Research indicates polysubstance abusers (e.g. both alcohol and opioid dependence) report 
Asken et al.
Page 18
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 higher frequencies of irritability and aggression than individuals with single substance abuse 
(Ilyuk et al. 2013). Substance use produces cognitive, emotional, and behavioral symptoms 
that show some overlap with CTE symptoms. The interactions among substance use, chronic 
pain, neurobehavioral outcomes, and repetitive brain trauma deserve special consideration in 
retired collision sport athlete populations.
Surgeries and Anesthesia
Athletes commonly undergo surgical interventions for injuries sustained during their playing 
careers. At the high school level, an increasing rate of sport-related surgeries has been seen 
over the past decade and collision sports like American football pose the highest risk 
(Rechel et al. 2010). Professional American football players are frequently injured and some 
of the most common injuries, such as knee ligament sprains, often require surgery (Feeley et 
al. 2008). Unfortunately, there are also significant lasting orthopedic effects of a career 
playing collision sports. Retired NFL players are two to five times more likely to be 
diagnosed with arthritis than general population males, and almost one in four retired NFL 
players require joint replacement surgery (Weir et al. 2009).
Research investigating the effects of surgeries or anesthesia on mood and behavior is very 
limited. Some evidence suggests acute increases in depression, fatigue, anger-hostility, and 
anxiety lasting about one week after administration of general anesthesia compared to 
unanesthetized controls; only depression symptoms remained slightly elevated after one 
month (Davison et al. 1975). A systematic review of biopsychosocial predictors of 
unfavorable post-surgical outcomes identified pre-surgical psychological complaints, pre-
surgical pain levels, and lower education levels as consistent risk factors (den Boer et al. 
2006). Preoperative anxiety carried a 1.9-fold increased mortality risk following coronary 
artery surgery (Tully et al. 2008) and has also been associated with slower postoperative 
recovery, in general (Kiecolt-Glaser, 1998). Both preoperative depression and anxiety are 
risk factors for persistent pain and decreased functionality following lumbar discectomy 
(Trief et al. 2000). The complex interactions of preoperative psychological distress, chronic 
pain, and the effects subsequent exposures to anesthesia on postoperative mood and behavior 
require further research, but are likely present in former collision sport athletes.
Clinicians and researchers have described cognitive changes following surgery known as 
post-operative cognitive dysfunction (POCD), though mechanisms underlying POCD have 
yet to be established (Monk et al. 2008). The cognitive domains affected are highly variable 
and include learning and memory, verbal abilities, perception, attention, and executive 
functions (Deiner and Silverstein 2009). Visuospatial deficits have been noted as long as one 
year post-surgery compared to controls (Ancelin et al. 2010). Anywhere from 30–41% of all 
adult patients may experience some form of POCD (Monk et al. 2008), though incidence 
reports differ greatly due to inconsistently defined diagnostic criteria and assessment 
protocols (Hussain et al. 2014). Risk factors for persistent POCD lasting three months after 
surgery include increasing age, lower education level, asymptomatic vascular events (i.e. 
previous stroke with no residual impairment), and POCD at the time of hospital discharge 
(Monk and Price 2011; Monk et al. 2008). The appearance and course of POCD is likely 
multifactorial (Monk et al. 2008); physiological stress responses to surgery (e.g. disturbed 
Asken et al.
Page 19
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cortisol secretion) (Lupien et al. 1998), anesthetic effects on anticholinergic and 
anticatecholeminergic circuitry (Pratico et al. 2005), nitrous oxide-based anesthesias 
interfering with vitamin B12 metabolism (Myles et al. 2004), sleep deprivation due to 
extended hospitalization, and postoperative opioid use can all contribute to poor 
neurocognitive performance postoperatively as well as after hospital discharge. Fong et al. 
examined preoperative differences on neuropsychological testing between patients who did 
and did not develop postoperative delirium and found patients in the postoperative delirium 
group performed worse preoperatively, on average, in cognitive flexibility (Trails B), 
category fluency (animal naming), new learning and recall (HVLT-R), and visual and 
sustained attention. However, predicting postoperative delirium based on preoperative 
performance is likely difficult because, at the individual level, a minority of postoperative 
delirium patients showed impaired performance preoperatively, ranging from 15% impaired 
on cognitive flexibility to 27% impaired on visual and sustained attention (Fong et al. 2015).
Although existing POCD findings are most relevant to surgery-induced changes in cognition 
within a relatively short time window, there is also concern that surgical and anesthesia 
exposure may increase risk of further cognitive decline later in life. Preclinical studies 
indicate overlapping risk factors and potential mechanisms of neurodegenerative disorders 
and POCD (Bilottaa et al. 2010). Links to specific types of surgery or anesthesia have yet to 
be established, though commonly used anesthetics (e.g. isoflurane) may lead to neuronal 
apoptosis and accumulation of misfolded proteins (Wei et al. 2008). While some population-
based studies show an age-of-exposure and dose-response relationship of general anesthesia 
and dementia risk (Chen et al. 2014), others have not shown this association (Sprung et al. 
2013). Meta-analysis results consolidating data from 15 case-control studies indicated no 
significant association between prior exposure to general anesthesia and incident AD 
dementia (Seitz, Reimer, & Siddiqui 2013). Avidan and Evers (2011) also determined there 
is minimal clinical evidence linking surgery or anesthesia to developing dementia. 
Neuropathologically, a review by Whittington et al. concluded sufficient evidence exists 
from preclinical and clinical studies that anesthetics can accelerate tau pathology 
(Whittington, Bretteville, Dickler, & Planel 2013). Jiang and Jiang (2015) drew similar 
conclusions from their review, noting that commonly used inhaled anesthetics induce pro-
apoptotic signaling, and increase the synthesis and accumulation of beta-amyloid and 
hyperphosphorylated tau. A randomized trial examining differential effects of anesthesia 
type found elevated levels of tau in cerebrospinal fluid following surgery, but no difference 
in degree of elevation based on use of isoflurane versus propofol (Berger et al. 2016). Taken 
together, evidence indicates exposure to surgery and general anesthesia increases risk for 
development of neuropathology; however, there is a lack of support for general anesthesia 
leading to clinically diagnosed dementia.
Surgeries and repeated exposure to anesthesia throughout the lifetime have yet to be studied 
in relation to clinical or neuropathological changes in retired collision sport athletes. 
Population-specific characteristics such as preoperative fitness levels, sociodemographic 
factors, and repetitive brain trauma may modify the risk of POCD or other postsurgical 
complications. Associations likely exist among surgery frequency, chronic pain, and opioid 
use in retired athletes, with both direct and indirect neurobehavioral consequences. The 
bidirectional influences of chronic pain, opioid use, and multiple surgeries/exposures to 
Asken et al.
Page 20
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anesthesia on neurobehavioral outcomes seems particularly relevant in understanding later 
life risk of cognitive and neuropsychiatric symptoms in retired collision sport athletes.
Sleep Disturbances
As athletes’ careers progress to higher levels, the time dedicated to their sport also increases. 
Quality and quantity of sleep fluctuate throughout the calendar year as athletic schedules 
vary throughout the preseason, in season, and postseason (Halson 2014). Efficiency and 
quality of sleep are reduced in athlete populations, which varies among different sports (e.g. 
poorer sleep has been reported for individual sports like cycling compared team sports like 
football and basketball) (Lastella et al. 2015). Concussion has been associated with 
disrupted sleep, suggesting professional American football players and other collision sport 
athletes at risk for brain trauma may also be at greater risk of adverse outcomes secondary to 
sleep deprivation (Jaffee et al. 2015). In the previously described Schwenk survey study of 
retired American football athletes, individuals reporting both high levels of depression and 
chronic pain were 32 times more likely to report trouble sleeping as “very common,” which 
was the most significantly elevated risk of all transition to retirement problems investigated 
(Schwenk et al 2007). The manner in which disrupted or disordered sleep affects cognition, 
behavior, and mood is perhaps one of the most important, pervasive, and complicated links 
within a biopsychosocial interpretation model.
Sleep plays a key role in a wide array of psychological, physiological, and cognitive 
processes in both younger and older adults. Sleep deprivation leads to increased stress 
reactivity (Minkel et al. 2012) and decreased quality of life (Farrell-Carnahan et al. 2013). 
Differential sleep characteristics, such as shorter rapid eye movement (REM) sleep latency 
(time interval between falling asleep and reaching rapid eye movement sleep) and reduced 
slow wave sleep (Riemann et al. 2001), as well as reduced frontal lobe activation during both 
wakefulness and sleep (Germain et al. 2004), have been found in patients diagnosed with 
depression. Past literature has also reported that depression is highly prevalent in individuals 
suffering from insomnia, suggesting a common etiology between the two disorders (Tsuno 
et al. 2005). Disordered sleep and depression have been researched extensively and are the 
subject of multiple review papers (Antonijevic and Antonijevic 2008; Buysse 2004; Tsuno et 
al. 2005). Sleep problems during development may carry a 43% increased risk for elevated 
anxiety/depression symptoms and 51% increased risk of aggressive behavior later in life 
(Gregory et al. 2008). These relationships between higher emotional reactivity and sleep 
deprivation have been reported throughout the lifespan. In their review of the literature 
published on violent and aggressive behavior in sleep deprived children and adults, 
Kamphuis et al concluded that sleep loss is a potential risk factor for impulsivity and 
reactive aggression (Kamphuis et al. 2012). Sleep disruptions are also associated with 
reduced performance on cognitive tasks (Fulda and Schulz 2001), including decreased 
attention span, slower reaction time, reduced episodic and working memory, and poor 
executive control (Durmer and Dinges 2005). Sleep appears to be particularly important for 
memory processes (Diekelmann and Born, 2010; Wagner and Born 2008).
Past literature has also suggested that chronic sleep disorders may be independent risk 
factors for the later development of neurodegenerative disease. For instance, Marion et al. 
Asken et al.
Page 21
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed a cross-sectional analysis examining interactions between REM-sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) and the presence or absence of clinically diagnosed dementia in 65 
Parkinson’s disease patients. The frequency of RBD was significantly higher in those with 
PD-dementia (10 of 13, 77%) compared to the PD-non demented group (14 of 52, 27%). 
Further, of 41 PD patients without RBD, only 3 (7.3%) had dementia compared to 10 of the 
24 PD patients with RBD (42%), suggesting an association between RBD and the clinical 
manifestation of dementia in PD patients (Marion et al. 2008). Sleep disordered breathing 
increased the risk for developing mild cognitive impairment and dementia by 85% in a 
prospective study of older women (Yaffe et al. 2011). Disordered sleep is also highly 
comorbid in Alzheimer’s disease (Liguori et al. 2014) and Parkinson’s disease (Porter et al. 
2015).
The physiological mechanisms driving the interaction of sleep and neurobehavioral changes 
are complex. Sleep disturbances in older adults (≥65 years of age) include earlier sleep 
onset, early morning awakening, decreased total time spent asleep, respiratory disorders 
(e.g., obstructive sleep apnea syndrome) (Wolkove et al. 2007), increased awakenings 
throughout the night (Porter et al. 2015), excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) (Jaussent et al. 
2012), and reduced slow wave sleep (SWS) amplitude (Mander et al. 2013). Objective 
studies have found a disruption in circadian rhythms, reduced time spent in SWS stages (N2 
and N3), sleep fragmentation (difficulty staying asleep), and reduced sleep efficiency (time 
spent in bed versus time spent asleep) in older adults (Cipriani et al. 2015; Porter et al. 
2015). Jaussent and colleagues found that EDS is associated with short and long term 
cognitive decline in non-demented adults (Jaussent et al. 2012). Similarly, reduced SWS is 
associated with reduced episodic memory recall (Mander et al. 2013).
A number of theories of physiological processes in the brain have been suggested to explain 
clinical and neuropathological changes in patient populations with sleep disorders, such as 
region-specific degeneration (Porter et al. 2015) and overall disruption to the ability of the 
brain to return to synaptic homeostasis following global degenerative changes in the brain 
(Mander, 2013). Recent evidence indicates that sleep enhances the clearance of metabolic 
waste products from interstitial space in the brain via the “glymphatic” system (Xie et al. 
2013). The glymphatic system is thought to rely on the sleep state to relax interstitial spaces 
enabling cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and interstitial fluid (ISF) to move through and clear 
metabolic waste (Jessen, Munk, Lundgaard, & Nedergaard, 2015). Interstitial space expands 
by up to 60% during sleep accelerating the flow of fluids (Iliff et al. 2013) and clearance of 
proteomic waste products (Iliff et al. 2013; Xie et al. 2013). During wakefulness, 
noradrenergic (NA) signaling in the locus coeruleus (LC), a brainstem structure, facilitates 
the closing of interstitial space (Mendelsohn and Larrick 2013). During sleep, NA signaling 
is inhibited, allowing opening of these spaces and the movement of CSF and ISF via 
aquaporin 4 (AQP4) channels located in highly polarized astrocytic endfeet (Jessen et al. 
2015; Mendelsohn and Larrick 2013). Disruption to this system may be particularly relevant 
to collision sport athletes, who are likely to consistently accumulate metabolic waste from 
concussive and subclinical brain insults, including beta-amyloid from recurrent trauma (Giza 
and Hovda 2014).
Asken et al.
Page 22
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Volumetric changes to the LC have been found in patient populations with significant sleep 
problems, including reduced sleep efficiency (more time spent awake) in TBI patients 
(Sullan et al. 2014) and RBD in Parkinson’s disease (Garcia-Lorenzo et al. 2013), thus 
indicating a possible role for disruption to the LC-NA system in sleep-related disorders. In 
TBI patients in particular, astroglial scars, inflammation, the buildup of proteomic waste 
products such as cleaved-tau and beta-amyloid, as well as astrocytic proteins such as glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), S100 calcium-binding protein B (S100B) and AQP4 re-
localization to the soma of the astrocyte following brain trauma (Ren et al. 2013), contribute 
to reduced glymphatic functioning (Jessen et al. 2015). Taken together, these findings 
highlight a problem specific to collision sport athletes – a metabolic cascade following brain 
trauma often results in increased glutamate release, increased metabolic activity, and may 
lead to a higher level of metabolic waste being produced. With potentially concurrent sleep 
disturbances (both during and after their playing careers), collision sport athletes may be at a 
greater risk of glymphatic system dysfunction and an inability to efficiently clear these 
accumulating metabolic byproducts over time. Since a number of neurodegenerative 
dementias stem from buildup of proteins such as beta-amyloid and tau, interference with 
removal may accelerate development of neurodegenerative disease secondary to trauma.
Glymphatic disruption may also help explain some of the variability in TBI outcome (Jessen 
et al. 2015). Relevant to retired athletes, Kress and colleagues found a 40% reduction in the 
clearance of metabolic waste from brain parenchyma in older compared to younger brains, 
with an 80–90% reduction in overall glymphatic functioning (Kress et al. 2014). Thus, the 
glymphatic system is important for its possible role in the accumulation of proteomic 
byproducts in the injured and/or aging brain. If exacerbated by a disruption to normal sleep 
cycles, as is often seen in TBI and older patients, the ability of the brain to repair damage 
and effectively remove metabolic waste may be progressively impaired.
From a psychosocial perspective, the presence of comorbid illness, medication use, 
psychological disorders such as depression and anxiety, as well as environmental factors 
such as stress, diet, exercise, and sleep hygiene practices can significantly affect sleep 
quality in older adults irrespective of neurodegenerative processes. For instance, depression 
may alter sleep architecture and disrupts normal SWS cycles (Tabuchi et al. 2015). In the 
case of neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, changes to sleep can be profound. In AD 
patients, reduced sleep quality, sleep fragmentation, and sleep-disordered breathing may lead 
to an increased burden of structural brain changes, thus increasing the likelihood of neuronal 
death and cognitive decline (Tabuchi et al. 2015).
Thus, disordered sleep represents a significant factor in the development of a wide range of 
cognitive, mood, and behavioral problems. Mechanistically, reduced sleep may contribute to 
increased pathological burden due to decreased glymphatic clearance, as well as increased 
toxicity to the surrounding tissues, with subsequent deleterious effects on brain health and 
cognitive function. Given that glymphatic system dysfunction seems to partially explain the 
reduction in proteomic clearance, its role in the development and progression of CTE 
symptoms warrants further study. Such research may support the implementation of earlier 
interventions for sleep disturbances, which could work to delay the time course for clinically 
significant symptoms of neurodegenerative processes, such as CTE.
Asken et al.
Page 23
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Summary and Conclusions
This review focused on factors in addition to repetitive brain trauma that may contribute to 
symptoms commonly associated with CTE. The factors are not exhaustive but are 
particularly relevant to retired professional collision sport athletes. Clinicians and 
researchers must pay careful attention to a career playing collision sports and the associated 
history of brain trauma, but explanatory models linking such trauma to later-life cognitive, 
behavioral, and emotional changes must also take these possibly co-occurring factors into 
account. Understanding the links between brain trauma, neurodegenerative pathology, and 
clinical changes remains in its infancy, and it is likely that these and other factors serve as 
complex moderators and mediators in determining who will, and who will not, develop CTE 
or its related clinical syndrome in their lifetime.
Mood and behavioral changes attributed to CTE pathology include depression, irritability, 
anxiety, explosivity, aggression, violence, and impulsivity (Montenigro et al. 2014). Such 
problems can be seen in individuals without repetitive brain trauma who present with 
neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g. LD and ADHD), normal aging, complicated adjustments 
to retirement, drug and alcohol abuse, and sleep problems. Suicidality was not addressed as 
this topic has been covered specifically and more extensively in reviews by Iverson (2014 
and 2016).
Memory impairment, executive dysfunction, impaired attention and language abilities, and 
progressive cognitive decline are all reportedly associated with CTE (McKee et al. 2013, 
Reams et al. 2016). These same cognitive difficulties may also be associated with 
developmental socioeconomic factors, neurodevelopmental disorders, normal aging, 
adjusting to retirement, drug and alcohol abuse, and sleep disorders. The literature is less 
definitive as it relates to surgeries and repeated exposure to anesthesia, but this warrants 
additional consideration due to the increased likelihood of a positive surgical history in 
professional athletes and links between anesthesia exposure and neuropathological outcomes 
(Weir et al. 2009).
Many of these factors have also been identified as independent risk factors for the 
development of neurodegenerative disease or dementia. Developmental SES and disordered 
sleep have ties to dementia or Alzheimer’s disease, while neurodevelopmental disorders, 
drug/alcohol abuse, and exposure to multiple surgeries/anesthesia have less consistent but 
notably evident connections to accumulated neuropathology and late-life cognitive 
impairment. We briefly reviewed the literature examining long-term risk of 
neurodegenerative disease and pathology following TBI, and results of both individual 
studies and meta-analyses typically indicate a small but statistically significant increased 
risk, though no studies to date have linked single-event TBI history to CTE, specifically. The 
recent report from Crane et al. shows TBI history may specifically influence long-term 
neuropathological outcomes consistent with PD and Lewy Bodies, but may not elevate risk 
for clinically diagnosed dementia (2016). Consideration of biopsychosocial influences 
frequently mitigates the relative risks reported in these studies, and attention must be paid to 
how these epidemiological investigations define TBI. Varying severities are often included in 
single analyses, and rarely is repetitive brain trauma specifically evaluated. The two studies 
Asken et al.
Page 24
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reporting results based on repetitive brain trauma history show conflicting results (Lehman 
et al. 2012; Savica et al. 2012). In order to inform public policy and contribute to our 
understanding of the true risks of participation in collision sports, more research is needed 
focusing on overall exposure to repetitive subclinical brain trauma and subsequent risk for 
both neuropathological and clinical outcomes. Based on available data, it may be concluded 
that the degree of clinical and neuropathological CTE symptoms in retired athletes is 
dependent not only on exposure to repetitive brain trauma, but also on the presence of a 
number of additional risk factors and modifying factors with substantial individual 
differences. This has important treatment implications.
Incorporating a biopsychosocial approach to the management of CTE increases the 
complexity of the associated clinical syndrome but also, conceivably, the likelihood of some 
symptom improvement. Clinicians cannot retroactively eliminate the repetitive brain trauma 
sustained playing collision sports, but many of the factors described in this paper represent 
modifiable risks that can be addressed through medical and psychological treatment. 
Pharmacotherapy for neuropsychiatric or sleep complaints, psychotherapy targeting mood 
and behavioral disturbances (Hofmann et al. 2012), sleep hygiene or cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia improving sleep quality (Stepanski and Wyatt 2003; Taylor and 
Pruiksma 2014), and cognitive training interventions (Ball et al. 2002) offer potentially 
effective ways of addressing many CTE-related symptoms and, if instituted throughout 
playing careers or early in the retirement period, may hold some promise for improving 
quality of life for aging collision sport athletes (see Figure). The Schwenk et al. survey of 
retired professional American football athletes highlights some of the potential barriers to 
engaging this population in treatment. Among retirees currently experiencing chronic pain 
and significant depression, 66% reported they did not recognize their issues as important, 
56% reported they felt they would be “weak” if they sought help, and 52% reported they 
were embarrassed by what friends or family would think if they sought treatment (Schwenk 
et al. 2007). Education, outreach, and general culture changes are likely necessary for 
increasing willingness to engage treatment services.
Based on evidence described above, we conclude that a biopsychosocial model should also 
be applied to research design (McCrea et al. 2015). Arguably the most important piece 
currently missing from the literature is a lack of clear understanding of the true incidence of 
CTE pathology in athletes and of athletes expressing clinical manifestation of the disease 
(i.e. TES). Incidence can only be determined by assessing large samples of both 
symptomatic and non-symptomatic former athletes. Methodological challenges to 
determining CTE causality and incidence include, but are not limited to, inconsistent 
definitions of repetitive brain trauma exposure and mild traumatic brain injury, selection and 
recall biases, and cohort effects (Gardner and Yaffe 2015). Research to date has examined 
convenience samples of athletes who donated their brains and were experiencing clinical 
symptoms prior to their death. This has unfortunately led to misleading headlines about the 
risk of developing CTE pathology, and estimates of its prevalence which are almost certainly 
inflated (O’Keefe 2015). As is the case with other neurodegenerative disorders, subsets of 
the population are prone to express symptoms of the disorder but lack underlying pathology, 
while others will have underlying pathology but do not express concomitant symptoms. The 
Asken et al.
Page 25
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 newly emerging ability to use PET imaging of tau pathology is a potentially invaluable tool 
that could be utilized to better understand the presence and distribution of tau in vivo.
Identification of CTE pathology in living patients will also substantially contribute to the 
determination of sensitive and specific clinical correlates. Recently proposed clinical 
diagnostic criteria for TES are non-specific and non-exclusive. In its current form, any 
patient receiving a dementia or neurodegenerative disease diagnosis who participated in 
collision sports at some point in their life, regardless of the affected cognitive domain, would 
likely be classified as having “Probable TES.” Criteria for “Possible TES” are even more 
inclusive, and the clinical utility of such a diagnosis is currently unclear. A clinical case 
series reported by Gardner et al. highlights the complexities of CTE-related phenotypic 
classification (Gardner et al. 2015).
Biopsychosocial influences are critical when interpreting past results and in the design of 
future studies. Previous studies have compared retired collision sport athletes to males in the 
general population in an attempt to determine the additive role of repetitive brain trauma on 
the natural aging process. However, the control groups used in these studies often fail to 
control for many of the factors we have discussed. As described, professional athletes are a 
demographically biased sample with significant inter-sport variability, and various 
socioeconomic factors can impact cognitive development across the lifespan. Two studies 
matched controls on age and education level but do not indicate the racial or ethnic diversity 
of the groups (Tremblay et al. 2013; Tremblay et al. 2014). One study used a control group 
comprised of approximately 90% (19/21) white and 10% (2/21) African American 
individuals compared to an athlete sample of 55% (11/20) white and 45% (9/20) African 
American athletes (Strain et al., 2015). A study with racially similar groups compared a non-
athlete group (N=9, mean age 58 years) to an athlete group (N=11, mean age 65 years) 
(Coughlin et al. 2015) approximately seven years older. Age differences of this magnitude 
may be significant when considering that the most likely age of onset of dementia is in the 
mid-60’s (“Alzheimer’s Disease Fact Sheet” 2015).
Another example of the key importance of well-designed control groups can be seen in 
recent studies that have described length of time playing football as a risk factor for 
cognitive decline in retired athletes. Stamm et al showed that a group of athletes who began 
playing football before the age of 12 performed worse on neuropsychological tests (Stamm 
et al. 2015). This finding makes intuitive sense, but 16% of the before-12 group had a 
previous diagnosis of learning disability compared to 0% of the athletes who began playing 
after age 12, thus confounding LD history with the length-of-play grouping. 
Neurodevelopmental conditions like learning disabilities and attention deficit-hyperactivity 
disorder significantly affect cognitive and emotional development across the lifespan and 
must be considered for retired athletes as well (Moss et al. 2000; Putukian et al. 2011). 
Indeed, a more recent study by Solomon et al utilizing more robust statistical procedures and 
addressing some of these sample concerns was unable to replicate these findings. They 
found no neurological, neuroradiological, or neuropsychological associations with exposure 
to football earlier in life (Solomon et al. 2016). Taken together, this highlights the need to 
incorporate demographics and comorbid medical conditions (i.e. neurodevelopmental 
Asken et al.
Page 26
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disorders, previous psychiatric conditions, etc.) when attributing causality of 
clinicopathological outcomes in repetitive brain trauma research.
Clinicians working with individuals exposed to repetitive brain trauma are tasked with the 
daunting responsibility of consolidating as much relevant information as possible pertaining 
to the brain that has been injured. The focus of this review is on retired professional athletes, 
but concerns about CTE are present in younger athletes as well (Mez et al. 2016); some of 
the findings described here may have relevance to them. Regardless of athlete age, 
evaluating premorbid neurobehavioral functioning is essential to understanding individual-
specific change over time and which factors may modify these changes the most. 
Importantly, attribution of pathological burden and symptom expression needs to be 
considered in a broad biopsychosocial explanatory framework that incorporates these factors 
in the causal model instead of focusing only on a history of repetitive brain trauma as the 
sole causative factor in the development or degree of CTE symptoms.
References
Alaranta A, Alaranta H, Helenius I. Use of prescription drugs in athletes. Sports Medicine. 2008; 
38(6):449–463. [PubMed: 18489193] 
Alexander S, Kerr ME, Yonas H, Marion DW. The effects of admission alcohol level on cerebral blood 
flow and outcomes after severe traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 2004; 21(5):575–583. DOI: 
10.1089/089771504774129900 [PubMed: 15165365] 
Alzheimer’s Disease Fact Sheet. 2015. from https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/
alzheimers-disease-fact-sheet
Amato PR, Zuo J. Rural poverty, urban poverty, and psychological well-being. Sociological Quarterly. 
1992:229–240.
American Psychological Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders:: DSM-5. 
ManMag; 2003. 
Ancelin ML, De Roquefeuil G, Scali J, Bonnel F, Adam JF, Cheminal JC, … Ritchie K. Long-term 
post-operative cognitive decline in the elderly: the effects of anesthesia type, apolipoprotein E 
genotype, and clinical antecedents. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease. 2010; 22:105.
Andersson HW, Sommerfelt K, Sonnander K, Ahlsten G. Maternal child-rearing attitudes, IQ, and 
socioeconomic status as related to cognitive abilities of five-year-old children. Psychol Rep. 1996; 
79(1):3–14. DOI: 10.2466/pr0.1996.79.1.3 [PubMed: 8873781] 
Andrews-Hanna JR, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Lustig C, Head D, Raichle Marcus E, Buckner RL. 
Disruption of Large-Scale Brain Systems in Advanced Aging. Neuron. 2007; 56(5):924–935. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.038. [PubMed: 18054866] 
Antonijevic I, Antonijevic I. HPA axis and sleep: Identifying subtypes of major depression: Review. 
Stress. 2008; 11(1):15–27. [PubMed: 17853067] 
Avidan MS, Evers AS. Review of clinical evidence for persistent cognitive decline or incident 
dementia attributable to surgery or general anesthesia. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease. 2011; 
24(2):201.
Ball K, Berch DB, Helmers KF, Jobe JB, Leveck MD, Marsiske M, … Tennstedt SL. Effects of 
cognitive training interventions with older adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002; 
288(18):2271–2281. [PubMed: 12425704] 
Barbaresi W, Katusic S, Colligan R, Weaver A, Pankratz V, Mrazek D, Jacobsen S. How common is 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder? Towards resolution of the controversy: results from a 
population-based study. Acta Paediatr. 2004; 93(s445):55–59.
Barkley RA. Differential diagnosis of adults with ADHD: the role of executive function and self-
regulation. The Journal of clinical psychiatry. 2010; 71(7):1,478–417.
Asken et al.
Page 27
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Beach TG, Monsell SE, Phillips LE, Kukull W. Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer 
disease at National Institute on Aging Alzheimer Disease Centers, 2005–2010. J Neuropathol Exp 
Neurol. 2012; 71(4):266–273. DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31824b211b [PubMed: 22437338] 
Belson, K. Ex-Players Suing N.F.L. Over Use of Painkiller. 2011. Retrieved January 18, 2016 http://
www.nytimes.com/2011/12/06/sports/football/nfl-sued-by-ex-players-over-painkiller-toradol.html?
_r=0
Beresford TP, Arciniegas DB, Alfers J, Clapp L, Martin B, Du Y, … Davatzikos C. Hippocampus 
volume loss due to chronic heavy drinking. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2006; 30(11):1866–1870. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2006.00223.x [PubMed: 17067350] 
Berger M, Nadler JW, Friedman A, McDonagh DL, Bennett ER, Cooter M. … MAD-PIA trial team. 
The Effect of Propofol Versus Isoflurane Anesthesia on Human Cerebrospinal Fluid Markers of 
Alzheimer’s Disease: Results of a Randomized Trial. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016; 52(4):1299–1310. 
DOI: 10.3233/JAD-151190 [PubMed: 27079717] 
Biederman J, Monuteaux MC, Mick E, Spencer T, Wilens TE, Silva JM, … Faraone SV. Young adult 
outcome of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a controlled 10-year follow-up study. 
Psychological medicine. 2006; 36(02):167–179. [PubMed: 16420713] 
Bieniek KF, Ross OA, Cormier KA, Walton RL, Soto-Ortolaza A, Johnston AE, … Dickson DW. 
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy pathology in a neurodegenerative disorders brain bank. Acta 
Neuropathol. 2015; 130(6):877–889. DOI: 10.1007/s00401-015-1502-4 [PubMed: 26518018] 
Bilottaa F, Doronzioa A, Stazia E, Fodaleb LTV. Postoperative cognitive dysfunction: toward the 
Alzheimer’s disease pathomechanism hypothesis. apoptosis. 2010; 22:25.
Blair K, Smith B, Mitchell D, Morton J, Vythilingam M, Pessoa L, … Drevets W. Modulation of 
emotion by cognition and cognition by emotion. Neuroimage. 2007; 35(1):430–440. [PubMed: 
17239620] 
Blaylock RL, Maroon J. Immunoexcitotoxicity as a central mechanism in chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy—a unifying hypothesis. Surg Neurol Int. 2011; 2
Borenstein AR, Copenhaver CI, Mortimer JA. Early-life risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease. 
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2006; 20(1):63–72. DOI: 10.1097/01.wad.0000201854.62116.d7 
[PubMed: 16493239] 
Bradley RH, Corwyn RF. Socioeconomic status and child development. Annu Rev Psychol. 2002; 
53:371–399. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135233 [PubMed: 11752490] 
Bramham J, Murphy D, Xenitidis K, Asherson P, Hopkin G, Young S. Adults with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder: an investigation of age-related differences in behavioural symptoms, 
neuropsychological function and co-morbidity. Psychological medicine. 2012; 42(10):2225–2234. 
[PubMed: 22369977] 
Braveman PA, Cubbin C, Egerter S, Chideya S, Marchi KS, Metzler M, Posner S. Socioeconomic 
status in health research: one size does not fit all. JAMA. 2005; 294(22):2879–2888. DOI: 
10.1001/jama.294.22.2879 [PubMed: 16352796] 
Butters MA, Young JB, Lopez O, Aizenstein HJ, Mulsant BH, Reynolds CF Iii, … Becker JT. 
Pathways linking late-life depression to persistent cognitive impairment and dementia. Dialogues 
in Clinical Neuroscience. 2008; 10(3):345–357. [PubMed: 18979948] 
Butters N, Stuss DT. Diencephalic amnesia. Handbook of neuropsychology. 1989; 3:107–148.
Buysse DJ. Insomnia, depression and aging. Assessing sleep and mood interactions in older adults. 
Geriatrics. 2004; 59(2):47–51. quiz 52. 
Calvo E, Sarkisian N, Tamborini CR. Causal effects of retirement timing on subjective physical and 
emotional health. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences. 2013; 68(1):73–84.
Campbell, L. For retired NFL players, most challening ‘season’ just beginning. 2011. from http://
www.cnn.com/2011/OPINION/09/08/nfl.life.after.the.game/
Caraci F, Pistara V, Corsaro A, Tomasello F, Giuffrida ML, Sortino MA, … Copani A. Neurotoxic 
properties of the anabolic androgenic steroids nandrolone and methandrostenolone in primary 
neuronal cultures. J Neurosci Res. 2011; 89(4):592–600. DOI: 10.1002/jnr.22578 [PubMed: 
21290409] 
Asken et al.
Page 28
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Carskadon, MD., WC. Principles and Practice of Slep Medicine, 5th Edition. St. Louis: Elsevier 
Saunders; 2011. Monitoring and Staging Human Sleep - Normal Human Sleep: An Overview; p. 
16-26.
Carter MAT, Cook K. Adaptation to retirement: Role changes and psychological resources. The Career 
Development Quarterly. 1995; 44(1):67–82.
Casey B, Trainor RJ, Orendi JL, Schubert AB, Nystrom LE, Giedd JN, … Cohen JD. A developmental 
functional MRI study of prefrontal activation during performance of a go-no-go task. Journal of 
cognitive neuroscience. 1997; 9(6):835–847. [PubMed: 23964603] 
Chapman SL, Byas-Smith MG, Reed BA. Effects of intermediate- and long-term use of opioids on 
cognition in patients with chronic pain. Clin J Pain. 2002; 18(4 Suppl):S83–90. [PubMed: 
12479258] 
Chen CW, Lin CC, Chen KB, Kuo YC, Li CY, Chung CJ. Increased risk of dementia in people with 
previous exposure to general anesthesia: A nationwide population-based case–control study. 
Alzheimer’s & Dementia. 2014; 10(2):196–204.
Choi P, Parrott A, Cowan D. High dose anabolic steroids in strength athletes: Effects upon hostility and 
aggression. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental. 1990; 5(4):349–356.
Chugani HT. A critical period of brain development: studies of cerebral glucose utilization with PET. 
Preventive medicine. 1998; 27(2):184–188. [PubMed: 9578992] 
Cipriani G, Lucetti C, Danti S, Nuti A. Sleep disturbances and dementia. Psychogeriatrics. 2015; 
15(1):65–74. DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12069 [PubMed: 25515641] 
Collins MW, Grindel SH, Lovell MR, Dede DE, Moser DJ, Phalin BR, … McKeag DB. Relationship 
between concussion and neuropsychological performance in college football players. JAMA. 
1999; 282(10):964–970. joc80880 [pii]. [PubMed: 10485682] 
Conger RD, Donnellan MB. An interactionist perspective on the socioeconomic context of human 
development. Annu Rev Psychol. 2007; 58:175–199. [PubMed: 16903807] 
Corben, B, Writer. 30 for 30: Broke: Entertainment and Sports Programming Network [ESPN]. 2012. 
30 for 30: Broke. 
Cottler LB, Ben Abdallah A, Cummings SM, Barr J, Banks R, Forchheimer R. Injury, pain, and 
prescription opioid use among former National Football League (NFL) players. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2011; 116(1–3):188–194. DOI: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.12.003 [PubMed: 21277121] 
Coughlin JM, Wang Y, Munro CA, Ma S, Yue C, Chen S, … Pomper MG. Neuroinflammation and 
brain atrophy in former NFL players: An in vivo multimodal imaging pilot study. Neurobiol Dis. 
2015; 74:58–65. DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.10.019 [PubMed: 25447235] 
Crane PK, Gibbons LE, Dams-O’Connor K, et al. Association of traumatic brain injury with late-life 
neurodegenerative conditions and neuropathologic findings. JAMA Neurol. 2016; doi: 10.1001/
jamaneurol.2016.1948
Crary JF, Trojanowski JQ, Schnieder JA, Abisambra JF, Abner EL, Alafuzoff I, … Nelson PT. Primary 
age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging. Acta 
Neuropathol. 2014; 128(6):755–766. DOI: 10.1007/s00401-014-1349-0 [PubMed: 25348064] 
Dave, D., Rashad, I., Spasojevic, J. The effects of retirement on physical and mental health outcomes. 
National Bureau of Economic Research; 2006. 
Davison L, Steinhelber J, Eger E 2nd, Stevens W. Psychological effects of halothane and isoflurane 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 1975; 43(3):313–324. [PubMed: 1163831] 
de Jong PF. Working memory deficits of reading disabled children. Journal of experimental child 
psychology. 1998; 70(2):75–96. [PubMed: 9729450] 
De Ronchi D, Fratiglioni L, Rucci P, Paternico A, Graziani S, Dalmonte E. The effect of education on 
dementia occurrence in an Italian population with middle to high socioeconomic status. 
Neurology. 1998; 50(5):1231–1238. [PubMed: 9595968] 
Deiner S, Silverstein JH. Postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction. Br J Anaesth. 2009; 
103(Suppl 1):i41–46. DOI: 10.1093/bja/aep291 [PubMed: 20007989] 
den Boer JJ, Oostendorp RA, Beems T, Munneke M, Oerlemans M, Evers AW. A systematic review of 
bio-psychosocial risk factors for an unfavourable outcome after lumbar disc surgery. European 
Spine Journal. 2006; 15(5):527–536. [PubMed: 15915334] 
Asken et al.
Page 29
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Diekelmann S, Born J. The memory function of sleep. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2010; 11(2):
114–126. [PubMed: 20046194] 
Dimoula F, Torregrosa M, Psychountaki M, Fernandez MD. Retiring from elite sports in Greece and 
Spain. Span J Psychol. 2013; 16:E38.doi: 10.1017/sjp.2013.18 [PubMed: 23866233] 
Dodge KA, Pettit GS. A biopsychosocial model of the development of chronic conduct problems in 
adolescence. Developmental psychology. 2003; 39(2):349. [PubMed: 12661890] 
Downer B, Jiang Y, Zanjani F, Fardo D. Effects of alcohol consumption on cognition and regional 
brain volumes among older adults. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2015; 30(4):364–374. 
DOI: 10.1177/1533317514549411 [PubMed: 25202027] 
Dufouil C, Pereira E, Chene G, Glymour MM, Alperovitch A, Saubusse E, … Forette F. Older age at 
retirement is associated with decreased risk of dementia. European Journal of Epidemiology. 2014; 
29(5):353–361. DOI: 10.1007/s10654-014-9906-3 [PubMed: 24791704] 
Duncan GJ, Brooks-Gunn J, Klebanov PK. Economic deprivation and early childhood development. 
Child Dev. 1994; 65(2):296–318. [PubMed: 7516849] 
Durmer JS, Dinges DF. Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation. Semin Neurol. 2005; 25(1):
117–129. DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-867080 [PubMed: 15798944] 
Estrada M, Varshney A, Ehrlich BE. Elevated testosterone induces apoptosis in neuronal cells. J Biol 
Chem. 2006; 281(35):25492–25501. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M603193200 [PubMed: 16803879] 
Evans GW. Child development and the physical environment. Annu Rev Psychol. 2006; 57:423–451. 
DOI: 10.1146/annurev.psych.57.102904.190057 [PubMed: 16318602] 
Ex-Players: NFL Illegally Used Drugs. 2014. from http://espn.go.com/nfl/story/_/id/10958191/nfl-
illegally-supplied-risky-painkilling-drugs-former-players-allege-suit
Farrell-Carnahan L, Franke L, Graham C, McNamee S. Subjective sleep disturbance in veterans 
receiving care in the veterans affairs polytrauma system following blast-related mild traumatic 
brain injury. Mil Med. 2013; 178(9):951–956. DOI: 10.7205/MILMED-D-13-00037 [PubMed: 
24005542] 
Feeley BT, Kennelly S, Barnes RP, Muller MS, Kelly BT, Rodeo SA, Warren RF. Epidemiology of 
National Football League training camp injuries from 1998 to 2007. Am J Sports Med. 2008; 
36(8):1597–1603. [PubMed: 18443276] 
Fiske A, Wetherell JL, Gatz M. Depression in older adults. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2009; 5:363–389. 
DOI: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.032408.153621 [PubMed: 19327033] 
Fjell AM, Walhovd KB. Structural Brain Changes in Aging: Courses, Causes and Cognitive 
Consequences. Reviews in the Neurosciences. 2010; 21:187. [PubMed: 20879692] 
Fleminger S, Oliver DL, Lovestone S, Rabe-Hesketh S, Giora A. Head injury as a risk factor for 
Alzheimer’s disease: the evidence 10 years on; a partial replication. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2003; 74(7):857–862. [PubMed: 12810767] 
Fong TG, Hshieh TT, Wong B, Tommet D, Jones RN, Schmitt EM, … Inouye SK. Neuropsychological 
profiles of an elderly cohort undergoing elective surgery and the relationship between cognitive 
performance and delirium. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015; 63(5):977–982. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.13383 
[PubMed: 25944109] 
Fralick M, Thiruchelvam D, Tien HC, Redelmeier DA. Risk of suicide after a concussion. CMAJ. 
2016; 188(7):497–504. DOI: 10.1503/cmaj.150790 [PubMed: 26858348] 
Fulda S, Schulz H. Cognitive dysfunction in sleep disorders. Sleep medicine reviews. 2001; 5(6):423–
445. [PubMed: 12531152] 
Garcia-Lorenzo D, Longo-Dos Santos C, Ewenczyk C, Leu-Semenescu S, Gallea C, Quattrocchi G, … 
Lehericy S. The coeruleus/subcoeruleus complex in rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorders 
in Parkinson’s disease. Brain. 2013; 136(Pt 7):2120–2129. DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt152 [PubMed: 
23801736] 
Gardner A, Iverson GL, McCrory P. British Journal of Sports Medicine. Chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy in sport: a systematic review. 2013 bjsports-2013-092646. 
Gardner RC, Burke JF, Nettiksimmons J, Kaup A, Barnes DE, Yaffe K. Dementia risk after traumatic 
brain injury vs. nonbrain trauma: the role of age and severity. JAMA Neurol. 2014; 71(12):1490–
1497. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.2668 [PubMed: 25347255] 
Asken et al.
Page 30
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gardner RC, Possin KL, Hess CP, Huang EJ, Grinberg LT, Nolan AL, … Rabinovici GD. Evaluating 
and treating neurobehavioral symptoms in professional American football players: Lessons from a 
case series. Neurol Clin Pract. 2015; 5(4):285–295. DOI: 10.1212/CPJ.0000000000000157 
[PubMed: 26336629] 
Gardner RC, Yaffe K. Epidemiology of mild traumatic brain injury and neurodegenerative disease. 
Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience. 2015; 66:75–80. [PubMed: 25748121] 
Gavett BE, Cantu RC, Shenton M, Lin AP, Nowinski CJ, McKee AC, Stern RA. Clinical appraisal of 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy: current perspectives and future directions. Current opinion in 
neurology. 2011; 24(6):525–531. [PubMed: 22045219] 
Geddes JF, Vowles GH, Nicoll JA, Revesz T. Neuronal cytoskeletal changes are an early consequence 
of repetitive head injury. [Case Reports]. Acta Neuropathologica. 1999; 98(2):171–178. [PubMed: 
10442557] 
Germain A, Nofzinger EA, Kupfer DJ, Buysse DJ. Neurobiology of non-REM sleep in depression: 
further evidence for hypofrontality and thalamic dysregulation. Am J Psychiatry. 2004; 161(10):
1856–1863. DOI: 10.1176/ajp.161.10.1856 [PubMed: 15465983] 
Giza CC, Hovda DA. The new neurometabolic cascade of concussion. Neurosurgery. 2014; 75(Suppl 
4):S24–33. DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0000000000000505 [PubMed: 25232881] 
Goldstein G, Beers SR, Siegel DJ, Minshew NJ. A comparison of WAIS-R profiles in adults with high-
functioning autism or differing subtypes of learning disability. Appl Neuropsychol. 2001; 8(3):
148–154. [PubMed: 11686649] 
Golimstok A, Rojas J, Romano M, Zurru M, Doctorovich D, Cristiano E. Previous adult attention-
deficit and hyperactivity disorder symptoms and risk of dementia with Lewy bodies: a case–
control study. European Journal of Neurology. 2011; 18(1):78–84. [PubMed: 20491888] 
Gottfried AW. Measures of socioeconomic status in child development research: Data and 
recommendations. Merrill-Palmer Quaterly (1982-). 1985; 31(1):85–92.
Grant I. Alcohol and the brain: neuropsychological correlates. Journal of consulting and clinical 
psychology. 1987; 55(3):310. [PubMed: 3597943] 
Grattan A, Sullivan MD, Saunders KW, Campbell CI, Von Korff MR. Depression and prescription 
opioid misuse among chronic opioid therapy recipients with no history of substance abuse. The 
Annals of Family Medicine. 2012; 10(4):304–311. [PubMed: 22778118] 
Gregory AM, Van der Ende J, Willis TA, Verhulst FC. Parent-reported sleep problems during 
development and self-reported anxiety/depression, attention problems, and aggressive behavior 
later in life. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 2008; 162(4):330–335. [PubMed: 
18391141] 
Guskiewicz K, Marshall SW, Bailes J, Mccrea M, Harding HP, Matthews A, … Cantu RC. Recurrent 
concussion and risk of depression in retired professional football players. Medicine & Science in 
Sports & Exercise. 2007; 39(6):903–909. [PubMed: 17545878] 
Hall KS, Gao S, Unverzagt FW, Hendrie HC. Low education and childhood rural residence: risk for 
Alzheimer’s disease in African Americans. Neurology. 2000; 54(1):95–99. [PubMed: 10636132] 
Hall RC, Hall RC, Chapman MJ. Psychiatric complications of anabolic steroid abuse. Psychosomatics. 
2005; 46(4):285–290. [PubMed: 16000671] 
Halson SL. Sleep in elite athletes and nutritional interventions to enhance sleep. Sports Med. 2014; 
44(Suppl 1):S13–23. DOI: 10.1007/s40279-014-0147-0 [PubMed: 24791913] 
Haorah J, Knipe B, Leibhart J, Ghorpade A, Persidsky Y. Alcohol-induced oxidative stress in brain 
endothelial cells causes blood-brain barrier dysfunction. J Leukoc Biol. 2005; 78(6):1223–1232. 
DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0605340 [PubMed: 16204625] 
Hasin DS, Grant BF. Major depression in 6050 former drinkers: association with past alcohol 
dependence. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2002; 59(9):794–800. [PubMed: 12215078] 
Herrmann LL, Goodwin GM, Ebmeier KP. The cognitive neuropsychology of depression in the 
elderly. Psychological medicine. 2007; 37(12):1693–1702. DOI: 10.1017/S0033291707001134 
[PubMed: 17610767] 
Hervey AS, Epstein JN, Curry JF. Neuropsychology of adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder: a meta-analytic review. Neuropsychology. 2004; 18(3):485. [PubMed: 15291727] 
Asken et al.
Page 31
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hildebrandt T, Langenbucher JW, Flores A, Harty S, Berlin HA. The influence of age of onset and 
acute anabolic steroid exposure on cognitive performance, impulsivity, and aggression in men. 
Psychol Addict Behav. 2014; 28(4):1096–1104. DOI: 10.1037/a0036482 [PubMed: 24841181] 
Hill P, Lowe B. The inevitable metathesis of the retiring athlete. International Review for the 
Sociology of Sport. 1974; 9(3):5–32.
Hoaken PN, Stewart SH. Drugs of abuse and the elicitation of human aggressive behavior. Addictive 
behaviors. 2003; 28(9):1533–1554. [PubMed: 14656544] 
Hofmann SG, Asnaani A, Vonk IJ, Sawyer AT, Fang A. The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: a 
review of meta-analyses. Cognitive therapy and research. 2012; 36(5):427–440. [PubMed: 
23459093] 
Horn, L., Nevill, S. National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: US Department of 
Education; 2006. Profile of undergraduate students in US postsecondary education institutions: 
2003–2004: With a special analysis of community college students (NCES 2006–184). 
Horn S, Gregory P, Guskiewicz KM. Self-reported anabolic-androgenic steroids use and 
musculoskeletal injuries: findings from the center for the study of retired athletes health survey of 
retired NFL players. American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation. 2009; 88(3):192–
200. [PubMed: 19847128] 
Hussain M, Berger M, Eckenhoff RG, Seitz DP. General anesthetic and the risk of dementia in elderly 
patients: current insights. Clin Interv Aging. 2014; 9:1619–1628. DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S49680 
[PubMed: 25284995] 
Iliff JJ, Lee H, Yu M, Feng T, Logan J, Nedergaard M, Benveniste H. Brain-wide pathway for waste 
clearance captured by contrast-enhanced MRI. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123(3):1299–1309. DOI: 
10.1172/jci67677 [PubMed: 23434588] 
Ilyuk R, Gromyco D, Kiselev A, Torban M, Krupitsky E. ANS: The Journal for Neurocognitive 
Research. Hostility and anger in patients dependent on different psychoactive drugs. 2013; 54(3–
4)
The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport. 2015. from http://www.tidesport.org/home.html
Ivanchak N, Fletcher K, Jicha GA. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in older adults: prevalence 
and possible connections to mild cognitive impairment. Current psychiatry reports. 2012; 14(5):
552–560. [PubMed: 22886581] 
Iverson GL. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy and risk of suicide in former athletes. British Journal of 
Sports Medicine. 2014; 48(2):162–164. [PubMed: 24178363] 
Iverson GL, Gardner AJ, McCrory P, Zafonte R, Castellani RJ. A critical review of chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 2015; 56:276–293. [PubMed: 
26183075] 
Iverson GL, Silverberg ND, Mannix R, Maxwell BA, Atkins JE, Zafonte R, Berkner PD. Factors 
Associated With Concussion-like Symptom Reporting in High School Athletes. JAMA Pediatr. 
2015; 169(12):1132–1140. DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2015.2374 [PubMed: 26457403] 
Iverson GL. Suicide and chronic traumatic encephalopathy. The Journal of neuropsychiatry and 
clinical neurosciences. 2016; 28.1(1):9–16. [PubMed: 26449269] 
Jafari S, Etminan M, Aminzadeh F, Samii A. Head injury and risk for Parkinson disease: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Mov Disord. 2013; 28(9):1222–1229. DOI: 10.1002/mds.25458 
[PubMed: 23609436] 
Jaffee MS, Winter WC, Jones CC, Ling G. Sleep disturbances in athletic concussion. Brain injury. 
2015; 29(2):221–227. [PubMed: 25587746] 
Jaussent I, Bouyer J, Ancelin ML, Berr C, Foubert-Samier A, Ritchie K, … Dauvilliers Y. Excessive 
sleepiness is predictive of cognitive decline in the elderly. Sleep. 2012; 35(9):1201–1207. DOI: 
10.5665/sleep.2070 [PubMed: 22942498] 
Jefferis BJ, Power C, Hertzman C. Birth weight, childhood socioeconomic environment, and cognitive 
development in the 1958 British birth cohort study. Bmj. 2002; 325(7359):305. [PubMed: 
12169505] 
Jenkins KR, Pienta AM, Horgas AL. Activity and health-related quality of life in continuing care 
retirement communities. Research on Aging. 2002; 24(1):124–149.
Asken et al.
Page 32
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Jessen NA, Munk AS, Lundgaard I, Nedergaard M. The Glymphatic System: A Beginner’s Guide. 
Neurochem Res. 2015; 40(12):2583–2599. DOI: 10.1007/s11064-015-1581-6 [PubMed: 
25947369] 
Jiang J, Jiang H. Effect of the inhaled anesthetics isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane on the 
neuropathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (review). Mol Med Rep. 2015; 12(1):3–12. DOI: 
10.3892/mmr.2015.3424 [PubMed: 25738734] 
Jordan BD. The clinical spectrum of sport-related traumatic brain injury. Nature Reviews Neurology. 
2013; 9(4):222–230. [PubMed: 23478462] 
Kamphuis J, Meerlo P, Koolhaas JM, Lancel M. Poor sleep as a potential causal factor in aggression 
and violence. Sleep medicine. 2012; 13(4):327–334. [PubMed: 22305407] 
Kanayama G, Cohane GH, Weiss RD, Pope HG. Past anabolic-androgenic steroid use among men 
admitted for substance abuse treatment: an underrecognized problem? The Journal of clinical 
psychiatry. 2003; 64(2):156–160. [PubMed: 12633124] 
Kanayama G, Kean J, Hudson JI, Pope HG Jr. Cognitive deficits in long-term anabolic-androgenic 
steroid users. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013; 130(1–3):208–214. DOI: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.
2012.11.008 [PubMed: 23253252] 
Kaplan GA, Turrell G, Lynch JW, Everson SA, Helkala EL, Salonen JT. Childhood socioeconomic 
position and cognitive function in adulthood. Int J Epidemiol. 2001; 30(2):256–263. [PubMed: 
11369724] 
Kaufman MJ, Janes AC, Hudson JI, Brennan BP, Kanayama G, Kerrigan AR, … Pope HG Jr. Brain 
and cognition abnormalities in long-term anabolic-androgenic steroid users. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2015; 152:47–56. DOI: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.04.023 [PubMed: 25986964] 
Kerr ZY, Marshall SW, Harding HP Jr, Guskiewicz KM. Nine-Year Risk of Depression Diagnosis 
Increases With Increasing Self-Reported Concussions in Retired Professional Football Players. 
Am J Sports Med. 2012; 0363546512456193 [pii]. doi: 10.1177/0363546512456193
Kessler RC, Adler L, Barkley R, Biederman J, Conners CK, Demler O, … Secnik K. The prevalence 
and correlates of adult ADHD in the United States: results from the National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2006
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Page GG, Marucha PT, MacCallum RC, Glaser R. Psychological influences on 
surgical recovery: perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology. American Psychologist. 1998; 
53(11):1209. [PubMed: 9830373] 
Klerman, LV. Alive and Well? A Research and Policy Review of Health Programs for Poor Young 
Children. ERIC; 1991. 
Korenman S, Miller JE, Sjaastad JE. Long-term poverty and child development in the United States: 
Results from the NLSY. Children and Youth Services Review. 1995; 17(1):127–155.
Kress BT, Iliff JJ, Xia M, Wang M, Wei HS, Zeppenfeld D, … Nedergaard M. Impairment of 
paravascular clearance pathways in the aging brain. Ann Neurol. 2014; 76(6):845–861. DOI: 
10.1002/ana.24271 [PubMed: 25204284] 
Lahey BB, Loeber R, Hart EL, Frick PJ, Applegate B, Zhang Q, … Russo MF. Four-year longitudinal 
study of conduct disorder in boys: patterns and predictors of persistence. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology. 1995; 104(1):83. [PubMed: 7897057] 
Lastella M, Roach GD, Halson SL, Sargent C. Sleep/wake behaviours of elite athletes from individual 
and team sports. Eur J Sport Sci. 2015; 15(2):94–100. DOI: 10.1080/17461391.2014.932016 
[PubMed: 24993935] 
Lavallee D, Grove JR, Gordon S. The causes of career termination from sport and their relationship to 
post-retirement adjustment among elite-amateur athletes in Australia. Australian Psychologist. 
1997; 32(2):131–135.
Lehman EJ, Hein MJ, Baron SL, Gersic CM. Neurodegenerative causes of death among retired 
National Football League players. Neurology. 2012; 79(19):1970–1974. [PubMed: 22955124] 
Lehman EJ, Hein MJ, Gersic CM. Suicide mortality among retired National Football League players 
who played 5 or more seasons. The American journal of sports medicine. 2016 
0363546516645093. 
Asken et al.
Page 33
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liguori C, Romigi A, Nuccetelli M, Zannino S, Sancesario G, Martorana A, … Placidi F. Orexinergic 
system dysregulation, sleep impairment, and cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease. JAMA 
Neurol. 2014; 71(12):1498–1505. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.2510 [PubMed: 25322206] 
Lule D, Ludolph A, Ludolph A. Neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases–Is there a 
pathophysiological link? Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis as examples. Medical hypotheses. 2008; 70(6):1133–1138. [PubMed: 18158219] 
Luo Y, Waite LJ. The impact of childhood and adult SES on physical, mental, and cognitive well-being 
in later life. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 
2005; 60(2):S93–S101.
Lupien SJ, de Leon M, De Santi S, Convit A, Tarshish C, Nair NPV, … Meaney MJ. Cortisol levels 
during human aging predict hippocampal atrophy and memory deficits. Nature neuroscience. 
1998; 1(1):69–73. [PubMed: 10195112] 
Lynch JW, Kaplan GA, Shema SJ. Cumulative impact of sustained economic hardship on physical, 
cognitive, psychological, and social functioning. N Engl J Med. 1997; 337(26):1889–1895. DOI: 
10.1056/NEJM199712253372606 [PubMed: 9407157] 
Madden D, Bennett I, Song A. Cerebral White Matter Integrity and Cognitive Aging: Contributions 
from Diffusion Tensor Imaging. Neuropsychology Review. 2009; 19(4):415–435. DOI: 10.1007/
s11065-009-9113-2 [PubMed: 19705281] 
Major League Soccer Racial and Gender Report Card. The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport; 
2015. from http://www.tidesport.org/mls-rgrc.html
Manchikanti L, Giordano J, Boswell MV, Fellows B, Manchukonda R, Pampati B. Psychological 
factors as predictors of opioid abuse and illicit drug use in chronic pain patients. J manag. 2007; 
5:8.
Mander BA, Rao V, Lu B, Saletin JM, Lindquist JR, Ancoli-Israel S, … Walker MP. Prefrontal 
atrophy, disrupted NREM slow waves and impaired hippocampal-dependent memory in aging. 
Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16(3):357–364. DOI: 10.1038/nn.3324 [PubMed: 23354332] 
Manly JJ, Echemendia RJ. Race-specific norms: Using the model of hypertension to understand issues 
of race, culture, and education in neuropsychology. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology. 2007; 
22(3):319–325. [PubMed: 17350797] 
Manly JJ, Jacobs DM, Touradji P, Small SA, Stern Y. Reading level attenuates differences in 
neuropsychological test performance between African American and White elders. J Int 
Neuropsychol Soc. 2002; 8(3):341–348. [PubMed: 11939693] 
Marion MH, Qurashi M, Marshall G, Foster O. Is REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) a risk factor 
of dementia in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease? Journal of neurology. 2008; 255(2):192–196. 
[PubMed: 18217187] 
Martland H. Dementia pugilistica. JAMA. 1928; 91 (11031107.9). 
McCann, B., Roy-Byrne, P. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and learning disabilities in adults; 
Paper presented at the Seminars in clinical neuropsychiatry; 2000. 
McCrea M, Broshek DK, Barth JT. Sports concussion assessment and management: future research 
directions. Brain Inj. 2015; 29(2):276–282. DOI: 10.3109/02699052.2014.965216 [PubMed: 
25313678] 
McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Kutcher JS, Jordan BD, Gardner A. What is the evidence for chronic 
concussion-related changes in retired athletes: behvaioural, pathological, and clinical outcomes? 
British Journal of Sports Medicine. 2013; 47(5):372–330.
McKee AC, Cantu RC, Nowinski CJ, Hedley-Whyte ET, Gavett BE, Budson AE, … Stern RA. 
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in athletes: progressive tauopathy after repetitive head injury. J 
Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2009; 68(7):709–735. DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181a9d503 
[PubMed: 19535999] 
McKee AC, Stein TD, Nowinski CJ, Stern RA, Daneshvar DH, Alvarez VE, … Baugh CM. The 
spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Brain. 2013; 136(1):43–64. [PubMed: 
23208308] 
McKee AC, Cairns NJ, Dickson DW, Folkerth RD, Keene CD, Litvan I. … TBI/CTE group. The first 
NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of 
Asken et al.
Page 34
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Acta Neuropathol. 2016; 131(1):75–86. DOI: 10.1007/
s00401-015-1515-z [PubMed: 26667418] 
McLoyd VC. The impact of poverty and low socioeconomic status on the socioemotional functioning 
of African-American children and adolescents: Mediating effects. Social and emotional 
adjustment and family relations in ethnic minority families. 1997:7–34.
Meck WH, Williams CL, Cermak JM, Blusztajn JK. Frontiers in integrative neuroscience. 
Developmental periods of choline sensitivity provide an ontogenetic mechanism for regulating 
memory capacity and age-related dementia. 2007; 1
Mendelsohn AR, Larrick JW. Sleep facilitates clearance of metabolites from the brain: glymphatic 
function in aging and neurodegenerative diseases. Rejuvenation Res. 2013; 16(6):518–523. DOI: 
10.1089/rej.2013.1530 [PubMed: 24199995] 
Mez J, Solomon T, Daneshvar DH, Stein TD, McKee AC. Pathologically Confirmed Chronic 
Traumatic Encephalopathy in a 25-Year-Old Former College Football Player. JAMA Neurol, 
Online First. 2016; doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.3998
Miles, K. Armond Armstead, Former USC Football Player, Sues School For Heart Attack. 2012. from 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/31/armond-armstead-football-player-sues-injections-
heart-attack_n_1847871.html
Mills JD, Bailes JE, Turner RC, Dodson SC, Sakai J, Maroon JC. Anabolic steroids and head injury. 
Neurosurgery. 2012; 70(1):205–210. [PubMed: 21606881] 
Millspaugh J. Dementia pugilistica. US Naval Med Bull. 1937; 35:297–303.
Minkel JD, Banks S, Htaik O, Moreta MC, Jones CW, McGlinchey EL, … Dinges DF. Sleep 
deprivation and stressors: evidence for elevated negative affect in response to mild stressors when 
sleep deprived. Emotion. 2012; 12(5):1015–1020. DOI: 10.1037/a0026871 [PubMed: 22309720] 
Moceri VM, Kukull WA, Emanuel I, van Belle G, Larson EB. Early-life risk factors and the 
development of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 2000; 54(2):415–420. [PubMed: 10668705] 
Monk TG, Price CC. Postoperative cognitive disorders. Current opinion in critical care. 2011; 17(4)
Monk TG, Weldon BC, Garvan CW, Dede DE, Van Der Aa MT, Heilman KM, Gravenstein JS. 
Predictors of cognitive dysfunction after major noncardiac surgery. ANESTHESIOLOGY-
PHILADELPHIA THEN HAGERSTOWN-. 2008; 108(1):18.
Montenigro PH, Baugh CM, Daneshvar DH, Mez J, Budson AE, Au R, … Stern RA. Clinical subtypes 
of chronic traumatic encephalopathy: literature review and proposed research diagnostic criteria 
for traumatic encephalopathy syndrome. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2014; 6(5):68. [PubMed: 
25580160] 
Mortimer JA, van Duijn CM, Chandra V, Fratiglioni L, Graves AB, … Heyman A, et al. Head trauma 
as a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease: a collaborative re-analysis of case-control studies. 
EURODEM Risk Factors Research Group. Int J Epidemiol. 1991; 20(Suppl 2):S28–35. 
[PubMed: 1833351] 
Moss S, Emerson E, Kiernan C, Turner S, Hatton C, Alborz A. Psychiatric symptoms in adults with 
learning disability and challenging behaviour. The British Journal of Psychiatry. 2000; 177(5):
452–456. [PubMed: 11060000] 
Mukamal KJ, Kuller LH, Fitzpatrick AL, Longstreth WT Jr, Mittleman MA, Siscovick DS. 
Prospective study of alcohol consumption and risk of dementia in older adults. JAMA. 2003; 
289(11):1405–1413. [PubMed: 12636463] 
Muratore AM, Earl JK, Collins CG. Understanding heterogeneity in adaptation to retirement: a growth 
mixture modeling approach. Int J Aging Hum Dev. 2014; 79(2):131–156. [PubMed: 25536703] 
Myles P, Leslie K, Silbert B, Paech M, Peyton P. A review of the risks and benefits of nitrous oxide in 
current anaesthetic practice. Anaesthesia and intensive care. 2004; 32(2):165. [PubMed: 
15957712] 
The National Football League Race and Gender Report Card. The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in 
Sport. 2015. from http://www.tidesport.org/nfl-rgrc.html
Nelson TF, Wechsler H. Alcohol and college athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001; 33(1):43–47. 
[PubMed: 11194110] 
Neuman K. Quit your job and get healthier? The effect of retirement on health. Journal of Labor 
Research. 2008; 29(2):177–201.
Asken et al.
Page 35
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ninomiya, K. How Long is the Average Career of an NFL Player?. May 04. 2015 from http://
www.livestrong.com/article/15527-long-average-career-nfl-player/
Nordberg A, Larsson C, Perdahl E, Winblad B. Changes in cholinergic activity in human hippocampus 
following chronic alcohol abuse. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1983; 18:397–400.
Nordstrom P, Michaelsson K, Gustafson Y, Nordstrom A. Traumatic brain injury and young onset 
dementia: a nationwide cohort study. Ann Neurol. 2014; 75(3):374–381. [PubMed: 24812697] 
Ogilvie BC, Howe M. The trauma of termination from athletics. Applied Sport Psychology: Personal 
growth to peak performance. 1986:365–382.
O’Keefe, M. Study finds 96 percent of former NFL players had CTE. 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2016, 
from http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/football/study-finds-96-percent-nfl-players-cte-
article-1.2365865
Omalu B, Bailes J, Hamilton RL, Kamboh MI, Hammers J, Case M, Robert Fitzsimmons J. Emerging 
histomorphologic phenotypes of chronic traumatic encephalopathy in American athletes. 
Neurosurgery. 2011; 69(1):173–183. [PubMed: 21358359] 
Omalu BI, DeKosky ST, Hamilton RL, Minster RL, Kamboh MI, Shakir AM, Wecht CH. Chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy in a national football league player: part II. Neurosurgery. 2006; 59(5):
1086–1092. discussion 1092-1083. 00006123-200611000-00014 [pii]. DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.
0000245601.69451.27 [PubMed: 17143242] 
Omalu BI, DeKosky ST, Minster RL, Kamboh MI, Hamilton RL, Wecht CH. Chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy in a National Football League player. Neurosurgery. 2005; 57(1):128–134. 
discussion 128–134. 
Omalu BI, Hamilton RL, Kamboh MI, DeKosky ST, Bailes J. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy 
(CTE) in a National Football League Player: Case report and emerging medicolegal practice 
questions. J Forensic Nurs. 2010; 6(1):40–46. JFN1064 [pii]. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1939-3938.2009.01064.x [PubMed: 20201914] 
Ouellet MC, Morin Charles M. Subjective and objective measures of insomnia in the context of 
traumatic brain injury: A preliminary study. Sleep medicine. 2006; 7:486–497. [PubMed: 
16934524] 
Pastor PN, Reuben CA. Diagnosed attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and learning disability: 
United States, 2004–2006. Vital and health statistics. Series 10, Data from the National Health 
Survey. 2008; (237):1–14.
Petrovitch H, White LR, Ross GW, Steinhorn SC, Li CY, Masaki KH, … Markesbery WR. Accuracy 
of clinical criteria for AD in the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study, a population-based study. 
Neurology. 2001; 57(2):226–234. [PubMed: 11468306] 
Pihl RO, Peterson J. Drugs and aggression: correlations, crime and human manipulative studies and 
some proposed mechanisms. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 1995; 20(2):141–149. [PubMed: 7703223] 
Ponsford J, Tweedly L, Taffe J. The relationship between alcohol and cognitive functioning following 
traumatic brain injury. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2013; 35(1):103–112. DOI: 
10.1080/13803395.2012.752437 [PubMed: 23339581] 
Pope HG, Katz DL. Psychiatric and medical effects of anabolic-androgenic steroid use: a controlled 
study of 160 athletes. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1994; 51(5):375–382. [PubMed: 8179461] 
Porter VR, Buxton WG, Avidan AY. Sleep, Cognition and Dementia. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2015; 
17(12):97.doi: 10.1007/s11920-015-0631-8 [PubMed: 26478197] 
Pratico C, Quattrone D, Lucanto T, Amato A, Penna O, Roscitano C, Fodale V. Drugs of anesthesia 
acting on central cholinergic system may cause post-operative cognitive dysfunction and 
delirium. Medical hypotheses. 2005; 65(5):972–982. [PubMed: 16043305] 
Putukian M, Kreher JB, Coppel DB, Glazer JL, McKeag DB, White RD. Attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder and the athlete: an American Medical Society for Sports Medicine position 
statement. Clin J Sport Med. 2011; 21(5):392–401. DOI: 10.1097/JSM.0b013e3182262eb1 
[PubMed: 21892014] 
Quinn PO. Treating adolescent girls and women with ADHD: Gender-Specific issues. Journal of 
clinical psychology. 2005; 61(5):579–587. [PubMed: 15723425] 
Randolph C. Is chronic traumatic encephalopathy a real diseaes? Current sports medicine reports. 
2014; 13(1):33–37. [PubMed: 24412888] 
Asken et al.
Page 36
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Reams N, Eckner JT, Ameida AA, Aagesen AL, Giordani B, Paulson H, … Kutcher JS. A Clinical 
Approach to the Diagnosis of Traumatic Encephalopathy Syndrome: A Review. JAMA Neurol. 
2016; 73(6):743–749. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.5015 [PubMed: 27111824] 
Rechel J, Collins C, Comstock D. Epidemiology of injuries requiring surgery among US high school 
athletes. Injury Prevention. 2010; 16(Suppl 1):A254–A254.
Riemann D, Berger M, Voderholzer U. Sleep and depression--results from psychobiological studies: an 
overview. Biol Psychol. 2001; 57(1–3):67–103. [PubMed: 11454435] 
Riffkin, R. Average U.S. Retirement Age Rises to 62. 2014. from http://www.gallup.com/poll/168707/
average-retirement-age-rises.aspx
Sagoe D, Molde H, Andreassen CS, Torsheim T, Pallesen S. The global epidemiology of anabolic-
androgenic steroid use: a meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis. Ann Epidemiol. 2014; 
24(5):383–398. DOI: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2014.01.009 [PubMed: 24582699] 
Sambataro F, Murty VP, Callicott JH, Tan HY, Das S, Weinberger DR, Mattay VS. Age-related 
alterations in default mode network: Impact on working memory performance. Neurobiology of 
Aging. 2010; 31(5):839–852. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.05.022. [PubMed: 
18674847] 
SAMHSA. Mental Health Services Administration (2009) Results from the 2008 national survey on 
drug use and health: national findings. Rockville, MD: 2009. (Office of Applied Studies, 
NSDUH Series H-36, HHS Publication No. SMA 09-4434)
SAMHSA. Table 2.46B—Alcohol Use, Binge Alcohol Use, and Heavy Alcohol Use in the Past Month 
among Persons Aged 18 or Older, by Demographic Characteristics: Percentages, 2012 and 2013. 
2013. National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). 
Savica R, Parisi JE, Wold LE, Josephs KA, Ahlskog JE. High school football and risk of 
neurodegeneration: a community-based study. Mayo Clin Proc. 2012; 87(4):335–340. DOI: 
10.1016/j.mayocp.2011.12.016 [PubMed: 22469346] 
Schwenk TL, Gorenflo DW, Dopp RR, Hipple E. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 
Depression and pain in retired professional football players. 2007; 39(4):599–605.
Seitz DP, Reimer CL, Siddiqui LN. A review of epidemiological evidence for general anesthesia as a 
risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological 
Psychiatry. 2013; 47:122–127. [PubMed: 22771690] 
Shifrer D, Muller C, Callahan R. Disproportionality and learning disabilities: Parsing apart race, 
socioeconomic status, and language. Journal of Learning Disabilities. 2011; 44(3):246–257. 
[PubMed: 20587753] 
Shih CL, Chi SI, Chiu TH, Sun GY, Lin TN. Ethanol effects on nitric oxide production in cerebral pial 
cultures. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2001; 25(4):612–618. [PubMed: 11329504] 
Solomon GS, Kuhn AW, Zuckerman SL, Casson IR, Viano DC, Lovell MR, Sills AK. Participation in 
Pre-High School Football and Neurological, Neuroradiological, and Neuropsychological 
Findings in Later Life: A Study of 45 Retired National Football League Players. Am J Sports 
Med, OnlineFirst. 2016; doi: 10.1177/0362546515626164
Spencer N, Bambang S, Logan S, Gill L. Socioeconomic status and birth weight: comparison of an 
area-based measure with the Registrar General’s social class. Journal of Epidemiology and 
Community Health. 1999; 53(8):495–498. [PubMed: 10562868] 
Sprung, J., Jankowski, CJ., Roberts, RO., Weingarten, TN., Aguilar, AL., Runkle, KJ., … Hanson, AC. 
Anesthesia and incident dementia: a population-based, nested, case-control study. Paper 
presented at the Mayo Clinic Proceedings; 2013. 
Stamm JM, Bourlas AP, Baugh CM, Fritts NG, Daneshvar DH, Martin BM, … Stern RA. Age of first 
exposure to football and later-life cognitive impairment in former NFL players. Neurology. 2015; 
84(11):1114–1120. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001358 [PubMed: 25632088] 
Stepanski EJ, Wyatt JK. Use of sleep hygiene in the treatment of insomnia. Sleep medicine reviews. 
2003; 7(3):215–225. [PubMed: 12927121] 
Stern RA, Daneshvar DH, Baugh CM, Seichepine DR, Montenigro PH, Riley DO, … McHale L. 
Clinical presentation of chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Neurology. 2013; 81(13):1122–1129. 
[PubMed: 23966253] 
Asken et al.
Page 37
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stern Y. What is cognitive reserve? Theory and research application of the reserve concept. Journal of 
the International Neuropsychological Society. 2002; 8(03):448–460. [PubMed: 11939702] 
Stern Y. Cognitive reserve. Neuropsychologia. 2009; 47(10):2015–2028. DOI: 10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2009.03.004 [PubMed: 19467352] 
Strain JF, Womack KB, Didehbani N, Spence JS, Conover H, Hart J Jr, … Cullum CM. Imaging 
Correlates of Memory and Concussion History in Retired National Football League Athletes. 
JAMA Neurol. 2015; 72(7):773–780. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.0206 [PubMed: 25985094] 
Stringaris A, Psych M, Cohen P, Pine DS, Leibenluft E. Adult outcomes of youth irritability: a 20-year 
prospective community-based study. Am J Psychiatry. 2009; 166(9):1048–1054. [PubMed: 
19570932] 
Sullan MJ, Bohsali AA, Gullett JM, Goldstein J, Bauer RM, Mareci TH, FitzGerald DB. The Locus 
Coeruleus and Sleep-Wake Disturbances in Veterans with mTBI. Journal of Sleep Medicine and 
Disorders. 2014
Svoboda, B., Vanek, M. Proceedings of the 5th World Congress of Sport Psychology. Ottawa, ON: 
Coaching Association of Canada; 1982. Retirement from high level competition; p. 166-175.
Tabuchi M, Lone SR, Liu S, Liu Q, Zhang J, Spira AP, Wu MN. Sleep interacts with abeta to modulate 
intrinsic neuronal excitability. Curr Biol. 2015; 25(6):702–712. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.016 
[PubMed: 25754641] 
Takashima A, Petersson KM, Rutters F, Tendolkar I, Jensen O, Zwarts MJ, … Fernandez G. 
Declarative memory consolidation in humans: a prospective functional magnetic resonance 
imaging study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103(3):756–761. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
0507774103 [PubMed: 16407110] 
Taylor DJ, Pruiksma KE. Cognitive and behavioural therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) in psychiatric 
populations: A systematic review. International Review of Psychiatry. 2014; 26(2):205–213. 
[PubMed: 24892895] 
Thomas VS, Rockwood KJ. Alcohol abuse, cognitive impairment, and mortality among older people. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2001; 49(4):415–420. [PubMed: 11347785] 
Tononi G, Cirelli C. Sleep and the price of plasticity: from synaptic and cellular homeostasis to 
memory consolidation and integration. Neuron. 2014; 81(1):12–34. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.
2013.12.025 [PubMed: 24411729] 
Torre, P. How (and Why) Athletes Go Broke. 2009. from http://www.si.com/vault/
2009/03/23/105789480/how-and-why-athletes-go-broke
Tremblay S, De Beaumont L, Henry LC, Boulanger Y, Evans AC, Bourgouin P, … Lassonde M. Sports 
concussions and aging: a neuroimaging investigation. Cereb Cortex. 2013; 23(5):1159–1166. 
DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhs102 [PubMed: 22581847] 
Tremblay S, Henry LC, Bedetti C, Larson-Dupuis C, Gagnon JF, Evans AC, … De Beaumont L. 
Diffuse white matter tract abnormalities in clinically normal ageing retired athletes with a history 
of sports-related concussions. Brain. 2014; 137(Pt 11):2997–3011. DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu236 
[PubMed: 25186429] 
Trief PM, Grant W, Fredrickson B. A prospective study of psychological predictors of lumbar surgery 
outcome. Spine. 2000; 25(20):2616–2621. [PubMed: 11034646] 
Trotter, J. Depression prevalent in ex-players. 2015. from http://espn.go.com/nfl/story/_/page/
hotread150225/depression-suicide-raise-issue-mental-health-former-nfl-players
Tsuno N, Besset A, Ritchie K. Sleep and depression. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 2005
Tully PJ, Baker RA, Knight JL. Anxiety and depression as risk factors for mortality after coronary 
artery bypass surgery. Journal of psychosomatic research. 2008; 64(3):285–290. [PubMed: 
18291243] 
Turrell G, Lynch JW, Kaplan GA, Everson SA, Helkala EL, Kauhanen J, Salonen JT. Socioeconomic 
position across the lifecourse and cognitive function in late middle age. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2002; 57(1):S43–S51.
Turrell G, Lynch JW, Kaplan GA, Everson SA, Helkala EL, Kauhanen J, Salonen JT. Socioeconomic 
position across the lifecourse and cognitive function in late middle age. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci 
Soc Sci. 2002; 57(1):S43–51. [PubMed: 11773232] 
Asken et al.
Page 38
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Vance DE, Crowe M. A proposed model of neuroplasticity and cognitive reserve in older adults. 
Activities, Adaptation & Aging. 2006; 30(3):61–79.
Van Meter A, Youngstrom E, Freeman A, Feeny N, Youngstron JK, Findling RL. Impact of Irritability 
and Impulsive Aggressive Behavior on Impairment and Social Functioning in Youth with 
Cyclothymic Disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmachol. 2016; 26(1):26–37. DOI: 10.1089/
cap.2015.0111
Victoroff J. Traumatic encephalopathy: review and provisional research diagnostic criteria. 
NeuroRehabilitation. 2012; 32(2):211–224.
Wagner U, Born J. Memory consolidation during sleep: Interactive effects of sleep stages and HPA 
regulation: Review. Stress. 2008; 11(1):28–41. [PubMed: 17853075] 
Waljas M, Iverson GL, Lange RT, Hakulinen U, Dastidar P, Huhtala H, … Ohman J. A Prospective 
Biopsychosocial Study of the Persistent Post-Concussion Symptoms following Mild Traumatic 
Brain Injury. J Neurotrauma. 2015; doi: 10.1089/neu.2014.3339
Wang M, Shi JQ. Psychological Research on Retirement. Annual Review of Psychology. 2014; 
65:209–233. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115131
Warner DC, Schnepf G, Barrett MS, Dian D, Swigonski NL. Prevalence, attitudes, and behaviors 
related to the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in student athletes. Journal 
of Adolescent Health. 2002; 30(3):150–153. [PubMed: 11869920] 
Webster LR, Choi Y, Desai H, Webster L, Grant BJ. Sleep-Disordered Breathing and Chronic Opioid 
Therapy. Pain Medicine. 2008; 9(4):425–432. [PubMed: 18489633] 
Wei H, Liang G, Yang H, Wang Q, Hawkins B, Madesh M, … Eckenhoff RG. The common 
inhalational anesthetic isoflurane induces apoptosis via activation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
receptors. Anesthesiology. 2008; 108(2):251–260. DOI: 10.1097/01.anes.0000299435.59242.0e 
[PubMed: 18212570] 
Weir, DR., Jackson, JS., Sonnega, A. National football league player care foundation study of retired 
NFL players. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Institute for Social Research; 2009. 
Werthner P, Orlick T. Retirement experiences of successful Olympic athletes. International journal of 
sport psychology. 1986
White RD, Harris GD, Gibson ME. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and athletes. Sports Health: 
A Multidisciplinary Approach. 2014; 6(2):149–156.
Whittington RA, Bretteville A, Dickler MF, Planel E. Anesthesia and tau pathology. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 47:147–155. DOI: 10.1016/pnpbp.2013.03.004 
[PubMed: 23535147] 
Wickrama KK, O’Neal CW. The influence of working later in life on memory functioning. Adv Life 
Course Res. 2013; 18(4):288–295. DOI: 10.1016/j.alcr.2013.09.001 [PubMed: 24796712] 
Wilson RS, Scherr PA, Hoganson G, Bienias JL, Evans DA, Bennett DA. Early life socioeconomic 
status and later life risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroepidemiology. 2005; 25(1):8–14. DOI: 
10.1159/000085307 [PubMed: 15855799] 
Wolkove N, Elkholy O, Baltzan M, Palayew M. Sleep and aging: 1. Sleep disorders commonly found 
in older people. Cmaj. 2007; 176(9):1299–1304. DOI: 10.1503/cmaj.060792 [PubMed: 
17452665] 
Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y, Thiyagarajan M, … Nedergaard M. Sleep drives metabolite 
clearance from the adult brain. Science. 2013; 342(6156):373–377. DOI: 10.1126/science.
1241224 [PubMed: 24136970] 
Yaffe K, Laffan AM, Harrison SL, Redline S, Spira AP, Ensrud KE, … Stone KL. Sleep-disordered 
breathing, hypoxia, and risk of mild cognitive impairment and dementia in older women. JAMA. 
2011; 306(6):613–619. [PubMed: 21828324] 
Yesalis CE, Bahrke MS. Anabolic-androgenic steroids. Current issues. Sports Med. 1995; 19(5):326–
340. [PubMed: 7618010] 
Zuckerman SL, Lee YM, Odom MJ, Solomon GS, Sills AK. Baseline neurocognitive scores in athletes 
with attention deficit-spectrum disorders and/or learning disability. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2013; 
12(2):103–109. DOI: 10.3171/2013.5.PEDS12524 [PubMed: 23790088] 
Asken et al.
Page 39
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure. 
Conceptual framework describing a non-exhaustive list of mediators and moderators of 
neuropathological and clinical outcomes of collision sport exposure. Evidence suggests 
repetitive brain trauma is a primary risk factor for developing neuropathology unique to 
CTE. Arrows between factors (ovals) indicate possible uni- and bidirectional influences 
amongst these variables. Path A includes the potential neurobiological mediators and 
moderators of pathological burden. Path B includes psychosocial factors directly influencing 
clinical/functional outcomes which over time, if untreated, may result in underlying 
neuronal reorganization or compound neuropathological outcomes (Path D). Path C 
describes factors that may modify the degree to which neuropathological changes ultimately 
manifest clinically (i.e. “cognitive reserve”). Possible treatment interventions may mitigate 
neuropathological outcomes by directly targeting neurobiological factors (Intervention Level 
A), prevent or minimize negative clinical/functional outcomes by directly targeting 
psychosocial factors (Intervention Level B), or mitigate the degree to which accumulated 
neuropathology translates to clinical outcomes (Intervention Level C). Research is essential 
for early identification of at-risk populations and improved understanding of appropriate 
intervention timing (e.g. before, during, and/or after playing careers).
Abbrev: ApoE – apolipoprotein E, CTE – chronic traumatic encephalopathy, p-tau – 
phosphorylated tau, b-amyloid – beta amyloid, TES – traumatic encephalopathy syndrome, 
MCI – mild cognitive impairment
*Research linking CTE to repetitive brain trauma, specifically, suggests mediating/
moderating factors are not causally responsible for its unique distribution of neurofibrillary 
tangles
Asken et al.
Page 40
Neuropsychol Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
