 Review Article
Systematic review of benefits or harms of routine anaesthetist-
inserted throat packs in adults: practice recommendations for
inserting and counting throat packs
An evidence-based consensus statement by the Difficult Airway Society (DAS), the British
Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (BAOMS) and the British Association of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery (ENT-UK)
V. Athanassoglou,1 A. Patel,2 B. McGuire,3 A. Higgs,4 M. S. Dover,5 P. A. Brennan,6 A. Banerjee,7
B. Bingham8 and J. J. Pandit1
1 Consultant, Nuffield Department of Anaesthetics, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK,
2 Consultant Anaesthetist, The Royal National Throat Nose and Ear Hospital, London, UK and President, DAS
3 Consultant Anaesthetist, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, UK and Secretary, DAS
4 Consultant in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Warrington Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cheshire, UK
and Treasurer, DAS
5 Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK and President, BAOMS
6 Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, Portsmouth Hospitals NHS Trust, Portsmouth, UK and Immediate Past
President, BAOMS
7 Consultant Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) Surgeon, James Cook University Hospital, Middlesbrough, UK and
Honorary Secretary ENT-UK
8 Consultant ENT Surgeon, New Victoria Hospital, Glasgow, UK and President, ENT-UK
Summary
Throat packs are commonly inserted by anaesthetists after induction of anaesthesia for dental, maxillofacial, nasal or
upper airway surgery. However, the evidence supporting this practice as routine is unclear, especially in the light of
accidentally retained throat packs which constitute ‘Never Events’ as defined by NHS England. On behalf of three
relevant national organisations, we therefore conducted a systematic review and literature search to assess the evi-
dence base for benefit, and also the extent and severity of complications associated with throat pack use. Other than
descriptions of how to insert throat packs in many standard texts, we could find no study that sought to assess the
benefit of their insertion by anaesthetists. Instead, there were many reports of minor and major complications (the
latter including serious postoperative airway obstruction and at least one death), and many descriptions of how to
avoid complications. As a result of these findings, the three national organisations no longer recommend the routine
insertion of throat packs by anaesthetists but advise caution and careful consideration. Two protocols for pack inser-
tion are presented, should their use be judged necessary.
.................................................................................................................................................................
Correspondence to: J. J. Pandit
Email: jaideep.pandit@dpag.ox.ac.uk
Accepted: 23 November 2017
Keywords: airway management; human factors; Never Events; patient safety; risk management
This article accompanies an editorial by Bailey et al., Anaesthesia 2018; 73: 535–8.
612
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
doi:10.1111/anae.14197
 Introduction
It is a common – even routine – anaesthetic practice,
acquired through teaching, to insert a throat pack after
tracheal intubation (or sometimes after supraglottic
airway insertion) for dental, maxillofacial, nasal or
upper airway surgery. The intention is for the pack to
absorb blood and other secretions or debris, keeping
the airway clear before extubation. Otherwise, there is
risk of a clot forming, which might dislodge to
obstruct the airway: the so-called ‘coroner’s clot’ [1].
The placement of throat packs is carefully described in
many authoritative texts [1, 2].
There are broadly six reasons to insert a throat pack:
(1) to prevent air leak, often in paediatric practice but
less commonly in adults (packs generally inserted dur-
ing laryngoscopy with Magill’s forceps and positioned
near the laryngeal inlet); (2) to prevent soiling of the
lower airway; (3) to soak up liquid nasal vasoconstric-
tors, which trickle down past the soft palate into the
oropharynx; (4) as surgical placement for surgical
access, haemostasis and protection (e.g. laser use [3]);
(5) when used with flexible laryngeal mask airway and
nasal surgery (the throat packs placed relatively proxi-
mally above back plate of laryngeal mask); (6) to prevent
blood entering the stomach and provoking postopera-
tive nausea and vomiting. In this article, we do not
address the first use, although our conclusions may have
implications for review of throat pack use in air leak and
paediatric practice. The last indication may have been
superseded by more effective anti-emetic drugs.
One direct risk of the throat pack itself, however, is
that if it is forgotten, and retained after surgery, it could
lead to the very airway obstruction its placement seeks
to prevent [4]. More recently, the NHS in England intro-
duced the concept of Never Events, defined as incidents
that are judged wholly preventable by existing guidance
that has not been implemented [5, 6]. Retained throat
packs as Never Events occurred eight times in 2013–
2014 and 2014–2015 and five times in 2015–2016 [7].
Over the years, increasingly elaborate methods
have been recommended by individual authors to avoid
retention. These include: leaving a portion of the pack
hanging visibly from the mouth; tying, or even sutur-
ing, the pack to the tracheal tube; placing reminder
labels on the patient, on the tracheal tube or on the
anaesthesia machine (or all of these); ensuring the use
of specially-designed radio-opaque packs to aid later
discovery; and documenting pack insertion either on a
dedicated checklist, or as part of the surgical count [8–
18]. Remarkably, some of these methods reflect earliest
insights: John Snow (1858) wrote: “I never allow a cork
or any such substance being put into a patient’s mouth
when insensible unless it is well tied to a string, lest it to
be swallowed” [19]. Nevertheless, the risk of pack reten-
tion increases with factors like distractions, emergen-
cies, change in staff, need for additional airway packing
and unexpected rapid recovery at extubation.
It is self-evident that if throat packs are not used in
the first place, they cannot be retained. Unsurprisingly,
given the morbidity and risk associated with their use,
previous authors have suggested abandoning their use
altogether [20]. The same textbooks that describe how
to insert a pack also stress that even when used, the
throat must be checked using direct laryngoscopy, to
verify that the pack has not been retained, and suc-
tioned of blood and secretions before extubation [1, 2].
The primary purpose of this article is, on behalf of
three national organisations involved in airway man-
agement, upper airway surgery and anaesthesia safety,
to ask the simple question: what is the evidence base
for the insertion of throat packs by anaesthetists? If,
for example, we were advocating the insertion of a
throat pack by anaesthetists as a novel concept today,
on what basis would we do this? Based on our find-
ings, we offer a protocol for throat pack use.
Methods
We conducted a PubMed search in September 2016
conforming to PRISMA guidelines, supplemented by
reference lists of some standard anaesthetic texts. The
search terms used, and the yields of material for each
set of terms, are shown in Table 1. Inclusion criteria
were any publications of any type (i.e. editorial,
research paper, abstract, letter) in English related to a
potential benefit of throat pack use in anaesthesia.
Exclusions were publications that did not relate to
throat pack use in anaesthetic practice. For example,
the majority of these papers, especially with the first,
broadest search terms, related to microbiological diag-
noses of infection or retained swabs in body cavities.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
613
Athanassoglou et al. | Practice recommendations for routine throat packs
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
 After
this
primary
set
of
searches,
we
also
searched for cases where failure to employ a throat
pack had led to harm, such as airway obstruction due
to haemorrhage, that was felt to be preventable by a
pack.
Relevant
search
terms
(‘obstruction’,
‘pack’,
‘airway’, etc, in different combinations) revealed no
relevant papers.
In August 2017, we repeated the search to capture
any potential articles that were not included in the initial
search. We also searched the combination ‘throat pack’
and ‘throat swab’ (coupled with ‘anaesthesia’ or ‘sur-
gery’). The numbers in Fig. 1 include this second search.
Results
The yield from the initial search is shown in Table 1.
The repeated update search in August 2017 yielded a
further 56 publications, and the search using the terms
‘throat pack’ and ‘throat swab’ (coupled with ‘anaesthe-
sia’ or ‘surgery’) produced six new results and one new
result, respectively. Within these updated search results,
however, only one apparently relevant paper was iden-
tified. This was a general review on retained surgical
foreign bodies after surgery and was not included in
the analysis. The reference lists within standard anaes-
thesia texts did not add any further material to the
PubMed search. In total, among the retrieved material,
we identified 45 publications as potentially relevant
(Fig. 1). Of these, most papers reported on complica-
tions
of
throat
packs
or
their
retention
(airway
Table 1 Search terms in initial search and yield for
each set of terms.
Search terms
Publications
retrieved
(throat swab OR throat swabs
OR throat pack OR throat packs
OR throat sponge OR throat sponges
OR surgical sponge OR surgical sponges)
AND (surgery OR anesth* OR anaesth*)
3929
(throat pack OR throat swab) AND surgery
178
(throat pack OR throat
swab) AND anaesthesia
43
(“Surgical Sponges” [Mesh] OR surgical
sponge*[tiab] OR throat pack*
OR throat swab*) AND
(retention OR retain*)
474
(throat swab OR throat swabs OR
throat pack OR throat packs OR throat
sponge OR throat sponges OR surgical
sponge OR surgical sponges) AND
(surgery OR anesth* OR anaesth*) AND
(retention OR retain*)
2
Records identified through
Records after duplicates removed
Records screened
Full-text articles assessed
Full-text articles excluded
for eligibility
Studies included in
qualitative synthesis
Included
Eligibility
Screening
Identification
Additional records identified
through other sources
database searching
(n = 3929)
(n = 3929)
(n = 3929)
(n = 221)
(n = 45)
(n = 176)
(n = 0)
Figure 1 Retrieval and sieving of papers.
614
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
Athanassoglou et al. | Practice recommendations for routine throat packs
 obstruction, infection, entry into oesophagus or stom-
ach, pharyngeal nerve injury) [10, 11, 16, 21–26], and a
death [4]. Several papers specifically discussed methods
to prevent accidental retention, or complications there-
after [4, 8–15, 17, 18, 27–30]. There were five reviews
or reviews of practice [31–35], one concerning the
medicolegal consequences of a retained throat pack
[36], and several papers studying the impact of packs
on postoperative nausea and vomiting [37–41]. We
located no articles discussing the merits of the different
types of throat packs available (e.g. by material, length,
width, dry vs. wet), or any papers comparing the effica-
cies of insertion techniques (e.g. by finger, laryngo-
scope, Magill’s forceps), or studies comparing the
benefits of different positions in the throat.
There were no trials of efficacy of anaesthetic
throat packs, but Jaiswal and Bedford conducted a
review, from a surgical perspective, of their efficacy in
preventing airway soiling. The paper did not specify
whether all packs were inserted by anaesthetists or not.
Review of papers published between 1950 and 2008
identified only four, methodologically flawed, ran-
domised trials (the patients randomly allocated to dif-
ferent types of surgical packs) and concluded that
there was little evidence to support their use as a sur-
gical intervention, even in nasal surgery [41].
There were two relevant surveys which produced
consistent results [34, 35]. A minority of surgeons and
anaesthetists (approximately one-third) never used throat
packs and about half of all respondents were aware of, or
had experienced problems with, accidental throat pack
retention. Both surveys found disagreements as to who is
considered responsible for removing the pack (opinions
were divided between ‘surgeon’, ‘anaesthetist’ or ‘whoever
places the pack’). If this uncertainty is reflected within a
team, it would explain some cases of retained packs. A
legal opinion (at least applicable in South Africa) was
clear that the person who inserts the pack (usually an
anaesthetist) is legally responsible for consequences of
retention, if they did not give specific instructions to
others for its removal at any handover of care. Surgeons
and other staff may be held co-responsible if they could
have reasonably known that the pack was not removed,
but this is little comfort in an adverse incident [36].
Therefore, although the 45 potentially relevant
papers have provided useful background intelligence,
none was in fact relevant to the primary question of
throat pack efficacy.
Discussion
The main result of our investigation is that there
appears to be no evidence upon which the use of
anaesthetic throat packs is based. If throat packs were
being advocated in practice today, then there would be
absolutely no current evidence to support their intro-
duction. If anaesthetists continue to insert throat packs
routinely after tracheal intubation, then they must do
so in the knowledge that there is no evidence support-
ing this practice; most evidence concerns complica-
tions of throat pack use.
There were no reports of specific beneficial safety
effects of throat pack use. Instead, there were reports
of a death, and critical incidents such as admissions to
intensive care and tracheal re-intubations. We noted
that the UK’s 4th National Audit Project (NAP4)
included one case of critical airway obstruction due to
a retained pack [42]. We might also have expected to
find studies using careful assessment by weighing of
the amount of blood soaked up by a pack, perhaps
comparing the amount suctioned in a no-pack control
group, but again no such study appears to exist.
Instead, some studies record the incidence of postoper-
ative nausea and vomiting or sore throat as a measure
of the extent of pharyngeal blood pooling (the former
caused by blood entering the stomach). The authors of
these reports readily concede, however, that these end-
points are surrogate and multifactorial [37–41].
The striking result is that all the available evidence
is of harm. Controlled trials would be highly desirable,
but currently there seems to be no case for the routine
insertion of throat packs for all upper airway or head
and neck operations. The scenarios in which there is a
chance of blood or operative soiling of the airway
invariably involve surgeons skilled in oral, maxillofacial
or nose/throat surgery. There is a perception that
blood loss during nasal and paranasal sinus surgery
has significantly reduced over the last 20 years, with
endoscopic techniques, instillation of vasoconstrictor
solutions and elimination of halothane from practice
[43]
(which
arguably
antagonised
vasoconstrictors
[44]), all contributing to this reduction in bleeding.
Indeed, throat packs (either deeply or anteriorly sited)
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
615
Athanassoglou et al. | Practice recommendations for routine throat packs
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
 are commonly placed by dental surgeons in awake or
sedated patients, to prevent not only blood soiling but
also ingestion of teeth or other material [45].
The consensus advice, therefore, is that if it is
judged that a throat pack is essential, then it should be
placed directly by the relevant surgeon (with anaesthetic
assistance for laryngoscopy if necessary) as part of the
surgical procedure, the pack therefore automatically
being part of the surgical swab count. This makes a
throat pack a surgical swab like any other, placed by the
primary operator at the time and place of their choosing
(Fig. 2; ‘surgeon’).
There are, however, some operations such as nasal
surgery, where the oral cavity is outside the surgical
(sterile) field. Or, in other scenarios, the degree of
blood loss or debris is judged to require a pack which
1.
Surgeon sites throat pack from the 
scrub count*. Like all other swabs or 
packs these should be removed by the 
surgeon, so that the final count can be 
completed, before wakening the 
patient and extubation. 
2.
The anaesthetist is responsible for 
checking a clear airway at the end of 
surgery before extubation**.
Surgeon
Anaesthetist
1.
Anaesthetist uses pack from the scrub 
count, so that it is automatically 
counted as part of the final count. If 
this is impossible and a different source 
for the pack is used, the anaesthetist
must ensure it is added to the surgical 
count. Like all other swabs or packs 
these should be removed by the 
surgeon, so that the final count can be 
completed, before wakening the 
patient and extubation.
2.
The anaesthetist is responsible for 
checking a clear airway at the end of 
surgery before extubation**.
Team decides whether surgeon or
Active decision made to site throat pack
anaesthetist to site throat pack
Figure 2 Consensus protocols for throat pack use. There is no indication for the routine insertion of a throat pack
by an anaesthetist at or after induction or tracheal intubation in upper airway surgery. The protocol to be followed
depends on whether it is judged best for the surgeon to site the pack (as when the pack will be within the operative
field), or for the anaesthetist to site the pack (as when the pack is outside the operative field). (*The anaesthetist
may be asked to assist, for example, with laryngoscopy; **notwithstanding cases where the jaw is wired, patient
transferred ventilated to intensive care, etc, or where a pack is intentionally left in-situ).
616
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
Athanassoglou et al. | Practice recommendations for routine throat packs
 the team jointly feels is better placed by the anaesthetist
in specific areas around the tracheal tube. Then, it is
reasonable for the anaesthetist to insert it, after discus-
sion, but ideally to use packing from the scrub count
(to reduce risk of retention). If any other pack is used
(e.g. if the shape of scrub pack is unsuitable), it should
be added to the surgical count (Fig. 2; ‘anaesthetist’).
Whether a pack is used or not, the anaesthetist
remains responsible for examining the throat by direct
laryngoscopy before extubation, applying direct suction
to the pharynx as necessary. Indeed, a throat pack will
not prevent a clot present in the nasopharynx from
entering the airway after removal of the throat pack,
before extubation. Notwithstanding situations where
laryngoscopy may be impossible (e.g. where the jaw is
wired after surgery), this should be undertaken before
full reversal of neuromuscular blockade. The 5th
National Audit Project (NAP5) now advises against
early reversal, so good practice should now allow suffi-
cient time for pharyngeal suctioning under appropri-
ately deep anaesthesia [46]. Figure 2 summarises the
protocol recommended by the relevant national soci-
eties consulted.
The protocol in Fig. 2 could be strengthened by
amending the current wording of the World Health
Organization ‘sign out’ check to make it more directly
relevant to anaesthesia. The existing wording (to dis-
cuss ‘concerns for recovery’; see: http://www.who.int/pa
tientsafety/safesurgery/ss_checklist/en/) is perhaps not
as relevant as would be a reminder to check if a throat
pack has been removed.
Figure 2
does
not
address
some
uncommon
instances where a throat pack may be deemed neces-
sary for anaesthetic indications alone in non-airway
operations. Anecdotally, we believe some practition-
ers use throat packs to prevent accidental extubation
in the prone position, or for neurosurgery. However,
we have been unable to locate textbooks or other
publications that describe or substantiate this prac-
tice, and a comprehensive study on preventing acci-
dental extubation in children (the group perhaps
most prone to this problem) does not mention this
practice [47]. We have not, for example, examined
the evidence base for throat pack use in the presence
of an air leak (adult or paediatric surgery). Neverthe-
less, since our conclusions are focused on preventing
the retention of throat packs, similar considerations
should apply when those practices are reviewed. In
these instances, it is necessary for the anaesthetist,
rather
than
the
surgeon,
to
site
the
pack,
and
thereby assume all the risk and legal responsibilities
for its removal.
Thus, although there are numerous and appropri-
ate surgical indications for inserting a throat pack,
which generally justify placement by the operating sur-
geon, we believe there are few, if any, purely anaes-
thetic indications for doing so. The routine practice of
inserting throat packs after induction should be aban-
doned by anaesthetists. Instead, we recommend the
protocol we have devised.
Acknowledgements
This article, and the protocol in Fig. 2, are supported
by the Difficult Airway Society (DAS), the British
Association
of
Oral
and
Maxillofacial
Surgery
(BAOMS), the British Association of Otorhinolaryn-
gology, Head and Neck Surgery (ENT-UK).
JP is Deputy Scientific Officer of the Difficult Air-
way Society and an Editor of Anaesthesia. The other
authors represent the national societies as officers of
those societies, as listed under the authorship. AH has
received expenses for speaking at educational events
(for which he has declined payment) and has received
one payment for an advisory meeting (Cook Medical)
and received expenses to attend one event (Fisher and
Paykel); he is a Specialist Adviser for the National
Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence. No other
funding or competing interests declared.
References
1. Shaw I, Kumar C, Dodds C. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia
for Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2010.
2. Prout J, Jones T, Martin D. Advanced Training in Anaesthesia.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
3. Pandit JJ, Chambers P
, O’Malley S. KTP laser-resistant proper-
ties of the reinforced laryngeal mask airway. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 1997; 78: 594–600.
4. Crawford BS. Prevention of retained throat pack. British Medi-
cal Journal 1977; 2: 1029.
5. Moppett IK, Moppett SH. Surgical caseload and the risk of
surgical Never Events in England. Anaesthesia 2016; 71: 17–
30.
6. Pandit JJ. Deaths by horsekick in the Prussian army – and
other ‘Never Events’ in large organisations. Anaesthesia 2016;
71: 7–11.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
617
Athanassoglou et al. | Practice recommendations for routine throat packs
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
 7. NHS England. Never Events Data. https://www.england.nhs.
uk/patientsafety/never-events/ne-data/
(accessed
15/10/
2016).
8. Vickery IM, Burton GW. Throat packs for surgery. An improved
design based on anatomical measurements. Anaesthesia
1977; 32: 565–72.
9. Green R, Akester J. A combined oropharyngeal airway and
dental pack. Anaesthesia 1981; 36: 889–91.
10. Lincourt AE, Harrell A, Cristiano J, Sechrist C, Kercher K, Heni-
ford BT. Retained foreign bodies after surgery. Journal of Sur-
gical Research 2006; 138: 170–4.
11. Hariharan D, Lobo DN. Retained surgical sponges, needles and
instruments. Annals of Royal College of Surgeons of England
2013; 95: 87–92.
12. Stone JP
, Collyer J. Aide-memoir to pharyngeal pack removal.
Anesthesia and Analgesia 2003; 96: 304.
13. Curran J, Ward M, Knepil G. Reducing the risk of retained
throat swabs after surgery. National Patient Safety Agency.
2009: 1–12. http://www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/resources/?entryid
45=59853 (accessed 15/10/2016).
14. Kinthala S, Rajashekar M, Kimberly J. Novel method to pre-
vent the inadvertent retention of throat pack. Anesthesia and
Analgesia 2012; 114: 701.
15. Scheck P
. A pharyngeal pack fixed on to the tracheal tube.
Anaesthesia 1981; 36: 892–5.
16. Walton SL. Post-extubation foreign body aspiration: a case
report. American Association of Nurse Anesthetists’ Journal
1997; 65: 147–9.
17. Hariharan U, Sharma P
, Sharma D, Sharma N. The curious case
of the missing throat pack: our experience and lessons learnt.
Ains Shams Journal of Anesthesiology 2014; 7: 251–2.
18. Colbert S, Jackson M, Turner M, Brennan PA. Reducing the risk
of retained throat packs after surgery. British Journal of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery 2012; 50: 680–1.
19. Snow J. On chloroform and other anesthetics: their action and
administration.
Reprinted.
British
Journal
of
Anaesthesia
1958; 30: 247–52.
20. Basha SI, McCoy E, Ullah R, Kinsella JB. The efficacy of
pharyngeal packing during routine nasal surgery—a prospective
randomised controlled study. Anaesthesia 2006; 61: 1161–5.
21. Baranger V, Bon Maridion N, Dureuil B, Compere V. Human
error in throat pack management: report of two cases. Anes-
thesia and Analgesia Case Reports 2016; 6: 397–8.
22. To EWH, Tsang WM, Yiu F, Chan M. A missing throat pack.
Anaesthesia 2001; 56: 383–4.
23. Sharma PK, Bhakta P
, Srinivasan S, Khan RM, Kaul N. Acute
tongue enlargement secondary to pharyngeal packing after
tracheal intubation – a case report. Middle East Journal of
Anaesthesiology 2012; 21: 761–4.
24. Ozer C, Ozer F, Sener M, Yavuz H. A forgotten gauze pack in the
nasopharynx: an unfortunate complication of adenotonsillec-
tomy. American Journal of Otolaryngology 2007; 28: 191–3.
25. Gue S. Images of interest. Gastrointestinal: ingested throat pack.
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2004; 19: 1418.
26. Mermer RW, Zwillenberg D, Maron A, Brill CB. Unilateral pha-
ryngeal plexus injury following use of an oropharyngeal pack
during third-molar surgery. Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery 1990; 48: 1102–4.
27. Burden RJ, Bliss A. Residual throat pack – a further method of
prevention. Anaesthesia 1997; 52: 806.
28. Parry MG, Glaisyer H, Enderby DH. Prevention of trauma asso-
ciated with throat pack insertion. Anaesthesia 1997; 52: 190.
29. Najjar MF, Kimpson J. A method for preventing throat pack
retention. Anesthesia and Analgesia 1995; 80: 208–9.
30. Weston B. A technique for removing an impacted postnasal
pack. Ear Nose Throat Journal 1978; 57: 360–1.
31. Abell D, Saju S, Wadhwani RN. Throat pack and associated
complications: not just about retention of packs after proce-
dure. British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery 2013;
51: 180–1.
32. Baiswal V, Bedford GC. Review of the use of throat packs in
nasal surgery. Journal of Laryngology and Otology 2009; 123:
701–4.
33. Kluger MT, Bullock MF. Recovery room incidents: a review of
419 reports from the Anaesthetic Incident Monitoring Study
(AIMS). Anaesthesia 2002; 57: 1060–6.
34. Bisease B, Matthews NS, Lan C. Current practice and opinions
regarding the use of oropharyngeal throat packs in the United
Kingdom. Journal of Patient Safety 2011; 7: 162–4.
35. Knepil GJ, Blackburn CW. Retained throat packs: results of a
national survey and the application of an organizational acci-
dent model. British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
2008; 6: 473–6.
36. McQuoid-Mason DJ. Postoperative care: from a legal point of
view, whose responsibility is it? South African Medical Journal
2016; 106: 874–6.
37. Piltcher O, Lavinsky M, Lavinsky J, de Oliveira Basso PR. Effec-
tiveness of hypopharyngeal packing during nasal and sinus
surgery in the prevention of PONV. Otolaryngology Head and
Neck Surgery 2007; 137: 552–4.
38. Griffiths DPG, Lindop MJ, Samuels SI, Roberts GDD. Pharyngeal
packs and the incidence of post-operative sore throat. Anaes-
thesia 1973; 28: 320–4.
39. Korkut AY, Erkalp K, Erden V, et al. Effect of pharyngeal packing
during nasal surgery on postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery 2010; 143: 831–6.
40. Tay JY, Tan WK, Chen FG, Koh KF, Ho V. Postoperative sore
throat after routine oral surgery: influence of the presence of
a pharyngeal pack. British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery 2002; 40: 60–3.
41. Jaiswal V, Bedford GC. Review of the use of throat packs in
nasal surgery. Journal of Laryngology and Otology 2009; 123:
701–4.
42. Cook T, Woodall N, Frerk C. Fourth National Audit Project of the
Royal College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society:
Major Complications of Airway Management in the United King-
dom. London: The Royal College of Anaesthetists, 2011. http://
www.rcoa.ac.uk/system/files/CSQ-NAP4-Section2.pdf. (accessed
17/09/2016).
43. Sury MR, Palmer JH, Cook TM, Pandit JJ. The state of UK
anaesthesia: a survey of National Health Service activity in
2013. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2014; 113: 575–84.
44. Larach DR, Schuler HG, Derr JA, Larach MG, Hensley FA Jr, Zelis
R. Halothane selectively attenuates alpha 2-adrenoceptor
mediated vasoconstriction, in vivo and in vitro. Anesthesiol-
ogy 1987; 66: 781–91.
45. Fields RT Jr, Schow SR. Aspiration and ingestion of foreign
bodies in oral and maxillofacial surgery: a review of the liter-
ature and report of five cases. Journal of Oral and Maxillofa-
cial Surgery 1998; 56: 1091–8.
46. Pandit JJ, Andrade J, Bogod DG, et al. 5th National Audit Pro-
ject (NAP5) on accidental awareness during general anaes-
thesia:
summary
of
main
findings
and
risk
factors.
Anaesthesia 2014; 69: 1089–101.
47. Lucas da Silva PS, de Carvalho WB. Unplanned extubation in
pediatric critically ill patients: a systematic review and best
practice recommendations. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine
2010; 11: 287–94.
618
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73, 612–618
Athanassoglou et al. | Practice recommendations for routine throat packs
