 Identification of unique neoantigen qualities in long term 
pancreatic cancer survivors.
Vinod P. Balachandran1,2,3, Marta Łuksza4, Julia N. Zhao1,2,3, Vladimir Makarov5,6, John 
Alec Moral1,2,3, Romain Remark7, Brian Herbst2, Gokce Askan2,8, Umesh Bhanot8, Yasin 
Senbabaoglu9, Daniel K. Wells10, Charles Ian Ormsby Cary10, Olivera Grbovic-Huezo2, 
Marc Attiyeh1,2, Benjamin Medina1, Jennifer Zhang1, Jennifer Loo1, Joseph Saglimbeni2, 
Mohsen Abu-Akeel9, Roberta Zappasodi9, Nadeem Riaz6,11, Martin Smoragiewicz12, Z. 
Larkin Kelley13, Olca Basturk8, Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative14, Mithat 
Gönen15, Arnold J. Levine4, Peter J. Allen1,2, Douglas T. Fearon13, Miriam Merad7, Sacha 
Gnjatic7, Christine A. Iacobuzio-Donahue2,5,8, Jedd D. Wolchok3,9,16,17, Ronald P. 
DeMatteo1,2, Timothy A. Chan3,5,6,11, Benjamin D. Greenbaum18, Taha Merghoub#3,9,17, and 
Steven D. Leach#1,2,5
1Departments of Surgery Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
2David M. Rubenstein Center for Pancreatic Cancer Research, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
3Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
4The Simons Center for Systems Biology, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA.
5Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
6Immunogenomics and Precision Oncology Platform, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY, USA.
Reprints and permissions information are available at www.nature.com/reprints. Vinod P. Balachandran, Vladimir Makarov, Nadeem 
Riaz, Jedd Wolchok, and Timothy Chan have received research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Nadeem Riaz has received 
honoraria from Medimmune. Douglas T. Fearon is a co-founder of Myosotis LLC. Sacha Gnjatic has received research support from 
Immune Design, Janssen R&D, and Agenus, and serves on advisory boards for Third Rock, Ventures/Neon Therapeutics, B4CC, and 
Oncomed Pharmaceuticals. Miriam Merad, Sacha Gnatic, and Romain Remark are inventors of a patent regarding “Tissue profiling 
using multiplexed immunohistochemical consecutive staining’ (patent number pending). Timothy Chan is a co-founder of Gritstone 
Oncology and also is an advisor for Genocea, Cancer Genetics, and Illumina.
Correspondence to: Vinod P. Balachandran.
*Corresponding Author: Vinod P. Balachandran, MD, Department of Surgery, David M. Rubenstein Center for Pancreatic Cancer 
Research, Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 
10065, Tel: (212) 639-5785, Fax: (929) 321-1060, balachav@mskcc.org.
Author Contributions
V.P.B., M.Ł., P.J.A., D.T.F., J.D.W., R.P.D., B.D.G., T.A.C., T.M., and S.D.L. conceived the study and V.P.B., J.D.W., T.A.C, B.D.G, 
T.M., and S.D.L, designed all experiments. V.P.B., M. Ł., J.N.Z., V.M., J.A.M., R.R., B.H., G.A., U.B., Y.S., D.K.W., C.I.O.C., 
O.G.H., M.A., B.M., J.Z., J.L., J.S., M.A.A., R.Z., N.R., M.S., Z.L.K., O.B., A.P.G.I., A.J.L., P.J.A., D.T.F., M.M., S.G., and C.I.D. 
acquired and analyzed data. G.A., U.B., and O.B. performed the histopathologic analyses. M.A., and C.I.D. performed tissue 
acquisition, and mutational identification for rapid autopsy tissues. V.M., N.R., T.A.C, D.K.W., and C.I.O.C. performed the neoantigen 
identification. M.Ł. and B.D.G. constructed the neoantigen fitness models. V.P.B, J.N.Z, M.A.A., and J.A.M performed the in vitro T 
cell assays. O.G.H. performed the transfections, immunocytochemistry, and western blots. M.G. provided statistical oversight. V.P.B., 
M.Ł., J.N.Z., D.T.F., J.D.W., R.P.D., B.D.G., T.A.C., T.M., and S.D.L. interpreted the data. V.P.B., M.Ł., J.D.W., B.D.G, T.M., and 
S.D.L. drafted the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 November 23; 551(7681): 512–516. doi:10.1038/nature24462.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7Tisch Cancer Institute, Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
8Pathology Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
9Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
10Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA, USA.
11Radiation Oncology Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
12Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
13Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York, NY, USA. Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, NY, USA.
14Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative (list of investigators and affiliations available in 
the Supplementary section)
15Biostatistics Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
16Melanoma and Immunotherapeutics Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 
New York, NY, USA.
17Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
18Tisch Cancer Institute, Departments of Medicine, Hematology and Medical Oncology, 
Oncological Sciences, and Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 
USA.
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a lethal cancer with less than 7% of patients 
surviving past 5 years. T cell immunity has been linked to the exceptional outcome of the 
few long term survivors (LTSs)1,2, yet the relevant antigens remain unknown. Here we use 
genetic, immunohistochemical, and transcriptional immunoprofiling, computational 
biophysics, and functional assays to identify T cell antigens in LTSs. Using whole exome 
sequencing and in silico neoantigen prediction, we found that tumors with both the highest 
neoantigen number and the most abundant CD8+ T cell infiltrates, but neither alone, 
stratified patients with the longest survival. Investigating the specific neoantigen qualities 
promoting T cell activation in LTSs, we discovered that LTSs were enriched in neoantigen 
qualities defined by a fitness model, and neoantigens in the tumor antigen MUC16/CA125. 
A neoantigen quality fitness model conferring greater immunogenicity to neoantigen 
presentation and homology to infectious disease-derived peptides, identified LTSs in two 
independent datasets, whereas a neoantigen quantity model ascribing greater 
immunogenicity to increasing neoantigen number alone did not. We detected intratumoral 
and lasting circulating T cell reactivity to both high quality and MUC16 neoantigens in 
LTSs, including clones with specificity to both high quality neoantigens and predicted cross 
reactive microbial epitopes, consistent with neoantigen molecular mimicry. Interestingly, we 
Balachandran et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 observed selective loss of high quality and MUC16 neoantigenic clones on metastatic 
progression, suggesting neoantigen immunoediting. Our results identify neoantigens with 
unique qualities as T cell targets in PDAC. More broadly, we identify neoantigen quality as a 
biomarker for immunogenic tumors that may guide application of immunotherapies.
To define the significance of neoantigens in PDAC, we compared stage-matched cohorts of 
treatment-naïve, surgically resected, rare LTSs (median survival 6 years, n=82) to short term 
survivors (STS) with more typical poor outcome (median survival 0.8 years, n=68; MSKCC 
cohort; Figure 1a, Extended Data Figure 1a-e). Using 9-parameter multiplexed 
immunohistochemistry3 and immunofluorescence in tissue microarrays, we found greater 
densities of CD8+ T cells (3-fold), cytolytic CD8+ cells (12-fold), mature dendritic cells, 
regulatory T cells, macrophages, and decreased CD4+ T cells in tumors of LTSs, yet no 
differences in B and MHC-I+ cells (Figures 1b, Extended Data Figure 2a). Transcriptomic 
profiling revealed an immunogenic microenvironment in tumors of LTSs, with upregulation 
of molecular markers of dendritic cells4, and antigen experience (PD-1 and TIGIT)5, as well 
as downregulation of the immunosuppressive marker STAT3 (Extended Data Figure 2b). T 
cell receptor (TCR) Vβ chain sequencing demonstrated that intratumoral T cells were 
increased 5-fold compared to matched adjacent non-tumor pancreatic tissue and markedly 
polyclonal (Figure 1c). Strikingly, >94% of intratumoral T cell clones were unique to 
tumors, consistent with tumor specificity (Figure 1d). Additionally, in unselected patients, 
flow cytometry on intratumoral T cells revealed activation and memory marker upregulation 
compared to draining lymph node and blood T cells, consistent with antigen specificity 
(Extended Data Figure 2c). Finally, tumors of LTSs exhibited greater TCR repertoire 
diversity (Figure 1e). The association of activated CD8+ T cells and survival was 
independent of clinicopathologic factors and adjuvant chemotherapy (Extended Data Figure 
2d) Collectively, tumors of LTSs exhibited an activated, polyclonal, tumor-specific T cell 
infiltrate implying differential antigenic targets.
To determine the neoantigen frequency in PDACs, we performed whole exome sequencing 
on macrodissected tumor islands. We detected a median of 38 predicted neoantigens per 
tumor (Extended Data Figure 3a, Supplemental Table 1)6. Remarkably, patients with both 
the highest predicted neoantigen number and either the greatest CD3+CD8+, or polyclonal T 
cell repertoire, but neither alone, exhibited the longest survival (median survival not reached, 
Figure 2a, Extended Data Figure 3b). We corroborated these findings using a second 
neoantigen prediction algorithm7 (Figure 2a, Extended Data Figure 3c). This association of 
higher neoantigen quantity and CD8+ T cell infiltrate with survival was independent of 
adjuvant chemotherapy (Extended Data Figure 3d). Furthermore, we found that higher 
neoantigen quantity and CD8+ T cell infiltrate together exhibited the strongest association 
with survival, with other genomic and immune parameters showing weak/no associations 
with survival (Extended Data Figure 4a-d)8. Together, these data suggest that neoantigen 
immunogenicity/quality, and not purely quantity, correlates with survival.
We next investigated neoantigen qualities that modulate differential immunogenicity. The 
theory of molecular mimicry postulates TCRs that can recognize pathogenic antigens can 
also recognize non-pathogenic antigens, which has been documented in autoimmunity9, but 
not in the cancer context. We theorized that neoantigen homology to infectious disease-
Balachandran et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 derived epitopes, which are recognized by the human TCR repertoire, can serve as a partial 
surrogate for differential neoantigen immunogenicity or “nonselfness”. This hypothesis does 
not assume any associations between pre-existing antimicrobial immunity and survival, but 
rather aims to develop a strategy to identify candidate neoantigens based on defined 
immunogenic pathogen-derived epitopes. To test this hypothesis, we developed neoantigen 
quality and quantity models (Extended Data Figure 5a, b). For each neoantigen in the quality 
model, we derived sequence alignment scores to human infectious derived, class-I restricted 
peptide sequences with positive immune assays (hereby referred to as “microbial”) from the 
Immune Epitope Database (IEDB, Supplementary Table 2). We then inferred its probability 
of TCR-recognition using a non-linear logistic dependence on alignment score, and 
calculated quality scores by amplifying these binding probabilities by inferred relative wild 
type and mutant peptide-MHC-I affinities (Extended Data Figure 5a, b). For the quantity 
model, the neoantigen score equaled the total number of neoantigens within a clone. Using 
an evolutionary model, we interpreted the score of a clone as calculated by each model as its 
fitness cost due to immune interactions10. We then recreated the clonal tree structure for 
each tumor based on mutant allele frequencies, and projected the change to each tumor’s 
effective cancer cell population size. Of these models, the quality model, but not the quantity 
model, significantly stratified short and LTSs independent of confounding factors and 
adjuvant chemotherapy (Figure 2b, Extended Data Figure 6a) Notably, all tumors with the 
highest neoantigen load in combination with the most abundant CD8+ T cell infiltrates 
harbored high quality neoantigens (Extended Data Figure 3e). Testing these models in a 
larger cohort unselected by survival (International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC); 
n=166), neoantigen quality, but not quantity, was prognostic of survival and independent of 
confounding variables (Figure 2b, Extended Data Figure 6b, c), with a stable association 
with survival in subsampled datasets in both cohorts (Extended Data Figure 7a, b). We 
conclude that neoantigen quality is a biomarker of survival in PDAC.
Recent data has shown that T cell-recognized neoantigens can be selectively lost from the 
tumor cell population either by mutant allelic loss or overall reduced gene expression11. 
Consistently, genes with high quality neoantigens evidenced a modest trend to lower mRNA 
expression compared to gene expression in the absence of high quality neoantigens (Figure 
3a). To further explore possible in vivo high quality neoantigen immunoediting, we 
examined neoantigen clonal dynamics on primary to metastatic tumor progression in one 
patient obtained through rapid autopsy. Of the three clones in the primary tumor, both clones 
with high quality neoantigens were lost in multiple metastatic samples, in contrast to the 
clone with a low quality neoantigen which was propagated to multiple metastatic sites 
(Figure 3b, Extended Data Figure 1f). These findings suggest differential immune fitness of 
clones bearing high versus low quality neoantigens within the same primary tumor.
We next sought to detect in vivo T cell responses to high quality neoantigens. We identified 
7 very long term PDAC survivors (median OS 10.5 years) that normally account for <2% of 
all PDAC patients (Extended Data Figure 1g) and pulsed their peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells with antigens predicted by the quality model. Remarkably, we observed selective CD8+ 
T cell expansion and degranulation to neopeptides and their homologous infectious disease-
derived peptides (deemed the “cross reactive” peptide relative to a neoantigen) but not to 
their WT peptides. Moreover, in all patients, identical TCR clones were significantly 
Balachandran et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expanded to both the neopeptides and cross reactive peptides (Figure 3c, Extended Data 
Figure 8a-b, Supplementary Table 3). Strikingly, in 5 of 7 patients, we identified neoantigen 
and microbial cross reactive peripheral T cell clones that were also present in their respective 
archival primary tumors. Patient 3, alive and disease free 12 years after primary tumor 
removal illustrated the most extreme instance – 15 neoantigen and microbial cross reactive T 
cell clones that persisted in the peripheral blood were found in the primary tumor, including 
the top T cell clone at an intratumoral rank frequency of 6.2% (Figure 3d). We submit that 
our quality model identifies bonafide neoantigens targeted by T cells and that tumor-
infiltrating T cells can cross reactively recognize both cancer neoantigens and homologous 
non-cancer microbial antigens.
In exploring if select genetic loci or “immunogenic hotspots” were preferentially enriched 
for neoantigens, we detected 4 loci harboring neoantigens in >15% of all patients, with one 
locus preferentially enriched in LTSs: the tumor antigen MUC16, a common ovarian cancer 
biomarker (CA125), and an established T cell immunotherapy target12 (Figure 4a). In 
tumors of LTSs, we found a 4-fold higher MUC16 neoantigen frequency and multiple 
MUC16 neoantigens in the same tumor whereas non-antigenic MUC16 mutation frequency 
was no different (Figures 4b, c; Extended Data Figure 9a). Only one patient with MUC16 
neoantigens had a hypermutated phenotype (>500 mutations), and exclusion of this patient 
did not alter the results (Figure 4c). Supporting possible in vivo anti-MUC16 immunity, 
tumors in LTSs had lower mRNA (6.6-fold), protein, and mutant allele frequency (MAF, 4-
fold) in non-hypermutated tumors compared to STSs (Extended Data Figure 9b). 
Consistently, the pVAC-Seq pipeline identified MUC16 as the most common locus 
generating neoantigens, after the frequently mutated oncogenes (KRAS, TP53) (Extended 
Data Figure 9c) We found no differences between the two cohorts in cell-autonomous 
regulators of MUC16 expression, mediators of MUC16 dependent effects on tumor 
progression, other mucin or tumor antigen expression, or evidence of MUC16 mutations 
altering RNA or protein expression (Extended Data Figure 9d)13–16. One interpretation of 
these results is that MUC16 neoantigen-specific T cell immunity induces immunoediting of 
MUC16 expressing clones in primary tumors, and prolong survival, given the cell-
autonomous roles of MUC16 in promoting metastases14,16. Notably, MUC16 protein 
expression was low yet not absent in tumors of LTSs, indicating antigen availability and 
mutations did not affect cell intrinsic expression (Extended Data Figure 9e, 10a-c). 
Consistent with possible MUC16 immunoediting, MUC16 neoantigens in primary tumors 
had complete neoantigenic mutational loss in matched metastases (n = 10) in contrast to 
MUC16 non-neoantigenic mutations that demonstrated mutation enrichment on metastatic 
progression (Figure 4d, Extended Data Table 5). MUC16 was also the only locus 
recurrently harboring neoantigens in both MSKCC and ICGC cohorts, outside of the most 
frequently mutated genes (oncogenes -KRAS, TP53; largest human gene -TTN) (Extended 
Data Figure 9c). Although the propensity to generate MUC16 neoantigens may be related to 
its large size, we did not detect trends towards neoantigen formation based on gene size 
alone across cohorts or pipelines. Additionally, as the number of patients with MUC16 
neoantigens in the LTS cohort was small, validation in a larger LTS dataset is warranted. 
Hence MUC16 is a candidate immunogenic hotspot in PDAC.
Balachandran et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We next stimulated peripheral blood from 2 LTSs (both disease-free 8 years following 
surgery) with predicted MUC16 neoantigens. In both patients, we observed CD8+ T cell 
expansion and degranulation, with expanded clones detected in archival surgically resected 
primary tumors (Figures 4e, Extended Data Figure 9f) We confirmed peripheral blood CD8+ 
T cell recognition of 2 additional MUC16 neoantigen-MHC complexes using peptide-MHC 
multimers in HLA-matched healthy donors (Extended Data Figure 8c), consistent with 
putative MUC16 neoantigen binding by the human TCR repertoire. Hence we present 
evidence of in vivo T cell reactivity to neoantigens in the tumor antigen MUC16, with 
lasting MUC16-specific T cell immunity in PDAC survivors.
Our results do not imply causal associations of pre-existing microbial and anti-tumor 
immunity in LTSs. Instead, our data suggest that embedding microbial homology in the 
context of our neoantigen quality model can help create an effective surrogate for 
immunogenic neoantigens. We posit two non-mutually exclusive mechanisms to explain 
these findings. The first is that although the naïve human TCR repertoire is theoretically 
vast, the observed TCR recombination products are notably restricted17, possibly 
representing sculpting of the TCR recombination space under the evolutionary selection 
pressures of pathogens, thereby skewing the repertoire to recognize their common protein 
features. The second is that as microbial antigens are by definition non-self sequences, 
enriched with documented human T cell clones surviving thymic selection, homologous 
tumor neoantigens are similarly non-self sequences enriched with bonafide human T cell 
clones. However, given recent evidence of intratumoral bacterial polarization of T cell 
phenotypes18, and microbial dependence of immunotherapy efficacy9, whether homology to 
patient-derived microbiomes enhances relevant neoantigen identification remains unknown 
yet timely. Notably, we identified no associations with survival when neoantigen quality was 
calculated using alignment to immunogenic allergy/autoimmune-derived IEDB peptides 
(Extended Data Figure 7c). However, the significant size discrepancy between the number of 
infectious disease-derived (Supplementary Table 2) and allergy/autoimmune-derived 
peptides (Supplementary Table 4) would warrant confirmation of these results in larger 
allergy/autoimmune peptide dataset.
Although viral-specific T cells have been detected in human tumors17, the presence of 
identical circulating and intratumoral T cell clones reactive to both high quality neoantigens 
and infectious disease-derived sequences offers proof-of-principle of neoantigenic molecular 
mimicry in a cancer context. Although patients with high quality neoantigen tumors 
exhibited prolonged survival, it remains unproven whether these cross reactive T cell clones 
contribute to this outcome, or whether this reflects the degeneracy of the human TCR 
repertoire.
Our results shed novel insight into the heterogeneous immunobiology of PDAC, a presumed 
poorly immunogenic and checkpoint blockade-refractory tumor, demonstrating that 
neoantigens may be T cell targets in LTSs. We propose that neoantigen quality, and not 
merely quantity, modulates immunogenicity, clonal fitness, and immunoselection during 
tumor evolution, with neoantigens in immunogenic residues such as MUC16 emerging as 
apparent hotspots. Our data suggest that neoantigen-specific immunity gained during 
primary tumor outgrowth could be associated with decreased relapse and prolonged survival, 
Balachandran et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 comparable to classical murine studies of prior tumor exposure protecting against tumor 
rechallenge18. Our findings support the development of strategies to harness neoantigen-
specific immunity to treat checkpoint blockade refractory cancers, and the identification of 
immunogenic hotspots for directed neoantigen targeting.
Methods
Patient Samples
MSKCC PDAC cohort: All tissues were collected at MSKCC following study protocol 
approval by the MSKCC institutional review board. Informed consent was obtained on all 
patients. The study was in strict compliance with all institutional ethical regulations. All 
tumor samples were surgically resected primary pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. Patients 
treated with neoadjuvant therapy were excluded. All tumors were subjected to pathologic re-
review and histologic confirmation by two expert PDAC pathologists prior to analyses. LTSs 
were defined as patients with overall survival > 3 years from surgery, STSs as patients with 
survival >3 months and < 1 year from surgery to exclude perioperative mortalities.
ICGC cohort: Clinical characteristics of the ICGC cohort have been previously 
described19.
Rapid Autopsy cohort: Primary and metastatic tumor samples were collected 
posthumously from four patients as part of the Gastrointestinal Cancer Rapid Medical 
Donation program at Johns Hopkins Hospital (JHH)20. Informed consent was obtained from 
all subjects. This program was deemed in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act and the study protocol was approved by the JHH institutional review 
board. The study was in strict compliance with all institutional ethical regulations.
Tissue Microarray
Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed from tumor and adjacent non-tumor cores 
from formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissue blocks in short (n=45 tumors, 5 normal 
tissue) and long term (n=51 tumors, 5 normal tissue) survivors. Histology sections were 
reviewed by two expert PDAC pathologists and the most representative areas were selected 
and marked on H&E slides. 1 mm diameter cores were sampled from three different tumor 
regions per patient using an automated TMA Grand Master (Perkin Elmer, USA). Five μm 
sections were prepared from TMA blocks for immunohistochemistry. Patient subsets were 
randomly selected to undergo tissue microarray construction.
Immunohistochemistry
Human specific antibodies to MUC16 (clone OCT125, dilution 1:130), WT1 (clone CANR9 
(IHC)-56–2, dilution 1:30), and Annexin A2 (ab54771, 5 ug/ml) were purchased from 
Abcam (MA, USA). Antibodies to MUC1 (clone M695, dilution 1:100), and Mesothelin 
(clone 5B2, dilution 1:50) were purchased from Vector laboratories (CA, USA). 
Immunohistochemistry was performed using standard techniques. MUC16 expression was 
scored as described21. For each core, a cumulative MUC16 expression score was calculated 
as the product of a score for the frequency of tumor cells expressing MUC16 (0–25%=1; 
Balachandran et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26–50%=2; 51–75%=3; 76–100%=4) and a score for the intensity of staining (0=negative; 
1=weak; 2=moderate; 3=strong). The median expression score across triplicate cores is 
reported as the final score for each patient.
Multiplexed consecutive immunohistochemistry on the same slide was performed as 
described3. Tissue microarray (TMA) slides were baked overnight at 37°C. Then, paraffin 
was removed using xylene and tissue rehydrated prior to incubation in antigen retrieval 
solution at 95°C for 45 minutes (pH 9 Target Retrieval Solution, Dako). After endogenous 
peroxidase inhibition and FcR blocking, Granzyme B was stained with anti-Granzyme B 
monoclonal antibody (clone GrB-7, Dako) for 1 hour at room temperature. After signal 
amplification with an HRP labeled polymer (Dako), the revelation was done using 3-
Amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC, Vector Laboratories). Then slides were immersed in 
hematoxylin, rinsed in distilled water and mounted in aqueous-based mounting medium 
(glycergel, Dako). After imaging using whole slide scanner, the slides were subjected to the 
Multiplexed Immunohistochemical Consecutive Staining on Single Slide protocol 
(MICSSS) and stained for T cells (CD3, clone 2GV6, Ventana and CD8, clone C8/144b, 
Dako), regulatory T cells (FoxP3, clone 236A/E7, Abcam), B cells (CD20, clone L26, 
Dako), macrophages (CD68, clone KP1, Dako), mature dendritic cells (DC-LAMP, clone 
1010E1.01, Novus Biologicals), MHC class-I (HLA-ABC, clone EMR8–5, Abcam) and 
tumor cells (CK19, clone EP1580Y, Abcam).
Immunofluorescence
For CD4, FoxP3, and CK19 staining, sections first were incubated with anti-CD4 (Ventana, 
cat#790–4423, 0.5ug/ml) for 5 hours, followed by 60 minutes incubation with biotinylated 
goat anti- rabbit IgG (Vector Laboratories, cat#PK6101) at 1:200 dilution. The detection was 
performed with Streptavidin-HRP D (part of DABMap kit, Ventana Medical Systems), 
followed by incubation with Tyramide Alexa 488 (Invitrogen, cat#T20922) prepared 
according to manufacturer instruction with predetermined dilutions. Next, slides were 
incubated with anti-FoxP3 (Abcam, cat#ab20034, 5 ug/ml) for 4 hours, followed by 60 
minutes incubation with biotinylated horse anti-mouse IgG (Vector Labs, cat#MKB-22258) 
at 1:200 dilution. The detection was performed with Streptavidin-HRP D (part of DABMap 
kit, Ventana Medical Systems), followed by incubation with Tyramide Alexa Fluor 568 
(Invitrogen, cat#T20914) prepared according to manufacturer instruction with predetermined 
dilutions. Finally, sections were incubated with anti-CK19 (Abcam, cat#ab52625, 1ug/ml) 
for 5 hours, followed by 60 minutes incubation with biotinylated goat anti- rabbit IgG 
(Vector, cat#PK6101) at 1:200 dilution. The detection was performed with Streptavidin-HRP 
D (part of DABMap kit, Ventana Medical Systems), followed by incubation with Tyramide 
Alexa 647 (Invitrogen, cat#T20936) prepared according to manufacturer instruction with 
predetermined dilutions. After staining slides were counterstained with DAPI (Sigma 
Aldrich, cat#D9542, 5 ug/ml) for 10 min and coverslipped with Mowiol.
For CD3, CD8, and CK19 staining, slides first were incubated with anti-CD3 (DAKO, 
cat#A0452, 1.2ug/ml) for 4 hours, followed by 60 minutes incubation with biotinylated goat 
anti-rabbit IgG (Vector Labs, cat#PK6101) at 1:200 dilution. The detection was performed 
with Streptavidin-HRP D (part of DABMap kit, Ventana Medical Systems), followed by 
Balachandran et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 incubation with Tyramide Alexa 488 (Invitrogen, cat#T20922) prepared according to 
manufacturer instruction with predetermined dilutions. Next, slides were incubated with 
anti-CD8 (Ventana, cat#790–4460, 0.35ug/ml) for 5 hours, followed by 60 minutes 
incubation with biotinylated goat anti- rabbit IgG (Vector, cat#PK6101) at 1:200 dilution. 
The detection was performed with Streptavidin-HRP D (part of DABMap kit, Ventana 
Medical Systems), followed by incubation with Tyramide Alexa Fluor 568 (Invitrogen, 
cat#T20914) prepared according to manufacturer instruction with predetermined dilutions. 
Finally, sections were incubated with anti-CK19 (Abcam, cat#ab52625, 1ug/ml) for 5 hours, 
followed by 60 minutes incubation with biotinylated goat anti- rabbit IgG (Vector, 
cat#PK6101) at 1:200 dilution. The detection was performed with Streptavidin-HRP D (part 
of DABMap kit, Ventana Medical Systems), followed by incubation with Tyramide Alexa 
647 (Invitrogen, cat#T20936) prepared according to manufacturer instruction with 
predetermined dilutions. After staining slides were counterstained with DAPI (Sigma 
Aldrich, cat#D9542, 5 ug/ml) for 10 min and coverslipped with Mowiol.
Digital Image Processing and Analysis
Tissue microarrays (TMAs) for each immunohistochemical stain were individually digitally 
scanned using Pannoramic Flash (3DHistech, Budapest, Hungary) with a 40x/0.95NA 
objective. Image registration and alignment was performed using Image J (NIH, Bethesda, 
MD). ROIs were drawn for each core and then transferred to others using CaseViewer 
(3DHistech). Each region from each scan was exported as tiff images at full resolution 
(0.243um/pixel). Images of the same core from multiple scans were stacked together and 
aligned using Linear Stack Alignment with SIFT algorithm from FIJI/ImageJ (NIH, 
Bethesda, MD). Once aligned, the RGB images were color deconvoluted to separate AEC 
and hematoxylin stainings and converted into 8-bit pseudo-fluorescent images. Individual 
immunohistochemical targets were sequentially assigned to fluorescent channels and 
subsequently merged. Hematoxylin staining was used to segment and count the number of 
nucleated cells in the core. After processing the images using background subtraction and 
median filter, staining was thresholded and split using Biovoxxel Watershed Irregular 
Features plugin. ROIs were drawn around each cell and matched to the signals from all other 
AEC stainings to count the number of positive cells for each staining. Total tissue area was 
measured by setting a very low threshold for hematoxylin images. For quantification, all 
nucleated cells were identified, followed by an intensity-based threshold determination of 
each target to identify positive cells. Triplicate cores were quantified followed by 
determination of the median number of cells per square mm of tissue (Image J, NIH, 
Bethesda MD). Quantification of cells detected using immunofluorescence was performed in 
a similar fashion. CD8+ T cells were defined as CD3+CD8+ cells, cytolytic CD8+ T cells as 
CD3+CD8+Granzyme-B+ cells, mature dendritic cells as DC-LAMP+ cells, regulatory T 
cells as CD3+FoxP3+ cells, macrophages as CD68+ cells, regulatory T cells as CD3+FoxP3+ 
cells, CD4+ T cells as both CD3+CD8- and CD4+ cells, and B cells as CD20+ cells.
Nucleic Acid Extraction
MSKCC PDAC Cohort: 10μm slides were cut from OCT embedded frozen tumor and 
matched normal tissues. Sections were brought to containers with 70% ethanol for OCT 
removal. Following OCT removal, specimens were dissected for subsequent DNA and RNA 
Balachandran et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 extraction. For whole exome sequencing, tumor islands of > 70% cellularity were 
macrodissected based on expert PDAC pathologic review, and DNA was extracted using the 
DNA Easy kit. Total RNA from Fresh Frozen OCT embedded tissues was extracted using 
TRIzol RNA Isolation Reagents (cat# 15596–026, Life Technologies).
Rapid Autopsy cohort: Genomic DNA was extracted using standard phenol-chloroform 
extraction followed by precipitation in ethanol. Quantification was done by LINE assay. 
Tissue samples confirmed to be of high quality and sufficient concentration were used for 
subsequent whole exome sequencing.
Transcriptome Analysis
Extracted RNA was qualified on Agilent BioAnalyzer and quantified by fluorometry 
(Ribogreen). Preparation of RNA for whole transcriptome expression analysis was done 
using the WT Pico Reagent Kit (Affymetrix, CA, USA). Reverse transcription was initiated 
at the poly-A tail as well as throughout the entire length of RNA to capture both coding and 
multiple forms of non-coding RNA. RNA amplification was achieved using low-cycle PCR 
followed by linear amplification using T7 in vitro transcription (IVT) technology. The cRNA 
was then converted to biotinylated sense strand DNA hybridization targets. Prepared target 
was hybridized to GeneChip® Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 (Affymetrix, CA, USA). 
Wash and scan was done using the GeneChip® Hybridization, Wash and Stain Kit using a 
Fluidics Station 450/250. Arrays were scanned using the GeneChip® Scanner 3000. Data 
analysis for the array was done using Affymetrix Expression Console™ Software (SST-
RMA algorithm to summarize the signal from array probesets). A dendritic cell signature 
was defined as previously described, using the genes CCL13, CCL17, CCL22, PPFIBP2, 
NPR1, HSD11B1, and CD209/DC-SIGN4. Patient subsets were randomly selected to 
undergo transcriptomic profiling.
T Cell Receptor Vβ Sequencing
Frozen tumor (short term n=30, long term n=30) and paired non-tumor adjacent pancreas 
tissue (short term n=30, long term n=30) samples were processed (Adaptive 
Biotechnologies, Seattle, USA). Genomic DNA was extracted according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions (QIAsymphony, Qiagen, Germany). The quantity and quality of 
extracted DNA was verified prior to sequencing. Using a standard quantity of input DNA, 
the TCR Vβ CDR3 regions were amplified and sequenced using the survey multiplexed 
PCR ImmunoSeq assay. The ImmunoSeq platform combines multiplex PCR with high 
throughput sequencing to selectively amplify the rearranged complementarity determining 
region 3 (CDR3) of the TCR, producing fragments sufficiently long to identify the VDJ 
region spanning each unique CDR3. 45 forward primers specific for TCR Vβ gene segments 
and 13 reverse primers specific to TCR Jβ gene segments were used (Adaptive 
Biotechnologies). Read lengths of 156bp were obtained using the Illumina HiSeq System. 
The ImmunoSeq assay allows for quantitative assessment of both total and unique TCRs in a 
sample, as it uses a complete synthetic repertoire of TCRs to establish an amplification 
baseline and adjust the assay chemistry to correct for primer bias. Barcoded, spiked-in 
synthetic templates were also used to measure and correct for sequencing coverage and 
residual PCR bias. Output data were then filtered and clustered using the relative frequency 
Balachandran et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ratio between similar clones and a modified nearest-neighbour algorithm, to merge closely 
related sequences and remove PCR and sequencing errors. The number of rearranged TCRs 
per diploid genome in the input material (total number of T cells) was estimated as 
previously described22. Data were analyzed using the ImmunoSeq analyzer tool. The 
frequency of T cells was determined as the total number of T cells per total number of 
sequenced cells in the input material. A T cell clone was defined as a T cell with a unique 
TCR Vβ CDR3 amino acid sequence. Clonality was defined as (1-normalized entropy). 
Normalized entropy was calculated as the Shannon entropy divided by the logarithm of the 
number of unique productive (exonic) TCR sequences. Shannon entropy equals the clonal 
abundance of all productive TCR sequences in the input material. For in vitro stimulated 
cells, clones with identical amino acid sequences that expanded > 2 fold on day 21 
compared to day 0, and fulfilled the Fisher’s Exact test and Storey’s Q value for false 
discovery rate were defined as expanded. Data analysis was performed using Adaptive 
Biotechnologies ImmunoSeq Analyzer (Analyzer 3.0, Seattle, Washington).
Whole Exome Sequencing
For all MSKCC PDAC patients, 500ng of genomic DNA was fragmented to a target size of 
150 to 200 bp on the Covaris LE220 system. Barcoded libraries (Kapa Biosystems) were 
subjected to exon capture by hybridization using the SureSelect Human All Exon 51MB V4 
kit (Agilent). DNA libraries were subsequently sequenced on a HiSeq 4000 (Illumina) in a 
Paired End 100/100, using the TruSeq SBS Kit v3 (Illumina) with a target coverage of 150X 
for tumor samples and 70X for matched normal (MSKCC Center for Molecular Oncology). 
Sequence data were demultiplexed using CASAVA, and after removal of adapter sequences 
using cutadapt (v1.6), reads were aligned to the reference human genome (hg19) using the 
Burrows-Wheeler Alignment tool (bwa mem v0.7.12). Duplicate-read removal, InDel 
realignment and Base Quality Score Recalibration were performed using the Genome 
Analysis Toolkit (GATK) according to GATK best practices, as previously described6. 
Variants were identified on processed data using Mutect, Mutect rescue (SNPs) and 
HaplotypeCaller (insertions/deletions) (Supplementary Data 2). A mean unique sequence 
coverage of 167.45X was achieved for tumor samples and 84.75 for normal samples. All 
MUC16 mutations were manually reviewed by 3 investigators using the Integrated 
Genomics Viewer (IGV) v2.3.72. Whole genome and whole exome sequencing for ICGC19 
patients has been previously described. For all ICGC and Rapid Autopsy samples, BAM 
files were re-processed and mutations identified as per the above outlined MSKCC protocol. 
Depth of sequencing for the rapid autopsy samples ranged from 150X to 250X.
HLA Typing
HLA typing for PDAC patients was performed in silico using the tool Short Oligonucleotide 
Analysis Package-HLA (SOAP, http://soap.genomics.org.cn/SOAP-HLA.html).
Somatic Mutation Immunogenicity Predictions
MSKCC Pipeline: Immunogenicity of somatic mutations was estimated using a previously 
described bioinformatics tool called NASeek6. Briefly, NASeek is a computational 
algorithm that first translates all mutations in exomes to strings of 17 amino acids, for both 
Balachandran et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the wild type and mutated sequences, with the amino acid resulting from the mutation 
centrally situated. Secondly, it evaluates putative MHC Class-I binding for both wild type 
and mutant nonamers using a sliding window method using NetMHC3.4 (http://
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHC/) for patient-specific HLA types, to generate predicted 
binding affinities for both peptides. NASeek finally assesses for similarity between 
nonamers that were predicted to be presented by patient-specific MHC Class-I. All 
mutations with binding scores below 500 nM are defined as neoantigens. As the MSKCC 
pipeline was, on average, more stringent with respect to the number of neoantigens 
identified (in comparison to the pVAC-Seq pipeline below), all neoantigen predictions were 
performed with the MSKCC pipeline unless otherwise specified.
pVAC-Seq Pipeline: As an independent algorithm to identify neoantigens, we used the 
pVAC-Seq pipeline7 with the NetMHCpan binding strength predictor(< 500nM binding 
strength). As recommended, we used the variant effect predictor from Ensembl23 to annotate 
variants for downstream processing by pVAC-Seq.
Neoantigen Fitness Modeling
The fitness of a clone is defined as
dNα
dt
= FαNα,
where Nα is the effective population size of tumor clone α and Fα is the fitness of clone α. 
We assume that the fitness effects due to the immune system are separable from other tumor 
fitness effects, that is, Fα = Fα
0 + Fα
I ,, where Fα
I  denotes the contribution to fitness due to 
selection on neoantigens and Fα
0 denotes contributions from other factors, such as classical 
tumor driver mutations. our model assumes the two components are separable, which is 
essentially equivalent to assuming targeting of neoantigens is largely emanating from 
passenger mutations. We test the hypothesis that due to T-cell mediated immune recognition, 
for some tumors, the deleterious effects of immune pressure due to mutation derived 
neoantigens can become a dominant fitness effect, either counteracting or substantially 
slowing the tumor’s growth rate.
In general, the predicted effective total tumor population size at time τ , denoted as n(τ), is
n τ = N τ
N 0 = ∑
α
Xα 0 exp Fατ = ∑
α
Xα 0 exp Fα
0 + Fα
I τ
where N(0) = Σα Nα (0) is the initial total effective population size of all clones within the 
tumor, and 𝑋α (0) = Nα(0)/N(0) is frequency of clone 𝛼. . The initial frequency of clone 𝛼 is 
the size of a clone estimated from a tumors phylogenetic tree, using the PhyloWGS software 
(https://github.com/morrislab/phylowgs) 24. For the tumors in our cohort there was not a 
discernable difference in the distributions of pancreatic cancer driver mutations across 
clones. As a result we assume Fα
0 ≈ F0 . Therefore,
Balachandran et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 n τ = e
F0τ∑αXα 0 exp Fα
I τ
We rank samples according to the value of (τ), based only on their neoantigen-immune 
interactions. This is equivalent to the assumption that 𝑒F0τ also does not vary as considerably 
across samples when compared with ∑αXα 0 exp Fα
I τ . As a result
n τ ∝ ∑
α
Xα 0 exp Fα
I τ
when considered across our cohort, we use the immune component as a basis for ranking. 
Our hypothesis is that there are tumors where typically F0 ≤ Fα
I , and the deleterious effects 
of neoantigen recognition sufficiently counterbalance the tumor’s growth. By ranking 
tumors according to (τ) we therefore test whether tumors with the strongest deleterious 
effects due to neoantigen fitness have better survival.
For a given neoantigen with sequence s we calculate R as the probability that neoantigen s is 
recognizable by the T cell receptor repertoire. We do so by calculating the probability a 
neoantigen sufficiently aligns to an epitope e from the IEDB via a thermodynamic model 
utilizing the alignment score between the two peptides, |s,e |:
R = Z k −1
∑
e ∈ IEDB
exp −k a − s, e
,
where a represents the horizontal displacement of the binding curve and k sets the slope of 
the curve at a. The partition function then becomes
Z k = 1 + ∑e ∈ IEDBexp −k a − s, e
.
The set of known positive epitopes were derived from the Immune Epitope Database, 
restricting the search to all human infectious disease, class-I restricted targets with positive 
immune assays (http://www.iedb.org/). As the peptides in IEDB can change over time, the 
version of IEDB utilized in our study is included (Supplementary Data 2). The alignments 
between all neoantigens and IEDB epitope sequences are found with blastp algorithm using 
BLOSUM62 matrix (gap opening penalty=−11, gap extention penalty=−1). For the 
identified alignments the alignment scores are then computed with Biopython Bio.pairwise2 
package (http://biopython.org).
The amplitude due to relative MHC dissociation constants between a neoantigen and its 
wildtype counterpart is A ≈ Kd
WT/Kd
MT, approximated here by the ratio of their inferred MHC 
binding affinities, which are inferred for neoantigens and their wildtype counterpart using 
NetMHC3.4 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHC/) as described above. We use the 
standard cutoff for Kd MT, the mutant dissociation constant, used in the literature, that is Kd 
Balachandran et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MT < 500 nM. For a given neoantigen, the quantity 𝐴×𝑅 is referred to as a neoantigen’s 
recognition potential, and is a measure of neoantigen quality in regard to T cell receptor 
recognition. Fitness due to T cell mediated neoantigen recognition within a clone is defined 
as
Fα
I = −
max
i ∈ Clone α
Ai × Ri ,
where i is an index running over neoantigens within a clone. That is, within a clone the 
maximal product of the amplitude Ai and the recognition probability fitness Ri for a 
neoantigen. As alternative hypothesis, fitness in the neoantigen load hypothesis defined as 
Fα
I = − Lα, where Lα is the simple number of neoantigens in clone α. For all cases, we 
computed the neoantigen load without clonal phylogeny, which was the standard 
benchmark, and the neoantigen load with clonal phylogeny, by taking into account the 
effective size of clones in which neoantigens were contained. We also compared our results 
to using the wild type recognition potential alone, in which case our MHC amplitude was 
one, and the fitness model without clonality, which essentially just scores the best 
neoantigen across the tumor.
We split samples by the median value of the cohort, with samples below this value 
designated as a low fitness group (Neoantigen QualityHigh group), and those above as a high 
fitness group (Neoantigen QualityLow group). We then compared survival for high versus 
low quality groups, expecting high quality tumors to be related to longer patient survival 
times. Our model has three parameters: 𝑎, 𝑘 and τ. We observe significant separation of 
patients at a sufficiently probability binding function - we therefore set the slope parameter 
𝑘=1. We report values for the shift and time parameters, a and τ, which optimized survival, 
as quantified by the log-rank test score using the lifelines software package (https://
lifelines.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). To test the stability of this choice, we derived the optimal 
value for subsampled datasets, with subsampling frequencies of 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9. The 
optimal parameters obtained on the full dataset, 𝑎 = 26 and τ ∈ [0.02,0.04] were the most 
frequent choice for all subsampling frequencies (as shown on the distribution of optimal 
parameters in Extended Data Figure 7).
We repeated the same analysis on the larger ICGC cohort with 166 patients. The optimal 
parameters obtained on the full dataset were a = 23 and τ ∈ [0.19,0.21]; however the 
optimum depended only marginally on τ, raising significant patient segregation for a very 
broad interval of values (in particular at τ ∈ [0.02,0.04] , optimal for the MSKCC cohort, we 
obtain P<0.01, see Extended Data Figure 7)We observe that the horizontal displacement 
parameter a is lower than in the MSKCC cohort. We attribute this trend to the difference in 
the survival time distribution in the two cohorts and the MSKCC cohort containing extreme 
LTSs, with likely “higher quality” neoantigens.
In Vitro T Cell Assays
Fresh blood was collected from seven PDAC LTSs whose tumors were identified based on 
whole exome sequencing and in silico predictions to harbor neoantigens. Peripheral-blood 
Balachandran et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mononuclear cells were isolated by density centrifugation over Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE 
Healthcare). Peptides were generated for immunodominant neoantigens as predicted by the 
neoantigen quality algorithm (the neoantigen with the maximum quality score within a 
tumor, driven by maximal TCR recognition probability was defined as the immunodominant 
neoantigen), MUC16 neoantigens, and the corresponding WT nonamers (Peptide 2.0, VA, 
USA, Supplementary Table 2). In vitro peptide stimulation was performed as described with 
minor modifications6. Briefly, 1 × 106 PBMCs were cultured with mutant or WT peptides 
(10ug/ml) on day 1. IL-2 (50U/ml) and IL-15 (10ng/ml) were added on day 2 and every 
subsequent 2–3 days. Mutant and WT peptides were added to respective cultures on days 7, 
and day 14 for second and third rounds of restimulation. On day 21, cells were restimulated 
in the presence of peptide for 5 hours and cells were subsequently stained as per 
manufacturer’s instructions or subject to sequencing. A peptide pool of 23 class-I-restricted 
viral peptides from human CMV and influenza virus (CEF, Cellular Technology Limited) 
served as a positive control (data not shown). Normalized expansion on day 21 of culture 
was defined as (absolute CD8+ T cell expansion Day 21 - absolute CD8+ T cell expansion 
Day 0)/(absolute CD8+ T cell expansion Day 0).
Flow Cytometry
Fresh blood and tumor samples from 6 individual patients undergoing elective surgery at 
Memorial Hospital were collected. Informed consent was obtained according to a Memorial 
Hospital Institutional Review Board approved protocol. Blood was drawn at the time of 
surgery, and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells were isolated by density centrifugation over 
Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare). Tumor and draining lymph node tissues were processed 
immediately after removal from the patient and single-cell suspensions were prepared. To 
assess if T cells bind in silico predicted neoantigen-HLA complexes, T cells of peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from HLA-specific healthy donors (Precision For 
Medicine, Frederick, MD) were assessed for binding to MUC16-neoantigen-MHC 
multimers. MUC16-MHC-FITC multimers were designed to HLA-B0801 (Immudex, 
Copenhagen, Denmark) with nonamer peptide sequences derived based on mutated MUC16 
sequences identified on whole exome sequencing that were in-silico predicted to be 
immunogenic. Single cell PBMC suspensions were surface stained for anti-human CD45, 
CD3, CD56, CD8, CD4, CD107a, and MHC-multimers according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. Human-specific antibodies used in all flow cytometric phenotyping included 
CD45 (clone HI30, BioLegend), CD3 (clone OKT3, BioLegend), CD4 (clone SK3, BD 
Biosciences), CD8 (clone SK1, BioLegend), CD56 (clone B159, BD Biosciences), CD69 
(clone FN50, BD Biosciences), CD19 (clone SJ25C1, BD Biosciences), PD1 (clone MIH4, 
BD Biosciences), CD45RA (clone HI100, BD Biosciences), CD45 RO (clone UCHL1, BD 
Biosciences), CD56 (clone B159, BD Biosciences) and CD107a (clone H4A3, BD 
Biosciences). Flow cytometry was performed on an LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) and data 
were analyzed using FlowJo Software (Tree Star).
Plasmids and Transfection
PhrGFP II-C vector (Stratagene, LaJolla, CA) expressing human wtMUC16c354N206-GFP 
fragment a kind gift of the Spriggs lab. A point mutation at position R15C in C-terminal 
portion of wtMUC16 was introduced using QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis 
Balachandran et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kit (Agilent Technologies) and validated by sequencing. HEK293T were transiently 
transfected with PhrGFP II-C vector (empty vector), wtMUC16c354N206-GFP, 
mtMUC16R16C-GFP using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Protein extracts from transiently transfected cells were analyzed by western blot 
(clone 4H11, anti-MUC16-carboxy-terminal monoclonal antibody25) and beta-actin-HRP 
antibody (Sigma Aldrich). Transfected cells were also analyzed by immunocytochemistry 
(clone 4H11).
Statistics
Comparisons between two groups were performed using unpaired two-tailed Mann-Whitney 
test (unpaired samples), paired two-tailed Mann Whitney test (paired samples), and two-
tailed students t-test (normally distributed parameters). Multiple samples were compared 
using Kruskal-Wallis test (non-grouped) and ANOVA with Tukey’s post-test for multiple 
comparisons (grouped). Survival curves were compared using log-rank test (Mantel-Cox). 
Categorical variables were compared using chi-square test. All comparison groups had 
equivalent variances. Specific clonal expansion on day 21 compared to day 0 (> 2 fold 
expansion by Fisher’s Exact test and Storey’s Q value for false discovery rate) was assessed 
by TCRVβ sequencing. In Figure 3D, we tested whether the number of clones expanding 
under more than one condition (mutant, cross reactive, tumor) is significantly different than 
that would be observed by chance using Poisson family saturated log-linear models with the 
canonical link function and the corresponding p-values for the third-degree term in these 
models. We used a hypothetical value of 107 for total number of clones in the blood for this 
calculation. The glm function in R version 3.4 was used for fitting these models. P<0.05 was 
considered to be statistically significant. Data analysis was performed using statistical 
software (Prism 7.0, GraphPad Software; Cox regression using STATA 13.1).
Data Availability
Data presented in this study can be downloaded from https://dcc.icgc.org/repositories under 
the identifier PACA-AU. Transcriptomic data is available under Gene Expression Omnibus 
accession number 89997. Source data are provided for all experiments, which includes 
figures 1b, 1c, 1e, 2d, 3a-d, 4a-e, and Extended Data Figures 2a-c, 3a, 3c, 3e, 4c, 6b, 8e, 9a-
f, 10a. All other data are available from the authors on reasonable request.
Code Availability
The data (Supplementary Table 1), the computational algorithm and softwares used, 
(Extended Data Figure 7), and the source code (Supplementary Data 2) allowing for 
reproduction of the neoantigen quality evaluation in this manuscript are included as 
indicated above.
Balachandran et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1|. Clinicopathologic characteristics of the MSKCC cohort.
a, Overall survival and patient overlap of short and long term survivors in tissue microarray, 
whole exome sequencing, TCRVβ sequencing, and bulk tumor transcriptomic profiling 
cohorts. b-g, Clinicopathologic characteristics of patients in tissue microarray, 
transcriptome, TCR sequencing, whole exome sequencing, matched primary-metastatic, and 
very long term survivor cohorts. In b-e, *= three patients with metastases noted on final 
pathology (one liver metastasis, one metastasis to small bowel/mesentery, one splenic 
metastasis). n=biologically independent samples in individual patients. P values were 
Balachandran et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 determined using log-rank test (a), and two-sided Fisher’s exact test (gender, tumor location, 
pN, pM, margin, chemotherapy), two-sided Chi-square test (procedure, pathological stage, 
pT, adjuvant treatment) and unpaired, two-tailed student’s t test (age) (b-g).
Extended Data Figure 2|. Long term PDAC survivors display enhanced intratumoral T cell 
immunity.
a, Representative sequential immunohistochemical staining of a single short term and a 
single long term core tumor section (left). Sections bounded by black rectangles (100X) are 
magnified to 275X (right) for each core section. (top right) Representative merged images of 
multiplexed immunohistochemistry are shown. Red rectangular sections are enlarged to 
50X. CK19 stains tumor cells. Arrows indicate CD3+CD8+Granzyme-B+ T cells. (middle 
Balachandran et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 right) Immunofluorescent quantification of CD8+ and CD4+cells in tumor tissue microarrays 
of short and long term survivors. Slides used were cut from separate sections of the block as 
those used for sequential immunohistochemistry (Figure 1b, Extended Data Figure 2a). 
(bottom right) Quantification of multiplexed immunophenotyping as shown in Extended 
Figure 2a (left, and top right). All immunofluorescent and immunohistochemical staining 
was repeated independently in triplicates for each patient. In (a), short term n=45, long term 
n=51. b, Bulk tumor transcriptomic immune profiling in short and long term survivors. DC 
signature genes include CCL13, 17, 22, PPFIBP2, NPR1, HSD11B1, CD209/DC-SIGN103. 
c, Flow cytometric gating strategy to phenotype human T cells (n=7). First plot is pre-gated 
on live cells, followed by CD45+, and CD3+CD56- cells. Values indicate percentage of cells 
within the red boxes, and are gated based on isotype controls. d, Top: Overall survival of 
patients who did or did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy (adjuvant chemotherapy+/− 
respectively, top left), and of patients with tumors harboring greater or less than the median 
number of CD3-CD8-GranzymeB triple positive cells (CD3-CD8-GranzymeBHi/Low 
respectively, top right). Overall survival of all four groups shown in bottom. Table shows 
univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis of clinicopathologic features, adjuvant 
chemotherapy, and CD3-CD8-GranzymeB density associations with overall survival. 
Horizontal bars, median values; error bars, mean ± SEM. n=biologically independent 
samples in individual patients. P values were determined two-tailed Mann Whitney test (a, 
b), one-way ANOVA (c), and log-rank test (d).
Balachandran et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3|. Neoantigen quantity and CD8+ T cell infiltrate identify long term 
pancreatic cancer survivors.
a, (left) Number of nonsynonymous, missense, and neoantigenic mutations per patient in the 
MSKCC cohort. Tick marks on the x-axis correspond to individual tumors. (right) Oncoprint 
demonstrating the frequency of oncogenic driver gene mutations in the MSKCC cohort. b, 
Overall survival of patients with tumors harboring greater than the median number of 
neoantigens (NeoantigenHi), and greater than the median intratumoral T cell repertoire 
polyclonality (PolyclonalHi), compared to all other patients (Rest). Neoantigens were 
determined using the MSKCC (top) and the pVAC-Seq (bottom) neoantigen prediction 
pipelines. c. Number of neoantigens per tumor as determined by the MSKCC and pVAC-Seq 
neoantigen calling pipelines (left). Tick marks on the x-axis correspond to individual tumors. 
Correlation matrix of neoantigens as determined by the MSKCC and pVAC-Seq neoantigen 
calling pipelines (right).Solid red line indicates line of best fit, dotted lines indicate 95% 
confidence intervals. d, Top: Overall survival of patients with tumors harboring greater or 
lesser than the median number of neoantigens (NeoantigenHi/Low) and CD3-CD8 double 
positive cells (CD3-CD8Hi/Low), compared to all other patients (Rest) (top left). Patients who 
did or did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy (adjuvant chemotherapy+/−, respectively) (top 
right), and all four groups (bottom) are also shown. Table shows univariate and multivariate 
Balachandran et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cox regression analysis of the associations of clinicopathologic features, adjuvant 
chemotherapy, and neoantigen-CD3-CD8 number with overall survival. e Distribution of 
tumors with high and low quality neoantigens in NeoantigenHi CD3-CD8Hi long term 
pancreatic cancer survivors compared to all other patients (Rest). n = biologically 
independent samples in individual patients. P-values were determined using log-rank (b, d), 
and Chi-square (e) tests.
Extended Data Figure 4|. Unique genomic features alone do not identify long term survivors.
a, Overall survival of patients with tumors harboring greater or lesser than the median 
number of neoantigens (NeoantigenHi/Low), CD3-CD8 double positive cells (CD3-
CD8Hi/Low), polyclonality (PolyclonalHi/Low), mutations (MutationHi/Low), and CD4 single 
positive cells (CD4Hi/Low). b, Oncoprint demonstrating no difference in the frequency of 
oncogenic driver mutations in short and long term tumors. c, No difference in the number of 
nonsynonymous, missense, and immunogenic mutations (neoantigens) in short and long 
term PDAC tumors. d, Overall survival stratified by mutations in ARID1A, KRASQ61H, 
RBM10, and MLL-related genes (MLL, MLL2, MLL3, MLL5). Horizontal bars, median 
Balachandran et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 values. n = biologically independent samples in individual patients. P-values were 
determined using log-rank test (a, d).
Extended Data Figure 5|. Neoantigen immune fitness models.
a, Comprehensive flowchart of neoantigen quality identification pipeline. Software 
programs utilized for each step are indicated in bold, colored text. Mathematical formulae 
for calculation of individual components of neoantigen quality are defined in Methods. All 
software components of the pipeline are published and/or publically available as indicated in 
italics above. b, (top) Schematic of neoantigen immune fitness models. Each circle 
represents a tumor clone in an evolutionary tree. Clones in both models are identical with 
respect to the number of mutations and neoantigens. Numbers represent hypothetical 
Balachandran et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neoantigens gained in a successive tumor clone. Shades of red indicate immunogenicity of 
each clone, as ascribed by the two models, namely neoantigen quality or neoantigen 
quantity. (bottom) Parameters defining the quality score in the quality model (1–3). In (1), 
amino acid sequences of a hypothetical wild type (WT) epitope, tumor neoepitope, and a 
homologous microbial epitope are shown. Yellow highlights the changing amino acid 
between the WT and tumor sequence as a consequence of a tumor specific mutation. The 
amino acids in red indicate homology between the tumor neoepitope and the microbial 
epitope.
Extended Data Figure 6|. Neoantigen quality is independently prognostic of survival.
Balachandran et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Overall survival of patients whose tumors displayed high compared to low neoantigen 
quality (Neoantigen QualityHi/Low) (top left). Overall survival of patient who did or did not 
receive adjuvant chemotherapy (top right). Overall survival of all four groups is shown at the 
bottom. Neoantigen quality defined by pipeline and schema as defined in Extended Data 
Figure 5a, b. Table shows univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis of the 
associations of clinicopathologic features, adjuvant chemotherapy, and neoantigen quality 
with overall survival. Data include all patients in the whole exome sequencing MSKCC 
cohort. b, Number of nonsynonymous, missense, and neoantigenic mutations per patient in 
the ICGC cohort (n=166). c, Overall survival of patients in the ICGC cohort whose tumors 
displayed high compared to low neoantigen quality (Neoantigen QualityHi/Low) (top left). 
Overall survival of patients in the ICGC cohort stratified by adjuvant chemotherapy 
administration (top right). Overall survival of all four groups shown in bottom. Neoantigen 
quality defined by pipeline and schema as defined in Extended Data Figure 5a, b. Table 
shows univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis of the associations of 
clinicopathologic features, adjuvant chemotherapy, and neoantigen quality with overall 
survival in the ICGC cohort. n = biologically independent samples in individual patients. P-
values were determined using log-rank test (a, c).
Balachandran et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7|. Stability of neoantigen quality model parameters on subsampled 
cohorts and prognostic dependence of neoantigen quality on infectious disease derived peptides.
Parameters of the neoantigen fitness quality model for a, the MSKCC cohort b, and the 
ICGC cohort (left). Log-rank test score landscape as a function of the model parameters, the 
horizontal alignment score displacement a, and the characteristic time τ, the significance of 
the score is denoted in the legend (right). Two dimensional histograms showing 
distributions of optimal parameters obtained on subsampled datasets with 50, 70, and 90% 
of patients left, over 500 iterations of subsampling at each frequency. c, Overall survival of 
patients in the MSKCC and ICGC cohort whole tumors displayed high compared to low 
neoantigen quality (Neoantigen QualityHi/Low) Neoantigen quality was calculated using 
alignment to immunogenic infectious disease-derived IEDB peptides (microbial peptides) or 
using alignment to immunogenic non-infectious disease-derived allergy/autoimmune 
peptides in the IEDB database (non-microbial peptides). n = biologically independent 
samples in individual patients. P-values were determined using log-rank test (c).
Balachandran et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8|. Predicted MUC16 neoantigens are recognized by the human TCR 
repertoire.
a, PBMCs pulsed with no peptide, control WT control peptide (WT), cross-reactive peptide 
(Cross Reactive), or high quality neopeptide (Mutant). Representative gating strategies for 
CD8+ T cell expansion, and degranulation are shown. b, PBMCs pulsed with no peptide, 
MUC16 neopeptides (Mutant), and control WT control peptide (WT). Representative gating 
strategies for CD8+ T cell expansion are shown. c, Representative gating strategy to identify 
CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood of healthy donors (top panel). Identification of CD8+ T 
cells in healthy donors reactive to unique MUC16 neoepitopes predicted to bind to the 
B∗0801 HLA-allele, using MUC16-neoepitope-HLA multimers. Quantification of all 
healthy donors (Neoepitope #1, 2 - n=5) is shown (right). Multimer staining is shown on the 
x-axis, CD8 is shown on the y-axis. Peptide information is provided in Supplementary Table 
2. n = biologically independent samples in individual patients. Horizontal bars, median 
values; error bars, mean ± SEM. P-values were determined using one-way ANOVA (c).
Balachandran et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9|. Long term survivors do not display differences in MUC16 mutations, 
transcriptional regulators or downstream targets of MUC16, or differences in other mucins and 
tissue expression antigens.
a, The frequency of MUC16 mutations in short and long term PDAC tumors. Lollipop plot 
showing location of MUC16 mutations and neoantigens in short and long term pancreatic 
cancer survivors. b, (left) Bulk tumor MUC16 mRNA, and (middle) protein expression by 
immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemical staining was repeated independently in 
triplicates for each patient. (right) MUC16 mutant allele frequency in non-hypermutated 
tumors with MUC16 mutations. c, (left) Frequency of patients with MUC16 neoantigens in 
MSKCC and ICGC cohorts. (middle) Frequency of patients with neoantigens in genes 
recurrently harboring neoantigens in >5% of patients in both MSKCC and ICGC cohorts. 
(right) Genes most frequently harboring neoantigens in the MSKCC cohort as determined by 
pVACSeq. Frequency of patients (y-axis) and raw numbers (above bar graphs) are indicated. 
d, mRNA expression of transcriptional activators of MUC16 (top left), mediators implicated 
in MUC16 dependent tumor progression (top right), and mRNA (bottom left) and protein 
(bottom right) of tissue expression antigens MUC1, MUC4, WT1, mesothelin, and Annexin 
A2 in short and long term tumors. WT1 protein was undetectable in both short and long term 
survivors. n=15 per group in top left, top right, and bottom left; short term n=45, long term 
n=51 in bottom right. e, MUC16 mRNA and protein expression in MUC16 non-mutated 
(WT; n=18 (top), n=20 (bottom)) and mutated (mutant; n=10 (top), n=9 (bottom)) tumors. f, 
Balachandran et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TCRVβ sequencing of T cell product following peripheral blood T cells pulse with MUC16 
neopeptides as in Figure 4e. Brown open circles – stable/contracted clones with mutant 
neopeptide; blue open circles – expanded clones with mutant neopeptide; red solid circles - 
expanded clones with mutant neopeptide detected in archival primary tumors. Arrows = 
clones in archival primary tumors with rank frequencies. Venn diagrams = clonal overlap in 
respective compartments. Horizontal bars, median values; error bars, mean ± SEM. n = 
biologically independent samples in individual patients. P-values were determined using 
two-tailed Mann Whitney and Students t-tests (b), Chi-square tests (c), and as described in 
the methods (f).
Balachandran et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10|. MUC16 mutations do not alter tumor cell-intrinsic MUC16 protein 
expression.
a, Representative immunohistochemical staining (left) and quantification (right) of MUC16 
expression in tissue microarrays of short and long term pancreatic cancer survivors as 
assessed using three independent anti-MUC16 antibodies. Ab#1– clone EPSISR23, 
purchased from Abcam; Ab# 2 – polyclonal, purchased from Abcam ab133419; Ab#3 – 
clone 4H11. Each open circle represents the median expression of independent 
immunohistochemical staining performed in triplicates for each patient. b, Western blot 
(top) and immunocytochemistry (bottom) of untransfected (−), empty vector (vector), 
MUC16 wild type (MUC16 WT), and MUC16 mutant (MUC16 R15C) HEK293T cells. The 
top left blot was probed with anti MUC16 specific antibody (clone 4H11) and the right blot 
with anti b-actin. Red rectangle indicates MUC16 specific band. All bottom cells were 
probed with anti MUC16 antibody (clone 4H1125). The inserted mutation was identical to a 
neoantigenic MUC16 mutation (Extended Data Figure 9a, Pt. 1). Data representative of two 
independent experiments with similar results. c, MUC16 immunohistochemistry on two long 
term pancreatic cancer survivors with MUC16 neoepitopes in primary resected tumors. 
Areas in rectangular low power fields are magnified on the right. Immunohistochemical 
staining was performed independently in triplicates for each patient in tissue microarrays, 
and confirmed with immunohistochemical staining on whole tumor sections (shown). 
Horizontal bars, median values; error bars, mean ± SEM. n = biologically independent 
samples in individual patients. P-values were determined using two-tailed Students t-tests 
(a).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Alexander Rudensky, Alexandra Snyder-Charan, Curtis Callan, Yuval Elhanati, Zachary Sethna, Christine 
Crabtree, Paula Garcia, Maria Singh, Anjuli McNeil, Dana Haviland, Jerry Melchor, and Joyce Tsoi for insightful 
discussions, technical, and editorial assistance. This work was supported by NIH R01DK097087–01 Pancreatic 
Cancer Action Network-AACR Research Acceleration Network Grant (S.D.L), P30 CA008748–50S4 
administrative supplement (S.D.L, V.P.B), Suzanne Cohn Simon Pancreatic Cancer Research Fund (S.D.L.), NCI 
K12CA184746–01A1 (V.P.B), Damon Runyon Clinical Investigator Award (V.P.B), Stand Up to Cancer, Lustgarden 
Foundation, and the National Science Foundation (M.Ł, J.D.W, B.D.G), the V Foundation (V.P.B, M.Ł, J.A.M, 
J.D.W, B.D.G), the Phil A. Sharp Innovation Award (B.D.G, J.D.W), and the Parker Institute for Cancer 
Immunotherapy (D.K.W and C.I.O.C). Services by the Integrated Genomics Core were funded by the NCI Cancer 
Center Support Grant (P30 CA08748), Cycle for Survival, and the Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for 
Molecular Oncology.
Author information
References
1. Ino Y et al. Immune cell infiltration as an indicator of the immune microenvironment of pancreatic 
cancer. Br J Cancer 108, 914–923 (2013). [PubMed: 23385730] 
2. Hiraoka N et al. Intratumoral tertiary lymphoid organ is a favourable prognosticator in patients with 
pancreatic cancer. Br J Cancer 112, 1782–1790 (2015). [PubMed: 25942397] 
3. Remark R, Merghoub T & Grabe N In-depth tissue profiling using multiplexed 
immunohistochemical consecutive staining on single slide. Science 1, aaf6925–aaf6925 (2016).
Balachandran et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Bindea G et al. Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Intratumoral Immune Cells Reveal the Immune 
Landscape in Human Cancer. Immunity 39, 782–795 (2013). [PubMed: 24138885] 
5. Gros A et al. Prospective identification of neoantigen-specific lymphocytes in the peripheral blood 
of melanoma patients. Nat Med 22, 433–438 (2016). [PubMed: 26901407] 
6. Rizvi NA et al. Cancer immunology. Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade 
in non-small cell lung cancer. Science 348, 124–128 (2015). [PubMed: 25765070] 
7. Hundal J et al. pVAC-Seq: A genome-guided in silico approach to identifying tumor neoantigens. 
Genome Med 8, 11 (2016). [PubMed: 26825632] 
8. Witkiewicz AK et al. Whole-exome sequencing of pancreatic cancer defines genetic diversity and 
therapeutic targets. Nat Commun 6, 6744 (2015). [PubMed: 25855536] 
9. Zitvogel L, Ayyoub M, Routy B & Kroemer G Microbiome and Anticancer Immunosurveillance. 
Cell 165, 276–287 (2016). [PubMed: 27058662] 
10. Luksza M & Lässig M A predictive fitness model for influenza. Nature 507, 57– 61 (2014). 
[PubMed: 24572367] 
11. Verdegaal EME et al. Neoantigen landscape dynamics during human melanoma-T cell interactions. 
Nature 536, 91–95 (2016). [PubMed: 27350335] 
12. Chekmasova AA et al. Successful eradication of established peritoneal ovarian tumors in SCID-
Beige mice following adoptive transfer of T cells genetically targeted to the MUC16 antigen. Clin 
Cancer Res 16, 3594–3606 (2010). [PubMed: 20628030] 
13. Morgado M et al. Tumor necrosis factor-α and interferon-γ stimulate MUC16 (CA125) expression 
in breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers through NFκB. Oncotarget 7, 14871–14884 (2016). 
[PubMed: 26918940] 
14. Das S et al. Carboxyl-terminal domain of MUC16 imparts tumorigenic and metastatic functions 
through nuclear translocation of JAK2 to pancreatic cancer cells. Oncotarget 6, 5772–5787 (2015). 
[PubMed: 25691062] 
15. Shukla SK et al. MUC16-mediated activation of mTOR and c-Myc reprograms pancreatic cancer 
metabolism. Oncotarget 6, 19118–19131 (2015). [PubMed: 26046375] 
16. Muniyan S et al. MUC16 contributes to the metastasis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
through focal adhesion mediated signaling mechanism. Genes Cancer 7, 110–124 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27382435] 
17. Andersen RS et al. Dissection of T-cell antigen specificity in human melanoma. Cancer Res. 72, 
1642–1650 (2012). [PubMed: 22311675] 
18. Gross L Intradermal Immunization of C3H Mice against a Sarcoma That Originated in an Animal 
of the Same Line. Cancer Res 3, 326–333 (1943).
19. Bailey P et al. Genomic analyses identify molecular subtypes of pancreatic cancer. Nature 531, 47–
52 (2016). [PubMed: 26909576] 
20. Embuscado EE et al. Immortalizing the complexity of cancer metastasis: genetic features of lethal 
metastatic pancreatic cancer obtained from rapid autopsy. Cancer Biol. Ther. 4, 548–554 (2005). 
[PubMed: 15846069] 
21. Haridas D et al. Pathobiological implications of MUC16 expression in pancreatic cancer. PLOS 
ONE 6, e26839 (2011). [PubMed: 22066010] 
22. Tumeh PC et al. PD-1 blockade induces responses by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. 
Nature 515, 568–571 (2014). [PubMed: 25428505] 
23. McLaren W et al. The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor. Genome Biol. 17, 122 (2016). [PubMed: 
27268795] 
24. Deshwar AG et al. PhyloWGS: reconstructing subclonal composition and evolution from whole-
genome sequencing of tumors. Genome Biol. 16, 35 (2015). [PubMed: 25786235] 
25. Dharma Rao T et al. Novel monoclonal antibodies against the proximal (carboxy-terminal) 
portions of MUC16. Appl. Immunohistochem. Mol. Morphol. 18, 462–472 (2010). [PubMed: 
20453816] 
Balachandran et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1: Pancreatic cancer survivors display enhanced T cell immunity.
(a) Survival of MSKCC cohorts. (b) Quantification of CD8+ T cells using multiplexed 
immunohistochemistry. (c) T cell frequency, repertoire clonality and (d) clonal overlap in 
tumor and matched adjacent normal pancreatic tissues by TCR Vβ sequencing. (e) 
Intratumoral T cell repertoire clonality in tumors of short and long term survivors. 
Horizontal bars, median values. n = biologically independent samples in individual patients. 
P values were determined by log rank test (a), two-tailed Mann Whitney test (b), two-tailed 
paired (c) and two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-tests (e).
Balachandran et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2: Neoantigen quality is prognostic of survival.
(a) Survival of patients with tumors harboring both greater than the median number of 
neoantigens (NeoantigenHi), and CD3-CD8 double positive cells (CD3-CD8Hi), compared to all 
other patients (Rest), as determined by the MSKCC and pVAC-Seq neoantigen prediction 
pipelines. (b) Patient survival stratified by neoantigen quality and quantity in the MSKCC 
and ICGC cohorts. n = biologically independent samples in individual patients. P-values 
were determined using log-rank test (a, b).
Balachandran et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3: Neoantigen and cross reactive microbial peptide T cells detected in blood and tumors.
(a) Gene expression in the presence (red) or absence (gray) of high quality neoantigenic 
mutations. X axis = genes, shaded circles = biologically independent samples in individual 
patients (n=30). Median non-neoantigenic and neoantigenic expression (right). All high 
quality neoantigenic genes with available mRNA expression are shown. (b) Metastatic 
propagation of all clones in the primary tumor stratified by neoantigen quality. Mutant allele 
frequencies in matched primary-metastatic tumors (left) and metastatic tumors alone (right) 
are shown in biologically independent samples in one patient. (c, d) PBMCs pulsed with no 
(N), WT control (WT), cross reactive (CR), and high quality neo (M) peptide (n=7). (c) 
CD8+ T cell expansion and degranulation. (d) Clonal overlap of expanded T cell clones in 
(c) and archival tumors by TCR Vβ sequencing. Arrows = clones in archival primary tumors 
with rank frequencies. Venn diagrams show number of T cell clones expanding with mutant, 
and cross reactive peptides, their respective clonal overlap, and clonal overlap with archival 
primary tumors. Note presence of clones recognizing both neopeptides and cross reactive 
peptides in archival tumors. Years surviving following surgery are shown for each individual 
patient. NED = No Evidence of Disease, AWD = Alive with Disease. Horizontal bars, 
median values. Error bars, mean ± SEM. n = biologically independent samples in individual 
patients in a and c. P values were determined in (a) using two-tailed Student’s t test, in (b) 
using two-tailed Mann Whitney test, in (c) using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple 
comparison test, and in (d) as described in the Methods.
Balachandran et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4: MUC16 is a neoantigenic hotspot in pancreatic cancer survivors.
(a) Genes with neoantigens in >15% of patients. (b) MUC16 neoantigen frequency and (c) 
number. Short term n=32, long term n=26 in (a), (b), and (c). (d) Metastatic propagation of 
all clones in the primary tumor stratified by the presence/absence of MUC16 neoantigens. 
Mutant allele frequencies in matched primary-metastatic tumors (left) and metastatic tumors 
alone (far right) are shown in biologically independent samples in four patients. (e) CD8+ T 
cell degranulation in PBMCs pulsed with no peptide (None), MUC16 neopeptide (Mutant), 
and control WT peptide (WT). Data in (e) are representative of two independent experiments 
with similar results. n = biologically independent samples in individual patients. Horizontal 
bars, median values. Error bars, mean ± SEM. P values were determined in (a, b) using two-
sided Chi-square test, in (c, d) using two-tailed Mann-Whitney test, and in (e) using two-
way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test.
Balachandran et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
