 A core viral protein binds host nucleosomes to sequester 
immune danger signals
Daphne C. Avgousti1,2, Christin Herrmann2,3, Katarzyna Kulej1,2, Neha J. Pancholi2,3, 
Nikolina Sekulic4,5,6, Joana Petrescu2,7, Rosalynn C. Molden5, Daniel Blumenthal8, Andrew 
J. Paris9, Emigdio D. Reyes1,2, Philomena Ostapchuk10, Patrick Hearing10, Steven H. 
Seeholzer11, G. Scott Worthen12, Ben E. Black4,5, Benjamin A. Garcia4,5, and Matthew D. 
Weitzman1,2,*
1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA
2Division of Cancer Pathobiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA
3Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA
4Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA
5Epigenetics Program, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 
USA
6Currently: Biotechnology Centre of Oslo and Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway
7Villanova University, Villanova, PA USA
8Division of Cell Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA
9Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Hospital of the University of 
Pennsylvania, and the Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
10Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, New York USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.D.W. (weitzmanm@email.chop.edu). 
Author Contributions D.C.A. and M.D.W. conceived the project and designed experiments; D.C.A., C.H., N.S., J.P., N.J.P, and 
E.D.R. performed the experiments; D.C.A., C.H., and J.P. generated constructs and cell lines; K.K., R.C.M., S.S. and B.A.G. 
performed mass spectrometry analysis; P.O. and P.H. generated Ad5-flox-VII virus and provided 293-Cre cell line; D.C.A. and D.B. 
performed the FRAP experiments; A.J.P. and G.S.W. conducted all mouse experiments; B.E.B. and B.A.G. designed experiments and 
interpreted the data; D.C.A. and M.D.W. interpreted the data and wrote the manuscript and all authors were involved in editing the 
manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Accession codes
All proteomics raw files generated for this manuscript are collected into the public database Chorus (https://chorusproject.org/, Project 
number: 1047).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 July 7; 535(7610): 173–177. doi:10.1038/nature18317.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11Protein and Proteomics Core, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA
12Division of Neonatology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, and Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
USA
Abstract
Viral proteins mimic host protein structure and function to redirect cellular processes and subvert 
innate defenses1. Small basic proteins compact and regulate both viral and cellular DNA genomes. 
Nucleosomes are the repeating units of cellular chromatin and play an important role in innate 
immune responses2. Viral encoded core basic proteins compact viral genomes but their impact on 
host chromatin structure and function remains unexplored. Adenoviruses encode a highly basic 
protein called protein VII that resembles cellular histones3. Although protein VII binds viral DNA 
and is incorporated with viral genomes into virus particles4,5, it is unknown whether protein VII 
impacts cellular chromatin. Our observation that protein VII alters cellular chromatin led us to 
hypothesize that this impacts antiviral responses during adenovirus infection. We found that 
protein VII forms complexes with nucleosomes and limits DNA accessibility. We identified post-
translational modifications on protein VII that are responsible for chromatin localization. 
Furthermore, proteomic analysis demonstrated that protein VII is sufficient to alter protein 
composition of host chromatin. We found that protein VII is necessary and sufficient for retention 
in chromatin of members of the high-mobility group protein B family (HMGB1, HMGB2, and 
HMGB3). HMGB1 is actively released in response to inflammatory stimuli and functions as a 
danger signal to activate immune responses6,7. We showed that protein VII can directly bind 
HMGB1 in vitro and further demonstrated that protein VII expression in mouse lungs is sufficient 
to decrease inflammation-induced HMGB1 content and neutrophil recruitment in the 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Together our in vitro and in vivo results show that protein VII 
sequesters HMGB1 and can prevent its release. This study uncovers a viral strategy in which 
nucleosome binding is exploited to control extracellular immune signaling.
Keywords
Adenovirus; chromatin; innate immunity; HMGB1
As viruses commandeer cellular functions to promote viral production, they induce 
numerous cellular changes. Manipulation of host chromatin is important for viral takeover of 
cellular functions1,8–11. Although there are known examples of viral control by manipulating 
gene expression2,9,12, an alternative strategy for immune evasion could exploit cellular 
chromatin to impact extracellular signaling. Genomes of DNA viruses are compacted and 
packaged into virus particles with small basic proteins encoded by host or virus. 
Adenoviruses encode protein VII, a small basic protein packaged with viral genomes3–5. We 
hypothesized that protein VII contributes to host chromatin manipulation. We investigated 
protein VII localization during infection, and found it present at both viral replication 
centers stained for viral DNA binding protein DBP (Fig 1a, Extended Data Fig 1a), and 
cellular chromatin stained for histone H1 and DAPI (Fig 1b). These observations suggest 
protein VII functions on both viral and host genomes. To determine protein VII’s impact on 
Avgousti et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cellular chromatin, we generated cell lines with inducible expression. In multiple cell types 
we observed that protein VII accumulation altered nuclear DNA into a punctate appearance 
(Fig 1c and Extended Data Fig 1b–c). We tested whether other basic proteins produce 
similar effects on chromatin. Viral core protein V and the precursor of protein VII (preVII) 
localized to nucleoli and did not affect chromatin appearance (Extended Data Fig 1d). 
Human protamine PRM1, a basic protein involved in sperm DNA compaction13, also 
localized to nucleoli and did not affect chromatin appearance (Extended Data Fig 1d). Taken 
together, our data demonstrate that protein VII is sufficient to alter cellular chromatin and is 
distinct from other small basic proteins.
To affect cellular chromatin at the nucleosome level during infection, we reasoned protein 
VII must be abundant and associated with histones. Acid extraction of histones14,15 from 
infected cells, revealed viral proteins VII and V isolated with cellular histones (Fig 1d), as 
verified by western blot (Extended Data Fig 2a) and mass spectrometry. Protein VII 
abundance was comparable to cellular histone levels (Fig 1d). We further analyzed 
association of protein VII with cellular chromatin by salt fractionation of nuclei16. We found 
protein VII with cellular histones and DNA in high salt fractions (Fig 1e and Extended Data 
Fig 2b–d). Ectopically expressed protein VII is also found in high salt fractions, in contrast 
to other viral proteins that elute at low salt (Fig 1e and Extended Data Fig 2b). These data 
suggest that protein VII is highly abundant and tightly associated with cellular chromatin.
We hypothesized protein VII interacts with chromatin by forming complexes with DNA, 
histones, or nucleosomes, and examined protein VII interactions in vitro. Purified 
recombinant protein VII binds to DNA5 (Extended Data Fig 2e–f). We reconstituted 
nucleosomes in vitro with recombinant histone proteins on 195 base pairs (bp) of DNA17. 
Protein VII changed nucleosome mobility upon native gel electrophoresis (Fig 1f and 
Extended Data Fig 2g). We analyzed native gel bands by denaturing SDS-PAGE, and 
confirmed complexes contained core histones with protein VII (Fig 1f, bottom). Unlike 
protamines13, protein VII forms complexes with nucleosomes but does not appear to replace 
histones. Next, we examined whether protein VII association with nucleosomes affects DNA 
wrapping using microccocal nuclease (MNase) digestion followed by DNA fragment 
analysis17. We found protein VII pauses nucleosomal DNA digestion at ~165bp, the point at 
which DNA strands crossover the nucleosome dyad (Fig 1g, Extended Data Fig 3a). In 
contrast, nucleosome digestion alone paused with core particles at ~150bp, suggesting 
protein VII encumbers DNA access. Unlike linker histone binding that is dependent on DNA 
length18, protein VII protects against MNase digestion on the nucleosome core particle of 
147bp (Extended Data Fig 3b). Protein VII alone protects DNA from MNase digestion, as 
would be expected given its role in the viral core. Together, these data demonstrate protein 
VII binds directly to nucleosomes and limits DNA accessibility at the DNA entry/exit site.
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) on histones are central to regulating chromatin 
structure14,19. Due to the histone-like nature of protein VII3, we hypothesized it is subject to 
post-translational modification similar to histones. Protein VII precursor was previously 
proposed to be acetylated by amino-terminal addition during protein synthesis20. We noted 
that protein VII contains conserved lysine residues within an AKKRS motif21, similar to the 
commonly modified canonical histone motif ARSK19. We therefore purified protein VII 
Avgousti et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from histone extracts over an adenovirus infection time-course by reverse phase HPLC (Fig 
2a, Extended Data Fig 4). Consistent with observations from histone extracts (Fig 1d), 
protein VII levels were comparable to endogenous histones. We digested purified protein 
VII and preVII with chymotrypsin to distinguish the two proteins, and analyzed peptides by 
tandem mass spectrometry. We identified several PTMs, with two acetylation sites and three 
phosphorylation sites as most abundant (Fig 2b, Extended Data Fig 5 and 6b). Interestingly, 
we identified acetylation sites on ectopically expressed protein VII but not on protein VII in 
virus particles (Extended Data Fig 6a). We speculate this provides a possible mechanism for 
distinguishing protein VII bound to cellular chromatin from protein destined for packaged 
virus. To investigate relevance of identified PTMs, we mutated modified sites in protein VII. 
An alanine-replacement mutant for all five PTM sites localized to nucleoli instead of cellular 
chromatin (Fig 2c). Results with individual point mutations suggest the K3 residue is 
important for chromatin localization, and employing glutamine as an acetylation mimic 
(K3Q) mirrored the pattern of wild-type protein (Fig 2c). Effects induced by protein VII are 
not due to global alteration of histone PTMs since only six PTMs on histones H3 and H4 
showed minor but significant changes (Extended Data Fig 6c–e and SI Table 1). These data 
suggest protein VII modification plays critical roles during virus infection.
To determine whether protein VII manipulation of cellular chromatin is part of a strategy to 
counteract host defenses, we employed mass spectrometry to examine changes in protein 
composition of nuclear fractions. We compared the total chromatin proteome in the presence 
and absence of protein VII (Fig 3a and SI Table 2). We identified 20 proteins that changed 
significantly across three biological replicates (Extended Data Fig 7 and SI Table 2). The 
categories of proteins most significantly changed upon protein VII expression were related 
to immune responses (Extended Data Fig 7c). The top four proteins enriched in chromatin 
fractions by protein VII were SET/TAF-1, a protein previously shown to interact with 
protein VII22,23, and high mobility group box proteins HMGB1, HMGB2 and HMGB3 (Fig 
3a). The HMGB proteins are alarmins with multiple functions as activators of immunity and 
inflammation6,7. HMGB1 is a nuclear protein normally only transiently associated with 
chromatin24,25. Cells also release HMGB1 as an extracellular danger signal that promotes 
immune responses after injury or infection26. We confirmed increased chromatin association 
of HMGB1 and HMGB2 by analysis of fractionated nuclei, upon protein VII expression and 
during adenovirus infection (Fig 3b). We verified these changes are not due to altered 
HMGB1 expression levels (Extended Data Fig 8a–b). We demonstrated direct binding of 
recombinant protein VII to HMGB1 in vitro and confirmed HMGB1 co-immunopreciptation 
with protein VII (Fig 3c). We visually observed reorganization of HMGB1 and HMGB2 
distribution upon protein VII expression, and at late stages of infection (Fig 3d–f, Extended 
Data Fig 8c–e). We also showed reorganization of HMGB1 distribution by vector 
transduction to express protein VII-GFP (Fig 3g, Extended Data 8f). The effect of protein 
VII on HMGB1 is also conserved across human Ad serotypes (Extended Data Fig 8g). We 
further defined effects of protein VII on HMGB1 mobility by fluorescence recovery after 
photobleaching (FRAP) and found decreased HMGB1 diffusion (Fig 3h). We next 
investigated whether protein VII is necessary for chromatin retention of HMGB1 during 
virus infection. We used a replication competent adenovirus with loxP sites inserted on 
either side of the protein VII gene, allowing deletion of protein VII during infection of cells 
Avgousti et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expressing Cre recombinase (Fig 3i–j, Extended Data Fig 9a–b). We fractionated nuclei 
from infected cells and found HMGB1 and HMGB2 were no longer retained in chromatin 
when protein VII was deleted (Fig 3k, Extended Data Fic 9c). Together, these data indicate 
that protein VII is necessary and sufficient to promote chromatin association and 
immobilization of HMGB1.
We hypothesized that protein VII retains HMGB1 in chromatin during natural infection to 
prevent cellular release and abrogate host immune responses. We therefore visualized 
endogenous HMGB1 during adenovirus infection in precision cut lung slices (PCLS)27 from 
human donors (Fig 4a). Consistent with cell culture experiments, we demonstrate that 
protein VII is sufficient to relocalize endogenous HMGB1. We then tested whether protein 
VII prevents HMGB1 release in cell culture and in vivo models. We expressed GFP or 
protein VII-GFP in macrophage-like THP-1 cells, and confirmed protein VII-GFP was 
sufficient to alter chromatin and HMGB1 localization (Extended Data Fig 9d). Cells were 
treated to stimulate inflammasomes, and HMGB1 analyzed in supernatants. Protein VII 
expression resulted in reduced levels of HMGB1 and HMGB2 in supernatants (Fig 4b–c). 
Subsequently, we employed a murine model of LPS induced lung injury28 to investigate 
protein VII’s impact on HMGB1 release and neutrophil recruitment in vivo (Fig 4d). We 
confirmed that protein VII was expressed in transduced mouse lungs (Extended Data Fig 
10a–c) and retained mouse HMGB1 (Extended data Fig 9e–f). We exposed mice to inhaled 
LPS to induce HMGB1 release and neutrophil recruitment to alveoli. Bronchoalveolar 
lavage (BAL) fluid obtained 24 hours after LPS exposure showed that mice transduced to 
express protein VII had significantly less HMGB1 and fewer neutrophils than mice 
expressing GFP (Fig 4d–f). Together, these data suggest that protein VII functions in cellular 
chromatin to retain HMGB1 as a mechanism to blunt immune responses.
In summary, in addition to known roles on packaged viral DNA29,30, we show that protein 
VII interacts with cellular chromatin and binds nucleosomes. We suggest that protein VII 
PTMs contribute to chromatin localization, and that protein VII impacts chromatin-
association of host proteins. Finally, we show that protein VII in cellular chromatin leads to 
sequestration of HMGB family members, contributing to abrogated immune responses 
(Extended Data Fig 10d). Our study reveals that chromatin retention of signaling molecules 
by a viral protein may represent a previously unrecognized immune evasion strategy.
 Methods
 Cells
Primary small airway epithelial cells (SAECs), U2OS, HeLa, 293, THP-1 and A549 cells 
were obtained from the American Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC) and grown according to 
the provider’s instructions. Cell lines were not authenticated or tested for mycoplasma. 
Acceptor cells for generation of inducible cell lines were kindly provided by E. Makeyev 
and used as previously reported31. Protein VII, preVII and V were cloned from genomic 
DNA isolated from HeLa cells infected with adenovirus type 5 and inserted into the 
inducible plasmid cassette with a C-terminal HA tag using restriction enzymes BsrGI and 
AgeI (primer sequences available upon request). Positive clones were selected in DH5α 
cells, sequenced, and transfected into A549, U2OS or HeLa acceptor cells along with 
Avgousti et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 plasmid expressing the Cre recombinase. Recombined clones were selected by puromycin 
resistance (1 µg/mL) and induced with doxycycline (0.2 µg/mL) to express the desired 
protein. Protein expression was verified by immunofluorescence and western blot. All 
figures shown are after 4 days of induction unless otherwise stated. Protein VII and preVII 
were also verified by HPLC purification and mass spectrometry analysis. Point mutations 
were generated by gene synthesis from Genewiz. 293-Cre cells were provided by from P. 
Hearing.
 Viruses and infections
Wild-type adenovirus type 5 (Ad5), adenovirus type 9 (Ad9), adenovirus type 12 (Ad12), 
and recombinant adenovirus vectors expressing only GFP were propagated in 293 cells as 
previously described32. Recombinant adenovirus vector with VII-GFP replaced in the E1 
region was a kind gift from D. Curiel33. Infections were carried out as described 
previously34 using a multiplicity of infection of 10 for primary cells and cell lines for Ad5 
infections. Ad9 and Ad12 infections were carried out with a multiplicity of infection of 50 
and 20, respectively. Ad5-flox-VII was generated by P. Hearing and also prepared using 
standard methods in 293 cells. LoxP sites were added flanking protein VII in the Ad5 
genome resulting in protein VII deletion during infection of 293 cells expressing Cre 
recombinase.
 Antibodies
Primary antibodies were purchased from Covance (HA MMS-101R), Abcam (H1 ab4269, 
H3 ab1791, HMGB1 ab18256, HMGB2 ab67282), Millipore (H2A 07-146, prosurfactin-C 
AB3786), and Santa Cruz (Ku86 sc5280, tubulin sc69969). The antibodies to DBP, 
adenoviral late proteins, terminal protein and protein VII were kind gifts from A. Levine35, 
J. Wilson32, R. Hay and L. Gerace, respectively. Secondary antibodies for immunoblotting 
were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch and secondary antibodies for 
immunofluorescence were obtained from Life Technologies.
 Immunofluorescence
Cells were grown on glass coverslips in 24-well plates and either infected or induced with 
doxycycline (0.2 µg/mL). Cells were harvested for immunofluorescence at the indicated 
time points, washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 
15 minutes and post-fixed with 100% ice-cold methanol for 5 minutes. Coverslips were then 
blocked and stained as previously described36 and mounted using ProLong Gold Antifade 
Reagent (Life Technologies). Immunofluorescence was visualized using a Zeiss LSM 710 
Confocal microscope (Cell and Developmental Microscopy Core at UPenn) and ZEN 2011 
software. Images were processed using ImageJ and assembled with Adobe CS6. All scale 
bars show in the figures are 10µm unless otherwise stated.
 Immunoblotting
Western blot analysis was carried out using standard methods. Briefly, equal amounts of 
total protein lysates were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore) for at 
Avgousti et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 least 30 minutes at 30V. Membranes were stained with ponceau to confirm protein loading 
and blocked in 5% milk in TBST containing 0.1% azide. Membranes were incubated with 
primary antibodies overnight, washed for 30 minutes in TBST and incubated with secondary 
antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Jackson Laboratories) for 1 hour. 
Membranes were washed again and proteins were visualized with Pierce ECL Western 
Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific) and detected using a Syngene G-Box.
 Mice
All mice were housed in SPF conditions in an animal facility at the Children’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia. All studies in mice were carried out in accordance with the recommendations 
in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health 
and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia Animal Welfare Assurance Number A3442-01. C57BL/6J male mice aged 8–
10 weeks were used for experiments. Mice were sedated with ketamine and xylazine. Once 
sedated, mice underwent orotrachial intubation, as previously described37, with a 20G 
angiocatheter from BD (Franklin Lakes, NJ). Mice subsequently received 5e10 GC of 
recombinant adenovirus expressing VII-GFP or GFP purified by the Penn Vector Core as 
described above. Four days after infection, mice were exposed to aerosolized LPS, 3 mg/mL 
for 30 minutes as previously described38. One day after LPS exposure, BAL, and lung tissue 
were harvested as previously detailed39 and examined for HMGB1 content (ELISA, 
Chondrex 6010) and neutrophil count (hematoxylin and eosin stain kit EMD 65044/93). 
Immunostaining was carried out by the CHOP Pathology Core using standard methods. A 
minimum of four biological replicates were used for each condition studied. Mice were 
assigned a random number and color at the start of the experiment and were randomized. 
Technicians carrying out the experiments were blinded to the identity of the samples. Tissue 
samples were assigned a random study number such that the technician performing the 
analysis was blinded. Unblinding for the purpose of data analysis occurred only after all data 
had been collected.
 Salt fractionation of nuclei
Salt fractionation of nuclei was adapted from established protocols16,40. Briefly, 2–4 × 107 
cells were collected and resuspended in 2 mL of ice-cold buffer I (0.32 M sucrose, 60 mM 
KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EGTA, 15 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1 
mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail from Roche). To dissolve the plasma membrane, 
2 mL ice-cold buffer I supplemented with 0.1% IGEPAL were added and samples were 
incubated on ice for 10 minutes. The 4 mL of nuclei was layered on 8 mL of ice-cold buffer 
II (1.2 M sucrose, 60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EGTA, 15 mM Tris, 
pH 7.5, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail from Roche) and 
centrifuged for 20 minutes at 10,000 × g and 4°C. The pelleted nuclei were resuspended in 
400 µL buffer III (10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM PMSF) supplemented with 
5mM CaCl2 and the DNA was digested to mononucleosomes by addition of 1 unit of MNase 
(Sigma-Aldrich, N3755). The reaction was incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes and then 
stopped by addition of 25 µL of 0.1M EGTA. The samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes, 
350 × g, at 4°C, and supernatants were set aside for western blot analysis. The pellet was 
resuspended in 400 µL of buffer IV (70 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM 
Avgousti et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 EGTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1 mM PMSF) with 80mM salt and rotated for 30 minutes at 
4°C. The sample was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 350 × g, 4°C, and the supernatant 
collected for western blot analysis. This step was repeated for salt concentrations in buffer 
IV of 150 mM, 300 mM and 600 mM. The final pellet was resuspended in 400 µL ddH2O 
and all samples were analyzed together by western blot. An aliquot of each supernatant was 
set aside for DNA purification using a PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and analyzed by 
agarose gel electrophoresis. Alternatively, 4 × 107 cells were resuspended in 400 µL 
hypotonic buffer (10 mM HEPES pH = 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 1:1000 PMSF, 0.5 
mM DTT) and incubated on ice for 30 min. The cells were transferred to a 1 ml dounce 
tissue grinder and the cell membranes were gently disrupted with 40 strokes of a tight-fitting 
pestle. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 1,500g and 4°C. The pelleted nuclei were 
resuspended in 400 µL buffer III and the fractionation was continued as described above.
 Preparation of salt fractions for mass spectrometry analysis
All chemicals used for preparation of mass spectrometry samples were of at least sequencing 
grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO), unless otherwise stated. Only the 
600 mM salt fraction was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. The 0.1% TritonX-100 detergent 
was removed from samples prior MS analysis by precipitation using chloroform (CHCl3)-
methanol (MeOH) precipitation41. The protein pellet from CHCl3-MeOH precipitation was 
resuspended in 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were 
reduced with 10mM DTT for 1 hour at room temperature and the carbamidomethylated with 
20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. After alkylation 
proteins were digested first with endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako, mass spectrometry grade) for 
3 hours, after which the solution was diluted 10 times with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 
Subsequently, samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme to substrate ratio 
of approximately 1:50 for 12 hours at room temperature. The samples were acidified with 
5% formic acid (FA) to a pH ≤ 3 and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 RP columns (PerSeptive 
Biosystems) packed in a P200 stage tip with C18 3M plug (3M Bioanalytical Technologies). 
Purified peptide samples were dried by lyophilization and stored at −20°C until further 
analysis. This procedure was carried out for three biological replicas.
 Nano LC-MS/MS and analysis of salt fractions
Samples were loaded onto a 16 cm C18–AQ column (inner diameter 75 µm, 3 µm beads, Dr, 
Maisch GmbH, Germany) using an Easy nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Odense, Denmark). The nanoLC was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass 
Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic 
acid) and eluted with a 120 minute linear gradient from 2–30% buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 
0.1% formic acid). After the gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B. Mass 
spectra were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method with the TopSpeed set with 
3-second cycle. Spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with mass range of 350–1200 
m/z and 120,000 resolution (200 m/z), with a maximum injection time of 50 msec and an 
AGC target of 5×10e5. Signals with 2–5 charges were selected for HCD fragmentation using 
a normalized collision energy of 27, a maximum injection time of 120 msec and an AGC 
target of 10,000. Fragments were analyzed in the ion trap. Raw MS files were analyzed by 
Avgousti et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8)42 (http://www.maxquant.org). MS/MS spectra were searched against 
the UniProt-human database (Version June 2014, 59,345 entries). All used search parameters 
were default, with the exception of including the match between runs (1 minute window) 
and the iBAQ label-free quantification43. The search included variable modifications of 
methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of 
carbamidomethyl cysteine. Each iBAQ value was log2 transformed and subsequently 
normalized by the average protein abundance within each run. Biological process 
association analysis and process network enrichment were performed using the GeneGo's 
MetaCore pathways analysis package with false discovery rate (FDR) <5%; each GO term 
was ranked using p-value enrichment.
 Purification of recombinant protein VII-His
Protein VII was cloned from genomic DNA isolated from adenovirus infected HeLa cells 
into a pET21a backbone to generate a C-terminal hexahistidine tag. Positive clones were 
selected in DH5α cells, sequenced, and transformed into BL21 (DE3) cells (NEB C2527I). 
The purification of insoluble protein VII-His was adapted from existing protocols to purify 
histone proteins from E. coli44,45. Briefly, BL21 cells were inoculated from overnight 
cultures and grown to an optical density of 0.5–0.6 OD260, induced with 0.1 mM IPTG 
(Sigma) and harvested after 4 hours at 37°C. Cells pellets were resuspended in a mild buffer 
(50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, 5% glycerol, 2.5 µg/mL aprotinin, 
leupeptin and pepstatin) and disrupted by sonication using a Branson 250 sonifier. The lysate 
was then centrifuged at 27,000 × g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatants were discarded 
and pellets were resuspended in a denaturing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM 
NaCl, 5% glycerol, 8 M urea). The suspension was centrifuged again to eliminate insoluble 
cell debris and the his-tagged protein was isolated using a cobalt resin (ThermoScientific 
89964) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for denaturing conditions. The purified 
protein was then dialyzed against water and lyophilized. Purified protein was verified by 
western blot and mass spectrometry.
 In vitro binding assays
HMGB1-GST (Abnova) or GST (Sigma) were combined with recombinant protein VII-His 
at equimolar ratios and incubated at 4°C for 1 hour. Complexes were then mixed with a 
cobalt resin (ThermoScientific 89964) to bind protein VII-His and any associated protein 
and washed three times in the binding buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 300 mM NaCl, 0.1% 
IGEPAL). The beads were then boiled in sample buffer, separated on a 4–12% NuPage gel 
and visualized by coomassie staining.
 Nucleosome in vitro binding and MNase digestion assays
Gel shift and MNase digestion assays were carried out as previously described17,46,47. 
Briefly, nucleosomes were reconstituted by incubating purified recombinant histones with 
‘601’ DNA of either 195 or 147bp over a series of dialysis. Recombinant protein VII-His 
was then combined with nucleosomes at various molar ratios, incubated at room temperature 
for 15 minutes, and analyzed by native gel electrophoresis. Complexes were also digested 
with MNase (Affymetrix) by addition of 1 unit per µg of DNA for 147bp nucleosome 
experiments and 0.1 unit per µg of DNA for 195bp nucleosome experiments, incubated at 
Avgousti et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22°C for varying amounts of time followed by the addition of EGTA and guanidine 
thiocyanate to stop the reaction. The DNA fragments were then purified using a MinElute 
PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and analyzed on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer as previously 
described17.
 Release assay of HMGB1 in THP-1 cells
THP-1 cells were seeded at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well in a 24-well plate, and 
stimulated into macrophage-like cells by addition of 10 ng/mL PMA for 48 hours. Cells 
were washed in PBS and transduced with recombinant adenovirus vectors expressing only 
GFP or protein VII-GFP such that > 90% of cells were GFP positive. At 48 hours post 
transduction, cells were washed and 200 µL of serum free RPMI was added. To stimulate the 
inflammasome, LPS (Sigma-Aldrich L2880) with a final concentration of 0.5 µg/mL was 
added to wells and incubated for 2 hours, then nigericin (Sigma-Aldrich N7143) was added 
with a final concentration of 10 µM for 1 hour. Supernatants were collected and proteins 
precipitated overnight at 4°C with a final concentration of 20% trichloroacetic acid (Sigma), 
washed with acetone, dried, and resuspended in 1× sample buffer with reducing agent 
(Invitrogen). For ELISA analysis, supernatants were harvested directly and HMGB1 content 
was detected by the manufacturer’s instructions (Chondrex 6010). Cells were also harvested 
by the addition of 1× sample buffer with reducing agent (Invitrogen) and boiled. 
Supernatants and lysates were analyzed together by western blot.
 Acid extraction and Reverse Phase-HPLC for purification of protein VII and analysis of 
total histone PTMs
Histones were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis as detailed previously48. Nuclei were 
isolated and histones from infected cells were extracted by acid as previously described14. 
The pre-protein VII and protein VII variants were fractionated using an offline RP-HPLC. 
Briefly, ~100 µg proteins were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 
HPLC grade water) and loaded onto a C18 5µm column (4.6 mm internal diameter × 250 
mm, Vydac) using a Beckman Coulter (System Gold, Brea, CA) HPLC (Buffer A: 0.1% 
TFA, Buffer B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.08% TFA). The proteins were separated using a gradient 
from 30–45% buffer B in 100 minutes at a flow-rate of 0.2 mL/min. The fractions containing 
the proteins of interest were collected using an automatic fraction collector and individual 
peaks combined based on their UV signal. The fractions were subsequently dried by vacuum 
centrifugation and prepared for mass spectrometry (see below). Protein VII was purified 
from three biological replicates and analyzed as follows for MS.
 Mass spectrometry analysis of protein VII PTMs
 Sample preparation/protein VII—RP-HPLC purified samples of protein VII variants 
were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 
56 °C. After cooling to room temperature, samples were alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide 
in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were digested with 
chymotrypsin or Arg-C, at an enzyme to substrate ratio of approximately 1:20 for 8 hours at 
37°C. The samples were acidified to a final concentration of 5% formic acid to a pH ≤ 3 and 
desalted using P200 stage tip columns packed with C18 3M plug (3M Bioanalytical 
Avgousti et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Technologies). Purified peptide samples were dried by lyophilization and stored at −20°C 
until further analysis.
 Nano LC-MS/MS analysis of histone PTMs—The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was 
performed as previously described48.
 Nano LC-MS/MS analysis of protein VII peptides—The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis 
was performed in triplicate for each sample. Samples were loaded onto a 16 cm C18–AQ 
column (inner diameter 75 µm, 3 µm beads, Dr, Maisch GmbH, Germany) using an Easy 
nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). The nanoLC was 
coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a 
nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded 
in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 45 minute linear gradient from 2–30% 
buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). After the gradient, the column was washed 
with 90% buffer B. Mass spectra were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method 
with the Top15 most intense ions. Spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with mass 
range of 350–1600 m/z and 60,000 resolution (400 m/z), with a maximum injection time of 
10 msec and an AGC target of 10e6. Signals above 1000 count charges were selected for 
HCD fragmentation using normalized collision energy of 36, a maximum injection time of 
100 msec and an AGC target of 50,000. Fragments were analyzed in the orbitrap.
 Data processing of protein VII spectra—Raw mass spectrometer files were 
analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS/MS 
spectra were converted to .mgf files and searched against the UniProt-adenovirus C serotype 
5 database using Mascot (v2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK). Database searching was 
performed with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; MS/MS mass 
tolerance 0.05 Da; enzyme chymotrypsin (Promega) or Arg-C (Roche), with two missed 
cleavages allowed; fixed modification was cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable 
modifications were methionine oxidation, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation, lysine 
acetylation and methylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation. Specifically, 
phosphorylation, acetylation, and methylation were searched separately, not as co-existing 
modifications. Peptides were filtered for <1% false discovery rate, Mascot ion score >20 and 
peptide rank 1.
 Co-immunoprecipitation of protein VII-HA
A549 cells were induced to express protein VII with doxycycline for four days as described 
above. Approximately 4 × 107 cells were harvested and pelleted for each 
immunoprecipitation reaction. Cell pellets were resuspended in 500 µl of IC wash buffer 
with protease inhibitors (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 110 mM KOAc, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM 
NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 0.1% Triton X) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes with intermittent 
vortexing to disrupt cells. Samples were then incubated on ice for 1 hour with 5 µl of 
benzonase (Millipore) added to each sample to digest DNA to ~150bp, which was confirmed 
by DNA isolation and agarose gel analysis. Samples were then sonicated in a Diagenode 
Bioruptre for 30s on and 30s off for five rounds at 4°C and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 
minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were then incubated rotating for 1 hour at 4°C with 30 µl of 
Avgousti et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HA-conjugated magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) and washed three times for five minutes 
in IC buffer. Isolated proteins were eluted with 100 µl of 2mg/ml HA peptide (Thermo 
Scientific) for 20 minutes rotating at 37°C and separated on and SDS-PAGE gel. For protein 
separation by SDS–PAGE the NuPAGE 1DE System was used (NuPAGE Novex 4–12% bis–
tris 1.0 mm gels, Invitrogen, USA). Uninduced cells were used as a negative control. The 
immunopreciptation was carried out in biological triplicate and pull-down of protein VII-HA 
and HMGB1 was confirmed by western blotting standard techniques as described above.
 Quantitative PCR
Genomic DNA was isolated using the PureLink Genomic DNA kit (Thermo Scientific). 
Quantitative PCR was performed using primers specific for viral DBP (5’ 
gccattgcgcccaagaagaa and 5’ ctgtccacgattacctctggtgat), protein VII (5’ gcgggtattgtcactgtgc 
and 5’ cacccaatacacgttgccc), and cellular tubulin (5’ ccagatgccaagtgacaagac and 5’ 
gagtgagtgacaagagaagcc). Values for DBP and VII were normalized internally to tubulin and 
to the 4 hour time point to control for any variation in virus input. RNA was isolated using 
the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and reverse transcribed using the High Capacity RNA to 
cDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems). Quantitative PCR was performed using primers specific 
for HMGB1 (5’ taactaaacatgggcaaaggag and 5’ tagcagacatggtcttccac) and beta actin (5’ 
gcaccacaccttctacaatgag and 5’ ggtctcaaacatgatctgggtc). Quantitative PCR was performed 
using the standard protocol for Sybr Green (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed using the ViiA 
7 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Scientific).
 Precision cut lung slice (PCLS) immunofluorescence
PCLS were obtained and prepared as previously described27,49. De-identified human lung 
tissue from donors was obtained from the National Disease Research Interchange (NDRI), 
Philadelphia, PA. Analysis of human samples was approved by the University of 
Pennsylvania Internal Review Board. Samples were infected with 108 pfu of Ad5 per slice or 
109 GC of rAd VII-GFP for 24 hours. Samples were fixed in 4% PFA at room temperature 
for 15 minutes and washed three times in PBS. Samples were permiabilized with 0.5% 
Triton X and washed twice more in PBS. Samples were then incubated with 3% BSA and 
0.03% Triton X in PBS for 1 hr to block. Primary antibodies (DBP or HMGB1) were 
incubated in the same buffer for 1 hr and then samples were washed three times in PBS with 
3% BSA, incubated with secondary antibodies and DAPI for 1 hr, and washed three more 
times. Whole slices were mounted on slides with mounting solution and imaged by confocal 
microscopy.
 Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
Full-length HMGB1 was cloned from pcDNA3.1 Flag-hHMGB1 (Addgene 31609) into 
pEGFP-N1 containing a L221K mutation to prevent dimerization of GFP molecules50. A549 
cells were induced to express protein VII for four days with doxycycline in glass-bottom 
dishes. Cells were then transfected with the construct that constitutively expresses HMGB1 
with a monomeric GFP C-terminal tag. FRAP was carried out using standard methods on a 
Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope. Diffusion coefficients were calculated using the 
“simFRAP” algorithm (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/plugins/sim-frap/index.html), a simulation 
based approach to FRAP analysis51.
Avgousti et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Statistical analyses
Statistical details are reported in each figure legend. Statistical analyses were performed on 
at least three different biological replicates, unless otherwise stated in the figure legend. The 
sample size was chosen to provide enough statistical power to apply parametric tests (one- 
or two-tailed homoscedastic t-test). The t-test was considered as valuable statistical test since 
binary comparisons were performed and the number of replicates was limited. Furthermore, 
we applied the homoscedastic t-test assuming that the variance between the two datasets 
would remain homogeneous due to the use of the same cell lines in culture with and without 
protein VII expression. No samples were excluded as outliers (this applies to all proteomics 
analyses described in this manuscript). Proteins with p-value smaller than 0.05 were 
considered as significantly altered between the two tested conditions for two-tailed and one-
tailed t-test. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. 
The nanoLC-MS analysis was performed in triplicate for each sample to determine technical 
variation.
Avgousti et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Adenovirus protein VII distorts chromatin
a, Protein VII localizes to cellular chromatin and viral replication centers in U2OS similarly 
to SAECs in Fig 1a. b, Protein VII mRNA levels measured by quantitative PCR showing 
that after 4 days of induction in the A549 cell line, the level of protein VII transcripts is 
approximately 10% of that measured during infection at 16 hpi. Despite the low relative 
level, this amount of protein VII is sufficient to cause dramatic changes in the nucleus (error 
bars=±s.d., nbiological=3). c, Inducible cell lines of U2OS and HeLa expressing protein VII-
HA show chromatin localization and distortion, similar to A549 cells in Fig 1c. d, Inducible 
A549 cell lines expressing viral protein V, the precursor for protein VII (preVII) or cellular 
protamine PRM1 with C-terminal HA tags. Although all 3 proteins possess a large number 
Avgousti et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of charged residues, none are sufficient to distort cellular chromatin or increase nuclear size 
as observed with mature protein VII.
Extended Data Figure 2. Protein VII associates tightly with chromatin and binds DNA and 
nucleosomes in vitro
a, Western blot analysis showing protein VII in histone extracts from infected HeLa cells at 
24 hpi. b, Chromatin fractionation of lysates from A549 cells that were uninfected (mock) or 
infected for 24 hrs with Ad5. Viral and cellular proteins were detected by western blotting 
with various antibodies as indicated. c, Agarose gel analysis of DNA extracted from nuclear 
Avgousti et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fractionation experiments indicating the size of DNA is between 100 – 200 bp and elutes 
predominantly in the higher salt fractions. d, Chromatin fractionation of cells induced to 
express protein VII indicating protein VII present in the highest salt fraction from the first 
day of induction. e–f, Recombinant protein VII-His binds DNA. Incubating increasing molar 
amounts of protein VII with 195bp DNA results in shifts by native gel electrophoresis 
indicating protein VII-DNA complex formation. Staining with either ethidium bromide (e) 
or coomassie (f) are shown to verify the presence of DNA and protein, respectively. g, 
Ethidium bromide staining shows DNA content of nucleosome shifts from gel in Fig 1f.
Avgousti et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Bioanalyzer examination of MNase digested nucleosomes and protein 
VII-nucleosome complexes
a, 195bp Nucleosomes or protein VII-nucleosome complexes were incubated with MNase 
for the indicated times, the reaction was stopped, DNA extracted and analyzed. As in Fig 1g, 
nucleosomes are shown in black and protein VII-nucleosome complexes in orange. The 
presence of protein VII pauses digestion at 165bp, suggesting that protein VII is blocking 
access to the DNA. b, 147bp nucleosomes or protein VII-nucleosome complexes were 
incubated with MNase for the indicated times, the reaction was stopped, DNA extracted and 
Avgousti et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analyzed. Graphs show nucleosomes in grey and protein VII-nucleosome complexes in 
orange. The presence of protein VII completely blocks digestion even after nucleosomes 
alone have been digested well beyond the core particle. In contrast to what would be 
expected for linker histones, protein VII protects the core nucleosome particle from 
digestion. These data indicate that protein VII may be masking the substrate for MNase 
through complex formation. This represents a unique mechanism of nucleosome binding and 
suggests a model for blocking DNA access in cellular chromatin during infection.
Avgousti et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Purification of protein VII from infected cells
a, Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions from RP-HPLC in Fig 2a. The bands 
in fraction 38–41 min correspond to histone H1. Protein VII and V, as indicated, were 
verified by mass spectrometry analysis (not shown). The slight upward shift of the protein 
VII bands in the later peak corresponds to the higher abundance of protein preVII, as seen 
by HPLC in Fig 2a. b, Western blot analysis of protein VII in HPLC fractions from (a). c, 
Time-course of infection followed by histone extraction and HPLC analysis. Mass 
spectrometry analysis verified peaks in each sample as indicated.
Avgousti et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Representative mass spectra
Annotated MS/MS spectra of identified peptides of protein VII containing PTMs (a–c, 
acetylated peptides; d–f, phosphorylated peptides). The images represent the observed 
fragment ions collected using MS/MS collision induced dissociation (CID). Colored lines 
represent matches between observed and expected fragment ions of the given peptides. 
Specifically, green lines represent not fragmented precursor mass, blue lines represent 
matches with y-type fragments, red lines with b-type fragments, and yellow boxed masses 
Avgousti et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 represent fragments containing PTM neutral losses (e.g. ions that lost the phosphorylation 
during fragmentation).
Extended Data Figure 6. Acetylated VII spectra from virus particles and analysis of total histone 
PTM changes upon protein VII expression
a, LC-MS analysis of unmodified and modified chymotryptic peptide 
AKKRSDQHPVRVRGHY. On the left, nanoLC–MS extracted ion chromatograms of 
protein VII peptides identified in the histone extracts of adenovirus infected cells (Inf) or 
viral particles (VP). The top left represents the modified form, while the bottom left the 
Avgousti et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 unmodified form. Non-modified forms were detected in both conditions for VII and VP, 
while the acetylated form was unique for the infected sample only (Inf). On the right, full 
MS spectrum of the modified (top) and unmodified (bottom) peptide. Circled mass 
represents the monoisotopic signal of the peptide. b, Summary of post-translational 
modifications detected on protein VII. Peptides shown were identified during infection at 
various time points with the mature protein VII in the top row and the precursor, preVII, in 
the bottom row. The numbers in brackets for preVII indicate the location of the same moiety 
in mature protein VII. Acetylation sites were detected in approximately 3% of peptides for 
mature protein VII and 2% of peptides in preVII. Phosphorylation was detected in 
approximately 1% of peptides for mature protein VII and preVII. c–d, Quantification of 
histone H3 (c) and H4 (d) PTMs in protein VII-HA induced (+dox) and uninduced (−dox) 
A549 cells from the analysis of crude histone mixtures (nbiological=3). Positions of PTMs are 
listed along the x-axis. Modification type is indicated by color as shown. y-axis represents 
the cumulative extent of PTMs as relative to the total histone H3 or H4, respectively. e, 
Breakdown of the histone marks (H3K14ac, H3K27me1, H3K36me3, H4K20me1, 
H4K20me2, and H4K20me3) found significantly different (nbiological=3) in terms of relative 
abundance between the protein VII-HA induced and uninduced states (<5% homoscedastic 
two-tailed t-test). Error bars represent ± standard deviation.
Avgousti et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Bioinformatic analysis of proteins enriched in the high salt fraction 
upon protein VII expression
a, Venn diagram showing overlap between three biological replicates of high salt fraction 
proteins significantly enriched as compared to uninduced cells. b, Proteins found 
significantly enriched in the protein VII-HA induced state as compared to uninduced (<5% 
homoscedastic t-test) in all three biological replicates (VII-HA induced: proteins identified 
only in protein VII-HA induced condition). c–d, Classification of proteins significantly 
enriched in minimum two out of three biological replicates (protein VII-HA induced vs 
Avgousti et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 uninduced) according to process network enrichment and gene ontology (GO) biological 
process (GeneGo's MetaCore pathways analysis package; false discovery rate <5%); each 
GO term was ranked using p-value enrichment.
Extended Data Figure 8. Protein VII retains HMGB1 and HMGB2 in chromatin
a, Western blot of adenovirus infected or doxycycline treated A549 cells showing the 
relative levels of protein VII expression. HMGB1 levels do not change upon infection or 
protein VII expression. Tubulin is shown as a loading control. b, Quantitative PCR analysis 
Avgousti et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of mRNA transcripts of HMGB1 in various cell types as indicated (for A549, nbiological=3, 
for THP-1, nbiological=2, error bar=±s.d.). The levels of HMGB1 do not significantly change. 
c, Immunofluorescence analysis of a time-course of protein VII-HA (red) induction shown 
with HMGB1 (green) and DAPI (grey, blue in merge) in A549 cells. Expression of protein 
VII-HA results in a change to the HMGB1 distribution upon expression. d, HMGB1 (green) 
localization changes between 12 and 24 hpi of wild-type adenovirus in A549 cells, and 
adopts a pattern similar to protein VII as in Fig 1a. DBP (red) is shown as a marker of 
infection, DNA is stained with DAPI (blue in merge). e, Same as (d) showing HMGB2 
adopts the same pattern as HMGB1 during Ad5 infection at 24 hpi. f, Multiple cells showing 
the same pattern of HMGB1 re-localization upon expressing VII-GFP as in Fig 3g. g, 
HMGB1 retention in the high salt fraction is conserved across Ad serotypes. Western blot 
analysis of HMGB1 from salt fractionated A549 cells infected with Ad5, Ad9 or Ad12 as 
shown.
Avgousti et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Protein VII is necessary and sufficient for chromatin retention of 
HMGB1 in human and mouse cells
a–b, Replication of Ad5-flox-VII virus on 293 or 293-Cre cells. Quantitative PCR analysis 
of viral genomic DNA over a time-course of infection (a) shows the DBP gene is increasing 
exponentially in 293 and 293-Cre cells when infected with Ad5-flox-VII virus. In contrast, 
PCR for the protein VII gene (b) demonstrates deletion in 293-Cre cells (nbiological=2, error 
bar=±s.d.). c, Salt fractionation of 293-Cre cells infected with wild-type Ad5 indicating that 
the Cre recombinase does not interfere with the ability of protein VII to retain HMGB1 in 
Avgousti et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the high salt chromatin fraction. Protein VII is also necessary for the chromatin retention of 
HMGB2. d, THP-1 cells transduced to express protein VII-GFP results in chromatin 
distortion and HMGB1 retention in chromatin. Immunofluorescence of transduced PMA-
treated THP-1 cells showing protein VII-GFP (green), HMGB1 (red) and DNA (grey, blue 
in merge). e, Transduction to express protein VII-GFP is sufficient to relocalize mouse 
HMGB1 in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells. f, Salt fractionation of mouse 
embryonic fibroblast cells transduced to express protein VII-GFP. Human Ad5 protein VII is 
sufficient to retain mouse HMGB1 in the high salt fraction in MEF cells. The control vector 
expressing GFP alone does not have this effect.
Avgousti et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. Transduction of mouse lungs demonstrating expression of GFP or 
protein VII-GFP
a, Sections of mouse lungs transduced to express protein VII-GFP or GFP co-stained for 
HMGB1. GFP signal shows multiple cell types transduced in both cases. Protein VII-GFP 
has a more distinct nuclear signal than GFP, which also appears cytoplasmic. Two sections 
for each condition are shown to indicate transduction efficiency. b, Same as (a) but co-
stained for prosurfactant-C to mark type II pneumocytes. Some cells are positive for both, 
confirming multiple cell types transduced. c, Zoomed images of individual epithelial cells 
Avgousti et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from mouse lungs showing the characteristic protein VII-GFP pattern colocalizing with 
DAPI in the nucleus. GFP only is mostly cytoplasmic. d, Schematic summarizing function 
of protein VII during infection. Newly synthesized protein VII late during infection can be 
post-translationally modified and binds to HMGB1, sequestering it on the cellular chromatin 
and preventing its release. Unmodified protein VII is packaged in viral progeny.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
 Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Weitzman Lab for insightful discussions and input, especially Robert Dilley and Bryan 
Simpson for generating reagents. We also thank R. Panetierri and C. Koziol-White for graciously providing 
precision cut lung slices. We are grateful to D. Curiel for generously sharing recombinant protein VII-GFP vectors 
and L. Gerace for anti-VII antibodies. We thank the Penn Vector Core for assistance in purifying recombinant 
vectors, the Penn CDB Microscopy Core for imaging and FRAP assistance, and the CHOP Pathology core for 
immunostaining of mouse lungs. We thank members of the Black, Garcia and Worthen labs for valuable technical 
help. We thank Craig Bassing, Igor Brodsky, Jorge Henao-Mejia, Rahul Kohli, Carolina Lopez, Adam Resnick, 
Sunny Shin, Kathy Spindler and Jonathan Weitzman for advice and critical reading of the manuscript. D.C.A. was 
supported in part by T32 CA115299 and F32 GM112414. N.J.P. was supported in part by T32 NS007180. N.S. was 
supported in part by funding from the American Cancer Society. Research was supported by grants from the 
National Institutes of Health (CA097093 to M.D.W., AI102577 and CA122677 to P.H., AI118891 and GM110174 
to B.A.G., and GM082989 to B.E.B.), the Institute for Immunology of the University of Pennsylvania, and funds 
from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (M.D.W.).
References
1. Elde NC, Malik HS. The evolutionary conundrum of pathogen mimicry. Nature Reviews 
Microbiology. 2009; 7:787–797. [PubMed: 19806153] 
2. Smale ST, Tarakhovsky A, Natoli G. Chromatin contributions to the regulation of innate immunity. 
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2014; 32:489–511. [PubMed: 24555473] 
3. Lischwe MA, Sung MT. A histone-like protein from adenovirus chromatin. Nature. 1977; 267:552–
554. [PubMed: 876376] 
4. Chatterjee PK, Vayda ME, Flint SJ. Adenoviral protein VII packages intracellular viral DNA 
throughout the early phase of infection. EMBO J. 1986; 5:1633–1644. [PubMed: 3743550] 
5. Vayda ME, Rogers AE, Flint SJ. The structure of nucleoprotein cores released from adenovirions. 
Nucleic Acids Research. 1983; 11:441–460. [PubMed: 6828374] 
6. Kang R, et al. HMGB1 in health and disease. Mol. Aspects Med. 2014
7. Lotze MT, Tracey KJ. High-mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1): nuclear weapon in the immune 
arsenal. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2005; 5:331–342. [PubMed: 15803152] 
8. Paschos K, Allday MJ. Epigenetic reprogramming of host genes in viral and microbial pathogenesis. 
Trends in Microbiology. 2010; 18:439–447. [PubMed: 20724161] 
9. Marazzi I, et al. Suppression of the antiviral response by an influenza histone mimic. Nature. 2012; 
483:428–433. [PubMed: 22419161] 
10. Ferrari R, Berk AJ, Kurdistani SK. Viral manipulation of the host epigenome for oncogenic 
transformation. Nat Rev Genet. 2009; 10:290–294. [PubMed: 19290008] 
11. Knipe DM, et al. Snapshots: chromatin control of viral infection. Virology. 2013; 435:141–156. 
[PubMed: 23217624] 
12. Ferrari R, et al. Adenovirus small E1A employs the lysine acetylases p300/CBP and tumor 
suppressor Rb to repress select host genes and promote productive virus infection. Cell Host and 
Microbe. 2014; 16:663–676. [PubMed: 25525796] 
13. Wykes SM, Krawetz SA. The structural organization of sperm chromatin. J. Biol. Chem. 2003; 
278:29471–29477. [PubMed: 12775710] 
Avgousti et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14. Lin S, Garcia BA. Examining histone posttranslational modification patterns by high-resolution 
mass spectrometry. Meth. Enzymol. 2012; 512:3–28. [PubMed: 22910200] 
15. Shechter D, Dormann HL, Allis CD, Hake SB. Extraction, purification and analysis of histones. 
Nature Protocols. 2007; 2:1445–1457. [PubMed: 17545981] 
16. Teves SS, Henikoff S. Salt fractionation of nucleosomes for genome-wide profiling. Methods Mol. 
Biol. 2012; 833:421–432. [PubMed: 22183608] 
17. Falk SJ, et al. CENP-C reshapes and stabilizes CENP-A nucleosomes at the centromere. Science. 
2015; 348:699–703. [PubMed: 25954010] 
18. White AE, Hieb AR, Luger K. A quantitative investigation of linker histone interactions with 
nucleosomes and chromatin. Sci. Rep. 2016; 6:19122. [PubMed: 26750377] 
19. Kouzarides T. Chromatin modifications and their function. Cell. 2007; 128:693–705. [PubMed: 
17320507] 
20. Fedor MJ, Daniell E. Acetylation of histone-like proteins of adenovirus type 5. Journal of Virology. 
1980; 35:637–643. [PubMed: 7420537] 
21. Robinson CM, et al. Molecular evolution of human adenoviruses. Sci. Rep. 2013; 3:1812. 
[PubMed: 23657240] 
22. Gyurcsik B, Haruki H, Takahashi T, Mihara H, Nagata K. Binding modes of the precursor of 
adenovirus major core protein VII to DNA and template activating factor I: implication for the 
mechanism of remodeling of the adenovirus chromatin. Biochemistry. 2006; 45:303–313. 
[PubMed: 16388607] 
23. Haruki H, Okuwaki M, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Nagata K. Involvement of template-activating factor 
I/SET in transcription of adenovirus early genes as a positive-acting factor. Journal of Virology. 
2006; 80:794–801. [PubMed: 16378981] 
24. Scaffidi P, Misteli T, Bianchi ME. Release of chromatin protein HMGB1 by necrotic cells triggers 
inflammation. Nature. 2002; 418:191–195. [PubMed: 12110890] 
25. Sapojnikova N, et al. Biochemical observation of the rapid mobility of nuclear HMGB1. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta. 2005; 1729:57–63. [PubMed: 15823506] 
26. Lu B, et al. Novel role of PKR in inflammasome activation and HMGB1 release. Nature. 2012; 
488:670–674. [PubMed: 22801494] 
27. Koziol-White CJ, Damera G, Panettieri RA. Targeting airway smooth muscle in airways diseases: 
an old concept with new twists. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2011; 5:767–777. [PubMed: 22082163] 
28. Ueno H, et al. Contributions of high mobility group box protein in experimental and clinical acute 
lung injury. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2004; 170:1310–1316. [PubMed: 15374839] 
29. Johnson JS, et al. Adenovirus protein VII condenses DNA, represses transcription, and associates 
with transcriptional activator E1A. Journal of Virology. 2004; 78:6459–6468. [PubMed: 
15163739] 
30. Karen KA, Hearing P. Adenovirus core protein VII protects the viral genome from a DNA damage 
response at early times after infection. Journal of Virology. 2011; 85:4135–4142. [PubMed: 
21345950] 
Methods References
31. Khandelia P, Yap K, Makeyev EV. Streamlined platform for short hairpin RNA interference and 
transgenesis in cultured mammalian cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011; 108:12799–12804. 
[PubMed: 21768390] 
32. Kozarsky KF, Jooss K, Donahee M, Strauss JF, Wilson JM. Effective treatment of familial 
hypercholesterolaemia in the mouse model using adenovirus-mediated transfer of the VLDL 
receptor gene. Nat. Genet. 1996; 13:54–62. [PubMed: 8673104] 
33. Orazio NI, Naeger CM, Karlseder J, Weitzman MD. The adenovirus E1b55K/E4orf6 complex 
induces degradation of the Bloom helicase during infection. Journal of Virology. 2011; 85:1887–
1892. [PubMed: 21123383] 
34. Le LP, et al. Core labeling of adenovirus with EGFP. Virology. 2006; 351:291–302. [PubMed: 
16678874] 
Avgousti et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Reich NC, Sarnow P, Duprey E, Levine AJ. Monoclonal antibodies which recognize native and 
denatured forms of the adenovirus DNA-binding protein. Virology. 1983; 128:480–484. [PubMed: 
6310869] 
36. Lilley CE, Chaurushiya MS, Boutell C, Everett RD, Weitzman MD. The intrinsic antiviral defense 
to incoming HSV-1 genomes includes specific DNA repair proteins and is counteracted by the 
viral protein ICP0. PLoS Pathog. 2011; 7:e1002084. [PubMed: 21698222] 
37. Das S, MacDonald K, Chang H-YS, Mitzner W. A simple method of mouse lung intubation. J Vis 
Exp. 2013:e50318. [PubMed: 23542122] 
38. Jeyaseelan S, Chu HW, Young SK, Worthen GS. Transcriptional profiling of lipopolysaccharide-
induced acute lung injury. Infect. Immun. 2004; 72:7247–7256. [PubMed: 15557650] 
39. Nick JA, et al. Role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in a murine model of pulmonary 
inflammation. J. Immunol. 2000; 164:2151–2159. [PubMed: 10657669] 
40. Zaret K. Micrococcal nuclease analysis of chromatin structure. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2005; 
Chapter 21(Unit 21.1)
41. Wessel D, Flügge UI. A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the 
presence of detergents and lipids. Anal. Biochem. 1984; 138:141–143. [PubMed: 6731838] 
42. Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range 
mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008; 26:1367–1372. 
[PubMed: 19029910] 
43. Schwanhäusser B, et al. Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature. 
2011; 473:337–342. [PubMed: 21593866] 
44. Tanaka Y, et al. Expression and purification of recombinant human histones. Methods. 2004; 33:3–
11. [PubMed: 15039081] 
45. Luger K, Rechsteiner TJ, Flaus AJ, Waye MM, Richmond TJ. Characterization of nucleosome core 
particles containing histone proteins made in bacteria. Journal of Molecular Biology. 1997; 
272:301–311. [PubMed: 9325091] 
46. Hasson D, et al. The octamer is the major form of CENP-A nucleosomes at human centromeres. 
Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013; 20:687–695. [PubMed: 23644596] 
47. Sekulic N, Bassett EA, Rogers DJ, Black BE. The structure of (CENP-A-H4)(2) reveals physical 
features that mark centromeres. Nature. 2010; 467:347–351. [PubMed: 20739937] 
48. Kulej K, Avgousti DC, Weitzman MD, Garcia BA. Characterization of histone post-translational 
modifications during virus infection using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Methods. 2015; 
90:8–20. [PubMed: 26093074] 
49. Cooper PR, Panettieri RA. Steroids completely reverse albuterol-induced beta(2)-adrenergic 
receptor tolerance in human small airways. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2008; 122:734–740. 
[PubMed: 18774166] 
50. Zacharias DA, Violin JD, Newton AC, Tsien RY. Partitioning of lipid-modified monomeric GFPs 
into membrane microdomains of live cells. Science. 2002; 296:913–916. [PubMed: 11988576] 
51. Blumenthal D, Goldstien L, Edidin M, Gheber LA. Universal Approach to FRAP Analysis of 
Arbitrary Bleaching Patterns. Sci. Rep. 2015; 5:11655. [PubMed: 26108191] 
Avgousti et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Protein VII is sufficient to alter chromatin and directly binds nucleosomes
a–b Ad5-infected SAECs stained for protein VII (red) with DBP (a), or histone H1 (b), and 
DAPI (grey, blue in merge). c, Protein VII-HA induced cells over four days showing HA 
(green) and DAPI (grey, blue in merge). d, SDS-PAGE of histone extract from Ad5-infected 
cells showing protein V and protein VII. e, Western blot of chromatin fractionation from 
nuclei of Ad5-infected cells, induced for protein VII-HA, or untreated. f, Protein VII binds 
to nucleosomes. Protein bands from native gel stained with coomassie (top) were subjected 
to 2D analysis by SDS-PAGE (bottom). g, Protein VII protects nucleosome complexes from 
Avgousti et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MNase digestion. Bioanalyzer curves represent nucleosomes alone (black) or protein VII-
nucleosome complexes (orange).
Avgousti et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Post-translational modifications on protein VII contribute to chromatin localization
a, RP-HPLC analysis of histone extracts. Viral proteins V, VII and preVII are indicated at 24 
hpi. b, Primary sequence of protein VII with modified residues identified in infected cells. 
Underlined residues represent moieties that may also be modified in identified peptides (see 
ED). c, Immunofluoresence showing DAPI (grey, blue in merge) and protein VII (red) as 
wild-type or with alanine substitutions at PTM sites (ΔPTM), K3A or K3Q.
Avgousti et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Protein VII directly binds HMGB1 and is necessary for retention of the alarmin in 
cellular chromatin
a, Volcano plot for proteomics analysis of one representative biological replicate of high salt 
fraction. The y-axis represents −log2 statistical p-value and x-axis represents log2 protein 
fold-change between uninduced or protein VII expressing cells (homoscedastic two-tailed t-
test, p<0.05 red dots; ntechnical=3). b, Nuclear fractionation shows HMGB1 and HMGB2 
normally elute from nuclei at low salt concentrations but are retained in high salt fractions 
by protein VII-HA. c, Protein VII interacts with HMGB1 in pull-down of recombinant 
Avgousti et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HMGB1-GST (left, coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE) and immunoprecipitation of HMGB1 
(right, western blots). d–e, Protein VII expression alters localization of HMGB1 (d) and 
HMGB2 (e). Immunofluorescence shows protein VII-HA (green) co-localized with HMGB1 
(d) and HMGB2 (e) in cellular chromatin, DAPI (grey, blue in merge). f, Same as (d) at 18 
hpi with Ad5 DBP (green). g, Protein VII-GFP relocalizes HMGB1 (red) to chromatin with 
DAPI (grey, blue in merge). h, FRAP experiment with HMGB1-mGFP. Recovery of FRAP 
signal in time-course images (left) with quantification and diffusion coefficients (right). i, 
Schematic showing loxP strategy for deleting protein VII. j, Western blots comparing 293 
and 293Cre cells infected with Ad5-flox-VII virus. k, Salt fractionation in nuclei from (j).
Avgousti et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Protein VII prevents HMGB1 release
a, Precision cut lung slices (PCLS) infected with Ad5 or transduced to express protein VII-
GFP. Endogenous HMGB1 (red) is redistributed in cells with virus (DBP in top) and VII-
GFP (bottom). b, Protein VII-GFP is sufficient to inhibit HMGB1 and HMGB2 release in 
THP-1 cells. Numbers indicate relative intensities of bands quantified with ImageJ. c, 
ELISA-based quantification of HMGB1 in supernatants from (b), error bars=±s.d., 
ntechnical=4, homoscedastic one-tailed t-test. d, Schematic for investigating protein VII in a 
mouse lung injury model. e, Expression of protein VII-GFP decreases HMGB1 in mouse 
Avgousti et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BAL fluid as quantified by ELISA, error bars=±s.d., biological replicates: nLPS=4, 
nGFP+LPS=6, nVII-GFP+LPS=7, homoscedastic one-tailed (p=0.02) or two-tailed (p=0.003) t-
test. f, Neutrophils in BAL fluid are significantly fewer in mice expressing protein VII-GFP, 
error bars=±s.d., biological replicates: nGFP+LPS=6, nVII-GFP+LPS=4, nLPS=5, nGFP=3, 
nVII-GFP=3 homoscedastic two-tailed t-test.
Avgousti et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
