 N E U R O R EH A B I L I T A T I O N
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
A soft robotic exosuit improves walking in patients
after stroke
Louis N. Awad,1,2,3* Jaehyun Bae,1,3* Kathleen O’Donnell,1,3 Stefano M. M. De Rossi,1,3
Kathryn Hendron,2 Lizeth H. Sloot,1 Pawel Kudzia,1 Stephen Allen,1 Kenneth G. Holt,2
Terry D. Ellis,2† Conor J. Walsh1,3†
Stroke-induced hemiparetic gait is characteristically slow and metabolically expensive. Passive assistive devices
such as ankle-foot orthoses are often prescribed to increase function and independence after stroke; however,
walking remains highly impaired despite—and perhaps because of—their use. We sought to determine whether a
soft wearable robot (exosuit) designed to supplement the paretic limb’s residual ability to generate both forward
propulsion and ground clearance could facilitate more normal walking after stroke. Exosuits transmit mechanical
power generated by actuators to a wearer through the interaction of garment-like, functional textile anchors and
cable-based transmissions. We evaluated the immediate effects of an exosuit actively assisting the paretic limb of
individuals in the chronic phase of stroke recovery during treadmill and overground walking. Using controlled,
treadmill-based biomechanical investigation, we demonstrate that exosuits can function in synchrony with a wearer’s
paretic limb to facilitate an immediate 5.33 ± 0.91° increase in the paretic ankle’s swing phase dorsiflexion and
11 ± 3% increase in the paretic limb’s generation of forward propulsion (P < 0.05). These improvements in paretic
limb function contributed to a 20 ± 4% reduction in forward propulsion interlimb asymmetry and a 10 ± 3% reduc-
tion in the energy cost of walking, which is equivalent to a 32 ± 9% reduction in the metabolic burden associated
with poststroke walking. Relatively low assistance (~12% of biological torques) delivered with a lightweight and
nonrestrictive exosuit was sufficient to facilitate more normal walking in ambulatory individuals after stroke. Future
work will focus on understanding how exosuit-induced improvements in walking performance may be leveraged to
improve mobility after stroke.
INTRODUCTION
Bipedal locomotion is a defining trait of the human lineage, with a key
evolutionary advantage being a low energetic cost of transport (1).
However, the economy of bipedal gait may be lost because of neuro-
logical injury with disabling consequences. Hemiparetic walking (2–7)
is characterized by a slow and highly inefficient gait that is a major
contributor to disability after stroke (8, 9), which is a leading cause of dis-
ability among Americans (10). Despite rehabilitation, the vast majority
of stroke survivors retain neuromotor deficits that prevent walking at
speeds suitable for normal, economical, and safe community ambu-
lation (11). Impaired motor coordination (12), muscle weakness and
spasticity (13), and reduced ankle dorsiflexion (DF; drop foot) and
knee flexion during walking are examples of typical deficits after
stroke that limit walking speed and contribute to gait compensations
such as hip circumduction and hiking (14–18), increase the risk of falls,
and reduce fitness reserve and endurance (3, 4, 9, 12, 19–21). Even
those able to achieve near-normal walking speeds present with gait
deficits (22, 23) that hinder community reintegration and limit par-
ticipation to well below what is observed in even the most sedentary
older adults (24, 25), ultimately contributing to reduced health and
quality of life (10, 26, 27).
Walking independence is an important short-term goal for survi-
vors of a stroke; however, independence can be achieved via compen-
satory mechanisms. The persistence of neuromotor deficits after
rehabilitation often necessitates the prescription of passive assistive de-
vices such as canes, walkers, and orthoses to enable walking at home
and in the community (28–30). Unfortunately, commonly prescribed
devices compensate for poststroke neuromotor impairments in a
manner that prevents normal gait function. For example, ankle-foot
orthoses (AFOs) inhibit normal push-off during walking (31) and re-
duce gait adaptability (32). The stigma associated with the use of these
devices is also important to consider, especially for the growing pop-
ulation of young adult survivors of stroke (33, 34). The major personal
and societal costs of stroke-induced walking difficulty and the limita-
tions of the existing intervention paradigm motivate the development
of rehabilitation interventions and technologies that enable the rapid
attainment of more normal walking behavior.
Recent years have seen the development of powered exoskeletal de-
vices designed to enable walking in individuals who are unable to walk
(35, 36). Central to this remarkable engineering achievement is a rigid
structure that can support its own weight and provide high amounts
of assistance; however, these powerful machines may not always be
necessary to restore more normal gait function in individuals who re-
tain the ability to walk after neurological injury, such as the majority
of those after stroke. To address this opportunity, our team developed
a lightweight, soft wearable robot (exosuit) that interfaces to the paretic
limb of persons after stroke via garment-like, functional textile anchors.
Exosuits produce gait-restorative joint torques by transmitting mechan-
ical power from waist-mounted body-worn (37) or off-board (38, 39)
actuators to the wearer through the interaction of the textile anchors
and a cable-based transmission.
Several factors, such as the compliance of the exosuit-human sys-
tem (40), prevent exosuits from providing the assistance necessary to
1Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, 3 Black-
fan Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 2Department of Physical Therapy and Athletic
Training, Boston University, 635 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
3Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, 60 Oxford Street, Suite 403, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: tellis@bu.edu (T.D.E.) and walsh@seas.harvard.edu (C.J.W.)
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
1 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 enable nonambulatory individuals to walk again (41); however, for
ambulatory individuals, the lightweight and nonrestrictive nature of this
technology has the potential to facilitate a more natural interaction with
the wearer and minimize disruption of the natural dynamics of walking
(42). Our first efforts developing exosuits led to the creation of systems
that could comfortably deliver assistive forces to healthy users during
walking (39, 40, 43–47). Recently, we demonstrated that assistive forces
delivered through the exosuit interface produce marked reductions in
the energy cost of healthy walking (37, 48). Thus, although exosuits can
only augment, not replace, a wearer’s existing gait functions, we posit
that they have the potential to work synergistically with the residual
abilities of individuals with impaired gait to improve walking function.
The primary objective of this foundational study was to evaluate
the potential of using the exosuit technology to restore healthy walk-
ing behavior in individuals after stroke. Toward this end, we evaluated
the effects on hemiparetic gait of actively assisting the paretic limb
during treadmill walking using a tethered, unilateral (worn on only
one side of the body) exosuit designed to supplement the wearer’s gen-
eration of paretic ankle plantarflexion (PF) during stance phase and
DF during swing phase. We posited that this targeted assistance of the
paretic ankle’s gait functions would facilitate more symmetrical propulsive
force generation by the paretic and nonparetic limbs and reduce the en-
ergetic burden associated with poststroke walking, which previous
work has shown can be more than 60% more costly (49). Previous work
on wearable assistive robots for persons after stroke has suggested that
the timing of PF force delivery during walking could be an important
contributor to positive outcomes in this heterogeneous population (50).
Hence, we also evaluated different onset timings of PF force delivery
for each individual, hypothesizing that this timing would need to be
individualized to optimize outcomes.
Designed to be unobtrusive to the wearer when not powered, the
exosuit’s mass of ~0.9 kg is distributed along the length of the paretic
limb similar to a pair of pants. Nonetheless, to understand the net ef-
fect of walking with an exosuit powered and assisting the paretic limb,
Fig. 1. Overview of a soft wearable robot (exosuit) designed to augment
paretic limb function during hemipareticwalking. Exosuits(A)usegarment-
like functional textile anchors worn around the waist and calf (B) and Bowden
cable-based mechanical power transmissions to generate assistive joint torques
as a function of the paretic gait cycle (C). Integrated sensors (load cells and
gyroscopes) are used to detect gait events and in a cable position–based force
controller that modulates force delivery. The contractile elements of the exosuit
are the Bowden cables located posterior and anterior to the ankle joint. Exosuit-
generated PF and DF forces are designed to restore the paretic limb’s contri-
bution to forward propulsion (GRF) and ground clearance (ankle DF angle
during swing phase)—subtasks of walking that are impaired after stroke.
Poststroke deficits in these variables are demonstrated through a compari-
son of paretic (black) and nonparetic (gray) limbs. Means across participants
are presented (n = 7).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
2 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 it is necessary to evaluate whether there are effects because of simply
wearing the exosuit passively (worn but unpowered). A secondary ob-
jective was thus to evaluate the effects of walking with the passive exo-
suit relative to walking with the exosuit not worn. Moreover, because
one of the compelling aspects of soft wearable robots, such as exosuits,
is their potential to provide gait assistance and, potentially, rehabilita-
tion benefit during community-based walking activities, in addition to
treadmill-based biomechanical investigation into the effects of a teth-
ered exosuit, our final objective was to evaluate the effects of exosuit
assistance delivered from a first-generation, body-worn (untethered)
exosuit during overground walking. Ultimately, by investigating how
individuals with poststroke hemiparesis respond to exosuit-generated
active assistance of ankle PF and DF during treadmill and overground
walking, this study serves to define the technology’s potential for improv-
ing mobility and enabling more effective neurorehabilitation after stroke.
RESULTS
In brief, individuals in the chronic phase of stroke recovery partici-
pated in evaluating the feasibility of using a unilateral, ankle-assisting
exosuit to restore more normal gait mechanics and energetics after
stroke (see Fig. 1, A and B). Walking dysfunction after stroke may re-
sult from a variety of deficits, ranging from reduced balance (51, 52)
to atypical biomechanics. We expected exosuits to have an immediate
effect on key biomechanical subtasks that are impaired after stroke,
specifically ground clearance by assisting ankle DF during swing phase
and propulsive force generation by assisting ankle push-off during
stance phase (Fig. 1C). We focused on the immediate improvements
in poststroke walking observed during exosuit assistance, not on long-
term therapeutic changes that may arise from sustained use.
For our primary investigation of changes in poststroke mechanics
and energetics during treadmill walking, two testing conditions were
evaluated: walking with the exosuit tethered to an off-board actuation
unit that delivered assistive forces to the wearer (powered) versus walk-
ing with the tethered exosuit not transmitting any forces (unpowered).
This testing was conducted on an instrumented treadmill with the speed
set to each participant’s usual overground walking speed (Fig. 2). Two
primary outcomes were considered: interlimb propulsion symmetry,
computed from the mass-normalized peaks [% body weight (% bw)]
of the anterior ground reaction force (GRF) recorded during each limb’s
stance phase (53), and the energy cost of walking, defined as mass-
normalized oxygen consumption per meter ambulated (ml O2/kg/m).
Participants’ propulsion impulse [% body weight seconds (% bw.s)]
was also measured as a secondary propulsion outcome.
Participant baseline characteristics
Participants, on average, were not able to produce sufficient ankle DF
to reach a neutral paretic ankle position during swing phase when walk-
ing with the exosuit unpowered, with the average peak ankle DF angle
during swing phase measured at −1.85 ± 1.98° (1.85° of PF) for the nine
participants recruited for this study. Forward propulsion data were
not measurable for two participants who walked with a gait pattern
that prevented independent measurement of GRFs for each limb by
the independent treadmill force plates. The remaining seven partici-
pants presented with, on average, 46% less peak paretic propulsion
(PP) (11.39 ± 2.31% bw) compared to peak non-PP (20.08 ± 2.03%
bw), 52% less PP impulse (1.98 ± 0.38% bw.s) compared to non-PP
impulse (4.23 ± 0.21% bw.s), and an energy cost of walking (0.22 ±
0.03 ml O2/kg/m) 46% higher than what has been reported to be
normal (0.151 ml O2/kg/m) (54). See the “Participants and inclusion/
exclusion criteria” section and Table 1 for
greater detail.
Effective targeting of paretic limb
ground clearance and forward
propulsion deficits
On average, participants walked with
5.33 ± 0.91° more peak ankle DF angle
during swing phase [P < 0.001, effect size
(ES) = 1.96] with the tethered exosuit
powered (3.49 ± 1.52°) versus unpowered
(−1.85 ± 1.98°) (Fig. 3A). This increase
was six times larger than the 0.90° mini-
mal detectable change (MDC) score re-
ported for this key metric of swing phase
gait function (55). For all subsequent
analyses, which are focused on the exo-
suit’s effects on propulsion and walking
economy, only data from when the on-
set timing of PF force delivery was tuned
for each participant to their more effective
timing were used (see the “PF assistance
timing” section). Participants’ peak PP
increased by 11 ± 3% (P = 0.009, ES =
1.44) when walking with the exosuit pow-
ered (12.66 ± 2.35% bw) versus unpow-
ered (11.39 ± 2.31% bw)—a change 1.6
times larger than the 0.80% bw MDC re-
ported for this variable (55). Concurrently,
Fig. 2. Illustration of experimental setup. Ground reaction force and kinematic data were collected concurrently
with metabolic data as participants walked on an instrumented treadmill with the exosuit worn either powered
(delivering forces generated by an off-board actuation unit) or unpowered. Participants were harnessed, but no
body weight was supported. Participants were allowed to hold a side-mounted handrail if necessary for safety.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
3 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 participants’ energy cost of walking was reduced by 10 ± 3% (P =
0.009, ES = 1.42) when walking with the exosuit powered (0.1979 ±
0.0218 ml O2/kg/m) versus unpowered (0.2204 ± 0.0275 ml O2/kg/m).
These improvements ultimately contributed to a 20 ± 4% reduction in
interlimb peak propulsion asymmetry (P = 0.002, ES = 1.93; Fig. 3B),
a similar 19 ± 8% reduction in propulsion impulse asymmetry (P =
0.021, ES = 1.19), and a walking economy 32 ± 9% closer to the
normal walking economy of 0.151 ml O2/kg/m (P = 0.009, ES =
1.81; Fig. 3C). A subgroup analysis of exosuit-induced changes in pro-
pulsion asymmetry for individuals who used (n = 3) and individ-
uals who did not use (n = 4) a handrail during testing revealed that
both groups reduced propulsion asymmetry by a similar magnitude
(handrail group %D, −22.8 ± 4.3%; no handrail group %D: −17.4 ±
5.5%; P = 0.45).
Across participants, relative improvements in walking economy
were highly related to relative improvements in propulsion symmetry
(R2 = 0.89, F1,5 = 41.09, P = 0.001; Fig. 3D). Although all participants
presented with an improvement in propulsion symmetry, slower par-
ticipants presented with the largest relative gains (R2 = 0.63, F1,5 =
8.50, P = 0.03; Fig. 3E).
Exosuit-generated assistive forces
An iterative, force-based, position controller was designed and imple-
mented to control the exosuit’s assistance of ankle PF and DF [see (39)
and (56) and the “Soft exosuit design and operation” and “Exosuit-
generated assistive forces” sections]. In brief, exosuit-generated assist-
ive forces are a function of a commanded Bowden cable position, the
wearer’s gait kinematics, and the exosuit-human series stiffness—a
parameter that accounts for the interaction between the commanded
cable position, the material properties of the textile anchors and Bowden
cables, and the compliance of the human tissue that supports the tex-
tile anchors (Fig. 4A) (40). To improve PP and ground clearance, user-
defined features of the commanded ankle PF and DF cable position
trajectory are adapted by the controller on a step-by-step basis. To in-
crease PP, PF force is generated by the exosuit during the paretic stance
phase, with the timing of force delivery defined as a percentage of the
paretic gait cycle (% GC) and the amplitude of force delivery defined
as a percentage of participants’ body weight (% bw). More specifically,
the onset timing of PF force delivery and peak amplitude of PF force
delivered (constrained to 25% bw) were selected by the research team
before testing and controlled on a step-to-step basis through adjustments
in the commanded cable position based on measurements of delivered
force made by a load cell integrated into the exosuit’s textiles and
located on the posterior shank (see the “PF assistance timing” section
and Fig. 4B). The timing of peak PF force and PF force cessation is not
directly controlled and varies with the wearer’s kinematics (Fig. 4B).
To improve paretic ground clearance, a DF cable position command
profile is executed as a function of the paretic gait cycle with the onset
and off timings of force delivery linked by the controller to the paretic
swing phase. More specifically, the amplitude of the DF cable position
command is selected by the research team before testing and is set to
match the position of a neutral ankle angle, or the smallest ankle PF
angle if neutral is not achievable, as identified through visual observa-
tion. With this approach, the amplitude of DF force that is delivered
to the wearer during swing phase within and across steps varies with
the wearer’s gait in a manner that maintains the commanded cable po-
sition and thus ankle angle.
The reliable delivery of exosuit-generated forces was evidenced
in low variability of the prescribed exosuit parameters within and
across the 2-day testing protocol conducted to evaluate the differen-
tial effects of an early-onset versus late-onset timing of ankle PF force.
Across the 2 days of testing, the average ± SE of the SD observed for
PF onset, DF onset, and DF off timings were 1.51 ± 0.26% GC, 2.71 ±
0.16% GC, and 0.91 ± 0.20% GC, respectively. Similarly, the average ±
SE of the SD in peak PF force was 1.15 ± 0.08% bw (Fig. 4C). As
prescribed, across participants, exosuit-generated peak PF forces
Table 1. Participant baseline characteristics and gait performance. AD, assistive device; P, paretic; NP, nonparetic; AGRF, anterior GRF; F, female; M, male;
Y, yes; N, no.
Participant
Side of
paresis
Sex
Age
(years)
Chronicity
(years)
Regular
orthosis
Regular
AD
Handrail
Walking
speed
(m/s)
Peak P ankle
angle (°)
Peak P
AGRF
(% bw)
Peak NP
AGRF
(% bw)
Cost of
transport
(ml O2/kg/m)
01
Right
F
30
7.08
AFO
None
Y
1.05*
−0.02
12.80
24.57
0.28
02
Left
M
56
3.58
None
None
N
1.05
4.20
7.09
20.32
0.20
03
Left
F
52
0.75
None
Cane
Y
0.53
0.30
3.89
11.05
0.28
04
Left
M
51
2.83
AFO†
Cane
Y
0.93
−14.73
9.48
17.60
0.15
05
Left
F
37
1.08
AFO†
Cane
N
0.67
0.39
7.64
17.43
0.33
06
Right
M
44
2.33
None
None
N
1.29
−2.34
18.77
22.27
0.14
07
Right
F
46
4.25
None
None
N
1.3*
−0.80
20.06
27.34
0.18
08‡
Right
M
61
14.17
AFO
None
Y
0.92
−7.52
—
—
—
09‡
Left
M
67
3.33
None
Cane
Y
0.81
3.85
—
—
—
*The participant’s actual 10-m overground walk test speed was higher than the speed tested on the treadmill. Participant #01’s actual overground speed was
1.16 m/s, but this participant was not safe walking at this speed on the treadmill. Participant #07’s speed was 1.72 m/s, but this speed was beyond the capa-
bilities of the electromechanical actuator used for this study.
†Participant #04 typically used a foot-up brace. Participant #05 used a custom brace that
supported frontal plane motion.
‡GRF data unavailable.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
4 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 averaged 25.02 ± 0.92% bw, with an SE across days of 0.13% bw (Fig.
4C). The peak PF assistive torque delivered to participants thus ap-
proximated 0.15 Nm/kg (table S1), which is 12% of the average
peak paretic ankle moment that was observed across participants
(1.26 ± 0.13 Nm/kg) and 9% of the average peak nonparetic ankle
moment (1.68 ± 0.12 Nm/kg).
PF assistance timing
The only parameter manipulated across the 2 days of testing was the
onset timing of PF force delivery. Across participants, a difference in
baseline gait performance (walking with the exosuit unpowered) across
these 2 days of testing was not observed for either primary variable
of interest (P > 0.05). For each participant, the effect of an onset timing
during terminal stance (late-onset) was compared to the effect of an
onset timing about 10% earlier in the gait cycle, during midstance
(early-onset). The exact timing varied across participants depend-
ing on the duration of each participant’s paretic stance phase, with
the actual commanded PF onset timings tested across participants
averaging 36.9 ± 0.76% GC and 27.5 ± 1.94% GC for late- and early-
onset timings, respectively (Fig. 4B). The order that these onset timings
were tested was randomized across participants.
An early-onset timing of PF force delivery generated higher PF
forces between 19% and 47% of the paretic gait cycle as compared
to a late-onset timing (P < 0.05; Fig. 4B), demonstrating our ability
to control the delivery of exosuit-generated forces. As previously de-
scribed, exosuit-generated peak PF forces did not differ between days
(P > 0.05; Fig. 4B). As hypothesized, the effect of exosuit-generated
PF forces on participants’ interlimb propulsion symmetry depended
on whether participants received an early- or late-onset timing of
PF force delivery (Fig. 4D). More specifically, four participants ben-
efited more from a late-onset timing of PF force delivery and two ben-
efited more from an early-onset timing. One participant benefited
equally from both onset timings. Three of four who benefited more
from a late onset of PF force delivery experienced greater propulsion
asymmetry with an early-onset timing of PF force, whereas no participants
experienced negative effects from a late-onset timing of PF force.
Walking with a passive exosuit
Five individuals participated in evaluating the effects of walking with an
exosuit worn,but not powered.Ashypothesized, walkingwiththe passive
exosuitdidnotsignificantlymodifyparticipants’generationofpropulsion
fromtheirparetic andnonpareticlimbsorenergycostofwalking(fig.S1).
Seethe “Passive exosuitstudy” section of the Supplementary Materialsfor
additional details regarding this secondary study.
Proof of principle: Overground walking with an
untethered exosuit
Consistent with our findings on the treadmill, walking overground
with an untethered exosuit (Fig. 5A) powered versus unpowered re-
sulted in 4.9° more peak ankle DF angle during swing phase (P <
0.002; Fig. 5B), an increase from −4.13 ± 1.82° (4° of PF) to 0.74 ±
1.51° (0.74° of DF); 13% more peak PP, an increase from 10.3 ±
0.60% bw to 11.6 ± 0.60% bw (P = 0.053); and 14% more PP impulse,
an increase from 2.0 ± 0.10% bw.s to 2.2 ± 0.10% bw.s (P = 0.029).
Ultimately, a 16.3 ± 6.8% reduction in propulsion asymmetry was
observed during overground walking with versus without exosuit assist-
ance (P = 0.045; Fig. 5C). See the “Overground gait assistance with an
untethered exosuit” section of the Supplementary Materials for more
details regarding this secondary study.
DISCUSSION
Exosuits function in synchrony with the paretic limb of persons after
stroke to overcome deficits in forward propulsion and ground clear-
ance during hemiparetic walking, ultimately facilitating more econom-
ical locomotion. Using a tethered exosuit research platform, this study
demonstrates the feasibility of unilateral assistance of paretic ankle
function through a soft human-machine interface and the efficacy of
minimal assistance (~12% of biological PF torques) delivered through
this interface. Moreover, using a first-generation, untethered exosuit,
this study demonstrates the potential for exosuits to provide gait as-
sistance and training during overground walking. These findings sup-
port future research and development of gait-restorative exosuits, with
studies using optimized body-worn actuators and evaluating clinic-
and community-based outcomes especially warranted.
Fig. 3. Exosuit-inducedchangesinpost-
stroke gait mechanics and energetics.
Changes in (A) peak paretic ankle DF an-
gle during swing phase (n = 9; P < 0.001,
paired t test), (B) interlimb propulsion
asymmetry (perfect symmetry = 0%; n =
7; P = 0.002, paired t test), and (C) walking
economy (normal walking economy =
0%; n = 7; P = 0.009, paired t test) during
walking with the exosuit powered versus
unpowered. Relationship between (D) rel-
ativechanges(%D)inpropulsionsymmetry
and walking economy (correlation: n = 7, P = 0.001) and (E) participants’ usual walking
speed and relative change in propulsion symmetry (correlation: n = 7, P = 0.03). Means
and SE are presented in (A) to (C). *P < 0.05.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
5 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Impaired forward propulsion is posited to be a major contributor
to walking dysfunction after stroke (14, 23, 57–63), with the magni-
tude of interlimb propulsion asymmetry differentiating individuals as
limited community versus community ambulators (64). Recent work
has also linked gains in propulsion to improvements in the long-
distance walking ability of persons after stroke (65), a factor identified
by individuals in the chronic phase of recovery as limiting engagement
at home and in the community (8). Commonly prescribed AFOs have
been shown to restrict ankle range of motion and impair the genera-
tion of forward propulsion during walking (31), effects shown to increase
the energetic demands of walking (66). A high energy cost of walking
has been posited to be a primary contributor to physical inactivity in
older adults (67) and persons with neurologically based walking defi-
cits (68–70), as well as a predictor of impending declines in walking
speed (71)—a powerful marker of reduced health and mobility (72, 73)
and mortality (74). Because it targets deficits in propulsion and improves
walking economy, the exosuit technology is a promising alternative to
the passive assistive devices typically used by ambulatory individuals
with walking-related disabilities (75).
An existing alternative to AFOs is functional electrical stimulation
(FES). Like exosuits, FES systems provide gait assistance through a light-
weight and unobtrusive human-device interface; however, exosuits
apply assistive joint torques in parallel with the underlying impaired
musculature, whereas FES directly activates the impaired musculature.
One limitation of FES that is directly addressed by exosuits is the high
fatigability, weakness, and reduced neuromuscular capacity of the pa-
retic limb musculature. By functioning in parallel with the paretic limb,
exosuits provide supplemental assistive forces and may thus be better
suited for use by individuals with larger impairments or during activ-
ities requiring longer walking durations such as community walking or
gait training. Future study of how exosuits and FES may be optimally
used to assist hemiparetic gait is needed.
Fig. 4. Overview and assessment of exosuit controller. (A) Commanded position trajectories (blue) translate to exosuit-generated forces (red) based on the exosuit-
human series stiffness. This parameter reflects the interaction of the cable position command with the compliance inherent to the textiles, cables, and human tissue. On
a step-by-step basis, the timing of exosuit-generated force delivery is controlled as a function of gait subphases identified using shoe-mounted gyroscope sensors (GY).
The amplitude of force produced by the exosuit is measured by load cells (LC) that measure the force delivered at the ankle—one for each PF and DF (only PF is shown).
The delivered force is continuously monitored, and adjustments are made by the controller to maintain specific features of the delivered force profile. (B) Average
exosuit-generated PF forces as a function of the paretic gait cycle (x axis). Two ankle PF force delivery onset timings were evaluated. PF forces were delivered during
terminal stance or about 10% earlier in the paretic gait cycle, during midstance. (C) Variability in commanded force parameters (x axis). The force features prescribed by
the controller on a step-by-step basis included the onset timing of PF force (PF onset), the peak amplitude of PF force (PF peak)—constrained to 25% bw, the onset
timing of DF force (DF onset), and the off time of DF force (DF offset). (D) Relative changes (%D) in participants’ interlimb propulsion symmetry based on the onset
timing of exosuit-generated PF forces. Four participants benefited more from a late onset of PF force timing, two participants benefited more from an early onset, and
one participant (#1) benefited equally from both timings. Means and SE are presented in (C) and (D). *P < 0.05.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
6 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 The results of this study suggest that successful translation of the
exosuit technology may require refinement of selection criteria to iden-
tify appropriate candidates. For example, the findings of this study sug-
gest that lower-functioning individuals may benefit more from exosuit
intervention than higher-functioning individuals (Fig. 3E). Although
this requires validation, it supports the potential use of the exosuit in
more disabled cohorts after stroke. It is also not clear if higher-functioning
participants could have seen added benefit with a higher amount of
assistance, assistance at joints other than the ankle, or with directed
training. Further investigation will be necessary.
A detailed analysis of the biomechanical mechanisms underlying
exosuit-induced improvements in poststroke walking will be necessary
to inform the development of future systems. Given the heterogeneity
of poststroke motor impairment, customizable solutions to the partic-
ular biomechanical needs of wearers and the goals of rehabilitation are
needed to enable widespread use (76). For example, the exosuit’s effects
appeared dependent, in part, on the onset timing of exosuit-generated
PF force, with the optimal timing varying across participants (Fig. 4, B
and D). Although this finding requires validation, it is consistent with
the heterogeneous nature of poststroke motor impairment and high-
lights the importance of understanding the interaction between hu-
man and machine when designing and implementing controllers for
gait-restorative wearable devices (35). On the basis of a biomechanical
understanding of the role of the plantarflexors during walking, an
earlier-onset timing of plantarflexor force generation would be ben-
eficial to participants requiring assistance to control the anterior
translation of the tibia over the foot, whereas a later-onset timing
would be beneficial in those requiring assistance with push-off. It
is likely that individuals after stroke will require some degree of as-
sistance with both of these important functions of the plantarflexors;
however, our finding that mistimed assistance of PF force delivery
could negatively affect propulsive force generation highlights the
need for individualization of timing. The personalization of wearable
active assistive devices will require substantial investigation into bio-
mechanical markers that can accurately predict optimal assistive strat-
egies. On the basis of the aforementioned biomechanical framework,
variables such as stance phase control of the tibia and ankle PF velocity
may be promising indicators of effective PF assistance onset timing
using our ankle exosuit. Further study and detailed biomechanical
analyses are required.
Exosuit-induced improvements in poststroke gait were observed
within minutes of powering the device and were comparable to, if not
greater than, therapeutic gains observed after single-session (77, 78)
and multisession (21, 65, 79, 80) clinical gait training programs. Al-
though this study does not demonstrate a therapeutic effect, several
benefits can be derived from such an immediate and substantial in-
crease in poststroke walking performance. For example, an immediate
improvement in walking capacity may increase the opportunity for
walking practice of higher intensity and variability—key ingredients
for effective neurorehabilitation (70, 81, 82). Improved walking ca-
pacity may improve self-efficacy and reduce barriers to community
engagement (8, 51, 83). Together, these factors may facilitate better
leveraging of key plasticity mechanisms such as salience, intensity,
and repetition during gait training (81, 84, 85). Moreover, as observed
with rehabilitation approaches centered on targeting ankle deficits
during poststroke gait training (49, 86, 87), the exosuit technology’s
Fig. 5. Overview of an untethered, unilateral, ankle-assisting exosuit adapted for overground walking. (A) Mechanical power generated by a 2.63-kg actuator
mounted posteriorly on the waist belt is transmitted to the wearer via cable-based transmissions. A 0.56-kg battery is attached anteriorly on the waist belt. The
contractile elements of the exosuit are located anterior and posterior to the ankle joint and assist ankle DF and PF, respectively. Improvements in (B) peak paretic
ankle DF during swing phase (n = 9; P = 0.002, paired t test) and (C) interlimb propulsion asymmetry (n = 9; P = 0.045, paired t test) during overground walking are
presented. Means and SE are presented. *P < 0.05.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
7 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 ability to facilitate walking practice of more normal gait mechanics also
has the potential to promote locomotor restoration rather than com-
pensation. For this proof-of-principle investigation, participants re-
ceived no instruction on how to walk with the exosuit. Further study
on how training may enhance exosuit-assisted walking is warranted.
Although this investigation’s primary finding is an improvement
in poststroke gait mechanics and energetics during exosuit-assisted walk-
ing versus walking with an exosuit unpowered, our secondary finding
that wearing a passive exosuit did not significantly influence partici-
pants’ walking (fig. S1) is equally important for a complete appreciation
of the exosuit technology. Together, these findings demonstrate that
exosuits are capable of providing targeted gait assistance through a
human-machine interface that imposes minimal biomechanical and
metabolic penalties when worn unpowered.
The tethered exosuit research platform used for this study provided
a suitable test bed for demonstrating proof of principle of the exosuit
concept; however, recognizing that there are differences between tread-
mill and overground walking after stroke, it was also necessary for us
to evaluate the effects of exosuit assistance during overground walking
with an untethered exosuit. Despite using a nonoptimized actuator pack,
we observed improvements in PP and ground clearance that were com-
parable to what was observed during treadmill walking. The actuator
data collected from this study will enable optimization of this body-worn
system to make it suitable for both clinic and free-living settings. We
estimate that the total mass of these systems will be <4 kg, including
batteries, with the majority worn discretely around the waist to min-
imize its impact on natural walking behavior (88).
This study revealed the potential importance of individualizing the
timing of exosuit-generated PF assistance. Because of logistical con-
straints, we could only evaluate two PF assistance onset timings. Although
the two onset timings that were tested may not have been optimal for
individual patients, they allowed us to evaluate the effects of PF assist-
ance during two distinct phases of the gait cycle. In addition, we did
not evaluate the effects of manipulating other exosuit parameters, such
as the amplitude of assistance. Although future work elucidating op-
timal parameter tuning will be necessary to inform translation, the
present study demonstrates the potential of tuning the exosuit tech-
nology to meet the needs of differengt gait presentations.
Considering the day-to-day variability inherent in the outcomes
used in this study, a 2-day testing protocol to evaluate the differential
effects of PF assistance timing is a potential limitation of this study.
Nonetheless, this experimental approach was deemed necessary to min-
imize the burden on participants and the fatigue inherent to longer
testing sessions. It is important to note that we made efforts to min-
imize the influence of participant day-to-day variability on this eval-
uation. For example, our between-day analyses compared the effects
of the exosuit relative to each day’s baseline performance, which we
demonstrated did not significantly vary across participants across the
2 days of testing.
For safety, three participants required use of a handrail during tread-
mill testing. Although it is possible that these participants may have
modulated the amount of body weight supported by the handrail
between testing conditions, our demonstration that the exosuit-induced
change in propulsion symmetry did not differ between individuals
who did and did not use a handrail reduces this concern, as does our
finding of improvements in PP during overground walking without
a handrail. These findings are consistent with previous work that has
shown that in individuals after stroke, changes in handrail forces are
unrelated to the mechanisms used to increase forward propulsion
(89). Nonetheless, future work quantifying changes in handrail support
during exosuit-assisted walking may be revealing. In addition, studies
that evaluate the long-term changes in poststroke gait because of ex-
tended use for gait training, on don/doff times, and on the robustness
of the exosuit’s effects to variability in exosuit placement are warranted
before the utility of exosuits as assistive and rehabilitation robots is
fully realized.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The feasibility of influencing poststroke walking using a unilateral, soft
wearable robot (exosuit) was evaluated through three experiments.
The primary experiment focused on evaluating the effects of a tethered
exosuit on poststroke gait mechanics and energetics during treadmill
walking (video S1). This investigation is detailed in this section and
focuses on nine individuals in the chronic phase of stroke recovery.
In addition, we performed two complementary studies to better define
the promise of the exosuit technology. The methods for these additional
studies are detailed in two supplementary sections: “Passive exosuit study”
and “Overground gait assistance with an untethered exosuit.” Additional
subject-level data are reported in table S2.
The exosuit was designed to support the paretic limb’s generation
of forward propulsion and ground clearance during walking by aug-
menting the paretic ankle’s PF during stance phase and DF during
swing phase (Fig. 1). We hypothesized that symmetry of the propul-
sive force output from the lower extremities would be increased, and
the energy cost of walking reduced during exosuit-assisted walking com-
pared to walking with the tethered exosuit unpowered. We used a 2-day
testing protocol to evaluate the effects of two different onset timings of
exosuit-generated PF force delivery on participants’ forward propul-
sion, with the peak amplitude of PF force delivered constrained across
testing days to 25% of each participant’s body weight (Fig. 4). This
allowed us to determine whether the exosuit’s effects on poststroke
walking depend on the timing of ankle PF assistance (50). Each day tested
the effects of a different onset timing (randomized order) to minimize the
influence of participant fatigue and after-effects on this evaluation. To
minimize the influence of participant day-to-day variability, each testing
day measured the effects of the exosuit relative to a daily baseline, with
within-session changes from each day compared for each individual.
The two PF force delivery onset timings evaluated occurred during
the paretic midstance (early-onset) or terminal stance (late-onset).
The same DF assistance profile was used on both testing days. Each
testing day included two 8-min testing bouts on a treadmill set to a
speed comparable to each participant’s usual overground walking
speed (Table 1), with as much rest as needed provided between
bouts. The first trial consisted of walking with the exosuit unpowered,
and the other trial with the exosuit powered. Participants were allowed
to hold a side-mounted handrail during treadmill testing if it was nec-
essary for safety (Table 1). All participants who used a handrail used
one during both bouts of testing and were instructed to use the
smallest amount of handrail support needed. Data from the 8th minute
of walking from each condition were used for all analyses.
Participants and inclusion/exclusion criteria
Participants (age, 49 ± 4 years; time since stroke, 4.38 ± 1.37 years;
female, 44%; left hemiparetic, 56%; see Table 1) were recruited from
rehabilitation clinics in the greater Boston area. Participant inclusion
criteria included the following: age between 25 and 75 years, at least
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
8 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 6 months after stroke, able to walk independently for 6 min with-
out stopping, sufficient passive ankle range of motion with the knee
extended to reach a neutral position, and pass cognitive screening.
Cognitive screening differed for those with versus without aphasia.
Those without aphasia had to score ≥23 on the Mini Mental State
Examination (MMSE). Those with aphasia had to score ≥19 on the
MMSE, as well as ≥35 on the Auditory Verbal Comprehension section
of the Western Aphasia Battery (WAB) and ≥10 on the Sequential
Commands section of the WAB. Exclusion criteria included Botox in-
jections within the past 6 months, substantial knee recurvatum during
walking, serious comorbidities (including musculoskeletal, cardiac,
and neuromuscular, skin, and vascular conditions), inability to com-
municate and/or be understood by investigators, a resting heart rate
outside the range of 50 to 100 beats per minute or blood pressure
outside the range of 90/60 to 200/110 mmHg, pain in the extremities
or spine that limits walking, and experiencing more than two falls in the
past month. Medical clearance and signed informed consent forms ap-
proved by the Harvard University Human Subjects Review Board were
obtained for all participants.
Soft exosuit design and operation
In brief, the exosuit has a unilateral design and is worn on the paretic
limb (Fig. 1). The exosuit is composed of garment-like, functional tex-
tiles that securely anchor to the body at the waist and paretic calf and
interact with a low-profile shoe insole to generate assistive ankle torques
through cable-based mechanical power transmission (Fig. 1 and
Table 2). The exosuit consists of two separate textile modules (Fig. 1):
the first is a monoarticular module that anchors at the paretic calf and
is designed to generate ankle DF torque and the second is a multiarticular
module designed to generate ankle PF torque. This PF module anchors
distally at the paretic calf separately from the DF module. Its proximal
anchor is at the waist. Straps attach to the waist and calf anchors and
extend anteriorly over the proximal thigh, straddling the knee joint
center. Lightweight laminates integrated into the modules provide
reinforcement, create force transmission paths, and distribute pressure.
Nonslip, breathable liners are also integrated into the modules to reduce
their migration relative to the body. A total of two Bowden cables are
integrated into the exosuit, one for each textile module. The proximal
and distal attachments of these Bowden cables are the shank and foot,
respectively. The DF module’s Bowden cable is located anterior to the
ankle joint, thus producing an ankle DF torque when retracted. The PF
module’s Bowden cable is located posterior to the ankle joint, thus
producing an ankle PF torque when retracted. When retracted by an
actuation unit, these Bowden cables transmit mechanical power to the
wearer, producing the assistive joint torques depicted in Fig. 1. The over-
all mass of the exosuit’s functional textile anchors, cables, and sensors is
about 0.90 kg (waist textile anchor, 0.15 to 0.20 kg; thigh connecting
straps, 0.20 to 0.22 kg; calf textile anchor and integrated sensors, 0.30
to 0.35 kg; cables and sheath, 0.12 to 0.15 kg).
A tethered, laboratory-based electromechanical actuation platform
was created to enable evaluation of the exosuit technology (Fig. 2).
Previous work from our laboratory describes in greater detail the con-
troller and actuation platform used in both healthy (38) and poststroke
(39) participants. Briefly, the actuation unit contains four linear actuators
that allow simultaneous actuation of up to four Bowden cables; only
two actuators were used in this study. Each actuator is equipped with
a linear potentiometer (P3 America Inc.) that enables closed-loop control
of the cable position and can deliver up to 300 N of force to the wearer.
The closed-loop controller used position measurements from the linear
potentiometers together with force measurements from load cells
(Futek) integrated into the exosuit textiles, and foot rotational velocity
measurements from a gyroscope (SparkFun) mounted to each shoe to iter-
atively adapt Bowden cable position trajectories and generate desired PF
and DF assistive force profiles. The gyroscopes enabled real-time gait seg-
mentation, and the linear potentiometers and load cells enabled iterative,
force-based, position control. Together, these sensors enable exosuits to
deliver appropriately timed assistive forces of adequate magnitude. The
“Exosuit-generated assistive forces” section of the Supplementary
Materials provides additional detail regarding the exosuit’s controller.
Clinical evaluations
Treadmill speed was set based on participants’ usual overground walk-
ing speed. This speed was measured using the 10-m walk test (10MWT).
The 10MWT was also used to quantify participants’ walking disability
Table 2. Participant measurements used for exosuit fitting. IC, iliac crest; W, wide; R, right; L, left.
Participant
Height (cm) Weight (kg)
Paretic limb anthropometric measurements (cm)
Shoe size (U.S.)
Lateral
support
IC to
ground
Hip circumference
(at IC)
Thigh
circumference
Below knee
circumference
Calf
circumference
01
162
49
40.6
32.5
20.0
13.5
15.2
7W
Y
02
177
73
43.0
35.3
19.0
14.0
14.8
R-10.5 | L-11
N
03
158
90
36.3
48.0
22.0
14.5
15.5
9.5W
N
04
173
79
44.5
39.5
17.0
12.5
13.0
12W
N
05
172
73
—
—
—
—
—
9
Y
06
186
80
47.0
38.5
19.0
14.0
14.3
11W
N
07
167
60
40.5
38.3
18.3
14.0
14.3
9.5W
N
08
181
99
39.8
41.3
17.7
15.4
15.4
R-11.5 | L-11
N
09
182
97
47.0
40.0
23.5
16.0
17.0
R- 12.5W | L- 13W
N
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
9 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (73) and evaluate their ability to safely walk without their regular
orthoses, which could not be used with the exosuit because of their
restriction of ankle PF. Participants who required the frontal plane
ankle support provided by an ankle orthosis for safe ambulation were
provided an optional exosuit module that passively controlled ankle in-
version. This passive module was used by two participants (Table 1)
during all testing. Participants were allowed to use their regular as-
sistive device (cane) during the 10MWT if they typically used one for
safety. A handrail was provided during treadmill testing for partici-
pants requiring one to safely walk on the treadmill (Table 1).
Motion analysis and metabolic data acquisition and analysis
Participants walked on an instrumented split-belt treadmill (Bertec) to
measure GRFs independently from each limb. There was no barrier
between the two treadmill belts, the small gap between the belts was
not perceivable during walking, and participants were instructed to
walk naturally. GRFs were used to compute PP and non-PP and this
study’s primary kinetic outcome: interlimb propulsion symmetry.
PP was defined as the anterior GRF measured during the paretic limb’s
stance phase, normalized by body weight (% bw) (65, 79, 86, 89–91).
Interlimb propulsion symmetry was calculated as follows:
Propulsion symmetry ¼ PP=non‐PP
where non-PP represents the nonparetic limb’s propulsive force during
its stance phase. For this metric, 1 represents perfect symmetry. Using this
metric, the magnitude of propulsion asymmetry was calculated as follows:
Propulsion asymmetry ¼ ðNon‐PP � PPÞ=Non‐PP
¼ 1 � Propulsion symmetry
Three-dimensional motion capture (VICON, Oxford Metrics) was
used to measure participants’ ankle motion during walking, with the peak
DF angle during the paretic swing phase serving as this study’s primary
kinematic outcome. All marker and force data were filtered using a
zero-lag, fourth-order, low-pass, Butterworth filter with a 5- to 9-Hz
optimal cutoff frequency that was selected using a residual analysis
algorithm (MATLAB, MathWorks Inc.) (92). Kinetic and kinematic
analyses were performed using Visual 3D (C-Motion). The last 15 good
strides from each testing condition were extracted for data analysis,
with good strides defined as the absence of crossed force plate strikes.
As depicted in Fig. 2, indirect calorimetry (K4b2, Cosmed) was con-
currently used to measure participants’ energy consumption (ml O2/min)
at rest (quiet standing) and during walking, with resting energy con-
sumption subtracted from energy consumption during walking to
yield participants’ net energy consumption during walking. Participants’
net energy cost of walking (ECnet) was computed by normalizing net
energy consumption by body weight (kg) and walking speed (m/min).
Similar to (54), participants’ deviation from the normal energy cost of
walking was computed as follows:
ECnet � N
whereN representsthe normalenergy cost of walking (0.151mlO2/kg/m).
Statistical analyses
Interparticipant means and SEs are reported unless otherwise indi-
cated. Peak PP, interlimb propulsion symmetry, peak paretic limb
swing phase ankle DF angle, and mass- and speed-normalized energy
consumption served as dependent variables because of their pop-
ularity and importance in the poststroke gait rehabilitation literature
(2, 22, 25, 49, 50, 55, 57, 63, 65, 86, 93, 94). All analyses were directed
toward evaluating the exosuit’s influence on poststroke gait. Given
previous work positing that the optimal timing of PF force delivery
may vary across participants because of poststroke heterogeneity,
paired t tests on individual participant data were used to determine
each participant’s more effective PF force delivery onset timing in
terms of the exosuit’s influence on propulsion symmetry (see the
“PF assistance timing” section). Paired two-tailed t tests subsequently
evaluated group-level effects, with PF assistance onset timings individ-
ualized. For these analyses, a = 0.05 and a Holm-Šídák correction
was applied to adjust for multiple comparisons. To evaluate our hypoth-
esis that improvements in propulsion symmetry would contribute to
reductions in the energy cost of walking, linear regression measured
the relationship between exosuit-induced changes in these two varia-
bles. To inform clinical translation, linear regression was also used to
determine whether participants’ baseline function (walking speed) in-
fluenced the effects of the exosuit. To evaluate differences in delivered
PF force on the days testing an early-onset and late-onset of PF force
delivery, we compared the magnitude of delivered force at each point
in the gait cycle using paired t tests. As has previously been done (95),
to minimize type 1 error, significance was concluded only if 40 consec-
utive pairs (4% of the gait cycle) indicated significance at a = 0.05.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/400/eaai9084/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Effects of wearing a passive exosuit on poststroke propulsion and energy expenditure.
Table S1. Tethered exosuit ankle PF assistive forces.
Table S2. Additional individual subject-level data.
Video S1. Video demonstration of exosuit-assisted treadmill walking.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. P. S. Rodman, H. M. McHenry, Bioenergetics and the origin of hominid bipedalism. Am. J.
Phys. Anthropol. 52, 103–106 (1980).
2. D. J. Farris, A. Hampton, M. D. Lewek, G. S. Sawicki, Revisiting the mechanics and
energetics of walking in individuals with chronic hemiparesis following stroke: From
individual limbs to lower limb joints. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 12, 24 (2015).
3. S. J. Olney, C. Richards, Hemiparetic gait following stroke. Part I: Characteristics.
Gait Posture 4, 136–148 (1996).
4. C. L. Richards, F. Malouin, C. Dean, Gait in stroke: Assessment and rehabilitation.
Clin. Geriatr. Med. 15, 833–855 (1999).
5. T. Kitago, J. W. Krakauer, Motor learning principles for neurorehabilitation. Handb. Clin.
Neurol. 110, 93–103 (2013).
6. C. K. Balasubramanian, R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, Variability in spatiotemporal step
characteristics and its relationship to walking performance post-stroke. Gait Posture 29,
408–414 (2009).
7. J. A. Schrack, E. M. Simonsick, P. H. M. Chaves, L. Ferrucci, The role of energetic cost in the
age-related slowing of gait speed. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 60, 1811–1816 (2012).
8. S. A. Combs, M. Van Puymbroeck, P. A. Altenburger, K. K. Miller, T. A. Dierks, A. A. Schmid,
Is walking faster or walking farther more important to persons with chronic stroke?
Disabil. Rehabil. 35, 860–867 (2013).
9. N. E. Mayo, S. Wood-Dauphinee, S. Ahmed, C. Gordon, J. Higgins, S. McEwen, N. Salbach,
Disablement following stroke. Disabil. Rehabil. 21, 258–268 (1999).
10. D. Lloyd-Jones, R. J. Adams, T. M. Brown, M. Carnethon, S. Dai, G. De Simone,
T. B. Ferguson, E. Ford, K. Furie, C. Gillespie, A. Go, K. Greenlund, N. Haase, S. Hailpern,
P. M. Ho, V. Howard, B. Kissela, S. Kittner, D. Lackland, L. Lisabeth, A. Marelli,
M. M. McDermott, J. Meigs, D. Mozaffarian, M. Mussolino, G. Nichol, V. L. Roger,
W. Rosamond, R. Sacco, P. Sorlie, R. Stafford, T. Thom, S. Wasserthiel-Smoller, N. D. Wong,
J. Wylie-Rosett, Heart disease and stroke statistics—2010 update: A report from the
American Heart Association. Circulation 121, e46–e215 (2010).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
10 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 11. P. W. Duncan, K. J. Sullivan, A. L. Behrman, S. P. Azen, S. S. Wu, S. E. Nadeau, B. H. Dobkin,
D. K. Rose, J. K. Tilson, S. Cen, S. K. Hayden; LEAPS Investigative Team, Body-weight–
supported treadmill rehabilitation after stroke. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2026–2036 (2011).
12. T. H. Cruz, M. D. Lewek, Y. Y. Dhaher, Biomechanical impairments and gait adaptations
post-stroke: Multi-factorial associations. J. Biomech. 42, 1673–1677 (2009).
13. C. Moriello, L. Finch, N. E. Mayo, Relationship between muscle strength and functional
walking capacity among people with stroke. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 48, 267–275 (2011).
14. G. Chen, C. Patten, D. H. Kothari, F. E. Zajac, Gait differences between individuals with
post-stroke hemiparesis and non-disabled controls at matched speeds. Gait Posture
22, 51–56 (2005).
15. T. H. Cruz, Y. Y. Dhaher, Impact of ankle-foot-orthosis on frontal plane behaviors
post-stroke. Gait Posture 30, 312–316 (2009).
16. D. C. Kerrigan, E. P. Frates, S. Rogan, P. O. Riley, Hip hiking and circumduction:
Quantitative definitions. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 79, 247–252 (2000).
17. S. Schmid, K. Schweizer, J. Romkes, S. Lorenzetti, R. Brunner, Secondary gait deviations in
patients with and without neurological involvement: A systematic review. Gait Posture
37, 480–493 (2013).
18. T. Susko, K. Swaminathan, H. I. Krebs, MIT-Skywalker: A novel gait neurorehabilitation robot
for stroke and cerebral palsy. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 24, 1089–1099 (2016).
19. S. A. Combs, E. L. Dugan, E. N. Ozimek, A. B. Curtis, Effects of body-weight supported
treadmill training on kinetic symmetry in persons with chronic stroke. Clin. Biomech. 27,
887–892 (2012).
20. A. L. Hall, M. G. Bowden, S. A. Kautz, R. R. Neptune, Biomechanical variables related to
walking performance 6-months following post-stroke rehabilitation. Clin. Biomech. 27,
1017–1022 (2012).
21. M. G. Bowden, A. L. Behrman, R. R. Neptune, C. M. Gregory, S. A. Kautz, Locomotor
rehabilitation of individuals with chronic stroke: Difference between responders and
nonresponders. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 94, 856–862 (2013).
22. D. S. Reisman, K. S. Rudolph, W. B. Farquhar, Influence of speed on walking economy
poststroke. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 23, 529–534 (2009).
23. C. K. Balasubramanian, M. G. Bowden, R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, Relationship between
step length asymmetry and walking performance in subjects with chronic hemiparesis.
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 88, 43–49 (2007).
24. C. English, P. J. Manns, C. Tucak, J. Bernhardt, Physical activity and sedentary behaviors
in people with stroke living in the community: A systematic review. Phys. Ther. 94,
185–196 (2014).
25. K. M. Michael, J. K. Allen, R. F. Macko, Reduced ambulatory activity after stroke: The role of
balance, gait, and cardiovascular fitness. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 86, 1552–1556 (2005).
26. P. H. Lee, H. Nan, Y.-Y. Yu, I. McDowell, G. M. Leung, T. H. Lam, For non-exercising people,
the number of steps walked is more strongly associated with health than time spent
walking. J. Sci. Med. Sport 16, 227–230 (2013).
27. D. Rand, J. J. Eng, P.-F. Tang, C. Hung, J.-S. Jeng, Daily physical activity and its contribution
to the health-related quality of life of ambulatory individuals with chronic stroke.
Health Qual. Life Outcomes 8, 80 (2010).
28. J. Jutai, S. Coulson, R. Teasell, M. Bayley, J. Garland, N. Mayo, S. Wood-Dauphinee, Mobility
assistive device utilization in a prospective study of patients with first-ever stroke.
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 88, 1268–1275 (2007).
29. L. E. Skolarus, J. F. Burke, V. A. Freedman, The role of accommodations in poststroke
disability management. J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 69 (suppl. 1), S26–S34 (2014).
30. P. M. Kluding, K. Dunning, M. W. O’Dell, S. S. Wu, J. Ginosian, J. Feld, K. McBride, Foot drop
stimulation versus ankle foot orthosis after stroke: 30-week outcomes. Stroke 44,
1660–1669 (2013).
31. A. Vistamehr, S. A. Kautz, R. R. Neptune, The influence of solid ankle-foot-orthoses on
forward propulsion and dynamic balance in healthy adults during walking. Clin. Biomech.
29, 583–589 (2014).
32. R. van Swigchem, M. Roerdink, V. Weerdesteyn, A. C. Geurts, A. Daffertshofer, The
capacity to restore steady gait after a step modification is reduced in people with poststroke
foot drop using an ankle-foot orthosis. Phys. Ther. 94, 654–663 (2014).
33. C. Marini, T. Russo, G. Felzani, Incidence of stroke in young adults: A review. Stroke Res.
Treat. 2011, 535672 (2010).
34. D. Griffiths, J. Sturm, Epidemiology and etiology of young stroke. Stroke Res. Treat. 2011,
209370 (2011).
35. M. Goldfarb, B. E. Lawson, A. H. Shultz, Realizing the promise of robotic leg prostheses.
Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 210ps15 (2013).
36. A. M. Dollar, H. Herr, Lower extremity exoskeletons and active orthoses: Challenges and
state-of-the-art. IEEE Trans. Robot. 24, 144–158 (2008).
37. F. A. Panizzolo, I. Galiana, A. T. Asbeck, C. Siviy, K. Schmidt, K. G. Holt, C. J. Walsh,
A biologically-inspired multi-joint soft exosuit that can reduce the energy cost of loaded
walking. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 13, 43 (2016).
38. Y. Ding, I. Galiana, A. Asbeck, B. Quinlivan, S. M. M. De Rossi, C. J. Walsh, in 2014
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE, 2014),
pp. 1327–1334.
39. J. Bae, S. M. M. De Rossi, K. O’Donnell, K. L. Hendron, L. N. Awad, T. R. Teles Dos Santos,
V. L. De Araujo, Y. Ding, K. G. Holt, T. D. Ellis, C. J. Walsh, in 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR) (IEEE, 2015), pp. 131–138.
40. A. T. Asbeck, R. J. Dyer, A. F. Larusson, C. J. Walsh, Biologically-inspired soft exosuit.
IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot. 2013, 6650455 (2013).
41. D. R. Louie, J. J. Eng, T. Lam; Spinal Cord Injury Research Evidence (SCIRE) Research Team,
Gait speed using powered robotic exoskeletons after spinal cord injury: A systematic
review and correlational study. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 12, 82 (2015).
42. A. J. Veale, S. Q. Xie, Towards compliant and wearable robotic orthoses: A review of
current and emerging actuator technologies. Med. Eng. Phys. 38, 317–325 (2016).
43. A. T. Asbeck, S. M. M. De Rossi, I. Galiana, Y. Ding, C. J. Walsh, Stronger, smarter, softer:
Next-generation wearable robots. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 21, 22–33 (2014).
44. A. T. Asbeck, K. Schmidt, I. Galiana, C. J. Walsh, in International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE, 2015).
45. F. Panizzolo, I. Galiana, A. T. Asbeck, K. Schmidt, C. Neill, F. Saucedo, S. Allen, C. Siviy,
P. Malcolm, K. Holt, C. J. Walsh, in 7th International Symposium on Adaptive Motion of
Animals and Machines (AMAM) (AMAM, 2015).
46. Y. Ding, I. Galiana, A. T. Asbeck, S. M. M. De Rossi, J. Bae, T. R. Teles Dos Santos, V. L. de Araujo,
S. Lee, K. Holt, C. J. Walsh, Biomechanical and physiological evaluation of multi-joint
assistance with soft exosuits. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 119–130 (2017).
47. A. T. Asbeck, S. M. M. De Rossi, K. G. Holt, C. J. Walsh, A biologically inspired soft exosuit
for walking assistance. Int. J. Rob. Res. 34, 744–762 (2015).
48. B. T. Quinlivan, S. Lee, P. Malcolm, D. M. Rossi, M. Grimmer, C. Siviy, N. Karavas, D. Wagner,
A. Asbeck, I. Galiana, C. J. Walsh, Assistance magnitude versus metabolic cost reductions
for a tethered multiarticular soft exosuit. Sci. Robot. 2, eaah4416 (2017).
49. L. N. Awad, D. S. Reisman, R. T. Pohlig, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Reducing the cost of
transport and increasing walking distance after stroke: A randomized controlled trial
on fast locomotor training combined with functional electrical stimulation. Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair 30, 661–670 (2016).
50. K. Z. Takahashi, M. D. Lewek, G. S. Sawicki, A neuromechanics-based powered ankle
exoskeleton to assist walking post-stroke: A feasibility study. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 12, 23
(2015).
51. A. A. Schmid, M. Van Puymbroeck, P. A. Altenburger, T. A. Dierks, K. K. Miller, T. M. Damush,
L. S. Williams, Balance and balance self-efficacy are associated with activity and
participation after stroke: A cross-sectional study in people with chronic stroke.
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 93, 1101–1107 (2012).
52. M. A. French, M. F. Moore, R. Pohlig, D. Reisman, Self-efficacy mediates the relationship
between balance/walking performance, activity, and participation after stroke. Top. Stroke
Rehabil. 23, 77–83 (2016).
53. H. Hsiao, T. M. Zabielski, J. A. Palmer, J. S. Higginson, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Evaluation of
measurements of propulsion used to reflect changes in walking speed in individuals
poststroke. J. Biomech. 49, 4107–4112 (2016).
54. R. L. Waters, S. Mulroy, The energy expenditure of normal and pathologic gait.
Gait Posture 9, 207–231 (1999).
55. T. M. Kesar, S. A. Binder-Macleod, G. E. Hicks, D. S. Reisman, Minimal detectable
change for gait variables collected during treadmill walking in individuals post-stroke.
Gait Posture 33, 314–317 (2011).
56. Y. Ding, I. Galiana, C. Siviy, F. A. Panizzolo, C. J. Walsh, in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (IEEE, 2016).
57. M. G. Bowden, C. K. Balasubramanian, R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, Anterior-posterior
ground reaction forces as a measure of paretic leg contribution in hemiparetic walking.
Stroke 37, 872–876 (2006).
58. S. Nadeau, D. Gravel, A. B. Arsenault, D. Bourbonnais, Plantarflexor weakness as a
limiting factor of gait speed in stroke subjects and the compensating role of hip flexors.
Clin. Biomech. 14, 125–135 (1999).
59. S. J. Mulroy, T. Klassen, J. K. Gronley, V. J. Eberly, D. A. Brown, K. J. Sullivan, Gait
parameters associated with responsiveness to treadmill training with body-weight
support after stroke: An exploratory study. Phys. Ther. 90, 209–223 (2010).
60. A. L. Hall, C. L. Peterson, S. A. Kautz, R. R. Neptune, Relationships between muscle
contributions to walking subtasks and functional walking status in persons with
post-stroke hemiparesis. Clin. Biomech. 26, 509–515 (2011).
61. C. L. Peterson, J. Cheng, S. A. Kautz, R. R. Neptune, Leg extension is an important predictor
of paretic leg propulsion in hemiparetic walking. Gait Posture 32, 451–456 (2010).
62. R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, F. E. Zajac, Contributions of the individual ankle plantar flexors
to support, forward progression and swing initiation during walking. J. Biomech. 34,
1387–1398 (2001).
63. C. L. Peterson, A. L. Hall, S. A. Kautz, R. R. Neptune, Pre-swing deficits in forward
propulsion, swing initiation and power generation by individual muscles during
hemiparetic walking. J. Biomech. 43, 2348–2355 (2010).
64. M. G. Bowden, C. K. Balasubramanian, A. L. Behrman, S. A. Kautz, Validation of a speed-
based classification system using quantitative measures of walking performance
poststroke. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 22, 672–675 (2008).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
11 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 65. L. N. Awad, S. A. Binder-Macleod, R. T. Pohlig, D. S. Reisman, Paretic propulsion and
trailing limb angle are key determinants of long-distance walking function after stroke.
Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 29, 499–508 (2015).
66. C. J. Wutzke, G. S. Sawicki, M. D. Lewek, The influence of a unilateral fixed ankle on
metabolic and mechanical demands during walking in unimpaired young adults.
J. Biomech. 45, 2405–2410 (2012).
67. D. M. Wert, J. S. Brach, S. Perera, J. VanSwearingen, The association between energy cost of
walking and physical function in older adults. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr. 57, 198–203 (2013).
68. R. Lapointe, Y. Lajoie, O. Serresse, H. Barbeau, Functional community ambulation
requirements in incomplete spinal cord injured subjects. Spinal Cord 39, 327–335 (2001).
69. M. Franceschini, A. Rampello, M. Agosti, M. Massucci, F. Bovolenta, P. Sale, Walking
performance: Correlation between energy cost of walking and walking participation.
New statistical approach concerning outcome measurement. PLOS ONE 8, e56669 (2013).
70. J. L. Moore, E. J. Roth, C. Killian, T. G. Hornby, Locomotor training improves daily stepping
activity and gait efficiency in individuals poststroke who have reached a “plateau” in
recovery. Stroke 41, 129–135 (2010).
71. J. A. Schrack, V. Zipunnikov, E. M. Simonsick, S. Studenski, L. Ferrucci, Rising energetic
cost of walking predicts gait speed decline with aging. J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci.
71, 947–953 (2016).
72. S. Studenski, S. Perera, K. Patel, C. Rosano, K. Faulkner, M. Inzitari, J. Brach, J. Chandler,
P. Cawthon, E. B. Connor, M. Nevitt, M. Visser, S. Kritchevsky, S. Badinelli, T. Harris,
A. B. Newman, J. Cauley, L. Ferrucci, J. Guralnik, Gait speed and survival in older adults.
JAMA 305, 50–58 (2011).
73. A. Middleton, S. L. Fritz, M. Lusardi, Walking speed: The functional vital sign. J. Aging
Phys. Act. 23, 314–322 (2015).
74. B. A. Franklin, J. Brinks, R. Sacks, J. Trivax, H. Friedman, Reduced walking speed and distance
as harbingers of the approaching grim reaper. Am. J. Cardiol. 116, 313–317 (2015).
75. M. W. Brault, Americans with Disabilities: 2010 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012).
76. D. Borton, S. Micera, J. R. Millán, G. Courtine, Personalized neuroprosthetics. Sci. Transl. Med.
5, 210rv2 (2013).
77. T. M. Kesar, D. S. Reisman, J. S. Higginson, L. N. Awad, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Changes
in post-stroke gait biomechanics induced by one session of gait training. Phys. Med.
Rehabil. Int. 2, 1072 (2015).
78. C. P. Phadke, Immediate effects of a single inclined treadmill walking session on level ground
walking in individuals after stroke. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 91, 337–345 (2012).
79. H. Hsiao, L. N. Awad, J. A. Palmer, J. S. Higginson, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Contribution of
paretic and nonparetic limb peak propulsive forces to changes in walking speed in
individuals poststroke. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 30, 743–752 (2016).
80. R. L. Routson, D. J. Clark, M. G. Bowden, S. A. Kautz, R. R. Neptune, The influence of
locomotor rehabilitation on module quality and post-stroke hemiparetic walking
performance. Gait Posture 38, 511–517 (2013).
81. K. R. Lohse, C. E. Lang, L. A. Boyd, Is more better? Using metadata to explore dose–response
relationships in stroke rehabilitation. Stroke 45, 2053–2058 (2014).
82. T. G. Hornby, C. L. Holleran, P. W. Hennessy, A. L. Leddy, M. Connolly, J. Camardo,
J. Woodward, G. Mahtani, L. Lovell, E. J. Roth, Variable Intensive Early Walking Poststroke
(VIEWS): A randomized controlled trial. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 30, 440–450 (2016).
83. A. Norlander, E. Carlstedt, A.-C. Jönsson, E. M. Lexell, A. Ståhl, A. Lindgren, S. Iwarsson,
Long-term predictors of social and leisure activity 10 years after stroke. PLOS ONE 11,
e0149395 (2016).
84. J. A. Kleim, T. A. Jones, Principles of experience-dependent neural plasticity: Implications
for rehabilitation after brain damage. J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. 51, S225–S239 (2008).
85. L. R. Sheffler, J. Chae, Technological advances in interventions to enhance poststroke gait.
Phys. Med. Rehabil. Clin. N. Am. 24, 305–323 (2013).
86. L. N. Awad, D. S. Reisman, T. M. Kesar, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Targeting paretic propulsion
to improve poststroke walking function: A preliminary study. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 95,
840–848 (2014).
87. L. W. Forrester, A. Roy, C. Hafer-Macko, H. I. Krebs, R. F. Macko, Task-specific ankle robotics
gait training after stroke: A randomized pilot study. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 13, 51 (2016).
88. R. C. Browning, J. R. Modica, R. Kram, A. Goswami, The effects of adding mass to the legs on
the energetics and biomechanics of walking. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 39, 515–525 (2007).
89. H. Hsiao, B. A. Knarr, J. S. Higginson, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Mechanisms to increase
propulsive force for individuals poststroke. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 12, 40 (2015).
90. H. Hsiao, B. A. Knarr, J. S. Higginson, S. A. Binder-Macleod, The relative contribution of
ankle moment and trailing limb angle to propulsive force during gait. Hum. Mov. Sci.
39, 212–221 (2015).
91. H. Hsiao, J. S. Higginson, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Baseline predictors of treatment gains in
peak propulsive force in individuals poststroke. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 13, 2 (2016).
92. D. A. Winter, Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Gait: Normal, Elderly and
Pathological (University of Waterloo Press, 1991).
93. H. Hsiao, B. A. Knarr, R. T. Pohlig, J. S. Higginson, S. A. Binder-Macleod, Mechanisms used
to increase peak propulsive force following 12-weeks of gait training in individuals
poststroke. J. Biomech. 49, 388–395 (2016).
94. M. G. Bowden, A. L. Behrman, M. Woodbury, C. M. Gregory, C. A. Velozo, S. A. Kautz, Advancing
measurement of locomotor rehabilitation outcomes to optimize interventions and
differentiate between recovery versus compensation. J. Neurol. Phys. Ther. 36, 38–44 (2012).
95. J. Skidmore, P. Artemiadis, On the effect of walking surface stiffness on inter-limb
coordination in human walking: Toward bilaterally informed robotic gait rehabilitation.
J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 13, 32 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank C. Siviy and F. Saucedo for their assistance with data collection
and processing. We thank G. Greeley, T. Wong, Y. Ding, M. Athanassiu, N. Menard, M. Rouleau,
N. Karavas, I. Galiana, and A. Asbeck for their assistance developing the exosuit. We thank
S. Sullivan, M. Jackson, N. Zingman-Daniels, L. Bizarro, and D. Roberts of the Wyss Institute Clinical
Research Team and S. Binder-Macleod for their assistance with the study. We thank our study
participants who gave their time for this research. Funding: This work was supported by the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Warrior Web Program (contract number
W911NF-14-C-0051). The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressly or
implied, of DARPA or the U.S. Government. This work was also partially funded by the NSF (CNS-
1446464), American Heart Association (15POST25090068), NIH (1KL2TR001411), Rolex Award for
Enterprise, Harvard University Star Family Challenge, Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired
Engineering, and Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. Author
contributions: L.N.A., J.B., K.O., S.M.M.D., K.G.H., T.D.E., and C.J.W. designed the experiments. J.B.,
K.O., S.M.M.D., K.G.H., and C.J.W. developed the soft exosuit and its actuation system. L.N.A., J.B., K.O.,
K.H., S.A., and P.K. collected the data. L.N.A., J.B., L.H.S., P.K., and C.J.W. analyzed the data. L.N.A., J.B.,
and C.J.W. wrote the manuscript. L.N.A., J.B., L.H.S., P.K., and C.J.W. generated the figures and tables.
All authors provided critical feedback on the manuscript. Competing interests: Patents have been
filed with the U.S. Patent Office describing the exosuit components documented in this manuscript.
S.M.M.D., J.B., K.G.H., K.O., and C.J.W. were authors of those patents and patent applications (PCT/
US2013/60225, Soft exosuit for assistance with human motion; PCT/US2014/68462, Assistive flexible
suits, flexible suit systems, and methods for making and control thereof to assist human mobility;
PCT/US2014/40340, Soft exosuit for assistance with human motion;
PCT/US2015/51107, Soft exosuit for assistance with human motion). Harvard has entered into a
licensing and collaboration agreement with ReWalk Robotics. C.J.W. is a paid consultant to
ReWalk Robotics. Data and materials availability: The data supporting the main conclusions
of this manuscript are located within the manuscript. Additional data are available upon request (C.J.
W., walsh@seas.harvard.edu).
Submitted 12 September 2016
Resubmitted 21 April 2017
Accepted 7 July 2017
Published 26 July 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aai9084
Citation: L. N. Awad, J. Bae, K. O’Donnell, S. M. M. De Rossi, K. Hendron, L. H. Sloot, P. Kudzia,
S. Allen, K. G. Holt, T. D. Ellis, C. J. Walsh, A soft robotic exosuit improves walking in patients
after stroke. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Awad et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaai9084 (2017)
26 July 2017
12 of 12
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 A soft robotic exosuit improves walking in patients after stroke
Kudzia, Stephen Allen, Kenneth G. Holt, Terry D. Ellis and Conor J. Walsh
Louis N. Awad, Jaehyun Bae, Kathleen O'Donnell, Stefano M. M. De Rossi, Kathryn Hendron, Lizeth H. Sloot, Pawel
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aai9084
, eaai9084.
9
Sci Transl Med 
observed using the powered exosuit makes this a promising approach for neurorehabilitation.
needs. Although long-term therapeutic studies are necessary, the immediate improvement in walking performance
adjusted to deliver supportive force during the early or late phase of the gait cycle depending on the patient's 
be
the energy required to walk when powered on during treadmill and overground walking tests. The exosuit could 
partially paralyzed lower limb reduced interlimb propulsion asymmetry, increased ankle dorsiflexion, and reduced
force) during walking in nine patients in the chronic phase of stroke recovery. A soft robotic exosuit worn on the 
. studied the effects of active assistance (delivery of supportive
et al
remains limited for some patients. Awad 
Passive assistance devices such as canes and braces are often used by people after stroke, but mobility
A softer recovery after stroke
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/400/eaai9084
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/07/24/9.400.eaai9084.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/363/6429/805.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/426/eaag1328.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/404/eaam9145.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/210/210ps15.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/210/210rv2.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/373/eaaf3925.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/399/eaah3621.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/400/eaai9084#BIBL
This article cites 87 articles, 9 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
