 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016 
e856
Eff
 ectiveness of one dose of oral cholera vaccine in response 
to an outbreak: a case-cohort study
Andrew S Azman, Lucy A Parker, John Rumunu, Fisseha Tadesse, Francesco Grandesso, Lul L Deng, Richard Laku Lino, Bior K Bior, Michael Lasuba, 
Anne-Laure Page, Lameck Ontweka, Augusto E Llosa, Sandra Cohuet, Lorenzo Pezzoli, Dossou Vincent Sodjinou, Abdinasir Abubakar, 
Amanda K Debes, Allan M Mpairwe, Joseph F Wamala, Christine Jamet, Justin Lessler, David A Sack, Marie-Laure Quilici, Iza Ciglenecki, 
Francisco J Luquero
Summary
Background Oral cholera vaccines represent a new eff
 ective tool to fi
 ght cholera and are licensed as two-dose regimens 
with 2–4 weeks between doses. Evidence from previous studies suggests that a single dose of oral cholera vaccine 
might provide substantial direct protection against cholera. During a cholera outbreak in May, 2015, in Juba, South 
Sudan, the Ministry of Health, Médecins Sans Frontières, and partners engaged in the fi
 rst fi
 eld deployment of a 
single dose of oral cholera vaccine to enhance the outbreak response. We did a vaccine eff
 ectiveness study in 
conjunction with this large public health intervention.
Methods We did a case-cohort study, combining information on the vaccination status and disease outcomes from a 
random cohort recruited from throughout the city of Juba with that from all the cases detected. Eligible cases were 
those aged 1 year or older on the fi
 rst day of the vaccination campaign who sought care for diarrhoea at all three 
cholera treatment centres and seven rehydration posts throughout Juba. Confi
 rmed cases were suspected cases who 
tested positive to PCR for Vibrio cholerae O1. We estimated the short-term protection (direct and indirect) conferred by 
one dose of cholera vaccine (Shanchol, Shantha Biotechnics, Hyderabad, India). 
Findings Between Aug 9, 2015, and Sept 29, 2015, we enrolled 87 individuals with suspected cholera, and an 898-person 
cohort from throughout Juba. Of the 87 individuals with suspected cholera, 34 were classifi
 ed as cholera positive, 
52 as cholera negative, and one had indeterminate results. Of the 858 cohort members who completed a follow-up 
visit, none developed clinical cholera during follow-up. The unadjusted single-dose vaccine eff
 ectiveness was 80·2% 
(95% CI 61·5–100·0) and after adjusting for potential confounders was 87·3% (70·2–100·0).
Interpretation One dose of Shanchol was eff
 ective in preventing medically attended cholera in this study. These 
results support the use of a single-dose strategy in outbreaks in similar epidemiological settings.
Funding Médecins Sans Frontières.
Copyright © The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.
Introduction
Oral cholera vaccines are a feasible and eff
 ective tool for 
cholera outbreak response.1,2 Currently, there are three 
WHO-prequalifi
 ed oral cholera vaccines; one primarily for 
travellers (Dukoral, Janssen, Beerse, Belgium), and two 
that are better adapted for delivery through mass 
campaigns in outbreaks, Shanchol (Shantha Biotechnics, 
Hyderabad, India, prequalifi
 ed in November, 2012) and 
Euvichol (EuBiologics, Seoul, South Korea, prequalifi
 ed in 
December, 2015). Two doses of any of these killed whole-
cell vaccines provide high levels of direct protection 
probably lasting at least 5 years and some herd protection.2–6
In 2015, fewer than 4 million doses of oral cholera 
vaccine were produced, with most purchased by the 
global oral cholera vaccine stockpile, managed by the 
International 
Coordinating 
Group, 
comprised 
of 
Médecins Sans Frontières, UNICEF, the International 
Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 
and WHO.7 Although production will probably have 
increased in 2016, global availability will continue to be 
dwarfed by the more than 2 billion people at risk of 
cholera.8 Delivery of two oral cholera vaccine doses 
separated by at least 2 weeks presents logistical challenges 
for achieving adequate coverage in areas at most risk 
where populations are highly mobile and the epidemic 
focus might rapidly shift.
Epidemiological evidence, although minimal, suggests 
that one oral cholera vaccine dose might provide 
moderate protection from cholera.2,4,9,10 Immunogenicity 
studies also suggest that a single dose of oral cholera 
vaccine elicits a similar (vibriocidal) antibody response to 
two doses provided 2–4 weeks apart.11,12 Modelling results 
suggest that when vaccine supply is limited, vaccinating 
twice the number of people with a single dose will often 
save more lives than providing the full two-dose regimen 
to a smaller population during an outbreak.13 The global 
shortage of oral cholera vaccine, which will probably 
persist for years, coupled with the challenges of delivering 
two doses in some settings, might make a single dose, if 
eff
 ective, an attractive regimen.
Lancet Glob Health 2016; 
4: e856–63
See Comment page e771
Department of Epidemiology 
(A S Azman PhD, J Lessler PhD) 
and Department of 
International Health 
(F J Luquero PhD, A K Debes PhD, 
Prof D A Sack MD), Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, 
USA; Médecins Sans Frontières, 
Geneva, Switzerland 
(A S Azman, L A Parker PhD, 
C Jamet MPH, I Ciglenecki MD); 
CIBER Epidemiología y Salud 
Pública, Universidad Miguel 
Hernández, Alicante, Spain 
(L A Parker); Republic of South 
Sudan Ministry of Health, Juba, 
South Sudan (J Rumunu MPH, 
L L Deng MD, R L Lino MPH, 
B K Bior PhD, M Lasuba MS); 
Epicentre, Paris, France 
(F Tadesse MPH, 
F Grandesso MPH, A-L Page PhD, 
A E Llosa PhD, S Cohuet MD, 
F J Luquero); AMREF Health 
Africa, Juba, South Sudan 
(L Ontweka BS); World Health 
Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland (L Pezzoli PhD); 
World Health Organization, 
Brazzaville, Republic of the 
Congo (D V Sodjinou MD); 
World Health Organization, 
Cairo, Egypt (A Abubakar MD); 
World Health Organization, 
Juba, South Sudan 
(A M Mpairwe MPH, 
J F Wamala MPH); and Bacterial 
Pathogens Unit, Institut 
Pasteur, Paris, France 
(M-L Quilici PhD)
Correspondence to:
Dr Andrew S Azman, Department 
of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, 
USA
azman@jhu.edu 
 Articles
e857 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016
Cholera outbreaks are reported every 1–5 years in 
South Sudan. In 2014, an outbreak of Vibrio cholerae O1 
Inaba struck the country, causing 6269 suspected cases 
and 156 deaths.14 Within this outbreak, oral cholera 
vaccine campaigns were implemented throughout the 
country and primarily focused on displaced person 
camps, including two on the outskirts of Juba where 
roughly 20 000 individuals were vaccinated with a two-
dose regimen.14
In May, 2015, less than a year from the end of this 
outbreak, a cholera case was detected in a camp of 
internally displaced people in the capital, Juba. A 
V cholerae O1 Inaba outbreak was offi
  cially declared in 
June and Médecins Sans Frontières along with the South 
Sudan Ministry of Health and the National Cholera 
Taskforce made the decision to integrate oral cholera 
vaccine into the cholera response, complementing water, 
sanitation, and hygiene; case management; and 
surveillance activities. Only being able to secure around 
250 000 doses of Shanchol from the oral cholera vaccine 
stockpile for the 500 000–1 million-person city of Juba, 
the Ministry of Health and partners agreed to off
 er a 
single dose of oral cholera vaccine to high-risk areas of 
the city to rapidly immunise as many as possible with an 
aim of maximising the public health benefi
 t.
We did a vaccine eff
 ectiveness study in conjunction 
with this large public health intervention. We present the 
fi
 rst vaccine eff
 ectiveness estimates for a single dose of 
oral cholera vaccine provided in response to an outbreak.
Methods
Study design and participants
Decisions about where to target the limited available 
vaccine within the city were made through a consultative 
process based on (1) evidence of continuous transmission 
from the most recent situation reports; (2) cumulative 
attack rates at the time of decision making; (3) general 
living conditions including water and sanitation access; 
and (4) the estimated population size in each 
neighbourhood. The mass vaccination campaign lasted 
from July 31, 2015, to Aug 5, 2015. Additional groups were 
targeted from Aug 13, 2015, to Sept 1, 2015, including 
neighbours of cholera cases, a military camp, prisoners, 
and health-care workers. Ultimately, 165 000 people were 
vaccinated with a single dose of oral cholera vaccine in 
this campaign, which targeted a diff
 erent population from 
those previously conducted.14
Enhanced surveillance for cholera began at the start of 
the outbreak and consisted of standardised line listing, 
including demographic and clinical data, of each patient 
seeking care for suspected cholera at any health facility 
within the city and daily reporting to the National Cholera 
Taskforce. Line lists were intended to help track the 
epidemic progression and to guide cholera control and 
case-management interventions. The surveillance network 
for the study included all three cholera treatment centres 
providing inpatient care and the seven oral rehydration 
posts, providing care for patients with mild suspected 
cholera throughout the city during the study period. At 
each site, the line lists were maintained by clinic staff
  and 
study staff
  were either posted full-time or made daily visits 
to each. When there were few cases at the end of the study, 
staff
  made regular phone calls to the sites for updates, and 
visited when any new suspected cases arrived.
We used a case-cohort approach to estimate vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness, combining information on vaccination 
status and disease outcomes from a random cohort 
recruited from throughout the city of Juba with that from 
all cases of cholera detected, irrespective of cohort 
membership, following established methods.15–17 This 
design allowed us to take into account the variable 
person-time at risk in vaccinated and unvaccinated states 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
We did a PubMed search between Jan 1, 1980, and Jan 1, 2016, 
for studies published in English using the search terms “(‘cholera 
vaccine’ OR ‘cholerae vaccine’) AND (effi
  cacy OR eff
 ectiveness) 
AND oral”, with 19 of the 213 manuscripts having primary 
assessments of killed whole cell oral cholera vaccine, including 
studies from Haiti, Bangladesh, India, Guinea, Mozambique, Peru, 
Vietnam, and Tanzania (excluding human challenge studies and 
those of travellers). A phase 3 clinical trial in Kolkata, India, a 
cholera-endemic setting, estimated the 5-year cumulative 
effi
  cacy of Shanchol, the vaccine used in the global cholera 
stockpile and the main focus of this study, to be 65%. Post-
licensure eff
 ectiveness studies of Shanchol conducted in outbreak 
settings estimated the (direct) eff
 ectiveness of the full two-dose 
regimen at 87% after 6 months (in Guinea) and 63% after 
24 months. No published studies in our search had a primary 
endpoint of effi
  cacy or eff
 ectiveness after one dose of oral cholera 
vaccine, although four fi
 eld studies included estimates for the 
eff
 ectiveness of a single dose, ranging from 33–67%, but none of 
these were statistically signifi
 cant.
Added value of this study
This study provides evidence of the eff
 ectiveness of a single 
dose of killed whole cell oral cholera vaccine (Shanchol) against 
symptomatic confi
 rmed cholera in an outbreak.
Implications of all the available evidence
These results, combined with evidence from previous two-dose 
studies, suggest that a single dose oral cholera vaccine regimen 
might provide a practical and cost-eff
 ective approach for 
rapidly protecting populations during an outbreak. More 
research is needed to understand how protection might vary 
across settings with diff
 erent levels of cholera endemicity, the 
duration of protection from a single-dose, and the added value 
of booster doses provided months to years after a primary dose. 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016 
e858
and provide a vaccine eff
 ectiveness estimate incorporating 
some degree of indirect protection due to the inclusion of 
unvaccinated individuals in both vaccine-targeted and 
non-targeted areas. 
Suspected cases were all individuals aged 1 year and 
older on the fi
 rst day of the vaccination campaign who 
sought care for diarrhoea at participating health 
structures; who had three or more loose stools in the 
preceding 24 h; who had lived in the same residence 
during the preceding 2 weeks (within a 2 h drive of 
central Juba); and who had not visited a health facility for 
diarrhoea before Aug 1, 2015, but reported that they 
would do so for severe diarrhoea. 
Cohort participants were eligible for inclusion in the 
trial if they were aged 1 year or older on the fi
 rst day of 
the vaccination campaign; resided in the same household 
in Juba for at least the preceding 2 weeks; and had not 
visited a health facility for diarrhoea before Aug 1, 2015 
(start of vaccination campaign), but reported that they 
would do so for severe diarrhoea. 
Procedures
On admission, study staff
  collected a stool sample using 
a clean, unused container. Once the patient was in a 
stable condition, they were approached by a study team 
member and asked for written consent to participate. If 
no consent was provided, the stool sample was tested 
locally and results were used for routine surveillance. 
The protocol for this study was approved by the South 
Sudan ethical review board and the Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health institutional review 
board.
Cohort participants were selected through a multistage 
random spatial sampling process. We divided the city 
into 350 m × 350 m grid cells and selected grid cells (45 in 
vaccinated and 45 in unvaccinated areas) randomly with 
weights proportional to the number of buildings within 
each (using recent digitised aerial imagery). For each 
chosen cell, we randomly (uniform distribution) selected 
ten points to visit. Study staff
  visited the closest 
residential door to each point. At each selected household 
(people sleeping under the same roof and sharing meals 
every day for at least the previous 2 weeks), all household 
members, not just those present, were enumerated, and 
one person was randomly chosen and asked for written 
consent to participate in the study.
Study staff
  attempted to follow-up each cohort member 
at the end of the epidemic to ask about episodes of 
diarrhoea, both medically attended and non-medically 
attended. At the end of the study, we cross-checked (using 
name, sex, and age) the study participants with the 
master national line list of suspected cholera cases.
All cohort members and cases were asked a series of 
questions from standardised pre-piloted questionnaires 
to capture data on their personal and household 
demographics, their date of arrival in Juba if not from 
there, recent health status, history of cholera vaccination 
(over the past 2 years), and data for other potential 
confounders including access to water, sanitation, and 
health care. Study staff
  were trained to ascertain 
vaccination status by fi
 rst describing the vaccination 
campaign and showing a photo of someone taking an 
oral cholera vaccine. They then asked the person if they 
were vaccinated along with details of when and where. 
Vaccination cards were requested from all individuals 
reporting to have been vaccinated. Since individuals with 
suspected cholera were unlikely to have vaccination cards 
in their possession at the health facilities when recruited, 
study staff
  visited households to ascertain vaccination 
status.
Individuals were considered vaccinated 10 days after 
reporting to have fully ingested one dose of oral cholera 
vaccine based on published immunological scientifi
 c 
literature suggesting that the peak vibriocidal antibody 
response after infection or vaccination occurs 9–11 days 
after exposure.18–21
Samples were tested in-country and at two international 
laboratories 
with 
culture-dependent 
and 
culture-
independent methods (appendix). First, stool was tested 
on-site after a 4–6 h-enrichment in alkaline peptone water 
with a rapid dipstick test (Crystal VC, Arkray Healthcare 
Pvt, Surat, India). Both direct and enriched specimens 
were placed on fi
 lter paper (Whatman 903 211 Protein 
Saver Card, GE Healthcare, Cardiff
 , UK) for PCR analyses 
at Johns Hopkins University.22 In parallel, stool was placed 
onto wet fi
 lter paper disks for culture at the South Sudan 
National Public Health Laboratory and both culture and 
PCR at Institut Pasteur, with standard methods.23,24 To 
maximise sensitivity while maintaining high specifi
 city, 
confi
 rmed cases were defi
 ned as suspected cases who were 
positive by at least one PCR test. To minimise the risk of 
misclassifi
 cation, cholera-negative cases were those testing 
negative by all tests including PCR, culture, and enriched 
rapid test.
Statistical analysis
In sample size calculations (PASS, version 14) assuming 
a vaccine eff
 ectiveness of 50%, 80% vaccine coverage in 
the targeted areas, and 15% loss to follow-up, we 
estimated that we needed to enrol 900 cohort members 
(450 each from vaccine-targeted and non-vaccine-targeted 
areas) and have 155 cases of cholera for 80% power to 
detect a signifi
 cant vaccine eff
 ectiveness at an α level of 
0·05. In addition to the case-cohort design, we also 
attempted to estimate vaccine eff
 ectiveness with a “test-
negative” design and the direct vaccine eff
 ectiveness with 
a matched case-control study, which were selected a 
priori as secondary analyses (appendix). We estimated 
unadjusted and adjusted hazard ratios (HR) of medically 
attended cholera, comparing those who received the 
vaccine to those who did not, and calculated the 
vaccine eff
 ectiveness with the association: vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness = 1 – HR. We used proportional hazards 
models with vaccination as an independent variable and 
For more on digitised aerial 
imagery see http://wiki.
openstreetmap.org/wiki/
WikiProject_South_Sudan
See Online for appendix
 Articles
e859 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016
a time origin of Aug 5, 2015 (the end of the mass 
campaign), following established case-cohort methods.25 
We assumed that individuals in the cohort reporting 
diarrhoea during follow-up, who did not have a positive 
cholera test result recorded at a cholera treatment centre, 
remained at risk of cholera after the episode(s).
Weights were used in all analyses to account for sampling 
design with relative population estimates derived from 
digitised satellite imagery layers. CIs were estimated with 
5000 bootstrap replicates. We explored violations of non-
proportionality of hazards visually and using Schoenfeld 
residuals, with no violations detected.26 Several adjusted 
candidate models, consistent with previous scientifi
 c 
literature and expert opinion, were proposed by co-
investigators of the study. These models and variants of 
models selected by stepwise selection were compared by 
Akaike Information Criteria (appendix).27 To understand 
the robustness of our estimates, we estimated the vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness using models that accounted for potential 
diff
 erences in the baseline hazard of cholera infection in 
diff
 erent areas of the city. We also estimated vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness with alternative defi
 nitions of vaccination 
(including only those with a vaccination card), confi
 rmed 
cases, timing of vaccine protection (2–14 days after 
ingestion), and alternative methods for accounting for 
diarrhoea cases within the cohort (appendix).
With use of the cholera-negative suspected cases, we 
also did a bias indicator study to help ascertain whether 
receipt of vaccine was associated with a change in risk of 
medically attended non-cholera diarrhoea. To control for 
potential biases in health-seeking behaviour, we restricted 
this analysis to those seeking care before Sept 1, 2015 
(when all but one cholera treatment centre closed and the 
health-care-seeking patterns changed throughout the 
city). With the use of the same methods as the primary 
analysis, we assessed the eff
 ectiveness of a single dose of 
oral cholera vaccine against non-cholera diarrhoea. 
Analyses were done with R software, version 3.2.3, and 
the survival package.
Role of the funding source
The funder of this study had staff
  (co-authors of this 
manuscript) who had a role in study design, study 
execution, data collection, data analysis, data inter-
pretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding 
author had full access to all data in the study and had 
fi
 nal responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication.
Results
Between Aug 9, 2015, and Sept 29, 2015, 110 individuals 
with suspected cholera visited health facilities for 
Figure 1: Study enrolment overview
Enrolment of cases outside the cohort (left) and follow-up within the cohort (right) are shown.
150 patients visited cholera treatment
centres during the study period
(based on the national line list)
110 patients with acute water diarrhoea
screened for eligibility
87 patients met inclusion criteria and had 
vaccination status ascertained
34 patients were 
cholera positive
52 patients were 
cholera negative
40 excluded
2 died before screening
38 discharged before screening
23 were excluded
1 resided outside study area
1 refused
20 lost to follow-up
1 died before providing consent
1 patient with discordant laboratory results
900 households randomly selected for
potential enrolment in cohort
450 in areas targeted with oral cholera 
vaccine
450 in areas not targeted with oral cholera 
vaccine
2 were excluded
2 refused to participate
898 individuals enrolled into cohort study
373 vaccinated
525 unvaccinated
40 unable to be recontacted after enrolment
858 individuals had at least one follow-up visit
16 reported diarrhoea during follow-up
0 sought care at cholera treatment centres
Cases
Cohort
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016 
e860
treatment in Juba (fi
 gure 1, 2). Of these, 87 were enrolled 
in the study. We also enrolled 898 cohort members from 
throughout the city, including 450 from vaccine-targeted 
areas and 448 from non-targeted areas starting on 
Aug 23, 2015 (fi
 gure 1).
Among the 87 enrolled participants with suspected 
cholera, 34 participants were classifi
 ed as cholera positive 
(confi
 rmed), 52 were classifi
 ed as cholera negative 
(negative to all tests), and one remained unclassifi
 ed 
because of discordant laboratory results. No cholera 
cases were detected within the cohort through self-report 
or matching with the national cholera line list, although 
16 (of the 858 successfully contacted for follow-up) 
reported having diarrhoea during the follow-up period.
Individuals with confi
 rmed cholera were aged between 
2 and 48 years old with a mean age of 23·1 years (SD 
11·96) and a median age of 25 years (IQR 17–29). 
Individuals with cholera came from both vaccine-targeted 
(n=20) and non-targeted (n=14) areas throughout the city, 
although most of those from vaccinated areas lived close 
to the border between vaccine-targeted and unvaccinated 
areas. Among the confi
 rmed cases, only two (6%) 
individuals were vaccinated at the time of symptom 
onset.
Within the cohort, 290 (64%) of 450 individuals living 
in vaccine-targeted areas and 83 (19%) of 448 living in 
non-targeted areas were vaccinated (through targeted 
vaccination after the mass campaign). Although 
vaccinated and unvaccinated participants of the case-
cohort study (including cases) generally appeared similar 
at baseline, some diff
 erences were apparent (table 1). 
Vaccinated indi 
viduals tended to be younger, more often 
female than male, live in larger households, more likely 
to treat their drinking water, more likely to share a latrine 
with someone who had severe diarrhoea in the week 
before the interview, and less likely to have improved 
sanitation than unvaccinated individuals.28
In both unadjusted and adjusted analyses, vaccination 
with one-dose of oral cholera vaccine was associated with 
signifi
 cant protection from medically attended cholera 
(table 2). We estimated the unadjusted single-dose 
vaccine eff
 ectiveness to be 80·2% (95% CI 61·5–100·0), 
and after adjusting for potential confounders, 87·3% 
(70·2–100·0). In a bias indicator analysis, we found that 
reported ingestion of one dose of oral cholera vaccine 
was not signifi
 cantly associated with medically attended 
non-cholera diarrhoea risk (vaccine eff
 ectiveness 17·6% 
[95% CI –48·7 to 67·1]).
Sensitivity analyses with alternative assumptions and 
models yielded similar results, and we had too few cases 
of cholera to reliably estimate vaccine eff
 ectiveness from 
the secondary study designs (appendix). With use of the 
test-negative design, we estimated the unadjusted vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness to be 60·0% (95% CI –123·0 to 94·8) and 
adjusted vaccine eff
 ectiveness to be 75·9% (–89·2 to 97·7), 
which were not statistically diff
 erent from our primary 
estimates. In the matched case-control design, aimed at 
measuring the direct vaccine eff
 ectiveness, we had only 
seven matched case-control sets contributing to our 
unadjusted estimate of 33·6% (–318·5 to 89·5) and 
adjusted estimate of 36·5% (–401·7 to 89·4).
Discussion
In this fi
 rst fi
 eld use of a single dose of oral cholera 
vaccine, we found the regimen to be eff
 ective in 
preventing medically attended cholera disease during an 
Figure 2: Suspected cholera cases enrolled by date of symptom onset and cholera confi
 rmation status
Aug 15, 2015
Sept 1, 2015
Sept 15, 2015
Oct 1, 2015
0
1
2
3
4
5
Suspected cases enrolled
Day of symptom onset
Indeterminate
Cholera positive
Cholera negative
Suspected case status
 Articles
e861 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016
outbreak. These fi
 ndings suggest that one dose of oral 
cholera vaccine, half the present regimen, might be an 
eff
 ective, practical tool in outbreaks where a rapid 
reduction in short-term cholera risk is needed.
Although this study represents the fi
 rst fi
 eld use and 
eff
 ectiveness study of a single-dose regimen, it also 
adds to the evidence provided by a randomised trial and 
secondary analyses from previous two-dose eff
 ective-
ness studies.2,9,10,29 The individually randomised trial, 
done in Bangladesh, estimated the 6-month direct 
effi
  cacy of this regimen to be 40% against all types of 
medically attended cholera and 63% against severely 
dehydrating cholera.10 The two-dose eff
 ectiveness 
studies, not powered to estimate the single dose eff
 ect, 
estimated the direct single-dose eff
 ectiveness to be 
33–67% with CIs that included zero.2,4,9,29 Secondary 
analyses of the direct eff
 ectiveness from our study 
(appendix) support the notion that the true direct 
vaccine eff
 ectiveness might fall within this range.
Our vaccine eff
 ectiveness estimates are higher than 
previous estimates for several potential reasons. First, 
in addition to the direct eff
 ects of the vaccine, our 
estimates include indirect eff
 ects, which might be 
substantial even with low vaccine coverage.5,6 Second, 
these estimates represent the eff
 ectiveness over a much 
shorter period of time (up to 2 months) than other 
studies. Finally, although we enhanced cholera 
surveillance, it probably remained less sensitive than 
surveillance in other countries, such as Bangladesh and 
India, where vaccine eff
 ectiveness in other studies was 
assessed. Therefore, our estimates might refl
 ect the 
eff
 ectiveness of oral cholera vaccine to prevent severe 
medically attended disease as opposed to all medically 
attended cholera disease.
The eff
 ectiveness of one dose of oral cholera vaccine is 
likely to depend on historical population-level exposure 
to cholera, with immunologically primed populations 
likely to benefi
 t more than those who have never had 
cholera before. A trial10 of a single-dose regimen found 
that young children were less protected than adults, 
which might be attributable to historical exposure. This 
study was done during an outbreak only 1 year after a 
previous large outbreak, suggesting that for some, one 
dose might have simply acted as a booster after natural 
exposure. More work is needed to understand how a 
single dose can protect populations not previously 
exposed to cholera, including young children, through 
both direct and indirect eff
 ects.
The observational nature of this study and the 
challenging fi
 eld conditions present several limitations 
for interpreting our results. Numerous quality control 
procedures were in place to ensure that interviewers 
correctly ascertained the participants’ vaccination status 
and vaccination date, although nearly 50% of participants 
did not have their vaccination cards. The verbal reports of 
vaccination used in the main analysis could have been 
aff
 ected by vaccination coverage and cholera incidence 
surrounding 
participants. 
However, 
in 
sensitivity 
analyses excluding those without a vaccination card, we 
fi
 nd our main vaccine eff
 ectiveness estimates to be 
similar to those reported here (appendix). Although our 
cohort was meant to be representative of the underlying 
population at risk of seeking care for suspected cholera, 
it is possible that diff
 erences in health-care-seeking 
behaviour across the city could have aff
 ected our 
estimates. Given that our estimates with the test-negative 
design, which controls for some biases related to care-
seeking behaviour, were similar to, although lower than, 
our main estimates, this eff
 ect was unlikely to be large.
Vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals in this study 
had baseline diff
 erences that we attempted to control for 
with regression models. However, these models come 
with many simplifying assumptions. Data for covariates 
were collected through self-report and could have been 
Unvaccinated 
(n=557)
Vaccinated 
(n=375)
p value
Age (years)
23·8 (15·33)
19·3 (14·77)
<0·0001
Sex
Male
306 (55%)
153 (41%)
..
Female
251 (45%)
222 (59%)
<0·0001
Mean number of people in the household
5·2 (2·77)
6·22 (3·83)
<0·0001
Had mobile telephone in household
454 (82%)
314 (84%)
0·38
Number of households where all school-aged children were 
in school*
230/287 
(80%)
199/261 (76%)
0·27
Time to nearest clinic (min)
25·9 (16·8)
25·25 (16·74)
0·56
Cases of cholera in household in the past week
14 (3%)
11 (3%)
0·70
Main drinking water source in the past week considered an 
“improved water source”†
94 (17%)
49 (13%)
0·11
Water treatment (sometimes or always)
390 (70%)
311 (83%)
<0·0001
Ate street food in the past week
170 (31%)
127 (34%)
0·27
Had soap available (self-report)
486 (87%)
321 (86%)
0·47
Had improved sanitation (self-report)†
345 (62%)
186 (50%)
0·0002 
Shared latrine with someone with severe diarrhoea in the 
past week
16 (3%)
25 (7%)
0·01
Shared water with someone with cholera case in the past 
week
17 (3%)
7 (2%)
0·25
Data are mean (SD), n (%), or n/N (%). p values refer to the Wald test. Anyone who was vaccinated for at least 1 day of the 
study period was classifi
 ed as vaccinated for this table and everyone else as unvaccinated; this included both cohort 
members and cases from outside the cohort. All variables were based on self-reports. *384 households ha 
d no individuals 
aged 5–15 years reported. †Defi
 ned by WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program. 
Table 1: Baseline characteristics
Unvaccinated 
group (30 001 
person-days)
Vaccinated 
group (13 591 
person-days) 
Unadjusted vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness (95% CI)
Adjusted vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness (95% CI)*
Number of cholera 
cases
32
2
80·2% (61·5–100·0)
87·3% (70·2–100·0)
*Adjusted for age, sex, household size, number of cholera cases in the household in the past week, improved drinking 
water source, drinking water treatment (sometimes or always) in the past week, whether street food was eaten in the 
last week, and whether soap was available.
Table 2: Overview of vaccine eff
 ectiveness results 
For more on the WHO/UNICEF 
Joint Monitoring Program see 
http://www.wssinfo.org/
definitions-methods/watsan-
categories/
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016 
e862
aff
 ected by social desirability and other biases. Our 
estimates could have residual confounding by measured 
and unmeasured covariates after adjustment; however, 
the stability of our eff
 ectiveness estimates across 
multiple adjusted models (appendix) provides some 
reassurance.
On the basis of previous cholera fi
 eld-eff
 ectiveness 
studies, we anticipated having only a few true cases 
enrolled in the study, with only a few of these being 
from vaccinated areas where a comparison of cholera in 
vaccinated and unvaccinated people could be made. We 
used a case-cohort design, which can be more effi
  cient 
and allowed us to make use of cases from both vaccine-
targeted and non-targeted areas in estimating vaccine 
eff
 ectiveness. We enrolled 34 confi
 rmed cases, which 
was far less than our target number of cases, and did 
not allow us to make stratifi
 ed estimates by age. 
Although these results are promising and qualitatively 
consistent with other published estimates, more 
evidence from fi
 eld studies is needed to confi
 rm the 
generalisability of these results. Several questions 
remain, including how long protection from a single-
dose lasts beyond the 2-month timeframe of this study 
and how the eff
 ectiveness of a single dose varies 
between people and settings with diff
 erent historical 
exposure to cholera.
We found a single dose of oral cholera vaccine to be 
eff
 ective in preventing cholera during an epidemic in 
Juba, South Sudan. Although these analyses come with 
several shortcomings, sensitivity and bias-indicator 
analyses point towards our results being robust. These 
results support the use of a single-dose regimen in 
response to outbreaks in populations who are at high risk 
of cholera, where the priority is to rapidly provide 
protection to populations at risk, particularly when 
vaccine supply is limited.
Contributors
ASA and FJL contributed to the study design and managed and 
supervised the study. LAP, FT, FG, LO, SC, IC, AEL, ASA, and FJL 
contributed to the implementation and supervision of the study. ASA, 
FG, JL, and FJL analysed the data. LLD, BKB, M-LQ, A-LP, LO, AKD, 
DAS, and M-LQ participated in the microbiological aspects of the study. 
All other authors had a role in facilitating the study and providing ad-hoc 
technical support. All authors participated in the writing of the 
manuscript, had full access to the data in the study, and saw and 
approved the fi
 nal version of the manuscript.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
ASA, DAS, AKD, JL, and FJL were funded by grants from the Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation (OPP1089243 and OPP153556). The 
laboratory work at Institut Pasteur was funded by the Institut Pasteur 
and the French Institute for Public Health Surveillance. The laboratory 
work at Johns Hopkins and the reagents used in the fi
 eld were 
supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation through the 
Delivering Oral Cholera Vaccines Eff
 ectively (DOVE) project. We thank 
all the study participants, study staff
 , vaccination teams, the Médecins 
Sans Frontières Juba team, the laboratory teams including Jean Rauzier 
(Institut Pasteur) and Abiem Bona But (South Sudan National Public 
Health), Jean Clement Cabrol, Javier Gori, Barbara Rusch, and 
Micaela Serafi
 ni for making this study and public health intervention 
possible. We thank Vincent Muller for the mapping support and 
Larry Moulton for the helpful comments.
References
1 
Abubakar A, Almiron M, Charito A, et al. Cholera, 2014. 
Wkly Epidemiol Rec 2015; 90: 517–44.
2 
Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki I, et al. Use of Vibrio cholerae 
vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 2111–20.
3 
Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year effi
  cacy of a bivalent 
killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: 
a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2013; 13: 1050–56.
4 
Khatib AM, Ali M, Seidlein von L, et al. Eff
 ectiveness of an oral 
cholera vaccine in Zanzibar: fi
 ndings from a mass vaccination 
campaign and observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 2012; 
12: 837–44.
5 
Ali M, Sur D, You YA, et al. Herd protection by a bivalent killed 
whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in the slums of Kolkata, India. 
Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56: 1123–31.
6 
Ali M, Emch M, Seidlein von L, et al. Herd immunity conferred by 
killed oral cholera vaccines in Bangladesh: a reanalysis. Lancet 2005; 
366: 44–49.
7 
Martin S, Lopez AL, Bellos A, et al. Post-licensure deployment of 
oral cholera vaccines: a systematic review. Bull World Health Organ 
2014; 92: 881–93.
8 
Ali M, Lopez AL, You YA, et al. The global burden of cholera. 
Bull World Health Organ 2012; 90: 209–18A.
9 
Ivers LC, Hilaire IJ, Teng JE, et al. Eff
 ectiveness of reactive oral 
cholera vaccination in rural Haiti: a case-control study and 
bias-indicator analysis. Lancet Glob Health 2015; 3: e162–68.
10 
Qadri F, Wierzba TF, Ali M, et al. Effi
  cacy of a single-dose, 
inactivated oral cholera vaccine in Bangladesh. N Engl J Med 2016; 
374: 1723–32.
11 
Kanungo S, Paisley A, Lopez AL, Bhattacharya M. 
Immune responses following one and two doses of the 
reformulated, bivalent, killed, whole-cell, oral cholera vaccine 
among adults and children in Kolkata, India: a randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial. Vaccine 2009; 27: 6887–93.
12 
Kanungo S, Desai SN, Nandy RK, et al. Flexibility of oral cholera 
vaccine dosing—a randomized controlled trial measuring immune 
responses following alternative vaccination schedules in a cholera 
hyper-endemic zone. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2015; 9: e0003574.
13 
Azman AS, Luquero FJ, Ciglenecki I, Grais RF, Sack DA, Lessler J. 
The impact of a one-dose versus two-dose oral cholera vaccine 
regimen in outbreak settings: a modeling study. PLoS Med 2015; 
12: e1001867
.
14 
Abubakar A, Azman AS, Rumunu J, et al. The fi
 rst use of the global 
oral cholera vaccine emergency stockpile: lessons from South 
Sudan. PLoS Med 2015; 12: e1001901.
15 
Barlow WE, Ichikawa L, Rosner D, Izumi S. Analysis of case-cohort 
designs. J Clin Epidemiol 1999; 52: 1165–72.
16 
Sharp SJ, Poulaliou M, Thompson SG, White IR, Wood AM. 
A review of published analyses of case-cohort studies and 
recommendations for future reporting. PLoS One 2014; 9: e101176.
17 
Moulton LH, Wolff
  MC, Brenneman G, Santosham M. Case-cohort 
analysis of case-coverage studies of vaccine eff
 ectiveness. 
Am J Epidemiol 1995; 142: 1000–06.
18 
Clements ML, Levine MM, Young CR, et al. Magnitude, kinetics, 
and duration of vibriocidal antibody responses in North Americans 
after ingestion of Vibrio cholerae. J Infect Dis 1982; 145: 465–73.
19 
Wasserman SS, Losonsky GA, Noriega F, Tacket CO, Castañeda E, 
Levine MM. Kinetics of the vibriocidal antibody response to live oral 
cholera vaccines. Vaccine 1994; 12: 1000–03.
20 Svennerholm AM, Jertborn M, Gothefors L, Karim AM, Sack DA, 
Holmgren J. Mucosal antitoxic and antibacterial immunity after 
cholera disease and after immunization with a combined 
B subunit-whole cell vaccine. J Infect Dis 1984; 149: 884–93.
21 
Sack RB, Barua D, Saxena R, Carpenter CC. Vibriocidal and 
agglutinating antibody patterns in cholera patients. J Infect Dis 1966; 
116: 630–40.
22 Debes AK, Ateudjieu J, Guenou E, et al. Clinical and environmental 
surveillance for vibrio cholerae in resource constrained areas: 
application during a 1-year surveillance in the far north region of 
Cameroon. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2016; 94: 537–43.
 Articles
e863 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 4   November 2016
23 Page A-L, Alberti KP, Guénolé A, et al. Use of fi
 lter paper as a 
transport medium for laboratory diagnosis of cholera under fi
 eld 
conditions. J Clin Microbiol 2011; 49: 3021–23.
24 
Hoshino K, Yamasaki S, Mukhopadhyay AK, et al. Development and 
evaluation of a multiplex PCR assay for rapid detection of toxigenic 
Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 1998; 
20: 201–07
.
25 Barlow WE, Ichikawa L, Rosner D, Izumi S. Analysis of case-cohort 
designs. J Clin Epidemiol 1999; 52: 1165–72.
26 Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S, May S. Applied survival analysis: 
Regression modelling of time to event data. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1999.
27 
Burnham K, Anderson DR. Model selection and multimodel 
inference. Berlin: Springer, 2002.
 
28 WHO, UNICEF. Progress on sanitation and drinking-water, 2014 
update. http://www.wssinfo.org/fi
 leadmin/user_upload/resources/
JMP_report_2014_webEng.pdf (accessed Jan 16, 2005).
29 Wierzba TF, Kar SK, Mogasale VV, et al. Eff
 ectiveness of an oral 
cholera vaccine campaign to prevent clinically-signifi
 cant cholera in 
Odisha State, India. Vaccine 2015; 33: 2463–69.
