 Protocol of the Australasian Malignant
Pleural Effusion-2 (AMPLE-2) trial:
a multicentre randomised study of
aggressive versus symptom-guided
drainage via indwelling pleural
catheters
Maree Azzopardi,1,2 Rajesh Thomas,1,2 Sanjeevan Muruganandan,1,3
David C L Lam,4 Luke A Garske,5 Benjamin C H Kwan,6,7
Muhammad Redzwan S Rashid Ali,8 Phan T Nguyen,9 Elaine Yap,10
Fiona C Horwood,10 Alexander J Ritchie,11 Michael Bint,12 Claire L Tobin,13
Ranjan Shrestha,14 Francesco Piccolo,15 Christian C De Chaneet,16,17
Jenette Creaney,18 Robert U Newton,19,20 Delia Hendrie,21 Kevin Murray,22
Catherine A Read,2,3 David Feller-Kopman,23 Nick A Maskell,24 Y C Gary Lee1,2,3
To cite: Azzopardi M,
Thomas R, Muruganandan S,
et al. Protocol of the
Australasian Malignant
Pleural Effusion-2 (AMPLE-2)
trial: a multicentre
randomised study of
aggressive versus symptom-
guided drainage via
indwelling pleural catheters.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-
011480
▸ Prepublication history and
additional material is
available. To view please visit
the journal (http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmjopen-2016-
011480).
Received 11 February 2016
Revised 7 May 2016
Accepted 8 June 2016
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Y C Gary Lee;
gary.lee@uwa.edu.au
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Malignant pleural effusions (MPEs) can
complicate most cancers, causing dyspnoea and
impairing quality of life (QoL). Indwelling pleural
catheters (IPCs) are a novel management approach
allowing ambulatory fluid drainage and are increasingly
used as an alternative to pleurodesis. IPC drainage
approaches vary greatly between centres. Some
advocate aggressive (usually daily) removal of fluid to
provide best symptom control and chance of
spontaneous pleurodesis. Daily drainages however
demand considerably more resources and may
increase risks of complications. Others believe that
MPE care is palliative and drainage should be
performed only when patients become symptomatic
(often weekly to monthly). Identifying the best drainage
approach will optimise patient care and healthcare
resource utilisation.
Methods and analysis: A multicentre, open-label
randomised trial. Patients with MPE will be randomised
1:1 to daily or symptom-guided drainage regimes after
IPC insertion. Patient allocation to groups will be
stratified for the cancer type (mesothelioma vs others),
performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group status 0–1 vs ≥2), presence of trapped lung
(vs not) and prior pleurodesis (vs not). The primary
outcome is the mean daily dyspnoea score, measured
by a 100 mm visual analogue scale (VAS) over the first
60 days. Secondary outcomes include benefits on
physical activity levels, rate of spontaneous
pleurodesis, complications, hospital admission days,
healthcare costs and QoL measures. Enrolment of 86
participants will detect a mean difference of VAS score
of 14 mm between the treatment arms (5%
significance, 90% power) assuming a common
between-group SD of 18.9 mm and a 10% lost to
follow-up rate.
Ethics and dissemination: The Sir Charles Gairdner
Group Human Research Ethics Committee has
approved the study (number 2015-043). Results will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
scientific meetings.
Trial registration number: ACTRN12615000963527;
Pre-results.
INTRODUCTION
Over 8000 Australians and 1 million patients
worldwide develop a malignant pleural effu-
sion (MPE) each year. MPE can complicate
most cancers, including 30% of lung and
breast carcinomas and over 90% of patients
Strengths and limitations of this study
▪ Multicentre randomised trial comparing aggres-
sive (daily) versus symptom-guided drainage
regimes after indwelling pleural catheter (IPC)
insertion for patients with malignant pleural
effusions.
▪ Variations in drainage approaches have direct
impact on patient care and major implications on
healthcare resources and costs. Establishing the
optimal approach will impact clinical care.
▪ The trial builds on the infrastructure and recruit-
ment network established via the recently com-
pleted Australasian Malignant Pleural Effusion-1
(AMPLE-1) study.
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
1
Open Access
Protocol
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 with malignant pleural mesothelioma.1 Breathlessness is
the most common symptom of MPE and is often disab-
ling and significantly impairs daily activities and quality
of life (QoL). The development of an MPE generally
heralds an incurable cancer with a median survival of
4–12 months for
metastatic
pleural carcinomas and
mesotheliomas, respectively.2 Conventional therapies are
suboptimal and patients often have to undergo multiple
pleural interventional procedures for fluid drainage.
These procedures are painful, costly, can be associated
with major complications and require medical visits or
hospitalisations, depriving patients of precious time in
their limited lifespan.3 Talc pleurodesis, a therapy first
described in 1935,4 remains the most commonly used
definitive therapy worldwide; however, data in recent
years have shown that this approach has high failure
rates,5 involves more time in hospital6 and is associated
with significant side effects.7
Indwelling pleural catheter (IPC) is a novel treatment
for MPE that has considerable advantages over talc
pleurodesis, providing equal benefits, as first-line treat-
ment, in the relief of breathlessness and chest pain,8
and offers at least as good improvements in QoL. IPC
can be applied to most patients with MPE, whereas
pleurodesis is only suitable in those with fully expanded
lungs. Significantly fewer patients treated with an IPC
require subsequent pleural drainages in their remaining
lifespan than those pleurodesed.5
9–11 In two rando-
mised trials, patients in the IPC group spent significantly
shorter time in hospital than those receiving pleurodesis
for the initial procedure;8 11 reduction of inpatient stay
can represent significant savings on healthcare costs.
Spontaneous pleurodesis can develop in patients fitted
with an IPC, thus allowing removal of the IPC and redu-
cing further drainage costs and adverse events. Recent
studies have shown that serious IPC complications are
uncommon, with a 4.7% incidence of pleural infection6
and 10% incidence of catheter tract metastases.12
Despite the reported benefits of IPC, its use is relatively
new and significant heterogeneity exists on practical
aspects of IPC management around the world. Opinions
are polarised even among world experts in the optimal
approach to fluid drainage regimes because of lack of
quality data on the subject. The variations in drainage
approaches have direct impact on patient care and major
implications on healthcare resources and costs.
Aggressive versus symptom-guided drainages
One school advocates aggressive removal of fluid, usually
by daily or alternate-day drainage via the IPC. This
approach is the standard practice in many medical
centres in the USA and Canada. On the other hand,
many centres in the UK believe that MPE care should
be palliative and symptom based. Hence, fluid drainage
should only be performed if and when patients become
symptomatic from MPE accumulation. Drainage is typic-
ally performed from weekly to monthly according to
individual needs.
Those who advocate ‘aggressive drainage’ argue that
daily fluid evacuation allows the best control of symp-
toms and thus maximal exercise and physical activities.
It is believed that keeping the pleural cavity dry permits
approximation of the visceral and parietal pleura and
promotes their symphysis. The resultant spontaneous
pleurodesis will allow removal of the IPC and reduce
long-term costs and complication rates. Reported rates
of spontaneous pleurodesis have varied;13 Tremblay
et al14 reported that up to 70% of those who did not
have trapped lungs will develop a spontaneous pleurod-
esis, whereas in another study of all MPE patients
treated with an IPC, a spontaneous pleurodesis rate of
45% (range: 26–57%) with a mean time to pleurodesis
of 52 days15 was reported. Once spontaneous pleurodesis
is
achieved,
few
(<7.9%)
required
further
pleural
intervention.14 15
Those who advocate ‘symptom-guided drainage’ argue
that fluid drainage in the absence of breathlessness is
unlikely to improve well-being or QoL. Daily drainages
involve considerably more time, effort on the part of the
patient and their caregivers and consumable costs. For
instance, daily drainage will cost 14 times more in
time and consumable costs compared with those who
drain fortnightly. Frequent access of the IPC may the-
oretically
increase
the
risks
of
complication—for
example, infection.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS
The Australian Malignant PLeural Effusion (AMPLE)
trial-2 is a multicentre, open-label randomised (trial
entry) study designed to define if either of the two
common drainage regimes (aggressive or symptom-
guided drainage) is superior to the other in improving
patient-relevant clinical outcomes, especially breathless-
ness, and their safety. The nature of the intervention
means that investigators and patients cannot be blinded
to the treatment allocation.
Primary end point
The degree of breathlessness will be assessed using a
100 mm visual analogue scale (VAS) score, recorded
daily in the first 60 days. This is the most validated
measure of dyspnoea in MPE and was successfully used
in
MPE
trials—for
example,
Second
Therapeutic
Intervention in Malignant Effusion Trial (TIME-2)8
(n=106) and AMPLE-1 (n=146).16
Secondary end points
Secondary end points include other clinical outcomes of
major relevance to patients with MPE. Physical activity
patterns will be evaluated by a well-validated triaxial accel-
erometer (ActiGraph GT3X+). QoL will be measured by
EQ-5D-5L and a 100 mm EQ-Visual Analogue Scale
(EQ-VAS). The rate of spontaneous pleurodesis, hospitalisa-
tion, adverse events and healthcare costs will be compared.
2
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
Open Access
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 SETTING
The trial will include 86 participants with MPEs rando-
mised 1:1 to either the aggressive (daily) or symptom-
guided drainage regimes after IPC insertion (figure 1).
Trial details are as per AMPLE-2 trial protocol V.1 (date
25 March 2015).
POWER CALCULATION
The study will involve centres in Australia, New Zealand,
Hong Kong and Malaysia, most of which are teaching
hospitals. Enrolment of 86 participants will detect a
mean difference of VAS score of 14 mm between the
treatment arms (5% significance, 90% power) assuming
a common between-group SD of 18.9 mm (based on the
TIME-2 trial8) and a 10% lost to follow-up rate. The
minimal clinically important difference for the VAS
score in this setting is 19 mm (95% CI 14 to 24 mm) as
per Mishra et al.17 The lower end of the CI of 14 mm
was used for this power calculation.
STATISTICAL PLAN
Data will be analysed on an intention-to-treat basis. The
difference between the two groups will be estimated
using a linear mixed-effects model, taking into account
the repeated VAS scores measured on the same partici-
pant, and missing VAS scores (assuming that missing
scores are missing at random). This model will be
adjusted for the minimisation variables. A secondary
analysis, again using linear mixed-effects models, will
investigate the effect of time from randomisation and will
include random intercepts and time effects as appropri-
ate, in addition to time and treatment interaction terms.
The economic evaluation will be a cost-effectiveness
analysis comparing differences in costs and quality-
adjusted life years (QALYs) between the two groups over
the duration of the trial. EQ-5D-5L response scores will
be converted into utility values using an algorithm for
the Australian population,18 with QALYs calculated from
utility values. The perspective adopted for the evaluation
will be the health sector. Simple regression analysis using
the measured covariates will be conducted to guide the
extent to which more complex analysis can be under-
taken to take account of the distributional characteristics
of the data and any differences in baseline characteristics
despite random allocation. Incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios will be calculated as the difference in the cost of
drainage regimes divided by the difference in QALYs.
PARTICIPANT SCREENING AND SELECTION
All patients who require IPC placement for management
of an MPE will be identified by the principal investigator
(PI) of each study site. Screening criteria are based on
standard
clinical
practice,
and
consecutive
eligible
patients will be offered trial entry. The PI or a nomi-
nated member of staff will approach participants who
fulfil the criteria to enter the trial. Screening logs will be
kept.
Figure 1
Study flow chart. IPC, indwelling pleural catheter; MPE, malignant pleural effusion.
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
3
Open Access
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 Inclusion criteria
Patients with a symptomatic MPE in whom fluid drain-
age via an IPC is considered appropriate by the man-
aging clinician. An MPE is defined as one in which
malignant cells are identified in the pleural fluid or
pleural biopsy; or a large exudative pleural effusion
without other causes in a patient with known dissemi-
nated extrathoracic malignancy.
Exclusion criteria
Age <18 years; expected survival <3 months; pleural
infection; chylothorax; pregnancy or lactation; uncor-
rectable bleeding diathesis; previous ipsilateral lobec-
tomy/pneumonectomy; significant loculations likely to
preclude
effective
fluid
drainage;
significant
visual
impairment and inability to consent or comply with the
protocol.
INFORMED CONSENT
The potential participant will be approached by the PI
or
nominated
investigator about
the possibility of
taking part in the study once they have decided to be
treated with an IPC to manage their MPE. They will be
given an explanation of the study by the doctor and the
Participant
Information
and
Consent
Form.
The
patient can either provide informed consent while at
the clinic or during the inpatient consultation or be
given the option to discuss the study with family,
friends and general practitioner (GP) before making a
decision. They can discuss the study further with the
study team when they return for their next clinic
appointment or hospital admission for insertion of
their IPC.
RANDOMISATION
Participants will be randomly assigned (1:1) to either
aggressive or symptom-guided drainage via their IPC.
Randomisation
will
include
minimisation
for
the
following:
1. Cancer type (mesothelioma vs non-mesothelioma);
2. Performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group (ECOG) 0–1 vs ≥2);
3. Presence of trapped lung—see online supplementary
appendix 1—(vs not);
4. Prior pleurodesis (vs not).
Recent publications have identified cancer type and
ECOG status as major predictors of survival in MPE.2
The presence of trapped lung and prior failed pleur-
odesis are known factors that reduce the likelihood for
spontaneous pleurodesis and thus impact on many of
the clinical outcome measures. There will be no strati-
fication by centre. The National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) Clinical Trials Centre will
provide the randomisation set-up using their auto-
mated
telephone-based
interactive
voice
response
service.
STANDARD CARE
Irrespective of the drainage strategy the participant is
randomised to, all participants and carers are given stand-
ard education (including information sheet and educa-
tional video materials where appropriate) and advice on
drainage method, IPC aftercare and potential complica-
tions on the routine care of the IPC. Participants and
their carers have the support and care of the respiratory
community nurses as per standard care and can readily
access support services (eg, via direct phone line) if any
concern arises. The local PI will be responsible to ensure
only properly trained clinical doctors and health staff
are involved in the procedures and ongoing aftercare of
the IPC. The IPC can be removed if clinically indicated
(eg, spontaneous pleurodesis).
All the participants will be managed by their own clin-
ical teams and receive all other medical treatments
(including chemotherapy and radiotherapy, if appropri-
ate) as per standard participant care.
INTERVENTIONS
The aggressive drainage arm
Participants will drain their MPE via their IPC every day
for the first 60 days unless:
A. Clinically contraindicated or
B. Spontaneous pleurodesis occurs. This is defined as
<50 mL of fluid removed on three consecutive drai-
nages, in the absence of any significant residual
pleural fluid collections on imaging.
The symptomatic drainage arm
Participants will drain their MPE via their IPC only if
they feel the effusion-related symptoms (usually breath-
lessness, cough and/or tightness) have recurred or at
least once per fortnight. In the symptom-guided arm,
spontaneous pleurodesis is defined as <50 mL drainage
in two attempts 2 weeks apart, in the absence of signifi-
cant residual fluid on imaging.
The intervention, that is, the drainage frequency, can
be modified if clinically indicated as judged by the
patients’ attending physician.
DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT
Clinical data, baseline VAS scores for breathlessness and
QoL (VAS and EQ-5D-5L) measure will be collected
prior to IPC insertion and at 72 hours postinsertion (see
online supplementary file: AMPLE2 SPIRIT Schedule).
Chest radiographs will be assessed for effusion size and
the presence of trapped lung and fluid loculations prior
to
IPC
insertion
and
at
72 hours
postinsertion.
Participants will be asked to keep a logbook recording
their VAS score for breathlessness, measured daily for
60 days, then weekly until the end of the study or death.
Participants will also record fluid drainage volumes for
each drainage and mark their pain level on the VAS
pain scale. Participants will be reviewed at 2 and 4 weeks,
and thereafter monthly for a minimum of 6 months and
4
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
Open Access
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 data collected on secondary end points. Physical activity
levels as measured by the 7-day triaxial accelerometer
will be assessed at sites where the device is available.
Actigraphy will be applied for 1 week at randomisation
and thereafter 1 week each month for a minimum of
6 months. Hospital admission details including length of
stay and any adverse events and their management will
be recorded.
Data will be entered into a secure study database, and
a system of data validation checks will be implemented
and applied to the database. The accuracy of the data
will be verified by comparing study data to source
documents.
PRIMARY OUTCOME
The degree of breathlessness will be assessed using a
100 mm VAS score, recorded daily in the first 60 days,
then weekly until the end of the study or death. The
VAS is a 100 mm line anchored with ‘no breathlessness’
at
0 mm
and
‘worst
breathlessness
imaginable’
at
100 mm. Participants are asked to make a mark along
the line at a point representing their level of breathless-
ness over the preceding 24 hours and at the same time
each day. All VAS scores will be measured by two inde-
pendent researchers and the mean score calculated. If
the two measurements differ by >3 mm, both measure-
ments will be repeated by the same observers.
SECONDARY OUTCOMES
Hospital admission
Hospitalisation for any causes (except for elective admis-
sions for chemotherapy) will be recorded for all partici-
pants postrandomisation until the end of follow-up
period or death, whichever comes first. Admission will
be analysed as total admission days (and number of epi-
sodes) and also as effusion-related admissions. The latter
will include all hospitalisations for drainage purposes,
for pleural or IPC-related complications such as infec-
tion, symptomatic loculation and for removal of the IPC
if indicated.
The percentage of participants who achieve spontaneous
pleurodesis
Spontaneous pleurodesis has occurred where there is
minimal
output
in
the
absence
of
any significant
residual pleural fluid collections, for a period as stated
above, which would allow removal of the IPC. This defin-
ition has been used in previous trials.19
Adverse events
An adverse event is defined as any complication that
is associated with the IPC such as pleural infection,
cellulitis, pain, symptomatic loculation, tube block-
age, catheter tract metastases, parenchymal air leak,
etc.
Quality of life (QoL)
QoL will be assessed using the EQ-5D-5L questionnaire
and a 100 mm VAS. The EQ-5D-5L is a standardised
measure of health-related QoL providing a single value
for health status.20 21 The VAS records self-rated health
on a straight line, where the end points are labelled ‘best
quality of life’ and ‘worst quality of life’ imaginable.22
Activity levels
The goals of MPE treatment are to improve patient-
related outcomes such as palliation of breathlessness, pain
and ultimately to improve functional levels. Objective
physical activity patterns will be assessed by 7-day triaxial
accelerometer assessment (ActiGraph GT3X+, Pensacola,
Florida, USA) at sites where the device is available.
Health economics
Data will be captured from local department coding
data and community-based costs from patient data. The
cost category will be divided into costs of ongoing drain-
age and adverse events. Resource use associated with the
different IPC drainage regimes, including drainage kits
and the drainage time by community nurse (if needed),
will be obtained from hospital records and patient self-
report, the latter at patient review sessions. Inpatient/
outpatient management of complications will be cap-
tured
by
participant
self-report
and
from
hospital
records and will include treatments (eg, antibiotics),
diagnostic imaging and other interventions related to
the adverse events.
Survival
Survival of all patients will be recorded from date of ran-
domisation to death or end of study follow-up.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
The trial has been approved (as of 23 January 2016) by
the following committees:
1. Sir Charles Gairdner Group Human Research Ethics
Committee (HREC) for WA Health hospitals.
2. St John of God Health Care Ethics Committee for
Bunbury and Midland Hospital, Western Australia.
3. South Eastern Sydney Local Health District HREC
for St George and the Sutherland hospitals, New
South Wales; Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital
and
Nambour
Hospital,
Queensland,
and
Royal
Adelaide Hospital, South Australia.
4. UnitingCare
Health
HREC
for
Wesley
and
St
Andrew’s hospitals, Queensland.
5. Institutional Review Board of the University of Hong
Kong/Hospital Authority Hong Kong West Cluster
for Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong.
Any protocol amendment may result in changes to the
patient information and consent form. The investigators
must ensure that the amended form receives approval/
favourable opinion from the ethics committee and that
it is signed by any patient subsequently entering into the
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
5
Open Access
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 trial and those currently in the study, if affected by the
amendment.
Safety reporting
All adverse events relating to the trial procedure occur-
ring during the course of the study will be collected and
documented by the investigator according to the specific
definitions and instructions detailed in the ‘Adverse
Event Reporting’ section of the Trial Master File. Any
serious or significant adverse event, whether or not con-
sidered related to the experimental procedure, will be
reported as soon as it becomes apparent using the report-
ing procedure and associated documentation according
to local regulatory requirements. Adverse events will be
followed up until resolution. Where adverse events are
not resolved at study completion, this will be noted on
the adverse event log.
Data safety
All procedures for the handling and analysis of data
will be conducted using the Good Clinical Practice
(GCP)
meeting
The
International
Conference
on
Harmonisation
of
Technical
Requirements
for
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)
guidelines and the Australian Human Research Ethics
Committees, or local equivalent for the handling and ana-
lysis of data for clinical trials. Access to the trial dataset
will be available to investigators at the lead site only.
Trial monitoring and oversight
The Trial Steering Committee (TSC) will be responsible
for supervision of the trial in its entirety. It will be
responsible for ensuring completion of the trial to clinical
and ethical standards. Members of the TSC include an
independent chairperson, independent member(s), chief
investigator and selected investigators, a consumer repre-
sentative and the trial coordinator. The Data and Safety
Monitoring Committee (DSMC) will oversee the monitor-
ing of adverse events and the ethical conduct of the
study. The DSMC includes an independent chairperson
and two independent members (including a statistician).
Author affiliations
1Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia
2Pleural Medicine Unit, Institute for Respiratory Health, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia
3Centre for Respiratory Health, School of Medicine & Pharmacology,
University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia
4Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
5Wesley Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
6St George and Sutherland Hospital Clinical School, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
7Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Sutherland Hospital, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia
8Respiratory Department, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Ministry of Health
Malaysia, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
9The Department of Thoracic Medicine, The Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia
10Respiratory Department, Middlemore Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand
11Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
12Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health
Service, Nambour, Queensland, Australia
13Respiratory Department, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia
14Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia
15Saint John of God Public and Private Hospital Midland, Midland, Western
Australia, Australia
16Bunbury Hospital, Western Australian Country Health Service, Bunbury,
Western Australia, Australia
17Saint John of God Hospital Bunbury, Bunbury, Western Australia, Australia
18National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia
19Exercise Medicine Research Institute, Edith Cowan University, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia
20Institute of Human Performance, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
21School of Public Health, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia,
Australia
22Centre for Applied Statistics, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia
23Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
24Academic Respiratory Unit, School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK
Contributors YCGL and RT conceived the initial trial concept with advice from
NAM and DF-K (cochairs of the Trial Steering Committee). RUN, DH and JC
are responsible for designing the accelerometry, health economics and
biodiscovery plans, methods and analyses. CAR is the trial manager and
oversees the data collection and running of the trial. MA and SM are the trial
coordinators. DCLL, LAG, BCHK, MRSRA, PTN, EY, FCH, DF, MB, RS, FP,
CCdC and YCGL developed and modified the trial design and protocol to
specifics of individual trial centres. RT, YCGL and KM wrote the statistical
analysis plan. YCGL is the chief investigator and takes overall responsibility
for all aspects of trial design, the protocol and trial conduct. All authors have
read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding This study is supported by project grant funding from the Cancer
Council of Western Australia and the Sir Charles Gairdner Research Advisory
Group. Rocket Medical (UK) Plc provided the drainage kits without charge for
the participants of the study and an unrestricted educational grant. MA, SM
and RT have received clinical research fellowships from the Western Australia
Cancer and Palliative Care Network (WACPCN). YCGL is an NHMRC Career
Development Fellow and has received project grant funding from the NHMRC,
New South Wales Dust Disease Board, Sir Charles Gairdner Research
Advisory Committee, Institute for Respiratory Health and Cancer Council of
Western Australia.
Competing interests YCGL and NAM have served on the advisory boards for
CareFusion Inc. and Sequana Medical Ltd. DF-K has also served as a
consultant for CareFusion Inc.
Ethics approval Sir Charles Gairdner Group Human Research Ethics
Committee.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided
the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
Davies H, Lee YC. Management of malignant pleural effusions:
questions that need answers. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2013;19:
374–9.
2.
Clive A, Kahan B, Hooper C, et al. Predicting survival in malignant
pleural effusion: development and validation of the LENT prognostic
score. Thorax 2014;69:1098–104.
6
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
Open Access
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 3.
Thomas R, Francis R, Davies H, et al. Interventional therapies for
malignant pleural effusions: the present and future. Respirology
2014;19:809–22.
4.
Bethune N. Pleural poudrage. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1935;1935:251–61.
5.
Dresler C, Olak J, Derndon J, et al. Phase III intergroup study of talc
poudrage vs talc slurry sclerosis for malignant pleural effusion. Chest
2005;127:909–15.
6.
Fysh E, Tremblay A, Feller-Kopman D, et al. Clinical outcomes of
indwelling pleural catheter-related pleural infections: an international
multicenter study. Chest 2013;144:15997–602.
7.
Maskell N, Lee YC, Gleeson F. Randomized trials describing lung
inflammation after pleurodesis with talc of varying particle size.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:377–82.
8.
Davies H, Mishra E, Kahan B, et al. Effect of an indwelling pleural
catheter vs chest tube and talc pleurodesis for relieving dyspnoea in
patients with malignant pleural effusion: the TIME2 randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 2012;307:2383–9.
9.
Fysh E, Waterer G, Kendall P, et al. Indwelling pleural catheters
reduce inpatient days over pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusion.
Chest 2012;142:394–400.
10.
Hunt B, Farivar A, Vallieres E, et al. Thoracoscopic talc versus
tunneled pleural catheters for palliation of malignant pleural
effusions. Ann Thorac Surg 2012.
11.
Putnam J, Light R, Rodriguez R, et al. A randomized comparison of
indwelling pleural catheter and doxycyline pleurodesis in the
management of malignant pleural effusions. Cancer
1999;86:1992–9.
12.
Thomas R, Budgeon C, Kuok Y, et al. Catheter tract metastasis
associated with indwelling pleural catheters. Chest
2014;146:557–62.
13.
Boshuizen R, Thomas R, Lee YC. Use of indwelling pleural catheter
for management of malignant pleural effusions: the advantages.
Curr Respir Care Rep 2013;2:93–9.
14.
Tremblay A, Mason C, Michaud G. Use of tunnelled catheters
for malignant pleural effusions in patients fit for pleurodesis.
Eur Respir J 2007;30:759–62.
15.
VanMeter M, McKee K, Kohlwes R. Efficacy and safety of tunnelled
pleural catheters in adults with malignant pleural effusions:
a systematic review. J Gen Intern Med 2011;26:70–6.
16.
Fysh E, Thomas R, Read C, et al. Protocol of the Australasian
Malignant Pleural Effusion (AMPLE) trial: a multicentre randomised
study comparing indwelling pleural catheter versus talc pleurodesis.
BMJ Open 2014;4:e006757.
17.
Mishra E, Corcoran J, Hallifax R, et al. Defining the minimal
important difference for the visual analogue scale assessing
dyspnea in patients with malignant pleural effusion. PLoS ONE
2015;10:e0123798.
18.
Norman R, Cronin P, Viney R. A pilot discrete choice experiment to
explore preferences for EQ-5D-5L health states. Appl Health Econ
Health Policy 2013;11:287–98.
19.
Tremblay A, Michaud G. Single-center experience with 250 tunnelled
pleural catheter insertions for malignant pleural effusion. Chest
2006;129:362–8.
20.
Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloyd A, et al. Development and preliminary
testing of the new five-level version of EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L). Qual Life
Res 2011;20:1727–36.
21.
EuroQoLGroup. Euro-QoL—a new facility for the measurement of
health-related quality of life. Health Policy 1990;16:199–208.
22.
Pickard A, Wilke C, Lin H, et al. Health utilities using the
EQ-5D in studies of cancer. Pharmacoeconomics 2007;25:
365–84.
Azzopardi M, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011480. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480
7
Open Access
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011480 on 5 July 2016. Downloaded from 
