 February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
1
Original research
published: 03 February 2017
doi: 10.3389/fbuil.2017.00003
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Chris Hendrickson, 
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Reviewed by: 
Rasa Ušpalyte
˙-Vitku
¯niene
˙, 
 
Vilnius Gediminas Technical 
University, Lithuania 
 
Cheul Kyu Lee, 
Korea Railroad Research Institute, 
South Korea
*Correspondence:
Sakdirat Kaewunruen 
 
sakdirat@hotmail.com, 
 
s.kaewunruen@bham.ac.uk
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Transportation and Transit Systems, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Built Environment
Received: 18 October 2016
Accepted: 11 January 2017
Published: 03 February 2017
Citation: 
Azzoug A and Kaewunruen S (2017) 
RideComfort: A Development of 
Crowdsourcing Smartphones in 
Measuring Train Ride Quality. 
 
Front. Built Environ. 3:3. 
 
doi: 10.3389/fbuil.2017.00003
ridecomfort: a Development of 
crowdsourcing smartphones in 
Measuring Train ride Quality
Adam Azzoug1 and Sakdirat Kaewunruen2*
1 
Department of Civil Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK, 2 
Birmingham 
Centre for Railway Research and Education, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Among the many million train journeys taking place every day, not all of them are being 
measured or monitored for ride comfort. Improving ride comfort is important for rail-
way companies to attract more passengers to their train services. Giving passengers 
the ability to measure ride comfort themselves using their smartphones allows railway 
companies to receive instant feedback from passengers regarding the ride quality on 
their trains. The purpose of this development is to investigate the feasibility of using 
smartphones to measure vibration-based ride comfort on trains. This can be accom-
plished by developing a smartphone application, analyzing the data recorded by the 
application, and verifying the data by comparing it to data from a track inspection vehicle 
or an accelerometer. A literature review was undertaken to examine the commonly used 
standards to evaluate ride comfort, such as the BS ISO 2631-1:1997 standard and 
Sperling’s ride index as proposed by Sperling and Betzhold (1956). The literature review 
has also revealed some physical causes of ride discomfort such as vibrations induced 
by roughness and irregularities present at the wheel/rail interface. We are the first to use 
artificial neural networks to map data derived from smartphones in order to evaluate ride 
quality. Our work demonstrates the merits of using smartphones to measure ride com-
fort aboard trains and suggests recommendations for future technological improvement. 
Our data argue that the accelerometers found in modern smartphones are of sufficient 
quality to be used in evaluating ride comfort. The ride comfort levels predicted both by 
BS ISO 2631-1 and Sperling’s index exhibit excellent agreement.
Keywords: railway infrastructure, ride quality, operations monitoring, artificial neural networks, mobile application
inTrODUcTiOn
Every day, many million train journeys take place and passengers traveling on these trains are 
exposed to the vibrations, noises, temperatures, etc. present in the train for the duration of their 
trips. Passengers will experience the train environment differently based on their individual prefer-
ences and expectations. Making passengers feel comfortable aboard their trains is something many 
railway companies strive to do (Suzuki, 1998; Förstberg, 2000; Karakasis et al., 2005). With the 
advent of smartphones, passengers can potentially measure the ride comfort themselves. This opens 
the door for many commercial opportunities, allowing passengers to provide on the fly feedback 
on the comfort of their journey and equipping railway companies with information they can use 
to further improve ride comfort for passengers. There is potential for this technology to be used 
 TaBle 1 | likely passenger reactions to a range of vibration magnitudes 
according to Bs isO 2631-1:1997.
rMs vibrational amplitude (m/s2)
likely reaction
Less than 0.315
Not uncomfortable
0.315–0.63
A little uncomfortable
0.5–1
Fairly uncomfortable
0.8–1.6
Uncomfortable
1.25–2.5
Very uncomfortable
Greater than 2
Extremely uncomfortable
TaBle 2 | evaluation of ride comfort according to sperling’s ride index 
(narayanamoorthy et al., 2008).
sperling’s ride  
index (Wz)
Vibration sensitivity
1
Just noticeable
2
Clearly noticeable
2.5
More pronounced but not unpleasant
3
Strong, irregular, but still tolerable
3.25
Very irregular
3.5
Extremely irregular, unpleasant, annoying, prolonged 
exposure intolerable
4
Extremely unpleasant; prolonged exposure harmful
2
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
to detect track faults and indicate which sections of track are in 
need of maintenance, possibly saving on maintenance costs and 
improving the safety of the railway.
Railway passengers expect a certain level of comfort dur-
ing their journeys. In general, the comfort of passengers can 
be affected by a range of different factors such as temperature, 
humidity, odors, noise, accelerations, and vibrations. The 
standard BS ISO 2631-1:1997 gives an approximate indication 
of possible reactions to varying magnitudes of vibration found 
in public transport, shown in Table 1. It is important to note 
that passenger reaction to motion is also influenced not only 
by other factors in their environment such as temperature and 
noise but also of their expectations, i.e., certain vibrations that are 
considered comfortable and expected in train journeys might be 
considered uncomfortable in a car (British Standards Institution, 
1997a, BS ISO 2631-1:1997; British Standards Institution, 2001, 
BS ISO 2631-4:2001; British Standards Institution, 2009, BS ISO 
2041:2009).
In this research and development project, we aim to produce a 
smartphone application that can record the vibrations measured 
by a smartphone and to investigate how well the smartphone can 
measure ride comfort aboard trains compared to a more sophis-
ticated accelerometer.
Prior to the development, a critical literature and technology 
review have been carried out in order to investigate different 
ways in which ride comfort is measured and evaluated. The 
review also examines previous products and investigates 
potential causes of vibrations in trains and also reviews other 
developments concerning the use of smartphones in measuring 
ride comfort. In this paper, we will demonstrate the development 
of smartphone application that can capture internal data and 
correlate the data with actual onboard sensors using artificial 
neural networks.
riDe cOMFOrT
Different methods of assessing and quantifying ride comfort have 
been developed to make it possible to evaluate and predict the 
ride comfort of a train vehicle based on the vibrations that are 
experienced inside the vehicle. One of these methods, BS ISO 
2631-1:1997 (1997) suggests using a frequency-weighted root 
mean squared (rms) acceleration to evaluate the ride comfort 
and is given by
 
a
t
a
t
t
t
w
w
( )
( )
0
2
1
2
1
0
0
=










−
∫
τ
τ
 
(1)
where aw(t) is the instantaneous frequency-weighted accelera-
tion (meters per square second), t is the time (seconds), t0 is the 
time of observation (seconds), and τ is the integration time for 
running averaging (seconds). The value gained from Eq. 1 is 
meant to be compared to the values presented in Table 1, which 
underlines the relationship between the rms acceleration and 
expected passenger reaction.
Another widely used method to measure ride comfort is 
Sperling’s ride index from Sperling and Betzhold (1956) (cited 
in Förstberg, 2000, p. 54), which is also called the Werzungzahl 
(Wz) method (Karakasis et al., 2005; Narayanamoorthy et al., 
2008; Darlton and Marinov, 2015). The original mathematical 
form given by Sperling is defined by
 
W
a
z
w,rms
 
= 4 42
0 3
.
.  
(2)
where aw,rms is the rms value of the measured frequency-weighted 
acceleration in meters per square second. The Wz values are 
intended to be compared to the values in Table 2. A Wz value of 
2.5 is comparable to a BS ISO 2631-1:1997 rms value of 0.25 m/s2 
according to Narayanamoorthy et al. (2008).
Other standards for evaluating ride comfort do exist such as 
UIC513, BS 6841, and ENV-12999 (Dumitriu, 2013); however, 
they do not seem to be employed in any of the papers that have 
been reviewed and appear to have been made obsolete by BS 
ISO2631-1:1997. Karakasis et al. (2005) state that the BS ISO 
2631-1:1997 is the most precise method but also argue that in 
certain circumstances where two or more situations need to be 
compared, the Sperling’s ride index can be more convenient and 
appropriate. Darlton and Marinov (2015) agree with this and 
state that due to the Sperling’s ride index need for each direc-
tion to be determined separately, it is less accurate compared 
to BS ISO 2631-1:1997. Darlton and Marinov (2015) also argue 
that the Sperling’s ride index is easier to read and understand. 
All of the authors seem to agree that BS ISO 2631-1:1997 is 
far superior to the Sperling’s ride index in the accuracy and 
quality of results it produces. However, Sperling’s ride index 
method still sees use since the results are easier to read and 
understand. Using both methods is the choice all of the authors 
made, and it gives an accurate prediction of the ride comfort as 
well as a number that can easily be compared between different 
situations.
It is important to note that the values obtained from the BS 
ISO 2631-1:1997 and Sperling’s ride index must agree with the 
 3
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
subjective ratings, otherwise they are not fulfilling their purpose 
of predicting ride comfort. This point is heavily discussed in 
Strandemar (2005), and the paper presents evidence that using 
the methods suggested in BS ISO 2631-1:1997 have shown strong 
correlation to subjective rating and have proven to be successful 
in measuring the ride comfort. However, a study done in Sweden 
by Narayanamoorthy et al. (2008) argues that both the BS ISO 
2631-1:1997 method and Sperling’s ride index are inadequate 
when it comes to measuring the effect of vibrations on the 
comfort of passengers performing sedentary activities, specifi-
cally the use of laptops on trains. The study did not mention the 
sample size; however, the argument is supported by the findings 
of Nakagawa and Suzuki (2005), which also indicate that pas-
sengers using laptops are more sensitive to discomfort caused 
by vibration. This mainly affects train journeys which durations 
are around 1 h or longer as most passengers who did not intend 
travel for less than an hour did not expect to use their laptops 
(Nakagawa and Suzuki, 2005; Narayanamoorthy et al., 2008). 
One can imply from this that passengers traveling only for short 
duration journeys are not as sensitive to discomfort caused by 
vibrations as passengers traveling longer journeys, who might 
expect to be able to read, write or use laptops. As improvements 
to ride comfort continue, more sensitive methods and limits 
might be required to evaluate ride comfort.
It is important to keep in mind that passengers in different 
parts of the world might perceive ride comfort differently, and 
so a study done in Sweden might not have as much relevance in 
other parts of the world. This must be considered when compar-
ing subjective measurements of ride comfort between different 
parts of the world.
Mechanical caUses OF riDe 
DiscOMFOrT
Understanding how the track and train characteristics affect 
the motions of the train is important to interpreting the data 
regarding ride comfort. Vibrations in trains can be caused by 
welding and rolling defects, rail joints, poor track alignments, 
various defects/roughness in the track or wheel surfaces, etc. 
(BS ISO 2631-4:2001; Karakasis et al., 2005; Lauriks et al., 2003). 
The vibrations can be divided into six components consisting 
of translational vibration in the x, y, and z-axis and rotational 
vibration in the x, y, and z-axis (British Standards Institution, 
1997b, BS ISO5805:1997; British Standards Institution, 2001, 
BS ISO 2631-4:2001; Karakasis et al., 2005; Suzuki, 1998). The 
vibrations experienced inside the train are partially dampened 
because of the suspension between the bogie and the carriage, 
etc. (Kargarnovin et al., 2005). The traveling speed of the train 
can also magnify the amplitude of the vibrations the faster the 
train goes (Esveld and Kok, 1998; Youcef et al., 2013). Further 
sections will briefly discuss how different types of track might 
affect ride comfort.
rail Bridges
Railway bridges allow trains to cross over an obstacle and are 
very common all around the world; however, crossing over 
them can have adverse effects on ride comfort. Kargarnovin 
et al. (2005) show that in the train–track–bridge interaction, 
the wheel–track roughness is the dominant factor causing ride 
discomfort when crossing a rail bridge. However, according to 
data obtained from experiments, the wheel–track roughness 
becomes less dominant compared to the train–bridge interac-
tion as the speed of the train crossing the bridge increases 
(Kargarnovin et al., 2005; Youcef et al., 2013). This means that 
when traveling at low speeds the impact on ride comfort from 
the bridge itself is quite low, rather the condition of the track 
has the largest impact on ride comfort. As the speed increases 
the act of traversing the bridge, and the consequent change in 
foundation strength has an increasing impact on ride comfort. 
Kargarnovin et al. also states that ride comfort linearly increases 
with the stiffness of the bridge supports.
Motions induced by the train unto the bridge can cause 
discomfort among passengers in the form of vertical and 
rotational acceleration (roll) (Youcef et al., 2013). The sudden 
change in the stiffness of the track when the train crosses the 
bridge can cause jerk and other vibrations detrimental to ride 
comfort (Youcef et al., 2013; Kaewunruen, 2014a). Kaewunruen 
(2014a) and Kargarnovin et al. (2005) indicate that enhancing 
the stiffness of the ballast near bridge ends slightly improves the 
ride comfort in those zones. The motions of the train passing 
over the bridge can also cause excitation of the bridge, which 
in turn also has an effect on the ride comfort of the passengers 
(Youcef et al., 2013).
Turnouts (switches and crossings)
A railway turnout (also called switches and crossings) is a type 
of track allowing trains to switch from one track to another. 
Passing a turnout induces motions in the train due to the rail 
track discontinuity in the turnout (BS ISO 2631-4:2001; Ren 
et al., 2005). Kaewunruen (2014b) show a large increase in 
vertical vibrations when passing a turnout. A sizeable difference 
in the amplitude of the vibrations, before and after action was 
taken to improve the condition of a deteriorated turnout, can 
also be observed in Kaewunruen (2014b). After the turnout was 
mended, a significant increase in ride comfort was observed. 
There are also substantial lateral vibrations associated with 
turnouts (Ren et al., 2005). Turnouts poorly aligned or in poor 
condition can cause significant vertical and lateral vibrations 
and may even cause derailment of the train (BS ISO 2631-
4:2001; Ren et al., 2005).
Turns and curves
When the train turns, there is an increase in rotational vibration 
(roll) (BS ISO 2631-4:2001; Orvnäs, 2011), this vibration is gen-
erally reduced due to the presence of cants (where one half of the 
track is superelevated), which enable trains to maintain higher 
speeds while traversing the curve. There is also an increase in 
lateral vibrations causing passenger to experience swaying when 
a train passes a curve (BS ISO 2631-4:2001; Orvnäs, 2011), 
which might have a negative impact on ride comfort. Sudden 
jerk might also be experienced due to changes in the curve radii 
(BS ISO 2631-4:2001; Lauriks et al., 2003).
 FigUre 2 | a map of long Marston with the section of track that was 
used highlighted in yellow.
FigUre 1 | comparison of the local coordinate system for a 
smartphone and the coordinate system of a train. (a) Coordinate 
system used by the Android sensor API (Google, 2015). (B) Coordinate 
system for a vehicle as proposed by BS ISO 2631-4:2001.
4
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
PasT DeVelOPMenTs OF 
sMarTPhOnes’ aPPlicaTiOns FOr 
MeasUring riDe QUaliTY
In recent years, the potential for the use of smartphones in 
enabling passengers to measure ride comfort has drawn a 
great deal of interest, and a few studies have been done using 
smartphones instead of traditional accelerometers. One project 
in Sweden, called Roadroid (Forslöf, 2012; Forslöf and Jones, 
2014), investigated the use of smartphones in determining the 
conditions of roads and the ride comfort associated with it. 
Forslöf (2012) found that there are big differences between 
different smartphones in terms of the quality and sampling 
frequency of data, making it sometimes problematic to compare 
data between them. Before using data from two different phones, 
data samples should be taken from the phones and compared 
to each other to observe the differences in sensitivity and 
sampling rate.
Based on field trials done by Forslöf, the smartphones were 
able to deliver usable data for the purpose of evaluating ride 
comfort on roads. Forslöf also mentions that this type of technol-
ogy can open up opportunities in developing countries where 
there is a limited availability of advanced measuring equipment. 
Islam and Johnston (2013) (cited in Forslöf and Jones, 2014, p. 
7) showed a correlation of up to 81% between laser measure-
ments and the measurements from the smartphone; this could 
suggest that measurements from the smartphone is sufficient 
for measuring ride comfort on roads (Forslöf and Jones, 2014). 
However, there is no mention as to how the laser measurements 
were carried out.
It should be noted that the types of vibrations experienced 
onboard trains are different from the ones experienced in road 
vehicles, and the test results gained from road vehicles do not 
necessitate that similar results will be achieved from measure-
ments taken in rail vehicles. George et al. (2013) studied the 
discomfort of standing passengers in trains, using smartphone 
accelerometers. Vibrational data were measured from phones 
and a stopwatch was used to allow subjects to report perceived 
discomfort. Using logistic regression analysis, a relationship 
between the subjective discomfort readings and the measured 
vibrations was established. The study achieved an accuracy of 
80% in predicting discomfort based of the logistic regression 
analysis, which is encouraging for the use of smartphones in 
measuring ride comfort. However, it should be noted that the 
study only used three subjects as well as using software not 
designed for the purpose of measuring ride comfort.
Before using third-party software for purposes it is not 
intended for, it should be understood how the software processes 
the data and if the software alters it in any way by using noise 
reduction filter to make the data more presentable. Based upon 
what is written in George et al. (2013), no actions have been 
taken to ensure the integrity of the data from the app. From the 
page of the app that George et al. (2013) claim to have used, 
users have reported that advertisements and other visual pro-
cesses cause lag in the data gathering (Mobile Tools, 2013), this 
is observable in the data presented in George et al. (2013) where 
there are visible gaps between certain measurements, potentially 
caused by the lags.
A study done in Newcastle (Darlton and Marinov, 2015) to 
evaluate the use of tilting technology in the “Tyne and Wear” 
metro also made use of smartphone accelerometers. The study 
made use of third-party software in the same manner as in 
George et al. (2013). The data were recorded by strapping the 
phone to the chest or thigh of a passenger, to better observe the 
trains effect on whole body vibration according to Darlton and 
Marinov (2015). This method might be considered questionable 
as the body itself dampen vibrations significantly depending on 
the individual and vibrations reaching the chest are even more 
dampened compared to vibrations in the thigh (Silva et al., 
2011). Darlton and Marinov claim that 95% of all recorded 
vibrations were induced by train movements.
 FigUre 3 | The placement of the two phones and the accelerometer 
before any wires were connected.
FigUre 4 | Diagram showing the details of the ann analysis process.
5
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
The studies done by Darlton and Marinov (2015) and George 
et al. (2013) make the presumption that a smartphone acceler-
ometer is of sufficient quality to measure ride comfort aboard rail 
vehicles although no studies have been undertaken to support 
this. In fact, this literature review has found that the commonly 
used standards to evaluate ride comfort are BS ISO 2631-1:1997 
standard and Sperling’s ride index. The development of any new 
method must be consistent with these indices. Therefore, it is 
crucial to develop a novel and innovative smartphone applica-
tion that could enable passengers to evaluate their trips, which is 
compatible with accepted standard practice such as the BS ISO 
2631-1:1997 standard and Sperling’s ride index.
MeThODOlOgY
Developing the app
The application developed to measure ride quality was made in 
Google’s Android Studio Integrated Development Environment 
with the Android Software Development Kit (SDK). The Android 
SDK was chosen as the author owns a Nexus 4, which was 
already set up to work with Android Studio. This method of app 
development was chosen as there is an abundance of documenta-
tion available regarding the Android SDK, and there is no real 
benefit in using another method to develop the app.
Due to the size and low cost of accelerometers and gyro-
scopes in smartphones, the instruments are generally not as 
accurate as their more expensive counterparts (Sachs, 2010). 
The accelerometers and gyroscopes found in smartphones only 
measure on sensor change; therefore, there is no set sample 
rate for the smartphones instead it varies depending on how 
often the phone detects a change in the accelerometer. How 
often the phone can detect a change in the sensor depends on 
the quality of the sensor itself as well as how fast the processor 
of the phone is. To find the average sampling rates inherent 
to different phones, as described by Forslöf (2012), a function 
was developed in the app to give an indication of the different 
average sampling rates possible when starting the app. BS ISO 
2631-4:2001 suggests using a coordinate system for rail vehicles 
as illustrated in Figure 1. Each axis is defined using the following 
references:
• z-axis: perpendicular to the floor.
• x-axis: along the direction of travel.
• y-axis: lateral at right angles to the direction of travel.
Figure 1A shows the default coordinate system used by the 
smartphone sensor systems. The device might be placed in dif-
ferent positions/orientations for the purpose of recording data, 
to avoid confusion and to ease analysis of the data the coordinate 
system of the phone will be translated to the coordinate system 
suggested in BS ISO 2631-4:2001.
Parameters to Be recorded
The application has been programmed to record the following 
parameters:
• Time and date
• The translational and rotational accelerations in the x, y, and 
z axes.
 FigUre 5 | regression analysis done by MaTlaB’s ann.
FigUre 6 | all of the data collected in long Marston (not synchronized with each other), recorded at 17 mph.
6
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
• Type of instrument (i.e., accelerometer or gyroscope) to help 
separate the readings in MATLAB.
• GPS location to see which parts of the track is associated with 
certain vibrations.
These parameters are sufficient to achieve the aims and objec-
tives of this project.
Field Testing
The field testing took place on the ninth of March 2016 in Long 
Marston, UK. A shunter had to be used in place of a locomotive 
for the experiment due to some unfortunate circumstances. The 
shunter could only travel up to 17 mph, and so all of the experi-
ments were conducted on varying speeds between 5 and 17 mph. 
For the experiment, the shunter passed back and forth on the 
section of track highlighted in Figure 2. The length the shunter 
traveled was approximately 600 m; however, this varied from pass 
to pass due to the needs of other researchers on site.
Two phones were acquired for field testing, a Nexus 4 and a 
HTC Sense as well as a PCB accelerometer. These phones were 
chosen as they were what was readily available. The phones were 
placed at the end of the carriage along with the accelerometer 
where the risk of people inadvertently bumping into them was 
minimized. The phones were placed on a thin high-friction 
rubber pad to prevent any movement, so that there would no 
relative motion between the carriage and the phones. The rubber 
pads were deemed the cheapest non-destructive way of holding 
the phones in place, which is they were chosen for the task. 
 FigUre 7 | a 4-min and 20-s sample of the data that were collected in 
long Marston, recorded at 17 mph.
7
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
Unfortunately, the magnetic base that was meant to be used with 
the accelerometer was not available, and so the accelerometer was 
also secured on the rubber pad due to a lack of other alternatives, 
which can be seen in Figure 3. The data collection on the phones 
was started manually by tapping the start button in the app, and 
data from the accelerometer were recorded on a laptop.
analysis Using MaTlaB and an ann
The data were resampled to 35 Hz in MATLAB; this was done 
to make it possible to synchronize the data more easily as well 
as preparing it for analysis in the ANN. Thirty-five hertz was the 
lowest average sampling rate during the experiment, and so to 
reduce the risk of introducing any errors, it was chosen as the 
resampling rate for all of the data. The data from the two phones 
were then used as input data for the ANN, while the accelerom-
eter data were put as the output data and so the ANN was trained. 
The whole process can be seen in Figure 4. The ANN model was 
then used to calculate the regression and get the coefficient of 
determination.
Ride comfort indices were also produced in MATLAB fol-
lowing the equations discussed in Sections “Ride Comfort” 
and “Mechanical Causes of Ride Discomfort.” The ride comfort 
indices can be calculated in accordance with BS ISO 2631-1:1997 
standard and Sperling’s ride index. The validation of the outcomes 
has been presented elsewhere. Excellent agreement (less than 3% 
error) is found in our ANN model (50% weighting) between 
trained and untrained data (prediction and measurement).
resUlTs anD DiscUssiOn
Results from the ANN show that the measurements from the 
phones and the accelerometer have a R2 value around 85% as 
shown in Figure 5. A 100% value would indicate a perfect fit, 
whereas a 0% value would indicate that there is no relationship 
between the two measurements. The reason that the coefficient of 
determination is not closer to 100% is most likely due to human 
errors introduced during the experiment, such as people coming 
into contact with the accelerometer equipment.
Visual inspection of the collected data in Figures 5 and 6 
confirms that the three devices all show the same vibrations. All 
of the data that were recorded is shown in Figure 6. Although the 
data in Figure 6 are presented as a continuous stream of data, it 
was actually not. We have observed several gaps in the time axis, 
which are not clearly shown. In general, Figure 6 shows the differ-
ences in the sensitivity, noise level, etc. between the three devices 
due to the differences in the type of accelerometers and support 
conditions. It can be also a good visual representation of all the 
errors that have been introduced into the accelerometer data. 
Every time the PCB chart violently spikes and goes beyond the 
y-axis limits, it means that something or someone had physical 
contact with either the accelerometer itself or the cable attached 
to it.
The lack of major vibrations in the PCB chart between 1,500 
and 2,500 s was caused by the cable coiling and coming into 
contact with another piece of electric equipment effectively 
preventing any meaningful data from being recorded during that 
time. The HTC Sense chart is shorter than the others because the 
phone itself crashed on two occasions during the field trial due 
to unknown reasons.
In Figure 7, the differences in measurements from the accel-
erometer and the two phones are observable. The measurement 
starts as the shunter just started moving around the 60 s mark 
the shunter starts braking and goes to a full stop 15 s later. It then 
starts moving again at around the 100 s mark. The accelerometer 
has a lot less noise, and the spikes that occur from the air brakes 
being used are clearly visible. The HTC Sense struggles to record 
many of the greater vibration, probably due to possessing an older 
and lower quality accelerometer, but also possibly because it does 
not have the processing power to keep up with the speed at which 
the measurements are being recorded.
Two different methods were used to calculate the ride comfort, 
BS ISO 2631-1:1997 and Sperling’s ride index; these can be seen in 
Figures 8 and 9. Excellent agreement can be observed using the 
British Standard, while very good prediction (peak picking) can 
also be found using Sperling’s index.
Figure 10 shows what percentage of the journey would be 
considered comfortable or uncomfortable according to Tables 1 
and 2. Most of the spikes in vibration amplitude were caused 
due to the driver of the shunter being quite inexperienced with 
the vehicle and using the air brakes a lot to regulate the speed. 
From Figures 7 and 8, it is quite clear that both phones give a 
very good representation of ride comfort when compared to 
the PCB accelerometer. Many of the figures indicate that there 
are some issues with the noise levels of the phones, especially 
the Nexus 4, while the HTC Sense might have some issues with 
its sensitivity.
 8
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
Power spectral density charts were produced and compared, 
which can be seen in Figure 11. The spectral charts can be used 
to understand where many of the vibrations are coming from 
as generally actions in the lower frequency domain relate to the 
wheel–track interaction, while actions in the higher frequency 
domain mainly concern the train itself (Oostermeijer and Kok, 
2000; Schulte-Werning et al., 2007). Changes to the profile of the 
spectral chart can indicate changes to the condition of either the 
track or train. Using the app to create a record of the spectral 
profile of the train/track could potentially be used to know what 
condition the train/track is in.
Discussion
Based on the results shown in Section “Past Developments 
of Smartphones’ Applications for Measuring Ride Quality,” 
the accelerometers in the smartphones seem to be able to 
measure ride comfort at a level comparable to that of a more 
sophisticated accelerometer. As was mentioned in Section “Past 
Developments of Smartphones’ Applications for Measuring 
Ride Quality,” the phones did have a different sampling rate 
and sensitivity as can be seen in Figure 6 when comparing data 
for the Nexus 4 to the HTC Sense. It should also be noted that 
both phones that were used, were relatively old. The Nexus 4 
was almost 4 years old, whereas the HTC Sense was around 
5 years old. Mobile technology develops at a high rate, and the 
smartphones of today and in the future will be equipped with 
higher quality accelerometers compared to the ones used in this 
experiment. Based on the results of this project, the technology 
used in modern smartphones is more than enough to measure 
ride comfort aboard trains.
However, it is not the quality of the sensors inside the phones 
that will hinder this type of technology from being implemented. 
Roadroid in Sweden is very successful because the application 
itself is part of a GPS program. Many drivers in Sweden use 
FigUre 8 | Bs isO 2631-1:1997 ride comfort for the 4-min sample.
 9
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
their phones for their GPS functionality and so getting people 
to use roadroid is exceedingly simple, just package it with the 
most popular GPS software. However, for the app that was 
developed for this project, it would much more difficult to get 
passengers to use it. There exists no reason to start up a specific 
app aboard a train and let it lay relatively still while collecting 
data. The greatest challenge in employ this type of technology is 
to make passengers themselves implement it in their daily lives. 
For roadroid, it was relatively simple as drivers were already 
implementing the use of phone GPS in their lives. For this app 
to be successful, there needs to be an incentive for passengers to 
use and implement it.
Providing an incentive could be done in a variety of ways, the 
app could be packaged with another app popularly used onboard 
trains if such an app exists. Rail companies could provide Wi-Fi 
onboard their trains while making it so that the app has to be 
FigUre 9 | sperling ride index for the 4-min sample.
running in order for the passenger to access the Wi-Fi network. 
Another idea might see that railway companies provide discounts 
to passengers who voluntarily use the app and collect valuable 
data. Perhaps, passengers themselves are curious about the ride 
comfort and end up implementing the app in their travels on their 
own. At this stage of the technology, how it will be implemented 
is mostly speculation. Unfortunately, during the field trials, the 
carriage only traveled on straight track, and so it was not possible 
to collect any data on how well the phones can measure swaying 
and other vibrations that are not in the z-axis (perpendicular to 
the floor).
error sources
Due to the HTC Sense being an older phone, the processor 
was not very powerful and so the sample rate varied quite a 
lot, dropping down to as low as 18 Hz at certain point in the 
 10
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
FigUre 10 | Pie charts showing the percentage of different comfort zones in a 4-min journey.
data collecting. It is entirely possible for it to have missed ride 
comfort significant vibrations as the phone is forced to buffer 
the recording of the data due to the lack of processing power. 
Designing the application in such a way that it is more efficient 
in the use of processing power might be a way to mitigate this 
type of problem in the future. Due to the lack of a magnetic 
base for the accelerometer, the only thing preventing it from 
moving was the rubber pads it was sitting on; the device was 
not very secure at all and at one point in the data collection 
toppled over from the strong vibration caused by the shunter’s 
air brakes. It should be noted that the HTC Sense has a broken 
screen due to being exposed heavy pressure; it is unknown how 
this has impacted on the sensors. The Nexus 4 has had its screen 
replaced on two separate occasions, once due to scratches 
caused by sand and another time due to falling, shattering the 
screen. Both times the screen was replaced by an amateur, and 
therefore, the instruments on the phone may or may not have 
suffered. There were many other researchers onboard the car-
riage, and due to the lack of time, it was very hectic, and even 
though the accelerometer and the phones were placed out of 
the way as possible, people may have stepped near the phones 
or inadvertently touched the accelerometer or its wiring, intro-
ducing errors to the data.
cOnclUsiOn anD recOMMenDaTiOn
In this study, we have investigated how well the accelerometers 
inside smartphones could measure ride comfort compared with 
a more sophisticated accelerometer. Although the phones show 
some inconsistency in being able to properly detect lower levels 
of discomfort, they show similarities when it comes to finding 
more uncomfortable levels of vibrations. After reviewing the 
results of the field trials, it is evident that there is merit in using 
smartphones for the purpose of measuring ride comfort aboard 
trains.
Every year more advanced accelerometers are being used in 
phones, in the future smartphones will be able measure ride com-
fort with even more accuracy than they currently can. The inher-
ent differences in the different phones sampling rate and quality 
of data could be seen in Figure 5. These differences between the 
phones can make it difficult to standardize the accuracy of the 
ride comfort that the application records. A database that keeps 
 11
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
FigUre 11 | Power spectral density charts for each device made 
using fast Fourier transformation.
phones ability to measure ride comfort in curves and turnouts. 
Correlating the measured vibrations with laser measurements 
of track could give a better understanding of the potential use 
of smartphones to determine the condition of the tracks/trains. 
Newer phones should be used as if and when this technology gets 
implemented the phones that are new at the time of development 
will be the standard in the future.
Based on our market research, we found that it is highly likely 
that passengers will install the app to better understand the ride 
quality. Adding a functionality to the app allowing passengers to 
give feedbacks on subjective causes of discomfort in trains such 
as smells, temperature, etc. could help rail companies improve 
conditions onboard the train. The extension can attract crowd-
sourcing data that could truly improve customer experiences.
aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns
AA and SK developed the idea; AA developed crowdsourcing 
platform and ANN server; AA and SK verified data and wrote 
the paper.
acKnOWleDgMenTs
The authors deeply appreciated technical support and construc-
tive advice during field measurement campaigns from Drs. 
Edward Steward, Mayorkinos Papaelias, Graeme Yeo, and Sarah 
Yeo. In addition, they are grateful to both the reviewers for their 
constructive comments.
FUnDing
The authors are very grateful for the financial support from 
European Commission for H2020-MSCA-RISE Project No. 
691135 “RISEN: Rail Infrastructure Systems Engineering 
Network,” which enables a global research network that tackles 
the grand challenge in railway infrastructure resilience and 
advanced sensing under extreme conditions (www.risen2rail.eu). 
 
This project is also partly sponsored by H2020-S2R Project No. 
730849 “S-CODE: Switch and Crossing Optimal Design and 
Evaluation.”
track of the inherent differences between the phones would need 
to be made if this app is to be put to use.
Due to there being many possible error sources during the field 
testing of the developed app, it is recommended that more testing 
be done to get less error-riddled data. Testing should preferably 
be done with a three-dimensional accelerometer to better test the 
reFerences
British Standards Institution. (1997a). Mechanical Vibration and Shock – Evaluation 
of Human Exposure to Whole Body Vibration – Part 1: General Requirements. 
London: BSI. (BS ISO 2631-1).
British Standards Institution. (1997b). Mechanical Vibration and Shock – Human 
Exposure – Vocabulary. London: BSI. (BS ISO 5805).
British Standards Institution. (2001). Mechanical Vibration and Shock – Evaluation of 
Human Exposure to Whole Body Vibration – Part 4: Guidelines for the Evaluation 
of the Effects of Vibration and Rotational Motion on Passenger and Crew Comfort 
in Fixed-Guideway Transport Systems. London: BSI. (BS ISO2631-4).
British Standards Institution. (2009). Mechanical Vibration, Shock and Condition 
Monitoring – Vocabulary. London: BSI. (BS ISO 2041).
Darlton, A. O., and Marinov, M. (2015). Suitability of tilting technology to the 
tyne and wear metro system. Urban Rail Transit 1, 47–68. doi:10.1007/
s40864-015-0007-8 
Dumitriu, M. (2013). Evaluation of the comfort index in railway vehicles depend-
ing on the vertical suspension. Ann. Fac. Eng. Hunedoara 11, 23–32. 
Esveld, C., and Kok, A. W. M. (1998). Interaction between moving vehicles and 
railway track at high speed. Rail Eng. Int. 27, 14–16. 
Forslöf, L. (2012). Roadroid–Smartphone Road Quality Monitoring. Available at: 
http://hojja.se/common/References/Roadroid%20Final%20Paper%20ITS%20
World%20Congress%20Vienna%202012.pdf 
Forslöf, L., and Jones, H. (2014). Roadroid Continuous Road Condition Monitoring 
with Smart Phones. Available at: http://roadroid.com/common/References/
SARF-IRF%20paper.v5.pdf
Förstberg, J. (2000). Ride Comfort and Motion Sickness in Tilting Trains. Available 
at: www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:8728/FULLTEXT01.pdf
George, T. K., Gadhia, H. M., Sukumar, R. S. O., and Cabibihan, J.-J. (2013). “Sensing 
discomfort of standing passengers in public rail transportation systems using a 
smart phone,” in 10th IEEE International Conference on Control and Automation 
(ICCA) 12–14 June 2013 (Hangzhou, China), 1509–1513.
 12
Azzoug and Kaewunruen
Crowdsourcing Smartphones for Train-Ride Quality
Frontiers in Built Environment | www.frontiersin.org
February 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3
Google. (2015). Coordinate System (Relative to a Device) That’s Used by the Sensor 
API. Available at: https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/sensors/sen-
sors_overview.html
Islam, T., and Johnston, M. (2013). Using Cell-Phones to Monitor Road Roughness. 
Auckland, New Zealand: Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
University of Auckland.
Kaewunruen, S. (2014a). Impact damage mechanism and mitigation by ballast 
bonding at railway bridge ends. Int. J. Railw. Technol. 3, 1–22. doi:10.4203/ 
ijrt.3.4.1 
Kaewunruen, S. (2014b). Monitoring structural deterioration of railway turnout 
systems via dynamic wheel/rail interaction. Case Stud. Nondestr. Test. Eval. 1, 
19–24. doi:10.1016/j.csndt.2014.03.004 
Karakasis, K., Skarlatos, D., and Zakinthinos, T. (2005). A factorial analysis for 
the determination of an optimal train speed with a desired ride comfort. Appl. 
Acoust. 66, 1121–1134. doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2005.02.006 
Kargarnovin, M., Younesian, D., Thompson, D., and Jones, C. (2005). Ride comfort 
of high-speed trains travelling over railway bridges. Veh. Syst. Dyn. 43, 173–197. 
doi:10.1080/00423110512331335111 
Lauriks, G., Evans, J., Förstberg, J., Balli, M., and Barron de Angoiti, I. (2003). UIC 
Comfort Tests. Available at: http://vti.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:670177/
FULLTEXT01.pdf 
Mobile Tools. (2013). Vibration Monitoring [Android App]. Available at: https://
play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.lul.vibration.monitoring
Nakagawa, C., and Suzuki, H. (2005). Effects of train vibrations on passenger pc 
use. Q. Rep. RTRI 46, 200–205. doi:10.2219/rtriqr.46.200 
Narayanamoorthy, R., Saran, V., Goel, V., Harsha, S., Khan, S., and Berg, M. (2008). 
“Determination of activity comfort in swedish passenger trains,” in Proceedings 
of 8th World Congress on Railway Research (WCRR 2008) (Seoul, South Korea), 
18–22.
Oostermeijer, K., and Kok, A. (2000). Dynamic behaviour of railway superstruc-
tures. HERON 45, 25–34.
Orvnäs, A. (2011). On Active Secondary Suspension in Rail Vehicles to Improve 
Ride Comfort. Available at: www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:460526/
FULLTEXT01.pdf
Ren, Z., Sun, S., and Zhai, W. (2005). Study on lateral dynamic characteris-
tics of vehicle/turnout system. Veh. Syst. Dyn. 43, 285–303. doi:10.1080/ 
00423110500083262 
Sachs, D. (2010). Sensor Fusion on Android Devices: A Revolution in Motion 
Processing. Google Tech Talks. Available at: https://youtu.be/C7JQ7Rpwn2k
Schulte-Werning, B., Thompson, D., Gautier, P., Hanson, C., Hemsworth, B., 
Nelson, J., et al. (2007). “Noise and vibration mitigation for rail transportation, 
systems,” in Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Railway Noise 
(Munich, Germany).
Silva, H., Lourenco, A., Tomas, R., Lee, V., and Going, S. (2011). “
Accelerometry-
based study of body vibration dampening during whole-body vibration train-
ing,” in IEEE International Workshop on Medical Measurements and Applications 
Proceedings (MeMeA) 30-31 May 2011 (Bari, Italy), 98–102.
Sperling, E., and Betzhold, C. (1956). Beitrag zur beurteilung des fahrkomforts in 
schienenfahrzeugen, Vol. 80. Dresden, Germany: Glasers Annalen, 314–320.
Strandemar, K. (2005). On Objective Measures for Ride Comfort Evaluation. 
Available at: www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:14199/FULLTEXT01.pdf
Suzuki, H. (1998). Research trends on riding comfort evaluation in japan. 
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. F J. Rail Rapid Transit 212, 61–72. doi:10.1243/ 
0954409981530689 
Youcef, K., Sabiha, T., El Mostafa, D., Ali, D., and Bachir, M. (2013). Dynamic anal-
ysis of train-bridge system and riding comfort of trains with rail irregularities. 
J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 27, 951–962. doi:10.1007/s12206-013-0206-8 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Azzoug and Kaewunruen. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal 
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or 
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
