 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 1 143–163
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20160675
143
IntroductIon
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of 
the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the world, 
resulting in a growing social and economic burden (Mathers 
and Loncar, 2006; 
Vestbo et al., 2013). It is anticipated that the 
prevalence and burden of COPD will further rise over the 
next decades, as a result of the aging population and the per-
sistent exposure of individuals to risk factors associated with 
the disease (Mathers and Loncar, 2006). In accordance, aging 
has recently been highlighted as a significant risk factor for 
chronic lung diseases (Meiners et al., 2015). Long-term cig-
arette smoke (CS) exposure is a primary causative risk factor 
for COPD, although the disease can also develop in individ-
uals who never smoked (Salvi and Barnes, 2009; 
Vestbo et al., 
2013). COPD is characterized by progressive, irreversible air-
flow limitation and loss of functional parenchymal pulmonary 
tissue, called emphysema. Emphysema comprises alveolar air-
space enlargement and impaired pulmonary regeneration; it 
has a poor prognosis and there are currently no effective med-
ical treatments aside from lung transplantation. 
The molecular 
mechanisms underlying the development and progression of 
COPD/emphysema are not yet fully clarified. Recent studies 
from our laboratory and others have demonstrated that alter-
ations in the WNT microenvironment potentially contribute 
to disease pathogenesis (Baarsma et al., 2011; Kneidinger et 
al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Heijink et al., 2013).
WNT ligands (19 in human) are evolutionarily con-
served secreted glycoproteins that are indispensable for proper 
organ, especially lung, development (Morrisey et al., 2013; 
Kotton and Morrisey, 2014). Specific 
WNT ligands can either 
activate the β-catenin–dependent (canonical) or β-catenin–
independent (noncanonical) pathways by acting on various 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (coPd) is a leading cause of death worldwide. one main pathological feature of coPd 
is the loss of functional alveolar tissue without adequate repair (emphysema), yet the underlying mechanisms are poorly de-
fined. reduced Wnt–β-catenin signaling is linked to impaired lung repair in coPd; however, the factors responsible for at-
tenuating this pathway remain to be elucidated. Here, we identify a canonical to noncanonical Wnt signaling shift contributing 
to coPd pathogenesis. We demonstrate enhanced expression of noncanonical Wnt-5A in two experimental models of coPd 
and increased posttranslationally modified Wnt-5A in human coPd tissue specimens. Wnt-5A was increased in primary lung 
fibroblasts from coPd patients and induced by coPd-related stimuli, such as tGF-β, cigarette smoke (cS), and cellular senes-
cence. Functionally, mature Wnt-5A attenuated canonical Wnt-driven alveolar epithelial cell wound healing and transdiffer-
entiation in vitro. Lung-specific Wnt-5A overexpression exacerbated airspace enlargement in elastase-induced emphysema in 
vivo. Accordingly, inhibition of Wnt-5A in vivo attenuated lung tissue destruction, improved lung function, and restored ex-
pression of β-catenin–driven target genes and alveolar epithelial cell markers in the elastase, as well as in cS-induced models 
of coPd. We thus identify a novel essential mechanism involved in impaired mesenchymal–epithelial cross talk in coPd patho-
genesis, which is amenable to therapy.
Noncanonical WNT
-5A signaling impairs endogenous 
lung repair in COPD
Hoeke A. Baarsma,1 Wioletta Skronska-Wasek,1 Kathrin Mutze,1 Florian Ciolek,1 Darcy E. Wagner,1 
Gerrit John-Schuster,1 Katharina Heinzelmann,1 Andreas Günther,2 Ken R. Bracke,3 Maylis Dagouassat,4 
Jorge Boczkowski,4 Guy G. Brusselle,3 Ron Smits,5 Oliver Eickelberg,1 Ali Ö. Yildirim,1 and 
Melanie Königshoff 1
1Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Research Unit Lung Repair and Regeneration, Helmholtz Center Munich, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich,  
University Hospital Grosshadern, 81377 Munich, Germany
2University of Giessen Lung Center, 35392 Giessen, Germany
3Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
4Inserm U955, Equipe 4, 94000 Créteil, France
5Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, 3000 Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2017 Baarsma et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License(Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Melanie Königshoff: melanie.koenigshoff@ucdenver.edu
Abbreviations used: ABC, active β-catenin; ATI, alveolar epithelial type I; CM, condi-
tioned medium; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CS, cigarette smoke; 
CSE, CS extract; DOX, doxycycline; FA, filtered air; GOLD, Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Diseesae; IPF, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; phLF, primary human 
lung fibroblast; PKC, protein kinase C; SFT 
PC, surfactant protein C; siRNA, small 
 
interference RNA.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20160675
Published Online: 15 December, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
144
transmembrane receptors (Baarsma et al., 2013). In emphy-
sematous COPD patients, nuclear expression of the tran-
scriptional coactivator β-catenin, a surrogate marker for active 
canonical WNT signaling, is decreased in alveolar epithelial 
type II (ATII) cells (Kneidinger et al., 2011; Jiang et al., 2016). 
The cause of reduced canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling in 
the alveolar epithelium and, consequently, limited lung repair 
capacity in COPD patients remains to be elucidated.
The structural and cellular alterations observed in the 
lungs of individuals with COPD phenotypically resemble ac-
celerated aging of the organ and WNT signal alterations have 
been shown to impact cellular aging mechanisms, such as se-
nescence (Ito and Barnes, 2009; Muñoz-Espín et al., 2013; 
Scheraga and Thannickal, 2014; Meiners et al., 2015). Recent 
evidence indicates that noncanonical WNT signaling is able 
to inhibit canonical WNT signaling, resulting in decreased 
β-catenin stability and/or impaired downstream signaling 
(Mikels and Nusse, 2006; Nemeth et al., 2007). Nevertheless, 
this mechanism has not been linked to chronic lung disease 
pathology. In the current study, we hypothesize that a tran-
sition of canonical to noncanonical WNT signaling contrib-
utes to COPD development.
We report for the first time that WNT
-5A expression, 
a ligand known to trigger noncanonical WNT signaling, is 
increased in experimental and human COPD. We provide 
evidence of WNT signaling being crucially involved in im-
paired cellular crosstalk in which fibroblast-derived WNT
-5A 
negatively regulates canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling in 
alveolar epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo, thereby impairing 
the capacity of the lung for wound healing and regeneration.
reSuLtS
noncanonical Wnt-5A is increased in murine models of 
coPd and contributes to emphysema development in vivo
We first examined the expression of the noncanonical 
WNT ligands in well-established mouse models of COPD. 
WNT
-5A was the only noncanonical WNT ligand signifi-
cantly increased in mice subjected to short-term (3 d) CS 
(ΔCT: Wnt-4, −1.93 ± 0.04 vs. −1.98 ± 0.11; P > 0.05; 
Wnt-5A, −2.20 ± 0.18 vs. −1.61 ± 0.15; P < 0.01; Wnt-5B, 
−4.50 ± 0.05 vs. −4.22 ± 0.19; P > 0.05; and Wnt-11, −2.45 
± 0.10 vs. −2.00 ± 0.16; P > 0.05; filtered air [FA] versus 
CS-exposed mice; n = 4). Increased WNT
-5A protein ex-
pression, accompanied by reduced active β-catenin (ABC) 
expression, was observed in whole-lung homogenate of mice 
chronically exposed to CS (4 mo) in comparison to FA-ex-
posed mice (fold change, 3.5 ± 0.7; Fig. 1 A). Accordingly, 
expression of the WNT/T–β-catenin target gene Axin2 was 
significantly attenuated, whereas expression of the neutrophil 
chemoattractant KC (Cxcl1) was increased by CS exposure 
(Fig. 1 B). Similar results were obtained in our mouse model 
of elastase-induced emphysema with WNT
-5A transcript 
and protein expression being increased (protein: 2.4 ± 0.3-
fold over vehicle control; Fig. 1, C and D). Elastase-induced 
emphysema development was also accompanied by a reduc-
tion in the canonical WNT target genes Axin2 and Naked1 
(Nkd1) and by an up-regulation of elastin (Eln; Fig. 1 D), fur-
ther corroborating previously published results (Kneidinger 
et al., 2011; Uhl et al., 2015).
Next, we analyzed whether WNT
-5A contributes to 
the development of experimental emphysema in vivo. T
o this 
end, we used mice that conditionally overexpress WNT
-5A 
specifically in the lung (SFT 
PC-rtTA T
etO-WNT
-5A mice). 
Pulmonary overexpression of WNT
-5A was initiated by 
supplementation of in the drinking water with doxycycline 
(DOX) 1 wk before the induction of emphysema and was 
well tolerated by the mice in all the experimental groups 
(Fig. 1, E and F). Overexpression of the ligand aggravated the 
development of elastase-induced emphysema, as determined 
by an increase in tropoelastin expression (Fig. 1 F), histologi-
cal assessment, and quantitative morphometry (Fig. 1, G and 
H). A significant increase in mean chord length was observed 
in emphysematous mice that overexpressed WNT
-5A com-
pared with respective control group (Fig. 1 H; 35.0 ± 3.0 ver-
sus 26.8 ± 1.9 µm, respectively; P < 0.05). Collectively, these 
data indicate a potential pathophysiological role of increased 
WNT
-5A in the development and progression of emphysema.
enhanced expression and posttranslationally modified  
Wnt-5A in biosamples of individuals with coPd
T
o determine the potential clinical relevance of WNT
-5A in 
human COPD, we investigated whether WNT
-5A expres-
sion was altered in lung samples of COPD patients. Notably, 
WNT
-5A transcript was enhanced in lung tissue specimens 
from individuals with COPD compared with tissue from 
individuals without COPD (donor; Fig. 2 A). Additionally, 
analysis of WNT
-5A expression in induced sputum of COPD 
patients revealed that expression of the ligand is dependent 
on disease severity (i.e., Global Initiative for Chronic Ob-
structive Lung Disease [GOLD] status; Fig. 2 B; data derived 
from Gene Expression Omnibus [GEO] microarray available 
under accession no. GSE22148; Singh et al., 2011). The data 
from this large cohort (GSE22148) with 140 COPD patients 
(GOLD stage II, n = 71; stage III, n = 59; and stage IV
, n = 13) 
revealed a weak (r = 0.18), but significant (P < 0.05), linear 
correlation between age of the patient and WNT
-5A expres-
sion, independent of disease severity (Fig. 2 C).
Monomeric WNT ligands are predicted to have a mo-
lecular mass of ∼40 kD; however, they are heavily subjected 
to posttranslational modifications, including palmitoylation 
and glycosylation (Willert and Nusse, 2012; Baarsma et al., 
2013). In addition, (secreted) WNT ligands can form high 
molecular weight homomers/oligomers, which may influ-
ence the signaling capacity of ligands (Cha et al., 2008; Mac-
Donald et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2015). We first verified if 
the antibody that we used for detection of WNT
-5A was also 
able to detect the ligand when oligomerized (Fig. S1). Nota-
bly, mature (∼49 kD) and homomeric/oligomeric WNT
-5A 
protein (∼230 kD) was increased in lung tissue of individuals 
with COPD, whereas the expression of WNT
-5A with a mo-
 145
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
Figure 1. noncanonical Wnt-5A is increased in murine models of coPd and contributes to emphysema development in vivo. (A) Immunoblots 
and quantification of WNT-5A and ABC in whole-lung homogenate of mice exposed to FA (n = 6) or CS (CS; n = 8) for 4 mo. (B) Expression Axin2 and KC 
(CXCL1) in whole-lung homogenate of mice exposed to FA (n = 6) or CS (n = 8) for 4 mo. (C) Immunoblots and quantification of WNT-5A expression in 
whole lung homogenate of mice 14 d after exposure to vehicle (PBS, n = 3) or elastase (n = 3). (D) Expression of Wnt-5A, Axin2, Nkd1, and Eln in whole-lung 
homogenate of mice 7 d after exposure to vehicle (PBS; n = 6) or elastase (n = 6–12). (A–D) *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test. 
(E) Experimental setup to determine the impact of lung-specific WNT-5A overexpression on emphysema development. Animals had ad libitum access to 
drinking water containing 5% sucrose (solid line) or DOX (2 mg/ml) in 5% sucrose (dashed line). Animals were treated on day 0 with either elastase (PPE; 40 
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
146
lecular weight of ∼45 kD tended to be increased, although 
not significantly (Fig. 2 D). In accordance, gene expression of 
porcupine (POR 
CN), an O-acyltransferase that posttransla-
tionally modifies WNT proteins, is increased in lung tissue of 
COPD patients (Fig. 2 E).
Pulmonary fibroblasts are a cellular 
source of noncanonical Wnt-5A
We next aimed to identify the main cellular source of 
WNT
-5A in COPD. WNT
-5A expression was analyzed 
in 3D human lung tissue cultures (3D-LTCs), primary 
human ATII (phATII) cells, and primary human lung fi-
broblasts (phLF; Fig. 3 A). The highest basal transcript level 
of WNT
-5A was detected in phLF compared with phATII 
and 3D-LTCs. WNT
-5A protein could be detected in su-
pernatants from phLF
, but not in supernatants of ATII-like 
A549 cells (Fig. 3 B). Notably, RNA sequencing of phLF 
from individuals without (donor) and with COPD further 
revealed aberrant gene expression of specific WNT ligands, 
with increased noncanonical WNT
-5A expression in COPD 
fibroblasts (Fig. 3 C; 2.4-fold of mean donor; P < 0.001; 
unpublished data). Moreover, WNT
-5A expression was in-
creased in senescent phLF of smokers, as well as from indi-
viduals with COPD compared with respective nonsenescent 
fibroblasts (Fig. 3 D). Next, we stimulated phLF with TGF-β 
and/or CS extract (CSE). TGF-β treatment of phLF resulted 
in increased expression of WNT
-5A, whereas expression of 
another noncanonical WNT ligand, WNT
-4, was unaffected 
(Fig. 3 E). Stimulation with 
TGF-β led to increased 
WNT
-5A 
protein expression and secretion of the ligand (Fig. 3, F and 
G). Although CSE alone (up to 15%) only resulted in a slight 
increase in intracellular WNT
-5A protein expression, CSE 
showed a synergistic effect on both 
TGF-β–induced 
WNT
-5A 
protein expression and secretion in phLF (Fig. 3, F and G).
Given our initial finding that WNT
-5A appears to be 
posttranslationally modified and oligomerized differently in 
human COPD samples, we next investigated the role of gly-
cosylation on WNT
-5A synthesis and secretion by phLF
. The 
phLF were stimulated without or with TGF-β in the absence 
or presence of tunicamycin, a compound that prevents gly-
cosylation of proteins. Tunicamycin largely decreased cellular 
expression and secretion of WNT
-5A in cell lysates and su-
pernatants from phLF
, respectively (Fig. 3 H). These findings 
highlight the requirement of WNT
-5A glycosylation to be 
produced and secreted by phLF
, which is in line with a bio-
chemical study investigating the relevance of posttranslational 
modifications of WNT
-5A (Kurayoshi et al., 2007).
Fibroblast-derived Wnt-5A inhibits canonical Wnt–β-
catenin signaling in alveolar epithelial cells
Next, we endeavored to elucidate the underlying mechanism 
by which WNT
-5A impairs lung repair. Our previous work 
demonstrated that canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling is 
attenuated in ATII cells of emphysematous COPD patients 
(Kneidinger et al., 2011; Uhl et al., 2015). Given that canon-
ical and noncanonical WNT signaling can reciprocally regu-
late each other’s signaling activity, we investigated the direct 
effect of WNT
-5A on WNT–β-catenin signaling in alveolar 
epithelial cells. Stimulation with WNT
-3A resulted in in-
creased phosphorylation of LRP6 (p-ser1490 LRP6) and ac-
cumulation of ABC in human (A549) and murine (MLE12) 
alveolar-like epithelial cells (Fig. 4, A and B). WNT
-5A 
cotreatment resulted in a concentration-dependent attenua-
tion of WNT
-3A–induced LRP6 phosphorylation and ABC 
accumulation. DVL2 phosphorylation, a positive control for 
WNT signaling in general, was induced by either WNT
-3A 
or WNT
-5A, and this response was enhanced by stimulation 
with both ligands together (Fig. 4, A and B). Moreover, in 
murine alveolar epithelial cells (MLE12), WNT
-3A enhanced 
cytosolic and/or nuclear localization of β-catenin (indicated 
by arrows), which was largely decreased by direct cotreatment 
with WNT
-5A (Fig. 4 C). Accordingly, activation of β-cat-
enin–dependent gene transcription (determined by TOP/
FOP flash activity) by WNT
-3A or pharmacological inhibi-
tion of GSK-3β by either LiCl (10 mM) or SB216763 (5 µM) 
was attenuated by WNT
-5A in lung epithelial cells (Fig. 4, 
D–F). The intracellular effects of WNT
-5A were at least in 
part mediated by protein kinase C (PKC), but not JNK1/2 
or TAK1/NLK (percentage inhibition of WNT
-3A signaling 
by 
WNT
-5A in the absence or presence of the PKC inhibitor 
GF109203X was 69.2 ± 3.3% and 43.3 + 9.4%, respectively; 
P < 0.05; and not depicted). These findings indicate that 
WNT
-5A impairs β-catenin activation and signaling not only 
at the receptor level (i.e., regulating LRP6 activation) but also 
downstream of canonical WNT receptors.
This effect was specific for WNT
-5A, as WNT
-4 was 
not able to inhibit β-catenin activity in alveolar epithelial cells 
(Fig. 4 G). In addition, the WNT
-5A effect seems to be cell 
specific, as WNT
-5A was unable to attenuate WNT
-3A–in-
duced activation of β-catenin–dependent gene transcription 
in fibroblasts (Fig. 4 H). Collectively, these results suggest that 
noncanonical WNT
-5A is a specific negative regulator of 
WNT–β-catenin signaling in alveolar epithelial cells.
We further investigated the importance of N-glycosyla-
tion on the signaling properties of WNT
-5A. Deglycosylated 
U/kg body weight) or vehicle control (PBS). Data are derived from two independent animal experiments. (F) Analysis of WNT-5A and tropoelastin at day 21 in 
whole-lung homogenate of SFT 
PC rtTA TetO-WNT-5A mice exposed to DOX or 5% sucrose in the drinking water and treated with elastase or vehicle control 
(n = 3–6 mice/group). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. (G) H&E-stained lung 
tissue sections. Bars: (left) 1 mm; (right) 100 µm. (H) Mean chord length as determined by quantitative morphometry (n = 6–9 animals per group). **, P < 
0.01; ***, P < 0.001, compared with vehicle treatment with sucrose; ###, P < 0.001 compared with vehicle treatment with DOX; $, P < 0.05, compared with 
elastase treatment with sucrose; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test.
 147
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
WNT-5A was generated by treating WNT-5A conditioned 
medium (WNT-5A CM) with Peptide-N-Glycosidase F 
(PNGase F), which did not influence protein stability of the 
ligand (Fig. 5 A). Deglycosylated WNT
-5A was not able to 
significantly attenuate canonical WNT signaling, whereas 
untreated WNT-5A CM attenuated WNT-3A–induced ac-
tivation of β-catenin dependent gene transcription in A549 
cells (Fig. 5 B, left). Furthermore, control CM treated with 
PNGase F did not affect WNT-3A driven transcriptional 
activity of β-catenin (Fig. 5 B, right). These results demon-
strate that glycosylation of the ligand is essential for the ob-
served negative regulation of WNT–β-catenin signaling by 
WNT
-5A in alveolar epithelial cells.
Next, we wondered if fibroblast-derived WNT
-5A 
was sufficient to affect canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling 
in alveolar epithelial cells. We experimentally addressed this 
Figure 2. enhanced expression and posttranslationally modified Wnt-5A in biosamples of individuals with coPd. (A) WNT-5A in whole-lung 
homogenate of individuals without (Donor; n = 19) and with COPD (n = 17). *, P < 0.05, unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction. (B) WNT-5A 
expression in induced sputum of individuals with COPD (GOLD stage II, n = 71; III, n = 59; IV, n = 13). *, P < 0.05, determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed 
by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. (C) WNT-5A expression in induced sputum of individuals with COPD correlated to age of the individual (COPD 
stage II/III/IV; n = 143). Linear regression analysis; r = 0.18 and P < 0.05. Data presented in B and C are derived from microarray data available under GEO 
accession no. GSE22148 (Singh et al., 2011). (D) Immunoblots and quantification of WNT-5A protein expression in whole-lung homogenate of individuals 
without (Donor; n = 16) and with COPD (n = 22). *, P < 0.05, unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction. (E) Expression of porcupine (POR 
CN) in whole-
lung homogenate of individuals without (Donor; n = 10) and with COPD (n = 14). *, P < 0.05, unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction.
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
148
Figure 3. Wnt-5A is highly expressed and secreted by human lung fibroblasts, which are augmented by cSe and/or tGF-β. (A) Comparison of 
WNT-5A expression in human 3D lung tissue cultures (3D-LTCs; n = 3), primary human alveolar epithelial cells (n = 4), and phLFs (n = 5). ***, P < 0.001, 
compared with 3D-LTCs; ###, P < 0.001, compared with phLF; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. 
 
(B) Comparison of WNT-5A secretion by human alveolar epithelial cells (A549; 24 and 48 h) and phLF (24 h; n = 4 independent experiments). (C) RNA 
sequence analysis of WNT ligand expression in phLF of individuals without (Donor; n = 4) and with COPD (n = 4). Gray boxes indicate that WNT ligands 
could not be detected in the respective sample. Adjusted p-value <0.05 (Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction). (D) WNT-5A in nonsenescent 
and senescent phLF of smokers (n = 7) and individuals with COPD (n = 8). *, P < 0.05, paired Student’s t test. (E) WNT-4 and WNT-5A in phLF in the absence 
 149
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
question by treating alveolar epithelial cells with supernatants 
of fibroblasts in which WNT
-5A was silenced by small in-
terference RNA (siRNA). Treatment of MRC5 human lung 
fibroblasts with WNT
-5A–specific siRNA attenuated both 
basal and TGF-β–induced expression of WNT
-5A in cell ly-
sates and supernatants (Fig. 5, C–E). WNT
-5A at >200 kD 
was only detected in the supernatant fraction and not in cell 
lysate, further corroborating that 
WNT
-5A homomers/oligo-
mers are a secreted form of WNT
-5A. Remarkably, superna-
tants of TGF-β–stimulated fibroblasts in which WNT
-5A was 
knocked down caused a significant activation of β-catenin/
TCF–dependent gene transcription in alveolar epithelial 
cells (Fig. 5 F), whereas supernatants of TGF-β–stimulated 
fibroblasts (scrambled siRNA with TGF-β) caused a slight, 
although not significant, decrease in β-catenin signaling in 
alveolar epithelial cells (Fig. 5 F). Collectively, these experi-
ments demonstrate that WNT
-5A secreted by lung fibroblasts 
is sufficient to negatively affect canonical WNT signaling in 
alveolar epithelial cells.
Wnt-5A impairs Wnt–β-catenin–mediated 
alveolar epithelial cell repair
These results urged us to study the functional consequence 
of noncanonical WNT-5A on alveolar epithelial cell repair 
capacity. WNT-5A significantly delayed WNT-3A–β-cat-
enin–mediated wound closure of murine lung epithelial 
cells (Fig. 6 A). We also used the well-characterized in vitro 
model in which primary mouse ATII cells trans-differenti-
ate spontaneously to ATI-like cells over culture, a process 
highly dependent on autocrine WNT–β-catenin signaling 
(Fig. 6, B and C; Flozak et al., 2010; Mutze et al., 2015). 
WNT-5A CM treatment impaired β-catenin activation and 
attenuated ATII-to-ATI cell trans-differentiation over time 
of culture, as determined by protein expression of ABC and 
T1α/podoplanin (ATI cell marker; Fig. 6 D). The inhib-
itory effect of WNT-5A on β-catenin signaling in the al-
veolar epithelium was once more confirmed by analyzing 
microarray data of primary mouse ATII cells treated with 
WNT-5A (unpublished data). Canonical WNT target genes, 
such as Nkd1 and Lgr5, were significantly down-regulated 
by WNT-5A compared with control treatment (Fig. 6 E). 
Interestingly, WNT-5A also negatively affected the expres-
sion of Nkx2.1 (TTF-1; pulmonary epithelial cell marker), 
whereas elastin (Eln), which is up-regulated in experimental 
emphysema (Fig. 1 D) and in patients with severe emphy-
sema (Deslee et al., 2009), was among the highest up-regu-
lated genes (Fig. 6 E).
Inhibition of Wnt-5A signaling in vivo recuperates 
alveolar cell function and attenuates lung pathogenesis 
in murine models of coPd
T
o evaluate if targeting WNT
-5A in vivo is beneficial in de-
veloping and/or established experimental COPD, we first 
used the model of elastase-induced emphysema and pro-
phylactically treated mice with either neutralizing antibod-
ies directed against WNT
-5A (αWNT
-5A) or respective IgG 
control antibodies (Fig. 7 A). Histological assessment of the 
lungs 7 d after elastase treatment revealed ameliorated lung 
pathology in animals that received αWNT
-5A compared with 
mice treated with IgG control antibodies (Fig. 7, B–D). This 
was confirmed by quantitative morphometric analysis (mean 
chord length, 26.2 ± 2.3 versus 32.1 ± 1.6 µm, respectively; 
P = 0.06) and by a significant increase in lung function (elas-
tance, 24.3 ± 1.6 versus 20.4 ± 0.9 cmH2O/ml, respectively; 
P < 0.05; Fig. 7 D). Furthermore, increased expression of 
ABC (Fig. 7 E), the canonical WNT target genes Axin2 and 
Nkd1, and the alveolar epithelial cell markers T1α (ATI) and 
Sftpc (ATII) were observed in mice treated with αWNT
-5A 
compared with respective IgG-treated mice (Fig. 7 F).
A contributing factor to the development of COPD is 
the inflammatory response to CS. Therefore, we further in-
vestigated if WNT
-5A is involved in CS-induced pulmonary 
inflammation in vivo (Fig. 7 G). CS increased the number 
of inflammatory cells, mainly neutrophils and macrophages, 
in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF; Fig. 7 H). No in-
crease in either eosinophils or lymphocytes was observed in 
response to CS (not depicted). Systemic application of BOX5, 
a synthetic peptide that acts as an antagonist of WNT
-5A 
(Jenei et al., 2009), did not influence macrophage and neu-
trophil recruitment into the lung (Fig. 7 H). Nevertheless, CS 
decreased the expression of Axin2 and the alveolar epithelial 
cell marker Nkx2.1, which was partially restored by 
WNT
-5A 
antagonism (Fig. 7 I). Plotting of Axin2 against Nkx2.1 re-
vealed a clear linear correlation (r = 0.95; P < 0.0001; Fig. 7 I). 
Moreover, both of these genes were significantly down-reg-
ulated in COPD patients (donor versus COPD: AXIN2, P = 
0.0026; NKX2.1, P = 0.0003), and a similar linear correlation 
between AXIN2 and NKX2.1 was observed in human lung 
tissue (all individuals, r = 0.46; Donor, r = 0.41; COPD, r = 
0.45; P < 0.0001 for all groups; Fig. 7 J). These findings fur-
ther indicate a close link between WNT signal activity and 
alveolar epithelial cell function in vivo.
Finally, to address if WNT
-5A is involved in the pro-
gression of emphysema and a potential therapeutic target for 
the treatment of emphysema, we exposed mice to elastase and 
and presence of TGF-β (2 ng/ml; 24 h) in phLF (n = 5–8). **, P < 0.01, paired Student’s t test. (F and G) Representative immunoblots and quantification of 
WNT-5A expression in supernatant (secretion) and cell lysate after stimulation with CSE (5–10–15% CSE) in the absence and presence of TGF-β (2 ng/ml) 
for 48 h (n = 4 independent experiments). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple 
comparison test. (H) WNT-5A in supernatant (secretion) and cell lysate after stimulation TGF-β (2 ng/ml) in the absence and presence of tunicamycin (TCN; 
5 µM) for 48 h (n = 3–5 independent experiments). **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 compared with vehicle without TNC; ##, P < 0.01; ###, P < 0.001, compared with 
TGF-β without TNC; $, P < 0.05, compared with vehicle with TCN; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test.
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
150
Figure 4. Wnt-5A attenuates canonical Wnt–β-catenin signaling in alveolar epithelial cells. (A and B) Immunoblots and quantification of LRP6 
phosphorylation and ABC accumulation in the absence and presence of WNT-3A and/or WNT-5A in (A) human (A549) and (B) murine (MLE12) alveolar 
epithelial cells (n = 3–5 independent experiments). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, compared with WNT-3A stimulation in the absence of WNT-5A; 
determined by one-way ANO 
VA followed by a Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. (C) Representative immunofluorescence images of active and total 
β-catenin (left and right, respectively) in murine alveolar epithelial cells (MLE12) treated with WNT-3A, WNT-5A, or both for 3 h. Arrows indicate cytosolic 
and/or nuclear β-catenin expression. ZO-1 staining (left) was included to show tight junctions between cells. Bars: (left) 20; (right) 50 µm (n = 3). (D) 
β-Catenin–dependent gene transcription (TOP/FOP-flash assay) activated by WNT-3A in the absence and presence of WNT-5A in human alveolar epithelial 
cells (n = 4–5). *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001 compared with vehicle; ###, P < 0.001, compared with WNT-3A; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a 
Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. (E and F) β-Catenin–dependent gene transcription activated by GSK-3β inhibitor (E) LiCl or (F) SB216763 in the 
absence and presence of WNT-5A (100 ng/ml) in human alveolar epithelial cells (A549). Data represents n = 3–5 independent experiments. **, P < 0.01; ***, 
P < 0.001, compared with vehicle control; ##, P < 0.01; ###, P < 0.001, compared with respective GSK-3β alone; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by 
 151
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
started treatment with IgG control antibodies or αWNT
-5A 
upon established emphysema (6 d after exposure; Fig. 8 A). 
Consistent with the preventative approaches, mice with estab-
lished emphysema that received αWNT
-5A had significantly 
improved lung architecture, better lung function (elastance 
and compliance), and reduced mean chord length as compared 
with mice receiving IgG treatment (Fig. 8, B–D). Similarly 
to what was seen in the CS model, inhibition of WNT
-5A 
did not influence inflammatory cell influx (Fig. 8 E), while 
resulting in an increased expression of canonical WNT tar-
get genes (Axin2 and Nkd1) and the alveolar epithelial cell 
marker Nkx2.1 (Fig. 8 F). Consistent with the CS model, a 
linear correlation between Axin2 and Nkx2.1 was also ob-
served in the therapeutic model of elastase-induced emphy-
sema (Fig. 8 G). Furthermore, these data were confirmed on 
the protein level with enhanced NKX2.1 (P = 0.075) expres-
sion in mice receiving αWNT
-5A antibodies in comparison 
to mice receiving IgG antibody treatment (Fig. 8, H and I). 
These data indicate that inhibition of WNT
-5A reduces the 
development and progression of emphysema by restoring ca-
nonical 
WNT signaling and alveolar epithelial cell function in 
vivo. Collectively, our data suggest that attenuated canonical 
WNT signaling and disturbed lung repair observed in COPD 
is in part a consequence of increased WNT
-5A secretion by 
pulmonary fibroblasts (Fig. 9).
dIScuSSIon
In the current study, we demonstrate that increased nonca-
nonical WNT signaling activated by WNT-5A contributes 
to COPD pathogenesis. Increased expression of noncanoni-
cal WNT-5A was detected in two distinct animal models of 
emphysema/COPD. Moreover, elevated expression together 
with posttranslational modification and oligomerization of 
the ligand was observed in human COPD. WNT-5A gene 
expression correlated to the age of COPD patients. Ac-
cordingly, we found increased WNT-5A in primary COPD 
fibroblasts, as well as senescent fibroblasts. Functionally, 
WNT-5A impaired the activation of β-catenin, the main 
effector protein in canonical WNT signaling, in alveolar ep-
ithelial cells, thereby inhibiting wound healing and ATII-
to-ATI cell trans-differentiation in vitro. Lung-specific 
overexpression of WNT-5A aggravated elastase-induced 
emphysema, and both preventive and therapeutic inhibition 
of WNT-5A restored canonical WNT signaling, resulting 
in decreased lung pathology in experimental emphysema/
COPD. Collectively, WNT-5A is increased in COPD and 
negatively affects canonical WNT signal–driven alveolar 
epithelial cell function, thereby contributing to disease de-
velopment and progression.
Canonical and noncanonical WNT signaling are both 
indispensable for proper lung development (Li et al., 2002; 
Goss et al., 2009). Mice carrying a targeted disruption of the 
WNT
-5A locus show distinct abnormalities in distal lung 
morphogenesis, characterized by increased proliferation of 
epithelial and mesenchymal cells, as well as impaired lung 
maturation (Li et al., 2002). Inducible WNT
-5A knockout 
mice do not currently exist and conventional, constitutive 
WNT
-5A knockout mice (WNT
-5A−/−) die shortly after 
birth, apparently due to respiratory failure (Yamaguchi et al., 
1999). T
o determine the relevance of WNT
-5A in emphy-
sema development in the adult mouse, we first performed 
gain-of-function experiments in which WNT
-5A was over-
expressed in vivo (SFT 
PC rtTA T
etO WNT
-5A mice). This 
mouse line is based on the incorporation of the 3.7-kb frag-
ment of the human SFT 
PC promoter and is one of the most 
widely used transgenic mouse strains that targets the respira-
tory epithelium (Wert et al., 1993). In the adult lung, SFT 
PC 
promoter activity has been reported to target ATII cells and 
subsets of cuboidal bronchiolar cells (Rawlins and Perl, 2012). 
Lung-specific overexpression of WNT
-5A during develop-
ment has been demonstrated to negatively affect epithelial 
branching in vivo (Li et al., 2005). Although mesenchymal 
cells most likely represent the majority of WNT
-5A–produc-
ing cells in the lung, the SFT 
PC rtTA T
etO WNT
-5A model 
allowed us to artificially enhance expression of the ligand into 
the extracellular space of the lung, similar to what is observed 
in COPD pathogenesis. WNT
-5A overexpression resulted 
in significant aggravation of elastase-induced emphysema in 
vivo, and thus indicates that WNT
-5A enhances the suscepti-
bility of the lung to develop emphysema/COPD.
In human lung tissue, we detected several forms of 
WNT
-5A with distinct molecular weights. WNT ligands are 
heavily subjected to posttranslational modifications, such as 
palmitoylation and glycosylation, and they can also agglomer-
ate into multimeric/oligomerized complexes (∼95–230 kD; 
Panáková et al., 2005; Kurayoshi et al., 2007; Baarsma et al., 
2013). We observed an increase in oligomerized WNT
-5A in 
the lung tissue of individuals with COPD. Similar findings 
have been observed in murine lung tissue; however, further 
in-depth studies are needed to corroborate these results. Fully 
matured, monomeric WNT
-5A is equivalent to ∼49 kD, and 
expression of WNT
-5A with this molecular weight was al-
most exclusively detected in individuals with COPD. Anal-
ogous to COPD, increased expression of mature WNT
-5A 
(∼49 kD) is present in other chronic pathologies, such as mel-
anoma and ovarian carcinoma (Da Forno et al., 2008; Bar-
bolina et al., 2011). The clinical relevance of fully matured 
WNT
-5A compared with partially, posttranslationally modi-
a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. (G) β-Catenin–dependent gene transcription activated by WNT-3A in the absence and presence of recombinant 
WNT-4 (200 ng/ml) in A549 cells (n = 6). ***, P < 0.001, compared with vehicle control; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls mul-
tiple comparison test. (H) β-Catenin–dependent gene transcription activated by WNT-3A in the absence and presence of recombinant WNT-5A (200 ng/ml) 
in 3T3 fibroblasts (n = 3). *, P < 0.05, compared with vehicle control; determined by one-way ANO 
VA followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test.
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
152
fied WNT
-5A in these diseases has not yet been investigated. 
Here, we provide in vitro evidence that attenuation of ca-
nonical WNT signaling by WNT
-5A was largely diminished 
when posttranslational modification (i.e., glycosylation and 
palmitoylation) within WNT
-5A were removed, indicating 
that these posttranslational modifications are important for 
the secretion and function of WNT
-5A.
Canonical and noncanonical WNT signaling can be in-
dependent signaling entities; however, over the last decade, 
increasing evidence indicates that these pathways are strongly 
interconnected (Ishitani et al., 2003; T
opol et al., 2003; Mikels 
and Nusse, 2006). Although inhibitory action of noncanon-
ical WNT
-5A on β-catenin signaling has been established 
previously, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to 
demonstrate that this mechanism is central to a specific lung 
disease in human. Our study shows that WNT
-5A attenuates 
canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling by reducing LRP6 acti-
vation and accumulation of transcriptionally ABC in alveolar 
Figure 5. Glycosylated, fibroblast-derived Wnt-5A 
is a negative regulator of canonical Wnt–β-cat-
enin signaling in alveolar epithelial cells. (A) Immu-
noblots and quantification of WNT-5A in L-cell–derived 
control CM or WNT-5A CM in the absence and presence 
of PNGase F for 1 h (n = 3–6 independent experiments). 
 
(B) β-Catenin–dependent gene transcription (TOP/FOP-
flash assay) in A549 cells activated by WNT-3A in the 
absence and presence of glycosylated WNT-5A (WNT-5A 
CM), deglycosylated WNT-5A (WNT-5A CM + PNGase F), 
or control CM without and with PNGase F (n = 3–6 in-
dependent experiments). ***, P < 0.001, compared with 
vehicle control; #, P < 0.05; ##, P < 0.01, compared with 
WNT-3A with WNT-5A CM; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison 
test. (C–E) Confirmation of WNT-5A silencing on (C) 
mRNA and (D and E) protein level in MRC5 fibroblast 
 
(n = 3) transfected with scrambled siRNA or WNT-5A 
siRNA and subsequently treated with TGF-β (2 ng/ml for 
48 h). **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, compared with vehicle 
control; ###, P < 0.001, compared with scrambled siRNA 
with TGF-β; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by 
a Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. (F) β-Catenin–
dependent gene transcription in A549 cells after 24 h of 
stimulation with supernatants derived from MRC5 human 
lung fibroblasts treated with scrambled siRNA or WNT-5A 
siRNA with or without additional TGF-β (2 ng/ml) treat-
ment (n = 3). *, P < 0.05, compared with scrambled siRNA 
control; #, P < 0.05, compared with scrambled siRNA with 
TGF-β; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a 
Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test.
 153
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
Figure 6. Wnt-5A impairs canonical Wnt signaling driven alveolar cell repair. (A) Representative images and quantification of wounds size of mu-
rine epithelial cells (MLE12) treated with WNT-3A, WNT-5A, or the combination (each WNT ligand: 100 ng/ml) for 48 h after wounding (n = 4 independent 
experiments). **, P < 0.01 compared with vehicle control; ##, P < 0.01, compared with WNT-3A stimulation; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a 
Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. (B) Representative immunofluorescence images of SPC (ATII cell marker) or T1α (ATI cell marker) in primary mouse 
ATII cells cultured up to 5 d. Bar, 100 µM. (C) Immunoblots of ABC and T1α (ATI cell marker) protein expression in primary mouse ATII cells cultured up to 
5 d. (D) Representative immunoblot and quantification of ABC and T1α in primary mouse ATII cells cultured for 3 or 5 d in the presence of control CM or 
WNT-5A CM (each diluted 1:1; n = 5). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, compared with control CM; determined by one-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Newman-Keuls 
multiple comparison test. (E) Microarray data for Nkd1, Lgr5, Eln, and Nkx2.1 of primary mouse ATII cells stimulated with WNT-5A (200 ng/ml; 6 h) or vehicle 
control (n = 3). *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001, paired Student's t test.
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
154
epithelial cells. Moreover, WNT
-5A attenuates β-catenin sig-
naling activated by pharmacological inhibition of GSK-3β, 
indicating that the ligand additionally activates an intracellular 
signaling cascade that negatively influences β-catenin signal-
ing. Alongside WNT
-5A, WNT
-4 is up-regulated in COPD 
(Durham et al., 2013; Heijink et al., 2013); however, this li-
gand did not affect canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling in 
alveolar epithelial cells. Recently, an in vitro study linked CS–
related lung carcinogenesis to WNT
-5A and PKC signaling 
(Whang et al., 2013). Analogously, we found that pharma-
cological inhibition of PKC partially prevented the action 
of WNT
-5A on β-catenin–dependent gene transcription in 
Figure 7. Prophylactic inhibition of Wnt-5A sig-
naling in vivo recuperates alveolar cell function and 
attenuates lung pathogenesis in murine models of 
coPd. (A) Experimental setup to determine the effect of 
antibody-mediated inhibition of WNT-5A on emphysema 
development in vivo. Animals were treated on day 0 with 
elastase (PPE: 80 U/kg body weight) and received either 
αWNT-5A antibodies or respective IgG control antibod-
ies as treatment. Data are derived from two independent 
animal experiments. (B and C) Representative images of 
H&E-stained lung tissue sections.Bars: (B) 500; (C)100 
µm. (D) Mean chord length and lung elastance measure-
ments in mice receiving elastase and either αWNT-5A or 
IgG antibodies (n = 6–16 animals per group). *, P < 0.05, 
unpaired Student's t test. (E) Representative immunoblots 
and quantification of ABC in mice with elastase-induced 
emphysema and either IgG or αWNT-5A treatment (n = 
7 for each group). **, P < 0.01, unpaired Student’s t test. 
(F) Expression of Nkd1, Axin2, T1α (podoplanin), and Sftpc 
in whole-lung homogenate of mice with elastase-induced 
emphysema and either IgG (n = 12) or αWNT-5A (n = 6) 
treatment. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s 
t test. (G) Experimental setup to determine the effect of 
WNT-5A blocking peptide BOX5 on CS-induced pulmo-
nary inflammation and alterations in lung epithelial cell 
function. Data are derived from a single animal experi-
ment. (H) Analysis of total cells, macrophages, and neu-
trophils in BALF of mice exposed for 10 d to FA (control) 
or CS in the absence or presence of BOX5 (40 µg per i.p. 
injection; n = 3–8 animals per group). *, P < 0.05; **, P 
< 0.01 compared with FA-exposed mice; determined by 
one-way ANO 
VA followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple 
comparison test. (I) Correlation between Axin2 and Nkx2.1 
expression in whole-lung homogenate of mice exposed to 
FA or CS in the absence or presence of BOX5 (n = 5–7 an-
imals per group). Linear regression analysis, r = 0.95 and 
P < 0.0001. (J) Correlation between AXIN2 and NKX2.1 
expression in whole-lung homogenate of individuals 
without (Donor; n = 91) and with COPD (n = 144). Lin-
ear regression analysis: all individuals, r = 0.46; donor, r = 
0.41; and COPD, r = 0.45; P < 0.0001 for all groups. Data 
derived from GSE47460-GPL14550.
 155
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
Figure 8. therapeutic inhibition of Wnt-5A signaling in vivo recuperates alveolar cell function and attenuates lung pathogenesis in murine 
models of coPd. (A) Experimental setup to determine the effect of antibody-mediated inhibition of WNT-5A on established emphysema in vivo. Animals 
were instilled on day 0 with elastase (PPE: 40 U/kg body weight) and received either αWNT-5A antibodies or respective IgG control antibodies as treatment 
starting at day 6 after elastase. Data are derived from two independent animal experiments. (B) Representative images of H&E-stained lung tissue sections. 
Bars: (left) 75; (right) 25 µM. (C and D) Lung function parameters (C) elastance and compliance and (D) mean chord length in mice receiving elastase and 
either αWNT-5A or IgG antibodies (n = 8–10 animals per group). *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test. (E) Analysis of total cells in BALF 
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
156
alveolar epithelial cells. Moreover, removal of posttranslational 
modifications within WNT
-5A diminished the capacity of 
the ligand to down-regulate WNT
-3A–β-catenin–mediated 
gene transcription, which is in agreement with biochemical 
studies investigating the relevance of posttranslational modi-
fications of WNT ligands (Komekado et al., 2007; Kurayoshi 
et al., 2007). Our in vivo intervention studies, in which the 
biological/pathogenic effect of WNT
-5A was investigated by 
treating mice subjected to elastase with WNT
-5A–neutral-
izing antibodies or mice exposed to CS with the WNT
-5A 
antagonist BOX5, show that inhibition of WNT
-5A, inde-
pendently of inflammation, increases canonical WNT signal-
ing and alveolar cell function accompanied by improved lung 
function and structure. Collectively, these data strongly sug-
gested that WNT
-5A is a negative regulator of endogenous 
lung repair in vivo and is a novel and suitable molecular target 
for therapeutic intervention in emphysema/COPD.
We report that, in the lung, WNT
-5A is most likely, but 
not exclusively, secreted by parenchymal fibroblasts and that 
secretion of the ligand is enhanced by TGF-β and/or sol-
uble components of CS. In agreement, components and/or 
contaminants of CS, including nicotine and LPS, have been 
demonstrated to directly enhance WNT
-5A expression in 
lung cells (Whang et al., 2013; Villar et al., 2014). In addi-
tion, WNT
-5A is a direct target of miR-487b, a microRNA 
that is repressed by CS (Xi et al., 2013). Collectively, these 
data provide evidence that noncanonical WNT
-5A represents 
a prime target of COPD-related exposures. These data are 
further corroborated by our finding that 
WNT
-5A expression 
is enhanced in phLFs from COPD patients. Furthermore, 
WNT
-5A expression in nonepithelial cells increases with age 
in the human lung, as shown in a case report by immuno-
fluorescence staining of the ligand in lung tissue obtained 
from a 73-yr old compared with a 21-yr old (Kovacs et al., 
2014). Moreover, WNT
-5A can suppress telomerase activity, 
and impaired telomerase activity increases the susceptibility 
to develop COPD/emphysema (Olson et al., 1998; Stanley 
et al., 2015). Consistent with these findings, we report that 
WNT
-5A gene expression correlates to the age of the COPD 
patients andwe observed enhanced WNT
-5A expression in 
vitro when phLFs of smokers or COPD patients become 
senescent. These data further indicate a potential age-asso-
ciated shift to noncanonical WNT signaling contributing to 
COPD pathogenesis. Florian et al. (2013) demonstrated that 
noncanonical WNT
-5A is able to negatively affect stem cell 
aging by inducing ageing-associated stem cell apolarity and 
the occurrence of aging-like differentiation. Here, we inves-
tigated the effects of WNT
-5A on ATII cells, which function 
as progenitor cells in the lung (Barkauskas et al., 2013). Our 
data underline the relevance of WNT–β-catenin signaling 
in repair processes by the alveolar epithelium and show that 
WNT
-5A negatively affects these processes. Canonical WNT 
signaling enhanced wound closure (i.e., migration) by alveolar 
epithelial cells, which was largely prevented by cotreatment 
with WNT
-5A. Moreover, ATII-to-ATI-like cell trans-differ-
entiation, which is dependent on autocrine WNT–β-catenin 
signaling (Flozak et al., 2010; Mutze et al., 2015), was also 
impaired by WNT
-5A. In addition, WNT
-5A down-regu-
lated the expression of canonical WNT target genes (Nkd1 
and Axin2), as well as the epithelial cell marker Nkx2.1, in 
primary mouse ATII cells. Notably, pulmonary Nkx2.1 ex-
pression closely correlates to the expression of the canoni-
cal WNT target gene Axin2 in individuals without and with 
COPD, which could be recapitulated in vivo in our murine 
models of COPD. The transcription factor NKX2.1 transac-
tivates promoters of surfactant proteins (i.e., Sp-A, Sp-B, and 
Sp-C) and podoplanin (T1α) in pulmonary epithelial cells, 
and is essential for lung morphogenesis (Ramirez et al., 1997; 
Minoo et al., 1999). Accordingly, inhibition of WNT
-5A in 
vivo in experimental emphysema enhances NKX2.1 expres-
sion, accompanied by increases in T1α and Sftpc and im-
proved lung architecture. In addition, WNT
-5A up-regulated 
elastin (Eln) expression in primary mouse ATII cells and re-
cent studies demonstrated that ELN (human elastin) is among 
the highest up-regulated genes in COPD compared with 
controls (Deslee et al., 2009; Brandsma et al., 2016), which 
may be caused in part by increased WNT
-5A expression in 
COPD, as our study indicates.
WNT signal alterations have also been implied in other 
chronic lung diseases, such as asthma and idiopathic pulmo-
nary fibrosis (IPF; Selman et al., 2008; Kumawat et al., 2014). 
In IPF
, increased canonical WNT–β-catenin signal activity 
in the alveolar epithelium has been reported (Chilosi et al., 
2003; Königshoff et al., 2009). Currently, knowledge about 
the contribution of noncanonical signaling in IPF is lim-
ited; however, increased WNT-5A expression has been de-
tected in IPF fibroblasts (Vuga et al., 2009). This raises the 
question, why WNT-5A is not able to achieve the herein 
described inhibition in canonical WNT–β-catenin signal-
ing in the IPF lung. Potentially several factors, such as dis-
ease-specific genetic susceptibility, interplay between various 
other growth factors, and alterations in the extracellular ma-
of mice receiving elastase and either αWNT-5A or IgG antibodies (n = 9–10 animals per group). (F) Expression of Axin2, Nkd1, and Nkx2.1 in whole-lung 
homogenate of mice with elastase-induced emphysema and either IgG or αWNT-5A treatment (n = 13–15 animals per group). *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001, 
unpaired Student’s t test. (G) Correlation between Axin2 and Nkx2.1 expression in whole lung homogenate of mice exposed to elastase and treated with 
either IgG or αWNT-5A (n = 9–10 animals per group). Linear regression analysis, r = 0.44 and P = 0.0575. (H) Immunoblots and quantification of NKX2.1 in 
whole-lung homogenate of mice receiving elastase and either αWNT-5A or IgG antibodies (n = 9 animals per group). P = 0.075, unpaired Student’s t test. (I) 
Representative immunofluorescent images of NKX2.1 (red), pro-SPC (green), and nuclei (DAPI; blue) in lung tissue of mice exposed to elastase and treated 
with either IgG (left) or αWNT-5A (right). Bars, 20 µm.
 157
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
trix, determine the outcome of WNT-5A signaling in the 
lung. Further studies addressing this question will provide 
important additional insight needed to fully understand dis-
ease-specific WNT signaling.
Collectively, our data demonstrate increased expres-
sion of mature noncanonical WNT
-5A in experimental and 
human COPD. Functionally, WNT
-5A impairs alveolar epi-
thelial cell repair by attenuating canonical WNT–β-catenin 
signaling in vitro and in vivo. We thus identify a novel essen-
tial mechanism involved in impaired lung repair and COPD 
pathogenesis, which is amenable to therapy.
MAterIALS And MetHodS
cell culture
Murine lung epithelial cells (MLE12; 
ATCC CRL-2110) were 
cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% (vol/
vol) FCS, 100 mg/liter streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicil-
lin. Human alveolar epithelial cells (A549; CCL-185; ATCC) 
were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium/nu-
trient mixture F12 medium (DMEM/F12) supplemented 
with 10% (vol/vol) FCS and antibiotics. MRC5 human lung 
fibroblasts (ATCC CCL-171) were cultured in Ham’s F12 
medium to which 10% (vol/vol) FCS, antibiotics, and 2 mM 
l-glutamine were added. Before cell stimulation, cells were 
synchronized by culturing them for 24 h in corresponding 
plain medium supplemented with 0.1% (vol/vol) FCS and 
antibiotics. In case of MRC5 fibroblasts, HAM’s F12 medium 
was additionally supplemented with 2 mM l-glutamine. Cell 
stimulations were performed with fresh medium with identi-
cal composition as medium for cell synchronization.
phLFs
phLFs were isolated from lung tissue biopsies from the Univer-
sity Hospital Grosshadern of the LMU (Ludwig Maximilians 
University, Munich, Germany). Specimens from lung lobes or 
segmental lung resections were dissected into 1–2-mm2 pieces 
and digested with 5 mg of collagenase I at 37°C for 2 h. Sub-
sequently, digested samples were filtered through nylon filters 
with a pore size of 70 µm. Filtrates, containing the lung fibro-
blasts, were centrifuged at 400 g at 4°C for 5 min. Cell pellets 
were resuspended and subsequently cultured in DMEM/F-12 
medium supplemented with 20% (vol/vol) FCS and antibi-
otics. Before cell stimulation, cells were synchronized by cul-
turing them for 24 h in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented 
with 0.1–0.5% (vol/vol) FCS and antibiotics. For cell stimu-
lation, fresh medium with identical composition as medium 
for cell synchronization was used. Fibroblasts from COPD and 
smoker controls were isolated and cultured until they achieved 
replicative senescence, as previously described (Dagouassat et 
al., 2013), from lung tissue of patients undergoing lung surgery.
rnA sequencing of phLFs
T
otal RNA of phLFs derived from COPD explants or donor 
material (n of 4 per group) was sequenced using the Illu-
mina system (HiSeq 2000). Sample preparation and sequenc-
ing was performed by GATC and Eurofins Genomic. Raw 
Figure 9. Schematic representation showing the proposed mechanism of how Wnt-5A contributes to coPd pathogenesis. Healthy lung: ca-
nonical WNT–β-catenin signaling contributes to homeostasis of the alveolar epithelium by regulating cell proliferation, migration, and transdifferentiation. 
Diseased lung: CS-induced damage of the alveolar epithelium causing release of mediators (e.g., TGF-β) which act on pulmonary fibroblasts. Pulmonary 
fibroblasts produce noncanonical WNT-5A, which is enhanced by senescence (indicated in gray), TGF-β, and/or soluble components of CS. Noncanoni-
cal WNT-5A attenuates canonical WNT–β-catenin signaling in ATII cells, thereby disrupting alveolar homeostasis and resulting in impaired endogenous 
lung repair and emphysema.
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
158
data were analyzed by Genomatix. Expression analysis was 
based on reads uniquely aligned to the human genome. Gene 
expression values were calculated for all loci available and 
provided as RPKM (reads per kilobase million per mapped 
reads) values. Genes differentially expressed between donor 
and COPD were determined by using edgeR 3.6.2 and de-
fined by a minimum log2 fold change of ±1 and a significance 
level of the adjusted p-value of 0.05 (Benjamini-Hochberg 
multiple testing correction).
Quantitative (q)rt-Pcr
Total RNA was extracted using the QIA 
GEN RNeasy Mini 
kit (QIA 
GEN) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
cDNA of all samples was generated by reverse transcription 
using SuperScriptII (Life T
echnologies). qRT
-PCR was per-
formed using SYBR Green and the LightCycler 480 System 
(both from Roche). Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl 
transferase (Hprt) was used as a reference gene in all qRT
-
PCR reactions. Relative transcript levels are expressed in 
ΔCt values (ΔCt = Ctreference − Cttarget) or fold change (2ΔΔCt). 
Primer sequences are presented in Table S1.
canonical Wnt–β-catenin activity assay
Transcriptional activity of canonical WNT signaling was de-
termined with the M50 Super 8x TOPflash and M51 Super 
8x FOPflash vectors, which contain a firefly luciferase gene 
under the control of 7 TCF/LEF binding sites (TOPflash) or 
mutated TCF/LEF binding sites (FOPflash). A549 cells were 
plated in 48-well plates at a density of 55 × 103 per well. The 
next day, cells were transfected with either 500 ng/well of 
M50 Super 8x 
TOPflash plasmid or the negative control M51 
Super 8x FOPflash using Lipofectamine LTX with PLUS 
reagent (Life T
echnologies) in serum-free Opti-MEM me-
dium (Life Technologies). After 6 h of transfection cells were 
stimulated with WNT ligands in the absence or presence of 
pharmacological inhibitors. Stimulations were performed in 
DMEM/F12 (A549) medium supplemented with 0.1% (vol/
vol) FCS. Transcriptional activity of canonical WNT signal-
ing in fibroblasts was analyzed in the Leading Light WNT 
reporter cell line (ENZ-61002-0001; Enzo Life Sciences). For 
each independent experiment, stimulations were performed 
in duplicates or more repetitions. After 24 h of stimulation 
the cells were lysed using Glo lysis buffer and luciferase ac-
tivity was assayed using the Bright-Glo luciferase assay system 
(Promega). 
TOPflash activity was normalized to FOPflash ac-
tivity and expressed relative to control conditions.
Wnt-5A sirnA transfection
MRC5 fibroblasts (ATCC CCL-171) were grown to ∼90% 
confluence in six-well cluster plates and transiently trans-
fected with specific double-stranded siRNA targeted against 
the WNT
-5A transcript (SC-41112; Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy, Inc.). Cells were transfected in serum-free Opti-MEM 
medium (Life T
echnologies) without any additional supple-
ments using 200 pmol of siRNA in combination with Li-
pofectamine 2000 transfection reagent (Life T
echnologies). 
Control transfections were performed using 200 pmol nonsi-
lencing control siRNA (SC-37007; Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy, Inc.). After 6 h of transfection, the medium was changed 
to Ham’s F12 medium supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) 
FCS, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 mg/l streptomycin, and 100 
U/ml penicillin for 16 h. Cells were subsequently stimulated 
for the indicated time points with 
TGF-β (2 ng/ml) in Ham’s 
F12 medium supplemented with 0.1% FCS, l-glutamine, 
and antibiotics. Supernatants were collected and cells were 
lysed using ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay buf-
fer (RIPA, pH 7.4; 20 mM Tris HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM 
EGTA, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM Na4P2O7, 1% C24H39NaO4, 
and 1% NP-40) supplemented with protease and phosphatase 
inhibitors (Roche). Supernatants and cell lysates were stored 
at –20°C until further use.
Preparation of Wnt-cM
Mouse fibroblasts-like L-cells stably expressing WNT
-3A or 
WNT
-5A were used to obtain WNT
-CM. Parental L-cells 
(control: ATCC CRL-2648), L-WNT
-3A cells (ATCC 
CRL-2647), or L-WNT
-5A cells (ATCC CRL-2814) were 
cultured in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% 
(vol/vol) FCS, 100 mg/l streptomycin, and 100 U/ml peni-
cillin. WNT CM or control CM was prepared according to 
the ATCC guidelines. In short, confluent L-cell cultures were 
split 1:10 and cultured for 4 d in supplemented DMEM/F12 
medium in 10-cm culture dishes. After 4 d, the medium was 
collected and the cells were cultured for another 3 d in fresh 
DMEM/F12 medium with supplements. The second batch 
of medium was collected after 3 d and mixed with medium 
of day 4 (ratio 1:1). 
The combined medium, which is referred 
to as CM, was filtered and stored at –20°C till further use. For 
cell stimulation, the conditioned media were prewarmed to 
37°C and diluted in DMEM/F12 medium with 0.1% (vol/
vol) FCS and antibiotics.
deglycosylation of Wnt-5A
Deglycosylated WNT
-5A was generated by incubating 
WNT
-5A CM with Peptide-N-Glycosidase F (PNGase F). 
This enzyme is a native glycoaminidase cleaving the link be-
tween asparagine and N-acetylglucosamines, thereby revers-
ing N-glycosylation of proteins. Freshly prepared WNT
-5A 
CM (500 µl) was incubated for 2 h at 37°C in the absence or 
presence of 1 µl PNGase F (New England Biolabs). Control 
CM was incubated at identical conditions. The conditioned 
media were directly used to determine their effect on β-cat-
enin/TCF-dependent gene transcription. In short, A549 cells 
transfected with either M50 Super 8x TOPflash plasmid or 
the negative control M51 Super 8x FOPflash were stimulated 
with 100 µl/well of control CM, WNT
-5A CM, or PNGase 
F–treated conditioned media added to 300 µl/well DMEM/
F12 medium without or with recombinant WNT
-3A (final 
volume, 400 µl/well; final concentration WNT3A, 100 ng/
ml). For each independent experiment, 3 distinct batches of 
 159
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
WNT
-5A CM without or with PNGase F were prepared, 
and stimulations were performed in duplicates. After 24 h of 
stimulation, the cells were lysed using Glo lysis buffer and 
luciferase activity was assayed using the Bright-Glo luciferase 
assay system (Promega). 
The degree of PNGase F–induced de-
glycosylation of WNT
-5A was determined by immunoblot-
ting. T
o examine the relevance of glycosylation in WNT
-5A 
secretion, confluent phLFs were stimulated without or with 
TGFβ (2 ng/ml) in the absence or presence of tunicamycin 
(5 µM) for 48 h. 
Tunicamycin prevents glycosylation of newly 
synthesized glycoproteins by inhibiting the formation of 
N-acetylgucosamine intermediates. After 48 h of stimulation 
the supernatants were collected and the cells were lysed in 
ice-cold RIPA buffer supplemented with protease and phos-
phatase inhibitors (Roche). Supernatants and cell lysates were 
stored at –20°C till further use.
Supernatant protein concentration
Supernatants were concentrated at a factor of 10 using Ami-
con Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter devices according to the man-
ufacturer’s instructions (Merck). In short, 500 µl of cell-free 
supernatant was loaded onto an Ultra 3K filter device and 
centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min. T
o recover the concen-
trated solute, the filter was placed upside down in a collection 
tube and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 2 min. 
The obtained ultra-
filtrate (50 µl) was stored at –20°C till further use.
Animals
Pathogen-free female C57BL/6 mice (8–10 wk old) were 
obtained from Charles River and housed in rooms main-
tained at constant temperature and humidity with a 12-h 
light cycle. Animals were allowed food and water ad libitum. 
In the model of CS-induced COPD, smoke was generated 
from 3R4F Research Cigarettes (T
obacco Research Institute, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY). Mice were exposed 
to mainstream smoke as described previously (John-Schus-
ter et al., 2014). In the intervention study, mice received 
every other day an i.p. injection with PBS (vehicle; 100 µl) 
or t-Boc-NH-Met-Asp-Gly-Cys-Glu-Leu-CO2H (BOX5: 
40 µg/mouse/injection) dissolved in PBS at least 1 h before 
exposure to CS. For the lung-specific WNT
-5A overexpres-
sion experiments, hemizygous SFT 
PC-rtTA mice (The Jack-
son Laboratory) were interbred with T
etO-WNT
-5A mice 
(provided by R. Smits, Department of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotter-
dam, the Netherlands; Bakker et al., 2012) obtaining double 
transgenic mice. Overexpression of WNT
-5A was initiated 
1 wk before the start of the experiment by supplying either 
DOX (2 mg/ml in 5% sucrose) or 5% sucrose solution in the 
drinking water, which was refreshed every other day till the 
end of the experiment. Emphysema was induced by dissolv-
ing pancreatic porcine elastase (40 or 80 U/kg body weight) 
in sterile phosphate-buffered saline, which was subsequently 
applied orotracheally. Control mice received 80 µl sterile PBS. 
In the intervention experiments, the mice were orotracheally 
treated with either αWNT
-5A antibodies (R&D Systems; 
MAB645 and AF645) or respective control IgG antibodies 
(R&D Systems; MAB006 and AB108) dissolved in PBS (15 
µg/mouse/instillation) at the indicated time points.
Lung function measurement
Lung function measurement was performed as previously 
described (John-Schuster et al., 2014). Mice were anaesthe-
tized with ketamine/xylazine and tracheostomized, and their 
pulmonary function was analyzed using the flexiVent system 
(Scireq). 
T
o obtain a mean lung volume similar to that of spon-
taneous breathing, mice were ventilated with a tidal volume of 
10 ml/kg at a frequency of 150 breaths/min. Lung mechani-
cal properties were tested using the SnapShot and Primewave 
perturbations. Four readings per animal were taken.
Lung tissue processing and quantitative morphometry
The right lung lobe was shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen for 
protein and RNA isolation and the left lung lobe was fixed 
at a constant pressure (20 cm fluid column) by intratracheal 
instillation of PBS-buffered 6% PFA and embedded into par-
affin for histological analysis of hematoxylin-eosin (H&E)–
stained slides. Design-based stereology was used to analyze 
sections via an Olympus BX51 light microscope equipped 
with a computer-assisted stereological toolbox (newCAST; 
Visiopharm) on H&E-stained lung tissue slides, as previously 
described (John-Schuster et al., 2014). Air space enlargement 
was assessed by quantifying mean linear chord length (MLI) 
on 30 fields of view per lung.
Human lung tissues
Lung tissue was obtained from 20 COPD patients classi-
fied as GOLD IV undergoing lung transplant due to their 
underlying COPD (7 females, 13 males; mean age = 56 ± 
5 yr) and 16 control subjects (transplant donors, 7 females 
and 9 males; mean age, 50 ± 11 yr). COPD samples were 
taken from the parenchyma with histological validation of 
emphysematous changes. Human 3D lung tissue cultures 
(3D-LTCs) were obtained and maintained as described previ-
ously (Uhl et al., 2015).
Immunoblotting
Cells or pulverized lung homogenates were lysed with ra-
dioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA) supplemented 
with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Protein 
concentrations were determined using BCA assay (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific). T
o each protein sample 4× Laemmli load-
ing buffer (composition: 150 mM Tris HCl, 275 mM SDS, 
400 mM dithiothreitol, 3.5% [wt/vol] glycerol, and 0.02% 
bromophenol blue) was added with the exception of samples 
used for the detection of 
WNT
-5A to which nonreducing 4× 
Laemmli loading buffer (identical composition as 4× Laem-
mli loading buffer, but without reducing agent dithiothreitol) 
was added. A similar protocol was used for analysis of pro-
teins in cell supernatants. T
o 20–30 µl of ultrafiltrate, 10 µl 
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
160
of either nonreducing 4× Laemmli loading buffer (detection 
of WNT-5A) or reducing 4× Laemmli loading buffer was 
added. Equal amounts of protein (10–20 µg/lane) were sub-
jected to electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels, transferred 
to nitrocellulose membranes and analyzed for the proteins of 
interest using specific primary and HRP-conjugated second-
ary antibodies. By using enhanced chemiluminescence re-
agents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) bands were recorded with 
a ChemiDoc XRS+ system equipped with Image Lab 5.0 
software (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Scratch assay
Murine lung epithelial cells (MLE12; CRL-2110; ATCC) 
were grown in 24-well plates with RPMI medium supple-
mented with 10% (vol/vol) FCS and antibiotics until conflu-
ence. Cells were synchronized for 24 h with RPMI medium 
containing 0.1% FCS and antibiotics. Confluent monolay-
ers of MLE12 cells were wounded by scraping a pipette tip 
across the monolayer. Cells were once washed with warm 
PBS (composition: 140.0 mM NaCl, 2.6 mM KCl, 1.4 mM 
KH2PO4, and 8.1 mM Na2HPO4·2H2O, pH 7.4) and stim-
ulated with vehicle control (0.1% BSA in PBS), WNT
-3A 
(100 ng/ml), WNT
-5A (100 ng/ml), or the combination of 
WNT
-3A with WNT
-5A (both 100 ng/ml). Cells were stim-
ulated in quadruplicates for each independent experiment. 
Images of wounds were captured using a canon EOS 1000D 
DSLR mounted on an Axiovert 40C microscope with a 
5× objective (Zeiss). Images were obtained at initial time of 
wounding and 48 h after wounding. The size of the wound 
was analyzed (three measurements per image) using ImageJ 
software and data are expressed relative to wound size of ve-
hicle control after 48 h.
normalization of microarray data
Raw .cel files from a previously published study were down-
loaded from GEO under accession no. GSE22148 (Singh 
et al., 2011), processed using R Software, and normalized 
using Robust Multi-Array Average expression measure 
(RMA) in the affy package from BioConductor. The mean 
of the WNT
-5A probe set was calculated for each patient 
and grouped according to GOLD status using available clin-
ical data. Deposited normalized microarray data from the 
Lung Genome Research Consortium for whole-lung tis-
sue homogenates from normal and COPD cohort sets were 
used (GSE47460–GPL14550).
Alveolar epithelial cell isolation and culture
Primary ATII cells were isolated from mice, as previously de-
scribed (Königshoff et al., 2009). In brief, lungs were lavaged 
twice with sterile PBS and tissues digested with dispase and 
minced. The suspension was sequentially filtered through 
100-, 20-, and 10-µm nylon meshes and centrifuged at 200 g 
for 10 min. The pellet was resuspended in DMEM, and neg-
ative selection for lymphocytes/macrophages was performed 
by incubation on CD16/32- and CD45-coated Petri dishes 
for 30 min at 37°C. Cell purity and viability were analyzed 
in freshly isolated ATII cells directly after isolation. Cell pu-
rity was routinely assessed by epithelial cell morphology and 
immunofluorescence analysis with panCK and SPC (both 
positive), as well as α-SMA and CD45 (both negative) of cy-
tocentrifuge preparations of ATII cells.
Immunofluorescence staining
Primary mouse ATII cells were fixed with acetone/methanol 
(1:1), and blocked with 5% (w/vol) BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 
30 min. Cells were subsequently incubated with the respec-
tive primary antibody at room temperature for 1 h in PBS 
containing 0.1% (w/vol) BSA, followed by incubation with 
the fluorescently labeled secondary antibody (goat anti–rabbit 
Alexa Fluor 555; Life T
echnologies). DAPI staining (Roche) 
was used to visualize cell nuclei. For staining of tissue sections, 
murine lung tissue was fixed in 4% formalin before paraffin 
embedding. Sections (4-µm) were prepared and mounted on 
slides, followed by deparaffinization and immunofluorescent 
staining according to a standard protocol. For deparaffiniza-
tion, the paraffin-embedded sections were placed at 60°C for 
at least 30 min, incubated twice in xylene, and then con-
secutively transferred into 100% ethanol, 90% ethanol, 80% 
ethanol, and 70% ethanol at room temperature. For antigen 
retrieval, slides were immersed in citrate buffer, pH 6.0, and 
heated in a decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical) for 30 s 
at 125°C, followed by 10 s at 90°C. Primary antibody dilu-
tions were prepared in antibody diluent (Zytomed Systems), 
added to each tissue section in a wet chamber and incubated 
overnight. Primary antibodies used were mouse monoclonal 
anti-TTF-1 (NKX2.1; dilution 1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy, Inc.), rabbit polyclonal anti-prosurfactant protein C (Pro-
SPC; dilution 1:200; Merck), polyclonal goat anti-podoplanin 
(T1α; dilution 1:500, R&D Systems), rabbit polyclonal anti–
tight junction protein 1 (TJP1 or ZO-1; 1:50; Invitrogen), 
mouse monoclonal anti–β-catenin (1:200; BD), and mouse 
monoclonal anti–ABC (ABC clone 8E7; Merck). Second-
ary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti–goat IgG, 
Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti–mouse IgG, Alexa Fluor 488 goat 
anti–rabbit IgG H+L, Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti–rabbit IgG 
(all Life T
echnologies; dilution 1:400), or FITC polyclonal 
goat anti–mouse (Dako). Nuclei were stained with DAPI 
(1:2,500; Sigma-Aldrich). The slides covered with Fluores-
cence Mounting Medium (Dako) and examined under an 
Axio Imager Microscope (Zeiss).
Antibodies and reagents
The rat anti-WNT
-5A (MAB645) antibody, recombi-
nant WNT
-3A (mouse; 1324, human; 5036), recombinant 
WNT
-5A (mouse/human: 645), and recombinant TGF-β 
(human; 240) were obtained from R&D Systems. The mouse 
anti-BSA (SC57504) antibody was obtained from Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology, Inc. The horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–con-
jugated sheep anti–mouse antibody (NA931V), HRP-con-
jugated donkey anti–rabbit antibody (NA934V), and 
 161
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
HRP-conjugated goat anti–rat antibody (NA935V) were 
purchased from GE Healthcare. Mouse anti–total β-catenin 
antibody was purchased from BD. Mouse anti-nonphosphor-
ylated-β-catenin antibody (clone 8E7) was obtained from 
Merck. All other chemicals were of analytical grade.
Study approval
Human lung tissue. 
 Lung tissue was obtained from 20 COPD 
patients classified as GOLD IV undergoing lung transplant as 
a result of their underlying COPD and 16 control subjects 
(donor). The study protocol was approved by the Ethics 
Committee of the Justus-Liebig-University School of Medi-
cine and the Ludwig Maximillians University (LMU; #330-
10). Informed consent was obtained in written form from 
each subject for the study protocol.
phLF isolation. 
 phLFs were isolated from lung tissue biopsies 
from the University Hospital Grosshadern of the LMU (Lud-
wig Maximilian University of Munich). Participants provided 
written informed consent to participate in this study, in ac-
cordance with approval by the local ethics committee of the 
LMU (Project 333–10, 455–12).
Animal studies. 
 All animal experiments were conducted 
under strict governmental and international guidelines and 
were approved by the local government for the administrative 
region of Upper Bavaria (Project 55.2–1-54-2532-129-14).
Statistical analysis
Data represent means ± SEM, from n separate experiments. 
Statistical significance of differences was evaluated by either 
a Student’s t test, Student’s t test with Welch correction, or 
one-way ANO 
VA followed by a Newman-Keuls multiple 
comparison test or followed by a Dunnett’s multiple compar-
ison test where appropriate. Differences were considered to 
be statistically significant when P < 0.05.
online supplement material
Fig. S1 shows that oligomerized WNT-5A can be de-
tected in murine and human samples using human/mouse 
WNT-5A antibody MAB645. Table S1 lists primer se-
quences for determination of gene expression in human 
and murine lung tissue.
AcknoWLedGMentS
The authors are indebted to all member of the Königshoff laboratory for stimulating 
discussions and particularly to Marlene Stein, Anastasia van den Berg, Rabea Imker, 
Katharina Lippl, and Julia Kipp (all CPC) for excellent technical assistance. We are in-
debted to Walter Klepetko (University Hospital, Vienna), Michael Lindner (Asklepios 
Clinic Gauting) and Martina Korfei (University of Giessen Lung Center) for human 
lung tissue processing and cell preparations. 
H.A. Baarsma is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the European 
Respiratory Society (Fellowship LTRF 79-2012) and a fellowship from the Helmholtz 
Zentrum Germany (PFP PD-135). Melanie Königshoff is supported by a European 
Research Council Starting Grant (ERC-StG-LS7; grant no. 261302). 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Submitted: 9 May 2016
Revised: 16 September 2016
Accepted: 4 November 2016
reFerenceS
Baarsma, H.A., A.I. Spanjer, G. Haitsma, L.H. Engelbertink, H. Meurs, M.R. 
Jonker, W
. Timens, D.S. Postma, H.A. Kerstjens, and R. Gosens. 2011. 
Activation of WNT/β-catenin signaling in pulmonary fibroblasts by 
TGF-β1 is increased in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. PLoS 
One. 6:e25450. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0025450
Baarsma, H.A., M. Königshoff, and R. Gosens. 2013. The WNT signaling 
pathway from ligand secretion to gene transcription: molecular 
mechanisms and pharmacological targets. Pharmacol. Ther. 138:66–83. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.pharmthera 
.2013 
.01 
.002
Bakker, E.R., L. Raghoebir, P
.F
. Franken, W
. Helvensteijn, L. van Gurp, F
. 
Meijlink, M.A. van der Valk, R.J. Rottier, E.J. Kuipers, W
. van Veelen, 
and R. Smits. 2012. Induced Wnt5a expression perturbs embryonic 
outgrowth and intestinal elongation, but is well-tolerated in adult mice. 
Dev. Biol. 369:91–100. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ydbio 
.2012 
.06 
.007
Barbolina, M.V
., R.J. Burkhalter, and M.S. Stack. 2011. Diverse mechanisms 
for activation of 
Wnt signalling in the ovarian tumour microenvironment. 
Biochem. J. 437:1–12. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1042 
/BJ20110112
Barkauskas, C.E., M.J. Cronce, C.R. Rackley, E.J. Bowie, D.R. Keene, B.R. 
Stripp, S.H. Randell, P
.W
. Noble, and B.L. Hogan. 2013. T
ype 2 alveolar 
cells are stem cells in adult lung. J. Clin. Invest. 123:3025–3036. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI68782
Brandsma, C.A., M. van den Berge, D. Postma, and 
W
. 
Timens. 2016. Fibulin-5 
as a potential therapeutic target in COPD. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets. 
20:1031–1033. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1517 
/14728222 
.2016 
.1164696
Cha, S.W
., E. Tadjuidje, Q. Tao, C. Wylie, and J. Heasman. 2008. Wnt5a and 
Wnt11 interact in a maternal Dkk1-regulated fashion to activate both 
canonical and non-canonical signaling in Xenopus axis formation. 
Development. 135:3719–3729. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/dev 
.029025
Chilosi, M., 
V
. Poletti, A. Zamò, M. Lestani, L. Montagna, P
. Piccoli, S. Pedron, 
M. Bertaso, A. Scarpa, B. Murer, et al. 2003. Aberrant Wnt/beta-catenin 
pathway activation in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. Pathol. 
162:1495–1502. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0002 
-9440(10)64282 
-4
Da Forno, P
.D., J.H. Pringle, P
. Hutchinson, J. Osborn, Q. Huang, L. Potter, 
R.A. Hancox, A. Fletcher, and G.S. Saldanha. 2008. WNT5A expression 
increases during melanoma progression and correlates with outcome. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 14:5825–5832. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1078 
-0432 
.CCR 
-07 
-5104
Dagouassat, M., J.M. Gagliolo, S. Chrusciel, M.C. Bourin, C. Duprez, P
. 
Caramelle, L. Boyer, S. Hue, J.B. Stern, P
. Validire, et al. 2013. The 
cyclooxygenase-2-prostaglandin E2 pathway maintains senescence of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease fibroblasts. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care 
Med. 187:703–714. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201208 
-1361OC
Deslee, G., J.C. Woods, C.M. Moore, L. Liu, S.H. Conradi, M. Milne, D.S. 
Gierada, J. Pierce, A. Patterson, R.A. Lewit, et al. 2009. Elastin expression 
in very severe human COPD. Eur. Respir. J. 34:324–331. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1183 
/09031936 
.00123008
Durham, A.L., A. McLaren, B.P
. Hayes, G. Caramori, C.L. Clayton, P
.J. Barnes, 
K.F
. Chung, and I.M. Adcock. 2013. Regulation of Wnt4 in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. FAS 
EB J. 27:2367–2381. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1096 
/fj 
.12 
-217083
Florian, M.C., K.J. Nattamai, K. Dörr, G. Marka, B. Uberle, V
. Vas, C. Eckl, 
I. Andrä, M. Schiemann, R.A. Oostendorp, et al. 2013. A canonical to 
non-canonical 
Wnt signalling switch in haematopoietic stem-cell ageing. 
Nature. 503:392–396. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature12631
Flozak, A.S., A.P
. Lam, S. Russell, M. Jain, O.N. Peled, K.A. Sheppard, R. Beri, 
G.M. Mutlu, G.R. Budinger, and C.J. Gottardi. 2010. Beta-catenin/T
-cell 
 WNT-5A impairs alveolar epithelial cell repair | Baarsma et al.
162
factor signaling is activated during lung injury and promotes the survival 
and migration of alveolar epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 285:3157–3167. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M109 
.070326
Goss, A.M., Y
. Tian, T. Tsukiyama, E.D. Cohen, D. Zhou, M.M. Lu, T.P
. 
Yamaguchi, and E.E. Morrisey. 2009. Wnt2/2b and beta-catenin signaling 
are necessary and sufficient to specify lung progenitors in the foregut. Dev. 
Cell. 17:290–298. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.devcel 
.2009 
.06 
.005
Heijink, I.H., H.G. de Bruin, M. van den Berge, L.J. Bennink, S.M. 
Brandenburg, R. Gosens, A.J. van Oosterhout, and D.S. Postma. 2013. 
Role of aberrant WNT signalling in the airway epithelial response 
to cigarette smoke in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax. 
68:709–716. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/thoraxjnl 
-2012 
-201667
Ishitani, T., S. Kishida, J. Hyodo-Miura, N. Ueno, J. Yasuda, M. Waterman, 
H. Shibuya, R.T. Moon, J. Ninomiya-Tsuji, and K. Matsumoto. 2003. 
The TAK1-NLK mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade functions in 
the Wnt-5a/Ca(2+) pathway to antagonize Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 23:131–139. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/MCB 
.23 
.1 
.131 
-139 
.2003
Ito, K., and P
.J. Barnes. 2009. COPD as a disease of accelerated lung aging. 
Chest. 135:173–180. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1378 
/chest 
.08 
-1419
Jenei, V
., V
. Sherwood, J. Howlin, R. Linnskog, A. Säfholm, L. Axelsson, and 
T. Andersson. 2009. A t-butyloxycarbonyl-modified Wnt5a-derived 
hexapeptide functions as a potent antagonist of Wnt5a-dependent 
melanoma cell invasion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:19473–19478. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0909409106
Jiang, Z., T. Lao, W
. Qiu, F
. Polverino, K. Gupta, F
. Guo, J.D. Mancini, Z.Z. 
Naing, M.H. Cho, P
.J. Castaldi, et al. 2016. A chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease susceptibility gene, FAM13A, regulates protein 
stability of β-catenin. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 194:185–197. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201505 
-0999OC
John-Schuster, G., K. Hager, 
T.M. Conlon, M. Irmler, J. Beckers, O. Eickelberg, 
and A.O. Yildirim. 2014. Cigarette smoke-induced iBALT mediates 
macrophage activation in a B cell-dependent manner in COPD. Am. J. 
Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 307:L692–L706. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1152 
/ajplung 
.00092 
.2014
Kneidinger, N., A.O. Yildirim, J. Callegari, S. Takenaka, M.M. Stein, R. 
Dumitrascu, A. Bohla, K.R. Bracke, R.E. Morty, G.G. Brusselle, 
et al. 2011. Activation of the WNT/β-catenin pathway attenuates 
experimental emphysema. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 183:723–733. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.200910 
-1560OC
Komekado, H., H. 
Yamamoto, T. Chiba, and A. Kikuchi. 2007. Glycosylation 
and palmitoylation of Wnt-3a are coupled to produce an active form 
of Wnt-3a. Genes Cells. 12:521–534. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1365 
-2443 
.2007 
.01068 
.x
Königshoff, M., M. Kramer, N. Balsara, J. Wilhelm, O.V
. Amarie, A. Jahn, F
. 
Rose, L. Fink, 
W
. Seeger, L. Schaefer, et al. 2009. 
WNT1-inducible signal-
ing protein-1 mediates pulmonary fibrosis in mice and is upregulated in 
humans with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. J. Clin. Invest. 119:772–787.
Kotton, D.N., and E.E. Morrisey. 2014. Lung regeneration: mechanisms, 
applications and emerging stem cell populations. Nat. Med. 20:822–832. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.3642
Kovacs, 
T., 
V
. Csongei, D. Feller, D. Ernszt, G. Smuk, 
V
. Sarosi, L. Jakab, K. Kvell, D. 
Bartis, and J.E. Pongracz. 2014. Alteration in the Wnt microenvironment 
directly regulates molecular events leading to pulmonary senescence. 
Aging Cell. 13:838–849. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/acel 
.12240
Kumawat, K., T. Koopmans, and R. Gosens. 2014. β-catenin as a regulator 
and therapeutic target for asthmatic airway remodeling. Expert Opin. 
Ther. Targets. 18:1023–1034. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1517 
/14728222 
.2014 
.934813
Kurayoshi, M., H. Yamamoto, S. Izumi, and A. Kikuchi. 2007. Post-
translational palmitoylation and glycosylation of Wnt-5a are necessary 
for its signalling. Biochem. J. 402:515–523. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1042 
/
BJ20061476
Li, C., J. Xiao, K. Hormi, Z. Borok, and P
. Minoo. 2002. Wnt5a participates 
in distal lung morphogenesis. Dev. Biol. 248:68–81. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/dbio 
.2002 
.0729
Li, C., L. Hu, J. Xiao, H. Chen, J.T. Li, S. Bellusci, S. Delanghe, and P
. Minoo. 
2005. 
Wnt5a regulates Shh and Fgf10 signaling during lung development. 
Dev. Biol. 287:86–97. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ydbio 
.2005 
.08 
.035
MacDonald, B.T., A. Hien, X. Zhang, O. Iranloye, D.M. Virshup, M.L. 
Waterman, and X. He. 2014. Disulfide bond requirements for active 
Wnt 
ligands. J. Biol. Chem. 289:18122–18136. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M114 
.575027
Mathers, C.D., and D. Loncar. 2006. Projections of global mortality and 
burden of disease from 2002 to 2030. PLoS Med. 3:e442. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pmed 
.0030442
Meiners, S., O. Eickelberg, and M. Königshoff. 2015. Hallmarks of the ageing 
lung. Eur. Respir. J. 45:807–827. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1183 
/09031936 
.00186914
Mikels, A.J., and R. Nusse. 2006. Purified Wnt5a protein activates or inhibits 
beta-catenin-TCF signaling depending on receptor context. PLoS Biol. 
4:e115. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pbio 
.0040115
Minoo, P
., G. Su, H. Drum, P
. Bringas, and S. Kimura. 1999. Defects in 
tracheoesophageal and lung morphogenesis in Nkx2.1(−/−) mouse 
embryos. Dev. Biol. 209:60–71. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/dbio 
.1999 
.9234
Morrisey, E.E., W
.V
. Cardoso, R.H. Lane, M. Rabinovitch, S.H. Abman, 
X. Ai, K.H. Albertine, R.D. Bland, H.A. Chapman, W
. Checkley, et al. 
2013. Molecular determinants of lung development. Ann. Am. Thorac. 
Soc. 10:S12–S16. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1513 
/AnnalsATS 
.201207 
-036OT
Muñoz-Espín, D., M. Cañamero, A. Maraver, G. Gómez-López, J. Contreras, 
S. Murillo-Cuesta, A. Rodríguez-Baeza, I. Varela-Nieto, J. Ruberte, M. 
Collado, and M. Serrano. 2013. Programmed cell senescence during 
mammalian embryonic development. Cell. 155:1104–1118. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2013 
.10 
.019
Mutze, K., S. 
Vierkotten, J. Milosevic, O. Eickelberg, and M. Konigshoff. 2015. 
Enolase 1 (ENO1) and protein disulfide-isomerase associated 3 (PDIA3) 
regulate Wnt/-catenin-driven trans-differentiation of murine alveolar 
epithelial cells. Dis. Model. Mech. 8:877–890. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/dmm 
.019117
Nemeth, M.J., L. Topol, S.M. Anderson, Y
. Yang, and D.M. Bodine. 2007. 
Wnt5a inhibits canonical Wnt signaling in hematopoietic stem cells and 
enhances repopulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 104:15436–15441. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0704747104
Olson, D.J., M. Oshimura, A.P
. Otte, and R. Kumar. 1998. Ectopic expression 
of wnt-5a in human renal cell carcinoma cells suppresses in vitro growth 
and telomerase activity. Tumour Biol. 19:244–252. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1159 
/000030014
Panáková, D., H. Sprong, E. Marois, C. 
Thiele, and S. Eaton. 2005. Lipoprotein 
particles are required for Hedgehog and Wingless signalling. Nature. 
435:58–65. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature03504
Ramirez, M.I., A.K. Rishi, 
Y
.X. Cao, and M.C. 
Williams. 1997. 
TGT3, thyroid 
transcription factor I, and Sp1 elements regulate transcriptional activity 
of the 1.3-kilobase pair promoter of T1alpha, a lung alveolar type I cell 
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 272:26285–26294. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.272 
.42 
.26285
Rawlins, E.L., and A.K. Perl. 2012. The a“MAZE”ing world of lung-specific 
transgenic mice. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 46:269–282. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1165 
/rcmb 
.2011 
-0372PS
 163
JEM Vol. 214, No. 1
Salvi, S.S., and P
.J. Barnes. 2009. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 
non-smokers. Lancet. 374:733–743. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(09)61303 
-9
Scheraga, R.G., and V
.J. Thannickal. 2014. Wnt/β-catenin and transforming 
growth factor-β signaling in pulmonary fibrosis. A case for antagonistic 
pleiotropy? Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 190:129–131. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201406 
-1037ED
Selman, M., A. Pardo, and N. Kaminski. 2008. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: 
aberrant recapitulation of developmental programs? PLoS Med. 5:e62. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pmed 
.0050062
Singh, D., S.M. Fox, R. Tal-Singer, J. Plumb, S. Bates, P
. Broad, J.H. Riley, B. 
Celli, and E. Investigators. ECL 
IPSE Investigators. 2011. Induced sputum 
genes associated with spirometric and radiological disease severity in 
COPD ex-smokers. Thorax. 66:489–495. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1136 
/
thx 
.2010 
.153767
Stanley, S.E., J.J. Chen, J.D. Podlevsky, J.K. Alder, N.N. Hansel, R.A. Mathias, 
X. Qi, N.M. Rafaels, R.A. Wise, E.K. Silverman, et al. 2015. T
elomerase 
mutations in smokers with severe emphysema. J. Clin. Invest. 125:563–
570. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI78554
T
opol, L., X. Jiang, H. Choi, L. Garrett-Beal, P
.J. Carolan, and Y
. Yang. 2003. 
Wnt-5a inhibits the canonical Wnt pathway by promoting GSK-3-
independent beta-catenin degradation. J. Cell Biol. 162:899–908. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.200303158
Uhl, F
.E., S. Vierkotten, D.E. Wagner, G. Burgstaller, R. Costa, I. Koch, M. 
Lindner, S. Meiners, O. Eickelberg, and M. Königshoff. 2015. Preclinical 
validation and imaging of Wnt-induced repair in human 3D lung 
tissue cultures. Eur. Respir. J. 46:1150–1166. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1183 
/09031936 
.00183214
Vestbo, J., S.S. Hurd, A.G. Agustí, P
.W
. Jones, C. Vogelmeier, A. Anzueto, P
.J. 
Barnes, L.M. Fabbri, F
.J. Martinez, M. Nishimura, et al. 2013. Global 
strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: GOLD executive summary. Am. J. Respir. 
Crit. Care Med. 187:347–365. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201204 
-0596PP
Villar, J., N.E. Cabrera-Benítez, A. Ramos-Nuez, C. Flores, S. García-
Hernández, F
. Valladares, J. López-Aguilar, L. Blanch, and A.S. Slutsky. 
2014. Early activation of pro-fibrotic WNT5A in sepsis-induced acute 
lung injury. Crit. Care. 18:568. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s13054 
-014 
-0568 
-z
Vuga, L.J., A. Ben-Y
ehudah, E. Kovkarova-Naumovski, T. Oriss, K.F
. Gibson, 
C. Feghali-Bostwick, and N. Kaminski. 2009. WNT5A is a regulator of 
fibroblast proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. 
Biol. 41:583–589. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1165 
/rcmb 
.2008 
-0201OC
Wang, R., J. Ahmed, G. 
Wang, I. Hassan, 
Y
. Strulovici-Barel, N.R. Hackett, and 
R.G. Crystal. 2011. Down-regulation of the canonical Wnt β-catenin 
pathway in the airway epithelium of healthy smokers and smokers with 
COPD. PLoS One. 6:e14793. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0014793
Wert, S.E., S.W
. Glasser, T.R. Korfhagen, and J.A. Whitsett. 1993. 
Transcriptional elements from the human SP-C gene direct expression 
in the primordial respiratory epithelium of transgenic mice. Dev. Biol. 
156:426–443. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/dbio 
.1993 
.1090
Whang, 
Y
.M., U. Jo, J.S. Sung, H.J. Ju, H.K. Kim, K.H. Park, J.W
. Lee, I.S. Koh, 
and Y
.H. Kim. 2013. Wnt5a is associated with cigarette smoke-related 
lung carcinogenesis via protein kinase C. PLoS One. 8:e53012. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0053012
Willert, K., and R. Nusse. 2012. Wnt proteins. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 
4:a007864. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1101 
/cshperspect 
.a007864
Xi, S., H. Xu, J. Shan, 
Y
. Tao, J.A. Hong, S. Inchauste, M. Zhang, T.F
. Kunst, L. 
Mercedes, and D.S. Schrump. 2013. Cigarette smoke mediates epigenetic 
repression of miR-487b during pulmonary carcinogenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 
123:1241–1261. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI61271
Yamaguchi, 
T.P
., A. Bradley, A.P
. McMahon, and S. Jones. 1999. A 
Wnt5a path-
way underlies outgrowth of multiple structures in the vertebrate embryo. 
Development. 126:1211–1223.
Zhang, X., S.M. Cheong, N.G. Amado, A.H. Reis, B.T. MacDonald, M. 
Zebisch, E.Y
. Jones, J.G. Abreu, and X. He. 2015. Notum is required 
for neural and head induction via Wnt deacylation, oxidation, and 
inactivation. Dev. Cell. 32:719–730. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.devcel 
.2015 
.02 
.014
 The Journal of Experimental Medicine
Correction: Noncanonical WNT-5A signaling impairs endogenous lung repair in COPD
Hoeke A. Baarsma, Wioletta Skronska-Wasek, Kathrin Mutze, Florian Ciolek, Darcy E. Wagner, Gerrit John-Schuster, Katharina Heinzelmann,  
Andreas Günther, Ken R. Bracke, Maylis Dagouassat, Jorge Boczkowski, Guy G. Brusselle, Ron Smits, Oliver Eickelberg, Ali Ö. Yildirim,  
and Melanie Königshoff
Vol. 214, No. 1, January 2017. Pages 143–163.
The authors regret that in their original paper, the left two micrographs in Fig. 7 C appeared as duplicates. The corrected figure appears below. The 
online HTML and PDF versions of this article have been corrected. The error only remains in the print version.
Correction
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
