 Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and
Practice: A Mixed-Methods Study Using a Model
of Organizational Resilience
Jonathan Back, PhD*; Alastair J. Ross, PhD; Myanna D. Duncan, PhD; Peter Jaye, MB, BS;
Katherine Henderson, MB, BChir; Janet E. Anderson, PhD
*Corresponding Author. E-mail: jonathan.back@kcl.ac.uk, Twitter: @jonback, @CARE_KCL.
Study objective: Escalation policies are used by emergency departments (EDs) when responding to an increase in
demand (eg, a sudden inflow of patients) or a reduction in capacity (eg, a lack of beds to admit patients). The policies
aim to maintain the ability to deliver patient care, without compromising safety, by modifying “normal” processes. The
study objective is to examine escalation policies in theory and practice.
Methods: This was a mixed-method study involving a conceptual analysis of National Health Service escalation policies
(n¼12) and associated escalation actions (n¼92), as well as a detailed ethnographic study of escalation in situ during
a 16-month period in a large UK ED (n¼30 observations).
Results: The conceptual analysis of National Health Service escalation policies found that their use requires the ability
to dynamically reconfigure resources (staff and equipment), change work flow, and relocate patients. In practice, it was
discovered that when the ED is under pressure, these prerequisites cannot always be attained. Instead, escalation
processes were adapted to manage pressures informally. This adaptive need (“work as done”) was found to be
incompletely specified in policies (“work as imagined”).
Conclusion: Formal escalation actions and their implementation in practice differed and varied in their effectiveness.
Monitoring how escalation works in practice is essential in understanding whether and how escalation policies help to
manage workload. [Ann Emerg Med. 2017;70:659-671.]
Please see page 660 for the Editor’s Capsule Summary of this article.
Readers: click on the link to go directly to a survey in which you can provide feedback to Annals on this particular article.
0196-0644/$-see front matter
Copyright © 2017 by the American College of Emergency Physicians. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.annemergmed.2017.04.032
SEE EDITORIAL, P. 672.
INTRODUCTION
The management of demand and capacity is a problem
for hospital emergency departments (EDs) worldwide.1
Inexorable increases in the demand for emergency care
combined with resource pressures place stress on the system.
Crowding caused by a surge in patient numbers, “exit block”
resulting from bottlenecks within hospitals, or difficulties
planning discharge can increase the risk of patient safety
incidents.2,3 Indeed, there is increasing evidence that long
waiting times in EDs are associated with negative patient
outcomes, including increased mortality.4,5 Ensuring efficient
flow through the department is therefore a crucial goal for all
managers, administrators, and clinicians for reasons of safety,
resource efficiency, and compliance with government targets.
There is a lack of evidence for implementing and
understanding interventions aimed at reducing demand,
managing throughput, and expediting output.6 Input
solutions aim to filter out “inappropriate users,” but some
question the premise that patients use emergency services
unnecessarily.7 Throughput solutions are dominated by
identifying inefficient processes (eg, triage8,9) and
encourage the introduction of engineering approaches that
help redesign systems (eg, streaming10). Output solutions
aim to reduce delays in discharging patients (eg, the use of
discharge lounges11,12). However, there is a lack of detail
on how throughput and output interventions are adjusted
and adapted in practice to make them work, which leads to
difficulties when they are widely implemented.6
In the United Kingdom, National Health Service
(NHS) policy responses to these problems have focused on
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 659
THE PRACTICE OF EMERGENCY MEDICINE/ORIGINAL RESEARCH
 Editor’s Capsule Summary
What is already known on this topic
Care delivery organizations commonly develop
“escalation policies” for managing crowding and
surges in emergency department (ED) demand. The
effectiveness of these policies has seldom been
studied.
What questions this study addressed
This study used mixed methods to identify common
patterns in escalation policies in UK EDs and to
evaluate how well they performed in practice.
What this study adds to our knowledge
Formal escalation policies often presumed the
availability of resources that were missing or degraded
when escalation was needed. Consequently, the
actual practice of managing crowding deviated from
that inscribed in policy.
How this is relevant to clinical practice
Recognizing and monitoring the gap between formal
policies and actual practice should help in the
development of more realistic and useful escalation
policies.
the introduction of “access targets” and the provision of
extra resources during winter to deal with increased
demand. One target is that patients must be treated and
discharged, or admitted, within 4 hours.13 Hospitals failing
to meet this target for 95% of patients can incur financial
penalties, but despite these serious consequences, recent
reports show that each year more hospitals fail to reach this
target, especially during winter.13
Managing patient flow is challenging, and although daily
and weekly peak times can be predicted, unexpected
demands or an unexpected reduction in capacity can occur
at any time. The imposition of waiting-time targets as a
measure of performance creates an additional pressure. In
response, the majority of hospitals in the United Kingdom
now have “escalation” policies. Escalation is the process of
identifying when the department is under increased
pressure and an intensification of effort is required to
maintain patient flow. Escalation policies specify thresholds
for action and the responses required. This is the major
codified organizational response that is designed to enable
EDs to remain resilient against unexpected variability in
demand and capacity, and continue to meet external and
internal targets and standards of care.14 Yet despite the
ubiquity of escalation policies, there has been relatively
little investigation of the actions they contain for aligning
demand and capacity, or of how effectively they work in
practice. Although escalation is a common feature of ED
practices, there have been no studies that we are aware of
that investigate how escalation works in practice.
Resilient Health Care
Resilient health care is a coherent set of principles for
understanding how complex adaptive systems such as health
care operate. Resilience can be defined as “the intrinsic
ability of a health care system (a clinic, ward, a hospital, a
country) to adjust its functioning prior to, during, or
following events (changes, disturbances and opportunities),
and thereby sustain required operations under both
expected and unexpected conditions.”15 The core concepts
of resilience direct attention to the importance of studying
how work is carried out in practice because clinical work
does not always fit prespecified policies and protocols.
Staff manage pressures and problems by making in situ
adaptations and goal trade-offs to achieve good outcomes,
and by studying these processes and learning from how
success is achieved, we can strengthen good practice.
Resilient health care studies have shown that health care
work is characterized by variability and unpredictability,16
and this is especially the case in emergency care. Within the
ED, resilience studies have explored the need for adaptation,
given inherent uncertainty and ambiguity,17 by exploring
processes such as informal patient handovers18 and
managing the risks associated with patient boarding.19
There is little guidance available about how to apply the
concepts of resilient health care in practice. The Concepts
for Applying Resilience Engineering (CARE) model of
resilient health care20,21 was used in this study to guide the
data collection and analysis phases. Briefly, the CARE
model shows that misalignments between demand and
capacity (such as missing equipment, short staffing, and
rapidly deteriorating condition of patients) create the need
for staff to adapt their activities so that positive outcomes
can still be achieved despite the pressures.
Goals of This Investigation
The aim of the study was to examine escalation policy in
theory and practice, using resilient health care principles to
identify opportunities for improving the way escalation is
planned and managed. Specific objectives were to identify
and categorize the types of escalation activities proposed
within a range of formal escalation policy documents;
observe escalation in context to study resilient practice, eg,
whether there was a gap between formal escalation protocol
660 Annals of Emergency Medicine
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Back et al
 and observed adaptations; and compare and contrast formal
and observed escalation activities to identify wider
implications for service managers and senior clinicians for
policy, system learning, and improvement.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This study is part of a wider project, for which there is
a published protocol,20 that is among the first worldwide
to systematically apply principles in resilient health care
for improvement purposes. The study involved 2 phases:
a structured thematic analysis of a range of escalation
policies, and a longitudinal observation of escalation
actions being carried out. Both phases took place in the
United Kingdom’s NHS between May 2014 and
September 2015.
Policies were purposively selected to provide a range of
actions across different organizational conditions. We first
identified EDs of various sizes, using NHS data,22
according to yearly attendance for 2014 to 2015 (large
>150,000, medium 100,000 to 125,000, and small
50,000 to 75,000 patients/year).
Further inclusion criteria were 4-fold: a formal escalation
policy was published and available through the hospital or
NHS Trust Web site; the policy had been updated or
authored within the last 5 years (2010 to 2015); there was a
dedicated policy section for the ED, outlining at least 5
escalation actions; and policy actions had demand triggers
for action (such as patient waiting time or the number of
patients occupying specific areas of the ED).
Twenty escalation policies were found that matched the
criteria. Eight were excluded from further analysis because
they did not provide specific detail on escalation actions to
allow extraction and coding of formal responses. The final
12 policies were from Imperial College Healthcare,
University Hospitals of Leicester, Brighton and Sussex, and
Guy’s and St Thomas’ (large); Gloucestershire Hospitals,
Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals, Royal Devon
and Exeter, and South Devon Healthcare (medium); and
Royal Cornwall Hospitals, Royal United Hospital Bath,
Gateshead Health, and East Cheshire (small).
Primary Data Analysis
The selected policies were analyzed to identify their
high-level goals (eg, to reduce waiting times, to garner extra
staff) and the types of escalation actions they contained (eg,
to divert ambulance arrivals, to ask on-call physicians to
attend the ED). Similar actions were grouped together
under a general description of the action. This initial
grouping was performed by a researcher (J.B., safety
scientist). Actions were then grouped thematically into
categories, using a process of aggregation and iterative
testing of the coherence of the categories. This was
performed by the researcher (J.B.), an ED consultant (P.J.),
and an ED service manager. The free-marginal multirater k
calculation23 was used to measure observer agreement for
the categorical data.
The study of escalation in practice drew on a subset of the
data collected during a large study of resilience as a quality
improvement method. For the larger study, data were
collected on all aspects of ED operations. For this study of
escalation, we selected data recording escalation actions.
After analysis of policies, the second phase of the work
involved detailed observations of escalation actions in St
Thomas’ Hospital ED, a large department with more than
150,000 patients attending per year (2014 to 2015). The
hospital is part of Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation
Trust, comprising several hospitals, and is a member of one
of the UK’s Academic Health Science Centres.
The observational study was conducted by 2 researchers
(J.B. and M.D.D.) during 16 months (May 2014 to
September 2015). Each observation lasted between 2 and 8
hours, and there were 30 observational episodes (15 per
researcher; 104 hours in total). The study took place
predominantly within the Majors area of the ED, which is
intended for patients with serious illnesses or injuries.
Majors is where the majority of escalation actions are
discussed and coordinated. Staff who consented to the study
were shadowed as they performed their normal duties, with
participants coming into contact with a range of colleagues
during their work. Staff responsible for managing patient
flow and executing escalation actions were purposively
selected to participate, including the physician in charge,
the nurse in charge, and the patient flow coordinator.
Nonparticipant observations24 took place at or close to
the central desk area, where many patient flow
management issues are discussed. The aim was to obtain a
rich description of the patient flow pressures that the ED
was under, and how escalation actions were used to help
address these pressures. Open-ended, informal interviews
were performed during the shadowing process.25
Researcher and participant discussed events and processes
at opportune moments to avoid compromising care or
interfering with escalation actions. This was important
because routine actions might be taken for granted by the
participants25; thus, opportune questions allowed
illumination of the decisionmaking processes involved
when escalation actions were executed.
Times and days for observations were selected to
maximize the chances of there being a busy department
(based on historic occupancy and arrivals data), thus
increasing the likelihood that escalation actions would be
Back et al
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 661
 needed. Historical data suggested that the departmental
occupancy levels were at their highest from noon to 2 PM,
with Monday being the busiest day of the week.
Consultants within the department identified that the shift
handover period 6 PM to 8 PM was when staff experienced
high workload that could affect the management of patient
flow issues. Our observation schedule was designed to
capture these periods, but we also observed at other times
to enable comparisons.
In the tradition of ethnographic studies, our aim was to
capture a deep understanding of the subtleties and nuances
of the culture of the work system. All relevant aspects of the
environment were captured, along with researchers’
questions and thoughts about what was happening.
Researchers used resilience engineering theory to focus on
how workers decided on actions, what actions were
undertaken, and the effect of those actions.
J.B., a safety scientist, and M.D.D., an organizational
psychologist, collected all the data. Extensive field notes of
observations, discussions, and personal reflections were
made. A pro forma method was designed and used by the 2
researchers (J.B. and M.D.D.) to capture when escalation
actions were proposed, how they were implemented (if
implemented), and any associated outcomes in terms of the
envisaged action. Field notes were transcribed and analyzed
in NVivo (version 10; QSR International Pty Ltd,
Doncaster, Victoria, Australia), using a combined deductive
and inductive thematic analysis. The deductive framework
included concepts from resilience engineering and the
CARE model,20,21 with a focus on adjustments and
adaptations that occurred in relation to escalation actions.
Major themes that were coded were demands, capacities,
misalignments between demand and capacity, adaptations
and outcomes, and the categories used to classify escalation
actions in the policy analysis (see “Results” section).
Actions planned and implemented by staff and outcomes
were analyzed inductively. Emerging insights from the
analysis were discussed extensively with the wider research
team, which included ED clinicians (physicians and
nurses), governance staff, and quality improvement
researchers. Results were also presented and discussed at
ED meetings and resilience health care conferences, and
with nurse colleagues, to test the credibility26 and
trustworthiness of the emerging interpretations.
RESULTS
Analysis of Escalation Policies
Escalation policies can be understood in terms of the
resources that EDs need to mobilize and deploy to
maintain acceptable levels of performance and patient
safety. Internal escalation actions can be performed with
existing resources within the department, whereas external
escalation actions require resources that are not currently
available within the department and have to be garnered
elsewhere. Table 1 presents the range of internal and
external escalation actions that were found by analyzing the
12 NHS escalation policy documents. Interrater reliability
was considered outstanding23 (k¼0.80; P<.001). A range
of actions was identified that aimed to reduce demand and
increase both capacity and efficiency. The implicit rationale
was that executing these actions would allow patient flow
bottlenecks to be avoided or better managed. Three
high-level goals of escalation policies were thematically
identified, together with action types to achieve these goals.
First was the goal of increasing capacity to allow more
patients to be assessed or treated. Action types codified to
achieve this goal were relocating patients who were
occupying areas that did not have capacity to less busy areas
within the ED, additional staffing, and change of
equipment use, including beds, trolleys, and cubicles.
Second was the goal of reducing demand on the ED.
Action types codified to achieve this goal were relocating
patients to other areas within the hospital (leaving the ED)
and adjusting processes to divert incoming patients to other
hospitals or health care services. Third was the goal of
increasing efficiency. Action types codified to achieve this
goal were adjusting processes to facilitate early
decisionmaking and avoid unnecessary investigations, and
flexing staffing by changing staff roles and responsibilities
within the ED to manage patient flow bottlenecks (for
example, moving a nurse from Majors to front-of-house
assessment).
Table 1 shows the thematic analysis of all codified
escalation actions (n¼92), categorized by the 3 high-level
goals and by action type. The number in brackets
represents the number of policies in which a specific action
was proposed.
The conceptual analysis of NHS escalation policies
found that their use requires the ability to dynamically
reconfigure resources (staff and equipment), change
normal work flow by adjusting processes, and relocate
patients to other departments or areas within the ED. All
the escalation policies we reviewed were similar in regard
to the detailing of actions involving the flexing of staffing.
The concept of using staff where most needed was
prevalent. Only the larger hospitals detailed processes that
were to be adjusted. The use of relocating patient and
equipment actions was dependent on the size of the ED
floor and whether short-stay or admission wards were
available for negotiated use. Some escalation policies were
more prescriptive in terms of what demands triggered an
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Back et al
662 Annals of Emergency Medicine
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
 Table 1. Thematic analysis of codified escalation actions.
Action Type
Aim
Increase Capacity
Reduce Demand
Increase Efficiency
Relocating patients
[4] Move lower-acuity patients who are currently
occupying cubicles or trolleys to seats
[1] Move patients to nonclinical areas
within the ED to free cubicles
[7] Consider direct referrals/fast-tracking of
patients to specialty wards
[6] Maximize use of protocols to stream patients
straight to admitting wards
[4] Move patients on admitting wards to
specialty wards to ease ED exit block
[2] Streaming nurse to turn patients
away (if appropriate)
[2] Specialist areas to organize collection of
patients directly from ED
Adjusting processes or
equipment use
[3] Beds throughout the hospital reviewed
to identify spare capacity
[3] Operational issues explored to identify
reduced capacity, eg, equipment failure
[2] Use Resus and Minors spaces for Majors patients
[1] Empty trolley space to ensure ambulances are offloaded
[1] Consider converting 4-bed bays to 6-bed
bays within Majors
[1] Compromise on the single-sex principle
for bays will be considered
[1] Compromise on infection control will be
considered for any closed (infected) areas
[4] Ambulance divert to be considered
as a last resort mechanism
[2] Patients should be assessed by specialty
team within 30 min
[2] Staff to use expedited discharge
protocol across ED area
[1] Ensure staff are not requesting inappropriate
investigations (laboratory tests)
[2] Site nurse practitioner to support ED
with patient flow/discharge
[2] Staff to use rapid assessment protocols
to ensure early decisionmaking
[1] Ensure transfer checklist is completed
and only essential tasks undertaken
[1] Ensure that investigations are
ordered for patients who are waiting
Additional staffing or
flexing staffing
[5] Allocate additional patient transfer
staff (nurses and porters)
[4] Additional locum/bank/agency staff to
be requested (physicians and nurses)
[3] Consider using emergency physicians and ED nurses from
administration roles and practice development
[3] External specialty team staffing reviewed
to identify spare capacity
[3] Make additional diagnostic staff available
in laboratories/radiology
[1] Service managers ED and acute medicine
to come to shop floor to assist
[1] Consultant on call to attend the ED and
consider calling in a second consultant
[1] Additional phleb/IV access capacity
to be deployed to the ED
[1] Consultants to ensure specialist physicians with
decisionmaking capability attend ED
[4] Additional review of patients by specialty to
identify those who may be discharged
[5] Staffing across all ED areas reviewed
to identify underused staff
[3] Emergency physicians and ED nurses redeployed
where this will best improve patient flow
[2] Consider making registrar physician
available to work with rapid assessment team
[2] Site nurse practitioner to support ED
with patient flow/discharge
[1] Consider redeploying staff to coordinate
front-of-house assessments
[1] Consider redeploying staff to coordinate
ambulance handovers
[1] Assign designated treatment nurse in
Urgent Care Center
IV, Intravenous.
Back et al
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 663
 action (eg, waiting times, departmental occupancy) than
others.
Although codified actions were specified by the policies,
these were devised as a way of behaving in response to a
predicted situation, established before the event, and can be
considered action-oriented rules.27 These types of action
responses have advantages such as saving time and effort in
“reinventing the wheel” in known situations, and aim to
increase capacity, reduce demand, or increase efficiency
through predictability in response across staff. However, it
has also been suggested that they may cause blindness to
new situations, may cause resentment at a loss of freedom
(possibly resulting in violations), and place higher demand
on the system for rule supervision.27 Our study of how
escalation works in practice investigated how codified
actions are implemented.
Observation of Escalation in Practice
The first task in observation of escalation in practice and
understanding the landscape of escalation was to
understand the important local context within which ED
escalation takes place in the study hospital (Figure).
Patients arriving by ambulance should be assessed within
15 minutes by the rapid assessment team or be taken
directly to the resuscitation area (in the case of life-
threatening illnesses or injuries). All other arrivals had to
undergo front-of-house assessment, where they might be
encouraged to visit a general practitioner surgery or
specialist clinic instead. Patients still wishing to be treated
were given a ticket, which started the visit timer, and were
required to register at reception. After registration, patients
waited until a nurse was available for triage. Once triage
was complete, a patient was discharged home or directed to
the urgent care center (low acuity); in some cases a
handover to Majors (where serious illnesses or injuries are
treated) was required. When patients arrive in Majors,
where the majority of those arriving by ambulance are
treated, the aim is to begin treating before the 1-hour
treatment target (patients should begin treatment by a
clinician within 1 hour of arrival). The study hospital had
an Emergency Medical Unit (short-stay ward) in which
patients who required additional diagnostics or treatment
could be sent, distributing workload within the department
and circumventing the 4-hour throughput rule.
Decisions to escalate were discussed at a meeting that
was scheduled every 2 hours and attended by
representatives who managed the different ED areas
(Figure). This primarily occurred between 8 AM and 6 PM
Figure. Simplified model of patient flow within the study hospital’s ED.
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Back et al
664 Annals of Emergency Medicine
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
 on weekdays and less formally outside these times. In total,
60 of these meetings were observed. Formal escalation
happened when the number of patients within the ED
exceeded planned capacity. We report on examples that
explicate these issues, and identify the prerequisites to
performing the escalation action types identified in the
policy analysis.
Table 2 summarizes actions that were taken to relocate
patients and reconfigure the use of beds to align capacity
with demand with illustrative excerpts from the data. When
the department became busy, the reality of working under
sustained pressure limited the extent to which 4-hour
breaches could be averted. For example, some physicians in
charge devoted their time and attention to patients with the
greatest clinical need, meaning they could not always assist
with patient flow management (observations 25, 27, and
28), even after being requested (observation 15). One
consultant argued that when there is poor skill mix,
physicians are motivated by clinical needs and patient safety
rather than by adhering to the 4-hour access target
(observation 23).
When pressure mounted, there was often a reduction in
communication between team members and increased “silo
working” on the part of the nurse in charge and physician
in charge. These senior clinicians would often become
overburdened, leaving the flow coordinator to cope alone,
further slowing down patient flow. On a number of
occasions, the flow coordinator had to enter “firefighting
mode” and was observed looking for missing diagnostic
results, finding missing documentation, looking for
specialty referrals, and locating missing members of staff as
a consequence of clinicians not having the capacity to
monitor patient flow (observations 25, 27, and 28).
Critically, there was individual variability in how key
coordinating roles were performed. This affected the ability
of the department to relocate patients. Some physicians in
charge maintained the ability to oversee the department
and proactively monitored junior physicians, asking them
Table 2. Relocating patients: escalation actions.
Escalation Action and Type
Example From Observational Data
Outcome
Relocating patients by sending
them to another service.
This attempts to reduce
demand.
Occasionally patients were encouraged to consult
a general practitioner or attend another health
care provider (eg, a sexual health clinic) instead
of waiting to be treated.
Conversations were oftentimes
consuming and slowed front-of-house
assessment (Observations 3, 6).
Relocating patients to a less
busy area within the ED.
This attempts to increase
capacity for waiting patients.
There was very limited scope to relocate patients
because of the physical limitations of the space.
Capacity could sometimes be increased by
reassigning cubicles in Resus for Majors patients
undergoing treatment, or creating a
chaired area in Majors where patients could sit
and await test results instead of occupying
cubicles.
When patient occupancy in the ED
was high, there was invariably
a lack of cubicle space
to assess and treat patients.
The escalation policy suggested
that this could be dealt with
by relocating patients within the
department (Observations 17, 21).
A consultant was observed telling a junior physician
that although cubicle space was available, it would be
unsafe to treat a patient in an area without adequate
staffing for monitoring (eg, what happens if
the patient unexpectedly deteriorates?).
Relocating patients was rarely
straightforward. Reconfiguring
the space created extra risks if
the area was not fully staffed
(Observation 25).
Expediting patient transfers to
other areas in the hospital.
This attempts to increase
efficiency of
patient relocation.
Successful expedited transfers required the ability to
maintain an awareness of the state of the wider
hospital system so that possible admission pathways
were identified in anticipation of needs. This also
enabled batch referrals, meaning that specialty
physicians could review a batch of potential patients
when in the ED rather than making multiple trips
to see individuals, which reduced overall waiting time.
The ability to expedite transfers
during escalation was found
to depend on the effectiveness
of the team working structure
established between the
physician in charge,
nurse in charge, and patient
flow-coordinator roles.
The patient flow coordinator was a crucial role and
helped by integrating data from a variety
of sources, including IT systems and
verbal updates from clinical staff, to make sense of
how the department was functioning. Bottlenecks
were preempted by ordering of diagnostic tests in
anticipation of need to expedite transfers.
“Exit block” occurred when there
was no bed availability or a
lack of coordination resulted in
the upcoming availability
of beds not being monitored
(Observations 4, 12, 13, 17, 23, 26).
Back et al
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 665
 for case presentations to expedite decisionmaking to enable
patients to be relocated (observations 13 and 17). Silo
working was observed when the physician in charge did not
take an overseer role and escalation actions that were
codified were not implemented (observations 25, 27, and
28). However, this was not exclusively a problem associated
with the physician-in-charge role. For example, the nurse in
charge sometimes helped with the assessment of newly
arrived patients, which increased workload for the patient
flow coordinator when planning patient transfers. An
overburdened flow coordinator was unable to maintain
situation awareness, slowing down patient transfers.
Information availability also greatly limited the ability of
the team to monitor patient flow. Adaptations were rarely
straightforward because of the difficulty of monitoring a
patient’s journey through the ED and the uncertainty or
complexity of patient flow. Despite the presence of an
information technology (IT) system that tracks a patient’s
stay in the department, there was no artifact in use (such as
a whiteboard) that could be used to maintain a shared
awareness of patient flow. Awareness was maintained
mostly by the patient flow coordinator, who was located
next to the IT system screen.
Table 3 shows escalation actions involving additional
staffing with illustrative excerpts from the data. Hospital-
wide escalations that attempted to garner staff from
elsewhere were sometimes not instituted because of the
likelihood of no response, or when they did happen, the
intended increase in capacity was compromised by a skill
mix problem. Recovery from skill mix problems required
further action involving flexing staffing within the
department. The most reliable method of obtaining
additional staff involved the use of ED staff working in
nonclinical roles. However, awareness of the need to avoid
fatigue and burnout meant that this response was not relied
on if escalations happened frequently.
Table 3. Additional staffing: escalation actions.
Escalation Action and Type
Example From
Observational Data
Outcome
Codified escalation involved reassigning
senior ED clinicians who were
working in nonclinical roles
(desk work) to clinical roles.
This attempts to increase capacity
by using existing known resources.
Occurs relatively frequently and is
effective when dealing with a surge
in inflow that threatens the overall
performance of the ED. If the
escalation requires more than
2 h of additional input, then
effectiveness degrades because the
response is less enthusiastic.
Staff lost time to perform other important activities
such as administration, teaching, and developing
quality improvement initiatives, to the detriment of
the department. It was also in addition to their
rostered clinical duties and could contribute to
increased levels of burnout and fatigue, both of
which are recognized issues (Observations 17, 21, 22).
Codified hospital wide escalation where
staff from other areas of the hospital
arrived in the department to assist.
This attempts to increase capacity
by garnering extra staff.
This option, although imagined as a
mechanism for increasing capacity,
significantly increased the workload
for senior staff, who had to assess
how many staff arrived and their
skill level, and perform handovers
to incoming staff.
In one observed situation, coordinating this process
took approximately 30 min to complete. The nurse
in charge found that 3 of the additional nursing
staff were not able (lack of qualifications) or willing
(lack of experience) to perform intravenous infusions,
necessitating the reallocation of these incoming
nurses to other ED areas. An experienced nurse
was then seconded from triage (flexing staff) to
perform intravenous infusions in the Majors area
(Observation 9).
Similarly, in 2 other observed situations, extra
workload was created for the physician in charge
because incoming physicians needed handover and
support to understand the work flow before they
could contribute to easing the pressure
(Observations 12, 25).
More often than not, external escalation did not result
in additional physicians being sent from other
departments. Not knowing the response makes the
advanced planning of resources difficult
(Observations 9, 21).
Adjusted codified hospital-wide
escalations. Often no attempt was
made to increase capacity.
External escalations that attempted to
garner staff from elsewhere were
sometimes not instituted because
of the likelihood of no response.
In the evening, there was likely to be a degraded
response to escalation from specialties, so the
department chose not to formally escalate despite
that triggers were met (Observations 17, 24).
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Back et al
666 Annals of Emergency Medicine
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
 Although the escalation policy recommended
adjustments to processes in some situations, these were
rarely observed. One reason was that physicians in charge
were observed to be risk averse and prioritized clinical care
over the 4-hour target. One physician in charge instructed
his junior physicians to ignore the 4-hour throughput
target and said that it was “[his] job to worry about that”
(observation 7). This was clearly to take pressure off them
and increase their focus on patient care. Similarly, junior
physicians were observed being encouraged to be thorough
and order the full range of diagnostic tests even when the
department was busy (observation 30). Observations
showed that the escalation policy was sometimes not
invoked even when conditions for escalation were met
(observations 7, 9, and 15). During busy periods of the
year, it was historically deemed important not to call
escalations too frequently because it might result in a
degraded response (“crying wolf”). Recent departmental
policy encouraged escalations when conditions were met,
and a failure to escalate would sometimes result in a
reprimand from service managers, especially when targets
were not met. Hospital management requires the ED to
trigger the escalation policy even when ED staff do not
believe that doing so will be beneficial (observation 30).
In situ interviews revealed that the best way of
identifying opportunities to adjust processes was to
instigate a board round (patient situational review). Board
rounds involved a standing meeting of all the physicians
who had patients assigned to them in the Majors area
(all observations). In one observed situation (observation
9), the ED met the occupancy triggers for an external
escalation, but after the board round it was decided that it
should remain at internal escalation. Each physician briefly
reported on whether his or her patients could be expedited
for admission or discharge. This resulted in one third of the
patients’ being identified as ready to leave the ED, and the
specified call for further escalation was averted. It logically
follows that if the department is very busy, then there may
be no time for opportunistic board rounds. In one observed
situation (observation 15), the nurse in charge had lost
track of plans made for a number of patients and suggested
to the physician in charge that a board round might help
clarify the situation. However, the physician in charge was
busy managing a complex patient case and was reluctant to
interrupt work flow. The lack of a board round at that time
had a downstream effect on planning, and at least some
4-hour target breaches might have been avoided if a board
round had been held.
Table 4 reports on the flexing staffing escalation action
type with illustrative excerpts from the data. Unfortunately,
flexible staffing was sometimes difficult to coordinate,
leading to a lack of awareness among team members.
Actions that were responsive adaptations had consequences
that also needed to be anticipated; consideration and
ownership of associated risks involved in these adaptations
were important. Furthermore, when a staff member had
Table 4. Flexing staffing: escalation actions.
Escalation Action and Type
Example From Observational Data
Outcome
Flexing staffing so that bottlenecks
may be avoided was a normal
part of managing the variability
in patient flow (this included
the flexing of physicians,
nurses, and administrative
staff). This attempts to
increase efficiency.
Staff were flexed before the need was raised at
the 2-h situational report meeting.
This enabled the department to
quickly respond to pressures
(Observations 16, 26).
The ability to flex staff in response to needs does,
however, present problems for effective team
coordination. During flexing, staff often cannot
be contacted easily by colleagues who may
need to query an aspect of patient care.
Time wasted locating colleagues, missing
notes, and blood samples
(Observations 12, 16, 17).
During escalation, flexing happened more frequently
and was often informal.
In one case, a Resus consultant who was
flexed to Majors left after reviewing a
patient, and a nurse was then unable to
locate the consultant to query an
outstanding issue (Observation 27).
The rapid assessment team physician decided to
work alongside the triage nurses to expedite the
treatment and discharge of low-acuity patients so
that the capacity to assess newly arrived patients
could be increased. This need had been identified
independently of the discussions of escalation.
Although this decision to help in triage was
indeed made in coordination with
the nurse in charge, the physician was
busy with other duties when an ambulance
patient handover was required; no one
else in the team knew where the physician
was and the handover was delayed
(Observation 12).
Back et al
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 667
 been flexed into a new role, how was the ongoing effect on
the system monitored or assessed? When was it time to
switch the staff member back to his or her original role?
There were no mechanisms in place to help with this type
of planning.
Although the escalation policy specified the patient
numbers that should trigger an escalation, in practice,
skilled practitioners used their expertise to decide when
escalation was necessary. Escalation decisions were made at
patient flow meetings held every 2 hours and attended by
representatives managing the different ED areas, depicted
in the Figure. During patient flow meetings, other informal
responses to the buildup of patients at crucial waiting areas
in the department were decided on and implemented.
Codified escalation was rarely discussed and avoided if at all
possible.
Invoking escalation often created additional demands at
the very time demand was highest and threatened to
overwhelm the department’s capacity to maintain patient
flow. Extra demands were created by the need to plan the
escalation, prioritize needed actions, coordinate handover
to incoming and reassigned staff, and assess the skills of
staff and match these to the areas of need. Many actions
were “shop-floor actions” and were successful because
escalation is experience based and case reasoned rather than
an easily codified process. Without the ability of the system
to perform adjusted shop-floor actions, there would be few
successful escalation actions. Furthermore, judging the
right time to escalate was difficult; staff wanted to avoid
unnecessary escalation but needed to take action before it
was too late for escalation to be effective. Learning this skill
was challenging, and getting it wrong was highly visible
throughout the hospital and had serious consequences for
the department.
LIMITATIONS
This qualitative study used longitudinal independent
observations of escalations across a range of ED locations
and functions. In line with quality criteria for qualitative
studies,28 we identified a well-defined research question,
clearly described our data collection and analysis methods,
and ensured that coding and interpretation of data were
discussed within the research team and that coding
reliability was tested as appropriate. We used data extracts
to illustrate our conclusions and identified implications for
health care organizations. However, the study was
conducted in a single organization, and although this
enabled us to capture and understand the subtle and
nuanced everyday work of patient flow management,
further studies could investigate how many of these actions
may be specific to organizations of a similar type (eg, large
site, teaching hospital). The escalation policies that we
studied were broadly similar across a range of organizations,
and this suggests that the types of adaptations we observed
might also be found in other organizations. The
classification systems and models we used in this study
could be further tested in other studies and used as a
resource for individuals interested in further study in this
dynamic area. The broader policy analysis covered a range
of institutions, and we are confident we have captured
broadly the types of escalation actions that are planned,
their general goals, and which are the most frequently
codified.
DISCUSSION
This study, following a published protocol based on
resilient health care theory, involved extracting and
classifying escalation actions for EDs found in policy, and
observing actual escalations longitudinally in practice. We
have described how formal attempts to specify what to do
when demand increases or capacity is reduced do not
capture the full extent to which the observed ED system
adapts to variable and sometimes unexpected demands, and
that specific actions may have positive and negative effects,
depending on context. We found many examples of
successful adaptations implemented by staff when the ED
was under pressure, including pre-empting the need for
escalation, using efficient practices such as board rounds to
expedite flow, and flexing staffing to areas within the
department under pressure.
Findings from this study have highlighted that the
common codified actions discussed below require in situ
adaptation to be successful.
When patients were relocated, the ability to expedite
transfers during escalation was found to depend on the
effectiveness of the team working structure established
between the physician in charge, nurse in charge, and
patient flow-coordinator roles. Successful adaptations
required the ability to maintain an awareness of the state of
the wider hospital system so that possible admission
pathways were identified in anticipation of needs, and
batch referrals to specialty services could be planned to
reduce waiting times.
When extra staff are garnered in an attempt to increase
capacity, adaptations and adjustments are required to keep
the system functioning while new staff are inducted and
tasks are handed over. External escalation could lead to
emergent effects that were the opposite of those intended
(such as increased workload rather than increased capacity);
knowledge of internal staffing resources tends to be higher
than that of external staffing resources, which need to be
managed with care. Recovery from skill mix problems
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Back et al
668 Annals of Emergency Medicine
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
 required further action involving flexing of known staffing
resources within the department.
When processes were adjusted, successfully expedited
patient journeys were reliant on getting the delicate balance
between continuing with clinical work and interrupting
work flow to perform planning activities right. Being
sensitive to these pressures highlighted the need for
awareness based on experience and expertise to avoid
initiating unnecessary escalations based on codified
indicators alone.
When staffing was flexed, the ability to anticipate
bottlenecks and prioritize actions accordingly was necessary
for successful outcomes such as safely managing patient
flow and staff workload. However, actions that were
responsive adaptations had consequences that also needed
to be anticipated, such as communication breakdowns
caused by information not being disseminated by a
member of staff who had been flexed elsewhere.
When the ED is under pressure, normal processes are
adapted to manage pressures informally and dynamically.
This adaptive capacity (work as done) was found to be
incompletely specified in policies (work as imagined).
Escalation actions, although enshrined in policy
documents, are adapted in practice to maximize patient
flow and avoid potential negative adverse effects of
escalating. Unlike the imagined action-orientated policy
responses, in practice adaptations were more goal
oriented.27 These responses allowed autonomous behavior
(eg, toward the goal of efficient throughput) without
specifying how such goals should be achieved. At times the
escalation policy was triggered without any expectation that
it would help. Such policies serve multiple purposes,
including satisfying hospital reporting requirements and
documenting pressure on the system.
There are a number of implications of the work that we
think are useful take-home messages for ED managers and
clinicians to consider.
Successful adaptations to policy to achieve key
efficiency goals have been observed here in situ, but are
not fully specified in policy. Learning from these
adjustments is unlikely because investigation and
reporting usually takes place only when performance is
suboptimal. This is a generic problem in health care29; we
react to problems rather than learning what is working
well and why. Although individual staff and colleagues
may of course learn from observing others, systematic
organizational-level learning about adaptive capacity in
the system is often lacking. This is important because
without routine study of what constitutes successful
adaptation, it may be simply assumed the policy is the
important driver (see below), which is not what our
evidence suggests, and the ability to respond to pressures
may not be optimal.
Internal performance reports should be encouraged to
include informal adaptations undertaken to make the
system work under pressure, as well as what these were in
response to (eg, surges in attendance or high acuity, staffing
shortages, equipment failures, bed availability). This
matching of diagnosis and response can give a fuller picture
of the “pathways to success” available to managers, some of
which may be less than fully understood.30 Much insight
can be gained organizationally from the extent to which
clinicians have developed their own adaptive strategies to
manage patient flow. Analysis of the relative merits of the
opportunistic versus the codified (eg, for board rounds)
might help improve efficiency.
The main policy implication is that there should be
mindful recognition and consideration of the fact that
formal policies do not always match the situations that staff
need to respond to; there will always be local contingencies
that have to be taken into account in situ. Failure to
recognize this could lead to the creation of “secret” policies
that reflect the real way to achieve things.18 The
development of underground practices can erode the ability
of teams to share and discuss the learning from them, or to
reflect on any inherent risks. Understanding the gap
between work as imagined and work as done is crucial for
improvement efforts, which could involve better alignment
between policy and practice, or explicitly supporting in situ
adaptations made by teams with expertise in patient flow.
Real-world escalation is fundamentally about trading off
efficiency and thoroughness goals.16 Thus, responses to
strategies used should be less about whether they were
procedural (action oriented) and more about whether they
were able to achieve goals while preserving the common
conventions of safe, quality patient care.
Kreindler31 argued that EDs struggle to achieve
anything more than small-scale localized gains when
attempting to improve patient flow, outlining common
design flaws. Furthermore, a lack of evidence on how
throughput and output interventions work in practice is
said to lead to difficulties in implementation.6 Our
approach to studying what happens in practice provides a
basis for understanding the opportunities for improvement
and the barriers to more efficient working.
CONCLUSIONS
It is now recognized that health care systems are complex
and dynamic and interventions often have multiple
components and mechanisms.32 Developing and evaluating
interventions thus requires theorizing to inform
intervention design and modeling of mechanisms and
Back et al
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 669
 contextual factors likely to come into play.33 This study
was explicitly carried out as a preliminary stage toward
codesigning an intervention with hospital partners. Our
findings support the view that interventions are unlikely to
succeed (or be meaningfully appraised) without at least
some understanding of likely barriers and facilitators to
improvement. Furthermore, interventions that support the
natural capacity in the system for flexible response to goals,
as observed here, should be considered alongside the
traditional model whereby interventions attempt to specify
standard working (for example, through education and
training).34
Escalation policies outline actions that aim to manage
high levels of workload. They do not explicitly outline the
prerequisite conditions that are needed to enable a
successful escalation. Our findings suggest that escalation
actions require careful review to ensure that they are
helping to manage workload. Work as done is not
completely specified by policies. Indeed, it could be argued
that the ability of the ED to make adaptations in situ is
critical for patient safety. However, we need to better
understand why some adaptations lead to desirable
outcomes and others result in failure. Thus, for successful
intervention it is critical to capture what adaptations are
made, rather than assuming it is the policies that enabled
the workload to be managed well or poorly.
The authors acknowledge the NHS staff who participated
in our study.
Supervising editor: Robert L. Wears, MD, PhD
Author affiliations: From Kings College London, UK (Back, Duncan,
Anderson); the University of Glasgow, UK (Ross); and Guy’s and
St Thomas’ NHS Trust, London, UK (Jaye, Henderson).
Author contributions: JB, JEA, and AJR conceived and designed the
study. JB and MDD performed the data collection. PJ and KH
performed quality control. JB analyzed the data and drafted the
manuscript with JEA, and AJR contributed substantially to a
redrafted manuscript. All authors contributed substantially to the
revision of the redrafted manuscript. JB takes responsibility for the
paper as a whole.
All authors attest to meeting the four ICMJE.org authorship criteria:
(1) Substantial contributions to the conception or design of the
work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the
work; AND (2) Drafting the work or revising it critically for important
intellectual content; AND (3) Final approval of the version to be
published; AND (4) Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of
the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or
integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and
resolved.
Funding and support: By Annals policy, all authors are required to
disclose any and all commercial, financial, and other relationships
in any way related to the subject of this article as per ICMJE conflict
of interest guidelines (see www.icmje.org). The authors have stated
that no such relationships exist. This study was approved by King’s
College London Psychiatry, Nursing & Midwifery Research Ethics
Committee (PNM/13/14-67) and by Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS
Trust R&D Department. The Centre for Applied Resilience in
Healthcare was established in August 2013 with funding from the
Guy’s and St Thomas’ Charity.
Publication dates: Received for publication November 22, 2016.
Revisions received December 8, 2016; March 24, 2017, and April
13, 2017. Accepted for publication April 19, 2017. Available online
June 26, 2017.
The views and opinions expressed herein are those of the authors.
The funding bodies have had no role in the design, data collection,
analysis and interpretation of the data, or the writing of the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Higginson I, Whyatt J, Silvester K. Demand and capacity planning in
the emergency department: how to do it. Emerg Med J.
2011;28:128-135.
2. Boyle A, Higginson I, Smith S, et al. Crowding in Emergency
Departments. London, England: College of Emergency Medicine;
2014.
3. Asplin BR, Magid DJ, Rhodes KV, et al. A conceptual model of
emergency department crowding. Ann Emerg Med. 2003;42:173-180.
4. Mason S, Mountain G, Turner J, et al. Innovations to reduce demand
and crowding in emergency care: a review study. Scand J Trauma
Resusc Emerg Med. 2014;22:55.
5. Kreindler SA. Watching your wait: evidence—informed strategies for
reducing health care wait times. Qual Manag Health Care.
2008;17:128-135.
6. Morris ZS, Boyle A, Beniuk K, et al. Emergency department crowding:
towards an agenda for evidence-based intervention. Emerg Med J.
2012;29:460-466.
7. Hoot NR, Aronsky D. Systematic review of emergency department
crowding: causes, effects, and solutions. Ann Emerg Med.
2008;52:126-136.e121.
8. Robinson DJ. An integrative review: triage protocols and the effect on
ED length of stay. J Emerg Nurs. 2013;39:398-408.
9. Choi YF, Wong TW, Lau CC. Triage rapid initial assessment by doctor
(TRIAD) improves waiting time and processing time of the emergency
department. Emerg Med J. 2006;23:262-265.
10. Eitel DR, Rudkin SE, Malvehy MA, et al. Improving service quality by
understanding emergency department flow: a white paper and position
statement prepared for the American Academy of Emergency
Medicine. J Emerg Med. 2010;38:70-79.
11. Walley P. Designing the accident and emergency system: lessons from
manufacturing. Emerg Med J. 2003;20:126-130.
12. Gonçalves-Bradley DC, Lannin NA, Clemson LM, et al. Discharge
planning from hospital. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;1:
CD000313.
13. Monitor. A&E Delays: Why Did Patients Wait Longer Last Winter?
Conclusions From the 10 Hypotheses Tested. London, UK: UK
Government; 2015.
14. Higginson I, Boyle A, Ahmad S, et al. Tackling Emergency
Department Crowding. London, UK: Royal College of Emergency
Medicine; 2015.
15. Wears RL, Hollnagel E, Braithwaite J. Resilient Health Care, Volume 2:
The Resilience of Everyday Clinical Work. Farnham, Surrey, UK: Ashgate
Publishing Ltd; 2015.
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Back et al
670 Annals of Emergency Medicine
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
 16. Hollnagel E. The ETTO Principle: Efficiency-Thoroughness Trade-off:
Why Things That Go Right Sometimes Go Wrong. Farnham, Surrey, UK:
Ashgate; 2009.
17. Perry SJ, Wears RL. Underground adaptations: case studies from
health care. Cogn Technol Work. 2012;14:253-260.
18. Sujan M, Spurgeon P, Cooke M. Translating tensions into safe
practices through dynamic trade-offs: the second secret handover. In:
Wears R, Hollnagel E, Braithwaite J, eds. The Resilience of Everyday
Clinical Work. Farnham, England: Ashgate; 2015:11-22.
19. Stephens R, Woods DD, Patterson E. Patient boarding in the
emergency department as a symptom of complexity-induced risks. In:
Wears RL, Hollnagel E, Braithwaite J, eds. Resilient Health Care,
Volume 2: The Resilience of Everyday Clinical Work. Farnham,
England: Ashgate; 2015:129-143.
20. Anderson JE, Ross AJ, Back J, et al. Implementing resilience
engineering for healthcare quality improvement using the
CARE model: a feasibility study protocol. Pilot Feasibility Stud.
2016;2:61.
21. Anderson JE, Ross AJ, Back J, et al. Resilience engineering for quality
improvement: case study in a unit for the care of older people. In:
Hollnagel E, Braithwaite J, Wears RL, eds. The Field Guide to Resilient
Health Care. Farnham, England: Ashgate; 2017.
22. NHS. A&E attendances and emergency admissions. Available at:
https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/ae-
waiting-times-and-activity/. Accessed November 1, 2016.
23. Warrens MJ. Inequalities between multi-rater kappas. Adv Data Anal
Classif. 2010;4:271-286.
24. Liu F, Maitlis S. Non-participant observation. In: Mills AJ, Durepos G,
Wiebe E, eds. Encyclopaedia of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks,
CA: SAGE Publications; 2010:610-612.
25. Beyer H, Holtzblatt K. Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered
Systems. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc; 1998.
26. Spencer L, Ritchie J, Lewis J. Quality in Qualitative Evaluation: A
Framework for Assessing Research Evidence. London, UK:
Government Chief Social Researcher’s Office, Cabinet Office; 2003.
27. Hale AR, Swuste P. Safety rules: procedural freedom or action
constraint? Saf Sci. 1998;29:163-177.
28. Dixon-Woods M, Shaw RL, Agarwal S, et al. The problem of appraising
qualitative research. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13:223-225.
29. Braithwaite J, Wears RL, Hollnagel E. Resilient health care: turning patient
safety on its head. Int J Qual Health Care. 2015;27:418-420.
30. Hoffman RR, Woods DD. Beyond Simon’s slice: five fundamental
trade-offs that bound the performance of macrocognitive work
systems. IEEE Intelligent Syst. 2011;26:67-71.
31. Kreindler SA. Six ways not to improve patient flow: a qualitative study.
BMJ Qual Saf. 2017;26:388-394.
32. Braithwaite J, Marks D, Taylor N. Harnessing implementation science
to improve care quality and patient safety: a systematic review of
targeted literature. Int J Qual Health Care. 2014;26:321-329.
33. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, et al. Developing and evaluating
complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance.
BMJ. 2008;337:a1655.
34. Cook R. Resilience and resilience engineering for health care. Ann Clin
Lab Sci. 2006;2:225-239.
Back et al
Emergency Department Escalation in Theory and Practice
Volume 70, no. 5 : November 2017
Annals of Emergency Medicine 671
