 www.advhealthmat.de
FULL PAPER
1800152 (1 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
Contact Lenses for Color Blindness
Abdel-Rahman Badawy, Muhammad Umair Hassan, Mohamed Elsherif, Zubair Ahmed, 
Ali K. Yetisen, and Haider Butt*
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.201800152
Normal color vision is trichromatic;[11] any 
color can be recreated by combining blue, 
red, and green, perceived by a cluster of 
photoreceptive cones at the back of the 
eye (Figure 1a). These cones are divided 
into three groups, responsible for short 
wavelengths (blue), medium wavelengths 
(green), and long wavelengths (red).[13] In 
normal vision, all three cones are present.[11] 
When identifying a color, these cones func-
tion according to their corresponding acti-
vation thresholds.[14] The combination of 
the different activation thresholds for the 
three types of cones is then processed by 
the brain and the corresponding color is 
perceived. When any of these cones are 
missing or defective, the brain receives 
incorrect information, leading to limited 
color perception.[4] Three possible outcomes if one of the cones 
is defective are: (i) protanomaly, occurs when the cone respon-
sible for red color is shifted to the left; (ii) deuteranomaly, the 
most common form of red-green color deficiency occurs when 
the cone responsible for green is shifted to the right; and 
 
(iii) tritanomaly, the least common of the three occurs when the 
cone responsible for blue is displaced (Figure 1b–d).[15]
Dichromatism, a condition in which one type of cone is com-
pletely missing, is divided into three subgroups—protanopia, 
deuteranopia, and tritanopia, that is, when the eye lacks the cones 
responsible for red, green, and blue wavelengths, respectively.[11,15] 
Protanopia, protanomoly, deuteranopia, and deuteranomaly are 
collectively referred as red-green color vision deficiency.[5] Trita-
nopia and tritanomly are both rarer, affecting ≈1% of males and 
0.03% of women.[5,13] The rarest form so called monochromatism 
occurs when the eye has either no cones at all or has only the cone 
responsible for blue color, causing a complete lack of the ability to 
perceive color.[13] CVD patients develop adaptive strategies,[4,16] for 
example, those having dichromatism displayed normal colored 
vision under certain test conditions validating the possibility of 
exploiting external factors for increased color perception.[17] This 
suggested the possibility to deceive the brain into perceiving 
wavelengths, which the eyes are unable to accurately detect.
While no cure for CVD currently exists, several manage-
ment techniques can be used to increase the color perception 
of affected patients.[5] One such method is the use of tinted 
spectacles.[5] The use of colored filters has been investigated 
to correct CVD.[9] While color discrimination was improved, 
it did not result in complete normal color vision.[18] Corrective 
glasses have been utilized to filter out a narrow range of wave-
lengths (≈545–575 nm) responsible for the largest confusion 
between the affected cones by using a multinotch filter.[18,19] 
This method has been experimentally shown to improve color 
Color vision deficiency (color blindness) is an inherited genetic ocular 
disorder. While no cure for this disorder currently exists, several methods 
can be used to increase the color perception of those affected. One such 
method is the use of color filtering glasses which are based on Bragg 
filters. While these glasses are effective, they are high cost, bulky, and 
incompatible with other vision correction eyeglasses. In this work, a 
rhodamine derivative is incorporated in commercial contact lenses to 
filter out the specific wavelength bands (≈545–575 nm) to correct color 
vision blindness. The biocompatibility assessment of the dyed contact 
lenses in human corneal fibroblasts and human corneal epithelial cells 
shows no toxicity and cell viability remains at 99% after 72 h. This study 
demonstrates the potential of the dyed contact lenses in wavelength 
filtering and color vision deficiency management.
A.-R. Badawy, Dr. M. U. Hassan, M. Elsherif, Dr. H. Butt
School of Engineering
University of Birmingham
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
E-mail: h.butt@bham.ac.uk
Dr. Z. Ahmed
Neuroscience and Ophthalmology
Institute of Inflammation and Ageing
University of Birmingham
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
Dr. A. K. Yetisen
School of Chemical Engineering
University of Birmingham
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201800152.
Color Vision Deficiency
1. Introduction
Colors are used to aid in identifying universal color phases, 
emotions, illnesses, and the ripeness or freshness of produce.[1–3] 
It can therefore lead to difficulties if these colors are not accu-
rately perceived. Color vision deficiency (CVD) or color blindness 
is a common ocular disorder affecting, for example, an esti-
mated 8% of males and 0.5% of women of Northern European 
descent.[3–8] It limits accurately distinguishing between specific 
colors depending on the type and intensity of the disorder.[3,5,7,8] 
CVD patients experience problems in work and everyday life 
when matching or discriminating between fine colors.[2,9–12] 
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 
Weinheim. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
 www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advhealthmat.de
1800152 (2 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
vision.[20] Several companies (e.g., Enchroma) offer products 
for CVD patients (Figure S1, Supporting Information).[21–23] 
Multiple layers of transparent materials are coated on glasses to 
filter out a band of certain wavelengths minimizing the overlap 
between blue and green, and green and red colors transmitted 
to the photoreceptive cones in the eye.[24] Existing color-correc-
tive glasses are high cost, bulky, and incompatible with other 
vision correction lenses. Here, a cost-effective contact lens 
was created for CVD management. The possibility of using 
contact lenses for CVD management is of interest particularly 
because of their ability to provide the entire corrected field of 
view and avoid obstructions from uncorrected peripheral vision 
inevitable in the case of glasses.
2. Results and Discussion
The stabilities of the dip and drop methods (explained in 
Experimental Section) were compared (Figure 2). All dipping 
processes were 30 s. Despite the dip method does not block the 
light band (545–575 nm) as much as the drop method, it is more 
suitable in terms of stability and CVD management. As over 
24 h, the transmission dip decreased only 7% for the dip-coated 
lens compared to 42% for the drop-cast lens (Figure 2b,c). This 
may be attributed to the contact lens not fully absorbing the 
dye—most of the dye dried out on the surface without diffusing 
into the lens (Section S2, Supporting Information). This caused 
the excess surface dye to dissolve more quickly when dipped 
in the test solution, varying the transmission properties of the 
contact lens at a faster rate. In comparison, the dip method pro-
vided increased immobilization of the dye in the contact lens 
matrix. Varying the dip time at t > 20 s had a negligible effect 
on the transmission spectra because of the saturation of the 
bulk (Figure 2a). The absorption saturation occurs at t > 20 s of 
the dipping time. The lack of any excess surface dye decreased 
the dispersion rate of the dye within the lens and therefore 
decreased the rate of transmission increase (Figure 2b). The dip 
method was also found to provide improved immobilization of 
the dye when used on pHEMA contact lenses. However, when 
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
Figure 1. Color perception in CVD. a) The anatomy of the eye and cone cells. b) The activation percentages for the different types of CVD for 510 nm. 
c) A visual representation of what is seen by individuals looking at the same image with different color vision abilities. d) Colors perceived by individuals 
having different types of CVD.
 www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advhealthmat.de
1800152 (3 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
Figure 2. Transmission spectra of dyed contact lenses. a) The effect on transmission by varying dip time. The inset shows photographic images of the 
color of the lenses at the specified dip times. b) The dip stability test showing the change in transmission with respect to time. c) The drop-cast method 
and its stability with inset showing the photographs taken after specified intervals of time. d) Transmission spectra of pHEMA and commercial soft 
contact lenses when dipped into the dye. e) The microscopic images of the cross sections taken under different viewing conditions. Scale bars = 100 µm.
 www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advhealthmat.de
1800152 (4 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
compared to the soft contact lens, the pHEMA contact lens 
showed lower ability to absorb the dye. Due to this poor absorp-
tion capability, its transmission (86%) dip was smaller than that 
of the soft contacts (26%) (Figure 2d). As the absorbance of the 
pHEMA contact lenses was low, the 23 wt% dye solution was 
used for this experiment. Soft contact lenses were used in sub-
sequent experiments due to their superior absorption of the dye.
Cross-sectional images of the dipped soft contact lens were 
used to evaluate the permeation of the dye through the con-
tact lens (Figure 2e). Furthermore, the distribution of the dye 
throughout the contact lens was reasonably uniform. Dark-field 
and bright-field reflection and transmission images were obtained 
to evaluate the edges, surface, and bulk of the dyed contact lens. 
The images displayed a uniform distribution without any lumping 
of the dye within the contact lens and did not indicate any loss of 
integrity of the contact lens due to the dipping method.
With the application method evaluated, the different concen-
trations of the dye were tested (Figure 3a–c). The higher con-
centration dyes provided a deeper transmission dip, for 23 and 
9% solutions the transmission dips of the dyed lenses were 72 
and 21%, respectively. By plotting the concentrations against the 
transmission dips, a linear trend between the two was found. This 
trend provided customizability for the transmission dip of the dye 
and allowed rational optimization of the dye concentration.
As contact lenses were stored in a saline solution, the reac-
tion between the dyed contact lenses and the storage solution 
was investigated (Figure 4). The dye showed an initial weak 
diffusion into the storage solution after submersion within the 
solution as no sealing or cross-linking technique was used to 
secure the dye within the contact lens. After 2 h, the change 
in transmission stopped (Figure 4a). When the concentration 
of the dye within the contact lens and its concentration within 
the storage solution were balanced, the dye diffusion ceased. 
To decrease this diffusion, 17 wt% dye (20 µL) was added to 
the storage solution to decrease the concentration gradient 
between the contact lens and the saline solution, where no dif-
fusion was recorded after 6 h of submersion. Usage of higher 
concentration of dye (20 µL of 20 wt%) inversed the initial con-
centration gradient and increased the transmission dip of the 
contact lens by ≈9% within the first 2 h.
As the dyed contact lens would come in contact with the 
eye, a phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution was used to 
simulate the tear behavior (Figure 5). The contact lens sample 
showed an initial maximum transmission dip of 52% which 
increased to 56 and 63% after first and second h, respectively. 
The transmission spectra recorded after 6 h ≤ t ≤ 3 h, showed 
almost identical transmission dip at ≈70%. The dye in the con-
tact lens diffused into the PBS solution indicating the need for 
better immobilization of the dye within the contact lens. The 
contact lenses were kept in the storage solution for one month, 
where no apparent degradation was observed.
The validity of the dyed contact lenses as a possible CVD 
management technique was evaluated. The filtering mecha-
nism was based on the stoppage of the increased overlapped 
band, that is, the common region of green and red wavelength 
bands perceived by the two types of corresponding optical 
cones. The dye effectively absorbed (blocked) this wavelength 
band. Therefore, the suppressed transmission of this band 
through as-made contact lenses did not trigger the optical cones 
in common (green-red) band region. As a result, enhanced 
color perception or CVD management was achieved. A survey 
consisting of both normal color sighted (NCS) individuals and 
individuals suffering from red-green color deficiency was used 
to test the effects of the dyed contacts (Figure S3, Supporting 
Information). When asked to compare the numbers visible on 
printed copies of the Ishihara test, all of the NCS participants 
detected a varying range improvement of the colors for different 
screens. In comparison, the levels of improvement acknowl-
edged by the participants affected by CVD varied substantially. 
However, all participants identified the improvement to the 
colors of their surrounding when looking through the contact 
lens, which concurs with the results of the commercial color 
vision correction glasses.[18] The main complication when per-
forming this survey was ensuring the color perception capabili-
ties of those tested. Several of the self-declared color deficient 
participants were unaware of their CVD condition. Additionally, 
many of those tested also suffered from slight blue/purple CVD 
as well as red-green CVD. As the lenses only targeted the wave-
lengths concerning red-green CVD, its effectiveness on those 
individuals with blue/purple CVD would be greatly reduced. 
Furthermore, as screening processes to identify CVD is no 
longer compulsory in schools,[4] some individuals with normal 
color vision could believe that they suffer from CVD.
Dyes are capable of absorbing narrow ranges of wavelength 
that can be controlled by altering their chemical structure.[25] 
While both dyes and Bragg mirrors can be synthesized to be 
highly selective light filters, dye processing does not require 
complex preparation methods. This method could potentially 
be used for both glass spectacles and contact lenses at low cost. 
Since the dyed contact lenses are to be used in the eye, the 
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium 
bromide 
(MTT) assay was used to assess potential toxicity to human 
corneal fibroblast (HCF) and human corneal epithelial cells 
(HCEC) after 72 h in culture. No toxicity of the dyed contact 
lenses was observed when compared to untreated cells and cell 
viability remained at ≈99% after 72 h, suggesting that the dyed 
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
Figure 3. Optimization of rhodamine dye concentrations. a) The effect of 
varying dip concentrations. b) The relationship between dye concentration 
used and absorption. c) Images of the contact lenses dipped in different 
dye concentrations.
 www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advhealthmat.de
1800152 (5 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
Figure 4. Dye diffusion from the contact lenses. The effect of time on the lenses when dipped into a storage solution with a) no added dye, b) 20 µL 
 
of equal concentration dye, and c) 20 µL of concentration dye (20 wt%). d–f) Images of the contact lenses corresponding to the graphs shown in 
(a)–(c), respectively. g) Change in the color of the storage solution at the beginning and end of each experiment.
Figure 5. Dyed contact lens in PBS solution. a) The change in transmission peaks of the dyed contact lens when dipped in PBS solution as a function 
of time. b) Photographs of the change in the color of the dyed contact lens when dipped PBS solution. The change in the color of PBS solution is 
shown in the last two images.
 www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advhealthmat.de
1800152 (6 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
contact lenses are nontoxic to human corneal cells (Figure 6). 
During our biocompatibility testing, no dye accumulation was 
observed in the cells. Although there is a potential for the dye to 
be taken up by cells of the eye, this may not be a problem since 
live cells will be able to exclude the dye, such as propidium 
iodide (used by ophthalmologists), which is a nonpermanent 
dye. However, to avoid possible leakage in contact lenses, the 
dye could be cross-linked to the lens matrix. Encapsulation is 
also an alternate stabilizing method to immobilize the dye.
3. Conclusion
A color filtering contact lens was successfully fabricated by 
submerging them in Atto 565 dye for 30 s. Furthermore, the 
concentration of the dye used could be controlled to accurately 
provide a high level of customization of the process. Due to its 
customizability, low cost of the dye, and the ease of the pro-
duction process, these dyed contact lenses can be promising 
for CVD management. The main drawback of the process was 
the dye diffusion in the PBS solution. This diffusion may be 
controlled using covalent bonding to contact lens polymer back-
bone and incubation in hydrophobic preservation materials or 
oils. Furthermore, the dyes were nontoxic to human corneal 
fibroblasts and human corneal epithelial cells. The results of 
the survey verified that dye tinted contact lenses can be used 
to slightly improve the color perception of both those affected 
by color vision deficiency and those without. However, this 
improvement may not allow those affected with CVD to have 
comparable color vision as those with normal color vision. Fur-
ther trials are required to investigate the ideal peak absorption 
percentage to optimize this enhancement. This experiment had 
several considerations. One important consideration is that the 
flow of the tear solution on the eye is ≈1.0 µL min−1, which 
is substantially lower than the 150 µL solution of PBS used. 
Therefore, the true leakage within the eye even without binding 
is expected to be lower than that recorded. Several solutions can 
be considered while preparing such lenses for clinical trials or 
practical use including incorporation of encapsulation method 
or crosslinking processes during the manufacturing stage or 
when the dye is applied to them postproduction. The fabricated 
contact lens is a step forward in the development of wearable 
devices for the management of color vision deficiency.
4. Experimental Section
A fluorescent rhodamine dye, 6-(2,5-dicarboxyphenyl)-1,11-diethyl-
3,4,8,9,10,11-hexahydro-2H-pyrano[3,2-g:5,6-g′]diquinolin-1-ium 
(Atto 
565, Sigma Aldrich) was used for the wavelength filtering properties of 
contact lenses. The dye offers an absorption band between ≈545 and 
575 nm with a peak absorption occurring at ≈565 nm (Figure 7a,b). It is 
moderately hydrophilic and has high photostability. Dye solutions were 
prepared using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to obtain 9, 13, 17, 20, and 
23 wt% concentrations.
The drop and dip methods were used to apply the dye on homemade 
poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (pHEMA) lenses and commercial 
silicone based 1 d contact lenses (Acuvue Moist) (Figure 2d,e). 
Commercial lenses were selected for further optimization. The drop 
method entailed directly casting a drop of the dye (20 µL) on the 
lens surface, ensuring that the center of the lens was evenly covered 
(Figure 7d). The dipping method involved dipping the contact lens into the 
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
Figure 6. Cell viability after 72 h exposure to dyed lenses. 5 × 103 HCF and 
HCEC were incubated in six-well tissue culture plates in DMEM + 10% 
FCS for 72 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The MTT assay reagent (0.5 mg mL−1) 
was added to each well and the samples were incubated for 4 h in dark. 
The medium was then removed and precipitates were resuspended in 
DMSO and measured on a plate reader set at 570 nm. Each experiment 
was performed in triplicates.
Figure 7. Rhodamine derivative (Atto 565) and its incorporation into con-
tact lenses. a) The absorption and emission spectra of the dye. b) The 
chemical structure of the Atto 565 dye. Schematics of the d) drop method 
and e) dip method. f) The dyed contact lens on an artificial eye model.
 www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advhealthmat.de
1800152 (7 of 7)
© 2018 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
dye solutions for 1 min. To prevent contact lens folding, it was placed onto 
the inside face of a surface. This surface was then inverted allowing the 
dye to encompass the contact lens (Figure 7e). The distribution of the dye 
across the lens was also found to be uniform using this method. Cross-
sectional microscopic images of these samples were taken to analyze 
the permeability of the dye in the contact lens. The optimal dip time 
was then investigated by submerging the contacts into the dye solution 
 
(17 wt%) for 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 s. The lenses were then scanned using 
an optical spectrophotometer (Ocean Optics, USB 2000) and the resulting 
transmission profiles were compared. Drop-cast and coating techniques 
were compared using spectroscopy by recording their absorption spectra 
at different time intervals after applying the dye. For dip processed lenses, 
17 and 25 wt% dye solutions (20 µL) were added to the storage solution 
(150 µL), and hourly readings were recorded. Additionally, the contact lens 
was submerged within daily contact lens saline storage solution (50 µL). 
Similarly, the reaction between the dyed contact lens and a phosphate-
buffered artificial tear solution (150 µL) was analyzed. As some contact 
lens wearers find the need to hydrate their eyes using artificial tears while 
wearing the contacts, the dyed contacts were also immersed within 150 µL 
of artificial tears. Hourly readings were recorded for both tests.
To analyze the effectiveness of the dyed contact lenses, a survey 
was performed under the guidelines and permission of University of 
Birmingham Ethical Review. Individuals with normal color vision and 
those having red-green color vision deficiency were asked to identify 
several numbers taken from the different standard Ishihara test slides. 
These individuals were then asked to look through the dyed contact 
lens—which was applied on a glass slide—and note whether there 
were any improvements to the colors or the clarity of the number. They 
were then asked to restate the number that they observed. Finally, they 
 
were asked to observe their surroundings and note whether any adequate 
improvement could be noted.
To investigate potential toxicity of the dyed contact lenses to cells 
in the eye, HCFs were expanded in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s 
medium (DMEM) and 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) (Invitrogen), 5 × 
103 cells were plated in six-well plates and covered with 2 mL of 
DMEM + 10% FCS. Contact lenses were immersed into the culture 
medium and left in contact with cells for 72 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. 
HCECs (Millipore) were expanded in EpiGRO medium (Millipore) and 
5 × 103 cells were inoculated in six-well plates, covered with 2 mL of 
EpiGRO and exposed to contact lenses as described above for HCF. 
After 72 h, supernatants were removed and cells were washed in PBS 
and the MTT assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions (R&D Systems, Watford, UK). Briefly, MTT reagent 
 
(100 µL, 0.5 mg mL−1) was added to each well and incubated for 4 h 
before incubation for a further 2 h in detergent reagent (100 µL). 
The absorbances of the resultant solutions were read at 570 nm and 
absorbance units calculated from triplicate readings after subtraction 
of blank wells (culture media only).
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or 
from the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Wellcome Trust for the research funding for this project.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
color blindness, color vision deficiency, contact lenses, ocular diseases, 
vision correction
Received: February 9, 2018
Revised: March 27, 2018
Published online: April 26, 2018
[1] B. L. Cole, in Colour Vision Deficiencies, Proc. Symp. Int. Research 
Group, XI, Springer, Netherlands 1993, pp. 67–86.
[2] P. Cumberland, J. Rahi, C. S. Peckham, Arch. Dis. Child. 2005, 90, 
906.
[3] B. L. Cole, Clin. Exp. Optom. 2004, 87, 258.
[4] K. Albany-Ward, Br. J. Sch. Nurs. 2015, 10, 197.
[5] M. P. Simunovic, Eye 2010, 24, 747.
[6] G. Jordan, J. D. Mollon, Vision Res. 1993, 33, 1495.
[7] R. H. Post, Soc. Biol. 1982, 29, 299.
[8] I. M. Siegil, Surv. Ophthalmol. 1981, 25, 312.
[9] L. T. Sharpe, H. Jagle, Color Res. Appl. 2001, 26, S269.
[10] J. Spalding, Br. J. Gen. Pract. 1999, 49, 469.
[11] A. Tofts, Focus: J. Res. Scholarly Output 2007, 2, 63.
[12] A. J. Vingrys, B. L. Cole, Ophthalmic Physiol. Opt. 1988, 8, 257.
[13] Health and Safety Executive, Colour Vision Examination: A Guide for 
Occupational Health Providers, HSE, UK 2005.
[14] M. H. Remmer, N. Rastogi, M. P. Ranka, E. J. Ceisler, Curr. Opin. 
Ophthalmol. 2015, 26, 333.
[15] Y. C. Chen, Y. Guan, T. Ishikawa, H. Eto, T. Nakatsue, J. Chao, 
M. Ayama, Color Res. Appl. 2014, 39, 234.
[16] P. Cumberland, J. Rahi, C. Peckham, Br. Med. J. 2004, 329, 1074.
[17] L. T. Sharpe, A. Stockman, H. Jägle, J. Nathans, Color Vision: From 
Genes to Perception, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1999, 
p. 351.
[18] N. Almutairi, J. Kundart, N. Muthuramalingam, J. Hayes, K. Citek, 
S. Aljohani, Assessment of Enchroma Filter for Correcting Color Vision 
Deficiency, College of Optometry, Pacific University, Oregon 2017, 
p. 21.
[19] A. W. Schmeder, D. M. McPherson, Google Patent,  2013.
[20] K. Knoblauch, M. J. McMahon, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 1995, 12, 2219.
[21] G. Lausegger, M. Spitzer, M. Ebner, Int. J. Interact. Mobile Technol. 
2017, 11, 161.
[22] H. M. de Oliveira, J. Ranhel, R. Alves, Simulation of Color Blindness 
and a Proposal for Using Google Glass as Color-Correcting Tool, XXIV 
Congresso Brasileiro de Engenharia Biomédica, Uberlândia, MG, Brazil  
2014.
[23] J. Lee, C. Anki, S. Juyeon, Google Patent,  2014.
[24] S. Randhawa, M. U. González, J. Renger, S. Enoch, R. Quidant, 
Opt. Express 2010, 18, 14496.
[25] E. E. Jelley, Nature 1936, 138, 1009.
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2018, 7, 1800152
