 The functional diversity of retinal ganglion cells in the mouse
Tom Baden1,2,3,§, Philipp Berens1,2,3,4,§, Katrin Franke1,2,3,5,§, Miroslav Román Rosón1,2,3,5, 
Matthias Bethge1,2,6, and Thomas Euler1,2,3
1Bernstein Centre for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
2Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
3Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tübingen, Germany
4Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA
5Graduate School of Neural & Behavioural Sciences | International Max Planck Research School, 
University of Tübingen, Germany
6Max Planck Institute of Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
SUMMARY
In the vertebrate visual system, all output of the retina is carried by retinal ganglion cells. Each 
type encodes distinct visual features in parallel for transmission to the brain. How many such 
“output channels” exist and what each encodes is an area of intense debate. In mouse, anatomical 
estimates range between 15–20 channels, and only a handful are functionally understood. 
Combining two-photon calcium imaging to obtain dense retinal recordings and unsupervised 
clustering of the resulting sample of >11,000 cells, we here show that the mouse retina harbours 
substantially more than 30 functional output channels. These include all known and several new 
ganglion cell types, as verified by genetic and anatomical criteria. Therefore, information channels 
from the mouse’s eye to the mouse’s brain are considerably more diverse than shown thus far by 
anatomical studies, suggesting an encoding strategy resembling that used in state-of-the-art 
artificial vision systems.
Visual processing begins in the retina (reviewed in1). Here, photoreceptors feed into bipolar 
cells2, which provide input to a diverse set of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). Each type of 
RGC tiles the retinal surface and extracts specific features of the visual scene for 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Thomas Euler (; Email: thomas.euler@cin.uni-tuebingen.de)
§These authors contributed equally to the presented work
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
TB, PB, MB and TE designed the study; KF performed imaging experiments with help by TB; KF and MRR performed 
electrophysiological experiments with help by TB; TB, PB, KF and MRR performed pre-processing; PB developed the clustering 
framework with help of MB; TB and PB analysed the data with input from TE; TB, PB and TE wrote the manuscript.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Data (original data, clustering and grouping results) as well as Matlab code for visualization are available from http://www.retinal-
functomics.org. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 January 21; 529(7586): 345–350. doi:10.1038/nature16468.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transmission to the brain. However, it is still unclear how many such parallel retinal “feature 
channels” exist, and what they encode.
Early studies classified cells into ON, OFF or ON-OFF and transient or sustained types 
(e.g.3,4) based on the response of individual RGCs to light stimulation. These studies also 
identified RGC types selective for local motion, motion direction or uniform 
illumination3,5–7. In the most complete physiological survey to date, Farrow and Masland8 
clustered ~450 mouse RGCs by their light responses into 12+ functional types using multi 
electrode array (MEA) recordings, suggesting a similar number of feature channels in the 
retina. In contrast, anatomical classifications of RGC dendritic morphologies estimated 
around 15–20 types (e.g.9–12). Recently, Sümbül and co-workers10 found 16+ types using 
unsupervised clustering together with genetic markers. If each of these anatomically distinct 
types performed one function, there should be no more than ~20 retinal output channels.
Commonly, RGCs of the same “genuine” type are thought to share the same physiology, 
morphology, intra-retinal connectivity, retinal mosaic, immunohistochemical profile and 
genetic markers. Whether these features suffice to define a type and how classification 
schemes should be organised is the matter of a long-standing debate13–16. For example, if 
also axonal projections were considered type-specific, this could result in a much greater 
variety of retinal output channels. In zebrafish, RGCs show at least 50 unique combinations 
of “dendro-axonal RGC morphologies” targeting a total of 10 anatomically defined 
projection fields17. RGCs in mice project to 40+ targets18, suggesting that there may be an 
even larger number of mouse RGC types.
Reliably recording from all RGC types
Here, we sought to test this idea and determine the number of functional output channels of 
the mouse retina, to obtain a complete picture of what the mouse’s eye tells the mouse’s 
brain. We used two-photon Ca2+ imaging to record light-evoked activity in all cells within a 
patch of the ganglion cell layer (GCL). Cells were loaded with the fluorescent Ca2+ indicator 
Oregon-Green BAPTA-1 (OGB-1) by bulk electroporation19 (Fig. 1a1,2). This approach 
resulted in near-complete (>92%) staining of GCL cells, with less than 1% damaged cells20. 
To acquire a patch of several hundreds of cells, we recorded up to 9 neighbouring 110 × 110 
μm fields (at 7.8 Hz), each containing 80 ± 20 GCL somata (Fig. 1a1,2, cf. SI Video 1). In 
total, >11,000 cells were sampled.
We presented four light-stimuli (Fig. 1b): (i) a full-field “chirp”-stimulus to characterise 
polarity, kinetics and the preference for temporal frequencies and contrasts, (ii) a moving bar 
to probe for direction and orientation selectivity (Fig. 1b2), (iii) binary dense noise to 
estimate receptive fields and (iv) an alternating long- / short-wavelength (“green/blue”) full-
field stimulus to probe for chromatic preference (Methods). This set of stimuli was chosen to 
cover a large stimulus-space that distinguishes different response types.
We performed recordings in the ventral retina, as verified by the mean chromatic response 
preference21,22 of each imaged field (Extended Data Fig. E1e), to control for retinotopic 
Baden et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sources of variability23–25. In addition, we always presented stimuli at the same light levels 
in the low photopic regime (Methods).
Our approach allowed us to determine the soma size and position of each recorded cell. 
Immunohistochemistry (Methods) was used in a subset of experiments: displaced amacrine 
cells (dACs), which are GABAergic and/or cholinergic and represent a substantial fraction 
of GCL somata26, were labelled for GAD67 and ChAT (Fig. 1c; n=522 of 1,584 cells; 
double-labelled: n=96). Melanopsin-labelling27,28 identified strongly melanopsin-expressing 
intrinsically-photosensitive RGCs (ipRGCs, n=18 of 905 cells). SMI-32 labelled a small set 
of GCL cells (n=85 of 1,912 cells), including starburst dACs29, and was used to identify 
alpha RGCs (large, strongly-labelled somata9,23). In addition, we performed recordings in 
two transgenic lines, PV and Pcp2 (Methods; Fig. 1d), to relate individual recorded cells to 
known genetically-defined populations.
Finally, we made electrical single-cell recordings from RGCs (n=84) followed by dye-filling 
to reconstruct their dendritic morphology (Fig. 1e1). For all cells with Ca2+ and spike 
activity recorded simultaneously (n=17), Ca2+ responses estimated from spike trains closely 
resembled measured Ca2+ responses (Fig. 1e2; Extended Data Fig. E1a–d).
A probabilistic clustering framework
Combining locally complete optical population recordings, genetic and 
immunohistochemical labels, as well as electrical measurements, yielded a comprehensive 
dataset of GCL cell light responses to a set of standardised visual stimuli. This provided the 
unprecedented opportunity for an unbiased characterisation of the retinal output. Since the 
dataset (11,210 cells, n=50 retinas; Extended Data Fig. E2) is too complex to be interpreted 
manually (e.g.30), we used a clustering approach, making our analysis as objective and 
quantitative as possible.
In the first step, we used an automatic unsupervised clustering procedure to identify 
response prototypes of GCL cells (Extended Data Fig. E2d,e1; Methods). Specifically, we 
used sparse Principal Component Analysis (sPCA) to extract features from the light-driven 
Ca2+ signals of the GCL cells (Methods), which identified many classically used temporal 
response features such as ON- and OFF responses with different kinetics or selectivity to 
different temporal frequencies. We then used a Mixture of Gaussian model on this feature set 
for clustering (Methods). In the second step, we post-processed the clustered data to make it 
accessible for interpretation, including the identification of clusters corresponding to dAC 
types based on GAD67 staining and isolation of alpha RGCs9 with large somata from 
similarly responding cells (Extended Data Fig. E2e2,f–h). The validity of this step was 
verified in detail below (see Example RGC types).
Finally, we arranged the clusters according to a hierarchical tree based on their functional 
similarity (Methods) and suggest a grouping scheme based on available domain-knowledge 
(Fig. 2a–c). Some groups span different branches, as the tree was solely based on the 
functional response features.
Baden et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 This framework yielded a total of 46 groups (n=7,982 cells, 71.2% of all cells, Extended 
Data Fig. E2f), divided into 32 RGC groups (n=5,024, 62.9% of grouped cells; including 4 
groups, G29–32, from “uncertain” clusters) and 14 dAC groups (n=2,958, 37.1% of grouped 
cells). The estimated fraction of dACs (between 37.1% and 50.6%, if including all 
“uncertain” groups) is within the expected range26. We did not analyse dACs in detail (see 
Extended Data Fig. E3a–c; SI Video 2; SI Data 150–75; SI Discussion).
A minimum of 32 mouse RGC types
The identified 32 RGC groups comprised non-DS (9 OFF, 12 ON, 3 ON-OFF) and DS (2 
ON-OFF, 4 ON, 2 OFF) groups (Fig. 2a–c; SI Data 21–32) and accounted for all known RGC 
types in the mouse retina15. This includes groups corresponding to three alpha types31 
(G5,8,24, see also below), ON-OFF32 (G12,13) and ON DS types33 (G16,25,26,29), JAM-B 
(ref24) (G6) and W3 cell25 (G10), and the OFF “suppressed-by-contrast” cell34 (G31,32). The 
allocation of cells to individual groups was uniform across space (Fig. 2d) and the fraction 
of the population accounted for by broad response types was consistent across experiments 
(Extended Data Fig. E3e).
As each RGC type is thought to tile the retina, we calculated each group’s functional 
coverage factor (CF) based on its average receptive field (RF) size and its relative abundance 
(Extended Data Fig. E4; Methods). A single RGC type would yield a CF of 1 without RF 
overlap, and a CF of ~2 with 30% overlap. A CF<<1 may indicate that a type has been 
artificially split.
The average CF across all RGC groups was 2.0 ± 0.7 (mean ± s.d. of Gaussian fit, Fig. 2e), 
broadly consistent with reported CFs for mouse RGCs (roughly 2–3; see SI Table 1 and SI 
Discussion). CFs higher than 2 may indicate groups consisting of multiple types: For 
example, G12 corresponding to ON-OFF DS cells32 (cf. Fig. 4a), has a CF of 7.7, consistent 
with 4 ON-OFF DS types, each preferring a different motion direction35 (see below). The 
mixed non-DS groups G17 and G31 likely contain more than one type, supported by multiple 
distinct morphologies and genetic identities (e.g. G31,32, Extended Data Fig. E5) or response 
properties (e.g. G17, see below).
Taken together, our CF analysis suggests that the number of unique functional RGC types in 
the mouse is substantially above 32, likely as high as 40, in particular since classical ipRGCs 
(i.e. M1) as well as at least one PV-positive small-field RGC type were largely discarded 
based on their low S/N response to our stimuli (see SI Discussion). This is about three times 
the highest number of physiologically defined RGC types to date8 and about twice the 
highest anatomical diversity reported in mouse11 (SI Table 2).
Example RGC types
There are three types of alpha cells known in the mouse retina31: the sustained (G5) and 
transient OFF alpha (G8) and the ON alpha (G24). These cells are characterised by their 
large somata, a feature that we used during the post-processing step (Extended Data Fig. 
E2g–h). For the transient OFF and the ON alpha we found similarly responding cells with 
smaller somata, which we named transient OFF “mini” (G9) and ON “mini” alpha cell 
Baden et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (G23), respectively (Fig. 3a–d). For the sustained OFF alpha (G5) we did not identify an 
obvious “mini”-version.
We tested whether these pairs consisted of distinct types using SMI-32 
immunohistochemistry on a subset of cells (n=1,912, Fig. 3e,f). These immunolabels were 
not used during post-processing (Extended Data Fig. E2e2). In an example field, all 
“classical” alpha cells were SMI-32-positive (#1–3; Fig. 3e). In contrast, two ON mini 
alphas (#4) had smaller somata and were SMI-32-negative, despite a response profile similar 
to the ON alpha. Across our entire set of stained cells, transient OFF and ON alpha cells 
were consistently SMI-32-positive, while their respective mini counterparts were not (Fig. 
3f, p<0.01, generalised linear model, Methods). In addition, ON alphas, unlike their mini 
counterparts, were PV-positive (nONalpha=16/26 vs. nONalpha-mini=1/37, SI Data 223,24). 
Finally, alpha and mini alpha types formed independent mosaics (Fig. 3a2–d2). Transient 
OFF mini alpha cells (n=2) stratified similarly to transient OFF alpha cells (n=5), but with 
smaller dendritic arbours, consistent with their smaller RFs (Fig. 2c; SI Data 28,9; for 
statistics, see Fig. 3 (legend)). The same was the case for ON alpha and mini alpha RGCs (SI 
Data 223,24). Together, these data argue that indeed alphas and mini alphas are distinct cell 
types. The OFF sustained alpha was only moderately SMI-32-immunoreactive (Fig. 3f), 
consistent with previous reports23. An additional, weakly SMI-32-positive RGC group with 
large somata (#5 in Fig. 3e) was dubbed “ON transient, large” (G19).
The classical “local edge detector” (ref36) or W3 cell25 likely corresponds to G10 (Extended 
Data Fig. E6a,b). This type had small somata and RFs, and responded poorly to full-field 
stimuli. Instead, G10 cells reliably responded to moving bars with a brisk burst at the leading 
and trailing edge, consistent with previous reports25. Intracellular filling confirmed the cell’s 
morphological identity (Extended Data Fig. E6a3). A second group, G11, had similar 
response properties with a reduced leading-edge response, potentially corresponding to a 
W3 variant25.
Contrast-suppressed RGCs (e.g.37,38) occur in many species and a type of OFF supressed-
by-contrast (Sbc) cell has recently been described in mouse34 (G31). We found a new ON 
Sbc cell type (G28), which responded slowly to a full-field increase in light level but was 
suppressed by temporal contrast (Extended Data Fig. E6c,d). One candidate morphology 
diffusively stratified across the entire IPL while another stratified exclusively in the ON 
layer.
Direction and orientation selectivity
Our RGC groups contained n=1,757 DS cells (35% of RGCs; Extended Data Fig. E7a–d; 
Methods). Most DS cells (70%) were sorted into 8 groups (G2,6,12,13,16,25,26,29). This high 
functional diversity among DS cells is in agreement with studies of DS RGC-specific 
transgenic mouse lines39. Further DS clusters were grouped with functionally similar non-
DS counterparts (G4,18,28), as they contained less cells than the matching non-DS clusters. 
These may include RGCs with slightly asymmetric dendritic arbours (e.g.10) that could lead 
to directional bias in response to motion. Classically, these cells are not considered DS.
Baden et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To identify the motion axes of DS groups, we registered the orientation of the retina in a 
subset of experiments (n=3,830 cells, n=12 retinas, Fig. 4; Extended Data Fig. E7e,f). Three 
DS groups largely preferred one direction: the ON DS transient (G16), the JAM-B RGC24 
(G6) and one of the sustained ON DS cells (G25) preferred backward, upward and forward 
motion, respectively. The other DS groups responded to more than one direction. The two 
groups of ON-OFF DS cells (G12,13) contain the four classical subtypes32, with room for 
additional ones, as suggested by genetics and central projections (e.g.40; SI Discussion). The 
three classical sustained ON DS types33 are included in G25,26,29.
We found two OFF DS groups (G2,6), with G6 containing JAM-B RGCs24. These cells 
responded weakly to ON and strongly to OFF light changes, consistent with the JAM-B’s 
polarity switch with stimulus size. In addition, we identified a new OFF DS cell (G2, 
Extended Data Fig. E6e,f). This group did not co-stratify with the ChAT bands, which play a 
role in most known DS circuits (reviewed in39). Morphology, response profile, and 
directional preference of G2 suggests that these cells are not the JAM-B RGCs (see above).
As predicted by recordings from mouse lateral geniculate nucleus41 and superior 
colliculus42, we identified n=730 (14.5%) orientation selective (OS) RGCs (Fig. 4b). While 
most RGC groups contained only few OS cells, G1,14,17,30 contained disproportionately 
more (~30% each). (ON-)OFF OS cells (G14) were selective for vertical and horizontal 
orientations, whereas ON transient OS cells (G17) included many preferred orientations, 
consistent with its CF of 7. Additional experiments with contrast inversed moving and 
stationary bars (n=826 cells) revealed further functional diversity in response to these stimuli 
among G17 cells (Extended Data Fig. E7g–i; SI Discussion).
Genetic and anatomical RGC types
To link RGC groups to genetically-defined populations, we performed a subset of our 
experiments in the PV (ref43) and Pcp2 (ref44) transgenic mouse lines (Extended Data Figs. 
E5, E8; nPV=173 cells in 24 retinas, nPcp2=15 cells in 3 retinas). PV- and Pcp2-positive cells 
were sorted into 20 (PVa-t) and 6 (Pcp2a–f) groups (Extended Data Fig. E5b–d), with 14 and 
3 of the groups containing n≥3 genetically-labelled cells, respectively. In case of the PV-line, 
many matches were very robust (e.g. the ON alpha cells: G24 or PVr or “PV1” from45). 
Nevertheless, the count of ≥14 functional types in the PV line is much higher than the 
previously described eight PV types45, suggesting higher functional diversity than 
appreciated in earlier studies (SI Discussion).
Next, we used our comparatively small sample of n=84 morphologically reconstructed cells 
to link functional groups to anatomically defined types. In many cases, it was possible to 
identify likely morphologies for functional RGC groups (Extended Data Fig. E9; SI 
Discussion). To generate an approximate mapping of functional groups to dendritic depth 
profiles in the IPL (Fig. 5), we averaged the stratification profiles of all reconstructed cells, 
weighted by the correlation coefficient between each cell’s light response and the functional 
group average (to full-field “chirp” and moving bars; Methods).
Baden et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The resulting map reproduced many known principles of inner retinal organisation. For 
example, OFF (G1–9) and sustained ON (G21–24;27,28,30) groups mostly stratified in the 
upper and lower half of the IPL (ref4) and groups with more transient responses closer to the 
centre (e.g. G1,2,8–10,20)46,47. Most groups corresponding to known types had expected 
stratification profiles (e.g. W3, ON-OFF DS and classical alphas) with few exceptions (e.g. 
G6,11,18,19). For example, our prediction was for the JAM-B (G6) to stratify mainly below 
the ChAT-band, while the cell is known to stratify above it, as it also does in our individual 
examples (Extended Data Fig. E9a). This is likely caused by many cell types with responses 
comparable to those of the JAM-B confounding the G6 IPL profile.
Conclusions
We found that a minimum of 32 different functional types of RGCs could be distinguished 
based on their light responses and basic anatomical criteria. The unusually high abundance 
of some of these functional types and evidence from immunohistochemistry suggests that 
further sub-divisions are needed. Accordingly, the number of distinct visual feature channels 
available to the mouse’s brain appears to be two- to threefold that of previous estimates.
Taken together, our RGC groups cover a broad range of “classical” features such as polarity, 
receptive field size, frequency and contrast sensitivity (Extended Data Fig. E10). In 
particular, RGC groups broadly span feature-dimensions such as response polarity and their 
preference for global vs. local stimuli. Less balanced is the temporal frequency selectivity, 
with only a few groups preferring high frequencies, in particular for groups with low 
contrast preference.
We verified our suggested functional classification by showing that most (i) functionally 
defined types (ii) exhibited a similar CF, (iii) some could be linked to genetically defined 
populations and (iv) had consistent morphology/dendritic stratification profiles in the IPL. 
Nonetheless, our definitions certainly remain incomplete; the classification of mouse RGCs 
will need to be refined by the expansion of the probed stimulus space, the use of cell-type 
selective genetic lines40 or single-cell transcriptomics48, and integration with data from 
large-scale EM49. However, even our comparatively basic analysis already reveals a large 
diversity in feature coding by mouse RGCs, very different from how digital cameras encode 
images, rather resembling an encoding strategy used in state-of-the-art artificial vision 
systems50. In the future, the “fingerprint” of different functional RGC types introduced here 
can provide a frame of reference for systematic investigations of feature coding by RGCs 
and for detecting functional changes in degenerated retina.
METHODS
Animals and tissue preparation
All procedures were performed in accordance with the law on animal protection issued by 
the German Federal Government (Tierschutzgesetz) and approved by the institutional animal 
welfare committee of the University of Tübingen. For all experiments, we used 4- to 8-
week-old mice of either sex. In addition to C57Bl6 (wild-type) mice, we used the transgenic 
lines PvalbCre (“PV”, JAX 008069, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, US;43), Pcp2Cre 
Baden et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (“Pcp2”, JAX 006207;44) and ChATCre (JAX 006410;51), cross-bred with the red 
fluorescence Cre-dependent reporter line Ai9:tdTomato (JAX 007905). Due to the 
exploratory nature of our study, we did not use randomization and blinding.
Animals were housed under a standard 12 hr day/night rhythm. For activity recordings, 
animals were dark-adapted for ≥1 h, then anesthetised with isoflurane (Baxter) and killed by 
cervical dislocation. The eyes were enucleated and hemisected in carboxygenated (95% O2, 
5% CO2) artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF) solution containing (in mM): 125 NaCl, 2.5 
KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 20 glucose, and 0.5 L-glutamine (pH 
7.4). Bulk electroporation of the fluorescent Ca2+ indicator Oregon-Green BAPTA-1 
(OGB-1) into the ganglion cell layer (GCL) was carried out as described before19,47. In 
brief, the retina was dissected from the eyecup, flat-mounted onto an Anodisc (#13, 0.2 um 
pore size, GE Healthcare, Maidstone, UK) with the GCL facing up, and placed between two 
4 mm horizontal plate electrodes (CUY700P4E/L, Nepagene/Xceltis, Meckesheim, 
Germany). A 10 μl drop of 5 mM OGB-1 (hexapotassium salt; Life Technologies, 
Darmstadt, Germany) in ACSF was suspended from the upper electrode and lowered onto 
the retina. After application of 10–12 pulses (+9 V, 100 ms pulse width, at 1 Hz) from a 
pulse generator/wide-band amplifier combination (TGP110 and WA301, Thurlby handar/
Farnell, Oberhaching, Germany), the tissue was moved to the recording chamber of the 
microscope, where it was continuously perfused with carboxygenated ACSF at ~37°C and 
left to recover for ~60 minutes before the recordings started. In all experiments with wild-
type mice, ACSF contained ~0.1 μM Sulforhodamine-101 (SR101, Invitrogen) to reveal 
blood vessels and any damaged cells in the red fluorescence channel20. All procedures were 
carried out under very dim red (>650 nm) light.
Two-photon Ca2+ imaging and light stimulation
We used a MOM-type two-photon microscope (designed by W. Denk, MPI, Martinsried; 
purchased from Sutter Instruments/Science Products, Hofheim, Germany). Design and 
procedures were described previously20. In brief, the system was equipped with a mode-
locked Ti:Sapphire laser (MaiTai-HP DeepSee, Newport Spectra-Physics, Darmstadt, 
Germany) tuned to 927 nm, two fluorescence detection channels for OGB-1 (HQ 510/84, 
AHF/Chroma Tübingen, Germany) and SR101 (HQ 630/60, AHF), and a water immersion 
objective (W Plan-Apochromat 20x/1,0 DIC M27, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). For image 
acquisition, we used custom-made software (ScanM, by M. Müller, MPI, Martinsried, and 
T.E.) running under IGOR Pro 6.3 for Windows (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR), taking 
64 × 64 pixel image sequences (7.8 frames/s) for activity scans or 512 × 512 pixel images 
for high-resolution morphology scans.
For light stimulation, we focused a DLP projector (K11, Acer) through the objective, fitted 
with band-pass-filtered light-emitting diodes (LEDs) (“green”, 578 BP 10; and “blue”, HC 
405 BP 10, AHF/Croma) that roughly match the spectral sensitivity of moose M- and S-
opsins. LEDs were synchronised with the microscope’s scan retrace. Stimulator intensity (as 
photoisomerisation rate, 103 P*/s/cone) was calibrated as described previously52 to range 
from 0 (LEDs off) to 10.8 and 9.9 for M- and S-opsins, respectively. Due to two-photon 
excitation of photopigments, an additional, steady illumination component of ~104 P*/s/
Baden et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cone was present during the recordings (for detailed discussion, see22). For all experiments, 
the tissue was kept at a constant intensity level (see stimuli below) for at least 30 s after the 
laser scanning started before light stimuli were presented. Four types of light stimulus were 
used (Fig. 1b, top): (i) Full-field “chirp” stimulus consisting of a bright step and two 
sinusoidal intensity modulations, one with increasing frequency and one with increasing 
contrast, (ii) 0.3 × 1 mm bright bar moving at 1 mm/s in 8 directions19, (iii) alternating blue 
and green 3 s flashes, and (iv) binary dense noise, a 20×15 matrix with 40 μm pixel-side 
length; each pixel displayed an independent, perfectly balanced random sequence at 5 Hz 
yielding a total running time of 5 minutes for receptive field (RF) mapping. In some 
experiments, we used in addition dark moving bars (like (ii) but contrast-inversed), and 
stationary bright or dark 0.2 × 0.8 mm bars flashed for 1 s in 6 orientations (see Extended 
Data Fig. E7g–i). Except for (iii), stimuli were achromatic, with matched photo-
isomerisation rates for M- and S-opsins.
Single-cell electrophysiology, dye filling and morphological reconstruction
TdTomato- or OGB-1- labelled RGCs were targeted using two-photon imaging for 
juxtacellular recordings using borosilicate electrodes (4–6 MΩ) filled with ACSF with added 
SR101 (250 μM). Data were acquired using an Axoclamp-900A or Axopatch 200A 
amplifier in combination with a Digidata 1440 (all: Molecular Devices, Biberach-an-der-
Riss, Germany), digitised at 10 kHz and analysed off-line using IGOR Pro. We presented the 
same light stimuli as for the Ca2+ imaging. In some experiments, electrical recordings and 
Ca2+ imaging was performed simultaneously. After the recording, the membrane under the 
electrode was opened using a voltage “buzz” to let the cell fill with dye by diffusion for 
approximately 30 minutes; then 2P image stacks were acquired to document the cell’s 
morphology.
Filled cells were traced semi-automatically offline using the Simple Neurite Tracer plugin 
implemented in Fiji (http://fiji.sc/Fiji), yielding cell skeletons. If necessary, we used the 
original image stack to correct the skeletons for any warping of the IPL using custom-
written scripts in IGOR Pro. To this end, we employed the SR101-stained blood vessel 
plexuses on either side of the IPL as landmarks to define the IPL borders (see below). Only 
cells where the filling quality allowed full anatomical reconstruction were used for analysis 
(see below).
Immunohistochemistry
Following Ca2+ imaging, retinas were mounted onto filter paper (0.8 μm pore size, 
Millipore) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS) for 15 min at 4°C. Immunolabelling 
was performed using antibodies against ChAT (choline-acetyltransferase; goat anti-ChAT, 
1:100, AB144P, Millipore), GAD67 (glutamate decarboxylase; mouse anti-GAD67, 1:100, 
MAB5046, Millipore), SMI-32 (mouse anti-SMI32, 1:100, SMI-32R-100, Covance), and 
melanopsin (rabbit anti-melanopsin, 1:4000, AB-N38, Advanced Targeting Systems) for 4 
days. Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor conjugates (1:750, 16 hours, Life 
Technologies). For each retina, the recorded region was identified by the local blood vessel 
pattern and confirmed by comparing size and position of individual somata in the GCL. 
Image stacks were acquired on a confocal microscope (Nikon Eclipse C1) equipped with a 
Baden et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 x60 oil objective (1.4 NA). The degree of immunolabelling of GCL cells was evaluate and 
rated (from 0, negative, to 4 positive) using z-stacks. Attribution of labelled somata to 
recorded ones was performed manually using ImageJ (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij) and IGOR 
Pro.
Data analysis
Data analysis was performed using Matlab 2012 and 2014a (The Mathworks Inc., Ismaning, 
Germany), and IGOR Pro. Data were organised in a custom written schema using the 
DataJoint for Matlab framework (https://github.com/datajoint/datajoint-matlab; D. Yatsenko, 
Tolias lab, Baylor College of Medicine).
Pre-processing—Regions of interest (ROIs), corresponding to somata in the GCL, were 
defined semi-automatically by custom software (“CellLab” by D. Velychko, CIN) based on a 
high resolution (512x512 pixels) image stack of the recorded field. Then, the Ca2+ traces for 
each ROI were extracted (as ΔF/F) using the IGOR Pro-based image analysis toolbox 
SARFIA (http://www.igorexchange.com/project/SARFIA). A stimulus time marker 
embedded in the recording data served to align the Ca2+ traces relative to the visual stimulus 
with a temporal precision of 2 ms. Stimulus-aligned Ca2+ traces for each ROI were imported 
into Matlab for further analysis.
First, we de-trended the Ca2+ traces by high-pass filtering above ~0.1 Hz. For all stimuli 
except the dense noise (for RF mapping), we then subtracted the baseline (median of first 8 
samples), computed the median activity r(t) across stimulus repetitions (typically 3–5 
repetitions) and normalised it such that 
.
Receptive field mapping—We mapped the linear RFs of the neurons by computing the 
Ca2+ transient-triggered average. To this end, we resampled the temporal derivative of the 
Ca2+ response 
 at 10-times the stimulus frequency and used Matlab’s findpeaks 
function to detect the times ti at which Ca2+ transients occurred. We set the minimum peak 
height to 1 s.d., where the s.d. was robustly estimated using:
We then computed the Ca2+ transient-triggered average stimulus, weighting each sample by 
the steepness of the transient:
Here, 
 is the stimulus, τ is the time lag (ranging from approx. −320 to 1,380 ms) 
and M is the number of Ca2+ events. We smoothed this raw RF estimate using a 5×5 pixel 
Gaussian window for each time lag separately. RF maps shown correspond to a s.d. map, 
where the s.d. is calculated over time lags τ:
Baden et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To extract the RF’s position and scale, we fitted it with a 2D Gaussian function using 
Matlab’s lsqcurvefit. The time course of the receptive field 
 was estimated by the 
average of the 8 pixels closest to the fitted RF centre (according to the Mahalanobis 
distance) weighted by a Gaussian profile. RF quality (RFqi) was measured as one minus the 
fraction of variance explained by the Gaussian fit 
,
Direction and orientation selectivity—To extract time course and directional tuning of 
the Ca2+ response to the moving bar stimulus, we performed a singular value decomposition 
(SVD) on the T by D normalised mean response matrix M (times samples by number of 
directions; 
; 
; Extended Data Fig. E7a):
This procedure decomposes the response into a temporal component in the first column of U 
and a direction dependent component or tuning curve in the first column of V, such that the 
response matrix can be approximated as an outer product of the two:
An advantage of this procedure is that it does not require manual selection of time bins for 
computing direction tuning, but extracts the optimal direction tuning curve given the varying 
temporal dynamics of different neurons.
To measure direction selectivity (DS) and its significance, we projected the tuning curve 
on a complex exponential 
, where 
 is the direction in the k-th condition:
This is mathematically equivalent to computing the vector sum in the 2D plane or computing 
the power in the first Fourier component. We computed a DS index as the resulting vector 
length
correcting for the direction spacing. We additionally assessed the statistical significance of 
direction tuning using a permutation test53. To this end, we created surrogate trials (i.e. 
stimulus repetitions) by shuffling the trial labels (i.e. destroying any relationship between 
Baden et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 condition and response), computed the tuning curve for each surrogate trial and projected it 
on the complex exponential . Carrying out the procedure 1,000 times generated a null 
distribution for K, assuming no direction tuning. We used the percentile of the true K as the 
p-value for direction tuning (Extended Data Fig. E7b). Importantly, a large DSi does not 
necessarily result in a small p-value, e.g. in the case of large trial to trial variability. As a 
result, the DSi distributions of significantly and not significantly direction tuned neurons 
show substantial overlap (Extended Data Fig. E7c,d). Therefore, a simple threshold as a DS 
criterion (e.g. DSi > 0.4) does not provide a good separation into direction selective cell 
types and others.
Orientation selectivity (OS) was assessed in an analogous way. However, we used the 
complex exponential 
, corresponding to the second Fourier component.
Other response measures
Response quality index: To measure how well a cell responded to a stimulus (chirp, 
moving bar, colour), we computed the signal-to-noise ratio
where C is the T by R response matrix (time samples by stimulus repetitions) and 〈 〉x and 
 denote the mean and variance across the indicated dimension, respectively. If all 
trials are identical such that the mean response is a perfect representative of the response, QI 
is equal to 1. If all trials are completely random with fixed variance (so that the mean 
response is not informative about the individual trial responses at all), QI is proportional to 
1/R.
For further analysis, we used only cells that responded well to the chirp and/or the moving 
bar stimulus ( 
 or 
).
Full-field index: The full-field index was computed as
comparing the response quality to a local stimulus (moving bar) and a global stimulus 
(chirp).
ON-OFF index: ON-OFF preference was measured as
Baden et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 where rON and rOFF are defined as the activity during the response to the leading edge of the 
moving bar (the first 400 ms of the OFF response) and the trailing edge of the moving bar 
(the first 400 ms of the OFF response).
Colour selectivity index: Colour selectivity was measured for the ON response using
and for the OFF response using an analogous definition. Here, rON,green and rON,blue are the 
responses in a time window of 1,280 ms after onset of the green and blue stimulus, 
respectively.
Feature extraction—We used sparse principle component analysis54, as implemented in 
the SpaSM toolbox by K. Sjöstrang et al. (http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/projects/spasm/), to 
extract sparse response features from the responses to the chirp, colour, and moving bar 
stimulus, resulting in features which use only a small number of time bins. The extracted 
features are localised in time and therefore readily interpretable (e.g. “high-frequency 
feature”), although this constraint was not explicitly enforced by the algorithm (Extended 
Data Fig. E2d2). We also explored alternative feature extraction techniques such as regular 
PCA, but these resulted in inferior cluster quality. In addition, they required manually 
defining regions corresponding to specific parts of the stimulus (e.g. frequency chirp) to 
yield localised and interpretable features.
We extracted 20 features with 10 non-zero time bins from the mean response to the chirp 
(averaging across trials) and 6 features with 10 non-zero time bins from the mean response 
to the colour stimulus. For the moving bar stimulus we extracted 8 features with 5 non-zero 
time bins from the response time course (see above) and 4 features with 6 non-zero time bins 
from its temporal derivative. All features were in the temporal domain, ensuring spatial 
invariance. In addition, we used two features from the time course of the RF, extracted with 
regular PCA. Overall, this procedure resulted in a 40 dimensional feature vector for each 
cell. Before clustering, we standardised each feature separately across the population of 
cells.
Clustering—DS and non-DS cells were clustered independently, classifying cells as DS if 
the permutation test resulted in P<0.05. We fit each data set with a Mixture of Gaussian 
model using the expectation-maximisation algorithm (Matlab’s gmdistribution object). 
We constrained the covariance matrix for each component to be diagonal, resulting in 80 
parameters per component (40 for the mean, 40 for the variances). We further regularised the 
covariance matrix by adding a constant (10−5) to the diagonal. To find the optimal number of 
clusters, we evaluated the Bayesian Information Criterion55
Baden et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 where L is the log-likelihood of the model, N is the number of cells and M is the number of 
parameters in the model, i.e. 
, where C is the number of clusters and the 
contributions that arose from means, variances and mixture proportions (which have to add 
to 1). Although other choices such as the Aikaike information criterion (AIC) would have 
been possible, we found the BIC to yield a good compromise between model complexity 
and quality, since the AIC is known to find to many clusters for large sample sizes. We also 
computed log Bayes factors as 
 for each candidate cluster number to test how strong 
the evidence for further splitting is. Values > 6 were treated as strong evidence in favour of 
further splitting. The minimum of the BIC coincided well with the number of clusters after 
which there was no strong evidence for further adding more clusters. To avoid local minima, 
we restarted the EM algorithm 20 times per candidate number of clusters and used the 
solution with the largest likelihood. This procedure resulted in 24 and 48 clusters for DS and 
non-DS cells, respectively (Extended Data Fig. E2a).
To evaluate cluster quality, we rank-ordered the posterior probabilities for cluster assignment 
for each cluster, normalised for cluster size and averaged across clusters for non-DS and DS 
cells separately (Extended Data Fig. E2b). The steep decays of the sigmoidal functions 
indicate good cluster separability. To check how consistent the clustering was against 
subsampling of the data, we created 20 surrogate datasets containing random selections of 
90% of the cells. We fit these surrogate datasets with a Mixture of Gaussians model with the 
optimal number of clusters determined on the original dataset. For each cluster mean in 
these models, we computed the correlations with the most similar cluster for the model fit on 
the original dataset. To summarise the similarity of clusterings, we computed the median 
correlation across clusters (Extended Data Fig. E2c). On average, the clusterings obtained on 
the surrogate and the original dataset were very similar (mean median correlation: 0.96 
± 0.19 and 0.97 ± 0.01; mean ± s.d.; for DS and non-DS cells separately).
In addition, we performed an alternative clustering version, were we did not split the data in 
DS and non-DS cells but added DSi, OSi, soma and receptive field size as features. The 
identified clusters were very similar, but this strategy failed to identify most DS types as 
separate clusters, except for the ON-OFF DS cell. Therefore, we decided to first isolate 
significant DS cells and cluster them separately, before merging similarly responding DS- 
and non-DS clusters (see below), if we did not find a reason to keep the DS group as a 
separate RGC type. Nevertheless, a strategy equally justified as ours could start with the 
alternative clustering and then split those clusters containing significant fractions of DS 
cells.
Automatic identification of RGCs and ACs—A subset of cells was stained against 
GAD67 to identify dACs (see above). The intensity of this staining was manually rated as 
follows: −2 (absent), −1 (likely absent), 0 (uncertain), 1 (likely present), and 2 (present). For 
each cluster, we computed the average staining from the labelled cells (average number of 
cells with GAD67 information per cluster: 16.8± 10.0, mean ± s.d.). Clusters with an 
average staining <−0.2 were labelled RGCs (n=30 clusters), those with average staining >0.2 
were labelled ACs (n=26). Clusters with average staining in between those values (n=5), or 
those that contained 6 or less cells with GAD67 information (n=8) were labelled as 
uncertain, unless other clear criteria such as soma size or genetic labels indicated that they 
Baden et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 are ACs or RGCs. In this case they were manually allocated to RGC or AC (n=3 and n=2, 
respectively). Two clusters automatically classified as AC were included in the uncertain 
group due to its functional similarity with the OFF-suppressed types (G31). This procedure 
resulted in 33 RGC clusters, 10 uncertain clusters and 26 AC clusters.
Identification of alpha-RGCs—We extracted all cells with large cell bodies (>136 μm²; 
mean +1 s.d. of total soma size distribution; Extended Data Fig. E2g,h) from RGC and 
uncertain clusters. Predominantly, these cells had been assigned to nine of the clusters. We 
re-clustered those cells using a mixture of Gaussian model as described above, resulting in 
16 clusters (Extended Data Fig. E2h). Receptive field size was not used in this process. Five 
of these clusters could be clearly associated with the three known alpha-RGC types and their 
response profiles31 (trans. OFF alpha, 2; sust. OFF alpha, 2; ON alpha, 1). Cells in these 
clusters were SMI-32-positive, as expected from alpha RGCs (Fig. 3f). Likely, this 
procedure missed some alpha cells, as somata close to the edge of scan fields were cut and 
we thus underestimate the soma size of these cells (e.g. G5c, see also main text). Remaining 
cells were kept in their original cluster. Logistic regression was used to assess the effect cell 
type (alpha vs. mini) on SMI-32 staining (absent vs. present). We used the Matlab 
implementation fitglm with a binomial non-linearity. 95%-confidence intervals on the 
proportion of SMI32-positive cells were computed using bootstrapping with 1,000 samples.
Dendrogram—We used a standard linkage algorithm on the means of the RGC groups in 
the standardised feature space with correlation distance 
 and average 
unweighted distance and plotted the result as a dendrogram (using Matlab functions 
linkage and dendrogram). The leaf order was optimised using the Matlab function 
optimalleaforder and modified for clarity of presentation.
Calculation of coverage factor—We calculated each group’s coverage factor (CF),
with the number of cells in a group ( 
), the median RF size ( 
) within a group 
counting only cells that surpassed a RF quality criterion of 0.3, and the total scan area across 
all experiments ( 
). We corrected 
 for 29% cells discarded by our quality criterion 
as well as an empirically estimated 8% of cells that did not yield a ROI in the first place due 
to weak or absent labelling. In addition, 
 was corrected for an empirically estimated 
34.8% RF overhang (=where a cell’s RF exceeds the scan field edge. This procedure yielded 
a CF 2.0 ± 0.7 for most RGC groups (Gaussian fit; see Fig. 2e, right). However, differences 
between studies in approaches to measure RFs (e.g. checkerboards vs. bars), in the 
assumptions used for RF fitting (e.g. homogenous RFs best fitted by Gaussians), or in the 
methods to estimate dendritic arbour area can easily yield different absolute estimates of CF 
(cf. also SI Table 1).
Estimation of IPL stratification profiles—To determine a cell’s IPL stratification 
profile, we calculated dendritic density as described previously10 with spatial smoothing of 1 
Baden et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 μm3. The resultant 3D density-cloud was projected on the Z-axis to estimate the mean IPL 
depth profile. The relationship between the depth profiles and the two ChAT bands was 
estimated in independent experiments using mice that express tdTomato in cholinergic ACs 
(ChATCre × Ai9:tdTomato). We compared the IPL depth of the tdTomato-labelled dendritic 
plexi to the two SR101-labelled blood vessel planes that line the inner retina. We estimated 
the error to be ~1.5 μm (s.d.), corresponding to 3–4% IPL depth (n=13 measurements in 2 
mice).
To relate each cell’s IPL profile to functional groups we calculated the mean correlation 
coefficient between a cell’s response to the “chirp” and moving bar stimuli and each group’s 
mean response. The correlation coefficient (−1…1) for each pair was then multiplied with 
the cell’s depth profile and a correlation-rank based weighting factor 
. Thus, 
each individual recording yielded a complete two-dimensional map, with IPL depth on one 
axis and functional group on the other. Next, we averaged across the maps for those cells 
that passed our response quality criterion (n(non-DS) = 31/51; n(DS) = 24/33; see above). The 
resultant matrices were normalised in two steps: First, we divided each group’s IPL depth 
profile by the mean depth profile of all included cells to eliminate any bias in sampling 
depth. Second, we divided each depth profile by its own maximum. This resulted in an 
automatic and unbiased estimate of dendritic stratification depth for all RGC groups (Fig. 5). 
Note that this automated approach is based on a relatively small sample of reconstructed 
cells and therefore can only provide an approximate prediction of stratification levels. 
Notably, this approach is invariant to differences in lateral dendritic field dimensions that 
may be associated with retinal position (e.g.10,23).
Baden et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Figure E1. Linking electrophysiology and imaging data (related to Fig. 1)
a, simultaneously recorded RGC Ca2+ (top) and spiking (bottom) activity in response to 
binary spatial dense noise stimulation. b, average Ca2+ event triggered by a single spike, 
averaged across n=6 cells (shading = 1 s.d.); event decay was fit (red) using a single 
exponential (for time constant τ, see inset, mean ± 1 s.d.) to yield an estimated impulse 
response. A linear prediction of Ca2+ (calculated by convolution of the impulse response 
with binarised spike-traces) was compared to measured values to estimate the mean 
nonlinearity (c). d, Ca2+ (top) and spiking (bottom) response to the full-field “chirp” 
stimulus (Methods) simultaneously recorded in an RGC (red trace, Ca2+ signal predicted 
Baden et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from spiking response). e, number of scan fields as a function of blue-green index (BGi, see 
Methods) averaged over all ROIs in each field (cf. Fig. 1a1).
Figure E2. Clustering and grouping (related to Fig. 2)
a–c. Selection of cluster size and cluster quality/consistency analysis. a, normalised 
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) curves for non-DS (black) and DS (blue) cells. 
Arrows indicate the optimal numbers of clusters. b, rank-ordered posterior probability 
curves indicating cluster quality. Curves were normalised for cluster size and averaged for 
Baden et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 non-DS (black) and DS (blue) clusters separately. Shaded area indicates 1 s.d. across 
clusters. c, histogram of median correlation between the original clusters and clusters 
identified on 20 surrogate datasets, created by repeated subsampling of 90% of the original 
dataset (bootstrapping); for each cluster, the best matching cluster from the original 
clustering was selected. d, heat maps of Ca2+ responses (d1) to the 4 visual stimuli (cf. Fig. 
1) of n=11,210 cells from 50 retinas. Shown are raw data sorted by the response to the 
colour stimulus. Each line represents responses of a single cell with activity colour-coded 
such that warmer colours represent increased activity. Temporal features (d2) were extracted 
from the cells’ light responses (Methods) and used for automatic clustering (d1 → e1). e, 
heat maps showing clustered data (e1, n=72 clusters plus cells discarded based on signal-to-
noise (S/N) ratio), with block height representing the number of included cells. Distributions 
of S/N (e2, top) and GAD67 labelling (e2, bottom) used to discard clusters and sort the 
remaining ones into retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), “uncertain” RGCs and displaced 
amacrine cells (dACs). f, heat maps showing n=46 groups (divided into n=32 RGC groups, 
including n=4 “uncertain” ones, and n=14 dAC groups; sorted by response similarities) after 
re-clustering of large-soma cells (alpha cell post-processing, see panels g,h). g, distribution 
of region of interest (ROI) area (as proxy for soma size) for all cells classified as RGCs and 
“uncertain” (e2). Inset: same distribution but on a log-scale. Dashed line marks threshold to 
separating large-soma cells (Methods). h, results of re-clustering of large-soma cells (from 
g): heat maps show light-evoked Ca2+ responses to the 4 visual stimuli (cf. Fig. 1b). Clusters 
that resulted in new RGC groups are indicated; the remaining cells stayed with their original 
clusters.
Baden et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure E3. Group overview – Functional groups classified as “uncertain” RGCs and displaced 
amacrine cell (dAC) in the mouse retina (related to Fig. 2)
a, clusters organised according to hierarchical trees (dendrograms, see Methods) and 
grouped based on functional similarity (see main text for details), resulting in n=4 
“uncertain” RGC (top) and n=14 dAC groups (bottom). b, mean Ca2+ responses to the 4 
stimuli (cf. Fig. 1b) for each cluster. c, histograms of selected properties, from left to right: 
ROI (soma) area, receptive field (RF) diameter (2 s.d. from Gaussian fit; see Fig. 1b1 and 
Fig. E4), DS and OS indices (DSi and OSi, respectively, Methods). For details on each 
Baden et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cluster, see also SI Data 140–49 (“uncertain”), and SI Data 150–75 (dACs). d, example 
experiment (left, from Fig. 1a2); centre: showing dACs (lilac) and “uncertain” RGCs (blue); 
right: colour-coded by broad categories, as in (e). e, total number of cells (top) and 
percentage of cells in sets of groups (bottom) per experiment (only experiments with ≥198 
cells) illustrating consistency across experiments. Scale bar: d, 50 μm.
Figure E4. Relationship between RGC receptive field centres and their dendritic arbours 
(related to Fig. 2)
a, receptive field (RF) centre maps of a G8 transient OFF alpha RGC (a1) and a G2 small-
field RGC (a2), with their reconstructed morphologies overlaid. 1- and 2-s.d. contours of RF 
centres fitted with 2D Gaussians are indicated by blue and red ovals, respectively. b, area of 
RF centre fits from (a) as function of dendritic arbour area (n=18 RGCs). Scale bar: 100 μm.
Baden et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure E5. Mapping RGC groups onto genetic types – Functional diversity of PV- and Pcp2-
positive RGCs (related to Fig. 2)
a, diversity of PV-positive RGCs (red) in a PV:tdTomato mouse retina electroporated with 
OGB-1 (a1, green). Ca2+ responses and receptive fields (a2) from 6 PV-positive cells in 
exemplary field are shown (black, mean response, grey, single trials). The top four cells 
could be clearly matched to RGC groups (cf. Fig. 2), whereas the remaining two (x1, x2) 
were discarded due to the lack of responses to both full-field and moving bar stimuli; note, 
however that both cells yielded a clear RF. b, Ca2+ responses of functionally distinct PV-
Baden et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RGC groups (20 response types PV a-t, thereof 14 with n ≥ 3 cells). Traces colour-coded by 
group assignment (colours as in Fig. 2) represent mean responses, with individual cell 
responses in grey. c, same for Pcp2-positive (6 response types Pcp2 a-f, thereof 3 with n ≥ 3 
cells) RGC groups. d, table illustrating the relationship between RGC groups (Fig. 2) and 
functional PV- and Pcp2-positive RGC types from (a,b). Numbers represent the total cell 
count of each allocation. Names in quotes (e.g. “PV5”) refer to the cells’ original names (see 
PV-45 and Pcp2-study56).
Baden et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure E6. Examples of RGC groups
a, functional “fingerprint” of G10 RGCs, identified as local-edge-detector (W3) cells. Light-
evoked Ca2+ responses of n=149 cells (a1): heat maps (top) illustrating individual responses, 
with response averages and firing rates estimated from Ca2+ signals (cf. Fig. E1a–d) below. 
Ganglion cell layer (a2; experiment from Fig. 1a2) with G10 somata (green) and receptive 
fields (RFs, dotted) indicated. Grey circles mark cells with RFs that passed a quality 
criterion (Methods). Example morphology of a G10 cell filled after electrical single-cell 
recording (a3, cf. b). For a complete summary of the group’s properties, see SI Data 210. b, 
electrical single-cell recording of a G10 cell: spiking responses as raster plots and mean 
spike rates for “chirp”, moving bar and blue/green stimuli as well as time kernel derived 
from noise stimulus (b1), polar plot of responses to moving bar (b2) and RF map (b3) c1,2, 
G28a,b (n=100) contrast-suppressed ON RGCs with sample morphology (c3; G28a,b cell dye-
injected after Ca2+ imaging). d1,2, electrical single-cell recording of a contrast-suppressed 
ON RGC with different morphology (d3 vs. c3). e,f, G2 direction-selective OFF RGCs 
(n=162) that stratify between the ChAT bands (e3), as fingerprint (e1,2) and exemplary 
electrical single-cell recording (f1–3). Scale bars: 50 μm; grey lines in a3,c3,d3,e3: ChAT 
bands.
Baden et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure E7. Direction and orientation selectivity (related to Fig. 4)
a, (a1) stimulus direction vs. time map for an exemplary direction selective RGC with 
temporal (top) and directional (right) activation profiles shown; Singular Value 
Decomposition (SVD) was used to estimate the time-course and tuning function; individual 
stimulus repeats in grey, average in black. (a2) Reconstruction of direction vs. time map 
based on time course and tuning function of extracted by SVD. b, statistical significance 
testing for direction selectivity (DS) or orientation selectivity (OS) was performed by 
projecting the direction/orientation profile on a single (for DS) or double (for OS) period 
Baden et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cosine (blue) and the magnitude of the projection to the distribution of projections obtained 
by randomly permuting tuning-angles from the original data (grey; bootstrapping). The p-
value is obtained by computing the percentile of the data (blue) in the bootstrap distribution 
(grey). c, d, p-values for direction (c) and orientation (d) tuning as function of the respective 
selectivity index (top, scatter plot; bottom, histogram; black, non-DS cells; light blue, DS 
cells; dark blue, OS cells). Note that tuning probability (pDS, pOS) only partially predicted 
tuning strength (DSi, OSi). e, pairs of polar plots showing the distribution of preferred 
motion directions for all direction-selective (DS) RGCs together and for all DS RGC groups 
not shown in Fig. 4, (V, ventral; N, nasal direction; same group colour code as in Fig. 2). Top 
plot of each pair: the cells’ individual preferred directions, with line length representing DSi 
and line grey level p(DS) (Methods). Bottom plot of each pair: circular histogram of 
preferred direction. f, like (a) but for orientation-selective (OS) RGCs. g–i, exemplary OS 
RGCs, illustrating the functional diversity within G17 (local ON trans. OS cells); none of 
them display strong full-field responses (g1,h1,i1, left). A “vertically-tuned” ON OS cell (g2, 
left) that shows little tuning to a dark moving bar (g2, right; g3, another example). Note the 
lobular structures bracketing the RF centre (coloured RF maps in g4). Two examples for 
“horizontally-tuned” ON OS cells (h2,3) with their respective RF maps (h4). ON OS cell that 
shows weak tuning to bright moving bars (i1, left) but strong OS to stationary bright and 
dark bars (i2–4, centre and right, respectively; Methods).
Figure E8. Retinal distribution of PV-positive cells in the PVCre × Ai9tdTomato mouse line 
(related to Fig. 2)
a,b, density map (a) and magnified sample areas (b) illustrate PV-labelling anisotropy.
Baden et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure E9. Mapping RGC groups to morphologies
a–c, exemplary morphologies of RGCs filled after electrical recording or Ca2+ imaging and 
subsequently clustered/sorted into specific RGC groups or discarded (c, right) based on their 
light response S/N. Scale bars: 50 μm.
Baden et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure E10. RGC groups cover a basic feature space
a,b, relationship of four basic response indices of RGC groups. Disc-area shows group size. 
Indices capture preference for stimulus polarity (ON-OFF index; Methods), for high vs. low 
temporal frequencies and contrasts (see below), as well as the full-field index (FFi; 
Methods), which reflects response preference for global (full-field “chirp”) versus local 
(moving-bar) stimulation. Contrast- and Frequency-indices represent contrasts of feature 
activation ( 
) at respective time points during the full-field “chirp” 
stimulus, with j=12, k=9 for frequency, and j=17, k=15 for contrast. Before calculating 
ratios, feature activation (F) was normalised (0…1) by passing values through a cumulative 
normal distribution.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Gordon Eske for technical support and H.S. Seung, P.R. Martin, and A.S. Tolias for discussion. This work 
was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative 
Neuroscience Tübingen, EXC 307 to M.B. and T.E.; BA 5283/1-1 to T.B.; BE 5601/1-1 to P.B.), the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) (BCCN Tübingen, FKZ 01GQ1002 to M.B. and T.E.), the 
BW-Stiftung (AZ 1.16101.09 to T.B.), the intramural fortüne-program of the University of Tübingen (2125-0-0 to 
T.B.) and the National Institute Of Neurological Disorders And Stroke of the National Institutes of Health 
(U01NS090562 to T.E.).
References
1. Masland RH. The neuronal organization of the retina. Neuron. 2012; 76:266–280. [PubMed: 
23083731] 
2. Euler T, Haverkamp S, Schubert T, Baden T. Retinal bipolar cells: elementary building blocks of 
vision. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2014; 15:507–19. [PubMed: 25158357] 
Baden et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Lettvin J, Maturana H, McCulloch W, Pitts W. What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain. Proc 
IRE. 1959; 47:1940–1951.
4. Werblin FS, Dowling JE. Organization of the retina of the mudpuppy, Necturus maculosus. II 
Intracellular recording. J Neurophysiol. 1969; 32:339–355. [PubMed: 4306897] 
5. Cleland BG, Levick WR. Brisk and sluggish concentrically organized ganglion cells in the cat’s 
retina. J Physiol. 1974; 240:421–456. [PubMed: 4421622] 
6. Barlow HB, Hill RM, Levick WR. Rabbit retinal ganglion cells responding selectively to direction 
and speed of image motion in the rabbit. J Physiol. 1964; 173:377–407. [PubMed: 14220259] 
7. Devries SH, Baylor DA. Mosaic arrangement of ganglion cell receptive fields in rabbit retina. J 
Neurophysiol. 1997; 78:2048–2060. [PubMed: 9325372] 
8. Farrow K, Masland RH. Physiological clustering of visual channels in the mouse retina. J 
Neurophysiol. 2011; 105:1516–30. [PubMed: 21273316] 
9. Coombs J, van der List D, Wang GY, Chalupa LM. Morphological properties of mouse retinal 
ganglion cells. Neuroscience. 2006; 140:123–36. [PubMed: 16626866] 
10. Sümbül U, et al. A genetic and computational approach to structurally classify neuronal types. Nat 
Commun. 2014; 5:3512. [PubMed: 24662602] 
11. Völgyi B, Chheda S, Bloomfield SA. Tracer coupling patterns of the ganglion cell subtypes in the 
mouse retina. J Comp Neurol. 2009; 512:664–87. [PubMed: 19051243] 
12. Kong JH, Fish DR, Rockhill RL, Masland RH. Diversity of ganglion cells in the mouse retina: 
unsupervised morphological classification and its limits. J Comp Neurol. 2005; 489:293–310. 
[PubMed: 16025455] 
13. Rowe MH, Stone J. Naming of neurones. Classification and naming of cat retinal ganglion cells. 
Brain Behav Evol. 1977; 14:185–216. [PubMed: 856398] 
14. Seung HS, Sümbül U. Neuronal Cell Types and Connectivity: Lessons from the Retina. Neuron. 
2014; 83:1262–1272. [PubMed: 25233310] 
15. Sanes JR, Masland RH. The Types of Retinal Ganglion Cells: Current Status and Implications for 
Neuronal Classification. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2015; 38:221–46. [PubMed: 25897874] 
16. Rodieck RW, Brening RK. Retinal ganglion cells: properties, types, genera, pathways and trans-
species comparisons. Brain Behav Evol. 1983; 23:121–64. [PubMed: 6320950] 
17. Robles E, Laurell E, Baier H. The Retinal Projectome Reveals Brain-Area-Specific Visual 
Representations Generated by Ganglion Cell Diversity. Curr Biol. 2014; 24:2085–96. [PubMed: 
25155513] 
18. Morin LP, Studholme KM. Retinofugal projections in the mouse. J Comp Neurol. 2014; 522:3733–
53. [PubMed: 24889098] 
19. Briggman KL, Euler T. Bulk electroporation and population calcium imaging in the adult 
mammalian retina. J Neurophysiol. 2011; 105:2601–2609. [PubMed: 21346205] 
20. Euler T, et al. Eyecup scope-optical recordings of light stimulus-evoked fluorescence signals in the 
retina. Pflugers Arch. 2008; 457:1393–1414. [PubMed: 19023590] 
21. Wang YV, Weick M, Demb B. Spectral and temporal sensitivity of cone-mediated responses in 
mouse retinal ganglion cells. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:7670–7681. [PubMed: 21613480] 
22. Baden T, et al. A tale of two retinal domains: near-optimal sampling of achromatic contrasts in 
natural scenes through asymmetric photoreceptor distribution. Neuron. 2013; 80:1206–1217. 
[PubMed: 24314730] 
23. Bleckert A, Schwartz GW, Turner MH, Rieke F, Wong ROL. Visual space is represented by 
nonmatching topographies of distinct mouse retinal ganglion cell types. Curr Biol. 2014; 24:310–
5. [PubMed: 24440397] 
24. Kim IJ, Zhang Y, Yamagata M, Meister M, Sanes JR. Molecular identification of a retinal cell type 
that responds to upward motion. Nature. 2008; 452:478–482. [PubMed: 18368118] 
25. Zhang Y, Kim IJ, Sanes JR, Meister M. The most numerous ganglion cell type of the mouse retina 
is a selective feature detector. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:E2391–8. [PubMed: 
22891316] 
26. Schlamp CL, et al. Evaluation of the percentage of ganglion cells in the ganglion cell layer of the 
rodent retina. Mol Vis. 2013; 19:1387–96. [PubMed: 23825918] 
Baden et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 27. Berson DM, Castrucci AM, Provencio I. Morphology and mosaics of melanopsin-expressing 
retinal ganglion cell types in mice. J Comp Neurol. 2010; 518:2405–22. [PubMed: 20503419] 
28. Ecker JL, et al. Melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion-cell photoreceptors: Cellular diversity and 
role in pattern vision. Neuron. 2010; 67:49–60. [PubMed: 20624591] 
29. Lim EJ, Kim IB, Oh SJ, Chun MH. Identification and characterization of SMI32-immunoreactive 
amacrine cells in the mouse retina. Neurosci Lett. 2007; 424:199–202. [PubMed: 17723270] 
30. Armañanzas R, Ascoli GA. Towards the automatic classification of neurons. Trends Neurosci. 
2015; 38:307–318. [PubMed: 25765323] 
31. Van Wyk M, Wässle H, Taylor WR. Receptive field properties of ON- and OFF-ganglion cells in 
the mouse retina. Vis Neurosci. 2009; 26:297–308. [PubMed: 19602302] 
32. Weng S, Sun W, He S. Identification of ON-OFF direction-selective ganglion cells in the mouse 
retina. J Physiol. 2005; 562:915–923. [PubMed: 15564281] 
33. Sun W, Deng Q, Levick WR, He S. ON direction-selective ganglion cells in the mouse retina. J 
Physiol. 2006; 576:197–202. [PubMed: 16901944] 
34. Tien NW, Pearson JT, Heller CR, Demas J, Kerschensteiner D. Genetically Identified Suppressed-
by-Contrast Retinal Ganglion Cells Reliably Signal Self-Generated Visual Stimuli. J Neurosci. 
2015; 35:10815–10820. [PubMed: 26224863] 
35. Oyster CW, Barlow HB. Direction-selective units in rabbit retina: distribution of preferred 
directions. Science (80-). 1967; 155:841–2.
36. Levick WR. Receptive fields and trigger features of ganglion cells in the visual streak of the rabbits 
retina. J Physiol. 1967; 188:285–307. [PubMed: 6032202] 
37. Sivyer B, Taylor WR, Vaney DI. Uniformity detector retinal ganglion cells fire complex spikes and 
receive only light-evoked inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:5628–5633. [PubMed: 
20212117] 
38. Nikolaev A, Leung KM, Odermatt B, Lagnado L. Synaptic mechanisms of adaptation and 
sensitization in the retina. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:934–941. [PubMed: 23685718] 
39. Vaney DI, Sivyer B, Taylor WR. Direction selectivity in the retina: symmetry and asymmetry in 
structure and function. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012; 13:194–208. [PubMed: 22314444] 
40. Rivlin-Etzion M, et al. Transgenic mice reveal unexpected diversity of on-off direction-selective 
retinal ganglion cell subtypes and brain structures involved in motion processing. J Neurosci. 
2011; 31:8760–9. [PubMed: 21677160] 
41. Zhao X, Chen H, Liu X, Cang J. Orientation-selective responses in the mouse lateral geniculate 
nucleus. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:12751–63. [PubMed: 23904611] 
42. Feinberg EH, Meister M. Orientation columns in the mouse superior colliculus. Nature. 2014; doi: 
10.1038/nature14103
43. Hippenmeyer S, et al. A developmental switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS 
transcription factor signaling. PLoS Biol. 2005; 3:e159. [PubMed: 15836427] 
44. Lewis PM, Gritli-Linde A, Smeyne R, Kottmann A, McMahon AP. Sonic hedgehog signaling is 
required for expansion of granule neuron precursors and patterning of the mouse cerebellum. Dev 
Biol. 2004; 270:393–410. [PubMed: 15183722] 
45. Farrow K, et al. Ambient illumination toggles a neuronal circuit switch in the retina and visual 
perception at cone threshold. Neuron. 2013; 78:325–338. [PubMed: 23541902] 
46. Roska B, Werblin F. Vertical interactions across ten parallel, stacked representations in the 
mammalian retina. Nature. 2001; 410:583–587. [PubMed: 11279496] 
47. Baden T, Berens P, Bethge M, Euler T. Spikes in mammalian bipolar cells support temporal 
layering of the inner retina. Curr Biol. 2013; 23:48–52. [PubMed: 23246403] 
48. Macosko EZ, et al. Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using 
Nanoliter Droplets. Cell. 2015; 161:1202–1214. [PubMed: 26000488] 
49. Denk W, Horstmann H. Serial block-face scanning electron microscopy to reconstruct three-
dimensional tissue nanostructure. PLoS Biol. 2004; 2:e329. [PubMed: 15514700] 
50. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural 
Networks. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2012:1–9.
Baden et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 51. Rossi J, et al. Melanocortin-4 receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons regulate energy balance 
and glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab. 2011; 13:195–204. [PubMed: 21284986] 
52. Breuninger T, Puller C, Haverkamp S, Euler T. Chromatic bipolar cell pathways in the mouse 
retina. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:6504–6517. [PubMed: 21525291] 
53. Ecker ASS, et al. State Dependence of Noise Correlations in Macaque Primary Visual Cortex. 
Neuron. 2014; 82:235–248. [PubMed: 24698278] 
54. Zou H, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Sparse Principal Component Analysis. J Comput Graph Stat. 2006; 
15:265–286.
55. Fraley C, Raftery A. Model-based clustering, discriminant analysis, and density estimation. J Am 
Stat. 2002; 97:611–631.
56. Ivanova E, Hwang GS, Pan ZH. Characterization of transgenic mouse lines expressing Cre 
recombinase in the retina. Neuroscience. 2010; 165:233–243. [PubMed: 19837136] 
Baden et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Data collection
a, whole-mounted mouse retina, electroporated with OGB-1 and recorded with a two-photon 
microscope (64×64 pixel @ 7.8 Hz) in the GCL. Scan fields (a1, left; 110×110 μm) 
comprised 80 ± 20 cells. Regions-of-interest (ROIs) (a1, right), were placed semi-
automatically. Montage (a2) of 9 consecutively recorded fields (rectangles; a1 in red). b, 
Ca2+ signals from 7 ROIs colour-coded in (a1). Single trials in grey, averages of n=4 
(“chirp”, green/blue) or 24 (moving bars) trials in black (b1). Responses to 4 visual stimuli 
(b1): Full-field “chirp”, bright bars moving in 8 directions, full-field alternating green/blue 
and binary noise for space-time kernels. Direction- and orientation-selectivity (b2): Traces 
by motion direction; polar plot of peak response, vector sum in red. c, left: experiment in (a) 
immunostained for GAD67 (green; GABAergic ACs) and ChAT (red; starburst-ACs). Right: 
from (a1); both images show same colour-coded ROIs (left, dots, right, ROI outlines) and 
Baden et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 starburst-ACs (white dots): cell 6 is GAD67-positive, cell 7 is a starburst-AC. d, OGB-1 
(green) electroporated retina from transgenic mice with tdTomato (red) expressed in sets of 
RGCs (top: PV; bottom: Pcp2). e, simultaneous Ca2+ imaging and electrical recording: dye-
filled, anatomically reconstructed cell (e1, top: whole-mount; bottom: profile, lines mark 
ChAT bands). Light responses (e2) from top to bottom: spike raster and rate (20 ms bins), 
recorded (black) and reconstructed (orange) Ca2+ signal. Scale bars: 50 μm unless indicated.
Baden et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Functional RGC types of the mouse retina
a, cluster-dendrogram (Methods) with groups indicated: n=28 RGC and n=4 “uncertain” 
RGC groups. b, cluster-mean Ca2+ responses to the 4 stimuli. c, selected metrics, from left 
to right: ROI (soma) area, receptive field (RF) diameter (2 s.d. of Gaussian), DS-index and 
OS-index (Methods). Background-histograms demarcate all RGCs. d, experiment (left, from 
Fig. 1a2) with RGCs colour-coded by group (right). dACs and discarded cells not shown. e, 
Coverage factor (CF) calculated from RF-area for RGC groups, with horizontal divisions 
Baden et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 delineating individual clusters (left) and distribution of CFs across groups (right). Scale bar 
in d, 50 μm.
Baden et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Classical alpha RGCs and their “mini” counterparts
a, functional “fingerprint” of classical transient OFF alpha cells (G8a,b). Light-evoked Ca2+ 
responses of n=80 cells (a1): heat-maps (top) of individual responses, response averages and 
firing rates estimated from Ca2+ signals below (cf. Extended Data Fig. E1). a2, left, G8a,b 
somata (yellow) and receptive fields (RFs, dotted) indicated in example experiment (cf. Fig. 
1a2). Grey circles mark cells with RFs above quality criterion (Methods). Sample 
morphology of a G8a,b cell filled after electrical single-cell recording (a2, right). For details, 
see SI Data 28. b1,2, G9 RGCs (n=68), dubbed transient OFF mini alpha because of their 
Baden et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 similarity in light response to G8a,b RGCs (cf. a1,2). c1,2, G24 RGCs (n=44), identified as 
classical ON alpha. d1,2, G23 RGCs (n=113), dubbed ON mini alpha (cf. c1,2). Mini alphas 
have smaller RF diameters than classical alphas (median in μm, 95% confidence interval): 
G9,280 (270–293) versus G8, 306 (294–315) with p=0.01232), and G23, 236 (218–256) 
versus G24, 319 (290–352) with p=0.00026 (rank-sum test). e, overlay of OGB-1-stained 
cells (green) and SMI-32 (magenta). SMI-32-positive RGCs include classical alphas (e1, 
solid contours; n.r. indicates a non-responsive cell), one large-soma non-alpha cell (green, 
dotted contour) as well as weakly-labeled ON-OFF DS cells (dashed contours) and starburst-
ACs (asterisks). Mini alpha cells (blue, dotted contours) are SMI-32-negative. Chirp-evoked 
Ca2+ responses (e2) for 5 cells in (e1). f, SMI-32 statistics (OFF tr.: alpha, n=16, mini, n=3; 
ON: alpha, n=6, mini, n=15; OFF sus. alpha, n=14; ON tr. large, n=7; other, n=957; means 
with 95% confidence intervals, **, p≤0.01; ****, p≤0.0001, logistic regression).
Baden et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Direction- and orientation-selectivity
a, pairs of retinocentric polar plots showing distributions of preferred motion directions of 
selected direction-selective (DS) RGC groups (V, ventral; N, nasal). Top, plot of each pair: 
preferred directions, with length representing DSi and grey level p(DS) (Methods). Bottom, 
plot of each pair: circular area-normalised histogram. b, like (a), selected orientation-
selective (OS) RGCs. Further DS/OS groups detailed in Extended Data Fig. E7. c, motion 
directions in the visual space of the mouse.
Baden et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Mapping RGC groups to morphologies
Heat map of each RGC group’s estimated dendritic stratification across the IPL (cf. Fig. 2); 
ON/OFF sublaminae and ChAT bands indicated. Warmer colours represent higher dendritic 
densities (Methods). Shaded IPL profiles indicate deviation from known stratification 
pattern (G6) or an unexpected pattern given a potentially novel group’s response polarity 
(G11,18,19).
Baden et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
