  
Title:  Transcription factor dynamics reveals a circadian code for fat cell differentiation 
 
Authors: Zahra Bahrami-Nejad1,#, Michael L. Zhao1,#, Stefan Tholen1, Devon Hunerdosse1, Karen E. 
Tkach1, Sabine van Schie1, Mingyu Chung1, and Mary N. Teruel1,* 
 
Affiliations:  
1Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA. 
 
*Corresponding Author and Lead Contact: mteruel@stanford.edu 
 
Additional Footnotes: #Equal contribution. 
 
SUMMARY 
Glucocorticoid and other adipogenic hormones are secreted in mammals in circadian oscillations. Loss 
of this circadian oscillation pattern during stress and disease correlates with increased fat mass and 
obesity in humans, raising the intriguing question of how hormone secretion dynamics affect the 
process of adipocyte differentiation. By using live, single-cell imaging of the key adipogenic 
transcription factors CEBPB and PPARG, endogenously tagged with fluorescent proteins, we show 
that pulsatile circadian hormone stimuli are rejected by the adipocyte differentiation control system, 
leading to very low adipocyte differentiation rates. In striking contrast, equally strong persistent signals 
trigger maximal differentiation. We identify the mechanism of how hormone oscillations are filtered as 
a combination of slow and fast positive feedback centered on PPARG. Furthermore, we confirm in 
mice that flattening of daily glucocorticoid oscillations significantly increases the mass of subcutaneous 
and visceral fat pads. Together, our study provides a molecular mechanism for why stress, 
Cushing's disease, and other conditions for which glucocorticoid secretion loses its pulsatility can 
lead to obesity. Given the ubiquitous nature of oscillating hormone secretion in mammals, the filtering 
mechanism we uncovered may represent a general temporal control principle for differentiation. 
 
KEYWORDS 
Positive feedback, adipogenesis, circadian filtering, hormone oscillations, glucocorticoids, PPARG, 
CEBPB 
 
HIGHLIGHT 
• 
We found that the fraction of differentiated cells is controlled by rhythmic and pulsatile hormone 
stimulus patterns.  
• 
Twelve hours is the cutoff point for daily hormone pulse durations below which cells fail to 
differentiate, arguing for a circadian code for hormone-induced cell differentiation.  
• 
In addition to fast positive feedback such as between PPARG and CEBPA, the adipogenic 
transcriptional architecture requires added parallel slow positive feedback to mediate temporal 
filtering of circadian oscillatory inputs  
 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
2 
INTRODUCTION 
Slow, ongoing terminal cell differentiation is essential for replacing aging or damaged cells and 
for maintaining tissue size in all adult mammals. For example, adipocytes (fat cells) and 
cardiomyocytes renew in humans at rates of approximately 8% and 1% per year, respectively 
(Bergmann et al., 2009; Spalding et al., 2008). Since terminally-differentiating cells are often derived 
from large pools of precursor cells, differentiation is expected to be a rare event. In the case of fat cell 
differentiation, or adipogenesis, for which there are estimates of about one preadipocyte for every five 
differentiated cells (Tchoukalova et al., 2004), fewer than 1% of preadipocytes are believed to embark 
on a differentiation path on any given day under normal, homeostatic conditions. How such low rates 
of differentiation can be reliably maintained is puzzling given that preadipocytes are subjected to daily 
high increases of differentiation-inducing hormones such as glucocorticoids which are needed in 
mammals to mobilize energy and increase physical activity, but which also have been shown to 
strongly accelerate adipogenesis in vitro and in vivo (Campbell et al., 2011; Farmer, 2006; Lee et al., 
2014; Park and Ge, 2017).  
Glucocorticoids are secreted in healthy mammals in daily oscillatory patterns (Figure 
1A)(Weitzman et al., 1971), as well as in sporadic bursts in response to stress. Levels of other 
adipogenic hormones such as ghrelin and prolactin, that raise cAMP, and insulin, fluctuate in vivo as 
well.  Given that so few preadipocytes differentiate each day despite significant daily increases in 
adipogenic hormone stimuli, we hypothesized that the regulatory circuit controlling adipocyte 
differentiation might be filtering out circadian and short hormone stimuli and that differentiation would 
only start to occur if the duration of the trough between circadian pulses shortens or if the hormone 
signal remain continuously elevated. Such a temporal filtering of hormone signals is consistent with 
the observation that, in contrast to short or daily oscillatory signals, more continuous glucocorticoid 
signals have been linked to increased fat mass (Campbell et al., 2011; Dallman et al., 2000; Lee et 
al., 2014). Shortening of the trough between glucocorticoid pulses, or “flattening of the daily 
oscillations” (Leliavski et al., 2015; Windle et al., 2013), due to irregular feeding or sleep cycles, 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
3 
prolonged treatment with glucocorticoid hormones, chronic stress, or metabolic diseases such as 
Cushing’s disease have all been shown to closely correlate with increased obesity (Balbo et al., 2010; 
Dallman et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2014; Panda, 2016).  
Adipogenesis occurs over several days by activation of a core adipogenic transcriptional 
network that is similar in vivo and in vitro (Roh et al., 2017; Rosen and Spiegelman, 2014). A critical 
feature of this hormone-induced differentiation process is its reliance on initiation processes requiring 
CEBPB and a canonical core positive feedback between PPARG and CEBPA that works together with 
additional secondary positive feedbacks and regulatory mechanisms (Ahrends et al., 2014; Farmer, 
2006; Lefterova et al., 2014; Rosen and Spiegelman, 2014). The positive feedbacks are proposed to 
control a bistable switch that separates a distinct undifferentiated precursor state and a distinct 
differentiated state (Ahrends et al., 2014; Jukam and Desplan, 2010; Park et al., 2012; Wang et al., 
2009). Nevertheless, while these previous studies provided indirect evidence for bistability using 
different strengths of continuous stimuli, they did not address the physiologically more relevant 
question if and how oscillating stimuli of the same total dose control the differentiation process. 
Futhermore, since these previous studies did not use live cell analysis, they were only able to infer a 
threshold and bistability of the differentiation process and could not directly show it. Since 
transcriptional processes are typically variable between cells, investigation of the dynamic processes 
controlling the switch requires time course-analysis in single cells (Loewer and Lahav, 2011; Spencer 
et al., 2009).  
Here we investigated whether a differentiation system can temporally filter out circadian 
hormone inputs, a question that to our knowledge has not been addressed by previous studies which 
typically administered only constant levels of hormone stimuli or single hormone pulses. To test for 
dynamic control of differentiation, we employed a multi-day, live-cell imaging approach in which we 
monitored the expression levels of the transcription factors CEBPB and PPARG by endogenously 
tagging the respective loci in model mouse adipocyte precursor cells (OP9 cells) with fluorescent 
protein. Strikingly, we demonstrate a temporal control principle whereby preadipocytes reject normal 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
4 
pulsatile, daily hormone inputs due to a combined slow and fast positive feedback circuit that controls 
the self-amplification of PPARG. The fraction of cells that differentiate only starts to increase when the 
durations of hormone pulses become extended beyond normal circadian pulse durations. 
 
RESULTS 
Circadian and rhythmic hormone stimuli are rejected by the preadipocyte differentiation 
system 
 
To determine whether and how pulsatile versus continuous hormone stimulation regulate 
adipogenesis, we used 3T3-L1 and OP9 in vitro models for adipocyte differentiation (Mandrup and 
Lane, 1997; Wolins et al., 2006), as well as primary stromal vascular fraction (SVF) preadipocytes 
isolated from mice (Luo et al., 2017). To induce differentiation, we applied pulses of an adipogenic 
hormone cocktail (DMI, see Methods) that mimics glucocorticoids and GPCR-signals that raise cAMP, 
such as ghrelin and prolactin. These signals have been shown to increase and decrease in circadian 
or fluctuating patterns in vivo (Carré and Binart, 2014; Thompson et al., 2004) and to promote 
adipogenesis by stimulating a core adipogenic transcriptional network that is similar in vivo and in vitro 
(Roh et al., 2017; Rosen and Spiegelman, 2014). Here we used the commonly-used DMI cocktail as 
a maximal stimulus of glucocorticoids and synergistic hormone signals. 
We quantified differentiation by measuring expression of PPARG, the master transcriptional 
regulator of adipogenesis, whose expression in individual cells correlates closely with lipid 
accumulation, as well as with expression of GLUT4, adiponectin, and other mature fat cell markers 
(Cristancho and Lazar, 2011; Tontonoz and Spiegelman, 2008) (Figures 1B, S1A-S1C). To determine 
the effect of pulsatile versus continuous DMI stimulation on adipogenesis, we used a protocol in which 
we added and removed DMI in four different pulse patterns while keeping the integrated DMI stimulus 
constant over four days (Figure 1C, left). Strikingly, rhythmic cycles of DMI stimuli applied to 
preadipocytes with durations of 12 hours or less caused only minimal differentiation (Figure 1C, blue) 
while, in contrast, the same total amount of stimulus applied continuously caused robust differentiation 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
5 
(Figure 1C, red; dashed line reflects basal differentiation). To validate that this is a general 
phenomenon, we applied the same protocols to primary SVF preadipocytes isolated from mice and 
measured accumulation of lipids which is a commonly used as a marker for differentiation in these 
cells (Rodeheffer et al., 2008; Van et al., 1976). Markedly, the primary preadipocytes showed an 
equally strong failure to differentiate in response to daily 12-hour on/12-hour off DMI stimulation 
compared to robustly differentiating when the same total integrated DMI stimuli was applied in a 
continuous manner for 48 hours (Figures 1D and S1D). 
Increasing the continuous stimulus durations from 12 to 24, 36, and 48 hours resulted in a 
progressive increase in differentiated cells (Figure 1C, red). However, once again, when the same 
total amount of stimulation was applied in circadian cycles, minimal differentiation was observed in 
OP9 and 3T3-L1 cells (Figure 1C, blue), as well as in primary SVF preadipocytes (Figure S1E). Control 
experiments confirmed that the doses of applied DMI stimuli were not saturating and that even the 
application of much stronger doses of DMI failed to induce differentiation when applied in circadian 
and rhythmic pulses (Figures S2A and S2B). The same filtering and differentiation response to 
pulsatile versus continuous stimuli was observed whether a synthetic glucocorticoid, dexamethasone, 
or the physiological glucocorticoid, corticosterone, was used in the hormone stimulus cocktail (Figure 
S1C). Taken together, these data show that preadipocytes make use of a robust filtering mechanism 
to maintain low rates of differentiation when exposed to daily hormone pulses. Intriguingly, the near 
complete filtering of differentiation-inducing stimuli was observed for pulse durations of up to 12 hours 
(Figure 1E), approximately reflecting the duration of normal circadian glucocorticoid patterns that 
preadipocytes are expected to experience in vivo (Weitzman et al., 1971) (Figure 1A).  
 
CEBPB mirrors the dynamic changes in pulsatile hormone inputs. 
 
To understand at which step in the differentiation signaling pathway input signals are filtered 
out, we compared the effect of two different stimuli: (i) rosiglitazone which binds to and directly 
activates PPARG (Lehmann et al., 1995) and (ii) DMI which mimics glucocorticoid stimuli and 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
6 
increases transcription of PPARG (schematic shown in Figure 2A, (Chawla et al., 1994)). The stimuli 
were applied for different durations ranging from 2 to 48 hours. When PPARG was directly activated 
with rosiglitazone, there was no filtering of input signals, and the fraction of differentiated cells 
increased proportionally with increasing pulse durations (Figure 2B, blue bars). However, when 
PPARG was indirectly activated with DMI, preadipocytes showed an increase in differentiation only for 
pulses longer than 12 hours (Figures 2B and S2D, red bars), arguing that the observed filtering of 
glucocorticoid input stimuli occurred before or along with PPARG activation.  
 
Since the transcription factor CEBPB is induced by DMI stimuli and is necessary for PPARG 
expression (Yeh et al., 1995) (Figures 2A and 2C), we tested whether CEBPB mediates the filtering 
of hormone pulses. We measured dynamic changes in CEBPB levels by using CRISPR-mediated 
genome editing to generate an OP9 preadipocyte cell line with Citrine (YFP) fused to the N-terminus 
of endogenous CEBPB (Figures 2D and S3). Control experiments verified that the tagged endogenous 
protein was regulated similarly and had the similar expression levels and lifetimes to the untagged 
endogenous CEBPB protein (Figure S5). To obtain timecourses of CEBPB levels, cells were 
automatically tracked over several days, and their nuclear YFP fluorescence was recorded. 
Surprisingly, these live-cell imaging experiments showed that the nuclear abundance of CEBPB was 
highly dynamic and closely mirrored the hormone input for oscillating stimuli (Figure 2E). Nuclear 
abundance of CEBPB has been shown to reflect DNA binding of CEBPB (Siersbæk et al., 2011), 
arguing that not only the level but also the activity of CEBPB follows the stimulus dynamics. Similar 
nuclear CEBPB dynamics as in Figure 2E were observed in 3T3-L1 cells stimulated with a pulsatile 
pattern (Figure 2F), suggesting that fast CEBPB dynamics mirror the external hormone stimulus in 
different pre-adipocyte models. The observed fast changes in CEBPB levels can be explained by the 
fast degradation rates of both CEBPB protein and mRNA (Figures 2G and S5).  
 
Live-cell imaging of fluorescently-tagged endogenous PPARG reveals the existence of a 
threshold where internal positive feedback becomes independent of external stimuli 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
7 
 
Because CEBPB dynamics closely mirrored the hormone input stimuli, filtering must occur 
downstream of CEBPB, suggesting that PPARG might be involved. We again made use of CRISPR-
mediated genome editing to generate an OP9 cell line with citrine (YFP) fused to the N-terminus of 
endogenous PPARG (Figures 3A and S3). Control experiments verified that the tagged endogenous 
protein was regulated similarly and had the similar expression levels and lifetimes to the untagged 
endogenous PPARG protein (Figure S6). 
The role of PPARG in filtering circadian inputs has to be investigated in the context of previous 
work that showed that PPARG is a critical part of a bistable switch that converts preadipocytes to 
adipocytes (Park et al., 2012). Bistable switches between two fates are a fundamental part of 
differentiation processes, and many models predict that a threshold in the expression of a core 
regulator must exist that decides whether or not a cell will differentiate (Jukam and Desplan, 2010; 
Kalmar et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2009). However, the existence of a threshold has never been directly 
shown since to do so requires live-cell measurement of the presumed regulator in individual cells while 
being able to remove the differentiation-inducing stimulus and continuing to track individual cells to 
their final differentiation state. Such live-cell analysis is necessary in order to verify that reaching the 
threshold level of the presumed regulator indeed results in that cell eventually transitioning irreversibly 
into the differentiated state.  
Our citrine-PPARG cells allowed us now to directly test for the first time whether such a 
threshold exists in cell differentiation. We continuously imaged and automatically tracked citrine-
PPARG preadipocytes over a 4-day time course using a 48-hour continuous DMI stimulation protocol. 
Markedly, when the DMI stimulus was removed, the population of preadipocytes split into two distinct 
populations: cells in which PPARG levels caught on and continued to increase with cells reaching the 
differentiated adipocyte state (red), and cells in the same population in which PPARG level dropped 
back down with cells staying in the undifferentiated state (blue) (Figure 3B). As shown in Figure 2A, 
PPARG levels are regulated by both external hormone stimulus and cell-intrinsic positive feedback. 
This dual regulation of PPARG levels can be more clearly seen in the live-cell traces when cells are 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
8 
binned together according to their level of PPARG at the time of DMI removal (Figure 3C). Markedly, 
in cells whose PPARG level is above a critical threshold when DMI is removed (red cells), PPARG 
levels first fall partially down due to the loss of the external hormone stimulus and then increase again 
as the cell-intrinsic positive feedbacks engage to continue to raise PPARG levels, independently of 
external stimuli, to the fully differentiated state. In cells whose PPARG level does not increase to this 
critical threshold (blue cells), the cell-intrinsic positive feedbacks do not engage strongly enough and 
cells thus fall back to the undifferentiated state. Figure 3D shows measurements extracted from 
individual cell timecourses which show the PPARG level in each cell at 48 hours before DMI removal 
and then again in the same cell at 96 hours when the final differentiation state is known. The threshold 
can then be calculated as the midpoint between the two distributions of the PPARG level for 
differentiated and undifferentiated cells before DMI removal (Figure 3D). This calculated threshold 
(marked as a yellow triangle in Figures 3B-D) predicts differentiation outcome at 96 hours already at 
the time of DMI removal at 48 hours.   
We also observed in the analysis in Figure 3C that PPARG levels start to increase faster 
approximately 24 hours after addition of the DMI stimulus and long before the threshold for 
differentiation is reached. When we knocked down CEBPA, the core positive feedback partner of 
PPARG, this faster increase in PPARG was absent and cells failed to reach the threshold for 
differentiation (Figure 3E), arguing that the external hormone stimulus first gradually increases PPARG 
levels for about 24 hours before cell-intrinsic positive feedback to PPARG engages to then allow cells 
to reach the threshold for differentiation.  The threshold level, which is reached after approximately 
36-48 hours of continuous external hormone stimulation, is the level of PPARG at which cell-intrinsic 
positive feedback, initially triggered around 24 hours, has becomes sufficiently strong to sustain the 
increase in PPARG even in the absence of external hormone stimuli. 
 
The core adipogenic transcription factors PPARG and CEBPA rapidly degrade which keeps 
PPARG levels below the threshold to differentiate for daily oscillatory stimuli 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
9 
 
Given the existence of a PPARG threshold, it was plausible that daily hormone stimuli fail to 
trigger differentiation due to a failure of PPARG levels to reach the threshold. Such a mechanism is 
plausible due to the very slow PPARG increase we observed in Figures 3B and 3C. It takes PPARG 
approximately 24-48 hours after continuous stimulation to reach the irreversible threshold for 
differentiation, meaning that shorter stimuli pulses may fail to trigger differentiation. Indeed, live-cell 
imaging experiments showed that repetitive 12-hour on / 12-hour off stimuli resulted in only minimal 
increases in PPARG levels in most cells (Figures 4A and 4B), and thus prevented differentiation 
compared to when an equally-strong continuous stimulus was applied (Figure 3B). Interestingly, when 
the stimulus was off during pulsatile condition.  PPARG levels not only stopped to increase but also 
dropped (blue traces in Figures 4A and 4C). The drops between pulses prevent PPARG levels from 
gradually increasing to the threshold to trigger differentiation for repetitive pulse protocols. The rapid 
changes in PPARG levels can be explained by the short half-lives of PPARG protein and mRNA, 
approximately 1 and 0.8 hour respectively (Figure 4D).  
 
The fast degradation times of CEBPB and PPARG and the failure of PPARG levels to 
sufficiently increase under pulsatile conditions can explain the filtering seen in response to daily 
hormone pulses. However, the fast dynamics also raised the puzzling question of how PPARG levels 
can slowly build over days to result in differentiation when cells are subjected to continuous adipogenic 
stimuli. It has previously been shown that 2 days of stimulation are needed to raise PPARG levels to 
be able to convert a large fraction of preadipocytes to the point where they stay on a differentiation 
path even when the stimulus is removed (Chawla et al., 1994; Tontonoz et al., 1994). As shown in 
Figure 3B, it takes most cells 24-48 hours to build PPARG levels to the threshold to differentiate.  Since 
the time for a protein to accumulate to a steady-state level depends only on its degradation rate when 
the synthesis rate is not changing (Rosenfeld et al., 2002), a regulatory circuit built from only fast-
degrading proteins such as PPARG and CEBPB would be unable to gradually increase PPARG 
expression levels for days since proteins with a 1 hour half-life will have already reached more than 
99% of their maximal level within 12 hours of stimulation (Figure 4E, red line). However, a slow-
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
10 
degrading regulator of PPARG would be able to slowly buildup up and increase PPARG levels for 
days for continuous stimuli (Figure 4E, blue line).  
 
The existence of a slow-degrading PPARG feedback partner would also explain another 
observed phenomenon: that the adipogenic differentiation system responds very differently to cversus 
continuous stimuli (Figures 1C-E, 3B-C, 4A-B), filtering out stimuli in the first case and regulating 
increasing fractions of the cell population to differentiate in the second case. A system with only fast-
degrading regulators would only have one response since it would rise rapidly to the same expression 
level for both oscillating or continuous stimuli and would either trigger differentiation or not for both 
types of stimuli without a delay (Figure 4F, top). In contrast, a slow-degrading PPARG regulator could 
rise to different steady-state amplitudes in response to different input pulse durations and thus would 
be able to keep its steady-state level below a threshold for oscillating stimuli while also being able to 
rise above the threshold and trigger differentiation for continuous stimulation (Figure 4F, bottom, solid 
red and blue lines). In other words, the existence of a slow-degrading PPARG regulator would allow a 
system to selectively prevent differentiation for oscillatory pulsatile stimulation as long as the trough 
between pulses is sufficiently long (~12 hours) which allows for sufficient degradation of the slow 
regulator between pulses. The dashed lines in Figure 4F shows how steady-state levels increase for 
daily pulses of 18-hour and become lower for daily pulses of 6-hour duration. The existence of slow-
degrading regulators in the adipogenic transcriptional architecture would enable adipocyte precursor 
cells to convert daily hormone stimuli of different pulse durations into different longterm steady-state 
amplitudes of expression of the regulator above and below a threshold. In summary, a slow feedback 
regulator of PPARG is needed both to increase PPARG levels slowly to the threshold to differentiate 
(Figures 3B-C, 4E) and to allow PPARG levels to rise to different steady-state levels for oscillating 
versus continuous stimuli (Figure 4F). Since a transcriptional positive feedback loop between PPARG 
and CEBPA has been shown to be particularly critical for differentiation (El-jack et al., 1999; Wu et al., 
1999) (Figure 2A), an obvious candidate for such a slow regulator is CEBPA. However, CEBPA also 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
11 
has short mRNA and protein half-lives of approximately 1 and 3 hours, respectively, and cannot be 
the required slow co-regulator (Figure 4G). 
 
Identification of a slow feedback regulator of PPARG that can mediate the slow buildup in 
PPARG levels to the threshold to differentiate 
 
Since their mRNA and protein all degrade quickly even in the presence of continuous stimuli, 
the three core regulators CEBPA, CEBPB, and PPARG (Figure 2A) cannot be alone responsible for 
the observed slow buildup of PPARG. A plausible alternative mechanism to explain the delayed 
PPARG increase would be if additional positive feedback regulators of PPARG had a much longer life 
time. Several such positive regulators of PPARG have been identified (Ahrends et al., 2014; 
Wakabayashi et al., 2009). At least two have been shown to have long protein lifetimes, FLNA and 
CEPBZ (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011), and one has been shown to have a long mRNA lifetime FABP4 
(Sharova et al., 2009; Spangenberg et al., 2013). To understand how a slow regulator might work in a 
differentiation system, we focused on FABP4 since previous work showed that it had a particularly 
strong effect on differentiation of OP9 cells (Ahrends et al., 2014).  
 
We first confirmed that FABP4 mRNA has a long half-life of between 14 to 34 hours (Figure 
5A and Figure S6) and that the increase in PPARG level is closely correlated with an increase in 
FABP4 in individual cells (Figure 5B). Previous studies had established FABP4 is a downstream target 
of PPARG (Hotamisligil and Bernlohr, 2015) that can positively regulate PPARG expression and 
adipogenesis (Ahrends et al., 2014; Ayers et al., 2007; Boss et al., 2015). Indeed, siRNA-meditated 
knockdown of FABP4 suppressed adipogenesis (Figure 5C), and overexpression of FABP4 increased 
adipogenesis in the absence of adipogenic stimulus in OP9 cells (Figure 5D). Furthermore, identical 
to the effect of CEBPA knockdown, siRNA-mediated depletion of FABP4 and overexpressing FABP4 
resulted in a slowing-down (Figure 5E) and acceleration (Figure 5F) of the normally-observed PPARG 
increase in response to DMI. Together with previous studies by other groups (Ayers et al., 2007; Boss 
et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2002a), our results support that FABP4 is in a positive-feedback relationship 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
12 
with PPARG in OP9 cells. Furthermore, the timecourses in Figures 5E and 5F support that slow-
degrading FABP4 can mediate the slow buildup in PPARG levels. While there are likely additional 
slow regulators of PPARG expression, our study argues that FABP4 has a critical role as a slow 
positive feedback partner that mediates the slow PPARG dynamics in response to oscillatory versus 
continuous stimuli.  
 
Model calculations show that transcriptional circuits with slow and fast positive feedback can 
filter periodic stimuli and regulate fractional differentiation 
 
Our results so far suggest that the ability to both reject single and repetitive pulses of stimuli 
and to regulate increasing fractions of cells in the population to differentiate for continuous stimuli of 
increasing durations requires a regulatory circuit with fast and slow positive feedback (Figure 6A). To 
validate this requirement, we carried out simulations using an ordinary differentiation model to predict 
abundance changes of PPARG driven by the action of combined fast and slow positive feedback (see 
Methods). In our model, the time constants of the fast and slow feedbacks were set to 3 and 34 hours, 
respectively, which corresponds to the typical values found for the CEBPA and FABP4 feedbacks to 
PPARG (Figures 4G and 5A). For a 48-hour continuously-applied stimulus, model calculations showed 
that a slow feedback partner would mediate a delayed buildup of PPARG past the threshold where 
differentiation is triggered (Figure 6B). For an oscillating stimulus, the model shows that the 
concentrations of a slow feedback partner would level off to a much lower steady-state than that 
reached by continuous stimulus, thereby preventing PPARG from reaching the threshold for 
differentiation (Figure 6C). It should be noted that for the transcriptional circuit depicted in Figure 6A 
to be able to filter out circadian input pulses. the slow feedback partner only needs to have a lifetime 
longer than 12 hours while the fast feedbacks should have a lifetime much shorter than 12 hours. 
The model so far could explain the experimentally-observed rejection of single and repetitive 
pulses of differentiation stimuli. However, our experiments showed that still a few cells could 
differentiate for pulsatile stimuli (Figure 1C, 4A). In addition, pulse durations of longer than 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
13 
approximately 12 hours resulted in an increasing fraction of the cell population differentiating (Figure 
2B) which also cannot be explained by the above model. We next added noise to our model in order 
to determine whether cell-to-cell variation (noise) in the slow and fast positive feedback circuit is 
sufficient to explain why stimulated cells cross the threshold at different times and why periodic stimuli 
generate low differentiation rates and not zero differentiation. The rationale for the addition of the noise 
is based on our finding that cell-to-cell variation in PPARG expression enables control of low rates of 
adipogenesis in a population of precursor cells (Ahrends et al., 2014; Park et al., 2012). Our 
experimental data in Figures 3B and 3C had shown that cells differentiated at different times when a 
continuous stimulus was applied. Indeed, adding lognormal stochastic variation to each simulation 
resulted in individual cells reaching the differentiation threshold with variable delays for continuous 
stimulation (Figure 6D), reproducing our experimental data in Figure 3B and 3C. Adding the same 
stochastic noise to the simulations in which differentiation was induced by daily 12-hour on/12-hour 
off pulses of stimuli showed that cells differentiated only rarely (Figure 6E), again reproducing our 
experimental data (Figures 4A). Differentiation outcome statistics of oscillating and continuous 
simulations is shown in Figure 6F. Thus, a circuit with fast and slow positive feedback, together with 
stochastic variation in PPARG signaling, is sufficient to explain variable delays in cells reaching the 
threshold and also recapitulates the low differentiation rates observed experimentally for daily 
oscillations of DMI stimuli. 
 
Flattening the circadian glucocorticoid oscillations in mice results in a striking increase in 
adipogenesis without an increase in food intake  
To test how oscillating versus continuous levels of glucocorticoid stimuli affect adipogenesis in vivo, 
we implanted eight-week old C57/Bl6 male mice with pellets that released Corticosterone (Cort) 
continuously over 21 days (Scheme in Figure 7A and data in Figure 7B). The Cort dose released per 
day from the pellet was chosen based on previous studies using Cort pellets in mice (Hodes et al., 
2012) such that mean Cort levels would not exceed normal mean physiological levels. Mice implanted 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
14 
with Cort pellets showed significant elevated Cort levels in the nadir of the diurnal pattern (08:00-
11:00), and also showed lower peak Cort levels (between 17:00-20:00), effectively flattening the level 
of circulating glucocorticoids without significantly changing the total amount of circulating 
glucocorticoids in the mice compared to mice implanted with sham pellets (Figure 7B). Such flattening 
of circadian glucocorticoid oscillations in the bloodstream by implanting Cort pellets has also been 
demonstrated in rats (Campbell et al., 2011; Dallman et al., 2000). It should be noted that due to the 
nocturnal waking of mice, the timing of circadian glucocorticoid oscillations in mice is shifted, peaking 
at approximately 7PM instead of at approximately 7AM as in humans. 
 
Confirming previous results in which Cort pellets were implanted in rats (Campbell et al., 2011), 
mice with Cort pellets initially showed a decrease in body weight immediately after receiving the pellets 
(Figure 7C). However, starting at 2 days after implantation, animals with Cort pellets increased their 
weight over the next 3 weeks at a faster rate compared to animals receiving the Sham pellets and 
ended up weighting ~10% more than sham animals on day 26. Sham and Cort groups of implanted 
animals also had indistinguishable food intake during the experiment (main effect of food: P < 0.05, 
Figure 7G), arguing that the greater weight increase in Cort animals was likely not a result of increased 
food intake.  
 
 
 
Since our in vitro data had shown that daily pulses with durations less than 12 hours do not 
result in differentiation independent of their amplitude within a 12-fold amplitude range (Supp. Figure 
S2C), we tested whether this was the case also in vivo. We generated a 40-fold increase in daily peak 
amplitude of glucocorticoids compared to Sham-injected mice by injecting Cort into mice at 5PM every 
day for 21 days (Figures 7D and 7E). Strikingly, despite the greatly increased daily peak levels  - and 
thus total dose - of Cort, we did not observe a significant difference in weight between the Cort- and 
sham-injected animals (Figure 7F), arguing that peak amplitude and total dose of glucocorticoids can 
change over wide ranges and still not cause an increase in weight as long as the increase in 
glucocorticoids occurs during a short time window and leaves a sufficiently long time period with low 
Cort. Again, both the Cort- and Sham-injected groups of animals had indistinguishable food intake 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
15 
(Figure 7G). Together, these results suggest that weight gain mostly results from the flattening of 
glucocorticoid levels rather than the total integrated dose or the peak levels of glucocorticoid activity.  
 
We next tested whether the observed weight gain in mice with flattened glucocorticoid levels 
is indeed the result of increased fat mass. Markedly, when we dissected animals in the four groups 
after 26 days, we found that the animals with implanted Cort-pellets - and flattened glucocorticorticoid 
levels - had significantly greater amounts of both inguinal and epidydimal adipose mass compared to 
the mice with sham pellets and normal circadian glucocorticoid oscillations (Figures 7H and 7I). 
Furthermore, despite experiencing daily 40-fold greater peak levels of glucocorticoids for 21 days, the 
Cort-injected animals showed indistinguishable increases in inguinal and epidydimal adipose mass 
from sham-injected animals. A summary of the Cort pellet and injection experiments is presented in 
Table 1. 
To further characterize the adipose tissues in Cort versus Sham-treated mice, we prepared 
paraffin sections from the inguinal and epididymal fat pads and carried out routine hematoxylin and 
eosin (H & E) histology staining. We used automated image analysis to compare histology images for 
the two conditions: Cort-pellet or Sham-pellet mice, and for both types of fat depots: inguinal and 
epididymal (Figure 7J). We quantified cell volumes since previous studies showed that glucocorticoid-
mediated increases in fat pad size are associated with both increased number of cells, as well as with 
increased cell volume (Campbell et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2014; Rebuffe-Scrive et al., 1992). In both 
inguinal and epididymal fat pads, animals with implanted with CORT pellets had significantly smaller 
adipocytes compared with animals implanted with sham pellets (Figure 7K). We then used the cell 
volume measurement and the respective fat pad weights to derive an estimated number of cells in the 
fat pads. Epididymal, but not inguinal, fat pads showed a significantly higher number of adipocytes, 
consistent with previous results in rats (Campbell et al., 2011) (Figure 7L), and suggesting that Cort 
pellet treatment, which flattens daily glucocorticoid oscillations, results in increased adipogenesis as 
well as an increase in adipocyte volume. 
 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
16 
DISCUSSION 
 
Our study shows that different preadipocyte model systems (i.e., primary SVF, 3T3-L1, and 
OP9 cells) fail to differentiate in response to 12-hour on / 12-hour off pulses of hormone stimuli that 
correspond to the timing of circadian hormone secretions observed in humans and mice. In striking 
contrast, the same preadipocytes differentiate at gradually increasing rates if the duration of the daily 
pulses increases from 12 to 18, and 24 hours. Because an increase in pulse duration leads to a shorter 
trough, or off-period, during each stimulation cycle, our study shows that cells increasingly fail to reset 
their PPARG level down as pulse durations get longer, thereby increasing the probability that PPARG 
levels will reach above the threshold and cause cells to continue on the path to the differentiated state. 
We validate these findings in mice and show that just flattening the circadian glucocorticoid oscillations 
while keeping the overall circulating glucocorticoid concentrations the same over 21 days caused fat 
mass to double in the mice compared to mice with normal circadian oscillations. Furthermore, when 
we raised the peak of the glucocorticoid oscillations 40-fold by injecting corticosterone into mice daily 
for 21 days, there was no increase in fat mass compared to sham (PBS)-injected mice, providing 
strong validation that as long as glucocorticoid increases occur within the correct circadian 
timeperiods, there is only minimal adipogenesis and that it is not increased levels of glucocorticoids, 
but rather losing the nadirs or "off-periods" that leads to increased fat mass.   
We were surprised to find in our live-cell analysis of endogenous CEBPB that the expression 
of CEBPB increases and decreases along with the daily hormone pulses, reaching each time quickly 
a maximal level and then dropping again back to basal levels after the hormone stimulus is removed. 
The closely mirrored relationship between internal CEBPB levels and the external pulse pattern argues 
that filtering has to occur downstream of CEBPB. We further showed that the life-time of the mRNA 
and protein of PPARG, CEBPB and CEBPA, are all relatively short lived, and all drop back down 
rapidly when the input stimulus is removed, which can explain how cells can reset back to their basal 
state after each of the external hormone pulses as long as the PPARG level in the cell has stayed 
below the threshold for differentiation. However, these findings did not explain how continuous stimuli 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
17 
can trigger a gradual buildup in PPARG which motivated us to search for slow-acting PPARG 
regulators. As one such slow-degrading co-factor, we identified FABP4, whose mRNA has a long 
lifetime of between 14 to 34 hours. We showed that its expression can accelerate PPARG induction 
and that it is also needed to mediate the slow 24 to 48-hour increase in PPARG levels up to the 
threshold where differentiation is triggered. This argues for a control principle for differentiation 
whereby a combined fast and slow positive feedback generates a differentiation system with a delayed 
and irreversible threshold that can filter out short pulses and circadian hormone stimuli. 
 
FABP4 is one of the most abundant proteins in adipocytes and is a downstream target of 
PPARG that is highly upregulated during adipogenesis (Hotamisligil and Bernlohr, 2015). Our live-cell 
analysis of the differentiation decision showed that FABP4 has a critical role in activating PPARG and 
in controlling the irreversible switch from preadipocyte to adipocyte differentiation. Our results are in 
line with several other studies that showed that FABP4 upregulates PPARG expression and activity 
(Adida and Spener, 2006; Ahrends et al., 2014; Ayers et al., 2007; Boss et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2002a). 
Nevertheless, FABP4's role in adipogenesis has been controversial since knockout of FABP4 in mice 
showed no decrease in fat mass (Hotamisligil et al., 1996). However, several studies have since shown 
that loss of FABP4 in adipocytes can be compensated for by FABP5, a fatty-acid binding protein that 
is also expressed in adipocytes and has high sequence similarity to FABP4 (Furuhashi et al., 2014; 
Haunerland and Spener, 2004; Hotamisligil and Bernlohr, 2015; Shaughnessy et al., 2000). In FABP4-
knockout mice, FABP5 expression is massively increased: 40-fold at the mRNA level and 13 to 20-
fold at the protein level (Coe et al., 1999; Hotamisligil et al., 1996). Indeed when both FABP4 and 
FABP5 are knocked out in mice, there is a significant reduction in total body adipose tissue mass both 
on regular and high-fat diet (Maeda et al., 2005).   
 
The transcriptional activity of PPARG is activated by lipids (Tontonoz et al., 1994). FABP4 is 
one of the most abundant proteins in adipocytes, and several studies have provided evidence that 
FABP4 has a role in transporting fatty-acid ligands across the cytosol and across the nuclear 
membrane to PPARG in the nucleus (Adida and Spener, 2006; Ayers et al., 2007; Tan et al., 2002b), 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
18 
thereby enhancing the transcriptional activity of the PPARG. As we point out in the Results section, 
we are aware that FLNA and CEBPZ are also slow positive feedback regulators, suggesting that 
FABP4 is likely not the only regulator of differentiation responsible for the filtering. 
 
Since preadipocytes differentiate at low rates in humans and mice (Spalding et al., 2008; Wang 
et al., 2013) and since a flattening of daily glucocorticoid oscillations leads to increased fat mass and 
obesity (Campbell et al., 2011; Dallman et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2014), our live-cell measurements 
provide a molecular basis for strategies to alter the daily timing of glucocorticoid pulses that might be 
beneficial therapeutically to influence differentiation rates. Specifically, it is suggestive that the 
dramatic suppression of differentiation for circadian hormone pulse patterns and the much higher rates 
of differentiation that we found for more sustained hormone signals may provide an explanation as to 
why conditions such as Cushing's disease, prolonged stress or long-term glucocorticoid treatments 
that disrupt normal circadian patterns of hormone oscillations also result in increased obesity. Finally, 
the molecular filtering mechanism for differentiation we uncovered for adipocytes provides support for 
the development of temporal therapeutic regimens aimed at changing adipogenic or other hormone 
pulse durations to control differentiation of precursor cells.   
 
In conclusion, our study introduces a temporal control mechanism for adipogenesis that 
allows precursor cells to reject normal, daily, oscillating hormone inputs. We show that a dual fast 
and slow positive feedback system centered on PPARG has the marked characteristic to remain 
unresponsive to circadian and rhythmic hormone pulses as long as the duration of the trough 
between pulses remains longer than 12 hours. However, when pulse duration increases and the 
trough duration becomes shorter, cells convert the duration of the daily pulses into an increasing 
probability for differentiation until the rate of differentiation becomes maximal for continuous 
stimulation. Our findings are likely of relevance for many, if not most, differentiation systems since 
oscillating hormone stimuli are a near universal stimulus pattern in mammalian physiology. 
 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
19 
REFERENCES 
Adida, A., and Spener, F. (2006). Adipocyte-type fatty acid-binding protein as inter-compartmental shuttle 
for peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma agonists in cultured cell. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1761, 172–181. 
Ahrends, R., Ota, A., Kovary, K.M., Kudo, T., Park, B.O., and Teruel, M.N. (2014). Controlling low rates of 
cell differentiation through noise and ultrahigh feedback. Science 344, 1384–1389. 
Ayers, S.D., Nedrow, K.L., Gillilan, R.E., and Noy, N. (2007). Continuous nucleocytoplasmic shuttling 
underlies transcriptional activation of PPARgamma by FABP4. Biochemistry 46, 6744–6752. 
Bergmann, O., Bhardwaj, R.D., Bernard, S., Zdunek, S., Barnabé-Heider, F., Walsh, S., Zupicich, J., 
Alkass, K., Buchholz, B.A., Druid, H., et al. (2009). Evidence for cardiomyocyte renewal in humans. 
Science 324, 98–102. 
Boss, M., Kemmerer, M., Brune, B., and Namgaladze, D. (2015). FABP4 inhibition suppresses 
PPARgamma activity and VLDL-induced foam cell formation in IL-4-polarized human macrophages. 
Atherosclerosis 240, 424–430. 
Campbell, J.E., Peckett, A.J., D’souza, A.M., Hawke, T.J., and Riddell, M.C. (2011). Adipogenic and 
lipolytic effects of chronic glucocorticoid exposure. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 300, C198-209. 
Carré, N., and Binart, N. (2014). Prolactin and adipose tissue. Biochimie 97, 16–21. 
Chawla, A., Schwarz, E.J., Dimaculangan, D.D., and Lazar, M. (1994). Peroxisome Proliferation-Activated 
Receptor ( PPAR) gamma : Adipose-Predominant Expression And Induction Early In Adipocyte 
Differentiation. Endocrinology 135, 798–800. 
Coe, N.R., Simpson, M. a, and Bernlohr, D. a (1999). Targeted disruption of the adipocyte lipid-binding 
protein (aP2 protein) gene impairs fat cell lipolysis and increases cellular fatty acid levels. J. Lipid Res. 
40, 967–972. 
Cristancho, A.G., and Lazar, M.A. (2011). Forming functional fat: a growing understanding of adipocyte 
differentiation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 722–734. 
Dallman, M.F., Akana, S.F., Bhatnagar, S., Bell, M.E., and Strack, A.M. (2000). Bottomed out: metabolic 
significance of the circadian trough in glucocorticoid concentrations. Int. J. Obes. 24, S40–S46. 
El-jack, A.K., Hamm, J.K., Paul, F., Farmer, S.R., and Pilch, P.F. (1999). Reconstitution of Insulin-
sensitive Glucose Transport in Fibroblasts Requires Expression of Both PPAR γ and C / EBP α 
Reconstitution of Insulin-sensitive Glucose Transport in Fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 7946–7951. 
Farmer, S.R. (2006). Transcriptional control of adipocyte formation. Cell Metab. 4, 263–273. 
Furuhashi, M., Saitoh, S., Shimamoto, K., and Miura, T. (2014). Fatty Acid-Binding Protein 4 (FABP4): 
Pathophysiological Insights and Potent Clinical Biomarker of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases. 
Clin. Med. Insights. Cardiol. 8, 23–33. 
Haunerland, N.H., and Spener, F. (2004). Fatty acid-binding proteins - Insights from genetic 
manipulations. Prog. Lipid Res. 43, 328–349. 
Hodes, G.E., Brookshire, B.R., Hill-Smith, T.E., Teegarden, S.L., Berton, O., and Lucki, I. (2012). Strain 
differences in the effects of chronic corticosterone exposure in the hippocampus. Neuroscience 222, 269–
280. 
Hotamisligil, G.S., and Bernlohr, D.A. (2015). Metabolic functions of FABPs—mechanisms and 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
20 
therapeutic implications. Nat. Publ. Gr. 11, 592–605. 
Hotamisligil, G.S., Johnson, R.S., Distel, R.J., Ellis, R., Papaioannou, V.E., and Spiegelman, B.M. (1996). 
Uncoupling of Obesity from Insulin Resistance Through a Targeted Mutation in aP2, the Adipocyte Fatty 
Acid Binding Protein. Science 274, 1377–1379. 
Jukam, D., and Desplan, C. (2010). Binary fate decisions in differentiating neurons. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 
20, 6–13. 
Kalmar, T., Lim, C., Hayward, P., Munoz-Descalzo, S., Nichols, J., Garcia-Ojalvo, J., and Arias, A.M. 
(2009). Regulated fluctuations in Nanog expression mediate cell fate decisions in embryonic stem cells. 
PLoS Biol. 7, 33–36. 
Lee, M.J., Pramyothin, P., Karastergiou, K., and Fried, S.K. (2014). Deconstructing the roles of 
glucocorticoids in adipose tissue biology and the development of central obesity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1842, 473–481. 
Lefterova, M.I., Haakonsson, A.K., Lazar, M.A., and Mandrup, S. (2014). PPARgamma and the global 
map of adipogenesis and beyond. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 25, 293–302. 
Lehmann, J.M., Moore, L.B., Smith-Oliver, T. a, Wilkison, W.O., Willson, T.M., and Kliewer, S. a (1995). 
An antidiabetic thiazolidinedione is a high affinity ligand for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma (PPAR gamma). J. Biol. Chem. 270, 12953–12956. 
Leliavski, A., Dumbell, R., Ott, V., and Oster, H. (2015). Adrenal clocks and the role of adrenal hormones 
in the regulation of circadian physiology. J. Biol. Rhythms 30, 20–34. 
Loewer, A., and Lahav, G. (2011). We are all individuals: Causes and consequences of non-genetic 
heterogeneity in mammalian cells. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 21, 753–758. 
Luo, X., Ryu, K.W., Kim, D.-S., Nandu, T., Medina, C.J., Gupte, R., Gibson, B.A., Soccio, R.E., Yu, Y., 
Gupta, R.K., et al. (2017). PARP-1 Controls the Adipogenic Transcriptional Program by PARylating 
C/EBPβ and Modulating Its Transcriptional Activity. Mol. Cell 65, 260–271. 
Maeda, K., Cao, H., Kono, K., Gorgun, C.Z., Furuhashi, M., Uysal, K.T., Cao, Q., Atsumi, G., Malone, H., 
Krishnan, B., et al. (2005). Adipocyte/macrophage fatty acid binding proteins control integrated metabolic 
responses in obesity and diabetes. Cell Metab. 1, 107–119. 
Mandrup, S., and Lane, M.D. (1997). Regulating adipogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 5367–5370. 
Park, Y.-K., and Ge, K. (2017). Glucocorticoid Receptor Accelerates, but Is Dispensable for, 
Adipogenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 37, e00260-16. 
Park, B.O., Ahrends, R., and Teruel, M.N. (2012). Consecutive Positive Feedback Loops Create a 
Bistable Switch that Controls Preadipocyte-to-Adipocyte Conversion. Cell Rep. 2, 976–990. 
Rebuffe-Scrive, M., Walsh, U.A., McEwen, B., and Rodin, J. (1992). Effect of chronic stress and 
exogenous glucocorticoids on regional fat distribution and metabolism. Physiol. Behav. 52, 583–590. 
Rodeheffer, M.S., Birsoy, K., and Friedman, J.M. (2008). Identification of white adipocyte progenitor cells 
in vivo. Cell 135, 240–249. 
Roh, H.C., Tsai, L.T., Lyubetskaya, A., Tenen, D., Kumari, M., Rosen, E.D., Roh, H.C., Tsai, L.T., 
Lyubetskaya, A., Tenen, D., et al. (2017). Simultaneous Transcriptional and Epigenomic Profiling from 
Specific Cell Types within Heterogeneous Tissues In Vivo: Cell Reports. CellReports 18, 1048–1061. 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
21 
Rosen, E.D., and Spiegelman, B.M. (2014). What we talk about when we talk about fat. Cell 156, 20–44. 
Rosenfeld, N., Elowitz, M.B., and Alon, U. (2002). Negative autoregulation speeds the response times of 
transcription networks. J. Mol. Biol. 323, 785–793. 
Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., and Selbach, M. 
(2011). Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 473, 337–342. 
Sharova, L. V, Sharov, A.A., Nedorezov, T., Piao, Y., Shaik, N., and Ko, M.S.H. (2009). Database of 
mRNA Half-Life of 19977 Genes Obtained by DNA Microarray Analysis of Pluripotent and Differentiating 
Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells Supplementary data. DNA Res. 16, S1. 
Shaughnessy, S., Smith, E.R., Kodukula, S., Storch, J., and Fried, S.K. (2000). Adipocyte metabolism in 
adipocyte fatty acid binding protein knockout mice (aP2-/-) after short-term high-fat feeding: functional 
compensation by the keratinocyte [correction of keritinocyte] fatty acid binding protein. Diabetes 49, 904–
911. 
Siersbæk, R., Nielsen, R., John, S., Sung, M.-H., Baek, S., Loft, A., Hager, G.L., and Mandrup, S. (2011). 
Extensive chromatin remodelling and establishment of transcription factor “hotspots” during early 
adipogenesis. EMBO J. 30, 1459–1472. 
Spalding, K.L., Arner, E., Westermark, P.O., Bernard, S., Buchholz, B. a, Bergmann, O., Blomqvist, L., 
Hoffstedt, J., Näslund, E., Britton, T., et al. (2008). Dynamics of fat cell turnover in humans. Nature 453, 
783–787. 
Spangenberg, L., Shigunov, P., Abud, A.P.R., Cofre, A.R., Stimamiglio, M.A., Kuligovski, C., Zych, J., 
Schittini, A. V., Costa, A.D.T., Rebelatto, C.K., et al. (2013). Polysome profiling shows extensive 
posttranscriptional regulation during human adipocyte stem cell differentiation into adipocytes. Stem Cell 
Res. 11, 902–912. 
Spencer, S.L., Gaudet, S., Albeck, J.G., Burke, J.M., and Sorger, P.K. (2009). Non-genetic origins of cell-
to-cell variability in TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Nature 459, 428–432. 
Tan, N., Shaw, N.S., Vinckenbosch, N., Liu, P., Yasmin, R., Desvergne, B., Wahli, W., and Noy, N. 
(2002a). Selective Cooperation between Fatty Acid Binding Proteins and Peroxisome Proliferator-
Activated Receptors in Regulating Transcription Selective Cooperation between Fatty Acid Binding 
Proteins and Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors in Regulating T. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 5114–
5127. 
Tan, N.-S., Shaw, N.S., Vinckenbosch, N., Liu, P., Yasmin, R., Desvergne, B., Wahli, W., and Noy, N. 
(2002b). Selective Cooperation between Fatty Acid Binding Proteins and Peroxisome Proliferator-
Activated Receptors in Regulating Transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 5114–5127. 
Tchoukalova, Y.D., Sarr, M.G., and Jensen, M.D. (2004). Measuring committed preadipocytes in human 
adipose tissue from severely obese patients by using adipocyte fatty acid binding protein. Am. J. Physiol. 
Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 287, R1132-40. 
Thompson, N.M., Gill, D.A.S., Davies, R., Loveridge, N., Houston, P.A., Robinson, I.C.A.F., and Wells, T. 
(2004). Ghrelin and des-octanoyl ghrelin promote adipogenesis directlyin vivo by a mechanism 
independent of GHS-R1a. Endocrinology 145, 234–242. 
Tontonoz, P., and Spiegelman, B.M. (2008). Fat and beyond: the diverse biology of PPARgamma. Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 77, 289–312. 
Tontonoz, P., Hu, E., and Spiegelman, B.M. (1994). Stimulation of adipogenesis in fibroblasts by 
PPARgamma2, a lipid-activated transcription factor. Cell 79, 1147–1156. 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
22 
Van, R.L.R., Bayliss, C.E., and Roncari, D.A.K. (1976). Cytological and enzymological characterization of 
adult human adipocyte precursors in culture. J. Clin. Invest. 58, 699–704. 
Wakabayashi, K., Okamura, M., Tsutsumi, S., Nishikawa, N.S., Tanaka, T., Sakakibara, I., Kitakami, J., 
Ihara, S., Hashimoto, Y., Hamakubo, T., et al. (2009). The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma/retinoid X receptor alpha heterodimer targets the histone modification enzyme PR-Set7/Setd8 
gene and regulates adipogenesis through a positive feedback loop. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29, 3544–3555. 
Wang, L., Walker, B.L., Iannaccone, S., Bhatt, D., Kennedy, P.J., and Tse, W.T. (2009). Bistable switches 
control memory and plasticity in cellular differentiation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 6638–6643. 
Wang, Q.A., Tao, C., Gupta, R.K., and Scherer, P.E. (2013). Tracking adipogenesis during white adipose 
tissue development , expansion and regeneration. Nat. Med. 19, 1338–1344. 
Weitzman, E.D., Fukushima, D., Nogeire, C., Roffwarg, H., Gallagher, T.F., and Hellman, L. (1971). 
Twenty-four hour pattern of the episodic secretion of cortisol in normal subjects. J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Metab. 33, 14–22. 
Windle, R.J., Wood, S.A., Kershaw, Y.M., Lightman, S.L., and Ingram, C.D. (2013). Adaptive changes in 
basal and stress-induced HPA activity in lactating and post-lactating female rats. Endocrinology 154, 
749–761. 
Wolins, N.E., Quaynor, B.K., Skinner, J.R., Tzekov, A., Park, C., Choi, K., and Bickel, P.E. (2006). OP9 
mouse stromal cells rapidly differentiate into adipocytes: characterization of a useful new model of 
adipogenesis. J. Lipid Res. 47, 450–460. 
Wu, Z., Rosen, E.D., Brun, R., Hauser, S., Adelmant, G., Troy, A.E., Mckeon, C., Darlington, G.J., and 
Spiegelman, B.M. (1999). Cross-Regulation of C / EBPalpha and PPARgamma Controls the 
Transcriptional Pathway of Adipogenesis and Insulin Sensitivity. Mol. Cell 3, 151–158. 
Yeh, W.C., Cao, Z., Classon, M., and McKnight, S.L. (1995). Cascade regulation of terminal adipocyte 
differentiation by three members of the C/EBP family of leucine zipper proteins. Genes Dev. 9, 168–181. 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
Z.B., M.L.Z., S.T., D.H., K.T., and M.N.T. conceived experiments. Z.B., M.L.Z., S.T., D.H., K.T., S.V., 
and M.N.T. performed experiments, and analyzed data. M.L.Z. and M.C. wrote the image analysis 
scripts. Z.B., M.L.Z., and M.N.T wrote the paper with input from all authors. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health RO1-DK101743, RO1-DK106241, and P50-
GM107615 (to M.N.T.), Stanford BioX Seed Grant funding (to M.N.T.), and T32-NIH T2HG00044 (to 
M.L.Z.). We thank Sean Collins (UC Davis), James Ferrell, Tobias Meyer, Brian Feldman, Fredric 
Kraemer, Connie Phong (Stanford University), and members of the Teruel Lab for discussions and 
critical reading of the manuscript.  
 
 
 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
23 
FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
Figure 1.  Preadipocytes reject circadian and rhythmic glucocorticoid stimuli 
(A) Schematic depicting averaged glucocorticoid time courses in humans (adapted from Weitzman et 
al, 1971).   
(B) Single-cell immunofluorescence assay used to quantitate percent of differentiated cells based on 
Park et al, 2012.  Preadipocyte cells were fixed and stained with Hoechst to visualize nuclei (blue),  
BODIPY to visualize lipids (green), and antibodies against PPARG (red) and adiponectin (white). The 
latter 3 signals are closely correlated in individual cells. Images show mouse OP9 cells. Scale bar, 10 
μm. Scatter plot shows that high-PPARG cells display mature fat cell features and accumulate high 
levels of lipid. The image and histograms show that application of an adipogenic stimulus causes cells 
to split into two populations of low PPARG and high PPARG cells. The middle of the trough between 
the bimodal PPARG intensity peaks (shown by black dotted line) was used to separate undifferentiated 
and differentiated cells. Percent of differentiated cells was assessed at t = 96 hours after applying 
adipogenic stimulus, using approximately 7,000 cells per technical replicate. See also Figure S1. 
(C) Different patterns of DMI stimuli were applied to OP9 and 3T3-L1 preadipocyte cells: 48 hours 
continuous delivery (red) and 3 different pulsatile protocols (blue): 12 hours on/12 hours off, 6 hours 
on/18 hours off, and 12 hours on/36 hours off.  The concentration of DMI stimulus used for a 48-hour 
continuous pulse was 1μM dexamethasone (dex), 250 μM IBMX, and 1.75 nM insulin. To keep the 
total amount of stimuli, i.e. area under the curve, constant for all 4 protocols over the 96-hour 
experimental timeframe, the concentration of dex and IBMX was increased proportionally to 
compensate for decreases in pulse duration. To end a pulse, the DMI containing media was aspirated, 
cells were washed gently three times with fresh media, and the cells were left in media with no 
glucocorticoids or IBMX, but containing 1.76 nM insulin. The doses of dex used were not saturating 
(Figures S2A and S2B), and using corticosterone instead of dex in the stimulus showed the same 
filtering effects (Figure S2C). 
(D) Experiments in primary SVF preadipocytes show that the same filtering effects are also observed 
in primary cells. SVF preadipocytes were plated into 96-well wells and induced to differentiate using 
the same pulsing protocols from (C). The Total BODIPY Intensity in each well was measured by 
imaging. 
(E) Applying continuous stimuli with durations greater than 12 hours resulted in corresponding 
increases in the number of differentiated OP9 and 3T3-L1 cells. However, the same total stimuli given 
in circadian pulses resulted in only minimal differentiation.  
(C-E) Barplots represents mean +/- s.e.m. from 3 technical replicates. All data shown are 
representative of 5 independent experiments.   
 
Figure 2. CEBPB mirrors the dynamics of the hormone input and transmits the pulse durations 
to PPARG 
(A) Simplified schematic of the canonical adipogenic transcriptional network (Farmer, 2006; Rosen 
and Spiegelman, 2014).  
(B) Stimuli pulses of different durations were applied to OP9 cells. DMI was used to indirectly activate 
PPARG, and rosiglitazone was used to directly activate PPARG. Data from 3T3-L1 cells is shown in 
Figure S2D.  
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
24 
(C) Suppression of differentiation by siRNA-mediated depletion of CEBPB versus control (YFP) in OP9 
cells.  
(B, C) The percent of differentiated cells was measured as in Figure 1B and show mean +/- s.e.m. 
from 3 technical replicates, representative of 3 independent experiments.  
(D) Endogenous CEBPB (LAP* isoform) in OP9 cells was tagged with citrine (YFP) using CRISPR-
mediated genome editing. Scale bar, 10 μm.  
(E) Single-cell time courses of total citrine-CEBPB nuclear abundance (CEBPB abundance) in 
response to a 12-hour on / 12-hour off pattern of DMI stimulus (thin lines). The bold line represents 
the population median and shaded regions represents the 25th to 75th percentile of the population, n 
> 300 cells. Citrine-CEBPB expression increased with t1/2 ~ 2 hours with stimulus addition and 
decreased with t1/2 ~3 hours with stimulus removal, as estimated by a single exponential decay model.   
(F) 3T3-L1 cells were stimulated with circadian pulses (12-hour on / 12-hour off) of DMI and fixed at 
the respective time points marked with yellow circles (top). Cells were stained with anti-CEBPB 
antibody and Hoescht as a nuclear marker and imaged. The mean nuclear CEBPB abundance was 
quantitied in each cell by measuring the intensity of the anti-CEBPB antibody. Each bar represents 
the mean +/- s.e.m. of 3 technical replicates, each with approximately 500 cells. The barplot shown is 
representative of 3 independent experiments.  
(G) OP9 cells were stimulated with DMI for 24 hours, treated with cyclohexamide or actinomycin-D, 
fixed at the plotted time points, and immunofluorescence or RNA FISH was performed to measure 
CEBPB protein levels or count the number of mRNA puncta per cell, respectively. First-order 
exponential decay curves were fitted to data (t1/2 ~3.6 hr and 1 hr, respectively). The shaded region 
represents the 95th confidence bounds. 
 
 
Figure 3.  PPARG levels increase slowly and typically do not reach the threshold to differentiate 
unless hormone stimuli are applied for longer than 24 hours. 
(A) Endogenous PPARG2 in OP9 cells was tagged with citrine (YFP) using CRISPR-mediated 
genome editing. Scale bar, 5 µm.   
(B) Identifying a PPARG threshold for differentiation by carrying out live-cell imaging of citrine-PPARG 
cells induced to differentiate with a DMI stimulation for 48 hours followed by insulin for another 48 
hours.  When the DMI stimulus is removed at 48 hours, cells either sustain or lose the increase in 
nuclear PPARG intensity (PPARG abundance). The thin lines show 50 representative single cell 
traces, and the bold line shows the population mean of 500 cells. Cells that differentiated after 96 
hours are marked in red, and cells that stayed in the preadipocyte state are marked in blue. The yellow 
triangle shows the threshold calculated in Figure 3D. 
(C) Timecourses from 419 cells were divided into 5 groups (bins) according to their PPARG level at 
48 hours, and the average of each bin was plotted. An initial drop was seen in each averaged 
timecourse after DMI removal, resulting in a return to the basal state for cells that had lower levels of 
PPARG and a delayed increase to the maximal state in cells that had higher levels of PPARG. 
(D) Scatter plot comparing the level of PPARG in the same cell measured at 48 hours just before DMI 
is removed and at 96 hours when PPARG levels reach their plateau in differentiated cells. The color 
of the dots and histograms mark cells that will be differentiated (red) or not differentiated (blue) at 96 
hours, respectively. The histograms on top shows the existence of a clear PPARG threshold already 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
25 
at 48 hours before the stimulus is removed (marked with dotted line) that can distinguish between cells 
that will go on to differentiate from those that will not.  The yellow triangle shows the threshold. 
(E) Live-cell imaging of citrine-PPARG cells following transfection with CEBPA-targeted or 
control(YFP) siRNA shows that knockdown of CEBPA, a main feedback partner of PPARG, results in 
loss of the feedback engagement point. Cells were stimulated to differentiate by adding DMI. Plotted 
lines are population median traces with shaded regions representing 25th and 75th percentiles of 
approximately 700 cells per condition. 
 
 
Figure 4. The core adipogenic transcription transcription factors PPARG and CEBPA rapidly 
degrade which keeps PPARG below the threshold to differentiate in response to oscillatory 
circadian hormone inputs  
(A) Single-cell timecourses showing the dynamics of citrine-PPARG expression when adipogenic DMI 
stimuli are applied in a pulsatile 12-hour on/12-hour off manner over 4 days. Cells were marked as 
differentiated (red) and undifferentiated (blue) based on whether their final citrine-PPARG values was 
above or below the threshold for differentiation defined in Figure 3.  
(B) Comparison of the percent of differentiated cells resulting from continuous (Figure 3B) versus 
circadian (Figure 4A) stimuli. Error bars show mean +/- s.e.m. from 6 technical replicates, representing 
3 independent experiments.  
(C) Zoom-in of the undifferentiated cells (blue traces) in (A). If PPARG levels do not reach the threshold 
to differentiate, PPARG levels drop back down to precursor levels each time the glucocorticoid and 
cAMP-inducing (DMI) stimulus is removed.  
(D) Lifetime analysis of PPARG protein and mRNA as in Figure 2G.  
(E) Plot of the times required to reach steady state for molecules with different half-lives and first order 
decay.  
(F) A slow-degrading regulator converts input stimuli with increasing pulse durations into increasing 
output signal amplitudes whereas a fast-degrading regulator outputs only a single maximal amplitude. 
Model output in response to different input pulse protocols shown on the left and assuming exponential 
increase and decay of proteins with t1/2 = 3 and 34 hrs, respectively. 
(G) Lifetime analysis of CEBPA protein and mRNA as in Figure 2G. 
 
 
Figure 5.  FABP4 is an example of a slow-degrading PPARG regulator that can mediate a slow 
increase in PPARG expression during adipogenesis.  
(A) Lifetime analysis of FABP4 protein as in Figure 2G. 
(B) Lifetime of FABP4 mRNA obtained as in Figure 2G by mRNA FISH analysis of OP9 cells fixed at 
different times after the addition of actinomycin D. Cebpa mRNA FISH images are shown for 
comparison. See also Figure S5. 
(C) Lifetime of FABP4 versus RPL18 mRNA obtained by RT-PCR analysis of OP9 cells collected at 
different times after the addition of actinomycin D. The lifetime of CEBPA versus RPL18 mRNA is 
shown for comparison. See also Figure S5. 
(E) Single cell immunofluorescence analysis showing the mean nuclear PPARG and the mean 
cytosolic FABP4 values in each cell stimulated with DMI for 24 hours or 48 hours and fixed at 96 hours. 
Each scatter plot represents approximately 5000 cells and is colored based on cell density. 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
26 
(F) OP9 cells were transfected with siRNA targeting FABP4, CEBPA, or control (YFP), induced to 
differentiate 24 hours later by usingthe standard protocol of 48-hours of DMI addition followed by 48 
hours in media with just insulin. Differentiation was assessed at 96 hours as in Figure 1B.  
(G) Overexpression of FABP4 increases differentiation even without DMI stimulation. OP9 cells were 
transfected with constructs expressing either just mcherry(control) or mcherry-FABP4 and left in 
normal growth media for 5 days. No adipogenic stimulus was added. mcherry is a version of the red 
fluorescent protein (Shaner et al., 2004).  
(E-F) Percent of differentiated cells was assesed as in Figure 1B. Barplots show mean +/- s.e.m. from 
3 technical replicates, representative of 3 independent experiments.  
(G-H) Citrine-PPARG cells were transfected in (G) with FABP4-targeted or control(YFP) siRNAs or in 
(H) with mcherry(control) or mcherry-FABP4. Twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were 
induced to differentiate by applying a 48-hour DMI stimulus, and live-cell imaging was carried out to 
monitor PPARG levels in individual cells. Plotted lines are population median traces with shaded 
regions representing 25th and 75th percentiles of approximately 700 cells per condition. 
 
Figure 6. A signaling circuit with a fast and slow positive feedback can trigger differentiation 
for continuous stimuli and reject daily oscillations  
(A) Schematic of the dual feedback loop circuit that rejects circadian inputs but locks cells in the 
differentiated state for continuous stimuli.  
(B) Quantitative simulations when a continuous 48-hour stimulus is applied show that the slow positive 
feedback regulator mediates a slow buildup of PPARG to the threshold for differentiation. The 
threshold is marked with the dotted line.   
(C) Same model simulations as in (B) but with an input stimulus applied in circadian 12-hour on / 12-
hour off oscillations. The slow regulator builds to a steady-state below the threshold in cells stimulated 
with circadian hormonal oscillations which keeps levels of its feedback partner PPARG permanently 
low and below the PPARG threshold where differentiation is triggered.  
(D and E) Addition of cell-to-cell variability (30% lognormal noise) to a model for a continuous 48-hour 
stimulus results in high rates of differentiation, but now with variable delays (D). In contrast, addition 
of cell-to-cell variability to the model with daily oscillating stimuli now allows PPARG levels in a few 
cells to reach the threshold and result in differentiation. 
(F) Barplot summarizing 400 simulations with continuous stimulus was applied for 48 hours and 400 
stimulations when an oscillating 12-hr on / 12-hr off stimulus was applied. Cells were categorized as 
differentiated if the PPARG level in that cell rose above the threshold and high PPARG was maintained 
even when input stimulus was removed.  Model results are similar to results from the fixed and live-
cell experiments shown in Figures 1C-D, 3B, and 4A-B. 
(B-E) Each trace represents a different simulated cell. 
 
 
Figure 7. Animals implanted with Corticosterone (Cort) pellets had sustained, flattened 
elevations in Cort and significant increases in adipose tissue mass.  
(A) Schematic of pellet implantation protocol to flatten glucocorticoid oscillations in animals.  
(B) Timecourse of average Cort levels in mice implanted with Cort pellets compared to mice implanted 
with Sham pellets. N=3, mean +/- s.e.m. 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
27 
(C) Timecourses showing weight of mice implanted with Cort pellets compared to mice implanted with 
Sham pellets. N=6, mean +/- s.e.m. Unpaired t-test (Sham pellet vs. Cort pellet): * p < 0.05, ** p < 
0.01. 
(D) Schematic of daily injection protocol to selectively increase peak amplitudes of Cort in animals.  
(E) Peak amplitudes of Cort are greater than 40-fold higher for mice injected daily with Cort compared 
to mice sham-injected daily with phosphate buffer solution (PBS). N=3, mean +/- s.e.m. 
(F) Timecourses showing weight of mice injected daily with Cort compared to Sham-injected daily with 
PBS. N=6, mean +/- s.e.m.  
(G) Food intake per mouse over the 26-day experimental timecourse for the four specified groups of 
mice. Each group consisted of 6 mice, housed 3 per cage. Each bar shows the food consumed in the 
two cages per group divided by 6 mice. 
(H and I) The weights of both the Epididymal (visceral) and Inguinal (subcutaneous) fat depots were 
significantly increased for the Cort pellet group but not for the other 3 groups of mice. N=6, mean +/- 
SD. Unpaired t-test: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. 
(J) A custom cell contour image analysis program written in MATLAB was used to automatically 
measure adipocyte size from H & E stained fat tissue slices. Right, example of original H & E image. 
Left, segmented image showing identified adipocytes in green. Cells touching borders or not meeting 
shape criteria were excluded.  
(K-L) Barplots of the average cell volume (K) and number of cells (L) in the Epididymal and Inguinal 
adipose fat depots in mice treated with Sham or Cort pellets for 21 days. The number of cells were 
derived by dividing total fat depot weight by the average cell volume.  
Each bar represents ~10,000 adipocytes analyzed from 90 images per condition (6 mice with either 
implanted Sham or Cort pellets x 3 tissue sections per mouse of either Epididymal or Inguinal fat x 5 
images per section). Error bars show s.e.m. based on 90 images. 
 
 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 B
C
E
Oscillatory Stimulus
Continuous Stimulus
12 hr
24 hr
36 hr
48 hr
0
24
48
72
96
Time (hr)
Total Stimulus Duration
0
24
48
72
96
Time (hr)
 Stimulus 
 Stimulus 
0
24
48
72
96
No stimulus
Time of day
Midnight
Midnight
Noon
Time (hr)
Total Stimulus Duration
% Differentiated Cells
OP9 cells
3T3-L1 cells
0
20
40
60
100
80
60
40
20
0
OP9 cells
3T3-L1 cells
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
80
12 hr
24 hr
36 hr
48 hr
No stimulus
Noon
Midnight
Noon
Noon
Day
Night
Day
Night
Day
Night
Day
Night
Night
Midnight
Midnight
% Differentiated Cells
1X, 1 pulse
48 hours
1X, 4 pulse
12 hours each
2X, 4 pulse
6 hours each
2X, 2 pulse
12 hours each
1X, 1 pulse
48 hours
1X, 4 pulse
12 hours each
2X, 4 pulse
6 hours each
2X, 2 pulse
12 hours each
12 hr
24 hr
36 hr
48 hr
differentiated 
cells
undifferentiated 
cells
0
100
200
Number of Cells
0
1
2
3
4
5
 96 hr
 0 hr
 PPARG abundance (a.u.)
6
8
10
12
log2(BODIPY) (a.u.)
 PPARG abundance (a.u.)
0
500
1000
Plasma 
Glucocorticoids
x103
Figure 1.  Circadian and rhythmic glucocorticoid stimuli are rejected by the preadipocyte differentiation system
(A) Schematic depicting averaged glucocorticoid time courses in humans (adapted from Weitzman et al, 1971).  
(B) Single-cell immunofluorescence assay used to quantitate percent of differentiated cells based on Park et al, 2012.  Preadipocyte 
cells  were fixed and stained with Hoechst to visualize nuclei (blue),  BODIPY to visualize lipids (green), and antibodies against PPARG 
(red) and adiponectin (white). The latter 3 signals are closely correlated in individual cells. Images show mouse OP9 cells. Scale bar, 
10 μm. Scatter plot shows that high-PPARG cells display mature fat cell features and accumulate high levels of lipid. The image and 
histograms show that application of an adipogenic stimulus causes cells to split into two populations of low PPARG and high PPARG 
cells.The middle of the trough between the bimodal PPARG intensity peaks (shown by black dotted line) was used to separate 
undifferentiated and differentiated cells. Percent of differentiated cells was assessed at t = 96 hours after applying adipogenic stimulus, 
using approximately 7,000 cells per technical replicate. See also Figure S1.
(C) Different patterns of DMI stimuli were applied to OP9 and 3T3-L1 preadipocyte cells: 48 hours continuous delivery (red) and 3 
different pulsatile protocols (blue): 12 hours on/12 hours off, 6 hours on/18 hours off, and 12 hours on/36 hours off.  The concentration 
of DMI stimulus used for a 48-hour continuous pulse was 1μM dexamethasone (dex), 250 μM IBMX, and 1.75 nM insulin. To keep the 
total amount of stimuli, i.e. area under the curve, constant for all 4 protocols over the 96-hour experimental timeframe, the concentration 
of dex and IBMX was increased proportionally to compensate for decreases in pulse duration. To end a pulse, the DMI containing media 
was aspirated, cells were washed gently three times with fresh media, and the cells were left in media with no glucocorticoids or IBMX, 
but containing 1.76 nM insulin. The doses of dex used were not saturating (Figures S2A and S2B), and using corticosterone instead of 
dex in the stimulus showed the same filtering effects (Figure S2C).
(D) Experiments in primary SVF preadipocytes show that the same filtering effects are also observed in primary cells. SVF 
preadipocytes were plated into 96-well wells and induced to differentiate using the same pulsing protocols from (C). The Total BODIPY 
Intensity in each well was measured by imaging.
(E) Applying continuous stimuli with durations greater than 12 hours resulted in corresponding increases in the number of differentiated 
OP9 and 3T3-L1 cells. However, the same total stimuli given in circadian pulses resulted in only minimal differentiation. 
(C-E) Barplots represents mean +/- s.e.m from 3 technical replicates. All data shown are representative of 5 independent experiments.  
A
High density
Low density
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Total BODIPY Intensity
x10
9
D
48 hours
1X, 4 pulse
12 hours each
2X, 4 pulse
6 hours each
2X, 2 pulse
12 hours each
1X, 1 pulse
Primary SVF
preadipocytes
No stimulus
HOESCHT (blue)
BODIPY (green)
PPARG (red)
ADIPONECTIN (white)
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 A
E
D
siYFP
(control)
siCEBPB
% Differentiated Cells
50
100
  0
Time (hr) 
Citrine-
CEBPB
C
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x10
4
CEBPB abundance (a.u.)
0
B
% Differentiated Cells
Stimulus Duration (hr)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14 16 18
24 36 48
Indirect Activation (DMI)
Direct Activation (Rosiglitazone)
100
80
60
40
20
0
Rosiglitazone
CEBPB
CEBPA +
other positive
feedbacks 
PPARG
Differentiated
fat cell
Time (hr)
0
1
2
3
Average mRNA
 puncta per cell
0
40
F
No stimulus
0
12 24 36 48
0
50
100
 
CEBPB abundance (a.u.)
G
DMI 
stimulus
0
12
24
36
48
Time (hr)
Time (hr)
t1/2 = 1.0 hr (0.6, 2.3) 
80
CEBPB mRNA
CEBPB protein
CEBPB 
(Mus musculus)
Citrine
t1/2 = 3.6 hr (3.0, 4.4) 
0
Time (hr)
0
1
2
3
Normalized Value
0
0.5
1
No stimulus
Figure 2. CEBPB mirrors the dynamics of the hormone input and transmits the pulse durations to PPARG 
(A) Simplified schematic of the canonical adipogenic transcriptional network (Farmer, 2006; Rosen and Spiegelman, 2014)). 
(B) Stimuli pulses of different durations were applied to OP9 cells. DMI was used to indirectly activate PPARG, and rosiglitazone was used 
to directly activate PPARG. Data from 3T3-L1 cells is shown in Figure S2D. 
(C) Suppression of differentiation by siRNA-mediated depletion of CEBPB versus control (YFP) in OP9 cells. 
(B, C) The percent of differentiated cells was measured as in Figure 1B and show mean +/- s.e.m. from 3 technical replicates, representa-
tive of 3 independent experiments. 
(D) Endogenous CEBPB (LAP* isoform) in OP9 cells was tagged with citrine (YFP) using CRISPR-mediated genome editing. Scale bar, 
10 μm. 
(E) Single-cell time courses of total citrine-CEBPB nuclear abundance (CEBPB abundance) in response to a 12-hour on / 12-hour off 
pattern of DMI stimulus (thin lines). The bold line represents the population median and shaded regions represents the 25th to 75th 
percentile of the population, n > 300 cells. Citrine-CEBPB expression increased with t1/2 ~ 2 hours with stimulus addition and decreased 
with t1/2 ~3 hours with stimulus removal, as estimated by a single exponential decay model.  
(F) 3T3-L1 cells were stimulated with circadian pulses (12-hour on / 12-hour off) of DMI and fixed at the respective time points marked 
with yellow circles (top). Cells were stained with anti-CEBPB antibody and Hoescht as a nuclear marker and imaged. The mean nuclear 
CEBPB abundance was quantitied in each cell by measuring the intensity of the anti-CEBPB antibody. Each bar represents the mean +/- 
s.e.m. of 3 technical replicates, each with approximately 500 cells. The barplot shown is representative of 3 independent experiments. 
(G) OP9 cells were stimulated with DMI for 24 hours, treated with cyclohexamide or actinomycin-D, fixed at the plotted time points, and 
immunofluorescence or RNA FISH was performed to measure CEBPB protein levels or count the number of mRNA puncta per cell, 
respectively. First-order exponential decay curves were fitted to data (t1/2 ~3.6 hr and 1 hr, respectively). The shaded region represents the 
95th confidence bounds.
Hormone 
stimuli (DMI)
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 A
Citrine-
PPARG 
Citrine
Pparg2 (Mus musculus)
Figure 3.  PPARG levels increase slowly and typically do not reach the threshold to differentiate unless hormone stimuli are 
applied for longer than 24 hours.
(A) Endogenous PPARG2 in OP9 cells was tagged with citrine (YFP) using CRISPR-mediated genome editing. Scale bar, 5 μm.  
(B) Identifying a PPARG threshold for differentiation by carrying out live-cell imaging of citrine-PPARG cells induced to differentiate with 
a DMI stimulation for 48 hours followed by insulin for another 48 hours.  When the DMI stimulus is removed at 48 hours, cells either 
sustain or lose the increase in nuclear PPARG intensity (PPARG abundance). The thin lines show 50 representative single cell traces, 
and the bold line shows the population mean of 500 cells. Cells that differentiated after 96 hours are marked in red, and cells that stayed 
in the preadipocyte state are marked in blue. The yellow triangle shows the threshold calculated in Figure 3D.
(C) Timecourses from 419 cells were divided into 5 groups (bins) according to their PPARG level at 48 hours, and the average of each 
bin was plotted. An initial drop was seen in each averaged timecourse after DMI removal, resulting in a return to the basal state for cells 
that had lower levels of PPARG and a delayed increase to the maximal state in cells that had higher levels of PPARG.
(D) Scatter plot comparing the level of PPARG in the same cell measured at 48 hours just before DMI is removed and at 96 hours when 
PPARG levels reach their plateau in differentiated cells. The color of the dots and histograms mark cells that will be differentiated (red) 
or not differentiated (blue) at 96 hours, respectively. The histograms on top shows the existence of a clear PPARG threshold already at 
48 hours before the stimulus is removed (marked with dotted line) that can distinguish between cells that will go on to differentiate from 
those that will not.  The yellow triangle shows the threshold.
(E) Live cell imaging of citrine-PPARG cells following transfection with CEBPA-targeted or control(YFP) siRNA shows that knockdown 
of CEBPA, a main feedback partner of PPARG, results in loss of the feedback engagement point. Cells were stimulated to differentiate 
by adding DMI. Plotted lines are population median traces with shaded regions representing 25th and 75th percentiles of approximately 
700 cells per condition.
B
Differentiated
Undifferentiated
Time (hr)
 PPARG abundance (a.u.)
1000
500
0 0
24
48
72
96
C
D
0
100
200
300
400
siNegative
siCEBPA
Time (hr)
0
12
24
36
48
PPARG  abundance (a.u.)
48hr DMI stimulus
48hr DMI stimulus
48hr DMI stimulus
bins 1-3
bins 4-5
24
48
72
0
500
250
0
Differentiated
Undifferentiated
Time (hr)
E
log2(PPARG abundance) 
at 48 hrs (a.u.)
Cell Count
Cell Count
log2 (PPARG abundance)
at 96 hrs (a.u.)
4
6
8
10
4
6
8
10
300
0
0
 PPARG abundance (a.u.)
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 A
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
Time (hr)
100
E
t1/2 = 1 hr
t1/2 = 3 hr
t1/2 = 12 hr
t1/2 = 36 hr
F
Time (hr)
Average mRNA 
puncta per cell
t1/2 = 3.5 hr (2.8, 4.7)
CEBPA mRNA
Normalized Intensity
CEBPA protein
t1/2 = 1.3 hr (1, 1.9)
3
2
1
0
120
80
40
0
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
Time (hr)
3
2
1
0
PPARG Protein
0
1
2
3
0
20
40
60
PPARG mRNA
Average mRNA 
puncta per cell
80
t1/2 = 0.8 hr (0.7, 0.9)
t1/2 = 1.4 hr (1.1, 1.9)
Normalized Intensity
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
Time (hr)
0
1
2
3
Time (hr)
B
0
20
40
60
80
Continuous
 48hr DMI
12hr DMI 
pulses
% Differentiated Cells
No stimulus
Time (hr)
0
12
24
36
48
60
0
20
40
60
80
C
12hr DMI pulses
12hr DMI pulses
24
48
72
96
0
Time (hr)
Differentiated
Undifferentiated
0
500
1000
PPARG abundance (a.u.)
D
Continuous stimulus
   
Figure 4. The core adipogenic transcription transcription factors PPARG and CEBPA rapidly degrade which keeps 
PPARG below the threshold to differentiate in response to oscillatory circadian hormone inputs.  
(A) Single-cell timecourses showing the dynamics of citrine-PPARG expression when adipogenic DMI stimuli are applied in a 
pulsatile 12-hour on/12-hour off manner over 4 days. Cells were marked as differentiated (red) and undifferentiated (blue) 
based on whether their final citrine-PPARG values was above or below the threshold for differentiation defined in Figure 3. 
(B) Comparison of the percent of differentiated cells resulting from continuous (Figure 3B) versus circadian (Figure 4A) stimuli. 
Error bars show mean +/- s.e.m. from 6 technical replicates, representing 3 independent experiments. 
(C) Zoom-in of the undifferentiated cells (blue traces) in (A). If PPARG levels do not reach the threshold to differentiate, PPARG 
levels drop back down to precursor levels each time the glucocorticoid and cAMP-inducing (DMI) stimulus is removed. 
(D) Lifetime analysis of PPARG protein and mRNA as in Figure 2G. 
(E) Plot of the times required to reach steady state for molecules with different half-lives and first order decay. 
(F) A slow-degrading regulator converts input stimuli with increasing pulse durations into increasing output signal amplitudes 
whereas a fast-degrading regulator outputs only a single maximal amplitude. Model output in response to different input pulse 
protocols shown on the left and assuming exponential increase and decay of proteins with t1/2 = 3 and 34 hrs, respectively.
(G) Lifetime analysis of CEBPA protein and mRNA as in Figure 2G.
50
 
0
Stimulus 
24
48
Time (hr)
72
96
100
50
0
Time (hr)
0
60
120
Fast-degrading protein 
(t1/2  = 3 hr)
Continuous
180
12 hr on / 12 hr off
Rel. protein abundance
(% of steady-state)
Rel. protein abundance
(% of steady-state)
Slow-degrading protein 
(t1/2 = 34 hr)
Time (hr)
0
60
120
180
100
0
50
Continuous
18 hr on / 6 hr off
12 hr on / 12 hr off
6 hr on / 18 hr off
Rel. protein abundance
(% of steady-statel)
G
PPARG abundance (a.u.)
DMI pulses
Control pulses
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 C
F
Control
lls
e
C
 
d
e
t
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
D
 
%
0
20
40
60
siControl
siFABP4
0
20
40
0
200
400
Time (hr)
PPARG abundance (a.u.)
 DMI stimulus
D
FABP4 mRNA
FABP4 protein
Time (hr)
Normalized Intensity
Average mRNA 
puncta per cell
1.2
0
50
100
150
Time (hr)
t1/2 = 34 hr (16, -411)
0
4
8
12
0
1
2
3
0.8
0.4
0
t1/2 = 3.6 hr (2.8, 5.2)
A
Figure 5.  FABP4 is an example of a slow-degrading PPARG regulator that can mediate a slow increase in PPARG 
expression during adipogenesis 
(A) Lifetime analysis of FABP4 protein as in Figure 2G.
(B) Lifetime of FABP4 mRNA obtained as in Figure 2G by mRNA FISH analysis of OP9 cells fixed at different times after the addition 
of actinomycin D. Cebpa mRNA FISH images  are shown for comparison. See also Figure S5.
(C) Lifetime of FABP4 versus RPL18 mRNA obtained by RT-PCR analysis of OP9 cells collected at different times after the addition of 
actinomycin D. The lifetime of CEBPA versus RPL18 mRNA is shown for comparison. See also Figure S5.
(E) Single cell immunofluorescence analysis showing the mean nuclear PPARG and the mean cytosolic FABP4 values in each 
cell stimulated with DMI for 24 hours or 48 hours and fixed at 96 hours. Each scatter plot represents approximately 5000 cells and 
is colored based on cell density.
(F) OP9 cells were transfected with siRNA targeting FABP4, CEBPA, or control (YFP), induced to differentiate 24 hours later by using
the standard protocol of 48-hours of DMI addition followed by 48 hours in media with just insulin. Differentiation was assessed at 
96 hours as in Figure 1B. 
(G) Overexpression of FABP4 increases differentiation even without DMI stimulation. OP9 cells were transfected with constructs 
expressing either just mcherry(control) or mcherry-FABP4 and left in normal growth media for 5 days. No adipogenic stimulus 
was added. mcherry is a version of the red fluorescent protein (Shaner et al., 2004). 
(E-F) Percent of differentiated cells was assesed as in Figure 1B. Barplots show mean +/- s.e.m. from 3 technical replicates, 
representative of 3 independent experiments. 
(G-H) Citrine-PPARG cells were transfected in (E) with FABP4-targeted or control(YFP) siRNAs or in (F) with mcherry(control) or 
mcherry-FABP4. Twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were induced to differentiate by applying a 48-hour DMI stimulus, 
and live-cell imaging was carried out to monitor PPARG levels in individual cells. Plotted lines are population median traces with 
shaded regions representing 25th and 75th percentiles of approximately 700 cells per condition.
0
20
40
Time (hr)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
PPARG abundance (a.u.)
Control
FABP4-OX
 DMI stimulus
E
FABP4-OX
B
0
100
200
8
10
12
14
0
100
200
log2 (FABP4 
abundance ) (a.u.)
PPARG abundance (a.u.)
Fix at 
96 hr
Fix at 
96 hr
24hr DMI
48hr DMI
High density
Low density
siControl
siFABP4
% Differentiated Cells
0
20
40
60
80
100
No stimulus
siCEBPA
G
H
FABP4
CEBPA
t1/2 > rpl18 half-life
fabp4 / rpl18
Time (hr)
t1/2 = 1.6 hr (1.0, 4)
Normalized value
cebpa / rpl18
Time (hr)
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 Figure 6. A signaling circuit with a fast and slow positive feedback can trigger differentiation for continuous stimuli and reject 
daily oscillations
(A) Schematic of the dual feedback loop circuit that rejects circadian inputs but locks cells in the differentiated state for continuous 
stimuli. 
(B) Quantitative simulations when a continuous 48-hour stimulus is applied show that the slow positive feedback regulator mediates a 
slow buildup of PPARG to the threshold for differentiation. The threshold is marked with the dotted line.  
(C) Same model simulations as in (B) but with an input stimulus applied in circadian 12-hour on / 12-hour off oscillations. The slow 
regulator builds to a steady-state below the threshold in cells stimulated with circadian hormonal oscillations which keeps levels of its 
feedback partner PPARG permanently low and below the PPARG threshold where differentiation is triggered. 
(D and E) Addition of cell-to-cell variability (30% lognormal noise) to a model for a continuous 48-hour stimulus results in high rates of 
differentiation, but now with variable delays (D). In contrast,  addition of cell-to-cell variability to the model with daily oscillating stimuli 
now allows PPARG levels in a few cells to reach the threshold and result in differentiation.
(F) Barplot summarizing 400 simulations with continuous stimulus was applied for 48 hours and 400 stimulations when an oscillating 
12-hr on / 12-hr off stimulus was applied. Cells were categorized as differentiated if the PPARG level in that cell rose above the threshold 
and high PPARG was maintained even when input stimulus was removed.  Model results are similar to results from the fixed and live-cell 
experiments shown in Figures 1C-D, 3B, and 4A-B.
Each trace in the plots in (B-E) represents a different simulated cell.
A
B
D
0
100
150
50
Time (hr)
0
100
200
300
Time (hr)
SLOW 
feedback 
partner
PPARG
SLOW feedback partner
PPARG
Oscillating stimulus 
Continuous stimulus 
Protein abundnce (a.u.)
0
1
2
3
4
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Continuous stimulus + Noise 
 PPARG abundance (a.u.)
Time (hr)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
1
2
3
 PPARG abundance (a.u.)
Time (hr)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
1
2
3
C
E
Glucocorticoid
and other
hormonal
stimulation
CEBPB
FAST
feedback
partner 
PPARG
Differentiated
fat cell
SLOW 
feedback
partner
t1/2 > 30 hr 
t1/2 ~ 3 hr
Continuous
stimulus
Oscillating 
stimulus
% Differentiated Cells
F
Oscillating stimulus + Noise 
60
40
20
0
Protein abundnce (a.u.)
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
 Figure 7. Animals implanted with Corticosterone (Cort) pellets had sustained, flattened elevations in Cort and significant 
increases in adipose tissue mass. 
(A) Schematic of pellet implantation protocol to flatten glucocorticoid oscillations in animals. 
(B) Timecourse of average Cort levels in mice implanted with Cort pellets compared to mice implanted with Sham pellets. 
N=3, mean +/- SEM.
(C) Timecourses showing weight of mice implanted with Cort pellets compared to mice implanted with Sham pellets. 
N=6, mean +/- SEM. Unpaired t-test (Sham pellet vs. Cort pellet): * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
(D) Schematic of daily injection protocol to selectively increase peak amplitudes of Cort in animals. 
(E) Peak amplitudes of Cort are greater than 40-fold higher for mice injected daily with Cort compared to mice sham-injected daily with 
phosphate buffer solution (PBS). N=3, mean +/- SEM.
(F) Timecourses showing weight of mice injected daily with Cort compared to Sham-injected daily with PBS. N=6, mean +/- SEM. 
(G) Food intake per mouse over the 26-day experimental timecourse for the four specified groups of mice. Each group consisted 
of 6 mice, housed 3 per cage. Each bar shows the food consumed in the two cages per group divided by 6 mice.
(H and I) The weights of both the Epididymal (visceral) and Inguinal (subcutaneous) fat depots were significantly increased for the 
Cort pellet group but not for the other 3 groups of mice. N=6, mean +/- SD. Unpaired t-test: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
(J) A custom cell contour image analysis program written in MATLAB was used to automatically measure adipocyte size from H & E 
stained fat tissue slices. Right, example of original H & E image. Left, segmented image showing identitified adipocytes in green. 
Cells touching borders or not meeting shape criteria were excluded. 
(K-L) Barplots of the average cell volume (K) and number of cells (L) in the Epididymal and Inguinal adipose fat depots in mice treated
with Sham or Cort pellets for 21 days. The number of cells were derived by dividing total fat depot weight by the average cell volume. 
Each bar represents ~10,000 adipocytes analyzed from 90 images per condition (6 mice with either implanted Sham or Cort pellets 
x 3 tissue sections per mouse of either Epididymal or Inguinal fat x 5 images per section). Error bars show s.e.m. based on 90 images.
C
A
B
Corticosterone Pellet
Corticosterone Injection
G
D
F
E
J
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
100
200
300
400
6000
10000
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
H
I
K
L
Inguinal
Epididymal
Number of cells in fat depot
12
8
4
0
x105
Number of cells in fat depot
12
8
4
0
x105
15
10
5
0
x102
Average cell volume
(picoliters)
8
6
4
0
x102
2
Average cell volume
(picoliters)
Inguinal
Epididymal
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Injection 
Cort Injection
Sham Injection 
Cort Injection
Time of Day (hours:minutes)
Time of Day (hours:minutes)
8:00
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Injection
Cort Injection
Food Intake (g)
80
60
40
20
 0
11:00
14:00
17:00
20:00
23:00
8:00
11:00
14:00
17:00
20:00
23:00
Corticosterone in 
Blood Serum (ng/ml)
Body Weight Gain 
(% of initial body weight)
Body Weight Gain 
(% of initial body weight)
Corticosterone in 
Blood Serum (ng/ml)
0
200
400
600
800
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Injection
Cort Injection
Inguinal WAT (mg)
0
500
1000
1500
Sham Pellet
Cort Pellet
Sham Injection
Cort Injection
Epididymal WAT (mg)
*
* *
*
*
*
* *
*
*
**
*
*
*
**
*
Time (days)
Time (days)
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
  
 
Control 
Pellet 
Cort  
Pellet 
Control 
Injection 
Cort  
Injection 
 
Body weight gain (g) 
 
3.32 ± 0.28 
 
4.67 ± 0.56 
 
1.08 ± 0.33 
 
1.62 ± 0.14 
 
Body weight gain (% of 
initial body weight) 
 
 
14.0 ± 1.2 
 
 
20.1 ± 2.5 
 
 
4.4 ± 1.3 
 
 
6.4 ± 0.6 
 
Inguinal adipose mass 
(mg) 
 
 
251.6 ± 25.0 
 
 
515.3 ± 65.5 
 
 
258.6 ± 18.6 
 
 
271.6 ± 27.7 
 
Inguinal adipose mass (% 
of final body weight) 
 
 
0.93 ± 0.09 
 
 
1.83 ± 0.21 
 
 
1.00 ± 0.07 
 
 
1.01 ± 0.10 
 
Epididymal adipose mass 
(mg) 
 
 
485.5 ± 37.6 
 
 
1070.2 ± 119.4 
 
 
521.4 ± 43.0 
 
 
538.1 ± 69.3 
 
Epididymal adipose mass 
(% of final body weight) 
 
 
1.80 ± 0.14 
 
 
3.81 ± 0.38 
 
 
2.02 ± 0.16 
 
 
2.01 ± 0.25 
 
Food intake (g/mouse) 
 
73.9 
 
70.9 
 
68.2 
 
74.0 
 
 
Table 1. Summary of experiments described in Figure 7 in which circulating Corticosterone 
(Cort) levels are manipulated in mice using either implanted Cort pellets or daily Cort 
injections. Values are mean +/- SEM. 
 
 
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/245332
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Jan. 9, 2018; 
