 Why screening tests to predict injury do not work—
and probably never will…: a critical review
Roald Bahr1,2
1Department of Sports
Medicine, Oslo Sports Trauma
Research Center, Norwegian
School of Sport Sciences, Oslo,
Norway
2Aspetar Orthopaedic and
Sports Medicine Hospital,
Doha, Qatar
Correspondence to
Professor Roald Bahr,
Department of Sports
Medicine, Oslo Sports Trauma
Research Center, Norwegian
School of Sport Sciences, P.O.
Box 4014, Ullevål Stadion,
Oslo 0806, Norway;
roald.bahr@nih.no
Accepted 30 March 2016
Published Online First
19 April 2016
To cite: Bahr R. Br J Sports
Med 2016;50:776–780.
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses if and how a periodic health
examination to screen for risk factors for injury can be
used to mitigate injury risk. The key question asked is
whether it is possible to use screening tests to identify
who is at risk for a sports injury—in order to address
the deficit through a targeted intervention programme.
The paper demonstrates that to validate a screening test
to predict and prevent sports injuries, at least 3 steps are
needed. First, a strong relationship needs to be
demonstrated in prospective studies between a marker
from a screening test and injury risk (step 1). Second,
the test properties need to be examined in relevant
populations, using appropriate statistical tools (step 2).
Unfortunately, there is currently no example of a
screening test for sports injuries with adequate test
properties. Given the nature of potential screening tests
(where test performance is usually measured on a
continuous scale from low to high), substantial overlap is
to be expected between players with high and low risk
of injury. Therefore, although there are a number of tests
demonstrating a statistically significant association with
injury risk, and therefore help the understanding of
causative factors, such tests are unlikely to be able to
predict injury with sufficient accuracy. The final step
needed is to document that an intervention programme
targeting athletes identified as being at high risk
through a screening programme is more beneficial than
the same intervention programme given to all athletes
(step 3). To date, there is no intervention study providing
support for screening for injury risk.
Imagine that you are planning an injury prevention
programme for your team. Chances are that you will
consider including a periodic health examination
(PHE) to screen athletes for injury risk as a key com-
ponent. As outlined in the second step of the van
Mechelen model,1 the classic approach to sports
injury prevention research, it is necessary to under-
stand the risk factors and injury mechanisms that
play a part in the occurrence of sports injuries to
develop a targeted prevention programme.2 3 This
paper addresses this step, focusing on if and how a
PHE to screen for risk factors for injury can be used
to mitigate injury risk. I will use hamstring and
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries, two of the
most common injuries in team sports,4 5 to illustrate
key issues. The key question is: ‘Is it possible to use
screening tests to identify who is at risk for a ham-
string or ACL injury—in order to address the deficit
through a targeted intervention programme?’
THE PURPOSE OF SCREENING
Screening is a strategy used in a population to
detect a disease in individuals without signs or
symptoms of that disease. The intention is to iden-
tify pathological conditions early, thus enabling
earlier intervention and management in the hope
of reducing future morbidity and mortality. Perhaps
the most famous, and successful, example is the
infant screening programmes instituted worldwide
in the early 1960s for phenylketonuria (Følling’s
disease).6 If left untreated, phenylketonuria leads to
severe brain function abnormalities. In contrast,
patients who follow the prescribed dietary treat-
ment from birth may have no symptoms at all.
Recent screening programmes include breast cancer
screening with mammography and prostate cancer
screening with a blood test measuring prostate-
specific antigen. However, it should be noted that
although screening may lead to an earlier diagnosis,
not all programmes have been shown to be benefi-
cial and the value of current programmes for breast
and prostate cancer screening are being debated.7 8
To ensure that screening programmes confer the
benefits
intended,
the
WHO
published
the
Wilson-Jungner criteria for appraising a screening
programme.9 These are the main criteria: (1) that
the condition being screened for is an important
health problem (depending not just on how serious
the condition is, but also how common it is), (2)
that there is a detectable early stage, (3) that treat-
ment at an early stage is of more benefit than at a
later stage and (4) that a suitable test is available to
detect disease in the early stage. Clearly, injuries
represent an important health problem in many
sports (criterion 1). However, criteria 2–4 need
adaptation when being applied to the case of sports
injury prevention.
First, while screening for breast cancer involves
detecting established disease as early as possible,
screening for injury risk usually involves using a
performance test to detect impairments which pre-
dispose the individual to injury (eg, hamstring
muscle weakness, poor knee alignment). This high-
lights an important difference between disease
detection and injury prediction. When screening
for disease, the individual is classified as healthy or
sick; the outcome is dichotomous (yes/no). When
risk factors for injuries are assessed, such as eccen-
tric hamstring strength or knee control in a vertical
drop jump test, the outcome is usually continuous.
Therefore, one more step is needed to make the
test be useful in clinical practice: the continuous
variable must be translated to a dichotomous
outcome, that is, whether the athlete is at increased
risk or not (yes/no).
Second, when screening for disease, the objective
is to initiate treatment as early as possible. In sports
injury prevention, the objective is early intervention
to minimise the risk factor before injury occurs.
Editor’s choice
Scan to access more
free content
Bahr R. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–780. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256
1 of 6
Review
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256 on 19 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 Examples include a strength training programme, targeting
players with low hamstring strength, or a balance training to
improve
knee
control,
targeting
at-risk
athletes
identified
through a vertical drop jump test.
Risk factors can be modifiable and non-modifiable, and
screening tests typically measure modifiable factors such as
strength or knee control since these can be targeted for change,
for example, through specific training programmes. However, it
should be noted that non-modifiable factors (such as gender or
previous injury history) can be used as well, to target interven-
tion measures to the subgroup thought to be at increased risk.
DEVELOPING A SCREENING PROGRAMME
Research on risk factors for injury is advocated for two reasons:
to help understand why injuries happen and to predict who is at
risk of injury. These two concepts are often, and erroneously,
confused. One common misconception is that all it takes to
develop a screening test is to identify a statistically (highly) sig-
nificant association between the result from a screening test and
increased injury risk. T
ypically, exploratory studies will have a
cohort of athletes undergo a series of tests during the preseason
to identify potential risk factors for injury and then injuries are
recorded
prospectively
during
the
subsequent
competitive
season. If a significant association is identified between one or
more factors and injury risk, it may be tempting to conclude
that these can be used to predict who is at risk of injury.
However, as illustrated in figure 1, this is only the first step
towards a validated screening programme.
The next step required is to repeat the same study using the
exact same screening test, but this time to use predetermined
cut-off criteria to separate athletes with high risk from the rest.
This needs to be performed in cohorts representing all potential
user groups for the screening test. In this second step, the ques-
tion is not how strong the association between the test result
and injury risk is (eg, OR, p value), but how well the test pre-
dicts who becomes injured and who does not in a new athlete
population, different from the one used to develop the test
criteria.
Once a test has been developed and validated with acceptable
test properties, the final step is to examine the efficacy of a
screening programme. As noted above, non-modifiable factors
may be relevant for stratification purposes, but the ultimate
purpose of athlete screening is to identify athletes at risk and
reduce
their
risk
by
addressing
modifiable
risk
factors.
Therefore, a prerequisite for a screening programme to be
effective is that methods exist to modify the risk factor before
injury occurs. The final step should be completed as a rando-
mised controlled trial, where the treatment group receives the
combined screening and intervention programme.
The treatment group outcome (injury rate) can be compared
with that of a control group, which trains as usual, but should
also be compared with that of a control group where all athletes
are given the prevention programme. This is another issue that
separates disease screening from athlete screening. If the disease
is breast cancer, treatment is obviously only relevant for those
identified with disease (or early stages of disease). However, if
the goal is to prevent ACL or hamstring injury, the intervention
can be offered to all athletes. The delivery cost is in most cases
the same; there is usually no risk associated with the prevention
programme per se, and the training may even improve sports
performance. In other words, for a screening test to be relevant,
it needs to capture the majority of athletes with increased injury
risk, so they do not miss the opportunity to prevent injury
through targeted training programmes. Ideally, it should also be
able to separate athletes with low risk from the rest of the
group, so they do not waste time doing prevention programmes
they do not need.
SCREENING TEST PROPERTIES
The ability of a test to predict injury is often described using the
same test properties as those used for diagnostic tests, that is,
sensitivity (does the test capture all those with injury), specificity
(does it capture only those with injury), positive predictive value
(how many with a positive test are injured) and negative predict-
ive value (how many with a negative test are not injured). The
following will explain these concepts and examine their rele-
vance in the athlete screening setting, using data on ACL and
hamstring injuries as examples.
Hewett et al10 introduced the vertical drop jump test as a
screening test for ACL injury in female athletes in 2005 based
on a prospective cohort study. Of 205 young female athletes
tested in the preseason, 9 went on to suffer an ACL rupture. Of
a range of different movement characteristics compared between
injured and uninjured players, they observed the strongest asso-
ciation with injury risk for peak external knee abduction
moment during landing, concluding that this factor predicted
Figure 1
Three research steps needed to develop and validate a
screening programme.
2 of 6
Bahr R. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–780. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256
Review
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256 on 19 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 ACL injury status with 78% sensitivity and 73% specificity. This
study, although the sample is small, is a good example of the
first step towards a screening test.
Figure 2 has been adapted to illustrate their data and demon-
strate one key challenge when developing a screening test:
There is substantial overlap in test results (external knee abduc-
tion moment) between the injured and uninjured groups; the
test does not separate these into two distinctly different popula-
tions. This should not be surprising, as most of the tests that
potentially could be used to screen for injury risk measure phys-
ical performance characteristics such as strength, flexibility,
balance or reaction time. In a relatively homogeneous group of
athletes, these characteristics typically follow a normal distribu-
tion. Unless the relationship between test score and injury risk is
extremely strong, considerable overlap in test scores should
therefore be expected between injured and uninjured athletes.
This is different from screening for early disease, where the
screening test is designed to have a yes/no outcome. The mammog-
raphy programme screens for the presence of a tumour or not.
Prostate cancer screening is based on a blood test where most indi-
viduals with disease (although not all) display a markedly
increased serum level compared with the general population.
For an athlete screening test, the critical question is where the
cut-off value separating high-risk and low-risk groups should be
set. Sensitivity and specificity are inversely related. This means
that if you want to capture all injured players (100% sensitivity),
specificity suffers (more uninjured athletes will be classified as
having high risk). In figure 2, scenario A results in a sensitivity
of only 44%, that is, only four of nine injured athletes are classi-
fied as high risk. Scenario B results in a sensitivity of 78% (the
best fit with the data), while the cut-off depicted for scenario C
is needed to capture 8 of the 9 injured players. However, speci-
ficity will then have dropped, from 93% in scenario A to 70%
in scenario C. The positive predictive value is low in all scen-
arios, ranging from 14% to 7%.
It follows from this that the optimal cut-off value for screen-
ing purposes is not necessarily the value representing the best
fit. If the intervention is costly (for athletes this usually means
time consuming), a conservative cut-off (high specificity) may be
more appropriate. But if the intervention is easy, has no side
effects and is highly effective, a cut-off with high sensitivity is
more reasonable.
However, the all-important next step involves using the same
test, applying a predetermined cut-off value, on a new popula-
tion of athletes to: (1) confirm the association between risk
factor and injury risk, and (2) test the performance of the
cut-off value selected. Several groups have examined the vertical
drop jump test and, unfortunately, other studies have not been
able to confirm that there is an association between knee abduc-
tion and injury risk.11
12 The most stringent study was by
Krosshaug et al,12 explicitly designed to validate the Hewett test
in a cohort of >700 elite female football and handball players,
of whom 42 suffered a new non-contact ACL injury. They
tested five predetermined candidate risk factors in separate logis-
tic regression analyses, with new ACL injury as the outcome: (1)
knee valgus angle at initial contact, (2) peak knee abduction
moment,
(3)
peak
knee
flexion
angle,
(4)
peak
vertical
ground-reaction force and (5) medial knee displacement. While
knee abduction moment was not associated with injury risk,
ACL-injured players displayed greater total medial knee dis-
placement during landing, as shown in figure 3 (although only
when players with previous ACL injury were included in the
analyses). However, these data once again illustrate the main
challenges with athletic screening tests: the risk factor is con-
tinuous and there is substantial overlap between groups. It can
be seen clearly from figure 3, where the mean difference in knee
displacement was only 5 mm, that it is not possible to select a
cut-off value to predict who is at risk and who is not.
Hamstring
injuries
are
also
common,
and
a
recent
meta-analysis demonstrated that older age, increased quadriceps
peak torque and history of hamstring injury were associated
with increased risk of hamstring muscle strain-type injuries in
sport.13 However, the authors also observed that studies were
Figure 2
Schematic representation of data from Hewett et al,10
illustrating the relationship between external knee abduction moment
(reported as Nm adjusted for body height and weight) and risk of ACL
injury. Uninjured players are shown in grey, while athletes who went on
to suffer an ACL injury during the season are shown in black. The
dotted lines denoted in A, B and C illustrate three alternative cut-off
values. Note that the relative proportion of injured (N=9) to uninjured
athletes (N=196) is not to scale, as each injured athlete is depicted by
a full-size figure.
Figure 3
Frequency diagram with Gaussian regression lines of medial
knee displacement (cm) in 42 injured (top panel) and 669 uninjured
knees (lower panel). Adapted from Krosshaug et al.12
Bahr R. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–780. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256
3 of 6
Review
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256 on 19 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 small, as previously noted.14 In a recent study, van Dyk et al15
therefore examined the relationship between injury risk and
various strength measures in 614 football players; during four
seasons, 190 of these suffered a hamstring strain injury. They
observed that eccentric hamstring strength at 60°/s was inde-
pendently associated with injury risk (OR 1.37 per 1 Nm/kg dif-
ference). However, as illustrated in figure 4, again there is
substantial overlap between injured and uninjured players,
which clearly illustrates that a screening test based on eccentric
hamstring strength cannot be used to predict injury risk.
Both of these examples illustrate that while a statistically sig-
nificant association indicates that there may be a causal relation-
ship between a specific test result and injury risk, this is not
sufficient to use the test to predict who is at risk of injury.
Markers proposed for classifying or predicting risk in individual
participants must be held to a much higher standard than
merely being associated with outcome.16 17
It should be noted that there are more appropriate statistical
measures than sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative pre-
dictive values and ORs, which should be used to describe the
predictive ability of a screening test, such as likelihood ratio18 19
or receiver operating characteristic curve analyses.16 In the
examples used here, receiver operating characteristic curve ana-
lyses revealed an area under the curve of only 0.60 (vertical
drop jump test)12 and 0.56 (eccentric hamstring strength),15
where a value of 1.0 indicates perfect prediction and 0.5 indi-
cates a truly useless test (one no better at identifying true posi-
tives
than
flipping
a
coin).
This
emphasises
that
more
appropriate statistical methods confirm that these markers
cannot be used as screening tests to predict ACL or hamstring
injury, respectively.
Combining information on several different markers may
improve predictive ability. However, even in larger studies, where
the sample size is sufficient to perform multivariate analyses, the
results are not impressive. Recent studies from Australia illustrate
this.20–22 A novel test for eccentric hamstring (knee flexor)
strength based on the Nordic hamstring exercise was completed
during the preseason in three cohorts of 210 elite Australian foot-
ball,20 178 rugby union21 and 152 association football (soccer)
players.22 In addition, previous injury, age, biceps femoris fascicle
length, between leg strength imbalance were included in multi-
variate models. However, the association with injury risk did not
improve markedly when adding these factors to the models. The
same studies also illustrate the importance of validating the
cut-off value for eccentric hamstring strength chosen to determine
risk in different cohorts; the best fit with injury risk was 256 N,20
268 N21 and 337 N22 in the three athlete groups.
CATEGORICAL RISK FACTORS AS SCREENING MARKERS
Also in sport, there are examples of binary categorical risk
factors, such as history of previous injury (yes/no) and sex
(male/female), and the question is how these behave as markers
for injury. Most such markers are non-modifiable, although it
may be argued that history of previous injury represents a modi-
fiable factor, at least for some injury types. The risk of reinjury
is highest immediately after return to sport, and wanes with
time.23 24 One example is that after an ankle sprain, the reinjury
rate is about 50% during the first 6 months after return to play,
but only 4% after 2 years, the same as for healthy ankles.23
Another study shows that graft ruptures after ACL surgery also
tend to occur within the first 6 months.25 The explanation is
probably that, with time, injured ligaments and muscles heal
and their functional properties (strength, balance, neuromuscu-
lar control) improve.
Nevertheless, a consistent finding across most injury types and
sports is that a history of previous injury is the by far strongest
risk factor for injury, with very impressive ORs, often in the 2–6
range.12 13 26–29 Table 1 shows an example based on data from
a one-season prospective study in Icelandic football, where
players were asked about previous injuries before the start of
the season and new injuries were recorded throughout the
season.30 This study observed the highest OR ever reported for
history of previous injury as a risk factor for hamstring strains;
the OR was 7.4 (95% CI 2.9 to 19.0, p<0.001, univariate logis-
tic regression).
However, the question is how well this marker predicts a new
hamstring injury. Using the traditional measures for the accuracy
of diagnostic tests, the sensitivity (10/19) was 53%, the specificity
(433/497) was 87%, the positive predictive value (10/74) was 14%
and the negative predictive value (433/442) 98% in this sample.
In other words, if this marker had been used to predict injury
(ie, to decide who needed an intervention programme), almost half
Figure 4
Frequency diagram with Gaussian regression lines of body
weight (BW)-adjusted hamstrings eccentric torque at 60°/s (Nm) in 190
injured (top panel) and 424 uninjured players (lower panel). Adapted
from van Dyk et al.15
Table 1
Comparison of the risk of new hamstring strains between
players who previously had sustained such an injury and players
with no previous injury
New hamstring
injury
No hamstring
injury
Total
History of previous
hamstring injury
10 (13.5%)
64
74
No previous hamstring
injury
9 (2.0%)
433
442
Total
19
497
516
Each leg was treated as a separate case. Adapted from figure 2 in Arnason et al.29
4 of 6
Bahr R. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–780. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256
Review
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256 on 19 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 of the players (9 out of 19) who went on to suffer an injury would
have been denied the intervention. T
o prevent hamstring strains,
the Nordic hamstring exercise programme has been developed as a
highly effective intervention,31–33 which is easy to do and has no
side effects when performed correctly
. Therefore, in this case, it
seems inappropriate to use a marker with low sensitivity.
Still, it may be argued that since injury risk is much higher
among players with a history of previous injuries, they are the
ones who should be targeted with a prevention programme (or
perhaps a more intensive rehabilitation programme before and
continuing after return to play). This view has some merits, as
illustrated by the randomised trial by Petersen and colleagues,32
testing the effect of the Nordic hamstring exercise programme
on hamstring injury risk. They showed that while 25 players
without history of previous injury (95% CI 15 to 72 players)
needed to perform the exercise programme to prevent one new
injury (the number needed to treat), only 3 players with a
history of previous injury (2 to 6) had to use the programme to
prevent one recurrent injury. However, it should be noted that
even in the group without previous injury, the preventive effect
was substantial; a 59% reduction in injury risk was seen in this
group (compared with an impressive 86% among players with a
history of injury). As nearly 50% of hamstring injuries happen
to players with no previous injury, a coach may therefore want
to offer the programme to the entire team. This illustrates that
when data from screening and intervention studies (based on
screening) are available, informed decisions can be made to
decide if a prevention programme should be introduced and
who should be using the programme.
Another example illustrating the issue of stratification of prevent-
ive interventions is the sex difference in ACL injury risk. Studies
have shown that the ACL injuries are anywhere between twofold
and fivefold more common among women than men, depending
on age group and sport.34 35 This is reflected in the research carried
out on risk factors for ACL injuries; the studies performed to
examine the performance of the vertical drop jump test have been
performed on women only
.10–12 It is also echoed in the intervention
trials performed to test the effect of various prevention programmes
for ACL injuries, which, almost exclusively
, are performed on
females only
.36 It may be expected that this is also reflected in how
individuals and teams have taken on such programmes; ACL injury
prevention programmes are most likely almost exclusively taken
aboard by female athletes. However, it should be noted that these
are decisions that have not been based on using sex as a predictive
marker for injury risk as such, but rather on the high prevalence of
ACL injuries among female athletes. There are examples of popula-
tions of male athletes, such as professional football players in the
Gulf region, where the prevalence of ACL injury seemingly is suffi-
cient to warrant preventive initiatives.25
As a final note on categorical, non-modifiable risk factors,
these can be used to make individual decisions, as well: “I am a
young woman. I have had one ACL injury. I should probably
give up basketball.” This decision is not helped by a vertical
drop jump test or other physical tests.
SHOULD WE DISCONTINUE PHES?
This paper demonstrates that to validate a screening test to
predict and prevent sports injuries, at least three steps are
needed. First, there needs to be a strong relationship between
the marker and injury risk. Second, the test properties need to
be examined in relevant populations, using appropriate statis-
tical tools. Unfortunately, there is currently no example of a
screening test for sports injuries with adequate test properties.
The third and final step would be to document that a screening-
based intervention is more beneficial than intervention alone.
However, given the nature of existing screening tests (where test
performance is measured on a continuous scale from low to
high), substantial overlap is typically seen between players with
high and low risk of injury. Therefore, although the factor
tested may demonstrate a highly significant relationship with
injury risk, and in this way improve the understanding of causa-
tive factors, such tests are unlikely to be able to predict injury
with sufficient accuracy.
While predicting future injury risk through screening tests is
unrealistic, a PHE or pre-participation examination can serve
several other purposes, as outlined in the the IOC consensus state-
ment on periodic health evaluation of elite athletes.37 First and
foremost, it includes a comprehensive assessment of the athlete’s
current health status, and, typically
, it is the entry point for
medical care of the athlete. As demonstrated by Bakken and collea-
gues,19 in a large cohort of professional football players, the
majority of athletes presented with at least one current health con-
dition and one in three with a musculoskeletal condition requiring
some form of follow-up. Other potential benefits of regular health
examinations include establishing rapport between the medical
team and the athlete, reviewing medications and supplements to
avoid inadvertent doping, establishing a performance baseline for
the athlete in the healthy state, and, in some settings, to satisfy the
medicolegal duties of care.37 Nevertheless, the IOC consensus
statement concluded that large-scale population-based studies are
needed to evaluate the components of history and examination
that can be used to identify athletes at risk, intervene and change
outcome, and recommended that programmes on PHEs be set up
and conducted as research projects. The current paper serves to
reinforce those conclusions.
What are the findings?
▸ To validate a screening test to predict and prevent sports
injuries, at least three steps are needed: (1) a strong
relationship must be demonstrated in prospective studies
between a marker from a screening test and injury risk; (2)
the test properties of the marker must be validated in
relevant populations, using appropriate statistical tools; (3)
an intervention programme targeting athletes identified as
being at high risk using the marker must be more beneficial
than the same intervention programme given to all athletes.
▸ To date, there is no screening test available to predict sports
injuries with adequate test properties and no intervention
study providing evidence in support for screening for injury
risk.
Correction notice This paper has been amended since it was published Online
First. The author’s affiliations have been updated.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank his colleagues at the Oslo
Sports Trauma Research Center and Ian Shrier for helpful comments to the
manuscript.
Funding The Oslo Sports Trauma Research Center has been established at the
Norwegian School of Sport Sciences through generous grants from the Royal
Norwegian Ministry of Culture, the South-Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority,
the IOC, the Norwegian Olympic Committee & Confederation of Sport, and Norsk
Tipping AS.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Bahr R. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–780. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256
5 of 6
Review
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256 on 19 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 REFERENCES
1
van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HC. Incidence, severity, aetiology and
prevention of sports injuries. A review of concepts. Sports Med 1992;14:
82–99.
2
Meeuwisse WH. Assessing causation in sport injury: a multifactorial model. Clin J
Sport Med 1994;4:166–70.
3
Bahr R, Krosshaug T. Understanding injury mechanisms: a key component of
preventing injuries in sport. Br J Sports Med 2005;39:324–9.
4
Ekstrand J, Hägglund M, Waldén M. Injury incidence and injury patterns
in professional football: the UEFA injury study. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:
553–8.
5
Myklebust G, Skjølberg A, Bahr R. ACL injury incidence in female handball 10 years
after the Norwegian ACL prevention study: important lessons learned. Br J Sports
Med 2013;47:476–9.
6
National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel. National Institutes of
Health Consensus Development Conference Statement: phenylketonuria: screening
and management, October 16–18, 2000. Pediatrics 2001;108:972–82.
7
Krogsbøll LT, Jørgensen KJ, Grønhøj Larsen C, et al. General health checks in adults
for reducing morbidity and mortality from disease: Cochrane systematic review and
metaanalysis. BMJ 2012;345:e7191.
8
Ilic D, Neuberger MM, Djulbegovic M, et al. Screening for prostate cancer.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;(1):Cd004720.
9
Wilson JMG, Jungner G. Principles and practice of screening for disease. Public
Health Papers No 34. Geneva: WHO, 1968.
10
Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromuscular
control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament injury risk
in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:492–501.
11
Smith HC, Johnson RJ, Shultz SJ, et al. A prospective evaluation of the Landing
Error Scoring System (LESS) as a screening tool for anterior cruciate ligament injury
risk. Am J Sports Med 2012;40:521–6.
12
Krosshaug T, Steffen K, Kristianslund E, et al. The vertical drop jump is a poor
screening test for ACL injuries in female elite soccer and handball players: a
prospective cohort study of 710 athletes. Am J Sports Med 2016;44:874–83.
13
Freckleton G, Pizzari T. Risk factors for hamstring muscle strain injury in sport:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:351–8.
14
Bahr R, Holme I. Risk factors for sports injuries: a methodological approach.
Br J Sports Med 2003;37:384–92.
15
van Dyk N, Bahr R, Whiteley R, et al. Hamstring and quadriceps isokinetic strength
deficits are weak risk factors for hamstring strain injuries. A 4-year cohort study.
Am J Sports Med 2016 Mar 21 doi:10.1177/0363546516632526
16
Pepe MS, Janes H, Longton G, et al. Limitations of the odds ratio in gauging the
performance of a diagnostic, prognostic, or screening marker. Am J Epidemiol
2004;159:882–90.
17
Hegedus EJ, Cook CE. Return to play and physical performance tests:
evidence-based, rough guess or charade? Br J Sports Med 2015;49:1288–9.
18
Whiteley R. Screening and likelihood ratio infographic. Br J Sports Med
2016;50:837–8.
19
Opar DA, Williams MD, Timmins RG, et al. Eccentric hamstring strength and
hamstring injury risk in Australian footballers. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2015;47:857–65.
20
Bourne MN, Opar DA, Williams MD, et al. Eccentric knee flexor strength and risk of
hamstring injuries in rugby union: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med
2015;43:2663–70.
21
Timmins RG, Bourne MN, Shield AJ, et al. Short biceps femoris fascicles and
eccentric knee flexor weakness increase the risk of hamstring injury in elite football
(soccer): a prospective cohort study. Br J Sports Med Published Online First: 16 Dec
2015 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095362
22
Bahr R, Bahr IA. Incidence of acute volleyball injuries: a prospective cohort
study of injury mechanisms and risk factors. Scand J Med Sci Sports
1997;7:166–71.
23
Verhagen EA, Bay K. Optimising ankle sprain prevention: a critical review and
practical appraisal of the literature. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:1082–8.
24
Kyritsis P, Bahr R, Landreau P, et al. Can objective discharge criteria protect against
ACL graft rupture after return to play? Br J Sports Med 2016; in press.
25
Whittaker JL, Small C, Maffey L, et al. Risk factors for groin injury in sport: an
updated systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:803–9.
26
Ryan J, DeBurca N, Mc Creesh K. Risk factors for groin/hip injuries in field-based
sports: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:1089–96.
27
Abrahams S, Fie SM, Patricios J, et al. Risk factors for sports concussion: an
evidence-based systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:91–7.
28
Witchalls J, Blanch P, Waddington G, et al. Intrinsic functional deficits associated
with increased risk of ankle injuries: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Br J
Sports Med 2012;46:515–23.
29
Arnason A, Sigurdsson SB, Gudmundsson A, et al. Risk factors for injuries in
football. Am J Sports Med 2004;32:5S–16S.
30
Mjølsnes R, Arnason A, Osthagen T, et al. A 10-week randomized trial comparing
eccentric vs. concentric hamstring strength training in well-trained soccer players.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2004;14:311–17.
31
Petersen J, Thorborg K, Nielsen MB, et al. Preventive effect of eccentric training on
acute hamstring injuries in men’s soccer: a cluster-randomized controlled trial. Am J
Sports Med 2011;39:2296–303.
32
van der Horst N, Smits DW, Petersen J, et al. The preventive effect of the Nordic
hamstring exercise on hamstring injuries in amateur soccer players: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Sports Med 2015;43:1316–23.
33
Stanley LE, Kerr ZY, Dompier TP, et al. Sex differences in the incidence of anterior
cruciate ligament, medial collateral ligament, and meniscal injuries in collegiate and
high school sports: 2009–2010 through 2013–2014. Am J Sports Med 2016
Mar 3. doi:10.1177/0363546516630927
34
Myklebust G, Maehlum S, Holm I, et al. A prospective cohort study of anterior
cruciate ligament injuries in elite Norwegian team handball. Scand J Med Sci Sports
1998;8:149–53.
35
Grimm NL, Jacobs JC Jr, Kim J, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament and knee injury
prevention programs for soccer players: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Sports Med 2015;43:2049–56.
36
Ljungqvist A, Jenoure P, Engebretsen L, et al. The International Olympic Committee
(IOC) Consensus Statement on periodic health evaluation of elite athletes March
2009. Br J Sports Med 2009;43:631–43.
37
Bakken A, Targett S, Bere T, et al. Health conditions detected in a comprehensive
periodic health evaluation of 558 professional football players. Br J Sports Med
Published Online First: 24 Mar 2016 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095829
6 of 6
Bahr R. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–780. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256
Review
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096256 on 19 April 2016. Downloaded from 
