   ENDOCRINE PRACTICE Vol 22 No. 2 February 2016  231
  
 
 AACE/ACE Consensus Statement
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
AND AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ENDOCRINOLOGY
2016 OUTPATIENT GLUCOSE MONITORING
CONSENSUS STATEMENT
Timothy S. Bailey, MD, FACP, FACE, ECNU, Cochair1; 
George Grunberger, MD, FACP, FACE, Cochair2;
Bruce W. Bode, MD, FACE3; Yehuda Handelsman, MD, FACP, FACE, FNLA4; 
Irl B. Hirsch, MD5; Lois Jovanovič, MD, MACE6; 
Victor Lawrence Roberts, MD, MBA, FACP, FACE7; 
David Rodbard, MD8; William V. Tamborlane, MD9; John Walsh, PA, CDTC10
From the 1Director, AMCR Institute Escondido, California Clinical Associate 
Professor, University of California, San Diego School of Medicine; 2Chairman, 
Grunberger Diabetes Institute; Clinical Professor, Internal Medicine and 
Molecular Medicine & Genetics, Wayne State University School of Medicine; 
Professor, Internal Medicine Oakland University William Beaumont School 
of Medicine Bloomfield Hills, Michigan; 3Atlanta Diabetes Associates; 
Associate Professor of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine 
Atlanta, Georgia; 4Medical Director and Principal Investigator, Metabolic 
Institute of America; President, American College of Endocrinology Tarzana, 
California; 5Professor of Medicine, University of Washington School of 
Medicine Seattle, Washington; 6Physician Consultant, Sansum Diabetes 
Research Institute; Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of Southern 
California-Keck School of Medicine; Attending Physician-Santa Barbara 
County Health Care Services; Adjunct Professor, Biomolecular Science 
and Engineering and Chemical Engineering, University of California-
Santa Barbara Santa Barbara, California; 7Professor of Internal Medicine, 
University of Central Florida College of Medicine Orlando, Florida; 8Chief 
Scientific Officer, Biomedical Informatics Consultants LLC Potomac, 
Maryland; 9Professor and Chief of Pediatric Endocrinology, Yale School of 
Medicine New Haven, Connecticut; 10Diabetes Clinical Specialist, AMCR 
Institute Escondido, California
Address correspondence to American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists, 245 Riverside Avenue, Suite 200, Jacksonville, FL 32202. 
E-mail: publications@aace.com. DOI: 10.4158/EP151124.CS
To purchase reprints of this article, please visit: www.aace.com/reprints.
Copyright © 2016 AACE.
Abbreviations:
A1C = glycated hemoglobin; AGP = ambulatory 
glucose profile; ARD = absolute relative difference; 
BGM = blood glucose monitoring; CGM = continu-
ous glucose monitoring; CMS = Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services; CSII = continuous subcuta-
neous insulin infusion; CV = coefficient of variation; 
DCCT = Diabetes Control and Complications Trial; 
DirecNet = Diabetes Research in Children Network; 
FDA = US Food & Drug Administration; GDM = 
gestational diabetes mellitus; GM = glucose monitor-
ing; IDF = International Diabetes Federation; ISO = 
International Organization for Standardization; MARD 
= mean absolute relative difference; MDI = multiple 
daily injections; MedARD = median absolute relative 
difference; MNT = medical nutrition therapy; SAP = 
sensor-augmented pump; T1DM = type 1 diabetes mel-
litus; T2DM = type 2 diabetes mellitus.
This document represents the official position of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American 
College of Endocrinology. Where there were no randomized controlled trials or specific U.S. FDA labeling for issues 
in clinical practice, the participating clinical experts utilized their judgment and experience. Every effort was made to 
achieve consensus among the committee members. Position statements are meant to provide guidance, but they are not to be 
considered prescriptive for any individual patient and cannot replace the judgment of a clinician.
(Appendixes are available online at http://aace.journals.aace.com)
 232  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
INTRODUCTION
 
The measurement of glycemic status is a key element 
in the care of all persons with diabetes (1,2). Glucose mon-
itoring (GM) enables clinicians to evaluate the efficacy of 
current therapy, make insulin and medication dose adjust-
ments, ensure patients’ glucose levels are within therapeu-
tic goal ranges, and monitor treatment safety. Both capillary 
blood glucose monitoring (BGM) and continuous glucose 
monitoring (CGM) with interstitial fluid sensors enable 
patients to better understand the impact of diet, exercise, 
illness, stress, and medications on glucose levels and to 
recognize and treat hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic epi-
sodes. Likewise, both BGM and CGM have been shown to 
improve the efficacy and safety of diabetes therapy (3-12).
 
This document provides recommendations to clini-
cians regarding the type and frequency of GM technology 
that should be employed in the management of patients 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM: pediatric or adult), 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and pregnancy compli-
cated by pre-existing diabetes or gestational diabetes mel-
litus (GDM). In this document, we refer to GM technology 
that improves the lives of people with diabetes as “mean-
ingful monitoring.” “The scope” of this document does not 
extend to the complexities of insulin adjustments based on 
the GM data obtained. Other pivotal reference documents 
can be consulted for this information (13,14). (Endocr 
Pract. 2016;22:231-261)
.
Additional aims of the document are to:
1. 
Provide a primer on GM accuracy 
a. Describe various ways to characterize accu-
racy, such as mean absolute relative difference 
(MARD) 
b. Review GM accuracy guidelines from the 
International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) 
and 
the 
US 
Food 
and 
Drug 
Administration (FDA)
c. Discuss how device accuracy has the potential 
to affect glucose control
2. 
Review measures of glycemic control (glucomet-
rics) such as the glycated hemoglobin (A1C) lab-
oratory measurement, change in average glucose 
with time, percentage of time in target, hypogly-
cemic and hyperglycemic ranges, and glucose fre-
quency distribution. Graphical methods to display 
glycemic data will also be presented.
History of GM in Diabetes
 
For several decades, urine glucose testing was the 
mainstay of diabetes monitoring (15). While patients could 
perform measurements at home and potentially adjust their 
therapy, the shortcomings of urine glucose testing were 
well recognized. Urine glucose correlated very poorly 
with blood glucose levels, provided no information about 
hypoglycemia, and gave negative results until the renal 
threshold for glucose excretion was exceeded. Therefore, 
urine glucose testing is presently of historical interest only.
 
The colorimetric Dextrostix® glucose test strip was 
developed in 1965. It was used for the first blood glu-
cose meter in 1970 (15). Starting in the late 1970s, daily 
BGM gained wider acceptance as research data began to 
support the correlation and causation between poor glyce-
mic control and diabetic complications (15-23). The “glu-
cose hypothesis” was confirmed in the landmark Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial (DCCT), the first long-
term randomized prospective study to compare intensive 
(≥4x/day) self-GM coupled with an insulin titration algo-
rithm versus standard therapy using once-daily GM and 1 
to 2 daily insulin injections (24). Intensive therapy delayed 
the onset and slowed the progression of microvascular 
complications in patients with T1DM. Following the pub-
lication of the DCCT results in 1993, the value of BGM 
in T1DM management became widely accepted, and its 
use gradually increased. It was clear that intensive insu-
lin therapy and self-adjustment of insulin dosage in T1DM 
required frequent BGM (9,13,25-27). Subsequently, the 
effectiveness of BGM in GDM was demonstrated. 
 
The value of BGM in T2DM has been controversial. 
As shown in Table 1, studies of BGM in T2DM have pre-
sented mixed conclusions. Several have shown a clear ben-
efit from frequent BGM (11,12,28-30). This has been par-
ticularly evident for patients with T2DM who are receiving 
insulin therapy, especially involving multiple daily injec-
tions (MDI), “basal-bolus” therapy, or insulin pump (con-
tinuous subcutaneous insulin infusion) (31). Newer studies 
using a more structured testing approach have suggested 
benefit even for persons with diabetes not receiving insulin 
(9); these data support the need for patient education to 
ensure that each measured glucose leads to an action plan.
 
There is a common misperception that BGM is an 
expensive, complex undertaking with limited benefit, lead-
ing some to assert that BGM is not warranted in patients 
with T2DM (32-35). The studies that appear to give nega-
tive results in patients with T2DM have been criticized 
for serious experimental design flaws (28). Several stud-
ies included rapid intensification of medication regimens 
following diagnosis, which may have obscured the effect 
of BGM. Additionally, many studies failed to couple GM 
to therapy adjustment, thus attenuating the benefit of the 
monitoring (28).
 
While BGM is a widely used and important compo-
nent of T1DM therapy, it has drawbacks: patients’ moni-
toring may be infrequent or intermittent, their reports may 
be inaccurate, and overnight glucose levels are seldom 
measured. Given these limitations, episodes of hypo- 
and hyperglycemia may be missed and not factored into 
treatment decisions (26,36). CGM offers the potential to 
revolutionize patient treatment by providing more fre-
quent information that may allow a greater proportion 
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  233 
of patients to achieve target glucose and A1C levels with 
greater safety. 
 
The first CGM device was approved in the United 
States in 1999. The MiniMed CGM System sampled glu-
cose through a subcutaneously implanted sensor, recording 
glucose levels every 5 minutes over a period of 3 days. 
Initial versions of this technology did not provide glucose 
values in real time; data were downloaded and retrospec-
tively evaluated by clinicians and used to make treatment 
adjustments (26). The first real-time CGM for prospective 
patient use was approved in 2001 (Glucowatch Biographer; 
Cygnus Inc, San Francisco, CA). The device used reverse 
iontophoresis to sample blood glucose, providing approxi-
mately 36 measurements directly to patients over the 
12-hour life of the sensor (37). It was withdrawn from the 
market due to skin site reactions, discomfort, limited accu-
racy, and difficult setup and calibration procedures (38). 
Since then, CGM technology has improved dramatically 
in terms of accuracy, usability, and duration of use. The 
landmark Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group trial (6) 
established the role of CGM in T1DM, demonstrating sig-
nificant A1C reductions in adults. The magnitude of ben-
efit correlated positively with both wearing and interacting 
with the technology (4). In patients with lower baseline 
A1C, there were smaller reductions in A1C, but a reduc-
tion in hypoglycemia (39). These benefits persisted for up 
to 12 months (40). Other unmasked parallel-group studies 
have confirmed significant reductions in A1C and a trend 
for reductions in severe hypoglycemia (3,4,41,42). A sum-
mary of trial results for A1C and hypoglycemia reduction 
with CGM is shown in Figure 1.
 
CGM has the ability to provide alerts to actual or 
predicted episodes of hypo- and hyperglycemia. Further, 
all modern-day sensor devices display arrows reflecting 
the current slope of glucose versus time, which can assist 
clinical decision-making by the patient. However, CGM 
technology has drawbacks including expense; a need to 
frequently calibrate most devices; and some issues related 
to accuracy, comfort, convenience, and patient acceptance.
Current Status of GM
 
Previous publications from the American Association 
of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE), Endocrine Society, 
and American Diabetes Association (ADA), provide 
sound general recommendations to guide diabetes therapy 
based on personal glucose records and laboratory values 
(1,2,28,43,44). No clinician caring for patients with dia-
betes would dispute the value of employing some form of 
GM. 
 
The Effective Health Care Program of the US Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality conducted compara-
tive effectiveness research assessing GM methods and 
intensive insulin therapy methods. This included effective-
ness studies comparing real-time CGM to BGM in adults, 
adolescents, and children with T1DM (45). While methods 
of GM did not affect patient quality of life, A1C was low-
ered by 0.3% in patients who used CGM compared with 
Table 1
Key Studies of BGM in T2DM (7,9-12,29,30,32-34,183-185)
T2DM: Evaluation of the role of BGM
Pro: Use of BGM significantly improves glycemic 
control and/or reduces risk of hypoglycemia 
Con: Use of BGM does not significantly improve 
glycemic control and/or reduce risk of hypoglycemia
Observational studies
ROSSO (12)
Karter, et al (Kaiser Permanente) (29)
Freemantle Diabetes Study (183)
QuED (184)
Randomized controlled trials
German-Austrian (30)
DINAMIC (111)
ASIA (185)
SteP (9)
ROSES (7)
St. Carlos (10)
King-Drew Medical Center (34)
ESMON (32)
DiGEM (33)
Abbreviations: ASIA = Auto-Surveillance Intervention Active Study; BGM = blood glucose monitoring; DiGEM = Diabetes 
Glycaemic Education and Monitoring Study; DINAMIC 1 = Diamicron MR in NIDDM: Assessing Management and Improving 
Control; ESMON = Efficacy of Self Monitoring of Blood Glucose in Patients with Newly Diagnosed Type 2 Diabetes Study; 
QuED = Quality of Care and Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes Study; ROSES = Role of Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose and Intensive 
Education in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Not Receiving Insulin Study; ROSSO = Retrolective Study “Self-monitoring of Blood 
Glucose and Outcome in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes”; SteP = Structured Testing Protocol Study; T2DM = type 2 diabetes mellitus.
 234  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
patients who used BGM. This positive outcome for CGM 
was consistent for patients <18 years of age, supporting 
its use in adolescent patients and children. Unfortunately, 
because GM is a substantial cost driver in the management 
of patients with diabetes (28,46,47), governments and 
insurance companies have restricted coverage, payments, 
and reimbursement. However, improvements in A1C and 
accompanying reductions in hypoglycemia have been used 
to justify the cost of newer diabetes medications. To the 
extent that GM can also enable patients to achieve lower 
A1C values with less hypoglycemia, a similar and stronger 
case can be made for increasing access to GM (48), partic-
ularly as costs come down and evidence continues to show 
benefit for both T1DM and T2DM. For patients who use 
insulin, CGM offers the distinct advantage of being able to 
securely maintain a more normal glucose range with less 
risk of hypoglycemia. As of the writing of this document, 
there remains no CGM coverage for elderly patients with 
T1DM, a population with frequent and severe hypoglyce-
mia (49).
 
Over the last 30 years, the FDA has approved many 
monitor models for use in GM. Since 2003, the FDA has 
required the accuracy of BGM devices to be within 20% 
of the true value at least 95% of the time (50). Certain 
monitors have shown substantially greater variability than 
allowed by FDA standards, leading to the recall of several 
brands of glucose meters and test strips in 2013 (51-54). 
The importance of GM accuracy and the emergence of 
stricter accuracy standards are discussed in greater detail 
in the “GM Accuracy and Precision” section later in this 
manuscript.
 
In 2013, the US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) implemented the controversial process of 
competitive bidding for BGM meters and test strips, with 
the intended goal of cost savings (55). This was one factor 
that led to a surge in the number and types of “generic” 
BGM meters. In some cases, when meters sourced from 
retail distribution channels were tested, the generic test-
ing systems meters demonstrated dramatically inferior 
accuracy and precision compared to systems from major 
branded manufacturers (56-59). These generic meters 
showed sufficient performance data to obtain initial FDA 
clearance; however, they may not have maintained ade-
quate performance over time, in part due to poor quality 
control leading to large between-lot variability in test strips. 
One proposed response has been to require postmarket sur-
veillance of BGM products (60-62). The CMS competi-
tive bidding process may have had other unintended con-
sequences. A recent analysis of CMS data by the National 
Minority Quality Forum (NMQF) found that test areas in 
which competitive bidding was initially implemented had 
substantial disruptions in BGM supply acquisition com-
pared to nontest markets (23% increase in partial acquisi-
tion vs. 1.7% in nontest markets) (63). Within the test mar-
kets, decreases in full acquisition (14.4%) and increases 
in migration from full to partial acquisition (58.1%) were 
Fig. 1. Glycated hemoglobin and hypoglycemia reductions in continuous glucose monitoring studies (189). 
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  235 
significant (P<.0001 for both) (64). Patients in these mar-
kets had increased mortality and hospitalization rates and 
increased medical costs (63,64). Based on these results, 
the NMQF has called for the CMS to suspend competitive 
bidding until proper safety review and monitoring can be 
implemented (65).
 
The purpose of the next section of this document, “GM 
Strategy and Rationale by Patient Profile,” is to provide 
concise and specific recommendations for clinicians on the 
type, frequency, and intensity of GM within the framework 
of specific patient profiles. The intent is to help clinicians 
counsel their patients to meaningfully monitor their glu-
cose levels to optimize their diabetes care.
GM STRATEGY AND RATIONALE 
BY PATIENT PROFILE T1DM
 
T1DM currently constitutes 5 to 10% of all people 
with diabetes globally (66,67). GM is one of the essential 
elements of effective T1DM management (68,69). The 
Type 1 Diabetes Exchange Clinic Registry (2013) found a 
systematic, statistically significant decrease in A1C levels 
in relation to increased frequency of daily BGM in chil-
dren, adolescents, and adults (Fig. 2) (70). 
Adult Patients With T1DM 
 
People with T1DM experience much greater glycemic 
variability than those with T2DM (71). This variability is 
associated with a higher risk of hypoglycemia (72). GM 
has a role in the early detection of hypoglycemia prior to 
overt symptoms. 
 
BGM provides patients with important information 
regarding treatment efficacy (68,69). BGM can also facili-
tate appropriate modifications to the therapeutic regimen, 
providing critical information that clinicians need to adjust 
dosage and/or timing of basal and bolus insulins, as well 
as reflecting the impact of food intake and physical activ-
ity (2,68,73). Use of BGM is supported by clinical data: 
the DCCT, Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and 
Complications (EDIC), and many other clinical trials have 
clearly established the usefulness of BGM toward achiev-
ing the goals of improved glycemic control and decreasing 
the risk of diabetes-related complications in T1DM (2,74). 
 
In all patients with T1DM, a rational and effective 
insulin regimen requires frequent GM. Frequent BGM is 
endorsed in all major clinical practice guidelines, including 
AACE, the ADA, the American Association of Diabetes 
Educators, the Joslin Diabetes Center, and the International 
Diabetes Federation (IDF) (2,28,68,73,75). Table 2 lists 
major organizations’ general recommendations for BGM 
timing and glucose goals in patients with T1DM. Current 
guidelines advise patients to check their blood glucose fre-
quently; recommendations range from at least 4 to 6 to 10 
or more times per day. All guidelines emphasize the need 
for individualization for each patient, with more or less fre-
quent monitoring before meals, postprandially, at bedtime, 
before exercise, and when undertaking potentially hazard-
ous tasks (e.g., driving) (2,68,69). Patients with T1DM 
should also monitor their blood glucose before driving 
and should not drive if their glucose level is <90 mg/dL
(5.0 mmol/L).
Fig. 2. Association between blood glucose monitoring frequency and A1C in patients with T1DM (70). A1C = gly-
cated hemoglobin; T1DM = type 1 diabetes mellitus.
 236  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
 
These guidelines also recommend the use of CGM, 
particularly for patients with a history of severe hypogly-
cemia or hypoglycemia unawareness (1,2,44,68). Once 
again, the timing and frequency of monitoring must be 
individualized to meet specific patient needs (2,28). Table 
A1 in Appendix A of this document summarizes pivotal 
trials of CGM in adult and pediatric patients with T1DM.
Pediatric Patients With T1DM
 
BGM remains a cornerstone for achieving optimal 
metabolic control in children, adolescents, and adults with 
T1DM (70). Frequent BGM, with a minimum of 4 blood 
glucose tests per day (premeal and at bedtime), should 
be the goal. In addition to these traditional 4 tests, many 
patients can gain a more robust picture of daily glucose 
trends by strategically adding additional tests, such as 2 
hours after meals, overnight, and before and after exercise 
(76). 
 
Optimal glycemic control of T1DM is particularly dif-
ficult to achieve in pediatric patients. Food intake and activ-
ity are unpredictable in very young patients, complicating 
parents’ efforts to regulate glucose levels. Additionally, 
many parents experience a “Scylla and Charybdis” situa-
tion, where their fear that severe hypoglycemia will cause 
irreparable brain damage may lead to allowing a child’s 
glucose to “run high.” Data from the Type 1 Diabetes 
Exchange Clinic Registry indicate that children with 
elevated blood glucose and A1C levels are not protected 
against severe hypoglycemic events (77). Moreover, recent 
evidence from the Diabetes Research in Children Network 
(DirecNet) indicates that hyperglycemia is at least as det-
rimental to normal brain development as hypoglycemia 
(78). In adolescents, the emotional fatigue of managing 
their diabetes often leads to a reduced frequency of BGM, 
missed insulin doses, and markedly elevated A1C levels. 
In older children and adolescents, the adverse effects of 
prolonged hyperglycemia on the cardiovascular system 
outweigh the potential harm from hypoglycemia (79), par-
ticularly as treatment modalities and hypoglycemia man-
agement strategies have improved (2). 
 
Another special challenge of managing T1DM dur-
ing childhood and adolescence is that insulin requirements 
change frequently. Simply measuring blood glucose and 
giving immediate correction doses are insufficient for long-
term glycemic control in pediatric patients. Physicians, 
parents, and patients need to be instructed on how to rec-
ognize trends that indicate the patient has outgrown their 
insulin dose(s) and learn to make longer-term regimen 
adjustments (80). Such pattern recognition requires main-
taining and periodically reviewing an electronic or written 
log of blood glucose levels. Unfortunately, only a small 
proportion of physicians, patients, and families are down-
loading data from glucose meters to appropriate computer 
programs; reviewing glucose meter data (including multi-
ple graphs and statistics); and carefully making thoughtful, 
appropriate insulin dosage self-adjustments on a system-
atic, periodic basis (81,82). 
 
As in the case of BGM, CGM is only as beneficial as 
the patient’s desire and ability to use it. It is essential that 
all CGM users know the basics of sensor insertion, calibra-
tion, and real-time data interpretation. To maintain a high 
frequency of use, patients and their parents require in-depth 
training with reinforcement, including periodic follow-up 
with clinicians and diabetes educators. The results of the 
JDRF CGM Study Group, using all the first-generation 
CGM devices available at that time (2007), showed that 
Table 2
Recommendations for Daily Blood Glucose Testing in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes (2,68,69)
Timing
Goal
mg/dL
mmol/L
Fasting plasma glucose
Test on awakening
and before meals
80-130 (ADA)
70-130 (Joslin)
<110 (AACE)
4.2-7.2 (ADA)
3.9-7.2 (Joslin)
<6.1 (AACE)
Postprandial
2 hours after meal
1-2 hours after meal
<180 (ADA)
<180 (Joslin)
<140 (AACE)
<10.0 (ADA)
<10.0 (Joslin)
<7.8 (AACE)
Bedtime glucose
At bedtime
90-150 (Joslin)
5.0-8.3 (Joslin)
These goals must be individualized to personal patient needs regarding pregnancy, hypoglycemia 
unawareness, patients who live alone, or occupational hazards that require further reduction of risk of 
hypoglycemia (2,68).
Abbreviations: AACE = American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists; ADA = American Diabetes 
Association; Joslin = Joslin Diabetes Center.
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  237 
children, adolescents, and young adults (aged 8-24 years) 
who used the sensor almost every day benefitted clini-
cally. Unfortunately, a much lower percentage of children 
and adolescents (34%) than adults (59%) performed daily 
CGM (83).
 
DirecNet studied the efficacy and safety of CGM in 
children <10 years of age. In a randomized clinical trial of 
146 patients aged 4 to 9 years, CGM did not improve meta-
bolic control. Despite a high degree of parental satisfaction 
with CGM, at the end of the 6-month study, only 41% of 
families reported daily CGM use (42). Similar results were 
reported by DirecNet in a nonrandomized, 6-month pilot 
study of 23 children <4 years of age (84). These studies 
were performed with older devices; the improved accuracy 
and ease of use of current devices might be better accepted. 
However, in a recent update of the state of the art of treat-
ment of T1DM in the US, the T1D Exchange reported 
that <5% of youth <18 years old were currently utilizing a 
CGM device (85). 
Combination of continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion and CGM (sensor-augmented pump)
 
The Sensor-Augmented Pump Therapy for A1C 
Reduction (STAR 3) Study (2012) examined a system that 
combines the use of a continuous subcutaneous insulin 
infusion (CSII) pump and a CGM system, termed sensor-
augmented pump (SAP) therapy. In this 1-year study, chil-
dren (aged 7-12) and adolescents (ages 13-18) with T1DM 
and baseline A1C ranging from 7.4 to 9.5% were random-
ized to either SAP or MDI therapy. Overall, patients in 
the SAP group had significantly improved (P<.05) A1C 
values compared with the MDI group at all postbaseline 
visits (86). Furthermore, children and adolescents in the 
SAP group were consistently more likely to meet age-spe-
cific A1C targets (88% and 57%, respectively) compared 
with those in the MDI group (51% and 13%, respectively) 
(86). Children and adolescents in the SAP group had lower 
area under the curve values than the MDI group, without 
increased risk of hypoglycemia, as well as improved glu-
cose variability (86). STAR 3 was the first study to exam-
ine the efficacy and safety of switching from conventional 
injections and BGM to 2 advanced technologies (CGM + 
CSII) nearly simultaneously; prior studies had only evalu-
ated the impact of a single technology.
 
A SAP system with threshold suspend functionality 
was approved by the FDA in 2013 following consider-
able experience in Europe. This device can suspend insu-
lin delivery for up to 2 hours when the sensor glucose 
value reaches a predetermined lower threshold (87). The 
improved accuracy of CGM sensors and this threshold 
suspend (called “low glucose suspend” in Europe) may 
increase the performance and frequency of CGM use in 
pediatric patients. More recent studies have indicated the 
effectiveness of the predictive low glucose suspend system 
in children (88). 
 
An international group of leading pediatric diabetolo-
gists issued a 2012 consensus statement regarding the use 
of CGM in children (89). They recommended that CGM be 
considered for regular daily use in children and adolescents 
with T1DM who:
• 
Are performing frequent BGM 
• 
Have experienced severe hypoglycemic episodes 
• 
Have hypoglycemic unawareness, especially in 
young children
• 
Have nocturnal hypoglycemia
• 
Have wide glucose excursions, regardless of A1C
• 
Have suboptimal glycemic control, with A1C 
exceeding the target range
• 
Have A1C levels <7% and wish to maintain tar-
get glycemic control while limiting hypoglycemia 
risk
 
Accordingly, CGM is potentially applicable and desir-
able in most children with diabetes. Recent enhancements 
have made it possible for parents and others to moni-
tor glucose levels continuously via smartphones, wrist-
watches, and computers. In 2015, the FDA approved mar-
keting of 3 such systems: Dexcom Share (90), Dexcom 
G5 with Bluetooth (91), and MiniMed Connect (92). An 
open-source system (not FDA approved) called Nightscout 
was created (hacked together) by a group of people with 
diabetes and their families to allow remote monitoring by 
parents of children with diabetes (93). Other companies 
are likely to follow, as anecdotal reports suggest that par-
ents and other caregivers find the technology invaluable 
when their children are away from home or participating in 
sports. Randomized controlled trial results evaluating these 
technologies are not available. 
T2DM
Adult Patients with T2DM 
 
BGM is an essential tool that should be accessible to 
all patients with T2DM, regardless of whether or not they 
are receiving insulin treatment (28). BGM is clearly ben-
eficial for adult patients with T2DM because it provides 
immediate feedback regarding glycemic control (rather 
than requiring waiting, possibly months, for the next A1C 
measurement), and it assists with patient education, under-
standing, and behaviors. Table A2 in Appendix A of this 
document summarizes pivotal trials of GM in adult patients 
with T2DM.
 
To ensure meaningful monitoring, use of BGM in 
patients with T2DM must be individualized by the physi-
cian and healthcare team in partnership with the patient. 
The patient should be given specific guidelines including 
frequency and timing of testing and taught how to com-
municate these results to the healthcare team. Methods for 
communication of glucose data are shown in Table 3. Two 
 238  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
of the goals for any BGM strategy are to empower patients 
to play a more active role in their diabetes management 
and to maximize the efficacy and safety of glucose-low-
ering therapies, including lifestyle management (94). GM 
results are also a vital component of the data that should 
be presented to the diabetes care clinician at each medi-
cal appointment, and potentially between visits, to assist in 
therapy titration.
 
Several randomized trials and literature reviews have 
called into question the clinical utility and cost-effective-
ness of routine BGM in patients with T2DM who are not 
receiving insulin therapy (32,33,35,95,96). A key consid-
eration is that BGM, used alone, does not lower blood 
glucose levels. To be useful, the information must be 
communicated to the healthcare team in an effective and 
timely manner and integrated into self-management plans. 
Several recent trials of structured BGM included specific 
instructions on testing frequency and timing, interpreting 
and communicating these results, and integrating results 
into self-management plans. These studies have shown 
improved glycemic control in patients with T2DM who do 
not receive insulin therapy (8,9,97,98). 
 
General guidelines on the frequency and timing of 
testing based on specific patients’ diabetes therapy are pre-
sented below and are outlined in Table 4.
GM in patients with T2DM on insulin therapy
 
If the patient is on intensive insulin therapy using 
prandial insulin combined with basal insulin, BGM should 
be performed when fasting, premeal, at bedtime, and peri-
odically in the middle of the night. Such monitoring allows 
for appropriate adjustment of doses of premeal insulin, cor-
rection boluses, and basal insulin. 
 
If the patient is receiving only basal insulin, with or 
without other diabetes medications, BGM should be per-
formed at minimum when fasting and also at bedtime to 
evaluate the impact of basal insulin on lowering overnight 
glycemic levels. If the decline in Bedtime to am (morn-
ing) glucose (known as the BeAM factor) is >55 mg/dL 
(3.1 mmol/L), this suggests an excessive basal insulin 
dose (99), just as an overnight rise in glucose levels may 
indicate a need to increase basal insulin. Before titrating 
basal insulin to higher doses, consider improving the bed-
time glucose by other means (e.g., with prandial insulin 
administered before dinner). This may prevent nocturnal 
hypoglycemia caused by excessive basal insulin and lead 
to improved overall glycemic control (31). If the patient 
is receiving basal insulin combined with 1 daily prandial 
or premixed insulin injection, BGM should be performed 
at minimum when fasting and before the prandial or pre-
mixed insulin and periodically at other times (i.e., pre-
meal, bedtime, 3 am, and possibly 2 hours postprandially). 
Insulin adjustments should be made to achieve acceptable 
glycemic targets.
GM in patients with T2DM on noninsulin therapies
 
The IDF published a 2009 guideline specific to 
BGM in noninsulin-treated patients with T2DM (28). 
 
The IDF recommends that:
1. 
BGM should only be used when patients and/or 
caregivers have the knowledge, skills, and will-
ingness to incorporate both BGM monitoring and 
accompanying therapeutic adjustments into their 
diabetes care plan. 
2. 
BGM is only appropriate if protocols are indi-
vidualized to meet their patients’ educational/
behavioral/clinical requirements and have been 
mutually agreed upon by the patient and clinician. 
3. 
BGM should be considered both at the time 
of diagnosis, to enhance patient education and 
facilitate treatment initiation, and as part of 
ongoing diabetes self-management education. 
 
The goal is to help patients actively and effec-
tively participate in their treatment. 
GM in patients with T2DM on noninsulin therapies
associated with frequent or severe clinical problems
related to hypoglycemia
 
Patients with T2DM receiving noninsulin agents asso-
ciated with elevated hypoglycemia risk (specifically, sulfo-
nylureas, and glinides) should perform BGM at least once 
daily (fasting) and periodically at other times to confirm 
the effectiveness of therapy and detect possible hypoglyce-
mia. Appropriate therapeutic adjustments should be made 
Table 3
Methods for Communication of Glucose Data
1. 
Logbook at time of office visit
2. 
Computer outputs (graphs, statistics, interpretation) generated by patient or clinic staff, immediately before or at 
time of office visit
3. 
Periodic phone calls, faxes, or emails to office 
4. 
Automated transfer from meter or sensor to Internet for review 
5. 
Automated interpretation by the glucose monitoring device displayed on its screen (e.g., “Your before-lunch 
glucose has been running high”)
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  239 
Table 4
Use of Glucose Monitoring Technology by Diabetes Type (1,2,44,48,68,76,80,101,107,115-120,186)
Diabetes type
BGM recommendations
CGM recommendations
Type 1 – Adult
At least twice per day to 6-10 times per 
day, including before meals, occasionally 
postprandially, before exercise or critical 
tasks (e.g., driving), and at bedtime.
CGM recommended, particularly 
for patients with history of severe 
hypoglycemia, hypoglycemia unawareness 
and to assist in the correction of 
hyperglycemia in patients not at goal. 
CGM users must know basics of sensor 
insertion, calibration, and real-time data 
interpretation.
Type 1 – Pediatric
At least 4 times per day, including before 
eating and at bedtime.
A more accurate picture of daily glucose 
trends may be gained with additional testing, 
including 1-2 hours after meals, overnight, 
and before/after exercise.
Insulin requirements for pediatric patients 
change frequently. Physicians, patients, 
and caregivers should learn to recognize 
glucose trends that indicate that the insulin 
regimen requires adjustment. This requires 
maintaining and periodically reviewing 
electronic or written logs of BG levels.
Same as Adult Type 1.
Both prevalence and persistent use of CGM 
is lower in children than adults. More in-
depth training as well as more frequent 
follow-up is recommended to enable 
children to adopt the technology more 
successfully. 
Type 2 – Receiving 
insulin/ sulfonylureas, 
glinides
Structured BGM is recommended.
BGM in patients on intensive insulin: fasting, 
premeal, bedtime, and periodically in the 
middle of the night.
BGM in patients on insulin ± other diabetes 
medication: at minimum, when fasting and at 
bedtime.
BGM in patients on basal insulin + 1 daily 
prandial or premixed insulin injection: 
at minimum when fasting and before the 
prandial or premixed insulin, and periodically 
at other times (i.e., premeal, bedtime, 3 am).
Additional testing before exercise or critical 
tasks (e.g., driving) as needed.
Data on CGM in T2DM are limited at this 
time. Trials assessing the use of CGM in 
T2DM patients are ongoing. 
Type 2 – Low risk of 
hypoglycemia 
Daily BGM not recommended.
Initial periodic structured BGM (e.g., at 
meals and bedtime) may be useful in helping 
patients understand effectiveness of MNT/
lifestyle therapy.
Once at A1C goal, less frequent monitoring is 
acceptable.
No recommendation.
Gestational
Patients not receiving insulin: fasting and 1 
hour postprandial.
Patients receiving insulin: fasting, 
preprandial, and 1 hour postprandial.
Benefits of CGM in pregnant females with 
pre-existing diabetes are unclear based on 
current data; additional studies are ongoing. 
CGM during pregnancy can be used as a 
teaching tool, to evaluate glucose patterns, 
and to fine-tune insulin dosing. 
CGM in pregnancy can supplement BGM, 
in particular for monitoring nocturnal 
hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia and 
postprandial hyperglycemia.
Abbreviations: A1C = glycated hemoglobin; BG  = blood glucose; BGM = blood glucose monitoring; CGM = continuous glucose 
monitoring; MNT = medical nutrition therapy; T2DM = type 2 diabetes mellitus.
 240  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
if patients are not at goal. Consideration should be given 
to altering therapy to employ 1 or more of the multiple 
classes that are not associated (or minimally associated) 
with increased risk of hypoglycemia (e.g., metformin, 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 [DPP-4] inhibitors, sodium-glucose 
cotransporter-2 [SGLT-2] inhibitors, thiazolidinediones 
[TZDs], or glucagon-like peptide-1 [GLP-1] receptor 
agonists). 
GM in patients with T2DM on noninsulin therapies not
associated with hypoglycemia
 
Patients with T2DM receiving treatment regimens not 
typically associated with increased risk of hypoglycemia 
and who are not at goal should be instructed to perform 
structured testing (e.g., systematically before meals and at 
bedtime) at least weekly to adjust and confirm therapeutic 
effectiveness (9). Patients should be educated about when 
and how frequently to monitor glucose and should record 
the data in an organized logbook for subsequent review by 
a diabetes professional. Guidance for communication of 
glucose data is outlined in Table 3. After the A1C goal has 
been reached, and in the absence of evidence of hypogly-
cemia, then less frequent monitoring may be necessary.
GM in patients with T2DM on diet/lifestyle therapy only
 
Daily BGM has not been shown to be effective in 
patients on diet/lifestyle therapy who are at low risk for 
hypoglycemia (28,33,35,94). However, structured testing 
may help patients improve their understanding of the effec-
tiveness of medical nutrition therapy (MNT) and lifestyle 
management. Initial periodic testing at meals and bedtime 
provides feedback to the patient regarding the impact of 
various foods and physical activity on glycemic levels. 
After the goal A1C has been achieved, less frequent moni-
toring may be needed.
Use of CGM in patients with T2DM
 
There are limited data on the use of real-time CGM in 
patients with T2DM, either masked for retrospective anal-
ysis or unmasked for real-time use. Several studies have 
evaluated masked CGM, in which patients cannot see glu-
cose values in real time, to help understand the progression 
from nondiabetes to prediabetes and T2DM (100). Other 
trials are ongoing to evaluate the potential use of masked 
CGM to guide both patients and clinicians regarding 
appropriate medication and lifestyle changes to improve 
glycemic control. Real-time CGM trials in T2DM patients 
are also ongoing, with several randomized controlled trials 
completed in recent years. 
 
Vigersky et al compared real-time CGM (used for 8 of 
the initial 12 weeks of the study) to BGM 4 times a day in 
100 patients with T2DM who were being treated with diet 
and exercise alone or with glucose-lowering therapies other 
than prandial insulin. At 12, 24, 38, and 52 weeks, respec-
tively, this study found mean, unadjusted A1C decreases 
of 1.0%, 1.2%, 0.8%, and 0.8% in the CGM group com-
pared with 0.5%, 0.5%, 0.5%, and 0.2% in the BGM group
(P = .04). The reduction in A1C over the study period 
remained significantly greater in the CGM versus BGM 
group after adjusting for covariates (P<.0001). Patients 
who used CGM for at least 48 days showed the most 
improvement (P<.0001) (48).
 
A multicenter trial randomized 57 insulin-treated 
patients with T2DM to real-time CGM versus Internet-
based BGM monitoring; results showed a greater reduction 
in A1C in the CGM group (1.31%) compared to the BGM 
group (0.83%), although the difference was not statistically 
significant (101). Additional randomized trials of CGM 
will be helpful in the evaluation of the benefits of CGM in 
T2DM. 
Pregnancy Complicated by Diabetes 
 
Approximately 8% of US pregnancies are complicated 
by either GDM or pre-existing T1DM or T2DM (102-
104). In the early weeks of pregnancy, the excessively high 
maternal glucose levels of patients with poorly controlled 
or undiagnosed T1DM and T2DM are associated with an 
increased risk of miscarriage and congenital malformations 
(103,105). Hyperglycemia during the second and third tri-
mesters results in fetal hyperinsulinemia that increases the 
risk of macrosomia and neonatal hypoglycemia (106,107). 
Maintenance of maternal glycemia as close to normal as 
possible through a program of BGM (or CGM), MNT, and 
insulin therapy offers the most effective protection against 
these complications (108).
 
The feasibility and efficacy of BGM in pregnancy 
complicated by diabetes were demonstrated in a seminal 
1980 clinical trial that used BGM (8 measurements per 
day), MNT, and basal (neutral protamine Hagedorn) plus 
regular insulin in pregnant patients with T1DM (n = 10). All 
patients achieved normal mean plasma glucose and A1C 
levels, and the infants showed no signs of diabetes-related 
complications (109). Today, BGM is integral to the man-
agement of diabetes in pregnancy (104). Real-time results 
enable individuals to make informed daily self-care deci-
sions regarding diet, exercise, and insulin. Retrospective 
analysis of BGM data enables clinicians to develop indi-
vidualized care plans (110), informing decisions related to 
insulin initiation and adjustment and the possible needs for 
interventions or hospitalization to improve inadequate self-
monitoring (111).
 
CGM generates a detailed profile of glucose excur-
sions that can be helpful when making decisions regarding 
self-care and treatment planning. Currently available CGM 
devices do not measure blood glucose levels <70 mg/dL 
(3.9 mmol/L) very accurately (112-114). Nevertheless, 
CGM can identify many episodes of hypo- and hypergly-
cemia that would go undetected by BGM (108,115). CGM 
appears superior to BGM in this regard, but it remains to be 
seen whether CGM improves pregnancy outcomes. A 2013 
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  241 
trial comparing BGM alone to BGM combined with sev-
eral 6-day periods of unmasked CGM in pregnant women 
with T1DM or T2DM (n = 154) found no differences in 
maternal A1C at term or in neonatal morbidity. Only 64% 
of the patients in that study were fully compliant with the 
CGM protocol, so potential benefits may have been missed. 
The most common reasons for noncompliance were device 
discomfort, sleep disturbances caused by alarms, and sen-
sor inaccuracy (116).
 
The potential benefit of CGM for pregnant women 
with pre-existing diabetes is unclear based on currently 
available data. A prospective, randomized controlled trial 
performed in the United Kingdom assigned 71 pregnant 
females with T1DM or T2DM to prenatal care with or 
without CGM (117). While no maternal A1C differences 
were observed at baseline or throughout the first 2 trimes-
ters, patients in the CGM group began to experience lower 
A1C levels between weeks 28 and 32, a difference that 
became statistically significant by weeks 32 to 36 (5.8% 
vs. 6.4%, P = .007). In contrast, a Danish trial that ran-
domized 123 pregnant females with T1DM or T2DM to 
routine prenatal care alone or similar care plus CGM did 
not find any differences in outcomes between the 2 groups 
(118). Another randomized controlled trial of 340 Chinese 
females with GDM found that the use of CGM combined 
with standard care led to decreased A1C levels and less 
severe glycemic excursions compared to standard care 
alone (P<.001). Additionally, the use of CGM decreased 
the risk of pre-eclampsia and cesarean birth (P = .019 and 
P = .028, respectively) (119). 
 
An ongoing study, the Continuous Glucose Monitoring 
in Women with Type 1 Diabetes in Pregnancy Trial 
(CONCEPTT, expected completion in late 2015), will 
attempt to determine if real-time CGM can safely improve 
glycemic control in patients with T1DM who are pregnant 
or planning pregnancy; this study will also assess infant 
outcomes (120).
 
CGM during pregnancy should be regarded as a teach-
ing tool to evaluate peak postprandial blood glucose, fine-
tune insulin dosing, and identify foods associated with 
blood glucose spikes (116). CGM can also be used as an 
adjunct to BGM to monitor nocturnal hypoglycemia and 
hyperglycemia, as well as the peak and duration of post-
prandial hyperglycemia. A 2007 clinical trial of CGM in 
pregnancy reported that the additional information pro-
vided by CGM altered clinical management decisions in 
62% of cases (this trial did not evaluate patient outcomes) 
(121).
 
Table A3 in Appendix A of this document summarizes 
pivotal trials of BGM and CGM in patients with pregnancy 
complicated by diabetes. Blood glucose goals and recom-
mended BGM patterns during and prior to pregnancy are 
summarized in Table 5.
 
Before attempting to become pregnant, females with 
pre-existing diabetes should maintain glycemic control as 
close to normal as possible for 3 to 6 months. Preprandial 
and fasting blood glucose should be maintained in the 60 to 
90 mg/dL range, and postprandial glucose tested at 1-hour 
postmeal should be between 100 and 120 mg/dL (107). 
 
The typical target fasting plasma glucose range during 
pregnancy complicated by diabetes is 55 to 90 mg/dL (3.1 
to 5.0 mmol/L). This implies a heightened risk of hypo-
glycemia. Accordingly, meter accuracy in the low blood 
glucose ranges is critically important in patients with preg-
nancy complicated by diabetes. Hypoglycemia, in particu-
lar asymptomatic hypoglycemia, is a key safety concern 
during pregnancy. Pregnant females with diabetes should 
monitor their blood glucose before driving and should not 
drive if their glucose level is <90 mg/dL (5.0 mmol/L). 
Likewise, they should always keep appropriate carbo-
hydrate snacks with them in the car in case they become 
hypoglycemic.
GM ACCURACY, PRECISION, 
AND DATA DISPLAY METRICS
 
Accuracy (the ability to obtain a true value without 
systemic bias) and precision (the ability to obtain highly 
reproducible results) have been steadily improving since 
the introduction of BGM in the 1970s. A 1986 ADA con-
sensus conference, convened at a time when an estimated 1 
million people with diabetes were using BGM, concluded 
that more than 50% of glucose meter measurements devi-
ated by more than 20% from a reference method. This was 
Table 5
Recommendations for Daily Blood Glucose Testing in 
Pregnancy Complicated by Diabetes (103)
Timing
Goal
mg/dL
mmol/L
Fasting
On awakening
60-90 
3.3-5.0 
Preprandial
Before every meal
60-90 
3.3-5.0 
1-hour postprandial
1 hour after every meal
100-120 
5.6-6.7 
 242  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
attributed to both system and human factors. The ADA 
stated an aspirational goal in 1987 that 100% of BGM 
readings be within 10% of reference values (122). In 1993, 
a similar panel was convened and recommended that the 
analytic error not exceed 5% (123). Since it is only recently 
that any devices have even approached such performance, 
regulatory criteria for device approval have been more 
pragmatic, focusing on the hazards of incorrect readings 
(e.g., suboptimal treatment decisions, including improper 
adjustments in medication dosage, potentially increasing 
the frequency of both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia) 
(58). 
 
Accuracy, ergonomics, and ease of use of blood glu-
cose meters have improved dramatically over time (124-
126), and the accuracy of CGM is beginning to approach 
that of BGM devices (113,114,127-130). However, a clini-
cally significant variation in accuracy and precision persists 
among currently marketed GM devices. Clinicians must be 
familiar with the clinical and laboratory standards used to 
characterize the accuracy and precision of the devices that 
they recommend in order to work safely and most effec-
tively with patients using BGM or CGM systems.
Measures of BGM and CGM Accuracy
 
There is a logical progression as to how one should 
interpret performance data with the objective of choosing 
the appropriate GM device for a particular patient. The fol-
lowing presents such an approach. 
 
(1) Bias. This refers to any systematic error in the 
measurements provided by the meter or sensor. This may 
be due to improper calibration, lack of calibration, or cali-
bration with an inaccurate BGM. Bias may vary depending 
on the glucose levels being measured.
 
(2) Precision: Precision refers to the reproducibility 
of measurements, irrespective of whether they accurately 
measure the true value they are supposed to be measur-
ing. Measurements may be highly reproducible but may be 
clustered around an erroneous value. We can measure the 
precision of a BGM or CGM by repeating measurements 
on the same blood sample or repeatedly measuring glucose 
using 2 or more CGM sensors simultaneously on the same 
subject. Even if the true value is not known, comparing the 
results for the multiple readings, we can derive a measure 
of precision.
 
For example, if 100 measurements gave a mean of 110 
mg/dL with an SD of 5, the values would be very reproduc-
ible with a percentage error of about 5%. However, if the true 
value were actually 100 mg/dL, then these measurements 
would be biased and would be significantly inaccurate. 
 
(3) Arithmetic deviation: If the true value is 100 mg/
dL and the measured value is 110 mg/dL, then there is an 
arithmetic deviation of +10; similarly a value of 90 mg/dL 
would have an arithmetic deviation of −10. 
 
For example, if the result of the meter or CGM being 
evaluated is 85 mg/dL, and the true value is 100 mg/dL (as 
provided by a very precise and accurate laboratory method 
or by some other reference method), then the arithmetic 
deviation is −15. These values can be calculated for each 
pair of true value and test-method value, and then aver-
aged. The average should be extremely close to 0. One can 
then plot the arithmetic deviation versus the true value, to 
see if the average magnitude of the deviations varies sys-
tematically with the true value (Fig. 3) Bias is defined as a 
systematic (built-in) error, which makes all measured val-
ues wrong by a certain amount. As an overall estimate of 
bias, one can use the mean arithmetic deviation divided by 
the mean or average glucose level, expressed as a percent-
age (131,132).
 
(4) Absolute deviation: The absolute deviation is the 
absolute value of the arithmetic deviation. In the cases 
above, the absolute deviations of the arithmetic deviations 
+10 and −15 would be 10 and 15, respectively. 
 
One should next examine the relationship of the abso-
lute deviation and its average magnitude for various glu-
cose ranges. There is almost always a systematic relation-
ship between the absolute deviations and the true glucose 
level. If the true glucose level is not known, one can use the 
average value of multiple replicated measurements (Fig. 
4).
 
(5) Absolute Relative Difference (ARD): Since an 
absolute deviation of 15 has a very different implication 
for a true value of 45 mg/dL compared with a true value of 
400 mg/dL, it is common practice to express the absolute 
difference as a percentage of the true glucose. One can also 
plot ARD versus the true glucose levels as a continuous 
function (Fig. 5).
a. 
Mean Absolute Relative Difference (MARD): 
When we calculate an absolute relative deviation 
based on individual measurements using the meter 
Fig. 3. Arithmetic deviations versus true glucose values (134). 
Relationship of deviations versus comparator glucose. The arith-
metic (signed) deviations can vary in magnitude (bias) and in 
terms of their own variability depending on glucose level. 
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  243 
or CGM being evaluated (test method) as compared 
with a “true” laboratory-based method, there is a very 
large random sampling error. The mean absolute rela-
tive difference (MARD) is calculated as the average 
(mean) value of individual ARDs (133). To reduce the 
random sampling error in the measurement of ARD, it 
is desirable to calculate a MARD using a large num-
ber of paired test-comparator values for each specified 
narrow ranges of glucose (to achieve a 10% relative 
error in the MARD, it is necessary to have at least 500 
data pairs).
 
MARD values have frequently been reported in 
the literature for the entire range of observed glucose 
levels (e.g., from 40 to 400 mg/dL). Since the ARD 
values differ systematically in the hypoglycemic, 
normoglycemic, and hyperglycemic ranges based on 
a specific GM device’s performance, providing ARD 
data for narrow glucose ranges gives important and 
useful performance information (134). MARD values 
for CGM can vary systematically by day of wear (e.g., 
day 1 vs. day 3 vs. day 7) (Fig. 6) (135,136). MARD 
also depends on rate-of-change of glucose.
b. Median ARD: Rather than using MARD, some 
authors prefer to present results in terms of the median 
ARD. 
 
One advantage of median ARD is that it is less influ-
enced by outliers. However, it may be biased due to exclu-
sion of the effects of outliers. Many studies have reported 
values for both MARD and the median ARD (frequently 
abbreviated as MedARD). MedARD is generally numeri-
cally smaller than MARD. The ratio of the MedARD to 
MARD has been found to be approximately 0.8 empiri-
cally for a variety of data in the literature. This is due to 
reduction in the influence of outliers, and the fact that the 
median is smaller than the mean for asymmetrical distri-
butions such as ARD. It can be shown both empirically, 
using simulations, and theoretically, that the MedARD is 
approximately 0.8  MARD.
 
Table 6 summarizes the most commonly used terms 
that describe performance of glucose meters and sensors. 
Understanding Clinical Standards for 
Accuracy of Current BGMs and CGMs
 
Error grids were the most popular early efforts to 
characterize the clinical significance of BGM device mea-
surement errors. Regions of the grid are identified by let-
ter designation, each reflecting the potential risk severity 
of incorrect treatment triggered by the measurement error 
(e.g., the device indicating hyperglycemia when someone 
is actually hypoglycemic). Clarke et al introduced the first 
error grid in 1987 (137). A variation of this grid was pre-
sented by Parkes et al in 2000 (Fig. 7) to smooth the bound-
aries of the grid regions. It incorporated the opinions of a 
greater number of expert clinicians (138). More recently, in 
2014, a surveillance error grid with finer gradations in the 
categories for clinical error was introduced (139,140).
 
Device performance is typically reported as a percent-
age of glucose values in zone A or zones A + B (higher 
percentages in zone A or zones A + B indicate better per-
formance). However, there are no generally accepted tar-
gets for clinical accuracy metrics such as percentage of 
observations within the various zones. These percentages 
may also depend on the range of blood glucose levels 
obtained. Error grids were a good tool to identify the fre-
quency of egregious errors, but as meters have become 
more accurate, they are less useful for comparing device 
accuracy.
Fig. 4. Absolute difference: average magnitude of absolute devia-
tions for various glucose levels (134). The absolute deviation of 
the test method from the comparator shows large random sampling 
variability. The magnitude of the absolute deviation and its own 
variability depend on glucose level. The least-squares regression 
line is shown.
Fig. 5. Absolute relative deviation as a continuous function of 
true glucose (134).
 244  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
 
Linear regression and correlation is another common 
way of expressing device accuracy (Fig. 8). Bland-Altman 
plots are used to illustrate the magnitude of errors depend-
ing on the glucose level (Fig. 3) (134); these plots have 
been presented in a variety of formats. The vertical axis 
may show either arithmetic or relative error. The glucose 
levels shown on the horizontal scale may be the result of 
the comparator method or the average value of glucose 
measured by 2 methods subject to roughly comparable 
magnitude of error.
ISO Standards
 
In 2003 the ISO criteria for glucose meters were intro-
duced; the FDA adopted these the following year. Official 
meter approval standards from 2003 to 2014 are summa-
rized in Table 7 (122,123,131,141-143). The 2003 ISO 
15197 standard requires that 95% of the values be accurate 
within ±15 mg/dL (0.83 mmol/L) for glucose values <75 
mg/dL (4.2 mmol/L) and within ±20% for glucose values 
≥75 mg/dL (4.2 mmol/L). These were updated in 2013 
(ISO 15197-2013) to require 95% of values to be accurate 
within ±15 mg/dL (0.83 mmol/L) for glucose values <100 
mg/dL (5.55 mmol/L) and within ±15% for glucose values 
≥100 mg/dL (5.55 mmol/L) (131,142).
 
On January 7, 2014, the FDA released draft guidance 
for BGM accuracy that would require far more accuracy 
and precision from BGMs (143). The draft proposes that 
there be smaller errors in the hypoglycemic range and 
fewer outliers, allowing only 5% of measurements to have 
an error larger than ±15% and 1% of measurements to 
have an error greater ±20% above or below the reference 
value, rather than the 5% permitted under the 2003 ISO 
Guidelines. Further, the FDA was considering requesting 
that the experiment test be repeated 3 times, and the device 
would need to pass all 3 tests. This would make the test-
ing more rigorous and conservative. If devices are tested 
by trained technicians, one would expect greater accuracy 
than if they were tested by untrained lay-persons such as 
patients and family caregivers. There is a suggestion that 
testing performed by nontrained people under “real-world” 
conditions might become required (144). 
 
Not all BGMs that receive FDA approval provide the 
same degree of accuracy. Several published studies have 
compared BGM brands and models by name during head-
to-head testing (56,57,136,145-148). For clinicians and 
consumers, MARD provides an excellent measure of accu-
racy and precision when evaluating a BGM (134). It has 
also been recommended that bias and coefficient of varia-
tion (%CV) should be reported (one can show mathemati-
cally and by simulations that there is a direct relationship 
between MARD and %CV: MARD is approximately 0.8 
%CV) (132). The degree of BGM accuracy that is desired 
and required is likely to depend on the clinical needs of 
individual patients. There is a growing consensus among 
Fig. 6. CGM MARD values displayed by day of wear (135). Box plots for MARD on successive study days. Displayed are 
mean (diamonds), median (horizontal lines within boxes), 25th and 75th percentiles (lower and upper edge of the boxes), 
and minimum and maximum values (antennae). CGM = continuous glucose monitoring; MARD = mean absolute relative 
difference.
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  245 
endocrinologists and other clinicians that the accuracy and 
precision performance characteristics of each BGM and 
CGM device should be made available both to the patient 
and physician, to properly match a BGM device to the 
appropriate individual or clinical setting (149). 
How Much Accuracy Is Needed?
 
Research on the impact of GM inaccuracy on health 
outcomes is limited; however, computer modeling can 
separate the impact of GM errors on glucose outcomes 
from those due to other factors. Modeling studies indicate 
that patients receiving bolus insulin therapy face increased 
risk of hypoglycemia even when using GM devices that 
achieve current standards (140,150-153). 
 
One study used 100 simulated adults with T1DM to run 
16,000 virtual trials applying varying levels of simulated 
BGM error (5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% deviation from true 
blood glucose values). Results showed that glycemic con-
trol deteriorated with each increase in BGM error. Failure 
to detect hypoglycemic episodes, hypoglycemia risk, gly-
cemic variability, and A1C increased as BGM error level 
increased (150). In another study, Schnell and colleagues 
reported that improvements in BGM accuracy (reducing 
error from ±20 to ±5%) would be expected to result in a 
10% reduction in severe hypoglycemia, a 0.4% reduction 
in A1C levels, and a 0.5% relative reduction in myocardial 
infarction. This study (2012 data) estimated an annual cost 
savings from this kind of improvement in BGM accuracy 
of €9.4 million for patients with T1DM and €55.5 million 
for insulin-treated patients with T2DM for Germany alone 
(151).
  
Another study of 100 simulated cases being treated 
with intravenous insulin therapy in an intensive care set-
ting found that increases in either BGM imprecision 
Table 6
Common Terminology Related to GM Accuracy
Accuracy is defined as the closeness of agreement between a glucose test result and an accepted reference value. 
Accuracy improves when it has minimal bias and relative error (%CV, MARD, and minimal absolute error). Point 
accuracy refers to blood glucose values and sensor readings at single points in time (142,187). 
Bias is an average of systematic error. It is measured as the difference or percentage difference of glucose values above 
(+) or below (–) reference values. The level of bias may differ systematically depending on the glucose level. The ideal 
bias is 0.0% (132,142). 
Calibration for CGM refers to using periodic BGM measurements or a more accurate reference level from the 
laboratory, YSI device, or other measurement with higher accuracy to ensure accuracy. Devices and sensors vary in their 
requirements for frequency of calibration. Calibration of devices at the factory may eliminate the need for this step.
Percent coefficient of variation (%CV), defined as 100 × SD/(mean BG), expresses variability as the SD as a 
percentage of the mean glucose. This is a measure of the percentage error of repeated measurements of the same 
sample. The %CV usually varies systematically depending on glucose level. 
Device stability is determined by the amount of change (also called drift) in accuracy over time (usually between the 
first and last measurement or between the first and second measurement). A commonly used stability standard is ≤4 mg/
dL difference between measurements at BG concentrations ≤100 mg/dL or ≤4% at BG concentrations >100 mg/dL. 
Most current CGM devices require periodic recalibration to ensure accuracy over the life of the device (56,57,142,158). 
Lag time refers to the difference in time between features (apices, nadirs) observed using capillary blood glucose as 
reflected in BGM or reference measurements and the time when the feature is observed using CGM (188). 
Mean absolute relative deviation (MARD) is the most common measure used to characterize the accuracy of CGM 
but may also be used with BGM. MARD includes the effects of all outlier values. 
Median absolute relative deviation (MedARD) is the median value of the absolute percentage deviation from 
reference glucose values. MedARD is less affected by outlier values than MARD. The MedARD is typically about 0.8 
times the MARD. 
Precision shows how closely a series of meter values agree with each other, regardless of how close they come to 
reference values. A GM that always reads 20% lower (or higher) than the true reference values may still have excellent 
precision. The precision of a device’s readings is often measured as the %CV. High precision (repeatability) does not 
indicate accuracy.
Trend accuracy is a CGM device’s ability to correctly measure the rate and direction of BG change over time (187). 
Abbreviations: BG = blood glucose; BGM = blood glucose monitoring; CGM = continuous glucose monitoring; CV = coefficient 
of variation; GM = glucose monitoring; MARD = mean absolute relative deviation; SD = standard deviation; YSI = Yellow Springs 
Instruments.
 246  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
(measured as %CV) or bias, tested separately (with 1 or 
the other variable set to 0), increased glucose variability 
and the frequency of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia 
(154). BGMs with a %CV ≤6.5% and bias ≤5% rarely lead 
to major (2-step or greater) errors in insulin dosing. This 
degree of accuracy would ensure that the rate of any insu-
lin dosing errors would be <5% (155). Table 8 summarizes 
clinical situations where increased accuracy may be of par-
ticular benefit.
What Impacts Accuracy?
 
Manufacturing 
defects 
and 
test-strip 
lot-to-lot 
variations directly impact accuracy and introduce bias 
(156,157). Bias is typically measured in the hypoglycemic 
range, target range, and hyperglycemic range. One study 
of test-strip accuracy compared 7 meters and tested 3 test-
strip lots for each range and found that lot-to-lot variations 
were as high as 11% using the same meter (158). Another 
study found that the difference in bias between widely used 
BGM devices was as high as 4.8% (159). Underfilling the 
test strip can introduce errors >20% in some BGMs. In 
another study, only 5 of 31 glucose meters were able to 
maintain 100% accuracy (either giving the correct read-
ing or rejecting the reading appropriately) when test strips 
were deliberately underfilled (160). 
 
Although many meters have been approved for alter-
nate site testing (e.g., sampling from the palm, upper arm, 
forearm, thigh or calf, rather than the fingertip), this prac-
tice can generate inaccurate results, particularly when glu-
cose levels are changing rapidly such as after meals or after 
exercise, when the patient is ill or under stress, or shortly 
after insulin administration (68). 
 
BGM testing methods are predominately based on the 
glucose oxidase or glucose-1-dehydrogenase enzyme. Any 
factor that interferes or impacts these enzymes or the BGM 
itself can degrade overall accuracy. Variation can be due to 
issues such as competing blood substrates (e.g., maltose, 
vitamin C) (161,162), environmental issues (e.g., cold tem-
perature, high altitude with reduced oxygen pressure), and 
factors related to individual patients. Reduced accuracy and 
precision have been observed in tests performed by patients 
and other lay users compared with highly trained, experi-
enced health professionals (163). GM accuracy is just one 
of many factors influencing the quality of subsequent glyce-
mic control achieved. Contaminants on the skin from food 
sources (fruits, juices, sodas, milk) and even hand lotions 
can artificially raise capillary blood glucose levels and 
potentially lead to an overdose of insulin with subsequent 
hypoglycemia. Acetaminophen is well-known to result 
in spurious values in CGM systems (15,44,56,164,165). 
Physical compression of the CGM sensor during sleep can 
result in seriously low glucose readings. 
How to Communicate Device Accuracy Data
 
It would be highly desirable to be able to label each 
GM device and its test strips or sensors with their per-
formance characteristics, and methods for labeling have 
been contemplated for several years (166,167). In a recent 
guidance document (143), the FDA suggests a simple sys-
tem that shows the percentage of a BGM glucose values 
expected to fall within 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% of the 
reference values (Fig. 9) (143). This allows clinicians and 
patients more insight into the accuracy of a particular GM 
device so they can make an informed choice.
Fig. 7. Parkes error grid (138). 
Fig. 8. Linear regression relationship between observed and com-
parator glucose (134). 
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  247 
BGM Accuracy Is Necessary but not Sufficient to 
Improve Quality of Glycemic Control
 
As measurement tools, BGMs and CGMs generate 
data used to make treatment decisions and adjust diabe-
tes medication doses. The aptitude of patients and clini-
cians with regard to data analysis and interpretation var-
ies widely. Accordingly, the methods of data display and 
reporting are critically important. Older BGMs displayed 
a single value without context. In contrast, many current 
BGMs report weekly or monthly averages for glucose 
and may also highlight patterns in glycemic variability 
(e.g., consistently high or low values at a particular time 
of day or in relationship to a specified meal). Similarly, 
current CGM devices have on-screen analysis capabili-
ties that display glucose trend lines over time, with arrows 
reflecting the magnitude of the current rate-of-change of 
glucose. These features provide additional information and 
help give context to raw glucose numbers. However, many 
users will require guidance to effectively use these infor-
mative features.
 
Clinicians should also consider the ease and speed of 
BGM downloading to ensure that the end user will be able 
to identify glucose patterns and that clinical interventions 
will be properly implemented. Currently, each device has 
proprietary software that displays data in widely differing 
formats, making clinical interpretation difficult. To accom-
modate their patients, clinicians need to master multiple 
software products. Although no current software down-
loads every device, several companies and organizations 
are attempting to develop standardized methods to down-
load and display data from nearly every type of BGM, 
CGM, insulin pump, and other health devices (e.g., activity 
monitors). 
 
To correctly gauge the timing of hypoglycemic and 
hyperglycemic events, the clock setting in the BGM must 
be accurate (168). BGM clock settings should be clearly 
visible and easy to adjust and should remain accurate when 
a battery is changed or temporarily removed. Clocks in the 
meter, CGM, and insulin pump (if utilized) should be syn-
chronized (automatically if possible), with accommodation 
for travel across time zones. Ideally, all glucose and related 
data should be integrated with an electronic health record. 
 
It has been proposed that the ongoing routine quality 
assurance verification currently being performed by manu-
facturers to ensure the accuracy and precision of subse-
quent lots of test strips should be confirmed by indepen-
dent laboratories using a standardized methodology (146). 
In support of this concept, Freckmann and colleagues 
reviewed the accuracy of 27 meters previously approved in 
Europe under the 2003 ISO 15197 standard (±20% for glu-
cose levels >75 mg/dL and ±15 mg/dL for glucose levels 
≤75 mg/dL). In postapproval testing, more than 40% of the 
meters failed to meet the standard by which they had previ-
ously received approval (58). When people with diabetes 
Table 7
Prior, Current, and Proposed Glucose Meter Performance 
Recommendations and Standards (131,142,143)
Meter approval standards
ISO 15197 2003
(adopted by FDA 
2004)
<75 mg/dL
(<4.2 mmol/L)
±15 mg/dL
(±0.83 mmol/L)
95%a
≥75 mg/dL
(≥4.2 mmol/L)
±20%
ISO 15197 2013
<100 mg/dL
(<5.55 mmol/L)
±15 mg/dL
(±0.83 mmol/L)
95%a,b
≥100 mg/dL
(≥5.55 mmol/L)
±15%
FDA 2014
50-400 mg/dL
(2.8-22.2 mmol/L)
±15%
95%
AND
50-400 mg/dL
(2.8-22.2 mmol/l)
±20%
99%
Abbreviations: ADA = American Diabetes Association; FDA = US Food and Drug 
Administration; ISO = International Organization for Standardization.
a Both FDA and ISO standards allow 5% of meter values to be outside these limits. There was no
  limitation on the clinical severity of these outliers prior to 2013.
b 99% of values must be within Consensus Error Grid (138) zones A or B. 
 248  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
Table 8
Clinical Situations That May Require Greater Glucose Monitoring Accuracy
Patients requiring the highest possible accuracy in glucose monitoring
• 
History of severe hypoglycemia
• 
Hypoglycemia unawareness
• 
Pregnancy
• 
Infants and children receiving insulin therapy
• 
Patients at risk for hypoglycemia, including: 
o Patients receiving basal insulin 
o Patients receiving basal bolus inulin therapy with multiple injections per day
o Patients receiving sulfonylureas or glinides (insulin secretagogues)
o Patients with irregular schedules, skipped or small meals, vigorous exercise, travel 
between time zones, disrupted sleep schedules, shift work
• 
People with occupational risks that enhance possible risks from hypoglycemia (for example, 
involving driving or operating hazardous machinery)
Fig. 9. Sample label information for meter and test-strip boxes (From the US Food and Drug Administration Guidance Document) 
(143).
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  249 
performed the testing, fully one-third of meters failed to 
meet the 2003 ISO 15197 standards (169). A recent study 
showed that only 12 (44.4%) of 27 available BGMs met 
the most recent 2013 ISO 15197 standard. Only 13 of 27 
(48.1%) BGMs gave adequately accurate results in the 
hypoglycemic range, while 19 (70.3%) had sufficient accu-
racy for glucose levels >250 mg/dL (13.9 mmol/L) (170). 
Unfortunately, one cannot assume that FDA approval 
implies that a BGM will continue to meet FDA accuracy 
requirements for subsequent batches of test strips. 
Glucometrics, Downloading, 
and Interpretation of GM Data 
 
The analysis and display of glucose data is termed 
“glucometrics” (171). It can describe the average value, 
distribution of glucose, glucose variability, patterns during 
the day and night, effects of days of the week, and long-
term trends. The availability of GM devices with electronic 
memory and the ability to download these data has fueled 
the rapidly growing science of glucometrics. Retrospective 
analysis of glucose levels, both overall and at specific times 
(e.g., after major meals or on selected days of the week), 
can provide insights into how factors such as medications, 
diet, stress, and activity contribute to diabetes control and 
how those factors should be addressed or adjusted (82,172). 
Communication of glucometric data to the healthcare team 
is key; communication methods between patient and clini-
cian are presented in Table 3. 
 
Which glucometrics parameters are best? Approaches 
vary in complexity but usually generate similar types 
of information (171,173). With enough information, it 
becomes possible to evaluate whether the A1C level, still 
the gold standard, is consistent with the patient’s average 
blood glucose (174). 
 
Table 9 summarizes high-level, clinically relevant 
information that can be obtained from BGM or CGM 
data. Either the mean or median can be used to charac-
terize the average glucose level. Since the SD of glucose 
is fairly highly correlated with the mean glucose, %CV is 
usually the best single simple method to characterize vari-
ability (26,37,175-178). As an approximation, SD tends 
to be higher in patients with higher mean glucose values. 
While mean, median, and %CV metrics describe overall 
glycemia, several additional methods have been developed 
to describe actionable patterns to help clinicians optimize 
diabetes therapy. In a graphical presentation, the “stan-
dard day,” “modal day,” (179,180) or ambulatory glucose 
profile (AGP) displays individual glucose measurements 
(pooled over multiple days) by time of day on a single 
24-hour scale (Table 9; image 1A; image 1B.; image 2A.). 
This graph indicates both the glucose values and the times 
of day when people have been monitoring their glucose 
levels, facilitating the detection of any consistent patterns 
in glucose excursions and providing an assessment of the 
adequacy of GM. The “Standard Day” is simple in prin-
ciple but can be difficult to interpret in view of the large 
amount of scatter observed in glucose data obtained over 
several days. 
AGP
 
The AGP was introduced by Mazze et al (1987) for 
BGM and subsequently applied with further enhancements 
(display of the smoothed curves for the 10th and 90th per-
centiles) to CGM data by Mazze (2008) and Bergenstal and 
colleagues (2013). The AGP provides an excellent starting 
point for a standardized computerized display of BGM 
and/or CGM data by time of day (173,178,179). To gener-
ate the AGP, an individual’s blood glucose levels are mea-
sured via CGM or BGM with all glucose data pooled and 
analyzed as if it had been collected during a single 24-hour 
period. The result is a standardized software report that can 
be displayed graphically. Examples of graphic AGP dis-
plays for patients with normal glucose tolerance, T1DM, 
and T2DM are shown in Table 9 (images 2A-C) (173,181). 
AGP has been proposed as a standardized method for glu-
cose reporting and analysis (173,178,181). One can also 
examine these 24-hour patterns in glucose by day of the 
week (180). It is customary to report a number of statistics 
to accompany the graphical display of the AGP (173).
 
Several additional graphic displays of data related to 
changes in glucose over time, time within different glucose 
ranges, glucose profile, etc. are shown in Table 9. Some 
are simplistic (e.g., pie graphs or simple bar charts display-
ing percentages of glucose values above, below, and within 
the target range). Others are slightly more complex (e.g., 
box plots [a methodology introduced by Tukey as part of 
his approach to Exploratory Data Analysis that makes no 
assumptions about the nature of the underlying distribution 
of glucose values and was introduced into glucometrics by 
Rodbard (180,182)], scattergrams, stacked bar charts, and 
histograms). Their purpose is to help the clinician identify 
and prioritize clinical problems and then educate and moti-
vate the patient to achieve improved glycemic control.
Recommendations
 
Health professionals should educate patients regard-
ing the interpretation and use of GM data to help modify 
patient behaviors, enhance their ability to self-adjust ther-
apy, and help them decide when to seek medical assistance.
 
To assess glucometrics, first examine the overall sta-
tistics (mean, SD, %CV); distribution of glucose values 
(e.g., stacked bar charts); and glucose by date, time of day, 
in relationship to meals, and by day of the week. This docu-
ment provides several examples for each of these types of 
analyses. Usually, the most helpful are graphs of glucose by 
date, the AGP by time of day, stacked bar charts in relation-
ship to time of day, and stacked bar charts and “box plots” 
for glucose in relation to meals and by day of the week. 
 250  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
Table 9
Glucometrics: Key Characteristics of BGM and CGM Glucose Data (171,173,174,179,181,182, 190)
Average glucose
Mean, median 
Calculated value of A1C corresponding to the observed average glucose
Glucose variability
SD, %CV, IQR, maximum, minimum, range
Standard/modal day
1A. Glucose profile by time of day
1B. Glucose values shown in 
relation to meals (solid circles) 
superimposed on target ranges 
for preprandial and postprandial 
glucose. Horizontal lines: median. 
The rectangles show the 25th and 
75th percentiles. 
AGP
2A. Patient with normal glucose 
tolerance (example)
 Ambulatory glucose profile 
(AGP) for CGM data (typically 
using data from 14 days), with 
smoothed estimates of 10th, 25th, 
50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles 
(Continued next page)
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  251 
2B. Patient with T1DM (example)
2C. Patient with T2DM
The solid curve in the middle 
represents the smoothed median 
glucose (50th percentile) values for 
a 24-hour period. The blue shaded 
area around the median reflects 
the range between the 25th and 
75th percentiles, which includes 
50% of the patient’s glucose 
readings for any specified time of 
day. The average vertical distance 
between the shaded curves is the 
overall IQR. The dashed lines 
show smoothed 10th and 90th 
percentiles. The striped, shaded 
area shows the presumptive target 
range (70-180 mg/dL or 3.9-10 
mmol/L). 
Change in glucose over time
3. Glucose by date for all glucose 
values. May also be used for:
• 
Mean glucose
• 
Fasting glucose
• 
Glucose values at any 
selected time of day
(Continued next page)
 252  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
4. Percentage of time in 7 
categories, by date, for 1 year
Glucose distribution
Quality of glycemic control 
5. Percentage of values in multiple 
categories of glycemic quality by 
time of day
• 
Percentage in target range 
(green)
• 
Percentage hyperglycemia 
(orange, dark orange, or pink, 
representing different degrees 
of severity)
• 
Percentage hypoglycemia 
(light blue, dark blue, blue-
black)
6. Categories of glycemic quality 
by day of the week (using stacked 
bar charts with 7 glucose level 
categories) 
7. Proportion of glucose values 
within the hypoglycemic, target, 
and hyperglycemic ranges in 
relationship to meals
7A. Pie charts showing before 
and after meals, at bedtime, and 
overnight (3 am) 
(Continued next page)
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  253 
7B. Proportion of glucose values 
within the hypoglycemic, target, 
and hyperglycemic ranges in 
relationship to meals
(stacked bar charts)
Integration with other relevant “logbook” data
8. Medications, insulin doses, diet, 
physical activity/exercise, illness, 
stress, travel
Abbreviations: AB = after breakfast; AD = after dinner; AGP = ambulatory glucose profile; A1C = glycated hemoglobin; AL = after 
lunch; BB = before breakfast; BD = before dinner; BG = blood glucose; BGM = blood glucose monitoring; BL = before lunch; BT = 
bedtime; CGM = continuous glucose monitoring; CV = coefficient of variation; IQR = interquartile range; T1DM = type 1 diabetes 
mellitus; T2DM = type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Image citations: 1A, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B: Rodbard D, et al. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2009;3:1388-1394.; 1B.: Pernick N and Rodbard 
D. Diabetes Care. 1986;9:61-69.; 2. A., 2. B.: Mazze RS, et al. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2008;10:149-159.; 2C.: Bergenstal R, et al. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol. 2013;7:562-578.; 8: Walsh J, et al. Using Insulin: Everything You Need for Success with Insulin. San Diego, 
CA: Torrey Pines Press. 2003.
 
Persons with diabetes who use an insulin pump have a 
rich data set of additional information to supplement glu-
cose values that includes the time and amount of all insulin 
administered whether for a meal or for a correction, as well 
as all recorded carbohydrate intake. Nonpump users must 
track insulin use manually. A review of reports that include 
medication history can greatly improve one’s ability to 
make therapeutic decisions and advise the patient.
CONCLUSION
 
GM is an essential component of care for all patients 
with diabetes. Over the years, BGM meters and CGM sen-
sors have improved dramatically in terms of accuracy, data 
usefulness, and the availability of automated analyses and 
interpretation. This document seeks to encourage “mean-
ingful monitoring,” a term that signifies an approach that 
 254  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
is intended to empower patients to manage glucose levels 
and reduce the risk of hypoglycemia. Meaningful moni-
toring will likely be different for each individual. Clinical 
practice guidelines from all major diabetes organizations 
recommend routine BGM for patients with T1DM. Most of 
these guidelines also recommend CGM for patients with a 
history of severe hypoglycemia or hypoglycemia unaware-
ness, as well as for patients not at goal based on A1C. 
Many pediatric patients with T1DM are candidates for 
CGM, especially if they and their family caregivers have 
the appropriate training to use the information effectively. 
 
Meaningful monitoring in patients with T2DM should 
also be individualized depending on the risk of hypoglyce-
mia estimated based on prior history, presence of hypogly-
cemia unawareness, and the nature of the current therapy 
(e.g., whether the patient is receiving medications with rel-
atively high hypoglycemia risk, such as insulin, sulfonyl-
ureas, or glinides). There have been some studies of CGM 
in T2DM, but more trials are needed to identify the settings 
in which it can be most beneficial and cost-effective. In 
T2DM as in T1DM, CGM can be useful in patients with 
unappreciated hyperglycemia, as well as in patients who 
are at high risk for hypoglycemia, those who have hypo-
glycemia unawareness, and those using intensive insulin 
therapy (44). 
 
Patients and clinicians should be educated to under-
stand and use GM data. Glucometric data analysis can help 
both patients and clinicians assess the quality of glycemic 
control, identify glucose patterns and responses to therapy, 
and evaluate glucose variability. Glucometric analysis can 
also be used as an educational tool. Education is essential 
to making apparent the relationship of specific glucose data 
with medication and other therapeutic interventions.
 
Looking forward, one can expect increased BGM 
accuracy and the continuing rapid evolution of CGM 
devices. Many improvements are in progress, includ-
ing data sharing via the Internet (e.g., as implemented by 
Nightscout, Dexcom Share, Medtronic), use of additional 
displays (e.g., Apple Watch™), increased duration of use, 
and improved usability (size, weight, form factor, ease of 
insertion, ease of interface with other devices, options for 
placement site). Several mobile-health applications have 
been developed for mobile phones, enabling patients to 
monitor and adjust their lifestyle and therapy on a continu-
ing real-time basis. As the technology advances, there is a 
vital need to integrate the multiple data inputs from insulin 
pumps, glucose sensors, glucose meters, and carbohydrate 
intake in a comprehensive and standardized way so clini-
cians and patients can make sense of it all. 
 
Additionally, CGM devices are now available with a 
longer duration of use (2 weeks); others in development 
may be implanted and last 6 months or longer. Some 
devices are factory calibrated and do not require additional 
calibrations by the end user. Devices will become smaller, 
lighter, and simpler to use. Some will have fewer features 
(e.g., no alarms), while others may have additional features 
and will integrate with insulin delivery (e.g., “artificial 
pancreas”) systems. These are examples of device inno-
vations that may broaden the appeal and applicability of 
CGM both in T1DM and T2DM. New clinical trials will be 
needed to better understand how to optimally utilize this 
technology for various patient populations with T2DM. 
DISCLOSURE
Cochairs
 
Dr. Timothy Bailey reports that he has received 
speaker/consultant honoraria and research support from 
Novo Nordisk A/S; consultant honoraria and research 
support from Bayer AG, BD, Medtronic, Inc, and Sanofi
 
US LLC; and research support from Abbott Laboratories, 
ACON Laboratories, Inc, Alere, Animas Corporation, 
Cebix Incorporated, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, 
Dexcom, Inc, Eli Lilly and Company, GlaxoSmithKline 
plc, Halozyme, Inc, Insulet Corporation, LifeScan, Inc, 
MannKind Corporation, Merck & Co, Inc, Orexigen 
Therapeutics, Inc, and Tandem Diabetes Care.
 
Dr. George Grunberger reports that he has received 
speaker honoraria and research support for his role as 
investigator from AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Merck & Co, Inc, Novo Nordisk A/S, and Sanofi US LLC; 
and speaker honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim, Glaxo 
SmithKline, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Task Force
 
Dr. Bruce W. Bode reports that he has received 
research support through his employer for his role as prin-
cipal investigator from Abbott Laboratories, Halozyme, 
Inc, and MannKind Corporation; speaker honoraria from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Eli Lilly and Company, 
and Merck & Co, Inc; consultant fees from Tandem 
Diabetes Care; speaker honoraria and research support 
through his employer for his role as principal investigator 
from DexCom, Inc; and consultant fees, speaker honoraria, 
and research support through his employer for his role as 
principal investigator from Medtronic, Inc, Novo Nordisk 
A/S, and Sanofi US LLC.
 
Dr. Yehuda Handelsman reports that he has received 
consultant/speaker fees and research grant support from 
Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, GlaxoSmithKline plc, and 
Novo Nordisk A/S; consultant fees and research grant 
support from Amgen Inc, Gilead, Merck & Co, Inc, and 
Sanofi US LLC; research grant support from Intarcia 
Therapeutics, Inc, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals, Inc, and 
Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited; consultant 
fees from Halozyme, Inc; and consultant/speaker fees 
from Amarin Corporation, Amylin Pharmaceuticals, LLC, 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc, and Vivus, Inc.
 
Dr. Irl B. Hirsch reports that he has received research 
grant support for his role as principal investigator from 
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  255 
Halozyme, Inc, Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi US LLC; and 
consultant honoraria from Abbott Laboratories, BD, and F. 
Hoffman-La Roche Ltd.
 
Dr. Lois Jovanovič has no multiplicity of interest to 
disclose.
 
Dr. Victor L. Roberts reports that he has received 
speaker honoraria from AstraZeneca and Novo Nordisk 
A/S; consultant honoraria from Advanced Health Media, 
LLC, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, decile.ten communi-
cations, and Medical Exchange International; consultant 
honoraria and clinical research support from Medtronic, 
Inc; and consultant fees from Schlesinger Associates.
 
Dr. David Rodbard reports that he has received 
consulting fees from Abbott Laboratories, Halozyme, 
Inc, MannKind Corporation, Merck & Co, Inc, Sanofi, 
OneDrop, and Valeritas, Inc.
 
Dr. William V. Tamborlane reports that he has 
received speaker honoraria from Novo Nordisk A/S; and 
consultant honoraria from Medtronic, Inc, and Sanofi US 
LLC.
 
Mr. John Walsh reports that he has received consul-
tant fees from ACON Laboratories, Abbott Laboratories, 
Animas Corporation, Becton, Dickinson and Company, 
Lifescan, Inc, and Tandem Diabetes Care; speaker hon-
oraria from Animas Canada, Becton, Dickinson and 
Company, and Sanofi K.K.; and advisory board hono-
raria from Becton, Dickinson and Company, Companion 
Diabetes, ConvaTec, Inc, Halozyme, Inc, and Tandem 
Diabetes.
Medical Writer
 
Ms. Caitlin Rothermel has no multiplicity of interest 
to disclose.
REFERENCES
 
1.  Blevins TC, Bode BW, Garg SK, et al. Statement by 
the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
Consensus Panel on continuous glucose monitoring. 
Endocr Pract. 2010;16:730-745. Available at: https://
www.aace.com/files/continuousglucosemonitoring.pdf.
 
2.  American Diabetes Association. Standards of Medical 
Care in Diabetes - 2015. Diabetes Care. 2015;38 Suppl 
1:S1-S94.
 
3.  Battelino T, Conget I, Olsen B, et al. The use and efficacy 
of continuous glucose monitoring in type 1 diabetes treated 
with insulin pump therapy: a randomised controlled trial. 
Diabetologia. 2012;55:3155-3162.
 
4.  Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous 
Glucose 
Monitoring 
Study 
Group, 
Beck 
RW, 
Buckingham B, et al. Factors predictive of use and of ben-
efit from continuous glucose monitoring in type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care. 2009;32:1947-1953.
 
5.  Bode BW, Tamborlane WV, Davidson PC. Insulin pump 
therapy in the 21st century. Strategies for successful use in 
adults, adolescents, and children with diabetes. Postgrad 
Med. 2002;111:69-77.
 
6.  Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring Study Group, Tamborlane WV, 
Beck RW, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring and 
intensive treatment of type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 
2008;359:1464-1476.
 
7.  Franciosi M, Lucisano G, Pellegrini F, et al. ROSES: 
Role of self-monitoring of blood glucose and intensive 
education in patients with type 2 diabetes not receiving 
insulin. A pilot randomized clinical trial. Diabet Med. 
2011;28:789-796.
 
8.  Khamseh ME, Ansari M, Malek M, Shafiee G, 
Baradaran H. Effects of a structured self-monitoring of 
blood glucose method on patient self-management behav-
ior and metabolic outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol. 2011;5:388-393.
 
9.  Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Schikman CH, et al. Structured 
self-monitoring of blood glucose significantly reduces 
A1C levels in poorly controlled, noninsulin-treated type 
2 diabetes: results from the Structured Testing Program 
Study. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:262-267.
 10.  Durán A, Martín P, Runkle I, et al. Benefits of self-moni-
toring blood glucose in the management of new-onset type 
2 diabetes mellitus: The St Carlos Study, a prospective 
randomized clinic-based interventional study with parallel 
groups. J Diabetes. 2010;2:203-211.
 11.  Barnett AH, Krentz AJ, Strojek K, et al. The efficacy 
of self-monitoring of blood glucose in the management of 
patients with type 2 diabetes treated with a gliclazide mod-
ified release-based regimen. A multicentre, randomized, 
parallel-group, 6-month evaluation (DINAMIC 1 study). 
Diabetes Obes Metab. 2008;10:1239-1247.
 12.  Martin S, Schneider B, Heinemann L, et al. Self-
monitoring of blood glucose in type 2 diabetes and 
long-term outcome: an epidemiological cohort study. 
Diabetologia. 2006;49:271-278.
 13.  Skyler JS, Skyler DL, Seigler DE, O’Sullivan MJ. 
Algorithms for adjustment of insulin dosage by patients who 
monitor blood glucose. Diabetes Care. 1981;4:311-318.
 14.  Walsh J, Roberts R, Chandrasekhar V, Bailey T. Using 
Insulin: Everything You Need to Know For Success with 
Insulin. San Diego, CA: Torrey Pines Press; 2003.
 15.  Clarke SF, Foster JR. A history of blood glucose meters 
and their role in self-monitoring of diabetes mellitus. Br J 
Biomed Sci. 2012;69:83-93.
 16.  Goldstein DE, Little RR, Lorenz RA, et al. Tests of gly-
cemia in diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:1761-1773.
 17.  Howe-Davies S, Holman RR, Phillips M, Turner RC. 
Home blood sampling for plasma glucose assay in control 
of diabetes. Br Med J. 1978;2:596-598.
 18.  Sönksen PH, Judd SL, Lowy C. Home monitoring of 
blood-glucose. Method for improving diabetic control. 
Lancet. 1978;1:729-732.
 19.  Danowski TS, Sunder JH. Jet injection of insulin during 
self-monitoring of blood glucose. Diabetes Care. 1978;1: 
27-33.
 20.  Walford S, Gale EA, Allison SP, Tattersall RB. Self-
monitoring of blood-glucose. Improvement of diabetic 
control. Lancet. 1978;1:732-735.
 21.  Skyler JS, Lasky IA, Skyler DL, Robertson EG, Mintz 
DH. Home blood glucose monitoring as an aid in diabetes 
management. Diabetes Care. 1978;1:150-157.
 22.  Peterson CM, Jones RL, Dupuis A, Levine BS, 
Bernstein R, O’Shea M. Feasibility of improved blood 
glucose control in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1979;2:329-335.
 23.  Ikeda Y, Tajima N, Minami N, Ide Y, Yokoyama J, Abe 
M. Pilot study of self-measurement of blood glucose using 
the Dextrostix-Eyetone system for juvenile-onset diabetes. 
Diabetologia. 1978;15:91-93.
 256  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
 24.  The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the devel-
opment and progression of long-term complications in 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. The Diabetes Control 
and Complications Trial Research Group. N Engl J Med. 
1993;329:977-986.
 25.  de Veciana M, Major CA, Morgan MA, et al. 
Postprandial versus preprandial blood glucose monitor-
ing in women with gestational diabetes mellitus requiring 
insulin therapy. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1237-1241.
 26.  Kaufman FR, Gibson LC, Halvorson M, Carpenter S, 
Fisher LK, Pitukcheewanont P. A pilot study of the con-
tinuous glucose monitoring system: clinical decisions and 
glycemic control after its use in pediatric type 1 diabetic 
subjects. Diabetes Care. 2001;24:2030-2034.
 27.  Hirsch IB, Farkas-Hirsch R, Skyler JS. Intensive insu-
lin therapy for treatment of type I diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
1990;13:1265-1283.
 28.  International Diabetes Federation. IDF Guideline on 
Self-monitoring of Blood Glucose in Non-insulin Treated 
Type 2 Diabetes. 2009. Available at: http://www.idf.org/
guidelines/self-monitoring.
 29.  Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, et al. Longitudinal 
study of new and prevalent use of self-monitoring of blood 
glucose. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:1757-1763.
 30.  Schwedes U, Siebolds M, Mertes G; SMBG Study 
Group. Meal-related structured self-monitoring of 
blood glucose: effect on diabetes control in non-insulin-
treated type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Care. 2002;25: 
1928-1932.
 31.  Inzucchi SE, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes: a 
patient-centered approach: Position statement of the 
American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes 
Care. 2012;35:1364-1379.
 32.  O’Kane MJ, Bunting B, Copeland M, Coates VE; 
ESMON study group. Efficacy of self monitoring of 
blood glucose in patients with newly diagnosed type 2 dia-
betes (ESMON study): randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 
2008;336:1174-1177.
 33.  Farmer A, Wade A, Goyder E, et al. Impact of self moni-
toring of blood glucose in the management of patients 
with non-insulin treated diabetes: open parallel group ran-
domised trial. BMJ. 2007;335:132.
 34.  Davidson MB, Castellanos M, Kain D, Duran P. The 
effect of self monitoring of blood glucose concentrations 
on glycated hemoglobin levels in diabetic patients not 
taking insulin: a blinded, randomized trial. Am J Med. 
2005;118:422-425.
 35.  Malanda UL, Welschen LM, Riphagen II, Dekker JM, 
Nijpels G, Bot SD. Self-monitoring of blood glucose in 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who are not using 
insulin. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;1:CD005060.
 36.  Chitayat L, Zisser H, Jovanovic L. Continuous glucose 
monitoring during pregnancy. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
2009;11 Suppl 1:S105-S111.
 37.  Potts RO, Tamada JA, Tierney MJ. Glucose monitoring 
by reverse iontophoresis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2002; 
18 Suppl 1:S49-S53.
 38.  Isaacs L. What Happened to the GlucoWatch Biographer? 
Available at: http://www.diabetesmonitor.com/glucose-
meters/what-happened-to-the-glucowatch.htm.
 39.  Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous 
Glucose 
Monitoring 
Study 
Group, 
Beck 
RW, 
Hirsch IB, et al. The effect of continuous glucose 
monitoring in well-controlled type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care. 2009;32:1378-1383.
 40.  Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring Study Group, Bode B, Beck RW, 
et al. Sustained benefit of continuous glucose monitoring 
on A1C, glucose profiles, and hypoglycemia in adults with 
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:2047-2049.
 41.  Kordonouri O, Pankowska E, Rami B, et al. Sensor-
augmented pump therapy from the diagnosis of child-
hood type 1 diabetes: results of the Paediatric Onset Study 
(ONSET) after 12 months of treatment. Diabetologia. 
2010;53:2487-2495.
 42.  Mauras N, Beck R, Xing D, et al. A randomized clini-
cal trial to assess the efficacy and safety of real-time con-
tinuous glucose monitoring in the management of type 1 
diabetes in young children aged 4 to <10 years. Diabetes 
Care. 2012;35:204-210.
 43.  Seaquist ER, Anderson J, Childs B, et al. Hypoglycemia 
and diabetes: a report of a workgroup of the American 
Diabetes Association and the Endocrine Society. Diabetes 
Care. 2013;36:1384-1395.
 44.  Klonoff DC, Buckingham B, Christiansen JS, et al. 
Continuous glucose monitoring: an Endocrine Society 
Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2011;96:2968-2979.
 45.  Yeh HC, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al. Comparative 
effectiveness and safety of methods of insulin delivery 
and glucose monitoring for diabetes mellitus: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157: 
336-347.
 46.  Tunis SL, Minshall ME. Self-monitoring of blood glu-
cose (SMBG) for type 2 diabetes patients treated with oral 
anti-diabetes drugs and with a recent history of monitor-
ing: cost-effectiveness in the US. Curr Med Res Opin. 
2010;26:151-162.
 47.  Tunis SL, Willis WD, Foos V. Self-monitoring of blood 
glucose (SMBG) in patients with type 2 diabetes on oral 
anti-diabetes drugs: cost-effectiveness in France, Germany, 
Italy, and Spain. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010;26:163-175.
 48.  Vigersky RA, Fonda SJ, Chellappa M, Walker MS, 
Ehrhardt NM. Short- and long-term effects of real-time 
continuous glucose monitoring in patients with type 2 dia-
betes. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:32-38.
 49.  Weinstock RS, Xing D, Maahs DM, et al. Severe hypo-
glycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis in adults with type 1 
diabetes: results from the T1D Exchange clinic registry. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:3411-3419.
 50.  American Association of Diabetes Educators. Practice 
Advisory. Blood Glucose Meter Accuracy. 2013. Available 
at: https://www.diabeteseducator.org/docs/default-source/
legacy-docs/_resources/pdf/research/Practice_Advisory_
BGM_FINAL.pdf.
 51.  US Food and Drug Administration. Abbott Diabetes 
Care: Class 1 Recall - FreeStyle InsuLinx Blood Glucose 
Meters - Risk of Incorrect Test Result. 2013. Available at: 
http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/SafetyInformation/
SafetyAlertsforHumanMedicalProducts/ucm353136.htm.
 52.  US Food and Drug Administration. FDA announces a 
voluntary recall of Nova Max Blood Glucose Test Strips. 
2013. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/
Newsroom/Press Announcements/ucm363241.htm.
 53.  US Food and Drug Administration. Abbott Issues Voluntary 
Recall of Certain FreeStyle® and FreeStyle Lite® Blood 
Glucose Test Strips in the United States. 2013. Available 
at: http://www.fda.gov/Safety/Recalls/ucm376975.htm.
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  257 
 54.  US Food and Drug Administration. LifeScan, Inc. 
OneTouch Verio IQ Blood Glucose Meter – Class I 
Recall: Failure to Provide a Warning at Extremely 
High Blood Glucose Levels. 2013. Available at: http://
www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/SafetyInformation/ 
SafetyAlertsforHumanMedicalProducts/ucm349187.htm.
 55.  Competitive Bidding Program | Medicare.gov. Available 
at: http://www.medicare.gov/what-medicare-covers/part-
b/competitive-bidding-program.html.
 56.  Freckmann G, Baumstark A, Schmid C, Pleus S, Link 
M, Haug C. Evaluation of 12 blood glucose monitoring 
systems for self-testing: system accuracy and measurement 
reproducibility. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2014;16:113-122.
 57.  Freckmann G, Schmid C, Baumstark A, Pleus S, Link 
M, Haug C. System accuracy evaluation of 43 blood 
glucose monitoring systems for self-monitoring of blood 
glucose according to DIN EN ISO 15197. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2012;6:1060-1075.
 58.  Freckmann G, Baumstark A, Jendrike N, et al. System 
accuracy evaluation of 27 blood glucose monitoring sys-
tems according to DIN EN ISO 15197. Diabetes Technol 
Ther. 2010;12:221-231.
 59.  Klonoff DC, Prahalad P. Performance of Cleared Blood 
Glucose Monitors. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2015;9:895-910.
 60.  Baumstark A, Schmid C, Pleus S, Rittmeyer D, Haug 
C, Freckmann G. Accuracy assessment of an advanced 
blood glucose monitoring system for self-testing with three 
reagent system lots following ISO 15197:2013. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol. 2014;8:1241-1242.
 61.  Link M, Pleus S, Schmid C, et al. Accuracy evaluation 
of three systems for self-monitoring of blood glucose 
with three different test strip lots following ISO 15197. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol. 2014;8:422-424.
 62.  Pleus S, Schmid C, Link M, et al. Accuracy assessment 
of two novel systems for self-monitoring of blood glu-
cose following ISO 15197:2013. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2014;8:906-908.
 63.  Puckrein G, Zangeneh F, Nunlee-Bland G, Xu L, 
Parkin CG, Davidson JA. CMS Competitive Bidding 
Program Disrupted Access to Diabetes Supplies with 
Resultant Increased Mortality. Poster presented at: 
American Diabetes Association 75th Scientific Sessions; 
June 5-9, 2015; Boston, MA. Available at: http://www.
nmqf.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/ADA_Puckrien_
CMS_HANDOUT_rev-FINAL.pdf.
 64.  National Minority Quality Forum (NMQF). The 
Unintended Consequences of the Competitive Bidding 
Program: Late-breaking Data from the American 
Diabetes Association 75th Scientific Sessions. June 6, 
2015. Available at: http://www.nmqf.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/06/NMQF-ADA-Poster-Backgrounder-
FINAL1.pdf.
 65.  National Minority Quality Forum (NMQF). Disruption 
in Access to Diabetes Monitoring Supplies Leads to 
Increased Hospitalizations, Mortality Among Medicare 
Beneficiaries. Data Analysis of CMS Competitive Bidding 
Program Shows Harm to Patient Care. American Diabetes 
Association 75th Scientific Sessions; June 6, 2015. 
Available at: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
disruption-in-access-to-diabetes-monitoring-supplies-
leads-to-increased-hospitalizations-mortality-among-
medicare-beneficiaries-300095195.html.
 66.  American Diabetes Association. Fast Facts: Data and 
Statistics About Diabetes. 2014. Available at: http://profes
 
 sional.diabetes.org/admin/UserFiles/0%20-%20Sean/14_
fast_facts_june2014_final3.pdf.
 67.  Maahs DM, West NA, Lawrence JM, Mayer-Davis EJ. 
Epidemiology of type 1 diabetes. Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am. 2010;39:481-497.
 68.  Joslin Diabetes Center, Joslin Clinic. Clinical Guideline 
For Adults With Diabetes. 2014. Available at: http://www.
joslin.org/docs/Adult_guideline_-update_thru_10-23-
14_2.pdf.
 69.  Handelsman Y, Mechanick JI, Blonde L, et al. American 
Association 
of 
Clinical 
Endocrinologists 
Medical 
Guidelines for Clinical Practice for developing a diabetes 
mellitus comprehensive care plan. Endocr Pract. 2011;17 
Suppl 2:1-53.
 70.  Miller KM, Beck RW, Bergenstal RM, et al. Evidence 
of a strong association between frequency of self-moni-
toring of blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c levels in 
T1D exchange clinic registry participants. Diabetes Care. 
2013;36:2009-2014.
 71.  Kohnert KD, Heinke P, Fritzsche G, Vogt L, Augstein 
P, Salzsieder E. Evaluation of the mean absolute glucose 
change as a measure of glycemic variability using con-
tinuous glucose monitoring data. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
2013;15:448-454.
 72.  Kilpatrick ES, Rigby AS, Goode K, Atkin SL. Relating 
mean blood glucose and glucose variability to the risk of 
multiple episodes of hypoglycaemia in type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetologia. 2007;50:2553-2561.
 73.  American Association of Diabetes Educators. AADE 
Guidelines for the Practice of Diabetes Self-Management 
Education and Training. 2011. Available at: http://care.dia-
betesjournals.org/content/35/11/2393.full. 
 74.  Kirk JK, Stegner J. Self-monitoring of blood glucose: 
practical aspects. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2010;4:435-439.
 75.  Garber AJ, Abrahamson MJ, Barzilay JI, et al. AACE/
ACE comprehensive diabetes management algorithm 
2015. Endocr Pract. 2015;21:438-447.
 76.  Sperling M, Tamborlane W, Battelino T, Weinzimer 
S, Phillip M. Diabetes mellitus. In: Sperling ME, ed. 
Pediatric Endocrinology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2014: 846-900.
 77.  Cengiz E, Xing D, Wong JC, et al. Severe hypoglycemia 
and diabetic ketoacidosis among youth with type 1 diabe-
tes in the T1D Exchange clinic registry. Pediatr Diabetes. 
2013;14:447-454.
 78.  Mauras N, Mazaika P, Buckingham B, et al. Longitudinal 
assessment of neuroanatomical and cognitive differences 
in young children with type 1 diabetes: association with 
hyperglycemia. Diabetes. 2015;64:1770-1779.
 79.  Effect of intensive diabetes treatment on the development 
and progression of long-term complications in adoles-
cents with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial. Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial Research Group. J Pediatr. 1994;125: 
177-188.
 80.  Niedel S, Traynor M, Acerini C, Tamborlane WV, 
McKee M. Framework for development of self-manage-
ment expertise: health professional guidance of the devel-
opment of parental expertise following diagnosis of child-
hood Type 1 Diabetes. J Health Services Research Policy. 
2013. Epub ahead of print.
 81.  Wong JC, Foster NC, Maahs DM, et al. Real-time con-
tinuous glucose monitoring among participants in the 
T1D exchange clinic registry. Diabetes Care. 2014;37: 
2702-2709.
 258  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
 82.  Bailey TS, Zisser HC, Garg SK. Reduction in hemo-
globin A1c with real-time continuous glucose monitor-
ing: results from a 12-week observational study. Diabetes 
Technol Ther. 2007;9:203-210.
 83.  Tansey M, Laffel L, Cheng J, et al. Satisfaction with con-
tinuous glucose monitoring in adults and youths with type 
1 diabetes. Diabet Med. 2011;28:1118-1122.
 84.  Tsalikian E, Fox L, Weinzimer S, et al. Feasibility of 
prolonged continuous glucose monitoring in toddlers with 
type 1 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012;13:301-307.
 85.  Miller KM, Foster NC, Beck RW, et al. Current state of 
type 1 diabetes treatment in the U.S.: updated data from 
the T1D Exchange clinic registry. Diabetes Care. 2015;38: 
971-978.
 86.  Slover RH, Welsh JB, Criego A, et al. Effectiveness of 
sensor-augmented pump therapy in children and adoles-
cents with type 1 diabetes in the STAR 3 study. Pediatr 
Diabetes. 2012;13:6-11.
 87. US Food and Drug Administration. MiniMed 530G FDA 
Approval Letter. Available at: http://www.accessdata.fda.
gov/cdrh_docs/pdf12/p120010a.pdf. Accessed 2013. 
 88. Buckingham BA, Raghinaru D, Cameron F, et al. 
Predictive low-glucose insulin suspension reduces duration 
of nocturnal hypoglycemia in children without increasing 
ketosis. Diabetes Care. 2015;38:1197-1204.
 89.  Phillip M, Danne T, Shalitin S, et al. Use of continuous 
glucose monitoring in children and adolescents. Pediatr 
Diabetes. 2012;13:215-228.
 90.  US Food and Drug Administration. Press Announcements 
> FDA Permits Marketing of First System of Mobile 
Medical Apps For Continuous Glucose Monitoring. 
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/newsroom/
pressannouncements/ucm431385.htm.
 91.  Dexcom. FDA Approves Dexcom G5® Mobile Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring System | Dexcom. August 24, 2015. 
Available 
at: 
http://dexcom.com/news/1257506247-f-
da-approves-dexcom-g5®-mobile-continuous-glucose-
monitoring-system. Accessed 2015. 
 92.  Medtronic. Press Release: Medtronic receives FDA 
clearance of MiniMed® Connect for more conve-
nient access to personal diabetes data. June 5, 2015. 
Available at: http://newsroom.medtronic.com/phoenix.
zhtml?c=251324&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=2056803. 
Accessed 2015. 
 93.  The Nightscout Project. Available at: http://www.night-
scout.info/.
 94.  Czupryniak L, Barkai L, Bolgarska S, et al. Self-
monitoring of blood glucose in diabetes: from evi-
dence to clinical reality in Central and Eastern Europe--
recommendations from the international Central-Eastern 
European expert group. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2014;16: 
460-475.
 95.  Simon J, Gray A, Clarke P, et al. Cost effectiveness of 
self monitoring of blood glucose in patients with non-insu-
lin treated type 2 diabetes: economic evaluation of data 
from the DiGEM trial. BMJ. 2008;336:1177-1180.
 96.  Willett LR. ACP Journal Club. Meta-analysis: self-mon-
itoring in non-insulin-treated type 2 diabetes improved 
HbA1c by 0.25%. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:JC6-12.
 97.  Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Schikman CH, et al. A struc-
tured self-monitoring of blood glucose approach in type 2 
diabetes encourages more frequent, intensive, and effec-
tive physician interventions: results from the STeP study. 
Diabetes Technol Ther. 2011;13:797-802.
 98.  Scavini M, Bosi E, Ceriello A, et al. Prospective, random-
ized trial on intensive SMBG management added value in 
non-insulin-treated T2DM patients (PRISMA): a study to 
determine the effect of a structured SMBG intervention. 
Acta Diabetol. 2013;50:663-672.
 99.  Zisman A, Vlajnic A, Zhou R. The BEAM Factor: An 
easy-to-determine clinical indicator for deciding when to 
add prandial insulin to basal insulin in type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes. 2011:A235-A352, Poster 1121-p.
100.  Zhou J, Mo Y, Li H, et al. Relationship between HbA1c 
and continuous glucose monitoring in Chinese population: 
a multicenter study. PLoS One. 2013;8:e83827.
101.  Tildesley HD, Wright AM, Chan JH, et al. A compari-
son of internet monitoring with continuous glucose moni-
toring in insulin-requiring type 2 diabetes mellitus. Can J 
Diabetes. 2013;37:305-308.
102.  Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Sutton PD, Ventura SJ, 
Menacker F, Munson ML. Births: final data for 2002. 
Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2003;52:1-113.
103.  Jovanovic L, ed. Medical Management of Pregnancy 
Complicated by Diabetes. 4th ed. Alexandria, VA: 
American Diabetes Association; 2009.
104.  Jovanovic L, Martin S. Developing criteria for defin-
ing type 2 diabetes in pregnancy. In: Feinglos M, Bethel 
MA, eds. Contemporary Endocrinology: Type 2 Diabetes 
Mellitus: An Evidence-Based Approach to Practical 
Management. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2008:365-375. 
10.1007/978-1-60327-043-4_22.
105.  Tennant PW, Glinianaia SV, Bilous RW, Rankin J, Bell 
R. Pre-existing diabetes, maternal glycated haemoglobin, 
and the risks of fetal and infant death: a population-based 
study. Diabetologia. 2014;57:285-294.
106.  Buchanan TA, Metzger BE, Freinkel N. Accelerated 
starvation in late pregnancy: a comparison between obese 
women with and without gestational diabetes mellitus. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 1990;162:1015-1020.
107.  American Diabetes Association. Gestational diabetes 
mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2004;27 Suppl 1:S88-S90.
108.  Jovanovic L. The role of continuous glucose monitoring 
in gestational diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
2000;2 Suppl 1:S67-S71.
109.  Jovanovic L, Peterson CM, Saxena BB, Dawood MY, 
Saudek CD. Feasibility of maintaining normal glucose 
profiles in insulin-dependent pregnant diabetic women. Am 
J Med. 1980;68:105-112.
110.  Boutati EI, Raptis SA. Self-monitoring of blood glucose 
as part of the integral care of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care. 2009;32 Suppl 2:S205-S210.
111.  Jovanovic L. 2014 Personal Communication. 
112.  Kropff J, Bruttomesso D, Doll W, et al. Accuracy of two 
continuous glucose monitoring systems: a head-to-head 
comparison under clinical research centre and daily life 
conditions. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2015;17:343-349.
113.  Peyser TA, Nakamura K, Price D, Bohnett LC, Hirsch 
IB, Balo A. Hypoglycemic Accuracy and Improved 
Low Glucose Alerts of the Latest Dexcom G4 Platinum 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring System. Diabetes Technol 
Ther. 2015;17:548-554.
114.  Matuleviciene V, Joseph JI, Andelin M, et al. A clini-
cal trial of the accuracy and treatment experience of the 
Dexcom G4 sensor (Dexcom G4 system) and Enlite sen-
sor (guardian REAL-time system) tested simultaneously in 
ambulatory patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol 
Ther. 2014;16:759-767.
115.  Chen R, Yogev Y, Ben-Haroush A, Jovanovic L, Hod M, 
Phillip M. Continuous glucose monitoring for the evalua-
tion and improved control of gestational diabetes mellitus. 
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2003;14:256-260.
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  259 
116.  Murphy HR. Continuous glucose monitoring in preg-
nancy: we have the technology but not all the answers. 
Diabetes Care. 2013;36:1818-1819.
117.  Murphy HR, Rayman G, Lewis K, et al. Effectiveness 
of continuous glucose monitoring in pregnant women with 
diabetes: randomised clinical trial. BMJ. 2008;337:a1680.
118.  Secher AL, Ringholm L, Andersen HU, Damm P, 
Mathiesen ER. The effect of real-time continuous glucose 
monitoring in pregnant women with diabetes: a random-
ized controlled trial. Diabetes Care. 2013;36:1877-1883.
119.  Yu F, Lv L, Liang Z, et al. Continuous glucose monitor-
ing effects on maternal glycemic control and pregnancy 
outcomes in patients with gestational diabetes mellitus: a 
prospective cohort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 
99:4674-4682.
120. US National Institutes of Health. Continuous Glucose 
Monitoring in Women With Type 1 Diabetes in Pregnancy 
Trial (CONCEPTT). Available at: http://clinicaltrials.gov/
show/NCT01788527.
121.  McLachlan K, Jenkins A, O’Neal D. The role of con-
tinuous glucose monitoring in clinical decision-making in 
diabetes in pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2007; 
47:186-190.
122.  Consensus statement on self-monitoring of blood glucose. 
Diabetes Care. 1987;10:95-99.
123.  Self-monitoring of blood glucose. American Diabetes 
Association. Diabetes Care. 1994;17:81-86.
124.  Boren SA, Clarke WL. Analytical and clinical perfor-
mance of blood glucose monitors. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2010;4:84-97.
125.  Rebel A, Rice MA, Fahy BG. Accuracy of point-of-care 
glucose measurements. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2012;6: 
396-411.
126.  Weitgasser R, Gappmayer B, Pichler M. Newer por-
table glucose meters--analytical improvement com-
pared with previous generation devices? Clin Chem. 
1999;45:1821-1825.
127.  Vashist SK. Continuous glucose monitoring systems: a 
review. Diagnostics. 2013;3:385-412.
128.  Bailey TS, Chang A, Christiansen M. Clinical accuracy of 
a continuous glucose monitoring system with an advanced 
algorithm. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2015;9:209-214.
129.  Zschornack E, Schmid C, Pleus S, et al. Evaluation of 
the performance of a novel system for continuous glucose 
monitoring. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2013;7:815-823.
130.  Damiano ER, McKeon K, El-Khatib FH, Zheng H, 
Nathan DM, Russell SJ. A comparative effective-
ness analysis of three continuous glucose monitors: 
the Navigator, G4 Platinum, and Enlite. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2014;8:699-708.
131. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 
15197:2003 - In vitro diagnostic test systems -- 
Requirements for blood-glucose monitoring systems 
for self-testing in managing diabetes mellitus. 2003. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.
htm?csnumber=26309.
132.  Wilmoth DR. The relationships between common mea-
sures of glucose meter performance. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2012;6:1087-1093.
133.  Obermaier K, Schmelzeisen-Redeker G, Schoemaker 
M, et al. Performance evaluations of continuous glucose 
monitoring systems: precision absolute relative devia-
tion is part of the assessment. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2013;7:824-832.
134.  Rodbard D. Characterizing accuracy and precision of glu-
cose sensors and meters. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2014;8: 
980-985.
135.  Pleus S, Schmid C, Link M, et al. Performance evalu-
ation of a continuous glucose monitoring system under 
conditions similar to daily life. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2013;7:833-841.
136.  Pleus S, Schoemaker M, Morgenstern K, et al. Rate-
of-change dependence of the performance of two CGM 
systems during induced glucose swings. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2015;9:801-807.
137.  Clarke WL, Cox D, Gonder-Frederick LA, Carter W, 
Pohl SL. Evaluating clinical accuracy of systems for self-
monitoring of blood glucose. Diabetes Care. 1987;10: 
622-628.
138.  Parkes JL, Slatin SL, Pardo S, Ginsberg BH. A new 
consensus error grid to evaluate the clinical significance 
of inaccuracies in the measurement of blood glucose. 
Diabetes Care. 2000;23:1143-1148.
139.  Klonoff DC, Lias C, Vigersky R, et al. The surveillance 
error grid. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2014;8:658-672.
140. Kovatchev BP, Wakeman CA, Breton MD, et al. 
Computing the surveillance error grid analysis: procedure 
and examples. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2014;8:673-684.
141.  US Food and Drug Administration. FDA 2003--To come. 
142. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 
15197:2013 
- 
In 
vitro 
diagnostic 
test 
systems 
-- 
Requirements 
for blood-glucose monitoring systems for self-testing in 
managing diabetes mellitus. 2013. Available at: http://
www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=54976.
143.  US Food and Drug Administration. Self-Monitoring Blood 
Glucose Test Systems for Over-the-Counter Use. Draft 
Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration 
Staff. 2014. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/down-
loads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/
GuidanceDocuments/UCM380327.pdf.
144.  Freckmann G, Schmid C, Baumstark A, Rutschmann 
M, Haug C, Heinemann L. Analytical performance 
requirements for systems for self-monitoring of blood 
glucose with focus on system accuracy: relevant differ-
ences among ISO 15197:2003, ISO 15197:2013, and 
current FDA recommendations. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2015;9:885-894.
145.  Freckmann G, Pleus S, Link M, et al. Accuracy evalu-
ation of four blood glucose monitoring systems in unal-
tered blood samples in the low glycemic range and blood 
samples in the concentration range defined by ISO 15197. 
Diabetes Technol Ther. 2015;17:625-634.
146.  Klonoff DC, Reyes JS. Do currently available blood glu-
cose monitors meet regulatory standards? J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2013;7:1071-1083.
147.  Link M, Schmid C, Pleus S, et al. System accuracy evalu-
ation of four systems for self-monitoring of blood glucose 
following ISO 15197 using a glucose oxidase and a hexo-
kinase-based comparison method. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2015;9:1041-1050.
148.  Jendrike N, Rittmeyer D, Pleus S, Baumstark A, Haug 
C, Freckmann G. ISO 15197:2013 accuracy evaluation 
of two CE-marked systems for self-monitoring of blood 
glucose. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2015;9:934-935.
149.  Walsh J, Roberts R, Vigersky RA, Schwartz F. New 
Criteria for Assessing the Accuracy of Blood Glucose 
Monitors Meeting, October 28, 2011. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2012;6:466-474.
 260  GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)
150.  Breton MD, Kovatchev BP. Impact of blood glucose self-
monitoring errors on glucose variability, risk for hypogly-
cemia, and average glucose control in type 1 diabetes: an 
in silico study. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2010;4:562-570.
151.  Schnell O, Erbach M, Wintergerst E. Higher accuracy of 
self-monitoring of blood glucose in insulin-treated patients 
in Germany: clinical and economical aspects. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol. 2013;7:904-912.
152.  Facchinetti A, Sparacino G, Cobelli C. Modeling the 
error of continuous glucose monitoring sensor data: critical 
aspects discussed through simulation studies. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol. 2010;4:4-14.
153.  Karon BS, Boyd JC, Klee GG. Empiric validation of sim-
ulation models for estimating glucose meter performance 
criteria for moderate levels of glycemic control. Diabetes 
Technol Ther. 2013;15:996-1003.
154.  Boyd JC, Bruns DE. Monte Carlo simulation in establish-
ing analytical quality requirements for clinical laboratory 
tests meeting clinical needs. Methods Enzymol. 2009;467: 
411-433.
155.  Boyd JC, Bruns DE. Quality specifications for glucose 
meters: assessment by simulation modeling of errors in 
insulin dose. Clin Chem. 2001;47:209-214.
156.  Baumstark A, Pleus S, Schmid C, Link M, Haug C, 
Freckmann G. Lot-to-lot variability of test strips and 
accuracy assessment of systems for self-monitoring of 
blood glucose according to ISO 15197. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2012;6:1076-1086.
157.  Kristensen GB, Christensen NG, Thue G, Sandberg 
S. Between-lot variation in external quality assessment of 
glucose: clinical importance and effect on participant per-
formance evaluation. Clin Chem. 2005;51:1632-1636.
158.  Brazg R, Klaff LJ, Parkin CG. Performance variability 
of seven commonly used self-monitoring of blood glucose 
systems: clinical considerations for patients and providers. 
J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2013;7:144-152.
159.  Tack C, Pohlmeier H, Behnke T, et al. Accuracy evalu-
ation of five blood glucose monitoring systems obtained 
from the pharmacy: a European multicenter study with 453 
subjects. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2012;14:330-337.
160.  Pfützner A, Schipper C, Ramljak S, et al. Evaluation of 
the effects of insufficient blood volume samples on the per-
formance of blood glucose self-test meters. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2013;7:1522-1529.
161.  Dungan K, Chapman J, Braithwaite SS, Buse J. Glucose 
measurement: confounding issues in setting targets for 
inpatient management. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:403-409.
162.  Vasudevan S, Hirsch IB. Interference of intravenous vita-
min C with blood glucose testing. Diabetes Care. 2014; 
37:e93-e94.
163.  Kilo C, Pinson M, Joynes JO, et al. Evaluation of a new 
blood glucose monitoring system with auto-calibration. 
Diabetes Technol Ther. 2005;7:283-294.
164.  Helton KL, Ratner BD, Wisniewski NA. Biomechanics 
of the sensor-tissue interface-effects of motion, pres-
sure, and design on sensor performance and foreign body 
response-part II: examples and application. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2011;5:647-656.
165.  Ginsberg BH. Factors affecting blood glucose monitoring: 
sources of errors in measurement. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2009;3:903-913.
166.  Ginsberg BH. We need tighter regulatory standards for 
blood glucose monitoring, but they should be for accuracy 
disclosure. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2010;4:1265-1268.
167.  Thorpe GH. Assessing the quality of publications evalu-
ating the accuracy of blood glucose monitoring systems. 
Diabetes Technol Ther. 2013;15:253-259.
168.  Crowe DJ, Klonoff DC. Time synching or time sinking? 
Diabetes Technol Ther. 2005;7:663-664.
169. Kristensen GB, Monsen G, Skeie S, Sandberg S. 
Standardized evaluation of nine instruments for self-
monitoring of blood glucose. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
2008;10:467-477.
170.  Hasslacher C, Kulozik F, Platten I. Analytical perfor-
mance of glucose monitoring systems at different blood 
glucose ranges and analysis of outliers in a clinical setting. 
J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2014;8:466-472.
171.  Rodbard D. Interpretation of continuous glucose moni-
toring data: glycemic variability and quality of glycemic 
control. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2009;11 Suppl 1:S55-S67.
172.  Rodbard D. Optimizing display, analysis, interpretation 
and utility of self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) 
data for management of patients with diabetes. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol. 2007;1:62-71.
173.  Bergenstal RM, Ahmann AJ, Bailey T, et al. 
Recommendations for standardizing glucose reporting and 
analysis to optimize clinical decision making in diabetes: 
the Ambulatory Glucose Profile (AGP). J Diabetes Sci 
Technol. 2013;15:198-211.
174.  Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, et al. Translating the 
A1C assay into estimated average glucose values. Diabetes 
Care. 2008;31:1473-1478.
175.  JDRF CGM Study Group. JDRF randomized clinical 
trial to assess the efficacy of real-time continuous glu-
cose monitoring in the management of type 1 diabetes: 
research design and methods. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
2008;10:310-321.
176.  Rodbard D. Clinical interpretation of indices of quality of 
glycemic control and glycemic variability. Postgrad Med. 
2011;123:107-118.
177.  DeVries JH. Glucose variability: where it is important and 
how to measure it. Diabetes. 2013;62:1405-1408.
178.  Rodbard D. Evaluating quality of glycemic control: 
graphical displays of hypo- and hyperglycemia, time in 
target range, and mean glucose. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 
2015;9:56-62. Available at: http://dst.sagepub.com/con-
tent/early/2014/10/10/1932296814551046.full.pdf?ijkey=
WlvR0wp7B7jpLE2&keytype=ref.
179.  Mazze RS, Lucido D, Langer O, Hartmann K, 
Rodbard D. Ambulatory glucose profile: representation of 
verified self-monitored blood glucose data. Diabetes Care. 
1987;10:111-117.
180.  Rodbard D. Potential role of computers in clinical inves-
tigation and management of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 
Care. 1988;11 Suppl 1:54-61.
181.  Mazze RS, Strock E, Wesley D, et al. Characterizing 
glucose exposure for individuals with normal glucose 
tolerance using continuous glucose monitoring and ambu-
latory glucose profile analysis. Diabetes Technol Ther. 
2008;10:149-159.
182.  Pernick NL, Rodbard D. Personal computer programs 
to assist with self-monitoring of blood glucose and self-
adjustment of insulin dosage. Diabetes Care. 1986;9:61-69.
183.  Davis WA, Bruce DG, Davis TM. Does self-monitoring 
of blood glucose improve outcome in type 2 diabetes? The 
Fremantle Diabetes Study. Diabetologia. 2007;50:510-515.
 GM Consensus Statement, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 2)  261 
184.  Franciosi M, Pellegrini F, De Berardis G, et al. The 
impact of blood glucose self-monitoring on metabolic con-
trol and quality of life in type 2 diabetic patients: an urgent 
need for better educational strategies. Diabetes Care. 
2001;24:1870-7.
185.  Guerci B, Floriot M, Böhme P, et al. Clinical perfor-
mance of CGMS in type 1 diabetic patients treated by con-
tinuous subcutaneous insulin infusion using insulin ana-
logs. Diabetes Care. 2003;26:582-589.
186.  Handelsman Y, Bloomgarden ZT, Grunberger G, et 
al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
and American College of Endocrinology - Clinical 
Practice Guidelines For Developing a Diabetes Mellitus 
Comprehensive Care Plan - 2015. Endocr Pract. 2015;21 
Suppl 1:1-87.
187.  Wentholt IM, Hoekstra JB, Devries JH. A critical 
appraisal of the continuous glucose-error grid analysis. 
Diabetes Care. 2006;29:1805-1811.
188.  Davey RJ, Low C, Jones TW, Fournier PA. Contribution 
of an intrinsic lag of continuous glucose monitoring sys-
tems to differences in measured and actual glucose con-
centrations changing at variable rates in vitro. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol. 2010;4:1393-1399.
189.  Liebl A, Henrichs HR, Heinemann L, et al. Continuous 
glucose monitoring: evidence and consensus statement for 
clinical use. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2013;7:500-519.
190.  Rodbard D. Display of glucose distributions by date, time 
of day, and day of week: New and improved methods. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol. 2009;3:1388-1394.
 516  ENDOCRINE PRACTICE Vol 22 No. 4 April 2016  
Correction
In the 2016 Outpatient Glucose Monitoring Consensus Statement published in the February issue of Endocrine Practice 
(Volume 22, pgs. 231-261), there were omissions in Tables 2 (p. 236) and 6 (p. 245) of the print version. In Table 2, fasting 
plasma glucose was tested before meals in addition to on awakening. In Table 6, “%C” should read “%CV.” We apologize 
for the errors.
Table 2
Recommendations for Daily Blood Glucose Testing in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes (2,68,69)
Timing
Goal
mg/dL
mmol/L
Fasting plasma glucose
Test on awakening
and before meals
80-130 (ADA)
70-130 (Joslin)
<110 (AACE)
4.2-7.2 (ADA)
3.9-7.2 (Joslin)
<6.1 (AACE)
Postprandial
2 hours after meal
1-2 hours after meal
<180 (ADA)
<180 (Joslin)
<140 (AACE)
<10.0 (ADA)
<10.0 (Joslin)
<7.8 (AACE)
Bedtime glucose
At bedtime
90-150 (Joslin)
5.0-8.3 (Joslin)
These goals must be individualized to personal patient needs regarding pregnancy, hypoglycemia unawareness, patients who 
live alone, or occupational hazards that require further reduction of risk of hypoglycemia (2,68).
Abbreviations: AACE = American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists; ADA = American Diabetes Association; 
Joslin = Joslin Diabetes Center.
Table 6
Common Terminology Related to GM Accuracy
Accuracy is defined as the closeness of agreement between a glucose test result and an accepted reference value. Accuracy improves 
when it has minimal bias and relative error (%CV, MARD, and minimal absolute error). Point accuracy refers to blood glucose values 
and sensor readings at single points in time (142,187). 
Bias is an average of systematic error. It is measured as the difference or percentage difference of glucose values above (+) or below 
(–) reference values. The level of bias may differ systematically depending on the glucose level. The ideal bias is 0.0% (132,142). 
Calibration for CGM refers to using periodic BGM measurements or a more accurate reference level from the laboratory, YSI 
device, or other measurement with higher accuracy to ensure accuracy. Devices and sensors vary in their requirements for frequency 
of calibration. Calibration of devices at the factory may eliminate the need for this step.
Percent coefficient of variation (%CV), defined as 100 × SD/(mean BG), expresses variability as the SD as a percentage of the 
mean glucose. This is a measure of the percentage error of repeated measurements of the same sample. The %CV usually varies 
systematically depending on glucose level. 
Device stability is determined by the amount of change (also called drift) in accuracy over time (usually between the first and last 
measurement or between the first and second measurement). A commonly used stability standard is ≤4 mg/dL difference between 
measurements at BG concentrations ≤100 mg/dL or ≤4% at BG concentrations >100 mg/dL. Most current CGM devices require 
periodic recalibration to ensure accuracy over the life of the device (56,57,142,158). 
Lag time refers to the difference in time between features (apices, nadirs) observed using capillary blood glucose as reflected in 
BGM or reference measurements and the time when the feature is observed using CGM (188). 
Mean absolute relative deviation (MARD) is the most common measure used to characterize the accuracy of CGM but may also be 
used with BGM. MARD includes the effects of all outlier values. 
Median absolute relative deviation (MedARD) is the median value of the absolute percentage deviation from reference glucose 
values. MedARD is less affected by outlier values than MARD. The MedARD is typically about 0.8 times the MARD. 
Precision shows how closely a series of meter values agree with each other, regardless of how close they come to reference values. 
A GM that always reads 20% lower (or higher) than the true reference values may still have excellent precision. The precision of a 
device’s readings is often measured as the %CV. High precision (repeatability) does not indicate accuracy.
Trend accuracy is a CGM device’s ability to correctly measure the rate and direction of BG change over time (187). 
Abbreviations: BG = blood glucose; BGM = blood glucose monitoring; CGM = continuous glucose monitoring; CV = coefficient 
of variation; GM = glucose monitoring; MARD = mean absolute relative deviation; SD = standard deviation; YSI = Yellow Springs 
Instruments.
