 Surveillance Summaries / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
April 27, 2018 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Among Children Aged 8 Years — Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 
11 Sites, United States, 2014
Please note: Errata have been published for this issue. To view the errata, please click here and here.
 Surveillance Summaries
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Surveill Summ 2018;67(No. SS-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Robert R. Redfield, MD, Director
Anne Schuchat, MD, Principal Deputy Director
Leslie Dauphin, PhD, Acting Associate Director for Science  
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Acting Editor in Chief, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Mary Dott, MD, MPH, Online Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Paul D. Maitland, Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................2
Methods 
....................................................................................................................4
Results .......................................................................................................................9
Discussion ............................................................................................................. 12
Limitations ............................................................................................................ 15
Future Surveillance Directions....................................................................... 15
Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 15
References 
............................................................................................................. 16
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Among Children Aged 8 Years — 
Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 
11 Sites, United States, 2014
Corresponding author: Jon Baio, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC. Telephone: 404-498-3873; 
E-mail: jbaio@cdc.gov.
Abstract
Problem/Condition: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Period Covered: 2014.
Description of System: The Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network is an active surveillance 
system that provides estimates of the prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) among children aged 8 years whose parents 
or guardians reside within 11 ADDM sites in the United States (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, 
Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Wisconsin). ADDM surveillance is conducted in two phases. The first 
phase involves review and abstraction of comprehensive evaluations that were completed by professional service providers in the 
community. Staff completing record review and abstraction receive extensive training and supervision and are evaluated according 
to strict reliability standards to certify effective initial training, identify ongoing training needs, and ensure adherence to the 
prescribed methodology. Record review and abstraction occurs in a variety of data sources ranging from general pediatric health 
clinics to specialized programs serving children with developmental disabilities. In addition, most of the ADDM sites also review 
records for children who have received special education services in public schools. In the second phase of the study, all abstracted 
information is reviewed systematically by experienced clinicians to determine ASD case status. A child is considered to meet 
the surveillance case definition for ASD if he or she displays behaviors, as described on one or more comprehensive evaluations 
completed by community-based professional providers, consistent with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) diagnostic criteria for autistic disorder; pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise 
specified (PDD-NOS, including atypical autism); or Asperger disorder. This report provides updated ASD prevalence estimates for 
children aged 8 years during the 2014 surveillance year, on the basis of DSM-IV-TR criteria, and describes characteristics of the 
population of children with ASD. In 2013, the American Psychiatric Association published the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), which made considerable changes to ASD diagnostic criteria. The change in ASD 
diagnostic criteria might influence ADDM ASD prevalence estimates; therefore, most (85%) of the records used to determine 
prevalence estimates based on DSM-IV-TR criteria underwent additional review under a newly operationalized surveillance case 
definition for ASD consistent with the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria. Children meeting this new surveillance case definition could 
qualify on the basis of one or both of the following criteria, as documented in abstracted comprehensive evaluations: 1) behaviors 
consistent with the DSM-5 diagnostic features; and/or 2) an ASD diagnosis, whether based on DSM-IV-TR or DSM-5 diagnostic 
criteria. Stratified comparisons of the number of children meeting either of these two case definitions also are reported.
Jon Baio, EdS1; Lisa Wiggins, PhD1; Deborah L. Christensen, PhD1; Matthew J Maenner, PhD1, Julie Daniels, PhD2; Zachary Warren, PhD3; 
Margaret Kurzius-Spencer, PhD4; Walter Zahorodny, PhD5; Cordelia Robinson Rosenberg, PhD6; Tiffany White, PhD7; Maureen S. Durkin, PhD8; 
Pamela Imm, MS8; Loizos Nikolaou, MPH1,9; Marshalyn Yeargin-Allsopp, MD1; Li-Ching Lee, PhD10; Rebecca Harrington, PhD10; 
Maya Lopez, MD11; Robert T. Fitzgerald, PhD12; Amy Hewitt, PhD13; Sydney Pettygrove, PhD4; John N. Constantino, MD12; Alison Vehorn, MS3; 
Josephine Shenouda, MS5; Jennifer Hall-Lande, PhD13; Kim Van Naarden Braun, PhD1; Nicole F. Dowling, PhD1
1National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 2University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; 
3Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee; 4University of Arizona, Tucson; 5Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey; 
6University of Colorado School of Medicine at the Anschutz Medical Campus; 7Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Denver; 
8University of Wisconsin, Madison; 9Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, Tennessee; 10Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; 
11University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock; 12Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri; 13University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
 Surveillance Summaries
2 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental 
disability defined by diagnostic criteria that include deficits 
in social communication and social interaction, and the 
presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, 
or activities that can persist throughout life (1). CDC began 
tracking the prevalence of ASD and characteristics of children 
with ASD in the United States in 1998 (2,3). The first 
CDC study, which was based on an investigation in Brick 
Township, New Jersey (2), identified similar characteristics 
but higher prevalence of ASD compared with other studies 
of that era. The second CDC study, which was conducted in 
metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia (3), identified a lower prevalence 
of ASD compared with the Brick Township study but similar 
estimates compared with other prevalence studies of that era. 
In 2000, CDC established the Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network to collect data that 
would provide estimates of the prevalence of ASD and other 
developmental disabilities in the United States (4,5).
Tracking the prevalence of ASD poses unique challenges 
because of the heterogeneity in symptom presentation, lack of 
biologic diagnostic markers, and changing diagnostic criteria 
(5). Initial signs and symptoms typically are apparent in the early 
developmental period; however, social deficits and behavioral 
patterns might not be recognized as symptoms of ASD until 
a child is unable to meet social, educational, occupational, 
or other important life stage demands (1). Features of ASD 
might overlap with or be difficult to distinguish from those of 
other psychiatric disorders, as described extensively in DSM-5 
Results: For 2014, the overall prevalence of ASD among the 11 ADDM sites was 16.8 per 1,000 (one in 59) children aged 8 years. 
Overall ASD prevalence estimates varied among sites, from 13.1–29.3 per 1,000 children aged 8 years. ASD prevalence estimates 
also varied by sex and race/ethnicity. Males were four times more likely than females to be identified with ASD. Prevalence estimates 
were higher for non-Hispanic white (henceforth, white) children compared with non-Hispanic black (henceforth, black) children, 
and both groups were more likely to be identified with ASD compared with Hispanic children. Among the nine sites with sufficient 
data on intellectual ability, 31% of children with ASD were classified in the range of intellectual disability (intelligence quotient [IQ] 
<70), 25% were in the borderline range (IQ 71–85), and 44% had IQ scores in the average to above average range (i.e., IQ >85). The 
distribution of intellectual ability varied by sex and race/ethnicity. Although mention of developmental concerns by age 36 months was 
documented for 85% of children with ASD, only 42% had a comprehensive evaluation on record by age 36 months. The median age 
of earliest known ASD diagnosis was 52 months and did not differ significantly by sex or race/ethnicity. For the targeted comparison 
of DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 results, the number and characteristics of children meeting the newly operationalized DSM-5 case 
definition for ASD were similar to those meeting the DSM-IV-TR case definition, with DSM-IV-TR case counts exceeding DSM-5 
counts by less than 5% and approximately 86% overlap between the two case definitions (kappa = 0.85).
Interpretation: Findings from the ADDM Network, on the basis of 2014 data reported from 11 sites, provide updated population-
based estimates of the prevalence of ASD among children aged 8 years in multiple communities in the United States. The overall 
ASD prevalence estimate of 16.8 per 1,000 children aged 8 years in 2014 is higher than previously reported estimates from the 
ADDM Network. Because the ADDM sites do not provide a representative sample of the entire United States, the combined 
prevalence estimates presented in this report cannot be generalized to all children aged 8 years in the United States. Consistent 
with reports from previous ADDM surveillance years, findings from 2014 were marked by variation in ASD prevalence when 
stratified by geographic area, sex, and level of intellectual ability. Differences in prevalence estimates between black and white 
children have diminished in most sites, but remained notable for Hispanic children. For 2014, results from application of the 
DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 case definitions were similar, overall and when stratified by sex, race/ethnicity, DSM-IV-TR diagnostic 
subtype, or level of intellectual ability. 
Public Health Action: Beginning with surveillance year 2016, the DSM-5 case definition will serve as the basis for ADDM 
estimates of ASD prevalence in future surveillance reports. Although the DSM-IV-TR case definition will eventually be phased 
out, it will be applied in a limited geographic area to offer additional data for comparison. Future analyses will examine trends in 
the continued use of DSM-IV-TR diagnoses, such as autistic disorder, PDD-NOS, and Asperger disorder in health and education 
records, documentation of symptoms consistent with DSM-5 terminology, and how these trends might influence estimates of 
ASD prevalence over time. The latest findings from the ADDM Network provide evidence that the prevalence of ASD is higher 
than previously reported estimates and continues to vary among certain racial/ethnic groups and communities. With prevalence 
of ASD ranging from 13.1 to 29.3 per 1,000 children aged 8 years in different communities throughout the United States, the 
need for behavioral, educational, residential, and occupational services remains high, as does the need for increased research on 
both genetic and nongenetic risk factors for ASD.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(1). Although standard diagnostic tools have been validated 
to inform clinicians’ impressions of ASD symptomology, 
inherent complexity of measurement approaches and variation 
in clinical impressions and decision-making, combined with 
policy changes that affect eligibility for health benefits and 
educational programs, complicates identification of ASD as a 
behavioral health diagnosis or educational exceptionality. To 
reduce the influence of these factors on prevalence estimates, 
the ADDM Network has consistently tracked ASD by applying 
a surveillance case definition of ASD and using the same 
record-review methodology and behaviorally defined case 
inclusion criteria since 2000 (5).
ADDM estimates of ASD prevalence among children aged 
8 years in multiple U.S. communities have increased from 
approximately one in 150 children during 2000–2002 to one in 
68 during 2010–2012, more than doubling during this period 
(6–11). The observed increase in ASD prevalence underscores 
the need for continued surveillance using consistent methods 
to monitor the changing prevalence of ASD and characteristics 
of children with ASD in the population.
In addition to serving as a basis for ASD prevalence estimates, 
ADDM data have been used to describe characteristics of 
children with ASD in the population, to study how these 
characteristics vary with ASD prevalence estimates over 
time and among communities, and to monitor progress 
toward Healthy People 2020 objectives (12). ADDM ASD 
prevalence estimates consistently estimated a ratio of 
approximately 4.5 male:1 female with ASD during 2006–2012 
(9–11). Other characteristics that have remained relatively 
constant over time in the population of children identified 
with ASD by ADDM include the median age of earliest known 
ASD diagnosis, which remained close to 53 months during 
2000–2012 (range: 50 months [2012] to 56 months [2002]), 
and the proportion of children receiving a comprehensive 
developmental evaluation by age 3 years, which remained close 
to 43% during 2006–2012 (range: 43% [2006 and 2012] to 
46% [2008]).
ASD prevalence by race/ethnicity has been more varied over 
time among ADDM Network communities (9–11). Although 
ASD prevalence estimates have historically been greater among 
white children compared with black or Hispanic children (13), 
ADDM-reported white:black and white:Hispanic prevalence 
ratios have declined over time because of larger increases 
in ASD prevalence among black children and, to an even 
greater extent, among Hispanic children, as compared with 
the magnitude of increase in ASD prevalence among white 
children (9). Previous reports from the ADDM Network 
estimated ASD prevalence among white children to exceed 
that among black children by approximately 30% in 2002, 
2006, and 2010, and by approximately 20% in 2008 and 
2012. Estimated prevalence among white children exceeded 
that among Hispanic children by nearly 70% in 2002 and 
2006, and by approximately 50% in 2008, 2010, and 2012. 
ASD prevalence estimates from the ADDM Network also have 
varied by socioeconomic status (SES). A consistent pattern 
observed in ADDM data has been higher identified ASD 
prevalence among residents of neighborhoods with higher 
socioeconomic status (SES). Although ASD prevalence has 
increased over time at all levels of SES, the absolute difference 
in prevalence between high, middle, and lower SES did not 
change from 2002 to 2010 (14,15). In the context of declining 
white:black and white:Hispanic prevalence ratios amidst 
consistent SES patterns, a complex three-way interaction 
among time, SES, and race/ethnicity has been proposed (16).
Finally, ADDM Network data have shown a shift toward 
children with ASD with higher intellectual ability (9–11), 
as the proportion of children with ASD whose intelligence 
quotient (IQ) scores fell within the range of intellectual 
disability (ID) (i.e., IQ <70) has decreased gradually over 
time. During 2000–2002, approximately half of children with 
ASD had IQ scores in the range of ID; during 2006–2008, 
this proportion was closer to 40%; and during 2010–2012, 
less than one third of children with ASD had IQ ≤70 (9–11). 
This trend was more pronounced for females as compared 
with males (9). The proportion of males with ASD and ID 
declined from approximately 40% during 2000–2008 (9) to 
30% during 2010–2012 (10,11). The proportion of females 
with ASD and ID declined from approximately 60% during 
2000–2002, to 45% during 2006–2008, and to 35% during 
2010–2012 (9–11).
All previously reported ASD prevalence estimates from the 
ADDM Network were based on a surveillance case definition 
aligned with DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for autistic 
disorder; pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise 
specified (PDD-NOS, including atypical autism); or Asperger 
disorder. In the American Psychiatric Association’s 2013 
publication of DSM-5, substantial changes were made to the 
taxonomy and diagnostic criteria for autism (1,17). Taxonomy 
changed from Pervasive Developmental Disorders, which 
included multiple diagnostic subtypes, to autism spectrum 
disorder, which no longer comprises distinct subtypes but 
represents one singular diagnostic category defined by level 
of support needed by the individual. Diagnostic criteria 
were refined by collapsing the DSM-IV-TR social and 
communication domains into a single, combined domain 
for DSM-5. Persons diagnosed with ASD under DSM-5 
must meet all three criteria under the social communication/
interaction domain (i.e., deficits in social-emotional reciprocity; 
deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors; and deficits in 
developing, understanding, and maintaining relationships) and 
Please note: Errata have been published for this issue. To view the errata, please click here and here.
 Surveillance Summaries
4 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
at least two of the four criteria under the restrictive/repetitive 
behavior domain (i.e., repetitive speech or motor movements, 
insistence on sameness, restricted interests, or unusual response 
to sensory input).
Although the DSM-IV-TR criteria proved useful in 
identifying ASD in some children, clinical agreement and 
diagnostic specificity in some subtypes (e.g., PDD-NOS) was 
poor, offering empirical support to the notion of two, rather 
than three, diagnostic domains. The DSM-5 introduced a 
framework to address these concerns (18), while maintaining 
that any person with an established DSM-IV-TR diagnosis 
of autistic disorder, Asperger disorder, or PDD-NOS would 
automatically qualify for a DSM-5 diagnosis of autism 
spectrum disorder. Previous studies suggest that DSM-5 criteria 
for ASD might exclude certain children who would have 
qualified for a DSM-IV-TR diagnosis but had not yet received 
one, particularly those who are very young and those without 
ID (19–23). These findings suggest that ASD prevalence 
estimates will likely be lower under DSM-5 than they have 
been under DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria.
This report provides the latest available ASD prevalence 
estimates from the ADDM Network based on both DSM-
IV-TR and DSM-5 criteria and asserts the need for future 
monitoring of ASD prevalence trends and efforts to improve 
early identification of ASD. The intended audiences for 
these findings include pediatric health care providers, school 
psychologists, educators, researchers, policymakers, and 
program administrators working to understand and address the 
needs of persons with ASD and their families. These data can 
be used to help plan services, guide research into risk factors 
and effective interventions, and inform policies that promote 
improved outcomes in health and education settings.
Methods
Study Sites
The Children’s Health Act (4) authorized CDC to monitor 
prevalence of ASD in multiple areas of the United States, 
a charge that led to the formation of the ADDM Network 
in 2000. Since that time, CDC has funded grantees in 16 
states (Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, 
Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, West Virginia, 
and Wisconsin). CDC tracks ASD in metropolitan Atlanta and 
represents the Georgia site collaborating with competitively 
funded sites to form the ADDM Network.
The ADDM Network uses multisite, multisource, records-
based surveillance based on a model originally implemented 
by CDC’s Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities 
Surveillance Program (MADDSP) (24). As feasible, the 
surveillance methods have remained consistent over time. 
Certain minor changes have been introduced to improve 
efficiency and data quality. Although a different array of 
geographic areas was covered in each of the eight biennial 
ADDM Network surveillance years spanning 2000–2014, 
these changes have been documented to facilitate evaluation 
of their impact.
The core surveillance activities in all ADDM Network 
sites focus on children aged 8 years because the baseline ASD 
prevalence study conducted by MADDSP suggested that this 
is the age of peak prevalence (3). ADDM has multiple goals: 
1) to provide descriptive data on classification and functioning 
of the population of children with ASD, 2) to monitor the 
prevalence of ASD in different areas of the United States, and 
3) to understand the impact of ASD in U.S. communities.
Funding for ADDM Network sites participating in the 
2014 surveillance year was awarded for a 4-year cycle covering 
2015–2018, during which time data were collected for children 
aged 8 years during 2014 and 2016. Sites were selected through 
a competitive objective review process on the basis of their 
ability to conduct active, records-based surveillance of ASD; 
they were not selected to be a nationally representative sample. 
A total of 11 sites are included in the current report (Arizona, 
Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, 
New Jersey, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Wisconsin). 
Each ADDM site participating in the 2014 surveillance year 
functioned as a public health authority under the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 Privacy 
Rule and met applicable local Institutional Review Board and 
privacy and confidentiality requirements under 45 CFR 46 (25).
Case Ascertainment
ADDM is an active surveillance system that does not 
depend on family or practitioner reporting of an existing 
ASD diagnosis or classification to determine ASD case status. 
ADDM staff conduct surveillance to determine case status in 
a two-phase process. The first phase of ADDM involves review 
and abstraction of children’s evaluation records from data 
sources in the community. In the second phase, all abstracted 
evaluations for each child are compiled in chronological order 
into a comprehensive record that is reviewed by one or more 
experienced clinicians to determine the child’s ASD case 
status. Developmental assessments completed by a wide range 
of health and education providers are reviewed. Data sources 
are categorized as either 1) education source type, including 
evaluations to determine eligibility for special education 
services or 2) health source type, including diagnostic and 
developmental assessments from psychologists, neurologists, 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
developmental pediatricians, child psychiatrists, physical 
therapists, occupational therapists, and speech/language 
pathologists. Agreements to access records are made at the 
institutional level in the form of contracts, memoranda, or 
other formal agreements.
All ADDM Network sites have agreements in place to 
access records at health sources; however, despite the otherwise 
standardized approach, not all sites have permission to access 
education records. One ADDM site (Missouri) has not been 
granted access to records at any education sources. Among the 
remaining sites, some receive permission from their statewide 
Department of Education to access children’s educational 
records, whereas other sites must negotiate permission from 
numerous individual school districts to access educational 
records. Six sites (Arizona, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, 
New Jersey, and North Carolina) reviewed education records 
for all school districts in their covered surveillance areas. Three 
ADDM sites (Colorado, Tennessee, and Wisconsin) received 
permission to review education records in only certain school 
districts within the overall geographic area covered for 2014. In 
Tennessee, permission to access education records was granted 
from 13 of 14 school districts in the 11-county surveillance 
area, representing 88% of the total population of children 
aged 8 years. Conversely, access to education records was 
limited to a small proportion of the population in the overall 
geographic area covered by two sites (33% in Colorado and 
26% in Wisconsin). In the Colorado school districts where 
access to education records is permitted for ADDM, parents are 
directly notified about the ADDM system and can request that 
their children’s education records be excluded. The Arkansas 
ADDM site received permission from their state Department 
of Education to access children’s educational records statewide; 
however, time and travel constraints prevented investigators 
from visiting all 250 school districts in the 75-county 
surveillance area, resulting in access to education records for 
69% of the statewide population of children aged 8 years. The 
two sites with access to education records throughout most, 
but not all, of the surveillance area (Arkansas and Tennessee) 
received data from their state Department of Education to 
evaluate the potential impact on reported ASD prevalence 
estimates attributed to missing records.
Within each education and health data source, ADDM 
sites identify records to review based on a child’s year of 
birth and one or more selected eligibility classifications for 
special education or International Classification of Diseases, 
Ninth Revision (ICD-9) billing codes for select childhood 
disabilities or psychological conditions. Children’s records are 
first reviewed to confirm year of birth and residency in the 
surveillance area at some time during the surveillance year. 
For children meeting these requirements, the records are then 
reviewed for certain behavioral or diagnostic descriptions 
defined by ADDM as triggers for abstraction (e.g., child does 
not initiate interactions with others, prefers to play alone or 
engage in solitary activities, or has received a documented 
ASD diagnosis). If abstraction triggers are found, evaluation 
information from birth through the current surveillance year 
from all available sources is abstracted into a single composite 
record for each child.
In the second phase of surveillance, the abstracted composite 
evaluation files are deidentified and reviewed systematically 
by experienced clinicians who have undergone standardized 
training to determine ASD case status using a coding scheme 
based on the DSM-IV-TR guidelines. A child meets the 
surveillance case definition for ASD if behaviors described 
in the composite record are consistent with the DSM-IV-TR 
diagnostic criteria for any of the following conditions: autistic 
disorder, PDD-NOS (including atypical autism), or Asperger 
disorder (Box 1). A child might be disqualified from meeting 
the surveillance case definition for ASD if, based on the 
clinical judgment of one or more reviewers, there is insufficient 
or conflicting information in support of ASD, sufficient 
information to rule out ASD, or if one or more other diagnosed 
conditions better account for the child’s symptoms.
Although new diagnostic criteria became available in 2013, 
the children under surveillance in 2014 would have grown up 
primarily under the DSM-IV-TR definitions for ASD, which 
are prioritized in this report. The 2014 surveillance year is the 
first to operationalize an ASD case definition based on DSM-5 
diagnostic criteria, in addition to that based on DSM-IV-TR. 
Because of delays in developing information technology systems 
to manage data collected under this new case definition, the 
surveillance area for DSM-5 was reduced by 19% in an effort to 
include complete estimates for both DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 
in this report. Phase 1 record review and abstraction was the 
same for DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5; however, a coding scheme 
based on the DSM-5 definition of ASD was developed for 
Phase 2 of the ADDM methodology (i.e., systematic review by 
experienced clinicians). The new coding scheme was developed 
through a collaborative process and includes reliability measures, 
although no validation metrics have been published for this new 
ADDM Network DSM-5 case definition. A child could meet 
the DSM-5 surveillance case definition for ASD under one 
or both of the following criteria, as documented in abstracted 
comprehensive evaluations: 1) behaviors consistent with the 
DSM-5 diagnostic features; and/or 2) an ASD diagnosis, 
whether based on DSM-IV-TR or DSM-5 diagnostic criteria 
(Box 2). Children with a documented ASD diagnosis were 
included as meeting the DSM-5 surveillance case definition 
for two reasons. First, published DSM-5 diagnostic criteria 
include the presence of a DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of autistic 
 Surveillance Summaries
6 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
disorder, PDD-NOS, or Asperger disorder, to ensure continuity 
of diagnoses and services. Second, sensitivity of the DSM-5 
surveillance case definition might be increased when counting 
children diagnosed with ASD by a qualified professional, based 
on either DSM-IV-TR or DSM-5 criteria, whether or not 
all DSM-5 social and behavioral criteria are documented in 
abstracted comprehensive evaluations. The ADDM Network 
methods allow differentiation of those meeting the surveillance 
case status based on one or both criteria. Consistent with the 
DSM-IV-TR case definition, a child might be disqualified 
from meeting the DSM-5 surveillance case definition for ASD 
if, based on the clinical judgment of one or more reviewers, 
there is insufficient or conflicting information in support of 
ASD, sufficient information to rule out ASD, or if one or 
BOX 1. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) case determination criteria under DSM-IV-TR
DSM-IV-TR behavioral criteria
Social
1a. Marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors, such as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and gestures to 
regulate social interaction
1b. Failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental level
1c. A lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests, or achievements with other people (e.g., by a lack of showing, bringing, or 
pointing out objects of interest)
1d. Lack of social or emotional reciprocity
Communication
2a. Delay in, or total lack of, the development of spoken language (not accompanied by an attempt to compensate through alternative modes 
of communication, such as gesture or mime)
2b. In individuals with adequate speech, marked impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with others
2c. Stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language
2d. Lack of varied, spontaneous make-believe play or social imitative play appropriate to developmental level
Restricted behavior/
Interest
3a. Encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or focus
3b. Apparently inflexible adherence to specific, nonfunctional routines, or rituals
3c. Stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (e.g., hand or finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole body movements)
3d. Persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
Developmental 
history
Child had identified delays or any concern with development in the following areas at or before the age of 3 years: Social, Communication, 
Behavior, Play, Motor, Attention, Adaptive, Cognitive
Autism discriminators
Oblivious to children
Oblivious to adults or others
Rarely responds to familiar social approach
Language primarily echolalia or jargon
Regression/loss of social, language, or play skills
Previous ASD diagnosis, whether based on DSM-IV-TR or DSM-5 diagnostic criteria
Lack of showing, bringing, etc.
Little or no interest in others
Uses others as tools
Repeats extensive dialog
Absent or impaired imaginative play
Markedly restricted interests
Unusual preoccupation
Insists on sameness
Nonfunctional routines
Excessive focus on parts
Visual inspection
Movement preoccupation
Sensory preoccupation
DSM-IV-TR case 
determination
At least six behaviors coded with a minimum of two Social, one Communication, and one Restricted Behavior/Interest; AND evidence of 
developmental delay or concern at or before the age of 3 years
OR
At least two behaviors coded with a minimum of one Social and either one Communication and/or one Restricted Behavior/Interest; AND 
at least one autism discriminator coded
Note: A child might be disqualified from meeting the DSM-IV-TR surveillance case definition for ASD if, based on the clinical judgment 
of one or more reviewers, there is insufficient or conflicting information in support of ASD, sufficient information to rule out ASD, or if 
one or more other diagnosed conditions better account for the child’s symptoms
Abbreviation: DSM-IV-TR = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (Text Revision).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
more other diagnosed conditions better account for the child’s 
symptoms. In this report, prevalence estimates are based on the 
DSM-IV-TR case definition, whereas case counts are presented 
and compared for children meeting the DSM-IV-TR and/or 
DSM-5 case definitions.
Quality Assurance
All sites follow the quality assurance standards established by 
the ADDM Network. In the first phase, the accuracy of record 
review and abstraction is checked periodically. In the second 
phase, interrater reliability is monitored on an ongoing basis 
using a blinded, random 10% sample of abstracted records 
that are scored independently by two reviewers (5). For 2014, 
interrater agreement on DSM-IV-TR case status (confirmed 
ASD versus not ASD) was 89.1% when comparison samples 
from all sites were combined (k = 0.77), which was slightly 
below quality assurance standards established for the ADDM 
Network (90% agreement, 0.80 kappa). On DSM-5 reviews, 
interrater agreement on case status (confirmed ASD versus 
not ASD) was 92.3% when comparison samples from all sites 
were combined (k = 0.84). Thus, for the DSM-5 surveillance 
definition, reliability exceeded quality assurance standards 
established for the ADDM Network.
Descriptive Characteristics and Data Sources
Each ADDM site attempted to obtain birth certificate data 
for all children abstracted during Phase 1 through linkages 
conducted using state vital records. These data were only 
available for children born in the state where the ADDM site 
is located. The race/ethnicity of each child was determined 
from information contained in source records or, if not found 
in the source file, from birth certificate data on one or both 
parents. Children with race coded as “other” or “multiracial” 
were considered to be missing race information for all analyses 
that were stratified by race/ethnicity. For this report, data on 
timing of the first comprehensive evaluation on record were 
restricted to children with ASD who were born in the state 
where the ADDM site is located, as confirmed by linkage to 
birth certificate records. Data were restricted in this manner to 
reduce errors in the estimate that were introduced by children 
for whom evaluation records were incomplete because they were 
born out of state and migrated into the surveillance area between 
the time of birth and the year when they reached age 8 years.
Information on children’s functional skills is abstracted 
from source records when available, including scores on 
tests of adaptive behavior and intellectual ability. Because no 
standardized, validated measures of functioning specific to ASD 
have been widely adopted in clinical practice and because adaptive 
behavior rating scales are not sufficiently available in health and 
education records of children with ASD, scores of intellectual 
ability have remained the primary source of information on 
children’s functional skills. Children are classified as having ID if 
they have an IQ score of ≤70 on their most recent test available 
in the record. Borderline intellectual ability is defined as having 
an IQ score of 71–85, and average or above-average intellectual 
BOX 2. Autism spectrum disorder case determination criteria under DSM-5
DSM-5 behavioral criteria
A. Persistent 
deficits in social 
communication and 
social interaction
A1: Deficits in social emotional reciprocity
A2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors
A3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships
B. Restricted, repetitive 
patterns of behavior, 
interests, or 
activities, currently 
or by history
B1: Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects or speech
B2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior
B3. Highly restricted interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus
B4. Hyper- or hypo-reactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of the environment
Historical PDD 
diagnosis
Any ASD diagnosis documented in a comprehensive evaluation, including a DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger disorder, or 
pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS)
DSM-5 case 
determination
All three behavioral criteria coded under part A, and at least two behavioral criteria coded under part B
OR
Any ASD diagnosis documented in a comprehensive evaluation, whether based on DSM-IV-TR or DSM-5 diagnostic criteria
Note: A child might be disqualified from meeting the DSM-5 surveillance case definition for ASD if, based on the clinical judgment of one 
or more reviewers, there is insufficient or conflicting information in support of ASD, sufficient information to rule out ASD, or if one or 
more other diagnosed conditions better account for the child’s symptoms
Abbreviation: DSM-5 = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.
 Surveillance Summaries
8 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ability is defined as having an IQ score of >85. In the absence of 
a specific IQ score, an examiner’s statement based on a formal 
assessment of the child’s intellectual ability, if available, is used 
to classify the child in one of these three levels.
Diagnostic conclusions from each evaluation record are 
summarized for each child, including notation of any ASD 
diagnosis by subtype, when available. Children are considered 
to have a previously documented ASD classification if they 
received a diagnosis of autistic disorder, PDD-NOS, Asperger 
disorder, or ASD that was documented in an abstracted 
evaluation or by an ICD-9 billing code at any time from birth 
through the year when they reached age 8 years, or if they 
were noted as meeting eligibility criteria for special education 
services under the classification of autism or ASD.
Analytic Methods
Population denominators for calculating ASD prevalence 
estimates were obtained from the National Center for Health 
Statistics Vintage 2016 Bridged-Race Postcensal Population 
Estimates (26). CDC’s National Vital Statistics System provides 
estimated population counts by state, county, single year of 
age, race, ethnic origin, and sex. Population denominators 
for the 2014 surveillance year were compiled from postcensal 
estimates of the number of children aged 8 years living in the 
counties under surveillance by each ADDM site (Table 1).
In two sites (Arizona and Minnesota), geographic boundaries 
were defined by constituent school districts included in the 
surveillance area. The number of children living in outlying 
school districts was subtracted from the county-level census 
denominators using school enrollment data from the U.S. 
Department of Education’s National Center for Education 
Statistics (27). Enrollment counts of students in third grade 
during the 2014–15 school year differed from the CDC 
bridged-race population estimates, attributable primarily to 
children being enrolled out of the customary grade for their 
age or in charter schools, home schools, or private schools. 
Because these differences varied by race and sex within the 
applicable counties, race- and sex-specific adjustments based 
on enrollment counts were applied to the CDC population 
estimates to derive school district-specific denominators for 
Arizona and Minnesota.
Race- or ethnicity-specific prevalence estimates were 
calculated for four groups: white, black, Hispanic (regardless of 
race), and Asian/Pacific Islander. Prevalence results are reported 
as the total number of children meeting the ASD case definition 
per 1,000 children aged 8 years in the population in each race/
ethnicity group. ASD prevalence also was estimated separately 
for boys and girls and within each level of intellectual ability. 
Overall prevalence estimates include all children identified with 
ASD regardless of sex, race/ethnicity, or level of intellectual 
ability and thus are not affected by the availability of data on 
these characteristics.
Statistical tests were selected and confidence intervals (CIs) 
for prevalence estimates were calculated under the assumption 
that the observed counts of children identified with ASD were 
obtained from an underlying Poisson distribution with an 
asymptotic approximation to the normal. Pearson chi-square 
tests were performed, and prevalence ratios and percentage 
differences were calculated to compare prevalence estimates 
from different strata. Kappa statistics were computed to 
describe concordance between the DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 
case definitions, as well as to describe interrater agreement 
on either case definition for quality assurance. Pearson chi-
square tests also were performed for testing significance in 
comparisons of proportions, and unadjusted odds ratio (OR) 
estimates were calculated to further describe these comparisons. 
In an effort to reduce the effect of outliers, distribution medians 
were typically presented, although one-way ANOVA was used 
to test significance when comparing arithmetic means of these 
distributions. Significance was set at p<0.05. Results for all sites 
combined were based on pooled numerator and denominator 
data from all sites, in total and stratified by race/ethnicity, sex, 
and level of intellectual ability.
Sensitivity Analysis Methods
Certain education and health records were missing for 
certain children, including records that could not be located 
for review, those affected by the passive consent process unique 
to the Colorado site, and those archived and deemed too costly 
to retrieve. A sensitivity analysis of the effect of these missing 
records on case ascertainment was conducted. All children 
initially identified for record review were first stratified by two 
factors closely associated with final case status: information 
source (health source type only, education source type only, 
or both source types) and the presence or absence of either an 
autism special education eligibility or an ICD-9-CM code for 
ASD, collectively forming six strata. The potential number of 
cases not identified because of missing records was estimated 
under the assumption that within each of the six strata, the 
proportion of children confirmed as ASD surveillance cases 
among those with missing records would be similar to the 
proportion of cases among children with no missing records. 
Within each stratum, the proportion of children with no 
missing records who were confirmed as having ASD was 
applied to the number of children with missing records to 
estimate the number of missed cases, and the estimates from 
all six strata were added to calculate the total for each site. 
This sensitivity analysis was conducted solely to investigate 
the potential impact of missing records on the presented 
estimates. The estimates presented in this report do not reflect 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
this adjustment or any of the other assessments of the potential 
effects of assumptions underlying the approach.
All ADDM sites identified records for review from health 
sources by conducting record searches that were based on a 
common list of ICD-9 billing codes. Because several sites were 
conducting surveillance for other developmental disabilities in 
addition to ASD (i.e., one or more of the following: cerebral 
palsy, ID, hearing loss, and vision impairment), they reviewed 
records based on an expanded list of ICD-9 codes. The 
Colorado site also requested code 781.3 (lack of coordination), 
which was identified in that community as a commonly used 
billing code for children with ASD. The proportion of children 
meeting the ASD surveillance case definition whose records 
were obtained solely on the basis of those additional codes was 
calculated to evaluate the potential impact on ASD prevalence.
Results
A total population of 325,483 children aged 8 years was 
covered by the 11 ADDM sites that provided data for the 
2014 surveillance year (Table 1). This number represented 
8% of the total U.S. population of children aged 8 years in 
2014 (4,119,668) (19). A total of 53,120 records for 42,644 
children were reviewed from health and education sources. Of 
these, the source records of 10,886 children met the criteria 
for abstraction, which was 25.5% of the total number of 
children whose source records were reviewed and 3.3% of 
the population under surveillance. Of the records reviewed 
by clinicians, 5,473 children met the ASD surveillance case 
definition. The number of evaluations abstracted for each 
child who was ultimately identified with ASD varied by site 
(median: five; range: three [Arizona, Minnesota, Missouri, and 
Tennessee] to 10 [Maryland]).
Overall ASD Prevalence Estimates
Overall ASD prevalence for the ADDM 2014 surveillance 
year varied widely among sites (range: 13.1 [Arkansas] to 29.3 
[New Jersey]) (Table 2). On the basis of combined data from 
all 11 sites, ASD prevalence was 16.8 per 1,000 (one in 59) 
children aged 8 years. Overall estimated prevalence of ASD 
was highest in New Jersey (29.3) compared to each of the other 
ten sites (p<0.01).
Prevalence by Sex and Race/Ethnicity
When data from all 11 ADDM sites were combined, ASD 
prevalence was 26.6 per 1,000 boys and 6.6 per 1,000 girls 
(prevalence ratio: 4.0). ASD prevalence was significantly 
(p<0.01) higher among boys than among girls in all 11 ADDM 
sites (Table 2), with male-to-female prevalence ratios ranging 
from 3.2 (Arizona) to 4.9 (Georgia). Estimated ASD prevalence 
also varied by race and ethnicity (Table 3). When data from all 
sites were combined, the estimated prevalence among white 
children (17.2 per 1,000) was 7% greater than that among 
black children (16.0 per 1,000) and 22% greater than that 
among Hispanic children (14.0 per 1,000). In nine sites, the 
estimated prevalence of ASD was higher among white children 
than black children. The white-to-black ASD prevalence ratios 
were statistically significant in three sites (Arkansas, Missouri, 
and Wisconsin), and the white-to-Hispanic prevalence ratios 
were significant in seven sites (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, 
Georgia, Missouri, North Carolina, and Tennessee). In nine 
sites (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, 
Minnesota, Missouri, North Carolina, and Tennessee), the 
estimated prevalence of ASD was higher among black children 
than that among Hispanic children. The black-to-Hispanic 
prevalence ratio was significant in three of these nine sites 
(Arizona, Georgia, and North Carolina). In New Jersey, there 
was almost no difference in ASD prevalence estimates among 
white, black, and Hispanic children. Estimates for Asian/Pacific 
Islander children ranged from 7.9 per 1,000 (Colorado) to 
19.2 per 1,000 (New Jersey) with notably wide CIs.
Intellectual Ability
Data on intellectual ability were reported for nine 
sites (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, 
Minnesota, New Jersey, North Carolina, and Tennessee) 
having information available for at least 70% of children who 
met the ASD case definition (range: 70.8% [Tennessee] to 
89.2% [North Carolina]). The median age of children’s most 
recent IQ tests, on which the following results are based, was 
73 months (6 years, 1 month). Data from these nine sites 
yielded accompanying data on intellectual ability for 3,714 
(80.3%) of 4,623 children with ASD. This proportion did 
not differ by sex or race/ethnicity in any of the nine sites or 
when combining data from all nine sites. Among these 3,714 
children, 31% were classified in the range of ID (IQ ≤70), 
25% were in the borderline range (IQ 71–85), and 44% had 
IQ >85. The proportion of children classified in the range of 
ID ranged from 26.7% in Arizona to 39.4% in Tennessee.
Among children identified with ASD, the distribution by 
intellectual ability varied by sex, with girls more likely than 
boys to have IQ ≤70, and boys more likely than girls to 
have IQ >85 (Figure 1). In these nine sites combined, 251 
(36.3%) of 691 girls with ASD had IQ scores or examiners’ 
statements indicating ID compared with 891 (29.5%) of 
3,023 males (odds ratio [OR] = 1.4; p<0.01), though among 
individual sites this proportion differed significantly in only 
 Surveillance Summaries
10 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
one (Georgia, OR = 1.6; p<0.05). The proportion of children 
with ASD with borderline intellectual ability (IQ 71–85) did 
not differ by sex, whereas a significantly higher proportion of 
males (45%) compared with females (40%) had IQ >85 (i.e., 
average or above average intellectual ability) (OR = 1.2; p<0.05).
The distribution of intellectual ability also varied by race/
ethnicity. Approximately 44% of black children with ASD were 
classified in the range of ID compared with 35% of Hispanic 
children and 22% of white children (Figure 2). The proportion 
of blacks and whites with ID differed significantly in all sites 
except Colorado, and when combining their data (OR = 2.9; 
p<0.01). The proportion of Hispanics and whites with ID 
differed significantly when combining data from all nine sites 
(OR = 1.9; p<0.01), and among individual sites it reached 
significance (p<0.05) in six of the nine sites, with the three 
exceptions being Arkansas (OR = 1.8; p = 0.10), North Carolina 
(OR = 1.8; p = 0.07), and Tennessee (OR = 2.1; p = 0.09). 
The proportion of children with borderline intellectual ability 
(IQ = 71–85) did not differ between black and Hispanic 
children, although a lower proportion of white children (22%) 
were classified in the range of borderline intellectual ability 
compared to black (28.4%; OR = 0.7; p<0.01) or Hispanic 
(28.7%; OR = 0.7; p<0.01) children. When combining data 
from these nine sites, the proportion of white children (56%) 
with IQ >85 was significantly higher than the proportion of 
black (27%, OR = 3.4; p<0.01) or Hispanic (36%, OR = 2.2; 
p<0.01) children with IQ>85.
First Comprehensive Evaluation
Among children with ASD who were born in the same 
state as the ADDM site (n = 4,147 of 5,473 confirmed 
cases), 42% had a comprehensive evaluation on record by age 
36 months (range: 30% [Arkansas] to 66% [North Carolina]) 
(Table 4). Approximately 39% of these 4,147 children did 
not have a comprehensive evaluation on record until after 
age 48 months; however, mention of developmental concerns 
by age 36 months was documented for 85% (range: 61% 
[Tennessee] to 94% [Arizona]).
Previously Documented ASD Classification
Of the 5,473 children meeting the ADDM ASD surveillance 
case definition, 4,379 (80%) had either eligibility for autism 
special education services or a DSM-IV-TR, DSM-5, or ICD-9 
autism diagnosis documented in their records (range among 11 
sites: 58% [Colorado] to 92% [Missouri]). Combining data 
from all 11 sites, 81% of boys had a previous ASD classification 
on record, compared with 75% of girls (OR = 1.4; p<0.01). 
FIGURE 1. Most recent intelligence quotient score as of age 8 years among children with autism spectrum disorder for whom test data were 
available, by sex and site — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, nine sites,* United States, 2014
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
Percentage
ADDM site
Arizona
Arkansas
Colorado
Georgia
Maryland
Minnesota
New Jersey
North Carolina
Tennessee
Total
Above intellectually disabled range (IQ >70)
Within intellectually disabled range (IQ ≤70)
Abbreviations: ADDM = Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network; ASD = autism spectrum disorder; F = female; IQ = intelligence quotient; 
 
M = male.
* Includes nine sites (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey, North Carolina, and Tennessee) that had intellectual ability data available 
for ≥70% of children who met the ASD case definition (n = 3,714).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
When stratified by race/ethnicity, 80% of white children 
had a previously documented ASD classification, compared 
with nearly 83% of black children (OR = 0.9; p = 0.09) and 
76% of Hispanic children (OR = 1.3; p<0.01); a significant 
difference was also found when comparing the proportion of 
black children with a previous ASD classification to that among 
Hispanic children (OR = 1.5; p<0.01).
The median age of earliest known ASD diagnosis 
documented in children’s records (Table 5) varied by diagnostic 
subtype (autistic disorder: 46 months; ASD/PDD: 56 months; 
Asperger disorder: 67 months). Within these subtypes, the 
median age of earliest known diagnosis did not differ by sex, 
nor did any difference exist in the proportion of boys and girls 
who initially received a diagnosis of autistic disorder (48%), 
ASD/PDD (46%), or Asperger disorder (6%). The median 
age of earliest known diagnosis and distribution of subtypes 
did vary by site. The median age of earliest known ASD 
diagnosis for all subtypes combined was 52 months, ranging 
from 40 months in North Carolina to 59 months in Arkansas.
Special Education Eligibility
Sites with access to education records collected information 
on the most recent eligibility categories under which children 
received special education services (Table 6). Among children 
with ASD who were receiving special education services 
in public schools during 2014, the proportion of children 
with a primary eligibility category of autism ranged from 
approximately 37% in Wisconsin to 80% in Tennessee. Most 
other sites noted approximately 60% to 75% of children with 
ASD having autism listed as their most recent primary special 
education eligibility category, the exceptions being Colorado 
(44%) and New Jersey (48%). Other common special 
education eligibilities included health or physical disability, 
speech and language impairment, specific learning disability, 
and a general developmental delay category that is used until 
age 9 years in many U.S. states. All ADDM sites reported <10% 
of children with ASD receiving special education services under 
a primary eligibility category of ID.
Sensitivity Analyses of Missing Records 
and Expanded ICD-9 Codes
A stratified analysis of records that could not be located for 
review was completed to assess the degree to which missing 
data might have potentially reduced prevalence estimates as 
reported by individual ADDM sites. Had all children’s records 
identified in Phase 1 been located and reviewed, prevalence 
estimates would potentially have been <1% higher in four sites 
(Arizona, Georgia, Minnesota, and Wisconsin), between 1% 
to 5% higher in four sites (Colorado, Missouri, New Jersey, 
and North Carolina), approximately 8% higher in Maryland, 
and nearly 20% higher in Arkansas and Tennessee, where 
investigators were able to access education records throughout 
most, but not all, of the surveillance area and received data from 
their state Department of Education to evaluate the potential 
impact on reported ASD prevalence estimates attributed to 
missing records.
The impact on prevalence estimates of reviewing records 
based on an expanded list of ICD-9 codes varied from site 
to site. Colorado, Georgia, and Missouri were the only three 
sites that identified more than 1% of ASD surveillance cases 
partially or solely on the basis of the expanded code list. In 
Missouri, less than 2% of children identified with ASD had 
some of their records located on the basis of the expanded 
code list, and none were identified exclusively from these 
codes. In Colorado, approximately 2% of ASD surveillance 
cases had some abstracted records identified on the basis of 
the expanded code list, and 4% had records found exclusively 
from the expanded codes. In Georgia, where ICD-9 codes were 
FIGURE 2. Most recent intelligence quotient score as of age 8 years 
among children with autism spectrum disorder for whom test data 
were available, by sex and race/ethnicity — Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network, nine sites,* United States, 2014
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentage
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
Hispanic
White, 
non-Hispanic
Asian or 
Pacifc Islander
Black, 
non-Hispanic
Race/Ethnicity
Average or above average (IQ >85)
Borderline range (IQ 71–85)
Intellectually disabled range (IQ ≤70)
Abbreviations: ASD = autism spectrum disorder; F = female; IQ = intelligence 
quotient; M = male.
* Includes nine sites (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, 
New Jersey, North Carolina, and Tennessee) that had intellectual ability data 
available for ≥70 of children who met the ASD case definition (n = 3,714).
 Surveillance Summaries
12 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
requested for surveillance of five distinct conditions (autism, 
cerebral palsy, ID, hearing loss, and vision impairment), 
approximately 10% of children identified with ASD had some 
of their records located on the basis of the expanded code list, 
and less than 1% were identified exclusively from these codes.
Comparison of Case Counts from 
DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 Case Definitions
The DSM-5 analysis was completed for part of the overall 
ADDM 2014 surveillance area (Table 7), representing a total 
population of 263,775 children aged 8 years. This was 81% 
of the population on which DSM-IV-TR prevalence estimates 
were reported. Within this population, 4,920 children were 
confirmed to meet the ADDM Network ASD case definition 
for either DSM-IV-TR or DSM-5. Of these children, 4,236 
(86%) met both case definitions, 422 (9%) met only the 
DSM-IV-TR criteria, and 262 (5%) met only the DSM-5 
criteria (Table 8). This yielded a DSM-IV-TR:DSM-5 
prevalence ratio of 1.04 in this population, indicating that 
ASD prevalence was approximately 4% higher based on the 
historical DSM-IV-TR case definition compared with the 
new DSM-5 case definition. Among 4,498 children who met 
DSM-5 case criteria, 3,817 (85%) met the DSM-5 behavioral 
criteria (Box 2), whereas 681 (15%) qualified on the basis of an 
established ASD diagnosis but did not have sufficient DSM-5 
behavioral criteria documented in comprehensive evaluations. 
In six of the 11 ADDM sites, DSM-5 case counts were within 
approximately 5% of DSM-IV-TR counts (range: 5% lower 
[Tennessee] to 5% higher [Arkansas]), whereas DSM-5 case 
counts were more than 5% lower than DSM-IV-TR counts 
in Minnesota and North Carolina (6%), New Jersey (10%), 
and Colorado (14%). Kappa statistics indicated strong 
agreement between DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 case status 
among children abstracted in Phase 1 of the study who were 
reviewed in Phase 2 for both DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 (kappa 
for all sites combined: 0.85, range: 0.72 [Tennessee] to 0.93 
[North Carolina]).
Stratified analysis of DSM-IV-TR:DSM-5 ratios were very 
similar compared with the overall sample (Table 9). DSM-5 
estimates were approximately 3% lower than DSM-IV-TR 
counts for males, and approximately 6% lower for females 
(kappa = 0.85 for both). Case counts were approximately 3% 
lower among white and black children on DSM-5 compared 
with DSM-IV-TR, 5% lower among Asian children, and 8% 
lower among Hispanic children. Children who received a 
comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months were 7% less likely 
to meet DSM-5 than DSM-IV-TR, whereas those evaluated 
by age 4 years were 6% less likely to meet DSM-5, and those 
initially evaluated after age 4 years were just as likely to meet 
DSM-5 as DSM-IV-TR. Children with documentation of 
eligibility for autism special education services, and those 
with a documented diagnosis of ASD by age 3 years, were 
2% more likely to meet DSM-5 than DSM-IV-TR. Slightly 
over 3% of children whose earliest ASD diagnosis was autistic 
disorder met DSM-5 criteria but not DSM-IV-TR, compared 
with slightly under 3% of those whose earliest diagnosis 
was PDD-NOS/ASD-NOS and 5% of those whose earliest 
diagnosis was Asperger disorder. Children with no previous 
ASD classification (diagnosis or eligibility) were 47% less likely 
to meet DSM-5 than DSM-IV-TR. Combining data from all 
11 sites, children with IQ scores in the range of ID were 3% 
less likely to meet DSM-5 criteria compared with DSM-IV-TR 
(kappa = 0.89), those with IQ scores in the borderline range 
were 6% less likely to meet DSM-5 than DSM-IV-TR (kappa 
= 0.88), and children with average or above average intellectual 
ability were 4% less likely to meet DSM-5 criteria compared 
with DSM-IV-TR (kappa = 0.86).
Discussion
Changes in Estimated Prevalence
The overall ASD prevalence estimate of 16.8 per 1,000 
children aged 8 years in 2014 is higher than previously 
reported estimates from the ADDM Network. An ASD case 
definition based on DSM-IV-TR criteria was used during the 
entire period of ADDM surveillance during 2000–2014, as 
were comparable study operations and procedures, although 
the geographic areas under surveillance have varied over 
time. During this period, ADDM ASD prevalence estimates 
increased from 6.7 to 16.8 per 1,000 children aged 8 years, 
an increase of approximately 150%.
Among the six ADDM sites completing both the 2012 
and 2014 studies for the same geographic area, all six showed 
higher ASD prevalence estimates for 2012 compared to 2014, 
with a nearly 10% higher prevalence in Georgia (p = 0.06) 
and Maryland (p = 0.35), 19% in New Jersey (p<0.01), 22% 
in Missouri (p = 0.01), 29% in Colorado (p<0.01), and 31% 
in Wisconsin (p<0.01). When combining data from these six 
sites, ASD prevalence estimates for 2014 were 20% higher 
for 2014 compared to 2012 (p<0.01). The ASD prevalence 
estimate from New Jersey continues to be one of the highest 
reported by a population-based surveillance system. The two 
sites with the greatest relative difference in prevalence are 
noteworthy in that both gained access to children’s education 
records in additional geographic areas for 2014. Colorado was 
granted access to review children’s education records in one 
additional county for the 2014 surveillance year (representing 
nearly 20% of the population aged 8 years within the overall 
Please note: Errata have been published for this issue. To view the errata, please click here and here.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Colorado surveillance area), and Wisconsin was granted 
access to review education records for more than a quarter of 
its surveillance population, and 2014 marked the first time 
Wisconsin has included education data sources. Comparisons 
with earlier ADDM Network surveillance results should be 
interpreted cautiously because of changing composition of 
sites and geographic coverage over time. For example, three 
ADDM Network sites completing both the 2012 and 2014 
surveillance years (Arizona, Arkansas, and North Carolina) 
covered a different geographic area each year, and two new sites 
(Minnesota and Tennessee) were awarded funding to monitor 
ASD in collaboration with the ADDM Network.
Certain characteristics of children with ASD were similar in 
2014 compared with earlier surveillance years. The median age 
of earliest known ASD diagnosis remained close to 53 months 
in previous surveillance years and was 52 months in 2014. 
The proportion of children who received a comprehensive 
developmental evaluation by age 3 years was unchanged: 
42% in 2014 and 43% during 2006–2012. There were a 
number of differences in the characteristics of the population 
of children with ASD in 2014. The male:female prevalence 
ratio decreased from 4.5:1 during 2002–2012 to 4:1 in 2014, 
driven by a greater relative increase in ASD prevalence among 
girls than among boys since 2012. Also, the decrease in the 
ratios of white:black and white:Hispanic children with ASD 
continued a trend observed since 2002. Among sites covering 
a population of at least 20,000 children aged 8 years, New 
Jersey reported no significant race- or ethnicity-based difference 
in ASD prevalence, suggesting more complete ascertainment 
among all children regardless of race/ethnicity. Historically, 
ASD prevalence estimates from combined ADDM sites have 
been approximately 20%–30% higher among white children 
as compared with black children. For surveillance year 2014, 
the difference was only 7%, the lowest difference ever observed 
for the ADDM Network. Likewise, prevalence among white 
children was almost 70% higher than that among Hispanic 
children in 2002 and 2006, and approximately 50% higher 
in 2008, 2010, and 2012, whereas for 2014 the difference 
was only 22%. Data from a previously reported comparison 
of ADDM Network ASD prevalence estimates from 2002, 
2006, and 2008 (9) suggested greater increases in ASD 
prevalence among black and Hispanic children compared 
with those among white children. Reductions in disparities 
in ASD prevalence for black and Hispanic children might 
be attributable, in part, to more effective outreach directed 
to minority communities. Finally, the proportion of children 
with ASD and lower intellectual ability was similar in 2012 
and 2014 at approximately 30% of males and 35% of females. 
These proportions were markedly lower than those reported 
in previous surveillance years.
Variation in Prevalence Among 
ADDM Sites
Findings from the 2014 surveillance year indicate that 
prevalence estimates still vary widely among ADDM Network 
sites, with the highest prevalence observed in New Jersey. 
Although five of the 11 ADDM sites conducting the 2014 
surveillance year reported prevalence estimates within a very 
close range (from 13.1 to 14.1 per 1,000 children), New 
Jersey’s prevalence estimate of 29.4 per 1,000 children was 
significantly greater than that from any other site, and four sites 
(Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, and North Carolina) reported 
prevalence estimates that were significantly greater than those 
from any of the five sites in the 13.1–14.1 per 1,000 range. 
Two of the sites with prevalence estimates of 20.0 per 1,000 
or higher (Maryland and Minnesota) conducted surveillance 
among a total population of <10,000 children aged 8 years. 
Concentrating surveillance efforts in smaller geographic areas, 
especially those in close proximity to diagnostic centers and 
those covering school districts with advanced staff training and 
programs to support children with ASD, might yield higher 
prevalence estimates compared with those from sites covering 
populations of more than 20,000 children aged 8 years. Of the 
six sites with prevalence estimates below the 16.8 per 1,000 
estimate for all sites combined, five did not have full access 
to education data sources (Arkansas, Colorado, Missouri, 
Tennessee, and Wisconsin), whereas only one of the six sites 
will full access to education data sources had a prevalence 
estimate below 16.8 per 1,000 (Arizona). Such differences 
cannot be attributed solely to source access, as other factors 
(e.g., demographic differences and service availability) also 
might have influenced these findings. In addition to variation 
among sites in reported ASD prevalence, wide variation among 
sites is noted in the characteristics of children identified with 
ASD, including the proportion of children who received 
a comprehensive developmental evaluation by age 3 years, 
the median age of earliest known ASD diagnosis, and the 
distribution by intellectual ability. Some of this variation might 
be attributable to regional differences in diagnostic practices 
and other documentation of autism symptoms, although 
previous reports based on ADDM data have linked much of 
the variation to other extrinsic factors, such as regional and 
socioeconomic disparities in access to services (13,14).
Case Definitions
Results from application of the DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 
case definitions were similar, overall and when stratified by 
sex, race/ethnicity, DSM-IV-TR diagnostic subtype, or level 
of intellectual ability. Overall, ASD prevalence estimates 
Please note: Errata have been published for this issue. To view the errata, please click here and here.
 Surveillance Summaries
14 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
based on the new DSM-5 case definition were very similar in 
magnitude but slightly lower than those based on the historical 
DSM-IV-TR case definition. Three of the 11 ADDM sites 
had slightly higher case counts using the DSM-5 framework 
compared with the DSM-IV-TR. Colorado, where the DSM-
IV-TR:DSM-5 ratio was highest compared with all other sites, 
was also the site with the lowest proportion of DSM-IV-TR 
cases having a previous ASD classification. This suggests that 
the diagnostic component of the DSM-5 case definition, 
whereby children with a documented diagnosis of ASD 
might qualify as DSM-5 cases regardless of social interaction/
communication and restricted/repetitive behavioral criteria, 
might have influenced DSM-5 results to a lesser degree in 
that site, as a smaller proportion of DSM-IV-TR cases would 
meet DSM-5 case criteria based solely on the presence of a 
documented ASD diagnosis. This element of the DSM-5 
case definition might carry less weight moving forward, as 
fewer children aged 8 years in health and education settings 
will have had ASD diagnosed under the DSM-IV-TR criteria. 
It is also possible that persons who conduct developmental 
evaluations of children in health and education settings will 
increasingly describe behavioral characteristics using language 
more consistent with DSM-5 terminology, yielding more ASD 
cases based on the behavioral component of ADDM’s DSM-5 
case definition. Prevalence estimates based on the DSM-5 case 
definition that incorporates an existing ASD diagnosis reflect 
the actual patterns of diagnosis and services for children in 
2014, because children diagnosed under DSM-IV-TR did not 
lose their diagnosis when the updated DSM-5 criteria were 
published and because professionals might diagnose children 
with ASD without necessarily recording every behavior 
supporting that diagnosis. In the future, prevalence estimates 
will align more closely with the specific DSM-5 behavioral 
criteria, and might exclude some persons who would have 
met DSM-IV-TR criteria for autistic disorder, PDD-NOS, or 
Asperger disorder, while at the same time including persons 
who do not meet those criteria but who do meet the specific 
DSM-5 behavioral criteria.
Comparison of Autism Prevalence 
Estimates
The ADDM Network is the only ASD surveillance system 
in the United States providing robust prevalence estimates for 
specific areas of the country, including those for subgroups 
defined by sex and race/ethnicity, providing information about 
geographical variation that can be used to evaluate policies 
and diagnostic practices that might affect ASD prevalence. 
It is also the only comprehensive surveillance system to 
incorporate ASD diagnostic criteria into the case definition 
rather than relying entirely on parent or caregiver report of a 
previous ASD diagnosis, providing a unique contribution to 
the knowledge of ASD epidemiology and the impact of changes 
in diagnostic criteria. Two surveys of children’s health, The 
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) and the National 
Survey of Children’s Health (NSCH), report estimates of ASD 
prevalence based on caregiver report of being told by a doctor 
or other health care provider that their child has ASD, and, for 
the NSCH, if their child was also reported to currently have 
ASD. The most recent publication from NHIS indicated that 
27.6 per 1,000 children aged 3–17 years had ASD in 2016, 
which did not differ significantly from estimates for 2015 or 
2014 (24.1 and 22.4, respectively) (28). An estimate of 20.0 
per 1,000 children aged 6–17 years was reported from the 
2011–2012 NSCH (29). The study samples for both surveys 
are substantially smaller than the ADDM Network; however, 
they were intended to be nationally representative, whereas 
the ADDM Network surveillance areas were selected through 
a competitive process and, although large and diverse, were 
not intended to be nationally representative. Geographic 
differences in ASD prevalence have been observed in both the 
ADDM Network and national surveys, as have differences in 
ASD prevalence by age (6–11,28,29).
All three prevalence estimation systems (NHIS, NSCH, 
and ADDM) are subject to regional and policy-driven 
differences in the availability and utilization of evaluation 
and diagnostic services for children with developmental 
concerns. Phone surveys are likely more sensitive in identifying 
children who received a preliminary or confirmed diagnosis 
of ASD but are not receiving services (i.e., special education 
services). The ADDM Network method based on analysis of 
information contained in existing health and education records 
enables the collection of detailed, case-specific information 
reflecting children’s behavioral, developmental and functional 
characteristics, which are not available from the national phone 
surveys. This detailed case level information might provide 
insight into temporal changes in the expression of ASD 
phenotypes, and offers the ability to account for differences 
based on changing diagnostic criteria.
Limitations
The findings in this report are subject to at least three 
limitations. First, ADDM Network sites were not selected to 
represent the United States as a whole, nor were the geographic 
areas within each ADDM site selected to represent that state 
as a whole (with the exception of Arkansas, where ASD is 
monitored statewide). Although a combined estimate is 
reported for the Network as a whole to inform stakeholders 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and interpret the findings from individual surveillance years in 
a more general context, data reported by the ADDM Network 
should not be interpreted to represent a national estimate of 
the number and characteristics of children with ASD. Rather, 
it is more prudent to examine the wide variation among sites, 
between specific groups within sites, and across time in the 
number and characteristics of children identified with ASD, 
and to use these findings to inform public health strategies 
aimed at removing barriers to identification and treatment, 
and eliminating disparities among socioeconomic and racial/
ethnic groups. Data from individual sites provide even greater 
utility for developing local policies in those states.
Second, it is important to acknowledge limitations of 
information available in children’s health and education records 
when considering data on the characteristics of children with 
ASD. Age of earliest known ASD diagnosis was obtained from 
descriptions in children’s developmental evaluations that were 
available in the health and education facilities where ADDM 
staff had access to review records. Some children might have 
had earlier diagnoses that were not recorded in these records. 
Likewise, some descriptions of historical diagnoses (i.e., those 
not made by the evaluating examiner) could be subject to 
recall error by a parent or provider who described the historical 
diagnosis to that examiner. Another characteristic featured 
prominently in this report, intellectual ability, is subject to 
measurement limitations. IQ test results should be interpreted 
cautiously because of myriad factors that impact performance 
on these tests, particularly language and attention deficits that 
are common among children with ASD, especially when testing 
was conducted before age 6 years. Because children were not 
examined directly nor systematically by ADDM staff as part 
of this study, descriptions of their characteristics should not be 
interpreted to serve as the basis for policy changes, individual 
treatments, or interventions.
Third, because comparisons with the results from earlier 
ADDM surveillance years were not restricted to a common 
geographic area, inferences about the changing number and 
characteristics of children with ASD over time should be 
made with caution. Findings for each unique ADDM birth 
cohort are very informative, and although study methods 
and geographic areas of coverage have remained generally 
consistent over time, temporal comparisons are subject to 
multiple sources of bias and should not be misinterpreted as 
representing precise measures that control for all sources of 
bias. Additional limitations to the records-based surveillance 
methodology have been described extensively in previous 
ADDM and MADDSP reports (3,6–11).
Future Surveillance Directions
Data collection for the 2016 surveillance year began in early 
2017 and will continue through mid-2019. Beginning with 
surveillance year 2016, the DSM-5 case definition for ASD will 
serve as the basis for prevalence estimates. The DSM-IV-TR 
case definition will be applied in a limited geographic area 
to offer additional data for comparison, although the DSM-
IV-TR case definition will eventually be phased out.
CDC’s “Learn the Signs. Act Early” (LTSAE) campaign, 
launched in October 2004, aims to change perceptions among 
parents, health care professionals, and early educators regarding 
the importance of early identification and treatment of autism 
and other developmental disorders (30). In 2007, the American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommended developmental 
screening specifically focused on social development and ASD 
at age 18 and 24 months (31). Both efforts are in accordance 
with the Healthy People 2020 (HP2020) goal that children 
with ASD be evaluated by age 36 months and begin receiving 
community-based support and services by age 48 months (12). 
It is concerning that progress has not been made toward the 
HP2020 goal of increasing the percentage of children with 
ASD who receive a first evaluation by age 36 months to 47%; 
however, the cohort of children monitored under the ADDM 
2014 surveillance year (i.e., children born in 2006) represents 
the first ADDM 8-year-old cohort impacted by the LTSAE 
campaign and the 2007 AAP recommendations. The effect of 
these programs in lowering age at evaluation might become 
more apparent when subsequent birth cohorts are monitored. 
Further exploration of ADDM data, including those collected 
on cohorts of children aged 4 years (32), might inform how 
policy initiatives, such as screening recommendations and other 
social determinants of health, impact the prevalence of ASD 
and characteristics of children with ASD, including the age at 
which most children receive an ASD diagnosis.
Conclusion
The latest findings from the ADDM Network provide 
evidence that the prevalence of ASD is higher than previously 
reported ADDM estimates and continues to vary among 
certain racial/ethnic groups and communities. The overall 
ASD prevalence estimate of 16.8 per 1,000 children aged 
8 years in 2014 is higher than previous estimates from the 
ADDM Network. With prevalence of ASD reaching nearly 3% 
in some communities and representing an increase of 150% 
since 2000, ASD is an urgent public health concern that could 
benefit from enhanced strategies to help identify ASD earlier; 
to determine possible risk factors; and to address the growing 
 Surveillance Summaries
16 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
behavioral, educational, residential and occupational needs of 
this population.
Implementation of the new DSM-5 case definition had 
little effect on the overall number of children identified with 
ASD for the ADDM 2014 surveillance year. This might be a 
result of including documented ASD diagnoses in the DSM-5 
surveillance case definition. Over time, the estimate might be 
influenced (downward) by a diminishing number of persons 
who meet the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for ASD based 
solely on a previous DSM-IV-TR diagnosis, such as autistic 
disorder, PDD-NOS or Asperger disorder, and influenced 
(upward) by professionals aligning their clinical descriptions 
with the DSM-5 criteria. Although the prevalence of ASD and 
characteristics of children identified by each case definition 
were similar in 2014, the diagnostic features defined under 
DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 appear to be quite different. The 
ADDM Network will continue to evaluate these similarities 
and differences in much greater depth, and will examine at 
least one more cohort of children aged 8 years to expand this 
comparison. Over time, the ADDM Network will be well 
positioned to evaluate the effects of changing ASD diagnostic 
parameters on prevalence.
Acknowledgments
Data collection was guided by Lisa Martin, National Center 
on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC, and 
coordinated at each site by Kristen Clancy Mancilla, University 
of Arizona, Tucson; Allison Hudson, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock; Kelly Kast, MSPH, Leovi Madera, 
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, 
Denver; Margaret Huston, Ann Chang, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland; Libby Hallas-Muchow, MS, Kristin Hamre, 
MS, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis; Rob Fitzgerald, PhD, 
Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri; Josephine Shenouda, 
MS, Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey; Julie Rusyniak and 
Paula Bell, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Alison Vehorn, 
MS, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee; 
Pamela Imm, MS, University of Wisconsin, Madison; and Lisa 
Martin and Monica Dirienzo, MS, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC.
Data management/programming support was guided by Susan 
Williams, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; with additional oversight by Marion Jeffries, Eric 
Augustus, Maximus/Acentia, Atlanta, Georgia, and was coordinated 
at each site by Scott Magee, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock; Marnee Dearman, University of Arizona, 
Tucson; Bill Vertrees, Colorado Department of Public Health and 
Environment, Denver; Michael Sellers, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland; John Westerman, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis; Rob Fitzgerald, PhD, Washington University in 
St. Louis, Missouri; Paul Zumoff, PhD, Rutgers University, 
Newark, New Jersey; Deanna Caruso, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill; John Tapp, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee; Nina Boss, Chuck Goehler, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison.
Clinician review activities were guided by Lisa Wiggins, 
PhD, Monica Dirienzo, MS, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC. Formative work on 
operationalizing clinician review coding for the DSM-5 case 
definition was guided by Laura Carpenter, PhD, Medical University 
of South Carolina, Charleston; and Catherine Rice, PhD, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia.
Additional assistance was provided by project staff including 
data abstractors, epidemiologists, and others. Ongoing ADDM 
Network support was provided by Anita Washington, MPH, Bruce 
Heath, Tineka Yowe-Conley, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Ann Ussery-Hall, National Center 
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC.
References
 1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual 
of mental disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Association; 2013.
 2. Bertrand J, Mars A, Boyle C, Bove F, Yeargin-Allsopp M, Decoufle P
. 
Prevalence of autism in a United States population: the Brick Township, 
New Jersey, investigation. Pediatrics 2001;108:1155–61. https://doi.
org/10.1542/peds.108.5.1155
 3. Yeargin-Allsopp M, Rice C, Karapurkar T, Doernberg N, Boyle C, 
Murphy C. Prevalence of autism in a US metropolitan area. JAMA 
2003;289:49–55. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.1.49
 4. GovTrack H.R. 4365—106th Congress. Children’s Health Act of 2000. 
Washington, DC: GovTrack; 2000. https://www.govtrack.us/congress/
bills/106hr4365
 5. Rice CE, Baio J, Van Naarden Braun K, Doernberg N, Meaney FJ, 
Kirby RS; ADDM Network. A public health collaboration for the 
surveillance of autism spectrum disorders. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 
2007;21:179–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3016.2007.00801.x
 6. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2000 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, six sites, United States, 2000. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2007;56(No. SS-1):1–11. 
 7. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2002 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 14 sites, United States, 2002. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2007;56(No. SS-1):12–28. 
 8. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2006 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, United States, 2006. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2009;58(No. SS-10):1–20. 
 9. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2008 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 14 sites, United States, 2008. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2012;61(No. SS-3):1–19. 
 
10. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorder among children aged eight years—Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 
2010. MMWR Surveill Summ 2014;63(No. SS-2).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
11. Christensen DL, Baio J, Van Naarden Braun K, et al. Prevalence 
and characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 
eight years—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2016;65(No. SS-3):1–23. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.ss6503a1
 
12. US Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy people 2020. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2010. 
https://www.healthypeople.gov
 
13. Jarquin VG, Wiggins LD, Schieve LA, Van Naarden-Braun K. Racial 
disparities in community identification of autism spectrum disorders over 
time; Metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia, 2000–2006. J Dev Behav Pediatr 
2011;32:179–87. https://doi.org/10.1097/DBP
.0b013e31820b4260
 
14. Durkin MS, Maenner MJ, Meaney FJ, et al. Socioeconomic inequality in 
the prevalence of autism spectrum disorder: evidence from a U.S. cross-
sectional study. PLoS One 2010;5:e11551. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0011551
 
15. Durkin MS, Maenner MJ, Baio J, et al. Autism spectrum disorder among 
US children (2002–2010): socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic disparities. 
Am J Public Health 2017;107:1818–26. https://doi.org/10.2105/
AJPH.2017.304032
 
16. Newschaffer CJ. Trends in autism spectrum disorders: the interaction 
of time, group-level socioeconomic status, and individual-level 
race/ethnicity. Am J Public Health 2017;107:1698–9. https://doi.
org/10.2105/AJPH.2017.304085
 
17. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders. 4th ed. Text revision. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association; 2000.
 
18. Swedo SE, Baird G, Cook EH Jr, et al. Commentary from the DSM-5 
Workgroup on Neurodevelopmental Disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry 2012;51:347–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2012.02.013
 
19. Maenner MJ, Rice CE, Arneson CL, et al. Potential impact of 
DSM-5 criteria on autism spectrum disorder prevalence estimates. 
JAMA Psychiatry 2014;71:292–300. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2013.3893
 
20. Mehling MH, Tassé MJ. Severity of autism spectrum disorders: current 
conceptualization, and transition to DSM-5. J Autism Dev Disord 
2016;46:2000–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-016-2731-7
 
21. Mazurek MO, Lu F, Symecko H, et al. A prospective study of the 
concordance of DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for autism 
spectrum disorder. J Autism Dev Disord 2017;47:2783–94. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10803-017-3200-7
 
22. Yaylaci F, Miral S. A comparison of DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 diagnostic 
classifications in the clinical diagnosis of autistic spectrum disorder. 
J Autism Dev Disord 2017;47:101–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-016-2937-8
 
23. Hartley-McAndrew M, Mertz J, Hoffman M, Crawford D. Rates of 
autism spectrum disorder diagnosis under the DSM-5 criteria compared 
to DSM-IV-TR criteria in a hospital-based clinic. Pediatr Neurol 
2016;57:34–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2016.01.012
 
24. Yeargin-Allsopp M, Murphy CC, Oakley GP
, Sikes RK. A multiple-
source method for studying the prevalence of developmental disabilities 
in children: the Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:624–30. 
 
25. US Department of Health and Human Services. Code of Federal 
Regulations. Title 45. Public Welfare CFR 46. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2010. https://www.hhs.
gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/45-cfr-46/index.html
 
26. CDC. Vintage 2016 bridged-race postcensal population estimates for 
April 1, 2010, July 1, 2010–July 1, 2016, by year, county, single-year 
of age (0 to 85+ years), bridged-race, Hispanic origin, and sex. https://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/bridged_race.htm
 
27. US Department of Education. Common core of data: a program of the 
U.S. Department of Education’s National Center for Education Statistics. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Education; 2017. https://nces.
ed.gov/ccd/elsi/tableGenerator.aspx
 
28. Zablotsky B, Black LI, Blumberg SJ. Estimated prevalence of children 
with diagnosed developmental disabilities in the United States, 2014–
2016. NCHS Data Brief, no 291. Hyattsville, MD: National Center 
for Health Statistics, 2017.
 
29. Blumberg SJ, Bramlett MD, Kogan MD, Schieve LA, Jones JR, Lu MC. 
Changes in prevalence of parent-reported autism spectrum disorder 
in school-aged U.S. children: 2007 to 2011–2012. National Health 
Statistics Reports; no 65. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health 
Statistics, 2013.
 
30. Daniel KL, Prue C, Taylor MK, Thomas J, Scales M. ‘Learn the signs. 
Act early’: a campaign to help every child reach his or her full potential. 
Public Health 2009;123(Suppl 1):e11–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
puhe.2009.06.002
 
31. Johnson CP
, Myers SM; American Academy of Pediatrics Council on 
Children With Disabilities. Identification and evaluation of children with 
autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 2007;120:1183–215. https://doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2007-2361
 
32. Christensen DL, Bilder DA, Zahorodny W, et al. Prevalence and 
characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among 4-year-old 
children in the Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network. J Dev Behav Pediatr 2016;37:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1097/
DBP
.0000000000000235
 Surveillance Summaries
18 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Number* and percentage of children aged 8 years, by race/ethnicity and site — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Site
Site institution
Surveillance area
Total
White, 
non-Hispanic
Black, 
non-Hispanic
Hispanic
Asian or 
Pacific Islander, 
non-Hispanic
American Indian 
or Alaska Native, 
non-Hispanic
No.
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
Arizona
University of 
Arizona
Part of 1 county in 
metropolitan 
Phoenix†
24,952
12,308
(49.3)
1,336
(5.4)
9,792
(39.2)
975
(3.9)
541
(2.2)
Arkansas
University of 
Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences
All 75 counties in 
Arkansas
39,992
26,103
(65.3)
7,705
(19.3)
5,012
(12.5)
843
(2.1)
329
(0.8)
Colorado
Colorado 
Department of 
Public Health and 
Environment
7 counties in 
metropolitan 
Denver
41,128
22,410
(54.5)
2,724
(6.6)
13,735
(33.4)
2,031
(4.9)
228
(0.6)
Georgia
CDC
5 counties 
including 
metropolitan 
Atlanta
51,161
15,495
(30.3)
22,042
(43.1)
9,913
(19.4)
3,599
(7.0)
112
(0.2)
Maryland
Johns Hopkins 
University
1 county in 
metropolitan 
Baltimore
9,955
4,977
(50.0)
3,399
(34.1)
829
(8.3)
719
(7.2)
31
(0.3)
Minnesota
University of 
Minnesota
Parts of 2 counties 
including 
Minneapolis–
St. Paul†
9,767
3,793
(38.8)
2,719
(27.8)
1,486
(15.2)
1,576
(16.1)
193
(2.0)
Missouri
Washington 
University
5 counties 
including 
metropolitan 
St. Louis
25,333
16,529
(65.2)
6,577
(26.0)
1,220
(4.8)
931
(3.7)
76
(0.3)
New Jersey
Rutgers University
4 counties 
including 
metropolitan 
Newark
32,935
13,593
(41.3)
7,166
(21.8)
10,226
(31.0)
1,874
(5.7)
76
(0.2)
North Carolina
University of 
North Carolina–
Chapel Hill
6 counties in 
central 
North Carolina
30,283
15,241
(50.3)
7,701
(25.4)
5,463
(18.0)
1,778
(5.9)
100
(0.3)
Tennessee
Vanderbilt 
University Medical 
Center
11 counties in 
middle 
Tennessee
24,940
15,867
(63.6)
4,896
(19.6)
3,324
(13.3)
799
(3.2)
54
(0.2)
Wisconsin
University of 
Wisconsin–
Madison
10 counties in 
southeastern 
Wisconsin
35,037
20,732
(59.2)
6,486
(18.5)
6,181
(17.6)
1,471
(4.2)
167
(0.5)
All sites combined
325,483 167,048 (51.3)
72,751
(22.4)
67,181
(20.6)
16,596
(5.1)
1,907
(0.6)
* Total numbers of children aged 8 years in each surveillance area were obtained from CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics Vintage 2016 Bridged-Race Population 
Estimates for July 1, 2014.
† Denominator excludes school districts that were not included in the surveillance area, calculated from National Center for Education Statistics enrollment counts 
of third graders during the 2014–2015 school year.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years, by sex — Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Site
Total 
population
Total no. 
with ASD
Sex
 Male-to-female 
prevalence ratio§
Overall†
Males
Females
Prevalence
95% CI
Prevalence
95% CI
Prevalence
95% CI
Arizona
24,952
349
14.0
(12.6–15.5)
21.1
(18.7–23.8)
6.6
(5.3–8.2)
3.2
Arkansas
39,992
522
13.1
(12.0–14.2)
20.5
(18.6–22.5)
5.4
(4.5–6.5)
3.8
Colorado
41,128
572
13.9
(12.8–15.1)
21.8
(19.9–23.9)
5.5
(4.6–6.7)
3.9
Georgia
51,161
869
17.0
(15.9–18.2)
27.9
(25.9–30.0)
5.7
(4.8–6.7)
4.9
Maryland
9,955
199
20.0
(17.4–23.0)
32.7
(28.1–38.2)
7.2
(5.2–10.0)
4.5
Minnesota
9,767
234
24.0
(21.1–27.2)
39.0
(33.8–44.9)
8.5
(6.3–11.6)
4.6
Missouri
25,333
356
14.1
(12.7–15.6)
22.2
(19.8–25.0)
5.6
(4.4–7.0)
4.0
New Jersey
32,935
964
29.3
(27.5–31.2)
45.5
(42.4–48.9)
12.3
(10.7–14.1)
3.7
North Carolina
30,283
527
17.4
(16.0–19.0)
28.0
(25.5–30.8)
6.5
(5.3–7.9)
4.3
Tennessee
24,940
387
15.5
(14.0–17.1)
25.3
(22.6–28.2)
5.4
(4.2–6.9)
4.7
Wisconsin
35,037
494
14.1
(12.9–15.4)
21.4
(19.4–23.7)
6.4
(5.3–7.7)
3.4
All sites combined
325,483
5,473
16.8
(16.4–17.3)
26.6
(25.8–27.4)
6.6
(6.2–7.0)
4.0
Abbreviations: ASD = autism spectrum disorder; CI = confidence interval.
* Per 1,000 children aged 8 years.
† All children are included in the total regardless of race or ethnicity.
§ All sites identified significantly higher prevalence among males compared with females (p<0.01).
TABLE 3. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years, by race/ethnicity — Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Site
Race/Ethnicity
Prevalence ratio
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian/Pacific Islander
White-to-
Black
White-to-
Hispanic
Black-to-
Hispanic
Prevalence
95% CI
Prevalence
95% CI
Prevalence
95% CI
Prevalence
95% CI
Arizona
16.2
(14.1–18.6)
19.5
(13.3–28.6)
10.3
(8.5–12.5)
10.3
(5.5–19.1)
0.8
1.6§
1.9§
Arkansas
13.9
(12.6–15.5)
10.4
(8.3–12.9)
8.4
(6.2–11.3)
14.2
(8.1–25.1)
1.3†
1.7§
1.2
Colorado
15.0
(13.5–16.7)
11.4
(8.0–16.2)
10.6
(9.0–12.5)
7.9
(4.8–12.9)
1.3
1.4§
1.1
Georgia
17.9
(16.0–20.2)
17.1
(15.4–18.9)
12.6
(10.6–15.0)
11.9
(8.9–16.1)
1.1
1.4§
1.4§
Maryland
19.5
(16.0–23.8)
16.5
(12.7–21.4)
15.7
(9.1–27.0)
13.9
(7.5–25.8)
1.2
1.2
1.1
Minnesota
24.3
(19.8–29.8)
27.2
(21.7–34.2)
20.9
(14.7–29.7)
17.8
(12.3–25.7)
0.9
1.2
1.3
Missouri
14.1
(12.4–16.0)
10.8
(8.6–13.6)
4.9
(2.2–10.9)
10.7
(5.8–20.0)
1.3†
2.9†
2.2
New Jersey
30.2
(27.4–33.3)
26.8
(23.3–30.9)
29.3
(26.2–32.9)
19.2
(13.9–26.6)
1.1
1.0
0.9
North Carolina
18.6
(16.5–20.9)
16.1
(13.5–19.2)
11.9
(9.3–15.2)
19.1
(13.7–26.8)
(6.7–23.3)
1.2
1.6§
1.4†
Tennessee
16.1
(14.3–18.2)
12.5
(9.7–16.0)
10.5
(7.6–14.7)
12.5
1.3
1.5†
1.2
Wisconsin
15.2
(13.6–17.0)
11.3
(8.9–14.2)
12.5
(10.0–15.6)
10.2
(6.1–16.9)
1.3†
1.2
0.9
All sites 
combined
17.2
(16.5–17.8)
16.0
(15.1–16.9)
14.0
(13.1–14.9)
13.5
(11.8–15.4)
1.1†
1.2§
1.1§
Abbreviation: CI = confidence interval.
* Per 1,000 children aged 8 years.
† Pearson chi-square test of prevalence ratio significant at p<0.05.
§ Pearson chi-square test of prevalence ratio significant at p<0.01.
 Surveillance Summaries
20 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 4. Number and percentage of children aged 8 years* identified with autism spectrum disorder who received a comprehensive evaluation 
by a qualified professional at age ≤36 months, 37–48 months, or >48 months, and those with a mention of general delay concern by age 
36 months — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Site
Earliest age when child received a comprehensive evaluation
Mention of 
general developmental delay
≤36 mos
37–48 mos
>48 mos
≤36 mos
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
Arizona
87
(34.1)
56
(22.0)
112
(43.9)
240
(94.1)
Arkansas
117
(30.5)
98
(25.6)
168
(43.9)
354
(92.4)
Colorado
200
(46.4)
66
(15.3)
165
(38.3)
383
(88.9)
Georgia
240
(37.6)
126
(19.7)
273
(42.7)
549
(85.9)
Maryland
96
(56.1)
19
(11.1)
56
(32.7)
158
(92.4)
Minnesota
57
(33.5)
36
(21.2)
77
(45.3)
124
(72.9)
Missouri
88
(32.1)
39
(14.2)
147
(53.6)
196
(71.5)
New Jersey
318
(40.5)
174
(22.2)
293
(37.3)
645
(82.2)
North Carolina
260
(66.2)
42
(10.7)
91
(23.2)
364
(92.6)
Tennessee
80
(34.0)
47
(20.0)
108
(46.0)
144
(61.3)
Wisconsin
194
(47.2)
87
(21.2)
130
(31.6)
368
(89.5)
All sites combined
1,737
(41.9)
790
(19.0)
1,620
(39.1)
3,525
(85.0)
* Includes children identified with autism spectrum disorder who were linked to an in-state birth certificate.
TABLE 5. Median age (in months) of earliest known autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and number and proportion within each diagnostic 
subtype — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Site
Autistic disorder
ASD/PDD
Asperger disorder
Any specified ASD diagnosis
Median age
No.
(%)
Median age
No.
(%)
Median age
No.
(%)
Median age
No.
(%)
Arizona
55
186
(76.2)
61
50
(20.5)
74
8
(3.3)
56
244
(69.9)
Arkansas
55
269
(63.0)
63
129
(30.2)
75
29
(6.8)
59
427
(81.8)
Colorado
40
192
(61.7)
65
104
(33.4)
61
15
(4.8)
51
311
(54.4)
Georgia
46
288
(48.1)
56
261
(43.6)
65
50
(8.3)
53
599
(68.9)
Maryland
43
52
(32.3)
61
104
(64.6)
65
5
(3.1)
52
161
(80.9)
Minnesota
51
50
(45.9)
65
54
(49.5)
62
5
(4.6)
56
109
(46.6)
Missouri
54
81
(26.7)
55
197
(65.0)
65
25
(8.3)
56
303
(85.1)
New Jersey
42
227
(32.7)
51
428
(61.6)
66
40
(5.8)
48
695
(72.1)
North Carolina
32
165
(52.5)
49
130
(41.4)
67
19
(6.1)
40
314
(59.6)
Tennessee
51
157
(57.1)
63
100
(36.4)
60
18
(6.5)
56
275
(71.1)
Wisconsin
46
143
(40.2)
55
189
(53.1)
67
24
(6.7)
51
356
(72.1)
All sites combined
46
1,810
(47.7)
56
1,746
(46.0)
67
238
(6.3)
52
3,794
(69.3)
Abbreviations: ASD = autism spectrum disorder; PDD = pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise specified.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 6. Number and percentage of children aged 8 years identified with autism spectrum disorder with available special education records, 
by primary special education eligibility category* — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 10 sites, United States, 2014
Characteristic
Arizona
Arkansas
Colorado
Georgia
Maryland Minnesota New Jersey North Carolina Tennessee Wisconsin
Total no. of ASD cases
349
522
572
869
199
234
964
527
387
494
Total no. (%) of ASD cases with 
special education records
308 (88.3)
327† (—§)
139† (—§)
708 (81.5)
149 (74.9)
188 (80.3)
822 (85.3)
420 (79.7)
218† (—§)
156† (—§)
Primary exceptionality (%)
Autism
64.9
65.4
43.9
58.9
67.1
67.0
48.4
75.0
79.8
36.5
Emotional disturbance
2.9
0.9
7.2
2.0
2.7
3.7
1.6
2.6
0.5
5.8
Specific learning disability
6.8
3.7
13.7
4.0
12.8
1.1
8.2
2.9
0.9
2.6
Speech or language impairment
5.5
8.9
10.8
1.0
3.4
2.7
13.7
2.4
3.2
20.5
Hearing or visual impairment
0
0.3
0
0.1
0
1.1
0.6
0.5
0
0.6
Health, physical or other disability
6.8
13.5
14.4
3.5
8.1
15.4
18.5
11.2
3.2
14.7
Multiple disabilities
0.3
3.4
5.0
0
4.0
1.6
6.7
1.7
0
0
Intellectual disability
3.2
4.0
4.3
2.0
2.0
6.9
1.7
2.4
2.8
0.6
Developmental delay/Preschool
9.4
0
0.7
28.5
0
0.5
0.6
1.4
9.6
18.6
Abbreviation: ASD = autism spectrum disorder.
* Some state-specific categories were recoded or combined to match current U.S. Department of Education categories.
† Excludes children residing in school districts where educational records were not reviewed (proportion of surveillance population: 31% Arkansas, 67% Colorado, 
12% Tennessee, 74% Wisconsin).
§ Proportion not reported because numerator is not comparable to other sites (excludes children residing in school districts where educational records were 
not reviewed).
 Surveillance Summaries
22 
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 7. Number* and percentage of children aged 8 years, by race/ethnicity and site in the DSM-5 Surveillance Area — Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Site
Site institution
Surveillance area
Total
White, 
non-Hispanic
Black, 
non-Hispanic
Hispanic
Asian or 
Pacific Islander, 
non-Hispanic
American Indian or 
Alaska Native, 
non-Hispanic
No.
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
Arizona
University of 
Arizona
Part of 1 county in 
metropolitan 
Phoenix†
9,478
5,340
(56.3)
321
(3.4)
3,244
(34.2)
296
(3.1)
277
(2.9)
Arkansas
University of 
Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences
All 75 counties in 
Arkansas
39,992
26,103
(65.3)
7,705
(19.3)
5,012
(12.5)
843
(2.1)
329
(0.8)
Colorado
Colorado 
Department 
of Public Health 
and Environment
1 county in 
metropolitan Denver
8,022
2,603
(32.4)
1,018
(12.7)
4,019
(50.1)
322
(4.0)
60
(0.7)
Georgia
CDC
5 counties including 
metropolitan Atlanta
51,161
15,495
(30.3)
22,042
(43.1)
9,913
(19.4)
3,599
(7.0)
112
(0.2)
Maryland
Johns Hopkins 
University
1 county in 
metropolitan 
Baltimore
9,955
4,977
(50.0)
3,399
(34.1)
829
(8.3)
719
(7.2)
31
(0.3)
Minnesota
University of 
Minnesota
Parts of 2 counties 
including 
Minneapolis–St. Paul†
9,767
3,793
(38.8)
2,719
(27.8)
1,486
(15.2)
1,576 (16.1)
193
(2.0)
Missouri
Washington 
University
1 county in 
metropolitan St. 
Louis
12,205
7,186
(58.9)
3,793
(31.1)
561
(4.6)
626
(5.1)
39
(0.3)
New Jersey
Rutgers University 4 counties including 
metropolitan Newark
32,935
13,593
(41.3)
7,166
(21.8)
10,226
(31.0)
1,874
(5.7)
76
(0.2)
North Carolina University of 
North Carolina–
Chapel Hill
6 counties in central 
North Carolina
30,283
15,241
(50.3)
7,701
(25.4)
5,463
(18.0)
1,778
(5.9)
100
(0.3)
Tennessee
Vanderbilt 
University 
Medical Center
11 counties in middle 
Tennessee
24,940
15,867
(63.6)
4,896
(19.6)
3,324
(13.3)
799
(3.2)
54
(0.2)
Wisconsin
University of 
Wisconsin–
Madison
10 counties in 
southeastern 
Wisconsin
35,037
20,732
(59.2)
6,486
(18.5)
6,181
(17.6)
1,471
(4.2)
167
(0.5)
All sites combined
263,775 130,930
(49.6) 67,246
(25.5) 50,258
(19.1) 13,903
(5.3)
1,438
(0.5)
Abbreviation: DSM-5 = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.
* Total numbers of children aged 8 years in each surveillance area were obtained from CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics Vintage 2016 Bridged-Race Population 
Estimates for July 1, 2014.
† Denominator excludes school districts that were not included in the surveillance area, calculated from National Center for Education Statistics enrollment counts 
of third graders during the 2014–2015 school year.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 27, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 6 
23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 9. Characteristics of children meeting DSM-IV-TR and/or DSM-5 surveillance case definition — Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
Characteristic
Met DSM-IV-TR 
or DSM-5
Met both DSM-IV-TR 
and DSM-5
Met DSM-IV-TR only
Met DSM-5 only
DSM-IV-TR vs. DSM-5
No.
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
Ratio
Kappa
Met ASD case definition under 
DSM-IV-TR and/or DSM-5
4,920
4,236
(86.1)
422
(8.6)
262
(5.3)
1.04
0.85
Male
3,978
3,452
(86.8)
316
(7.9)
210
(5.3)
1.03
0.85
Female
942
784
(83.2)
106
(11.3)
52
(5.5)
1.06
0.85
White, non-Hispanic
2,486
2,159
(86.8)
193
(7.8)
134
(5.4)
1.03
0.85
Black, non-Hispanic
1,184
994
(84.0)
109
(9.2)
81
(6.8)
1.03
0.84
Hispanic, regardless of race
817
695
(85.1)
91
(11.1)
31
(3.8)
1.08
0.86
Asian/Pacific Islander, 
non-Hispanic
207
188
(90.8)
14
(6.8)
5
(2.4)
1.05
0.88
≤36 months
1,509
1,372
(90.9)
115
(7.6)
22
(1.5)
1.07
0.89
37–48 months
723
640
(88.5)
61
(8.4)
22
(3.0)
1.06
0.86
>48 months
1,503
1,195
(79.5)
154
(10.2)
154
(10.2)
1.00
0.81
Autism special education 
eligibility†
2,270
2,156
(95.0)
35
(1.5)
79
(3.5)
0.98
0.57
ASD diagnostic statement§
Earliest ASD diagnosis 
≤36 months
951
936
(98.4)
0
(0)
15
(1.6)
0.98
0.71
Earliest ASD diagnosis autistic 
disorder
1,577
1,526
(96.8)
0
(0)
51
(3.2)
0.97
0.50
Earliest ASD diagnosis PDD-NOS/
ASD-NOS
1,564
1,525
(97.5)
0
(0)
39
(2.5)
0.98
0.72
Earliest ASD diagnosis Asperger 
disorder
221
210
(95.0)
0
(0)
11
(5.0)
0.95
0.72
No previous ASD diagnosis or 
eligibility on record
950
484
(50.9)
369
(38.8)
97
(10.2)
1.47
0.62
Intellectual disability (IQ ≤70)
1,191
1,089
(91.4)
67
(5.6)
35
(2.9)
1.03
0.89
Borderline range (IQ 71–85)
881
778
(88.3)
74
(8.4)
29
(3.3)
1.06
0.88
Average or above average 
(IQ >85)
1,620
1,391
(85.9)
143
(8.8)
86
(5.3)
1.04
0.86
Abbreviations: ASD = autism spectrum disorder; DSM-5 = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; DSM-IV-TR = Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision; PDD-NOS = pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise specified.
* Includes children identified with ASD who were linked to an in-state birth certificate.
† Includes children with autism as the Primary Exceptionality (Table 6) as well as children documented to meet eligibility criteria for autism special education services.
§ An ASD diagnosis documented in abstracted comprehensive evaluations, including DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of autistic disorder, PDD-NOS or Asperger disorder qualifies 
a child as meeting the DSM-5 surveillance case definition for ASD.
¶ Includes data from all 11 sites, including those with IQ data available for <70% of confirmed cases.
TABLE 8. Number and percentage of children meeting DSM-IV-TR and/or DSM-5 surveillance case definition — Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2014
 Site
Met DSM-IV-TR 
or DSM-5
Met both DSM-IV-TR 
and DSM-5
Met DSM-IV-TR only
Met DSM-5 only
DSM-IV-TR vs. DSM-5
No.
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
Ratio
Kappa
Arizona
179
143
(79.9)
17
(9.5)
19
(10.6)
0.99
0.83
Arkansas
560
514
(91.8)
8
(1.4)
38
(6.8)
0.95
0.92
Colorado
116
92
(79.3)
19
(16.4)
5
(4.3)
1.14
0.79
Georgia
937
790
(84.3)
79
(8.4)
68
(7.3)
1.01
0.83
Maryland
207
187
(90.3)
12
(5.8)
8
(3.9)
1.02
0.89
Minnesota
254
200
(78.7)
34
(13.4)
20
(7.9)
1.06
0.79
Missouri
209
179
(85.6)
12
(5.7)
18
(8.6)
0.97
0.74
New Jersey
995
842
(84.6)
122
(12.3)
31
(3.1)
1.10
0.85
North Carolina
532
493
(92.7)
34
(6.4)
5
(0.9)
1.06
0.93
Tennessee
408
348
(85.3)
39
(9.6)
21
(5.1)
1.05
0.72
Wisconsin
523
448
(85.7)
46
(8.8)
29
(5.5)
1.04
0.83
All sites combined
4,920
4,236
(86.1)
422
(8.6)
262
(5.3)
1.04
0.85
Abbreviations: DSM-5 = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; DSM-IV-TR = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edition, Text Revision.
   ISSN: 1546-0738 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of charge 
in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/ss/ss6706a1.htm?s_
cid=ss6706a1_w. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, 
Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
