 STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1075
ABSTRACT: The Cardiovascular Disease in Women Committee of the 
American College of Cardiology, in conjunction with interested parties (from 
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, American Heart Association, 
and European Society of Cardiology), convened a working group to develop 
a consensus on the syndrome of myocardial ischemia with no obstructive 
coronary arteries. In general, these patients have elevated risk for a 
cardiovascular event (including acute coronary syndrome, heart failure 
hospitalization, stroke, and repeat cardiovascular procedures) compared 
with reference subjects and appear to be at higher risk for development of 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. A subgroup of these patients 
also has coronary microvascular dysfunction and evidence of inflammation. 
This document provides a summary of findings and recommendations for 
the development of an integrated approach for identifying and managing 
patients with ischemia with no obstructive coronary arteries and outlines 
knowledge gaps in the area. Working group members critically reviewed 
available literature and current practices for risk assessment and state-of-
the-science techniques in multiple areas, with a focus on next steps needed 
to develop evidence-based therapies. This report presents highlights of this 
working group review and a summary of suggested research directions to 
advance this field in the next decade.
P
atients presenting with the syndrome of symptoms and signs suggesting 
ischemic heart disease but found to have no obstructed coronary arteries 
(INOCA) are increasingly recognized.1–4 Specifically, these patients most of-
ten have symptoms suspected to be due to ischemia, prompting coronary angiog-
raphy, yet no obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD), that is, ≥50% diameter 
stenosis, is found. Considerable evidence now documents that this syndrome is 
associated with a prognosis that is clearly not benign, yet no clinical practice 
management guidelines exist for these patients. Although there is likely overlap 
between INOCA and myocardial infarction (MI) with no obstructive coronary arter-
ies (MINOCA), which appears to be increasingly described,5–7 the primary need and 
focus is on non-MI syndromes. To summarize current knowledge and to provide 
the next steps for developing evidence-based management strategies for INOCA, 
a think tank was convened at the American College of Cardiology Heart House, 
Washington, DC, on May 17, 2016. This report summarizes those presentations 
and discussions.
C. Noel Bairey Merz, MD
Carl J. Pepine, MD
Mary Norine Walsh, MD
Jerome L. Fleg, MD
WHITE PAPER
Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery 
Disease (INOCA)
Developing Evidence-Based Therapies and Research Agenda for the Next 
Decade
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Correspondence to: C. Noel 
Bairey Merz, MD, Cedars-Sinai 
Heart Center, 8700 Beverly 
Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 
90048. E-mail merz@cshs.org
Key Words: heart diseases  
◼ ischemia
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1076
PREVALENCE, COSTS, AND PROGNOSTIC 
SIGNIFICANCE
The American College of Cardiology-National Cardio-
vascular Data Registry and National Heart, Lung and 
Blood Institute–sponsored WISE (Women’s Ischemic 
Syndrome Evaluation) databases suggest that at least 
3 to 4 million women and men with signs/symptoms 
suggestive of myocardial ischemia have no obstructive 
CAD.8,9 Such individuals incur healthcare costs and dis-
abilities similar to those incurred by many with obstruc-
tive CAD, in part because of angina and heart failure 
(HF) hospitalizations and repeat testing.8,10 These cost 
burdens related to hospitalizations and repeat angiog-
raphy are confirmed by a European consecutive-patient 
registry.11
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of 
death in Americans. Although more women than men die 
annually of CVD, predominantly ischemic heart disease,12 
women presenting with symptoms and signs of myocar-
dial ischemia are more likely to have no obstructive CAD 
on coronary angiography compared with men in the 
setting of both chronic and acute coronary syndromes 
(ACS).4,8,13,14 Such patients are often reassured but of-
fered no specific management, yet data now document 
a heightened risk of adverse CVD outcomes compared 
with age- and sex-matched reference subjects.2,10,15
Almost two thirds of women undergoing clinically in-
dicated coronary angiography for suspected ischemic 
heart disease in the original cohort of the WISE had IN-
OCA.8,13 During follow-up, they had an intermediate risk 
for major adverse cardiac event (MACE; death, nonfatal 
MI, nonfatal stroke, and HF hospitalization) rate exceed-
ing 2.5% yearly by 5 years, as well as elevated rates 
of readmission and repeat angiography triggered by 
symptom burden.10,16 At 10 years, CVD death or MI oc-
curred in 6.7% of those with no evident angiographic 
CAD and in 12.8% among those with nonobstructive 
CAD.17 Of note, women with INOCA are ≈4 times more 
likely than men to be readmitted within 180 days for 
ACS/chest pain.16 Large, consecutive-case registry re-
ports have replicated this heightened risk for adverse 
prognosis and extended the findings to men.2,3,18 Given 
the increased economic role women play in society, it 
is imperative to many stakeholders (Health and Human 
Services, Department of Labor, Department of De-
fense) that we understand and manage this epidemic 
to avoid direct and indirect economic burden (missed 
work, disability, death).
PREDICTORS OF ADVERSE OUTCOMES
Older age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and smok-
ing have been associated with increased mortality, 
whereas sex, hyperlipidemia, family history of premature 
CAD, or pretest CAD likelihood have not.19 Risk-adjusted 
analyses found that nonobstructive CAD conferred in-
creased mortality risk compared with patients with no 
evident CAD.19
Chest pain persisting at the 1-year follow-up predicted 
MACE among those with INOCA in the WISE.20 Measures 
of nonobstructive CAD extent and severity (WISE CAD 
severity score, number of vessels involved, etc) also ap-
pear important in prognosis, but these measures are not 
well developed.2,3,17 A large cohort undergoing coronary 
computed tomographic angiography, with patients pro-
pensity matched for age, CAD risk factors, and “angina 
typicality,” observed elevated death/MI rates in those 
with nonobstructive CAD versus those with normal an-
giograms.21
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Mechanisms contributing to INOCA appear multifactorial 
and may operate alone or in combination.22,23 Although 
these may include hypertension, severe aortic stenosis, 
severe anemia, type II MI, shunts, certain drugs, HF or 
cardiogenic shock, Prinzmetal variant angina (coronary 
spasm), myocardial diseases (eg, myocarditis), con-
genital heart disease, coronary anomalies, myocardial 
bridging, and other causes in an occasional patient, 
underlying mechanisms and appropriate diagnostic and 
management strategies in these settings are usually 
apparent. Accordingly, the remainder of this document 
focuses on clinical situations in which the pathophysi-
ological mechanism for INOCA remains unclear after ini-
tial evaluation.
Mechanisms of Coronary Flow Regulation
Coronary blood flow is closely linked with metabolite pro-
duction, which modulates vascular smooth muscle tone. 
Voltage-gated potassium channels (Kv1.5) are critical in 
coupling myocardial blood flow to myocardial metabo-
lism. Table 1 summarizes intrinsic mechanisms of coro-
nary blood flow regulation.
Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction 
One proposed mechanism contributing to INOCA is 
coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD),24 defined 
as epicardial, microvascular endothelial, or nonendo-
thelial dysfunction that limits myocardial perfusion, 
most often detected as reduced coronary flow reserve 
(CFR). CMD may occur in the absence of obstructive 
CAD and myocardial diseases, in myocardial diseases, 
or in obstructive CAD or may be iatrogenic.24 Coronary 
vasomotor dysfunction, even without flow-limiting ste-
nosis, identifies patients at risk for cardiac death.25–27 
There is a distribution of risk across the CFR range 
from those with angiographic obstructive disease to 
those with diffuse nonobstructive atherosclerosis to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1077
those with normal-appearing angiograms to those 
with only coronary microvascular dysfunction. There 
is limited correlation between anatomic CAD severity 
and functional impairment, as reflected in the CFR.28 
Patients with low CFR, independent of angiographic 
severity of obstructive disease, have increased risk 
for adverse outcomes. For example, diabetic patients 
without obstructive CAD but with impaired CFR expe-
rienced cardiac death rates similar to those for non-
diabetic patients with CAD.29 Prospective studies are 
needed to assess modifiability of CFR to therapy and 
its ability to reclassify patients at varying risk across the 
anatomic spectrum of CAD.
Coronary reactivity testing, usually with adenosine or 
an analog, is required to diagnose CMD. In the WISE, a 
CFR, defined as an invasive Doppler time-averaged peak 
hyperemic coronary flow velocity/resting flow velocity 
<2.32, best predicted adverse outcomes in women with 
INOCA, with a 5-year MACE rate of 27% versus 9.3% 
for those with a CFR ≥2.32 (P=0.01).30 It is important 
to note that CFR was a continuous predictor of MACE, 
similar to blood pressure and low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, rather than having a step-like threshold for 
normal versus abnormal values. Similar findings (Table 
2) have been observed in other studies that include non-
invasive CFR velocity measurements by transthoracic 
echo Doppler or absolute measurements (in milliliters 
per minute per gram of myocardium) by positron emis-
sion tomography (PET).26,31,32 The latter study provides 
the most definitive data on CMD and adverse outcome 
risk among patients with INOCA.32 In those with CFRPET 
<2.0, the MACE (cardiac death, MI, late revasculariza-
tion, or HF hospitalization) rate was increased at 3 years 
compared with those with higher CFRs. A CFR of <2 was 
associated with 7.8% and 5.6% annualized MACE among 
symptomatic men and women without obstructive CAD 
versus 3.3% and 1.7%, respectively, for those with CFR 
≥2.0.32 It is interesting that although women make up 
≈70% of the INOCA population,41 increased risk associat-
ed with limited CFR does not appear different for women 
compared with men (Figure 1). A recent publication dem-
onstrates that the excess cardiovascular risk in women 
relative to men is associated with severely impaired CFR, 
not with obstructive CAD.42
Age, Sex, and Other Risk Variables
Conditions associated with increased risk for CMD ap-
pear similar to those for obstructive CAD and include 
traditional atherosclerosis risk factors such as aging, 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia.43 Ag-
ing (see below) leads to increased arterial wall stiffness, 
medial thickening, and lumen enlargement, resulting in 
increased pulse pressure and hypertrophy of arteries 
leading to endothelial dysfunction, dysregulation of ven-
tricular-aortic coupling, and subendocardial hypoperfu-
sion, contributing to CMD.44 Hypertension is associated 
with remodeling of small arteries, including coronary ar-
teries,45 and leads to arteriolar constriction and reduced 
microvascular density.46 CMD may also be associated 
with diabetes mellitus47 because chronic hyperglycemia 
reduces endothelium-dependent and -independent coro-
nary vasodilator capacity.48,49 Hypercholesterolemia may 
lead to CMD,50 but higher high-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol and lower triglyceride levels are associated with 
higher microvascular flow.
Although CMD is most prevalent in midlife women, 
WISE data do not support a role for estrogen deficien-
cy.51 However, traditional CAD risk factors explained 
<20% of the variation in CMD in the WISE cohort.51 
Traditional risk factors are not always present in CMD, 
and novel risk markers such as those associated with 
inflammation may contribute.51,52 There is a correlation 
between high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and number 
of ischemic episodes during ambulatory ECG monitor-
ing.53 C-reactive protein is increased among subjects 
with microvascular angina compared with control sub-
jects, further supporting a possible role of inflammation 
and endothelial dysfunction in causing CMD.54 Patients 
with increased high-sensitivity C-reactive protein have 
an attenuated rise in cerebral blood flow in response to 
acetylcholine.55,56 Systemic lupus erythematosus is fre-
quently associated with angina and CMD,57 whereas pri-
or breast cancer chemotherapy may also be associated 
with CMD.58 CFR is reduced among patients with normal 
or minimally diseased coronary arteries and either sys-
temic lupus erythematosus or rheumatoid arthritis, and 
prolonged systemic inflammation may also contribute to 
premature CAD in these patients.59
Conduit Vessel Stiffness
Aortic pulse wave velocity with other vessel stiffness 
indexes explained >50% of CFR variance in a WISE sub-
Table 1. Intrinsic Mechanisms of Coronary Artery 
Vasoreactivity
Factor
Arteries 
(Endothelial 
Dysfunction)
Arterioles 
(Endothelial 
Dysfunction)
Serotonin
Constricts
Dilates (constricts)
Vasopressin
Dilates (±constricts)
Constricts
Endothelin
Constricts
Constricts
Thromboxane
Constricts
Constricts
Acetylcholine
Dilates (constricts)
Dilates (±constricts)
Adenosine
Dilates
Potent dilator
Nitric oxide
Dilates
Dilates
H2O2
Dilates
Potent dilator
Norepinephrine
Constricts
No direct effect
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1078
study.60 Arterial stiffness is known to predict cardiovas-
cular events beyond traditional risk factors. When arterial 
stiffness indexes were assessed by magnetic resonance 
imaging, ultrasound, and tonometry in asymptomatic 
subjects from the community,61 peripheral and central 
pulse pressure, augmentation index, carotid-femoral 
pulse wave velocity, and aortic arch pulse wave velocity 
all increased with age, but ascending aortic strain and 
distensibility decreased with age. The best markers of 
subclinical large artery stiffening were aortic arch disten-
sibility in younger individuals and aortic arch pulse wave 
velocity after age 50.61
Atherosclerosis 
The pathophysiology of atherosclerosis has shifted 
from a lipid storage disease with large lipid pool thin 
fibrous cap atheroma (eg, rupture-vulnerable plaque) 
and flow-limiting plaque resulting in vessel occlusion 
to a more chronic inflammatory process interrupted 
by periods of minor plaque rupture, erosion, and distal 
embolism.62 The initial phase begins early in life, as ox-
idant stress related to various risk conditions (genetic 
predisposition, elevated blood pressure, diabetes mel-
litus, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, environmen-
tal factors such as tobacco) activates endothelial cells 
Table 2. Natural History Studies of Patients With Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction
Author and 
Year
n
Population
Method
Outcome Measure
Follow-Up
CMD Outcome Predictor
Univariate 
Multivariate
Pepine et al30 
(WISE)
2010
189
Women, angina/
ischemia most with 
nonobstructive CAD
Intracoronary Ado-
CFR Doppler flow 
wire
Death, nonfatal MI, 
nonfatal stroke, HF 
hospitalization
5.4 y (mean)
Yes
Yes
Balázs et al31 
(Szeged)
2011
45
Women, angina/
ischemia, no 
obstructive CAD
Vasodilator CFR, 
Doppler/TEE, TTE
Death, cardiovascular 
hospitalization
102±26 mo 
(median, 113) 
Yes
Yes
Murthy et al32
2014
1218
(813 F, 
405 M)
No obstructive CAD 
(excluded by CTA 
or PET)
Stress perfusion 
imaging (PET)
Cardiovascular 
death, MI, late 
revascularization 
(>90 d) or HF 
hospitalization
3 y
Yes
Yes
Britten et al33
2004
120
Post PCI/mild CAD
IC papaverine or 
Ado-CFR Doppler 
flow wire
Cardiac death, ACS, 
revascularization, 
stroke
6.5±3 y
(14–125 mo)
Yes
Yes
Schindler et al34
2006
72
CAD risk factors 
without
flow-limiting stenosis
CPT-MBF increase 
with 13N-NH3 PET
Cardiovascular death, 
ACS, MI, PCI/CABG, 
stroke, PTA
66±8 mo
Yes
No
Rigo et al35
2007
86
CAD, LAD 51%–75% 
stenosis
Vasodilator LAD 
CFR, Doppler /TTE
Nonfatal MI
30 mo
(median, 14)
Yes
Yes
Nemes et al36
2008
397
Hospitalized, angina, 
mostly severe CAD, 
TEE for AA
Vasodilator LAD 
CFR, Doppler /TEE
Cardiovascular death, 
HF, thrombosis
41±12 mo
Yes
Yes
Herzog et al37
2009
229
Suspected CAD/66% 
had severe CAD
Vasodilator CFR 
with 13N-NH3 PET
Cardiovascular 
death, nonfatal MI, 
hospitalization, PCI/
CABG
5.5±2.1 y
Yes
Yes
Tio et al38
2009
344
Severe CAD, not 
revascularization, LV 
systolic dysfunction
Vasodilator CFR 
with 13N-NH3 PET
Cardiac death
85 mo
(1–138 mo)
Yes
Yes
Cortigiani et al39
2010
1660
Chest pain, normal 
DSE
Vasodilator LAD 
CFR, Doppler/TTE
Death, MI, 
revascularization
19 mo median
Yes
Yes
Ziadi et al40
2011
677
Most had severe 
CAD
Vasodilator CFR 
with 82Rb PET
Cardiovascular death, 
nonfatal MI
387 d
(375–416 d)
Yes
Yes
AA indicates abdominal aneurysm; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; Ado, adenosine; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CAD, coronary artery disease; 
CFR, coronary flow reserve; CMD, coronary microvascular dysfunction; CPT, cold pressor test; CTA, computed tomographic angiography; DSE, dobutamine 
stress echocardiography; HF, heart failure; IC, intracoronary; LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; LV, left ventricular; MBF, myocardial blood flow; 
MI, myocardial infarction; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PET, positron emission tomography; PTA, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty; TEE, 
transesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography; and WISE, Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1079
STATE OF THE ART
and probably vascular smooth muscle cells.62 Bone 
marrow–derived inflammatory cells (monocytes) join 
endothelial and smooth muscle cells of the artery wall 
to initiate and perpetuate a less intensive, chronic in-
flammatory response, leading to endothelial and vas-
cular smooth muscle dysfunction. Multiple adhesion 
molecules for leukocytes, chemoattractant cytokines, 
and activators of leukocyte function actively partici-
pate in the atherogenic process. This process is sys-
temic with variable endothelial and vascular smooth 
muscle dysfunction in all vessels (large and small) and 
plaque growth, within large and medium-sized arteries, 
leading to different clinical manifestations of ischemia, 
depending on the acuity of the process and organs 
involved.62 Evidence linking microvascular and inflam-
matory responses to risk factors indicates that oxida-
tive stress, reduced nitric oxide bioavailability, and 
endothelial activation are common early features of 
coronary microvascular responses to atherosclerosis 
risk factors.63
Almost all patients with INOCA with chronic angina 
studied by intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) to date have 
some coronary atherosclerosis.22,64 Given sampling limi-
tations of IVUS as used in these reports, those findings 
strongly suggest that atherosclerosis is a key mediator 
of the syndrome. In support of this hypothesis, a greater 
burden of risk factors is associated with more athero-
sclerosis, concealed by compensatory positive remodel-
ing, yielding diffuse nonobstructive CAD.64 Plaque rup-
ture by IVUS was not observed in patients with INOCA 
from 2 series of patients with chronic angina.5,22,64 Two 
single-center reports of nonobstructive CAD presenting 
with ACS suggest that plaque rupture is observed in the 
minority: 38% of 50 women6 and 37% of men and wom-
en.5 The former study found that plaque ulceration was 
also frequent, in addition to late gadolinium enhance-
ment with an ischemic pattern of injury.6 The latter study 
found that plaque ruptures frequently appeared in more 
voluminous plaques with large plaque burden and posi-
tive remodeling.5
Nonobstructive CAD
Prior work evaluating patients suspected to have myo-
cardial ischemia found that ≈40% of women and 8% of 
men had nonsignificant CAD (30%–49% stenosis).14 The 
CASS registry (Coronary Artery Surgery Study) reported 
that 39% of women and 11% of men with angina had 
normal coronary arteries.65 However, CASS lacked an 
angiographic core laboratory, and in a sample that was 
retrospectively reviewed, variation in interpretations of 
proximal lesions was unacceptably high.66 Furthermore, 
it is unclear how many patients were retrospectively en-
tered, enhancing survival bias to limit adverse outcome 
estimates.67
More recent analyses have linked angiographic mea-
sures of extent of nonobstructive CAD with increased 
risk for adverse outcomes. These include number of ma-
jor vessels involved with nonobstructive CAD,3 WISE-CAD 
Severity Score,17 and TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial 
Infarction) frame counts.68 In a European consecutive-
case registry of patients undergoing clinically indicated 
coronary angiography, the prevalence of nonobstructive 
CAD was 65% among women and 32% in men.2 The 
American College of Cardiology-National Cardiovascular 
Data Registry prospective registry of patients undergoing 
clinically indicated invasive coronary angiography found 
that the prevalence of nonobstructive CAD was 51% in 
women and 32% in men.9 Diffuse nonobstructive CAD is 
increasingly recognized with the more widespread use 
of fractional flow reserve, which may be helpful in as-
sessing long moderate lesions. Measures from coronary 
computed tomographic angiography are also evolving. 
Except for the variables cited above, the other variables 
have not been studied in detail, and limited positive find-
ings lack replication in other large cohorts.
Blood Pressure
Thickened and stiffened microvessels have poor auto-
regulatory capacity, allowing transmission of increased 
blood pressure to the microvessels.24 Along with hydrau-
Figure 1. Sex effects on coronary microvascular dysfunction measured by positron emission tomography and 
adverse outcomes in symptomatic patients without obstructive coronary artery disease.  
CFR indicates coronary flow reserve. Data obtained from Murthy et al.32
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1080
lic factors such as blood pressure level, intramural fac-
tors such as impaired coronary microvascular density 
and impaired myocardial perfusion likely contribute to 
INOCA.
Lipids
Dyslipidemia contributes to, and statin treatment im-
proves, coronary endothelial dysfunction.69 Additional 
contributing roles include myocardial ischemia-related 
steatosis, which appears to be mechanistically linked 
with impairments in ventricular relaxation in women with 
CMD evidenced by magnetic resonance spectroscopy.70 
Specifically, women with CMD had higher myocardial 
triglyceride content (0.83±0.12% versus 0.43±0.06%; 
P=0.025) and lower diastolic circumferential strain rate 
(168±12%/s versus 217±15%/s; P=0.012), with myo-
cardial triglyceride content correlating inversely with dia-
stolic circumferential strain rate (r=−0.779, P=0.002),70 
suggesting that CMD triggers a metabolic shift away 
from free fatty acids, resulting in ectopic fat deposition 
in cardiomyocytes. Mitochondrial functions, including 
reactive oxygen species signaling, apoptosis, steroid 
synthesis, hormonal signaling (mitochondrial estrogen 
receptor), and sexual dimorphism in the expression of 
mitochondria-related genes, may be involved.71
Obesity, Metabolic Syndrome, and Diabetes 
Mellitus
Obesity-related hypertension, cardiomyocyte hypertro-
phy, and impaired cardiac vascular adaptation to meta-
bolic needs are well documented in obesity. Decreased 
serum adiponectin levels and impaired CFR occur in 
women with normal epicardial coronary arteries.72 Insulin 
resistance is strongly associated with both microvascu-
lar and macrovascular coronary disorders and confers 
high risk for CVD morbidity and mortality (women more 
than men).4,73 Coronary microvascular abnormalities are 
highly prevalent and worsen with progressive glucose 
intolerance with or without obstructive CAD, and nonob-
structive CAD is highly prevalent in those with diabetes 
mellitus.34,74,75
Cardiac Autonomic Nervous System 
Abnormal cardiac adrenergic nerve function is well docu-
mented in patients with INOCA.76–78 Among patients 
experiencing mental stress–induced angina, exposure 
to cold triggers angina, rest angina, or early morning 
angina. There is close interplay between the autonomic 
nervous system and endothelium whereby β-adrenergic 
receptor activation of vascular smooth muscle cells in-
duces vasodilation, α-adrenergic receptor activation in-
duces vasoconstriction, and muscarinic receptor activa-
tion induces vasoconstriction.79,80
An abnormal vascular response to acetylcholine may 
be a sign of defective bioavailable nitric oxide, prostacy-
clin, or excess endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing fac-
tor release, or it could be indicative of increased smooth 
muscle cell sensitivity to muscarinic stimulation or exces-
sive release of endothelium-derived contracting factor, 
a finding in HF.81,82 Sympathetically mediated effects of 
mental stress on the coronary microcirculation may also 
be deleterious.83 For example, CMD after percutaneous 
coronary intervention is due to sympathetically mediated 
vasoconstriction and may be prevented or attenuated 
by oral pretreatment with an α1-adrenergic antagonist.84 
Normally, increased sympathetic activity dilates coronary 
resistance vessels to increase myocardial blood flow, 
modulated at least partially by endothelium.81
Platelet Dysfunction or Other Coagulopathy
Platelet reactivity, in response to collagen/ADP stimula-
tion, decreases after exercise in patients with angina, posi-
tive exercise tests, and smooth coronary arteries (eg, IN-
OCA).85 Flow cytometry measures at rest and exercise86 in 
patients with INOCA demonstrated that increases in plate-
let receptor expression and leukocyte-platelet aggregate 
formation to ACP were consistently lower after exercise 
than before. These findings agree with and expand on prior 
work demonstrating lower whole-blood platelet reactivity 
to collagen/ADP in patients with INOCA after exercise, in 
contrast to the absence of change in control subjects and 
an increase in patients with CAD.13,14 Changes in platelet 
receptor expression and leukocyte-platelet aggregate for-
mation have been reported after exercise in INOCA,86 and 
adenosine has been shown to inhibit ADP- and thrombin-
induced monocyte-platelet aggregates in INOCA.87
DIAGNOSIS
Invasive Testing
CBF is driven by the pressure difference between the 
aorta and the capillary bed and modulated further by 
physical and neural factors that affect the microcircula-
tion. Different microcirculation compartments are influ-
enced by one main physiological mechanism to control 
their vascular tone with cardiac metabolism as the final 
determining factor. Measurement of coronary vascular 
function includes measurements of CBF and epicardial 
coronary artery diameter with endothelium-dependent 
probes—acetylcholine, bradykinin, substance-P, l-NG-
monomethyl arginine citrate, and shear stress—and pre-
dominantly endothelium-independent probes, adenosine 
and sodium nitroprusside. Doses of test agents and defi-
nitions of test findings are summarized in Tables 3 and 
4, respectively, in Figure 2, and the protocol in Table 5.
Exercise, pacing-induced tachycardia, cold pressor 
test, and mental stress have also been used to elicit abnor-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1081
malities in CBF. The WISE-CVD (coronary vascular dysfunc-
tion) project data suggest a strong correlation between 
acetylcholine and cold pressor test coronary artery diam-
eter changes in women.22 Reports from invasive testing 
>1500 patients indicate an excellent safety record with no 
deaths and <1% procedure-related adverse experiences 
such as those observed with coronary angiography.88–90
Noninvasive Testing
Position Emission Tomography
PET is a highly accurate, reproducible, and modifiable 
procedure providing comprehensive evaluation of CBF, 
including perfusion, left ventricular function, and CFR. 
There is a strong association between impaired CFR and 
impaired left ventricular myocardial relaxation or elevat-
ed filling pressures that is strongest among those with 
cardiac troponin elevations.91 In a study32 of chest pain 
patients without CAD history, PET-assessed rest and 
post hyperemic flow (adenosine, dobutamine, dipyridam-
ole) identified significant MACE predictors: Duke clinical 
risk score (hazard ratio, 1.06), left ventricular ejection 
fraction (10% increase; hazard ratio, 0.56), and CFR 
(hazard ratio, 0.80 for each 10% increase).
Transthoracic Echo Doppler
In another study of patients with chest pain without ob-
structive CAD and coronary flow velocity, by pulsed wave 
Doppler of the left anterior descending coronary artery 
at rest and after dipyridamole, 26% had coronary flow 
velocity reserve <2.0.92 Those with low coronary flow 
velocity reserve had significantly greater physical limita-
tion and disease perception scores on the Seattle An-
gina Questionnaire.
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Failure of subendocardial perfusion to increase appropri-
ately in response to stress can be detected by cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging among subjects with INO-
CA.93,94 A semiquantitative approach with measurement 
of myocardial perfusion reserve index detects CMD in 
women with INOCA.95 Those with CMD, by abnormal in-
vasive cardiac resynchronization therapy, had reduced 
myocardial perfusion reserve index compared with nor-
mal women. Because the methodology uses standard 
equipment and protocol available in tertiary hospitals 
without radiation, myocardial perfusion reserve index 
appears useful for the diagnosis and management of 
INOCA and deserves additional evaluation.
MANAGEMENT
At present, the management strategy for INOCA remains 
unclear, largely because of the absence of an evidence 
base needed for guidelines. Figure 3 outlines potential 
therapies for CMD.
Statins, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors, and 
Aspirin
Multiple prior statin trials using IVUS have documented 
prevention of progression, or even regression, of athero-
sclerosis in coronary arteries and coronary endothelial 
or vascular smooth muscle function in subjects with non-
obstructive CAD.96,97 Statins not only lower cholesterol 
but also have antiatherosclerotic and anti-inflammatory 
effects.98 Data support the use of statins to improve 
CFR. Fluvastatin alone showed improvement in CFR and 
even greater improvement in combination with diltia-
zem.99 Two small pilot studies have shown that admin-
istration of atorvastatin improved CFR after 2 months100 
and 6 months.101 Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-
Figure 2. Coronary reactivity testing protocol. 
ACH indicates acetylcholine; ADO, adenosine; and NTG, 
nitroglycerin.
Table 3. Intracoronary Acetylcholine Concentration 
and Infusion
Prepared 
Concentration, 
mol/L (μg/mL)
Infusion Rate, 
mL/h
Infusion 
Duration, min
Infused  
Dose, μg
10–6 (0.182)
48
3
0.364
10–4 (18.2)
48
3
36.4
10–4 (18.2)
120
3
108
Table 4. Definitions of Coronary Microvascular and 
Macrovascular Dysfunction
CMD Pathways
Microvascular 
Dysfunction
Macrovascular 
Dysfunction
Non–endothelium 
dependent
CFR in response to 
adenosine <2.5
Change in coronary 
artery diameter 
in response to 
nitroglycerin <20%
Endothelium 
dependent
Change in CBF 
in response to 
acetylcholine <50%
Change in coronary 
artery diameter 
in response to 
acetylcholine ≤0%
Coronary spasm
Chest pain+ECG changes
Change in coronary artery diameter in 
response to acetylcholine <90%
CBF indicates coronary blood flow; CFR, coronary flow reserve; and 
CMD, coronary microvascular dysfunction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1082
tors (ACE-I) have been shown to improve exercise toler-
ance and angina symptoms.102 In the WISE controlled 
trial, women who received quinapril had improved CFR 
after 16 weeks compared with the placebo group. In ad-
dition, the experimental group had improvement in angi-
na symptoms as shown by the Seattle Angina Question-
naire.103 Patients with essential hypertension had marked 
improved coronary blood flow after 12 months of treat-
ment with perindopril, with regression of periarteriolar fi-
brosis seen on biopsy.104 In patients already on an ACE-I, 
the addition of an aldosterone blocker did not improve 
endothelial function.105 In subjects with diabetes mellitus, 
the addition of spironolactone has been shown to im-
prove coronary microvascular function.106 The benefit of 
spironolactone is explained by the fact that mineralocor-
ticoid receptor activation has been shown to cause vas-
cular damage107 and dysfunction.108 A statin plus ACE-I 
(atorvastatin and ramipril) was used in a randomized trial 
of angina patients with normal coronary angiograms and 
ischemia during stress testing; at 6 months, the statin/
ACE-I strategy improved Seattle Angina Questionnaire 
scores and exercise duration compared with placebo. 
Mechanistically, the combination produced greater in-
creases in brachial artery flow–mediated dilation com-
pared with placebo and reduced extracellular superoxide 
dismutase.102
Antiplatelet Agents
A majority of patients with CMD have endothelial dys-
function, and although angiography shows no significant 
plaque burden, IVUS has demonstrated coronary athero-
sclerosis in most patients.22,64 Therefore, ACC/American 
Heart Association chronic stable angina guidelines109 
should be extrapolated to use of antiplatelet agents such 
as aspirin in patients with evidence of ischemia and no 
obstructive CAD.
Antianginal Agents
Current approaches to the treatment of CMD (Table 6) 
include the management of risk factors and use of an-
tianginal and antiatherosclerotic medication and some 
novel agents. However, current literature has little evi-
dence for effective therapy for CMD for the following 2 
reasons: First, studies often include patients with car-
diac chest pain that may be attributed to clinical enti-
ties other than CMD such as cardiac syndrome X,111 and 
second, studies have used various CFR cutoff criteria for 
CMD because there is no guideline consensus definition 
thus far.112
Management of risk factors includes control of diabe-
tes mellitus and hypertension. Therapeutically lowering 
blood pressure can improve CFR, but excess lowering 
of diastolic blood pressure attenuates the benefit.113 The 
insulin sensitizer metformin has been shown to improve 
endothelial function.114 Lifestyle modifications include 
weight loss,115 smoking cessation, high-fiber diet, fruit 
and vegetable consumption, and regular physical activ-
ity.116–118
Few studies have addressed the use of β-blockers. 
The existing studies included patients with signs and 
symptoms of ischemia but without definitive diagno-
Table 5. Protocol for Invasive Coronary Reactivity 
Testing
Preparation
 Withhold for 48 h
  Long-acting calcium antagonists
 Withhold for 24 h
  Caffeine
  Long-acting nitrates
  Short-acting calcium antagonists
  α-Blockers
  β-Blockers
   
ACE-I/angiotensin receptor blockers/renin inhibitors/aldosterone 
inhibitors
 Withhold for 4 h
  Sublingual nitroglycerin
Protocol
 Review indications for invasive coronary reactivity testing
  Chest symptoms thought to be angina or equivalent
  Evidence of ischemia
   
Confirmation of no obstructive CAD (stenosis >50%); use FFR if 
borderline
  
Assess for increased cardiac sensitivity (eg, chest pain with 
contrast infusion or catheter movement)
 Record LVEDP
 Administer intravenous heparin (70 U/kg)
  
Advance Doppler flow wire (0.014-in) pressure and flow system  
to proximal-mid LAD artery
 Confirm adequate CBF velocity signal
 Infuse provocative agents (using doses in Figure 2)
 Recordings and calculations
   
12-Lead ECG, repeated with chest pain or ischemic ECG 
changes
  APV at baseline and after each provocative agent
    Hemodynamic variables (HR, BP)
   
Coronary angiogram for coronary artery diameter measured 5 
mm distal to tip of Doppler guide wire
  CBF=π(coronary artery diameter/2)2(APV/2)
  CBF change=(peak CBF−baseline CBF)/(baseline CBF)
ACE-I indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; APV, 
average peak blood flow velocity; BP, blood pressure; CAD, coronary 
artery disease; CB, coronary blood flow; FFR, fractional flow reserve; 
HR, heart rate; LAD, left anterior descending; and LVEDP, left ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1083
STATE OF THE ART
sis of CMD. β -Blockers reduce myocardial oxygen 
consumption and increase diastolic filling time. Ateno-
lol has been shown to reduce the number of angina 
episodes119 and to improve ischemic threshold.120 
Carvedilol has been shown to improve endothelial 
function.121
Another class of vasodilator is calcium channel block-
ers, which are a reasonable first-line treatment for CMD 
given the underlying pathophysiology. However, one 
study of intracoronary diltiazem did not improve CFR in 
CMD patients but rather had a predominant vasodilatory 
effect on the epicardial artery.122 Despite these findings, 
patients with abnormal vasodilator reserve can have im-
proved symptoms, less nitrate use, and improved ex-
ercise tolerance after being treated with verapamil or 
nifedipine.123
Nitrates achieve antianginal effect through venodi-
lation to reduce preload; in addition, they may have 
some coronary vasodilatory effect. The use of nitrates 
may improve patient symptoms, but there are limited 
data on their effect on endothelial and microvascular 
function.
Ranolazine is an antianginal that inhibits the late sodi-
um current and overall reduces intracellular calcium lev-
els in cardiomyocytes, thus leading to improved ventricu-
lar relaxation.124 Results for CMD have been conflicting. 
One pilot study showed improved symptoms in women 
with angina and evidence of ischemia but no obstructive 
CAD, and patients with low CFR demonstrated improved 
CFR with treatment.125 A similar-sized study showed 
some improvement with symptoms but no effect on 
coronary microvascular function.126 A recent large ran-
domized trial of a 2-week course of ranolazine versus 
placebo found no difference in symptoms or myocardial 
perfusion reserve.127
Ivabradine reduces heart rate through its effect on If 
of the sinoatrial node. In patients with stable CAD, it is 
found to improve CFR.128 Another study showed improve-
ment of symptoms but no effect on coronary microvas-
cular function.126 Ivabradine may have a therapeutic role 
in CMD patients.
Aminophylline, a nonselective adenosine-receptor an-
tagonist, blocks the mediation of nociception. It is pos-
tulated to benefit CMD by attenuating the excess dilation 
of the microvasculature in a relatively well-perfused area, 
thus shunting blood to a poorly perfused area. Some 
improvement in symptoms and exercise capacity was 
seen with short-term intravenous129 and oral aminophyl-
line130 in patients with signs and symptoms of ischemia 
but normal coronary angiogram.
Fasudil, a rho kinase inhibitor that reduces smooth 
muscle cell hypercontraction,131 is being investigated 
currently and has potential for CMD. It has been shown 
to be effective for vasospastic angina. Preliminary stud-
ies showed that patients pretreated with fasudil did not 
manifest evidence of ischemia with acetylcholine infu-
sion compared with saline pretreatment.132
There may be a role for l-arginine supplementation to 
improve endothelial dysfunction because l-arginine is the 
precursor of nitric oxide.133 Two studies have found im-
provement of CFR after 1-time infusion of l-arginine.134,135 
However, Lerman et al136 found that after 6-month oral 
supplementation, there is symptom improvement, de-
creased endothelin concentration, improvement in CBF, 
but no improvement in CFR.
Given that impaired cardiac nociception may be in-
volved in CMD, low-dose tricyclic antidepressants can 
be considered because they are thought to have modu-
latory effects on norepinephrine uptake and anticholin-
ergic effect that can cause analgesia. Imipramine has 
been shown to reduce frequency of pain137,138 but in 
one of the studies did not show any improvement in 
quality of life,138 likely because of its significant side 
effects.
Nonpharmacological treatments can be effective in 
controlling patient symptoms. Spinal cord stimulation 
Figure 3. Potential therapies  
for coronary microvascular  
dysfunction (CMD). 
ACE-I indicates angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor; and PDE-5, phos-
phodiesterase type 5 inhibitor.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1084
has been shown to normalize abnormal pain percep-
tion,139 to improve angina symptoms, and to increase 
exercise tolerance.140 Enhanced external counterpulsa-
tion uses pneumatic cuffs applied to the patient’s legs. 
Sequential inflation and deflation synchronized to the 
cardiac cycle improves hemodynamics.141 It has been 
shown to improve angina in a small case series.142 Cog-
nitive behavioral therapy can reduce symptom severity 
and frequency.143 Cardiac rehabilitation involves mul-
tiple sessions of cardiovascular exercise, psychological 
counseling, and nutritional planning and can be helpful in 
that it improves blood pressure, body mass index, and 
exercise capacity.144
In summary, small studies support the use of statins 
and ACE-Is to prevent the progression of nonobstruc-
tive coronary atherosclerosis and to improve endothelial 
and microvascular function and symptoms. However, 
treatments for INOCA have not been studied in clinical 
outcome trials adequately powered to inform evidence-
based guidelines.
KNOWLEDGE GAPS
Definition
Gaps 
in 
current 
knowledge 
related 
to 
patient 
phenotype(s), mechanistic understanding, and manage-
ment of patients with INOCA are numerous. To advance 
this field, it is essential to develop a uniform definition 
of the patient with INOCA. Prevailing elements of a defi-
nition, summarized from presentations by Think Tank 
members, include patients with the following:
1. Stable, chronic (several weeks or longer) symp-
toms suggesting ischemic heart disease such as 
chest discomfort with both classic (eg, angina pec-
toris) and atypical features in terms of location, 
quality, and inciting factors;
2. Objective evidence for myocardial ischemia from 
the ECG or a cardiac imaging study (echocar-
diography, nuclear imaging, magnetic resonance 
imaging, or spectroscopy) at rest or during stress 
(exercise, mental, or pharmacological); and
3. Absence of flow-limiting obstruction by coronary 
angiography (invasive or computed tomographic 
angiography) as defined by any epicardial coro-
nary artery diameter reduction ≥50% or fractional 
flow reserve <0.8.
Diagnosis and Phenotyping
Given the likelihood that multiple mechanisms may con-
tribute to INOCA, improved understanding by specific 
phenotyping of these individuals beyond symptoms and 
ischemia is needed. For example, although epicardial 
coronary spasm has been recognized for decades, its 
specific role in patients with INOCA is unclear. Although 
recent data suggest that ≈5% of clinically stable women 
with angina and INOCA have epicardial spasm with intra-
coronary acetylcholine testing, the role of microvascular 
coronary spasm requires additional study. The potential 
for INOCA to evolve into an ACS/MINOCA (eg, MI with 
no obstructive coronary arteries) or HF with preserved 
ejection fraction (HFpEF) requires additional study from 
large, prospective cohorts.
Management
Knowledge gaps exist in the pathogenesis and manage-
ment of INOCA. For example, why are certain cardiovas-
cular risk factors associated with CMD in some patients 
but not in others? What are the clinical, therapeutic, and 
prognostic implications of using a classification based 
on measures of nonobstructive CAD, CFR, myocardial 
perfusion reserve index, and PET in these patients? How 
often does INOCA/CMD progress to HF with preserved 
ejection fraction, and what is the mechanistic pathway? 
Are there novel provocative tests for earlier diagnosis 
and treatment of INOCA? The questions are numerous, 
Table 6. Treatment of Subjects With Angina, 
Evidence of Myocardial Ischemia, and No Obstructive 
Coronary Artery Disease
CMD
 Abnormal endothelial function
  ACE-Is
  Statins
  
l-arginine supplementation
  Aerobic exercise
  Enhanced external counterpulsation
 Abnormal nonendothelial function
  β-Blockers/α-blockers
  Nitrates
 Antianginal
  Ranolazine
  Ivabradine
  Xanthine derivatives
Abnormal smooth muscle function (Prinzmetal angina)
 Calcium channel blockers
 Nitrates
Abnormal cardiac nociception
 Low-dose tricyclic medication
 Spinal cord stimulation
 Cognitive behavioral therapy
ACE-I indicates angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; and CMD, 
coronary microvascular dysfunction.
Reproduced from Mehta and Bairey Merz110 with permission from the 
publisher. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1085
but they need to be addressed if we are to make prog-
ress in understanding and managing this common syn-
drome that is increasing in prevalence and costs.
RESEARCH AGENDA FOR THE NEXT DECADE
The following recommendations address 3 overarching 
goals: to formulate phenotypic classification of patients 
with INOCA based on clinical presentation, pathophysio-
logical mechanisms, and prognosis; to develop diagnos-
tic algorithms based on this classification system; and to 
develop management approaches to reduce or prevent 
symptoms and to modify risk for adverse outcomes.
1. Design adequately powered, population-based 
natural history studies/registries of patients with 
INOCA using consecutive-case cohorts from the 
large numbers of patients undergoing stress test-
ing and coronary angiography with the definition 
for INOCA proposed above. Specific attention 
should be directed to the detection and quantifica-
tion of nonobstructive atherosclerosis using inva-
sive coronary angiography, coronary computed 
tomographic angiography, and other modalities. 
Within these studies, obtain comprehensive clini-
cal (including detailed symptom tools such as the 
Seattle Angina Questionnaire, the Kansas Heart 
Failure Questionnaire, and other standardized 
quality-of-life measures) and biological information 
(such as functional capacity, left ventricular func-
tion, and filling pressures), including cells, tissue, 
and body fluids, when feasible. Collect outcomes 
data and develop rank-ordered adverse outcomes 
metrics (angina exacerbation and hospitalization, 
HF with preserved ejection fraction hospitalization, 
MI, cardiac death) in patients with INOCA.
2. Develop markers as risk reporters among high-
risk patients with INOCA that include clinical 
and advanced technology variables (eg, pro-
teomic, gene expression, cell-based, exosomes, 
miRNAs). Validate them in clinical settings and 
develop informatics platforms for prediction mod-
eling that may require monitoring specific biologi-
cal “signatures” periodically to discern which are 
perturbed before a clinical event (eg, angina, HF 
Figure 4. Ischemia with no  
obstructive CAD (INOCA). 
ACEi indicates angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor; ASA, aspirin; CAD, 
coronary artery disease; CMD, 
coronary microvascular dysfunction; 
HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction; IHD, 
ischemic heart disease; MACE, major 
adverse cardiac event; MRI, magnetic 
resonance imaging; Rx, prescription; 
and PET, positron emission tomog-
raphy.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1086
hospitalization) and will be useful for predicting 
risk and directing new therapies. This should 
include, but not be limited to, new methods for 
predictive modeling using multidimensional data 
sets. For example, new scores could be devel-
oped and validated from coronary or computed 
tomographic angiography and other sources to 
estimate near-term risk that also include clinical 
and behavioral variables, existing biomarkers, 
genetic, ’omic, and imaging markers. The scoring 
system should allow the addition of new variables 
when they become available. It would be used as 
a targeted screening tool for patients deemed to 
be at intermediate or higher CVD risk by tradi-
tional risk scores to determine who would ben-
efit from more intensive testing, monitoring, and 
therapeutic interventions. Use this information to 
better understand underlying pathophysiological 
mechanisms of INOCA, including CMD. Discover 
reporters for these mechanisms to investigate 
environmental and biological determinants that 
may account for individual differences in vasomo-
tor function, plaque microdisruption, enhanced 
thrombus formation, sympathetic nervous sys-
tem activation, and other potential triggering 
mechanisms for ACS.
3. Conduct adequately powered clinical trials, using 
standardized INOCA and CMD definitions, on risk 
outcomes with existing strategies effective in ath-
erosclerotic CVD such as aspirin, statins, ACE-Is, 
and lifestyle modification. Conduct exploratory tri-
als using novel interventions based on new phe-
notypic and mechanistic understanding on risk 
outcomes.
4. Construct evidence-based diagnostic and thera-
peutic guidelines for INOCA. Develop physician 
education and fellowship training programs to 
enhance the understanding of this syndrome and 
to encourage the use of novel risk assessment 
and management strategies. Develop programs 
to understand and overcome barriers to clinical 
implementation of these guidelines.
CONCLUSIONS
The prevalence of nonobstructive CAD among clinically 
ordered coronary angiograms conducted for evidence 
of suspected myocardial ischemia (INOCA) is increas-
ing.1–4 A subgroup of these patients has CMD, an el-
evated risk for a cardiovascular event (including ACS 
and repeat cardiovascular procedures), and higher risk 
for the development of HF hospitalization. At present, 
there is no uniform, comprehensive diagnostic strategy 
or algorithm for risk stratification for these patients; 
however, invasive and noninvasive CFR testing can be 
useful. Although small trials have suggested benefit from 
ACE-Is and statins, there is a lack of appropriately de-
signed clinical outcome trials to inform evidence-based 
therapeutic strategies. Next steps needed to address 
knowledge gaps include evidence-based approaches to 
the definition, diagnostic evaluation, risk stratification, 
and management of patients with INOCA, including large 
outcome clinical trials. This summary of our current un-
derstanding of INOCA (Figure 4) supports the need for 
a research agenda for the next decade to facilitate the 
development of evidence-based risk assessment tools 
and effective therapies for this rapidly growing patient 
population.
APPENDIX
Working Group Members
Co-Chairs
C. Noel Bairey Merz, MD, Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute; 
Carl J. Pepine, MD, University of Florida School of 
Medicine; Mary Norine Walsh, MD, St Vincent Heart; 
Jerome L. Fleg, MD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute.
Members
Paolo G. Camici, MD, Università Vita Salute San Raf-
faele; William M. Chilian, PhD, Northeast Ohio Medical 
University; Janine Austin Clayton, MD, National Institutes 
of Health; Lawton S. Cooper, MD, National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute; Filippo Crea, MD, Università Cat-
tolica del Sacro Cuore; Marcelo Di Carli, MD, Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital; Pamela S. Douglas, MD, Duke 
University School of Medicine; Zorina S. Galis, PhD, Na-
tional Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Paul Gurbel, MD, 
Inova Heart and Vascular Institute; Eileen M. Handberg, 
PhD, University of Florida School of Medicine; Ahmed 
Hasan, MD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 
Joseph A. Hill, MD, PhD, University of Texas Southwest-
ern Medical Center; Judith S. Hochman, MD, New York 
University School of Medicine; Erin Iturriaga, BS, MSN, 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Ruth Kirby, BS, 
RN, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Glenn N. 
Levine, MD, Baylor College of Medicine; Peter Libby, MD, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Joao Lima, MD, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine; Puja Mehta, MD, 
Emory University School of Medicine; Patrice Desvigne-
Nickens, MD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 
Michelle Olive, PhD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute; Gail D. Pearson, MD, National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute; Arshed A. Quyyumi, MD, Emory 
University School of Medicine; Harmony Reynolds, MD, 
New York University Langone Medical Center; British 
Robinson, MA, Women’s Heart Alliance; George Sopko, 
MD, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Viviany 
Taqueti, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Janet Wei, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1087
MD, Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute; Nanette Wenger, MD, 
Emory University School of Medicine
SOURCES OF FUNDING
This work was supported by contracts from the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institutes, Nos. N01-HV-68161, N01-HV-68162, 
N01-HV-68163, N01-HV-68164, RO1-and HL-073412-01, and 
grants U01-64829, U01-HL649141, U01-HL649241, and UL1-
TR001427; grants from the Gustavus and Louis Pfeiffer Re-
search Foundation, Danville, NJ, the Women’s Guild of Cedars-
Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, the Ladies Hospital Aid 
Society of Western Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, PA, and QMED, 
Inc, Laurence Harbor, NJ; the Edythe L. Broad Endowment; 
the Barbra Streisand Women’s Cardiovascular Research and 
Education Program; the Linda Joy Pollin Women’s Heart Health 
Program; the Constance Austin Fellowship Endowment, Cedars-
Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles; the Erika Glazer Women’s 
Heart Health Project, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California; and the American College of Cardiology.
DISCLOSURES
Dr Bairey Merz reports receiving consulting monies from Gil-
ead, Medscape, and Research Triangle Institute International 
and research grants from the National Institutes of Health. Dr. 
Bairey Merz also reports receiving payment for lectures from 
Beaumont 7th Annual Heart Disease, C2, European Horizon 
2020, Florida Hospital, 5th Annual Flagstaff Cardiology Sym-
posium, Gilead, INOVA, Korean Cardiology Society, Medscape, 
PCP Symposium–Santa Rosa, Practice Point Communications, 
Pri-Med, Valley Health Grand Rounds, VBWG, University of Colo-
rado, University of Utah, Washington University Grand Rounds, 
and WomenHeart. Dr Pepine has received unrestricted educa-
tional grants to the University of Florida for the Vascular Biol-
ogy Working Group—Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer Healthcare, 
Boehringer Ingleheim, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead Sciences, Pfizer, 
and United Therapeutics; grant support from Bayer Healthcare 
(FINESSE HF), Baxter Healthcare (CMI-RENEW), Capricor (ALL-
STAR), Cytori Therapeutics (ATHENA and ATHENA Ancillary), 
Florida Health Equity Research Institute (HERI), Gilead (RWISE), 
inVentive Health Clinical LLC (TEVA), and Sanofi-Aventis (ODYS-
SEY); and consulting fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer 
HealthCare, Foundation for the Accreditation of Cellular Thera-
py, Gilead, Merck, and SLACK Inc. Drs Walsh and Fleg report 
no conflicts.
The views expressed in this document are the authors’ and 
do not necessarily reflect those of the National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, American 
College of Cardiology Foundation, American Heart Association, 
or European Society of Cardiology.
AFFILIATIONS
From Barbra Streisand Women’s Heart Center, Cedars-Sinai 
Heart Institute, Los Angeles, CA (C.N.B.M.); Division of Cardiol-
ogy, University of Florida, Gainesville (C.J.P.); St. Vincent Heart 
Transplant, Indianapolis, IN (M.N.W.); and National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD (J.L.F.).
FOOTNOTES
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
REFERENCES
 1. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, Mark DB, Al-Khalidi HR, Cava-
naugh B, Cole J, Dolor RJ, Fordyce CB, Huang M, Khan MA, Kosin-
ski AS, Krucoff MW, Malhotra V, Picard MH, Udelson JE, Velazquez 
EJ, Yow E, Cooper LS, Lee KL; PROMISE Investigators. Outcomes 
of anatomical versus functional testing for coronary artery dis-
ease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1291–1300. doi: 10.1056/NEJ-
Moa1415516.
 2. Jespersen L, Hvelplund A, Abildstrøm SZ, Pedersen F, Galatius 
S, Madsen JK, Jørgensen E, Kelbæk H, Prescott E. Stable angina 
pectoris with no obstructive coronary artery disease is associated 
with increased risks of major adverse cardiovascular events. Eur 
Heart J. 2012;33:734–744. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr331.
 3. Maddox TM, Stanislawski MA, Grunwald GK, Bradley SM, Ho PM, 
Tsai TT, Patel MR, Sandhu A, Valle J, Magid DJ, Leon B, Bhatt DL, 
Fihn SD, Rumsfeld JS. Nonobstructive coronary artery disease 
and risk of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2014;312:1754–1763. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.14681.
 4. Pepine CJ, Ferdinand KC, Shaw LJ, Light-McGroary KA, Shah RU, 
Gulati M, Duvernoy C, Walsh MN, Bairey Merz CN; ACC CVD in 
Women Committee. Emergence of nonobstructive coronary artery 
disease: a woman’s problem and need for change in definition 
on angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1918–1933. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.08.876.
 5. Ouldzein H, Elbaz M, Roncalli J, Cagnac R, Carrié D, Puel J, Alibelli-
Chemarin MJ. Plaque rupture and morphological characteristics 
of the culprit lesion in acute coronary syndromes without sig-
nificant angiographic lesion: analysis by intravascular ultrasound. 
Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris). 2012;61:20–26. doi: 10.1016/j.an-
card.2011.07.011.
 6. Reynolds HR, Srichai MB, Iqbal SN, Slater JN, Mancini GB, Feit 
F, Pena-Sing I, Axel L, Attubato MJ, Yatskar L, Kalhorn RT, Wood 
DA, Lobach IV, Hochman JS. Mechanisms of myocardial infarction 
in women without angiographically obstructive coronary artery 
disease. Circulation. 2011;124:1414–1425. doi: 10.1161/CIR-
CULATIONAHA.111.026542.
 7. Agewall S, Beltrame JF, Reynolds HR, Niessner A, Rosano G, Ca-
forio AL, De Caterina R, Zimarino M, Roffi M, Kjeldsen K, Atar 
D, Kaski JC, Sechtem U, Tornvall P; WG on Cardiovascular Phar-
macotherapy. ESC working group position paper on myocardial 
infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries. Eur Heart J. 
2017;38:143–153. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw149.
 8. Bairey Merz CN, Shaw LJ, Reis SE, Bittner V, Kelsey SF, Olson M, 
Johnson BD, Pepine CJ, Mankad S, Sharaf BL, Rogers WJ, Pohost 
GM, Lerman A, Quyyumi AA, Sopko G; WISE Investigators. Insights 
from the NHLBI-sponsored Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evalua-
tion (WISE) Study, part II: gender differences in presentation, di-
agnosis, and outcome with regard to gender-based pathophysi-
ology of atherosclerosis and macrovascular and microvascular 
coronary disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47(suppl):S21–S29. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.12.084.
 9. Shaw LJ, Shaw RE, Merz CN, Brindis RG, Klein LW, Nallamothu B, 
Douglas PS, Krone RJ, McKay CR, Block PC, Hewitt K, Weintraub 
WS, Peterson ED. Impact of ethnicity and gender differences on 
angiographic coronary artery disease prevalence and in-hospital 
mortality in the American College of Cardiology-National Cardio-
vascular Data Registry. Circulation. 2008;117:1787–1801.
 
10. Gulati M, Cooper-DeHoff RM, McClure C, Johnson BD, Shaw LJ, 
Handberg EM, Zineh I, Kelsey SF, Arnsdorf MF, Black HR, Pepine 
CJ, Merz CN. Adverse cardiovascular outcomes in women with 
nonobstructive coronary artery disease: a report from the Wom-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1088
en’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation Study and the St James Wom-
en Take Heart Project. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:843–850. doi: 
10.1001/archinternmed.2009.50.
 
11. Jespersen L, Abildstrom SZ, Hvelplund A, Madsen JK, Galatius S, 
Pedersen F, Hojberg S, Prescott E. Burden of hospital admission 
and repeat angiography in angina pectoris patients with and with-
out coronary artery disease: a registry-based cohort study. PLoS 
One. 2014;9:e93170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093170.
 
12. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cush-
man M, Das SR, de Ferranti S, Despres JP, Fullerton HJ, Howard 
VJ, Huffman MD, Isasi CR, Jimenez MC, Judd SE, Kissela BM, 
Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu S, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, McGuire 
DK, Mohler ER, 3rd, Moy CS, Muntner P, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, 
Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, 
Rodriguez CJ, Rosamond W, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan 
TN, Virani SS, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB. Heart disease and 
stroke statistics–2016 update: a report from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2016;133:e38–e360. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000350.
 
13. Shaw LJ, Bairey Merz CN, Pepine CJ, Reis SE, Bittner V, Kelsey 
SF, Olson M, Johnson BD, Mankad S, Sharaf BL, Rogers WJ, Wes-
sel TR, Arant CB, Pohost GM, Lerman A, Quyyumi AA, Sopko G; 
WISE Investigators. Insights from the NHLBI-sponsored Women’s 
Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) Study, part I: gender differ-
ences in traditional and novel risk factors, symptom evaluation, 
and gender-optimized diagnostic strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2006;47(suppl):S4–S20. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.01.072.
 
14. Sullivan AK, Holdright DR, Wright CA, Sparrow JL, Cunningham D, 
Fox KM. Chest pain in women: clinical, investigative, and prognos-
tic features. BMJ. 1994;308:883–886.
 
15. Eastwood JA, Johnson BD, Rutledge T, Bittner V, Whittaker KS, 
Krantz DS, Cornell CE, Eteiba W, Handberg E, Vido D, Bairey Merz 
CN. Anginal symptoms, coronary artery disease, and adverse out-
comes in black and white women: the NHLBI-sponsored Women’s 
Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) Study. J Womens Health 
(Larchmt). 2013;22:724–732. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2012.4031.
 
16. Kothawade K, Bairey Merz CN. Microvascular coronary dysfunc-
tion in women: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management. 
Curr Probl Cardiol. 2011;36:291–318. doi: 10.1016/j.cpcar-
diol.2011.05.002.
 
17. Sharaf B, Wood T, Shaw L, Johnson BD, Kelsey S, Anderson 
RD, Pepine CJ, Bairey Merz CN. Adverse outcomes among 
women presenting with signs and symptoms of ischemia and 
no obstructive coronary artery disease: findings from the Na-
tional Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute-sponsored Women’s 
Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) angiographic core 
laboratory. Am Heart J. 2013;166:134–141. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2013.04.002.
 
18. Sedlak TL, Lee M, Izadnegahdar M, Merz CN, Gao M, Humphries 
KH. Sex differences in clinical outcomes in patients with stable 
angina and no obstructive coronary artery disease. Am Heart J. 
2013;166:38–44. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2013.03.015.
 
19. Min JK, Dunning A, Lin FY, Achenbach S, Al-Mallah M, Budoff MJ, 
Cademartiri F, Callister TQ, Chang HJ, Cheng V, Chinnaiyan K, 
Chow BJ, Delago A, Hadamitzky M, Hausleiter J, Kaufmann P, Maf-
fei E, Raff G, Shaw LJ, Villines T, Berman DS; CONFIRM Investiga-
tors. Age- and sex-related differences in all-cause mortality risk 
based on coronary computed tomography angiography findings: 
results from the International Multicenter CONFIRM (Coronary CT 
Angiography Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: An International 
Multicenter Registry) of 23,854 patients without known coro-
nary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:849–860. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2011.02.074.
 
20. Johnson BD, Shaw LJ, Pepine CJ, Reis SE, Kelsey SF, Sopko 
G, Rogers WJ, Mankad S, Sharaf BL, Bittner V, Bairey Merz CN. 
Persistent chest pain predicts cardiovascular events in women 
without obstructive coronary artery disease: results from the 
NIH-NHLBI-sponsored Women’s Ischaemia Syndrome Evaluation 
(WISE) Study. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:1408–1415. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehl040.
 
21. Leipsic J, Taylor CM, Gransar H, Shaw LJ, Ahmadi A, Thompson 
A, Humphries K, Berman DS, Hausleiter J, Achenbach S, Al-Mallah 
M, Budoff MJ, Cademartiri F, Callister TQ, Chang HJ, Chow BJ, 
Cury RC, Delago AJ, Dunning AL, Feuchtner GM, Hadamitzky M, 
Kaufmann PA, Lin FY, Chinnaiyan KM, Maffei E, Raff GL, Villines 
TC, Gomez MJ, Min JK. Sex-based prognostic implications of non-
obstructive coronary artery disease: results from the international 
multicenter CONFIRM study. Radiology. 2014;273:393–400. doi: 
10.1148/radiol.14140269.
 
22. Lee BK, Lim HS, Fearon WF, Yong AS, Yamada R, Tanaka S, Lee 
DP, Yeung AC, Tremmel JA. Invasive evaluation of patients with 
angina in the absence of obstructive coronary artery disease. 
Circulation. 2015;131:1054–1060. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULA-
TIONAHA.114.012636.
 
23. Pepine CJ. Multiple causes for ischemia without obstructive coro-
nary artery disease: not a short list. Circulation. 2015;131:1044–
1046. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.015553.
 
24. Camici PG, Crea F. Coronary microvascular dysfunction. N Engl J 
Med. 2007;356:830–840. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra061889.
 
25. Ziadi MC, Dekemp RA, Williams KA, Guo A, Chow BJ, Renaud JM, 
Ruddy TD, Sarveswaran N, Tee RE, Beanlands RS. Impaired myo-
cardial flow reserve on rubidium-82 positron emission tomogra-
phy imaging predicts adverse outcomes in patients assessed for 
myocardial ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:740–748. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2011.01.065.
 
26. Murthy VL, Naya M, Foster CR, Hainer J, Gaber M, Di Carli G, 
Blankstein R, Dorbala S, Sitek A, Pencina MJ, Di Carli MF. Im-
proved cardiac risk assessment with noninvasive measures of 
coronary flow reserve. Circulation. 2011;124:2215–2224. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.050427.
 
27. Fukushima K, Javadi MS, Higuchi T, Lautamäki R, Merrill J, Nekolla 
SG, Bengel FM. Prediction of short-term cardiovascular events 
using quantification of global myocardial flow reserve in patients 
referred for clinical 82Rb PET perfusion imaging. J Nucl Med. 
2011;52:726–732. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.110.081828.
 
28. Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, Naya M, Foster CR, 
Hainer J, Dorbala S, Blankstein R, Di Carli MF. Global coronary 
flow reserve is associated with adverse cardiovascular events 
independently of luminal angiographic severity and modifies the 
effect of early revascularization. Circulation. 2015;131:19–27. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011939.
 
29. Murthy VL, Naya M, Foster CR, Gaber M, Hainer J, Klein J, Dor-
bala S, Blankstein R, Di Carli MF. Association between coronary 
vascular dysfunction and cardiac mortality in patients with and 
without diabetes mellitus. Circulation. 2012;126:1858–1868. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.120402.
 
30. Pepine CJ, Anderson RD, Sharaf BL, Reis SE, Smith KM, Handberg 
EM, Johnson BD, Sopko G, Bairey Merz CN. Coronary microvas-
cular reactivity to adenosine predicts adverse outcome in women 
evaluated for suspected ischemia results from the National Heart, 
Lung and Blood Institute WISE (Women’s Ischemia Syndrome 
Evaluation) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:2825–2832. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2010.01.054.
 
31. Balázs E, Pintér KS, Egyed Á, Csanády M, Forster T, Nemes 
A. The independent long-term prognostic value of coronary 
flow velocity reserve in female patients with chest pain and 
negative coronary angiograms (results from the SZEGED 
study). Int J Cardiol. 2011;146:259–261. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.ijcard.2010.10.071.
 
32. Murthy VL, Naya M, Taqueti VR, Foster CR, Gaber M, Hainer J, 
Dorbala S, Blankstein R, Rimoldi O, Camici PG, Di Carli MF. Ef-
fects of sex on coronary microvascular dysfunction and cardiac 
outcomes. Circulation. 2014;129:2518–2527. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.008507.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1089
 
33. Britten MB, Zeiher AM, Schächinger V. Microvascular dysfunction 
in angiographically normal or mildly diseased coronary arteries 
predicts adverse cardiovascular long-term outcome. Coron Artery 
Dis. 2004;15:259–264.
 
34. Schindler TH, Cardenas J, Prior JO, Facta AD, Kreissl MC, Zhang 
XL, Sayre J, Dahlbom M, Licinio J, Schelbert HR. Relationship 
between increasing body weight, insulin resistance, inflam-
mation, adipocytokine leptin, and coronary circulatory func-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1188–1195. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2005.10.062.
 
35. Rigo F, Sicari R, Gherardi S, Djordjevic-Dikic A, Cortigiani L, Picano 
E. Prognostic value of coronary flow reserve in medically treated 
patients with left anterior descending coronary disease with ste-
nosis 51% to 75% in diameter. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:1527–
1531. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.06.060.
 
36. Nemes A, Forster T, Geleijnse ML, Soliman OI, Cate FJ, 
Csanády M. Prognostic role of aortic atherosclerosis and 
coronary flow reserve in patients with suspected coronary ar-
tery disease. Int J Cardiol. 2008;131:45–50. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2007.08.137.
 
37. Herzog BA, Husmann L, Valenta I, Gaemperli O, Siegrist PT, Tay 
FM, Burkhard N, Wyss CA, Kaufmann PA. Long-term prognostic 
value of 13N-ammonia myocardial perfusion positron emission to-
mography added value of coronary flow reserve. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2009;54:150–156. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.02.069.
 
38. Tio RA, Dabeshlim A, Siebelink HM, de Sutter J, Hillege HL, Zee-
bregts CJ, Dierckx RA, van Veldhuisen DJ, Zijlstra F, Slart RH. 
Comparison between the prognostic value of left ventricular func-
tion and myocardial perfusion reserve in patients with ischemic 
heart disease. J Nucl Med. 2009;50:214–219. doi: 10.2967/
jnumed.108.054395.
 
39. Cortigiani L, Rigo F, Gherardi S, Galderisi M, Bovenzi F, Picano 
E, Sicari R. Prognostic effect of coronary flow reserve in women 
versus men with chest pain syndrome and normal dipyridamole 
stress echocardiography. Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:1703–1708. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.08.011.
 
40. Ziadi MC, Dekemp RA, Williams KA, Guo A, Chow BJ, Renaud JM, 
Ruddy TD, Sarveswaran N, Tee RE, Beanlands RS. Impaired myo-
cardial flow reserve on rubidium-82 positron emission tomogra-
phy imaging predicts adverse outcomes in patients assessed for 
myocardial ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:740–748. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2011.01.065.
 
41. Jones E, Eteiba W, Merz NB. Cardiac syndrome X and microvascu-
lar coronary dysfunction. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2012;22:161–
168. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2012.07.014.
 
42. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, Murthy VL, Shah NR, Foster CR, 
Hainer J, Blankstein R, Dorbala S, Di Carli MF. Excess cardiovas-
cular risk in women relative to men referred for coronary angiog-
raphy is associated with severely impaired coronary flow reserve, 
not obstructive disease. Circulation. 2017;135:566–577. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.023266.
 
43. Crea F, Camici PG, Bairey Merz CN. Coronary microvascular 
dysfunction: an update. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1101–1111. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/eht513.
 
44. Moreau P, d’Uscio LV, Lüscher TF. Structure and reactivity of small 
arteries in aging. Cardiovasc Res. 1998;37:247–253.
 
45. Rizzoni D, Palombo C, Porteri E, Muiesan ML, Kozàkovà M, La 
Canna G, Nardi M, Guelfi D, Salvetti M, Morizzo C, Vittone F, Rosei 
EA. Relationships between coronary flow vasodilator capacity and 
small artery remodelling in hypertensive patients. J Hypertens. 
2003;21:625–631. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000052467.40108.a7.
 
46. Smith SM, Huo T, Delia Johnson B, Bittner V, Kelsey SF, Vido 
Thompson D, Noel Bairey Merz C, Pepine CJ, Cooper-Dehoff 
RM. Cardiovascular and mortality risk of apparent resistant hy-
pertension in women with suspected myocardial ischemia: a re-
port from the NHLBI-sponsored WISE Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2014;3:e000660. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000660.
 
47. Sucato V, Evola S, Novo G, Novo S. Diagnosis of coronary micro-
vascualar dysfunction in diabetic patients with cardiac syndrome 
X: comparison by current methods [in Italian]. Recenti Prog Med. 
2013;104:63–68. doi: 10.1701/1241.13706.
 
48. Maseri A, Crea F, Kaski JC, Crake T. Mechanisms of angina pecto-
ris in syndrome X. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;17:499–506.
 
49. Di Carli MF, Janisse J, Grunberger G, Ager J. Role of chronic hyper-
glycemia in the pathogenesis of coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion in diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:1387–1393.
 
50. Kaufmann PA, Gnecchi-Ruscone T, Schäfers KP, Lüscher TF, Cami-
ci PG. Low density lipoprotein cholesterol and coronary micro-
vascular dysfunction in hypercholesterolemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;36:103–109.
 
51. Wessel TR, Arant CB, McGorray SP, Sharaf BL, Reis SE, Kerensky 
RA, von Mering GO, Smith KM, Pauly DF, Handberg EM, Mankad 
S, Olson MB, Johnson BD, Merz CN, Sopko G, Pepine CJ; NHLBI 
Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). Coronary micro-
vascular reactivity is only partially predicted by atherosclerosis 
risk factors or coronary artery disease in women evaluated for 
suspected ischemia: results from the NHLBI Women’s Ischemia 
Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). Clin Cardiol. 2007;30:69–74. doi: 
10.1002/clc.19.
 
52. Recio-Mayoral A, Rimoldi OE, Camici PG, Kaski JC. Inflammation 
and microvascular dysfunction in cardiac syndrome X patients 
without conventional risk factors for coronary artery disease. 
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013;6:660–667. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcmg.2012.12.011.
 
53. Cosín-Sales J, Pizzi C, Brown S, Kaski JC. C-reactive protein, 
clinical presentation, and ischemic activity in patients with 
chest pain and normal coronary angiograms. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2003;41:1468–1474.
 
54. Sakr SA, Abbas TM, Amer MZ, Dawood EM, El-Shahat N, Abdel 
Aal IA, Ramadan MM. Microvascular angina: the possible role of 
inflammation, uric acid, and endothelial dysfunction. Int Heart J. 
2009;50:407–419.
 
55. Ong P, Sivanathan R, Borgulya G, Bizrah M, Iqbal Y, Andoh J, 
Gaze D, Kaski JC. Obesity, inflammation and brachial artery flow-
mediated dilatation: therapeutic targets in patients with micro-
vascular angina (cardiac syndrome X). Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 
2012;26:239–244. doi: 10.1007/s10557-012-6382-4.
 
56. Teragawa H, Fukuda Y, Matsuda K, Ueda K, Higashi Y, Os-
hima T, Yoshizumi M, Chayama K. Relation between C reac-
tive protein concentrations and coronary microvascular en-
dothelial function. Heart. 2004;90:750–754. doi: 10.1136/
hrt.2003.022269.
 
57. Ishimori ML, Martin R, Berman DS, Goykhman P, Shaw LJ, Shufelt 
C, Slomka PJ, Thomson LE, Schapira J, Yang Y, Wallace DJ, Weis-
man MH, Bairey Merz CN. Myocardial ischemia in the absence of 
obstructive coronary artery disease in systemic lupus erythema-
tosus. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4:27–33. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcmg.2010.09.019.
 
58. Hahn VS, Lenihan DJ, Ky B. Cancer therapy-induced cardiotox-
icity: basic mechanisms and potential cardioprotective thera-
pies. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000665. doi: 10.1161/
JAHA.113.000665.
 
59. Recio-Mayoral A, Mason JC, Kaski JC, Rubens MB, Harari OA, 
Camici PG. Chronic inflammation and coronary microvascular 
dysfunction in patients without risk factors for coronary artery 
disease. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:1837–1843. doi: 10.1093/eur-
heartj/ehp205.
 
60. Nichols WW, Denardo SJ, Davidson JB, Huo T, Bairey Merz CN, 
Pepine CJ. Association of aortic stiffness and wave reflections 
with coronary flow reserve in women without obstructive coronary 
artery disease: an ancillary study from the National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute-sponsored Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evalu-
ation (WISE). Am Heart J. 2015;170:1243–1254. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2015.08.019.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1090
 
61. Redheuil A, Yu WC, Wu CO, Mousseaux E, de Cesare A, Yan R, 
Kachenoura N, Bluemke D, Lima JA. Reduced ascending aortic 
strain and distensibility: earliest manifestations of vascular aging 
in humans. Hypertension. 2010;55:319–326. doi: 10.1161/HY-
PERTENSIONAHA.109.141275.
 
62. Libby P, Pasterkamp G. Requiem for the “vulnerable plaque.” 
Eur Heart J. 2015;36:2984–2987. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehv349.
 
63. Vitiello L, Spoletini I, Gorini S, Pontecorvo L, Ferrari D, Ferraro 
E, Stabile E, Caprio M, La Sala A. Microvascular inflammation in 
atherosclerosis. IJC Metab Endocr. 2014;3:1–7.
 
64. Khuddus MA, Pepine CJ, Handberg EM, Bairey Merz CN, Sopko 
G, Bavry AA, Denardo SJ, McGorray SP, Smith KM, Sharaf BL, 
Nicholls SJ, Nissen SE, Anderson RD. An intravascular ultrasound 
analysis in women experiencing chest pain in the absence of ob-
structive coronary artery disease: a substudy from the National 
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute-sponsored Women’s Ischemia Syn-
drome Evaluation (WISE). J Interv Cardiol. 2010;23:511–519. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540-8183.2010.00598.x.
 
65. Davis KB, Chaitman B, Ryan T, Bittner V, Kennedy JW. Compari-
son of 15-year survival for men and women after initial medical 
or surgical treatment for coronary artery disease: a CASS reg-
istry study: Coronary Artery Surgery Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1995;25:1000–1009.
 
66. Fisher LD, Judkins MP, Lesperance J, Cameron A, Swaye P, Ryan 
T, Maynard C, Bourassa M, Kennedy JW, Gosselin A, Kemp H, 
Faxon D, Wexler L, Davis KB. Reproducibility of coronary arte-
riographic reading in the Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS). 
Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1982;8:565–575.
 
67. Kemp HG, Kronmal RA, Vlietstra RE, Frye RL. Seven year sur-
vival of patients with normal or near normal coronary arte-
riograms: a CASS registry study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;7: 
479–483.
 
68. Petersen JW, Johnson BD, Kip KE, Anderson RD, Handberg EM, 
Sharaf B, Mehta PK, Kelsey SF, Merz CN, Pepine CJ. TIMI frame 
count and adverse events in women with no obstructive coronary 
disease: a pilot study from the NHLBI-sponsored Women’s Isch-
emia Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). PLoS One. 2014;9:e96630. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096630.
 
69. Baller D, Notohamiprodjo G, Gleichmann U, Holzinger J, Weise 
R, Lehmann J. Improvement in coronary flow reserve determined 
by positron emission tomography after 6 months of cholesterol-
lowering therapy in patients with early stages of coronary athero-
sclerosis. Circulation. 1999;99:2871–2875.
 
70. Wei J, Nelson MD, Szczepaniak EW, Smith L, Mehta PK, Thomson 
LE, Berman DS, Li D, Bairey Merz CN, Szczepaniak LS. Myocardi-
al steatosis as a possible mechanistic link between diastolic dys-
function and coronary microvascular dysfunction in women. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2016;310:H14–H19. doi: 10.1152/
ajpheart.00612.2015.
 
71. Colom B, Oliver J, Garcia-Palmer FJ. Sexual dimorphism in the 
alterations of cardiac muscle mitochondrial bioenergetics as-
sociated to the ageing process. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2015;70:1360–1369. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glu014.
 
72. Eroglu S, Sade LE, Bozbas H, Haberal A, Ozbicer S, Demir O, 
Muderrisoglu H. Association of serum adiponectin levels and coro-
nary flow reserve in women with normal coronary angiography. 
Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2009;16:290–296. doi: 10.1097/
HJR.0b013e32831f1b8a.
 
73. Regensteiner JG, Golden S, Huebschmann AG, Barrett-Connor E, 
Chang AY, Chyun D, Fox CS, Kim C, Mehta N, Reckelhoff JF, Re-
usch JE, Rexrode KM, Sumner AE, Welty FK, Wenger NK, Anton B. 
Sex differences in the cardiovascular consequences of diabetes 
mellitus: a scientific statement from the American Heart Associa-
tion. Circulation. 2015;132:2424–2447.
 
74. Di Carli MF, Charytan D, McMahon GT, Ganz P, Dorbala S, 
Schelbert HR. Coronary circulatory function in patients with the 
metabolic syndrome. J Nucl Med. 2011;52:1369–1377. doi: 
10.2967/jnumed.110.082883.
 
75. Nahser PJ Jr, Brown RE, Oskarsson H, Winniford MD, Rossen 
JD. Maximal coronary flow reserve and metabolic coronary 
vasodilation in patients with diabetes mellitus. Circulation. 
1995;91:635–640.
 
76. Jacobson AF, Senior R, Cerqueira MD, Wong ND, Thomas GS, 
Lopez VA, Agostini D, Weiland F, Chandna H, Narula J; ADMIRE-HF 
Investigators. Myocardial iodine-123 meta-iodobenzylguanidine 
imaging and cardiac events in heart failure: results of the prospec-
tive ADMIRE-HF (AdreView Myocardial Imaging for Risk Evaluation 
in Heart Failure) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:2212–2221. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.01.014.
 
77. Lanza GA, Giordano A, Pristipino C, Calcagni ML, Meduri G, Trani 
C, Franceschini R, Crea F, Troncone L, Maseri A. Abnormal cardiac 
adrenergic nerve function in patients with syndrome X detected 
by [123I]metaiodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy. Circula-
tion. 1997;96:821–826.
 
78. Mehta PK, Nelson M, Thomson L, Friedman J, Hayes S, Hermel 
D, Slomka P, Swift A, Wei J, Cook-Wiens G, Sayari S, Irwin MR, 
Krantz D, Travin M, Berman D and Bairey Merz CN. Abnormal car-
diac sympathetic activity detected by 123-I-meta-iodobenzylgua-
nidine imaging in women with signs and symptoms of ischemia 
and no obstructive coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2016;67(suppl):1619.
 
79. Klabunde RE. Cardiovascular Physiology Concepts. 1st ed. Phila-
delphia, PA: Lippincott; 2005.
 
80. Muller MD, Gao Z, McQuillan PM, Leuenberger UA, Sinoway LI. Cor-
onary responses to cold air inhalation following afferent and effer-
ent blockade. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014;307:H228–
H235. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00174.2014.
 
81. Di Carli MF, Tobes MC, Mangner T, Levine AB, Muzik O, Chak-
roborty P, Levine TB. Effects of cardiac sympathetic innervation 
on coronary blood flow. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1208–1215. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199704243361703.
 
82. Harris KF, Matthews KA. Interactions between autonomic ner-
vous system activity and endothelial function: a model for 
the development of cardiovascular disease. Psychosom Med. 
2004;66:153–164.
 
83. Dakak N, Quyyumi AA, Eisenhofer G, Goldstein DS, Cannon RO 
3rd. Sympathetically mediated effects of mental stress on the 
cardiac microcirculation of patients with coronary artery disease. 
Am J Cardiol. 1995;76:125–130.
 
84. Rimoldi O, Spyrou N, Foale R, Hackett DR, Gregorini L, Camici PG. 
Limitation of coronary reserve after successful angioplasty is pre-
vented by oral pretreatment with an alpha1-adrenergic antagonist. 
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2000;36:310–315.
 
85. Lanza GA, Andreotti F, Sestito A, Sciahbasi A, Crea F, Maseri 
A. Platelet aggregability in cardiac syndrome X. Eur Heart J. 
2001;22:1924–1930. doi: 10.1053/euhj.2001.2624.
 
86. Lanza GA, Aurigemma C, Fattorossi A, Scambia G, Crea F. 
Changes in platelet receptor expression and leukocyte-platelet 
aggregate formation following exercise in Cardiac Syndrome X. 
J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:1623–1625. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-
7836.2006.02003.x.
 
87. Aurigemma C, Scalone G, Fattorossi A, Sestito A, Lanza GA, 
Crea F. Adenosine inhibition of adenosine diphosphate and 
thrombin-induced monocyte-platelet aggregates in cardiac syn-
drome X. Thromb Res. 2009;124:116–120. doi: 10.1016/j.
thromres.2008.12.041.
 
88. Ong P, Athanasiadis A, Borgulya G, Vokshi I, Bastiaenen R, Kubik 
S, Hill S, Schäufele T, Mahrholdt H, Kaski JC, Sechtem U. Clinical 
usefulness, angiographic characteristics, and safety evaluation of 
intracoronary acetylcholine provocation testing among 921 con-
secutive white patients with unobstructed coronary arteries. Circu-
lation. 2014;129:1723–1730. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
113.004096.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Ischemia and No Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534 
March 14, 2017
1091
 
89. Reriani M, Sara JD, Flammer AJ, Gulati R, Li J, Rihal C, Len-
non R, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Coronary endothelial func-
tion testing provides superior discrimination compared with 
standard clinical risk scoring in prediction of cardiovascular 
events. Coron Artery Dis. 2016;27:213–220. doi: 10.1097/
MCA.0000000000000347.
 
90. Wei J, Mehta PK, Johnson BD, Samuels B, Kar S, Anderson 
RD, Azarbal B, Petersen J, Sharaf B, Handberg E, Shufelt C, 
Kothawade K, Sopko G, Lerman A, Shaw L, Kelsey SF, Pepine 
CJ, Merz CN. Safety of coronary reactivity testing in women 
with no obstructive coronary artery disease: results from the 
NHLBI-sponsored WISE (Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evalu-
ation) study. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;5:646–653. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcin.2012.01.023.
 
91. Taqueti VR, Everett BM, Murthy VL, Gaber M, Foster CR, Hainer 
J, Blankstein R, Dorbala S, Di Carli MF. Interaction of impaired 
coronary flow reserve and cardiomyocyte injury on adverse car-
diovascular outcomes in patients without overt coronary artery 
disease. Circulation. 2015;131:528–535. doi: 10.1161/CIRCU-
LATIONAHA.114.009716.
 
92. Mygind ND, Michelsen MM, Pena A, Frestad D, Dose N, Aziz A, 
Faber R, Høst N, Gustafsson I, Hansen PR, Hansen HS, Bairey Merz 
CN, Kastrup J, Prescott E. Coronary microvascular function and 
cardiovascular risk factors in women with angina pectoris and no 
obstructive coronary artery disease: the iPOWER Study. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2016;5:e003064. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.115.003064.
 
93. Lanza GA, Buffon A, Sestito A, Natale L, Sgueglia GA, Galiuto L, 
Infusino F, Mariani L, Centola A, Crea F. Relation between stress-
induced myocardial perfusion defects on cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance and coronary microvascular dysfunction in patients 
with cardiac syndrome X. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:466–472. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.08.060.
 
94. Panting JR, Gatehouse PD, Yang GZ, Grothues F, Firmin DN, Col-
lins P, Pennell DJ. Abnormal subendocardial perfusion in cardiac 
syndrome X detected by cardiovascular magnetic resonance 
imaging. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1948–1953. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa012369.
 
95. Thomson LE, Wei J, Agarwal M, Haft-Baradaran A, Shufelt C, Meh-
ta PK, Gill EB, Johnson BD, Kenkre T, Handberg EM, Li D, Sharif 
B, Berman DS, Petersen JW, Pepine CJ and Bairey Merz CN. Car-
diac magnetic resonance myocardial perfusion reserve index is 
reduced in women with coronary microvascular dysfunction. A 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute-sponsored study from 
the Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation. Circ Cardiovasc Im-
aging. 2015;8:e002481.
 
96. Ballantyne CM, Raichlen JS, Nicholls SJ, Erbel R, Tardif JC, Brener 
SJ, Cain VA, Nissen SE; ASTEROID Investigators. Effect of rosu-
vastatin therapy on coronary artery stenoses assessed by quan-
titative coronary angiography: a study to evaluate the effect of 
rosuvastatin on intravascular ultrasound-derived coronary ather-
oma burden. Circulation. 2008;117:2458–2466. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.108.773747.
 
97. Dupuis J, Tardif JC, Cernacek P, Théroux P. Cholesterol reduc-
tion rapidly improves endothelial function after acute coronary 
syndromes: the RECIFE (Reduction of Cholesterol in Ischemia and 
Function of the Endothelium) trial. Circulation. 1999;99:3227–
3233.
 
98. Ridker PM, MacFadyen J, Libby P, Glynn RJ. Relation of baseline 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level to cardiovascular out-
comes with rosuvastatin in the Justification for Use of statins 
in Prevention: an Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JU-
PITER). Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:204–209. doi: 10.1016/j.amj-
card.2010.03.018.
 
99. Zhang X, Li Q, Zhao J, Li X, Sun X, Yang H, Wu Z, Yang J. Effects 
of combination of statin and calcium channel blocker in patients 
with cardiac syndrome X. Coron Artery Dis. 2014;25:40–44. doi: 
10.1097/MCA.0000000000000054.
 
100. Caliskan M, Erdogan D, Gullu H, Topcu S, Ciftci O, Yildirir A, 
Muderrisoglu H. Effects of atorvastatin on coronary flow reserve 
in patients with slow coronary flow. Clin Cardiol. 2007;30:475–
479. doi: 10.1002/clc.20140.
 
101. Eshtehardi P, McDaniel MC, Dhawan SS, Binongo JN, Krishnan 
SK, Golub L, Corban MT, Raggi P, Quyyumi AA, Samady H. Effect 
of intensive atorvastatin therapy on coronary atherosclerosis pro-
gression, composition, arterial remodeling, and microvascular 
function. J Invasive Cardiol. 2012;24:522–529.
 
102. Pizzi C, Manfrini O, Fontana F, Bugiardini R. Angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 
coenzyme A reductase in cardiac syndrome X: role of super-
oxide dismutase activity. Circulation. 2004;109:53–58. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000100722.34034.E4.
 
103. Pauly DF, Johnson BD, Anderson RD, Handberg EM, Smith KM, 
Cooper-DeHoff RM, Sopko G, Sharaf BM, Kelsey SF, Merz CN, 
Pepine CJ. In women with symptoms of cardiac ischemia, nonob-
structive coronary arteries, and microvascular dysfunction, angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibition is associated with improved 
microvascular function: a double-blind randomized study from 
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Women’s Ischemia 
Syndrome Evaluation (WISE). Am Heart J. 2011;162:678–684. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2011.07.011.
 
104. Schwartzkopff B, Brehm M, Mundhenke M, Strauer BE. Repair of 
coronary arterioles after treatment with perindopril in hyperten-
sive heart disease. Hypertension. 2000;36:220–225.
 
105. Bavry AA, Handberg EM, Huo T, Lerman A, Quyyumi AA, Shufelt 
C, Sharaf B, Merz CN, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Sopko G, Pepine CJ. 
Aldosterone inhibition and coronary endothelial function in women 
without obstructive coronary artery disease: an ancillary study of 
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute-sponsored Women’s 
Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation. Am Heart J. 2014;167:826–
832. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2014.01.017.
 
106. Garg R, Rao AD, Baimas-George M, Hurwitz S, Foster C, 
Shah RV, Jerosch-Herold M, Kwong RY, Di Carli MF, Adler GK. 
Mineralocorticoid receptor blockade improves coronary micro-
vascular function in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 
2015;64:236–242. doi: 10.2337/db14-0670.
 
107. Oestreicher EM, Martinez-Vasquez D, Stone JR, Jonasson L, 
Roubsanthisuk W, Mukasa K, Adler GK. Aldosterone and not 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 is a critical mediator of early 
angiotensin II/NG-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester-induced myocardial 
injury. Circulation. 2003;108:2517–2523. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000097000.51723.6F.
 
108. Farquharson CA, Struthers AD. Aldosterone induces acute endo-
thelial dysfunction in vivo in humans: evidence for an aldosterone-
induced vasculopathy. Clin Sci (Lond). 2002;103:425–431. doi: 
10.1042/.
 
109. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, Bittl JA, Byrne JG, 
Fletcher BJ, Fonarow GC, Lange RA, Levine GN, Maddox 
TM, Naidu SS, Ohman EM, Smith PK. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the di-
agnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic 
heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, 
and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive 
Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2014;130:1749–1767. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000095.
 
110. Mehta PK, Bairey Merz, CN. Treatment of angina in subjects with 
evidence of myocardial ischemia and no obstructive coronary ar-
tery disease. In: Braunwald’s Heart Disease. 9th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Elsevier; 2011.
 
111. Kemp HG Jr, Vokonas PS, Cohn PF, Gorlin R. The anginal syn-
drome associated with normal coronary arteriograms: report of 
a six year experience. Am J Med. 1973;54:735–742.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Bairey Merz et al
March 14, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024534
1092
 
112. Marinescu MA, Löffler AI, Ouellette M, Smith L, Kramer CM, 
Bourque JM. Coronary microvascular dysfunction, microvascu-
lar angina, and treatment strategies. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2015;8:210–220. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.12.008.
 
113. Mizuno R, Fujimoto S, Saito Y, Okamoto Y. Optimal antihyperten-
sive level for improvement of coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion: the lower, the better? Hypertension. 2012;60:326–332. 
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.189209.
 
114. Jadhav S, Ferrell W, Greer IA, Petrie JR, Cobbe SM, Sattar N. 
Effects of metformin on microvascular function and exercise 
tolerance in women with angina and normal coronary arteries: 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2006;48:956–963. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.04.088.
 
115. Lim TK, Choy AJ, Khan F, Belch JJ, Struthers AD, Lang CC. 
Therapeutic development in cardiac syndrome X: a need to target 
the underlying pathophysiology. Cardiovasc Ther. 2009;27:49–
58. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5922.2008.00070.x.
 
116. Anand SS, Islam S, Rosengren A, Franzosi MG, Steyn K, Yusufali 
AH, Keltai M, Diaz R, Rangarajan S, Yusuf S; INTERHEART 
Investigators. Risk factors for myocardial infarction in women 
and men: insights from the INTERHEART study. Eur Heart J. 
2008;29:932–940. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehn018.
 
117. Stampfer MJ, Hu FB, Manson JE, Rimm EB, Willett WC. Primary 
prevention of coronary heart disease in women through diet 
and lifestyle. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:16–22. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM200007063430103.
 
118. Parikh P, McDaniel MC, Ashen MD, Miller JI, Sorrentino M, Chan V, 
Blumenthal RS, Sperling LS. Diets and cardiovascular disease: an 
evidence-based assessment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1379–
1387. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.11.068.
 
119. Lanza GA, Colonna G, Pasceri V, Maseri A. Atenolol versus amlo-
dipine versus isosorbide-5-mononitrate on anginal symptoms in 
syndrome X. Am J Cardiol. 1999;84:854–866, A8.
 
120. Leonardo F, Fragasso G, Rossetti E, Dabrowski P, Pagnotta P, 
Rosano GM, Chierchia SL. Comparison of trimetazidine with at-
enolol in patients with syndrome X: effects on diastolic function 
and exercise tolerance. Cardiologia. 1999;44:1065–1069.
 
121. Matsuda Y, Akita H, Terashima M, Shiga N, Kanazawa K, 
Yokoyama M. Carvedilol improves endothelium-dependent 
dilatation in patients with coronary artery disease. Am Heart J. 
2000;140:753–759. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2000.110093.
 
122. Sütsch G, Oechslin E, Mayer I, Hess OM. Effect of diltiazem on 
coronary flow reserve in patients with microvascular angina. Int J 
Cardiol. 1995;52:135–143.
 
123. Cannon RO 3rd, Watson RM, Rosing DR, Epstein SE. Efficacy 
of calcium channel blocker therapy for angina pectoris resulting 
from small-vessel coronary artery disease and abnormal vasodi-
lator reserve. Am J Cardiol. 1985;56:242–246.
 
124. Hasenfuss G, Maier LS. Mechanism of action of the new anti-
ischemia drug ranolazine. Clin Res Cardiol. 2008;97:222–226. 
doi: 10.1007/s00392-007-0612-y.
 
125. Mehta PK, Goykhman P, Thomson LE, Shufelt C, Wei J, Yang 
Y, Gill E, Minissian M, Shaw LJ, Slomka PJ, Slivka M, Berman 
DS, Bairey Merz CN. Ranolazine improves angina in women with 
evidence of myocardial ischemia but no obstructive coronary ar-
tery disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4:514–522. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.03.007.
 
126. Villano A, Di Franco A, Nerla R, Sestito A, Tarzia P, Lamendola 
P, Di Monaco A, Sarullo FM, Lanza GA, Crea F. Effects of iv-
abradine and ranolazine in patients with microvascular an-
gina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:8–13. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2013.02.045.
 
127. Bairey Merz CN, Handberg EM, Shufelt CL, Mehta PK, Minissian 
MB, Wei J, Thomson LE, Berman DS, Shaw LJ, Petersen JW, 
Brown GH, Anderson RD, Shuster JJ, Cook-Wiens G, Rogatko A, 
Pepine CJ. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of late Na cur-
rent inhibition (ranolazine) in coronary microvascular dysfunction 
(CMD): impact on angina and myocardial perfusion reserve. Eur 
Heart J. 2016;37:1504–1513. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv647.
 
128. Skalidis EI, Hamilos MI, Chlouverakis G, Zacharis EA, Vardas PE. 
Ivabradine improves coronary flow reserve in patients with stable 
coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis. 2011;215:160–165. 
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.11.035.
 
129. Yeşildağ O, Yazici M, Yilmaz O, Uçar R, Sağkan O. The effect of 
aminophylline infusion on the exercise capacity in patients with 
syndrome X. Acta Cardiol. 1999;54:335–337.
 
130. Elliott PM, Krzyzowska-Dickinson K, Calvino R, Hann C, Kaski 
JC. Effect of oral aminophylline in patients with angina and 
normal coronary arteriograms (cardiac syndrome X). Heart. 
1997;77:523–526.
 
131. Shi J, Wei L. Rho kinases in cardiovascular physiology and 
pathophysiology: the effect of fasudil. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 
2013;62:341–354. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e3182a3718f.
 
132. Mohri M, Shimokawa H, Hirakawa Y, Masumoto A, Takeshita A. 
Rho-kinase inhibition with intracoronary fasudil prevents myocar-
dial ischemia in patients with coronary microvascular spasm. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:15–19.
 
133. Palmer RM, Ashton DS, Moncada S. Vascular endothelial cells 
synthesize nitric oxide from l-arginine. Nature. 1988;333:664–
666. doi: 10.1038/333664a0.
 
134. Egashira K, Hirooka Y, Kuga T, Mohri M, Takeshita A. Effects of 
l-arginine supplementation on endothelium-dependent coronary 
vasodilation in patients with angina pectoris and normal coronary 
arteriograms. Circulation. 1996;94:130–134.
 
135. Gellman J, Hare JM, Lowenstein CJ, Gerstenblith G, Coombs V, 
Langenberg P, Brinker JA, Resar JR. l-Arginine ameliorates the 
abnormal sympathetic response of the dysfunctional human 
coronary microvasculature. Angiology. 2004;55:1–8.
 
136. Lerman A, Burnett JC Jr, Higano ST, McKinley LJ, Holmes 
DR Jr. Long-term l-arginine supplementation improves small-
vessel coronary endothelial function in humans. Circulation. 
1998;97:2123–2128.
 
137. Cannon RO 3rd, Quyyumi AA, Mincemoyer R, Stine AM, Gracely 
RH, Smith WB, Geraci MF, Black BC, Uhde TW, Waclawiw MA. 
Imipramine in patients with chest pain despite normal coro-
nary angiograms. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1411–1417. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199405193302003.
 
138. Cox ID, Hann CM, Kaski JC. Low dose imipramine improves chest 
pain but not quality of life in patients with angina and normal 
coronary angiograms. Eur Heart J. 1998;19:250–254.
 
139. Sestito A, Lanza GA, Le Pera D, De Armas L, Sgueglia GA, 
Infusino F, Miliucci R, Tonali PA, Crea F, Valeriani M. Spinal cord 
stimulation normalizes abnormal cortical pain processing in pa-
tients with cardiac syndrome X. Pain. 2008;139:82–89. doi: 
10.1016/j.pain.2008.03.015.
 
140. Lanza GA, Sestito A, Sandric S, Cioni B, Tamburrini G, Barollo 
A, Crea F, De Seta F, Meglio M, Bellocci F, Maseri A. Spinal cord 
stimulation in patients with refractory anginal pain and normal 
coronary arteries. Ital Heart J. 2001;2:25–30.
 
141. Kitsou V, Xanthos T, Roberts R, Karlis GM, Padadimitriou L. 
Enhanced external counterpulsation: mechanisms of action 
and clinical applications. Acta Cardiol. 2010;65:239–247. doi: 
10.2143/AC.65.2.2047060.
 
142. Kronhaus KD, Lawson WE. Enhanced external counterpulsa-
tion is an effective treatment for Syndrome X. Int J Cardiol. 
2009;135:256–257. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.03.022.
 
143. Asbury EA, Kanji N, Ernst E, Barbir M, Collins P. Autogenic train-
ing to manage symptomology in women with chest pain and 
normal coronary arteries. Menopause. 2009;16:60–65. doi: 
10.1097/GME.0b013e318184762e.
 
144. Samim A, Nugent L, Mehta PK, Shufelt C, Bairey Merz CN. 
Treatment of angina and microvascular coronary dysfunction. 
Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2010;12:355–364. doi: 
10.1007/s11936-010-0083-8.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
