 Sickle cell anemia mice develop a unique
cardiomyopathy with restrictive physiology
Nihal Bakeera,b,c, Jeanne Jamesd,e, Swarnava Royb,c, Janaka Wansapuraf,g, Shiva Kumar Shanmukhappah,
John N. Lorenzi, Hanna Osinskae,j, Kurt Backerb,c, Anne-Cecile Hubyd,e,j, Archana Shresthab,c, Omar Nissa,c, Robert Fleckk,
Charles T. Quinna,c, Michael D. Taylord,e,j, Enkhsaikhan Purevjave,j, Bruce J. Aronowl, Jeffrey A. Towbind,e,j,
and Punam Malika,b,c,1
aDivision of Hematology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; bDivision of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; cCancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229; dDivision of Cardiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; eHeart Institute, Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; fImaging Research Center, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229;
gDepartment of Physics, University of Colombo, Colombo 03, Sri Lanka; hDepartment of Pathology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229; iDepartment of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267; jDivision of Molecular
Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; kDepartment of Radiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; and lDivision of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229
Edited by J. G. Seidman, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, and approved June 24, 2016 (received for review January 7, 2016)
Cardiopulmonary complications are the leading cause of mortality in
sickle cell anemia (SCA). Elevated tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity,
pulmonary hypertension, diastolic, and autonomic dysfunction have
all been described, but a unifying pathophysiology and mechanism
explaining the poor prognosis and propensity to sudden death has
been elusive. Herein, SCA mice underwent a longitudinal compre-
hensive cardiac analysis, combining state-of-the-art cardiac imaging
with electrocardiography, histopathology, and molecular analysis to
determine the basis of cardiac dysfunction. We show that in SCA
mice, anemia-induced hyperdynamic physiology was gradually super-
imposed with restrictive physiology, characterized by progressive left
atrial enlargement and diastolic dysfunction with preserved systolic
function. This phenomenon was absent in WT mice with experimen-
tally induced chronic anemia of similar degree and duration. Restrictive
physiology was associated with microscopic cardiomyocyte loss
and secondary fibrosis detectable as increased extracellular volume
by cardiac-MRI. Ultrastructural mitochondrial changes were consistent
with severe chronic hypoxia/ischemia and sarcomere diastolic-length
was shortened. Transcriptome analysis revealed up-regulation of
genes involving angiogenesis, extracellular-matrix, circadian-rhythm,
oxidative stress, and hypoxia, whereas ion-channel transport and car-
diac conduction were down-regulated. Indeed, progressive corrected
QT prolongation, arrhythmias, and ischemic changes were noted
in SCA mice before sudden death. Sudden cardiac death is common in
humans with restrictive cardiomyopathies and long QT syndromes.
Our findings may thus provide a unifying cardiac pathophysiology
that explains the reported cardiac abnormalities and sudden death
seen in humans with SCA.
sickle cell anemia | cardiomyopathy | restrictive physiology | arrhythmias |
sudden death
S
ickle cell anemia (SCA) results from a point mutation in the
β-globin gene and affects millions world-wide. It is characterized
by production of the mutant hemoglobin S (HbS), which polymerizes
upon deoxygenation and distorts the shape of RBCs, increasing their
propensity to hemolysis and microvascular occlusion. Recurrent
cycles of HbS polymerization result in a host of acute and chronic
complications, including vaso-occlusive pain crisis, chronic hemo-
lytic anemia, and organ damage. SCA-associated mortality rates
have improved because of early diagnosis with universal newborn
screening, immunization, and penicillin prophylaxis, which has
changed the natural history of SCA (1, 2) and the impact of SCA
on organ pathologies is now becoming evident.
Despite improved early survival, nearly one-third of young
adults with SCA die suddenly (3–9). The sickle myocardium has
been presumed to be relatively resistant to the effects of sickling
(10), and studies/autopsies show little evidence of atherosclerosis
or coronary disease (11–14). Mildly increased systolic pulmonary
arterial pressure (PAP) estimated by tricuspid regurgitant jet
velocity (TRV) of >2.5 m/s by echocardiography has been shown
to be an independent risk factor for early mortality (odds ratio
8–15) (5, 15–20). This finding was initially considered to be con-
sistent with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PH) (5, 17, 21–25).
However, right heart catheterization studies show that only 25–30%
of patients with TRV ≥ 2.5 m/s truly have PH, with the majority
having pulmonary venous hypertension (18, 26–29). Indeed, PAP in
SCA patients was only modestly elevated to 30–60 mmHg (30), in
contrast to patients with idiopathic PH. Increased left ventricular
(LV) mass and chamber sizes in the setting of normal systolic
function are well-known findings in SCA (31–35) and have been
attributed to a high-output state from the chronic anemia (31, 36).
More recently, evidence of diastolic dysfunction has emerged in
patients with SCA (37–40), the mechanism of which remains
unknown. Unlike the iron overload-related diastolic dysfunc-
tion seen in patients with β-thalassemia (41), myocardial iron de-
position is not seen in patients with SCA with diastolic dysfunction
Significance
Sickle cell anemia (SCA) is a common monogenic disorder associ-
ated with significant morbidity and mortality and a high incidence
of unexplained sudden death in young adults. With the prevention
of infections, there is an increasing appreciation for cardiopulmo-
nary complications and a cardiac phenotype that cannot be solely
attributed to chronic anemia. We used mouse models of SCA and
iron-deficient anemia to show distinct functional, pathological,
ultrastructural, and molecular cardiac features causing a unique
restrictive cardiomyopathy in SCA that predisposed the myo-
cardium to electrophysiological abnormalities and sudden death.
This is a comprehensive longitudinal analysis in preclinical mouse
models that unifies the previously reported diverse cardiac
phenotypes in SCA, and opens new avenues for early diagnostics
and targeted therapies for human SCA-related cardiac disease.
Author contributions: P.M. designed research; N.B., J.J., S.R., J.W., S.K.S., J.N.L., H.O., K.B.,
A.-C.H., and A.S. performed research; N.B., J.J., S.R., J.W., S.K.S., J.N.L., H.O., A.-C.H., O.N.,
R.F., C.T.Q., M.D.T., E.P., B.J.A., J.A.T., and P.M. analyzed data; N.B., J.J., and P.M. wrote
the paper; and J.A.T. and P.M. conceived the project.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
See Commentary on page 9670.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: punam.malik@cchmc.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1600311113/-/DCSupplemental.
E5182–E5191
|
PNAS
|
Published online August 8, 2016
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600311113
 (42, 43). Furthermore, the combination of modestly increased PAP
and diastolic dysfunction confers an increased probability of
death in SCA (37, 44) and suggests a hitherto unrecognized
unifying etiology.
A comprehensive understanding of SCA-associated cardio-
vascular pathologies has been hampered partly because the data
are inferred from cross-sectional analysis and partly because of
limited right heart catheterization studies, given the morbidity
associated with invasive tests in SCA. Right heart catheterization
studies have been largely restricted to patients with echocardio-
graphically estimated elevation of PAP or those with clinical signs of
PH (45, 46). Few studies have been performed with cardiac MRI
(CMR) (42, 47, 48), although this noninvasive imaging modality
does offer unique advantages. Therefore, the bulk of the cardiac
data reported in SCA is based on cross-sectional cardiac imaging
using echocardiography. We performed a longitudinal compre-
hensive cardiac analysis on the Berkeley SCA mouse model
(hereafter referred to as Berk-SS) (49), combining state-of-the-art
cardiac imaging, electrocardiogram (ECG), cardiac histopathology,
and molecular analysis to determine the basis of cardiac dysfunction
in Berk-SS mice. Our study demonstrates a distinct restrictive car-
diomyopathy superimposed on high-output physiology that results
from ischemic cardiomyocyte (CM) loss with secondary microscopic
fibrosis and remodeling, predisposing to electrophysiological ab-
normalities and sudden death.
Results
Berk-SS Mouse Cardiac Features Are Similar to Human SCA. We first
wanted to determine if the Berk-SS mouse model mimics the
human SCA-related cardiac phenotype. At 7–8 mo of age,
echocardiography of Berk-SS and control mice (Table 1) shows
Berk-SS mice to have significantly hypertrophied and enlarged
LVs, with increased end-diastolic interventricular septal thick-
ness (IVSd), end-diastolic left ventricular posterior wall thick-
ness, LV mass (LVM), and end-diastolic LV internal dimension
(LVIDd). LV systolic function as assessed by LV shortening
fraction was not different between the two groups, and was thus
preserved in the Berk-SS mice, as is the case in human SCA.
Diastolic dysfunction has been reported in adults with SCA
(24, 37, 50, 51) and hence was assessed in similarly aged Berk-SS
mice using pulsed-wave and tissue Doppler imaging (Fig. 1 and
SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Pulsed-wave Doppler of mitral valve (MV)
flow velocities were consistent with the phenomenon of pseu-
donormalization seen in early human diastolic dysfunction, and
there was a trend toward prolonged isovolumic relaxation time
as well. Importantly, the MV IVS E/e′ ratio was significantly
higher in Berk-SS mice compared with controls, analogous to
humans with diastolic dysfunction and elevated LV end-diastolic
pressure. Five aged Berk-SS mice (ages 34–43 wk) and six age-
and gender-matched WT mice underwent invasive hemodynamic
assessment. Two of the five Berk-SS mice died upon induction of
anesthesia but all WT control animals survived to the end of the
experimental protocol. Compared with WT, the Berk-SS mice
had normal contractility (i.e., dP/dt max) at baseline and at lower
levels of β-adrenergic stimulation, consistent with normal systolic
function noted by echocardiography in younger Berk-SS mice.
However, significantly compromised contractility was evident at
higher dobutamine doses. Importantly, we found a trend toward
reduced relaxation (τ) (SI Appendix, Fig. S2), consistent with the
noninvasive data obtained from echocardiography.
Longitudinal Cardiac Imaging Reveals Progressive Left Atrial Enlargement
in Berk-SS Mice. To investigate the temporal development of the
cardiac phenotype in Berk-SS mice, we performed serial echo-
cardiograms through 8 mo of age. Compared with their age- and
gender-matched controls (all mice used in these experiments
were males), young Berk-SS mice trended to smaller left atrial
dimensions (LAD) initially, likely because Berk-SS mice are
relatively “runted” as a consequence of anemia, and weigh ∼1–2 g
less than their age- and gender-matched counterparts at all
these time points. We observed a progressive increase in the
LAD, becoming apparent in the Berk-SS mice at 5 mo of age
(2.3 ± 0.1 mm vs. 1.9 ± 0.0 mm, SCA vs. WT, respectively, P =
0.008) and persisting at 8 mo of age (2.6 ± 0.1 mm vs. 2.0 ±
0.2 mm, SCA vs. WT, respectively, P = 0.03) (Fig. 2B). Impor-
tantly, the LAD did not increase with age in controls and there
was no detectable mitral regurgitation in any animal. Furthermore,
8-mo-old SCA mice weighed significantly less (28.5 ± 0.8 g) than
their WT counterparts (30.4 ± 0.5 g). The survival curves of all
SCA and iron deficiency anemia (IDA) animals used in the ex-
periment are shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S3. Representative still
images of parasternal long axis M-mode imaging demonstrating
left atrial (LA) dimension are shown in Fig. 2A.
Progressive LA Enlargement Is Not from Anemia. Chamber dilation
can occur from an anemia-related high-output state. To determine
if the progressive LA enlargement (LAE) in Berk-SS mice was
merely a function of chronic anemia, serial echocardiograms were
done on mice with experimentally induced IDA. The hemoglobin
of the IDA group of mice was maintained at 7.5 ± 0.1 g/dL (range
5–9 g/dL) from 5 to 8 mo of age. We compared the LAD of
5-mo-old Berk-SS mice to that of 8-mo-old IDA mice to account
for the fact that Berk-SS mice become profoundly anemic (average
hemoglobin 7.5 g/dL) at ∼2 mo of age, whereas IDA mice did
not become anemic until ∼5 mo of age. Thus, both groups were
anemic for ∼3 mo at the time of echocardiography. IDA mice
developed features of a high-output state (Table 2). Interestingly,
the LAD of 5-mo-old Berk-SS mice was still significantly higher
than that of the 8-mo-old IDA mice after an equal duration of the
anemia (Fig. 2C). We also examined the change in LAD (ΔLAD)
in the Berk-SS and IDA mice before and after 3 mo of anemia and
found that the ΔLAD in 3 mo was also significantly higher in the
Berk-SS group compared with the IDA group of animals (P <
0.001) (SI Appendix, Fig. S4).
Table 1.
Echocardiographic features of SCA mice
Measurement (unit)
WT
Berk-SS
P value
IVSDd (mm)
1.04 ± 0.03
1.13 ± 0.05
0.04
LVPWd (mm)
0.96 ± 0.03
1.15 ± 0.05
0.005
LVM (mg)
112 ± 6
201 ± 12
<0.0001
LVIDd (mm)
3.67 ± 0.16
4.72 ± 0.11
<0.0001
LVSF (%, vol/vol)
36 ± 3
35 ± 2
0.38
Berk-SS SCA mice (n = 16; 7–8 mo) compared with age- and gender-matched
WT controls (n = 14). Data presented as mean ± SEM. Mann–Whitney U test.
IVSDd, end-diastolic interventricular septum thickness; LVPWd, end-diastolic LV
posterior wall thickness; LVSF, left ventricular shortening fraction.
WT Berk-SS
0
200
400
600
800
1000
MV E [mm/sec]
**
WT Berk-SS
0
20
40
60
MV IVS E/e'
*
WT Berk-SS
0
200
400
600
800
MV A [mm/sec]
*
A
B
C
Fig. 1.
Sickle mice exhibit evidence of diastolic dysfunction by tissue
Doppler imaging (TDI). Six- to 9-mo-old age- and gender-matched sickle
(Berk-SS) and WT mice underwent cardiac echocardiography with TDI. Select
panels are shown that depict (A) mitral valve early filling (MV E), (B) mitral
valve late filling (MV A), and (C) ratio of transmitral E and e′ (MV IVS E/e′).
Data shown as mean ± SEM, n = 8–14 mice in WT and 5–10 mice in Berk-SS;
Mann–Whitney U test; *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01.
Bakeer et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 8, 2016
|
E5183
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 In another group of mice, IDA was induced for 6 mo and normal
control mice of the same age were followed concurrently. IDA
mice had the expected features of a high-output state, specifically
a significantly higher LVIDd with preservation of the systolic
function, but did not develop LAE compared with normal con-
trols (SI Appendix, Table S1). Taken together, we observed sig-
nificant LAE in Berk-SS mice that was distinct from the
ventricular dilation associated with chronic IDA.
Berk-SS Mice Exhibit Evidence of Diffuse Myocardial Fibrosis by CMR.
The Berk-SS cardiac phenotype of preserved systolic function
with LAE and diastolic dysfunction was quite striking. Because
restrictive LV filling can be secondary to myocardial fibrosis, we
performed CMR with gadolinium contrast on 6- to 9-mo-old male
Berk-SS mice and age- and gender-matched controls. Consistent
with the echocardiography data, CMR also showed biventricular
dilation and LVH with preserved systolic function in Berk-SS
animals (Fig. 3 A–C). Late gadolinium enhancement (evidence of
gross myocardial scarring) was absent. We used contrast-enhanced
T1 mapping to measure the proportion of myocardial extracellular
volume (ECV), which increases in proportion to the connective
tissue fraction and can be regarded as a continuous measurement
of the degree of diffuse myocardial fibrosis (52, 53). Interestingly,
the percentage myocardial ECV was significantly higher in the
Berk-SS mice compared with normal age-matched controls [40.7 ±
2.9% (vol/vol) vs. 29.0 ± 2.8% (vol/vol), P = 0.006] (Fig. 3D),
demonstrating that Berk-SS mice do indeed have evidence of
diffuse myocardial fibrosis, which likely results in impaired re-
laxation, restrictive ventricular filling, and LAE. Our ECV values
for normal mice (25 ± 7%) are within the range of published ECV
values for mice [22% for juvenile mice and 32% for aged mice
(54)]. However, it should be noted that because of various forms
of errors in T1 measurement at high field strengths (55), MRI-
derived ECV measurements at 7T are best at depicting relative
measures of fibrosis between groups rather than absolute values.
Diffuse Myocardial Fibrosis Is Secondary to Sickle Hematopoiesis. To
separate potential genetic background influences in the Berk-SS
mice from the effects of SCA, we transplanted sickle bone
marrow (BM) into lethally irradiated WT mice. To account for
potential confounding effects of radiation, mice fully chimeric
for sickle hematopoiesis (i.e., exclusively expressing HbS on WT
background, designated HbS/WT) were compared with congenic
control mice transplanted with WT BM (SI Appendix, Table S2).
Both groups of mice were followed for 8–9 mo and evaluated
using CMR and echocardiography. Hearts that were normal ana-
tomically and functionally before HbS transplant developed find-
ings that mirrored the features of the nontransplanted Berk-SS
mice (SI Appendix, Tables S3 and S4), specifically ventricular
dilation, LVH, and preserved systolic function. Increased pro-
portion of myocardial ECV was seen in the HbS/WT chimeras,
demonstrating that diffuse cardiac fibrosis is a unique feature
that develops in SCA and is secondary to sickle hematopoiesis
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5).
Berk-SS Mice Show Evidence of Microscopic Multifocal Ischemic
Changes and Fibrosis. Histopathologic evaluation was performed
to dissect the mechanisms underlying Berk-SS restrictive physi-
ology. H&E-stained sections of Berk-SS mouse hearts showed
LAE as early as 3 mo of age. After a similar duration of anemia,
the IDA mouse hearts exhibited ventricular dilation but not
LVH (Fig. 4A), consistent with the echocardiography data.
Although no gross infarction was evident in the ventricles of
Berk-SS mice, myocardial tissue exhibited multifocal areas of
ischemic changes of varying stages microscopically (Fig. 4B).
Early ischemic changes were characterized by loss of cardiac
cross striations and decreased CM cytoplasmic eosinophilia (Fig.
4 B, b). Late and more severe ischemic changes included myo-
cytolysis and occasional vacuolar degeneration (Fig. 4 B, d and e).
In a few cases, microvessels occluded/congested with sickled
RBCs were found adjacent to these microscopic ischemic lesions
(Fig. 4 B, f). No ischemic changes or microvascular occlusions
were present in the WT controls (Fig. 4 B, a and c). CM loss was
multifocal and distributed randomly, being replaced by areas of
fibrosis, seen as patches of Sirius red and Masson’s Trichrome
1
5
8
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
LAD [mm]
WT
Berk-SS
Age in Months
ns
**
*
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
LAD [mm]
***
Berk-SS
IDA
3 Months of Anemia
A
B
C
Ao
LA
a
b
c
d
Ao
Ao
Ao
LA
LA
LA
Fig. 2.
Sickle mice exhibit progressive LAE compared with their age- and
gender-matched WT controls, which is unique to SCA and does not develop
in the IDA mice. (A) Representative images of parasternal long-axis M-mode
imaging through the aortic root and LA demonstrating cross-sectional atrial
dilation in a 1- and 8-mo-old sickle cell and WT mouse. The smaller upper image
in each set shows the 2D picture of this region of the heart in the parasternal
long axis, and the lower image records the movement of each pixel during
the cardiac cycle, allowing quantification of structure sizes. Under normal
conditions, the LA and aortic root are of approximately equal size. The sub-
panels are: (a) 1-mo-old WT control mouse; (b) 8-mo-old WT control mouse;
(c) 1-mo-old sickle cell mouse (Berk-SS); (d) 8-mo-old Berk-SS. Ao, aortic root; LA,
left atrium. (B) A temporal analysis of LAD by M-mode imaging of WT and Berk-
SS mice starting soon after weaning to 8 mo of age. (C) Assessment of LAD
by transthoracic echocardiography in experimentally induced IDA to achieve
hemoglobin levels similar to sickle mice for 3 mo compared with LAD in sickle
mice with a similar 3-mo duration of anemia. Data shown as mean ± SEM, n = 4
mice in WT, 6–11 mice in Berk-SS, and 10 mice in IDA; Mann–Whitney U test; ns,
P > 0.05; *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001.
Table 2.
Echocardiographic features of IDA mice
Measurement (unit)
WT
IDA
P value
IVSDd (mm)
0.98 ± 0.03
1.02 ± 0.07
0.34
LVPWd (mm)
0.92 ± 0.05
0.86 ± 0.05
0.23
LVM (mg)
102 ± 5
128 ± 13
0.09
LVIDd (mm)
3.65 ± 0.20
4.20 ± 0.11
0.03
LVSF (%, vol/vol)
33 ± 3
29 ± 3
0.14
IDA mice (n = 10; 8-mo-old, 3 mo of IDA) compared with age- and gender-
matched WT controls (n = 7). Data presented as mean ± SEM. Mann-Whitney
U test.
E5184
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600311113
Bakeer et al.
 staining (Fig. 5). These microscopic fibrotic foci in the myocar-
dium were absent in WT mice, and were found to be scattered
across multiple sections of the myocardium with intervening
normal hypertrophied myocardial tissue, complicating quantifi-
cation. The total hydroxyproline content of the atria and the
ventricles-interventricular septum of age- and gender-matched
SCA mouse hearts was significantly higher in the SCA mice than
WT controls (SI Appendix, Fig. S6), although the hydroxyproline
concentration was not (and indeed lower), likely because of the
pronounced intervening cardiomyocyte hypertrophy seen in SCA
hearts compared with controls. Furthermore, Prussian blue and
Congo red stains did not show evidence of iron overload or
amyloid deposition in the sickle myocardium, respectively (SI
Appendix, Fig. S7). Collectively, Berk-SS hearts were character-
ized by both myocardial LVH and extracellular matrix expansion
from fibrotic foci, likely a sequelae of microvascular ischemic
events and consistent with the increased ECV seen on CMR.
Berk-SS Mouse CMs Exhibit Hypoxia/Ischemia-Related Mitochondrial
Ultrastructural Changes and Contracted Sarcomeres with Significant
Remodeling. EM showed enlargement of Berk-SS mitochondria
with variation in size, shape, and distribution compared with the
regularly distributed and mostly elongated mitochondria of WT
controls (Fig. 6 A–D). Some Berk-SS mitochondria appeared
swollen, with fewer and less-compacted cristae, and there were
areas of matrix lysis and elongated cristae, findings associated
with prolonged ischemia. Other observations distinct to the
Berk-SS mice included unevenly widened myofibrils with large
spaces between membranes of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)
and sarcomeres around the mitochondria. Sarcomeres of Berk-SS
CMs often had indistinguishable/invisible I bands with a signifi-
cantly shorter mean sarcomere length in Berk-SS mice compared
with controls (1.76 ± 0.03 μm vs. 2.01 ± 0.01 μm, respectively,
P < 0.0001) (Fig. 6 D–F and SI Appendix, Fig. S8), suggesting
alterations in cross-bridge cycling, particularly during relaxation.
The Myocardial Transcriptome Shows an Increased Hypoxic, Oxidative,
Profibrotic Signature with Down-regulation of Genes Associated with
Electrophysiological Function. To evaluate the cardiac stress state
and adaptations to the effects of SCA, we evaluated gene-expression
patterns in normal and Berk-SS mice. Berk-SS mice exhibited a
very distinct signature compared with normal animals (SI Appendix,
Fig. S9A), with 334 genes being up-regulated and 147 down-
regulated (using 1.5-fold and <0.05 false-discovery rate cut-offs).
Functional enrichment analysis showed particularly strong en-
richment of genes involving angiogenesis, extracellular matrix,
and circadian rhythm, as well as responses associated with oxidative
stress, hypoxia, and TGF-β signaling (Fig. 7A) that are congruent
Fig. 4.
Sickle mice exhibit biventricular hypertrophy and microscopic multifocal
ischemic changes and fibrosis. (A) Representative H&E-stained four-chamber
views of WT, IDA, and sickle (Berk-SS) mouse hearts. Compared with an age-
and gender-matched WT control, the 8-mo-old IDA mouse heart exhibits
ventricular dilation but not hypertrophy after 3 mo of anemia. Biventricular
hypertrophy and LA dilation are noted as early as 3 mo of age in the Berk-SS
mouse. These findings worsen with age as evident in the 7-mo-old Berk-SS
mouse. (B) H&E-stained mouse myocardium. Compared with an age- and
gender-matched WT control (a), an 8-mo-old male Berk-SS mouse shows
early ischemic changes characterized by loss of cross striations and decreased
cardiomyocyte cytoplasmic eosinophilia (black arrows) (b). Late and more-
severe ischemic changes, such as vanishing dead cardiomyocytes, are also
noted in the Berk-SS mouse (d and e), and an occluded/congested micro-
vessel with sickled RBC is noted adjacent to these ischemic changes (f, Inset).
Microvessels are patent in the WT mouse (c, Inset).
0
25
50
75
100
0
25
50
75
100
End Diastolic Volume [µl]
**
WT
WT
Berk-SS
**
Berk-SS
LVEDV
             
RVEDV
0
25
50
75
0
25
50
75
LVEF (%)
ns
WT
WT
Berk-SS
**
Berk-SS
SV [µl]
WT Berk-SS
0
50
100
150
LVM [mg]
**
WT
Berk-SS
10
20
30
40
50
60
ECV (%)
**
A
B
C
D
Fig. 3.
Sickle mice exhibit LV hypertrophy and dilation with preserved
systolic function but increased myocardial fibrosis by CMR. Six- to 9-mo-old
age- and gender-matched sickle (Berk-SS) and WT mice underwent CMR.
Panels depict (A) left and right end-diastolic volumes (LVEDV and RVEDV,
respectively); (B) LV ejection fraction (LVEF) and stroke volume (SV); (C) LVM;
and (D) myocardial extracellular volume (ECV%) measured by contrast-en-
hanced T1 mapping. Data shown as mean ± SEM n= 3–7 mice in WT and 7–9
mice in Berk-SS; Mann–Whitney U test; ns, P > 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001.
Bakeer et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 8, 2016
|
E5185
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 with the imaging and histopathology data. Down-regulated genes
were particularly enriched for ion channel transport and fatty
acid-associated metabolism. The detailed Gene Ontology listing
with the individual gene hits is available in SI Appendix, Table S5.
Connective-tissue growth factor (CTGF), a fibrotic factor known
to trigger synthesis of extracellular matrix in the myocardium in
response to TGF-β, was found to be up-regulated by 3.5-fold by
RNA-seq. Increased CTGF protein was confirmed by immuno-
histochemistry with interspersed areas of pronounced focal
CTGF staining in regions of CM loss (Fig. 7B). We also noted a
15-fold up-regulation of δ-aminolevulinic acid synthase (ALAS2), a
key enzyme involved in heme synthesis. It is noteworthy that of
the down-regulated genes, at least 31 are involved in ion and
voltage transport and regulation, all of which are critical for
cardiac function and conduction (heat map shown in SI Appendix,
Fig. S9B). Gene network analysis (Fig. 8) showed dramatic loss of
expression of an extensive set of genes associated with mainte-
nance of electrophysiological and structural integrity of the heart.
Seven key down-regulated genes [carnitine palmitoyltransferase
(CPT)1A, CPT2, sodium voltage-gated channel beta subunit
4 (SCN4B), A-kinase anchoring protein 9 (AKAP9), sodium
voltage-gated channel alpha subunit 4 (SCN4A), potassium voltage-
gated channel subfamily J member 2 (KCNJ2), calcium voltage-
gated channel subunit alpha1 S (CACNA1S)] whose dysfunction is
associated with prolonged QT interval, arrhythmias, and sudden
cardiac death are highlighted.
Berk-SS Mice Develop Corrected QT Prolongation and Widening of
QRS Associated with Cardiac Ischemic Events and Fatal Arrhythmias
with Sudden Death. ECGs were obtained weekly from 5 to 8 wk of
age. Like humans with SCA, Berk-SS mice also experience
sudden death, with increased mortality in the first 3–4 mo after
weaning that occurs without forewarning signs of distress. Sur-
vival curves for our WT and Berk-SS mice are shown in SI Ap-
pendix, Fig. S3, confirming the high mortality in SCA mice and
none in the WT mice during the window where ECG experi-
ments were performed. Corrected QT (QTc) and QRS interval
prolongations were noted as early as 5 wk of age compared with
age- and gender-matched WT controls (SI Appendix, Table S6).
QTc prolongation persisted to 8 wk of age in the surviving mice
(99 ± 3 ms vs. 81 ± 3 ms in Berk-SS vs. WT controls, respectively;
P = 0.0003) (Table 3). Over the ECG surveillance month, the
mortality rate among the sickle mice was about 40%, consistent
with the overall mortality in our Berk-SS mouse colony (56). All
WT mice survived through adulthood. Antemortem telemetry
was serendipitously obtained for two 2-mo-old Berk-SS mice that
were found to be sluggish during daily mouse assessment, despite
being active and well-appearing the day prior, and who died
while on the ECG platform. Compared with a normal WT
control (Fig. 9, panel 1), the telemetry of the first mouse was
significant for ST depression, suggestive of an ischemic insult
before death (Fig. 9, panel 2). In the second mouse (Fig. 9,
panels 3–5), initial recordings showed that the mouse had a
slower heart rate and P-wave irregularity (Fig. 9, panel 3), which
then progressed to heart block with atrial flutter with 4–5:1 AV
conduction (Fig. 9, panel 4), and eventual ventricular fibrillation
(Fig. 9, panel 5). This mouse had a very prolonged QTc on the
day of his death at 119 ms, nearly 1.5-times that of age- and
gender-matched WT controls. Interestingly, three other 6-wk-old
Fig. 5.
Patchy microscopic fibrosis is seen in sickle mice hearts. Sirius red
(A and B) and Masson’s trichrome (C and D) staining of the myocardium of
8-mo-old sickle (Berk-SS) and WT mice. Patchy microscopic fibrosis can be
seen in the Berk-SS mouse (B and D) but not the age- and gender-matched
WT control mice (A and C).
Fig. 6.
Sickle cardiomyocytes exhibit hypoxia/ischemia-related mitochondrial
ultrastructural changes, contracted sarcomeres, and chaotic remodeling. Repre-
sentative EM images of WT and sickle mouse LV posterior wall myocardium.
Compared with WT control (A and C), a subset of cardiomyocytes in an 8-mo-
old sickle mouse show ultrastructural abnormalities (B, D, and E). Electron
lucent areas between mitochondria and sarcomeres, and membranes of
the SR and sarcomeres are noted (B, arrows). Mitochondria are hypertro-
phied, more abundant, more rounded, with less densely packed and
often disrupted cristae (D, arrow). Sarcomeres in some of the sickle cells
were contracted and hence shorter in diastole (D, double-headed arrow)
compared with WT (C, double-headed arrow). Chaotic cardiomyocyte
remodeling is noted in a 2-mo-old Berk-SS mouse (E). Sarcomere lengths
of two, 8-mo-old sickle (Berk-SS) and age- and gender-matched WT con-
trols are shown in F. Data shown as mean ± SEM, n = 187 sarcomere in WT
and 150 sarcomere in Berk-SS, two mice per group, Mann–Whitney U test,
****P ≤ 0.0001.
E5186
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600311113
Bakeer et al.
 Berk-SS mice that died suddenly (where ECGs were not recorded
in the immediate antemortem period) were noted to have sig-
nificant prolongation in their QTc on the ECG obtained 1–3 d
before their death (Fig. 9, panel 6). These data suggest that
ischemia, with evidence present on myocardial histology, and
arrhythmias secondary to asymptomatic QTc prolongations, may
precede sudden death, although the ECG changes noted in the
mice dying during monitoring could be a nonspecific finding of
impending death. Interestingly, the electrical anomalies in the
Berk-SS mice precede the functional changes first manifested as
LA dilation at 5 mo of age, suggesting that the ECG changes are
not merely a consequence of established cardiomyopathy.
Discussion
Herein, we show the development of a distinct SCA cardiomy-
opathy superimposed on changes associated with chronic anemia
and characterized by diffuse myocardial fibrosis and restrictive
physiology. Consistent with human data, SCA mouse echocar-
diographic and CMR data show dilated and hypertrophied ven-
tricles with preserved systolic function, findings attributable to
the chronic anemia-associated high-output state (31–35). Using a
chronic IDA model with the same duration and degree of ane-
mia, we show that the SCA cardiac phenotype is not caused pri-
marily by chronic anemia; rather, sickle hematopoiesis-associated
focal microvascular occlusions, ischemia, and oxidative stress
compound the effect of chronic anemia. Scattered microscopic
CM loss, myocardial fibrosis, and significant CM remodeling
likely contribute to this distinct cardiomyopathy and predispose
to electrophysiological abnormalities, leading to arrhythmias and
sudden death. Although some ultrastructural changes seen in the
SCA myocardium are reminiscent of those previously reported in
chronic anemia-associated myocardial hypoxia (i.e., enlarged mi-
tochondria with variation in size, shape, and distribution and un-
evenly thickened myofibrils) (57–60), EM demonstrated features
distinct to SCA, including mitochondria with fewer and less-
compacted cristae, abnormalities of the SR, and contracted sar-
comeres, features that may contribute to diastolic dysfunction and
an arrhythmogenic milieu.
LAE was quite prominent in mice with SCA. LAE is clinically
significant because it has been shown to predict and foreshadow
adverse clinical cardiovascular outcomes in other conditions where
A
Extracellular Matrix
P value
Extracellular matrix organization 
1.65E-05
Cell-matrix adhesion  
3.40E-02
Extracellular matrix binding  
2.53E-05
Cellular response to transforming 
growth factor beta stimulus  
2.22E-03
Angiogenesis
Vasculature development  
2.44E-11
Angiogenesis  
2.16E-10
Lipid Metabolism
Response to lipid  
4.80E-07
Abnormal circulating free 
fatty acid levels
9.18E-06
Glycerolipid metabolic  
1.62E-03
Neurotransmission
Abnormal circadian period  
8.55E-04
Ion channel activity  
6.70E-05
Serotonergic synapse  
1.97E-03
B
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
40x
40x
40x
40x
40x
40x
40x
40x
Fig. 7.
(A) Gene Ontology pathways that are differentially regulated be-
tween WT and Berk-SS mouse myocardium (n = 3 WT and 3 in Berk-SS),
following a sickle myocardial transcriptome (with associated P values) compared
with WT myocardial transcriptome; arrows indicate up- or down-regulated
pathways in the sickle myocardium. (B) Immunohistochemistry staining of
CTGF in mouse myocardium. Compared with age- and gender-matched WT
myocardium (a, c, e, g), an 8-mo-old Berk-SS mouse shows increased overall
background expression (b, d, f, h) with several areas of pronounced focal
staining (perivascular regions and areas of myocyte loss).
Inhibition  of voltage gated Ca2+ channels via Gbeta/ga ...
potassium channel activity
potassium
CHORDC1
Potassium Channels
delayed rectifier potassium channel activity
voltage-gated potassium channel complex
basolateral plasma membrane
apical plasma membrane
calcium ion binding
cation transport
voltage-gated cation channel activity
Calcium Regulation in the Cardiac Cell
magnesium ion transport
regulation of ion transport
calcium channel activity
ANO10
RHBDL3
SMOC2
SLC47A1
SLC36A2
Abnormality of the cardiovascular system
CDH23
CPT1A
TESC
MASP1
SLC26A6
CPT2
PPARA
CASQ1
AKAP9
SCN4B
KCNJ3
KCNV2
CACNA1S
KCNJ2
sodium channel activity
membrane depolarization
cardiac muscle depolarization
abnormal myocardial fiber physiology
abnormal free fatty acids level
Fatty acid Metabolism
Regulation of Lipid Metabolism by Peroxisome proliferat ...
lipid oxidation
carnitine O-palmitoyltransferase activity
monocarboxylic acid transport
sarcoplasmic reticulum
T-tubule
I band
sarcolemma
intercalated disc
cell-cell contact zone
Carnitine
SCARA5
PKD2L2
NIPAL3
Abnormality of cardiac morphology
Prolonged QT interval
Arrhythmia
Sudden cardiac death
Abnormality of cardiac conduction
Abnormal EKG
Supraventricular arrhythmia
SCN4A
AQP1
P2RY1
KCND2
CLCN1
ENPP2
KCNA7
Fig. 8.
Biological network analysis of the SS down-regulated genes in the heart showed dramatic loss of expression of an extensive set of genes associated with
maintenance of the electrophysiological and structural integrity of the heart. RNAseq showed that 31 ion channel genes and genes associated with electrophys-
iologic function were down-regulated in Berk-SS mouse myocardium compared with WT (n = 3 WT and 3 in Berk-SS). The seven key down-regulated genes (yellow:
CPT1A, CPT2, SCN4B, AKAP9, SCN4A, KCNJ2, CACNA1S) are associated with arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. The cardiac networks they affect and how they
interact with the rest of the down-regulated genes associated with rhythm dysfunction, including prolonged QTc, are shown.
Bakeer et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 8, 2016
|
E5187
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 diastolic dysfunction is a predominant mechanism (61–64). The
LAE in our SCA mice was not associated with mitral regurgi-
tation and was both early and exaggerated. Importantly, LAE
was significantly greater in SCA than IDA mice, indicating that
the phenotype is more complex than hyperdynamic physiology
because of anemia. We propose that in our SCA mice, LAE is a
downstream consequence of microscopic myocardial fibrosis,
leading to ventricular diastolic dysfunction and in turn, impaired
LA emptying and LA hypertension. Restrictive LV filling and
LA hypertension may lead to elevated pulmonary venous pres-
sure, a feature associated with increased TRV in patients with
SCA (18, 65, 66).
In addition to LAE, another significant finding in our SCA
model is LV diastolic dysfunction with preserved systolic per-
formance. Importantly, this phenotype is reproduced in normal
mice transplanted with sickle bone marrow. This SCA cardio-
myopathy is not a “classic” restrictive cardiomyopathy, the latter
characterized by diastolic dysfunction and atrial dilation in the
presence of normal atrioventricular valve anatomy, ventricular
wall thickness, and systolic function. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
diagnostic criteria typically exclude ventricular dilation and hy-
pertrophy, both features of our model (67–69). Interestingly,
diastolic dysfunction is also prevalent in human SCA and has
been considered to be an independent risk factor for early
mortality (37). The exact cause of diastolic dysfunction in SCA is
not well understood, but we show that it cannot be significantly
attributed to chronic anemia. Most reports of diastolic dysfunc-
tion in humans with chronic anemia are in the setting of
comorbidities, such as chronic kidney disease (70, 71), diabetes
mellitus (72), and coronary artery disease (73), whereas reports
of diastolic dysfunction developing in otherwise healthy adults
who are chronically anemic are inconsistent (74).
Of the childhood cardiomyopathies, restrictive cardiomyopathy
has the highest rate of sudden cardiac death, with survivors dem-
onstrating findings of pulmonary hypertension as a result of LA
hypertension. The severity of the compounded effects of anemia
and restrictive physiology in SCA patients is thus of significant
concern and warrants careful study. Anemia-related LVH is seen
in SCA and it is conceivable that the chronic anemia-associated
LVH progressively increases myocardial oxygen demand and
oxygen extraction, which subsequently results in microvascular
sickling and microvasculature-related ischemic events, character-
ized at the microscopic level by CM loss and myocardial fibrosis.
Increased oxidative stress likely further compounds this effect.
Similar, albeit milder changes, have been described in IDA animal
models (59, 60, 75, 76). It may be that these changes are more
severe in SCA because of the added disadvantage of sickling in
the microvasculature and increased oxidative stress, both evident
in our transcriptome analyses. Also evident is a down-regulation
of circadian rhythm genes. Experimentally induced deficiency of
circadian rhythm genes in mice (SCN, CK1e, Per2, and CLOCK)
have been shown to alter cytokine and immune responses, shorten
lifespan, increase fibrosis, tumor progression, and result in cardiac
disturbances, including myocardial infarction and altered cardiac
hypertrophic pathways. Hence, future studies are warranted to
determine the role of down-regulated circadian rhythm genes in
modulating clinical phenotype in SCA.
Repeated sickling-related microvascular ischemic events, in-
creased oxidative stress and microscopic focal fibrosis, can result
in significant remodeling and a stiff LV with diastolic dysfunc-
tion. It has been recently reported that some degree of focal LV
fibrosis measured using late gadolinium enhancement can be
seen in young adults with SCA by CMR (42, 48), and LV fibrosis
was also reported in autopsies of young adults with SCA who
died suddenly (77). Moreover, recent reports suggest dysregulated
profibrotic pathways are up-regulated in SCA in general, as
polymorphisms in TGF-β signaling pathway genes have been
found in this patient population (78). We have recently reported
hyperangiotensinemia in mice and humans with SCA (79). It would
be worth exploring whether angiotensin signaling, which is known
to up-regulate TGF-β1 signaling, may also contribute to the cardiac
hypertrophy and remodeling seen in SCA mice, in contrast with
the IDA mice. Our SCA mouse myocardium gene-expression
profile is consistent with this concept, showing strong enrichment
of genes involving angiogenesis and extracellular matrix, including
CTGF, a fibrotic factor known to trigger synthesis of extracellular
matrix in the myocardium in response to TGF-β1. One notable
finding was remarkably increased expression of a heme synthetic
Table 3.
ECG parameters of SCA mice
Measurement (unit)
WT
Berk-SS
P value
P duration (ms)
14.7 ± 0.5
15.3 ± 0.8
0.6
PR interval (ms)
33.2 ± 0.6
32.8 ± 0.8
0.71
RR interval (ms)
79 ± 2
83 ± 5
0.05
Heart rate (bpm)
763 ± 7
730 ± 12
0.05
QRS duration (ms)
12.2 ± 0.5
14.6 ± 0.6
0.01
QTc (ms)
81 ± 3
99 ± 3
0.0003
Berk-SS SCA mice (n = 10; 2 mo) compared with age- and gender-matched
WT controls (n = 8). Data presented as mean ± SEM. Multiple t tests, Holm–
Sidak correction. bpm, beats per minute.
1
2
3
4
5
6
5
6
50
75
100
125
Age in Weeks
QTc [msec]
ns
*
Fig. 9.
QTc prolongation, cardiac ischemic events, and fatal arrhythmias
are evident in antemortem EKG tracings of sickle mice. Compared with
the normal sinus rhythm in a 2-mo-old WT control (1), antemortem EKG
tracings of an age-matched Berk-SS mouse shows ST depression (2). An-
other 2-mo-old Berk-SS mouse’s antemortem EKG tracings show slower
heart rate and P-wave irregularity (3), which progressed into outright atrial
flutter with 4–5:1 AV conduction (4), and eventual ventricular fibrillation
(5). Sudden and significant QTc prolongation of three 6-wk-old Berk-SS
male mice few days before their death (filled triangle) compared with their
age- and gender-matched WT (open triangles) controls (6). Data shown as
mean ± SEM n = 8 mice in WT and 3 mice in Berk-SS; Mann-Whitney U test;
ns, P > 0.05; *P ≤ 0.05.
E5188
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600311113
Bakeer et al.
 enzyme ALAS2. Recently, increased myocardial ALAS2 expression
has been shown to potentiate ischemic injury and to be associated
with heart failure (80, 81). The finding of ALAS2 up-regulation in
SCA is consistent with the myocardial ischemia observed on
histopathology and EM.
Although we used IDA mice to control for anemia, which do
not have the confounding effects of hemolysis, ineffective erythro-
poiesis, and iron overload, this model does suffer from iron de-
ficiency. It may be worthwhile comparing other chronic anemia
models that are not iron deficient, such as thalassemia intermedia
mice on a low-iron diet (to prevent iron overload that otherwise
develops on an iron-replete diet in thalassemia) in future studies.
In summary, using the SCA mouse model, we demonstrate a
distinctive sickle cardiomyopathy where restrictive physiology is
superimposed on chronic anemia and predisposes to sudden
death. Mechanistically, ischemic-scattered CM loss, myocardial
fibrosis, and significant cardiac remodeling appears to underlie this
restrictive physiology and abnormal electrophysiology. In addition,
our studies show that restrictive physiology can be diagnosed
by noninvasive methodology, which is particularly desirable in
monitoring patients with SCA. Our genetic studies point to the
importance of up-regulated fibrotic pathways and secondary
consequences, including dysregulated ion channels. Equipped
with this knowledge, the SCA mice are a valuable resource for
preclinical study of this phenomenon with the ultimate goal of a
better understanding of—and treatment for—the cardiac com-
plications of SCA.
Materials and Methods
Experimental Mice. Berkeley SCA mice [Tg(Hu-miniLCRα1GγAγδβS) Hba0//Hba0
Hbb0//Hbb0] (49) are genetic knockouts for mouse β- and α-globin genes that
exclusively express human α and βS (HbS) postnatally. WT control Bl/6 congenic
mice were either C57BL/6 (CD45.2+) or Bl/6.BoyJ (CD45.1+). In some experi-
ments, we performed hematopoietic stem cell transplantation of pooled Berk-SS
donor BM into WT mice. The Berk-SS mice were derived from five different
genetic strains of mice and have been backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice for six
generations, and thus can be used as donors for transplant into Bl/6 mice.
Briefly, lethally irradiated (1,175 cGy) Bl/6.Boy J (CD45.1) recipient mice were
transplanted with either Berk-SS or C57BL/6 (CD45.2) BM in a 1:6–7 donor to
recipient ratio. Only mice showing complete donor chimerism [>99.5% donor
cells, compared to 0.5% residual host cells] were followed in the experiments.
IDA was induced in cohorts of WT (C57BL/6) mice using a low-iron chow
(Modified AIN-93M, containing 8 ppm of iron) and paper bedding to maintain
hemoglobin levels between 5 and 9 g/dL, which corresponds to the hemoglobin
profile of the SCA mice in our colony. A control age-matched cohort was placed
on iron-replete chow (39 ppm of iron). Per protocol, weekly complete blood
counts were monitored to ensure chronic anemia; if animals in the IDA group
had hemoglobin values below 5 g/dL, iron-deficient chow was replaced with
regular chow for a week. If animals had hemoglobin levels greater than 9 g/dL
in the IDA group, a 250- to 300-μL phlebotomy was performed that week. All
animals were maintained in the Cincinnati Children’s Research Foundation’s
vivarium using protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee.
Hematological Assessment. Whole blood was obtained from animals via
phlebotomy from the inferior vena cava into tenth volume 0.1 M sodium
citrate. Aliquots of this whole blood were used for complete blood count
determinations using a Hemavet 950FS (Drew Scientific) analyzer.
Echocardiography. Two-dimensional and M-mode transthoracic echocardi-
ography was performed as previously described using a Vevo 2100 Micro-
Imaging system (VisualSonics) equipped with a 40-MHz high-frequency
transducer (82). The imaging platform was warmed to prevent hypothermia
and sickling in SCA mice.
Invasive Hemodynamics. Invasive LV pressure measurements were made in
inaction/ketamine-anesthetized mice using a high-fidelity pressure catheter
(Transonic Scisense) under baseline conditions and in response to graded
doses of the β-adrenergic agonist dobutamine.
CMR. CMR was performed in the Cincinnati Children’s Imaging Research Core
on a 7 Tesla Bruker MR scanner using a custom-made single-turn-solenoid RF
coil. Mice were anesthetized with 1.5% (vol/vol) isoflurane. Physiological
monitoring, ambient temperature, and cardiac triggering were done using
an MR-compatible monitoring and gating system (Model 1025, SA Instru-
ments), and the data were processed using Segment v1.9 (segment.heiberg.
se) for volumetric analysis (83), and custom-designed software (MATLAB, 8.3
MathWorks) for diffuse fibrosis. CMR was used to quantify fibrosis, chamber
volumes, and systolic function. Chamber volumes were measured using
short-axis cine images using a FLASH sequence, which included slice thickness
1.0 mm, matrix size 256 × 256, and in-plane resolution 117 × 117 μm2, TE/TR
3/10 ms, flip angle 20°, and segments = 1. Approximately 15–20 cine frames
were acquired during the cardiac cycle, depending on heart rate, with a tem-
poral resolution of 10 ms. Systolic strain was measured using tagged images
acquired in the midventricle using an RF pulse train, as previously described
(84). Tag separation was 0.8 mm, field-of-view was 34 × 34 mm2, and slice
thickness was 1 mm, with matrix 256 × 128. Diffuse fibrosis was measured by
quantifying myocardial T1 before and after injecting a bolus of gadolinium (0.2
mmol/kg diluted in saline solution in a 1:10 ratio) intraperitoneally. A double-
gated, Look-Locker sequence was used. Twenty phase-encoding lines were ac-
quired at 20 different inversion times [TI = multiples of 2 RR (time interval
between consecutive R-waves in the ECG) for precontrast T1, TI = multiples of 1
RR for postcontrast T1]. All images were acquired in the short-axis plane at end
diastole. Diffuse fibrosis was quantified in terms of T1-dependent ECV of the
myocardium (85).
For T1 measurement we used an inversion-recovery T1 (Look-Locker)
method as implemented in a previous study (86). The following steps were
taken to minimize errors resulting from ECG variations. (i) We reduced the
total scan time for T1 measurement to less than 15 min (64 k-space lines) by
not acquiring multiple scans for signal averaging. Typically, the total drift of
the RR during this period was less than 10% (msec/msec) of the initial RR
value. The loss in SNR as a result of not signal averaging was compensated by
limiting spatial resolution. (ii) The experiment was stopped if the RR drift
was more than 10% of its initial value. In such cases, readjusting the anes-
thetic gas volumes enabled steady RR.
Electrocardiography. A noninvasive ECG recording system (ECGenie, Mouse
Specifics) was used to acquire ECGs from conscious mice during the daytime,
as previously described (87). Because even modest handling of mice may
induce alterations in their heart rate (88), each mouse was permitted to
acclimate for at least 10 min, and recording commenced when at least three
of the mouse’s paws were in full contact with the leads.
Histology. Mice were killed, dissected, and their hearts isolated carefully and
submerged in cold PBS for 10 s to remove excess blood. The hearts were then
perfused with a cardioplegic solution (68 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 11 mM
glucose, 12 mM NaHCO3, 30 mM 2,3-butanedione monoxime, 10 mM EGTA,
1 μM nifedipine, and 10 units/mL heparin, pH titrated to 7.4). Thereafter, the
hearts were perfused with 15 mL of 10% (vol/vol) formalin, fixed for at least
48 h, embedded in paraffin, and processed for histological analysis. Four- to
6-μm sections of the paraffin-embedded hearts were stained with H&E,
Masson’s trichrome, Picrosirius red, Prussian blue, and Congo red stains by
the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Pathology Core Facility. All staining pro-
cedures were performed using the Ventana Symphony staining platform
(Ventana Medical Systems). Stained sections were reviewed with a board-
certified pathologist who was blinded to the mouse genotype.
Determination of Myocardial Hydroxyproline Content. Myocardial hydroxy-
proline content was analyzed as previously described (89, 90). Briefly, the
atria were separated from the ventricles and intraventricular septum. The
ventricles and septum were cut into smaller pieces, which were weighed and
hydrolyzed overnight with 6 N hydrochloric acid in an oven at 100 °C. The
samples were thereafter desiccated in the oven at 50 °C using a desiccator
containing sodium hydroxide pellets. The tissue was kept under vacuum
until dry, and thereafter resuspended in 5 mM hydrochloric acid. Aliquots of
each hydrolyzed tissue sample were then combined with water, chloramine
T solution, hydroxyproline assay buffer, and Ehrlich’s reagent. After in-
cubating the samples for 20–25 min at 55 °C, and subsequently cooling them
to room temperature, sample absorbance was read at 558 nm. Trans-4-
hydroxy-l-proline standard (Sigma; ranging from 0 to 4 μg) was used to gen-
erate a standard curve to determine hydroxyproline content. Readings were
subsequently normalized to starting tissue weight.
Immunohistochemistry. Paraffin-embedded heart sections (4 μm) were
deparaffinized, hydrated, and incubated in 3% (vol/vol) hydrogen peroxide
Bakeer et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 8, 2016
|
E5189
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 solution for 10 min and rinsed, then blocked with 10% (vol/vol) normal goat
serum + 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS (hereafter referred to as “block solution”)
for 1 h at room temperature. Sections were then incubated in CTGF primary
antibody (Ab6992, Rabbit polyclonal anti-mouse, 1:600 dilution in block
solution) overnight at 4 °C. On the next day after washing, slides were in-
cubated with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (diluted in
1:200 in block solution) for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubation
in ABC solution for 1 h VECTASTAIN Elite ABC kit (Vector Laboratories). After
rinses, sections were stained with DAB (SK-4100, Vector Laboratories) for
5 min, and rinsed in water and counterstained with hematoxylin. Finally,
sections were dehydrated, then cleared in xylene and mounted using His-
tomount. Stained sections were reviewed with a board-certified pathologist
who was blinded to the mouse genotype and experimental arm.
Transmission Electron Microscopy and Sarcomere Length Measurement. Hearts
of previously anesthetized (isoflurane) mice were perfused through the LV
apex and then the right ventricle (RV) with 1% glutaraldehyde/2% (vol/vol)
paraformaldehyde in cardioplegic solution (100 mM KCl, 5% dextrose in PBS)
followed by 1% glutaraldehyde/2% (vol/vol) paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M caco-
dylate buffer (pH 7.3), dissected out, and dropped into ice-cold glutaraldehyde/
paraformaldehyde/cacodylate solution. Next the LV and RV free walls, septum
and apex were separated and, after being divided into 1-mm3 fragments, and
further fixed for 1–4 d at 4 °C, subsequently they were postfixed in 1% osmium
tetroxide/cacodylate buffer, dehydrated in acetone series, and embedded in an
EMbed812 resin mixture. Ultrathin (70 nm) sections were counterstained with
uranium and lead salts and examined using the Hitachi 7600 transmission
electron microscope at accelerating voltage of 80 kV. Images were acquired with
an AMT digital camera. The sarcomere length (distance between two thick
myosin filaments) was measured on sections from each group of young adult or
old, WT, or Berkeley sickle mice, for a total of 1,295 sarcomeres. Lengths of
sarcomeres were determined using ImageJ (NIH, Public Domain) and sub-
sequently converted to micrometers (91, 92).
RNA Extraction and Sequencing. Myocardial tissue of age- and gender-matched
mice was obtained from the posterior wall of the LV. After a quick rinse in PBS to
remove excess blood, the myocardial tissue was immediately snap-frozen.
Homogenization of the LV myocardial tissue was done using 2.3-mm Zirconia/
Silica beads, TRIzol reagent, and the Precellys bead beater system (Precellys24
Tissue homogenizer, Bertin Technologies). Total RNA was extracted using the
TRIzol method (93) and subjected to Illumina TruSeq kit RNA V2 library gen-
eration and sequenced at a depth of 15–30 million single-end 50-base reads on
an Illumina HiSEq. 2000. FASTQ files were aligned to the human genome build
GRCh37 and University of California Santa Cruz transcriptome reference (94)
using TopHat 2.0.9 (95) and Bowtie2 (96). Gene-level fragments per kilobase of
transcript per million expression was also obtained with Cufflinks2 (97) (ccb.
jhu.edu/software/tophat/igenomes.shtml).
Statistical Analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism v6.
Echocardiographic and CMR data between experimental groups of mice were
analyzed using nonparametric t tests or ANOVA. P values less than 0.05 were
considered statistically significant. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Anastacia Loberg, Katie Burke, and Devin
Pillis for assistance with mouse procedures; Michelle Niemann for assistance
with invasive hemodynamics; Dr. Uzmee Mendsaikhan for assistance with
cardiac perfusions; Betsy DiPasquale for preparing histopathology slides;
Victoria Moore and Christine Schulte for echocardiography; Scott Dunn for
CMR; Dr. Diana Lindquist from the Imaging Research Core for her help with
the CMR studies and specifically the phantom experiments; Chris Woods for
technical support with image preparation; Dr. Tilat Rizvi for performing
immunhistochemistry; and N.B.’s scientific oversight committee members,
Drs. Carolyn Lutzko, Katherine Yutzey, and Theodosia Kalfa, for their time
and input. This work was funded by the U01 HL117709 Excellence in Hemo-
globinopathies Research Award (to P.M., J.A.T., and C.T.Q.), and the Arnold
Strauss Fellowship Award (to N.B.).
1. Quinn CT, Rogers ZR, Buchanan GR (2004) Survival of children with sickle cell disease.
Blood 103(11):4023–4027.
2. Lanzkron S, Carroll CP, Haywood C, Jr (2013) Mortality rates and age at death from
sickle cell disease: U.S., 1979–2005. Public Health Rep 128(2):110–116.
3. Fitzhugh CD, et al. (2010) Cardiopulmonary complications leading to premature
deaths in adult patients with sickle cell disease. Am J Hematol 85(1):36–40.
4. Darbari DS, et al. (2006) Circumstances of death in adult sickle cell disease patients.
Am J Hematol 81(11):858–863.
5. Gladwin MT, et al. (2004) Pulmonary hypertension as a risk factor for death in patients
with sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med 350(9):886–895.
6. James TN, Riddick L, Massing GK (1994) Sickle cells and sudden death: morphologic
abnormalities of the cardiac conduction system. J Lab Clin Med 124(4):507–520.
7. Romero Mestre JC, Hernández A, Agramonte O, Hernández P (1997) Cardiovascular
autonomic dysfunction in sickle cell anemia: A possible risk factor for sudden death?
Clin Auton Res 7(3):121–125.
8. Fontaine JM, Ofili EO, Adenaike MB, VanDecker W, Haywood LJ (2008) Clinical as-
sessment of the risk for sudden cardiac death in patients with sickle cell anemia. J Natl
Med Assoc 100(4):360–368.
9. Hamideh D, Alvarez O (2013) Sickle cell disease related mortality in the United States
(1999–2009). Pediatr Blood Cancer 60(9):1482–1486.
10. Baroldi G (1969) High resistance of the human myocardium to shock and red blood
cell aggregation (sludge). Cardiologia 54(5):271–277.
11. Assanasen C, Quinton RA, Buchanan GR (2003) Acute myocardial infarction in sickle
cell anemia. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 25(12):978–981.
12. Chacko P, Kraut EH, Zweier J, Hitchcock C, Raman SV (2013) Myocardial infarction in
sickle cell disease: Use of translational imaging to diagnose an under-recognized
problem. J Cardiovasc Transl Res 6(5):752–761.
13. Wang H, Laslett LJ, Richman CM, Wun T (2004) Acute myocardial infarction in he-
moglobin SC disease. Ann Hematol 83(10):622–624.
14. Martin CR, Johnson CS, Cobb C, Tatter D, Haywood LJ (1996) Myocardial infarction in
sickle cell disease. J Natl Med Assoc 88(7):428–432.
15. Ataga KI, et al. (2006) Pulmonary hypertension in patients with sickle cell disease: A
longitudinal study. Br J Haematol 134(1):109–115.
16. Voskaridou E, et al. (2007) Pulmonary hypertension in patients with sickle cell/beta
thalassemia: Incidence and correlation with serum N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic
peptide concentrations. Haematologica 92(6):738–743.
17. Gladwin MT, Vichinsky E (2008) Pulmonary complications of sickle cell disease. N Engl
J Med 359(21):2254–2265.
18. Parent F, et al. (2011) A hemodynamic study of pulmonary hypertension in sickle cell
disease. N Engl J Med 365(1):44–53.
19. De Castro LM, Jonassaint JC, Graham FL, Ashley-Koch A, Telen MJ (2008) Pulmonary
hypertension associated with sickle cell disease: Clinical and laboratory endpoints and
disease outcomes. Am J Hematol 83(1):19–25.
20. Hebbel RP (2011) Reconstructing sickle cell disease: A data-based analysis of the
“hyperhemolysis paradigm” for pulmonary hypertension from the perspective of
evidence-based medicine. Am J Hematol 86(2):123–154.
21. Reiter CD, et al. (2002) Cell-free hemoglobin limits nitric oxide bioavailability in sickle-
cell disease. Nat Med 8(12):1383–1389.
22. Morris CR, et al. (2005) Dysregulated arginine metabolism, hemolysis-associated
pulmonary hypertension, and mortality in sickle cell disease. JAMA 294(1):81–90.
23. Reiter CD, Gladwin MT (2003) An emerging role for nitric oxide in sickle cell disease
vascular homeostasis and therapy. Curr Opin Hematol 10(2):99–107.
24. Sachdev V, et al.; Walk-PHASST Investigators (2011) Echocardiographic markers of
elevated pulmonary pressure and left ventricular diastolic dysfunction are associated
with exercise intolerance in adults and adolescents with homozygous sickle cell
anemia in the United States and United Kingdom. Circulation 124(13):1452–1460.
25. Caughey MC, Hinderliter AL, Jones SK, Shah SP, Ataga KI (2012) Hemodynamic
characteristics and predictors of pulmonary hypertension in patients with sickle cell
disease. Am J Cardiol 109(9):1353–1357.
26. Castro O, Hoque M, Brown BD (2003) Pulmonary hypertension in sickle cell disease:
Cardiac catheterization results and survival. Blood 101(4):1257–1261.
27. Kasner M, et al. (2007) Utility of Doppler echocardiography and tissue Doppler imaging
in the estimation of diastolic function in heart failure with normal ejection fraction: A
comparative Doppler-conductance catheterization study. Circulation 116(6):637–647.
28. Mehari A, Gladwin MT, Tian X, Machado RF, Kato GJ (2012) Mortality in adults with
sickle cell disease and pulmonary hypertension. JAMA 307(12):1254–1256.
29. Fonseca GH, Souza R, Salemi VM, Jardim CV, Gualandro SF (2012) Pulmonary hyper-
tension diagnosed by right heart catheterisation in sickle cell disease. Eur Respir J
39(1):112–118.
30. Sutton LL, Castro O, Cross DJ, Spencer JE, Lewis JF (1994) Pulmonary hypertension in
sickle cell disease. Am J Cardiol 74(6):626–628.
31. Covitz W, et al.; The Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease (CSSCD) (1995) The heart
in sickle cell anemia. Chest 108(5):1214–1219.
32. Lindsay J, Jr, Meshel JC, Patterson RH (1974) The cardiovascular manifestations of
sickle cell disease. Arch Intern Med 133(4):643–651.
33. Lester LA, Sodt PC, Hutcheon N, Arcilla RA (1990) Cardiac abnormalities in children
with sickle cell anemia. Chest 98(5):1169–1174.
34. Covarrubias EA, Sheikh MU, Solanki DL, Morjaria M, Fox LM (1980) Left ventricular
function in sickle cell anemia: A noninvasive evaluation. South Med J 73(3):342–344.
35. Gerry JL, Baird MG, Fortuin NJ (1976) Evaluation of left ventricular function in pa-
tients with sickle cell anemia. Am J Med 60(7):968–972.
36. Doshi AR, Pauliks LB (2013) Increased left main coronary artery dimensions in children
with sickle cell disease. Pediatr Cardiol 34(4):954–958.
37. Sachdev V, et al. (2007) Diastolic dysfunction is an independent risk factor for death in
patients with sickle cell disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 49(4):472–479.
38. Johnson MC, et al. (2010) Left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction in
children with sickle cell disease are related to asleep and waking oxygen desatura-
tion. Blood 116(1):16–21.
39. Arslankoylu AE, Hallioglu O, Yilgor E, Duzovali O (2010) Assessment of cardiac
functions in sickle cell anemia with Doppler myocardial performance index. J Trop
Pediatr 56(3):195–197.
E5190
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600311113
Bakeer et al.
 40. Cabrita IZ, et al. (2013) The association between tricuspid regurgitation velocity and
5-year survival in a North West London population of patients with sickle cell disease
in the United Kingdom. Br J Haematol 162(3):400–408.
41. Isma’eel H, et al. (2008) Relation between iron-overload indices, cardiac echo-Doppler,
and biochemical markers in thalassemia intermedia. Am J Cardiol 102(3):363–367.
42. Junqueira FP, et al. (2013) Right and left ventricular function and myocardial scarring
in adult patients with sickle cell disease: a comprehensive magnetic resonance as-
sessment of hepatic and myocardial iron overload. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 15:83.
43. Hankins JS, et al. (2010) Ventricular diastolic dysfunction in sickle cell anemia is
common but not associated with myocardial iron deposition. Pediatr Blood Cancer
55(3):495–500.
44. Voskaridou E, Christoulas D, Terpos E (2012) Sickle-cell disease and the heart: Review
of the current literature. Br J Haematol 157(6):664–673.
45. Ataga KI, Klings ES (2014) Pulmonary hypertension in sickle cell disease: Diagnosis and
management. Hematology (Am Soc Hematol Educ Program) 2014(1):425–431.
46. Klings ES, et al.; American Thoracic Society Ad Hoc Committee on Pulmonary Hy-
pertension of Sickle Cell Disease (2014) An official American Thoracic Society clinical
practice guideline: Diagnosis, risk stratification, and management of pulmonary hy-
pertension of sickle cell disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 189(6):727–740.
47. Westwood MA, et al. (2007) Myocardial tissue characterization and the role of chronic
anemia in sickle cell cardiomyopathy. J Magn Reson Imaging 26(3):564–568.
48. Bratis K, et al. (2013) Abnormal myocardial perfusion-fibrosis pattern in sickle cell
disease assessed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Int J Cardiol 166(3):e75–e76.
49. Pászty C, et al. (1997) Transgenic knockout mice with exclusively human sickle he-
moglobin and sickle cell disease. Science 278(5339):876–878.
50. Eddine AC, et al. (2012) Ventricular structure and function in children with sickle cell
disease using conventional and tissue Doppler echocardiography. Am J Cardiol 109(9):
1358–1364.
51. Zilberman MV, Du W, Das S, Sarnaik SA (2007) Evaluation of left ventricular diastolic
function in pediatric sickle cell disease patients. Am J Hematol 82(6):433–438.
52. Arheden H, et al. (1999) Measurement of the distribution volume of gadopentetate
dimeglumine at echo-planar MR imaging to quantify myocardial infarction: Com-
parison with 99mTc-DTPA autoradiography in rats. Radiology 211(3):698–708.
53. Flett AS, et al. (2010) Equilibrium contrast cardiovascular magnetic resonance for the
measurement of diffuse myocardial fibrosis: Preliminary validation in humans.
Circulation 122(2):138–144.
54. Neilan TG, et al. (2013) Myocardial extracellular volume fraction from T1 measure-
ments in healthy volunteers and mice: Relationship to aging and cardiac dimensions.
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 6(6):672–683.
55. Rodgers CT, et al. (2013) Inversion recovery at 7 T in the human myocardium: Mea-
surement of T(1), inversion efficiency and B(1) (+). Magn Reson Med 70(4):1038–1046.
56. Arumugam PI, et al. (2015) Genetic diminution of circulating prothrombin amelio-
rates multiorgan pathologies in sickle cell disease mice. Blood 126(15):1844–1855.
57. Tomanek RJ, Grimes JC, Diana JN (1981) Relationship between the magnitude of
myocardial ischemia and ultrastructural alterations. Exp Mol Pathol 35(1):65–83.
58. Vandeplassche G, Thoné F, Hermans C, Borgers M (1990) Ultrastructural damage and
Ca2(+)-shifts in the canine myocardium subjected to regional incomplete ischemia.
Basic Res Cardiol 85(4):384–391.
59. Tanne Z, et al. (1994) Ultrastructural and cytochemical changes in the heart of iron-
deficient rats. Biochem Pharmacol 47(10):1759–1766.
60. Dong F, et al. (2005) Dietary iron deficiency induces ventricular dilation, mitochon-
drial ultrastructural aberrations and cytochrome c release: Involvement of nitric oxide
synthase and protein tyrosine nitration. Clin Sci (Lond) 109(3):277–286.
61. Asrar Ul Haq M, Mutha V, Rudd N, Hare DL, Wong C (2014) Heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction—Unwinding the diagnosis mystique. Am J Cardiovasc Dis
4(3):100–113.
62. Pape LA, Price JM, Alpert JS, Ockene IS, Weiner BH (1991) Relation of left atrial size
to pulmonary capillary wedge pressure in severe mitral regurgitation. Cardiology
78(4):297–303.
63. Patel DA, Lavie CJ, Milani RV, Shah S, Gilliland Y (2009) Clinical implications of left
atrial enlargement: A review. Ochsner J 9(4):191–196.
64. Appleton CP, Galloway JM, Gonzalez MS, Gaballa M, Basnight MA (1993) Estimation
of left ventricular filling pressures using two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiog-
raphy in adult patients with cardiac disease. Additional value of analyzing left atrial
size, left atrial ejection fraction and the difference in duration of pulmonary venous
and mitral flow velocity at atrial contraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 22(7):1972–1982.
65. Machado RF, et al. (2007) Severity of pulmonary hypertension during vaso-occlusive pain
crisis and exercise in patients with sickle cell disease. Br J Haematol 136(2):319–325.
66. Anthi A, et al. (2007) Hemodynamic and functional assessment of patients with sickle
cell disease and pulmonary hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175(12):
1272–1279.
67. Denfield SW, Webber SA (2010) Restrictive cardiomyopathy in childhood. Heart Fail
Clin 6(4):445–452, viii.
68. Russo LM, Webber SA (2005) Idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy in children. Heart
91(9):1199–1202.
69. Webber SA, et al.; Pediatric Cardiomyopathy Registry Investigators (2012) Outcomes
of restrictive cardiomyopathy in childhood and the influence of phenotype: A report
from the Pediatric Cardiomyopathy Registry. Circulation 126(10):1237–1244.
70. Foley RN, et al. (1996) The impact of anemia on cardiomyopathy, morbidity, and
mortality in end-stage renal disease. Am J Kidney Dis 28(1):53–61.
71. Metivier F, Marchais SJ, Guerin AP, Pannier B, London GM (2000) Pathophysiology of
anaemia: Focus on the heart and blood vessels. Nephrol Dial Transplant 15(Suppl 3):
14–18.
72. Srivastava PM, et al. (2006) Diastolic dysfunction is associated with anaemia in pa-
tients with type II diabetes. Clin Sci (Lond) 110(1):109–116.
73. Nair D, et al. (2005) Association of anemia with diastolic dysfunction among patients
with coronary artery disease in the Heart and Soul Study. Am J Cardiol 95(3):332–336.
74. Cho IJ, Mun YC, Kwon KH, Shin GJ (2014) Effect of anemia correction on left ven-
tricular structure and filling pressure in anemic patients without overt heart disease.
Korean J Intern Med 29(4):445–453.
75. Rakusan K, Cicutti N, Kolar F (2001) Effect of anemia on cardiac function, microvas-
cular structure, and capillary hematocrit in rat hearts. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
280(3):H1407–H1414.
76. Rossi MA, Carillo SV (1983) Electron microscopic study on the cardiac hypertrophy
induced by iron deficiency anaemia in the rat. Br J Exp Pathol 64(4):373–387.
77. Desai AA, et al. (2014) Mechanistic insights and characterization of sickle cell disease-
associated cardiomyopathy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 7(3):430–437.
78. Fertrin KY, Costa FF (2010) Genomic polymorphisms in sickle cell disease: Implications
for clinical diversity and treatment. Expert Rev Hematol 3(4):443–458.
79. Chang KH, et al. (2015) Vasculopathy-associated hyperangiotensinemia mobilizes
haematopoietic stem cells/progenitors through endothelial AT₂R and cytoskeletal
dysregulation. Nat Commun 6:5914.
80. Sawicki KT, et al. (2015) Increased heme levels in the heart lead to exacerbated is-
chemic injury. J Am Heart Assoc 4(8):e002272.
81. Khechaduri A, Bayeva M, Chang HC, Ardehali H (2013) Heme levels are increased in
human failing hearts. J Am Coll Cardiol 61(18):1884–1893.
82. Acehan D, et al. (2011) Cardiac and skeletal muscle defects in a mouse model of
human Barth syndrome. J Biol Chem 286(2):899–908.
83. Heiberg E, et al. (2010) Design and validation of Segment—Freely available software
for cardiovascular image analysis. BMC Med Imaging 10:1.
84. Wansapura JP, Millay DP, Dunn RS, Molkentin JD, Benson DW (2011) Magnetic resonance
imaging assessment of cardiac dysfunction in δ-sarcoglycan null mice. Neuromuscul Disord
21(1):68–73.
85. Messroghli DR, et al. (2011) Assessment of diffuse myocardial fibrosis in rats using
small-animal Look-Locker inversion recovery T1 mapping. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging
4(6):636–640.
86. Abeykoon S, Sargent M, Wansapura JP (2012) Quantitative myocardial perfusion in
mice based on the signal intensity of flow sensitized CMR. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson
14:73.
87. Chu V, et al. (2001) Method for non-invasively recording electrocardiograms in con-
scious mice. BMC Physiol 1:6.
88. Desai KH, et al. (1997) Cardiovascular indexes in the mouse at rest and with exercise:
New tools to study models of cardiac disease. Am J Physiol 272(2 Pt 2):H1053–H1061.
89. Parsons SA, et al. (2007) Genetic disruption of calcineurin improves skeletal muscle
pathology and cardiac disease in a mouse model of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.
J Biol Chem 282(13):10068–10078.
90. Woessner JF, Jr (1961) The determination of hydroxyproline in tissue and protein
samples containing small proportions of this imino acid. Arch Biochem Biophys 93:
440–447.
91. Maiellaro-Rafferty K, et al. (2013) Altered regional cardiac wall mechanics are asso-
ciated with differential cardiomyocyte calcium handling due to nebulette mutations
in preclinical inherited dilated cardiomyopathy. J Mol Cell Cardiol 60:151–160.
92. Gupta MK, et al. (2013) Functional dissection of myosin binding protein C phos-
phorylation. J Mol Cell Cardiol 64:39–50.
93. Brattelid T, et al. (2007) Expression of mRNA encoding G protein-coupled receptors
involved in congestive heart failure—A quantitative RT-PCR study and the question of
normalisation. Basic Res Cardiol 102(3):198–208.
94. Karolchik D, et al. (2014) The UCSC Genome Browser database: 2014 update. Nucleic
Acids Res 42(Database issue, D1):D764–D770.
95. Kim D, et al. (2013) TopHat2: Accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of
insertions, deletions and gene fusions. Genome Biol 14(4):R36.
96. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL (2009) Ultrafast and memory-efficient
alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol 10(3):R25.
97. Trapnell C, et al. (2012) Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-
seq experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat Protoc 7(3):562–578.
Bakeer et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 8, 2016
|
E5191
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
