 Comprehensive transcriptional map of primate brain 
development
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract
The transcriptional underpinnings of brain development remain poorly understood, particularly in 
humans and closely related non-human primates. We describe a high resolution transcriptional 
atlas of rhesus monkey brain development that combines dense temporal sampling of prenatal and 
postnatal periods with fine anatomical parcellation of cortical and subcortical regions associated 
with human neuropsychiatric disease. Gene expression changes more rapidly before birth, both in 
progenitor cells and maturing neurons, and cortical layers and areas acquire adult-like molecular 
profiles surprisingly late postnatally. Disparate cell populations exhibit distinct developmental 
timing but also unexpected synchrony of processes underlying neural circuit construction 
including cell projection and adhesion. Candidate risk genes for neurodevelopmental disorders 
including primary microcephaly, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability, and 
schizophrenia show disease-specific spatiotemporal enrichment within developing neocortex. 
Human developmental expression trajectories are more similar to monkey than rodent, and 
approximately 9% of genes show human-specific regulation with evidence for prolonged 
maturation or neoteny.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding author: Ed S. Lein, Ph.D., Allen Institute for Brain Science, 615 Westlake Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, Tel: 
206.548.7039, Fax: 206.548.7071, EdL@alleninstitute.org.
*These authors contributed equally
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions
T.E.B., J.A.M., S.-L.D., L.N., A.S., R.A.D., J.J.R., Sh.S., M.J.H., D.G.A., A.Be. and E.S.L. contributed significantly to the analysis. 
K.A.S., L.N., A.S., R.A.D., J.G.H., R.F.H., Z.M., C.D., D.G.A., A.Be. and E.S.L. contributed significantly to the experimental and 
technical design. T.E.B., J.A.M., T.L., Sh.S. and A.Be. contributed significantly to generation of the data. S.M.S., K.A.S., L.N., T.L., 
P.W., J.G.H., M.J.H., J.W.P., C.D., A.R.J., D.G.A., A.Be. and E.S.L. contributed significantly to supervision and management of the 
project. K.A., N.De., T.D., J.G., G.Gu., C.L.K., C.L., C.-K.L., P.D.P., T.R., K.R. and D.S. contributed to the analysis. N.De., T.A.D., 
A.E., J.G., R.A.G., G.Gu., D.R.H., A.H.-S., J.J., C.L.K., C.L., C.-K.L., F.L., J.N., J.R., Z.L.R. and W.B.W. contributed to the 
experimental and technical design. K.A., J.A., C.B., J.L.B., D.B., K.Bi., A.Bo., K.Br., S.B., E.B., S.Cal., A.C., S.Cat., M.C., J.C., 
N.De., T.A.D., N.Do., G.Ge., T.L.G., J.G., L.G., B.G., G.Gu., J.H., Z.H., N.H., R.H., M.K., A.K., C.L.K., C.L., C.-K.L., F.L., N.Ma., 
R.M., J.M., N.Mo., E.M., K.N., J.N., A.O., E.O., J.Pa., S.P., J.Pe., L.P., M.R., Z.L.R., T.R., B.R., K.R., D.R., M.S., N.Sh., S.S., N.Sj., 
A.J.S., R.T., L.V., U.W., W.B.W., C.Wh., J.W., R.Y. and B.L.Y. contributed to generation of the data. A.Bo., E.B., M.C., T.D., T.A.D., 
A.E., E.F., B.G., M.K., C.L., L.L., N.Ma., S.P., M.R. and A.J.S. contributed to supervision and management of the project. T.E.B., 
J.A.M. and E.S.L. wrote the manuscript.
Author Information
Detailed technical white papers describing tissue processing and microarray profiling are available at the Allen Brain Atlas portal 
(www.brain-map.org) through the Non-Human Primate link, or directly from the NIH Blueprint NHP Atlas website 
(www.blueprintnhpatlas.org), under the ‘Documentation’ tab. Microarray data can be viewed online by selecting ‘Microdissection’ 
under the ‘Microarray’ tab and can be downloaded under the ‘Download’ tab. Reprints and permissions information is available at 
www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 July 21; 535(7612): 367–375. doi:10.1038/nature18637.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The primate brain develops through a series of stereotyped processes that are conserved 
across mammals1, including the specification, migration and maturation of diverse cell types 
and the formation and refinement of functional neuronal circuits. There are also primate-
specific features of brain development that increase anatomical2, cognitive3, and behavioral 
complexity4 and may explain why many human neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases 
are not well modeled in rodents5. These features include a larger cortical progenitor pool in 
the outer subventricular zone not present in rodents2 and protracted myelination6, synapse 
production7, and pruning8. Consequently, rhesus monkey and human share a greatly 
expanded neocortex and specialization of areas (most notably primary visual cortex2), 
compared to mouse, reflecting the more recent common ancestor of human and rhesus 
monkey (25 million years) than human and mouse (70 million years)9. Likewise, rhesus 
monkey and human brain10 share more similar patterns of gene expression than do mouse 
and human brain11. Rhesus monkey thus provides a valuable proxy for human brain 
development, particularly during prenatal and early postnatal development that are difficult 
to sample in human, and also provides a comparator to study human-specific features such 
as prolonged maturation or neoteny6,12,13.
Molecular programs responsible for brain development remain incompletely understood in 
any species, due to the spatiotemporal complexity of these processes and the resource 
intensity of methods needed to probe them. Transcriptome-based approaches have 
dramatically accelerated understanding of variation in gene expression programs related to 
brain structure and function in adult and developing human14–17 and rhesus monkey10,18, 
albeit with limited anatomical resolution and developmental coverage. Recent studies in 
adult mouse19,20 and human21 have profiled individual cortical cells and demonstrated 
robust transcriptional differences between neuronal and non-neuronal cell types and large-
scale changes over the course of development. While these approaches offer cellular 
resolution in targeted domains, a global picture of gene expression changes over 
development across the complete cellular milieu has been lacking
This project aimed to create a transcriptional atlas of non-human primate brain combining 
fine anatomical precision with dense temporal coverage across prenatal and postnatal 
development in regions associated with neuropsychiatric disease. These transcriptional data 
are complemented by imaging and histology-based anatomical reference and cellular 
resolution in situ hybridization (ISH) datasets, all publicly accessible through the NIH 
Blueprint Non-Human Primate (NHP) Atlas (www.blueprintnhpatlas.org; www.brain-
map.org).
Spatiotemporal transcriptome analysis
This resource characterizes rhesus monkey forebrain development with three modalities: 1) 
anatomical reference datasets consisting of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
corresponding densely sampled Nissl stains; 2) cellular resolution gene expression data 
generated with a high throughput ISH platform; and 3) fine anatomical resolution 
transcriptome timeseries data generated with a combination of laser microdissection (LMD) 
and DNA microarrays (Fig. 1a). Molecular analyses focused on discrete progenitor and 
postmitotic cell populations in neocortex (medial prefrontal and visual cortical areas), 
Bakken et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hippocampus, striatum, and amygdala (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Tables 1–2). Ten 
developmental timepoints were chosen to correspond to peak periods of neurogenesis for 
neurons destined for different layers and glial cell types of V1 (prenatal)22 and major 
developmental epochs: neonate, infant, juvenile, and young adult (postnatal; Fig. 1c). 
Anatomical parcellation at each time point was based on prior work in monkey and human 
brain development2,17 (Extended Data Fig. 1). Canonical genes marking different neural cell 
types showed expected spatiotemporal patterning across development, shown as heatmaps 
(Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 2) laid out following the anatomical organization in Fig. 1c.
To gain a high level understanding of transcriptional dynamics during cortical development, 
we represented the similarity between cortical samples using multidimensional scaling 
(MDS) based on correlated expression (Fig. 1 e–g). Layer and age explained almost 90% of 
the variation across all samples (n = 922; Fig. 1e) and prenatal samples (n = 542; Fig. 1f). To 
examine smaller differences between neuronal populations (grey circles in Fig. 1f), we 
repeated the MDS analysis only on V1 cortical layers (containing different types of 
excitatory neurons; n = 175; Fig. 1g). Transcriptional similarity of layers reflects spatial 
proximity and birth date, as described in adult rhesus monkey10. Moreover, continuous 
variation across prenatal development suggests gradual changes in gene expression.
There were few sex-related differences in expression, although the study was not powered to 
detect subtle differences restricted to specific brain regions or developmental stages. Only 
one autosomal gene (LOC693361, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase chain 1-like) showed 
robust increased expression in males across brain regions during prenatal development 
(Extended Data Fig. 9, Supplementary Table 3). However, the microarray probe for 
LOC693361 also targets an unannotated region of rhesus monkey Y chromosome23 so there 
are likely no autosomal genes with persistent male- or female-specific expression differences 
across development.
Developmental transcriptional dynamics
Previous work has demonstrated that different cortical layers have distinct transcriptomic 
profiles both in adult and developing cortex, where the largest differences are seen between 
germinal and postmitotic cell populations17. In grossly dissected developing human 
prefrontal cortex, gene expression changes fastest prenatally and slows sharply just after 
birth14. If dividing cells drive most expression change, then depletion of the progenitor pool 
would explain decreased rates. In contrast, we find that all layers of V1 and prefrontal cortex 
(anterior cingulate gyrus; ACG) have similar rates of expression change across development 
(Fig. 2a). Thus transcriptional programs change dramatically both in progenitor cell 
populations as they give rise to different neuronal and non-neuronal cell types, as well as in 
postmitotic neuronal cell types as they differentiate and mature into adulthood.
Similar developmental trajectories were seen in hippocampus, basal ganglia and amygdala 
(Extended Data Fig. 4a). However, the genes changing dynamically could differ by region or 
age. We identified the top 1000 genes with the largest increase and decrease in relative 
expression between all pairs of ages for each structure and visualized overlap of these gene 
lists as a heatmap (Fig. 2b). This threshold was selected because at least 1000 genes 
Bakken et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significantly changed expression (ANOVA FDR < 0.05, fold change > 1.25) between all 
adjacent ages in the majority of regions (Extended Data Fig. 4b). Genes changing over time 
were remarkably synchronized across different cell populations. At every age, 
approximately half of the top increasing and decreasing genes were shared by most brain 
regions, and unsupervised clustering grouped samples almost perfectly by age (age index bar 
in Fig. 2b). Genes increasing with age showed substantial overlap across ages within, but 
much less between, prenatal and postnatal ages. This suggests that distinct transcriptional 
programs are active in prenatal and postnatal development, and that many of these programs 
progress gradually. At early stages, samples grouped by proliferative state independently of 
brain region (mitotic index bar in Fig. 2b) reflecting a common set of cell division genes. 
Postnatally, samples grouped more by anatomical structure, reflecting increased regional 
identity during brain maturation (structure index bar in Fig. 2b).
To interpret these dynamic gene expression patterns, we searched for enrichment of gene 
ontology (GO) terms at each region and age (Supplementary Tables 4–5) and represented 
significant enrichments as heatmaps ordered as above (Fig. 2c). For example, genes related 
to onset (positive regulation) of axonal projection were enriched during prenatal periods as 
expected. Surprisingly, this process appears to be actively repressed during late postnatal 
development, as genes associated with offset (negative regulation) of axonal projection 
showed increased expression from juvenile (12 months) to young adult (48 month) stages. 
Processes associated with synapse development appear to be temporally enriched in late 
prenatal and early postnatal periods, and also synchronized between presynaptic (synaptic 
vesicle localization) and postsynaptic (dendrite development) neurons. Interestingly, the 
region-specific blocks of coordinated expression in postnatal visual cortex (V1 and V2) and 
hippocampus (Fig. 2b, arrows) were enriched for autophagy (Extended Data Fig. 4c), which 
may reflect early dendritic spine pruning24 and grey matter volume reduction25 in visual 
cortex.
Regional timing of biological processes
Some biological processes, such as synaptogenesis and myelination, are protracted over 
development6,24, and we find that process activation (increasing genes) is longer than 
inactivation (decreasing genes; Fig. 3a). Biological processes persist longer in all regions 
pooled together (black lines) than in any individual region (colored lines) so developmental 
timing must vary between regions. We quantified synchrony between pairs of regions as the 
proportion of ages during which a process is active in either region, for processes active in 
all regions at some age (e.g., Extended Data Fig. 5a). Remarkably, despite major differences 
in cellular and functional makeup of brain regions sampled, all pairs of regions showed 
similar degrees of synchrony across all GO terms. This synchrony was centered on overlap 
of approximately half of all ages (Extended Data Fig. 5b), far greater than expected by 
chance. Few processes – cell proliferation, projection, and adhesion – were synchronized 
across all regions and ages (Supplementary Table 5).
Processes usually started before birth in all regions, but sometimes at strikingly different 
times in different regions (Fig. 3b). Consistent with known early maturation of subcortical 
circuits1, rank ordering age of onset for each process across regions showed earlier 
Bakken et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subcortical onset, particularly in amygdala, and similar timing for neocortex and 
hippocampus (Extended Data Fig. 5c). For example, subcortical globus pallidus is 
myelinated before cortical white matter26 and shows early increased expression of genes 
specific to myelinating oligodendrocytes (MOG, MOBP, and ERMN) (Fig. 3c and Extended 
Data Fig. 5d). Interestingly, three other oligodendrocyte markers (MAL, ASPA, and 
OPALIN) turned on synchronously in all regions, suggesting a temporal and regional 
dissociation of different stages of myelination.
Late emergence of mature cortical identity
The neocortex is composed of diverse neuronal subtypes organized into layers that have 
distinct connectivity and transcriptional signatures in the adult10,20,27 with graded and 
discrete variation between cortical areas15,16,28. A neuron develops its mature molecular 
identity through cell-autonomous processes and environmental interactions during 
migration, process extension, and synapse formation. If early generated neurons closely 
resemble their mature states, then environmental interactions must have small effects on 
their terminal molecular identities. Since we found dramatic expression changes within 
postmitotic cortical layers (see Fig. 2a), there is a significant role for either or both of these 
mechanisms.
To examine the emergence of mature laminar signatures, we compared layer-enriched 
expression patterns across development from the earliest stage at which all postmitotic 
layers are present (E80) to adulthood. We calculated the average expression correlation, 
across layers and between all pairs of ages, of the top 2.5% of genes most specific for each 
layer in V1 at each age (see Methods, Supplementary Table 6). Adult identity emerged 
gradually (Fig. 4a), as evidenced by decreased expression similarity with increased age 
separation. In fact, laminar expression patterns in young adulthood barely resembled mid-
fetal cortex (R < 0.1).
These correlation trends result from nearly complete shifts in genes showing robust layer-
specific expression (fold change > 1.5; Fig. 4b). Most genes were enriched only for a subset 
of contiguous ages at early, middle, and late stages, while few genes showed persistent 
laminar enrichment (Fig. 4b,c, Supplementary Table 7). Sets of laminar genes tile smoothly 
across development, suggesting a graded emergence of functional characteristics of neuronal 
subtypes as well as shifting proportions of subtypes within layers. Genes with early laminar 
expression are enriched for GO terms related to early developmental events such as neuron 
differentiation (P = 1.6 × 10−7) and axon generation (P = 6.7 × 10−6), whereas later laminar 
genes are enriched for axon guidance (P = 6.5 × 10−5) and innervation (P = 9.8 × 10−6).
Different anatomical and functional neocortical areas have distinct gene expression patterns 
in the adult, most prominently in V115,16,28. During development, intrinsic (protomap)29 and 
extrinsic (protocortex)30 factors shape cortical area identity. To ask whether the temporal 
dynamics of areal expression support intrinsic versus extrinsic areal specification, we first 
identified genes differentially expressed between caudal (V1, blue) and rostral (ACG, red) 
cortex in different layers at each developmental stage (Fig. 4d, Supplementary Table 8). 
More genes were differentially expressed between cortical areas in postmitotic layers during 
Bakken et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 late postnatal than prenatal development. These genes were enriched for cell adhesion (P = 
3.9 × 10−6) and synaptic transmission (P = 7.3 × 10−4) GO terms, suggesting a role for 
extrinsic factors related to the functional maturation of cortical circuitry. Developmental 
process timing varies across primate cortex, with neurogenesis occurring earlier in frontal 
than caudal cortex but circuit maturation persisting later in frontal cortex6,8, and this was 
recapitulated by an even more protracted emergence of enriched genes in ACG (12 to 48 
months) compared to V1 (3 to 12 months).
To test for genes that may contribute to intrinsic specification, we searched for genes with 
persistent areal enrichment beginning prior to the arrival of thalamic31 or other extrinsic 
inputs. While 38% of genes showed regional differences, only 1% were persistent over 
development (Supplementary Table 8). These genes were primarily expressed in postmitotic 
cortical layers, for example CBLN217, and only 20 genes (0.2%) were expressed in germinal 
zones, including the well-known caudal-to-rostral gradient genes FGFR317,29 and NR2F1 
(COUP-TFI)29. Thus, while there is evidence for a small number of genes clearly reflecting 
early intrinsic areal specification, there are many more adult differences that could be due to 
extrinsic interactions and activity-dependent mechanisms32.
Some areal differences are likely due to differences in the proportion and maturation state of 
specific cell types, such as dividing neural progenitors and postmitotic neurons and glia. 
Indeed, we identified spatiotemporal locations with significant enrichment in V1 or ACG for 
markers of cell cycle (i.e. actively dividing progenitor cells), GABAergic and glutamatergic 
neurons in adult mouse V1, and astrocytes (Fig. 4e–h). Cell cycle markers were enriched in 
V1 SZ from E80-E90 (Fig. 4e), reflecting extended generation of superficial excitatory 
neurons in V1 relative to ACG. Likewise, markers for excitatory neurons (Fig. 4g) were 
enriched in ACG prenatally, corresponding to earlier generation and maturation of these 
cells. Postnatal enrichment in V1 is likely secondary to using markers derived from adult 
mouse V1. Astrocyte marker enrichment in prenatal ACG progressed from proliferative to 
postmitotic layers (Fig. 4h), tracking astrocyte generation and migration in these layers. 
Finally, markers of inhibitory GABAergic interneurons showed early enrichment in V1 SZ, 
followed by ACG enrichment in several layers (Fig. 4f), a potential signature of early 
interneuron migration from medial ganglionic eminence to caudal cortex.
The majority of areal genes showed intermediate expression in primary somatosensory 
cortex (S1), located approximately midway between rostral ACG and caudal V1 (Extended 
Data Fig. 6). Therefore, rostro-caudal expression gradients, rather than specific features of 
ACG and V1, likely drive many of these areal expression differences.
Mapping disease genes to development
Highly heritable but genetically complex neurodevelopmental disorders will be more 
tractable if we can identify common pathways linking many candidate risk genes. For 
example, recent work on autism spectrum disorder (ASD) demonstrated that candidate genes 
are co-expressed in mid-fetal human cortical neurons17,33,34 and converge on synaptic 
development pathways. Large-scale genetic association studies have identified high 
confidence genes associated with primary autosomal recessive microcephaly (MCPH), ASD, 
Bakken et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intellectual disability (ID), and schizophrenia (SCZ). We localized these disease genes in 
developing cortex using this new high resolution map.
We used weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify sets of genes 
with correlated patterning (modules) in cortical samples at each age, linked modules with 
overlapping genes between adjacent ages, and annotated modules for enrichment in different 
cortical layers and cell types (Fig. 5a; Supplementary Table 9). Next, we tested disease gene 
sets for significant enrichment (hypergeometric test, corrected P < 0.1). As expected, MCPH 
genes showed early- to mid-fetal enrichment in neuronal progenitor-enriched modules (Fig. 
5b) where they are positioned to alter cell cycle kinetics to reduce neuron numbers and brain 
size. Many ASD genes showed coordinated expression in post-mitotic neurons prenatally 
(Fig. 5c), as previously reported17,33,34, but also postnatally. In contrast, SCZ genes were 
selectively enriched only in postmitotic neuronal modules from infancy through adulthood 
(Fig. 5d).
ID-associated genes were not enriched in any gene modules, consistent with the view that 
disruption of many biological pathways can undermine cognitive development34. To 
investigate whether these diverse molecular pathways converge on intermediate phenotypes 
within ID such as structural brain malformations, we looked for correlated expression 
among the 71 ID genes across prenatal and postnatal cortex. We identified four major 
expression patterns: 1) postnatal cortical plate, 2) prenatal germinal layers, 3) prenatal 
subventricular zone and cortical plate, and 4) more complex patterns spanning development 
(Fig. 5e). Consistent with the module analysis above, MCPH-associated genes had 
significantly similar expression profiles (multivariate distance matrix regression, P < 0.001) 
and were enriched in prenatal germinal zones in clusters 2 and 3 in either VZ or SZ. In 
contrast, other phenotypes did not share expression patterns, including cortical atrophy, 
seizures and even microcephaly with other brain malformations. Furthermore, genes with 
similar patterns can give rise to different phenotypes: ASXL3 and GRIP1 are co-expressed 
(R = 0.80) in cluster 3 but are associated with MCPH and corpus callosum agenesis, 
respectively.
Human-specific developmental trajectories
Humans exhibit unique cortical and cognitive developmental trajectories compared to other 
mammals5 that are likely correlated with differences in gene expression. To identify 
conserved and divergent genes, we compared gene expression trajectories across prenatal 
and postnatal development in frontal cortex between rat, rhesus monkey, and two 
independent human data sets, normalizing timescales by developmental event scores1. 
Expression conservation varied across species (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test, P < 10−21), 
with greater similarity within humans than within primates (Wilcoxon signed rank test, P < 
10−6), as expected based on evolutionary distance (Fig. 6a). Surprisingly, there was no 
significant difference in conservation of rat trajectories with either human or rhesus monkey, 
indicating transcriptional patterning has evolved at the same average rate in human and 
rhesus monkey since our last common ancestor. On average, 69% of genes had conserved 
expression trajectories (R > 0.5) across all three species, and genes with the most dynamic 
expression change over development were even more highly conserved (Extended Data Fig. 
Bakken et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7a,b). For example, EMX2, a transcription factor critical to cortical arealization35, and 
CNTN1, a cell adhesion gene that guides neuronal migration and connectivity (Fig. 6b), are 
highly conserved.
A significant minority (13%) of genes differed between primates and rat (validated for a 
subset of genes in developing mouse; Supplementary Table 10) and approximately 9% had 
human-specific expression trajectories. The proportion of genes showing different 
conservation patterns was robust to gene selection and correlation threshold (Extended Data 
Fig. 7b). Some of these differences were dramatic; for example, BMP3 decreases over 
primate development but increases in rodents (Fig. 6b). BMP3 is a WNT signaling growth 
factor that has been linked to craniofacial variation in dogs36. CNTN2, a close family 
member of the conserved adhesion gene CNTN1, likewise shows opposite developmental 
trajectories in primates and rodents. In both human data sets, LGALS1 and LIN7A increase 
or decrease expression, respectively, in opposite directions to other species. LGALS1 further 
has a different adult laminar pattern of cortical expression in human compared to mouse11, 
while deletion of LIN7A is associated with human intellectual disability and disrupted 
neuronal migration and axonal pathfinding in mouse37.
Some aspects of cortical development, such as myelination6 and synaptic pruning8, are 
protracted or neotenous between cortical areas or between species. Reasoning that abrupt 
changes in expression may represent important developmental milestones, we compared 
developmental timing by identifying distinct changes in expression trajectories, or 
breakpoints. 179 increasing and 179 decreasing genes met these criteria in all three species, 
being well fit by segmented linear regression (Supplementary Table 11). Consistent with 
different developmental rates of these species, breakpoints for increasing (Fig. 6c) and 
decreasing (Extended Data Fig. 7c) genes often occurred earliest in rat, intermediate for 
rhesus monkey, and latest in human. Almost half (81) of increasing genes were synapse 
related (dashed lines, Fig. 6c), and breakpoints coincided with ages of peak synaptic density 
estimated in these species (shaded rectangles, Fig. 6c, Extended Data Fig. 7d). There was no 
significant difference in the breakpoints for synapse-related genes in human V1 versus 
prefrontal cortex and only a short delay in rhesus monkey V1 (42 days, P = 9.6 × 10−9, 
Extended Data Fig. 7e), consistent with synchronous synaptogenesis reported in 
primates7,38–40. One study later reported protracted synaptogenesis in human41, but this 
study suffered from sparse sampling and no statistical analysis and does not appear 
consistent with the bulk of evidence.
While breakpoint timing was largely conserved between species, particularly between rhesus 
monkey and rat (Extended Data Fig. 7f), human breakpoints were clearly bimodally 
distributed (Fig. 6c) suggesting that some genes had different developmental timing. For 
example, OLIG1 is expressed in maturing oligodendrocytes and had a late breakpoint 
relative to rhesus monkey (Fig. 6d), consistent with prolonged myelination in several human 
cortical areas compared to rhesus monkey and chimpanzee6. Surprisingly, many more genes 
had an early rather than late breakpoint in human prefrontal cortex (Fig. 6e), in contrast to 
previous work12,13 showing human-specific delayed peak expression in this brain region. 
However, we found that many early genes continued to increase expression through 
adulthood (Fig. 6e), such as SYT7 (Fig. 6d), a presynaptic calcium-binding protein 
Bakken et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 important for modifying neurotransmitter release42. In rhesus monkey, gene expression often 
did not change significantly after breakpoints. Genes with an early breakpoint and late 
maximal expression may mark developmental processes that are protracted in human 
relative to non-human primates and that underlie our extended cognitive development. 
Interestingly, we found this transcriptional signature of neoteny between species in both 
prefrontal cortex and V1, but much less so in evolutionarily older structures including 
hippocampus, amygdala and striatum (Fig. 6e and Extended Data Fig. 7g).
Discussion
The current project transcriptionally profiled primate brain development with fine 
anatomical detail from early gestation to young adulthood. While expression rates of change 
decreased more than 100-fold over development, we observed small but coherent changes 
from juvenile to adult, a period of enormous cognitive change and susceptibility to 
neuropsychiatric disease. These changes related to the late emergence of mature laminar and 
areal signatures, biological pathways such as negative regulation of axonal pathfinding, and 
the appearance of gene modules significantly associated with ASD and SCZ.
Two unexpected characteristics of expression trajectories support extrinsic influences on 
developmental transcriptional regulation. First, there was a striking synchrony among genes 
changing in disparate brain regions and cell populations, suggesting a mechanism for global 
regulation such as circulating hormones. Second, the surprisingly late acquisition of adult-
like cortical areal and laminar molecular phenotypes points to an important role for 
contextual and activity-dependent mechanisms in sculpting mature cellular phenotypes43,44.
We show that 22% of genes have different developmental trajectories in rat and human, 
comparable to 25% of genes that have different laminar patterns in adult mouse and human 
cortex11. In contrast, approximately 9% of genes have different trajectories in rhesus 
monkey and human including genes with delayed peak expression solely in human cortex. 
Therefore, rhesus monkey is an important comparator for understanding human-specific 
features of brain development but cannot fully model protracted circuit formation and 
associated diseases that are seen only in humans.
A recently expanded set of ASD candidate genes45 were significantly enriched in newborn 
neurons during prenatal development, as previously reported17,33,34, but also enriched 
throughout postnatal development. SCZ risk genes were also enriched in neurons but not 
until infancy, suggesting a larger role for dysfunction in circuit refinement than prenatal 
processes such as neurogenesis. SCZ and ASD were enriched in the same neuron-enriched 
module in infancy despite only 5% overlap in candidate genes, pointing to a shared etiology 
that is being increasingly appreciated46.
This data resource (www.blueprintnhpatlas.org; www.brain-map.org) has many potential 
applications; for example, establishing an in vivo baseline against which to compare the 
identity and maturity of in vitro stem cell-derived neurons47. Recent technical advances 
enable profiling the full transcriptome19–21, epigenome48, and ultimately proteome of single 
cells. These techniques promise to refine this broad survey to a causal understanding of 
Bakken et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 molecular programs driving the complete lineage of primate brain cells and the maturation 
of specific neuron types in functional circuits.
Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size, and the experiments were not 
randomized or blinded. More complete descriptions of the experimental and data processing 
methods are available in white papers at the NIH Blueprint NHP Atlas website 
(www.blueprintnhpatlas.org; “Documentation” tab).
Animals
Frozen postmortem tissue samples from prenatal rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) of 
predominantly Indian origin (Extended Data Table 1) were provided by the Time-Mated 
Breeding Program at the California National Research Primate Center (CNPRC; 
www.cnprc.ucdavis.edu). Prenatal brain material was acquired following fetectomy using 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) at the CNPRC. Timed pregnancy derived biological 
replicate specimens (2 males, 2 females) at each of six prenatal developmental stages (E40, 
E50, E70, E80, E90, and E120) were profiled. These timepoints were selected to coincide 
with peak periods of neurogenesis for the different layers of primary visual cortex based on 
birthdating experiments22. Frozen postmortem tissue samples from postnatal rhesus 
macaque were also provided by CNPRC. Brain regions were systematically collected from 
well-characterized rhesus monkeys born and raised at the CNPRC in outdoor, half-acre 
enclosures that provide a naturalistic setting and normal social environment. For 
transcriptome analysis, three male specimens at each of four postnatal developmental stages 
representing the neonate (0 months), infant (3 months), juvenile (12 months) and post-
pubertal adult (48 months) were profiled. Extensive health, family lineage and dominance 
information were maintained on all animals. All procedures were approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at UC Davis.
Postnatal MRI and histological reference series
An interleaved anatomical atlas of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), histology, and block 
face photographs was created from four male rhesus macaques at 2 weeks, 3, 12 and 48 
months after birth as described in the “Reference Series” white paper. In addition, ISH data 
were generated serially across complete hemispheres of three post-pubertal adult (48 
months) male specimens. Genes were selected to mark specific cell populations and cortical 
areas and to represent gene families important to neural function and associated with 
neuropsychiatric disease and brain evolution. Several histological stains (Nissl, 
acetylcholinesterase and SMI-32) of complete hemispheres were combined with ISH data to 
provide an unprecedented cellular resolution view of gene expression in the whole post-
pubertal adult brain. High-throughput colorimetric ISH methods are described in detail 
elsewhere49 and in the “In Situ Hybridization” white paper.
Tissue processing
Following collection, brain tissues were partitioned in a manner dependent on specimen 
stage, gradually frozen, and then stored at −80°C until processing. For a subset of E40 
Bakken et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specimens, following specimen collection, the calvarium was frozen intact in an 
isopentane/dry ice slurry maintained at −40°C to −45°C, gradual freezing at a steady rate. 
For the majority of E40 specimens, the specimens were embedded in OCT (optimal cutting 
temperature compound) during the freezing process. In brief, chilled OCT was placed 
around the calvarium. A disposable embedding chamber was filled with approximately 5 
mm3 chilled OCT. The specimen was carefully oriented and centered in the OCT, posterior 
surface down in the OCT. Then, the specimen was aligned along the medial/lateral axis 
using the bilateral ocular fiduciaries as a frame of reference. Next, the specimen was aligned 
in the coronal plane. After alignment along all axes, OCT was added to encase the specimen 
in its entirety. The top of the specimen was covered with approximately 3 mm of OCT. The 
chamber containing the specimen was directly placed onto a level bed of dry ice. The 
specimen and OCT were allowed to freeze completely. After demarcation of the orientation 
of the brain in the OCT block, the frozen tissue block was stored at −80°C.
For the E50 specimens, following removal of the brain from the skull, the whole brain was 
frozen intact in an isopentane/dry ice slurry maintained at −40°C to −45°C, gradual freezing 
at a steady rate. For a subset of E50 specimens, the specimens were embedded in OCT 
during the freezing process. In brief, chilled OCT was placed around the intact brain. 
Freestanding aluminum bars were assembled onto a Teflon coated plate and sized to the 
appropriate specifications for the E50 brain. The internal chamber was filled with 
approximately 5 mm3 chilled OCT. The specimen was carefully oriented and centered in the 
OCT dorsal surface down in the OCT. Then, the specimen was aligned along the medial/
lateral axis using the longitudinal fissure as the frame of reference. Next, the specimen was 
aligned in the coronal plane. After alignment along all axes, OCT was added to encase the 
specimen in its entirety. The top of the specimen was covered with approximately 3 mm of 
OCT. The Teflon plate containing the specimen was directly placed onto the level bed of dry 
ice. The specimen and OCT were allowed to freeze completely. After demarcation of the 
orientation of the brain in the OCT block, the aluminum bars were removed and the frozen 
tissue block was stored at −80°C.
For the E70, E80, E90, and E120 specimens, the hemispheres were bisected along the 
midline and individually frozen by placing the medial aspect of each hemisphere down onto 
an aluminum-Teflon coated plate that was slowly lowered into an isopentane/dry ice slurry 
maintained at −40°C to −45°C. Only approximately a third of the tissue was submerged in 
the slurry to allow the tissue to gradually freeze and to keep freezing artifacts to a minimum. 
Frozen hemispheres were stored at −80°C.
Depending on the prenatal timepoint, different approaches were taken for generating coronal 
slabs. When possible, the number of slabs per specimen was kept to a minimum. The E40, 
E50, and E70 specimens were not slabbed. For E80, the first slab contained up through the 
temporal pole and the second slab contained the occipital pole. For E90, the first slab 
contained the frontal lobe anterior of the temporal pole and the second slab contained 
temporal pole posterior through the occipital lobe. For E120, three coronal slabs were made. 
The first slab consisted of the frontal lobe anterior of the temporal pole. The second slab 
consisted of the temporal pole posterior to the cerebellum including all of the mid-brain. The 
third slab included primarily the occipital lobe.
Bakken et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For postnatal brains, after dissection brains were sectioned into coronal slabs approximately 
1 to 1.5 cm in thickness and the left hemisphere was prepared for sectioning onto 
microscope slides for ISH. Structures for microarray analysis were isolated from the right 
hemisphere slabs, and these samples were then frozen at −80°C until processed further.
Laser microdissection and RNA isolation
Tissue spanning five anatomically distinct brain regions — frontal cortex, visual cortex, 
hippocampus, striatum, and amygdala (Figure 1; Supplementary Table 1) — was selected 
from each specimen and processed for further thin sectioning and LMD using a standard 
protocol. Specifically, frozen tissue was cryosectioned at 14 µm onto polyethylene 
naphthalate (PEN) slides (Leica Microsystems, Inc., Bannockburn, IL) and a 1:10 Nissl 
series was generated for neuroanatomical reference for all prenatal timepoints. In addition, 
for the E40, E50, E70, E80, and E90 timepoints, a 1:10 GAP43 and 1:10 ENC1 in situ 
hybridization (ISH) series was generated for neuroanatomical reference, as they often clearly 
delineate nuclei and layers at early developmental stages. For E120, a 1:10 
acetylcholinesterase series was generated for neuroanatomical reference. In total 127 
transient and terminal anatomical structures were isolated using this strategy50–53.
After drying for 30 minutes at room temperature, PEN slides were frozen at −80°C. Slides 
were lightly Nissl stained with cresyl violet to allow cytoarchitectural visualization. Slides 
were fixed in ice-cold 70% ethanol for 30 seconds, washed 15 seconds in nuclease-free 
water, stained in 0.7% cresyl violet in 0.05% NaOAc, pH 3.4 for 2 minutes, nuclease-free 
water for 15 seconds, followed by 15 seconds each in 50%, 75%, and 95% ethanol, followed 
by 20 seconds in 100% ethanol, and then a final 100% ethanol wash for 25 seconds. Slides 
were air-dried for 2 minutes, and desiccated in a vacuum for 1 hour, then frozen at −80°C 
until microdissection. Laser microdissection was performed on a Leica LMD6000 (Leica 
Microsystems, Inc., Bannockburn, IL), using the Nissl stain and GAP43 and ENC1 ISH or 
acetylcholinesterase histological staining as a guide to identify target brain regions in 
prenatal samples.
Microdissected tissue was collected directly into RLT buffer from the RNeasy Micro kit 
(Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA) with β-mercaptoethanol. Samples were volume-adjusted with 
water to 75 µl, vortexed, centrifuged, and frozen at −80°C.
RNA was isolated for each structure following the manufacturer’s directions for the RNeasy 
Micro kit. RNA samples were eluted in 14 µl and 1 µl was run on the Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA) using the Pico assay. Due to low 
sample volume and incompatibility of the eluant with the Nanodrop spectrophotometer 
(Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE), samples were quantitated using the Bioanalyzer 
concentration output. This was done by running a 1ng/µl RNA standard on the same Pico 
chip and then dividing the sample concentration output by the output of the standard 
concentration. For prenatal samples, 2 ng of total RNA was almost always used as the input 
amount for the labeling reaction, and the average RNA Integrity Number (RIN) of passed 
samples was 7.5, with RINs typically lower than 4.5 failing. For postnatal samples, 5 ng of 
total RNA was almost always used as the input, and the average RIN of passed samples was 
7.5, with RINs typically lower than 5 failing.
Bakken et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Histological stains
Nissl—For the Nissl neuroanatomical reference slides, slides were stored at 37°C for 1–5 
days prior to staining. Sections were defatted with xylene or the xylene substitute Formula 
83, and hydrated through a graded series containing 100%, 95%, 70%, and 50% ethanol. 
After incubation in water, the sections were stained with 0.213% thionin, then differentiated 
and dehydrated in water and a graded series containing 50%, 70%, 95% and 100% ethanol. 
Finally, slides were incubated in xylene or Formula 83, and coverslipped with the mounting 
agent DPX. After drying, slides were cleaned prior to digital imaging.
Acetylcholinesterase—A modified acetylcholinesterase protocol was used to assist in 
neuroanatomical delineations in E120. Unlike acetylcholinesterase staining in fixed tissue, 
staining in fresh frozen tissue does not elucidate cholinergic fibers commonly seen in the 
cortex, but instead provides demarcation of various subcortical nuclei. Acetylcholinesterase 
staining was performed using a direct coloring thiocholine method combined with a methyl 
green nuclear counterstain to improve tissue visibility54. Glass slides with fresh frozen tissue 
sections were removed from 4°C, allowed to equilibrate to room temperature, fixed in 10% 
neutral buffered formalin (NBF) and washed briefly in ultra-pure water. Sections were then 
incubated for 25 minutes in a solution of acetylthiocholine iodide, sodium citrate, cupric 
sulfate, and potassium ferricyanide in a 0.1M sodium acetate buffer (pH 6.0), washed in 
0.1M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.2), and incubated with 0.5% diaminobenzidine (DAB) in 0.1M 
Tris-HCl with 0. 03% hydrogen peroxide for 8 minutes. Slides were incubated in 0.2% 
methyl green, briefly dipped in 100% ethanol, cleared with Formula 83 and coverslipped 
with DPX. After drying, slides were cleaned prior to digital imaging.
In situ hybridization (ISH)—High-throughput colorimetric ISH methods are described in 
detail elsewhere (see Lein et al. 2007) and in the In situ Hybridization white paper located 
under the “Documentation” tab. In brief, fresh frozen tissue sections (from either E40, E50, 
E70, E80, or E90) on slides were fixed in 4% PFA in PBS, acetylated, and dehydrated 
through graded alcohols. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% hydrogen 
peroxide in methanol. Proteinase K digestion at 0.0135 unit/ml was done. Digoxigenin 
(DIG)-labeled riboprobes (either GAP43 or ENC1) were hybridized at 63.5°C for 5.5 hr, 
followed by stringency washes and a series of enzymatic reaction steps for detection and 
amplification of DIG signal. Sections were washed with EDTA, fixed in 4% PFA, and 
washed with acid alcohol (70% ethanol, adjusted to pH = 2.1 with 12 N HCl) to reduce 
background signal. Slides were coverslipped with Hydromatrix, subjected to quality control 
analysis and cleaned prior to digital imaging. The complete list of 46 ISH gene targets for 
ISH in postnatal rhesus monkey is also available in the “Documentation” tab.
Digital imaging and processing of histologically stained sections
Digital imaging was done using the ScanScope XT (Aperio Technologies Inc., Vista, CA). 
Final resolution of images was 1 µm/pixel. All images were databased and preprocessed, 
then subjected to quality control analysis to ensure optimal focus and that no process 
artifacts were present in the images. Images that passed this initial QC were further assessed 
to ensure that the staining data were as expected. Once all QC criteria were met, images 
became available for annotation of anatomic structures.
Bakken et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mRNA profiling
Prenatal samples passing RNA quality control (QC) were amplified and profiled. Briefly, 
samples were amplified and labeled using a custom 2 cycle Ultra Low Input procedure, 
using components of MessageAmp II aRNA Amplification kit (AM1751) for the first 
amplification cycle (using oligodT), and components of MessageAmp II Biotin Enhanced 
Single Round aRNA Amplification kit (AM1791) for the second amplification cycle (using 
both random hexamers and oligodT). For prenatal samples, 2ng of total RNA was added to 
the initial reaction mix together with 250ng of pBR322 (Invitrogen). Following the first 
cycle of IVT, the plasmid carrier was removed with a DNaseI (Qiagen) treatment. The first 
cycle IVT products were purified using the QiagenMinElute Kit (Qiagen). Input into the 
second cycle was normalized to 400ng. Hybridization was to catalog GeneChip Rhesus 
Macaque Genome Arrays from Affymetrix containing 52,803 probe sets/sequences. For 
detailed information about this macaque microarray, see the Affymetrix web site (http://
www.affymetrix.com/browse/products.jsp?
productId=131496&navMode=34000&navAction=jump&aId=productsNav#1_3). Labeling 
and scanning were completed following the manufacturer’s recommendations. QC 
assessment failed a small number of microarray samples. Sample amplification, labeling, 
and microarray processing were performed by Covance in Seattle, WA.
Postnatal samples passing RNA quality control (QC) were amplified and profiled as 
described in Winrow et al.55 with a few modifications. Briefly, samples were amplified and 
labeled using a custom 2 cycle version, using 2 kits of the GeneChip HT One-Cycle cDNA 
Synthesis Kit from Affymetrix. For postnatal samples, 5 ng of total RNA was added to the 
initial reaction mix together with 250ng of pBR322 (Invitrogen). In vitro transcription (IVT) 
for the first cycle was performed using a 5X MEGAscript T7 Kit (Ambion). Following the 
first round of IVT, the plasmid carrier was removed with a DNaseI (Qiagen) treatment. The 
first round IVT products were purified using the QiagenMinElute Kit (Qiagen). Input into 
the second round was normalized to 150ng for postnatal samples. Hybridization was to 
catalog GeneChip Rhesus Macaque Genome Arrays. Labeling and scanning were completed 
following the manufacturer’s recommendations and profiles were normalized using robust 
multi-array (RMA). Sample amplification, labeling, and microarray processing were 
performed by Covance in Seattle, WA.
Microarray processing and normalization
To account for differences in mRNA processing, prenatal and postnatal samples were first 
normalized separately using a standard procedure, and then scaled together to minimize the 
effects of technical biases (e.g. due to differences in mRNA processing of prenatal and 
postnatal samples) while preserving biological variance. For prenatal samples, the 
BioConductor “affy” package was used to read in the Affymetrix microarray data and RMA 
method56, consisting of background normalization, log2 transformation, and quantile 
normalization, was applied to summarize the probe level data into gene expression 
measurements for each batch. Control samples from macrodissected adult cortex were 
included in each batch to normalize the data across batches by aligning their mean gene 
expression values. Postnatal samples from each batch were preprocessed using the same 
RMA method as for prenatal samples. ComBat (http://statistics.byu.edu/johnson/ComBat/)57 
Bakken et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was then applied to reduce more severe non-biological batch-to-batch bias. The postnatal 
microarray data are unchanged since the original public release. Finally, the normalized 
prenatal data was scaled to postnatal data by sorting probes by average expression across 
developed regions in E80 and older animals, finding the difference in average expression 
levels (postnatal – prenatal) of each group of 100 probes, and then scaling each probe by the 
corresponding value.
The purpose of normalization was to minimize the effects of these non-biological biases 
while keeping biological variance intact so that within and across brain comparisons 
primarily reveal differences and similarities that are biologically relevant. As a data-driven 
QC process, for each batch, we applied clustering/MDS (multi-dimensional scaling) to 
detect any outlier in the batch by checking whether samples from the same structure/age 
were grouped together. IAC (inter-array-connectivity) was also calculated to numerically 
measure how one microarray was similar to the other microarrays in the batch. The same QC 
process was applied over multiple batches to identify outliers. After normalization and 
outlier removal, a total of 1212 prenatal and 724 postnatal samples remained.
Probe set filtering and gene symbol assignments
From the 52,865 probe sets included on the microarray, we identified 12,441 high-
confidence probe sets mapping to unique genes (Supplementary Table 2). First, to assess the 
targeting specificity of each probe set, we pooled mRNA from 20 prenatal and 20 postnatal 
discrete anatomical and temporal populations and ran these mRNA pools both on 
Affymetrix microarrays and using RNA-Seq as previously described58. Since a high quality 
transcriptome was not available for rhesus macaque, we used GSNAP to map RNA-seq 
reads to the rheMac2 (Jan. 2006) genome and identified expression values for 50,648 
putative transcripts. We used Galaxy (usegalaxy.org)59–61 to intersect rheMac2 genomic 
coordinates of probes (Affymetrix annotation version 34; 1/30/2014), GSNAP transcripts 
and NCBI rhesus gene information (downloaded 2/06/2014). 34,646 probe sets mapped 
unambiguously to 15,577 genes (i.e. rhesus Entrez ids) and were further considered. For 
each probe set, we calculated the correlation between probe set intensity and FPKM values 
for all RNA-seq transcripts corresponding to the same gene and retained the most highly 
correlated probe set for each gene. We omitted 3,136 genes that did not have any probe sets 
significantly correlated (FDR < 0.1) between methods. We annotated the final set of 12,441 
genes with 10,715 human and 10,403 mouse orthologs using NCBI Homologene 
(downloaded 1/7/2014).
Comparing gene expression across neocortex
Heatmaps were independently generated for each gene by mapping expression levels in 
neocortex to a color vector of white (low expression) to red (high expression). Samples were 
organized in a grid corresponding to layer (vertical axis, from ventricular to pial surface), 
age (horizontal axis, from young to old), and cortical region (ordered rostral to caudal within 
each age). Each sample is labeled on the axes as well as within the corresponding boxes, 
with missing data points (either due to incomplete sampling or if a structure does not exist) 
left blank. The size of each box is chosen for clarity and is unrelated to gene expression.
Bakken et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We calculated the correlation between all neocortical samples based on the expression 
correlation of 12,441 genes. We converted correlations into distances with the 
transformation 1 - (0.5 * (1 + correlation)), applied metric multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) 
using the cmdscale R function to represent these distances in two dimensions, and estimated 
percent variance explained for the first two principal coordinates. We plotted samples with 
point color representing cortical layer and point size representing age. For clarity, samples 
that were annotated as cortical plate were assigned to postmitotic layers (L2-L6) that were 
most transcriptionally similar. We repeated this analysis for two subsets of samples: prenatal 
cortical layers and V1 postmitotic layers (layers 2–6).
Sex differential expression
Brain samples with data from both male and female donors included all prenatal ages and 
were included in a linear mixed model with sex as a fixed effect and brain region, age and 
donor as random effects. One model was fit for each gene individually using the “nlme” R 
package and P values were estimated using Satterthwaite’s approximation to degrees of 
freedom as implemented in the “lmerTest” R package (see Supplementary Table 3). A 
permutation based correction for multiple comparisons was then performed. For each of 6 
prenatal ages, donor sex labels (2 males, 2 females) were shuffled to generate 64 permuted 
data sets. For each of these permutations, an identical linear mixed model was fit to all 
genes, and genes were ordered by the magnitude of the fixed effect of sex. Median and 95% 
confidence interval (i.e. 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles) were calculated for each rank ordered 
fixed effect. Finally, a quantile-quantile plot (Extended Data Fig. 3) was created to compare 
observed fixed effects to median expected (permuted) effects. 11 genes had sex effects lying 
outside of the 95% confidence interval (i.e. greater expression in males), and 7 of these 
genes were nominally significant (mixed model P value < 0.05).
For probes that showed differential sex expression greater than expected by chance or for Y 
chromosome probes, target sequences were downloaded from Affymetrix (https://
www.affymetrix.com/analysis/index.affx). These sequences were compared to a primate 
nucleotide database using NCBI Blastn62, and the best match (Query coverage > 80%, 
Sequence identity > 90%) was reported in Supplementary Table 3. Note that 5 of 6 Y-
chromosome probes likely measured expression of highly similar paralogs on the X-
chromosome or autosomes, a consequence of the Affymetrix Rhesus Macaque microarray 
having been developed several years before the rhesus monkey Y chromosome was 
sequenced23.
Analysis of dynamic genes using GO
We first calculated average gene expression in all brain regions (n = 3–4 monkeys) at 10 
ages, and then calculated rates of expression change as the difference in log2-transformed 
expression between adjacent ages in each region and expressed as doublings or halvings per 
year. Note that rates of expression change could not be calculated for the earliest time point 
(E40) or for regions without sampling at adjacent ages. For each of 419 distinct brain 
regions, we rank ordered genes by rates of expression change, and selected the top 1000 
increasing and decreasing genes. We compared all of these genes lists (419 * 418 = 175,142 
comparisons). For each gene list comparison, we found the number of overlapping genes and 
Bakken et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 calculated an overlap similarity score based on the weighted rank order of the lists 
(“OrderedList” package in R). We then generated a null distribution of similarity scores by 
shuffling gene lists 10 million times and calculated P values for observed similarity scores. 
We found that 56,540 gene lists were significantly (Bonferroni corrected P < 0.05) 
overlapping.
We visualized the number of overlapping genes as a heatmap and reordered rows and 
columns based on the correlated patterns of overlapping increasing genes. Specifically, we 
calculated the distance between 419 brain samples as (1 – correlation) / 2 and used 
unsupervised hierarchical clustering with complete linkage to order samples. The 
dendrogram was reordered (while preserving the tree structure) by weighting branches by 
median ages of samples and rotating branches to group similar ages. Samples from the same 
age were highlighted with grid lines aligned to this dendrogram (Fig. 2b). The heatmap was 
also annotated with brain structure and a mitotic index approximated by mean expression 
ofMKI67 (Ki-67 protein).
We performed GO enrichment with the Bioconductor “GOstats” package in R with a 
background set of 10,715 human orthologs included in this study. We repeated GO 
enrichment analysis on each of 56,540 gene lists (32,053 increasing and 24,487 decreasing), 
and found 11,899 biological process terms were nominally significant (P < 0. 05) for at least 
one list. To reduce false positive associations, we calculated the level of statistical support 
for each GO term as the proportion of children of that term (based on the GO hierarchy) that 
were nominally enriched. For example, if a GO term had 10 associated children and four 
were enriched, then the term had a support of 0.4. For each term, we plotted a heatmap of 
statistical support for all 56,540 gene lists (on a scale of 0 to 1), and many of these heatmaps 
showed distinct patterns of enrichment (e.g. Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 4). We 
summarized GO enrichment as a table by calculating the average support for all 419 regions 
and considered a GO term active if mean support was greater than 0.01. We transformed this 
table into a binary matrix showing when and where GO terms were active. We removed 
terms associated with fewer than 10 of 419 regions since these terms likely represented 
noise, and this resulted in 3,704 processes increasing and/or decreasing over development 
(Supplementary Table 4).
We repeated the previous gene overlap and GO enrichment analyses with a set of five major 
brain regions including neocortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia and amygdala at nine ages 
and thalamus at four ages (40 total brain regions). We found that 556 of 1,600 gene list 
comparisons were significantly overlapping and 1,012 biological processes were active in 
these regions (Supplementary Table 5). For each GO term, we calculated commonality as the 
number of ages (maximum nine) that term was active in each brain region and in any region. 
We plotted the distribution of commonalities across all terms in different regions as density 
line plots separately for increasing and decreasing processes (Fig. 2d).
Relative timing of developmental processes
We calculated the relative timing of GO term activity using the binary matrix representing 
when and where terms were active in the four brain regions (neocortex, hippocampus, basal 
ganglia and amygdala) for which we had information across development. For each of six 
Bakken et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 possible region comparisons, we divided the number of ages a GO term was active in both 
regions by the number of ages it was active in either region (e.g. Extended Data Fig. 5a). For 
each term, we averaged the six age overlap calculations to summarize overall timing 
differences. We repeated these calculations for all 1,012 GO terms and plotted the 
distribution of age overlaps for increasing and decreasing processes (Extended Data Fig. 5b).
For 837 increasing processes, we plotted the earliest age of activity in four brain regions and 
ordered terms by age of onset in amygdala, basal ganglia, hippocampus and neocortex (Fig. 
3c). We characterized timing as either simultaneous (equal age of onset in all regions), 
subcortex early (either amygdala or hippocampus onset earlier than both hippocampus and 
neocortex), or cortex early (either hippocampus or neocortex onset earlier than both 
amygdala and hippocampus). Next, for each term, we rank ordered the four brain regions 
based on age of onset. Ties were broken by assigning the average rank to all tied regions. For 
example, if a process was first active at E50 in amygdala and at E70 in the other three 
regions, then amygdala was assigned a rank of 1 while the other regions were assigned a 
rank of 3 (average of ranks 2, 3 and 4). This tie-breaking method highlighted terms that were 
earlier and later than all other regions. We calculated region ranks for 837 terms and plotted 
a heatmap of the proportion of terms with each rank for each region (columns sum to one in 
Extended Data Fig. 5c) and used these proportions to calculate the weighted mean rank of 
each region.
We selected the top 40 genes enriched in myelinating oligodendrocytes in adult mouse63 and 
identified 23 orthologs with expression data in rhesus. Six genes (MOG, MOBP, ERMN, 
MAL, ASPA and OPALIN) were highly correlated (R> 0.9) with each other across all brain 
regions over development (Extended Data Fig. 5d). We calculated average expression of 
these genes (N= 3–4 subjects) in the highly myelinated regions that were sampled in this 
study.
Transcriptional signatures of V1 layers
We compared gene expression across postmitotic layers in V1 for each age starting from 
E80, the earliest age at which all layers were sampled. Samples from L2 and L3 were 
considered together as L2/3, and samples from sub-layers of L4 were considered together as 
L4. For each subject and age, we calculated the average log2 scaled gene expression of 
layers 2/3, 4, 5 and 6, as well as adjacent layers marginal zone/L1 and intermediate zone/
white matter for comparison. For each age, we fit a linear model to the expression data with 
a dummy variable coding for layer. The proportion of variance explained by each layer was 
estimated using the CAR metric64 in the “relaimpo” R package. For each layer and age, we 
rank ordered genes based on the proportion of variance explained (Supplementary Table 6).
Layer signatures between ages were compared by identifying the top 10% most laminar 
genes evenly allocated between layers (top 2.5% each in L2/3, L4, L5, and L6), and then 
calculating their average across-layer correlation between ages. Specifically, for each 
“source” list of marker genes, we found the average expression by layer of these genes at the 
“source” age and at every other “target” age, resulting in two expression tables of 1224 
genes by 4 layers. Gene by gene, expression across layers was compared using Pearson 
correlation and the average correlation across all 1224 genes was determined.
Bakken et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Differential expression between the layer and all other layers was calculated using the 
“limma” R package. Genes were considered layer-enriched if they explained at least 25% of 
the expression variance in all layers (see description of analysis above) and had expression > 
1.5-fold higher than other layers combined. Genes marking the same layer in at least two 
ages were further defined as “persistent” if they were laminar during at least 5 out of 7 ages, 
or “early”, “middle”, or “late” if their median age of laminar enrichment was <E120, 
between E120 and 3M, or >3M, respectively (Supplementary Table 7). Selected marker 
genes were visualized using heatmaps as described above, but only showing the subset of 
data considered in this analysis (L1-WM in V1 from E80-48M). To characterize the function 
of genes from each laminar timing group, we grouped genes from all layers with the same 
timing and performed gene ontology (GO) enrichment using all “Biological Process” terms 
with fewer than 500 associated genes. We identified significantly associated terms (nominal 
P <10−4 and five or more genes enriched for at least one timing group) and visualized–
log10P values using a heatmap.
Differential expression between neocortical regions
We compared gene expression in V1 and ACG independently for each age in the outer 
(L2/L3) and inner (L5/L6) cortical layers, in the subventricular zone (SZ), and in the 
ventricular zone (VZ). First, we averaged gene expression (logarithmically scaled) within 
specimen across all relevant samples for each layer in V1 and ACG independently (i.e., L2 
and L3 in V1 were averaged in each brain). For each age and layer, nominal P values for 
differential regional expression were calculated using a paired test (n = 3–4 monkeys), and 
genes with P <0.05 and average fold change >2 were considered significantly enriched in 
ACG or V1 (Supplementary Table 8). We then defined persistent regional markers as genes 
significantly enriched in either ACG or V1 in at least 2/3 of the ages in which a layer was 
present (N>=5 in L2/L3; N>=6 in L5/L6; N>=4 in SZ and VZ). We visualized the 
expression patterns of select regional markers using line plots, where each point shows the 
average (± standard deviation) log2-scaled gene expression levels of that gene in ACG (red) 
or V1 (blue) for a particular layer (specified to the right of the plot).
We quantified regional enrichment of several cell types in each layer and at each age using a 
hypergeometric test. Specifically, we compared 242 lists of marker genes derived from the 
literature against each set of V1 and ACG enriched genes described above, calculated a P 
value based on the significance of overlap using the phyper function in R. P values were 
Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons and visualized as boxes in a grid of layers 
(vertical axis) and ages (horizontal axis). Cell type lists were derived as follows: dividing 
cell markers were defined as any marker of any phase of cell cycle as presented in 
Supplemental Figure 3 of Bar-Joseph et al.65. Markers for excitatory neurons in adult mouse 
V1 were derived from Tasic et al.66 by identifying all genes expressed in at least 2.2X as 
many excitatory as inhibitory cells (based on proportion) and that have expression in the 80th 
percentile excitatory cell that is both 2.2X higher than the 80th percentile inhibitory cell and 
also higher than RPKM=2.5. Inhibitory neuron markers were defined the same way, but 
swapping excitatory and inhibitory above. Finally, astrocyte marker genes were defined as 
genes which showed at least 10-fold enrichment in sorted astrocytes compared with both 
neurons and oligodendrocytes in Cahoy et al.67
Bakken et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To address the issue of timing of gene expression in prenatal cortical development, we 
extended these analysis to S1 by considering the set of genes showing rostral enrichment 
during the phase in which V1 corticogenesis lags ACG (E70-E90), and asked to what extent 
these genes also show higher expression in S1 vs. V1. We do this in two ways. First, we re-
plot genes presented in Fig. 4 with S1 also shown for direct comparison. Second, we 
calculate the average enrichment of these genes in S1 relative to V1 (using log2 fold change 
across all samples from the relevant layers between E70-E90), and compare it directly to the 
average enrichment in ACG relative to V1 (Extended Data Fig. 6).
Network profiling of disease genes
We used weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA)68,69 to generate 10 
unbiased gene co-expression networks (one at each age) using cortical structures (ACG and 
V1) with the goal of quantifying the distribution of disease-related genes throughout these 
networks. Initial networks were generated using an automated strategy with the following 
function call in R:
blockRun = blockwiseModules(datExprRun, checkMissingData = TRUE,
 maxBlockSize = 17500,power = 14, networkType = "signed", deepSplit = 1,
 minModuleSize = 50, minCoreKMESize = 17, minKMEtoStay = 0.4,
 mergeCutHeight = 0.1, numericLabels = TRUE, verbose = 1)
where datExprRun is the log2 normalized microarray data from the top 9331 (75%) most 
variable genes (at each time point). For postnatal time points these values in V1 and ACG 
were scaled to the mean interquartile expression of samples from layers 2, 3, 5, and 6. The 
goal of this scaling was to deemphasize regional patterning differences or batch effects and 
maximize laminar and cell type patterning. After running the network (and after performing 
the merging steps described below) module eigengenes (ME; the first principal component 
of genes in the module) were calculated for each module, and all genes were reassigned to 
the module to which it is most highly correlated to the ME (referred to as the gene’s module 
membership, or kME). Genes with kME<0.4 for all modules in a given age are left 
unassigned (defined as module 0). While there is no agreed upon value for a kME cutoff in 
the literature, we have successfully used a cutoff of kME < 0.4 in the past as the cutoff for 
assigned vs. unassigned genes (e.g. Hawrylycz et al. 201570).
If the resulting network at any time point contained more than 15 modules, the module pair 
with the most highly correlated ME were iteratively merged until 15 modules remained. 
Since networks are unaffected by changes in labeling, modules were then re-ordered 
manually such that modules with strong enrichment for cortical plate neurons had low 
numbers, modules with strong enrichment for progenitor or glial cells had higher numbers, 
and modules between ages with a highly significant number of overlapping genes were 
ordered similarly across development. To do this third step, every pair of modules in 
networks from adjacent ages were compared using a hypergeometric test, and pairs with 
overlap significance of P < 10−50 were linked (using grey lines in Fig. 5). We note that 
several additional pairs of modules show significant overlap (but with P >= 10−50)—these 
Bakken et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 modules pairs are not shown in the plot for readability and because we are interesting in 
finding only the most significant overlaps. Finally, modules which were split into two 
modules at a single age but not at both adjacent ages were merged. At each age, modules are 
numbered by row number in Fig. 5a with the top row being Module 01 at each age. Module 
assignments for each gene at each age are provided in Supplementary Table 9.
We have broadly annotated many of these modules based on cortical layer, cell type, and 
disease enrichments, and provide the annotated network as a resource to the community. 
Module assignments of postmitotic vs. progenitor cell layer in prenatal neocortex was done 
by comparing mean expression in cortical plate (CP) and subplate (SP) vs. all other layers, 
and noting which mean value is highest. Similarly, assignments of cortical vs. glial cell 
layers in postnatal neocortex was done by comparing mean expression in post-mitotic layers 
2–6 vs. white matter and layer 1. Module assignments based on cortical layer were 
performed by finding the average expression of all module genes in all layers included in 
them and finding the layer in which expression is highest (select layer enrichments are 
labeled in Fig. 5a). Additional assignments for primarily postmitotic cortical layers (from 
E80-48M) were found by performing a hypergeometric test on every module against layer 
markers identified in the analysis in Fig. 4b for each age. Significant enrichments (P < 
10−30) are color-coded in Fig. 5a. This p-value cutoff ensured that modules selected were 
only enriched with markers for a single layer, whereas with lower cutoffs some modules had 
markers for multiple layers. Module enrichments for astrocytes and oligodendrocytes were 
calculated by performing hypergeometric test comparisons, and plotting these P values as 
colored discs in Fig. 5a for modules that are highly significant (P < 10−15). Astrocyte marker 
genes were defined as genes which showed at least 10-fold enrichment in sorted astrocytes 
compared with both neurons and oligodendrocytes in Cahoy et al.67 (likewise for 
oligodendrocyte markers).
We used empirical rather than Bonferroni correction of the significance of disease gene 
enrichments because the tests were correlated due to high module gene overlap. 
Hypergeometric P values were calculated by comparing each module against genomics-
based disease genes for autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (13 genes)71, autism 
spectrum disorder (a posteriori probability > 0.8; 171 genes)45 and schizophrenia (206 
genes)72 with homologs in this data set. Module assignments were then permuted 999 times 
per disease, and the minimum P value across all modules for each of the permuted 
comparisons was recorded. Nominal P values were corrected with this empirical null 
distribution of minimum P values. For example, a nominal P value less than the minimum P 
value in 90% of the permutations had an empirically corrected P value equal to 0.1 that 
controlled the family-wise error rate at 10%. This is a much more stringent criterion than 
FDR < 0.1 because it means that there is a less than 10% chance that any of the enriched 
modules is a false positive enrichment. Modules that were significantly enriched for disease-
associated genes were plotted as red discs in Fig. 5b–d. For each disease, expression 
heatmaps for genes present in at least two enriched modules were plotted to show different 
developmental profiles.
A recent study of intellectual disability with and without brain malformations in 
consanguineous families identified 89 known and candidate disease related genes73. For 
Bakken et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 each pair of 71 genes profiled in this data set, we calculated the Pearson correlation of 
expression in all ACG and V1 cortical samples across development. We used hierarchical 
clustering of the Euclidean distance of correlations to group genes with similar 
spatiotemporal expression profiles into 4 major clusters and visualized correlations as a 
heatmap with the “pheatmap” R package. Genes were annotated with color bar tracks 
indicating phenotypes present in one or more individuals with likely pathological mutations 
in these genes. Primary microcephaly was defined as microcephaly without other brain 
malformations and corpus callosum abnormalities included agenesis and various 
hypogenesis and dysgenesis phenotypes. Multivariate distance matrix regression (MDMR) 
was used to test whether each phenotype explained a significant proportion of variation in 
the expression based distance matrix, and p-values were calculated based on a permutation 
test as previously described74. Expression heatmaps for a representative gene from each 
cluster were plotted to show different developmental profiles.
Conservation of developmental expression trajectories
Developmental expression data were downloaded for rat frontal cortex75 and five human 
brain regions (medial frontal cortex, MFC; primary visual cortex, V1; hippocampus; 
amygdala; and striatum)16 homologous to regions profiled in this study. To compare rhesus 
monkey to gross cortical samples in rat and human, we calculated average expression across 
all sub-regions of anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG, partially overlapping with MFC in human), 
V1, hippocampus, amygdala and striatum at each age. We aligned ages across species by 
estimating event scores based on the conserved timing of developmental events1 and found 
that prenatal and postnatal development were well sampled in all species.
For frontal cortical samples, 4,125 orthologous genes were identified using NCBI 
Homologene, and we selected 2,062 genes that were among the top 50% most variable genes 
over development in rhesus. This filter removed genes that had relatively constant expression 
and therefore would be difficult to compare trajectories between species. Independently for 
each gene and species, we estimated the shape of expression trajectories by smoothed local 
linear regression (“loess” R function) with degree zero to allow for complex dynamics while 
reducing overfitting. With these smoothed fits, we estimated expression at 8 approximately 
evenly spaced event scores (ranging from 0.27 to 1.32) for each species. We correlated 
expression trajectories between each pair of species and plotted a Venn diagram showing the 
number of conserved (Pearson correlation R > 0.5) genes between each pair of species. 
Genes were assigned to one of five sets based on the pattern of species conservation. 
“Conserved” genes were conserved between at least two species pairs and “Not conserved” 
were not conserved between any species pair and may represent noise. “Primate-specific” 
genes were conserved between human and rhesus but not between rat and either primate. 
“Human-specific” genes were conserved between rhesus and rat but not between human and 
either other species. “Rhesus-specific” genes were conserved between human and rat but not 
between rhesus and either other species.
Next, we downloaded developmental expression profiles from an independent human data 
set (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, dlPFC, GEO: GSE30272)14. For 1,848 of 2,062 variable 
genes with dlPFC data, we calculated Pearson correlations of expression trajectories 
Bakken et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 between human MFC and dlPFC as described above. Expression correlations between all 
pairs of species were compared with box plots (median ± 25th and 75th percentiles, whiskers 
at 1.5 times the inter-quartile range, and outliers plotted as points). Correlation distributions 
deviated significantly from normality based on a Shapiro-Wilk test (“shapiro.test” in R), and 
so differences were tested with a Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test (“kruskal.test”) followed by 
paired Wilcoxon signed rank tests (“wilcox.test”) to test for significant differences in 
conservation between species. Finally, we repeated the analysis described above for a larger 
set of 8,683 orthologous genes in human and rhesus macaque. First, we rank ordered genes 
based on the standard deviation of expression across rhesus monkey development. For the 
top 100 most variable genes, we calculated expression correlations between human data sets 
and between human and rhesus. We repeated this analysis 86 times, each time including the 
next set of 100 most variable genes. Finally, we plotted the median correlation within and 
between species as a function of developmental expression variability.
We downloaded expression data (average ISH density) for 2,024 genes in the dorsal pallium 
(which includes frontal cortex) of developing mouse76 (http://developingmouse.brain-
map.org/) using the Allen Brain Atlas Application Programming Interface (API) and 
calculated Spearman correlations between 305 mouse and rat orthologous genes. All pair-
wise species correlations are included in Supplementary Table 10.
We used DAVID77,78 v6.7 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) to test different sets of 
conserved genes for significant enrichment in gene ontology categories, tissue specificity 
and disease association relative to a background set of all 1,848 variable genes. Gene 
paralogs were downloaded from Ensembl with BioMart79. We checked genes for evidence 
of positive selection on different evolutionary branches using Selectome80,81 (http://
selectome.unil.ch/).
Developmental breakpoint analysis
For 4,125 orthologous genes in homologous brain regions of human, rhesus monkey and rat, 
we fit expression trends (log-transformed intensity versus age in post-conceptional days) 
using segmented linear regression (“segmented” R package) with a single breakpoint and 
two slopes. Breakpoints were initialized at the mid-point of development, and standard 
errors for breakpoint and slope estimates were calculated using 20 bootstrap iterations 
(Supplementary Table 11). 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated for slopes based 
on bootstrapped standard errors (i.e. ± 1.96 × SE). Genes with a good model fit (R2> 0.8) 
and significantly increasing (95% CI did not include zero) or decreasing initial slopes in all 
three species were included for further analysis. Breakpoint densities of log10(Age) in 
frontal and primary visual cortical areas were plotted for different species for all genes and 
for synapse related genes downloaded from SynaptomeDB82 (http://metamoodics.org/
SynaptomeDB). For each brain region, species pairwise comparisons of breakpoints and 
standard errors were plotted and genes with significantly increasing or decreasing second 
slopes (95% CI did not include zero) were highlighted (Fig. 6e and Extended Data Fig. 
7d,e). For each pair of species, ages corresponding to equivalent (i.e. equal event scores) or 
nearby developmental stages (event scores within ± 0.2) were plotted. Genes with 
significantly different breakpoints between species (95% CI of breakpoints did not overlap) 
Bakken et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were counted and summarized for each brain region as a stacked bar plot indicating the 
expression slope after human breakpoints. Breakpoint timing was also compared between 
frontal and primary visual areas in rhesus and human with a paired Wilcoxon signed rank 
test and plotted (Extended Data Fig. 7c). In total, expression breakpoints were identified for 
179 significantly increasing and 179 decreasing genes in human and rhesus monkey V1 and 
ACG.
Synaptic density measurements were obtained from previously published studies for V1 in 
rat83, and V1 and prefrontal cortex in human41 and rhesus40. Segmented linear regression 
was fit to synaptic density trends (% max synaptic density versus age in post-conceptional 
days), and breakpoints corresponded to ages of peak density (Extended Data Fig. 7b). 
Breakpoint 95% CIs were calculated and plotted as shaded bands in density plots.
Code availability
All results and figures from this study can be reproduced using R code and data files 
available from GitHub (https://github.com/AllenBrainAtlas/DevRhesusLMD). The software 
is free and can be modified and redistributed under the terms of the GNU General Public 
License, Version 3 (GPLv3).
Bakken et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Anatomical parcellations of developing cortical and subcortical regions
Nissl stained sections of major brain regions sampled in this resource. Green lines demarcate 
subregions that were isolated by laser capture microdissection and transcriptionally profiled.
Bakken et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Canonical cell type marker gene expression across cortical development
Heatmaps of average gene expression in cortical layers at different prenatal (E40 – E120) 
and postnatal ages (0 – 48 months). Anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG) and primary visual 
cortex (V1) were sampled at all ages, while primary somatosensory cortex (S1) was sampled 
in a limited set of layers prenatally. Several additional prefrontal and visual areas were 
sampled postnatally: orbital gyrus (OG), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), rectal gyrus 
(RG) and secondary visual cortex (V2).
Bakken et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Sex differential expression is limited to two Y chromosome genes
a, Quantile-quantile plot of observed versus expected sex differential expression for all 
12,441 genes across brain regions during prenatal development. A linear mixed model was 
fit to all prenatal brain samples with a fixed effect for sex and random effects for brain 
region, age and donor (see Supplementary Table 11). Genes were ordered by the observed 
sex effect and plotted versus the expected sex effect based on permutation testing. A 95% 
confidence interval was calculated (dashed line) based on permutations, and 11 genes in 
males and no genes in females were more highly expressed than expected by chance. Seven 
Bakken et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of these 11 genes were nominally significant and included at least two Y-chromosome genes 
(EIF1AY, LOC720563) and potentially a third gene (LOC693361) whose microarray probe 
maps to an unannotated region of the Y chromosome.
Extended Data Figure 4. Expression rates of change have similar developmental trajectories 
across all brain regions
a, Rates of expression change in all available brain subregions and ages. b, Boxplots 
summarizing the number of significantly increasing or decreasing genes between adjacent 
time points in all subregions. At all ages, the majority of subregions had at least 1000 genes 
Bakken et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (red line) that were significantly changing. c, Regional specificity of increased autophagy 
may reflect differential timing of synaptic pruning. Enrichment for autophagy of the most 
dynamically increasing (upper triangle) and decreasing (lower triangle) genes with samples 
ordered and labeled as in Fig. 3b. For each gene list, the color corresponds to the proportion 
of GO terms that are more specific (i.e. “child”) terms subsumed under autophagy (GO:
0006914) based on the GO hierarchy and that are significantly enriched (nominal P < 0.05). 
Note that autophagy was selectively turned on in occipital cortex after infancy and in 
hippocampus after juvenility (arrows).
Extended Data Figure 5. Variable synchrony of biological processes between brain regions
a, Example of variable timing of GO process activity (black boxes) between regions, 
resulting in different age overlaps (table below). Note that E50 was the earliest age for which 
we could calculate expression change. AM, amygdala; BG, basal ganglia; HP, hippocampus; 
NCX, neocortex. b, Average pairwise age overlaps (black, solid line) for all increasing (top) 
and decreasing (bottom) GO processes were greater than expected by chance (black, dotted 
line). c, Rank ordered timing of GO processes in Fig. 4c with weighted average rank for 
each region (asterisks). d, Developmental expression of mature oligodendrocyte markers in 
four myelin-enriched brain subregions with early increased expression in globus pallidus 
(arrows) for MOG and ERMN but not MAL and ASPA.
Bakken et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Neuro- and glio-genesis in S1 occur at a time course intermediate 
between V1 and ACG
a, Genes with enriched expression in ACG relative to V1 between E70-E90 also show 
enriched expression in S1 relative to V1, suggesting that the timing of primary sensory 
regions is non-uniform in L5/L6 (top), SZ (middle), and VZ (bottom). Each plot shows the 
average enrichment (log2 fold change) in S1 vs. V1 (y-axes) compared with the average 
enrichment in ACG vs. V1 (x-axes) between E70-E90 for all genes significantly enriched in 
ACG in at least two of the three ages between E70-E90 (Fig. 5a). b, Marker genes for cell 
Bakken et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 types (compare with Fig. 5e–h) show expression patterns in S1 which are either consistent 
with ACG (i.e., GAD1) or intermediate between V1 and ACG (i.e., AQP4). c, Genes with 
enriched expression for V1 (FGFR3) or ACG (CBLN2) across development show 
intermediate expression in S1, suggesting that these genes may show cortical gradients 
rather than specific expression in V1 or ACG. d, Genes with common expression patterning 
in V1 and ACG can show different patterns in S1, suggesting that rate of neuron and glia 
development is not the whole story. For example, SPARCL1 and ABCA8 both show 
increased expression with time in VZ with V1 showing a delay relative to ACG; however, 
these two genes show different temporal delays in S1.
Bakken et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Evolutionary conservation of developmental expression
a, Median pairwise correlations of expression trajectories in prefrontal cortex within human 
(black) and between human and rhesus monkey (red) decrease for less variable genes in 
rhesus monkey (genes ordered by standard deviation of expression across ages). b, Left: 
Proportion of genes assigned to different conservation categories is robust to correlation 
threshold. Right: Developmentally dynamic genes are more highly conserved (genes ordered 
by same method as in a). For each set of genes, the average ± standard deviation of the 
proportion of genes in each conservation category was estimated using correlation thresholds 
Bakken et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ranging from 0 to 0.9. c, Left: Segmented linear fits of expression for example gene with 
estimated breakpoints in each species (dashed lines). Right: Distribution of breakpoint ages 
for 179 decreasing genes with good fits to the model in frontal and primary visual cortex. 
Colors and symbols are consistent in c-d. d, Segmented linear fits with breakpoint 
estimation of synaptic density for prefrontal and primary visual cortex based on previously 
published studies (see Methods). e, Breakpoint comparison of 179 increasing genes 
including 81 synapse related genes (red) between cortical areas within species. Genes that 
fall on the lines peak at the same age in primary visual and prefrontal cortex. f-g, 
Comparison of breakpoint timing between human, rhesus monkey and rat in f, prefrontal 
cortex and g, additional brain regions. Genes that plateau in expression after their breakpoint 
in human (grey points), and genes that significantly decrease (blue symbols) or increase (red 
symbols) expression with 95% confidence intervals (grey lines) of breakpoints. Black lines 
correspond to equal (solid) ± a window (dashed) of developmental ages between species. 
pcd, post-conceptional days.
Extended Data Table 1
Rhesus monkey donor information.
Animal ID
Age
SX date
Sex
Indian
origin
(proportion)
Chinese
origin
(proportion)
MMU37857
E40
2/9/2012
Female
15/16
1/16
MMU38481
E40
5/2/2012
Male
1
0
MMU31370
E40
3/26/2013
Male
1
0
MMU36477
E40
4/16/2012
Female
1
0
DAM37624
E50
1/13/2012
Male
5/8
3/8
MMU36725
E50
4/23/2012
Male
1
0
MMU30213
E50
3/6/2012
Male
1
0
MMU38099
E50
2/23/2012
Female
15/16
1/16
DAM35650
E70
1/23/2012
Female
1
0
MMU32143
E70
3/9/2012
Female
1
0
MMU33757
E70
3/5/2012
Male
15/16
1/16
MMU35475
E70
3/5/2012
Male
7/8
1/8
MMU35058
E80
2/2/2012
Female
15/16
1/16
MMU37852
E80
3/29/2012
Female
1
0
MMU34624
E80
4/19/2012
Male
3/4
1/4
MMU36435
E80
4/30/2012
Male
15/16
1/16
MMU34326
E90
4/16/2012
Male
1
0
MMU35674
E90
4/13/2012
Female
1
0
MMU38285
E90
4/13/2012
Female
13/16
3/16
MMU38521
E90
4/27/2012
Male
1
0
MMU27052
E120
3/23/2012
Male
1
0
MMU30021
E120
3/7/2012
Female
1
0
MMU34501
E120
7/30/2012
Male
3/4
1/4
MMU29380
E120
3/12/2012
Female
1
0
Bakken et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Animal ID
Age
SX date
Sex
Indian
origin
(proportion)
Chinese
origin
(proportion)
MMU39867
OM
NA
Male
NA
NA
MMU39893
OM
4/12/2013
Male
3/4
1/4
MMU40864
OM
4/21/2014
Male
1
0
MMU40944
OM
4/29/2014
Male
1
0
MMU39465
3M
11/13/2008
Male
1
0
MMU39538
3M
5/10/2013
Male
1
0
MMU39766
3M
7/15/2013
Male
7/8
1/8
MMU40525
3M
6/9/2014
Male
1
0
MMU39420
12M
6/26/2013
Male
1
0
MMU39620
12M
3/9/2014
Male
7/8
1/8
MMU39645
12M
3/9/2014
Male
7/8
1/8
MMU36322
48M
7/11/2013
Male
1
0
MMU36358
48M
7/14/2013
Male
5/8
3/8
MMU36468
48M
6/26/2013
Male
5/8
3/8
Subject information for 38 rhesus macaque monkeys included in study. Surgery (SX) date, age, sex, and ancestry based on 
origin of parents and grandparents.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Trygve E. Bakken1,*, Jeremy A. Miller1,*, Song-Lin Ding1,*, Susan M. Sunkin1, 
Kimberly A. Smith1, Lydia Ng1, Aaron Szafer1, Rachel A. Dalley1, Joshua J. Royall1, 
Tracy Lemon1, Sheila Shapouri1, Kaylynn Aiona1, James Arnold1, Jeffrey L. 
Bennett2, Darren Bertagnolli1, Kristopher Bickley1, Andrew Boe1, Krissy Brouner1, 
Stephanie Butler1, Emi Byrnes1, Shiella Caldejon1, Anita Carey1, Shelby Cate1, 
Mike Chapin1, Jefferey Chen1, Nick Dee1, Tsega Desta1, Tim A. Dolbeare1, Nadia 
Dotson1, Amanda Ebbert1, Erich Fulfs1, Garrett Gee1, Terri L. Gilbert1, Jeff Goldy1, 
Lindsey Gourley1, Ben Gregor1, Guangyu Gu1, Jon Hall1, Zeb Haradon1, David R. 
Haynor3, Nika Hejazinia1, Anna Hoerder-Suabedissen4, Robert Howard1, Jay 
Jochim1, Marty Kinnunen1, Ali Kriedberg1, Chihchau L. Kuan1, Christopher Lau1, 
Chang-Kyu Lee1, Felix Lee1, Lon Luong1, Naveed Mastan1, Ryan May1, Jose 
Melchor1, Nerick Mosqueda1, Erika Mott1, Kiet Ngo1, Julie Nyhus1, Aaron Oldre1, 
Eric Olson1, Jody Parente1, Patrick D. Parker1, Sheana Parry1, Julie Pendergraft1, 
Lydia Potekhina1, Melissa Reding1, Zackery L. Riley1, Tyson Roberts1, Brandon 
Rogers1, Kate Roll1, David Rosen1, David Sandman1, Melaine Sarreal1, Nadiya 
Shapovalova1, Shu Shi1, Nathan Sjoquist1, Andy J. Sodt1, Robbie Townsend1, 
Lissette Velasquez1, Udi Wagley1, Wayne B. Wakeman1, Cassandra White1, Crissa 
Bennett1, Jennifer Wu1, Rob Young1, Brian L. Youngstrom1, Paul Wohnoutka1, 
Richard A. Gibbs5, Jeffrey Rogers5, John G. Hohmann1, Michael J. Hawrylycz1, 
Bakken et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Robert F
. Hevner6, Zoltán Molnár4, John W. Phillips1, Chinh Dang1, Allan R. Jones1, 
David G. Amaral2, Amy Bernard1, and Ed S. Lein1
Affiliations
1Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA
2Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, California National Primate 
Research Center, The M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, 
CA 95817, USA
3Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, 
USA
4Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South 
Parks Road Oxford OX1 3QX, UK
5Human Genome Sequencing Center and Department of Molecular and Human 
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
6Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington 98101, USA
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Allen Institute for Brain Science founders, Paul G. Allen and Jody Allen, for their vision, 
encouragement, and support. The authors also thank Dr. Juan Montiel and Dr. Wei Zhi Wang for their advice on 
developmental neuroanatomy and experimental design. We also wish to acknowledge the California National 
Primate Research Center (NIH Award Number RR00169) for providing tissues and Covance Genomics Laboratory 
(Seattle, WA) for microarray probe generation, hybridization and scanning. The project was supported by NIH 
Blueprint for Neuroscience Research contract HHSN-271-2008-0047 (PI: Ed Lein, Allen Institute for Brain 
Science) from the National Institute of Mental Health. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do 
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health or the National Institute of Mental 
Health.
References
1. Workman AD, Charvet CJ, Clancy B, Darlington RB, Finlay BL. Modeling Transformations of 
Neurodevelopmental Sequences across Mammalian Species. J. Neurosci. 2013; 33:7368–7383. 
[PubMed: 23616543] 
2. Smart IHM, Dehay C, Giroud P, Berland M, Kennedy H. Unique morphological features of the 
proliferative zones and postmitotic compartments of the neural epithelium giving rise to striate and 
extrastriate cortex in the monkey. Cereb. Cortex. 2002; 12:37–53. [PubMed: 11734531] 
3. MacLean EL, et al. The evolution of self-control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2014; 111:E2140–
E2148. [PubMed: 24753565] 
4. Caldwell, CA., Whiten, Ain. Primates Perspect. Oxford University Press; 2011. p. 652-662.
5. Belmonte JCICI, et al. Brains, Genes, and Primates. Neuron. 2015; 86:617–631. [PubMed: 
25950631] 
6. Miller DJ, et al. Prolonged myelination in human neocortical evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 
A. 2012; 109:16480–16485. [PubMed: 23012402] 
7. Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, Eckenhoff MF, Zecevic N, Goldman-Rakic PS. Concurrent overproduction of 
synapses in diverse regions of the primate cerebral cortex. Science. 1986; 232:232–235. [PubMed: 
3952506] 
8. Petanjek Z, et al. Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic spines in the human prefrontal cortex. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2011; 108:13281–13286. [PubMed: 21788513] 
Bakken et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Gibbs RA, et al. Evolutionary and biomedical insights from the rhesus macaque genome. Science. 
2007; 316:222–234. [PubMed: 17431167] 
10. Bernard A, et al. Transcriptional Architecture of the Primate Neocortex. Neuron. 2012; 73:1083–
1099. [PubMed: 22445337] 
11. Zeng H, et al. Large-scale cellular-resolution gene profiling in human neocortex reveals species-
specific molecular signatures. Cell. 2012; 149:483–496. [PubMed: 22500809] 
12. Somel M, et al. Transcriptional neoteny in the human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2009; 
106:5743. [PubMed: 19307592] 
13. Liu X, et al. Extension of cortical synaptic development distinguishes humans from chimpanzees 
and macaques. Genome Res. 2012; 22:611–622. [PubMed: 22300767] 
14. Colantuoni C, et al. Temporal dynamics and genetic control of transcription in the human 
prefrontal cortex. Nature. 2011; 478:519–523. [PubMed: 22031444] 
15. Hawrylycz MJ, et al. An anatomically comprehensive atlas of the adult human brain transcriptome. 
Nature. 2012; 489:391–399. [PubMed: 22996553] 
16. Kang HJ, et al. Spatio-temporal transcriptome of the human brain. Nature. 2011; 478:483–489. 
[PubMed: 22031440] 
17. Miller JA, et al. Transcriptional landscape of the prenatal human brain. Nature. 2014; 508:199–
206. [PubMed: 24695229] 
18. Bakken TE, et al. Spatiotemporal dynamics of the postnatal developing primate brain 
transcriptome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2015; 24:4327–4339. [PubMed: 25954031] 
19. Molyneaux BJ, et al. DeCoN: Genome-wide Analysis of In Vivo Transcriptional Dynamics during 
Pyramidal Neuron Fate Selection in Neocortex. Neuron. 2015; 85:275–288. [PubMed: 25556833] 
20. Zeisel A, et al. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. 
Science. 2015; 347:1138–1142. [PubMed: 25700174] 
21. Darmanis S, et al. A survey of human brain transcriptome diversity at the single cell level. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 2015; 112:7285–7290. [PubMed: 26060301] 
22. Rakic P. Neurons in rhesus monkey visual cortex: systematic relation between time of origin and 
eventual disposition. Science. 1974; 183:425–427. [PubMed: 4203022] 
23. Hughes JF, et al. Strict evolutionary conservation followed rapid gene loss on human and rhesus Y 
chromosomes. Nature. 2012; 483:82–86. [PubMed: 22367542] 
24. Elston GN, Oga T, Fujita I. Spinogenesis and pruning scales across functional hierarchies. J. 
Neurosci. 2009; 29:3271–3275. [PubMed: 19279264] 
25. Scott, Ja, et al. Longitudinal analysis of the developing rhesus monkey brain using magnetic 
resonance imaging: birth to adulthood. Brain Struct. Funct. 2015 doi:10.1007/s00429-015-1076-x. 
26. Hasegawa M, et al. Development of myelination in the human fetal and infant cerebrum: a myelin 
basic protein immunohistochemical study. Brain Dev. 1992; 14:1–6. [PubMed: 1375444] 
27. Sorensen SA, et al. Correlated Gene Expression and Target Specificity Demonstrate Excitatory 
Projection Neuron Diversity. Cereb. Cortex. 2015; 25:433–449. [PubMed: 24014670] 
28. Pletikos M, et al. Temporal specification and bilaterality of human neocortical topographic gene 
expression. Neuron. 2014; 81:321–332. [PubMed: 24373884] 
29. O’Leary DDM, Chou S-JJ, Sahara S. Area patterning of the mammalian cortex. Neuron. 2007; 
56:252–269. [PubMed: 17964244] 
30. De la Rossa A, et al. In vivo reprogramming of circuit connectivity in postmitotic neocortical 
neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 2013; 16:193–200. [PubMed: 23292682] 
31. Rakic P. Prenatal development of the visual system in rhesus monkey. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 
B. Biol. Sci. 1977; 278:245–260. [PubMed: 19781] 
32. Tropea D, et al. Gene expression changes and molecular pathways mediating activity-dependent 
plasticity in visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 2006; 9:660–668. [PubMed: 16633343] 
33. Willsey AJ, et al. Coexpression Networks Implicate Human Midfetal Deep Cortical Projection 
Neurons in the Pathogenesis of Autism. Cell. 2013; 155:997–1007. [PubMed: 24267886] 
34. Parikshak NN, et al. Integrative functional genomic analyses implicate specific molecular pathways 
and circuits in autism. Cell. 2013; 155:1008–1021. [PubMed: 24267887] 
Bakken et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Bishop KM, Goudreau G, O’Leary DD. Regulation of area identity in the mammalian neocortex by 
Emx2 and Pax6. Science. 2000; 288:344–349. [PubMed: 10764649] 
36. Schoenebeck JJ, et al. Variation of BMP3 Contributes to Dog Breed Skull Diversity. PLoS Genet. 
2012; 8:1–11.
37. Matsumoto A, et al. LIN7A depletion disrupts cerebral cortex development, contributing to 
intellectual disability in 12q21-deletion syndrome. PLoS One. 2014; 9:3–10.
38. Bianchi S, et al. Synaptogenesis and development of pyramidal neuron dendritic morphology in the 
chimpanzee neocortex resembles humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2013; 110:10395–10401. 
[PubMed: 23754422] 
39. Huttenlocher PR. Synaptic density in human frontal cortex - developmental changes and effects of 
aging. Brain Res. 1979; 163:195–205. [PubMed: 427544] 
40. Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, Goldman-Rakic PS. Synaptic development of the cerebral cortex: 
implications for learning, memory, and mental illness. Prog. Brain Res. 1994; 102:227–243. 
[PubMed: 7800815] 
41. Huttenlocher PR, Dabholkar AS. Regional differences in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 1997; 387:167–178. [PubMed: 9336221] 
42. Jackman SL, Turecek J, Belinsky JE, Regehr WG. The calcium sensor synaptotagmin 7 is required 
for synaptic facilitation. Nature. 2016; 529:88–91. [PubMed: 26738595] 
43. Pouchelon G, et al. Modality-specific thalamocortical inputs instruct the identity of postsynaptic 
L4 neurons. Nature. 2014; 511:471–474. [PubMed: 24828045] 
44. De Marco García NV, Karayannis T, Fishell G. Neuronal activity is required for the development 
of specific cortical interneuron subtypes. Nature. 2011; 472:351–355. [PubMed: 21460837] 
45. Iossifov I, et al. Low load for disruptive mutations in autism genes and their biased transmission. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2015; 112:E5600–E5607. [PubMed: 26401017] 
46. de Lacy N, King BH. Revisiting the Relationship Between Autism and Schizophrenia: Toward an 
Integrated Neurobiology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 2013; 9:555–587. [PubMed: 23537488] 
47. Stein JJL, et al. A quantitative framework to evaluate modeling of cortical development by neural 
stem cells. Neuron. 2014; 83:69–86. [PubMed: 24991955] 
48. Cusanovich DA, et al. Multiplex single-cell profiling of chromatin accessibility by combinatorial 
cellular indexing. Science. 2015; 348:910–914. [PubMed: 25953818] 
49. Lein ES, et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature. 2007; 
445:168–176. [PubMed: 17151600] 
50. Bystron I, Blakemore C, Rakic P. Development of the human cerebral cortex: Boulder Committee 
revisited. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2008; 9:110–122. [PubMed: 18209730] 
51. Price, J., Russchen, F., Amaral, Din. Handb. Chem. Neuroanat. Hokfelt, B., Swanson, L., editors. 
Elsevier; 1987. p. 279-381.
52. Berger B, Alvarez C. Neurochemical development of the hippocampal region in the fetal rhesus 
monkey. III: Calbindin-D28K, calretinin and parvalbumin with special mention of Cajal-Retzius 
cells and the retrosplenial cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 1996; 366:674–699. [PubMed: 8833116] 
53. Paxinos, G. The Rhesus Monkey Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Elsevier/Academic Press; 2009. 
54. Karnovsky MJ, Roots L. A ‘direct-coloring’ thiocholine method for cholinesterases. J. Histochem. 
Cytochem. 1964; 12:219–221. [PubMed: 14187330] 
55. Winrow CJ, et al. Refined anatomical isolation of functional sleep circuits exhibits distinctive 
regional and circadian gene transcriptional profiles. Brain Res. 2009; 1271:1–17. [PubMed: 
19302983] 
56. Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP. A comparison of normalization methods for high 
density oligonucleotide array data based on variance and bias. Bioinformatics. 2003; 19:185–193. 
[PubMed: 12538238] 
57. Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using 
empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics. 2007; 8:118–127. [PubMed: 16632515] 
58. Miller, Ja, et al. Improving reliability and absolute quantification of human brain microarray data 
by filtering and scaling probes using RNA-Seq. BMC Genomics. 2014; 15:154. [PubMed: 
24564186] 
Bakken et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 59. Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J. Galaxy: a comprehensive approach for supporting accessible, 
reproducible, and transparent computational research in the life sciences. Genome Biol. 2010; 
11:R86. [PubMed: 20738864] 
60. Blankenberg D, et al. Galaxy: a web-based genome analysis tool for experimentalists. Curr. Protoc. 
Mol. Biol. Chapter. 2010; 19 Unit 19.10.1–21. 
61. Giardine B, et al. Galaxy: A platform for interactive large-scale genome analysis. Genome Res. 
2005; 15:1451–1455. [PubMed: 16169926] 
62. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. 
Biol. 1990; 215:403–410. [PubMed: 2231712] 
63. Zhang Y, et al. An RNA-Sequencing Transcriptome and Splicing Database of Glia, Neurons, and 
Vascular Cells of the Cerebral Cortex. J. Neurosci. 2014; 34:11929–11947. [PubMed: 25186741] 
64. Zuber V, Strimmer K. Variable importance and model selection by decorrelation. Statistics. 2010; 
10:1–22.
65. Bar-Joseph Z, et al. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis of the human cell cycle identifies genes 
differentially regulated in normal and cancer cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2008; 105:955–
960. [PubMed: 18195366] 
66. Tasic B, et al. Adult cortical cell taxonomy by single cell transcriptomics. Nat. Neurosci. 2016
67. Cahoy J, et al. A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes: a new 
resource for understanding brain development and function. J. Neurosci. 2008; 28:264–278. 
[PubMed: 18171944] 
68. Langfelder P, Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2008; 9:559. [PubMed: 19114008] 
69. Langfelder P, Horvath S. Fast R Functions for Robust Correlations and Hierarchical Clustering. J. 
Stat. Softw. 2012; 46
70. Hawrylycz M, et al. Canonical genetic signatures of the adult human brain. Nat. Neurosci. 2015; 
18:1832–1844. [PubMed: 26571460] 
71. Verloes, A., Drunat, S., Gressens, P., Passemard, Sin. GeneReviews® [Internet]. Pagon, RA., et al., 
editors. University of Washington, Seattle; 2013. at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK9587/>
72. Ripke S, et al. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature. 2014; 
511:421–427. [PubMed: 25056061] 
73. Karaca E, et al. Genes that Affect Brain Structure and Function Identified by Rare Variant 
Analyses of Mendelian Neurologic Disease. Neuron. 2015; 88:499–513. [PubMed: 26539891] 
74. Zapala, Ma, Schork, NJ. Multivariate regression analysis of distance matrices for testing 
associations between gene expression patterns and related variables. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2006; 
103:19430–19435. [PubMed: 17146048] 
75. Stead JDH, et al. Transcriptional profiling of the developing rat brain reveals that the most dramatic 
regional differentiation in gene expression occurs postpartum. J. Neurosci. 2006; 26:345–353. 
[PubMed: 16399705] 
76. Thompson CL, et al. A High-Resolution Spatiotemporal Atlas of Gene Expression of the 
Developing Mouse Brain. Neuron. 2014; 83:309–323. [PubMed: 24952961] 
77. Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki Ra. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists 
using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat. Protoc. 2009; 4:44–57. [PubMed: 19131956] 
78. Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the 
comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:1–13. 
[PubMed: 19033363] 
79. Smedley D, et al. The BioMart community portal: an innovative alternative to large, centralized 
data repositories. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:W589–W598. [PubMed: 25897122] 
80. Proux E, Studer RA, Moretti S, Robinson-Rechavi M. Selectome: a database of positive selection. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:D404–D407. [PubMed: 18957445] 
81. Moretti S, et al. Selectome update: quality control and computational improvements to a database 
of positive selection. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:D917–D921. [PubMed: 24225318] 
Bakken et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 82. Pirooznia M, et al. SynaptomeDB: an ontology-based knowledgebase for synaptic genes. 
Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:897–899. [PubMed: 22285564] 
83. Blue ME, Parnavelas JG. The formation maturation of synapses in the visual cortex of the rat. II. 
Quantitative analysis. J. Neurocytol. 1983; 12:697–712. [PubMed: 6619907] 
Bakken et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. High-resolution transcriptional profiling of rhesus monkey brain development
a, Neuroimaging, histological and transcriptome data components. b, Brain regions 
analyzed. c, Primary visual cortex (V1) sampling paradigm for transcriptome analysis 
spanning ages from 40 post-conceptional days (E40) to 48 months after birth, with salient 
developmental events or stages noted (top row). Whole brain or hemisphere sections are 
shown for each age (V1, red box), as well as a high magnification Nissl image detailing 
laminar microdissections. Cortical layers profiled at each stage are color-coded by 
predominant mitotic (red, pink) or postmitotic (orange, yellow, tan) cell makeup. d, 
Bakken et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Heatmaps of canonical cell type marker gene expression organized anatomically as in c. e-g, 
Multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) plots showing the first two principal axes of variation for 
all cortical samples (n = 922) (e), prenatal samples (n = 542) (f) and postmitotic layers in V1 
(n = 175) (g). Scale bars in c: 1 cm (top panels) or 1 mm (bottom panel). Structure 
abbreviations in Supplementary Table 1.
Bakken et al.
Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Transcriptional dynamics across brain regions and ages
a, Similar decreasing rates of gene expression change across cortical layers (rows, ordered 
from apical to basal) and areas (anterior cingulate gyrus, ACG, red; primary visual cortex, 
V1, blue). b, Overlap of temporally dynamic genes across brain regions and ages. Proportion 
of the top 1000 increasing (red, upper triangle) or decreasing (blue, lower triangle) genes for 
each region between pairs of adjacent ages (e.g. E50 compared to E40) that are shared with 
other ages and regions. Note large overlap between all regions at each age and within 
prenatal and postnatal periods. Arrows highlight region-specific rapid expression change. 
AM, amygdala; BG, basal ganglia; HP, hippocampus; FCx frontal, OCx occipital, PCx 
parietal and TCx temporal cortex; THAL, thalamus. c, Timing of neuronal connectivity-
related events revealed by enrichment of gene ontology (GO) terms in overlapping gene lists 
from b.
Bakken et al.
Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Variable onset of biological processes between brain regions
a, Prolonged duration of biological GO processes. Number of ages at which increasing and 
decreasing GO processes are active in each region (colors) or in any region (black). b, 
Synchronous and asynchronous onset of GO processes between regions, mainly beginning in 
prenatal development. Left: Age of onset for all increasing GO processes ordered by onset in 
subcortical and then cortical regions (AM, BG, HP, then NCX). Right: GO processes 
predominantly begin earlier in subcortical than cortical regions. c, Early onset (arrow) of 
mature oligodendrocyte marker MOBP in subcortical globus pallidus (arrow) compared to 
cortical myelin-enriched regions. Other myelin genes such as OPALIN show synchronous 
developmental timing. CA1or, hippocampal CA1 stratum oriens; V1 iz/wm, intermediate 
zone/white matter; ic, internal capsule.
Bakken et al.
Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Protracted maturation of neocortex through young adulthood
a, Expression patterns of genes best marking each cortical layer progressively change with 
time. Each dot represents the average across-layer expression correlation of the 10% of 
genes best distinguishing layers at one age (source list) with their expression levels in 
another age (comparison). Values are plotted against a scaled difference in age. b, Layer-
enriched gene expression shows progressive and dramatic change with age. Binary heatmap 
showing expression of layer-enriched genes (rows) across ages (columns). Genes are ordered 
and divided based on the median age of laminar expression into four chronological groups: 
Bakken et al.
Page 44
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 early (median age < E120), middle (E120 – 3M), late (> 3M) and persistent. c, 
Developmental expression of representative genes from each chronological group in layer 6. 
d, Number of genes differentially expressed between rostral (ACG) and caudal (V1) cortex 
in superficial (L2/3), deep (L5/6) and proliferative (SZ, VZ) layers across development. 
Most differences are found in postmitotic layers during early prenatal and late postnatal 
development. e-h, Genes marking specific cell classes show regional enrichment consistent 
with earlier neuro- and gliogenesis in ACG compared to V1. Left column: enrichment of 
regional genes (from d) with markers for e, cell cycle (progenitors); f, GABAergic and g, 
glutamatergic neurons in V1; and h, astrocytes. Size of box indicates significance of cell 
type enrichment in a given layer, region, and age. Right column: expression levels (mean +/− 
SE) of canonical marker genes for each cell type in V1 (blue) and ACG (red).
Bakken et al.
Page 45
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Spatiotemporal localization of disease-specific associations in developing cortex
a, WGCNA gene co-expression networks (modules; Supplementary Table 9) based on 
pooled V1 and ACG samples analyzed independently at each age (columns). Modules were 
tested for significant gene set enrichment and overlap with hypergeometric tests. Modules 
significantly enriched for markers of glial cell classes (P < 10−15) or cortical layers (P < 
10−30) are color-coded and annotated. Remaining modules are colored or labeled based on 
maximal expression in postmitotic (neuron-enriched; cyan) layers or progenitor or largely 
non-neuronal (WM, Layer 1; orange) layers. Modules from adjacent ages with the most 
highly significant gene overlap (P < 10−50) are connected by grey lines. b-d, Left: Modules 
significantly enriched for risk genes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders 
(empirically corrected P < 0.1; red discs). Right: Average expression pattern of genes found 
in at least two enriched modules. b, Genes related to primary autosomal recessive 
microcephaly are enriched in early non-neuronal modules, and show maximal expression in 
early prenatal VZ. c, Genes related to autism spectrum disorder are enriched in modules 
associated with cortical neurons, and show highest expression in cortical plate across 
development. d, Genes related to schizophrenia show similar neuronal layer enrichment to 
autism genes, but restricted to postnatal ages. e, Left: Genes related to intellectual disability 
are associated with different brain malformations and/or seizures and show four major 
expression patterns over cortical development. Right: Expression heatmaps of known and 
Bakken et al.
Page 46
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 candidate disease genes representing developmental profiles of each cluster. ID genes also 
associated with primary microcephaly are significantly enriched in cortical progenitor-
enriched pattern 2 (* P < 0.001; multivariate distance matrix regression permutation test). 
CC, corpus callosum.
Bakken et al.
Page 47
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Conserved and human-specific gene expression trajectories in frontal cortex
a, Left: Boxplots of pairwise correlations between developmental expression trajectories 
(median ± 25th and 75th percentiles, whiskers at 1.5 times the inter-quartile range) of 
orthologous genes profiled in rhesus monkey, rat and two human data sets. Kruskal-Wallis 
rank sum test, post-hoc Wilcoxon signed rank paired tests: * P < 0.001 (Bonferroni-
corrected), n.s. not significant. Right: Venn diagram showing the number of conserved (R > 
0.5) genes between each pair of species. b, Examples of conserved and species-specific gene 
trajectories. Colors and symbols are consistent in b-d. c, Distribution of breakpoint ages for 
Bakken et al.
Page 48
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 179 orthologs (solid lines) of which 81 were synapse related (dashed lines) in frontal cortex 
and V1. Shaded bars indicate periods of peak synaptic density (95% confidence intervals) in 
each species (Extended Data Extended Data Fig. 7b). d, Genes with unexpectedly early and 
late breakpoints in expression trajectories in human. Observed breakpoints (dashed lines) 
compared to expected breakpoints (dotted lines) based on timing in rhesus monkey. e, Many 
genes in human cortex have early breakpoints followed by prolonged increase in expression. 
Left: Comparison of breakpoint timing (points with 95% confidence intervals) between 
human and rhesus shows a biased population of early breakpoint genes in human cortex but 
not striatum. Many of these early breakpoint genes continue to increase expression through 
young adulthood (red) in contrast to genes with relatively conserved timing that tend to 
plateau (grey) or decrease (blue). Ages corresponding to equivalent (solid lines) or nearby 
(dashed lines) developmental stages (event scores within ± 0.2; see Methods) in human and 
rhesus monkey are shown. Right: Bar plot summarizing the number of genes that have an 
early or late breakpoint in human in different brain regions.
Bakken et al.
Page 49
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
