 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Neuroprotective effects of apigenin 
against inflammation, neuronal 
excitability and apoptosis in an 
induced pluripotent stem cell 
model of Alzheimer’s disease
Rachelle Balez1, Nicole Steiner2, Martin Engel1, Sonia Sanz Muñoz1, Jeremy Stephen Lum3, 
Yizhen Wu3, Dadong Wang4, Pascal Vallotton4, Perminder Sachdev5, Michael O’Connor2,6, 
Kuldip Sidhu5, Gerald Münch2,7 & Lezanne Ooi1
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most prevalent neurodegenerative diseases, yet current 
therapeutic treatments are inadequate due to a complex disease pathogenesis. The plant polyphenol 
apigenin has been shown to have anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective properties in a number of 
cell and animal models; however a comprehensive assessment has not been performed in a human 
model of AD. Here we have used a human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) model of familial and 
sporadic AD, in addition to healthy controls, to assess the neuroprotective activity of apigenin. The 
iPSC-derived AD neurons demonstrated a hyper-excitable calcium signalling phenotype, elevated levels 
of nitrite, increased cytotoxicity and apoptosis, reduced neurite length and increased susceptibility to 
inflammatory stress challenge from activated murine microglia, in comparison to control neurons. We 
identified that apigenin has potent anti-inflammatory properties with the ability to protect neurites 
and cell viability by promoting a global down-regulation of cytokine and nitric oxide (NO) release in 
inflammatory cells. In addition, we show that apigenin is able to protect iPSC-derived AD neurons 
via multiple means by reducing the frequency of spontaneous Ca2+ signals and significantly reducing 
caspase-3/7 mediated apoptosis. These data demonstrate the broad neuroprotective action of apigenin 
against AD pathogenesis in a human disease model.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder involving the progressive loss of neurons in the brain1. 
The precise etiology is unknown for the majority of AD patients, who suffer from sporadic or late-onset AD; how-
ever, advanced age and inheritance of the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene are significant risk factors2. For a 
subset of patients, who suffer from the familial or early-onset form of the disease, specific genetic mutations have 
been identified. These include mutations in the presenilin-1 or -2 genes (PSEN1, PSEN2), as well as the amyloid 
precursor protein (encoded by APP)3,4. These mutations directly contribute to the accumulation of one of the 
pathogenic protein hallmarks of AD, β 
-amyloid (Aβ 
), which aggregates to form extracellular plaques that can 
disrupt a multitude of cellular functions4. For example, amyloid peptide accumulation has been reported to cause 
disruptions to the tightly regulated neuronal calcium (Ca2+) signalling systems during the progression of AD, 
affecting synaptic plasticity, memory and learning5, and contributing to a wide range of downstream pathogenic 
1Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, School of Biological Sciences, University of Wollongong, 
Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia. 2School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Locked bag 1797, Penrith, 
NSW, Australia. 3Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of Wollongong, 
Wollongong, NSW,  2522, Australia. 4CSIRO Informatics and Statistics, Locked Bag 17, North Ryde, NSW 1670, 
Australia. 5Centre for Healthy Brain Ageing School of Medicine, University of New South Wales, High Street, 
Kensington,. NSW,  2052, Australia. 6Molecular Medicine Research Group, Western Sydney University, Locked 
bag 1797, Penrith, NSW, Australia. 7Centre of Complementary Medicine Research (CompleMed), Western Sydney 
University, Locked bag 1797, Penrith, NSW, Australia. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to L.O. (email: lezanne@uow.edu.au)
Received: 18 December 2015
Accepted: 21 July 2016
Published: 12 August 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
effects, such as the generation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species6. Furthermore, accumulation of Aβ 
 has 
been shown to cause inflammation, leading to the activation of microglia around Aβ 
 plaques7. These activated 
microglia likely contribute to the increased levels of cytokines and chemokines, including interleukin-1 (IL-1), 
IL-6, and tumour necrosis factor α 
 (TNF-α 
), observed in AD brains7,8. The second major pathogenic hallmark 
of AD is the accumulation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles, which form when the microtubule associated 
protein tau becomes hyperphosphorylated, destabilising microtubules9. It has been reported that inflammation 
and reactive nitrogen species, which can cause the nitration of tau tyrosine residues, can further contribute to the 
aggregation of tau10. The combined action of these pathogenic factors likely contributes to the loss of synapses, 
neurite retraction and ultimately the death of neurons.
The rate of neurodegeneration in AD, from the initial pathogenic changes in neuronal signalling, to the pres-
entation of clinical symptoms and the subsequent cognitive decline, differs between individuals1. This has led to 
suggestions that both genetic and environmental factors play a significant role in the progression of this neuro-
degenerative disease1. This concept is supported by epidemiological studies that have positively correlated envi-
ronmental and behavioral aspects, such as diet and lifestyle, with incidents of AD and other forms of dementia 
(reviewed in refs 11,12). The combination of these factors indicates that the most effective treatments for AD 
might be pre-emptive, targeting the prevention or delay of onset rather than attempting to reverse pathogenic 
mechanisms once symptoms have developed.
Research has indicated that dietary based neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant agents may 
successfully reduce the risk or delay the onset or progression of AD13. Indeed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) decrease the risk of AD14, though their serious side effects prevent long-term use15. Our pre-
vious studies have used macrophage and microglial cell lines to systematically screen compounds for their 
anti-inflammatory activity16 and cytoprotective properties in inflammation and oxidative stress-induced cell death 
in astrocyte17 and neuronal cell lines18. From these studies we have identified the polyphenolic compound api-
genin, which is present in celery, parsley and artichoke, as able to reduce both tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα 
) 
and NO release from RAW264.7 macrophages, following activation with lipopolysaccharide19, however in these 
studies only a limited cytokine repertoire was assessed. These data suggest that apigenin could possess neuropro-
tective properties in the pro-inflammatory setting of AD.
Several groups have reported the anti-inflammatory action of apigenin in a number of human and animal 
inflammatory cell lines and animal models20–22. Furthermore, analysis of the neuroprotective potential of apigenin 
in a double transgenic mouse model of AD (APP/PS1) indicated that apigenin could ameliorate AD-associated 
memory impairment, reduce the Aβ 
 plaque burden and inhibit oxidative stress23. Several groups have reported 
anti-apoptotic effects of apigenin in murine HT2224 and human SH-SH5Y cell lines25 and shown that apigenin can 
reduce glutamate-induced Ca2+ signalling in murine cortical neurons26. Collectively, these results indicate that 
apigenin may have potent neuroprotective properties. However its contribution to neuroprotective mechanisms 
in human AD neurons is currently unknown.
Studying the temporal and cellular responses of neurons from AD patients to novel therapeutics has been dif-
ficult. A primary setback in the development of effective treatments for AD is the disparity between the outcomes 
in multiple cell and animal based models in comparison to clinical trials27. These models often over-express the 
pathogenic protein hallmarks of AD to induce the disease phenotype, while failing to fully recapitulate vital 
aspects of pathogenesis, such as gross synaptic loss and neuronal death28,29. The advent of induced pluripotent 
stem cell (iPSC) models has provided the opportunity to interrogate AD pathogenesis in human disease-specific 
neurons30 that express endogenous levels of disease-relevant proteins31.
We carried out a comprehensive and complementary analysis of the anti-inflammatory and neuroprotec-
tive activity of apigenin in human iPSC-derived neurons from familial, sporadic AD or healthy individuals. The 
iPSC-derived AD neurons used in the present study have shortened neurites and reduced neuronal viability, as 
well as elevated levels of nitrite and apoptosis. In addition, we identified a hyper-excitable Ca2+ signalling pheno-
type in the iPSC-derived AD neurons, which demonstrated spontaneous Ca2+ signals in the absence of stimulus. 
By developing a co-culture model using iPSC-derived neurons together with activated murine macrophages, 
we show that inflammation and oxidative stress lead to reduced neurite length and neuronal viability within 
AD patient-derived neurons, and that this effect can be prevented with apigenin. We show that apigenin is able 
to protect neurons from apoptosis (but not cytotoxicity), as well as reduce the hyper-excitable Ca2+ signalling 
phenotype in AD neurons and glutamate signalling in healthy neurons. Together our data highlight a broad 
neuroprotective action of apigenin via multiple mechanisms against AD pathogenesis in a human disease model.
Results
Apigenin protects familial AD neurons from inflammatory stress. 
Inflammatory signalling mol-
ecules from activated glia can cause neuronal death7,8,18. To identify whether apigenin could protect against 
inflammation-induced neuronal death in our cellular model, we first carried out a comprehensive analysis of the 
anti-inflammatory activity of apigenin in the murine macrophage cell line RAW264.7, microglial cell line C8-B4, 
and primary microglia, all of which are commonly used as cellular models of inflammation18. In each of these cell 
types apigenin is able to down-regulate NO and a range of pro-inflammatory cytokines with IC50 values between 
10 and 100 μ 
M (Supp. Tables 1–3), consistent with previous studies20,21.
In order to determine whether these anti-inflammatory effects would lead to neuroprotection in a human 
neuronal model of AD, we first generated iPSCs from a patient with familial AD, bearing a mutation in PSEN1 
(P117R), and an age-matched control. This mutation has a symptomatic age of onset around 35 years of age32 and 
leads to an aggressive phenotype that we hypothesised would generate a robust cellular AD model. As shown 
previously30,33, the iPSCs expressed Oct3/4 and grew in colonies (Fig. 1). The iPSCs could be differentiated into 
neurons with extended neurites (Fig. 1). Western blot analysis of familial AD and control neurons at 35 days of 
differentiation identified the expression of synapse markers PSD-95 and Synapsin I, both of which are required for 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
formation and maturation of synapses34 (Supp. Fig. 1), in addition to the dendrite marker MAP2 (Supp. Fig. 1). 
 
However, after 75 days of differentiation, the iPSC-derived neurons from the familial AD patient displayed 
reduced neurite length, compared to control neurons (Fig. 2A,B).
Using this disease model, treatment with H2O2 (100 μ 
M) for 24 h to induce oxidative stress led to neuronal 
death, causing a greater reduction in neuronal viability in neurons from the familial AD patient (32 fold) than the 
control (4 fold; Fig. 2C; p < 0.01).
Our current results and previously published work16 show that inflammatory activation of microglia and 
macrophages increases NO and cytokine release. As inflammation and elevated levels of nitrosative and oxidative 
stress are associated with neurodegeneration during AD7,35, we then investigated the effect of conditioned media 
from activated primary microglia on AD neurons in combination with the neuroprotective effect of apigenin. 
Exposure of the iPSC-derived AD neurons to conditioned medium for 48 h led to a reduction in both neuronal 
viability (Fig. 2D) and neurite length (Fig. 2E). We used a concentration of 50 μ 
M apigenin, in line with our pre-
vious IC50 values, to test the neuroprotective activity of apigenin. Pre-incubation (24 h) with apigenin (50 μ 
M) 
protected against both neuronal death and neurite shortening in AD neurons (Fig. 2E,F).
To investigate whether the neuroprotective mechanism of apigenin was due to its ability to scavenge the high 
levels of NO produced by activated glial cells, nitrite formation was measured by Griess assay following treatment 
with the NO donor, S-Nitroso-N-acetyl-DL-penicillamine (SNAP), in cell medium in the absence of cells. There 
was no significant difference in nitrite levels across all concentrations of apigenin and SNAP treatments (Fig. 2F), 
suggesting that apigenin does not directly scavenge NO in the cell medium.
Together, these data demonstrate reduced neurite length and cell viability in familial AD neurons, which was 
exacerbated by exposure to oxidative and inflammatory stresses. Treatment with apigenin protected neurons 
against the inflammatory stress induced neurite retraction and death.
Apigenin reduces apoptosis in sporadic AD and control neurons. 
Familial AD neurons provide a 
good model to understand early-onset AD, however since sporadic, late-onset AD is the most common form 
of the disease and is difficult to model using animals36, we focused the remainder of our study on sporadic AD 
neurons. In order to further interrogate the potential neuroprotective effects of apigenin, we differentiated 
iPSCs derived from a sporadic AD patient and an age and gender matched control. As shown previously25, these 
iPSCs form stem cell colonies, express markers of pluripotency and form teratomas following implantation into 
immune-compromised mice (data not shown). For the present study these sporadic AD and control iPSCs were 
differentiated into neurons with extended neurites, with immunocytochemistry demonstrating the expression of 
Figure 1. Neuronal differentiation timeline (A) with (B–D) control and (E–G) AD derived iPSC cells.  
(B,E) immunostaining of pluripotent stem cell marker Oct3/4, (C,F) brightfield images of stem cell colonies  
and (D,G), cells after differentiation into neurons.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
Figure 2. Apigenin treatment regime for familial AD iPSC-derived neurons (A). Neurons were generated from 
iPSCs from a familial AD patient carrying a PSEN1 (P117R) mutation or an age-matched control. (B) Length 
of neurites from familial AD or control neurons was measured using HCA-vision software. All neurites were 
measured in > 
10 images per experiment, n = 3. * 
* 
indicates significant difference (p ≤ 0.01), paired t-test.  
(C) Neurons were treated with vehicle control or 100 μ 
M H2O2 for 24 h and viability of AD or control neurons 
was measured. (D) Neuronal viability and (E) neurite length were measured in AD neurons or those cultured 
in media taken from activated microglia under inflammatory conditions (Infl; microglia activated with LPS 
(50 μ 
g/ml) and IFN-γ (20 U/ml) for 48 h ± 50 μ 
M Apigenin (Apg; 24 hour pre-incubation). (F) Nitrite formation 
in cell culture medium in the absence of cells treated with SNAP (0, 1, 10, 100, 1000 μ 
M) and apigenin (0, 5, 10, 
50 μ 
M). Data shown are mean ± standard error of the mean from 3 independent experiments.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
the synaptic maturation protein Synapsin I, the post-synaptic marker PSD-95 (Fig. 3A–F) and the neuronal micro-
tubule marker MAP2 (Fig. 3G–L), as well as GFAP-positive neural precursors/cells (Fig. 3G–L). The iPSC-derived 
neurons from the sporadic AD patient released 2.6 fold higher levels of Aβ 
42 compared to neurons from the 
control patient (t(4) = 
 3.426, p < 
 0.05), however there was no significant difference in Aβ 
40 release (Supp. Fig. 2), 
 
which is in accordance with the results of several other studies31,37,38.
As the loss of synapses from neurite retraction is one of the strongest pathological correlates with cognitive 
decline in AD39, we assessed neurite length. Similar to familial AD iPSC-derived neurons, the neurites of spo-
radic AD neurons were 54% shorter at 52 days of differentiation, in comparison to control neurons (t(39) = 
 8.15, 
p < 
 0.001; Fig. 3M). This result is further supported by western blot analysis of iPSC-derived neurons, which 
identified a significant decrease in the dendrite marker and microtubule associated protein, MAP-2C, in spo-
radic AD neurons in comparison to the control, at 52 days of differentiation (t(12) =  2.276, p < 0.05; Supp. Fig 3). 
However, there was no difference in the expression levels of the neuronal markers, neuron specific enolase (NSE) 
and NeuN, nor synaptic marker, synapsin-1, or axonal marker, neurofilament heavy chain, between control and 
sporadic AD neurons, suggesting there was no difference in the number of neurons present in the cultures.
Central to neurodegeneration is the loss of neurons by cell death pathways, due to multiple contrib-
uting factors in AD, potentially including oxidative and nitrosative stress1. We therefore used our cel-
lular model to assess the effects of apigenin on the levels of cytotoxicity and apoptosis. In the brain, NO 
can be both neuroprotective and neurotoxic, depending on the local concentration; we have previously 
shown that exogenous application of high levels of NO is neurotoxic to cell lines like Neuro2a19, how-
ever at low concentrations NO can be neuroprotective (reviewed in ref. 35). Neurons were differentiated for 
75 days, prior to 50 μ 
M apigenin or vehicle control pre-treatment (24 h), followed by 300 μ 
M H2O2 or 10 μ 
M 
SNAP treatment for 24 h prior to analysis (Fig. 4A). Sporadic AD neurons had a significantly higher 
basal level of nitrite (F(1, 8) = 
 64.69, p < 
 0.001), used as a downstream marker of NO, present in cell cul-
ture medium, compared to control neurons (p < 
 0.05, Fig. 4B). Pre-treatment of the cells for 24 h with 
50 μ 
M apigenin caused a small but non-significant reduction in basal nitrite levels (F(1, 8) = 
 4.89, n.s.), 
 
in comparison to vehicle treatment in both healthy control and sporadic AD cells. This is consistent with our 
previous results that suggest that apigenin does not scavenge NO in cell culture medium (Fig. 2). The sporadic 
AD neurons exhibited a significantly higher level of caspase-3/7 activation (F(5, 24) = 
 11.16) than healthy control 
neurons, used as a marker of apoptosis (p < 
 0.001, Fig. 4C,D). Pre-treatment with apigenin (50 μ 
M) for 24 h sig-
nificantly reduced caspase-3/7 activity levels of sporadic AD neurons (p < 
 0.001) to the level of control neurons 
(Fig. 4C). Consistent with our previous experiments showing that neurons from a familial AD patient displayed 
reduced viability following H2O2 treatment (Fig. 2), levels of cytotoxicity (F(5, 24) = 8.26, p < 0.001) were higher 
in the sporadic AD neurons than controls and cytotoxicity increased following treatment with H2O2, promoting 
oxidative stress (p < 0.001; Fig. 4D). Although apigenin protected both sporadic AD and control neurons against 
apoptosis it had no effect on cytotoxicity (Fig. 4D).
To establish the effect of exogenous NO on these neurons, the cells were treated with the NO donor SNAP 
(10 μ 
M). Treatment with SNAP caused a small but significant reduction in apoptosis (F(5, 24) = 249.5, p < 0.001) 
for both sporadic AD (p < 
 0.01) and control neurons (p < 
 0.05), but did not affect cytotoxicity (Fig. 4C,D). 
Collectively, these data identify significantly increased levels of apoptosis, cytotoxicity and nitrite, in conjunction 
with reduced neurites in sporadic AD neurons and that apigenin and low levels of exogenous NO are able to 
reduce apoptosis.
Apigenin treatment limits apoptosis in sporadic AD and control neurons. 
In order to further 
interrogate the potential neuroprotective effects of apigenin against oxidative stress, we differentiated iPSCs 
derived from a sporadic AD patient and an age and gender matched control into neurons with extended neu-
rites in hypoxic conditions. After 75 days differentiation, neurons were transferred to atmospheric oxygen 24 h 
prior to apigenin (10 μ 
M) treatment. AD and control neuronal cultures showed similar caspase 3/7 activity 
 
(993.7 vs 715.8 substrates/mm2 respectively, p > 
 0.9, Fig. 5A,B) at the beginning of the normoxic culturing 
period. Increasing O2 from 3 to 19% triggered a steady increase in caspase 3/7 substrates (AD: 136.1 ± 
 8.60%, 
Control: 125.3 ± 
 5.15%; Fig. 5A). Apigenin (10 μ 
M) treatment slowed the production of caspase 3/7 sub-
strates (AD: 101.3 ± 
 1.66%, Control: 116.3 ± 
 6.66% difference vs − 
22 h–0 h; Fig. 5A) for 24 h. The number of 
caspase 3/7 substrates significantly rose again for the following 24 h period (AD: 149.3 ± 
 13.28%, p < 
 0.001 vs 
0 h–24 h; Control: 146.6 ± 
 6.1%, p < 
 0.01 vs 0 h–24 h; Fig. 5A), with more substrates produced by the AD neu-
ronal cultures than control cultures (p < 
 0.01). Propidium iodide binding was not affected by the increase in O2 
 
(Fig. 5C,D), with 2.62 ± 
 0.13 times more propidium iodide positive cells, as a marker of dead cells, in sporadic 
AD cultures than control cultures (1018.3 ± 
 40.9 vs 393.2 ± 
 39.3, respectively, p < 
 0.001; Fig. 5C). Caspase 3/7 
substrates showed high colocalization with propidium iodide signal for sporadic AD and control neuronal cul-
tures before and after apigenin treatment (Fig. 5E,G), with a trend for higher correlation in sporadic cultures than 
control cultures (p = 
 0.07, Fig. 5E,G). This data was further confirmed using Annexin V and propidium iodide 
(Supp. Fig. 4); together this data provided evidence for AD neuronal cell death via apoptosis in oxidative stress 
conditions, with protection from apoptosis afforded by apigenin.
Apigenin reduces hyper-excitability in sporadic AD neurons. 
We hypothesised that Ca2+ dys-
function, as a major disease phenotype accompanying AD5,40, could be contributing to the increased apoptosis 
observed in the sporadic AD neurons. Strikingly, through live cell Ca2+ imaging we observed that the sporadic 
AD neurons displayed a hyper-excitable phenotype, demonstrating multiple spontaneous Ca2+ responses in the 
absence of stimulus, whereas control neurons remained inactive in the absence of stimulus (Fig. 6A,B). Exposure 
to apigenin reduced the hyper-excitable phenotype observed in sporadic AD neurons, significantly reducing the 
frequency of spontaneous Ca2+ signalling (Fig. 6C,D).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
Figure 3. Neurons were generated from iPSCs from a sporadic AD patient or an age-matched control. 
Immunostaining of neurons in culture with (A,D) Synapsin I (SYN-1) and (B,E) PSD-95, (C,F) overlay or  
(G,J) GFAP and (H,K) MAP2, (I,L) overlay. (M) Length of neurites from sporadic AD or control neurons 
presented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments. * 
* 
* 
Indicates significant difference (p ≤ 0.001), 
paired t-test.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
Treatment with glutamate induced an influx of Ca2+ into both control and sporadic AD neurons (Fig. 6E,F). 
Exposure to apigenin (F(3, 159) = 31.05, p < 
 0.001) prior to glutamate significantly reduced the amplitude of the 
Ca2+ response in control neurons (P < 0.05) but not in sporadic AD neurons (Fig. 6E,F). Exposure of neurons to 
the NO donor, SNAP, prior to glutamate had no effect on the amplitude of the Ca2+ response in either control or 
sporadic AD neurons, while H2O2 significantly increased the glutamate induced Ca2+ response in control neurons 
only (p < 0.001).
Similar to glutamate, treatment with high K+ induced an influx of Ca2+ into both control and sporadic AD 
neurons. Exposure to apigenin or SNAP prior to high K+ had no effect on the amplitude of the Ca2+ response in 
either control or sporadic AD neurons. However, exposure to H2O2 prior to high K+ significantly increased the 
amplitude of the Ca2+ response in both control (p < 0.001) and sporadic AD neurons (p < 0.001).
Taken together, these data indicate a hyper-excitable phenotype in sporadic AD neurons that can be moder-
ated by apigenin, and that apigenin is able to decrease glutamate-induced Ca2+ influx in healthy neurons.
Discussion
Through the use of iPSC-based AD modelling, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the neuroprotective 
 
effects of apigenin against mediators of AD: inflammation, oxidative stress, disruption to neuronal Ca2+  
signalling patterns, neurite retraction and apoptosis. For the first time in an iPSC model of AD we demonstrated 
a hyper-excitable phenotype in neuronal Ca2+ signalling. In addition, we also showed that AD neurons had a 
shorter neurite length, increased nitrite levels and increased cytotoxicity and apoptosis. Loss of neuronal viability 
was further enhanced in AD neurons following challenge with inflammatory or oxidative stress. Importantly, our 
results show that apigenin is able to protect these human neurons from neurite retraction and apoptosis, as well 
as reduce the hyper-excitable Ca2+ signalling phenotype.
Figure 4. (A) Apigenin treatment regime for sporadic AD and control neurons. (B) Nitrite concentration in 
the cell medium was measured by Griess assay in the presence of vehicle control or apigenin (50 μ 
M treatment 
for 24 h). (C) Apoptosis and (D) cytotoxicity were simultaneously measured using an Apotox Glo kit. Control 
or AD neurons were treated with vehicle control or apigenin (50 μ 
M), H2O2 (300 μ 
M) or SNAP (10 μ 
M) for 24 h. 
Data are presented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments. Significant differences from matched 
treatment are indicated by * 
p ≤ 0.05 and * 
* 
* 
p ≤ 0.001, with significant difference from control treatment 
indicated by ###p ≤ 0.001 using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
Neuroprotective potential of apigenin: anti-inflammatory activity. 
Patients who suffer from AD 
display higher levels of inflammation, oxidative and nitrosative stress, as evidenced by high levels of cytokines, 
chemokines and nitrated tyrosines present in patient brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid41,42. As the develop-
ment of AD is hypothesised to occur over several decades, this suggests that successful treatments need to be 
pre-emptive to prevent or delay disease onset, rather than reversing the pathogenic mechanisms once symptoms 
have developed, in addition to being suitable for long-term use. The dietary accessibility of plant-based polyphe-
nolic compounds, like apigenin, makes them a suitable candidate as they have been shown to prevent microglial 
activation and may be potentially protective against AD progression43.
We first wanted to determine whether apigenin could protect against inflammatory-mediated neurite retrac-
tion, as one of the strongest pathogenic correlates with cognitive decline in AD is the loss of neurons from 
the retraction of neurites and neuronal death39. We demonstrated that iPSC-derived neurons generated from 
AD patients displayed a significant reduction in neurite length, which was exacerbated by exposure to media 
from activated inflammatory cells, in addition to elevated levels of nitrite, used as a downstream marker of 
NO. By using activated murine macrophage and microglial cells, our results indicate that apigenin has broad 
anti-inflammatory activity, which protects neurites by preventing activation of inflammatory pathways and 
reducing the release of NO. Potential mechanisms mediating neuroprotection by apigenin may involve the regu-
lation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-1β 
 and TNF-α 
 by preventing NF-kB activation20.
The involvement of NO in the pathogenesis of AD is highly complex35. As our results, and reports from the 
literature suggest, activated glial cells can produce high concentrations of NO, which is generated by the enzyme 
Figure 5. iPSC-derived neurons were generated from a sporadic AD patient or an age-matched control. 
Apoptosis and cell viability were simultaneously assessed after increasing oxygen from 3 to 19% 22 h prior to 
apigenin (10 μ 
M) treatment. Apoptosis was assessed through quantifying caspase 3/7 substrates (A), number of 
substrates per mm2, n = 8) % of change between − 
22 h and 0 h, 0 h and 24 h and 24 h and 44 h indicated through 
dotted lines. Dead cells were quantified through counting of propidium iodide (C), number of cells per mm2, 
n = 4). Representative microscopy images of caspase 3/7 substrates (B) and propidium iodide (D) at 10× 
,  
scale = 200 μ 
m. (E) Colocalization was determined through Pearson’s correlation coefficient for caspase 3/7 
substrate signal with propidium iodide signal (1 = 100% colocalization, 0 = no colocalization). (F) Merged 
microscopy images of caspase 3/7 and propidium iodide signal at 10× 
, scale = 200 μ 
m. (G) Representative 2D 
intensity histogram for green (y-axis, caspase 3/7 substrates) and red (x-axis, propidium iodide signal) pixels. 
Data presented as mean ± SEM; * 
* 
p < 0.01, * 
* 
* 
p < 0.001, * 
* 
* 
* 
p < 0.0001 as compared to % change between  
0 h and 24 h time points; #Tp = 0.07, ##p < 0.01, ###p < 0.001 difference between AD and control cultures.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
inducible NO synthase (iNOS), while neurons produce much lower concentrations by the Ca2+ activated enzyme 
neuronal NO synthase (nNOS)44. When produced at low concentrations, NO plays an important role in synaptic 
plasticity and as a second messenger in the brain45. Indeed we found that low concentrations of NO protected 
neurons from apoptosis. However, at high concentrations NO can become neurotoxic, due to its propensity 
to react with the superoxide anion to form aggressive oxidants, such as peroxynitrite46. Studies using the N2a/
Peuht39 neuroblastoma line have demonstrated that peroxynitrite can induce the nitration and aggregation of 
tau, which could potentially contribute to AD pathology10. Our results suggest that apigenin is able to protect 
neurons by reducing NO levels from activated glia, using a mechanism distinct from NO scavenging. However, 
our results also show that apigenin does not significantly reduce nitrite levels in neurons. Together, this indicates 
that the mechanism of action for apigenin may be specific to pathways associated with iNOS activation, as it was 
Figure 6. Representative images of Ca2+ imaging traces in (A) control, (B) sporadic AD derived neurons 
and (C) sporadic AD derived neurons exposed to apigenin. Neurons were loaded with fluorescent Ca2+ 
indicator Fluo3-AM and data are represented as mean change in fluorescence from baseline (F/F0) over 
time. Application of 60 mM KCl (high K+) or 50 μ 
M apigenin is represented as the light or dark shaded area, 
respectively. Mean relative change in fluorescence was calculated from (D) control and (E) sporadic AD derived 
neurons. Loaded neurons were perfused with 50 μ 
M apigenin, 300 μ 
M H2O2, or 10 μ 
M SNAP prior to 200 μ 
M 
glutamate or 60 mM high K+. Data are presented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments from > 
30 
cells. Significant difference from basal response was calculated using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple 
comparisons test and is indicated by * 
* 
* 
p ≤ 0.001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
able to reduce nitrite levels in glial cells. The targeted action of apigenin towards iNOS generated NO is important 
in the physiological context of the brain as apigenin may reduce the potentially cytotoxic levels of NO produced 
by activated glia, without global scavenging of NO, allowing the lower concentrations of NO produced in neurons 
by nNOS (and in endothelial cells by eNOS) to continue mediating vital cellular functions and protection.
The suppressive effect of apigenin on iNOS activity has been recently reported in a diabetes-associated cogni-
tive decline rat model47. This group also demonstrated that apigenin was able to reduce the activity of both nNOS 
and eNOS. Although we did not identify a reduction in nitrite in our cultures after apigenin treatment, under 
certain conditions the mechanism could involve reducing intracellular Ca2+, which is required for the function of 
calmodulin, an essential co-factor for nNOS and eNOS.
Understanding the action of apigenin on the different NOS enzymes is important due to the complex and 
often concentration dependent role of NO in the brain. High levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species medi-
ating cytotoxic and apoptotic mechanisms in neuronal cell lines have previously been shown48,49. However low 
concentrations of NO, applied via a NO donor, were protective in our cells, significantly reducing apoptosis in 
both the AD and control neurons. In the brain, induction of the soluble guanylate cyclase and the cyclic guano-
sine monophosphate cGMP pathway by NO in neurons promotes vasodilation, increasing the cerebral blood sup-
ply to neurons and decreasing the potential for oxidative stress50,51. This complex and concentration dependent 
role of NO in the brain highlights the need to understand the specific action of apigenin in regards to inhibition 
of NO production by the different NOS enzymes and in different cell types.
The murine RAW264.7 macrophage cell line, along with the C8B4 microglial cell line, is often used as a model 
for inflammatory cells18. Activation of these cells with LPS and IFNγ 
 results in the release of cytokines, chemok-
ines and a synergistic and potent up-regulation of iNOS, leading to an increase in NO release18. For this reason 
RAW264.7 and C8B4 cells, along with primary microglia, were used to assess the anti-inflammatory properties 
of apigenin. However, an ideal model for understanding the effects of inflammatory activation on AD neurons 
would be to use microglia differentiated from iPSCs. Although there are protocols for generating microglia-like 
cells from mouse iPSCs52, these cells (and similarly for human iPSCs) do not release the comprehensive panel of 
cytokines and chemokines of primary microglia. An important future direction is therefore to develop human 
iPSC-derived microglia that can release the full complement of cytokines and chemokines upon activation.
Development of human iPSC-derived microglia is important as our data suggest that there are differences 
in the panel of cytokines and chemokines that are released from the different cell lines used in this study53. 
Activation of microglia is a relatively early pathogenic event in AD patients (prior to neuropil destruction), 
while transgenic AD mouse studies suggest that cytokines may also influence plaque deposition/degradation54. 
Pro-inflammatory mediators, such as TNFα 
 and IL-1β 
, in combination with IFN-γ 
, can be directly cytotoxic 
to neurons when chronically produced at high concentrations55 and stimulate the production of Aβ 
 peptides56. 
Conversely upon activation with Aβ 
, microglial cells produce the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6 and 
TNFα 
 and the chemokines MIP-1 and MCP-157. This pathogenic and cyclical relationship between inflammatory 
cytokines and Aβ 
 formation highlights the fundamental role of inflammation in AD and the need to develop 
human disease models to accurately understand the multiple and interconnected pathways.
Collectively, our results in the macrophage and microglial cells suggest that apigenin has broad anti-inflammatory 
 
activity, preventing activation of inflammatory pathways and NO release. Apigenin may therefore delay the onset 
or slow the progression of AD, targeting multiple pathogenic components associated with the early stages of disease 
 
progression by reducing the inflammatory response. Our data further suggests the activation of microglia could 
contribute to neurite retraction, synapse loss and neuronal death.
Neuroprotective potential of apigenin: anti-apoptotic activity in neurons. 
The loss of neurons 
during AD is one of the strongest pathological correlates with cognitive decline, yet is a disease phenotype that 
has been difficult to recapitulate in animal models28,58. The AD neurons generated in this study demonstrated 
significantly higher levels of caspase-3/7 activity, two cysteine-aspartic proteases that play an essential role in 
apoptosis, highlighting the biological relevance of our iPSC-derived model of AD. Several groups have confirmed 
a significant increase in caspase-3/7 activity at the onset of cognitive decline during AD, closely correlating this 
change with synaptic loss and neuronal death59,60. Increases in caspase-3 and 7 activity were specifically associated 
with synaptic dysfunction in a mouse model of AD60, suggesting that therapeutic compounds aimed at protect-
ing neurons against caspase-3/7 activation would be particularly beneficial against synaptic loss and cognitive 
decline.
We show that in a human iPSC-derived model of AD that apigenin is able to significantly reduce caspase-3/7 
activity, protecting cells from apoptosis. Conversely, apigenin was unable to protect neurons from cytotoxicity, 
suggesting its mechanism of action may be caspase-specific. These findings are in accordance with previous stud-
ies showing that apigenin protects against caspase-3 induced apoptosis in SH-SY5Y cells by inhibiting the release 
of cytochrome c and thus preventing the activation of the caspase-3 cascade25.
The specific mechanisms triggering the observed increase of caspase-3/7 activity in AD neurons may be the 
result of AD mediated pathogenesis. Studies regarding the activation of caspase-3 in a number of AD trans-
genic mouse models have demonstrated that ROS, generated by toxic Aβ 
1–42 oligomers, can induce the release of 
cytochrome c from mitochondria, which then activates caspase-324,61.
Together, these results demonstrate increased cytotoxicity and apoptosis in iPSC-derived sporadic AD neu-
rons, which has been difficult to recapitulate in animal models of the disease. Furthermore, we showed that treat-
ment with apigenin could significantly reduce caspase-3/7 meditated apoptosis in AD neurons, highlighting the 
potential therapeutic application of apigenin.
Neuroprotective mechanism for apigenin: reducing neuronal hyper-excitability and Ca2+ dys-
function. 
Perturbed Ca2+ homeostasis may play a key role in AD pathogenesis, by stimulating the production 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
of inflammatory cytokines, reactive nitrogen and oxygen species62 in neurons and glia, and as a central under-
lying mechanism in the activation of many downstream pathways40. Recently, a shift in the understanding of 
how Ca2+ dysfunction manifests and contributes to the functional impairment of neurons has begun to emerge. 
Increasing experimental evidence from mouse models and human patients with AD is suggesting that neuronal 
networks are hyperactive, especially in the early stages of disease progression63. In order to improve cell modelling 
of these complex phenotypes in neurodegenerative disorders, it is increasingly important to validate the differen-
tiation of disease relevant cells from iPSCs by identifying and investigating disease phenotypes using functional 
assays (reviewed in ref. 64). The Ca2+ imaging experiments reported in this study demonstrate an endogenous 
hyper-excitability phenotype in iPSC-derived AD neurons. This provides a novel in vitro human model with 
which to investigate this emerging contributing factor of AD pathogenesis and a platform to test potential ther-
apeutic compounds.
Imaging experiments on hippocampus CA1 neurons in double transgenic AD mice (APPswe/PS1M146V) 
have shown increased neuronal firing rates in association with reduced neurite length65. These results are in 
accordance with the AD neurons generated in this study, which had a hyper-excitable phenotype in the absence 
of stimulus and reduced dendrite length. In addition, although networks of hyperactive neurons have been found 
clustered around Aβ 
 plaques, two-photon calcium imaging in young double transgenic mice (APP23/PS45) 
found populations of hyperactive CA1 neurons, prior to plaque formation, suggesting this is an early occurrence 
in AD pathogenesis66. The relatively short maturation time for the neurons generated in this study (i.e., weeks, 
in comparison to years in the human brain), in conjunction with the elevated levels of secreted Aβ 
42 could act as 
a proxy for earlier stages of AD progression. Our results also suggest that culturing neurons at atmospheric O2 
promotes oxidative stress that is able to drive pathogenesis and disease phenotype in the cells. A potential mecha-
nism driving the hyper-excitable phenotype is that elevated levels of Aβ 
, as measured in the AD neurons, have the 
capacity to modify receptors involved in Ca2+ signalling, such as NMDA receptors, increasing intracellular Ca2+ 
and altering signalling patterns40.
Exposure to apigenin reduced the frequency (but not amplitude) of Ca2+ signals in the AD neurons. This is the 
first report of apigenin modulating hyper-excitability in a model of AD, demonstrating a further neuroprotective 
mechanism against AD pathogenesis. Intriguingly, apigenin reduced the mean Ca2+ response to glutamate in 
control neurons but not in AD neurons; the loss of this regulatory mechanism in AD neurons remains uniden-
tified and will be the subject of future research. There are conflicting reports in the literature regarding the effect 
of apigenin on receptors involved in Ca2+ signalling. In cultured rat cortical neurons apigenin has been shown 
to decrease NMDA receptor function, with no effect on AMPA receptor activity26, however in cultured rat hip-
pocampal neurons, apigenin was shown to inhibit both NMDA and AMPA receptors67. Identifying the specific 
effect of apigenin on these important signalling channels in human neurons should be investigated to better 
understand the protective mechanism of apigenin.
The iPSC-derived neurons used in this study express NMDA receptor subunits (data not shown), indicat-
ing that the observed effects in these human cells could be mediated via NMDA receptors. There are a num-
ber of potential mechanisms facilitating the observed reduction in neuronal hyper-excitability by apigenin. The 
reported anti-oxidative and anti-amyloidogenic properties of apigenin in transgenic APP mouse models of AD23, 
in conjunction with the ability of apigenin to reduce NO production, may protect against oxidative modifica-
tion of NMDA receptors, as a result of reactive oxygen species generated by Aβ 
42. In addition, apigenin protec-
tion could be mediated through inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation of the NMDA receptor. 
Phosphorylation of the core NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor potentiates Ca2+ influx through the receptor68. 
Studies have shown that the polyphenolic compound, curcumin, is able to inhibit PKC phosphorylation of 
NMDA receptors in primary rat cerebral cortex cells68, and that apigenin and curcumin can inhibit PKC activity 
in NIH3T3 cells69. However, it has yet to be confirmed if apigenin alters PKC activity in neurons and should be 
the focus of future studies.
The decreased glutamate-induced Ca2+ response to apigenin suggest a potential protective effect through 
a reduction in Ca2+ signalling, with the associated benefits of reduced Ca2+ signalling widely reported for AD 
(reviewed in ref. 70). For example, NMDA receptor antagonists, such as Memantine, are among the limited phar-
macological compounds currently available for AD71. Attenuation of increased Ca2+ signalling may reduce some 
of the widespread downstream consequences, such as the activation of glial cells, the production of inflammatory 
cytokines and even a reduction in the formation of toxic Aβ 
 oligomers, which can ultimately lead to neuronal 
death72.
The neuronal hyper-excitability observed in the AD neurons used in this study was also accompanied by 
significantly elevated levels of nitrite, used as a downstream marker of NO production. This suggested that 
the iPSC-derived AD neurons had a higher level of basal NO production. In post-synaptic neurons, the gen-
eration of NO is Ca2+ dependent, with nNOS co-localised with glutamate activated NMDA receptors73. The 
hyper-excitability in the AD neurons could be contributing to the elevated levels of nitrite. A recent study using 
the triple transgenic AD mouse model (3xTg-AD) suggested that elevated levels of NO may be a compensatory 
mechanism employed by neurons to boost synaptic transmission in the early stages of AD74. However, the sus-
tained generation of NO due to neuronal hyper-excitability could lead to the formation of damaging reactive 
nitrogen and oxygen species, resulting in a pathogenic shift from a neuroprotective mechanism to a mediator 
of neurodegeneration. The hyper-excitable phenotype and elevated levels of nitrite present in this iPSC-derived 
model of AD provide a disease and species-relevant platform to investigate and confirm this proposed mechanism.
Conclusion
Collectively, we report a hyper-excitable Ca2+ signalling phenotype in an iPSC-derived model of AD, as well as 
significantly elevated levels of apoptosis and nitrite, in association with decreased neurite length. We showed that 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
treatment of AD neurons with apigenin reduces neuronal hyper-excitability and apoptosis. Furthermore, through 
the use of activated inflammatory cells we demonstrated that apigenin could inhibit the activation of cytokines 
and NO production, protecting AD neurons from inflammatory induced stress and neurite retraction.
Human iPSC-derived neuronal models provide opportunities to understand the neuronal functions and 
mechanisms of disease. Findings from our study suggest that the flavonoid apigenin has broad neuroprotective 
effects against a suite of pathogenic factors mediating AD progression, highlighting its potential as a therapeutic 
agent.
Materials and Methods
Derivation of control and AD-specific iPSCs. 
Skin samples were collected from patients and healthy 
individuals (all male), including: a 39-year old early-onset familial AD patient (PSEN1P117R; APOE3/3); a 29-year 
old healthy individual (APOE4/4); a 65-year old late-onset sporadic AD patient (APOE3/4); a 57-year old healthy 
individual (APOE3/3). All experimental protocols were approved by the University of Wollongong and University 
of New South Wales Human Research Ethics Committees (HE13/299 and HREC08037, respectively). The meth-
ods were carried out in accordance with the guidelines as set out in the National Statement on Ethical Conduct 
in Research Involving Humans and informed consent was obtained from all donors. Generation of human feed-
er-free iPSCs was carried out as previously described (Chung et al., 2012). The iPSCs were considered pluripotent 
by teratoma assay and were karyotyped to confirm the lack of chromosomal changes during reprogramming. 
The iPSCs were cultured on Matrigel (Corning) coated tissue culture plates in mTeSR1 (Stem Cell Technologies) 
containing 25 U/mL Penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator.
Differentiation of control and AD-specific iPSCs to neurons. 
Differentiation of iPSCs was performed 
via neurospheres as per75. On day 29, neurospheres were dissociated with accutase, re-suspended in neural expan-
sion media (DMEM/F12) supplemented with N2, B-27, Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) nonessential amino 
acids and heparin (1 mg/mL)) and triturated into single cells. Cells were plated out on laminin-coated 18 mm 
glass coverslips for Ca2+ imaging or in 24 well tissue culture plates for assays in neural expansion media at a den-
sity of 25,000 cells / well.
All growth factors were from R&D systems. Following overnight incubation, media was aspirated and 
replaced with media supplemented with 100 ng/mL of sonic hedgehog (SHH) and fibroblast growth factor 8 
(FGF-8). On day 36, media was supplemented with 200 μ 
M ascorbic acid in addition to SHH and FGF-8. On day 
44 media was supplemented with 100 ng/mL each of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor, glial-derived neurotrophic factor and insulin-like growth factor 1, in addition to SHH, 
FGF-8 and ascorbic acid until day 75. Partial media changes were performed every other day for the entire culture 
period. For inflammation-based assays, neurons were treated with 50 μ 
M apigenin or vehicle for 24 h, prior to 
complete media changes with conditioned media from activated microglia for 48 h. For all other assays neurons 
were treated with apigenin 50 μ 
M or vehicle for 24 h, prior to complete media changes containing either 10 μ 
M 
SNAP or 300 μ 
M hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) for 24 h.
Immunocytochemistry. 
Samples of iPSCs and neurons were stained for specific markers to confirm pluri-
potency and differentiation into mature neurons, respectively. Both iPSCs and neurons were plated on poly-L 
lysine (BD Biosciences) laminin-coated 8 mm coverslips. Cells were fixed with 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde, per-
meabilised with 0.5% (v/v) TritonX-100 in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and blocked with 5% (w/v) bovine 
serum albumin in PBS.
The iPSC colonies were stained with Oct3/4 (mouse 1:500, Stem Cell Technologies) primary antibody and 
anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (1:1000, Life Technologies) secondary antibody. Neurons were stained with pri-
mary antibodies to microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2, 1:500), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, 
1:250), synapsin-1 (SYN-1, 1:500) and postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95, 1:500). Antibodies were 
from Millipore unless otherwise stated and were incubated with cells in blocking solution overnight at 4 °C. 
Anti-mouse/anti-rabbit isotype controls (Life Technologies) were used as negative controls. Anti-rabbit Alexa 
Fluor 488 and anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 633 secondary antibodies were used at 1:1000 in blocking solution for 1 h 
at room temperature. Cells were mounted in SlowFade Gold antifade reagent with DAPI (Life Technologies). 
Immunocytochemical preparations were imaged with a Leica DMI6000B confocal microscope and acquired 
using LAS AF 2.6 (Leica microsystems).
Primary microglia isolation and cell line culture. 
RAW264.7 and C8B4 cells were maintained in 
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 200 U/ml penicillin, 200 μ 
g/ml streptomycin 
and 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) and incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2. For primary microglial culture, brains were 
removed from murine E18 embryos from C57/Bl6 mice and meninges were removed. Cell cultures were washed 
twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.2) followed by a 5 min incubation with 2 ml of 0.05% TrypLE 
Express (Life technologies) at 37 °C. Dislodged cells were resuspended in 10 ml of ice-cold separation buffer (PBS, 
pH 7.2, 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 2 mM EDTA). The buffer was degassed in an ultrasound water 
bath (Unisonics, Brookvale, Australia), to prevent air bubbles from blocking the column. Cells were centrifuged at 
300 g for 10 min and the supernatant discarded. Up to 1 × 107 cells were resuspended in 90 μ 
l of separation buffer 
(Miltenyi Biotec). The cells were incubated with 20 μ 
l CD11b magnetic beads on a MS column (Miltenyi Biotec) 
for 15 min at 4 °C, washed with 2 ml separation buffer and centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min. The supernatant was 
removed completely and the cells were resuspended in 500 μ 
l of separation buffer. Cells were passed through a 
40 μ 
m nylon mesh to remove cell clumps and plated into a T25 flask.
Activation of microglia with LPS and IFN-γ and treatment with apigenin. 
Immediately after 
CD11b magnetic bead isolation primary microglia cells were seeded into 96 well Primaria tissue culture plates 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
(Bio-Rad) at a density of 3 × 
 105 cells per well. The conditioned media from the mixed culture was diluted 1:2 with 
fresh medium (total volume in each well 100 μ 
l). Primary microglia, RAW264.7 and C8B4 cells were plated 24 h 
before incubation with apigenin for 1 h. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 50 μ 
g/ml) and Interferon-γ 
 (IFN-γ 
; 20 U/ml) 
were added, followed by incubation for 48 h. The supernatant of three wells was combined, spin filtered (0.22 μ 
m 
Corning Costar Spin-X spin filter with a cellulose acetate membrane) and 0.4 μ 
l protease inhibitor cocktail con-
taining Aprotinin, Bestatin, E-64, Leupeptin and Pepstatin A was added. Of the supernatant 50 μ 
l were immedi-
ately used for Griess assay and the remainder was stored at − 
80 °C for the cytokine assay.
Resazurin-based assay for determination of cell viability. 
Cell viability of activated inflamma-
tory cells or iPSC-derived neurons was assessed in terms of the metabolic capability of cells to convert the 
non-fluorescent redox indicator, resazurin, into its highly fluorescent product, resorufin. Briefly, 100 μ 
l DMEM 
containing 0.125 mg/l resazurin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each well of a 96-well plate and incubated for 
90 min at 37 °C. Fluorescence was measured at 560 nm excitation / 590 nm emission using a POLARstar Omega 
fluorescent plate reader (BMG LABTECH).
Nitrite determination by Griess assay. 
The nitrite concentration in the culture medium of activated 
inflammatory cells or iPSC-derived neurons was used as an indicator of NO production using the Griess reaction. 
Cell culture medium in the absence of cells was also assessed to investigate the scavenging action of apigenin, 
with fresh media exposed to SNAP (0, 1, 10, 100, 1000 μ 
M) and apigenin (0, 5, 10, 50 μ 
M). The supernatant (50 μ 
l 
from each well) was transferred to a fresh 96 well plate with 50 μ 
l Griess reagent (25 μ 
l of 1% sulphanilamide and 
25 μ 
l of 0.1% napthyethylene-diamine in 5% HCl). After 10 min incubation at room temperature, the absorbance 
of each well was measured at 540 nm. Nitrite concentration was calculated with reference to a standard curve of 
sodium nitrite generated by known concentrations, ranging from 0-100 μ 
M.
Neuron and neurite length measurements. 
Analyses were performed with High Content Analysis 
software HCA-Vision (CSIRO) to assess the neuronal images: Neuron Body Detection, Neurite Detection and 
Neurite Analysis. Images were background corrected and analysis was performed as in ref. 76.
Apoptosis and cytotoxicity assay. 
The ApoTox-Glo Triplex assay (Promega) was performed accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s guidelines to assess apoptosis, cytotoxicity and cell viability in parallel. Differentiated 
iPSC-derived neurons were pre-treated in the presence or absence of apigenin (10 μ 
M) for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% 
CO2. Neurons were exposed to vehicle control, H2O2 (300 μ 
M) or SNAP (10 μ 
M) for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. All 
measurements were taken after 30 min incubation using a Polarstar Omega plate reader (BMG Labtech).
Apoptosis and cytotoxicity assay over time. 
Differentiated iPSC-derived neurons were transferred to 
normoxic (37 °C, 5% CO2 and atmospheric O2) conditions after differentiation in hypoxic (3% O2) conditions. 
The culture media was supplemented with caspase 3/7 NucView 488 enzyme substrate (2.5 μ 
M final concentra-
tion, Biotium #10402) and either CF594 Annexin V (2.5 μ 
M final concentration, Biotium #30067) or propidium 
iodide (1 μ 
g/ml final concentration, Sigma #P4884) 24 h prior to apigenin treatment (10 μ 
M). Phase contrast and 
fluorescent images were captured using an IncuCyte Zoom (Essen Bioscience) at 2 h intervals and 10× 
 magnifi-
cation. Caspase substrates, propidium iodide-positive cells and annexin V confluence were quantified using the 
in-built basic analyser algorithm (Table 1) from a minimum of 8 images per well and time point after removing 
green (8%) and red (5%) channel bleed through. The colocalization of caspase 3/7 substrates with propidium 
iodide was analysed using the Coloc 2 ImageJ plugin (NIH). Pearson’s correlation coefficient and Manders split 
coefficients were used to determine colocalization of caspase 3/7 substrates with propidium iodide signal.
Calcium imaging. 
To confirm the differentiation of functional neurons from iPSCs and compare differences 
in Ca2+ responses between iPSC derived neurons following treatments with acute application of apigenin, SNAP, 
H2O2 and glutamate, live cell fluorescence Ca2+ imaging experiments were performed. Images were captured at a 
rate of 1 frame per 0.112 s using a Leica confocal SP5 microscope and excitation at 488 nm with a 10× objective.
Neurons (day 75) were loaded with 3 μ 
M Fluo3-AM (Life Technologies) and 0.04 μ 
M pluronic acid (Biotium) 
in standard bath solution (SBS), containing 160 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 mM 
HEPES, and 5 mM glucose, pH 7.4, for 15 min at 37 °C in the dark. Neurons were washed for 5 min in SBS at room 
temperature in the dark.
Neurons were perfused with 5 mL SBS at 2.2 mL/min using a Scintilla EpiPump to attain a baseline reading of flu-
orescence intensity (F0). Treatment regimes included 50 μ 
M apigenin, 10 μ 
M SNAP or 300 μ 
M H2O2 prior to 200 μ 
M 
glutamate and 60 mM KCl. Cells were considered for further analysis if they responded to 60 mM KCl (90% of cells 
responded to KCl, and there was no significant difference in the % responders among control or AD neurons). 
 
During post imaging analysis more than 30 individual cells were selected as regions of interest (ROIs) from three 
Targets
Channel
Exposure (ms)
Background Correction
Edge Sensitivity
Minimum Particle 
Size (μ 
m2)
Maximum 
Particle Size (μ 
m2)
Data presentation
Caspase 3/7 Substrates
Green
400
Top-Hat (10 μ 
m, 2 GCU)
0
10
∞ 
Counts/mm2
Propidium Iodide
Red
800
Adaptive (2 RCU)
0
∞ 
∞ 
Counts/mm2
Annexin V
Red
800
Top-Hat (20 μ 
m, 1 RCU)
− 
27
∞ 
∞ 
% Confluence
Table 1. Mask parameters for Incucyte Basic analyser image analysis.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
independent differentiation experiments, with fluorescence data background subtracted. Evoked Ca2+ responses 
for ROIs were expressed as the relative change in fluorescence intensity (F) to the baseline fluorescence signal of 
the cell (Δ 
F/F0).
Statistical analysis. 
Paired T-test, one-way and two-way ANOVAs, as appropriate, were used to analyse the 
effects and interactions between treatments, followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, results were consid-
ered significantly different at p < 0.05.
References
1. Reitz, C., Brayne, C. & Mayeux, R. Epidemiology of Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. 27, 204–206 (2011).
2. Poirier, J. et al. Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 342, 697 (1993).
3. Haass, C. et al. The Swedish mutation causes early-onset Alzheimer’s disease by [beta]-secretase cleavage within the secretory 
pathway. Nat Med 1, 1291–1296 (1995).
4. De Strooper, B., Iwatsubo, T. & Wolfe, M. S. Presenilins and -Secretase: Structure, Function, and Role in Alzheimer Disease. Cold 
Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2, a006304–a006304 (2012).
5. Larson, J., Lynch, G., Games, D. & Seubert, P. Alterations in synaptic transmission and long-term potentiation in hippocampal slices 
from young and aged PDAPP mice. Brain Res. 840, 23–35 (1999).
6. Huang, X. et al. Cu (II) potentiation of Alzheimer Aβ 
 neurotoxicity correlation with cell-free hydrogen peroxide production and 
metal reduction. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 37111–37116 (1999).
7. Akiyama, H. et al. Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 21, 383–421 (2000).
8. Combs, C. K., Karlo, J. C., Kao, S.-C. & Landreth, G. E. β 
-Amyloid stimulation of microglia and monocytes results in TNFα 
- 
dependent expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and neuronal apoptosis. J. Neurosci. 21, 1179–1188 (2001).
9. Wang, J., Wu, Q., Smith, A., Grundke-Iqbal, I. & Iqbal, K. τ 
 is phosphorylated by GSK-3 at several sites found in Alzheimer disease 
and its biological activity markedly inhibited only after it is prephosphorylated by A-kinase. FEBS Lett. 436, 28–34 (1998).
10. Zhang, Y. J., Xu, Y. F., Chen, X. Q., Wang, X. C. & Wang, J.-Z. Nitration and oligomerization of tau induced by peroxynitrite inhibit 
its microtubule-binding activity. FEBS Lett. 579, 2421–2427 (2005).
11. Ramassamy, C. Emerging role of polyphenolic compounds in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases: a review of their 
intracellular targets. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 545, 51–64 (2006).
12. Rossi, L., Mazzitelli, S., Arciello, M., Capo, C. & Rotilio, G. Benefits from dietary polyphenols for brain aging and Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurochem. Res. 33, 2390–2400 (2008).
13. Dai, Q., Borenstein, A. R., Wu, Y., Jackson, J. C. & Larson, E. B. Fruit and vegetable juices and Alzheimer’s disease: the Kame Project. 
Am. J. Med. 119, 751–759 (2006).
14. Broe, G. A. et al. Anti-inflammatory drugs protect against Alzheimer disease at low doses. Arch. Neurol. 57, 1586–1591 (2000).
15. Ray, W. A. et al. COX-2 selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of serious coronary heart disease. The Lancet 360, 
1071–1073 (2002).
16. Gunawardena, D. et al. Determination of anti-inflammatory activities of standardised preparations of plant-and mushroom-based 
foods. Eur. J. Nutr. 53, 335–343 (2014).
17. Steele, M. L. et al. Cytoprotective properties of traditional Chinese medicinal herbal extracts in hydrogen peroxide challenged 
human U373 astroglia cells. Neurochem. Int. 62, 522–529 (2013).
18. Steiner, N. et al. Neuroprotection of Neuro2a cells and the cytokine suppressive and anti-inflammatory mode of action of resveratrol 
in activated RAW264.7 macrophages and C8-B4 microglia. Neurochem. Int. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2015.10.013 (2015).
19. Chandler, D. et al. Effects of plant‐derived polyphenols on TNF‐α 
 and nitric oxide production induced by advanced glycation 
endproducts. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 54, S141–S150 (2010).
20. Zhang, X., Wang, G., Gurley, E. C. & Zhou, H. Flavonoid apigenin inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory response 
through multiple mechanisms in macrophages. PLoS One 9, e107072 (2014).
21. Rezai-Zadeh, K. et al. Apigenin and luteolin modulate microglial activation via inhibition of STAT1-induced CD40 expression. 
 
J Neuroinflammation 5, 41 (2008).
22. Liang, Y.-C. et al. Suppression of inducible cyclooxygenase and inducible nitric oxide synthase by apigenin and related flavonoids in 
mouse macrophages. Carcinogenesis 20, 1945–1952 (1999).
23. Zhao, L. et al. Neuroprotective, anti-amyloidogenic and neurotrophic effects of apigenin in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. 
Molecules 18, 9949–9965 (2013).
24. Choi, A. Y. et al. Apigenin protects HT22 murine hippocampal neuronal cells against endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced 
apoptosis. Neurochem. Int. 57, 143–152 (2010).
25. Kang, S. S., Lee, J. Y., Choi, Y. K., Kim, G. S. & Han, B. H. Neuroprotective effects of flavones on hydrogen peroxide-induced 
apoptosis in SH-SY5Y neuroblostoma cells. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 14, 2261–2264 (2004).
26. Losi, G., Puia, G., Garzon, G., de Vuono, M. C. & Baraldi, M. Apigenin modulates GABAergic and glutamatergic transmission in 
cultured cortical neurons. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 502, 41–46 (2004).
27. Mullane, K. & Williams, M. Alzheimer’s therapeutics: continued clinical failures question the validity of the amyloid hypothesis—
but what lies beyond? Biochem. Pharmacol. 85, 289–305 (2013).
28. Gotz, J., Matamales, M., Gotz, N., Ittner, L. M. & Eckert, A. Alzheimer’s disease models and functional genomics-How many needles 
are there in the haystack. Front Physiol 3, 320 (2012).
29. Kunkanjanawan, T., Noisa, P. & Parnpai, R. Modeling neurological disorders by human induced pluripotent stem cells. BioMed Res. 
Int. 2011 (2011).
30. Ooi, L. et al. Induced pluripotent stem cells as tools for disease modelling and drug discovery in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neural 
Transm. 120, 103–111 (2013).
31. Israel, M. A. et al. Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer/’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 482, 216–220 
(2012).
32. Żekanowski, C. et al. Mutations in presenilin 1, presenilin 2 and amyloid precursor protein genes in patients with early-onset 
Alzheimer’s disease in Poland. Exp. Neurol. 184, 991–996 (2003).
33. Chung, H. C. et al. Human induced pluripotent stem cells derived under feeder-free conditions display unique cell cycle and DNA 
replication gene profiles. Stem Cells Dev. 21, 206–216 (2011).
34. Hirokawa, N., Sobue, K., Kanda, K., Harada, A. & Yorifuji, H. The cytoskeletal architecture of the presynaptic terminal and 
molecular structure of synapsin 1. J. Cell Biol. 108, 111–126 (1989).
35. Balez, R. & Ooi, L. Getting to NO Alzheimer’s Disease: Neuroprotection versus Neurotoxicity Mediated by Nitric Oxide. Oxid. Med. 
Cell. Longev. 2016, 3806157 (2016).
36. Wojda, U. & Kuznicki, J. Alzheimer’s disease modeling: ups, downs, and perspectives for human induced pluripotent stem cells. J. 
Alzheimers Dis. 34, 563–588 (2013).
37. Yagi, T. et al. Modeling familial Alzheimer’s disease with induced pluripotent stem cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, 4530–4539 (2011).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
15
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
38. Kondo, T. et al. Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with iPSCs reveals stress phenotypes associated with intracellular Aβ 
 and differential 
drug responsiveness. Cell Stem Cell 12, 487–496 (2013).
39. Serrano-Pozo, A., Frosch, M. P., Masliah, E. & Hyman, B. T. Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb. 
Perspect. Med. 1, a006189 (2011).
40. Bezprozvanny, I. & Mattson, M. P. Neuronal calcium mishandling and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Neurosci. 31, 
454–463 (2008).
41. Su, J. H., Deng, G. & Cotman, C. W. Neuronal DNA damage precedes tangle formation and is associated with up-regulation of 
nitrotyrosine in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Brain Res. 774, 193–199 (1997).
42. Hensley, K. et al. Electrochemical analysis of protein nitrotyrosine and dityrosine in the Alzheimer brain indicates region-specific 
accumulation. J. Neurosci. 18, 8126–8132 (1998).
43. Jayasena, T. et al. The role of polyphenols in the modulation of sirtuins and other pathways involved in Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing 
Res. Rev. 12, 867–883 (2013).
44. Aktan, F. iNOS-mediated nitric oxide production and its regulation. Life Sci. 75, 639–653 (2004).
45. Steinert, J. R., Chernova, T. & Forsythe, I. D. Nitric oxide signaling in brain function, dysfunction, and dementia. The Neuroscientist 
16, 435–452 (2010).
46. Lipton, S. A. et al. A redox-based mechanism for the neuroprotective and neurodestructive effects of nitric oxide and related 
nitroso-compounds. Nature 364, 626–632 (1993).
47. Mao, X.-Y., Yu, J., Liu, Z.-Q. & Zhou, H.-H. Apigenin attenuates diabetes-associated cognitive decline in rats via suppressing 
oxidative stress and nitric oxide synthase pathway. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Med. 8, 15506 (2015).
48. Wei, T., Chen, C., Hou, J., Xin, W. & Mori, A. Nitric oxide induces oxidative stress and apoptosis in neuronal cells. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta BBA-Mol. Cell Res. 1498, 72–79 (2000).
49. Moriya, R., Uehara, T. & Nomura, Y. Mechanism of nitric oxide-induced apoptosis in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. FEBS 
Lett. 484, 253–260 (2000).
50. Ditlevsen, D. K., Køhler, L. B., Berezin, V. & Bock, E. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate signalling pathway plays a role in neural cell 
adhesion molecule‐mediated neurite outgrowth and survival. J. Neurosci. Res. 85, 703–711 (2007).
51. Kohgami, S., Ogata, T., Morino, T., Yamamoto, H. & Schubert, P. Pharmacological shift of the ambiguous nitric oxide action from 
neurotoxicity to cyclic GMP-mediated protection. Neurol. Res. 32, 938–944 (2010).
52. Beutner, C., Roy, K., Linnartz, B., Napoli, I. & Neumann, H. Generation of microglial cells from mouse embryonic stem cells. Nat. 
Protoc. 5, 1481–1494 (2010).
53. Veerhuis, R. et al. Cytokines associated with amyloid plaques in Alzheimer’s disease brain stimulate human glial and neuronal cell 
cultures to secrete early complement proteins, but not C1-inhibitor. Exp. Neurol. 160, 289–299 (1999).
54. Eikelenboom, P. et al. Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease and prion disease. Glia 40, 232–239 (2002).
55. Jeohn, G.-H., Kong, L.-Y., Wilson, B., Hudson, P. & Hong, J.-S. Synergistic neurotoxic effects of combined treatments with cytokines 
in murine primary mixed neuron/glia cultures. J. Neuroimmunol. 85, 1–10 (1998).
56. Blasko, I., Marx, F., Steiner, E., Hartmann, T. & Grubeck-Loebenstein, B. TNFα 
 plus IFNγ 
 induce the production of Alzheimer β 
-amyloid peptides and decrease the secretion of APPs. FASEB J. 13, 63–68 (1999).
57. Lue, L. et al. Inflammatory repertoire of Alzheimer’s disease and nondemented elderly microglia in vitro. Glia 35, 72–79 (2001).
58. Terry, R. D. et al. Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive 
impairment. Ann. Neurol. 30, 572–580 (1991).
59. Shimohama, S., Tanino, H. & Fujimoto, S. Changes in caspase expression in Alzheimer’s disease: comparison with development and 
aging. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 256, 381–384 (1999).
60. D’Amelio, M. et al. Caspase-3 triggers early synaptic dysfunction in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 69–76 
(2011).
61. Wang, C.-N., Chi, C.-W., Lin, Y.-L., Chen, C.-F. & Shiao, Y.-J. The neuroprotective effects of phytoestrogens on amyloid β 
 protein-
induced toxicity are mediated by abrogating the activation of caspase cascade in rat cortical neurons. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 5287–5295 
(2001).
62. Mattson, M. P. Oxidative stress, perturbed calcium homeostasis, and immune dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurovirol. 8, 
539–550 (2002).
63. Busche, M. A. & Konnerth, A. Neuronal hyperactivity–a key defect in Alzheimer’s disease? Bioessays 37, 624–632 (2015).
64. Engel, M., Do-Ha, D., Muñoz, S. S. & Ooi, L. Common pitfalls of stem cell differentiation: a guide to improving protocols for 
neurodegenerative disease models and research. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 1–17, doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2265-3 (2016).
65. Šišková, Z. et al. Dendritic structural degeneration is functionally linked to cellular hyperexcitability in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 84, 1023–1033 (2014).
66. Busche, M. A. et al. Critical role of soluble amyloid-β 
 for early hippocampal hyperactivity in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 8740–8745 (2012).
67. Han, J.-H. et al. Effects of Apigenin on Glutamate-induced [Ca2+ 
] i Increases in Cultured Rat Hippocampal Neurons. Korean J. 
Physiol. Pharmacol. 12, 43–49 (2008).
68. Yazawa, K. et al. Distinct mechanisms underlie distinct polyphenol-induced neuroprotection. FEBS Lett. 580, 6623–6628 (2006).
69. Lin, J., Chen, Y., Huang, Y. & Lin‐Shiau, S. Suppression of protein kinase C and nuclear oncogene expression as possible molecular 
mechanisms of cancer chemoprevention by apigenin and curcumin. J. Cell. Biochem. 67, 39–48 (1997).
70. Yu, J.-T., Chang, R. C.-C. & Tan, L. Calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease: from mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. 
Prog. Neurobiol. 89, 240–255 (2009).
71. Lipton, S. A. Failures and successes of NMDA receptor antagonists: molecular basis for the use of open-channel blockers like 
memantine in the treatment of acute and chronic neurologic insults. NeuroRx 1, 101–110 (2004).
72. Supnet, C. & Bezprozvanny, I. The dysregulation of intracellular calcium in Alzheimer disease. Cell Calcium 47, 183–189 (2010).
73. Zhou, L. & Zhu, D.-Y. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase: structure, subcellular localization, regulation, and clinical implications. Nitric 
Oxide 20, 223–230 (2009).
74. Chakroborty, S., Kim, J., Schneider, C., West, A. R. & Stutzmann, G. E. Nitric oxide signaling is recruited as a compensatory 
mechanism for sustaining synaptic plasticity in Alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Neurosci. 35, 6893–6902 (2015).
75. Lie, K., Chung, H. & Sidhu, K. Derivation, propagation, and characterization of neuroprogenitors from pluripotent stem cells 
(hESCs and hiPSCs). Methods Mol. Biol. 873, 237–246 (2012).
76. Wang, D. et al. HCA-Vision Automated Neurite Outgrowth Analysis. J. Biomol. Screen. 15, 1165–1170 (2010).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) of Australia 
(APP1071250 and APP1079995 awarded to LO), a Cooper Foundation grant awarded to LO, a Brain Foundation 
research gift awarded to LO and an industry grant awarded to GM by Nutrafur SA (Spain). We thank Prof Brett 
Garner and A/Prof Ron Sluyter (University of Wollongong) for helpful discussions and assistance.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
16
Scientific RepoRts | 6:31450 | DOI: 10.1038/srep31450
Author Contributions
R.B., N.S., S.S.M., M.E., J.S.L. and Y.W. performed experiments and prepared Figures. D.W. and P.V. provided 
HCA-vision software and training. P.S. and K.S. provided patient cells. MO’C provided technical advice and 
training. L.O. and G.M. designed experiments. R.B. and L.O. wrote the main manuscript text with contributions 
from all authors.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Balez, R. et al. Neuroprotective effects of apigenin against inflammation, neuronal 
excitability and apoptosis in an induced pluripotent stem cell model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 6, 31450; 
doi: 10.1038/srep31450 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016
