 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Nursing Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijns
Post-operative mortality, missed care and nurse staffing in nine countries: A
cross-sectional study
Jane E. Balla,b,⁎,1, Luk Bruyneelc,1, Linda H. Aikend, Walter Sermeusc, Douglas M. Sloaned,
Anne Marie Raffertye, Rikard Lindqvistf, Carol Tishelmang, Peter Griffithsh, RN4Cast Consortium2
a Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics (LIME), Karolinska Institutet (KI), Stockholm, Sweden
b University of Southampton & National Institute for Health Research Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRC) Wessex, Southampton,
United Kingdom
c KU Leuven Institute for Healthcare Policy, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
d Center for Health Outcomes and Policy Research, University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
e Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, King’s College London, London, England, United Kingdom
f LIME Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
g LIME Karolinska Institutet & Innovation Centre, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
h Chair of Health Services Research, University of Southampton, & National Institute for Health Research Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
(CLAHRC) Wessex, Southampton, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Patient safety
Nurse staffing
Mortality
Post-surgical
Hospital
Care left undone
Missed care
Cross-sectional study
Mediation
A B S T R A C T
Background: Variation in post-operative mortality rates has been associated with differences in registered nurse
staffing levels. When nurse staffing levels are lower there is also a higher incidence of necessary but missed
nursing care. Missed nursing care may be a significant predictor of patient mortality following surgery.
Aim: Examine if missed nursing care mediates the observed association between nurse staffing levels and
mortality.
Method: Data from the RN4CAST study (2009–2011) combined routinely collected data on 422,730 surgical
patients from 300 general acute hospitals in 9 countries, with survey data from 26,516 registered nurses, to
examine associations between nurses’ staffing, missed care and 30-day in-patient mortality. Staffing and missed
care measures were derived from the nurse survey. A generalized estimation approach was used to examine the
relationship between first staffing, and then missed care, on mortality. Bayesian methods were used to test for
mediation.
Results: Nurse staffing and missed nursing care were significantly associated with 30-day case-mix adjusted
mortality. An increase in a nurse’s workload by one patient and a 10% increase in the percent of missed nursing
care were associated with a 7% (OR 1.068, 95% CI 1.031–1.106) and 16% (OR 1.159 95% CI 1.039–1.294)
increase in the odds of a patient dying within 30 days of admission respectively. Mediation analysis shows an
association between nurse staffing and missed care and a subsequent association between missed care and
mortality.
Conclusion: Missed nursing care, which is highly related to nurse staffing, is associated with increased odds of
patients dying in hospital following common surgical procedures. The analyses support the hypothesis that
missed nursing care mediates the relationship between registered nurse staffing and risk of patient mortality.
Measuring missed care may provide an ‘early warning’ indicator of higher risk for poor patient outcomes.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2017.08.004
Received 30 January 2017; Received in revised form 4 August 2017; Accepted 8 August 2017
⁎ Corresponding author at: University of Southampton (Building 67), Highfield Campus, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom.
1 Ball & Bruyneel contributed equally to this article.
2 RN4CAST Consortium: Walter Sermeus (Director), Koen Van den Heede, Luk Bruyneel, Emmanuel Lesaffre (Belgium, Catholic University Leuven); Linda Aiken (Co-Director), Herbert
Smith, Douglas Sloane (USA, University of Pennsylvania); Anne Marie Rafferty (UK, King’s College London), Simon Jones (UK, University of Surrey) Jane Ball, Peter Griffiths (UK,
University of Southampton); Juha Kinnunen, Anneli Ensio, Virpi Jylhä (Finland, University of Eastern Finland); Reinhard Busse, Britta Zander, Miriam Blümel (Germany, Berlin
University of Technology); John Mantas, Marianna Diomidous (Greece, University of Athens); Anne Scott, Anne Matthews, Anthony Staines (Ireland, Dublin City University); Ingeborg
Strømseng Sjetne (Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services) Inger Margrethe Holter (Norwegian Nurses Organization); Tomasz Brzostek, Maria Kózka, Piotr Brzyski (Poland,
Jagiellonian University Collegium Medicum); Teresa Moreno-Casbas, Carmen Fuentelsaz-Gallego, Esther Gonzalez-María, Teresa Gomez-Garcia (Spain, Institute of Health Carlos III);
Carol Tishelman, Rikard Lindqvist, Lisa Smeds-Alenius (Sweden, Karolinska Institutet); Sabina De Geest, Maria Schubert, René Schwendimann; Dietmar Ausserhofer (Switzerland, Basel
University); Theo van Achterberg, Maud Heinen, (Netherlands, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre), Lisette Schoonhoven (Netherlands & England, University of Southampton).
E-mail addresses: Jane.ball@soton.ac.uk, jane.ballpike@gmail.com (J.E. Ball).
International Journal of Nursing Studies xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
0020-7489/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
Please cite this article as: Ball, J.E., International Journal of Nursing Studies (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2017.08.004
 What is already known about the topic?
• Research spanning decades has reported that lower registered nurse
(RN) staffing is associated with higher levels of case-mix adjusted
patient mortality.
• Lower RN staffing is also associated with a greater risk that neces-
sary nursing care is missed due to lack of time.
• Mediation analysis has shown that missed care explains the asso-
ciation between nurse staffing and patient experiences with care.
What this paper adds
• Building on earlier previously published findings from an observa-
tional study of 422,730 patients who underwent common surgeries
in 300 European hospitals, this paper provides evidence of an as-
sociation between missed nursing care and post-surgical mortality.
• Missed nursing care is a mediator in the relationship between nurse
staffing and mortality.
• The analysis supports the existence of a causal relationship between
nurse staffing and patient outcomes; an interpretation of the re-
lationship that has hitherto been contested.
1. Background
Case-mix adjusted mortality rates have become a common indicator
of the effectiveness of health care (Goranitis and Fischer, 2015). Even
when restricting analysis to a defined group of patients – for example,
those undergoing common surgical procedures – wide variations in
case-mix adjusted mortality rates are reported between hospitals
(Ghaferi et al., 2009). In some healthcare systems complications and
mortality rates are used as a performance metric for hospitals or in-
dividual surgeons (Lilford et al., 2004). The premise is that if factors
related to the patient are taken into account through case-mix adjust-
ment, any remaining differences between hospitals in the odds of pa-
tients dying during their hospitalization or within a short period fol-
lowing their discharge may reflect differences in the treatment and care
provided. However, it is unclear to what extent the variation in patient
deaths across hospitals is related to differences in post-surgical care.
Hospitals with high and low mortality rates are reported to have
very similar rates of postoperative complications, whereas the risk of
death
following
complications
after
surgery
varies
substantially
(Ghaferi et al., 2009). To lower post-operative mortality it may there-
fore be as important to ensure effective management of complications
as it is to reduce the incidence of complications.
In their review of post-operative care following common surgery,
the Royal College of Surgeons (RCSE, 2011) in England highlights the
importance of adequate ward-based nurse staffing to deliver a “reliable
tiered pathway of care” to detect and respond to patients who develop
complications. The relevance of adequate nurse staffing to patient
outcomes and hospital mortality rates is borne out by research (Kane
et al., 2007). Studies report an observed association between higher
hospital mortality rates and lower levels of registered nurse staffing.
Much of this research has come from hospitals in the US but over the
past 10 years the same patterns of association have been reported in
studies across Europe and other parts of the world (Aiken et al., 2014;
Griffiths et al., 2016a; Twigg et al., 2010).
More recently researchers have shown that missed care is twice as
common in some European hospitals as in others, and examined the
relationship between nurse staffing levels and missed care (also termed
‘nursing care that is left undone’, ‘incomplete care’, or ‘rationed care’)
(Ausserhofer et al., 2014). When registered nurse staffing levels are
low, nursing care is more likely to be reported as missed due to lack of
time (Ausserhofer et al., 2014; Ball et al., 2014). A higher rate of missed
care in turn relates to lower safety grades reported by nurses (Ball et al.,
2014), patients being less likely to rate their hospital highly (Bruyneel
et al., 2015), and increased risk of falls and other adverse events
(Kalisch et al., 2013). Missed care is thus both an outcome of low nurse
staffing as well as a potential predictor of patient experience and out-
comes; it may be a key mechanism through which nurse staffing has an
effect on patient outcomes (Needleman, 2016). However, this hypoth-
esis that missed care explains the observed relationship between
staffing and mortality has remained largely untested, with few analyses
directly assessing it by studying both relationships simultaneously. A
recent study has confirmed missed care as a mediator for the associa-
tion between nurse staffing and patient-reported experience. (Bruyneel
et al., 2015)
Establishing whether missed care increases the risk of patient deaths
following surgery will clearly have important patient safety implica-
tions. If it is established as a mediator it might be that reports of missed
care could provide a leading indicator of nursing related safety. And if
missed care not only relates to risk of death following surgery, but
partly explains the relationship between staffing and mortality, it would
also support the existence of a causal relationship between nurse
staffing and outcomes – an interpretation of the relationship that has
hitherto been contested (Griffiths et al., 2016b).
2. Methods
2.1. Study design and participants
This is an observational study exploring the relationship between
nurse staffing, missed care and mortality. It seeks to explore whether
there is an association between missed care and mortality and, through
mediation analysis, determine whether this relationship can explain the
association between nurse staffing levels and mortality.
The study uses administrative data on hospital patients and hospital
characteristics and a survey of nurses in 300 hospitals in nine European
countries
(Belgium,
England,
Finland,
Ireland,
the
Netherlands,
Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland). Information about the 300
hospitals (e.g. bed size, available technology, teaching status) was
provided by administrators and supplemented with publically available
data. The patient data are based on 422,730 patients aged 50 years or
older who underwent common general, orthopedic, or vascular sur-
geries and were discharged from these 300 hospitals between 2007 and
2009–the year most proximate to the nurse survey in each country for
which data were available. The nurse survey data are from 26,516 re-
gistered nurses (RNs) in the same 300 hospitals and were collected in
2009–2010. In each country the survey covered a minimum of 30
general acute care hospitals, each with at least 100 beds. The study
included most adult acute care hospitals in Norway and Ireland, and
geographically representative samples of hospitals in the other coun-
tries. In Sweden, all hospitals were included by surveying medical and
surgical nurses nationally. The survey response rates averaged 62%.
The study protocol (Sermeus et al., 2011) and approach to defining and
analyzing patient mortality data6 are described in detail in earlier
publications.
The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee at
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, which was the coordinating centre for
the study, and by the relevant ethical committees in all participating
countries. Country level approvals to acquire and analyze patient out-
comes data were also obtained.
2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Mortality and related measures
The primary outcome measure is patient mortality following sur-
gery within 30 days of admission. It was measured using administrative
data on discharge status (death or survival), length of stay (less than
30 days) and adjusted for surgical procedure undergone (43 dummy
variables for the specific surgery types), patient age, sex and admission
type (emergency or elective). Established definitions were used for
common surgical procedures and comorbidities (Silber et al., 2000).
J.E. Ball et al.
International Journal of Nursing Studies xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
2
 The 17 comorbidities from the Charlson comorbidity index were used to
control for differences between patients on admission (Charlson et al.,
1987).
2.2.2. Missed care
The nurses surveyed were asked: “On your most recent shift, which
of the following activities were necessary but left undone because you
lacked the time to complete them?” and presented nurses with a list of
13 activities, informed by earlier work in USA and Europe (Schubert
et al., 2012; Aiken et al., 2001). The measure included activities related
to clinical care as well as planning and communication: adequate pa-
tient surveillance, skin care, oral hygiene, pain management, treat-
ments and procedures, administering medication on time, frequently
changing the patient’s position, comforting/talking with patients,
educating patients and family, preparing patients and families for dis-
charge, developing or updating nursing care plans/care pathways,
documenting nursing care, and planning care. The percentage of care
activities reported as missed by each nurse (as a percentage of all
possible activities) was averaged across all nurses in each hospital and
used as a measure of missed care.
2.2.3. Nurse staffing, nurse education, and the nurse work environment
Survey respondents were asked for the number of staff providing
direct patient care and the number of patients on their ward on the last
shift that they worked. From these responses, the mean number of
patients per RN providing direct care was calculated, and the mean for
each hospital was then derived by averaging across all nurse re-
spondents in each hospital.
In line with previous research examining the relationship between
nurse staffing and mortality (Aiken et al., 2014), data on the educa-
tional level of nursing staff and the nurse practice environment were
also included in the statistical model. Nurse education levels for each
hospital were measured by calculating the percentage of nurses at each
hospital that reported holding at least a baccalaureate degree in nur-
sing. The practice environment of each hospital was measured using the
‘Practice Environment Scale’ which comprises 32 items from the Nur-
sing Work Index (Lake, 2002). The four items related to perceptions of
nurse staffing were excluded to avoid common variance with the nurse
staffing measure. The mean score across the remaining 28 items for all
nurses surveyed was calculated for each hospital.
2.2.4. Control variables
The models we used also controlled for hospital bed size, teaching
status, and technology. We differentiated non-teaching hospitals (no
medical residents or fellows) from teaching hospitals (which had re-
sidents or fellows). High technology hospitals were defined as those
that had facilities for open-heart surgery, major organ transplants, or
both.
2.3. Statistical analysis
The approach taken to testing the mediating effect of missed care is
based on Baron and Kenny (Baron and Kenny, 1986). A mediator is
defined as a variable that accounts, in whole or in part, for the re-
lationship between the independent and dependent variables. To test
the mediation hypotheses in this case, it is necessary to establish that
the staffing level (independent variable) is significantly related to 30-
day inpatient mortality (dependent variable) and to missed care (pro-
posed mediator). A significant association between the proposed med-
iator and the dependent variable must also be established. In other
words, if missed care does indeed mediate the relationship between
staffing and mortality, there will be a significant relationship between
missed care and mortality, and the relationship between staffing and
mortality will be reduced when the effects of both are examined in the
same model.
To examine the association between nurse staffing and 30-day
inpatient mortality (Model 1), missed care and 30-day inpatient mor-
tality (Model 2) and nurse staffing, missed care and 30-day inpatient
mortality (Model 3), we first used a generalized estimation approach
and random intercept models. Thirty-day mortality was analysed at the
patient level, whilst missed care and nurse staffing were analysed at the
hospital level. Dummy variables to allow for unmeasured differences
across countries were included. We used SAS software for this purpose
and replicated and expanded on the modeling approach for estimating
the association between nurse staffing and case-mix adjusted mortality.
In the first model we specify the association between nurse staffing
and 30-day inpatient mortality. These findings, which have been pub-
lished previously (Aiken et al., 2014), are presented to place the new
analysis in context and include the association between nurse education
and 30-day inpatient mortality. No interaction effects between any of
the main covariates or control variables were observed.
In the second model we examine the association between missed
care and 30-day inpatient mortality.
The third model introduces missed care into the nurse staffing and
30-day inpatient mortality model, as a covariate together with nurse
staffing.
In Model 4, a multilevel structural equation model in the form of
multilevel mediation analysis is undertaken to test whether missed care
directly mediates the relationship between registered nurse staffing
levels and 30-day inpatient mortality. Here, we simultaneously examine
the association between nurse staffing and missed care on 30-day in-
patient mortality, and the association between nurse staffing and
missed care. This model also includes the associations between nurse
education, practice environment and 30-day inpatient mortality, and
between the practice environment and missed care. For Model 4, Mplus
Version 7.2 was used as this is specialized software geared towards
multilevel structural equation modeling (Muthén and Muthén, 2009).
Estimating the mediation model (Appendix A in Supplementary mate-
rial) in this software required several adjustments to be made. Firstly,
the risk-adjustment was simplified by summarizing the 17 comorbid-
ities into an index using established procedures (Quan et al., 2011).
Secondly, the 43 dummy variables for type of surgery were collapsed
into three categories: orthopaedic, general or vascular surgery. Sensi-
tivity analyses showed that these simplifications did not impact findings
for Models 1–3 (Appendix B in Supplementary material). Country-level
random intercepts were used.
The approach used adopts Bayesian methods using probit link. A
Bayesian estimator is imposed by the statistical software that was used
for constructing this model. In a Bayesian analysis a posterior dis-
tribution for parameter estimates is formed by combining prior dis-
tributions with the data likelihood. Here, diffuse priors were used. This
means that no information from previous studies was used and that the
estimate is closer to a maximum-likelihood estimate. Sensitivity ana-
lyses again showed that these specifications did not change any of the
conclusions for Models 1–3 (Appendix C in Supplementary material).
Evidence of convergence was assessed by running longer chains.
Parameter values changed very little and for each parameter the
Proportional Scale Reduction Factor was below 1.1, suggesting good
convergence and model fit. (Brooks and Gelman, 1998)
3. Results
The mean hospital mortality rate across all 300 hospitals, before
adjusting for case-mix, was 1.3%. Across the nine countries, on average
25.6% of the necessary nursing care activities were reported as missed
on the last shift (Table 1).
Table 2 first shows the previously established relationship (Aiken
et al., 2014): nurse staffing levels and the proportion of nurses with a
bachelor’s degree are associated with 30-day inpatient mortality (Model
1). Each additional patient per nurse is associated with a 7% increase in
the odds of a patient dying within 30 days of admission (OR 1.068 95%
CI 1.031–1.106). Every 10% increase in bachelor's degree nurses was
J.E. Ball et al.
International Journal of Nursing Studies xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
3
 associated with a decrease in this likelihood by 7% (OR 0.929,
0.886–0.973). In the second model, missed care is significantly asso-
ciated with 30-day case-mix adjusted inpatient mortality. Each 10%
increase in missed care is associated with a 16% (OR 1.159 95% CI
1.039–1.294) increase in the odds of a patient dying within 30 days of
admission (Model 2). When nurse staffing and education are included in
the model in addition to missed care (Model 3) the relationship be-
tween nurse staffing and patient mortality is reduced (from an OR of
1.068 in Model 1, to OR 1.056 in Model 3), signaling a potential
mediation effect. The estimate for the association between nurse edu-
cation (OR 0.928 95% CI 0.885–0.972) and mortality remains almost
unchanged.
Model 4 builds on these findings, and shows that missed care
mediates the association between nurse staffing and patient mortality
(Table 3). This can be seen from the significant indirect effect in the
model, which is the product of the path from nurse staffing to missed
care, and the path from missed care to mortality. The direct effect of
nurse staffing on mortality is no longer significant (the credibility in-
terval includes zero), whilst the effect of nurse education on mortality
remains.
4. Discussion
Based on data from over 400,000 patients and 25,000 nurses, we
found that missed care by registered nurses due to lack of time, is sig-
nificantly related to mortality following common surgical procedures.
More patients die when nurses report that they do not provide complete
care, and necessary care is more likely to have been missed when re-
gistered nurse staffing levels are low. The results support a potential
explanation for the frequently observed association between nurse
staffing and mortality, that nurses who have too many patients to care
for do not have time to complete all necessary care, and that this missed
nursing care increases the odds of poor patient outcomes, in this case a
higher risk of dying in hospital. The findings also confirm that bache-
lor’s level educational qualifications for hospital nurses are associated
with lower post-surgical mortality, and the inclusion of missed care in
our analysis did not reduce this association.
Errors in hospitals remain a major cause of death (Makary and
Daniel, 2016). Many patient safety initiatives aimed at reducing post-
surgical mortality focus on reducing the risk of potentially fatal errors
being made (Reason, 1990). The findings from our study remind us that
errors of omission – in this case missed nursing care – must be con-
sidered alongside errors of commission (Kalisch et al., 2009). Reducing
deaths following common surgery requires hospitals not just to mini-
mize the risk of mistakes being made, but to maximize the capacity for
necessary surveillance to be undertaken and nursing care to be deliv-
ered.
Risk control is commonplace in other safety-critical industries;
safety systems in nuclear or airline industries make explicit the condi-
tions required for services to be run safely, and to discontinue if these
conditions – including staffing levels – are not met (Vincent and
Amalberti, 2016). Yet such an approach regarding safe nurse staffing is
rare.
These findings have implications for health care systems: for hos-
pital managers responsible for making decisions about workforce size
and configuration and deployment patterns, for regulators charged with
monitoring patient safety, and for policy makers with responsibility for
developing guidance on minimizing risk in hospitals to keep patients
safe from avoidable harm. Appropriate workforce policies and practices
are needed to minimize the risk of care being missed and of patients
dying from factors that are within the health system’s control, such as
safe nurse staffing.
It is also within the health system’s control to educate nurses at the
bachelor’s level. Our study confirms that after taking into account many
other factors including the severity of illness of patients and the ade-
quacy of nurse staffing, the proportion of nurses with bachelor’s edu-
cation is directly associated with inpatient mortality. It is timely to call
attention to this finding in view of continuing debate on the merits of
Table 1
Surgical Patient Discharges and Deaths, and Nursing Characteristics, in the 300 Study
Hospitals.
Mean (SD)
Range (across
hospitals)
Discharges
1409
103–6583
30 day in-patient mortality following
common surgery
1.3% (0.83)
0–7.2%
Nurse staffing (RN: Patient ratio)
8.3 (2.4)
3.4–17.9
Practice Environment Scale (PES-28) (1–4
scale)
2.68
2.05–3.36
Nurse Education: Percentage with degree
52% (27)
0–100%
Missed care: Percentage
25.6%
8.3–50.0%
Table 2
Adjusted models estimating the association between staffing and education and 30-day
inpatient mortality (Model 1), the association between missed care and 30-day inpatient
mortality (Model 2) and association between missed care, staffing, education and 30-day
inpatient mortality (Model 3).
30-day inpatient mortality
Odds ratio
Lower 2.5% CI
Upper 2.5% CI
p-value
Model 1
Nurse staffing
1.068
1.031
1.106
0.0002
Nurse education
0.929
0.886
0.973
0.0019
Model 2
Missed care
1.159
1.039
1.294
0.0084
Model 3
Missed care
1.125
1.006
1.258
0.0392
Nurse staffing
1.056
1.018
1.095
0.0036
Nurse education
0.928
0.885
0.972
0.0018
All models adjusted for hospital characteristics (bed size, teaching status, and technology)
and patient characteristics (age, sex, admission type, type of surgery, and comorbidities
present on admission) unless specified otherwise. Models 1 and 3 are also adjusted for
practice environment. CI = Confidence Interval.
Table 3
Adjusted model estimating the mediating effect of missed care in the association between nurse staffing and 30-day inpatient mortality (Model 4).
30-day Inpatient mortality
Missed Care
Estimate
Posterior SD
Lower 2.5% CI
Upper 2.5% CI
Estimate
Posterior SD
Lower 2.5% CI
Upper 2.5% CI
Model 4
Missed care
0.050
0.023
0.005
0.093
–
–
–
–
Nurse staffing
0.013
0.010
−0.006
0.032
0.100
0.016
0.070
0.133
Nurse education
−0.033
0.010
−0.052
−0.011
–
–
–
–
Indirect effect
0.005
0.002
0.000
0.010
–
–
–
–
The model is adjusted for hospital characteristics (bed size, teaching status, and technology), practice environment, patient characteristics (age, sex, admission type, type of surgery, and
comorbidities present on admission). SD = Standard Deviation CI = Credibility Interval (Bayesian estimator).
J.E. Ball et al.
International Journal of Nursing Studies xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
4
 bachelor’s education for nurses and proposals to introduce apprentice
education for RNs (Santry, 2016).
There are a number of limitations to the study. Whilst we used
patient level analysis of outcomes data, aggregated data were used to
construct estimates of nurse measures. Furthermore, the number of
nurses from which these measured were constructed varied across
countries and hospitals within countries, as previously reported (Aiken
et al., 2016). This may have produced biased estimates.
A limitation of this study is reliance on nurses’ reports of missed
care. Previous research on nurse reported outcomes such as quality of
care shows that nurse reports are a good representation of actual pa-
tient mortality derived from independent sources (McHugh and
Stimpfel, 2012; Smeds-Alenius et al., 2016). The association between
nurses’ reports of missed care and mortality from independent data
sources as reported here offer confidence that our global measure of
missed care is a reasonable proxy measure of what would be found
using confirmatory counts of actual missed care which would be diffi-
cult if not impossible to collect in a large number of hospitals.
Another limitation of the analysis presented in this paper is that it
has examined missed care as a single construct, without exploring dif-
ferences related to the constituent activities of care. Previously pub-
lished analysis has explored the prevalence and nature of care left un-
done by care activity type and found a pattern: clinical activities were
less likely to be reported as missed due to lack of time compared with
communication and planning activity (Ball et al., 2014; Jones et al.,
2015). Future studies could examine the relative effect on patient
outcomes of missing different aspects of care, to explore which may be
most ‘critical’ to patient outcomes. Advances in electronic health re-
cords will allow for individual nurse-patient matching as well as iden-
tification of missed care on a patient level. This would allow researchers
to have a more detailed understanding of which care activities are
missed, under which circumstances these are missed, and which patient
outcomes are affected by which missed care activities.
The cross-sectional study design means that causality cannot be
proven. However, having tested a hypothesized causal pathway, we can
have more confidence in the inference of causality.
This is the first international health services research study that
points to a chain of systemic factors that define quality in terms of in-
hospital mortality. The relationships found between nurse staffing,
missed nursing care and mortality suggest that measuring missed care
could be a useful performance measure for hospitals to monitor, as is
being piloted in Ireland (DoH-Ireland, 2016). In England, analysis of
observed case mix adjusted hospital mortality rates compared against
the expected rates revealed that insufficient nurse staffing was a con-
tributing factor with poor patient outcomes at Mid-Staffordshire Trusts
(Francis, 2010). But the analysis and subsequent inquiries came several
years after poor care was delivered. Monitoring missed care may offer a
more responsive and sensitive early-warning system for hospitals, to
detect problems before patients die, rather than using patient deaths
themselves as the indicator of poor care.
Authorship
All authors meet the ICMJE recommended criteria for authorship.
They have:
1a) made a substantial contribution to the conception and design
1b) the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of the data,
2a) Contributed to drafting the article or
2b) critical revision for important intellectual content
3. They have given (or undertake to give) final approval of the
version to be published.
4. Have agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work in
ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part
of the article are appropriately investigated and resolved.
No further writing assistance other than basic copy-editing has been
provided.
Competing/Conflicting interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests, or con-
flict of interests.
Funding
Funding was provided by the EU 7th Framework programme (FP7/
2007-2013, grant agreement no. 223468, Sermeus) and the National
Institute
of
Nursing
Research,
National
Institutes
of
Health
(R01NR014855, Aiken).
Ethical approval
The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee at
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, which was the coordinating centre for
the study, and by the relevant ethical committees in all participating
countries. Country level approvals to acquire and analyze patient out-
comes data were also obtained and permissions acquired for the re-
search to be undertaken at each hospital. For example in England the
National Research Ethics service granted ethical approval. (ref 09/
H0808/69).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2017.08.004.
References
Aiken, L.H., Clarke, S.P., Sloane, D.M., et al., 2001. Nurses’ reports on hospital care in five
countries. Health Aff. 20 (3), 43–53.
Aiken, L.H., Sloane, D.M., Bruyneel, L., et al., 2014. Nurse staffing and education and
hospital mortality in nine European countries: a retrospective observational study.
Lancet 383 (9931), 1824–1830.
Aiken, L.H., Sloane, D., Griffiths, P., et al., 2016. Nursing skill mix in European hospitals:
cross-sectional study of the association with mortality, patient ratings, and quality of
care. BMJ Qual. Saf bmjqs-2016-005567.
Ausserhofer, D., Zander, B., Busse, R., et al., 2014. Prevalence, patterns and predictors of
nursing care left undone in European hospitals: results from the multicountry cross-
sectional RN4CAST study. BMJ Qual. Saf. 23 (2), 126–135.
Ball, J.E., Murrells, T., Rafferty, A.M., Morrow, E., Griffiths, P., 2014. ‘Care left undone’
during nursing shifts: associations with workload and perceived quality of care. BMJ
Qual. Saf. 23 (2), 116–125.
Baron, R.M., Kenny, D.A., 1986. The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. J. Pers.
Soc. Psychol. 51 (6), 1173.
Brooks, S.P., Gelman, A., 1998. General methods for monitoring convergence of iterative
simulations. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 7 (4), 434–455.
Bruyneel, L., Li, B., Ausserhofer, D., et al., 2015. Organization of hospital nursing, pro-
vision of nursing care, and patient experiences with care in Europe. Med. Care Res.
Rev. 72 (6), 643–664.
Charlson, M.E., Pompei, P., Ales, K.L., MacKenzie, C.R., 1987. A new method of classi-
fying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. J.
Chronic Dis. 40 (5), 373–383.
DoH-Ireland, 2016. Interim Report of the Taskforce on Staffing and Skill Mix for Nursing.
Department of Health Ireland, Dublin.
Francis, R., 2010. Robert Francis Inquiry Report into Mid-Staffordshire NHS Foundation
Trust. The Stationery Office, London.
Ghaferi, A.A., Birkmeyer, J.D., Dimick, J.B., 2009. Variation in hospital mortality asso-
ciated with inpatient surgery. New Engl. J. Med. 361 (14), 1368–1375.
Goranitis, I., Fischer, A., 2015. Measuring the contributions of prevention and treatment
of illness to changing life expectancy with avoidable mortality as the outcome in-
dicator: how to deal with new diseases. Lancet 386, S38.
Griffiths, P., Ball, J., Murrells, T., Jones, S., Rafferty, A.M., 2016a. Registered nurse,
healthcare support worker, medical staffing levels and mortality in English hospital
trusts: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 6 (2), e008751.
Griffiths, P., Ball, J., Drennan, J., et al., 2016b. Nurse staffing and patient outcomes:
strengths and limitations of the evidence to inform policy and practice. A review and
discussion paper based on evidence reviewed for the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence Safe Staffing guideline development. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 63, 213–225.
Jones, T.L., Hamilton, P., Murry, N., 2015. Unfinished nursing care, missed care, and
implicitly rationed care: state of the science review. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 52 (6),
1121–1137.
Kalisch, B.J., Landstrom, G., Williams, R.A., 2009. Missed nursing care: errors of omis-
sion. Nurs. Outlook 57 (1), 3–9.
J.E. Ball et al.
International Journal of Nursing Studies xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
5
 Kalisch, B.J., Xie, B., Dabney, B.W., 2013. Patient-reported missed nursing care correlated
with adverse events. Am. J. Med. Qual 1062860613501715.
Kane, R.L., Shamliyan, T.A., Mueller, C., Duval, S., Wilt, T.J., 2007. The association of
registered nurse staffing levels and patient outcomes: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Med. Care 45 (12), 1195–1204.
Lake, E.T., 2002. Development of the practice environment scale of the nursing work
index†‡. Res. Nurs. Health 25 (3), 176–188.
Lilford, R., Mohammed, M.A., Spiegelhalter, D., Thomson, R., 2004. Use and misuse of
process and outcome data in managing performance of acute medical care: avoiding
institutional stigma. Lancet 363 (9415), 1147–1154.
Makary, M.A., Daniel, M., 2016. Medical error—the third leading cause of death in the
US. BMJ 353, i2139.
McHugh, M.D., Stimpfel, A.W., 2012. Nurse reported quality of care: a measure of hos-
pital quality. Res. Nurs. Health 35 (6), 566–575.
Muthén, B., Muthén, B.O., 2009. Statistical Analysis with Latent Variables. Wiley.
Needleman, J., 2016. The economic case for fundamental nursing care. Nurs. Leadersh.
(Toronto, Ont.) 29 (1), 26.
Quan, H., Li, B., Couris, C.M., et al., 2011. Updating and validating the Charlson co-
morbidity index and score for risk adjustment in hospital discharge abstracts using
data from 6 countries. Am. J. Epidemiol. 173 (6), 676–682.
RCSE, 2011. The Higher Risk General Surgical Patient: Towards Improved Care for a
Forgotten Group. Royal College of Surgeons England, London.
Reason, J., 1990. Human Error. Cambridge University Press.
Santry, C., 2016. Nurse apprenticeships to beginin september 2017. Nursing Times. 10
Nov 2016.
Schubert, M., Clarke, S.P., Aiken, L.H., De Geest, S., 2012. Associations between rationing
of nursing care and inpatient mortality in Swiss hospital. Int. J. Qual. Health Care
mzs009.
Sermeus, W., Aiken, L.H., Van den Heede, K., et al., 2011. Nurse forecasting in Europe
(RN4CAST): rationale, design and methodology. BMC Nurs. 10 (1), 6.
Silber, J.H., Kennedy, S.K., Even-Shoshan, O., et al., 2000. Anesthesiologist direction and
patient outcomes. J. Am. Soc. Anesthesiol. 93 (1), 152–163.
Smeds-Alenius, L., Tishelman, C., Lindqvist, R., Runesdotter, S., McHugh, M.D., 2016. RN
assessments of excellent quality of care and patient safety are associated with sig-
nificantly lower odds of 30-day inpatient mortality: a national cross-sectional study of
acute-care hospitals. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 61, 117–124.
Twigg, D., Duffield, C., Thompson, P.L., Rapley, P., 2010. The impact of nurses on patient
morbidity and mortality–the need for a policy change in response to the nursing
shortage. Aust. Health Rev. 34 (3), 312–316.
Vincent, C., Amalberti, R., 2016. Safer Healthcare Strategies for the Real World.
SpringerOpen.
J.E. Ball et al.
International Journal of Nursing Studies xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
6
