 Manuscript Details
Manuscript number
BIOC_2017_58
Title
The environmental footprints of conservationists, economists and medics
compared
Article type
Full Length Article
Abstract
Many conservationists undertake environmentally harmful activities in their private lives such as flying and eating
meat, while calling for people as a whole to reduce such behaviors. To quantify the extent of our hypocrisy and put our
actions into context, we conducted a questionnaire-based survey of 300 conservationists and compared their personal
(rather than professional) behavior, across 10 domains, with that of 207 economists and 227 medics. We also
explored two related issues: the role of environmental knowledge in promoting pro-environmental behavior, and the
extent to which different elements of people’s footprint co-vary across behavioral domains. The conservationists we
sampled have a slightly lower overall environmental footprint than economists or medics, but this varies across
behaviors. Conservationists take fewer personal flights, do more to lower domestic energy use, recycle more, and eat
less meat - but don’t differ in how they travel to work, and own more pets than do economists or medics. Interestingly,
conservationists also score no better than economists on environmental knowledge and knowledge of pro-
environmental actions. Overall footprint scores are higher for males, US nationals, economists, and people with higher
degrees and larger incomes, but (as has been reported in other studies) are unrelated to environmental knowledge.
Last, we found different elements of individuals’ footprints are generally not intercorrelated, and show divergent
demographic patterns. These findings suggest three conclusions. First, lowering people’s footprints may be most
effectively achieved via tailored interventions targeting higher-impact behaviors (such as meat consumption, flying and
family size). Second, as in health matters, education about environmental issues or pro-environmental actions may
have little impact on behavior. Last, while conservationists perform better on certain measures than other groups, we
could (and we would argue, must) do far more to reduce our footprint.
Keywords
pro-environmental behavior; flying; meat consumption; energy saving;
greenhouse gas emissions; environmental education
Taxonomy
Environmental Education, Conservation Biology
Corresponding Author
Andrew Balmford
Corresponding Author's
Institution
Univ of Cambridge
Order of Authors
Andrew Balmford, Lizzy Cole, Chris Sandbrook, Brendan Fisher
Suggested reviewers
Richard Cowling, Sheila Walsh Reddy, David Wilcove, Richard Fuller
Submission Files Included in this PDF
File Name [File Type]
Cover letter.doc [Cover Letter]
Responses to Editor's comments.docx [Response to Reviewers]
Responses to comments.docx [Response to Reviewers]
Balmford et al. Highlights.docx [Highlights]
Balmford et al Biol cons reresubmission.docx [Manuscript File]
Appendix A Questionnaire.pdf [Supporting File]
Appendix B Supplementary figures.pdf [Supporting File]
To view all the submission files, including those not included in the PDF, click on the manuscript title on your EVISE
Homepage, then click 'Download zip file'.
 Research Data Related to this Submission
There are no linked research data sets for this submission. The following reason is given:
The data that has been used is confidential
 Andrew Balmford FRS
Professor of Conservation Science
12 January 2017
Dear Editors
I have pleasure in submitting our MS “The environmental footprints of conservationists, economists and 
medics compared” for consideration as a contributed paper in Biological Conservation. Given its content 
I’m not sure whether it would fit better as a Research Paper or a Perspectives piece, but for now have 
submitted it as the former.
It’s an inter-disciplinary MS that takes as its starting point the growing number of observations that 
conservationists are worryingly hypocritical in the scale of their environmental footprints (Gremillet 2008 
Nature; Bearzi 2009 Conservation Biology; Fox et al. 2009 Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment; Fraser 
et al. in press Conservation Biology). By carrying out what we think is probably the largest survey to date of 
conservationists’ behaviour across multiple domains (from recycling and domestic energy use to flying, 
meat eating and family sizes) and comparing this with the responses of a broadly similar group of 
economists and medics we find that conservationist have a slightly lighter footprint, but not across all 
behaviours. Our data also reveal that despite working in the environmental sector, conservationists have 
no greater environmental knowledge than economists – and that variation in knowledge fails to predict 
people’s footprints, which are more closely related to gender, nationality, occupation, age, education and 
income. Our results suggest that exposure to environmental information may have limited effect in 
lowering people’s footprints, and that, while performing slightly better than some other groups, 
conservationists could do a great deal more to reduce their impacts, both professionally and personally. 
We close with some suggestions as to how. 
The work is original research carried out by the authors, all of whom agree with the contents of the 
manuscript and its submission to Biological Conservation. No part of the research has been published in 
any form, and the MS is not being considered for publication elsewhere while it is being considered by you. 
There are no sources of funding to acknowledge. We explain in the MS that the research has obtained full 
ethical clearance. 
I do hope you find our MS interesting, and are in due course able to accept it for publication in Biological 
Conservation.
Yours sincerely
Andrew Balmford
Downing Street
Cambridge  CB2 3EJ
Tel: +44 (0) 1223 331770
Fax: +44 (0) 1223 336676
Email: a.balmford@cam.ac.uk
www.zoo.cam.ac.uk
 Responses to Editor’s comments
Thank you very much for your positive letter earlier this month. I’m submitting a revised version of 
the MS which I hope deals with your points; it also includes a few additional clarifications and 
references.
Specifically:
1. Please end your abstract with a shorter sentence (cut the last long phrase and end with a 
straightforward take home message).
The last sentence of the Abstract has now been split to make it easier to read, and to close on 
stronger closing message:
“These findings suggest three conclusions. First, lowering people’s footprints may be most 
effectively achieved via tailored interventions targeting higher-impact behaviors (such as meat 
consumption, flying and family size). Second, as in health matters, education about environmental 
issues or pro-environmental actions may have little impact on behavior. Last, while conservationists 
perform better on certain measures than other groups, we could (and we would argue, must) do far 
more to reduce our footprint.”
2. Re. “Conservation is fundamentally about changing people’s behavior" - I tend to agree but this 
claim is quite strong … Whether a conservation biologist working on protected area effectiveness or 
trying to understand the metapopulation dynamics of a given species can/should "change" people's 
behaviour is not obvious.
All authors share the view of conservation being fundamentally about changing human behaviour 
(and have published it separately in quite a few papers over the past 10 or 15 years). Of course we 
also appreciate your point, but suspect your argument is more true of conservation biology (or 
perhaps conservation science) than about conservation in the round. We would argue that even 
where an activity is solely focused on biological management of a reserve, effective conservation 
hinges on a practitioner behaving in a particular way; it will nearly always also depend on behaviour 
change by others (farmers, tourists, consumers…). Given this, if possible we would very much like to 
keep this statement as it is.
3. Line 80 - In this sentence, can you please attach each reference to the issue considered instead of 
making the list and then 11 references.
We’ve now done this, so it reads (from new line 82):
“Instead, it seems many other psychological and societal factors also influence the expression of pro-
environmental behaviors - including values (the importance individuals attach to issues; Bolderdijk et 
al., 2013; Gromet et al., 2013; Li et al., 2016; Reddy et al., 2017); social norms (and the role of 
consumption in social signalling; Bamberg and Möser, 2007; Csutora, 2012; Jackson, 2004; Kahan et 
al,. 2012; Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002; Reddy et al., 2017; Steg and Vlek, 2009; Thøgersen, 2014; 
Vermeir and Verbeken, 2008); structural, cognitive and economic constraints (which may make more 
sustainable alternatives unavailable; Csutora, 2012; Gifford and Nilsson, 2014; Jackson, 2004; 
Kennedy et al., 2009; Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002); individuals’ perceptions of their control over 
outcomes (Bamberg and Mõser, 2007; Gifford and Nilsson, 2014; Hines et al., 1987; Kennedy et al., 
2009l Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002); people’s ingrained habits (Jackson, 2004; Steg and Vlek, 2009; 
Thøgersen, 2014);  and so-called choice architecture (the way in which alternatives are presented, 
 with easier, more attractive or default options often perpetuating the status quo; Marteau, 2017; 
Reddy et al., 2017; Sunstein and Reisch, 2014).”
4. On toning down (a bit) the claim that conservationists are to some extent guilty of hypocrisy
We have changed the text in a couple of places. New line 47 now reads
“Conservationists fly, sometimes a lot more than our fellow citizens…” (cf “Conservationists fly, often 
a great deal more than our fellow citizens”);
and new line 374 now reads:
“…our results show that – while performing better on certain measures (include some that are high-
impact) than do our other groups – as conservationists we could nevertheless do a great deal more 
to reduce our footprint.” (cf “…our results show that – while performing better on certain measures 
than our other groups – as conservationists we could nevertheless do a great deal more to reduce 
our footprint.”).
I hope this and our other changes are acceptable.
With best wishes
Andrew Balmford
 1
Responses to Reviewer 1 comments
We thank the Reviewer for their very extensive comments. We agree with many, disagree with 
some, and set out below our responses to each point, as well as the corresponding changes we have 
made in the revised version of our MS.
Theory and hypotheses (and Abstract, point 2; and Introduction, point 2). The reviewer would like to 
see more of a review of the literature relating environmental behaviours to occupation or socio-
economic variables, and would like us to present underlying hypotheses, and a detailed theory of 
change. We feel that we already do introduce quite a lot of the literature underlying our study. We 
also appreciate that in psychology journals presenting findings within a framework of theory is the 
norm. However, our aim here (as in many other papers in Biological Conservation) is not primarily to 
advance theory but to present novel data in an attempt to answer three questions of considerable 
applied relevance: whether conservationists have lighter environmental footprints than other 
professionals; whether greater environmental knowledge is associated with greater pro-
environmental behaviour; and whether people’s footprints co-vary across behavioural domains. We 
make an effort to introduce each topic with a review of the relevant literature (e.g. the Reviewer 
specifically asks for citations to work on correlations between pro-environmental behaviours and 
socio-economic variables, yet we already cite four studies on this, in the second para of the 
Introduction) – though we realise though that much of this literature is not couched in terms of 
hypotheses or theories of change. We don’t know of any papers on the specific question of links 
between occupations, knowledge and behaviours, but have elaborated on our underlying logic in the 
Introduction (see Introduction point 4 below). We suggest that a wider, more theory-based literature 
review would be inappropriate for what is essentially an applied, data-based paper.
Methods and measurement
a. On justification for our knowledge and behaviour variables. We’ve tried to strengthen this aspect 
of the paper quite a lot. 
We’ve added some explanation about our selection of behaviour/footprint measures to the second 
para of the Introduction (WITH NEW TEXT FLAGGED HERE IN CAPITALS):
“we quantified people’s actions across 10 diverse behavioral domains, from recycling to having 
children, CONSIDERED TO BE RELEVANT TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND OVER WHICH WE 
SUGGEST INDIVIDUALS HAVE AT LEAST SOME DEGREE OF CONTROL.”
We’ve also added substantial text and 10 new citations to the second para of the Methods, justifying 
our choice of outcome variables, but also explaining that they do not provide a comprehensive 
assessment of our respondents’ footprints:
“Our key behavioral questions (Table 1) asked participants ABOUT SEVERAL BEHAVIOURS KNOWN 
TO CAUSE NEGATIVE OR POSITIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS: whether they walked, cycled or used 
public transport to get to work (ERCAN ET AL. 2016); how often they flew (for work or personal 
 2
reasons, which we analysed separately; MIYOSHI AND MASON, 2016); energy-saving measures in 
their homes (DIETZ ET AL. 2009); whether they offset their energy or travel footprint (GOSSLING ET 
AL. 2009); their level of recycling and composting (HERMANN ET AL. 2011); their production of food 
waste (GARNETT, 2011); their consumption of meat or fish (TILMAN AND CLARK, 2014); their use of 
bottled water (BOTTO ET AL. 2011); the number of children they have (or hope to have; MURTAUGH 
AND SCHLAX, 2009); and their ownership of cats and dogs (RAVILIOUS, 2009). We also invited 
respondents to give reasons for their answers. WHILST THE DOMAINS WE SELECTED DO NOT 
ENABLE US TO CARRY OUT A COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT, THEY DO GIVE US A 
BROAD INDICATION OF RESPONDENTS’ RELATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE AND ALLOW US 
TO INVESTIGATE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN DIFFERENT BEHAVIOURS.”
On our knowledge questions, we have used similar questions in two previous papers – Balmford et 
al. 2004 Science 305: 1713 and Fisher et al. 2009 Oryx 43: 361. 
These questions from the Reviewer also link to Methods points 2-5  and point 15 – about survey 
piloting, question reliability, and Cronbach’s alpha. Please see our responses to those more detailed 
points below.
b. On why we chose to focus on personal (cf professional) behaviours? (also raised in points a and b 
under Framing,discussion and conclusions; in point 7 under Methods, “The measures missed 
professional behaviors…”; and point 9 under Discussion, “The study did not survey… professionals on 
how they may be helping to change systems”).  We apologise for being unclear about our focus. The 
professional impacts of conservationists are of great interest, but are not the target of this study, 
which instead explores how far conservationists – who are more exposed to arguments for pro-
environmental behaviour than other groups, and who often urge others to change their behaviour – 
exhibit environmentally-friendly behaviour in their personal lives. This is an important issue, because 
if conservationists do not have substantially lower impacts, this suggests that increasing exposure of 
other groups to environmental messages may by itself have limited benefits.  We have altered the 
MS to emphasize our focus on personal behaviours, in both the Abstract:
“Many conservationists continue to engage in environmentally harmful activities IN THEIR PRIVATE 
LIVES, such as flying and eating meat, WHILE CALLING ON SOCIETY AT LARGE TO REDUCE THESE 
ACTIVITIES”; and
“…we conducted a questionnaire-based survey of 300 conservationists and compared ASPECTS OF 
THEIR PERSONAL (CF PROFESSIONAL) behavior, across 10…”
and in the Introduction:
“actively (and visibly) adopting pro-environmental behaviors IN THEIR PERSONAL LIVES in order to 
lower…”.
 It is of course possible that conservationists’ professional actions have environmental benefits that 
outweigh their personal footprints, but that is a separate issue, and one which we do not attempt to 
examine here.
 3
c. On the importance of self-selection and social desirability bias (also raised by Methods point 13 
below). We agree with the reviewer that our assumption that these are consistent across our groups 
is rather weak. We have therefore changed the relevant section of the Methods:
“we are therefore relying on the weaker assumption that any biases are relatively consistent across 
respondents (BUT SEE DISCUSSION)”
to draw attention to an expanded consideration of this problem in the Discussion:
“Our assessment of variation in their footprints relies on self-reporting, and therefore on the 
assumption that the biases this induces are similar across different groups. IT IS POSSIBLE OF 
COURSE THAT CONSERVATIONISTS ARE DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFECTED BY SOCIAL DESIRABILITY 
BIAS BECAUSE THEY KNOW MORE ABOUT PRO-ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIONS THAN (SOME) OTHERS, 
AND WISH TO APPEAR AS RESPONSIBLE CITIZENS. IF SO, THIS SUGGESTS THE BEHAVIOR 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CONSERVATIONISTS AND OUR OTHER GROUPS ARE EVEN LESS MARKED 
THAN WE OBSERVED.”
Length constraints make it very difficult to draw out the implications of social desirability bias in the 
Abstract, but we feel we have now explored the issue at sufficient length in the body of the MS.
d. We should focus primarily on the results from our GLMs (also raised by point 4 under Abstract, 
point 2, point 3 and point 4 under Results, and point 3 under Discussion). We disagree with the 
reviewer on this point. At its simplest our study is a phenomenological assessment of whether 
conservationists’ behaviour differs from that of other groups. (Our first question is “Do 
conservationists have a lower footprint than other people?”) As such a simple univariate set of 
comparisons is entirely appropriate (by analogy, if we are interested in whether elephants differ in 
body mass from mice we don’t need first to control for differences in longevity and diet). We are 
also interested in understanding why the patterns we see arise, and hence we next build and 
present many GLMs which explore associations between behaviours and a suite of predictors 
reported in the literature. To the extent one can infer causations from such correlations (which we 
are very reluctant to do), these suggest that some of the differences between conservationists and 
other groups may arise because of differences among our groups in income, gender, etc. – but they 
do not mean that the differences observed in the univariate analyses do not exist. For this reason, 
and because it is more logical for the reader to see the univariate results before the GLMs, we have 
retained the order of the Results. However, we have also increased the profile of the GLM results by 
adding to the first major point of the Discussion:
“Conservationists have a somewhat lower environmental footprint than economists or medics, but 
this DIFFFERENCE varies across behaviors, is not the case for travelling to work or pet ownership, 
AND IS FURTHER WEAKENED IN GLMs THAT TAKE INTO ACCOUNT SOCIO-ECONOMIC VARIATION 
ACROSS OUR SAMPLED GROUPS.”
Framing, discussion and conclusions
 4
a. On barriers limiting pro-environmental behaviours. We agree this may be part of the explanation 
for the absence of a link between environmental knowledge and pro-environmental behaviour, 
which is why we write in the Discussion:
“These results mirror those from other environmental studies and from the health sector which 
indicate that the effects of income, social norms, habits, infrastructure and choice architecture may 
all be more important than knowledge in shaping our behavior.”
However, we consider it beyond the scope of a survey-based paper to then go on to review 
examples of other ways of shifting environmentally-sensitive behaviours. Two of the authors are 
involved in a separate 8000-word review of this topic, but it is not the focus of this MS.
b. On focusing on conservationists’ professional behaviours. See Methods and measurement point b 
above.
c. On the Abstract going beyond the strength of the evidence. See Abstract points 7 and 8 below. 
Abstract
1. Acknowledging the lack of correlation between attitudes and actions in the Abstract. We have now 
changed the Abstract text to read:
“overall footprint scores are higher for males, US nationals, economists, and people with higher 
degrees and larger incomes, but (AS HAS BEEN REPORTED IN OTHER STUDIES) show no relationship 
with environmental knowledge.”
2. On the need to set up theory and hypotheses. See Theory and hypotheses above.
3. Hypocrisy may not accurately reflect the situation. Hypocrisy is defined as “the behavior of people 
who do things that they tell other people not to do”. It seems that in undertaking environmentally 
damaging behaviours while calling on society as a whole to change its behaviour, conservationists 
are indeed, on the average, behaving hypocritically. The Reviewer might perhaps argue that 
conservationists face such great barriers that they have no choice in how they behave – but the 
evidence of enormous within-group variation in behaviours reported in our survey confirm the 
common-sense intuition that people have considerable ability to choose how much meat to eat, 
how often to take personal flights, or whether they own a dog. We have added a small section to the 
second para of the Introduction to clarify our position on this:
“we quantified people’s actions across 10 diverse behavioral domains, from recycling to having 
children, CONSIDERED TO BE RELEVANT TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND OVER WHICH WE 
SUGGEST INDIVIDUALS HAVE AT LEAST SOME DEGREE OF CONTROL.”
4. On socio-economic variables explaining variation in behaviour. See Methods and measurement 
point d above.
5. On saying more about likely biases in the Abstract. Length constraints make this difficult, but see 
Methods and measurement point c above for how we have expanded this point in the Discussion.
 5
6. On whether we looked at people’s entire footprints. This would be impossible in a simple survey 
such as this, but we think this is clear from the wording of the Abstract, where we say we surveyed 
people’s behaviour across 10 domains, which we equate to “different elements of people’s 
footprint”.
We’ve now underscored it in the second para of the Methods by adding:
“WHILST THE DOMAINS WE SELECTED DO NOT ENABLE US TO CARRY OUT A COMPREHENSIVE 
ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT, THEY DO GIVE US A BROAD INDICATION OF RESPONDENTS’ RELATIVE 
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE AND ALLOW US TO INVESTIGATE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN 
DIFFERENT BEHAVIOURS.”
7. On how a recommended focus on high-impact behaviours follows from our results.  The argument 
is that behaviours differ enormously in their environmental impact (paragraph 2 of section 3.1), but 
changes in one domain are rarely correlated with shifts in others. It therefore seems logical that 
efforts should focus on interventions targeting behaviours of high impact. We’ve added a little to the 
key Discussion sentence on this point:
“Our results provide no indication that encouraging relatively easy BUT LOW-IMPACT behavioral 
changes (such as increased recycling) is likely to lead to shifts in other domains, and we instead 
suggest efforts should focus on devising audience-specific interventions targeting those behaviors 
with greatest environmental impact.”
8. Conclusions re. the knowledge-attitude gap are not new. We now explicitly acknowledge this point 
in the Abstract (see Abstract point 1 above).
Introduction
1. Conservationists may be unable to change their behaviours because they are stuck in the same 
systems as others. We agree that infrastructure and choice architecture may constrain everyone’s 
behaviours to some degree (see Framing, discussion and conclusions point a above). However we 
believe that conservationists are far from being completely constrained (see Abstract point 3 above, 
and Discussion point 10 below), and that it is not unreasonable to expect them to show considerably 
greater pro-environmental behaviour than others, in many behavioural domains.
2. Wanting to see more of a detailed theory of change. See Theory and hypotheses above.
3. More on why our comparison groups are similar. We don’t claim great similarity, but have tried to 
clarify this by changing the sentence to read:
“we extended our sample to two other groups with BROADLY similar educational and APPLIED 
characteristics…”
We did not limit ourselves to particular sectors, merely to people who responded to requests to 
participate which were distributed by conservation, economics and biomedical organisations.
 6
4. On the assumption that conservationists have been exposed to environmental information for 
longer than people in our other groups. Thanks for pointing out this lack of clarity. We have now 
made this step in the logic explicit:
“WE EXPECT THAT THROUGH THEIR JOBS AND/OR INTERESTS THE CONSERVATIONISTS WE SAMPLED 
HAVE EXPERIENCED MUCH LONGER-TERM EXPOSURE TO ENVRIONMENTAL INFORMATION THAN 
OUR OTHER RESPONDENTS. We therefore used our comparison of conservationists with other 
groups to examine associations between SUCH exposure, environmental knowledge and pro-
environmental behaviors, adjusting as far as possible for the effects of other factors.”
5. On the need to flag the limitations of a correlational study. We agree, and have added a final 
sentence to this paragraph:
“AS WITH OTHER ASPECTS OF OUR STUDY, HOWEVER, WE RECOGNISE THAT ADOPTING A NON-
EXPERIMENTAL, CORRELATIONAL APPROACH LIMITS OUR ABILITY TO UNDERSTAND THE CAUSALITY 
OF THE PATTERNS WE OBSERVE.”
Note that we also make this limitation very clearly in the Discussion, highlighting it as our third and 
most important caveat.
6. Provide a review of literature on co-variation in different aspects of people’s environmental 
footprints. Providing a full review here would be impractical, but we have added a sentence and 
citations:
“are the predictors of different behaviors similar across domains? EVIDENCE FOR SUCH CO-
VARIATION IS SO FAR RATHER WEAK (E.G. ALCOCK ET AL. 2017; BARR ET AL., 2010; PAINTER ET AL., 
1983). To the extent there are congruent patterns…”
Methods
1. Be clearer about this being a non-random sample. We have added a sentence on this to the first 
paragraph of the Methods:
“RESPONDENTS WERE SELF-SELECTED AND THUS (AS IN MOST STUDIES OF THIS NATURE) WERE A 
NON-RANDOM SAMPLE.”
This also addresses Methods point 14 below.
2. Was the survey piloted? We have now clarified this in the first para of the Methods:
“After PILOTING THE SURVEY ITERATIVELY WITH 36 UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE STUDENTS 
AT THE UNIVERSITIES OF CAMBRIDGE AND VERMONT and receiving approval from….”
3.  Reliability. See the detailed discussion of Reliability and Cronbach’s alpha under Methods point 15 
below.
4. Use of questions from other surveys. We have used similar knowledge questions in two previous 
papers – Balmford et al. 2004 Science 305: 1713; Fisher et al. 2009 Oryx 43: 361.
 7
5. Question development. See answers to Methods point 2 and point 4 above.
6. Did we ask enough to make a comprehensive footprint estimate? No – this would impractical for a 
sample of this size; instead we focused on a few relatively measurable behaviours which have high 
footprints or a high profile in environmental campaigns. We hope this focus is clear right from the 
abstract:
“we … compared …  behaviour, across 10 domains ….. and the extent to which different elements of 
people’s footprint co-vary…”
We’ve now underscored it in the second para of the Methods by adding:
“WHILST THE DOMAINS WE SELECTED DO NOT ENABLE US TO CARRY OUT A COMPREHENSIVE 
ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT, THEY DO GIVE US A BROAD INDICATION OF RESPONDENTS’ RELATIVE 
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE AND ALLOW US TO INVESTIGATE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN 
DIFFERENT BEHAVIOURS.”
7. Our measures missed professional behaviours. See Methods and measurement point b, above.
8. Did we screen out respondents? No we did not. But we realise this question may have arisen 
because we omitted the legend Appendix A (the questionnaire). We used three very slightly 
different versions of the questionnaire, with the wording of question 6 (Do you consider yourself a 
professional, a practitioner, a researcher?) tailored to the group receiving the invitation to 
participate. For conservationists the question asked Do you consider yourself a conservation 
professional, a conservation practitioner, a conservation researcher? For economists it asked Do you 
consider yourself an economics professional, an economics practitioner, an economics researcher? 
And for medics it asked Do you consider yourself a biomedical professional, a biomedical 
practitioner, a biomedical researcher? We have now added the legend to Appendix A:
“Appendix A. Questionnaire. All respondents received an identical questionnaire, except that 
question 6 (“Do you consider yourself to be … a professional in the XXX sector, a XXX practitioner, a 
XXX researcher?”) varied across groups, such that XXX read “conservation”, “economics” or 
“biomedical”, depending on the organisation through which the respondent was contacted. We 
present the conservationist version here.”
9 and 10. How did we classify economists, medics and conservationists? We have now added a 
sentence on this to the first paragraph of the Methods:
“WE ASSIGNED RESPONDENTS TO OUR THREE GROUPS SIMPLY BASED ON WHETHER THEY 
RESPONDED TO A COMMUNICATION FROM A CONSERVATION, AN ECONOMICS OR A BIOMEDICAL 
ORGANISATION.”
11. Did economists and medics say yes to being conservation professionals? As explained in Methods 
point 8 they were only asked if they were economics or biomedical professionals, respectively. We 
apologise for the confusion.
12. The questions about environmental knowledge primarily pertain to knowledge of issues but not 
how to change behaviour. Is this a problem for examining the link between knowledge and action? 
We don’t think so. As explained in the Methods we asked a separate multi-part question about what 
 8
actions could reduce the average citizen’s footprint, and analysed correlations between people’s 
behaviours and their score for that question (which we term “knowledge of pro-environmental 
actions”) entirely separately to correlations between their actions and their score for knowledge of 
issues (which we term “environmental knowledge”).
13. Conservationists are more likely to have social desirability bias. See Methods and measurement 
point c above.
14. Bring up sample unrepresentativeness earlier. We now do – see Methods point 1 above.
15. Reliability and Cronbach’s alpha. Cronbach’s Alpha is used to see if items in a set reliably 
measure the same construct, but a person’s environmental footprint is in our view unlikely to lend 
itself to a single instrument whose terms have internal validity. Unlike with instruments such as the 
Connectedness to Nature Scale, we would actually not expect the items we measured to covary.  
Indeed there are behavioural patterns and behaviours (e.g. moral licensing; status quo bias) that 
predict that we would expect to see little correlation across different footprint-related behaviours.  
Hence Cronbach’s Alpha does not seem like a valid test for our instrument, as our items are trying to 
capture a suite of impacts, but not trying to establish reliability across answers. Nonetheless to 
satisfy the Reviewers we did run a test to measure Cronbach’s Alpha.  The standardized Alpha is 
0.34, suggesting that (as predicted) our instrument cannot be purported to have high tau-equivalent 
reliability.
16. We should not talk about predictors without providing evidence of causality. In our view this is 
point is simply incorrect – to describe something as a predictor of variation in a variable is not to say 
it is the cause of that variation. This answer also applies to Discussion point 4 below.
Results
1. How do the results compare with those from representative surveys? This a good question which is 
impossible to answer as we are aware of no surveys asking these questions which involve truly 
representative sampling.
2-4. Wanting to see the GLM results first. Please see detailed explanation under Methods and 
measurement point d above.
5. Wanting a citation to low r2-values being quite common in analyses of human behaviour. We have 
added a citation to Abelson 1985. A variance explanation paradox: when a little is a lot. Psychological 
Bulletin 97: 129-133 .
6. Is lack of control over work flights typical of the other behaviours we measure here? As explained 
under Abstract point 3, we suggest that, although people will be making personal behaviour choices 
under some constraints, they nevertheless can be expected to have some degree of control over the 
measures we examine. 
7. Role of institutions. See response to Abstract point 12 below.
 9
8. On whether people flying more for work and for personal reasons could both be explained by 
income. This is plausible, as income is a strong predictor of both behaviours (see Fig. 3). On whether 
place of residence explains both pet-owning and how people get to work. We can’t tell, as we didn’t 
collect detailed information on where people live.
9. On explanation of people flying more having more pets. We agree this co-variation might well be 
explained by factors other than environmental knowledge: that is indeed our conclusion to this 
entire section:
“Higher environmental knowledge and knowledge of pro-environmental actions were both 
associated with a lower footprint in how people get to work, but showed very limited links to any 
other behaviors.”
Discussion
1. On possible explanations for the interaction term with environmental importance.  We suggest the 
most plausible explanation is that economists often know quite a lot about the environment and the 
actions they could take to reduce their footprint, but generally attach less importance to the 
environment than conservationists – and hence only share their slightly lower overall footprint if 
they have a similar environmental importance score. However, this interpretation is speculative, and 
deals with a rather minor result, so we would prefer to omit it and focus the Discussion on the 
answers to our questions, and our main caveats. If essential we could add a phrase either to the 
relevant part of the Results, or to the legend to Fig. 2.
2. What did the solicitation for the survey look like and how could it bias results? The message posted 
in newsletters on social media groups read:
“Dear member
In recent decades environmental issues have received more and more attention - in the media, in 
politics and in research. We are conducting a survey on the environmental impact of people's 
lifestyles and their knowledge of environmental issues and would like to invite you to take part. A 
link to the survey can be found here. It should take you around 5 minutes to complete.
The study is being organised by a joint team of natural and social scientists from the University of 
Cambridge (Professor Andrew Balmford, Dr Chris Sandbrook, Lizzy Cole) and the University of 
Vermont (Professor Brendan Fisher). 
All responses will remain anonymous with no names or other identifying features recorded, unless 
you wish us to contact you with the results of the study All information will be held in accordance 
with the UK Data Protection Act 1998. Respondents can exit the survey at any point, and incomplete 
survey data will not be used for analysis.
 10
If you have any questions about the survey please feel free to contact the authors at 
environment_and_you@yahoo.com. Many thanks for taking the time to read this and complete this 
survey.”
We do not think this wording could have led to differences in survey responses across our groups, 
though of course cannot rule this out.
3. Our conclusion that conservationists have a somewhat lower footprint may be misleading because 
other variables explain these differences. As discussed under Measurement and methods point d, we 
largely disagree with the reviewer on this. Within our sample conservationists do have a slightly 
lower footprint (just as elephants are heavier than mice); asserting a difference is not the same as 
explaining it. But here are several caveats to this statement – hence it begins “Our results suggest…”; 
it goes on to say:
“Conservationists have a somewhat lower environmental footprint than economists or medics, but 
this DIFFERENCE varies across behaviors, is not the case for travelling to work or pet ownership, AND 
IS FURTHER WEAKENED IN GLMs THAT TAKE INTO ACCOUNT SOCIO-ECONOMIC VARIATION ACROSS 
OUR SAMPLED GROUPS”;
and it is immediately followed by a paragraph about self-selection and social desirability bias, 
unmeasured aspects of people’s footprints, and the perils of correlational analyses.
4. Using the word predictions to describe correlations. As discussed under Methods point 16, this is 
standard practice.
5. Our point is hard to read. Thanks for bringing this to our attention. We have now split the 
sentence to improve clarity. It now reads:
“Variation in people’s combined footprint is independently predicted by their gender, nationality, 
occupation, education, income and the value which they attach to the environment – but not by 
their environmental knowledge or knowledge of pro-environmental actions. INDEED BOTH OUR 
KNOWLEDGE MEASURES are no greater among conservationists than economists.”
We obscured the point that knowledge is lower among conservationists than economists. It is not, on 
either score. We hope this is now clearer. We also spell out our knowledge results in the Abstract, 
and in Results section 3.2.
6. Our sample is a non-random subset of a non-random sample of people. We agree. We now say 
more about the people invited to participate being non-random (see answer to Methods point 1) –
and the Reviewer’s point about those choosing to respond being a non-random subset of those 
contacted is the first of our major caveats in the Discussion.
7. Frame this as exploratory, baseline or descriptive. We have done so, now saying:
“Yet despite these caveats, and because this is APPARENTLY THE FIRST wide-ranging DESCRIPTIVE 
survey of the relative footprint of conservationists to date, we believe some cautious inferences can 
still be made.”
 11
8. Say more about the unintended negative effects of environmental messaging. We have now added 
some text:
“Indeed there is now growing OBSERVATIONAL AND experimental evidence that among audiences 
with negative attitudes to the environment, greater knowledge and environmental messaging can 
even prompt a reduction in pro-environmental behavior (AS SEEN IN STUDIES OF THE EFFECTS OF 
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT LABELLING ON CONSERVATIVE CONSUMERS, AND OF THE POPE'S 
LAUDATO SI ENCYLCICAL ON CONSERVATIVE CATHOLICS - Dietz et al., 2013; Gromet et al., 2013; 
Kahan et al., 2012; Li et al., 2016).
9. We could foreshadow the issues of structural constraints and choice architecture in the 
Introduction. We already do – in the third paragraph:
“Instead, it seems many other psychological and societal factors also influence the expression of pro-
environmental behaviors - including … structural, cognitive and economic constraints (which may 
make more sustainable alternatives unavailable); individuals’ perceptions of their control over 
outcomes; people’s ingrained habits;  and so-called choice architecture (the way in which 
alternatives are presented, with easier, more attractive or default options often perpetuating the 
status quo).”
The study did not survey how professional activities may help change systems. This was never our 
aim. See response to Measurement and methods point b above.
10.  Could conservationists do more? We think they could. There are of course constraints and 
counter-incentives, but  quite a few of the conservationists we surveyed choose to eat less meat and 
fly less (for work as well as pleasure); some offset their flight emissions; and some even opt for 
fewer children for pro-environmental reasons. We thus stand by our point (reiterated under 
Abstract point 3 above) that “as conservationists we could … do a great deal more to reduce our 
footprint.”
11. Citation for “We think that trying to lead by example is key to encouraging and sustaining 
fundamental society-wide changes in behavior.”. We’ve never before been asked to provide a 
citation for a “We think ...” statement in a Discussion.
12. Give tangible examples of efforts of changing the way we interact. We’ve added a citation to the 
really interesting example of the Flying Less blog, which specifically targets academics:
“attending frequent international meetings is no longer regarded as essential to making scientific or 
personal progress (see also Fraser et al., 2016; AND THE FLYING LESS INITIATIVE - FLYING LESS, N.D.).
13. Make the point that conservationists could help create offset programmes that support 
biodiversity. The final phrase now reads:
“and offsetting our residual footprints (preferably through CREATING AND SUPPORTING projects 
that generate biodiversity co-benefits) rather than continuing to pass on the impacts of our residual 
footprint to future generations and other species.”
 Highlights
conservationists often engage in environmentally harmful behaviors
we found they have slightly lower footprints than comparable groups, but only in some domains
footprints did not shrink with increasing environmental knowledge
different elements of people’s footprints did not co-vary
exposure to environmental information may have little impact on pro-environmental behavior
 1
1
The environmental footprints of conservationists, 
2
economists and medics compared
3
Andrew Balmforda,*, Lizzy Colea, Chris Sandbrookb,c & Brendan Fisherd,e
4
a Conservation Science Group, Dept of Zoology, University of Cambridge, 
5
Downing St, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK
6
b UN Environment World Conservation Monitoring Centre, 219 Huntingdon Rd, 
7
Cambridge CB3 0DL, UK
8
c Dept of Geography, University of Cambridge, Downing Place, Cambridge CB2 
9
3EN, UK
10
d Environmental Program, Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural 
11
Resources, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA
12
e Gund Institute for Environment, University of Vermont, 617 Main St, 
13
Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA
14
15
* Corresponding author. E-mail address: a.balmford@zoo.cam.ac.uk
16
17
 2
18
Abstract
19
Many conservationists undertake environmentally harmful activities in their private lives such as 
20
flying and eating meat, while calling for people as a whole to reduce such behaviors. To quantify the 
21
extent of our hypocrisy and put our actions into context, we conducted a questionnaire-based 
22
survey of 300 conservationists and compared their personal (rather than professional) behavior, 
23
across 10 domains, with that of 207 economists and 227 medics. We also explored two related 
24
issues: the role of environmental knowledge in promoting pro-environmental behavior, and the 
25
extent to which different elements of people’s footprint co-vary across behavioral domains. The 
26
conservationists we sampled have a slightly lower overall environmental footprint than economists 
27
or medics, but this varies across behaviors. Conservationists take fewer personal flights, do more to 
28
lower domestic energy use, recycle more, and eat less meat - but don’t differ in how they travel to 
29
work, and own more pets than do economists or medics. Interestingly, conservationists also score 
30
no better than economists on environmental knowledge and knowledge of pro-environmental 
31
actions. Overall footprint scores are higher for males, US nationals, economists, and people with 
32
higher degrees and larger incomes, but (as has been reported in other studies) are unrelated to 
33
environmental knowledge. Last, we found different elements of individuals’ footprints are generally 
34
not intercorrelated, and show divergent demographic patterns. These findings suggest three 
35
conclusions. First, lowering people’s footprints may be most effectively achieved via tailored 
36
interventions targeting higher-impact behaviors (such as meat consumption, flying and family size). 
37
Second, as in health matters, education about environmental issues or pro-environmental actions 
38
may have little impact on behavior. Last, while conservationists perform better on certain measures 
39
than other groups, we could (and we would argue, must) do far more to reduce our footprint.
40
41
Keywords
42
pro-environmental behavior, flying, meat consumption, energy saving, greenhouse gas emissions, 
43
environmental education
44
45
1. Introduction
46
Conservationists fly, sometimes a lot more than our fellow citizens (Fox et al., 2009; Grémillet, 
47
2008). We buy a lot of computers; and some of us – even some marine experts - eat swordfish 
48
(Bearzi, 2009). These specific examples highlight a much broader and deeply worrying issue. 
 3
49
Conservation is fundamentally about changing people’s behavior. As such, conservationists should 
50
be in the vanguard – actively (and visibly) adopting pro-environmental behaviors in their personal 
51
lives in order to lower our own footprints as much as possible. Failure to do so risks undermining the 
52
credibility of the conservation movement. Documenting and understanding our failings, however, 
53
might also help identify ways of catalysing and accelerating change across society as a whole.
54
With this in mind we conducted a wide-ranging questionnaire-based assessment of the 
55
environmental footprint of individuals linked to conservation groups (hereafter “conservationists”). 
56
Because it is possible that the published examples of conservationists’ excess are exceptional and do 
57
not generalise, we quantified people’s actions across 10 diverse behavioral domains, from recycling 
58
to having children, considered to be relevant to environmental impact and over which we suggest 
59
individuals have at least some degree of control. Because many other variables impact pro-
60
environmental behaviors – most obviously demographic attributes such as age, gender and income 
61
(Alcock et al., 2017; Csutora, 2012; Gatersleben et al., 2002; Gifford and Nilssen, 2014; Jones and 
62
Kammen, 2011; Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002) - we also collected information on these variables, 
63
and adjusted our assessments of conservationists’ footprints to take them into account. And to help 
64
put these findings into context, we extended our sample to two groups with broadly similar 
65
educational and applied characteristics – those linked to economics and to biomedical groups 
66
(hereafter “economists” and “medics” respectively).
67
Conservationists might be expected to know more about environmental problems and solutions 
68
than these other groups, so this comparison also enabled us to explore one of the core notions of 
69
environmental education: that enhanced knowledge promotes greater pro-environmental behavior. 
70
Despite observed associations between knowledge and actions (Bamberg and Möser, 2007; Hines et 
71
al., 1987), the correlational evidence for this intuitive premise is complex. The essentially linear idea 
72
that enhanced knowledge promotes greater awareness in turn triggering pro-environmental 
73
behavior is no longer accepted (yet as Kollmuss and Agyeman [2002] point out, still forms the basis 
74
of many NGO and government communications campaigns). Instead, it seems many other 
75
psychological and societal factors also influence the expression of pro-environmental behaviors - 
76
including values (the importance individuals attach to issues; Bolderdijk et al., 2013; Gromet et al., 
77
2013; Li et al., 2016; Reddy et al., 2017); social norms (and the role of consumption in social 
78
signalling; Bamberg and Möser, 2007; Csutora, 2012; Jackson, 2004; Kahan et al,. 2012; Kollmuss and 
79
Agyeman, 2002; Reddy et al., 2017; Steg and Vlek, 2009; Thøgersen, 2014; Vermeir and Verbeken, 
80
2008); structural, cognitive and economic constraints (which may make more sustainable 
81
alternatives unavailable; Csutora, 2012; Gifford and Nilsson, 2014; Jackson, 2004; Kennedy et al., 
 4
82
2009; Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002); individuals’ perceptions of their control over outcomes 
83
(Bamberg and Mõser, 2007; Gifford and Nilsson, 2014; Hines et al., 1987; Kennedy et al., 2009l 
84
Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002); people’s ingrained habits (Jackson, 2004; Steg and Vlek, 2009; 
85
Thøgersen, 2014);  and so-called choice architecture (the way in which alternatives are presented, 
86
with easier, more attractive or default options often perpetuating the status quo; Marteau, 2017; 
87
Reddy et al., 2017; Sunstein and Reisch, 2014).  Experiments offer some scope for isolating the 
88
effects of knowledge from these other factors, but where knowledge effects have been identified 
89
they often appear specific to particular behaviors and audiences (Abrahamse et al., 2007; Bolderdijk 
90
et al., 2013; Gromet et al., 2013; Huffman, 2009; Kahan et al., 2012; Osbaldiston and Schott, 2012). A 
91
further problem is the difficulty of teasing-out long-term impacts from experiments – where 
92
exposures are typically brief, and prone afterwards to dilution by many confounding effects. 
93
Through their jobs and/or interests we expect that the conservationists we sampled have 
94
experienced much longer-term exposure to environmental information than have other 
95
respondents. We therefore used our comparison of conservationists with other groups to examine 
96
associations between such exposure, environmental knowledge and pro-environmental behaviors, 
97
adjusting as far as possible for the effects of other factors. 
98
By generating data on many different aspects of peoples’ environmental footprints our survey also 
99
provides an opportunity to examine a third issue of considerable practical relevance:  how far 
100
patterns of pro-environmental behavior co-vary across different domains. Are people that are pro-
101
environmental in one aspect of their lives likely to be so in others, and are the predictors of different 
102
behaviors similar across domains? Evidence for such co-variation – for what has been termed the 
103
“pro-environmental consistency hypothesis” (Alcock et al., 2017) - is so far rather weak (e.g. Alcock 
104
et al., 2017; Barr et al., 2010; Kennedy et al., 2015; Painter et al., 1983). To the extent there are 
105
congruent patterns, interventions to shift behaviors could perhaps be generalised, but to the extent 
106
they are divergent, interventions probably need to be tailored to specific behaviors and groups 
107
(Alcock et al., 2017; Kennedy et al., 2015; McKenzie-Mohr et al., 1995; Osbaldiston and Schott, 2012; 
108
Painter et al., 1983). We thus used our measures of different pro-environmental actions to look at 
109
how far people behave consistently across behavioral domains, and at how far predictors of inter-
110
individual variation show similarities across behaviors.
111
112
2. Materials and Methods
 5
113
Between July and October 2015 we surveyed pro-environmental behaviors and their co-variates 
114
through an anonymous questionnaire (Appendix A). After piloting the survey iteratively with 36 
115
undergraduate and graduate students at the Universities of Cambridge and Vermont and receiving 
116
approval from the University of Cambridge Ethics Review Group we distributed it electronically via 
117
conservation, economics and biomedical organisations to targeted newsletters, mailing lists and 
118
social media groups. Respondents were self-selected and thus (as in most studies of this nature) 
119
were a non-representative sample. We assigned respondents to our three groups simply based on 
120
whether they responded to a communication from a conservation, an economics or a biomedical 
121
organisation.  The questionnaires were accessed and returned to us via SurveyMonkey 
122
(SurveyMonkey Inc., n.d.). Background socio-economic questions asked respondents about their 
123
gender, age, nationality, occupation, level of education, household income and size and level of 
124
charitable donations. We also asked respondents to rank the importance they attach to the 
125
environment (relative to education, the economy, healthcare and immigration; for analysis we 
126
reversed the ranks, so that 5=highest importance). We assessed knowledge about the environment 
127
by asking six factual questions about human populations, atmospheric change and species 
128
extinction; and knowledge about pro-environmental actions from a multiple-response question 
129
about how citizens could most effectively lower their carbon footprint.
130
Our key behavioral questions (Table 1) asked participants about several behaviors known to cause 
131
negative or positive environmental impacts: whether they walked, cycled or used public transport to 
132
get to work (Ercan et al. 2016); how often they flew (for work or personal reasons, which we 
133
analysed separately; Miyoshi and Mason, 2016); energy-saving measures in their homes (Dietz et al. 
134
2009); whether they offset their energy or travel footprint (Gössling et al. 2009); their level of 
135
recycling and composting (Hermann et al. 2011); their production of food waste (Garnett, 2011); 
136
their consumption of meat or fish (Tilman and Clark, 2014); their use of bottled water (Botto et al. 
137
2011); the number of children they have (or hope to have; Murtaugh and Schlax, 2009); and their 
138
ownership of cats and dogs (Ravilious, 2009). We also invited respondents to give reasons for their 
139
answers. Whilst the domains we selected do not enable us to carry out a comprehensive 
140
environmental footprint, they do give us a broad indication of respondents’ relative environmental 
141
performance and allow us to investigate correlations between different behaviors.
142
Using self-reporting to estimate people’s footprints means that impacts may be underestimated as a 
143
result of social desirability bias (the tendency to give answers that convey a favourable impression; 
144
Gatersleben et al., 2002: Kormos & Gifford 2014). However, here we are interested in a diverse 
145
range of behaviors (many of which are not amenable to more direct measurement – Abrahamse et 
 6
146
al., 2007), and are focused not on absolute impacts but on differences across individuals; we are 
147
therefore relying on the less extreme assumption that any biases are relatively consistent across 
148
respondents (but see Discussion). To tackle the related problem that some self-reported pro-
149
environmental behaviors may have little beneficial impact (Bleys et al. 2017; Csutora, 2012; Kennedy 
150
et al., 2015) we used the literature and online calculators to estimate the difference in resulting 
151
greenhouse gas emissions of the 5th-percentile and 95th-percentile of respondents, when ranked for 
152
each behavior in turn (see Table 1; though note that this of course overlooks other components of 
153
the environmental footprint of these behaviors).
154
In total, 734 participants completed the questionnaire – 300 conservationists, 207 economists and 
155
227 medics; 329 respondents were UK nationals, and 132 were US nationals. There were some 
156
similarities in the profiles of those sampled in each group (summarised in Table 2) – in median age, 
157
and income; but also some marked differences – in gender (with a higher proportion of male 
158
economists), nationality (fewer British economists, fewer US medics), occupation (fewer medics 
159
declared themselves as “practitioners”), education (more economists had PhDs), and charitable 
160
giving (medics on average donated a lower proportion of their salary than other groups). 
161
Unsurprisingly, conservationists ranked the environment as being more important to them than did 
162
economists or medics. As an aside, it is perhaps noteworthy that a year or so before the Brexit 
163
referendum and the Trump election 89.1% of all UK respondents and 94.0% of all US respondents 
164
listed the environment as more important to them than immigration – making clear that ours is 
165
certainly not a representative sample of society as a whole. This is underscored by all of our groups 
166
reporting numbers of children substantially below current cohort fertility rates (estimated at 2.0 and 
167
2.3 for the UK and USA, respectively – Myrskylä et al., 2013).
168
We used a simple scheme (Table 1) to score participants’ responses to each behavioral question, but 
169
to make subsequent analyses easier to interpret we reversed the scores for those behaviors that 
170
reduced people’s footprints (lowering domestic energy use; offsetting; recycling). To look at overall 
171
behaviors we then generated a combined score, giving equal weight to each behavior (after 
172
combining work and personal flights into a single score).  As potential predictors of variation in 
173
behaviors, we also calculated simple summary scores of respondents’ environmental knowledge and 
174
knowledge of pro-environmental actions, and treated rank importance of the environment as a 
175
measure of its value to them (sensu Gromet et al., 2013). We analysed associations among response 
176
and predictor variables in two steps (as in Alcock et al., 2017), first using ANOVAs and correlations to 
177
assess simple patterns among knowledge and behaviors before building Generalized Linear Models 
178
(GLMs) to identify independent predictors of pro-environmental behaviors. To check the GLM results 
 7
179
were reasonably robust despite their relatively limited predictive power, we supplemented our 
180
analysis of variation in overall behavior with a model-averaging, information theoretic  approach 
181
(weighting the coefficient of each predictor by the model weight and summing over all possible 
182
models; Burnham and Anderson, 2002). 
183
184
3. Results
185
3.1. Do conservationists have a lower footprint than other people?
186
For some but not all the behaviors we considered, the conservationists we sampled had a smaller 
187
footprint than respondents from other groups (Fig. 1). They took fewer personal flights, did more to 
188
lower domestic energy use, recycled more, and ate less meat than either economists or medics. 
189
They also took fewer work flights and tended to have fewer children than did participating 
190
economists; and wasted less food and tended to offset their footprint more than did medics. 
191
However, the differences across groups were quite modest compared with the range of values seen 
192
across our sample as a whole (Table 1). Moreover, conservationists were similar to both other 
193
groups in how they travelled to work and in their use of bottled water, and (perhaps predictably) 
194
owned more cats and/or dogs than did economists or medics. The combined footprint scores across 
195
all behaviors were lowest for conservationists, then medics, and then economists (Fig. 1), although 
196
when work flights were excluded from the calculation (because these, it could be argued, are 
197
beyond the control of the participant), the difference between medics and economists disappeared 
198
(F2,723= 15.71, p<0.001, with conservationist-medic and conservationist-economist differences 
199
significant at p<0.05). 
200
In interpreting these patterns it is important to note that the behavioral domains we considered vary 
201
enormously in their environmental impact (Table 1, and squares above plots in Fig. 1), with 
202
estimated differences in resulting greenhouse gas emissions between those at the 5th and 95th 
203
percentiles for a behavior ranging across more than four orders of magnitude. The observed 
204
differences in bottled water use and recycling, for example, have almost no impact on overall 
205
emissions, while observed variation in domestic energy-saving, in meat-eating, in flying and 
206
especially in having children are associated with very substantial differences in people’s footprints. 
207
Seen through this lens the better performance of conservationists in terms of personal flights, 
208
domestic energy-saving, carnivory and number of children is somewhat encouraging. 
209
 8
210
3.2. How important is knowledge in predicting variation in people’s overall footprints?
211
The conservationists in our sample scored more highly for environmental knowledge than the 
212
medics, but not the economists (F2,731= 11.56, p<0.001, with conservationist-medic and economist-
213
medic differences significant at p<0.05). Conservationists also had marginally higher scores than 
214
medics but not economists for knowledge of pro-environmental actions (F2,731= 7.18, p<0.001;  
215
conservationists vs medics, p=0.07; economists vs medics, p=0.001). Given that our three groups 
216
differed in other ways too (Table 2), to explore the extent to which knowledge predicts variation in 
217
footprints we next built a GLM of our respondents’ combined footprint scores, and cross-checked 
218
the results via model averaging. 
219
The GLM indicated that participants’ combined footprint scores were higher for males, US nationals, 
220
economists, those with PhDs or (to a lesser extent) Masters degrees, and those with higher incomes 
221
(Fig. 2a). Income and being an economist had especially strong effects, as did an interaction term 
222
indicating that, for economists but not others, attaching high importance to the environment was 
223
associated with a markedly lower footprint (Fig. 2b). Footprint scores were also slightly lower (at 
224
p<0.1) for older respondents, and UK nationals. Importantly, controlling for the effects of other 
225
terms, there was no association between participants’ combined footprint scores and their 
226
environmental knowledge, or knowledge of pro-environmental actions. 
227
The overall explanatory power of the GLM was modest (pseudo r2 = 0.17), although reasonable for 
228
an analysis of human behavior (see Abelson, 1985). However, our results were broadly similar when 
229
we adopted a model-averaging, information-theoretic approach, which combines the results from all 
230
possible models (Fig. A1, Appendix B; though note that the interaction term is no longer significant). 
231
Re-running the GLM with the combined footprint score modified to exclude work flights led to a 
232
weakening of the model (pseudo r2 = 0.13), to the loss of the effects of education, age and to some 
233
extent gender, and to conservationists having a lower overall footprint than both medics and 
234
economists (Fig. A2, Appendix B). Importantly in none of these alternative model formulations was 
235
there any association between footprint scores and knowledge of the environment or of pro-
236
environmental actions.
237
238
3.3. How far do behaviors co-vary across different domains?
239
We found only rather limited co-variation across respondents in their scores for different behaviors 
240
(Table 3). After adjusting significance values to account for making multiple comparisons, we found 
241
that only in a minority of cases did aspects of people’s footprints co-vary positively. Individuals who 
 9
242
flew more for work also flew more for personal reasons. Those with more pets were more likely to 
243
get to work by car. Those who recycled more did more to cut domestic energy use and also used less 
244
bottled water, and those who used less bottled water produced less food waste. There were 
245
negative associations too: respondents with more children undertook more actions to cut household 
246
energy use, those who flew more for work offset their emissions more, and those who flew more for 
247
personal reasons had fewer pets. However, all these correlations were relatively weak, and many 
248
pairs of behaviors did not co-vary at all. 
249
To explore how far predictors of inter-individual variation differ across behaviors, we built separate 
250
GLMs for each behavior in turn (Fig. 3). These had limited predictive power, though each was 
251
statistically significant, and together they revealed some interesting patterns. Attaching high value 
252
to the environment, for example, was consistently associated with having a lower footprint: through 
253
fewer personal flights, more offsetting, less food waste, and less meat consumption. The statistical 
254
effect of other predictors, however, varied across behaviors. For instance, respondents with higher 
255
incomes had more children and flew more for work and personal reasons, but they also took more 
256
steps to cut domestic energy use. Likewise while older participants ate meat more frequently, and 
257
had more children and pets, they also made fewer personal flights, undertook more energy-saving 
258
measures, recycled more and were more likely to offset their emissions. Higher environmental 
259
knowledge and knowledge of pro-environmental actions were both associated with a lower 
260
footprint in how people get to work, but showed very limited links to any other behaviors. 
261
262
4. Discussion
263
Our results suggest the following answers to our main questions:
264
1. Conservationists have a somewhat lower environmental footprint than economists or medics, but 
265
this difference varies across behaviors, is not the case for travelling to work or pet ownership, and is 
266
further weakened in GLMs that take into account socio-economic variation across our sampled 
267
groups.
268
2. Variation in people’s combined footprint is independently predicted by their gender, nationality, 
269
occupation, education, income and the value which they attach to the environment – but not by 
270
their environmental knowledge or knowledge of pro-environmental actions. Moreover, both our 
271
knowledge measures are no greater among conservationists than economists.
 10
272
3. Different components of people’s environmental footprint are typically not correlated with one 
273
another, and show differing demographic patterns - with better paid or older individuals, for 
274
instance, having a higher footprint for some behaviors and a lower footprint for others.  
275
These findings are of course subject to several important caveats. First, our respondents were a self-
276
selected and thus non-random subset of the thousands of people who received invitations to 
277
participate in the survey. Our assessment of variation in their footprints relies on self-reporting, and 
278
therefore on the assumption that the biases this induces are similar across different groups. 
279
However, the validity of self-reporting varies (Kormos and Gifford, 2014), and it is possible that 
280
conservationists are disproportionately affected by social desirability bias because they know more 
281
about pro-environmental actions than (some) others and wish to convey a favorable impression of 
282
themselves. To the extent this is true it suggests the behavior differences between conservationists 
283
and our other groups are even less marked than we observed. Second, we considered only a fraction 
284
of all those behaviors with negative environmental impacts; to make participating relatively easily 
285
we measured most of them using fairly crude metrics (e.g. what forms of transport people used, 
286
rather than the distances covered); and we combined them without weighting them by their relative 
287
impact (though if we had done so, the results would essentially have replicated those for the 
288
number of children people have, given the overwhelming impact of this single behavior). Third and 
289
most importantly, our results are entirely correlational, greatly limiting our ability to understand the 
290
causality of the patterns we observed. Yet despite these caveats, because this is probably the first 
291
wide-ranging descriptive survey of the relative footprint of conservationists to date, we believe 
292
some cautious inferences can still be made.
293
Returning to our questions (but in reverse order), across our respondents as a whole there was 
294
limited covariation in different aspects of their footprint, with most behaviors we examined 
295
predicted by distinct (and sometimes opposing) combinations of socio-economic variables. Other 
296
studies have shown similar differences – especially in what predicts variation in different behaviors 
297
(e.g. Alcock et al., 2017; Barr et al., 2010; Kennedy et al., 2015; McKenzie-Mohr et al., 1995; Painter 
298
et al., 1983) or in the effects of interventions aimed at altering them (Abrahamse et al., 2007; 
299
Huffman, 2009; Osbaldiston and Schott 2012). As one example, in their assessment of people’s 
300
environmental impacts on holiday, Barr et al. (2010) identified a group of richer, environmentally 
301
aware people who (like wealthier individuals in our own sample) take more personal flights than 
302
others but are also more likely to offset their emissions, and to adopt energy-saving actions at home. 
303
In addition we saw marked variation across behaviors in how conservationists compared with other 
304
groups (Fig. 1). We found no difference for the least important and perhaps most trivial behavior 
 11
305
(use of bottled water), but somewhat encouraging differences for some more deeply-rooted, higher-
306
impact activities (such as meat-eating, taking personal flights, and having children) – in line, perhaps, 
307
with the idea that higher-impact behaviors are harder to shift (Abrahamse et al., 2007). Taken 
308
together these results underscore the importance of not assuming that people who are pro-
309
environmental in one domain are necessarily so in others, and support suggestions that different 
310
approaches are needed to tackle different aspects of people’s footprint (Abrahamse et al., 2007; 
311
Alcock et al., 2017; Huffman, 2009; Osbaldiston and Schott, 2012). Our results provide no indication 
312
that encouraging relatively easy but low impact behavioral changes (such as increased recycling) is 
313
likely to spill over into shifts in other domains, and we instead suggest efforts should focus on 
314
devising audience-specific interventions targeting those behaviors with greatest environmental 
315
impact. Meat consumption, flying and family size seem like important places to begin.
316
On our second question, we found almost no evidence that knowledge about the environment or of 
317
how to make a difference helps to promote pro-environmental behavior.  Neither knowledge 
318
variable entered our GLMs predicting combined footprint scores (Fig. 2, Fig. A2), and they 
319
contributed to just three of 11 behavior-specific GLMs (Fig. 3), and then only weakly. Moreover, 
320
knowledge scores were no different between conservationists and economists (see also Kempton et 
321
al., 1995, cited in Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002). Despite their presumably much more extensive 
322
exposure to information, conservationists didn’t know much more, and knowledge cannot explain 
323
their somewhat lighter footprint. These results mirror those from other environmental studies 
324
(Bolderdijk et al., 2013; Csutora, 2012; Gromet et al., 2013; Hines et al., 1987; Jackson, 2004; 
325
Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002; Li et al., 2016; Marteau, 2017; Steg and Vlek, 2009; St John et al., 
326
2013; Sunstein and Reisch, 2014; Thøgersen, 2014; Vermeir and Verbeken, 2008) and from the 
327
health sector (e.g. Marteau et al., 2012) which indicate that the effects of income, social norms, 
328
habits, infrastructure and choice architecture may all be more important than knowledge in shaping 
329
our behavior. Indeed there is now growing observational and experimental evidence that among 
330
audiences with negative attitudes to the environment, greater knowledge and environmental 
331
messaging can even prompt a reduction in pro-environmental behavior (as seen in studies of the 
332
effects of pro-environmental product labelling on conservative consumers, and of the Pope's 
333
Laudato Si encyclical on conservative Catholics - Dietz et al., 2013; Gromet et al., 2013; Kahan et al., 
334
2012; Li et al., 2016). Conservation education may instead have greater impact if it focuses on 
335
underlying values (which we found were more consistently linked to behavior than was knowledge; 
336
see also Bolderdijk et al., 2013). Improving conservationists’ understanding of how to influence 
337
values - perhaps through providing formative life experiences (Chawla, 1998) – may be rewarding 
338
(but see Manfredo et al., 2016). Education aside, studies from other sectors strongly suggest that 
 12
339
conservationists could profitably do more to tackle structural constraints and choice architecture – 
340
both the absence of alternatives to high-impact behaviors, and the subtly counterproductive ways in 
341
which, when they are available, such options are often presented (Jackson, 2004; Marteau, 2017; 
342
Sunstein and Reisch, 2014; Thøgersen, 2014). 
343
Finally, and closest to home, our results show that – while performing better on certain measures 
344
(include some that are high-impact) than do our other groups – as conservationists we could 
345
nevertheless do a great deal more to reduce our footprint. We think that trying to lead by example is 
346
key to encouraging and sustaining fundamental society-wide changes in behavior. Yet the average 
347
conservationist in our sample took three flights each year for work, plus three more for personal 
348
reasons; did nothing at all to offset their carbon emissions; and ate meat five times a week – while 
349
also listing the environment as their primary concern. As authors, we are every bit as hypocritical. 
350
Between the four of us we have seven children, took 31 flights in 2016, and ate an average of two 
351
meat meals in the week before submitting this paper. Being the change we wish to see in the world 
352
(to misquote Gandhi – Morton, 2011) will require us to make many potentially uncomfortable 
353
personal choices - about our family sizes and our diets, for example. But we suggest we must also 
354
take active steps as a movement and as a profession (Favaro, 2014). Obvious but challenging starting 
355
points could include changing the ways we interact, and measure our performance, so that 
356
attending frequent international meetings is no longer regarded as essential to making scientific or 
357
personal progress (see also Fraser et al., 2016; and the Flying Less initiative – Flying Less, n.d.); 
358
making these and other events we run free from ruminant meat or unsustainably-sourced fish; and 
359
offsetting our residual personal and professional footprints (preferably through creating and 
360
supporting projects that generate biodiversity co-benefits) rather than continuing to pass on the 
361
impacts of our choices to future generations and other species.
362
363
Acknowledgements
364
We are very grateful to all those who took part in our survey; to the American Economic Association, 
365
the Arizona Wilderness Coalition, the Association for Science Education, Bill Bewes at the British 
366
Ecological Society, the British Infection Association, Will Simonson of the Cambridge Conservation 
367
Forum, Elizabeth Allen at the Cambridge Conservation Initiative, the Medical Research Council, 
368
Phoebe Maund, Elena McPhilbin at the Nuffield Department of Medicine (University of Oxford), the 
369
Society for Conservation Biology, Siegi Arndt of the UK Network on Environmental Economists, and 
370
the University of Cambridge Conservation Research Initiative for distributing the questionnaire; to 
 13
371
Andrea Manica and Robin Naidoo for statistical advice; and to Vincent Devictor and an anonymous 
372
referee for comments on the MS. This work did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies 
373
in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
374
375
Appendix A. Questionnaire. All respondents received an identical questionnaire, except that 
376
question 6 (“Do you consider yourself to be … a professional in the XXX sector, a XXX practitioner, a 
377
XXX researcher?”) varied across groups, such that XXX read “conservation”, “economics” or 
378
“biomedical”, depending on the organisation through which the respondent was contacted. We 
379
present the conservationist version here. 
380
Appendix B. Supplementary figures. These show the results of model-averaging (Figure A1), and the 
381
GLM of the combined footprint scores omitting work-related flights (Figure A2).
382
383
Literature Cited
384
Abelson, RP. 1985. A variance explanation paradox: When a little is a lot. Psychological Bulletin 97: 
385
129-133.
386
Abrahamse W, Steg L, Vlek C, Rothengatter T. 2007. The effect of tailored information, goal setting, 
387
and tailored feedback on household energy use, energy-related behaviourbehaviors, and 
388
behavioral antecedents. Journal of Environmental Psychology 27:265–276.
389
Alcock I, White MP, Taylor T, Coldwekk DF, Gribble MO, Evans KL, Corner A, Vardoulakis S, Fleming 
390
LE.  2017. 'Green' on the ground but not in the air: Pro-environmental attitudes are related to 
391
household behaviours but not discretionary air travel. Global Environmental Change 42:136-
392
147.
393
Atmosfair. (n.d.). No Title. Atmosfair, Berlin, Germany. Available from https://www.atmosfair.de/en/ 
394
(accessed October 27, 2016).
395
Bamberg S, Möser G. 2007. Twenty years after Hines, Hungerford, and Tomera: A new meta-analysis 
396
of psycho-social determinants of pro-environmental behaviour. Journal of Environmental 
397
Psychology 27:14–25.
398
Barr S, Shaw G, Coles T, Prillwitz J. 2010. “A holiday is a holiday”: practicing sustainability, home and 
399
away. Journal of Transport Geography 18:474–481.
 14
400
Bearzi G. 2009. When swordfish conservation biologists eat swordfish. Conservation Biology 23:1–2.
401
Bleys B, DeFloor L, Van Ootegem L, Verhofstadt E. 2017. The environmental impact of individual 
402
behavior: self-assessment versus the ecological footprint. Environment and Behavior DOI: 
403
10.1177.0013916517693046
404
Bolderdijk JW et al. 2013. Values determine the (in)effectiveness of informational interventions in 
405
promoting pro-environmental behavior. PLoS ONE 8:e83911 DOI: 
406
10.1371/journal.pone.0083911.
407
Botto S, Niccolucci V, Rugani B, Nicolardi V, Bastianoni S, Gaggi C. 2011. Towards lower carbon 
408
footprint patterns of consumption: The case of drinking water in Italy. Environmental Science 
409
and Policy 14:388-395.
410
Burnham KP, Anderson DR. 2002. Model Selection and Multimodel Inference: A Practical 
411
Information-Theoretic Approach. Springer-Verlag, New York.
412
Chawla L. 1998. Significant life experiences revisited: A review of research on sources of 
413
environmental sensitivity. Journal of Environmental Education 29:11–21.
414
Clear. (n.d.). Calculate my carbon footprint. Clear, Bourne End, UK. Available from https://clear-
415
offset.com/offset-my-carbon-footprint.php (accessed October 27, 2016).
416
CoolClimate Network. (n.d.). CoolClimate calculator. CoolCliimate Network, Berkeley, USA. Available 
417
from http://coolclimate.berkeley.edu/calculator (accessed October 27, 2016).
418
Csutora M. 2012. One more awareness gap? The behaviour–impact gap problem. Journal of 
419
Consumer Policy 35:145–163.
420
Dietz T, Gardner GT, Gilligan J, Stern PC, Vandenbergh M. 2009. Household actions can provide a 
421
behavioral wedge to rapidly reduce US carbon emissions. Proceedings of the National Academy 
422
of Sciences (USA) 106:18452-18456.
423
Dietz T, Leshko C, McCright AM. 2013. Politics shapes individual choices about energy efficiency. 
424
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA) 110:9191–9192.
425
ELUA. (n.d.). Bottled Water and Our Environment. Thunder Bay, Canada. Available from 
426
http://elua.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Elua-Bottled-Water-and-Our-Environment.pdf 
427
(accessed October 11, 2016).
428
Ercan T, Onat NC, Tatari, O. 2016. Investigating carbon footprint reduction potential of public 
 15
429
transportation in the United States: A system dynamics approach. Journal ofCleaner Production 
430
133:12601-276.
431
Favaro B. 2014. A carbon code of conduct for science. Science 344:1461.
432
Flying Less. (n.d.) Flying less: reducing academia's footprint. Available from 
433
https://academicflyingblog.wordpress.com/.
434
Fox HE et al. 2009. Why do we fly? Ecologists’ sins of emission. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
435
Environment 7:294–296.
436
Fraser H, Soanes K, Jones SA, Jones CS, Malishev M. 2016. The value of virtual conferencing for 
437
ecology and conservation. Conservation Biology. Available from 
438
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/cobi.12837.
439
Garnett T. 2011. Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the 
440
food system (including the food chain)? Food Policy 36:S23-S32.
441
Gatersleben B, Steg L, Vlek C. 2002. Measurement and determinants of environmentally significant 
442
consumer behavior. Environment and Behavior 34:335–362.
443
Gifford R, Nilsson A. 2014. Personal and social factors that influence pro-environmental concern and 
444
behaviour: a review. International Journal of Psychology 49:141-157.
445
Gössling S, Broderick J, Upham P, Ceron J-P, Dubois G, Peeters P, Strasdas W. 2007. Voluntary carbon 
446
offsetting schemes for aviation: efficiency, credibility and sustainable tourism. Journal of 
447
Sustainable Tourism 15:223-248.
448
Grémillet D. 2008. Paradox of flying to meetings to protect the environment. Nature 455:1175.
449
Gromet DM, Kunreuther H, Larrick RP. 2013. Political ideology affects energy-efficiency attitudes and 
450
choices. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA) 110:9314–9319.
451
Hermann BG, Debeer L, De Wilde B, Blok K, Patel MK. 2011. To compost or not to compost: Carbon 
452
and energy footprints of biodegradable materials' waste treatment. Polymer Degradation and 
453
Stability 96:1159-1171.
454
Hines JM, Hungerford HR, Tomera AN. 1987. Analysis and synthesis of research on responsible 
455
environmental behavior: a meta-analysis. The Journal of Environmental Education 18:1–8.
456
Huffman WE. 2009. Does Information Change Behavior? Working Paper No.09026. Iowa State 
 16
457
University, Department of Economics.
458
Jackson T. 2004. Negotiating sustainable consumption: a review of the consumption debate and its 
459
policy implications. Energy & Environment 15:1027–1051.
460
Jones CM, Kammen DM. 2011. Quantifying carbon footprint reduction opportunities for U.S. 
461
households and communities. Environmental Science & Technology 45:4088–4095.
462
Kahan DM, Peters E, Wittlin M, Slovic P, Ouellette LL, Braman D, Mandel G. 2012. The polarizing 
463
impact of science literacy and numeracy on perceived climate change risks. Nature Climate 
464
Change 2:732–735.
465
Kempton W, Boster JS, Hartley JA. 1995. Environmental Values in American Culture. MIT Press, 
466
Cambridge, MA.
467
Kennedy EH, Beckley TM, McFarlane BL, Nadeau S. 2009. Why we don’t "walk the talk": 
468
understanding the environmental values/behaviour gap in Canada. Human Ecology Review 
469
16:151-160.
470
Kennedy EH, Krahn H, Krogman NT. 2015. Are we counting what counts? A closer look at 
471
environmental concern, pro-environmental behaviour, and carbon footprint. Local 
472
Environment 20:220-236.
473
Kollmuss A, Agyeman J. 2002. Mind the gap: why do people act environmentally and what are the 
474
barriers to pro-environmental behavior? Environmental Education Research 8:239–260.
475
Kormos C, Gifford R. 2014. The validity of self-report measures of proenvironmental behavior: a 
476
meta-analytic review. Journal of Environmental Psychology 40:359-371.
477
Li N, Hilgard J, Scheufele DA, Winneg KM, Jamieson KH. 2016. Cross-pressuring conservative 
478
Catholics? Effects of Pope Francis’ encyclical on the U.S. public opinion on climate change. 
479
Climatic Change. Available from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10584-016-1821-z.
480
Manfredo MJ et al. 2016. Why social values cannot be changed for the sake of conservation. 
481
Conservation Biology. Available from http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/cobi.12855.
482
Marteau TM. 2017. Towards environmentally sustainable human behaviour: targeting non-conscious 
483
and conscious processes for effective and acceptable policies. Philosophical Transactions of the 
484
Royal Society A.  DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2016.0371
485
Marteau TM, Hollands GJ, Fletcher PC. 2012. Changing human behavior to prevent disease: the 
 17
486
importance of targeting automatic processes. Science 337:1492–1495.
487
McKenzie-Mohr D, Nemiroff LS, Beers L, Desmarais S. 1995. Determinants of responsible 
488
environmental behavior. Journal of Social Issues 51:139–156.
489
Morton B. 2011, August 29. Falser words were never spoken. The New York Times. Available from 
490
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/30/opinion/falser-words-were-never-spoken.html?_r=0.
491
Murtaugh PA, Schlax MG. 2009. Reproduction and the carbon legacies of individuals. Global 
492
Environmental Change 19:14–20.
493
Myoshi C, Mason KJ. 2009. The carbon emissions of selected airlines and aircraft types in three 
494
geographic markets. Journal of Air Transport Management 15:138-147.
495
Myrskylä M, Goldstein JR, Cheng YA. 2013. New cohort fertility forecasts for the developed world: 
496
rises, falls, and reversals. Population and Development Review 39:31–56.
497
Osbaldiston R, Schott JP. 2012. Environmental sustainability and behavioral science: meta-analysis of 
498
proenvironmental behavior experiments. Environment and Behavior 44:257–299.
499
Painter J, Semenik R, Belk R. 1983. Is there a generalized energy conservation ethic? A comparison of 
500
the determinants of gasoline and home heating energy conservation. Journal of Economic 
501
Psychology 3:317–331.
502
Ravilious K. 2009. How green is your pet? New Scientist 2731:46-47.
503
Reddy SMW, Montambault J, Masuda YJ, Keenan E, Butler W, Fisher JRB, Asah ST, Gneezy A. In press. 
504
Advancing conservation by understanding and influencing human behavior. Conservation 
505
Letters.
506
Rushforth R, Moreau M. 2013. Finding Your Dog’s Ecological’Pawprint’: A Hybrid EIO-LCA of Dog 
507
Food Manufacturing. Center for Earth Systems Engineering and Manufacturing, Arizona State 
508
University.
509
St John FAV, Keane AM, Milner-Gulland EJ. 2013. Effective conservation depends upon 
510
understanding human behaviour. Pages 344–361 in Macdonald DW, Willis KJ, editors. Key 
511
Topics in Conservation Biology 2. John Wiley & Sons, Oxford.
512
Steg L, Vlek C. 2009. Encouraging pro-environmental behaviour: An integrative review and research 
513
agenda. Journal of Environmental Psychology 29:309–317.
 18
514
Sunstein CR, Reisch LA. 2014. Automatically green: behavioral economics and environmental 
515
protection. Harvard Environmental Law Review 38:127–158.
516
SurveyMonkey Inc. (n.d.). SurveyMonkey. SurveyMonkey, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Available from 
517
www.surveymonkey.com (accessed December 2, 2016).
518
Thøgersen J. 2014. Unsustainable consumption: Basic causes and implications for policy. European 
519
Psychologist 19:84–95.
520
Tilman D, Clark M. 2014. Global diets link environmental sustainability and human health. Nature 
521
515:518-522.
522
United States Environmental Protection Agency. (n.d.). Carbon footprint calculator. EPA, 
523
Washington, D.C., USA. Available from https://www3.epa.gov/carbon-footprint-calculator/ 
524
(accessed October 27, 2016).
525
Vermeir I, Verbeke W. 2008. Sustainable food consumption among young adults in Belgium: theory 
526
of planned behaviour and the role of confidence and values. Ecological Economics 64:542–553.
527
WWF-UK. (n.d.). How big is your environmental footprint? WWF-UK, Woking, UK. Available from 
528
www.footprint.wwf.org.uk (accessed October 27, 2016).
529
530
 19
531
Table 1. Summary of surveyed behaviors, how we scored them, and the range in scores and associated emissions reported in our sample.
Footprint range
Behavior
Scoring system
5%ile
score
95%ile
score
Difference 
(tCO2e/y)*
Source and method
travelling to work
walk or cycle = 0, train or bus = 0.5, 
car = 1
0 
1
2.1
Clear, n.d. 
assumes 15km each way commute in 2 year-old Ford 
Focus
flights per year 
(work and personal 
recorded separately)
3h = 1, >3h =2, with return trips 
counted as two flights
0 (work)
0 (personal)
20 (work)
16.7 (personal)
12 (work)
9.6 (personal)
Atmosfair, n.d. 
assumes 3h flight is London-Berlin, >3h flight is 
London-New York
energy-saving 
measures at home^
0.25 for each of insulation, 
changed temperature settings, 
double-glazing, and solar panels
0
1
6.0
CoolClimate Network, n.d.; Jones and Kammen, 2011;
United States Environmental Protection Agency, n.d.; 
WWF-UK n.d.
offsetting emissions 
from home energy use 
or travel^
no = 0, partly = 0.5, yes = 1
0
1
2.3
Atmosfair, n.d. 
assumes full offsetting of all personal flights of median 
respondent
recycling (or 
composting) ^
approximate % recycled
0
100
0.25
United States Environmental Protection Agency, n.d. 
assumes recycle all paper, glass, plastic and metal
generating food waste
0.2 for throwing out over the past 
month any of a piece of fruit, a bag 
of salad, any leftovers, half a loaf of 
bread, or half a container of milk
0
1
2.2
WWF, n.d. 
assumes score of 1 corresponds to >30% food waste
consumption of meat 
or fish
rough number of meat or fish 
meals per week
0
14
8.4
CoolClimate Network n.d.; Jones and Kammen, 2011
use of bottled water
rough number of bottles bought 
per week
0
6
0.03
ELUA, n.d. 
number of children
the number people have or hope to 
have
0
3
570
Murtaugh and Schlax, 2009 
footprint of all descendants annualised across 
estimated 50y life as a parent, assuming constant 
emissions scenario and medium fertility variant
ownership of cats and 
dogs
number of cats and dogs owned
0 (cats)
0 (dogs)
2 (cats)
1 (dogs)
4.6
Rushforth and Moreau, 2013;
assumes cats eat 50kg feed/y and dogs eat 100kg/y
532
* difference estimates are absolute, and very approximate (and so reported to only two significant places); ^ to ensure higher-footprint behaviors 
533
consistently received higher scores, in subsequent analyses we reversed scores for reducing domestic energy use, offsetting, and recycling
 20
534
Table 2.Socio-economic profile of our three groups of respondents.
Conservationists
Economists
Medics
no. of respondents
300
207
227
% female
63.7
39.6
67.4
median age
43
40
37
nationality                                           % UK
% US
% other
57.3
23.7
19.0
33.3
23.7
43.0
66.5
5.3
28.2
occupation                        % professionals
% practitioners 
% researchers
58.7
41.7
44.7
69.1
58.0
76.8
53.7
19.4
53.7
education                                          % PhD
% Masters
% other
33.3
37.0
29.7
64.3
29.0
6.7
40.1
28.2
31.7
median household income/person (£/y)
22500
24200
25000
median % income to charity
5.6
5.6
3.3
median rank importance of 
environment
4.31
3.59
3.02
 21
535
Table 3. Spearman rank correlations between the footprints of different behaviors across our 734 respondents. Bold denotes correlations which are 
536
significant at P<0.05 after Bonferroni correction for 55 comparisons. Scores for behaviors marked ^ were reversed (see text). Hence significant positive 
537
correlations indicate that individuals with a high footprint for one behavior had a high footprint for the other, while significant negative correlations indicate a 
538
high footprint in one domain was associated with a low footprint in the other. 
work 
flights
personal 
flights
energy-
saving at 
home†
offsetting †
recycling †
food waste
meat 
consumption
bottled 
water
no. of 
children
no. of cats 
and dogs
travelling to work
0.01
-0.12
-0.11
0.00
0.01
0.13
0.13
0.03
0.10
0.16
work flights
0.26
0.14
-0.13
0.10
-0.05
0.02
0.13
0.03
0.06
personal flights
0.16
-0.08
0.12
0.04
-0.05
0.02
-0.12
-0.14
energy-saving at 
home†
0.06
0.26
-0.01
0.01
0.06
-0.25
-0.13
offsetting †
0.08
0.04
0.10
0.00
0.02
-0.01
recycling †
0.15
0.15
0.14
-0.06
-0.01
food waste
0.10
0.15
0.09
0.05
meat 
consumption
0.12
0.11
0.04
bottled water
0.09
0.00
no. of children
0.11
539
 22
540
541
542
 23
543
544
545
Figure 1. Footprint scores of conservationists, economists and medics compared, for 11 behaviors, 
546
and in total. For more detail on behaviors and how they were scored see Table 1. Plots show means 
547
and standard errors, with the range of y-axis values reflecting the span of scores seen in our data 
548
(Table 1). ANOVA results: for work travel F2,731=6.58, P<0.01; work flights F2,731=13.59, P<0.001; 
549
personal flights F2,731=4.29, P<0.05; energy-saving measures^ F2,731=6.23, P<0.01; offsetting 
550
emissions^ F2,731=2.46, P=0.09; recycling or composting^ F2,722=14.94, P<0.001; generating food 
551
waste F2,731=7.34, P<0.001; consumption of meat or fish F2,731=8.45, P<0.001; use of bottled water 
552
F2,731=2.45, P=0.09; number of children F2,731=2.73, P=0.07; ownerships of cats and dogs F2,731=5.48, 
553
P<0.01; total footprint score F2,723=20.79, P<0.001. Occupations that differ significantly in their 
554
footprint are shown by different letters. For three behaviors (marked with ^), scores were reversed 
555
so that (as with all other variables) higher scores denote a higher footprint. Filled squares above 
556
plots indicate the relative environmental impact of observed variation in each behavior, estimated 
557
simplistically as the difference in greenhouse gas emissions between those at the 5th and 95th 
558
percentiles of our sample for that behavior (▪<0.1 tCO2e/y; ▪▪<1 tCO2e/y; ▪▪▪<10 tCO2e/y; ▪▪▪▪<100 
559
tCO2e/y; ▪▪▪▪▪<1000 tCO2e/y; Table 1). 2-COLUMN IMAGE
 24
560
561
562
563
Figure 2. Results of the GLM predicting variation in participants’ combined footprint scores, showing 
564
(a) standardised regression coefficients for each term and their plausible two-way interactions; and 
565
(b) the interaction between the effect of importance attached to the environment and that of 
566
occupation. In (a) bars denote standard deviation and 95% confidence intervals for the coefficient of 
567
each term’s effect on combined footprint score, relative to that of a female conservationist from 
568
outside the UK or US and with no university education. In (b) lines show fitted values.
569
1-COLUMN IMAGE
 25
570
571
 26
572
573
574
575
576
577
578
579
580
Figure 3. Results of GLMs predicting variation in participants’ footprint scores across 11 behaviors showing standardised regression coefficients for each 
581
term. Bars denote standard deviation and 95% confidence intervals for the coefficient of each term’s effect on combined footprint score, relative to that of 
582
a female conservationist from outside the UK or US and with no university education. 2-COLUMN IMAGE
 Page 1
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
Consent
*
Please give your consent to the information you provide being used for research. All uploaded information
will be held anonymously with no names or other identifying features recorded, unless you wish us to contact
you in due course with the survey results. You can exit the survey at any point, and incomplete survey data
will not be uploaded.
1. Do you consent to the information you provide being used for research?
Yes
No
 Page 2
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
Welcome
Thank you for agreeing to take part in this survey. All responses will be treated entirely anonymously. Please
answer all questions, as honestly as possible.
 Page 3
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
Section A: Some questions about you
*
*
*
*
*
Please answer every question and ensure you enter only numbers to questions that require numeric answers.
2. Gender
3. Age
4. Nationality
Country
In what country are you a full
national?
 
5. Occupation
6. Do you consider yourself to be any of the following?
Yes
No
Not sure
A professional in the
conservation sector
A conservation practitioner
A conservation researcher
Male
Female
 Page 4
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
7. Highest level of education completed
8. Approximate total household income per year (no commas please!)
9. Please give the currency
10. Household size
11. How many children do you have (or hope to have) in total?
You are already a third of the way through the survey!
12. How many cats and dogs do you own?
Cats
Dogs
13. Approximately how much did your household give to charity over the past year (no
commas please!)?
14. Please give the currency
To age 16
To age 18
First Degree
Masters
PhD
Other (please specify)
£
$
€
£
$
€
 Page 5
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
*15. Please rank the following issues in order of importance to you (1= most
important, 5= least important)
  
Education
  
Economy
  
Healthcare
  
Environment
  
Immigration
 Page 6
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
Section B: Your lifestyle
*
*
Please answer every question and feel free to use the boxes to give reasons for each answer. Again, please
ensure you enter only numbers to questions that require numeric answers.
16. For the most part, what method do you use to travel most of the distance to get to
work?
17. Feel free to tell us why
 
18. Many of us fly to places for work and/or pleasure. Roughly how many fights do you
take in the average year (counting out + return as two flights)
For work ­ 3 hours or less
For work ­ more than 3 hours
For pleasure ­ 3 hours or
less
For pleasure ­ more than 3
hours
19. Feel free to tell us why
 
Car
Bus
Train
Cycle
Walk
N/A
Other (please specify)
 
 
 Page 7
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
*20. Which of the following have you done to cut your domestic energy bills (tick all
that apply)?
Added insulation
Changed the temperature settings
Installed double­glazing
Installed solar panels
Other measures
None of these
 Page 8
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
*
*
*
21. Feel free to tell us why
 
22. Do you offset the greenhouse gas emissions of your home energy use or travel?
23. Feel free to tell us why
 
24. Thinking about the volume (number of bags or bins) you throw out each week,
roughly what % of your waste do you recycle (including composting)?
25. Feel free to tell us why
 
26. Most of us throw away around 30% of the food we buy. Looking back over the past
month, have you thrown out any of the following (tick all that apply)?
27. Feel free to tell us why
 
You are two­thirds of the way through the survey! Nearly there!
Yes
No
Partly
One or more pieces of fruit
A bag of salad
a meal you've bought or made (i.e. leftovers)
Half or more of a loaf of bread
Half or more of a container of milk
Other items
None of these
 
 
 
 
 Page 9
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
*
*
28. Roughly how many of your week's meals contain meat (including fish and
chicken)?
29. Feel free to tell us why
 
30. Roughly how many bottles of water do you buy in the average week?
31. Feel free to tell us why
 
 
 
 Page 10
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
Section C: Your thoughts on environmental issues
*
*
*
*
*
*
Many of these questions could be answered using Google, but that would be boring ­ we're interested in
what you think. Please answer every question. Like the previous sections, for questions that require a
numeric answer, please ensure you only enter a number (with or without a decimal) in the answer box.
32. Roughly how many people do you think live on Earth today (in billions)? (Hint: it's
between 2.5 and 19.0 billion)
33. Roughly how much do you think the Earth has warmed over the past 100 years (in
degrees Celsius)? (Hint: it's between 0.2 and 5.3 degrees Celsius)
34. Roughly what % of the world's bird species do you think are currently thought to
be threatened by extinction? (Hint: it's between 2.0 and 37.0%)
35. Which of the following gases do you think has caused depletion of the Earth's
ozone layer (tick all that apply)?
36. Which of the following do you think currently threatens the greatest number of
endangered species?
37. Which of these countries do you think has the highest rate of population growth
(in % terms)?
Carbon dioxide
CFCs
Methane
Overexploitation
Habitat loss and degradation
The spread of non­native species
UK
Russia
USA
China
 Page 11
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
*38. Which of the following do you think would reduce the average US or UK citizen's
carbon footprint by more than 4% (tick all that apply)?
Halving meat consumption
Cutting flying by 80%
Buying 80% of food from local producers
Switching to low energy domestic appliances
Recycling 80% of household waste
Turning down the household's heating by 1 degree Celsius
 Page 12
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
 Page 13
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
The environment and you
Thank you
Thank you for taking the time to complete this survey. Please now click 'Done' to record your responses. If
you would like us to contact you in due course with the survey results, please also enter your email address
in the box below. If you do decide to do this, your answers will remain anonymous.
39. Email
  
 
Figure A1. Results of the model-averaging procedure for predicting variation in participants’ 
combined footprint scores, showing standardised regression coefficients for each term and their 
plausible two-way interactions. Bars denote 95% confidence intervals for the coefficient of each 
term’s effect on combined footprint score, relative to that of a female conservationist from outside 
the UK or US and with no university education.  
 
 
  
 
Figure A2. Results of the GLM predicting variation in participants’ combined footprint scores, this 
time omitting work flights (which might be considered outside the respondent’s control), and 
showing (a) standardised regression coefficients for each term and their plausible two-way 
interactions; and (b) the interaction between the effect of importance attached to the environment 
and that of occupation. In (a) bars denote 95% confidence intervals for the coefficient of each term’s 
effect on combined footprint score, relative to that of a female conservationist from outside the UK 
or US and with no university education. In (b) lines show fitted values. 
 
