 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 11
CANCER
A personalized platform identifies trametinib 
plus zoledronate for a patient with KRAS-mutant 
metastatic colorectal cancer
Erdem Bangi1*, Celina Ang2,3, Peter Smibert1†, Andrew V. Uzilov4,5, Alexander G. Teague1, 
Yevgeniy Antipin4,5, Rong Chen4,5, Chana Hecht1, Nelson Gruszczynski1‡, Wesley J. Yon1, 
Denis Malyshev1, Denise Laspina1, Isaiah Selkridge2, Hope Rainey2, Aye S. Moe4,5, 
Chun Yee Lau4,5, Patricia Taik4,5, Eric Wilck6, Aarti Bhardwaj2, Max Sung2,3, Sara Kim7, 
Kendra Yum7, Robert Sebra4,5, Michael Donovan3,8, Krzysztof Misiukiewicz2,3,  
Eric E. Schadt4,5,3, Marshall R. Posner2,3, Ross L. Cagan1,3§
Colorectal cancer remains a leading source of cancer mortality worldwide. Initial response is often followed by 
emergent resistance that is poorly responsive to targeted therapies, reflecting currently undruggable cancer drivers 
such as KRAS and overall genomic complexity. Here, we report a novel approach to developing a personalized 
therapy for a patient with treatment-resistant metastatic KRAS-mutant colorectal cancer. An extensive genomic 
analysis of the tumor’s genomic landscape identified nine key drivers. A transgenic model that altered orthologs 
of these nine genes in the Drosophila hindgut was developed; a robotics-based screen using this platform identi-
fied trametinib plus zoledronate as a candidate treatment combination. Treating the patient led to a significant 
response: Target and nontarget lesions displayed a strong partial response and remained stable for 11 months. By 
addressing a disease’s genomic complexity, this personalized approach may provide an alternative treatment 
option for recalcitrant disease such as KRAS-mutant colorectal cancer.
INTRODUCTION
Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains the second leading cause of cancer 
mortality in the United States. Current standard of care includes sur-
gery and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)–based chemotherapy combinations 
such as FOLFIRI (5-FU/leucovorin/irinotecan) and FOLFOX (5-FU/
leucovorin/oxaliplatin); recalcitrant or recurrent disease is then 
treated with one of several targeted therapies. Despite an increasing 
number of therapeutic options for patients with CRC, those diag-
nosed with metastatic disease (mCRC) have a 5-year survival rate of 
11%. Furthermore, toxicities from targeted therapies are substantial: 
For example, many approved therapies inhibit FLT1, which is closely 
associated with kidney toxicity and hypertension (1–3).
Tumors with oncogenic RAS isoforms (“RAS-mutant” tumors) 
represent a particular challenge. An estimated 30 to 50% of CRC pa-
tient tumors include an oncogenic KRAS mutation; an additional 
~6% of colorectal tumors contain mutations in NRAS or HRAS (4, 5). 
Several studies, although not all, have associated RAS-mutant tumors 
with more aggressive metastatic disease and reduced survival (6–10). 
RAS-mutant CRC affects more than 60,000 patients annually, leading 
to more than 20,000 cancer deaths in the United States alone (11, 12). 
More broadly, despite recent advances (12–14), therapeutic options 
for targeting RAS-dependent cancers remain limited (15–17).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved therapies 
that target the RAS pathway have shown limited efficacy in patients 
with KRAS-mutant mCRC. For example, the FDA-approved kinase 
inhibitor regorafenib (Stivarga) provides limited mCRC patient sur-
vival benefit (1.4 to 2.5 months), with substantial and highly pene-
trant adverse events (3). Other FDA-approved RAS pathway inhibitors 
such as trametinib (Mekinist) and immune checkpoint inhibitors 
have failed in CRC clinical trials for microsatellite stable disease 
(18, 19), leading to new interest in combinations of targeted thera-
pies (20, 21). Patients with KRAS-mutant mCRC, typically presenting 
with right-sided tumors that are more aggressive on recurrence, are 
resistant to or even harmed by therapies targeting epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR), and testing for RAS mutations are standard 
exclusionary criteria (22–26). Overall, patients with KRAS-mutant 
mCRC that develop recurrent disease have few good therapeutic options.
Our previous work demonstrated that complex RAS-mutant 
Drosophila CRC models exhibit broad aspects of transformation, includ-
ing hyperproliferation, multilayering, altered apoptosis and senescence, 
and dissemination of transformed cells to distant sites (27). Here, we 
present the results of treating a patient with KRAS-mutant colorectal 
adenocarcinoma using Drosophila as a personalized cancer drug dis-
covery platform (Fig. 1A). Before our treatment, the patient had 
shown initial partial response to chemotherapy and then tumor pro-
gression. We developed a “personalized Drosophila model” that altered 
orthologs of nine genes identified in the patient’s tumor. Robotics- 
based high-throughput screening was then used to identify a novel 
combination, trametinib plus zoledronate, that improved survival of 
1Department of Cell, Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. 2Division of Hematology and 
Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. 3Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. 4Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences and Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. 5SEMA4, a Mount Sinai Venture, 
333 Ludlow Street, South Tower, 3rd floor, Stamford, CT 06902, USA. 6Department 
of Radiology, The Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY 10029, USA. 7Department of 
Pharmacy, The Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY 10029, USA. 8Department of 
Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
*Present address: Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.
†Present address: Technology Innovation Lab, New York Genome Center, New 
York, NY 10013, USA.
‡Present address: Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
§Corresponding author. Email: ross.cagan@mssm.edu
Copyright © 2019 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 11
the personalized Drosophila model. Treating the patient with trame-
tinib plus zoledronate led to a partial response: Target lesions were 
reduced by 45% and remained stable for several months; nontarget 
lesions showed a similar response. Eventually, new lesions emerged 
that were nonresponsive to trametinib/zoledronate therapy. Given the 
typically poor third-line response observed in patients with KRAS-mutant 
mCRC, this work suggests that personalized screening using a model 
organism platform merits further investigation. Our results also 
demonstrate that drug combinations can provide a useful therapeutic 
alternative to single-agent targeted therapies in KRAS-mutant mCRC.
RESULTS
Clinical synopsis and treatment history
A 53-year-old man without previous comorbidities was found to 
have a large partially obstructing mass of the distal sigmoid colon. A 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 1. Overview and construction of Drosophila patient model. (A) An outline of our approach. First, a comprehensive genomic analysis of the patient’s tumor and normal DNA 
[copy number, whole-exome sequencing (WES), and targeted HotSpot panel] was performed. Then, a personalized Drosophila model that captures a portion of the patient’s tumor’s 
genomic complexity was generated by targeting each Drosophila ortholog specifically in the Drosophila hindgut. After the model was validated, a high-throughput “rescue from 
lethality” drug screen was performed on FDA-approved drugs as single agents and in combination. Findings were then presented to a multidisciplinary tumor board. A personalized 
treatment plan based on the multidisciplinary tumor board’s recommendation was prepared and institutional review board–approved, followed by patient treatment. (B) Patient’s 
genomic landscape: Genes altered in the patient’s tumor, their functions, and Drosophila orthologs are indicated. LOH, copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity. MAPK, mitogen- 
activated protein kinase. (C) GAL4/UAS system used for targeted genetic manipulations in Drosophila. Transgenes targeting nine genes (ras85DG12V, etc.) were cloned downstream of a 
GAL4-responsive UAS promoter and transgenic flies generated. Transgene expression was then induced in a tissue-specific manner by crossing transgenic flies to byn-gal4 for hindgut 
epithelium and to tubulin-gal4 for ubiquitous expression. GFP, green fluorescent protein. (D) Personalized construct generated for the patient, targeting nine genes. This construct ex-
pressed a GAL4-inducible (i) UAS-ras85DG12V transgene and (ii) synthetic eight-hairpin cluster targeting the Drosophila orthologs of the eight tumor suppressor genes. After trans-
genic flies were generated, transgenic constructs UAS-agoRNAi and UAS-apcRNAi were genetically introduced by standard genetic crosses to increase overall ago and apc knockdown.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 11
biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of colorectal adenocarcinoma. In-
traoperatively, he was noted to have synchronous liver metastases. 
A laparoscopic lower anterior resection was performed with cre-
ation of a sigmoid end colostomy. Surgical pathology identified a 
moderately differentiated pT3N2a adenocarcinoma of the recto-
sigmoid colon with proficient DNA mismatch repair protein expression, 
lymphovascular and perineural invasion, and negative margins. A 
targeted next-generation sequencing panel identified a KRAS(G13A) 
mutation; BRAF, NRAS, and PIK3CA were wild type.
Six weeks after surgery, the patient initiated systemic therapy with 
FOLFOX and bevacizumab. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 
which was 9.6 ng/ml on the day of surgery, decreased to 7.1 ng/ml at 
the start of chemotherapy. After 6 months of therapy, his CEA normal-
ized, and a repeat computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, 
and pelvis showed a partial response by the liver metastases. He under-
went a segment 8 hepatectomy, en bloc diaphragm resection, and 
colostomy reversal, followed by 3 months of postoperative FOLFOX.
On a repeat CT 1 month later, multiple new lung nodules and 
left superior mediastinal adenopathy were identified. Serum CEA 
was normal at 1.8 ng/ml. The patient resumed chemotherapy with 
FOLFIRI and bevacizumab for an additional 6 months. Serial imag-
ing performed during the chemotherapy regimen initially showed a 
slight decrease in size of the pulmonary nodules. Subsequent imaging 
3 months later showed a mixed response: slight interval progression 
of some pulmonary nodules and stability in others. There was also 
an increase in scant subcentimeter retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy 
and a more prominent left supraclavicular lymph node. A subse-
quent CT 2 months later revealed progression of lung metastases 
plus new left axillary, subpectoral, and mediastinal adenopathy. 
Previously noted retroperitoneal and pelvic adenopathy had increased. 
Serum CEA was 2.3 ng/ml.
Anticipating possible emergence of resistant disease, we initiated 
an experimental personalized treatment platform (Fig. 1A) while 
the patient received chemotherapy. Given the limited expected effi-
cacy of available third-line options should FOLFIRI/bevacizumab 
fail (28–32), the patient elected to enroll in the experimental study 
2 months after the colostomy.
Genomic analysis and mutant selection
As a first step toward developing a personalized Drosophila model, 
we carried out a comprehensive analysis of the patient’s tumor genomic 
landscape (Fig. 1A). To this end, we extracted DNA from the pri-
mary tumor specimen and patient’s blood (patient-specific normal 
control) and performed whole-exome sequencing (WES), targeted 
HotSpot panel, and copy number analysis (CNA) assays. The patient’s 
tumor exhibited a large number of variants: 132 somatic and 965 
rare germline variants.
To build a patient-specific Drosophila model, we focused our 
analysis on mutations in recurrently mutated cancer driver genes and 
genes that regulate cancer-relevant signaling pathways and cellular 
processes. In addition to confirming the oncogenic KRAS(G13A) 
mutation, WES analysis of the patient’s tumor showed biallelic loss of 
the well-established CRC drivers APC, TP53, and FBXW7 and a germ-
line heterozygous missense mutation in TGFBR2 (Fig. 1B). We also 
identified heterozygous somatic mutations in SMARCA4, FAT4, and 
MAPK14 and a heterozygous germline mutation in CDH1 (Fig. 1B). 
While these genes are not frequently mutated in tumors, they regu-
late important cancer-relevant biological processes including chro-
matin remodeling, cell polarity, and adhesion.
CNA identified a large number of alterations that included hun-
dreds of genes. Using immunohistochemistry to assess gene expres-
sion levels, we focused our analysis on copy number alterations 
recurrently observed in colon tumors (33). The patient’s tumor included 
a copy gain event in a region that encompassed receptor tyrosine 
kinases FLT1 and FLT3. However, immunohistochemistry analysis 
of the tumor specimen did not reveal an increase in the levels of either 
protein, and they were not included in the Drosophila model.
Model building and validation
To build a Drosophila model that reflected the patient’s specific ge-
nomic complexity, we altered Drosophila orthologs of the nine genes 
identified in our genomic analysis (Fig. 1B) in the fly’s hindgut using 
the GAL4/UAS expression system (Fig. 1C) (34). Specifically, we 
cloned transgenes downstream of UAS, a yeast-derived promoter that 
is responsive specifically to the yeast GAL4 transcription factor. To target 
transgenes to the hindgut, we then crossed together (i) transgenic flies 
containing a stable genomic insertion of UAS-transgenes with (ii) flies 
directing GAL4 expression in the hindgut (byn-GAL4; Fig. 1C). We 
included a UAS-GFP reporter to visualize transformed tissue.
We modified a previously developed transformation vector (35) 
to contain three UAS cloning cassettes (Fig. 1D). Oncogenic Drosophila 
ras85D(G12V) was placed under the control of one UAS promoter. 
To simultaneously reduce activity in eight tumor suppressors, we 
generated synthetic clusters of sequences encoding short hairpin 
RNAs (shRNAs) targeting each gene; we modeled the sequences on 
endogenous microRNA clusters found in Drosophila and human 
genomes (see Materials and Methods and table S1). For genes biallel-
ically inactivated in the patient—APC, TP53, and FBXW7—we selected 
hairpins predicted to provide strong knockdown; for the remaining 
genes with heterozygous variants, hairpins predicted to provide 
moderate knockdown were used. We assembled hairpin sequences 
into a single oligonucleotide and placed them under the control of a 
separate UAS promoter (see Materials and Methods and Fig. 1D). 
Two stable transgenic Drosophila lines were generated to assess dif-
ferent hairpin predictions: 006.1 and 006.2 each with ras85D(G12V) 
but a different set of shRNA-based hairpin oligonucleotides targeting 
the same eight genes. After transgenic lines were established, we also 
introduced additional RNA interference (RNAi) constructs for apc 
and ago by standard genetic crosses to ensure strong knockdown. 
While both models showed effective knockdown of most target 
genes, model 006.1 showed a more favorable knockdown profile (fig. S1). 
We also used hindgut lysates to analyze knockdown of Shg and P53 
proteins using commercially available antibodies; these results were 
consistent with our quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) 
data (fig. S2, A and B). Expression of the transgenes in the larval 
hindgut with the byn-GAL4 driver led to substantial expansion of 
the anterior portion of the hindgut (Fig. 2, A and B), reflecting aspects 
of transformation, as we previously published (27). We therefore 
selected model 006.1 for drug screening.
Drug screening
We previously demonstrated that rescue from lethality can be used as a 
quantitative phenotypic readout for high-throughput drug screening. 
Targeting transgene expression to the developing hindgut epithelium 
can lead to broad transformation in the epithelium and organismal 
lethality; this lethality can be rescued by drugs mixed with the fly’s 
food. A drug’s ability to rescue Drosophila cancer models to puparia-
tion or adulthood indicates that the drug is both effective and nontoxic.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 11
For drug screening, we assembled a custom “focused FDA library” 
consisting of 121 drugs FDA-approved for (i) cancer, (ii) noncancer 
indications with reported antitumor effects, and (iii) noncancer indi-
cations with cancer-relevant targets. The first round of screening did 
not identify any drugs that provided significantly improved survival 
(see table S2A for raw data). This result is consistent with our previ-
ous work demonstrating that genetically complex cancer models are 
often resistant to single agents and may require drug combinations to 
be effective at addressing genetic complexity (27).
Given the presence of oncogenic RAS in the patient’s tumor, we 
focused on identifying effective drug combinations that included 
the MEK (mitogen activated protein kinase kinase) inhibitor tra-
metinib. Trametinib is strongly effective against oncogenic RAS 
alone but not against highly multigenic CRC Drosophila models. A 
combination screen focusing on noncancer drugs in a focused FDA 
library was screened in the presence of trametinib; the bisphospho-
nate class drug ibandronate was identified as strongly effective in 
combination with trametinib (see table S2B for raw data). These 
results were confirmed in an independent experiment in which tra-
metinib was tested in combination with three different doses of 
ibandronate (Fig. 2C and table S2C).
Bisphosphonates have been previously reported to have anti-
tumor effects as single agents and in combination with different tyro-
sine kinase inhibitors. We therefore tested two additional bisphosphonates, 
pamidronate and zoledronate, in combination with trametinib. 
Zoledronate also proved to be an effective partner for trametinib 
(Fig. 2D and table S2C). Ibandronate synergized with trametinib 
at a wider range of doses and provided a more significant rescue 
than zoledronate. The reason for this difference is not clear; for 
example, it may reflect subtle toxicity that was not apparent in con-
trols, differences in off-target activities that lead to toxicity at higher 
doses, or differences in drug stability/metabolism in Drosophila. 
C
A
D
B
Fig. 2. Validating and screening Drosophila patient model. (A) Expressing byn > GFP in control animals highlighted the hindgut in bright-field (top panels) and expres-
sion of the byn-GAL4 driver specific to the hindgut (bottom panels). Microscope magnifications (5× and 10×) are shown. (B) Expressing the 006.1 transgene set in 
the hindgut led to strong expansion of the anterior hindgut. The midgut/hindgut (M/H) boundaries are indicated; the dark regions in the 006 bright-field images 
likely reflect cell death. Image contrast was enhanced equally using Preview software for clarity. Scale bars, 100 m. (C and D) Trametinib in combination with ibandronate 
or zoledronate rescued the lethality observed by the patient’s personalized Drosophila model. Concentrations indicate final food concentrations. Each data point rep-
resents a replicate with 10 to 15 experimental and 20 to 30 control animals. Raw numbers are provided in table S2C. Error bars indicate SEM. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 11
A multidisciplinary tumor board that included pharmacists, oncol-
ogists, and clinical trial experts who reviewed our findings noted 
that oral ibandronate can cause esophagitis (36); intravenous ad-
ministration of bisphosphonates would avoid esophagitis. Given 
the data supporting zoledronate as a potential anticancer agent 
(37–40), the tumor board recommended a combination of intrave-
nous zoledronate and oral trametinib for the patient.
We also explored drug response at the molecular and phenotypic 
level in the patient model’s hindgut (Fig. 3). We first evaluated RAS/
MAPK signaling pathway output using dually phosphorylated ex-
tracellular signal–regulated kinase (dpERK) in hindgut lysates from 
drug-treated experimental animals. Lysates from the patient model 
demonstrated significantly increased dpERK levels compared to 
control animals (Fig. 3A and fig. S2C). Trametinib significantly re-
duced dpERK levels in the patient model, while zoledronate had no 
detectable effect on MAPK signaling output. Combining trametinib 
with zoledronate led to a stronger reduction in dpERK levels than 
trametinib alone, indicating that zoledronate enhances the ability of 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Area (arbitrary units)
B
C
A
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Fig. 3. Secondary assays of drug response. (A) Western blot analysis of MAPK signaling pathway output from control and drug-treated hindgut lysates using dpERK as 
a readout. Quantification represents two independent experiments with different sets of biological replicates. Each experiment was performed in triplicate with 10 hindguts 
per biological replicate (gel images are shown in fig. S2C). (B and C) Analysis of the expansion of the anterior hindgut in control and drug-treated animals. (B) Quantifica-
tion of the anterior region of the hindgut. Data points indicate individual hindguts. (C) Two images representing the high and low ends of the size distribution observed 
in the assay. Quantified region of the hindgut is outlined by white dashed lines. T, 1 M trametinib; Z, 0.7 M zoledronate in the food. Statistical significance in (A) and (B) 
was determined using multiple t tests with Holm-Sidak correction for multiple hypotheses.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 11
trametinib to inhibit MAPK signaling. Regarding phenotypic 
changes, we found a statistically significant reduction in the expan-
sion of the anterior portion of the hindgut in the patient model in 
response to each single agent; the trametinib/zoledronate combination 
directed a stronger rescue than either drug alone (Fig. 3, B and C). 
Notably, the observation that zoledronate (i) partially rescued the 
anterior portion of the hindgut but (ii) had no effect on MAPK sig-
naling output (Fig. 3A) suggests a complex, pleiotropic mechanism 
of action for the combination.
Patient treatment
Before beginning third-line therapy, the patient underwent an oph-
thalmologic exam and a cardiac multigated acquisition scan; both 
were in the normal range. A pretreatment baseline CT reported target 
lesions, including left axillary and para-aortic, aortocaval, and right 
external iliac adenopathy and a left upper lobe pulmonary nodule. 
The sum of the longest diameter for all target lesions was 74 mm. 
Pretreatment baseline CEA was 2.2 ng/ml.
Patient treatment was initiated with oral trametinib (2 mg daily) 
plus zoledronate (4 mg intravenously every 4 weeks). Within 2 weeks 
of starting therapy, the patient developed a grade 2 acneiform rash 
on his face, neck, and upper back, which was attributed to trametinib. 
The rashes progressed, and the patient was prescribed minocycline, 
topical clindamycin, and antihistamines. Despite these measures, 
the rash progressed to grade 3 in severity and the patient developed 
facial swelling without dyspnea or dysphonia by week 4 of therapy. 
Trametinib was suspended, and the patient was referred to a derma-
tologist, who confirmed the diagnosis of drug-induced dermatitis. His 
symptoms improved with the addition of prednisone. Zoledronate 
infusions continued every 4 weeks.
A CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, performed 8 weeks from 
the initial start date of therapy, revealed that the sum of the target 
lesion diameters had decreased to 41 mm, representing a 45% decrease 
from baseline and partial response to treatment based on RECIST 
(Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) 1.1 (Fig. 4, A and B, 
and table S3). The patient subsequently resumed trametinib a week 
later at a reduced dose of 0.5 mg every other day. Serum CEA at the 
time was 2.5 ng/ml. He tolerated the modified dose of trametinib well, 
except for grade 1 pruritis. A repeat CT scan performed 5 weeks after 
resuming trametinib demonstrated a sustained partial response in target 
lesions (sum of diameters, 41 mm). New peripancreatic and periportal 
adenopathy emerged, measuring 16 mm by 15 mm and 15 mm by 
53 mm, respectively. On the basis of these results, the dose of trametinib 
was increased to 0.5 mg daily. Twelve weeks after resuming trametinib, 
another CT was performed, showing a 10% increase in the sum of 
target lesions (now 45 mm) from nadir but still 39% below baseline, 
indicative of a sustained partial response. The two new nontarget 
lesions were also slightly larger (19 mm by 16 mm and 21 mm by 65 mm), 
but there were no new lesions.
Given the tolerance of 0.5-mg daily trametinib without any new 
cutaneous toxicity, the dose was gradually increased to 1 mg daily. A 
further dose increase to trametinib (1.5 mg) was attempted, but the 
A
0
8.5
15
20.5
27
36
42.5
Week
Left supraclavicular node
Right retroperitoneal node
B
Left supraclavicular node
Week 0
Week 27
Fig. 4. Patient response. (A) Patient scans before treatment and 27 weeks after treatment. Arrow indicates an example of lesion in left supraclavicular node. (B) Two 
examples of target lesion shrinkage at indicated time points are highlighted by pink shading plus red dashed outline; the top panels provide detail to (A).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 11
patient developed a pruritic rash after 1 week, causing the dose to be 
reduced back to 1 mg daily. A CT performed 18 weeks after resuming 
trametinib showed that the sum of target lesions was now 46 mm, con-
stituting a 12% increase from nadir but still 38% lower than baseline 
measurements. In addition, the peripancreatic nodes had increased to 
28 mm by 26 mm and the periportal nodes to 27 mm by 85 mm.
Following the CT scan, trametinib was held while a 10-day course 
of stereotactic radiation was initiated to the abdominal adenopathy. 
Trametinib was resumed 11 days later at a dose of 1 mg daily. Serum 
CEA was 3.0 ng/ml. At this dose of trametinib, the patient occasion-
ally experienced mild exacerbations of the drug rash and/or skin 
dryness involving his face or arms, but these reactions remained 
grade 1 in severity. Although he still maintained a good performance 
status [ECOG 1 (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 1)], he reported 
increasing fatigue, occasional postprandial nausea without vomit-
ing, and abdominal bloating. He stopped trametinib on his own for 
4 days because of these symptoms and then resumed. Approximately 
5 weeks after completing radiation, a new CT demonstrated that the 
sum of the target lesions (now 62 mm) had increased by 51% from 
nadir, and the total sum was now 16% below baseline. New nontarget 
lesions had also appeared: a left perirenal soft tissue nodule measuring 
32 mm by 23 mm and an aortopulmonary window nodule measur-
ing 15 mm by 18 mm. The irradiated periportal nodes were stable, 
but the peripancreatic nodes were slightly larger, measuring 28 mm 
by 26 mm. At this juncture, the decision was made to discontinue 
study therapy and switch to fourth-line therapy with regorafenib.
Overall, the patient was treated with trametinib plus zoledronate for 
approximately 11 months, exhibiting a maximum of 45% reduction in 
tumor burden. The primary toxicity was a severe rash controlled with 
antibiotics and antihistamines, permitting him to resume trametinib. The 
patient was eventually removed from treatment primarily because of 
emergence of previously unobserved lesions; the full genomic landscape of 
these lesions is unknown. We had the opportunity to explore the muta-
tional profile of the treatment-resistant peripancreatic and periportal nodes 
using a specimen obtained from an endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy. 
The biopsy provided sufficient material for a targeted, high-coverage analy-
sis using Oncomine Comprehensive Panel version 2. No new mutations 
were reported on the panel, ruling out most druggable targets and at 
least many of the mutations known to promote resistance. A similar 
analysis using circulating cell-free DNA identified a similar profile and 
also did not identify a specific resistance mechanism.
DISCUSSION
Here, we report a novel treatment approach for a patient with ad-
vanced KRAS-mutant mCRC. Before our personalized therapy, the 
patient had received but eventually failed multiple courses of chemo-
therapy. Anticipated response for this class of patients to third-line 
targeted therapy or chemotherapy is poor, with marginal improvement 
in overall survival (41–43). Instead, on the basis of extensive genomic 
analysis of the tumor, we developed a personalized Drosophila model as 
a whole-animal screening platform. A combination of trametinib plus 
a bisphosphonate reduced animal lethality. Treating the patient with 
trametinib/zoledronate led to a progression-free interval of 3 months 
overall but a partial response of target lesions lasting 8 months, includ-
ing a maximum of 45% reduction in target lesions.
Our goal in creating this model was to capture tumor complexity: 
Drugs and lead compounds that have shown success in genetically 
less complex KRAS-mutant tumor models, including models that 
contain one to two additional targeted genes, have typically per-
formed poorly in clinical trials. Genetically complex models can 
also identify candidate therapeutics that act through multiple targets, 
providing an opportunity for a “network approach” to address tu-
mor complexity. Notably, regorafenib is approved as a multikinase 
inhibitor (44) that can extend survival of patients with mCRC by 
several weeks.
The model described here is one of the most genetically complex 
transgenic whole-animal disease models described to date. Still, we 
were able to capture only a small subset of genomic alterations ob-
served in the patient’s tumor. Using functional prediction algorithms 
to prioritize those variants that are most likely to deleteriously affect 
protein function eliminated a substantial number of variants most 
likely to be passenger events. We then focused on variants in genes 
identified as recurrently mutated drivers of cancer and those with 
clear cancer-relevant functions; however, our exclusion criteria are 
necessarily incomplete, and a large number of candidate variants 
remained. Further expanding the multigenic platform technology 
described here would provide an opportunity to generate even more 
sophisticated models that can better capture the genomic complex-
ity of tumor genomic landscapes.
Most tumor genome landscapes contain a combination of hetero-
zygous and homozygous loss of genes. Knockdown of a large number 
of genes to the desired level is a technically challenging issue. Use of 
hairpin sequences based on their predicted efficacy introduces a 
degree of uncertainty regarding how well they would perform in vivo, 
particularly in these genetically complex backgrounds. Generating 
two models each with a different set of hairpins targeting the same 
genes has been a useful approach to increasing the likelihood of suc-
cess. For instance, we did not find any significant knockdown of ft 
in model 006.1 and ft or shg in model 006.2. The knockdown profiles 
of the models would be further optimized by replacing the ineffective 
hairpins with improved version. However, building and validating 
additional models were not feasible in the time frame of the clinical 
study with our current approach.
Trametinib is a potent RAS pathway inhibitor, and its clinical failure 
to slow progression of most KRAS-mutant solid tumor types has been 
unexpected. Here, we demonstrate that trametinib can act on a nine-hit 
Drosophila model when dosed in combination with a bisphosphonate; 
this effectiveness translated into a partial response by the patient. The 
nature of zoledronate’s synergy with trametinib is not clear. Zoledro-
nate has been previously demonstrated to inhibit RAS pathway signaling 
through direct inhibition of EGFR activity and inhibition of prenyla-
tion (37–40). In addition, zoledronate and related bisphosphonates are 
associated with strong protection against CRC: Women who took bis-
phosphonates to protect from excess bone resorption—patients with 
breast cancer and postmenopausal women— 
exhibited a 40 to 59% re-
duced incidence of CRC, leading to speculation of its use as a therapeutic 
for patients with CRC (45, 46). Whether any of these activities are related 
to zoledronate’s ability to synergize with trametinib is unclear.
Preclinical mammalian models, including patient-derived xeno-
grafts (PDXs) and organoid cultures, are key components of the 
drug discovery pipeline. We explored the possibility of incorporating 
these models into our pipeline. However, success rates for growing 
patient-derived tumor tissue in mice or in three-dimensional culture 
are generally low and highly variable, and the cost and time frame 
are generally prohibitive. Furthermore, these approaches require 
live tumor specimen from patients; our Drosophila pipeline on the 
other hand can be applied to any patient with isolated tumor tissue, 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 11
including fixed [formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)] tissue. 
As both Drosophila and mammalian technologies advance, an inte-
grated approach that combines Drosophila and organoid/PDX studies 
may prove feasible, with the latter initiated in parallel to generate 
sufficient models to test the most promising candidates that emerge 
from the Drosophila patient model.
In this study, we present a new, highly personalized approach to 
treating CRC that can be adapted for use in other tumor types and 
other diseases that can be modeled in Drosophila. The advantage of 
Drosophila is the ability to alter a large number of genes in a single 
tissue and screen a large number of drugs and drug combinations in 
a whole-animal setting with a simple readout for efficacy and toxic-
ity. Identifying an effective, unique drug combination, trametinib 
plus zoledronate, emphasizes the potential for moderately high- 
throughput screens that can be accomplished in a time frame that is 
useful for treating a patient. This approach may prove especially 
useful in tumors with challenging profiles, for example, KRAS-mutant 
tumor types. Outcome data from additional patients to evaluate 
success rates will be necessary to determine the feasibility of integrat-
ing this approach into clinical practice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Enrollment
The study was regulated by three separate protocols approved by 
the Mount Sinai Institutional Review Board: (i) a biorepository pro-
tocol that regulated inventory and processing of tumor and patient- 
specific normal control (whole blood in EDTA) specimens; (ii) a 
molecular analysis protocol that included genomic analysis, model 
building/validation, and drug screening pipelines; and (iii) a treat-
ment protocol including a personalized treatment consent for the 
recommended therapy after the results were reviewed and approved 
by a multidisciplinary tumor board.
Sample processing and genome assays
Genomic analysis was performed on (i) FFPE primary tumor speci-
men and (ii) whole blood collected at the time of consent to serve as 
a patient-matched normal control. Detailed protocols for sample 
processing, next-generation sequencing assays, and data integration 
were described previously (47).
Variant selection and validation
WES of tumor and blood DNA identified 132 somatic and 965 rare 
germline variants. We focused our analysis on genes recurrently mutated 
in cancers including colorectal and those involved in cancer-relevant 
signaling pathways and cellular processes. To determine the likelihood that 
observed missense variants are deleterious (e.g., negatively affect protein 
function), two functional prediction algorithms were used: database for 
functional prediction and annotation of all potential non-synonymous 
single nucleotide variants in the human genome (dbNSFP) and Combined 
Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) (48, 49). Variants predicted to 
be benign (e.g., unlikely to affect protein function) by both methods were 
eliminated. The remaining variants were first manually reviewed by 
examining the raw sequence reads to exclude false positives from automated 
WES variant calling algorithms. In addition, each variant was independently 
assessed by a Pacific Biosciences sequencing platform for orthogonal 
validation using targeted amplicon circular consensus sequencing, as 
previously described (47, 50). Using this method, we confirmed the 
presence of each variant except for SMARCA4, which was inconclusive 
strictly because of technical reasons and was included in our final selection 
of variants for building the Drosophila model.
Immunohistochemical analysis
To confirm the findings of the gene expression analysis, we performed 
immunohistochemical assays on 5-m FFPE primary tumor sections 
for both FLT1 (1:200; catalog no. ab9540, Abcam) and FLT3 (1:100; 
catalog no. ab150599, Abcam) with appropriate antibody controls 
(51). Immunohistochemical scoring was performed semiquantitatively 
with an H-score (i.e., “histo” score) with intensity of staining rang-
ing from 0 to 3+ multiplied by the percentage of positive expressing 
cells with a final score ranging from 0 to 300. The sample was con-
sidered overexpressed on the basis of a discriminating threshold 
greater than or equal to an H-score of 150.
Model building
Patient-specific models were generated using a multigenic UAS vector 
modified from a previously reported Drosophila transformation vector 
(35). The modified vector contains three UAS cassettes, each with their 
own UAS promoter, SV40 terminator sequences, and unique multiple 
cloning sites (MCSs). Oncogenic Drosophila ras85D(G12V) was 
PCR-amplified from a previously validated transgenic construct using 
primers designed to append restriction sites for enzymes Fse I and Pac I to 
the 5′ and 3′ ends of the product and cloned into one of the MCSs (Fig. 1D).
Short hairpins for gene knockdown were selected using DSIR, a 
publicly available tool for designing shRNAs (52) following previously 
established hairpin selection criteria for Drosophila (35). Individual 
hairpins were separated by spacer sequences found 5′ to well- 
expressed 
Drosophila microRNAs. To help ensure that a personalized model with 
a desired knockdown profile was obtained, two independent clusters 
that target the same eight genes using different hairpin clusters were 
generated (006.1 and 006.2). Hairpin, spacer, and final cluster sequences 
are provided in table S1.
Hairpin clusters were generated by gene synthesis (GENEWIZ). 
Sequence-confirmed products were then cloned into the multigenic 
vector using Xba I (5′) and Not I (3′). Transgenic flies were generated 
by PhiC31-mediated targeted integration into the attp40 site on the 
second chromosome (BestGene) (53). To ensure strong knockdown 
for biallelically inactivated genes, previously validated transgenic RNAi 
knockdown lines for apc (VDRC) and ago (TRIP) were introduced by 
standard genetic crosses after transgenic flies were generated.
Model validation
Personalized models were validated by qPCR and Western blots. Exper-
imental and control animals for validation were generated by crossing 
both models (006.1 and 006.2) to a tub-gal4 tub-gal80ts line to transiently 
and ubiquitously induce transgene expression for 3 days. Whole larvae 
with the genotypes (i) tub-gal4 tub-gal80ts > UAS-006.1; UAS agoRNAi 
UAS-apcRNAi; (ii) tub-gal4 tub-gal80ts > UAS-006.2; UAS agoRNAi 
UAS-apcRNAi; and (iii) tub-gal4 tub-gal80ts/+ as controls were collected 
(three biological replicates per genotype and six larvae per replicate).
For protein extraction, larvae were homogenized using a motor-
ized pestle in ice-cold 100-l radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer 
(Sigma-Aldrich) with the Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set III 
(EMD Millipore) and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Lysates 
were centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 13,000 rpm, supernatants (70 l) 
were transferred to a fresh tube, and 25 l of 4× NuPAGE LDS 
Sample Buffer and 10 l of NuPAGE 10× Reducing Agent (Invitrogen) 
were added. After a brief spin down, samples were boiled for 10 min, 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 11
briefly spun down, and centrifuged at 4°C for 5 min at 13,000 rpm. 
Supernatant (80 l) was transferred to new tubes and stored at 
−80°C. Western blots were performed as described previously (27) 
using the following primary and secondary antibodies: mouse 
anti-p53 [1:1000; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (DSHB) 
Dmp53-H3], mouse anti-dpERK (1:1000; Sigma-Aldrich), mouse 
anti-syntaxin as loading control (1:1000; DSHB), and goat anti- 
mouse horseradish peroxidase secondary (1:10,000).
Larvae collected for RNA extraction were stored in 300-l 
RNAlater (Life Technologies). RNA extraction was performed using 
the RNeasy Plus Kit with the RNase-free DNase Set for on-column 
DNA digestion (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 
RNA concentration was measured using Qubit. For qPCR analysis, 
1 g of RNA was converted to complementary DNA (cDNA) using the 
High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (Life Technologies), and qPCR was 
performed using the PerfeCTa SYBR Green FastMix for IQ (VWR 
Scientific). A panel of four housekeeping genes (rpl32, cyp33, gapdh, 
and sdha) were first assayed to identify the best candidate, and cyp33 
was selected as providing the most robust and consistent results. 
qPCR data were analyzed using the ΔΔC(t) method (54).
Model imaging
Whole guts were dissected from third instar byn-GAL4 tubulin- 
GAL80ts UAS-GFP/UAS-transgene larvae that were induced at 25°C 
for 4 days. Control and experimental animals were fixed with 4% 
paraformaldehyde, washed, and mounted. Images were taken at 5× 
(low magnification) and 10× in Fig. 2. Quantification of the anterior 
portions of hindguts from drug-treated animals was performed with 
ImageJ software using images captured at 10× magnification.
Drug screening
Drugs in our custom focused FDA library were purchased individually 
as powder from the following commercial sources: Selleck Chem-
icals, LC Laboratories, Tocris Bioscience, and MedChemExpress. 
Drugs were dissolved in 100% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or water 
on the basis of the solubility information provided by the manufac-
turers. For each drug, the highest possible dose (based on solubility) 
that did not lead to detectable toxicity on wild-type animals was se-
lected for screening, and drugs were aliquoted into 384-well plates.
The library was screened at a single dose for each drug along 
with DMSO controls (eight replicates per condition) by diluting 
each drug in the library 1:1000, which brings the DMSO concentra-
tion in the food to 0.1%. Drug-food mixtures were made using an 
automated liquid handling workstation (PerkinElmer) by adding 
0.7 l of drug into round-bottom test tubes (12 mm by 75 mm; 
Sarstedt), followed by 700 l of semidefined Drosophila medium 
(recipe obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center) 
and mixing by pipetting.
After food was solidified, a mixture of experimental and control 
embryos (at a ratio of 1:2 based on expected Mendelian ratios) was 
aliquoted into each drug/food tube (15 l per tube). Embryo sus-
pensions were generated using the buffer that we designed to mini-
mize embryo clumping and settling (15% glycerol, 1% bovine serum 
albumin, and 0.1% Tween 20 in water). Embryos for drug screening 
were generated from the following cross in cages: w/Y; UAS-006.1; 
UAS agoRNAi UAS-apcRNAi/Stub-gal80-T X w UAS-dicer2; +; byn-gal4 
UAS-GFP tub-gal80ts/TM6, Hu, Tb. Embryos were obtained from 
each cage for four to five consecutive days by providing daily a fresh 
apple juice plate with yeast paste. Egg lays were performed at 22°C 
to minimize transgene expression during embryogenesis to prevent 
embryonic defects or lethality that could not potentially be rescued 
by drug feeding. After embryos were aliquoted, drug tubes were 
transferred to 25°C to induce transgene expression. After 2 weeks, 
the number of surviving experimental pupae (EP) was counted in 
each tube. Drugs that showed significantly higher numbers of experi-
mental survivors compared to vehicle controls (multiple Student’s 
t tests corrected for multiple comparisons using the Holm-Sidak 
method, PRISM software) were considered hits.
Drug combination screens were performed by combining trame-
tinib at its screening dose (1 M in the food) with each drug in the 
library and mixing with Drosophila medium (eight replicates for each 
combination). DMSO and trametinib alone served as controls. Drug 
combinations identified as candidate hits were retested in an indepen-
dent experiment by combining the screening dose of trametinib with 
three different doses of each partner drug (original screening dose 
and 10 and 1% of screening dose). Experimental and control pupae 
(EP and CP, respectively) were counted for each tube, and percentage of 
survival to pupal stage was calculated using the formula [(EP × 2/CP) × 100]. 
Statistical analysis was performed as described above.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/5/eaav6528/DC1
Fig. S1. Validation of patient’s personalized Drosophila model (see Materials and Methods for 
details).
Fig. S2. Validation of patient’s personalized Drosophila model and drug response from hindgut 
lysates (see Materials and Methods for details).
Table S1. Multi-hairpin cluster sequences for patient’s personalized model.
Table S2. Raw drug screening and testing data.
Table S3. Patient’s tumor measurements.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. H. Izzedine, O. Rixe, B. Billemont, A. Baumelou, G. Deray, Angiogenesis inhibitor 
therapies: Focus on kidney toxicity and hypertension. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 50, 203–218 
(2007).
 2. S. R. Hayman, N. Leung, J. P. Grande, V. D. Garovic, VEGF inhibition, hypertension, and 
renal toxicity. Curr. Oncol. Rep. 14, 285–294 (2012).
 3. M. Røed Skårderud, A. Polk, K. Kjeldgaard Vistisen, F. O. Larsen, D. L. Nielsen, Efficacy and 
safety of regorafenib in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: A systematic 
review. Cancer Treat. Rev. 62, 61–73 (2018).
 4. Y. Y. Chang, P. C. Lin, H. H. Lin, J. K. Lin, W. S. Chen, J. K. Jiang, S. H. Yang, W. Y. Liang, 
S. C. Chang, Mutation spectra of RAS gene family in colorectal cancer. Am. J. Surg. 212, 
537–544.e3 (2016).
 5. E. Valtorta, S. Misale, A. Sartore-Bianchi, I. D. Nagtegaal, F. Paraf, C. Lauricella, 
V. Dimartino, S. Hobor, B. Jacobs, C. Ercolani, S. Lamba, E. Scala, S. Veronese,  
P. Laurent-Puig, S. Siena, S. Tejpar, M. Mottolese, C. J. A. Punt, M. Gambacorta, A. Bardelli, 
F. Di Nicolantonio, KRAS gene amplification in colorectal cancer and impact on response 
to EGFR-targeted therapy. Int. J. Cancer 133, 1259–1265 (2013).
 6. R. P. Jones, P. A. Sutton, J. P. Evans, R. Clifford, A. McAvoy, J. Lewis, A. Rousseau, 
R. Mountford, D. McWhirter, H. Z. Malik, Specific mutations in KRAS codon 12 are 
associated with worse overall survival in patients with advanced and recurrent colorectal 
cancer. Br. J. Cancer 116, 923–929 (2017).
 7. G. Karagkounis, M. S. Torbenson, H. D. Daniel, N. S. Azad, L. A. Diaz Jr., R. C. Donehower, 
K. Hirose, N. Ahuja, T. M. Pawlik, M. A. Choti, Incidence and prognostic impact of KRAS 
and BRAF mutation in patients undergoing liver surgery for colorectal metastases. 
Cancer 119, 4137–4144 (2013).
 8. H. S. Kim, J. S. Heo, J. Lee, J. Y. Lee, M.-Y. Lee, S. H. Lim, W. Y. Lee, S. H. Kim, Y. A. Park, 
Y. B. Cho, S. H. Yun, S. T. Kim, J. O. Park, H. Y. Lim, Y. S. Choi, W. I. Kwon, H. C. Kim, Y. S. Park, 
The impact of KRAS mutations on prognosis in surgically resected colorectal cancer 
patients with liver and lung metastases: A retrospective analysis. BMC Cancer 16, 120 
(2016).
 9. A. L. Russo, D. R. Borger, J. Szymonifka, D. P. Ryan, J. Y. Wo, L. S. Blaszkowsky, E. L. Kwak, 
J. N. Allen, R. C. Wadlow, A. X. Zhu, J. E. Murphy, J. E. Faris, D. Dias-Santagata, K. M. Haigis, 
L. W. Ellisen, A. J. Iafrate, T. S. Hong, Mutational analysis and clinical correlation of 
metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer 120, 1482–1490 (2014).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 11
 10. Y. Umeda, T. Nagasaka, Y. Mori, H. Sadamori, D.-S. Sun, S. Shinoura, R. Yoshida, D. Satoh, 
D. Nobuoka, M. Utsumi, K. Yoshida, T. Yagi, T. Fujiwara, Poor prognosis of KRAS or BRAF 
mutant colorectal liver metastasis without microsatellite instability. J. Hepatobiliary 
Pancreat. Sci. 20, 223–233 (2013).
 11. H. J. N. Andreyev, A. R. Norman, D. Cunningham, J. Oates, B. R. Dix, B. J. Iacopetta, 
J. Young, T. Walsh, R. Ward, N. Hawkins, M. Beranek, P. Jandik, R. Benamouzig,  
E. Jullian, P. Laurent-Puig, S. Olschwang, O. Muller, I. Hoffmann, H. M. Rabes, C. Zietz, 
C. Troungos, C. Valavanis, S. T. Yuen, J. W. C. Ho, C. T. Croke, D. P. O’Donoghue, W. Giaretti, 
A. Rapallo, A. Russo, V. Bazan, M. Tanaka, K. Omura, T. Azuma, T. Ohkusa, T. Fujimori, 
Y. Ono, M. Pauly, C. Faber, R. Glaesener, A. F. P. M. . Goeij, J. W. Arends, S. N. Andersen, 
T. Lövig, J. Breivik, G. Gaudernack, O. P. F. Clausen, P. D. Angelis, G. I. Meling, 
T. O. Rognum, R. Smith, H. S. Goh, A. Font, R. Rosell, X. F. Sun, H. Zhang, J. Benhattar, 
L. Losi, J. Q. Lee, S. T. Wang, P. A. Clarke, S. Bell, P. Quirke, V. J. Bubb, J. Piris, 
N. R. Cruickshank, D. Morton, J. C. Fox, F. al-Mulla, N. Lees, C. N. Hall, D. Snary, 
K. Wilkinson, D. Dillon, J. Costa, V. E. Pricolo, S. D. Finkelstein, J. S. Thebo, A. J. Senagore, 
S. A. Halter, S. Wadler, S. Malik, K. Krtolica, N. Urosevic, Kirsten ras mutations in patients 
with colorectal cancer: the 'RASCAL II' study. Br. J. Cancer 85, 692–696 (2001).
 12. J. M. Ostrem, U. Peters, M. L. Sos, J. A. Wells, K. M. Shokat, K-Ras(G12C) inhibitors 
allosterically control GTP affinity and effector interactions. Nature 503, 548–551 (2013).
 13. S. M. Lim, K. D. Westover, S. B. Ficarro, R. A. Harrison, H. G. Choi, M. E. Pacold, M. Carrasco, 
J. Hunter, N. D. Kim, T. Xie, T. Sim, P. A. Jänne, M. Meyerson, J. A. Marto, J. R. Engen, 
N. S. Gray, Therapeutic targeting of oncogenic K-Ras by a covalent catalytic site inhibitor. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 53, 199–204 (2014).
 14. G. Zimmermann, B. Papke, S. Ismail, N. Vartak, A. Chandra, M. Hoffmann, S. A. Hahn, 
G. Triola, A. Wittinghofer, P. I. H. Bastiaens, H. Waldmann, Small molecule inhibition of the 
KRAS-PDE interaction impairs oncogenic KRAS signalling. Nature 497, 638–642 (2013).
 15. S. Misale, R. Yaeger, S. Hobor, E. Scala, M. Janakiraman, D. Liska, E. Valtorta, R. Schiavo, 
M. Buscarino, G. Siravegna, K. Bencardino, A. Cercek, C.-T. Chen, S. Veronese, C. Zanon, 
A. Sartore-Bianchi, M. Gambacorta, M. Gallicchio, E. Vakiani, V. Boscaro, E. Medico, M. Weiser, 
S. Siena, F. D. Nicolantonio, D. Solit, A. Bardelli, Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired 
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature 486, 532–536 (2012).
 16. R. Nazarian, H. Shi, Q. Wang, X. Kong, R. C. Koya, H. Lee, Z. Chen, M.-K. Lee, N. Attar, 
H. Sazegar, T. Chodon, S. F. Nelson, G. McArthur, J. A. Sosman, A. Ribas, R. S. Lo, 
Melanomas acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS upregulation. 
Nature 468, 973–977 (2010).
 17. A. G. Stephen, D. Esposito, R. K. Bagni, F. McCormick, Dragging ras back in the ring. 
Cancer Cell 25, 272–281 (2014).
 18. G. S. Falchook, K. D. Lewis, J. R. Infante, M. S. Gordon, N. J. Vogelzang, D. J. DeMarini, 
P. Sun, C. Moy, S. A. Szabo, L. T. Roadcap, V. G. Peddareddigari, P. F. Lebowitz, N. T. Le, 
H. A. Burris III, W. A. Messersmith, P. J. O’Dwyer, K. B. Kim, K. Flaherty, J. C. Bendell, 
R. Gonzalez, R. Kurzrock, L. A. Fecher, Activity of the oral MEK inhibitor trametinib in 
patients with advanced melanoma: A phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet Oncol. 13, 
782–789 (2012).
 19. J. R. Infante, L. A. Fecher, G. S. Falchook, S. Nallapareddy, M. S. Gordon, C. Becerra, 
D. J. DeMarini, D. S. Cox, Y. Xu, S. R. Morris, V. G. Peddareddigari, N. T. Le, L. Hart, 
J. C. Bendell, G. Eckhardt, R. Kurzrock, K. Flaherty, H. A. Burris III, W. A. Messersmith, Safety, 
pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and efficacy data for the oral MEK inhibitor 
trametinib: A phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet Oncol. 13, 773–781 (2012).
 20. M. S. Lee, T. L. Helms, N. Feng, J. Gay, Q. E. Chang, F. Tian, J. Y. Wu, C. Toniatti, 
T. P. Heffernan, G. Powis, L. N. Kwong, S. Kopetz, Efficacy of the combination of MEK and 
CDK4/6 inhibitors in vitro and in vivo in KRAS mutant colorectal cancer models. 
Oncotarget 7, 39595–39608 (2016).
 21. E. Martinelli, F. Morgillo, T. Troiani, F. Ciardiello, Cancer resistance to therapies against the 
EGFR-RAS-RAF pathway: The role of MEK. Cancer Treat. Rev. 53, 61–69 (2017).
 22. S. Benvenuti, A. Sartore-Bianchi, F. Di Nicolantonio, C. Zanon, M. Moroni, S. Veronese, 
S. Siena, A. Bardelli, Oncogenic activation of the RAS/RAF signaling pathway impairs the 
response of metastatic colorectal cancers to anti-epidermal growth factor receptor 
antibody therapies. Cancer Res. 67, 2643–2648 (2007).
 23. F. Di Nicolantonio, M. Martini, F. Molinari, A. Sartore-Bianchi, S. Arena, P. S. De Dosso, 
L. Mazzucchelli, M. Frattini, S. Siena, A. Bardelli, Wild-type BRAF is required for response 
to panitumumab or cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 
5705–5712 (2008).
 24. J. Gong, M. Cho, M. Fakih, RAS and BRAF in metastatic colorectal cancer management. 
J. Gastrointest. Oncol. 7, 687–704 (2016).
 25. A. Lièvre, J.-B. Bachet, D. L. Corre, V. Boige, B. Landi, J.-F. Emile, J.-F. Côté, G. Tomasic, 
C. Penna, M. Ducreux, P. Rougier, F. Penault-Llorca, P. Laurent-Puig, KRAS mutation status 
is predictive of response to cetuximab therapy in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 66, 
3992–3995 (2006).
 26. A. B. Benson III, A. P. Venook, M. M. Al-Hawary, L. Cederquist, Y.-J. Chen, K. K. Ciombor, 
S. Cohen, H. S. Cooper, D. Deming, P. F. Engstrom, I. Garrido-Laguna, J. L. Grem, 
A. Grothey, H. S. Hochster, S. Hoffe, S. Hunt, A. Kamel, N. Kirilcuk, S. Krishnamurthi, 
W. A. Messersmith, J. Meyerhardt, E. D. Miller, M. F. Mulcahy, J. D. Murphy, S. Nurkin, 
L. Saltz, S. Sharma, D. Shibata, J. M. Skibber, C. T. Sofocleous, E. M. Stoffel,  
E. Stotsky-Himelfarb, C. G. Willett, E. Wuthrick, K. M. Gregoryand, D. A. Freedman-Cass, 
NCCN Guidelines Insights: Colon Cancer, Version 2.2018. J. Natl. Compr. Canc. Netw. 16, 
359–369 (2018).
 27. E. Bangi, C. Murgia, A. G. S. Teague, O. J. Sansom, R. L. Cagan, Functional exploration of 
colorectal cancer genomes using Drosophila. Nat. Commun. 7, 13615 (2016).
 28. G. Colucci, V. Gebbia, G. Paoletti, F. Giuliani, M. Caruso, N. G. Cartenì, B. Agostara, 
G. Pezzella, L. Manzione, N. Borsellino, A. Misino, S. Romito, E. Durini, S. Cordio, M. D. Seri, 
M. Lopez, E. Maiello, Phase III randomized trial of FOLFIRI versus FOLFOX4 in the 
treatment of advanced colorectal cancer: A multicenter study of the Gruppo Oncologico 
Dell'Italia Meridionale. J. Clin. Oncol. 23, 4866–4875 (2005).
 29. T. Deng, L. Zhang, X.-j. Liu, J.-m. Xu, Y.-x. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Han, Y.-h. Li, Y. Ba, Bevacizumab 
plus irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFIRI) as the second-line therapy for 
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, a multicenter study. Med. Oncol. 30, 752 
(2013).
 30. B. J. Giantonio, P. J. Catalano, N. J. Meropol, P. J. O'Dwyer, E. P. Mitchell, S. R. Alberts, 
M. A. Schwartz, A. B. Benson III; Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200, 
Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX4) for 
previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer: Results from the Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group Study E3200. J. Clin. Oncol. 25, 1539–1544 (2007).
 31. C.-Y. Qu, Y. Zheng, M. Zhou, Y. Zhang, F. Shen, J. Cao, L.-M. Xu, Value of bevacizumab in 
treatment of colorectal cancer: A meta-analysis. World J. Gastroenterol. 21, 5072–5080 
(2015).
 32. L. B. Saltz, S. Clarke, E. Díaz-Rubio, W. Scheithauer, A. Figer, R. Wong, S. Koski, 
M. Lichinitser, T. S. Yang, F. Rivera, F. Couture, F. Sirzén, J. Cassidy, Bevacizumab in 
combination with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as first-line therapy in metastatic 
colorectal cancer: A randomized phase III study. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 2013–2019 (2008).
 33. Cancer Genome Atlas Network, Comprehensive molecular characterization of human 
colon and rectal cancer. Nature 487, 330–337 (2012).
 34. A. H. Brand, N. Perrimon, Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and 
generating dominant phenotypes. Development 118, 401–415 (1993).
 35. J.-Q. Ni, R. Zhou, B. Czech, L.-P. Liu, L. Holderbaum, D. Yang-Zhou, H.-S. Shim, R. Tao, 
D. Handler, P. Karpowicz, R. Binari, M. Booker, J. Brennecke, L. A. Perkins, G. J. Hannon, 
N. Perrimon, A genome-scale shRNA resource for transgenic RNAi in Drosophila.  
Nat. Methods 8, 405–407 (2011).
 36. D. R. Guay, Ibandronate: A new oral bisphosphonate for postmenopausal osteoporosis. 
Consult. Pharm. 20, 1036–1055 (2005).
 37. P. A. Konstantinopoulos, M. V. Karamouzis, A. G. Papavassiliou, Post-translational 
modifications and regulation of the RAS superfamily of GTPases as anticancer targets. 
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 6, 541–555 (2007).
 38. H. Mo, C. E. Elson, Studies of the isoprenoid-mediated inhibition of mevalonate synthesis 
applied to cancer chemotherapy and chemoprevention. Exp. Biol. Med. 229, 567–585 
(2004).
 39. W. W.-L. Wong, J. Dimitroulakos, M. D. Minden, L. Z. Penn, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors 
and the malignant cell: The statin family of drugs as triggers of tumor-specific apoptosis. 
Leukemia 16, 508–519 (2002).
 40. T. Yuen, A. Stachnik, J. Iqbal, M. Sgobba, Y. Gupta, P. Lu, G. Colaianni, Y. Ji, L. L. Zhu, 
S. M. Kim, J. Li, P. Liu, S. Izadmehr, J. Sangodkar, J. Bailey, Y. Latif, S. Mujtaba, S. Epstein, 
T. F. Davies, Z. Bian, A. Zallone, A. K. Aggarwal, S. Haider, M. I. New, L. Sun, G. Narla, 
M. Zaidi, Bisphosphonates inactivate human EGFRs to exert antitumor actions. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 17989–17994 (2014).
 41. A. Grothey, E. Van Cutsem, A. Sobrero, S. Siena, A. Falcone, M. Ychou, Y. Humblet, 
O. Bouché, L. Mineur, C. Barone, A. Adenis, J. Tabernero, T. Yoshino, H. J. Lenz, 
R. M. Goldberg, D. J. Sargent, F. Cihon, L. Cupit, A. Wagner, D. Laurent; CORRECT Study 
Group, Regorafenib monotherapy for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer 
(CORRECT): An international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. 
Lancet 381, 303–312 (2013).
 42. J. Li, S. Qin, R. Xu, T. C. Yau, B. Ma, H. Pan, J. Xu, Y. Bai, Y. Chi, L. Wang, K. H. Yeh, F. Bi, Y. Cheng, 
A. T. Le, J. K. Lin, T. Liu, D. Ma, C. Kappeler, J. Kalmus, T. W. Kim; CONCUR Investigators, 
Regorafenib plus best supportive care versus placebo plus best supportive care in Asian 
patients with previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer (CONCUR): A randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 16, 619–629 (2015).
 43. R. J. Mayer, E. Van Cutsem, A. Falcone, T. Yoshino, R. Garcia-Carbonero, N. Mizunuma, 
K. Yamazaki, Y. Shimada, J. Tabernero, Y. Komatsu, A. Sobrero, E. Boucher, M. Peeters, 
B. Tran, H. J. Lenz, A. Zaniboni, H. Hochster, J. M. Cleary, H. Prenen, F. Benedetti, 
H. Mizuguchi, L. Makris, M. Ito, A. Ohtsu; RECOURSE Study Group, Randomized trial of 
TAS-102 for refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 1909–1919 
(2015).
 44. S. M. Wilhelm, J. Dumas, L. Adnane, M. Lynch, C. A. Carter, G. Schütz, K.-H. Thierauch, 
D. Zopf, Regorafenib (BAY 73-4506): A new oral multikinase inhibitor of  
angiogenic, stromal and oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases with potent preclinical 
antitumor activity. Int. J. Cancer 129, 245–255 (2011).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Bangi et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav6528     22 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 11
 45. M. Pazianas, B. Abrahamsen, P. A. Eiken, R. Eastell, R. G. Russell, Reduced colon cancer 
incidence and mortality in postmenopausal women treated with an oral 
bisphosphonate—Danish National Register Based Cohort Study. Osteoporos. Int. 23, 
2693–2701 (2012).
 46. G. Rennert, M. Pinchev, H. S. Rennert, S. B. Gruber, Use of bisphosphonates and reduced 
risk of colorectal cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 1146–1150 (2011).
 47. A. V. Uzilov, W. Ding, M. Y. Fink, Y. Antipin, A. S. Brohl, C. Davis, C. Y. Lau, 
C. Pandya, H. Shah, Y. Kasai, J. Powell, M. Micchelli, R. Castellanos, Z. Zhang, 
M. Linderman, Y. Kinoshita, M. Zweig, K. Raustad, K. Cheung, D. Castillo, 
M. Wooten, I. Bourzgui, L. C. Newman, G. Deikus, B. Mathew, J. Zhu, 
B. S. Glicksberg, A. S. Moe, J. Liao, L. Edelmann, J. T. Dudley, R. G. Maki, A. Kasarskis, 
R. F. Holcombe, M. Mahajan, K. Hao, B. Reva, J. Longtine, D. Starcevic, R. Sebra, 
M. J. Donovan, S. Li, E. E. Schadt, R. Chen, Development and clinical application of 
an integrative genomic approach to personalized cancer therapy. Genome Med. 8, 
62 (2016).
 48. M. Kircher, D. M. Witten, P. Jain, B. J. O’Roak, G. M. Cooper, J. Shendure, A general 
framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants.  
Nat. Genet. 46, 310–315 (2014).
 49. X. Liu, C. Wu, C. Li, E. Boerwinkle, dbNSFP v3.0: A one-stop database of functional 
predictions and annotations for human nonsynonymous and splice-site SNVs.  
Hum. Mutat. 37, 235–241 (2016).
 50. A. V. Uzilov, K. C. Cheesman, M. Y. Fink, L. C. Newman, C. Pandya, Y. Lalazar,  
M. Hefti, M. Fowkes, G. Deikus, C. Y. Lau, A. S. Moe, Y. Kinoshita, Y. Kasai, M. Zweig, 
A. Gupta, D. Starcevic, M. Mahajan, E. E. Schadt, K. D. Post, M. J. Donovan,  
R. Sebra, R. Chen, E. B. Geer, Identification of a novel RASD1 somatic mutation in a 
USP8-mutated corticotroph adenoma. Cold Spring Harb. Mol. Case Stud. 3, a001602 
(2017).
 51. M. J. Donovan, A. Kotsianti, V. Bayer-Zubek, D. Verbel, M. Teverovskiy,  
C. Cordon-Cardo, J. Costa, F. A. Greco, J. D. Hainsworth, D. V. Parums, A systems 
pathology model for predicting overall survival in patients with refractory,  
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer treated with gefitinib. Eur. J. Cancer 45,  
1518–1526 (2009).
 52. J.-P. Vert, N. Foveau, C. Lajaunie, Y. Vandenbrouck, An accurate and interpretable model 
for siRNA efficacy prediction. BMC Bioinformatics 7, 520 (2006).
 53. J. Bischof, R. K. Maeda, M. Hediger, F. Karch, K. Basler, An optimized transgenesis system 
for Drosophila using germ-line-specific φC31 integrases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 
3312–3317 (2007).
 54. R. Sopko, M. Foos, A. Vinayagam, B. Zhai, R. Binari, Y. Hu, S. Randklev, L. A. Perkins, 
S. P. Gygi, N. Perrimon, Combining genetic perturbations and proteomics to examine 
kinase-phosphatase networks in Drosophila embryos. Dev. Cell 31, 114–127 (2014).
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the Cagan Laboratory for important discussions during the 
progression of the study and the Genomics Core Facility at the Icahn Institute and Department of 
Genetics and Genomic Sciences for technical support. Computational resources and staff expertise 
were provided by the Department of Scientific Computing at the Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai. We acknowledge support from the Novartis Patient Assistance Program. A patent 
application has been filed related to this work. Funding: This work was supported by funds from 
the Dean’s Office and by U54OD020353 from the NIH. Author contributions: E.B., P.S., C.H., N.G., 
W.J.Y., D.M., D.L., and R.L.C. were responsible for developing and screening the Drosophila models. 
E.B., A.V.U., A.G.T., Y.A., R.C., C.Y.L., R.S., E.W., M.D., E.E.S., and R.L.C. were responsible for the 
genomics and tissue analyses. C.A., I.S., H.R., A.S.M., P.T., A.B., M.S., S.K., K.Y., K.M., and M.R.P. were 
responsible for patient clinical interactions. E.B., C.A., K.M., M.R.P., and R.L.C. had the primary roles 
in writing the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data and accession numbers needed to 
evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary 
Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 7 October 2018
Accepted 12 April 2019
Published 22 May 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aav6528
Citation: E. Bangi, C. Ang, P. Smibert, A. V. Uzilov, A. G. Teague, Y. Antipin, R. Chen, C. Hecht, 
N. Gruszczynski, W. J. Yon, D. Malyshev, D. Laspina, I. Selkridge, H. Rainey, A. S. Moe, C. Y. Lau, 
P. Taik, E. Wilck, A. Bhardwaj, M. Sung, S. Kim, K. Yum, R. Sebra, M. Donovan, K. Misiukiewicz, 
E. E. Schadt, M. R. Posner, R. L. Cagan, A personalized platform identifies trametinib plus 
zoledronate for a patient with KRAS-mutant metastatic colorectal cancer. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav6528 (2019).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 metastatic colorectal cancer
A personalized platform identifies trametinib plus zoledronate for a patient with KRAS-mutant
Krzysztof Misiukiewicz, Eric E. Schadt, Marshall R. Posner and Ross L. Cagan
Chun Yee Lau, Patricia Taik, Eric Wilck, Aarti Bhardwaj, Max Sung, Sara Kim, Kendra Yum, Robert Sebra, Michael Donovan,
Hecht, Nelson Gruszczynski, Wesley J. Yon, Denis Malyshev, Denise Laspina, Isaiah Selkridge, Hope Rainey, Aye S. Moe, 
Erdem Bangi, Celina Ang, Peter Smibert, Andrew V. Uzilov, Alexander G. Teague, Yevgeniy Antipin, Rong Chen, Chana
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aav6528
 (5), eaav6528.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/5/eaav6528
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/05/20/5.5.eaav6528.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/5/eaav6528#BIBL
This article cites 54 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
