 The Copenhagen Consensus Conference 2016:
children, youth, and physical activity in schools
and during leisure time
Jens Bangsbo,1 Peter Krustrup,1,2 Joan Duda,3 Charles Hillman,4 Lars Bo Andersen,5,6
Maureen Weiss,7 Craig A Williams,8 Taru Lintunen,9 Ken Green,10
Peter Riis Hansen,11 Patti-Jean Naylor,12 Ingegerd Ericsson,13 Glen Nielsen,14
Karsten Froberg,15 Anna Bugge,15 Jesper Lundbye-Jensen,1 Jasper Schipperijn,15
Symeon Dagkas,16 Sine Agergaard,17 Jesper von Seelen,18 Charlotte Østergaard,19
Thomas Skovgaard,15 Henrik Busch,20 Anne-Marie Elbe1
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Peter Krustrup,
Department of Nutrition,
Exercise and Sports, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen
2100-Ø, Denmark;
pkrustrup@nexs.ku.dk
Accepted 10 May 2016
Published Online First
27 June 2016
To cite: Bangsbo J,
Krustrup P, Duda J, et al. Br
J Sports Med
2016;50:1177–1178.
ABSTRACT
From 4 to 7 April 2016, 24 researchers from 8 countries
and from a variety of academic disciplines gathered in
Snekkersten, Denmark, to reach evidence-based
consensus about physical activity in children and youth,
that is, individuals between 6 and 18 years. Physical
activity is an overarching term that consists of many
structured and unstructured forms within school and
out-of-school-time contexts, including organised sport,
physical education, outdoor recreation, motor skill
development programmes, recess, and active
transportation such as biking and walking. This
consensus statement presents the accord on the effects
of physical activity on children’s and youth’s fitness,
health, cognitive functioning, engagement, motivation,
psychological well-being and social inclusion, as well as
presenting educational and physical activity
implementation strategies. The consensus was obtained
through an iterative process that began with
presentation of the state-of-the art in each domain
followed by plenary and group discussions. Ultimately,
Consensus Conference participants reached agreement
on the 21-item consensus statement.
THEME 1: PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN CHILDREN
AND YOUTH: FITNESS AND HEALTH
▸ Cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness levels in
children and youth are strong predictors of
future cardiometabolic disease, such as coronary
artery disease and diabetes mellitus.
▸ Vigorous
exercise
has
a
marked
favourable
impact on cardiometabolic fitness and other car-
diovascular risk factors in children and youth.
▸ Frequent moderate-intensity and, to a lesser
extent, low-intensity exercise improves cardio-
metabolic fitness in children and youth.
▸ Physical activity is important in the treatment of
many chronic diseases in children and youth.
▸ Children and youth participating in leisure-time
sports have higher levels of physical activity,
fitness and overall cardiometabolic health, and
better musculoskeletal health when involved in
weight-bearing sports.
▸ Field-based testing of cardiorespiratory fitness
and waist/height scores, is a valuable tool for
preliminary
assessment
and
identification
of
children and youth with cardiometabolic risk.
THEME 2: PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN CHILDREN
AND YOUTH: COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING
▸ Physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness are
beneficial to brain structure, brain function and
cognition in children and youth.
▸ Physical activity before, during and after school
promotes scholastic performance in children
and youth.
▸ A single session of moderate physical activity
has an acute benefit to brain function, cognition
and scholastic performance in children and
youth.
▸ Mastery of fundamental movement skills is
beneficial to cognition and scholastic perform-
ance in children and youth.
▸ Time taken away from academic lessons in
favour of physical activity has been shown to
not come at the cost of scholastic performance
in children and youth.
THEME 3: PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN CHILDREN
AND YOUTH: ENGAGEMENT, MOTIVATION,
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING
▸ Engagement in physical activity has the potential
to positively influence psychological and social
outcomes for children and youth, such as self-
esteem and relationships with peers, parents and
coaches.
▸ An autonomy supportive, mastery focused and
caring/socially
supportive
environment,
posi-
tively influences children’s and youths’ self-
determined motivation, physical activity behav-
iour and holistic well-being.
▸ Close friendships and peer group acceptance
in physical activity are positively related to
perceived
competence,
intrinsic
motivation
and participation behaviour in children and
youth.
▸ Parental attitudes and behaviours are strongly
related
to
children’s
and
youths’
self-
perceptions, motivation and physical activity.
▸ Systematic and deliberate training enables tea-
chers and coaches to create a positive motiva-
tional environment for children and youth.
Bangsbo J, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1177–1178. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096325
1177
Consensus statement
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096325 on 27 June 2016. Downloaded from 
 ▸ Physical
activity-based
positive youth
development
pro-
grammes that have an intentional curriculum and deliberate
training are effective at promoting life skills (eg, interper-
sonal, self-regulation skills) and core values (eg, respect and
social responsibility) in children and youth.
THEME 4: PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH:
SOCIAL INCLUSION AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES
▸ Participation of children and youth in physical activity and
sport is influenced by socioeconomic status, gender, ethnicity,
sexual orientation, skill level and disabilities.
▸ Culturally
and
contextually
relevant
physical
activity
opportunities help to recognise and account for the diverse
lives of children and youth, and to promote social inclusion.
▸ Social inclusion can be promoted by providing equal access
to opportunities within physical activity and sports settings
regardless of children and young people’s social, cultural,
physical and demographic characteristics.
▸ Whole school approaches and the provision of physical
activity-conducive environments such as bike lanes, parks
and playgrounds, are both effective strategies for providing
equitable access to, and enhancing physical activity for, chil-
dren and youth.
Author affiliations
1Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports (NEXS), University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark
2Sport and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
3School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
4Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois, Urbana,
Illinois, USA
5Faculty of Teacher Education and Sport, Sogn and Fjordane University Colleage,
Sogndal, Norway
6Department of Exercise Epidemiology, Center of Research in Childhood Health,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
7Department of Kinesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
8Children’s Health and Exercise Research Centre, Sport and Health Sciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
9Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland
10University of Chester, Chester, UK
11Department of Cardiology, Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark
12School of Exercise Science, Physical and Heal, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada
13Sport Sciences, Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden
14Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Copenhagen N, Denmark
15Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
16Health Sport and Biosciences, London, UK
17Department of Public Health, Section for Sports Science, Aarhus Universitet,
Aarhus, Denmark
18Department for Research and Development, UC Syddanmark, Esbjerg, Denmark
19Institute of School and Learning, Metropolitan University College, Frederiksberg,
Denmark
20Metropolitan University College, Copenhagen N, Denmark
Twitter Follow Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports (NEXS), Copenhagen
University at @NEXSKU Symeon Dagkas at @symeondagkas Joan Duda at
@JoanDuda and Jesper von Seelen at @jespervonseelen
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
1178
Bangsbo J, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1177–1178. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-096325
Consensus statement
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096325 on 27 June 2016. Downloaded from 
