 INTRODUCTION
There is an increasing demand for UK 
primary care services, with overall clinical 
workload increasing by 16% between 2007 
and 2014.1 General practices have struggled 
to meet this challenge and difficulties with 
access have become a major source of 
patient dissatisfaction and practitioner 
stress.2,3 Primary care providers have 
been encouraged to develop new, flexible 
models of patient access, including online 
consultation.4 
It has been suggested that online 
consultations have the potential to reduce 
the burden of time for patients and staff, 
and lead to more focused, time-saving face-
to-face consultations.5,6 The technology has 
also been identified as offering improved 
access to marginalised groups who may 
find the usual access routes challenging.7 
Current evidence indicates a low level of 
use, with around 6% of practices having 
used some form of electronic consultation 
(e-consultation) and a further 20% having 
plans to do so in the future.8 The Royal College 
of General Practitioners has highlighted 
limited research evidence around the use 
of online consultations,9 and a systematic 
review did not identify any substantive 
benefits.10 The technology supporting online 
consultations has advanced in recent years 
and made inroads into primary care but, to 
date, the experience of using such systems 
has yet to be fully evaluated. 
There 
are 
currently 
two 
main 
e-consultation systems being used in 
primary care in the UK NHS: askmyGP 
(http://askmygp.uk/) and eConsult (https://
www.emishealth.com/products/econsult/ 
[previously known as WebGP]).6 This study 
focuses on eConsult, an online platform 
developed by the Hurley Group, now 
delivered by EMIS Health, which aims to 
give patients access to advice and care via 
their GP practice website.6 Patients can 
use a symptom checker (self-help guides 
and videos about common conditions), 
find pharmacy advice, link to the NHS 111 
service (a free phoneline for medical advice 
in the UK), perform an administrative service 
(such as to request a repeat prescription), 
or submit an e-consultation. To submit 
an e-consultation, patients complete an 
online form to provide a structured medical 
account of their condition to a clinician. If the 
patient is identified as in need of immediate 
medical attention (through identification of 
red-flag symptoms) while completing the 
form, they are directed to relevant services. 
There are no financial charges for patients 
using the system. 
Thirty-six practices from a regional 
consortium of GP practices based in the 
West of England participated in a 15-month 
pilot of eConsult, the preferred system 
of the practices involved in the pilot and 
Research
J Banks, PhD, research fellow; M Farr, PhD, 
senior research associate; H Edwards, MSc, 
senior research associate; J Horwood, PhD, 
senior research fellow, National Institute for 
Health Research Collaboration for Leadership 
in Applied Health Research and Care (NIHR 
CLAHRC) West, University Hospitals Bristol 
NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol. C Salisbury, MD, 
professor of primary heath care; K Northstone, 
PhD, senior lecturer in medical statistics, 
Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical 
School, University of Bristol, Bristol. E Bernard, 
MSc, PGDip, BA, business services manager, One 
Care (BNSSG) Ltd, Whitchurch, Bristol.
Address for correspondence
Jon Banks, NIHR CLAHRC West, Population 
Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, 
University of Bristol, 9th Floor, Whitefriars, Lewins 
Mead, Bristol, BS1 2NT, UK.
E-mail: Jon.Banks@Bristol.ac.uk
Submitted: 25 May 2017; Editor’s response: 
19 June 2017; final acceptance: 17 August 2017.
©British Journal of General Practice
This is the full-length article (published online 
7 Nov 2017) of an abridged version published in 
print. Cite this version as: Br J Gen Pract 2017;  
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp17X693509
Jon Banks, Michelle Farr, Chris Salisbury, Elly Bernard, Kate Northstone, Hannah Edwards  
and Jeremy Horwood 
Use of an electronic consultation system in 
primary care: 
a qualitative interview study
Abstract
Background
The level of demand on primary care continues 
to increase. Electronic or e-consultations 
enable patients to consult their GP online and 
have been promoted as having potential to 
improve access and efficiency. 
Aim
To evaluate whether an e-consultation system 
improves the ability of practice staff to manage 
workload and access.
Design and setting
A qualitative interview study in general 
practices in the West of England that piloted 
an e-consultation system for 15 months during 
2015 and 2016. 
Method
Practices were purposefully sampled by 
location and level of e-consultation use. 
Clinical, administrative, and management staff 
were recruited at each practice. Interviews were 
transcribed and analysed thematically. 
Results
Twenty-three interviews were carried out across 
six general practices. Routine e-consultations 
offered benefits for the practice because they 
could be completed without direct contact 
between GP and patient. However, most 
e-consultations resulted in GPs needing to 
follow up with a telephone or face-to-face 
appointment because the e-consultation did not 
contain sufficient information to inform clinical 
decision making. This was perceived as adding 
to the workload and providing some patients 
with an alternative route into the appointment 
system. Although this was seen as offering 
some patient benefit, there appeared to be 
fewer benefits for the practices. 
Conclusion
The experiences of the practices in this study 
demonstrate that the technology, in its current 
form, fell short of providing an effective platform 
for clinicians to consult with patients and did not 
justify their financial investment in the system. 
The study also highlights the challenges of 
remote consultations, which lack the facility for 
real time interactions.
Keywords
electronic mail; online consultation system; 
online systems; primary health care; qualitative 
research; remote consultation.
e1  British Journal of General Practice, January 2018
 thus the focus of this evaluation. GP 
practices received the eConsult software 
free of charge during this pilot, and did 
not receive any other reimbursement for 
conducting e-consultations (as GPs in the 
UK are paid predominantly by capitation 
and not per consultation). Overall, there 
were an average of 18 e-consultations 
per month at each of the practices and 
a comprehensive quantitative analysis 
is published separately.11 A qualitative 
evaluation was undertaken to investigate the 
views and experience of practice staff using 
e-consultations and the perceived impact on 
managing patient access and care. 
METHOD
Sampling and interviews 
A range of practices was recruited as study 
sites. These were purposively sampled 
by: practice population measures of 
deprivation,12 proportion of ethnic minority 
population in practice area,12 location (rural 
and urban), and level of e-consultation 
use (high, medium, and low, calculated by 
dividing the number of e-consultations by 
number of days the system was live). 
Semi-structured 
interviews 
were 
conducted with a range of practice staff at 
each site. Practice staff, including reception 
and administrative staff, practice managers, 
and GPs, were purposefully sampled via 
the practice manager who identified and 
contacted staff who were involved in the 
implementation and/or day-to-day use 
of the system. All participants gave full 
informed consent. 
Researchers used an interview topic 
guide that explored how staff worked with 
the e-consultation system, clinical issues 
arising, and acceptability and effectiveness. 
Interviews were conducted face to face 
or by telephone and lasted between 10 
and 40 minutes. Sampling was continual 
until no new themes emerged from the 
interviews by the end of data collection.13
Data analysis 
Interviews were audiorecorded, transcribed, 
anonymised, checked for accuracy, and 
then imported into NVivo (version 10) 
qualitative data analysis software. 
All data were scrutinised using inductive 
thematic analysis to identify and analyse 
patterns and themes.14,15 First, the 
interview transcripts were individually read 
and re-read to gain familiarity with the 
data and initial ideas noted. From this, 
an overarching coding framework was 
developed, informed by the interview 
topic guide. This was developed with 
inductive sub-codes, generated by line-
by-line analysis that provided insight into 
the participants’ behaviours, views, and 
understanding of their experiences. The 
data were scrutinised for differences 
and similarities within themes across 
interviews, seeking disconfirming as well as 
confirming cases. To enhance analysis and 
enable team discussion and interpretation, 
two researchers independently coded 
a subset of transcripts to inform the 
development of the coding framework. Any 
discrepancies were discussed to achieve a 
coding consensus and maximise rigour
.
RESULTS
Six practices were recruited to the study 
(Table 1) and 23 staff members agreed to 
be interviewed (Table 2). These practices 
introduced eConsult between August 
2015 and January 2016. Interviews were 
undertaken between June 2016 and August 
2016 when practices had been using 
eConsult for a minimum of 5 months and 
were still using the system. 
There was variation in how practices 
incorporated e-consultations into their 
workflow but there were core procedures 
common to all practices. Usually, on the 
morning of a working day (Monday to 
Friday), a member of staff would retrieve 
all the e-consultations that had arrived 
since the previous working day. These 
were either dealt with electronically by 
exporting them into the relevant electronic 
patient record and assigning them to a 
GP appointment slot for review, or they 
were manually printed out and stored in 
a folder for designated GPs. GPs would 
decide whether patients needed a face-to-
face appointment, a telephone consultation, 
or whether advice, a prescription, or 
information could be relayed to them. These 
How this fits in
Electronic consultations in primary care 
have been identified by UK policymakers as 
a means of easing pressure on practices 
and improving patient access, but there is 
very limited research on whether they are 
able to deliver such improvements. This 
qualitative research study examined the 
experiences of practices that piloted the 
use of an e-consultation system. A number 
of challenges were associated with the 
technology, including increased workload, 
difficulties in clinical decision making, and 
administrative problems generated by a 
lack of system integration. This article 
discusses the potential changes needed 
to facilitate future development and use of 
such systems.
British Journal of General Practice, January 2018  e2
 follow-on actions varied between practices 
but they often involved administration team 
members who contacted the patient by 
telephone either to arrange an appointment 
or to relay messages. Practices were obliged 
to respond to a patient’s e-consultation 
within 1 working day. The system did have an 
option to respond to patients electronically, 
but at the time of data collection it was not 
easy to incorporate this within the practice 
operating systems, and it was not used 
substantively by participating practices. 
Therefore e-consultations were not normally 
conducted as a two-way online-based 
interaction between GPs and patients. 
Three key themes emerged from the 
interviews: the impact of the system on 
clinical decision making, the impact of the 
system on workload, and staff perceptions 
of patients’ use of e-consultations. The 
quotes described below are differentiated 
by clinician (CN) and administration staff 
(AM). The nurse practitioner is included in 
the clinician group with the GPs to ensure 
anonymity.
Impact on clinical decision making 
E-consultations were challenging for 
GPs, with the asynchronous nature of the 
assessment meaning they were unable to 
probe for further information. They were 
limited to the textual information provided 
by the patient along with background 
information contained in the patient record 
on the practice system: 
‘It depends probably on your general 
confidence overall of doing anything without 
seeing the patient face to face … medicine 
isn’t completely a science. It’s also an art in 
terms of you reading body language, what 
other things are going on in someone’s … 
you do lose that nuance which sometimes 
helps you make a decision.’ (CN07) 
GP confidence or ability to process 
e-consultations without seeing, or talking 
to, a patient varied but they consistently 
identified the type of consultation or enquiry 
as being key. For patients presenting with a 
complex or new set of symptoms clinicians 
usually felt the need to talk to the patient 
directly: 
‘When someone says, “I have felt unwell 
for 3 weeks with headache, dizziness, limb 
aches, vision’s blurred” it’s just impossible to 
actually disentangle that with an e-consult, 
you’ve got to see them.’ (CN17) 
GPs often struggled to identify a patient’s 
key concern or reason for consulting based 
on the information in the e-consultation form:
‘It’s difficult to know what was expected 
from it … whether they’re expecting you to 
ring them or what they wanted but, yeah, 
as we’ve got used to it, it seems to be … 
sounds like they need to get a phone call 
from somebody.’ (CN06)
Another key factor that influenced clinical 
decision making was the level of detail 
and the quality of information available to 
GPs on the e-consultation form. Clinical 
staff described a wide variability on the 
e-consultations they examined: 
‘Generally, they are quite good at explaining 
what the problem is and in some ways it’s 
quite clear and concise.’ (CN13)
‘We get so many spurious things coming 
through that you just think, “How on earth 
do you think that a GP could have dealt with 
that reading it?”’ (AM03)
Although initial clinical decision making 
took place remotely and asynchronically, 
GPs did not report feeling a greater risk 
Table 2. Study interviewees by practice and role (n = 23)
 
Practice 
Practice 
Practice 
Practice 
Practice 
Practice 
 
Staff role 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Total
GP 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
10
Nurse practitioner 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1
Admin/reception/IT manager 
1 
2a 
1 
1 
0 
1 
6
Practice manager 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6
aUndertaken as a joint interview.
Table 1. Practice characteristics 
Practice 
 
Ethnic minority % 
eConsult use 
Index of Multiple 
number 
Area 
populationa 
per dayb 
Deprivation decilec
Practice 1 
Urban 
17.5–20.0 
2.9 
5
Practice 2 
Rural 
0.0–2.5 
0.9 
10
Practice 3 
Urban 
35.0–37.5 
1.6 
1
Practice 4 
Urban 
7.5–10.0 
0.2 
1
Practice 5 
Urban 
5.0–7.5 
0.7 
3
Practice 6 
Urban 
10.0–12.5 
0.8 
8
aEthnic minority data are estimated proportion of non-white population at each GP practice (presented in 2.5% 
bands to preserve anonymity). bCalculated by dividing the number of e-consultations recorded by the number 
of days live prior to commencement of the study. cGP practice levels of deprivation based on Index of Multiple 
Deprivation and grouped by decile (1 = most deprived, 10 = least deprived). Deprivation and ethnic minority data 
from National General Practice Profiles (Public Health England).12
e3  British Journal of General Practice, January 2018
 burden. If there was any doubt, they did not 
tend to ‘force’ themselves into providing 
advice or making a decision. Instead 
they would telephone the patient or task 
the administration team to arrange an 
appointment:
‘If you have any doubts about what’s going 
on or you need to review, you know you need 
that proximity to actually “Well I need to see 
you”, then you just get them in.’ (CN13)
Clinicians felt happy to deal with an 
e-consultation without creating a further 
appointment for what were considered 
straightforward clinical queries such as 
slight changes in medication for an ongoing 
issue (for example, changes in blood 
pressure tablets following changes in blood 
pressure): 
‘So to me, it [e-consultation] favours people 
who have some experience in their condition 
and know what sort of treatment they’re 
looking for, or maybe it favours people who 
just want a quick bit of advice from a doctor 
… it feels like it’s an easy way to get advice 
from a doctor without having to go through 
the appointment system and booking an 
appointment.’ (CN15)
They also felt comfortable processing 
some issues via the administration team, 
including prescription queries, test results, 
and fit notes, without direct contact with 
the patient. 
Impact on workload 
The 
Hurley 
Group 
had 
promoted 
e-consultations on the basis that it could 
reduce face-to-face and telephone contact 
with GPs. This proved to be a strong motivator 
for practices that felt overstretched and 
under pressure for appointments. It also 
resonated with practices that considered 
themselves to be innovative: 
‘I think it fitted in quite nicely with our ethos 
of trying to move work away from GPs … 
we thought hopefully this will give another 
avenue in for patients that GPs in a 5-minute 
appointment can bat away, and that we can 
get rid of the easy stuff and not have to deal 
with face to face. And that worked in the way 
that our practice works, which is all about 
the multidisciplinary workforce and moving 
work away from GPs and towards other 
things. So in terms of our business strategy 
it fitted in really well.’ (AM03)
The 
perceived 
impact 
of 
the 
e-consultation platform on GP practice 
workload varied. Many clinical staff felt that 
most e-consultations required the patient 
to be telephoned and/or seen before clinical 
advice could be given. Rather than save 
time, it added a stage to the workflow and 
therefore increased practice workload: 
‘One of the things that we’ve found is that 
often a lot of the EGP [e-consultation] 
appointments … So, you know, if you have 
two or three a day then all three would be 
needing an appointment, so then actually 
it hasn’t saved time … From the clinician’s 
point of view, it’s still generated the same 
sort of things. It’s just been an extra step to 
go through.’ (CN05)
E-consultations could save clinician 
time when they were actioned without 
direct contact between GP and patient. 
As described above, these would typically 
be consultations for clinical administrative 
issues (such as fit notes) or straightforward 
clinical enquiries where a GP could assess 
the e-consultation and direct administration 
staff to follow up and complete the 
consultation using their instructions: 
‘For somebody saying, “I came in 2 days 
ago, was told to leave a urine test, I’ve still 
got symptoms. You know, what does the 
doctor think?” Then, I can just say, “Actually, 
I’ve looked up the result. It showed a wee 
infection. There are some antibiotics at 
the desk. Please tell them that if they start 
vomiting, or having more of a temperature, 
or the antibiotics aren’t working, that they 
should call me back.” Then that’s also 
saved me a phone call, and it’s saved, it’s 
saved the patient even having to come 
anywhere near here.’ (CN22)
There were subtle perceived benefits in 
the e-consultation process, even when a 
face-to-face or telephone consultation was 
generated. A number of GPs felt that having 
the clinical issue documented before 
the appointment gave the consultation 
an advanced starting point. This could 
contribute to some e-consultations leading 
to a more focused and quicker consultation: 
‘The agenda’s already set isn’t it? So you 
say, “Oh you’ve come about this, this is what 
you mentioned” and I have found that with 
those they don’t then tend to bring in their 
list because they’re coming about whatever 
it was they put on the e-consult thing, so 
yeah, possibly they’re a bit more focused.’ 
(CN16) 
There 
was 
a 
perception 
that 
British Journal of General Practice, January 2018  e4
 e-consultations could be changing the 
consultation threshold with patients more 
likely to complete an e-consultation for 
issues that may not have been raised 
through the usual appointment system. 
This led to a change and possible increase 
in the workload. This was seen as a different 
method of access, which brought with it a 
different type of enquiry:
‘It’s very easy to access and for some 
patients they may not have brought that 
particular niggle at all because actually 
they sort of thought it, we’re not sure, we 
need this, but because there is this way 
of e-consulting, then it is another way of 
coming in to consult with us.’ (CN07)
Despite the benefits identified, the 
overall feeling from practices was that 
e-consultations did not save time; the 
system generated work by adding another 
stage in the workflow for GPs and 
administration staff.
Staff perceptions of patients’ use of 
e-consultations
Practice staff highlighted tension between 
their expectations of how e-consultations 
should be used and their perception of how 
they were being used by patients:
‘I think it has to be used appropriately by 
patients and it also has to be, we have to 
use it for our good as well, it has to be a 
mutual thing for it to work. I think that’s the 
difficulty, because I think the, there can be 
a mismatch between what patients feel the 
process can be used for, what it should be 
used for, and versus actually what it is being 
used for
.’ (CN18)
Perhaps the biggest frustration expressed 
by practice staff was in receiving an 
e-consultation in cases where clinicians felt 
it was clear that a face-to-face consultation 
was necessary. This type of e-consultation 
came to represent a different means of 
accessing a face-to-face or telephone 
appointment. E-consultations require a 
response from the practice by the end of 
the next working day — if it was clear to a 
GP that a patient needed a face-to-face or 
telephone consultation, this was arranged 
by the administrative team and was 
sometimes perceived as patients ‘gaming’ 
the system. Staff felt that patients could 
get an appointment quicker via eConsult 
without having the challenge of getting 
through on the telephone because it then 
became the responsibility of the practice 
to contact the patient. Thus, patients were 
seen as having quicker and easier access 
to the appointment system and potentially 
using it inappropriately for this purpose: 
‘[e-consultation patients] are brought in 
more urgently than sometimes they need 
to be.’ (CN17) 
‘I think that there are a few who are using 
it because they can’t get appointments, 
which, you know, it’s pretty obvious that 
they’re going to need to see someone. You 
know, “I’ve got this shoulder pain. It’s just 
not getting better
.” What am I going to say 
on the webGP thing? So, reading between 
the lines, what they’re wanting is us to ring 
them back with an appointment. But I can’t 
blame them for that. It’s frustrating if you 
can’t get an appointment.’ (CN22)
‘But because all it is, is a quick way into 
the appointment system or a way into the 
appointment system. So it’s not batting off 
what we thought it would.’ (AM03)
There was a feeling that if used in this 
way the overall outcome could be to reduce 
pressure on practice telephone systems at 
times of peak demand for appointments 
such as Monday mornings:
‘If it frees up telephone lines, then that 
means they’re [patients] going to get 
through sooner
.’ (CN22)
There was a widespread perception 
among participants that, although the 
e-consultation system may not have 
delivered the expected benefits to practice 
workload, it had proved valuable to those 
patients who used it:
‘We’ve got a high number of commuters 
that are out before we open in a morning at 
work and don’t get back until after we close, 
they can sit in when they get home and ping 
you off a e-consult. You see them coming 
through at 9, 10, 11 o’clock at night or over 
a weekend. You know it can fit in around 
their lifestyles so there is a, I think there is a 
demand and it’s welcomed.’ (AM10)
Practices also perceived other patient 
benefits around the ability that patients 
have to articulate their concerns with less 
fear of embarrassment:
‘The feedback from patients I found really 
positive. I think they’ve really, you know, 
found it; I think they like it and a couple 
of them crystallise it around saying that 
it was a bit of an embarrassing problem 
e5  British Journal of General Practice, January 2018
 and this almost allowed me to sort of hide 
behind. I haven’t got to have a whites of the 
eyes conversation with my GP. I can put 
it in an e-mail and it feels very detached 
when I send it off and then I get the answer 
or result back without having to sort of 
embarrass myself so that’s worked well.’ 
(AM10)
The recognition of the value to patients 
was juxtaposed against the system’s 
shortcomings for practices and created 
potential dilemmas regarding the future of 
the system. Once beyond the pilot period, 
practices would have to pay to continue 
using the system and, although the financial 
cost to the practice was a key factor, the 
staff members interviewed did consider the 
benefits that it brought both patients and 
the practice:
‘I would like it from a patient experience, if 
nothing else, because I think it’s good that 
people can go online at any hour of the day, 
register a worry with a doctor
.’ (AM23).
‘I think the principle of it is brilliant. We just 
need to engage our patients and work out 
a way because if not we won’t be able to 
afford to pay for it.’ (AM12)
DISCUSSION
Summary
For the practices in this study the eConsult 
platform did not deliver substantial savings 
in GP contact time to justify financial 
investment in the system. Although positive 
elements were identified, these were minor 
in comparison with a perceived increase in 
workload and no improvements in freeing up 
GP time overall. Using the system presented 
challenges for GPs because they initially 
had to work with textual information and 
lacked direct interaction with the patient. 
The one-way patient written communication 
reduced the ability for clinical decision 
making, and further direct contact with the 
patient (via telephone or face to face) was 
often needed to facilitate adequate clinical 
assessment. GPs effectively deferred many 
e-consultations to face-to-face or telephone 
consultations. This links directly to another 
key finding: practice staff perceived that 
some patients were using e-consultations 
as an easier way to get an appointment 
and bypass the normal telephone booking 
system. If practice staff are, in effect, taking 
triage decisions rather than substantive 
clinical decisions, the e-consultation system 
may be vulnerable to being seen as a route 
to an appointment rather than a means of 
undertaking a clinical consultation. 
Practices did recognise benefits when 
an e-consultation could be processed 
without a further appointment, and these 
were reliant on particular types of enquiry, 
typically clinical administrative and routine 
enquiries about longstanding conditions.
It is important to highlight that this study’s 
results provide the practice perspective, 
which focused on workload impact. 
However, staff also recognised benefits 
to patients including the ability to access 
the system at any time, avoidance of the 
busy telephone system, and an opportunity 
to raise issues they may not have been 
comfortable raising face to face.
Strengths and limitations 
The study provides a novel and in-depth 
insight into the experiences and challenges 
of using e-consultations in primary care from 
a range of staff involved in using the system. 
Practices were chosen to ensure that a range 
of patient populations were included, as well 
as those with high and low e-consultation 
use. The study provides evidence at a time 
when the drive to expand e-consultations in 
primary care has been given fresh impetus 
and support by policymakers.16 It has also 
been undertaken on one of the two systems 
that have gained traction in UK primary care, 
and the results are therefore very relevant to 
practices considering implementation. 
However, this study only evaluates one 
system, and the limitations may not apply to 
other e-consultation systems. It is important 
to note that this evaluation took place during 
the pilot phase of implementing the system 
and captured issues related to its initial 
use. Because practices were given the 
system free of charge, it is possible that 
their implementation strategy and use of 
the system may have been different had 
they paid for it; having not made financial 
investment, they may have lacked motivation 
to increase uptake and engagement with the 
system. Nevertheless, the results highlight 
issues and challenges that arguably apply 
across asynchronous consultations, in 
particular, the difficulties of making clinical 
decisions with limited information leading to 
more traditional types of consultation and 
the resultant impact on workload. 
Comparison with existing literature 
There are few published studies about the 
use of e-consultations in primary care. A 
Cochrane review of e-mail consultations 
in clinical practice identified fewer than 10 
randomised controlled trials and was unable 
to make any substantive recommendations.10 
Brant et al8 investigated the use of 
alternatives to face-to-face consultations in 
British Journal of General Practice, January 2018  e6
 Funding
This research is part-funded by the One 
Care Consortium and the National Institute 
for Health Research Collaboration for 
Leadership in Applied Health Research and 
Care (NIHR CLAHRC) West at University 
Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust. The 
views expressed are those of the authors 
and not necessarily those of the NHS, the 
NIHR, or the Department of Health. 
Ethical approval
The study was granted ethical approval by 
the Faculty of Health Sciences Research 
Ethics Committee, University of Bristol 
(reference 32961). Approval to conduct 
the research on NHS sites was given by 
the Health Research Authority (reference 
204925). 
Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed.
Competing interests 
Elly Bernard is employed by One Care, 
which part-funded the research. 
Open access
This article is Open Access: CC BY-NC 
4.0 licence (http://creativecommons.org/
licences/by-nc/4.0/).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank practice staff for 
participating in interviews and Samantha 
Hacker from the One Care Consortium for 
assisting with recruitment of practices. The 
authors are also grateful to the reviewers of 
this article for their helpful and considered 
comments.
Discuss this article
Contribute and read comments about this 
article: bjgp.org/letters
primary care and found a gulf between the 
rhetoric of policymakers promoting digital 
consultation and GPs, who were much more 
sceptical about the benefits of technology. 
An earlier study exploring the use of e-mail 
between patients and GPs highlighted how 
the use of e-mail for clinical communication 
was not only often triggered by situational 
need and convenience but also took place 
in an ad hoc, unstructured, and unregulated 
way.17 The e-consultation platform in the 
current study attempts to overcome the 
latter factors by providing a secure platform 
with clear regulatory boundaries, but the 
convenience that the GPs highlighted in 
the study by Atherton et al17 was not a 
significant feature of the e-consultation 
system examined in this study. Issues 
with lack of system integration have been 
highlighted previously,18 and were also 
present in this study, where e-consultations 
had to be printed for clinicians or electronic 
files had to be attached to the patient record. 
A pair of studies that looked at the 
perspectives of GPs and practice managers 
both highlighted a potential interest in using 
digital communication but with limitations, 
most notably from GPs who favoured e-mail 
communication for administrative and 
less complex clinical tasks.19,20 This finds 
resonance with GPs in the current study 
who favoured e-consultation for specific 
types of consultation. 
It is worth noting that many of the issues 
that this study highlights, particularly 
around clinical decision making without 
the aid of visual assessment, can be 
found in the early literature on the use of 
telephone consultations in primary care.21,22 
Now telephone consultations have become 
normalised in primary care, although their 
impact on workload and access continues 
to be a source of debate.1 
Implications for practice
The current drive from the UK government 
is to improve access to primary care and to 
use technology as a key element to support 
this.16,23 Perhaps the fundamental issues 
highlighted by this study are the challenges 
in not only creating an e-consultation 
system that brings with it the flexibility 
and convenience offered by other aspects 
of electronic communication in modern 
life, such as online banking, but also 
incorporates safeguards for clinician and 
patient safety. In its current form, it is 
arguable whether the e-consultations in 
this study could be truly classified as a tool 
of electronic communication; as once with 
the clinical staff communications reverted 
to a more traditional form, with responses 
being mainly facilitated via telephone. To 
some extent this could be seen as an 
outcome of poor system integration, with 
the e-consultation platform sitting outside 
the practice information technology system 
and relying on staff manually importing 
e-consultation details into the electronic 
patient record in practice systems. However, 
the limitations GPs identified in working 
with text-based information identifies key 
problems in developing such models for 
use in primary care. 
Although the current study highlights 
areas where the system was perceived to 
add to the practice workload, there were 
certain types of consultations deemed to be 
effective, such as routine enquiries around 
fit notes, repeat prescriptions, test results, 
and simple requests about ongoing or more 
straightforward conditions. These enabled 
GPs to process clinical enquiries quickly 
without the need for direct contact with a 
patient. There could be a case for developing 
an electronic platform that integrates with 
practice information technology systems, 
and has algorithms that channel these 
more routine types of enquiries down an 
electronic route, but for more complex 
clinical enquiries the system could also 
enable a patient to make an appointment. 
e7  British Journal of General Practice, January 2018
 REFERENCES
1. 
Hobbs FDR, Bankhead C, Mukhtar T, et al. Clinical workload in UK primary 
care: a retrospective analysis of 100 million consultations in England, 2007–
2014. Lancet 2016; 387(10035): 2323–2330.
2. 
Kontopantelis E, Roland M, Reeves D. Patient experience of access to primary 
care: identification of predictors in a national patient survey. BMC Fam Pract 
2010; 11: 61.
3. 
Orton P, Orton C, Pereira Gray D. Depersonalised doctors: a cross-sectional 
study of 564 doctors, 760 consultations and 1876 patient reports in UK 
general practice. BMJ Open 2012; 2: e000274.
4. 
Royal College of General Practitioners. The 2022 GP: a vision for general 
practice in the future NHS. London: RCGP, 2013.
5. 
Liddy C, Afkham A, Drosinis P, et al. Impact of and satisfaction with a new 
econsult service: a mixed methods study of primary care providers. J Am 
Board Fam Med 2015; 28(3): 394–403.
6. 
Madan A. webGP: the virtual general practice. Pilot report. London: Hurley 
Group, 2014.
7. 
Huxley CJ, Atherton H, Watkins JA, Griffiths F. Digital communication between 
clinician and patient and the impact on marginalised groups: a realist review 
in general practice. Br J Gen Pract 2015; DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/
bjgp15X687853.
8. 
Brant H, Atherton H, Ziebland S, et al. Using alternatives to face-to-face 
consultations: a survey of prevalence and attitudes in general practice. Br J 
Gen Pract 2016; DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp16X685597.
9. 
Royal College of General Practitioners. The 2022 GP: compendium of 
evidence. London: RCGP, 2013. http://www.rcgp.org.uk/policy/rcgp-policy-
areas/general-practice-2022.aspx (accessed 18 Oct 2017).
10. 
Atherton H, Sawmynaden P, Sheikh A, et al. Email for clinical communication 
between patients/caregivers and healthcare professionals. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2012; (11): CD007978. 
11. 
Edwards H, Marques E, Hollingworth W, et al. Use of a primary care 
online consultation system, by whom, when and why: evaluation of a pilot 
observational study in 36 general practices in South West England. BMJ Open 
2017. In press.
12. 
Public Health England. National general practice profiles. https://fingertips.
phe.org.uk/profile/general-practice/data (accessed 25 Oct 2017).
13. 
Sandelowski M. Sample size in qualitative research. Res Nurs Health 1995; 
18(2): 179–183.
14. 
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psych 
2006; 3(2): 77–101.
15. 
Boyatzis RE. Transforming qualitative information: thematic analysis and code 
development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998.
16. 
NHS England. General practice forward view. 2016. https://www.england.nhs.
uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/gpfv.pdf (accessed 18 Oct 2017).
17. 
Atherton H, Pappas Y, Heneghan C, Murray E. Experiences of using email for 
general practice consultations: a qualitative study. Br J Gen Pract 2013; DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp13X674440.
18. 
Health Innovation Network South London. Online GP consultation services: 
understanding the opportunity. Guidance for implementation. 2016. http://
healthinnovationnetwork.com/system/resources/resources/000/000/323/
original/eConsult_final_report.pdf (accessed 18 Oct 2017).
19. 
Hanna L, May C, Fairhurst K. The place of information and communication 
technology-mediated consultations in primary care: GPs’ perspectives. Fam 
Pract 2012; 29(3): 361–366.
20. 
Hanna L, May C, Fairhurst K. Non-face-to-face consultations and 
communications in primary care: the role and perspective of general practice 
managers in Scotland. Inform Prim Care 2011; 19(1): 17–24.
21. 
Hallam L. Patient access to general practitioners by telephone: the doctor’s 
view. Br J Gen Pract 1992; 42(358): 186–189.
22. 
Foster J, Jessopp L, Dale J. Concerns and confidence of general practitioners 
in providing telephone consultations. Br J Gen Pract 1999; 49(439): 111–113.
23. 
Department of Health. Prime Minister pledges to deliver 7-day GP services by 
2020. 2015. https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-pledges-
to-deliver-7-day-gp-services-by-2020 (accessed 18 Oct 2017).
British Journal of General Practice, January 2018  e8
