 Evidence for Neuroplastic Compensation in the Cerebral Cortex 
of Persons with Depressive Illness
Ravi Bansal, Ph.D.1,2, David J. Hellerstein, M.D.3,4, and Bradley S. Peterson, M.D.1,5
1Institute for the Developing Mind, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, CA, USA 90027
2Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA 90033
3Depression Evaluation Service, Division of Clinical Therapeutics, New York State Psychiatric 
Institute, New York, NY 10032
4Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, 
NY 10032
5Department of Psychiatry, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA 90033
Abstract
We yoked anatomical brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging to a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial (RCT) of antidepressant medication for 10-week’s duration in patients with 
dysthymia. The RCT study design mitigated ascertainment bias by randomizing patients to receive 
either duloxetine or placebo, and it supported true causal inferences about treatment effects on the 
brain by controlling treatment assignment experimentally. We acquired 121 anatomical scans: at 
baseline and endpoint in 41 patients, and once in 39 healthy controls. At baseline, patients had 
diffusely thicker cortices than did healthy participants, and patients who had thicker cortices had 
proportionately less severe symptoms. During the trial, symptoms improved significantly more in 
medication- compared with placebo-treated patients; concurrently, thicknesses in medication-
treated patients declined toward values in healthy controls, but they increased slightly, away from 
control values, in placebo-treated patients. Changes in symptom severity during the trial mediated 
the association of treatment assignment with the change in thickness, suggesting that the beneficial 
effects of medication on symptom severity were at least partially responsible for normalizing 
cortical thickness. Together our findings suggest that baseline cortical hypertrophy in medication-
free patients likely represented a compensatory, neuroplastic response that attenuated symptom 
severity. Medication then reduced symptoms and lessened the need for compensation, thereby 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding Author: Ravi Bansal, Ph.D., 4650 Sunset Blvd, MS # 135, Los Angeles, CA 90027, Phone: 323-361-7558, Fax: 
323-361-5309, rabansal@chla.usc.edu. 
Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00360724
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Dr. Bansal reports no financial relationships with commercial interests.
Supplementary information is available at Molecular Psychiatry’s website.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Mol Psychiatry. 2018 February ; 23(2): 375–383. doi:10.1038/mp.2017.34.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 normalizing thickness. This is to the best of our knowledge the first study to report within an RCT 
a differential change in cortical morphology during medication treatment for depressive illness and 
the first to provide within an RCT in vivo evidence for the presence of neuroanatomical plasticity 
in humans.
INTRODUCTION
Dysthymic disorder (DD) is a chronic but comparatively less severe form of Persistent 
Depressive Disorder that affects approximately 5% of the US population(1). DD is 
characterized by the presence of depressed mood most of the time for 2 or more years 
accompanied by at least two additional depressive symptoms, including poor self-esteem, 
low energy, feelings of hopelessness, insomnia, poor appetite, or impaired concentration(2). 
Compared with patients who have episodic Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), DD has 
been associated with greater childhood adversity, more psychosocial impairment, greater 
suicidality(3), fewer disturbances in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, and elevated 
cytokines(4, 5). DD and MDD patients, however, respond similarly to medications(6), and 
more than 60% of DD patients have a lifetime history of MDD(7, 8). A comprehensive 
analysis of self-reported depressive symptoms suggests a latent continuum of symptoms 
across all forms of unipolar depression(9). Thus the preponderance of evidence suggests that 
DD and MDD lie along a phenotypic and pathophysiological continuum, although whether 
they also constitute a continuum at the level of brain architecture and function is unknown, 
as no imaging studies have yet compared brain measures across DD and MDD participants 
at the same time and using the same image processing techniques.
Prior magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of MDD have reported abnormalities in 
brain regions involved in mood regulation, emotional processing, memory formation, and 
decision-making, particularly larger volumes and greater activity in the amygdala and 
reduced volumes in orbitofrontal, subgenual prefrontal(10), and prefrontal(11) cortices, and 
in the hippocampus(12). We previously showed that individuals at high compared with low 
familial risk for MDD had thinner cortices across the entire lateral aspect of the right and 
mesial wall of the left hemisphere; individuals who actually developed depression had 
additional thinning of the lateral aspect of the left hemisphere(13). Consistent with studies in 
MDD, the few neuroimaging studies in DD have also implicated abnormalities in brain 
regions that regulate mood, including enlarged amygdala(14), increased amygdala 
activation(15), and increased functional connectivity in the default-mode network(16). No 
studies of DD thus far have assessed measures of cortical thickness compared to values in 
healthy control participants.
A serious and pervasive limitation of nearly all prior brain imaging studies has been their use 
of a case-control design, which renders studies vulnerable to a wide range of ascertainment 
biases in the selection of participants. Most importantly, the absence of control over 
experimental variables renders case-control studies merely associational and incapable of 
supporting causal inferences concerning mechanisms of pathogenesis or treatment 
response(17). The most common independent variable studied in case-control designs is 
diagnosis (e.g. MDD vs control), which in humans ethically cannot be controlled 
Bansal et al.
Page 2
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experimentally. One variable that can be controlled in human studies, however, is treatment 
assignment. Experimental control of intervention through randomization and double 
blinding in treatment(17) or prevention studies(18) is why the randomized controlled trial 
(RCT) has become the gold standard for demonstrating that the experimentally controlled 
variable, such as treatment assignment, influences an outcome variable, such as symptom 
severity. A placebo arm in addition controls for non-specific treatment effects. We can 
understand the causal influences of treatment on the brain by using the change in brain 
imaging measures instead of the change in symptoms as the primary outcome measure in an 
RCT. This requires acquisition of images at the beginning and end of the RCT, then 
analyzing those images while blind to treatment assignment and time point of image 
acquisition (i.e., the beginning or end of the trial). Yoking imaging to an RCT study design 
in this way mitigates the problem of ascertainment bias that vitiates case-control studies, 
because patients are randomly assigned to the treatment arms, and most importantly it 
supports true causal inferences about the effects that the experimentally controlled treatment 
has on the brain.
We yoked anatomical MRI to a 10-week, prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled RCT 
of the use of antidepressant duloxetine for treating DD(19), which permitted us to ascribe 
the effects of antidepressant medication on cortical thickness. We acquired MRI scans in 
dysthymic patients both at baseline and end of the trial. We also acquired scans in age- and 
sex-matched heathy participants at a single point in time to assess whether the medication in 
DD patients changed cortical thickness towards or away from healthy values. We previously 
showed in a larger clinical trial of 57 dysthymic patients that duloxetine treatment produced 
a greater reduction in symptoms than did placebo, and that a greater number of duloxetine- 
compared to placebo-treated patients experienced remission of symptoms by the end of the 
trial(19). We also reported in the same subsample as the present study that duloxetine 
treatment normalized resting-state BOLD fMRI activity in an otherwise hyperactive default-
mode network, especially in the functional interactions between the posterior cingulate 
cortex and amygdala(16). We wanted to determine for the same participants as those in the 
fMRI study whether duloxetine treatment for 10 weeks changes brain structure and, if it 
does, how those changes relate to changes in symptom severity. Based on our prior resting 
state fMRI findings, we hypothesized that duloxetine treatment would normalize baseline 
alterations of cortical thickness in DD patients.
MATERIALS/SUBJECTS AND METHODS
See Supplemental Information for further details of participant recruitment and 
characterization, image processing, statistical modeling, and results. The study was approved 
by the New York State Institute/Columbia University Department of Psychiatry Institutional 
Review Board (IRB).
Participants
Patients were recruited for the study through advertisements, website postings, and the 
hospital’s telephone referral service; 350 individuals expressed interest in the study, 70 of 
these met inclusion/exclusion criteria, and 60 agreed to participate and were randomized to 
Bansal et al.
Page 3
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 either active treatment or placebo. All provided informed written consent prior to 
participation. Three patients dropped out before the start of the trial, and therefore at 
baseline we treated and acquired clinical and behavioral data in 57 patients. Of these 57 
patients, 53 were consented for MRI at baseline. However, 11 patients declined to have an 
MRI scan at the end of the trial, and the MRI data for 1 patient had motion artifact, leaving 
41 patients who had MRI data at both baseline and end of the study. At the time of 
recruitment, 22 patients were medication-naïve; another 15 had discontinued medication use 
for more than a year. Four patients who were taking psychotropic medications underwent a 
4-week medication wash-out prior to participation. We also acquired MRI data at one time 
point in 39 healthy participants who were group-matched to the patients on age and sex, and 
who were recruited through mailings and phone calls to households identified in 
telemarketing lists of the local community. DD patients were diagnosed by a board certified 
psychiatrist using clinical interviews and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR 
(SCID).(19) Patients met DSM-IV-TR(2) criteria for either dysthymic disorder (DD) or 
Depressive Disorder not otherwise specified, but they did not meet criteria for Major 
Depressive Disorder (MDD). Symptom severity was assessed using both the 24-item 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS)(20) and Cornell Dysthymia Rating scale 
(CDRS)(21). At the time of recruitment, patients had their current episode of DD for at least 
2 years before entering the clinical trial, and they scored 12 or higher on the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale (HDRS)(20). Healthy controls had no current illness and minimal 
lifetime history of Axis I illness on the SCID (Supplemental Information).
We randomized 21 patients to the active medication arm, where they were treated with up to 
120 mg/day of duloxetine; 20 patients randomized to the placebo arm received gelatin shell 
capsules with sugar balls. Patients in the 2 arms did not differ on age, symptom severity at 
baseline, or lifetime history of MDD; they did differ significantly in their sex composition, 
however, with 14 females receiving duloxetine and 5 placebo (χ2=7.15,df=1,p=0.007)(Table 
1). Comorbid illnesses either in the past or at the time of study entry in the patients are listed 
in Table 2; 10 patients in each treatment arm had any comorbid illness in their lifetimes. All 
participants agreed not to take other psychotropic medication or receive psychotherapy 
during the trial.
MRI Scanning
We acquired a total of 121 anatomical MRI scans – one at baseline and one immediately 
after trial week 10 in the DD patients, and at one time point for the healthy participants. The 
scans were obtained on a 3Tesla GE Signa MRI scanner using a 3D fast spoiled gradient 
recall sequence: Resolution=0.98x0.98x1.0 mm; Repetition Time=4.7 ms; Echo Time=1.3 
ms; Inversion Time=500 ms; Flip Angle=11°; Matrix=256x256; Field of View=25 cm; 
Phase Field of View=100%; Slice Thickness=1.0 mm.
MRI Processing
Scans received a clinical reading by a neuroradiologist to exclude the presence of any 
clinically significant findings in all study participants. All MRI data were processed blind to 
the order of scan acquisition (baseline or week 10), treatment assignment, and participant 
clinical characteristics.
Bansal et al.
Page 4
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Preprocessing—We applied automated tools to correct for large-scale variations in image 
intensities(22) and to remove extracerebral tissue(23). We then removed connecting dura 
manually on each slice in the sagittal, axial, and coronal views.
Segmentation of Cortical Gray Matter—We used a semi-automated method to 
segment brain tissue as gray or white matter, with an expert neuroanatomist sampling gray-
scale values of both cortical gray matter and white matter at 4 standard locations throughout 
the brain. The sampled values were averaged to generate mean values for gray and white 
matter; these values were used to threshold and generate initial tissue segmentations, which 
were then edited to remove the subcortical gray matter. The test-retest intraclass correlation 
coefficient (ICC)(24) for the cortex was >0.98.
Mapping Cortical Thickness—We spatially normalized all brains to a template brain 
(see Supplementary Information) and established point-by-point correspondence across their 
surfaces. We then applied to each coregistered brain a 3D morphological operator to 
distance-transform the brain without its cortical mantle to the surface of the cerebrum(25) 
and calculated cortical thickness as the smallest distance of each point on the cerebral 
surface to the outermost surface of the white matter. Cortical thickness was calculated with 
brains scaled to the template, thereby accounting for overall scaling effects on thickness 
measures.
Statistical Analyses
We used voxel-wise linear regression and repeated measures analyses of variance, while 
covarying for age and sex, to assess respectively the correlations of cortical thickness with 
symptom severity and the effects of treatment on cortical thickness. We used a procedure for 
False Discovery Rate (FDR), with FDR = 0.05, to control for Type I error in the multiple 
statistical tests performed across the cerebral surface. We did not control for the effects of 
comorbid illnesses in our analyses because only a small number of patients in each treatment 
arm had those specific illnesses (Table 2). We color-coded P-values that survived FDR 
correction, using cool colors (purple and blue) for inverse associations and warm colors 
(yellow and red) for positive associations. Detailed statistical models are presented in the 
methods section of Supplementary Information.
Baseline Analyses—We used multiple linear regression to compare cortical thickness 
across patient and healthy control participants at baseline and to aid understanding of 
whether treatment-induced changes in thickness during the 10-week trial were in a direction 
toward or away from normal values. In addition, we correlated thickness with symptom 
severity in DD patients.
Longitudinal Analyses—We applied linear mixed models to the longitudinal data to 
assess whether treatment differentially altered cortical thickness across the two treatment 
arms (i.e., to assess the treatment-by-time interaction). We also assessed treatment effects on 
thickness separately in the duloxetine- and placebo-treated patients.
Bansal et al.
Page 5
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Repeated Measures Analyses of Thickness Associations with Symptom 
Severity—We used a repeated measures analysis of longitudinal data in the 21 duloxetine-
treated patients to assess within individuals how thickness changed over time with changes 
in symptom severity, and to assess across individuals the correlation of thickness with 
severity.
Mediation Analysis—We conducted post hoc mediation analyses to test whether the 
changes in thickness mediated the effects of treatment assignment on changes in symptom 
severity, or whether the changes in symptom severity mediated the effects of treatment on 
cortical thickness.
Code Availability—Computer code as executables in Windows Operating System will be 
made available upon request.
RESULTS
Although symptom severity declined significantly over the 10-week trial for both the 
duloxetine- and placebo-treated patients (placebo p=5.76*10−3; duloxetine p=2.51*10−15), 
at the end of the trial severity was significantly lower for the duloxetine- than for the 
placebo-treated patients (p=8.54*10−6). In addition, a significantly greater proportion of 
duloxetine-(15 out of 21) compared to placebo-(2 out of 20) treated patients experienced 
remission of illness(χ2=15.14,df=1, p<0.0001) (Table 1). Age was not associated with 
symptom severity in patients at baseline, nor did it moderate the decline in symptom severity 
over the trial.
Baseline Analyses
At baseline, cortical thickness did not differ significantly between patients who were 
randomized to duloxetine compared with those randomized to placebo (not shown). The 
dysthymic patients collectively, compared with healthy participants, had thicker cortices 
bilaterally across large portions of the brain, especially in the superior and middle temporal 
gyrus, cingulate gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, supramarginal gyrus, and pre- and post-
central gyrus(Fig.1). Thickening was present in patients randomized to either treatment arm 
(not shown). The associations of cortical thickness with DD did not change when controlling 
for prior MDD (not shown), suggesting that prior MDD did not influence the effects of 
depressive illness on cortical morphology. Symptom severity correlated inversely with 
thickness, indicating that a thicker cortex was associated with less severe symptoms; this 
was especially true in regions where the cortex was thicker in patients than in healthy 
controls.
Longitudinal Analyses
These analyses revealed significant treatment-by-time effects on cortical thickness, deriving 
from cortical thinning over the course of the trial in the duloxetine-treated patients toward 
values in healthy participants, particularly in regions where the patients at baseline had 
thicker cortices than healthy participants(Fig.2 & Supplementary Fig.1). In contrast, the 
Bansal et al.
Page 6
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cortex thickened over the trial in placebo-treated patients, diverging further from control 
values than at baseline.
Repeated Measures Analyses
The between-individual analyses showed that severity correlated strongly and inversely with 
thickness across most of the brain, except for small regions of positive correlation in the 
mesial and lateral surfaces of the frontal pole and posterior parietal cortex(Fig.3). Within-
individual changes in thickness generally correlated positively with changes in symptom 
severity–i.e., the cortex thinned as symptom severity declined over the 10-week clinical trial. 
Inverse associations, in which the cortex thickened within individuals as symptom severity 
declined, were evident in several brain regions, especially in the cingulate gyrus along the 
mesial wall of the left hemisphere and bilaterally in occipital cortex(Fig.3 & Supplementary 
Fig. 3). In contrast, within-individual changes in thickness for placebo-treated patients 
generally correlated inversely with changes in symptom severity(Supplementary Figure 4). 
In an exploratory analysis, we determined that cortical thinning varied with age in the 
duloxetine-treated patients, with thinning more prominent in the younger compared with 
older patients(Supplementary Fig.2).
Mediation Analyses
Mediation analyses showed that the change in thickness did not mediate treatment effects on 
the change in symptom severity. Instead, the change in symptom severity significantly 
mediated the effects of treatment on the change in cortical thickness across large portions of 
the brain(Fig.4 & Supplementary Fig.5).
To understand better the mediation findings, we generated scatterplots representing the 
associations of the treatment (independent variable), change in symptom severity (mediator 
variable), and change in thickness (dependent variable) in a representative location in the 
superior parietal cortex. These plots showed that (1) duloxetine treatment significantly 
decreased symptom severity (p<4.0*10−6), (2) the decline in symptom severity correlated 
significantly with cortical thinning (p<0.01), and (3) duloxetine treatment also correlated 
significantly with cortical thinning (p<0.04)(Fig.4).
DISCUSSION
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to report a differential change in 
thickness of the cerebral cortex during medication compared with placebo treatment for a 
depressive illness within an RCT. Combining brain imaging with an RCT study design 
allowed us to infer that medication treatment not only was associated with changes in brain 
structure in DD patients, but it also allowed us to conclude that medication actually caused 
those changes. Inclusion of healthy controls allowed us to determine whether the treatment-
related changes in brain structure were toward or away from normal values. We found that 
the cortex at the beginning of the trial was significantly and diffusely thicker in DD patients 
than in healthy participants. Moreover, the baseline thickening was associated with less 
severe depressive symptoms, suggesting that the thickening may have been a neuroplastic 
response to illness that served a compensatory function in this patient population. Although 
Bansal et al.
Page 7
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 symptom severity declined in both treatment arms over the course of the trial, the 
duloxetine-treated patients improved to a significantly greater extent, and more frequently 
achieved clinical remission, than did placebo-treated patients. The cortex thinned 
significantly during the trial in duloxetine-treated patients in the direction of healthy control 
values, whereas the cortex thickened slightly in placebo-treated patients, diverging even 
further from healthy values at baseline. We also showed that the change in symptom severity 
mediated the association of treatment assignment with the change in cortical thickness 
during the trial, suggesting that medication exerted its normalizing effects on cortical 
thickness by reducing the severity of symptoms, and supporting further our interpretation 
that baseline thickening in DD patients was a neuroplastic compensation to chronic illness. 
When medication successfully reduced symptoms, this putative neuroplastic compensation 
was no longer needed, which presumably then permitted the return of cortical thickness 
toward normal values. Finally, we showed that younger compared with older patients had 
more prominent cortical thinning, and across larger expanses of the cortical surface over the 
course of the trial (Supplementary Fig. 2), suggesting that medication was more effective at 
normalizing cortical thickness in younger patients.
At baseline when they were medication-free, patients had cortices that were diffusely thicker 
than in the healthy participants, an effect that did not differ between patients randomized to 
the duloxetine or placebo arms. These findings are consistent with those in recent studies 
reporting thicker cortices across several brain regions in medication-naive adults with 
MDD(26). We also detected cortical thinning in the lateral and mesial prefrontal cortices, 
consistent with the majority of anatomical studies of MDD reporting thinner cortices in 
brain regions that support emotion regulation, including orbitofrontal, dorsal anterolateral, 
and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices(27). Our findings, however, could initially seem at odds 
with our previously reported findings that individuals at high, compared with low, familial 
risk for MDD have thinner cortices across the entire lateral aspect of the right hemisphere 
and mesial wall of the left hemisphere(13). It seems likely that the high-risk individuals in 
that prior study did not generate the compensatory cortical thickening that we have detected 
in DD patients because the high risk participants were largely free of illness at the time of 
scan. Their cortical thinning likely represented instead a trait vulnerability for developing 
MDD, particularly in relation to thickness in low-risk individuals, whose thicker cortices 
presumably protected against the development of MDD. Consistent with this interpretation, 
we also reported that high-risk individuals who endorsed more religious beliefs had thicker 
cortices relative to high-risk individuals who endorsed less religiosity, and they also had 
fewer lifetime MDD episodes, suggesting that cortical thickening associated with religiosity 
was protective against developing MDD(28). Our DD patients, in contrast to our prior high-
risk sample, had been ill for more than 2 years at the time of study, giving them abundant 
time to develop neuroplastic cortical hypertrophy, as presumably manifested in those who 
had thicker cortices and proportionately fewer symptoms. Therefore we suspect that the 
baseline cortical thickening in DD patients was a consequence of their chronic illness and 
represented a neuroplastic compensation that helped to attenuate their depressive symptoms. 
It is possible that the presence of neuroplastic compensation is precisely what distinguished 
DD from MDD; without compensation, DD patients presumably would become more severe 
and would then meet criteria for MDD, rather than DD. If this is the case, then an important 
Bansal et al.
Page 8
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 question for future research is why MDD patients do not engage fully these neuroplastic 
compensatory processes.
We detected a significant treatment-by-time interaction on cortical thickness over the 10-
week trial. The interaction derived from treatment-related changes in cortical thickness 
occurring in both arms, but in opposite directions: in duloxetine-treated patients, the cortex 
thinned in a direction toward values in healthy participants; in placebo-treated patients, the 
cortex thickened slightly, and in a direction even more divergent from control values than at 
baseline. These longitudinal, within-individual analyses further showed that symptom 
severity declined as the cortex thinned during the trial in the duloxetine-treated patients. 
Because cortical thickening at baseline and its association with fewer symptoms suggested 
the presence of neuroplastic compensation, the exaggeration of baseline thickening in the 
placebo arm during the RCT suggests the presence of continuing neuroplastic compensation 
with continuing illness. It is tempting to speculate, in fact, that cortical thickening during 
placebo administration could have contributed to the reduction in symptoms in that arm of 
the trial. If the same compensatory processes were operating in the duloxetine-treated 
patients as speculated in the placebo-treated patients, then the duloxetine-induced 
normalization of cortical thickness would presumably represent the reduced need for 
compensatory hypertrophy, thanks to the duloxetine-induced reductions in symptom 
severity. Alternatively, duloxetine-induced normalization of cortical thickness could be a 
direct consequence of the medication, with the reductions in symptoms following it. We 
therefore conducted mediation analyses to provide statistical evidence for or against each of 
these two competing interpretations. We found no statistical evidence that cortical thickness 
mediated the association of treatment assignment (duloxetine or placebo) with the change in 
symptom severity during the trial. Instead, we found that the change in symptom severity 
partially but significantly mediated the association of treatment with change in cortical 
thickness, supporting the interpretation that medication-induced improvement in symptoms 
during the trial reduced the need for neuroplastic compensation, thereby reducing cortical 
thickness toward normal values. Placebo-treated patients, however, continued to require 
compensation for their continuing symptoms, thereby thickening their cortices during the 
trial.
Our findings provide imaging-based evidence for the presence of an adaptive, neuroplastic 
compensation in response to chronic symptoms of dysthymia. Neuroplastic changes 
comprise persistent changes in dendritic length and branching, synaptic density and strength, 
and neurogenesis, which together produce structural and functional alterations in brain 
circuits and how they process information in response to changing functional demands on 
the central nervous system(29). Activity-dependent neuroplasticity has been reported in 
several prior imaging studies in healthy humans, including experience-dependent changes in 
gray and white matter volumes in response to learning(30), mindfulness meditation(31), 
physical exercise(32), and cognitive training(33). Animal studies have reported cortical 
thickening in response to environmental enrichment, likely due to neurotrophin-driven 
increases in dendritic branching(34), spine density(35), and glial cell density(36). Studies of 
older animals in enriched environments(37) and older humans who suffered either limb 
amputations(38) or strokes(39) suggest that neural plasticity is retained across the lifespan. 
Our findings similarly suggest that neuroplastic compensation is present at all adult ages, 
Bansal et al.
Page 9
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 although the age-specific effects in the reversion of thickening toward normal values during 
the trial, being more prominent in younger than in older patients when successfully treated 
with medication, suggests that neuroplastic hypertrophy may be more dynamic in younger 
persons.
Evidence is growing for the presence of neuroplasticity and its compensatory functions in 
neuropsychiatric illnesses(40). The voluntary suppression of tics in patients with Tourette 
Syndrome, for example, is thought to generate hypertrophy of frontal and parietal cortices, 
which in turn attenuates the severity of tic symptoms and normalizes excess functional 
activity during cognitive tasks that require activation of these cortical regions(41). Youth 
who, for reasons unknown, are unable to generate this cortical hypertrophy have more severe 
symptoms and may be more likely to have illness that persists into adulthood. Additional 
hypertrophy of the hippocampus is thought to modulate the severity of not only tic 
symptoms, but also of comorbid Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and 
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder symptoms(42). Hypertrophy of the hippocampus is thought 
to serve a similar symptom-attenuating function in youth who have ADHD without tic 
disorder(43). Successful treatment of ADHD youth with stimulant medications has been 
associated with normalization of highly localized morphological abnormalities in the 
surfaces of the basal ganglia nuclei(44) and thalamus(45), presumably because the 
stimulant-induced increases in dopaminergic transmission supported neuroplastic changes in 
these subcortical regions. Similarly, studies of veterans with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD) showed that the veterans who completely recovered from their illness had larger 
hippocampal volumes than those with current PTSD(46), suggesting either that those with 
larger hippocampal volumes recovered, or those with neuroplastic reversal of hippocampal 
volume loss had positive outcomes of treatment and higher rates of symptom remission. 
Antipsychotic medications have been reported to moderate the age-related decline in gray 
matter volumes in patients with Schizophrenia(47). Together these studies provide 
compelling evidence that activity-induced neuroplastic changes in the brain may 
simultaneously attenuate symptom severity, help maintain cognitive and behavioral 
performance on tasks that depend on those neural systems, and even contribute to the 
remission of illness in individuals with neuropsychiatric disorders.
The findings of this study should be interpreted in light of its limitations. First, we cannot 
entirely exclude the possibility that a thicker cortex at baseline derived from prior use of 
psychotropic medications in 19 of our patients. However, at the time of recruitment, 15 
patients had not used medication more than a year prior to entering the study, and 4 patients 
on medications underwent a 4-week wash-out period; furthermore, our findings did not 
change when we excluded those 4 patients from our analyses. We therefore believe that prior 
use of psychotropic medications did not affect baseline findings of cortical thickening. 
Second, we acquired MRI data in healthy individuals at only one time point, which limited 
our ability to assess and interpret fully the brain changes in placebo-treated patients. 
Nevertheless, the data in healthy participants at even a single time point permitted us to 
assess whether the medication-induced changes in cortical thickness were in a direction 
toward or away from values in healthy persons. Third, even though the RCT study design 
mitigated ascertainment bias by randomly assigning patients to either duloxetine or placebo 
arm of the study, the participants in the trial may not be representative of all patients in the 
Bansal et al.
Page 10
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 general population who have depressive illness. Fourth, despite random assignment, patients 
differed in sex composition across the 2 treatment arms (15 males in placebo, 7 males in 
duloxetine); symptom severity did not differ between men and women at baseline or at the 
end of the trial in either of the two treatment arms, however, indicating that treatment effects 
did not differ by sex. We also incorporated sex as a covariate in all our analyses. Thus we 
believe that differing sex compositions in the two treatment arms did not confound the 
effects of treatment on cortical thickness. Finally, our participants, similar to participants in 
any RCT, may not have been representative of all patients in the general population who 
have depressive illness.
Despite these potential limitations, our findings provide strong evidence for compensatory, 
activity-dependent, neuroplastic thickening of the cortex that attenuates the chronic 
symptoms of dysthymia. The baseline cortical thickening may have protected DD patients 
from developing a more severe form of illness, MDD, which has been associated with 
thinning across large portions of the cortical surface(13). In this view, the severity and 
clinical course of depressive illness may depend upon whether an individual is able to 
engender in the brain an adaptive neuroplastic response to the presence of their distress. 
Disruptions of neuroplasticity from any cause may interfere with compensatory thickening 
and lead either to a new onset of illness, more severe symptoms, or clinical relapse. 
Understanding the molecular and cellular underpinnings of neuroplastic changes in the 
cortex and why those mechanism fail in certain individuals, and identifying ways to enhance 
neuroplastic response, will be important in the future to prevent new onset of illness, reduce 
symptom severity in individuals who are already ill, and induce compensation as a form of 
resilience in individuals who are at high-risk for developing depressive illnesses.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by NIH grant K02-74677 (PI, Dr. Bradley S. Peterson), an Investigator-Initiated Grant 
from Eli Lilly company to Drs. Hellerstein and Peterson, and funding from Children’s Hospital Los Angeles and 
the University of Southern California. We are grateful to Zachary Toth, MS, Giancarlo Nati, MA, and Ming Qian, 
MS, for their technical assistance in data processing, archiving, and maintenance. The research was made possible 
by the provision of data by New York State Psychiatric Institute and Columbia University.
Drs. Hellerstein and Peterson received an investigator-initiated grant from Eli Lilly to support in part the costs of 
this study. Neither received salary support from that grant.
REFERENCES
1. Sansone RA, Sansone LA. Dysthymic disorder: forlorn and overlooked? Psychiatry (Edgmont). 
2009; 6(5):46–51. Epub 2009/09/03. 
2. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Fourth. 
DSM-IV-TR: American Psychiatric Pub; 2000. 
3. Hellerstein, DJ., Eipper, JW. Dysthymia and chronic depression. In: Mann, J.Roose, SP., McGrath, 
PJ., editors. The Clinical Handbook for the Management of Mood Disorders. New York: Cambridge 
University Press; 2013. p. 20-36.
Bansal et al.
Page 11
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Anisman H, Ravindran AV, Griffiths J, Merali Z. Endocrine and cytokine correlates of major 
depression and dysthymia with typical or atypical features. Mol Psychiatry. 1999; 4(2):182–188. 
Epub 1999/04/20. [PubMed: 10208451] 
5. Schlatter J, Ortuno F, Cervera-Enguix S. Differences in interleukins' patterns between dysthymia 
and major depression. Eur Psychiat. 2001; 16(5):317–319.
6. Griffiths J, Ravindran AV, Merali Z, Anisman H. Dysthymia: a review of pharmacological and 
behavioral factors. Mol Psychiatr. 2000; 5(3):242–261.
7. Weissman MM, Leaf PJ, Bruce ML, Florio L. The epidemiology of dysthymia in five communities: 
rates, risks, comorbidity, and treatment. Am J Psychiatry. 1988; 145(7):815–819. Epub 1988/07/01. 
[PubMed: 3381924] 
8. Keller MB, Klein DN, Hirschfeld RMA, Kocsis JH, Mccullough JP, Miller I, et al. Results of the 
Dsm-Iv Mood Disorders Field Trial. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1995; 152(6):843–849. 
[PubMed: 7755112] 
9. Solomon A, Haaga DAF, Arnow BA. Is clinical depression distinct from subthreshold depressive 
symptoms? A review of the continuity issue in depression research. Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease. 2001; 189(8):498–506. [PubMed: 11531201] 
10. Malykhin NV, Carter R, Hegadoren KM, Seres P, Coupland NJ. Fronto-limbic volumetric changes 
in major depressive disorder. J Affect Disorders. 2012; 136(3):1104–1113. [PubMed: 22134041] 
11. McEwen BS. Mood disorders and allostatic load. Biological Psychiatry. 2003; 54(3):200–207. 
[PubMed: 12893096] 
12. Schmaal L, Veltman DJ, van Erp TGM, Penninx BWJH, Thompson PM, Hibar DP, et al. 
Subcortical Brain Alterations in Major Depressive Disorder: Findings from the ENIGMA Major 
Depressive Disorder Working Group. Biological Psychiatry. 2015; 77(9)
13. Peterson BS, Warner V, Bansal R, Zhu H, Hao X, Liu J, et al. Cortical thinning in persons at 
increased familial risk for major depression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106(15):6273–6278. 
Epub 2009/03/31. [PubMed: 19329490] 
14. van Elst LT, Woermann FG, Lemieux L, Trimble MR. Amygdala enlargement in dysthymia - A 
volumetric study of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. Biological Psychiatry. 1999; 46(12):
1614–1623. [PubMed: 10624542] 
15. Ravindran AV, Smith A, Cameron C, Bhatla R, Cameron I, Georgescu TM, et al. Toward a 
functional neuroanatomy of dysthymia: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J Affect 
Disorders. 2009; 119(1-3):9–15. [PubMed: 19351572] 
16. Posner J, Hellerstein DJ, Gat I, Mechling A, Klahr K, Wang ZS, et al. Antidepressants Normalize 
the Default Mode Network in Patients With Dysthymia. Jama Psychiat. 2013; 70(4):373–382.
17. Horga G, Kaur T, Peterson BS. Annual research review: Current limitations and future directions in 
MRI studies of child- and adult-onset developmental psychopathologies. Journal of child 
psychology and psychiatry, and allied disciplines. 2014; 55(6):659–680. Epub 2014/01/21. 
18. Peterson BS. From correlations to causation: the value of preventive interventions in studying 
pathogenic mechanisms in childhood psychiatric disorders. Journal of child psychology and 
psychiatry, and allied disciplines. 2013; 54(8):813–815. Epub 2013/07/20. 
19. Hellerstein DJ, Stewart JW, McGrath PJ, Deliyannides DA, Batchelder ST, Black SR, et al. A 
randomized controlled trial of duloxetine versus placebo in the treatment of nonmajor chronic 
depression. The Journal of clinical psychiatry. 2012; 73(7):984–991. Epub 2012/08/21. [PubMed: 
22901348] 
20. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1960; 23:56–62. Epub 
1960/02/01. [PubMed: 14399272] 
21. Hellerstein DJ, Batchelder ST, Lee A, Borisovskaya M. Rating dysthymia: an assessment of the 
construct and content validity of the Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale. J Affect Disorders. 2002; 
71(1-3):85–96. [PubMed: 12167504] 
22. Sled GJ, Zijdenbos AP, Evans AC. A Nonparametric Method for Automatic Correction of Intensity 
Nonuniformity in MRI Data. IEEE Trans of Medical Imaging. 1998; 17(1):87–97. [PubMed: 
9617910] 
23. Shattuck DW, Leahy RM. BrainSuite: An Automated Cortical Surface Identification Tool. Medical 
Image Analysis. 2002; 8(2):129–142.
Bansal et al.
Page 12
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Shrout PE, Fleiss JL. Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychol Bull. 1979; 
86:420–428. [PubMed: 18839484] 
25. Haralick, R., Shapiro, L. Computer and Robot Vision, volume 1: Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company. 1992. 
26. Qiu L, Lui S, Kuang W, Huang X, Li J, Li J, et al. Regional increases of cortical thickness in 
untreated, first-episode major depressive disorder. Translational Psychiatry. 2014; 4
27. Kempton MJ, Salvador Z, Munafo MR, Geddes JR, Simmons A, Frangou S, et al. Structural 
Neuroimaging Studies in Major Depressive Disorder Meta-analysis and Comparison With Bipolar 
Disorder. Arch Gen Psychiat. 2011; 68(7):675–690. [PubMed: 21727252] 
28. Miller L, Bansal R, Wickramaratne P, Hao X, Tenke CE, Weissman MM, et al. Neuroanatomical 
correlates of religiosity and spirituality: a study in adults at high and low familial risk for 
depression. Jama Psychiat. 2014; 71(2):128–135. Epub 2013/12/27. 
29. Pascual-Leone A, Amedi A, Fregni F, Merabet LB. The plastic human brain cortex. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2005; 28:377–401. Epub 2005/07/19. [PubMed: 16022601] 
30. Zatorre RJ, Fields RD, Johansen-Berg H. Plasticity in gray and white: neuroimaging changes in 
brain structure during learning. Nature Neuroscience. 2012; 15(4):528–536. [PubMed: 22426254] 
31. Fox KCR, Nijeboer S, Dixon ML, Floman JL, Ellamil M, Rumak SP, et al. Is meditation associated 
with altered brain structure? A systematic review and meta-analysis of morphometric 
neuroimaging in meditation practitioners. Neurosci Biobehav R. 2014; 43:48–73.
32. Hotting K, Roder B. Beneficial effects of physical exercise on neuroplasticity and cognition. 
Neurosci Biobehav R. 2013; 37(9):2243–2257.
33. Stine-Morrow, EAL., Basak, C. Cognitive Interventions. In: Schaie, KW., Willis, SL., editors. 
Handbook of the Psychology of Aging. Seventh. Academic Press; 2011. p. 153-171.
34. Greenoug, Wt, Volkmar, FR., Juraska, JM. Effects of Rearing Complexity on Dendritic Branching 
in Frontolateral and Temporal Cortex of Rat. Experimental Neurology. 1973; 41(2):371–378. 
[PubMed: 4126876] 
35. Kozorovitskiy Y, Gross CG, Kopil C, Battaglia L, McBreen M, Stranahan AM, et al. Experience 
induces structural and biochemical changes in the adult primate brain. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2005; 102(48):17478–17482.
36. Blumenfeld-Katzir T, Pasternak O, Dagan M, Assaf Y. Diffusion MRI of Structural Brain Plasticity 
Induced by a Learning and Memory Task. PLoS One. 2011; 6(6)
37. Nilsson M, Perfilieva E, Johansson U, Orwar O, Eriksson PS. Enriched environment increases 
neurogenesis in the adult rat dentate gyrus and improves spatial memory. J Neurobiol. 1999; 39(4):
569–578. [PubMed: 10380078] 
38. Ramachandran VS, Hirstein W. The perception of phantom limbs - The D.O. Hebb lecture. Brain. 
1998; 121:1603–1630. [PubMed: 9762952] 
39. Taub E, Uswatte G, Elbert T. New treatments in neurorehabilitation founded on basic research. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2002; 3(3):228–236. [PubMed: 11994754] 
40. Kays JL, Hurley RA, Taber KH. The dynamic brain: neuroplasticity and mental health. J 
Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2012; 24(2):118–124. Epub 2012/07/10. [PubMed: 22772660] 
41. Plessen KJ, Royal JM, Peterson BS. Neuroimaging of tic disorders with co-existing attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007; 16(Suppl 1):60–70. Epub 
2007/09/05. [PubMed: 17665284] 
42. Peterson BS, Choi HA, Hao XJ, Amat JA, Zhu H, Whiteman R, et al. Morphologic features of the 
amygdala and hippocampus in children and adults with Tourette syndrome. Arch Gen Psychiat. 
2007; 64(11):1281–1291. [PubMed: 17984397] 
43. Plessen KJ, Bansal R, Zhu HT, Whiteman R, Amat J, Quackenbush GA, et al. Hippocampus and 
amygdala morphology in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiat. 2006; 63(7):
795–807. [PubMed: 16818869] 
44. Sobel LJ, Bansal R, Maia TV, Sanchez J, Mazzone L, Durkin K, et al. Basal ganglia surface 
morphology and the effects of stimulant medications in youth with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2010; 167(8):977–986. Epub 2010/07/03. [PubMed: 20595414] 
45. Miller AM, Bansal R, Hao XJ, Sanchez-Pena JP, Sobel LJ, Liu J, et al. Enlargement of Thalamic 
Nuclei in Tourette Syndrome. Arch Gen Psychiat. 2010; 67(9):955–964. [PubMed: 20819989] 
Bansal et al.
Page 13
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Apfel BA, Ross J, Hlavin J, Meyerhoff DJ, Metzler TJ, Marmar CR, et al. Hippocampal volume 
differences in Gulf War veterans with current versus lifetime posttraumatic stress disorder 
symptoms. Biol Psychiatry. 2011; 69(6):541–548. Epub 2010/11/26. [PubMed: 21094937] 
47. Vita A, De Peri L, Deste G, Barlati S, Sacchetti E. The Effect of Antipsychotic Treatment on 
Cortical Gray Matter Changes in Schizophrenia: Does the Class Matter? A Meta-analysis and 
Meta-regression of Longitudinal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies. Biological Psychiatry. 
2015; 78(6):403–412. [PubMed: 25802081] 
Bansal et al.
Page 14
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Baseline Data Analyses
We compared cortical thickness in the 41 dysthymic patients with thickness in the 39 age- 
and sex-matched healthy participants, and we correlated cortical thickness with symptom 
severity within the dysthymic patients. We covaried for age and sex, and controlled for 
multiple hypothesis testing using a procedure for False Discovery Rate (FDR), with the FDR 
set at 0.05. We color-coded and displayed the P-values smaller than 0.05 across the surface 
of a template brain using the color bar shown at the bottom. The findings were unchanged 
when we covaried for a lifetime history of MDD in dysthymic patients.
Left Panel: Dysthymic patients compared to healthy controls had a thicker cortex bilaterally 
across large portions of the brain, especially in the superior and middle temporal gyrus, 
cingulate gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, supramarginal gyrus, and pre- and post-central 
gyrus. In addition, the patients had thinner lateral and mesial prefrontal cortices bilaterally. 
Warm colors (red and orange) represent thicker, cool colors (blue and purple) represent 
thinner, cortices in patients compared with healthy participants, and gray shows voxels 
where thickness did not differ between patients and controls.
Right Panel: Symptom severity correlated inversely with cortical thickness bilaterally 
across the parietal and temporal cortices, indicating that patients with thicker cortices had 
proportionately lower symptom severity scores. Warm colors (red and orange) show positive 
correlations, cool colors (blue and purple) show inverse correlations, and grey shows no 
significant correlations between thickness and symptom severity. Findings were similar for 
the correlations of cortical thickness with symptom severity measured using the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale (not shown).
DD=Dysthymic Disorder; HC=Healthy Controls; CDRS=Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale; 
PFC=Prefrontal Cortex; mPFC=mesial Prefrontal Cortex; CG=Cingulate Gyrus; 
MTG=Middle Temporal Gyrus; STG=Superior Temporal Gyrus; IPL=Inferior Parietal 
Lobule; SMAR=Supramarginal Gyrus; PoG=Postcentral Gyrus; PCG=Precentral Gyrus; 
A=Anterior; P=Posterior
Bansal et al.
Page 15
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Longitudinal Data Analyses to Assess Change in Thickness with Time
We used linear mixed models to assess the change in cortical thickness with time in the 41 
dysthymic patients. Findings showed a significant treatment-by-time interaction on the 
cortical thickness (left panel), which was driven primarily by a decline in cortical thickness 
over the trial in the duloxetine-treated patients (middle panel) and a slight increase in 
thickness in the placebo-treated patients, especially in the occipital cortex bilaterally (right 
panel). Warm colors (orange and red) show thickening, cool colors (purple and blue) show 
thinning, and gray shows no significant change in thickness with time. We showed time 
effects only in voxels where we detected significant effects of treatment-by-time interaction 
on cortical thickness to understand better treatment effects over the 10-week period of the 
clinical trial. See Supplementary Figure 1 for maps of time effects across the entire cortical 
surface. Line graphs for representative locations in the right occipital cortex and right mesial 
parietal cortex illustrate the opposing change in thickness with time for patients in the two 
treatment arms. At baseline, the variance of the cortical thickness did not differ between 
duloxetine-treated patients and placebo-treated patients (scatterplot at mesial location: F-
statistic=1.11; df1=19; df2=20; p=0.81; scatterplot at lateral location: F-statistic=0.65; 
df1=19; df2=20; p=0.36). At the end of the trial, the variance did differ between the two 
treatment arms for the lateral location (F-statistic=1.53; df1=19; df2=20; p=0.35) but was 
significantly different for the mesial location (F-statistic=0.31; df1=19; df2=20; p=0.016).
DULX=Duloxetine; PBO=Placebo
Bansal et al.
Page 16
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Repeated Measures Analyses Associating Symptom Severity with Cortical Thickness
We assessed how cortical thickness in duloxetine-treated patients was associated with 
symptom severity across individuals, as well as how cortical thickness changed with the 
change in symptom severity within individuals over time. Symptom severity was measured 
with the Cornell Dysthymic Rating scale (CDRS). We covaried for age and sex effects and 
generated scatterplots using age- and sex-adjusted cortical thickness measures. We displayed 
findings only in voxels where the interaction of treatment-by-time on cortical thickness was 
statistically significant (Figure 2). Maps of findings across the entire brain are shown in 
Supplementary Figure 3 of the Supplementary Information.
Left Panel: The cross-sectional, across-individual correlation of cortical thickness with 
severity showed that thickness correlated inversely with CDRS values, averaged over 
pretreatment baseline (Time1) and end of trial (Time2), in large expanses of the lateral and 
mesial surfaces of both hemispheres, especially in regions where the dysthymic patients had 
thicker cortices than healthy participants at baseline (Figure 1). Scatterplots for 
representative voxels where inverse correlations were located illustrate that patients with 
thicker cortices generally had less severe symptoms. In contrast, cortical thickness correlated 
positively with symptom severity bilaterally in the anterior prefrontal and posterior parietal 
cortex.
Bansal et al.
Page 17
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Right Panel: The longitudinal, within-individual, correlation of change in thickness with the 
change in severity over the course of the trial showed positive associations (indicating that 
cortical thickness decreased as symptom severity decreased, as shown in orange and red) 
located bilaterally in the parietal and posterior temporal cortex, and inverse associations 
(indicating that cortical thickness increased as symptom severity decreased, shown in blue 
and violet) located bilaterally in the occipital, anterior cingulate, and anterior prefrontal 
cortex.
Note that the cross-sectional, across-individual maps generally show color codings for 
correlations that are opposite from those in the longitudinal, within-individual maps: In the 
left panel, individuals with fewer symptoms had thicker cortices in voxels shown in blue; in 
the right panel, cortical thickness decreased over the 10-week period of the trial within 
individuals for whom treatment with antidepressants reduced symptom severity. Thus, the 
findings in both panels, taken together, suggest that a thicker cortex at baseline is associated 
with fewer symptoms, likely representing a compensatory, neuroplastic hypertrophy of the 
cortex. Successful treatment and a decline in symptoms over the course of the trial seems to 
obviate the need for that compensatory hypertrophy and thereby produces a relative thinning 
and normalization of the cortical mantle.
Bansal et al.
Page 18
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Longitudinal Mediation Analyses
We applied a longitudinal mediation analysis to assess whether the change in symptom 
severity mediated the association between treatment arm and the change in cortical thickness 
in our 41 dysthymic patients. We covaried for age and sex and controlled for multiple 
hypothesis testing using a procedure for false discovery rate (FDR) with FDR=0.05. Here 
we display findings only for those voxels where we detected significant treatment-by-time 
interaction effects on cortical thickness (Figure 2). The findings across the entire brain are 
shown in Supplementary Figure 5.
Left Panel: At each voxel on the template surface we color-coded and plotted P-values in 
warm colors (red and orange) where the test statistic was positive and in cool colors (violet 
and blue) where the test statistic was negative for the mediation analyses. These plots 
showed that the decline in symptom severity over the trial significantly mediated the 
associations between treatment and change in cortical thickness across large portions of the 
brain where dysthymic patients at baseline had thicker cortices than healthy controls. We 
used cortical thickness from the brain region pointed to by the arrow for the scatterplot 
shown in the right panel.
Right Panel: We generated scatterplot for the associations among treatment, change in 
symptom severity, and change in cortical thickness variables for a representative voxel 
where the mediating effects of symptom severity were statistically significant. These plots 
showed that symptom severity declined significantly (p=4×10−6) in the duloxetine-treated 
patients, the decrease in symptom severity was significantly (p=0.01) associated with a 
decrease in cortical thickness, and treatment was significantly (p=0.045) associated with the 
decrease in cortical thickness. The overall P-value was < 0.008 for the mediating effect of 
change in symptom severity on the association of treatment with change in cortical 
thickness.
* = P-value<0.05; ** = P-value<0.01; *** = P-value<0.00001.
Bansal et al.
Page 19
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bansal et al.
Page 20
Table 1
Demographics and Symptom Severity of the Participants in this Study
The 41 dysthymic patients did not differ significantly from the 39 healthy controls in age (p=0.97) or sex (χ2=0.508, df=1, p=0.47). At baseline, patients 
randomized to the duloxetine arm did not differ significantly from those randomized the placebo arm in age (p=0.44), symptom severity measured using 
either the HDRS (p=0.26) or the CDRS (p=0.76) scale, or lifetime history of Major Depressive Disorder (χ2=1.17, df=1, p=0.27). However, the sex 
composition differed significantly in the two treatment arms (χ2=7.152, df=1, p<0.01). By the end of the trial (i.e. Week 10), symptom severity had 
decreased significantly for both the duloxetine-treated patients (p<1.0*10−15 for HDRS scores and p<4.0*10−13 for CDRS scores) and placebo-treated 
patients (p<0.002 for HDRS scores and p<0.01 for CDRS scores). However, the duloxetine-treated compared with placebo-treated patients had 
significantly lower symptom severity (p<9.0*10−6 for HDRS scores and p<2.0*10−5 for CDRS scores). Furthermore, a significantly (χ2=15.14, df=1, 
p<0.0001) greater proportion of the duloxetine-treated patients had a remission of illness by the end of the trial. The average and standard deviation of age 
and symptom severity are shown in the table.
Age
(Years)
Sex
Symptom Severity
(At Baseline)
Symptom Severity
(At Week 10)
Lifetime
MDD
Remitted at
Week 10
HDRS
CDRS
HDRS
CDRS
Healthy, N=39
39.55±10.26
22 Males
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
Duloxetine Arm, N=21
39.08±10.00
7 Males
20.66±4.09
37.62±8.16
5.76±3.12*
12.14±7.37*
13
15
Placebo Arm, N=20
40.82±10.81
15 Males
22.23±4.79
38.38±8.22
15.76±7.71
29.04±13.09
9
2
HDRS = Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; CDRS = Cornell Dysthymia Rating Scale; N/A = not applicable; MDD = Major Depressive disorder
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bansal et al.
Page 21
Table 2
Comorbid Illnesses in the Dysthymic Patients
The table lists the number of dysthymic patients who had a comorbid illness either previously or at the time of 
study entry; 10 patients in the duloxetine arm and 10 patients in the placebo arm had a comorbid illness other 
than Major Depressive Disorder in their lifetimes.
Comorbid Illnesses
Previous
At Study Entry
Duloxetine Arm
Placebo Arm
Major Depressive Disorder
22
0
13
9
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
9
0
5
4
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
1
2
1
2
Panic Disorder
2
2
2
2
Social Phobia
1
7
5
3
Specific Phobia
3
4
4
3
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
2
2
3
1
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 27.
