 ARTICLE
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1115
J. Exp. Med. 2018 Vol. 215 No. 4 1115–1133
Rockefeller University Press
Here we describe a new mouse model that exploits the pattern of expression of the high-affinity IgG receptor (CD64) and 
allows diphtheria toxin (DT)–mediated ablation of tissue-resident macrophages and monocyte-derived cells. We found that 
the myeloid cells of the ear skin dermis are dominated by DT-sensitive, melanin-laden cells that have been missed in previous 
studies and correspond to macrophages that have ingested melanosomes from neighboring melanocytes. Those cells have 
been referred to as melanophages in humans. We also identified melanophages in melanocytic melanoma. Benefiting of 
our knowledge on melanophage dynamics, we determined the identity, origin, and dynamics of the skin myeloid cells that 
capture and retain tattoo pigment particles. We showed that they are exclusively made of dermal macrophages. Using the 
possibility to delete them, we further demonstrated that tattoo pigment particles can undergo successive cycles of capture–
release–recapture without any tattoo vanishing. Therefore, congruent with dermal macrophage dynamics, long-term tattoo 
persistence likely relies on macrophage renewal rather than on macrophage longevity.
Unveiling skin macrophage dynamics explains both 
tattoo persistence and strenuous removal
Anna Baranska1, Alaa Shawket1*, Mabel Jouve3*, Myriam Baratin1*, Camille Malosse1, Odessa Voluzan1, Thien‑Phong Vu Manh1, 
Frédéric Fiore2, Marc Bajénoff1, Philippe Benaroch4, Marc Dalod1, Marie Malissen1,2, Sandrine Henri1**, and Bernard Malissen1,2**
Rockefeller University Press
Introduction
Recent studies, based on ontogeny and transcriptomic analysis, 
have succeeded in discriminating conventional dendritic cells 
(cDCs) from monocyte-derived cells. cDCs comprise two lin-
eages known as cDC1 and cDC2 (Guilliams et al., 2016), have a 
short life span, and are continually replenished from committed 
cDC precursors that originate in the bone marrow (BM). Under 
steady-state conditions, BM-derived blood Ly-6Chigh monocytes 
extravasate at a slow pace into nonlymphoid tissues, such as the 
intestinal lamina propria and the skin dermis, where they give 
rise to two developmental streams (Tamoutounour et al., 2012, 
2013; Bain et al., 2013; Jakubzick et al., 2013). Progression through 
the first developmental stream is associated with the preserva-
tion of CC-chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) expression, the acquisi-
tion of MHC 
II molecules, and a diminution of Ly-6C expression. 
It can be visualized in Ly-6C–MHC 
II dot plots as a “monocyte 
waterfall,” the final product of which share features with cDC2 
and is called monocyte-derived DC (mo-DCs; Tamoutounour et 
al., 2013). Blood Ly-6Chi monocytes extravasate at a higher pace 
into inflamed tissues (Tamoutounour et al., 2012, 2013; Bain et 
al., 2013) and give rise to cells that, because of their ability to 
produce TNFα and inducible NO synthase, are denoted as Tip-
DCs (Serbina et al., 2003; De Trez et al., 2009; Tamoutounour et 
al., 2012). Under steady-state conditions, extravasated Ly-6Chigh 
monocytes also proceed through a second developmental stream 
yielding tissue-resident macrophages (mo-Mac) that have lost 
expression of CCR2 and Ly-6C and express or not MHC 
II mole-
cules (Jakubzick et al., 2013; Tamoutounour et al., 2013; Yona et 
al., 2013; Bain et al., 2014; McGovern et al., 2014). In the intestine 
and dermis, such mo-Mac replace in part or in totality a pool of 
macrophages that develops before the establishment of definitive 
hematopoiesis in a CCR2-independent manner (Tamoutounour 
et al., 2013; Bain et al., 2014; Sheng et al., 2015). Monocyte fate 
toward mo-Mac or mo-DCs is specified by microenvironmental 
cues (Goudot et al., 2017).
The possibility of discriminating cDCs from mo-DCs and 
macrophages emphasized their distinct functional specializa-
tion. Upon infection, antigen-laden cDCs migrate to draining 
LNs and trigger the conversion of antigen-specific naive T cells 
into effector T cells. In contrast, most mo-DCs remain in tissue 
parenchyma where they contribute to local immune responses 
and provide potent antimicrobial function during infection. 
Macrophages contribute to tissue homeostasis and wound repair 
because of their capacity to phagocyte cellular debris, invading 
organisms, and apoptotic cells. Owing to their strategic position-
ing at body barriers, macrophages capture a wide range of exog-
enous particulates. They also ingest self-derived particulates, as 
*A. Shawket, M. Jouve, and M. Baratin contributed equally to this paper; **S. Henri and B. Malissen contributed equally to this paper; Correspondence to Bernard 
Malissen: bernardm@ 
ciml 
.univ 
‑mrs 
.fr; Sandrine Henri: henri@ 
ciml 
.univ 
‑mrs 
.fr; A. Baranska’s present address is Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany. 
© 2018 Baranska et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the 
publication date (see http:/
/ 
www 
.rupress 
.org/ 
terms/ 
). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 
International license, as described at https:/
/ 
creativecommons 
.org/ 
licenses/ 
by 
‑nc 
‑sa/ 
4 
.0/ 
).
1Centre d’Immunologie de Marseille‑Luminy, Aix Marseille Université, INS 
ERM, CNRS UMR, Marseille, France; 2Centre d’Immunophénomique, Aix Marseille Université, 
INS 
ERM, CNRS, Marseille, France; 3UMR3215, Institut Curie, Paris, France; 4Institut Curie, PSL Research University, INS 
ERM U932, Paris, France.
on June 1, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
Published Online: 6 March, 2018 | Supp Info: 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1116
Figure 1. Replenishment kinetics of monocytes, mo-DCs, and macrophages in the dermis of CD64dtr mice after DT treatment. CD64dtr mice were left 
untreated (-DT) or treated twice and 24 h apart with DT. Analysis of the CD64+CCR2+monocytes and mo-DCs and CD64+CCR2– macrophages found in the 
ear dermis (Fig. S1 A) was performed before (-DT) and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, and 90 d after the last DT injection. (A) CD64+CCR2+ dermal cells were analyzed at 
the specified time points by using Ly-6C–MHC 
II dot plots to define the percentages of Ly-6C+MHC 
II– (P1) dermal monocytes, Ly-6C+MHC 
II+ (P2) mo-DCs, and 
Ly-6C–MHC 
II+ (P3) mo-DCs (Tamoutounour et al., 2013). (B) Quantification of the results in A showing the absolute number of cells obtained from two ears 
of each mouse. Each symbol corresponds to a mouse and the mean (horizontal bar) is indicated. (C) CD64+CCR2– dermal cells were analyzed at the specified 
time points by using Ly-6C–MHC 
II dot plots to define the percentages of Ly-6C–MHC 
II– (P4) dermal macrophages and Ly-6C–MHC 
II+ (P5) dermal macrophages 
(Tamoutounour et al., 2013). A Ly-6C+MHC 
II– to high cell population transiently developed 2–5 d after the last DT treatment and is denoted as Px cells. (D) 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1117
exemplified by the melanin-laden macrophages that have been 
sporadically observed in the normal human dermis and referred 
to as “melanophages” (Haniffa et al., 2009, 2012).
To study the functional specialization that exists among 
cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system, several strains of 
gene-targeted mice have been developed to ablate a given cell 
subset by placing the human diphtheria toxin receptor (hDTR) 
under the control of a gene promoter specific for the subset of 
interest. Those models are sometimes associated with drawbacks 
(van Blijswijk et al., 2015; Durai and Murphy, 2016). For instance, 
in CD11b-DTR mice, cDC2s, macrophages, and mo-DCs were 
depleted, and because of off-target DTR expression, those mice 
died after a few diphtheria toxin (DT) injections (Duffield et al., 
2005). Although CCR2-DTR mice were not prone to DT-induced 
lethality (Hohl et al., 2009), some of the phenotypes observed 
by using those mice likely resulted from the depletion of CCR2+ 
cDC2s rather than of monocytes and monocyte-derived cells as 
generally assumed (Malissen et al., 2014).
In contrast to cDCs, both the mo-DCs and mo-Mac, includ-
ing their precursors, and the macrophages of embryonic origin 
that are found in tissues such as the skin, the lung, and the gut 
express the high-affinity IgG receptor FcgRI (CD64; Bain et al., 
2013; Plantinga et al., 2013; Tamoutounour et al., 2013). Here, we 
developed mice in which a hDTR gene was placed under the con-
trol of the Fcgr1 gene that codes for CD64. This model has a tighter 
ablation specificity compared with previous models in that it 
permitted specifically ablating macrophages, monocytes, and 
monocyte-derived cells in vivo. It allowed us to identify in the ear 
skin dermis of C57BL/6 (B6) mice a population of melanophages 
that constitutes a quantitatively major subset of dermal myeloid 
cells and has been missed in previous studies. By characterizing 
their phenotype, origin, and dynamics, we showed that they cor-
responded to dermal macrophages that have ingested melanin 
granules. Benefiting from the knowledge gained on melanophage 
dynamics, we further elucidated the identity, origin, and dynam-
ics of the myeloid cells that are found in the mouse skin and capa-
ble of capturing and retaining tattoo pigment particles.
Results
Mice permitting ablation of macrophages and 
monocyte-derived cells
To assess the dynamics and functional role of CD64+ macro-
phages and monocyte-derived cells in vivo, we generated a line 
of gene-targeted mice containing in the 3′-UTR of the Fcgr1 
gene a cassette composed of an internal ribosomal entry site, 
an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), a 2A cleavage 
sequence, and an hDTR. To demonstrate that the mo-Mac and 
monocyte-derived cells found in mice homozygous for the Fcgr1-
IRES-EGFP-hDTR allele (also known as B6-Fcgr1tm1Ciphe and called 
CD64dtr mice here) developed normally and expressed normal 
levels of CD64, we analyzed their skin dermis because it contains 
a full complement of such cells (Fig. S1 A; Tamoutounour et al., 
2013). Among dermal CD11b+ cells, cDC2s can be distinguished 
from non-cDC2s cells by their Ly-6C–CD64– phenotype. Dermal 
CD11b+CD64+ non-cDC2 cells can be further resolved into CCR2+ 
and CCR2– cells. CCR2+ cells comprise Ly-6ChighMHC 
II– dermal 
monocytes (P1), Ly-6Chigh (P2), and Ly-6C– (P3) MHC 
II+ mo-DCs 
that constitute a P1 → P2 → P3 developmental series. CCR2– cells 
comprise MHC 
IIlow (P4) and MHC 
IIhigh (P5) dermal macrophages. 
The ear skin dermis of DT-untreated CD64dtr mice showed ratios 
and numbers of monocytes, mo-DCs, and macrophages compa-
rable to those of WT mice (Fig. S1 B), and all those cells expressed 
normal levels of CD64 (Fig. S1 C). Similar results were obtained 
when CD64+ cells found in the lamina propria of the large intes-
tine were analyzed (not depicted).
CD64dtr mice were treated with DT twice and 24 h apart 
without lethality, and the myeloid cells present in the ear skin 
were analyzed at various time points after the last DT injec-
tion. DT treatment was not associated with overt inflammation 
as documented by the lack of skin infiltrating neutrophils (not 
depicted). CD64+CCR2+ cells were all ablated within 24 h (Fig. 1, 
A and B), demonstrating that the hDTR was functional. 48 h 
after the last DT injection, Ly-6ChighMHC 
II– dermal monocytes 
started to return, and Ly-6Chigh and Ly-6C– MHC 
II+ mo-DCs were 
replenished in sequence over the next 5 d. A transient rebound 
in their numbers occurred around day 4, suggesting that their 
rate of generation can increase in response to acute, DT-induced 
loss. Both MHC 
IIlow and MHC 
IIhigh CCR2–CD64+ dermal macro-
phages showed protracted reconstitution kinetics compared 
with CD64+CCR2+ cells in that it took up to 10 d to fully recon-
stitute their pools (Fig. 1, C and D). Analysis of the gate corre-
sponding to CCR2–CD64+ cells at days 2–3 revealed a population 
of Ly-6ChighMHC 
IIlow to high cells (denoted as Px cells in Fig. 1, C 
and D) that started losing Ly-6C expression on day 4 and thus 
progressively merged within gates corresponding to MHC 
IIlow 
and MHC 
IIhigh dermal macrophages. The phenotype, kinetics of 
reappearance of Px cells, and the occurrence at days 4 and 5 of 
cells straddling the Px and P4/P5 gates suggest that they corre-
spond to intermediaries between Ly-6Chigh blood monocytes and 
MHC 
IIlow and MHC 
IIhigh dermal macrophages. The percentage 
of Px cells among CCR2–CD64+ cells reached pre-DT-treatment 
levels upon replenishment of the MHC 
IIlow and MHC 
IIhigh dermal 
macrophage compartments (Fig. 1, C and D).
In the lamina propria of the large intestine of CD64dtr mice, 
CD64+ cells were also ablated within 24 h after the last DT injec-
tion and reconstituted from 48 h onward akin to dermal CD64+ 
cells (Fig. S2). Therefore, by allowing to conditionally empty the 
niche occupied in the skin dermis and intestinal lamina propria 
by CD64+ myeloid cells, the CD64dtr mouse model demonstrated 
that all the mo-DC and macrophage subsets that were present 
in adult skin and intestine before DT treatment can be readily 
Quantification of the results in C showing the absolute number of cells obtained from two ears of each mouse. Each symbol corresponds to a mouse and the 
mean (horizontal bar) is indicated. Data are representative of three independent experiments involving three to six animals per group. *, P ≤ 0.05; **, P ≤ 0.01; 
***, P ≤ 0.001; unpaired Student’s t test.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1118
Figure 2. Replenishment kinetics of blood monocytes of CD64dtr mice after DT treatment. (A) Gating strategy used to identify CD11b+Lin– cell subsets 
within the blood. Red blood cells were lysed before analysis, and the absolute number of a given cell type present in a given blood volume was determined 
by staining samples in Trucount Absolute Counting Tubes. Beads were gated out on the basis of their FSC-A–SSC-A profile, and after excluding CD5+ T cells, 
CD19+ B cells, CD161+ NK cells, as well as SSC-Aint eosinophils, and Ly-6G+ neutrophils, the majority of the remaining CD11b+Lin– cells were CD45+CD115+; when 
analyzed on CD115-CD43 dot plots, they comprise CD115+CD43– and CD115+CD43+ subsets. As expected, CD115+CD43– cells corresponded to Ly-6Chigh blood 
monocytes, whereas most CD115+CD43+ corresponded to Ly6-Clow blood monocytes. (B) Absolute number (mean values ± SD) of the specified cells in the 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1119
reconstituted in normal ratios and numbers and with kinetics 
consistent with their expected precursor-product relationship.
Kinetics of replenishment of blood monocytes 
after DT treatment
Adult steady-state monopoiesis occurs in BM, where mono-
cyte–macrophage DC progenitors (MDPs) give rise to common 
monocyte progenitors (cMoP) that generate two main blood 
monocyte subsets that are both CD115 (CSF1R)+ and can be dis-
tinguished on the basis of CD43 expression (Fig. 2 A). CD43– cells 
are CX3CR1intCCR2+CD64+Ly-6Chigh and CD43+ cells are mostly 
CX3CR1highCCR2–CD64+Ly-6Clow (Sunderkötter et al., 2004). They 
are denoted here as Ly-6Chigh and Ly-6Clow monocytes, respec-
tively. Ly-6Clow monocytes remain within blood vessels (Carlin et 
al., 2013) whereas Ly-6Chigh monocytes contribute to the replen-
ishment of mo-DCs and mo-Mac in tissues, including the skin 
and the intestine (Jakubzick et al., 2013; Tamoutounour et al., 
2013; Yona et al., 2013; Bain et al., 2014; McGovern et al., 2014). 
Intraperitoneal injection of DT twice and 24 h apart resulted 
within 24 h in the complete ablation of the MDPs and cMoPs 
and Ly-6Chigh, Ly-6Cint, and Ly-6Clow monocytes found in the 
BM (Fig. S3) and of the Ly-6Chigh and Ly-6Clow blood monocytes 
(Fig. 2, B–D). Analysis of the blood and BM of CD64dtr mice at 
various time points after the last DT injection showed that blood 
Ly-6Chigh and Ly-6Clow monocytes were rapidly replenished and 
that a transient rebound in their numbers occurred (Fig. 2, B–D; 
and Fig. S3). Consistent with the observation that CD115 is dra-
matically down-regulated in response to CSF-1 (Yu et al., 2012), 
the earliest BM-derived monocytes reappearing in the blood 
expressed lower levels of CD115 than CD115+ steady-state mono-
cytes and are denoted here as CD115int cells (Fig. 2, A, B, and E). 
Because of their CD115int phenotype, those Ly-6Chigh monocytes 
were not recorded in the CD115+CD43– gate used in Fig. 2 C. Their 
numbers peaked at day 3 after DT treatment (Fig. 2, B and E), 
and when blood monocytes were fully replenished, their relative 
representation dramatically decreased. Congruent with the view 
that circulating CD43–Ly-6Chigh monocytes give rise to CD43+ 
Ly-6Clow monocytes (Varol et al., 2007; Thomas et al., 2016; 
Mildner et al., 2017), the first CD43+ monocytes reappeared at days 
3–4 after the last DT treatment and gradually lost Ly-6C expression 
(Fig. 2 D). An approximately fourfold increase in blood neutro-
phils occurred in CD64dtr mice and peaked 3 d after DT treatment 
(Fig. 2 B). It occurred, however, with a far lower magnitude and 
shorter duration than that observed upon DT administration in 
CD11c-DTR mice (Autenrieth et al., 2012; Tittel et al., 2012).
DT treatment of CD64dtr mice spares skin cDCs
We analyzed next whether DT treatment of CD64dtr mice affects 
the cDCs found in the skin. Langerhans cells (LCs; CD24hiCD11b+), 
cDC1s (CD11b–CD24+), cDC2s (CD24lowCD11b+), and double-nega-
tive (DN) cDCs (CD11b–CD24–) were identified as described in Fig. 
S4 A. Although the absolute numbers of LCs, cDC1s, and DN cells 
were not affected by DT treatment, a 1.3-fold reduction in cDC2 
absolute number was observed 1 d after DT treatment (Fig. S4 B). 
Therefore, our regimen of DT administration had a rather mini-
mal impact on the cDC subsets found in the skin of CD64dtr mice. 
CD64dtr mice can thus be used to monitor the dynamics and func-
tion of macrophages and monocyte-derived cells without major 
collateral effects or lethality.
Melanophages predominate among dermal myeloid 
cells of B6 ear skin
Former analyses of CD45+Lin– myeloid cells present in the ear 
skin dermis focused on SSC-AlowFSC-Alow to high (SSC-Alow in 
short) cells, leaving aside an uncharacterized population of 
SSC-AhighFSC-Alow to int (SSC-Ahigh in short) cells (Tamoutounour 
et al., 2013). After treatment of CD64dtr mice with DT twice and 
24 h apart, all those SSC-Ahigh cells were unexpectedly ablated 
(Fig. 3 A). Further characterization of such DT-sensitive, 
 
SSC-Ahigh cells showed that they had a CD24lowCD11b+CD64+CCR2–
MHC 
II+ or – phenotype identical to that of SSC-Alow dermal mac-
rophages and that CD64 expression accounted for their DT sen-
sitivity (Fig. 3 B).
In the almost hairless skin of mouse ears, melanocytes are 
primarily found in the dermis (Fig. 3 C; Aoki et al., 2009) and 
synthetize melanin pigment within specialized lysosome-related 
structures known as melanosomes. Considering that the SSC-A 
parameter used in cytometry is proportional to cell granularity 
and that CD64dtr mice were of B6 origin and have a black coat, 
we surmised that the high granularity of the SSC-Ahigh myeloid 
cells found in the ear dermis was due to their capture of melanin 
granules from neighboring melanocytes. Hematoxylin and eosin 
staining of cytospin preparations showed that the SSC-AlowCCR2–
CD64+ cells and the SSC-Ahigh cells sorted from the ear dermis 
have typical features of tissue macrophages; they were large 
with prominent cytoplasmic vacuoles (Fig. 3 D). The vacuoles of 
 
SSC-Ahigh cells differed, however, from those of SSC-Alow CCR2–
CD64+ cells in that they were loaded with dark material (Fig. 3 D). 
Upon analysis by electron microscopy, such dark vacuolar mate-
rial had an extremely electron-dense appearance and an ellip-
soidal shape (∼0.2 µm × 0.7 µm), two hallmarks of melanosomes 
(Fig. 3 E). All the ingested melanosomes were in a mature stage, 
showing a uniformly electron-dense granule without discernable 
internal structure (Fig. 3 E).
In contrast to their precursors, dermal macrophages do not 
express CX3CR1 (Tamoutounour et al., 2012). Consistent with 
our hypothesis that melanophages correspond to macrophages 
that ingested melanosomes, they were CX3CR1– (not depicted) 
blood of CD64dtr mice before and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, and 20 d after DT treatment. (C) CD115+CD43– monocytes were analyzed at the specified time points by using 
Ly-6C–MHC 
II dot plots to define the percentages of Ly-6ChighMHC 
II– and Ly-6ChighMHC 
II+ monocytes. (D) CD115+CD43+ cells were analyzed at the specified 
time points by using Ly-6C–MHC 
II dot plots to define the percentages of Ly-6C+MHC 
II– and Ly-6ClowMHC 
II– monocytes. (E) Ly-6G–SSC-Alow cells were analyzed 
at the specified time points by using CD115-CD45 dot plots to define the percentages of CD115int and CD115+ blood monocytes. Data are representative of at 
least three experiments involving three to six animals per group.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1120
Figure 3. CD64dtr mice unveil the existence of a novel CD64+ cell population in the skin that is highly granular and DT sensitive and corresponds to 
melanophages. (A) Cell suspensions from the ear skin of CD64dtr mice were analyzed by flow cytometry before (-DT) or 48 h after (DT + 48 h) DT treatment. 
After excluding CD3+ T cells, CD19+ B cells, CD161+ NK cells, and Ly-6G+ neutrophils, the remaining lineage-negative (Lin–) CD45+ live cells were analyzed by 
using FSC-A–SSC-A dot plots to define the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. (B) Comparative analysis of the SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells found in the 
ear skin by using a gating strategy resolving the cDC2s, monocytes, mo-DCs and macrophages present among CD45+Lin–CD11b+ cells (Fig. S1 A). The percentage 
of cells found in each of the specified gate is indicated. (C) Transversal tissue sections of B6 ear or trunk skin (at telogen and anagen phases) were stained with 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1121
and identified as melanin+tdTomato+CD64+ cells in the ear sec-
tion of CX3CR1Cre/+ Rosalsl-tdt/+ mice that fate map cells that have 
expressed CX3CR1 during their development (Fig. 3 F). In the 
densely haired mouse trunk, melanocytes are absent from the 
dermis and confined to the hair follicles where melanosomes are 
transferred from melanocytes to matrix keratinocytes to give 
rise to melanized hairs (Fig. 3 C). Such transfer is strictly coupled 
to the anagen phase of hair growth, and melanin is not formed 
during the telogen phase (Fig. 3 C; Slominski et al., 2005). Consis-
tent with these anatomical features, the CD11b+CD64+CCR2– mac-
rophages isolated from the trunk skin during both the anagen 
and telogen phases lacked melanophages (Fig. 3 G). Likewise, 
the ear skin of B6-albino and BALB/c mice, which is deprived 
of melanic pigment, also lacked SSC-Ahigh melanophages (Fig. 4, 
A and B). Therefore, the presence of dermal melanophages cor-
relates with the presence of dermal melanocytes. Although they 
represent 55 ± 10% of the monocyte-derived cells present in the 
B6 ear dermis (Fig. 4, A and B), it is likely that melanophages 
have been missed in previous studies because of their unusual 
 
SSC-Ahigh phenotype.
Dynamics and origin of dermal melanophages
To assess the dynamics of dermal melanophages replenishment 
after DT-induced depletion, CD64dtr mice were treated with DT 
twice and 24 h apart. Melanophages were all ablated within 24 h, 
and their numbers fully reconstituted ∼20 d after the last DT 
injection (Fig. 5, A and B). The granularity of SSC-Ahigh cells, a 
proxy for melanin content, increased with time. The upper sec-
tion (>190 K) of the SSC-Ahigh gate was only filled between days 
20 and 90 after DT treatment, and a melanin content distribution 
identical to pre-DT-treatment levels was regained 90 d after DT 
treatment (Fig. 5, A and B). Although the dermis of CCR2-defi-
cient mice is only populated by macrophages of prenatal origin 
that self-maintain without any input from adult monopoiesis 
(Tamoutounour et al., 2013), it showed a melanophage to macro-
phage ratio and melanin content distribution identical to that of 
WT dermis (Fig. 6 A). Therefore, the macrophages found in the 
ear dermis have the same propensity to capture melanin regard-
less of their prenatal (Fig. 6 A) or adult (Fig. 5) origin.
To demonstrate without relying on DT ablation that replen-
ishment of the pool of adult dermal macrophages and mela-
nophages relied on continuous input from BM-derived circu-
lating precursors, parabiosis was established between adult 
mice expressing CD45.1 and CD45.2 (Fig. 6 B). Blood monocytes 
were allowed to exchange between parabionts for 8 wk before 
assessing the presence of donor-derived macrophages and 
melanophages in the ear skin of each parabiont. Dermal MHC 
II+ macrophages contained ∼15% of cells originating from the 
parabiotic partner (Fig. 6 B), a distribution comparable to that of 
Ly-6Chigh blood monocytes and demonstrating that they contin-
uously develop from BM monocytes (Tamoutounour et al., 2013; 
Sheng et al., 2015). Consistent with the view that a fraction of 
dermal MHC 
II– macrophages is of embryonic origin and self-re-
news in situ (Sheng et al., 2015), MHC 
II– macrophages showed 
a twofold reduced rate of exchange with blood-borne precur-
sors compared with dermal MHC 
II+ macrophages. In parabi-
osis experiments involving WT and CCR2-deficient mice, the 
percentages of donor-derived cells found in the CCR2-deficient 
parabionts reached 80% and 40% of MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– mac-
rophages, respectively, compared with 80% for Ly-6Chigh blood 
monocytes (Fig. 6 B). As expected for cells linked by a precur-
sor-product relationship, in both types of parabiosis MHC 
II+ and 
MHC 
II– melanophages achieved a degree of chimerism identical 
to that of MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– macrophages (Fig. 6 B). Altogether, 
these data indicate that dermal macrophages and melanophages 
are related through a precursor-product relationship and that 
dying dermal macrophages and melanophages are continuously 
replenished with new ones via CCR2-dependent recruitment of 
circulating Ly-6Chigh blood precursors.
Comparative transcriptomic analysis of dermal macrophages 
and melanophages
To assess whether melanophages show a unique transcriptomic 
signature compared with dermal SSC-Alow macrophages that 
have not ingested melanin, MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– melanophages 
and macrophages from the ear dermis were sorted in triplicates 
and subjected to gene-expression profiling. Principal compo-
nent analysis (PCA) on all the genes found to be differentially 
expressed between at least two of the four subsets showed that 
the MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– status accounted for most of the over-
all variability observed in the dataset (47%) and that differences 
between melanophages and macrophages was only the second 
component of variability (17%; Fig. 7 A). Insights into the biolog-
ical pathways underlying these transcriptomic differences were 
obtained through ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) of eight 
lists of genes corresponding to those differentially expressed 
(1) in one out of the four subsets, (2) between MHC 
II+ versus 
MHC 
II– cells, and (3) between melanophages and macrophages 
(Fig. 7 B). When compared with their MHC 
II– counterparts, 
 
MHC 
II+ macrophages and melanophages were significantly 
DAPI and analyzed by microscopy for the presence of melanin. Bars: (top) 100 μm; (bottom) 20 µm. (D) Morphological characteristics of CD64+CCR2–SSC-Alow 
macrophages and CD64+SSC-Ahigh melanophages sorted from ear skin and analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin staining after cytospin onto glass slides. Two 
representative cells are shown for each population. Bar, 10 µm. (E) Morphological characteristics of CD64+SSC-Ahigh melanophages sorted from ear skin and 
analyzed by electron microscopy. Three representative cells are shown. Melanophages display an irregular nucleus surrounded by a prominent cytoplasm 
crowded with elongated melanin granules. Bars, 1 µm. Higher magnification shows pigment granules with a homogeneous and extremely dense content, attest-
ing for its mature stage. Melanosomes are grouped together forming melanosome complexes (asterisks), but they are also singly dispersed in the cytoplasm, 
all of them are surrounded by a membrane. Bars, 0.5 µm. (F) En face section of ear dermis from CX3CR1Cre/+ Rosalsl-tdt/+ mice analyzed by confocal microscopy 
for the colocalization of melanin with CD64+ CX3CR1-fate-mapped macrophages (tdtomato+). Bars: (top) 50 µm; (bottom) 10 µm. Data are representative of 
two to three experiments. (G) CD11b+CD64+CCR2– cells from the ear skin and trunk skin of B6 (telogen and anagen phases) of B6 mice were analyzed for the 
percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. Data are representative of at least two experiments involving three animals per group.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1122
enriched in annotations related to the adaptive immune response 
such as antigen presentation pathway, dendritic cell matura-
tion, and cytokine signaling (IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-17). MHC 
II 
expression was also associated with a pro-inflammatory signature 
with higher expression of Ccr7, Il1b, Il1r2, and Il6 and to immune 
cell chemotaxis with higher expression of Ccl17, Ccl22, Ccl5, and 
Cxcl13 (Fig. 7 C). When compared with SSC-Alow macrophages, 
melanophages were significantly enriched in annotations related 
to aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling and glutathione-mediated 
detoxification (Fig. 7 B) because of their expression of two genes 
of the glutathione S transferase family (Gstm1 and 3; Table S1). 
High and selective expression by melanophages of genes coding 
for a lysosomal ATPase and a cystein protease (Atp6v0d2 and Ctsk, 
respectively) led to their enrichment for the annotation phago-
some maturation (Fig. 7 B and Table S1), a feature consistent with 
the fact that they are laden with melanosomes.
Melanophages are found in melanocytic melanoma
Tumors depend on the supportive functions of macrophages. 
Clusters of melanophages have been observed in the periphery 
of the nevi found in the dermis of mice expressing oncogenic 
mutated form (BrafV600E) of the serine-threonine-specific 
protein kinase BRAF (Dhomen et al., 2009). To determine 
whether such melanoma-associated melanophages correspond 
to CD64+SSC-Ahigh cells, B6-albino mice, which lack melano-
phages, were injected with melanocytic (B16) or amelanoctyic 
(BrafV600E) melanoma cells. Analysis of CD45+Lin–Siglec-F– cells 
isolated from tumor masses 14 to 18 d after inoculation showed 
that SSC-Ahigh cells were present only in the melanocytic mel-
anoma (Fig. 8 A). Their morphology was similar to that of the 
melanophages identified in the B6 dermis (Fig. 8 B) and they had 
a CD11b+CD64+F4/80+ phenotype (Fig. 8 C).
The melanophages that are identifiable in melanocytic mela-
noma constitute a unique thread permitting revisiting the phe-
notype of tumoral macrophages. For instance, the presence of 
CD64 and absence of Ly-6C permit readily distinguishing macro-
phages in steady-state tissues (Tamoutounour et al., 2013), and it 
has been assumed that such a feature holds true within the tumor 
microenvironment (Salmon et al., 2016). Our analysis of the 
melanophages found in melanocytic tumors showed, however, 
Figure 4. SSC-AhighCD64+ dermal cells correspond to melanophages. (A) CD45+Lin– cells from the ear skin of B6, B6-albino, and BALB/c mice, the tail skin 
of B6 mice, and the lamina propria of the large intestine of B6 mice were analyzed for the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. As expected on the basis 
of the anatomical distribution of mouse melanocytes (Aoki et al., 2009), the lamina propria of B6 mice lacked melanophages. (B) Pie charts and corresponding 
frequencies of the indicated cells among CD11b+ noncDC2 cells found in the specified anatomical location and mice strain. Data corresponding to each pie 
chart were averaged from six mice and the corresponding percentages (mean values ± SD) are shown below the charts. Data are representative of at least three 
experiments involving three to six animals per group.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1123
that most of them expressed Ly-6C (Fig. 8 C). Therefore, analy-
sis of the melanophages found in melanoma constitute a unique 
decision support tool permitting to determine whether markers 
defined as macrophage-specific under steady-state conditions 
keep or lose their discriminatory potential within the tumor 
microenvironment.
Skin macrophages capture and retain tattoo pigment particles
Using the CD64dtr mouse model and benefiting of our knowledge 
on melanophages, we determined next the identity, origin, and 
dynamics of the skin myeloid cells that are capable of captur-
ing and retaining tattoo pigment particles. The frequency of 
melanophages in the tail skin of B6 mice is fourfold lower than 
that of melanophages in ear dermis and reflects its scarcity in 
melanocytes. Moreover, because of their reduced melanin con-
tent tail skin melanophages barely merged in the SSC-Ahigh gate, 
the lower limit of which that was defined by using B6 albino ear 
(Fig. 4, A and B). Accordingly, we used tail skin of B6 mice to mon-
itor the appearance in the almost-empty SSC-Ahigh gate of those 
cells that have captured the bright green pigment particles that 
are contained in the tattooing ink paste used in the present study. 
Analysis of the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells found 
among the CD45+Lin– cells isolated from the skin of tails that 
were tattooed 3 wk before analysis showed that they contained 
a unique population of SSC-Ahigh cells compared with untreated 
mice (Fig. 9 A). Further characterization of those SSC-Ahigh cells 
showed that they had a CD24lowCD11b+CD64+CCR2– to low pheno-
type (Fig. 9 A), which was identical to that observed for SSC-Ahigh 
Figure 5. SSC-AhighCD64+ melanophages showed a protracted 
kinetics of replenishment after DT treatment compared with 
SSC-Alow macrophages. (A) CD45+Lin– cells from the ear skin of 
CD64dtr mice were analyzed for the percentages of SSC-Alow and 
SSC-Ahigh cells before (-DT) or at the specified time points after 
DT treatment. (B) Quantification of the results in A are shown for 
the MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– cells found among the SSC-Ahigh melano-
phages. Each symbol corresponds to a mouse and the mean (hor-
izontal bar) is indicated. Data are representative of two to three 
independent experiments involving three to six animals per group. 
n.s., P > 0.05; *, P ≤ 0.05; **, P ≤ 0.01; unpaired Student’s t test.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1124
melanophages and SSC-Alow macrophages (Fig. 3 B). Cytospin 
analysis of SSC-Ahigh cells sorted from tattooed tail skin showed 
that they were large cells containing prominent cytoplasmic vac-
uoles loaded with green material, whereas SSC-Alow dermal mac-
rophages and cDCs contained no green tattoo pigment (Fig. 9 B). 
None of the CD45– skin cells, which mostly comprise keratino-
cytes, contained green material (not depicted). Therefore, 3 wk 
after tail tattooing, the green pigment particles present at the site 
of tattooing were primarily found within dermal macrophages.
Cycles of pigment capture–release–recapture account for long-
term tattoo persistence
We used CD64dtr mice to ablate dermal CD64+ macrophages laden 
with green pigment particles (“green” macrophages in short) 
and to determine whether their death results in tattoo vanish-
ing. Accordingly, CD64dtr mice that had the skin of their tail tat-
tooed with green tattoo ink paste 3 wk before were treated with 
DT twice and 24 h apart. Analysis of tattooed skin of those mice 
for the presence of SSC-Ahigh green macrophages showed that 
they were as expected all ablated within 2 d after DT treatment 
and that, akin to melanophages, their pool was slowly reconsti-
tuted after DT injection (Fig. 9 C). Their granularity, reflecting 
green-particle content per cell, increased with time and 90 d after 
DT injection reached levels identical to those present just before 
DT treatment (Fig. 9, A and C). The pool of SSC-Ahigh cells that was 
replenished 90 d after DT treatment was exclusively composed 
of green macrophages with a morphology and CD24lowCD11b+ 
CD64+CCR2– to low phenotype resembling those of green macro-
phages observed pre-DT treatment (Fig. 9 D and not depicted).
Considering that no green tattoo ink paste was reapplied after 
DT treatment, it is likely that most of the green pigment particles 
released after DT-induced green macrophage death remained in 
an extracellular form at the site of tattooing where they were 
progressively recaptured by incoming dermal macrophages orig-
inating from circulating Ly-6Chigh blood monocytes (see model 
A in Fig. 10). Consistent with that model, cytospin preparation 
of the total cell suspension from tail skin showed that before DT 
treatment green pigment particles were all associated with cells 
that had typical features of tissue macrophages, whereas 2 d after 
the last DT injection no green macrophages were left (Fig. 9 C) 
and the green pigment particles that were spun down with the 
cells were all extracellular (Fig. 9 E). Importantly, macroscopic 
examination of tattooed tails showed that even at time points 
when green macrophages were absent and green pigment par-
ticles were extracellular (for instance, day 2 after DT), the tattoo 
kept the appearance it had just before DT treatment (Fig. 9 F). 
Therefore, despite the fact that the green tattoo pigments went, 
over 90 d, through a full cycle of capture–release–recapture, the 
tattoo kept its macroscopic appearance.
To further support our pigment capture–release–recapture 
model without relying on DT ablation, CD45.1+ B6 mice were tat-
tooed on the tail. The tattooed tail skin was explanted and grafted 
on the skin of the back of CD45.2+ B6 albino mice. Analysis of 
the myeloid cells present in the graft 6 wk after transplantation 
showed that most of the SSC-Ahigh cells found among CD11b+ 
CD64+CCR2– cells were of host origin, suggesting that green tat-
too pigments were released from the CD45.1+CD11b+CD64+CCR2–
SSC-Ahigh cells originally present in the donor graft and captured 
by incoming CD45.2+CD11b+CD64+CCR2– macrophages of host 
origin (Fig. 9 G). As discussed below, those findings provide a cel-
lular basis for long-term tattoo persistence and have implications 
for improving strategies aimed at removing tattoos.
Discussion
We used a novel model of DT-induced depletion of macrophages 
to generate niche availability without triggering inflammation 
and showed that the pool of adult dermal macrophages can be 
fully reconstituted from circulating Ly-6Chigh monocytes. By 
using a model of DT-mediated depletion of liver Kupffer cells, 
circulating Ly-6Chigh monocytes were also found capable of col-
onizing the emptied liver niches and of adopting a Kupffer cell 
identity (Scott et al., 2016). Likewise, transferred BM-derived 
monocytes were able to colonize the empty alveolar macrophage 
Figure 6. Prenatal and adult origins of SSC-AhighCD64+ melanophages. 
(A) CD45+Lin– cells from the ear skin of B6 (WT) and Ccr2−/− mice were ana-
lyzed for the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. (B) Percentages 
(mean values ± SD) of donor chimerism in MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– dermal mac-
rophages and MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– melanophages found in the skin dermis of 
parabiotic mice involving either CD45.1 and CD45.2 WT parabionts or CD45.1 
WT and CD45.2 Ccr2−/− parabionts. No macrophages or melanophages orig-
inating from CCR2-deficient mice were found in the dermis of WT partners. 
Data are representative of two to three independent experiments involving 
two to four animals per group.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1125
Figure 7. Gene expression profiling of MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– melanophages and macrophages from steady-state dermis. MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– CD64+CCR2–
SSC-Alow macrophages and MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– CD64+SSC-Ahigh melanophages were sorted in triplicates from ear skin and subjected to gene-expression 
profiling (Affymetrix 1.0ST). (A) PCA of gene expression by MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– dermal macrophages and MHC 
II+ and MHC 
II– melanophages, based on all the 
1,054 unique genes differentially expressed between at least one pair of experimental conditions. The percentage of overall variability of the dataset is indicated 
along each PC axis. (B) Heat map representation of selected functions and pathways found enriched by IPA for the lists of genes differentially expressed in one 
of the three cell types, between MHC 
II+ versus MHC 
II− cells, or between melanophages and macrophages. (C) Heat map showing the expression pattern across 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1126
niche of neonatal CSF2RB-deficient mice and generate alveo-
lar macrophages (van de Laar et al., 2016). Therefore, our data 
showed that the capacity for Ly-6Chigh blood monocytes to replen-
ish macrophages after DT-induced ablation also extends to the 
skin dermis. Moreover, we characterized the melanophages that 
are present in large numbers in the normal ear dermis of mice 
with a black coat, demonstrating that they correspond to dermal 
macrophages that have ingested melanosomes originating from 
neighboring melanocytes.
Limited information has been provided on the identity of 
the cells that are found in tattooed skin biopsies and capable of 
retaining tattoo pigment particles. By capitalizing on the knowl-
edge gained on melanophages and on the functionalities offered 
by CD64dtr mice, we conducted the first systematic analysis of 
the identity, origin, and dynamics of the skin myeloid cells that 
are capable of capturing and retaining tattoo pigment particles. 
The tattooing process consists of inserting water-insoluble pig-
ment of the desired color into the dermis layer of the skin. Tattoo 
pigments are primarily metal salts in the submicrometer range. 
Immediately after tattooing, a fraction of pigments is shed with 
the epidermis or transported away from the dermis via lymphatic 
vessels. We demonstrated that the pigment particles that remain 
at the site of injection and cause the long-term tattoo color were 
exclusively found within dermal macrophages. Zaba et al. (2007) 
previously identified a population of cells located in the human 
dermis that was positive for factor XII 
IA and the macrophage 
scavenger receptor CD163 that lacked CD11c and BDCA-1 and 
weakly activated allogenic T cells. Those cells have structural and 
ultrastructural features of macrophages and in biopsies of tat-
toos they were selectively laden with granular pigments. The fate 
of tattoo pigment injected into dermal tissues has been studied in 
the past, and fibroblasts were considered the primary long-term 
reservoir of the pigment granules (Ferguson et al., 1997; Elsaie et 
al., 2009). However, the morphological study of Zaba et al. (2007) 
and our present data combining multiparameter cytometry and 
the use of CD64dtr “depleter” mice demonstrate that dermal mac-
rophages constitute the primary store of dermal tattoo pigment 
in both mice and humans.
Although the dermis lacked macrophages for approximately 
1 wk after DT treatment and it took several more weeks for the 
incoming macrophages to scavenge the released cell-free tattoo 
pigments, no macroscopic modification of the tattoo occurred. 
Before our study, the longevity of the undefined tattoo-pig-
ment-laden cells found in the dermis was thought to be in the 
same order of that of a human adult, thereby accounting for 
long-term tattoo persistence (Fig. 10 B). Based on the present 
results, an alternative model for long-term tattoo persistence 
can be proposed. It takes into consideration the facts that the 
macrophages found in the dermis of adult mice are continu-
ously replenished from circulating monocytes to compensate 
for the loss of dying macrophages and that most of the tattoo 
particles that are released from macrophages after DT treatment 
of CD64dtr mice remain in situ and are recaptured by incoming 
macrophages. According to the pigment capture–release–recap-
ture model (Fig. 10 A), in physiological conditions, when tat-
too-pigment-laden macrophages die during the course of adult 
life, neighboring macrophages recapture the released pigments 
and ensure in a dynamic manner the macroscopic stability and 
long-term persistence of tattoos. Note that, in contrast to dermal 
cDCs, dermal macrophages do not have the capacity to migrate 
to draining LNs under normal and inflammatory conditions 
(Tamoutounour et al., 2013), an essential property for insuring 
tattoo persistence. Whether the pigment capture–release–recap-
ture model of tattoo persistence applies to humans remains to be 
determined. In the case of the melanophages found in the human 
dermis, it has been suggested that they persist for years through 
longevity rather than continual renewal (Bigley et al., 2011).
Professional tattoos last for years or decades, and when no 
longer desired, they can be removed through the use of quali-
ty-switched lasers. Laser pulses lead to lysis of the tattoo-pig-
ment-laden cells, fragmentation of the tattoo pigments, and 
their lymphatic transportation. Several cycles of laser treat-
ment are required to achieve tattoo removal, and some tattoos 
remain immune to full removal. These difficulties are generally 
accounted for by the fact that a fraction of the fragmented pig-
ment particles remains at the tattooing site and are recaptured 
by neighboring cells, a possibility formally demonstrated here by 
using the CD64dtr model. Considering the long duration needed 
for the reconstitution of the pool of dermal macrophages and the 
recapture of the whole released pigments, tattoo removal can be 
likely improved by combining laser surgery with the transient 
ablation of the macrophages present in the tattoo area. As a 
result, the fragmented pigment particles generated by using laser 
pulses will not have the possibility to be immediately recaptured, 
a condition increasing the probability of having them drained 
away via the lymphatic vessels.
In conclusion, we have validated a new model of DT-me-
diated depletion of tissue-resident macrophages, monocytes, 
and monocyte-derived cells in which DCs are spared. By per-
mitting the emptying of the niche occupied in the skin der-
mis and intestinal lamina propria by CD64+ myeloid cells, the 
CD64dtr mouse model showed that all the mo-DC and macro-
phage subsets that were present in adult skin and intestine 
before DT treatment can be readily reconstituted from circu-
lating Ly-6Chigh monocytes. Furthermore, we showed that the 
myeloid cells of the ear skin dermis are dominated by melano-
phages, and we determined their origin and dynamics. Bene-
fiting by our knowledge on melanophages, we determined the 
identity, origin, and dynamics of the skin myeloid cells that are 
capable of capturing tattoo-pigment particles and showed that 
skin monocytes (P1), mo-DCs (P2, P3), macrophages (P4, P5, Mac), melanophages (Mel), and cDC2s of selected genes contributing to IPA enrichments for the 
SSC-Alow macrophage, SSC-Ahi melanophage, and MHC 
II– versus MHC 
II+ transcriptomic signatures. The cell samples which names are in black font on the top 
of the heat map originate from Tamoutounour et al. (2013), where the P4 and P5 cells correspond to the MHC 
II– and MHC 
II+ macrophages from the present 
study. The exhaustive lists of genes responsible for the IPA enrichments shown in B are provided in Table S1.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1127
they correspond exclusively to dermal macrophages. Based on 
those results, we proposed a dynamic model that accounts for 
long-term tattoo persistence and suggest that tattoo removal 
can be improved by combining laser surgery with the transient 
and specific ablation of the macrophages present in the tattooed 
area. Finally, we showed that melanocytic melanoma host read-
ily identifiable melanophages that permit determining whether 
markers defined as macrophage-specific under steady-state 
conditions keep or lose their discriminatory potential within 
the tumor microenvironment.
Materials and methods
Mice
Ccr2−/− mice have been described (Jung et al., 2000). Cx3cr1cre/+ 
(MW126Gsat) mice were generated by N. Heintz (The Rockefeller 
University, GEN 
SAT, New York) and purchased from MMR 
RC. 
Rosalsl-tdt/+ (Ai14[RCL-tdT]-D) have been described (Madisen et 
al., 2010) and purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Genera-
tion of Fcgr1-IRES-EGFP-hDTR gene-targeted mice is described 
below. C57BL/6 (B6) and BALB/c mice were purchased from Jan-
vier and B6 albino (B6[Cg]-Tyrc-2J/J) and CD45.1 C57BL/6 mice 
from Charles River. All mice, except BALB/c, were maintained 
on a B6 background. Mice were housed under specific pathogen–
free conditions, and in vivo procedures were performed follow-
ing protocols approved by the Ethics Committee of Marseille in 
accordance with institutional, national, and European directives 
for animal care (approvals APA 
FIS 779–2015 0605 10534083 and 
APA 
FIS 781–2015 0605 14006182).
Construction Fcgr1-IRES-EGFP-hDTR mice
A 6.2-kb genomic fragment encompassing exons 4 to 6 of the 
Fcgr1 gene (ENS 
MUSG00000015947) was isolated from a BAC 
clone of B6 origin (clone RP23-427P23; http:// 
www 
.lifesciences 
.sourcebioscience 
.com). By using ET recombination, an IRES- 
EGFP-2A-hDTR-loxP-Cre-neoR-loxP cassette was introduced in 
the 3′ untranslated region of the Fcgr1 gene, 33 bp downstream 
of the stop codon. The targeting construct was abutted to a 
cassette coding for the DT fragment A expression cassette and 
linearized with Pme1. JM8.F6 C57BL/6N embryonic stem (ES) 
cells (Pettitt et al., 2009) were electroporated with the target-
ing vector. After selection in G418, ES cell clones were screened 
for proper homologous recombination by Southern blot. When 
tested on Sca1-digested genomic DNA, the 3′ single-copy probe 
used to identify proper recombination events hybridized to a 7.0-
kb WT fragment and to a 10.3-kb recombinant fragment. When 
tested on HindIII-digested genomic DNA, the 5′ single-copy probe 
used to identify proper recombination events hybridized to a 
10.7-kb WT fragment and to a 6.3-kb recombinant fragment. A 
neomycin-specific probe was used to ensure that adventitious 
nonhomologous recombination events had not occurred in the 
selected ES clones. Properly recombined ES cells were injected 
into FVB blastocysts. Germline transmission led to the self-exci-
sion of the loxP-Cre-NeoR-loxP cassette in male germinal cells. 
Fcgr1-IRES-EGFP-hDTR mice were identified by PCR of tail DNA. 
The pair of primers, sense 5′-CCC 
TTC 
CTC 
CCA 
GTG 
ACA 
GTA 
CTG-
3′ and antisense 5′-TGA 
ACC 
CAT 
CCA 
CCC 
TGT 
GAG-3′, amplifies a 
402-bp band in case of the WT Fcgr1 allele, whereas the pairs of 
primers, sense 5′-CCC 
TTC 
CTC 
CCA 
GTG 
ACA 
GTA 
CTG-3′ and anti-
sense 5′-CCT 
GCA 
AAG 
GGT 
CGC 
TAC 
AGA-3′, amplified a 349-bp 
Figure 8. SSC-AhighCD64+ melanophages can be found in melanocytic 
melanoma. (A) B6-albino mice were injected subcutaneously with 105 ame-
lanocytic (BrafV600E) or melanocytic (B16) melanoma cells. CD45+Lin–Siglec-F– 
cells were isolated from tumor masses 14–18 d after inoculation and analyzed 
for the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. Note that Siglec-F stain-
ing permits elimination of eosinophils. (B) Morphological characteristics of 
representative SSC-Ahigh melanophages and SSC-Alow macrophages sorted 
from B16 melanoma tumor masses after cytospin onto glass slides. Four rep-
resentative cells are shown for each population. Panels are made of two to 
four concatenated images. Bars, 10 µm. (C) Analysis of CD45+Lin–Siglec-F– 
SSC-Ahigh cells isolated from B16 melanoma tumor masses 14 d after inocula-
tion for CD11b, CD64, F4/80, MHC 
II, Ly6C, and CD11c expression. Appropriate 
isotype controls are shown for each of the analyzed markers. Data are rep-
resentative of at least three experiments involving three animals per group.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1128
Figure 9. Dermal macrophages are responsible for uptake and storage of tattoo pigment particles. (A) CD45+Lin– cells from the tail skin of B6 mice that 
were left untreated or tattooed with green tattoo ink paste 3 wk before isolation were analyzed for the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. SSC-Ahigh 
cells were further analyzed by using a gating strategy resolving cDC2s, monocytes, mo-DCs, and macrophages (Fig. S1 A). (B) Morphological characteristics 
of representative SSC-Ahigh cells (green macrophages), SSC-Alow cells (macrophages), and cDC2s sorted from tail skin of B6 mice tattooed with green tattoo 
paste 3 wk before isolation and analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin staining after cytospin onto glass slides. Bar, 10 µm. (C) Tails of CD64dtr mice were tattooed 
with green tattoo paste. 3 wk after, mice were treated twice and 24 h apart with 1 µg DT, and tail skin was analyzed 2 or 90 d after the last DT injection for the 
percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells found among CD45+Lin– cells. (D) SSC-Ahigh cells were sorted from the tail skin of CD64dtr mice that were tattooed 
with green tattoo paste and either left untreated (-DT) or treated with DT and analyzed 90 d (DT + d90) after DT treatment. Sorted cells were analyzed by 
hematoxylin and eosin staining after cytospin onto glass slides. One representative cell is shown for each population. Bar, 10 µm. (E) Tail skin of CD64dtr mice 
that were tattooed with green tattoo paste and either left untreated (-DT) or treated with DT and analyzed 2 d (DT + d2) after DT treatment was digested, and 
the resulting cell suspension was directly analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin staining after cytospin onto glass slides. Insets show magnification of selected 
areas. Bar, 10 µm. (F) Macroscopic view of the tails of CD64dtr mice that were tattooed with green tattoo ink paste and either left untreated (-DT) or treated 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1129
band in the case of the Fcgr1-IRES-EGFP-hDTR allele. Because of 
its low level of expression, the EGFP reporter was not used in 
the present study.
Isolation of monocytes, macrophages, and DCs from 
tissues and tumors
To isolate myeloid cells from ear skin, ears were processed as 
described (Bouladoux et al., 2017). In brief, ears were split into 
ventral and dorsal parts and incubated for 105 min at 37°C in 
RPMI containing 0.25 mg/ml Liberase TL (Roche Diagnostic 
Corp.) and 0.5 mg/ml DNase I (Sigma Aldrich). Digested tissue 
was homogenized by using Medicons and Medimachine (Bec-
ton Dickinson) to obtain homogenous cell suspensions. To iso-
late myeloid cells from tail skin, the skin was separated from 
the muscle and the vertebra and cut into small pieces and then 
digested in RPMI with Liberase TL and DNase as described 
for ear skin. The digested tissue was homogenized by using C 
Tubes and GentleMACS Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec). To isolate 
myeloid cells from the lamina propria of the large intestine, the 
large intestine was opened longitudinally, cut into pieces, and 
washed in HBSS. The epithelial layer was eliminated by two 
incubations of 20 and 30 min in HBSS containing 2 mM EDTA. 
Intestinal pieces were washed twice in HBSS and then digested 
in RPMI medium containing 10% FCS, 1 mg/ml Collagenase 8 
(Sigma Aldrich), and 30 ng/ml DNase I. Tissue was homogenized 
in C Tubes and GentleMACS Dissociator. Light-density cells were 
then purified by centrifugation on a 70–40% Percoll gradient (GE 
Healthcare). To isolate myeloid cells from tumor mass, tumors 
were cut into small pieces and then digested in RPMI medium 
containing 5% FCS, 0.8 mg/ml Collagenase 4 (Worthington), and 
0.2 mg/ml DNase I for 40 min at 37°C. The digested tissue was 
homogenized by using C Tubes and GentleMACS Dissociator 
(Miltenyi Biotec).
Analysis of blood cells
Blood was collected in EDTA-containing tubes and then trans-
ferred to Trucount Absolute Counting Tubes (Becton Dickinson). 
Red blood cells were lysed with BD FACS Lysing Solution (Becton 
Dickinson). The absolute number of cells present in a given vol-
ume was determined by using the bead-to-cell ratio.
Antibodies
APC-Vio770–conjugated anti-NK1.1 (PK136), anti-CD3 (17A2), anti–
Ly-6G (1A8), and anti-CD19 (6D5) were from Miltenyi Biotec. Bio-
tin-conjugated anti–mouse-MER 
TK (BAF591) and PE-conjugated 
anti-CCR2 (475301) were from R&D. BV711-conjugated anti-CD11b 
(M1/70); BV605-conjugated anti-CD11c (N418); FITC-conjugated 
anti-CD43 (S7); Alexa Fluor 700–conjugated anti-CD45.1 (A20); 
Alexa Fluor 700–conjugated rat IgG2b κ isotype control (R35-38); 
FITC-conjugated anti-CD45.2 (104); APC-conjugated anti-CD64 
(X54-5/7.1); FITC-, PE-CF594-, and BV421-conjugated anti–Ly-6C 
(AL-21); BV650-conjugated anti-NK1.1 (PK136); BV421-conjugated 
anti–Siglec-F (E50-2440); biotin-conjugated anti–Ly-6C (AL-21); 
and biotin-conjugated anti-CD103 (M290) were from BD PharMin-
gen. PE-Cy5–conjugated anti-CD24 (M1/69), BV650-conjugated 
anti-CD45.1 (A20), PE-conjugated anti–Ly-6G (1A8), Pe-Dazzle–
conjugated anti-CD45.2 (104), APC-conjugated anti-F4/80 (BM8), 
APC-conjugated rat IgG2a κ isotype control (RTK2758), APC-con-
jugated anti-CD11c (N418), APC-conjugated Armenian hamster 
IgG isotype control (HTK888), APC-conjugated anti-CD5 (53–7.3), 
APC-conjugated anti-CD19 (6D5), APC-Cy7–conjugated anti-
CD11b (M1/70), FITC-conjugated anti-CD11b (M1/70), FITC-conju-
gated rat IgG2b κ isotype control (MRG25-8T), BV711-conjugated 
anti-CD64 (X54-5/7,1), BV711-conjugated mouse IgG1 κ isotype 
control (MOPC-21), and BV510- and Alexa-700–conjugated anti–
MHC Class II (IA/I-E; M5/114.15.2) were from Biolegend. PE-Cy5.5–
conjugated anti-CD45 (30-F11) and Pe-Cy7–conjugated anti-CD115 
(AFS98) were from eBioscience. Biotin-conjugated antibodies 
were detected by using streptavidin conjugated with PE-CF594 or 
Pe-Cy7 (BD PharMingen).
Flow cytometry
Cells were stained and acquired on a FACS LSR 
II system and ana-
lyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star). Neutrophils and B, T, and 
NK cells were systematically gated out by using a Lin+ gate (Fig. 
S1 and Fig. 2).
Cell sorting
The different cell types were sorted on a FACS Aria II accord-
ing to the marker combination specified on Fig. S1 A and Fig. 3. 
For microarrays (Affymetrix 1.0ST), cells were sorted directly 
in lysis buffer provided from the Qiagen RNAeasy PLUS 
extraction kit.
Cell morphology
Sorted cells were spun onto Shandon Cytoslides with a Thermo 
Shandon Cytospin 4 cytofuge (4 min at 400 g), fixed with meth-
anol and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
Electron microscopy
Sorted cells were incubated at 37°C on poly-Lysine–coated cover 
slides. After 30 min, attached cells were fixed by using 2% glu-
taraldehyde in 0.1 M cacoldylate buffer, pH 7.4 for 1 h, postfixed 
for 1 h with 2% buffered osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in a 
graded series of ethanol solution, and then embedded in epoxy 
resin. Images were acquired with a digital camera Quemesa (SIS) 
mounted on a Tecnai Spirit transmission electron microscope 
(FEI Company) operated at 80 kV.
with DT and analyzed 2 (DT + d2) and 90 d (DT + d90) after DT treatment. Data are representative of at least three experiments. (G) CD11b+CD64+CCR2– cells 
from the back of untreated CD45.2 albino mice or from the back of CD45.2 albino mice previously grafted with green-tattooed tail skin from CD45.1 B6 animals 
were analyzed for the percentages of SSC-Alow and SSC-Ahigh cells. The SSC-Ahigh CD64+ cells found in the back of the grafted CD45.2 albino mice were further 
analyzed for the percentages of CD45.1 (donor) and CD45.2 (host) expression. Data are representative of two to three independent experiments involving two 
to four animals per group.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1130
Confocal microscopy
Trunk and ear skin pieces were fixed in Antigen Fix (Microm 
Microtech) for 2 h, washed in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, and dehy-
drated overnight in 30% sucrose in 0.1M phosphate buffer. Tis-
sues were snap frozen, and 25-µm sections were stained with 
DAPI. To obtain an en face section of ear dermis, the dorsal part 
was split from the ventral one 2 h after intradermal ear injection 
of CD64-APC (2 µg), fixed in Antigen Fix for 2 h, washed in phos-
phate buffer, stained with DAPI, and clarified with Rapiclear 1.47 
(SunJin Lab). Immunofluorescence confocal microscopy was per-
formed by using a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope. Separate 
images were collected for each fluorochrome and merged to 
obtain a multicolor image. Final image processing was performed 
with Imaris software (Bitplane) and Adobe Photoshop.
RNA isolation and microarray analysis
Transcriptomic and bioinformatics analyses were performed as 
previously described (Tamoutounour et al., 2013). To perform 
a PCA focused on all variability across the four biological sam-
ples examined (Fig. 7 A), we selected all ProbeSets showing a 
fold change ≥1.2 between at least one pair of conditions, taking 
into account only those ProbeSets nonambiguously annotated 
Figure 10. Models accounting for tattoo persistence. (A) The pigment capture–release–recapture model. Analysis of parabiotic mice that share a blood 
supply showed that the macrophage pool found in the noninflammatory dermis of adult mice is continuously replenished from circulating monocytes, thereby 
permitting replacement of dying macrophages. Upon tattooing, pigment particles (green) are captured by dermal macrophages. With time, macrophages laden 
with tattoo pigment particles die and release the tattoo pigment particles. Because of their size, those particles remain in an extracellular form at the site of 
tattooing where they are recaptured by neighboring or incoming macrophages. During the adult life, several cycles of pigment capture–release–recapture can 
occur, accounting for long-term tattoo persistence. (B) The “longevity” model. Although data on dermal macrophage dynamics (Tamoutounour et al., 2013; 
McGovern et al., 2014; and this paper) speak in favor of a pigment capture–release–recapture model, the possibility that a few dermal macrophages including 
those laden with green tattoo pigments had a longevity of the same order of adult mice cannot be excluded.
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1131
to one gene only and further keeping only the highest ProbeSet 
for each gene. This led to selection of 1,054 unique genes. To 
select the genes showing a significant differential expression in 
one type of condition compared with the other three, between 
 
MHC 
II+ versus MHC 
II– cells, or between melanophages and mac-
rophages (Fig. 7 B), we used the GeneSign module of the Bubble-
GUM software using the metrics Minimal pairwise (Mean[test]/
Mean[ref]) with a linear fold change threshold of 1.5 and a P 
value threshold of 0.05. The microarray data have been depos-
ited in the GEO database under accession number GSE103339.
Generation of parabiotic mice
Parabiotic mice were generated by using 8–9-wk-old male mice 
as described previously (Tamoutounour et al., 2013). For WT-WT 
parabiosis, CD45.1 B6 mice were sutured together with CD45.2 
B6 mice, whereas for WT-Ccr2−/− parabiosis, WT CD45.1 B6 mice 
were sutured with Ccr2−/− CD45.2 B6 mice and subsequently 
treated with Bactrim for 8 wk before analysis.
In vivo depletion of CD64+ cells
CD64dtr mice were injected intraperitoneally twice and 24 h apart 
with 1 µg DT (Calbiochem, EMD Millipore) in PBS. CD64dtr mice 
injected with PBS showed no ablation of monocyte-derived cells 
and macrophages.
Tumor model
B6-albino mice were injected subcutaneously with 105 amelano-
cytic (BrafV600E) or melanocytic (B16) melanoma cells (Brown et 
al., 2001; Zelenay et al., 2015).
Tattooing
Tattooing was performed on the tail skin of mice under general 
anesthesia. Tail skin was tattooed by using the Animal Tattoo Ink 
Paste (Ketchum Mfg. Co, Inc.) and a 25-gauge needle. The ink-
coated needle permits ink delivery in a topical manner. Before 
analysis, mice were kept for at least 3 wk until complete healing 
of the treated skin.
Skin grafting
CD45.1 B6 mice were tattooed as described above. After 5 wk, 
the tattooed tail skin was explanted and grafted on the back of 
CD45.2 albino mice under general anesthesia. The back skin of 
the host was analyzed 6 wk after the graft.
Statistical analyses
The unpaired Student t test was used for statistical analyses with 
GraphPad Prism software.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows the gating strategy used to identify CD11b+ cell sub-
sets within the skin of WT and CD64dtr mice. Fig. S2 shows the 
ablation of CD64+ cells present in the lamina propria of the large 
intestine upon DT treatment of CD64dtr mice. Fig. S3 shows the 
replenishment kinetics of the monocyte precursors and mono-
cytes found in the BM after DT treatment of CD64dtr mice. Fig. S4 
shows the lack of major impact of DT treatment on cDCs found 
in the skin of CD64dtr mice. Table S1, a separate Excel file, shows 
the exhaustive lists of genes responsible for the IPA enrichments 
shown in Fig. 7 B.
Acknowledgments
We thank M.M. Haniffa, C. Wohn, M. Guilliams, and N. Malis-
sen for discussions; A. Adda-Benatia and F. Danjan for construc-
tion of the mice; C. Reis e Sousa for the BrafV600E melanoma; F. 
Devaux, L. Chasson, and the CIML flow cytometry core facility for 
technical help. Microarray experiments were performed at the 
Plateforme GenomEast (Strasbourg, France; http:// 
www 
.igbmc 
.fr/ 
technologies/ 
5/ 
team/ 
54/ 
).
This work was supported by Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Med-
icale, PHE 
NOM 
IN, European Research Council (FP7/2007–2013 
grant 322465 to B. Malissen), Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions 
(PIOF-GA-2013-625328-MeTaPATH to S. Henri), ERA-NET 
Infect-ERA (ABIR: ANR-13-IFEC-0005-03 to B. Malissen), the 
 
DCB 
IOL Labex (ANR-11-LAB 
EX-0043, grant ANR-10-
IDEX-0001-02 PSL), and the A*MID 
EX project (ANR-11-
IDEX-0001-02). A. Baranska is supported by a fellowship from 
the ABIR project. We acknowledge PICT-IBiSA, a member of the 
France-BioImaging national research infrastructure, supported 
by the CelTisPhyBio LabEx (ANR-10-LBX-0038) as part of the 
IDEX PSL (ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: B. Malissen, S. Henri, and A. Baranska 
conceived the project. B. Malissen and F. Fiore designed the 
Fcgr1-IRES-EGFP-hDTR mice. A. Baranska and S. Henri did the 
experiments with the technical assistance of C. Malosse and O. 
Voluzan. M. Malissen contributed data in Fig. 2. A. Shawket, T.-P. 
Vu Manh, and M. Dalod performed microarray analysis. M. Jouve 
and P. Benaroch performed electron microscopy. M. Baratin and 
M. Bajénoff performed the fluorescent microscopy analysis.
Submitted: 31 August 2017
Revised: 14 December 2017
Accepted: 6 February 2018
References
Aoki, H., Y. Yamada, A. Hara, and T. Kunisada. 2009. Two distinct types of 
mouse melanocyte: Differential signaling requirement for the main-
tenance of non-cutaneous and dermal versus epidermal melanocytes. 
Development. 136:2511–2521. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1242/ 
dev 
.037168
Autenrieth, S.E., P. Warnke, G.H. Wabnitz, C. Lucero Estrada, K.A. Pasquevich, 
D. Drechsler, M. Günter, K. Hochweller, A. Novakovic, S. Beer-Hammer, 
et al. 2012. Depletion of dendritic cells enhances innate anti-bacterial 
host defense through modulation of phagocyte homeostasis. PLoS Pat-
hog. 8:e1002552. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.ppat 
.1002552
Bain, C.C., C.L. Scott, H. Uronen-Hansson, S. Gudjonsson, O. Jansson, O. Grip, 
M. Guilliams, B. Malissen, W.W. Agace, and A.M. Mowat. 2013. Resident 
and pro-inflammatory macrophages in the colon represent alternative 
context-dependent fates of the same Ly6Chi monocyte precursors. 
Mucosal Immunol. 6:498–510. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
mi 
.2012 
.89
Bain, C.C., A. Bravo-Blas, C.L. Scott, E.G. Perdiguero, F. Geissmann, S. Henri, 
B. Malissen, L.C. Osborne, D. Artis, and A.M. Mowat. 2014. Constant 
replenishment from circulating monocytes maintains the macrophage 
pool in the intestine of adult mice. Nat. Immunol. 15:929–937. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ni 
.2967
Bigley, V., M. Haniffa, S. Doulatov, X.N. Wang, R. Dickinson, N. McGovern, L. 
Jardine, S. Pagan, I. Dimmick, I. Chua, et al. 2011. The human syndrome 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1132
of dendritic cell, monocyte, B and NK lymphoid deficiency. J. Exp. Med. 
208:227–234. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20101459
Bouladoux, N., C. Hennequin, C. Malosse, B. Malissen, Y. Belkaid, and S. 
Henri. 2017. Hapten-specific T cell-mediated skin inflammation: Flow 
cytometry analysis of mouse skin inflammatory infiltrate. Methods Mol. 
Biol. 1559:21–36. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
978 
-1 
-4939 
-6786 
-5 
_2
Brown, D.M., T.L. Fisher, C. Wei, J.G. Frelinger, and E.M. Lord. 2001. Tumours 
can act as adjuvants for humoral immunity. Immunology. 102:486–497. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1046/ 
j 
.1365 
-2567 
.2001 
.01213 
.x
Carlin, L.M., E.G. Stamatiades, C. Auffray, R.N. Hanna, L. Glover, G. Viz-
cay-Barrena, C.C. Hedrick, H.T. Cook, S. Diebold, and F. Geissmann. 2013. 
Nr4a1-dependent Ly6C(low) monocytes monitor endothelial cells and 
orchestrate their disposal. Cell. 153:362–375. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2013 
.03 
.010
De Trez, C., S. Magez, S. Akira, B. Ryffel, Y. Carlier, and E. Muraille. 2009. 
iNOS-producing inflammatory dendritic cells constitute the major 
infected cell type during the chronic Leishmania major infection phase 
of C57BL/6 resistant mice. PLoS Pathog. 5:e1000494. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.ppat 
.1000494
Dhomen, N., J.S. Reis-Filho, S. da Rocha Dias, R. Hayward, K. Savage, V. Del-
mas, L. Larue, C. Pritchard, and R. Marais. 2009. Oncogenic Braf induces 
melanocyte senescence and melanoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 15:294–303. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ccr 
.2009 
.02 
.022
Duffield, J.S., S.J. Forbes, C.M. Constandinou, S. Clay, M. Partolina, S. Vuthoori, 
S. Wu, R. Lang, and J.P. Iredale. 2005. Selective depletion of macrophages 
reveals distinct, opposing roles during liver injury and repair. J. Clin. 
Invest. 115:56–65. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1172/ 
JCI200522675
Durai, V., and K.M. Murphy. 2016. Functions of murine dendritic cells. Immu-
nity. 45:719–736. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2016 
.10 
.010
Elsaie, M.L., K. Nouri, V. Vejjabhinanta, M.P. Rivas, L.M. Villafradez-Diaz, A. 
Martins, and R. Rosso. 2009. Topical imiquimod in conjunction with Nd: 
YAG laser for tattoo removal. Lasers Med. Sci. 24:871–875. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1007/ 
s10103 
-009 
-0709 
-9
Ferguson, J.E., S.M. Andrew, C.J. Jones, and P.J. August. 1997. The Q-switched 
neodymium: 
YAG laser and tattoos: A microscopic analysis of laser-tat-
too interactions. Br. J. Dermatol. 137:405–410. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
j 
.1365 
-2133 
.1997 
.tb03747 
.x
Goudot, C., A. Coillard, A.C. Villani, P. Gueguen, A. Cros, S. Sarkizova, T.L. 
Tang-Huau, M. Bohec, S. Baulande, N. Hacohen, et al. 2017. Aryl hydro-
carbon receptor controls monocyte differentiation into dendritic cells 
versus macrophages. Immunity. 47:582–596.e6. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2017 
.08 
.016
Guilliams, M., C.A. Dutertre, C.L. Scott, N. McGovern, D. Sichien, S. Chakarov, 
S. Van Gassen, J. Chen, M. Poidinger, S. De Prijck, et al. 2016. Unsuper-
vised high-dimensional analysis aligns dendritic cells across tissues and 
species. Immunity. 45:669–684. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2016 
.08 
.015
Haniffa, M., F. Ginhoux, X.N. Wang, V. Bigley, M. Abel, I. Dimmick, S. Bullock, 
M. Grisotto, T. Booth, P. Taub, et al. 2009. Differential rates of replace-
ment of human dermal dendritic cells and macrophages during hema-
topoietic stem cell transplantation. J. Exp. Med. 206:371–385. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20081633
Haniffa, M., A. Shin, V. Bigley, N. McGovern, P. Teo, P. See, P.S. Wasan, X.N. 
Wang, F. Malinarich, B. Malleret, et al. 2012. Human tissues contain 
CD141hi cross-presenting dendritic cells with functional homology 
to mouse CD103+ nonlymphoid dendritic cells. Immunity. 37:60–73. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2012 
.04 
.012
Hohl, T.M., A. Rivera, L. Lipuma, A. Gallegos, C. Shi, M. Mack, and E.G. Pamer. 
2009. Inflammatory monocytes facilitate adaptive CD4 T cell responses 
during respiratory fungal infection. Cell Host Microbe. 6:470–481. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.chom 
.2009 
.10 
.007
Jakubzick, C., E.L. Gautier, S.L. Gibbings, D.K. Sojka, A. Schlitzer, T.E. Johnson, 
S. Ivanov, Q. Duan, S. Bala, T. Condon, et al. 2013. Minimal differentiation 
of classical monocytes as they survey steady-state tissues and transport 
antigen to lymph nodes. Immunity. 39:599–610. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2013 
.08 
.007
Jung, S., J. Aliberti, P. Graemmel, M.J. Sunshine, G.W. Kreutzberg, A. Sher, and 
D.R. Littman. 2000. Analysis of fractalkine receptor CX(3)CR1 function 
by targeted deletion and green fluorescent protein reporter gene inser-
tion. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20:4106–4114. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1128/ 
MCB 
.20 
.11 
.4106 
-4114 
.2000
Madisen, L., T.A. Zwingman, S.M. Sunkin, S.W. Oh, H.A. Zariwala, H. Gu, L.L. 
Ng, R.D. Palmiter, M.J. Hawrylycz, A.R. Jones, et al. 2010. A robust and 
high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the 
whole mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 13:133–140. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nn 
.2467
Malissen, B., S. Tamoutounour, and S. Henri. 2014. The origins and functions 
of dendritic cells and macrophages in the skin. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14:417–
428. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nri3683
McGovern, N., A. Schlitzer, M. Gunawan, L. Jardine, A. Shin, E. Poyner, K. 
Green, R. Dickinson, X.N. Wang, D. Low, et al. 2014. Human dermal 
CD14+ cells are a transient population of monocyte-derived macro-
phages. Immunity. 41:465–477. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2014 
.08 
.006
Mildner, A., J. Schonheit, A. Giladi, E. David, D. Lara-Astiaso, E. Lorenzo-Vivas, 
F. Paul, L. Chappell-Maor, J. Priller, A. Leutz, et al. 2017. Genomic char-
acterization of murine monocytes reveals C/EBPβ transcription factor 
dependence of Ly6C− cells. Immunity. 46:849–862.e7. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2017 
.04 
.018
Pettitt, S.J., Q. Liang, X.Y. Rairdan, J.L. Moran, H.M. Prosser, D.R. Beier, K.C. 
Lloyd, A. Bradley, and W.C. Skarnes. 2009. Agouti C57BL/6N embryonic 
stem cells for mouse genetic resources. Nat. Methods. 6:493–495. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nmeth 
.1342
Plantinga, M., M. Guilliams, M. Vanheerswynghels, K. Deswarte, F. Bran-
co-Madeira, W. Toussaint, L. Vanhoutte, K. Neyt, N. Killeen, B. Malissen, 
et al. 2013. Conventional and monocyte-derived CD11b(+) dendritic cells 
initiate and maintain T helper 2 cell-mediated immunity to house dust 
mite allergen. Immunity. 38:322–335. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2012 
.10 
.016
Salmon, H., J. Idoyaga, A. Rahman, M. Leboeuf, R. Remark, S. Jordan, M. 
Casanova-Acebes, M. Khudoynazarova, J. Agudo, N. Tung, et al. 2016. 
Expansion and activation of CD103(+) dendritic cell progenitors at the 
tumor site enhances tumor responses to therapeutic PD-L1 and BRAF 
inhibition. Immunity. 44:924–938. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2016 
.03 
.012
Scott, C.L., F. Zheng, P. De Baetselier, L. Martens, Y. Saeys, S. De Prijck, S. Lip-
pens, C. Abels, S. Schoonooghe, G. Raes, et al. 2016. Bone marrow-derived 
monocytes give rise to self-renewing and fully differentiated Kupffer 
cells. Nat. Commun. 7:10321. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ncomms10321
Serbina, N.V., T.P. Salazar-Mather, C.A. Biron, W.A. Kuziel, and E.G. Pamer. 
2003. TNF/iNOS-producing dendritic cells mediate innate immune 
defense against bacterial infection. Immunity. 19:59–70. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S1074 
-7613(03)00171 
-7
Sheng, J., C. Ruedl, and K. Karjalainen. 2015. Most tissue-resident macro-
phages except microglia are derived from fetal hematopoietic stem cells. 
Immunity. 43:382–393. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2015 
.07 
.016
Slominski, A., J. Wortsman, P.M. Plonka, K.U. Schallreuter, R. Paus, and D.J. 
Tobin. 2005. Hair follicle pigmentation. J. Invest. Dermatol. 124:13–21. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
j 
.0022 
-202X 
.2004 
.23528 
.x
Sunderkötter, C., T. Nikolic, M.J. Dillon, N. Van Rooijen, M. Stehling, D.A. 
Drevets, and P.J. Leenen. 2004. Subpopulations of mouse blood mono-
cytes differ in maturation stage and inflammatory response. J. Immunol. 
172:4410–4417. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.172 
.7 
.4410
Tamoutounour, S., S. Henri, H. Lelouard, B. de Bovis, C. de Haar, C.J. van 
der Woude, A.M. Woltman, Y. Reyal, D. Bonnet, D. Sichien, et al. 2012. 
CD64 distinguishes macrophages from dendritic cells in the gut and 
reveals the Th1-inducing role of mesenteric lymph node macrophages 
during colitis. Eur. J. Immunol. 42:3150–3166. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
eji 
.201242847
Tamoutounour, S., M. Guilliams, F. Montanana Sanchis, H. Liu, D. Terhorst, C. 
Malosse, E. Pollet, L. Ardouin, H. Luche, C. Sanchez, et al. 2013. Origins 
and functional specialization of macrophages and of conventional and 
monocyte-derived dendritic cells in mouse skin. Immunity. 39:925–938. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2013 
.10 
.004
Thomas, G.D., R.N. Hanna, N.T. Vasudevan, A.A. Hamers, C.E. Romanoski, S. 
McArdle, K.D. Ross, A. Blatchley, D. Yoakum, B.A. Hamilton, et al. 2016. 
Deleting an Nr4a1 super-enhancer subdomain ablates Ly6Clow mono-
cytes while preserving macrophage gene function. Immunity. 45:975–
987. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2016 
.10 
.011
Tittel, A.P., C. Heuser, C. Ohliger, C. Llanto, S. Yona, G.J. Hämmerling, D.R. 
Engel, N. Garbi, and C. Kurts. 2012. Functionally relevant neutrophilia 
in CD11c diphtheria toxin receptor transgenic mice. Nat. Methods. 9:385–
390. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nmeth 
.1905
van Blijswijk, J., B.U. Schraml, N.C. Rogers, P.G. Whitney, S. Zelenay, S.E. Acton, 
and C. Reis e Sousa. 2015. Altered lymph node composition in diphtheria 
toxin receptor-based mouse models to ablate dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 
194:307–315. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.1401999
van de Laar, L., W. Saelens, S. De Prijck, L. Martens, C.L. Scott, G. Van Isterdael, 
E. Hoffmann, R. Beyaert, Y. Saeys, B.N. Lambrecht, and M. Guilliams. 
 Baranska et al. 
Skin and melanoma melanophages
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171608
1133
2016. Yolk sac macrophages, fetal liver, and adult monocytes can colo-
nize an empty niche and develop into functional tissue-resident mac-
rophages. Immunity. 44:755–768. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2016 
.02 
.017
Varol, C., L. Landsman, D.K. Fogg, L. Greenshtein, B. Gildor, R. Margalit, V. 
Kalchenko, F. Geissmann, and S. Jung. 2007. Monocytes give rise to 
mucosal, but not splenic, conventional dendritic cells. J. Exp. Med. 
204:171–180. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20061011
Yona, S., K.W. Kim, Y. Wolf, A. Mildner, D. Varol, M. Breker, D. Strauss-Ayali, 
S. Viukov, M. Guilliams, A. Misharin, et al. 2013. Fate mapping reveals 
origins and dynamics of monocytes and tissue macrophages under 
homeostasis. Immunity. 38:79–91. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2012 
.12 
.001
Yu, W., J. Chen, Y. Xiong, F.J. Pixley, Y.G. Yeung, and E.R. Stanley. 2012. Macro-
phage proliferation is regulated through CSF-1 receptor tyrosines 544, 
559, and 807. J. Biol. Chem. 287:13694–13704. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1074/ 
jbc 
.M112 
.355610
Zaba, L.C., J. Fuentes-Duculan, R.M. Steinman, J.G. Krueger, and M.A. Lowes. 
2007. Normal human dermis contains distinct populations of CD11c+B-
DCA-1+ dendritic cells and CD163+FXI 
IIA+ macrophages. J. Clin. Invest. 
117:2517–2525. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1172/ 
JCI32282
Zelenay, S., A.G. van der Veen, J.P. Böttcher, K.J. Snelgrove, N. Rogers, S.E. 
Acton, P. Chakravarty, M.R. Girotti, R. Marais, S.A. Quezada, et al. 2015. 
Cyclooxygenase-dependent tumor growth through evasion of immu-
nity. Cell. 162:1257–1270. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2015 
.08 
.015
