 www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1 
1
Series
Preconception health 3
Intervention strategies to improve nutrition and health 
behaviours before conception
Mary Barker, Stephan U Dombrowski, Tim Colbourn, Caroline H D Fall, Natasha M Kriznik, Wendy T Lawrence, Shane A Norris, Gloria Ngaiza, 
Dilisha Patel, Jolene Skordis-Worrall, Falko F Sniehotta, Régine Steegers-Theunissen, Christina Vogel, Kathryn Woods-Townsend, Judith Stephenson
The nutritional status of both women and men before conception has profound implications for the growth, 
development, and long-term health of their offspring. Evidence of the effectiveness of preconception interventions for 
improving outcomes for mothers and babies is scarce. However, given the large potential health return, and relatively 
low costs and risk of harm, research into potential interventions is warranted. We identified three promising strategies 
for intervention that are likely to be scalable and have positive effects on a range of health outcomes: supplementation 
and fortification; cash transfers and incentives; and behaviour change interventions. On the basis of these strategies, 
we suggest a model specifying pathways to effect. Pathways are incorporated into a life-course framework using 
individual motivation and receptiveness at different preconception action phases, to guide design and targeting of 
preconception interventions. Interventions for individuals not planning immediate pregnancy take advantage of 
settings and implementation platforms outside the maternal and child health arena, since this group is unlikely to be 
engaged with maternal health services. Interventions to improve women’s nutritional status and health behaviours at 
all preconception action phases should consider social and environmental determinants, to avoid exacerbating health 
and gender inequalities, and be underpinned by a social movement that touches the whole population. We propose a 
dual strategy that targets specific groups actively planning a pregnancy, while improving the health of the population 
more broadly. Modern marketing techniques could be used to promote a social movement based on an emotional and 
symbolic connection between improved preconception maternal health and nutrition, and offspring health. We 
suggest that speedy and scalable benefits to public health might be achieved through strategic engagement with the 
private sector. Political theory supports the development of an advocacy coalition of groups interested in preconception 
health, to harness the political will and leadership necessary to turn high-level policy into effective coordinated action.
Introduction
In 2016, the UN committed to “end all forms of 
malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the 
internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting 
in children under 5 years of age, and address the 
nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and 
lactating women, and older persons” in target 2·2 of 
Sustainable 
Development 
Goal 
2.1 
Growth 
and 
development targets for children, and the consequent 
reduction in their risk of non-communicable disease in 
adulthood, could be achieved through improving 
women’s nutritional status and health behaviour before 
conception.2 Two previous Lancet Series have called for 
innovation in the design and delivery of affordable, 
scalable nutrition interventions to improve maternal 
and child health.3,4 In this Series paper, we review what 
is known about the effectiveness of preconception 
nutritional and behavioural interventions, and propose 
a strategy for aligning interventions with individual 
motivation and receptiveness at different preconception 
action phases during the life course. We propose a 
dual strategy targeting health improvement in men 
and women planning a pregnancy, and in the general 
population, on the basis that improvements in pre-
conception health require a supportive environment 
(under 
pinned by a social movement and policy 
initiatives), and on the engagement of the private sector.
Intervention strategies
We conducted a quasi-systematic review of trials of 
preconception nutrition and health behaviour inter-
ventions, to identify effective interventions and specify 
pathways to effect (appendix). We included interventions 
assessing nutritional status and body composition 
outcomes, excluding other clinical outcomes such as 
improved glycaemic control. Pathways to effect were 
Published Online 
April 16, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(18)30313-1
This is the third in a Series of 
three papers about 
preconception health
MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology 
Unit, University of 
Southampton, Southampton 
General Hospital, 
Southampton, UK 
(M Barker PhD, 
Prof C H D Fall DM, 
W T Lawrence PhD, C Vogel PhD); 
NIHR Southampton Biomedical 
Research Centre, Southampton 
General Hospital, 
Southampton, UK 
(M Barker, W T Lawrence, C Vogel, 
K Woods-Townsend PhD); 
Faculty of Natural Sciences, 
Division of Psychology, 
University of Stirling, Stirling, 
UK (S U Dombrowski PhD); UCL 
Institute for Global Health 
(T Colbourn PhD, G Ngaiza PhD, 
J Skordis-Worrall PhD), and UCL 
EGA Institute for Women’s 
Health, Faculty of Population 
Health Sciences (D Patel MSc, 
Prof J Stephenson FFPH), 
University College London, 
London, UK; The Healthcare
Key messages
• 
Epidemiological data, and findings from developmental biology, suggest that 
intervening to improve men’s and women’s nutritional status before pregnancy 
improves long-term outcomes for mothers and babies
• 
Trials of interventions to improve nutritional status before conception and birth 
outcomes are scarce, but new trials are underway
• 
Effective preconception nutritional interventions include supplementation or food 
fortification to provide micronutrients, particularly folic acid and iodine
• 
To maximise benefit and achieve health growth trajectories in the next generation, 
preconception strategies should be broader than supplementation or fortification, 
and address wider determinants of health
• 
Motivations to engage with preconception nutrition differ according to age and life 
phase; understanding and harnessing these motivations is key to successful intervention
• 
Interventions should be context-specific and make use of existing platforms for delivery
• 
Preconception interventions need to be supported by a social movement and political 
will, both of which require skilful engagement with powerful commercial interests
 Series
2 
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1
then incorporated into a life-course framework to aid the 
targeting of interventions. Preconception interventions 
were reviewed using the reach, effectiveness, adoption, 
implementation, and main 
tenance (REAIM) framework.5 
Finally, we applied a consumer-marketing approach to 
the challenge of creating a social movement to strengthen 
political resolve for wide-scale intervention.
We identified 14 controlled primary studies evaluating 
three strategies: supplementation and fortification, cash 
transfers or incentives, and behaviour change intervention. 
We did not identify enough good quality studies conducted 
in the preconception period to enable us to perform 
a meta-analysis or draw firm conclusions about effective-
ness; however, epidemiological and biological evidence 
points to the value of intervening prior to conception. 
Intervention strategies were selected for review on the 
basis of being scalable, low risk, and of likely benefit to 
nutritional outcomes in the preconception period. We 
developed a model describing the key pathways to be 
quantified once more high quality data from randomised 
trials become available (figure 1).
Supplementation and food fortification
Most evidence for the benefits of improving precon-
ception nutrition and health comes from trials examining 
the effects of micronutrient and energy supplementation. 
The Bacon Chow study,6 done in Taiwan, found that 
supplementing the diets of women who were under-
nourished with 800 kcal and 40 g protein per day after the 
birth of their first baby increased birthweight of the 
second baby when compared with a control group given 
just 80 kcal extra per day. A similar study in the USA7 
also found increased birthweight of subsequent babies 
among women given supplements for 5–7 months 
following the birth of their first baby, compared with 
those given supplements for up to 2 months. The 
Mumbai Maternal Nutrition Project8,9 showed that a 
locally sourced, micronutrient-rich snack, given daily 
before conception and during pregnancy, reduced the 
likelihood of gestational diabetes and increased 
birthweight in a high-risk Indian population (but only 
among mothers who were not underweight). These 
studies represent the best available evidence for the 
benefits of preconception nutritional supplemen 
tation. 
Effective strategies to improve access to additional 
calories before conception still need to be identified in 
contexts where maternal undernutrition is common.
Supplementation interventions are generally accept-
able to women, but uptake is often hampered by poor 
adherence. Several solutions have been proposed, in-
cluding a contraceptive pill containing folic acid available 
in the USA;10,11 however, the impact of this solution 
depends on contraceptive pill use, which varies widely 
between countries. Fortifying foods such as flour or rice 
has wide potential reach, and is currently mandated in 
87 countries.12 The WHO has also issued a guideline for 
the fortification of salt with iodine, which can prevent 
irreversible mental impairment of the fetus.13 In 
addition, reductions in the prevalence of neural tube 
defects have been observed following mandatory folic 
acid fortification in Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, South 
Africa, and the USA.14,15 However, folic acid forti-
fication is not mandatory in Europe; in the UK, 
there are concerns about increasing cancer risk in 
older populations, potential masking of anaemia 
caused by vitamin B12 deficiency, and removal of 
individual choice.14 Despite these concerns, there is 
little evidence of negative effects from folic acid 
fortification.16 The UK’s Scientific Advisory Committee 
on Nutrition continues to recommend mandatory folic 
Improvement Studies Institute, 
University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK 
(N M Kriznik PhD); MRC 
Developmental Pathways for 
Health Research Unit, 
Department of Paediatrics, 
School of Clinical Medicine, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa 
(Prof S A Norris PhD); Institute 
of Health and Society, 
Newcastle University and Fuse, 
the UK Clinical Research 
Collaboration Centre of 
Excellence for Translational 
Research in Public Health, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 
(Prof F F Sniehotta PhD); 
Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology, and Department 
of Pediatrics, Division of 
Neonatology, Erasmus MC, 
University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands 
(Prof R Steegers-Theunissen PhD); 
and Southampton Education 
School, Faculty of Social and 
Human Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, 
UK (K Woods-Townsend)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Judith Stephenson, UCL EGA 
Institute for Women’s Health, 
Faculty of Population Health 
Sciences, University College 
London, Medical School 
Building, 74 Huntley Street, 
London WC1E 6AU, UK 
judith.stephenson@ucl.ac.uk
See Online for appendix
Preconception
Previous
pregnancy/
birth
2
years
1
year
3
months
Pregnancy trimester
First
Second
Third
Postbirth
1 month
6 months
12 months
24 
months
60 
months
Conception
Birth
Risk factors
Maternal nutrition
 Underweight 
 (BMI <18)
 Normal 
 (BMI 18–25)
 Overweight 
 (BMI 25–30)
 Obese 
 (BMI >30)
Interventions
Mechanisms
Outcomes
Increased calorie 
consumption
Increased micronutrient 
consumption (including 
fruit and vegetables)
Decreased calorie 
consumption
 
 
Food/fortification and
supplementation
Cash transfers or 
incentives
Confounders
Socioeconomic status
Education
Behaviour change 
interventions
Increased 
gestation
Increased 
birthweight
Increased 
maternal BMI
Decreased 
macrosomia
Decreased 
maternal BMI
Decreased 
stillbirth
Decreased neonatal 
mortality
Increased WAZ, HAZ, WHZ
Improved early childhood
development
Addresses undernutrition
Addresses overnutrition
Confounders
Income
Occupation
Figure 1: Conceptual model of pathways between interventions to improve maternal nutritional status and maternal and infant outcomes
BMI=body-mass index. WAZ=weight-for-age Z score. HAZ=height-for-age Z score. WHZ=weight-for-height Z score.
 Series
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1 
3
acid fortification to improve the folate status of women 
most at risk of neural tube defect-affected pregnancies.16
Cash transfers and incentives
None of the studies identified investigated the effects of 
preconception cash transfers on birth or nutritional 
outcomes. However, this strategy was included in the 
model because cash transfers are effective in improving 
school enrolment and attendance among girls, access to 
preventive health care, and household food consumption 
in low-income settings.17–19 These factors are risks for 
poor birth and nutritional outcomes, suggesting that 
preconception cash transfers could be useful.20,21 In high-
income settings, further work is needed to demonstrate 
the effectiveness and acceptability of combating over-
weight and obesity through incentivising the purchase of 
healthy foods.
Behaviour change interventions
Two systematic reviews22,23 examining 12 preconception 
trials identified possible improvements in health 
behaviours (including alcohol consumption and smok-
ing), and psychological mediators of intervention effects 
(such as maternal self-efficacy and perceived control). 
Neither review reported maternal nutritional status as an 
outcome. Two studies tested the effect of preconception 
nutritional or behavioural interventions on birth 
outcomes: no effect on pregnancy outcomes was found 
in a Dutch study24 when general practitioners counselled 
couples on health behaviours; and a negative effect on 
birthweight of counselling on risk factors including diet, 
timing of next pregnancy, and specialist referrals was 
noted in an Australian study.25 The authors of the latter 
study speculated that improved preconception health 
meant that previously unsustainable pregnancies were 
sustained for longer, resulting in increased preterm 
births and decreased birthweights. If true, this would 
be an unexpected and adverse effect of preconception 
intervention.
Addressing preconception undernutrition in low-income 
settings could require broader behavioural strategies than 
tackling overnutrition in high-income settings. Low-
resource households cannot simply change their behaviour 
if food is unavailable, and so strategies must combine 
behaviour change with food access, as was done in the 
CARING Trial26,27 in eastern India. A health-care approach 
was used that successfully engaged women and reduced 
maternal and neonatal mortality in rural, low-resource 
settings, known as participatory learning and action 
through women’s groups.28 Facilitated by a trained health-
care professional, this group-based, problem-solving 
approach involves women of all ages, and tackles a variety 
of maternal and newborn problems including nutrition. 
Although the original trials testing this approach did not 
report on nutritional outcomes, the CARING trial found 
that the approach improved key secondary outcomes, 
including dietary diversity and handwashing (although no 
significant increase in child length was measured). 
Interventions in high-resource contexts can focus on 
individual choice, but multilevel interventions might be 
more effective.29 Intervention trials developed as part of the 
Canadian Government’s Healthy Life Trajectories Initiative 
are good examples of multilevel interventions that aim to 
address precon 
ception nutrition and health behaviour, but 
also wider health and social determinants. These trials 
will provide gold standard evidence of the effectiveness, 
and cost-effectiveness, of multicomponent preconception 
interventions in improving outcomes for children.
Preconception interventions often require engagement 
from individuals who are not thinking about becoming 
pregnant in the near future, and are unlikely to be using 
maternal health services. Interventions to improve health 
behaviours in adolescents and young adults might, 
therefore, have to be placed outside maternal and child 
health services and appeal to motivations unrelated to 
health, such as self-image.30–32
Motivation and engagement
The complexities involved in changing individual and 
population health behaviours are well recognised. It is 
usually not enough to simply educate or give advice, as 
knowing something is good for you is rarely sufficient to 
change behaviour. Successful behaviour change requires 
the target population to engage with the need to change, 
sustain the motivation to maintain the change, and be 
supported by contexts that facilitate change (service 
providers, society, social networks, and environments).33
Figure 2 shows a model of preconception action phases, 
adapted from the Rubicon model of action phases and the 
Action phase model of developmental regulation, and 
applied to preconception motivations and interventions.34,35 
The model is based on five assumptions: first, most 
young adults intend to become parents at some point, 
and this goal begins to form in childhood; second, young 
adults have the adaptive capacity to pursue this goal 
among their other developmental life-course goals, and to 
translate it into action; third, the goal to become a parent 
is nested within other facilitating and conflicting develop-
mental life-course goals, which are pursued as oppor-
tunities evolve over time; fourth, motivation to become a 
parent is the driver that translates that goal into relevant 
preconception behaviours; and fifth, translating the goal 
to become a parent into conception and pre 
gnancy 
outcomes is imperfect.
The model distinguishes four phases, characterised by 
overarching biological or psychological agendas and 
motives, in relation to the goal to become a parent. As an 
individual moves through the phases, interventions 
become less general and more targeted towards specific 
populations (in keeping with the dual strategy for 
promoting preconception health proposed here). In the 
early phases of the model, intervention reach will be 
increased, although effect sizes are likely to be small due 
to low intensity. The benefits of interventions in these 
For the Healthy Life Trajectories 
Initiative see http://www.cihr-
irsc.gc.ca/e/49511.html
 Series
4 
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1
early phases will be general; healthy diets will benefit 
both the individual and society, and enhance motivation 
in those not planning imminent pregnancy. Creating a 
social movement could raise awareness of the importance 
of preconception nutrition, and generate a supportive 
social environment for preconception health. It could also 
help build engagement at each phase, and facilitate 
preparation for pregnancy as a normal part of having a 
baby within standard health-care practice.36
Intervening with children and adolescents
In the first phase of preconception action, motivation to 
become a parent forms without any physical capability 
for childbearing, which changes as children develop into 
adolescents. Laying foundations for a healthy life is 
essential for reasons independent of any preconception 
health agenda, and there is a need to raise awareness of 
healthy preparation for pregnancy as a concept from an 
early age.
Recent recognition of the triple benefit from investment 
in adolescent health—their health now, their health in the 
future, and the health of the next generation—has 
focused attention on this life-course phase.37–39 90% of the 
world’s 1·8 billion adolescents live in low-income and 
middle-income countries (LMICs); up to half experience 
stunted growth and pregnancy is common.40 For this 
group, a key intervention in improving outcomes for 
mothers and babies is to delay first pregnancy beyond 
18 years, when nutrients are no longer needed to support 
maternal growth.40 In high-income countries, adolescents 
have the poorest diets of any age group.41 Physiological 
responses and health behaviours established during 
adolescence continue into adulthood, and neurological 
and epigenetic changes in adolescence suggest that it is a 
crucial period for establishing long-term health risk.42,43 
Adolescents typically disengage with traditional health 
messages, prioritising the immediate over the long-term, 
and having a strong desire for autonomy causes them to 
reject instructive health education.44,45 Effective inter-
ventions with adolescents need to empower and 
encourage 
by 
giving, 
rather 
than 
taking 
away, 
responsibility.
The LifeLab programme is an example of a school-
based intervention, aimed at developing adolescents’ 
motivations for improving their diets and physical 
activity levels through engagement with science, with an 
emphasis on their health but with reference to benefits 
for their future children (appendix).46,47 The students 
report that being good parents in the future is important 
to them; learning about preconception health motivates 
Goal to
become parent
Forming
• Developing biological
 capacity to become
 pregnant
• Family role modelling
   to influence
 parenthood expectations
• Learning of lifestyle habits
Activated
• Increased investment of
 thought, time, and effort
 into becoming pregnant
• Receptive to pre-
 pregnancy input
• Reflecting on lifestyle 
 habits and contemplating
 change
Reactivated
• Previous experience of
 pre-pregnancy phase and
 outcome
• Activation of previous
 habits and behaviours
• Lower receptiveness for
 pre-pregnancy input
Refining
• Pregnancy physically
 possible, but other life
 goals more importatant
• Consolidation of
 lifestyle habits
• Loss of capacity to have a 
 healthy child in future may 
 be motivating factor for 
 some (loss aversion)
• Consideration of personal, 
 normative, economic, 
 and social context
• Foster healthy lifestyle
 independent of 
 preconception agenda
• Teach why and how 
 lifestyle is important for
 preconception health
• Raise public awareness of 
 preconception health
• Signpost to available 
 evidence-based
 information resources and
 support tools, eg, online
 information platforms
• Support foundations for
 independent living
• Actively support 
 preconception health, 
 eg, text messaging 
 intervention
• Provide practical tools and
 stratagies in an engaging
 way
• For subgroups, provide
 intense direct and tailored
 individual support, eg, 
 one-to-one counselling
• Actively support
 preconception health
 tailored to parents
• Provide practical tools and
 strategies in an engaging
 way and relevant to parents
 taking previous pregnancy
 experience into account
Features
Intervention
opportunities
Children and
adolescents
Adults with no immediate 
intention to become 
pregnant
Adults with intention to
become pregnant
Adults with intention to
become pregnant again
Maturation and socialisation
Intention formation
Intention prioritisation
Intention reactivisation
Figure 2: Model of preconception action phases 
The model outlines four phases individuals move through in relation to the goal to become a parent, highlighting features and intervention opportunities for each 
phase (adapted from the Rubicon model of action phases and the Action phase model of developmental regulation).34,35
 Series
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1 
5
them to improve their diets and physical activity. LifeLab 
has potential to help children and adolescents develop a 
concept of preconception and parenthood, but this 
concept alone might not motivate change because it is 
not an immediate imperative. Motivation is a necessary 
but not sufficient condition for behaviour change.48 The 
addition of an in-person intervention to LifeLab 
would support students’ capabilities (ie, “you can do 
this! I believe in you!”), and opportunities for behaviour 
change (ie, “how are you going to exercise more and 
what is your plan for eating healthily?”). Where female 
participation in formal schooling is low, alternative 
approaches are needed to ensure engagement of 
adolescent boys and girls.
In rural South Africa, where there are high rates of 
adolescent overweight and obesity, the Ntshembo (Hope) 
intervention49 aims to achieve a healthy body-mass index in 
14–19 year-olds through a 2-year programme of behaviour 
change support. Working with adolescents, their carers, 
and village leaders, Ntshembo is explicitly designed to 
address individual and community motiva 
tions and 
capabilities, and to provide opportunities for adolescents to 
eat well and exercise more. It harnesses the power of social 
influence on adolescent behaviour through peer support, 
and employs community health workers trained to support 
problem-solving and capitalise on adolescents’ need 
for autonomy; the development of an adolescent-friendly 
health service to deliver gender and context-specific 
interventions is widely supported.50 As in LifeLab, the 
preconception agenda in Ntshembo is largely that of 
the intervention developers, who will need to engage 
with adolescents’ own imperatives for the intervention 
to succeed.
Interventions with adults not immediately intending to 
become pregnant
In this second phase, the goal to become a parent is 
refined and shaped by the individual’s psychological, 
social, economic, and biological status.51–53 As young 
adults mature, developmental goals such as completing 
education, obtaining employment, and forming intimate 
relationships generally take priority over becoming a 
parent. Consequently, preconception health will have 
little motivational currency during this phase. Effective 
methods of engagement at this stage will be highly 
context-specific.
In some cultures, marriage offers an opportunity to 
engage couples in thinking about their nutrition and 
health before conception, particularly in countries 
where premarital testing aimed at reducing transmission 
of inherited disorders is mandatory. The Jom Mama 
project,54 supported by the Malaysian Government, uses 
an existing premarital HIV screening and wellness 
programme to provide preconception nutrition support 
to couples, using a combination of an online platform 
and in-person behaviour change support (appendix). 
Newly married Malaysian women said that having a 
healthy baby in the future was a major motivation for 
improving their diets and physical activity (panel). 
However, other life-course goals, such as work, were a 
barrier to eating well and being active. The effectiveness 
of this intervention might be constrained by its focus on 
individual responsibility, and the fact that it does not 
directly address the challenge of social influences or an 
obesogenic environment.
The absence of dedicated preconception health care in 
many countries means interventions to improve pre-
conception nutritional status need to take advantage of 
routine contact between young adults and health-
care professionals.55 For example, offering support in 
reproductive health clinics has the potential to improve the 
preconception nutritional status of women who might or 
might not be actively planning pregnancies. This requires 
health-care professionals to be aware of the importance of 
preconception nutrition, have the skills to intervene, and 
see offering nutritional support as part of their job. To help 
raise awareness, the USA’s Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention promotes a Reproductive Life Plan56 
intended to encourage people of child-bearing age to 
prepare for pregnancy, and maximise the preconception 
benefit of interactions with health-care professionals.
Training for health-care professionals in skills to 
support behaviour change is available in the form of 
Healthy Conversation Skills;57 this set of easily acquired, 
theory-based skills for practitioners is designed to 
engage and motivate patients and clients during brief 
consultations. Unlike giving information and advice, 
the Healthy Conversation Skills training promotes the 
use of open discovery questions, listening, reflecting, 
and goal-setting to enable a woman or couple to prepare 
for pregnancy, and support them in finding their own 
solutions to challenges. The skills have been used in 
maternal and child health contexts around the world, and 
their use is both acceptable and feasible.58,59
Armed with these skills, practice and community 
nurses, sexual and reproductive health clinic staff, those 
working in early pregnancy units (who treat women who 
have miscarried), and staff providing weight management 
services are all potential agents for delivering appropriate, 
timely, and culturally sensitive support to improve 
preconception nutritional status at scale. Extending this 
skills training to community health workers, with support 
from local and national policies, has the potential for 
widespread impact on preconception health; in other 
contexts this approach can improve health outcomes in a 
range of public health and primary care settings.60,61 
An approach such as Healthy Conversation Skills enables 
health-care professionals to provide care that is responsive 
to women’s personal, social, and cultural environments.55
In contexts outside health care, supermarkets represent 
an unexploited opportunity for promoting preconception 
nutrition. Supermarkets have an unparalleled reach into 
communities and expertise in customer engagement. 
Women do most of the family food shopping, and in 
For USA’s Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention  
preconception health guidance 
see https://www.cdc.gov/
preconception/index.html
 Series
6 
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1
high-income countries, these choices are made in super-
markets.62 The food choices of disadvantaged women are 
particularly susceptible to the supermarket environment, 
suggesting that modifications which encourage the 
purchasing of healthy foods, might have greatest impact 
on women with poor diets.63 In LMICs, the role of 
supermarkets as food purveyors is rapidly expanding, 
although not necessarily in remote and rural areas where 
increasing the accessibility of nutrient-dense food 
remains a priority.64,65 A model whereby supermarkets 
offer precon 
ception nutritional support alongside sales of 
folic acid and other supplements is one that could be 
developed in high-income countries and, if successful, 
translated to LMICs as supermarkets become more 
widespread.
Interventions with adults intending to become pregnant
In the third phase, the goal to become a parent has been 
activated through a combination of social (eg, subjective 
norms), situational (eg, marriage), and biological (eg, age) 
Panel: Motivations for engagement in interventions to improve preconception health
In the development of the Jom Mama intervention, 18 couples 
were interviewed about their motivations to engage with the 
intervention programme, and to improve their health before 
conception. Having a healthy pregnancy and a healthy child 
were clear motives for improving diet and lifestyle:
• 
“Because I want to conceive as I’ve never conceived before. 
So getting pregnant will motivate us.” (Respondent 12)
• 
“I wanted to be healthy for myself and for my child…I think 
my commitment as a wife and mother is important.” 
(Respondent 10)
Interviewees suggested that a range of incentives, including 
financial and personalised support from health-care staff, 
would sustain their engagement in a programme of diet and 
lifestyle improvement, as would stories from others at the same 
stage of life. They also proposed that programme content 
should be simple, attractive, and specifically targeted to them, 
and that it should not interfere with their working hours, 
suggesting that delivery should be on a digital platform, 
accessible at their convenience.
Participants described features of their lives as young, working 
people that acted as barriers to improving their diets and 
physical activity levels in preparation for pregnancy.
• 
Working patterns: “I usually don’t take breakfast…and then I 
start work, rest at 12.30 pm, but if I’m too busy I don’t rest 
until the evenings, sometimes at 6 pm, sometimes until 
8, 9 pm only then I go home.” (Respondent 8)
• 
Eating habits: “Sometimes I have lunch at 12 noon…
sometimes at 3 pm…it’s uncertain.” (Respondent 13)
• 
Exercise: “Not after marriage…can’t make it in the evening. 
No time.” (Respondent 1)
In the UK, women who had recently had a child attending 
routine appointments with health visitors were approached 
and asked whether they would be planning another 
pregnancy in the following 12 months. Those who indicated 
they would be interested were invited to participate in a pilot 
study of the effectiveness of the Smarter Pregnancy 
intervention and subsequently provide an in-depth interview. 
15 women were interviewed and their views of preconception 
care were sought.
Women felt that just because they had already had a baby did not 
mean they were aware of what was required for a healthy 
conception and pregnancy. Because of their involvement in the 
interconception study, they accepted that preconception care was 
important, something they might not have considered before:
• 
“We’ve not had something like this before and I felt like, at 
that time when I wanted to get pregnant…you don’t know, 
even though you’ve had three kids already before. You just 
forget everything.” (Woman 31, married with three children 
aged 14 years, 8 years, and 4 years)
• 
“I know [now] that our body has to be ready before we get 
pregnant. You need to be prepared. Everything has to be 
enough. Since then, I know, I start to understand you have 
to eat enough vitamins to get pregnant.” (Woman 31, 
married with two children—a baby and a 10-year-old)
When they discussed the implications of their new 
understanding, women highlighted the importance of 
improving their health prior to conceiving, with specific focus 
on improving their diet and being a healthy weight:
• 
“In terms of...sometimes, you lose track of what is healthy. 
So that is when I had to relook at my diet in terms of having 
more vegetables and then taking my folic acid and looking 
at all of these healthy things.” (Woman 40, previous 
stillbirth, currently pregnant)
Key sources of information for preconception care were the 
internet and friends and family. There was a desire for reliable 
and accredited sources of information to put couples’ minds at 
ease. What the women said suggests there is a gap in current 
provision of preconception health information:
• 
“I think the problem is if people don’t know, they go to 
Google. And you go to Google, and you get some chat on 
Mumsnet. And it’s a load of women feeding other women 
garbage... there’s so much false information out there. But if 
you don’t know that, you go ‘This is what it means.’ Stuff 
like this [the intervention material] just keeping people on 
the straight and narrow is quite helpful.” (Woman 32, 
one child aged 1 year, recent miscarriage)
There was agreement among women that healthier lifestyles can 
contribute to healthier pregnancies, a reflection that they had 
not considered this for their previous pregnancy, and an 
intention to improve their nutritional status in preparation for 
the next pregnancy. Therefore, the inter-partum period might be 
a fruitful time to engage women in preconception health care.
In the UK, women are under the care of the community health visiting services from 
pregnancy up to 5 years of age of the child.
 Series
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1 
7
factors, and is now actively pursued. This phase is 
characterised by an increased investment of thought, 
time, and effort into becoming pregnant. Willingness 
to engage in interventions increases, and behaviours 
can range from passive (eg, reduced investment in 
contraception), to active. With appropriate support, pre-
conception interventions are likely to be translated into 
behaviour change. Interventions need to allow for swift 
and discrete implementation, given the sensitive nature 
of couples’ plans for conception, and active promotion 
through channels such as contraception counselling.
Since this group is likely to be engaged and seeking 
information, preconception health services in primary 
care, with a focus on nutrition, could be appropriate. 
Interventions offered in this setting can improve pre-
conception health behaviours in women who are planning 
to become pregnant.23,66,67 Screening for pregnancy 
intention, as outlined in the first paper in this Series, 
would enable practitioners in sexual and reproductive 
health clinics to offer preconception support, for example, 
to women attending for removal of implants and 
intrauterine devices.
Digital interventions (online or smartphone-based) 
offer privacy and easy access for disadvantaged or 
disenfranchised groups less likely to engage with more 
formal services. Smarter Pregnancy is a rare example of a 
digital intervention designed specifically to support 
improvements in preconception nutrition and health 
behaviours, and has had some success with couples 
who are actively preparing for pregnancy (appendix).68,69 
Mobile phone interventions to improve maternal and 
child health in LMICs have delivered tailored information 
and supported improved infant feeding outcomes.70 
Combining digital interventions with motivational 
human interaction increases engagement with, and the 
effectiveness of, behaviour change interventions.71 An 
accessible, population-wide preconception health-care 
service could be offered to women via a digital 
intervention, and combined with face-to-face or 
telephone contact with health-care staff trained in a 
motivational approach, such as Healthy Conversation 
Skills.
Interventions with adults intending to become 
pregnant again
In the fourth phase, the goal to become a parent is 
reactivated. Preparation for pregnancy is likely to be influ-
enced by couples’ previous preconception experiences. 
Previously uncomplicated pregnancies might decrease 
receptiveness for preconception input; if their first baby 
was healthy why would couples change their preparations? 
However, women and their families have intensive 
contact with health services and health-care professionals 
during pregnancy, and are motivated to make dietary 
changes. Therefore, interventions can support maternal 
dietary behaviour change and reduce postnatal weight 
gain.72–76
In LMICs, interest has focused mainly on maternal 
underweight and micronutrient deficiencies. Women are 
willing to take nutritional supplements during pregnancy, 
with con 
sequent reductions in low birthweight,77 
however, few studies have focused on supporting change 
in habitual dietary behaviour, likely because choices tend 
to be limited in undernourished settings. Exceptions 
include qualitative studies78 that have sug 
gested 
modifiable dietary behaviours in populations in LMICs. 
Young, rural Indian women report avoiding specific 
nutritious foods because of fears they could harm a 
pregnancy, undereat in the belief that this will make 
delivery easier, consume the least nutritious foods after 
other family members have eaten because of household 
hierarchies, and observe women’s cultural fasting days 
(eating predominantly low-nutrient foods).79,80 These data 
provide further evidence for extending initiatives that 
support wider social and cultural change to include 
preconception nutritional interventions.
Maternal and child health-care systems offer post-
partum or interpartum opportunities for working with 
women to support dietary behaviour change. Women 
interviewed following an interpartum inter 
vention at a 
health visitor clinic in London, UK, had a new awareness 
that their nutritional status during and between 
pregnancies had an impact on the baby (panel). In high-
income countries, post-partum studies have mainly 
focused on limiting weight retention among normal or 
overweight women, and improving glucose tolerance 
among women with a history of gestational diabetes.81,82 
Interventions to address both diet and physical activity 
that include self-monitoring of progress, could be more 
effective than interventions that focus on only one 
behaviour or that do not support monitoring of weight.83,84 
Some 
studies 
have 
successfully 
used 
education 
programmes, or financial incentives, to improve dietary 
quality by reducing energy intake and increasing fruit, 
vegetable, and whole grain intake.85,86
Many post-partum randomised studies report low 
recruitment or retention rates; post-partum mothers 
report multiple barriers to participation, including little 
spare time, stress, and sleep deprivation.87 Interventions 
might need to take a supportive approach involving home 
visits, and provision of foods, child care, and 
self-monitoring facilities such as weighing scales.87 One 
solution could be to integrate in-person support for 
interpartum behaviour change with a digital service. Post-
partum weight retention is associated with lifetime obesity 
risk and adverse outcomes in the next pregnancy.88 A 
cluster randomised trial89 of an internet-based weight loss 
programme, 
coupled 
with 
face-to-face 
support 
(Fit Moms/Mamás Activas) in low-income women in 
California, USA, found that women in the intervention 
group maintained significantly greater weight loss at 
12 months than did women who did not receive the 
intervention (3·2 kg vs 0·9 kg; difference 2·3 kg [95% CI 
1·1–3·5]).
 Series
8 
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1
Creation of a social movement
A social movement to optimise preconception health, 
nutritional status, and health behaviours needs to involve 
the whole population and harness political will and 
leadership. A social movement in Brazil led to significant 
improvements in preconception nutrition for women, 
and virtual eradication of undernutrition and wasting 
among children younger than 5 years, between 1994 
and 2006.90,91 The movement involved, first, a national 
cam 
paign against hunger that raised public aware-
ness of the need to tackle malnutrition, and, second, 
development of an advocacy coalition with political 
affinities that created a critical mass of activists, and 
monitored the government’s progress in reducing 
malnutrition. Eradicating mal 
nutrition became a high-
profile social responsibility, prompting strong leadership 
from central government in addressing food security. 
Under 
pinning Brazil’s approach was an appreciation 
that how women feed themselves and their children is 
not solely an individual responsibility, but involves 
wider determinants.
Social movements are distinct from social marketing 
campaigns. The latter would traditionally attempt to 
improve nutrition and health behaviour through providing 
information and recommending behaviour change, but 
could fail to reach the neediest groups and inadvertently 
widen inequalities.92,93 The UK’s Change4Life intervention 
adopted this approach, with little evidence of effective-
ness.94 Social practice theory provides some insight as 
to why such campaigns are insufficient; individuals 
and communities require, not only knowledge, but also 
resources to enact change, and a purpose or meaning to 
provide motivation.95 A social movement providing these 
factors might best be founded in socially constructed ideas 
of human action, and allied to the field of consumer 
marketing and brand creation.
Consumer marketing recognises that individual 
behaviour and choices are a function of self-image, 
and brands must develop an emotional and symbolic 
connection with consumers, making the brand a form of 
self-expression.96 A campaign using brand development 
practice would target emotions that are central to an 
individual’s identity. This approach is epitomised in such 
campaigns as the handwashing with soap social move-
ment, which applied brand marketing practices and an 
advocacy campaign to address infant mortality under the 
tag-line Help a Child Reach 5. The media campaign 
followed the principles of being personally relevant, 
emotionally engaging, and easy to understand.97 The 
evidence-based rationale for handwashing is given only 
after the other appeals have been made. The campaign 
was driven by a multinational company (Unilever), 
supported by an alliance of public health activists and 
academics. It has received strong endorsement by the 
inclusion of handwashing with soap as an indicator in 
the UN’s sustainable development goals, and government 
policy initiatives to improve washing facilities.
The handwashing movement is an example of mutual 
benefit for public health and for private sector profit that 
can come from a joint social purpose. Companies are 
more likely to do the right thing in a sustainable way if 
public health benefit is accompanied by commercial gain.97
In 2013, Black and colleagues3 declared that “the private 
sector is an important force in shaping nutrition outcomes 
and has the potential to do more” to improve maternal and 
child nutrition. Engaging with the food industry is crucial 
because of their reach and power to shape consumer 
behaviour. A major difficulty with applying the mutual 
benefit approach to improving preconception nutrition 
and lifestyle through a relationship with the food industry 
is their history of malpractice in respect to infant feeding,98 
and their role in generating and sustaining an obesogenic 
environment. Whether commercial and public health 
interests can be aligned in the way they have been for 
handwashing remains to be seen. One attempt is 
Unilever’s campaign to market iron-fortified stock cubes 
to reduce iron-deficiency anaemia in women in Nigeria.99 
However, lobbying by some members of the food industry 
against sugar-sweetened beverage taxes suggests that 
caution is required to ensure the legitimacy of campaigns 
and health actions from the food industry. Independent 
monitoring of food industry activities by academia and the 
public is crucial to building societal support that will 
catalyse government and industry actions in respect of 
preconception health.100
Marketing principles suggest that a preconception 
social movement should be emotionally engaging and 
positively framed, appealing to positive emotions, such as 
love, as opposed to campaigns that call on personal 
responsibility or fear. The call to action would target the 
whole population and would ask people to, for example, 
support young women or couples to achieve an optimal 
pre-pregnancy weight, or eat a variety of fruits and 
vegetables. The challenge is to identify simple actions 
around which the campaign could be built.
Advocacy coalitions
Political science suggests that a strong advocacy coalition 
within international, national, and local policy subsystems 
should be developed to place preconception nutrition 
firmly on government agendas to incite global policy 
action.101 International organisations are already engaged 
in advocacy to promote improved preconception health 
care. In 2012, WHO coordinated a global consensus on 
Preconception Care to Reduce Maternal and Childhood 
Mortality and Morbidity, and provided a package of 
evidence-based interventions, including nutritional inter-
ventions.102 Pre 
conception nutrition was then integrated 
into a number of transnational organisation initiatives. 
With the notable exception of the Netherlands, only 
LMICs have shown political support for the adoption of 
strategies to address social, environmental, and economic 
determinants of maternal and child malnutrition.90,103 
Political debate in the Netherlands was sparked by 
For Help a Child Reach 5 see 
http://www.lifebuoy.com/article/
category/1102088/help-a-child-
reach-5
 Series
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1 
9
academics drawing attention to high national perinatal 
mortality rates, especially among poor immigrant 
communities. The promotion of preconception health to 
reach the poorest in the Netherlands has since become a 
priority, and includes addressing social deprivation and 
broad determinants of maternal ill-health.
Policy change is more likely if advocacy coalitions are 
developed to focus on a specific policy subsystem and 
engage multiple participants (ie, government agencies, 
research institutions, non-government organisations, the 
media, commercial interests, and influential individuals) 
to build critical mass.101 Strong leadership, adequate 
resources, and a coordinated infrastructure are required 
to ensure advocacy coalitions sustain engagement over 
the potentially lengthy period of time necessary to achieve 
high-level, coordinated policy action, particularly in 
competitive policy subsystems with opposing advocacy 
coalitions. Initiatives such as sugar taxes or marketing 
restrictions to curb sugar intake have gained policy 
traction in some countries following decades of increasing 
evidence, advocacy, and public awareness, in spite of 
strong opposition from food companies.104 A major 
advantage of campaigning for better preconception 
nutrition is that the focus is building stronger mothers 
and babies and reducing non-communicable disease 
burden in the next generation; these are uncontroversial 
messages, easy for the public to engage with emotionally.
Conclusion
A dual strategy targeting women and couples planning a 
pregnancy, coupled with promoting the health of all 
women of child-bearing age, could be the most effective 
approach to improving preconception health. Sparse 
evidence from robust and context-relevant trials of 
preconception nutrition and health behaviour inter-
ventions, makes it hard to draw firm conclusions about 
their effectiveness in improving outcomes for mothers 
and babies on a large scale. Trials of preconception 
interventions are far fewer than those conducted during 
pregnancy, because recruitment is more difficult and 
Study design
Participants
Estimated 
completion
Sites
Nutritional Intervention Preconception 
and During Pregnancy to Maintain Healthy 
Glucose Metabolism and Offspring Health 
(NiPPeR study, NCT02509988)
The aim is to assess whether a nutritional drink taken before conception and 
continuing through pregnancy, assists in the maintenance of healthy glucose 
metabolism in the mother and promotes offspring health
1800 women
October, 2018
New Zealand, 
Singapore, and UK
Inter-pregnAncy Coaching for a Healthy 
fuTure (Inter-ACT, NCT02989142)
The intervention targets women with excessive weight gain in their first pregnancy, 
and attempts to reduce complications in the second pregnancy through an 
interpartum programme of coaching, combining face-to-face counselling with the use 
of a mobile application connected to medical devices (scale and pedometer)
1100 women
September, 2020
Belgium
Women First: Preconception Maternal 
Nutrition (WF, NCT01883193)
Multicountry three-arm, individually randomised, non-masked, controlled trial to 
ascertain the benefits of ensuring optimal maternal nutrition before conception, 
and providing an evidence-base for programmatic priority to minimise the risk of 
malnutrition in females of reproductive age. Women are required to take a lipid-based 
micronutrient supplement. Run from University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA
7374 women
October, 2019
Democratic 
Republic of the 
Congo, Guatemala, 
India, and Pakistan
Development of Pre-pregnancy 
Intervention to Reduce the Risk of 
Diabetes and Prediabetes (Jom Mama, 
NCT02617693)
The aim is to assess the efficacy of a pre-pregnancy intervention to reduce the risk of 
diabetes and prediabetes. A lifestyle intervention combines behaviour change 
counselling from community health promoters trained to support behaviour change, 
and utilisation of an eHealth platform providing preconception information and support
660 women
November, 2017 
Malaysia
Erasmus MC Care Innovation for a healthy 
pregnancy (NTR4150)
To test whether use of the Smarter Pregnant intervention (a mobile application 
comprising an interactive food and lifestyle coaching programme) leads to an 
improvement in unhealthy food habits (intake of fruits and vegetables, and folic acid 
use) after 6 months, measured as a decrease in the Food Risk Score of women and men 
considering pregnancy
3000 men and 
women
January, 2017*
The Netherlands
Healthy Lifestyles Trajectory Initiative 
(HeLTI)
Four interlinked preconception nutrition intervention trials planned by a consortium 
of the Canadian Institute for Health Research, the WHO, the governments of Canada, 
China, India, and South Africa, and academic partners in each country. These 
randomised controlled trials aim to test the effect of a package of nutritional and 
lifestyle interventions before conception on offspring body composition
Not applicable
October, 2017 
(start date)
Canada, China, 
India, and South 
Africa
The Low Birth Weight in South Asia Trial 
(LBWSAT)105†
This cluster randomised controlled trial aims to identify the most cost-effective means 
of increasing birthweight by comparing birthweight in current programme areas with 
birthweight in areas where one of three combinations of interventions is conducted: 
first, a behaviour change strategy involving working with participatory women’s groups 
and other community members, to change pregnant women’s eating behaviour and to 
increase their intake of nutritious food; second and third combine this strategy with 
provision of a food supplement or a cash payment, respectively. The primary outcome 
of the trial is birthweight, accurate to 10 g, measured within 72 h of birth
17 000 pregnant 
women, 
13 000 babies
Unknown
Nepal (80 study 
areas)
*This study has been extended as recruitment was slower than anticipated. †This trial is not a preconception trial, but will have implications for understanding the value of cash transfers and participatory 
women’s groups in improving the nutritional status of women of childbearing age.
Table: Ongoing trials of preconception nutrition interventions
 Series
10 
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1
5 
Gaglio B, Shoup JA, Glasgow RE. The RE-AIM framework: 
a systematic review of use over time. Am J Public Health 2013; 
103: e38–46.
6 
McDonald EC, Pollitt E, Mueller W, Hsueh AM, Sherwin R. 
The Bacon Chow study: maternal nutrition supplementation and 
birth weight of offspring. Am J Clin Nutr 1981; 34: 2133–44.
7 
Caan B, Horgen DM, Margen S, King JC, Jewell NP. 
Benefits associated with WIC supplemental feeding during the 
interpregnancy interval. Am J Clin Nutr 1987; 45: 29–41.
8 
Potdar RD, Sahariah SA, Gandhi M, et al. Improving women’s diet 
quality preconceptionally and during gestation: effects on birth 
weight and prevalence of low birth weight—a randomized controlled 
efficacy trial in India (Mumbai Maternal Nutrition Project). 
Am J Clin Nutr 2014; 100: 1257–68.
9 
Sahariah SA, Potdar RD, Gandhi M, et al. A daily snack containing 
leafy green vegetables, fruit, and milk before and during pregnancy 
prevents gestational diabetes in a randomized, controlled trial in 
Mumbai, India. J Nutr 2016; 146: 1453S–60S.
10 
Pena-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Dowswell T, Viteri FE. Daily oral iron 
supplementation during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2012; 12: CD004736.
11 
Lassi ZS, Bhutta ZA. Clinical utility of folate-containing oral 
contraceptives. Int J Womens Health 2012; 4: 185–90.
12 
Food Fortification Initiative. Say hello to a fortified future: 2016 
year in review. 2017
. http://ffinetwork.org/about/stay_informed/
publications/documents/FFI2016Review.pdf (accessed 
March 6, 2018).
13 
WHO. Fortification of food-grade salt with iodine for the prevention 
and control of iodine deficiency disorders: guideline. 2014. 
http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/guidelines/fortification_
foodgrade_saltwithiodine/en/ (accessed March 6, 2018).
14 
Crider KS, Bailey LB, Berry RJ. Folic acid food fortification— 
its history, effect, concerns, and future directions. Nutrients 2011; 
3: 370–84.
15 
Mastroiacovo P, Leoncini E. More folic acid, the five questions: 
why, who, when, how much, and how. Biofactors 2011; 37: 272–79.
16 
Scientifc Advisory Committee on Nutrition, Public Health England. 
Folic acid: updated SACN recommendations. July, 2017
. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/folic-acid-updated-
sacn-recommendations (accessed March 6, 2018).
17 
Manley J, Gitter S, Slavchevska V, et al. How effective are cash 
transfers at improving nutritional status? A rapid evidence 
assessment of programmes’ effects on anthropometric outcomes. 
July, 2012. http://www.cashlearning.org/downloads/q33-cash-
transfers-2012manley-rae.pdf (accessed March 6, 2018).
18 
Fenn B, Colbourn T, Dolan C, Pietzsch S, Sangrasi M, Shoham J. 
Impact evaluation of different cash-based intervention modalities on 
child and maternal nutritional status in Sindh Province, Pakistan, 
at 6 mo and at 1 y: a cluster randomised controlled trial. PLoS Med 
2017; 14: e1002305.
19 
Fenn B, Pietzsch S, Morel J, et al. Research on Food Assistance for 
Nutritional Impact (REFANI): literature review. March, 2015. 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/
Refani-literature-review-final-03092015.pdf (accessed 
March 6, 2018).
20 Ruel MT, Alderman H. Nutrition-sensitive interventions and 
programmes: how can they help to accelerate progress in 
improving maternal and child nutrition? Lancet 2013; 382: 536–51.
21 
Rawlings LB, Rubio GM. Evaluating the impact of conditional cash 
transfer programs. World Bank Res Obs 2005; 20: 29–55.
22 Whitworth MK, Dowswell T. Routine pre-pregnancy health 
promotion for improving pregnancy outcomes. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009; 4: CD007536.
23 Hussein N, Kai J, Qureshi N. The effects of preconception 
interventions on improving reproductive health and pregnancy 
outcomes in primary care: a systematic review. Eur J Gen Pract 2016; 
22: 42–52.
24 
Elsinga J, de Jong-Potjer LC, van der Pal-de Bruin KM, le Cessie S, 
Assendelft WJ, Buitendijk SE. The effect of preconception 
counselling on lifestyle and other behaviour before and during 
pregnancy. Womens Health Issues 2008; 18: S117–25.
25 Lumley J, Donohue L. Aiming to increase birth weight: a randomised 
trial of pre-pregnancy information, advice and counselling in 
inner-urban Melbourne. BMC Public Health 2006; 6: 299.
outcomes can be assessed only in women who sub-
sequently become pregnant. Fortunately, several such 
trials are underway (table). Meanwhile, public health 
strategies to improve nutritional status in children and 
in adults of reproductive age should be strengthened 
without delay.
Interventions could be more effective for longer if they 
use existing delivery platforms within a systems approach. 
System-wide changes to accommodate preconception 
health care will need support from a social movement 
that establishes its importance for the health of the next 
generation, stresses societal responsibility, and requires 
strong local, national, and international leadership. The 
strength of this social movement, and the capacity to 
deliver effective nutrition and behavioural interventions, 
could be enhanced through carefully negotiated engage-
ment with commercial interests.
Contributors
MB conceptualised the paper in consultation with all authors and wrote 
the first draft with substantial inputs from TC, JS-W, GN, SUD, FFS, 
CHDF, SAN, CV, NMK, WTL, and JS. TC, JS-W, and GN carried out the 
review and produced the pathways model of intervention effects. 
The analysis of preconception action phases was developed by SUD and 
FFS. SAN, RS-T, DP, and KW-T provided data and wrote descriptions of 
exemplar intervention studies. CHDF wrote the first draft of the section on 
interventions with adults intending to become pregnant again. Sections on 
the creation of a social movement and advocacy coalitions were produced 
by CV and NMK. JS oversaw and advised on all aspects of producing and 
editing the paper. All authors saw successive drafts of the paper and 
provided input. MB finalised the paper and is the overall guarantor.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
The idea for this Series was conceived by JS and developed during a 
4-day symposium, led by MB and JS and funded by The Rank Prize 
Funds, on Preconception Nutrition and Lifelong Health in Grasmere, 
UK, February, 2016. We thank a number of individuals who have 
contributed their thoughts and time to this paper: Nicola Heslehurst 
(Newcastle University, Newcastle,UK) for her contribution to an early 
draft of the paper; Zulfi Bhutta (Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan) 
for his perspectives on interventions in LMICs; Chandni Jacob and 
Mark Hanson (University of Southampton, Southampton, UK) for their 
contribution to the review; Jayne Hutchinson and Janet Cade (University 
of Leeds, Leeds, UK) for advice on fortification; Matthijs van Dijk 
(Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands) for data from Smarter 
Pregnancy; Julius Cheah and the Jom Mama project partners comprised 
of the Ministry of Health of Malaysia (Putrajaya, Malaysia), University of 
Southampton (Southampton, UK), University of Witwatersrand 
(Johannesburg, South Africa), Steno Diabetes Center (Gentofte, 
Denmark), and Novo Nordisk (Gentofte, Denmark); Mike Kelly 
(University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK) for discussions on the value 
of social practices; and Andy Last (MullenLowe salt, London, UK) for his 
insights into how a social movement might be created around 
preconception health.
References
1 
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Sustainable 
Development Goal 2. 2016. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/
sdg2 (accessed March 6, 2018).
2 
Godfrey KM, Gluckman PD, Hanson MA. Developmental origins of 
metabolic disease: life course and intergenerational perspectives. 
Trends Endocrinol Metab 2010; 21: 199–205.
3 
Black RE, Alderman H, Bhutta ZA, et al. Maternal and child 
nutrition: building momentum for impact. Lancet 2013; 382: 372–75.
4 
Ceschia A, Horton R. Maternal health: time for a radical reappraisal. 
Lancet 2016; 388: 2064–66.
 Series
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1 
11
26 Nair N, Tripathy P, Sachdev HS, et al. Participatory women’s groups 
and counselling through home visits to improve child growth in 
rural eastern India: protocol for a cluster randomised controlled 
trial. BMC Public Health 2015; 15: 384.
27 
Nair N, Tripathy P, Sachdev HS, et al. Effect of participatory 
women’s groups and counselling through home visits on 
children’s linear growth in rural eastern India (CARING trial): 
a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health 2017; 
5: e1004–16.
28 Prost A, Colbourn T, Seward N, et al. Women’s groups practising 
participatory learning and action to improve maternal and newborn 
health in low-resource settings: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Lancet 2013; 381: 1736–46.
29 Compernolle S, De Cocker K, Lakerveld J, et al. A RE-AIM 
evaluation of evidence-based multi-level interventions to improve 
obesity-related behaviours in adults: a systematic review 
(the SPOTLIGHT project). Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2014; 11: 147
.
30 Santos I, Sniehotta FF, Marques MM, Carraça EV, Teixeira PJ. 
Prevalence of personal weight control attempts in adults: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev 2017; 18: 32–50.
31 
Bhutta Z, Das J, Rizvi A, et al. Evidence-based interventions for 
improvement of maternal and child nutrition: what can be done 
and at what cost? Lancet 2013; 382: 452–77
.
32 De-Regil LM, Harding KB, Roche ML. Preconceptional nutrition 
interventions for adolescent girls and adult women: global 
guidelines and gaps in evidence and policy with emphasis on 
micronutrients. J Nutr 2016; 146: 1461S–70S.
33 Kwasnicka D, Dombrowski SU, White M, Sniehotta F. 
Theoretical explanations for maintenance of behaviour change: 
a systematic review of behaviour theories. Health Psychol Rev 2016; 
10: 277–96.
34 
Heckhausen H. Motivation and action. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1991.
35 Heckhausen J. Developmental regulation in adulthood: 
age-normative and sociostructural constraints as adaptive 
challenges. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
36 Steegers EA, Barker ME, Steegers-Theunissen RP, Williams MA. 
Societal valorization of new knowledge to improve perinatal health: 
time to act. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2016; 30: 201–04.
37 
United Nations Secretary-General. Global strategy for women’s, 
children’s and adolescent’s health (2016–2030). 2015. http://www.
who.int/life-course/publications/global-strategy-2016-2030/en/ 
(accessed March 6, 2018).
38 WHO. Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents 
(AA-HA!): guidance to support country implementation. 2017
. 
http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/topics/
adolescence/framework-accelerated-action/en/ (accessed 
March 6, 2018).
39 Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS, et al. Our future: a Lancet 
commission on adolescent health and wellbeing. Lancet 2016; 
387: 2423–78.
40 
King JC. A Summary of pathways or mechanisms linking 
preconception maternal nutrition with birth outcomes. J Nutr 2016; 
146: 1437S–44S.
41 
Bates B, Lennox A, Prentice A, et al. National diet and nutrition 
survey: results from years 1–4 (combined) of the rolling programme 
(2008/2009–2011/12). May, 2014. https://www.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/594361/NDNS_Y1_
to_4_UK_report_full_text_revised_February_2017
.pdf (accessed 
March 6, 2018).
42 
Craigie AM, Lake AA, Kelly SA, Adamson AJ, Mathers JC. 
Tracking of obesity-related behaviours from childhood to adulthood: 
a systematic review. Maturitas 2011; 70: 266–84.
43 
Viner RM, Ross D, Hardy R, et al. Life course epidemiology: 
recognising the importance of adolescence. 
J Epidemiol Community Health 2015; 69: 719–20.
44 
Vansteenkiste M, Simons J, Lens W, Sheldon KM, Deci EL. 
Motivating learning, performance, and persistence: the synergistic 
effects of intrinsic goal contents and autonomy-supportive contexts. 
J Pers Soc Psychol 2004; 87: 246–60.
45 
Blakemore SJ, Mills KL. Is adolescence a sensitive period for 
sociocultural processing? Annu Rev Psychol 2014; 65: 187–207
.
46 
Grace M, Woods-Townsend K, Griffiths J, et al. 
Developing teenagers’ views on their health and the health of their 
future children. Health Educ 2012; 112: 543–59.
47 
Woods-Townsend K, Bagust L, Barker M, et al. Engaging teenagers 
in improving their health behaviours and increasing their interest 
in science (evaluation of LifeLab Southampton): study protocol for a 
cluster randomized controlled trial. Trials 2015; 16: 372.
48 
Michie S, West R. Behaviour change theory and evidence: 
a presentation to Government. Health Psychol Rev 2013; 7: 1–22.
49 
Draper CE, Micklesfield LK, Kahn K, et al. Application of intervention 
mapping to develop a community-based health promotion 
pre-pregnancy intervention for adolescent girls in rural South Africa: 
Project Ntshembo (Hope). BMC Public Health 2014; 14 (suppl 2): S5.
50 Bhutta ZA, Lassi ZS, Bergeron G, et al. Delivering an action agenda 
for nutrition interventions addressing adolescent girls and young 
women: priorities for implementation and research. 
Ann NY Acad Sci 2017; 1393: 61–71.
51 
Bachrach CA, Morgan SP. A cognitive-social model of fertility 
intentions. Popul Dev Rev 2013; 39: 459–85.
52 Miller WB. Childbearing motivations, desires, and intentions: 
a theoretical framework. Genet Soc Gen Psychol Monogr 1994; 
120: 223–58.
53 Nettle D. Flexibility in reproductive timing in human females: 
integrating ultimate and proximate explanations. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2011; 366: 357–65.
54 
Norris SA, Ho JCC, Rashed AA, et al. Pre-pregnancy 
community-based intervention for couples in Malaysia: application 
of intervention mapping. BMC Public Health 2016; 16: 1167
.
55 Tuomainen H, Cross-Bardell L, Bhoday M, Qureshi N, Kai J. 
Opportunities and challenges for enhancing preconception health 
in primary care: qualitative study with women from ethnically 
diverse communities. BMJ Open 2013; 3: e002977
.
56 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. My reproductive 
life plan. 2014. https://www.cdc.gov/preconception/
reproductiveplan.html (accessed May 17, 2017)
57 
Black C, Lawrence W, Cradock S, et al. Healthy Conversation Skills: 
increasing competence and confidence in front-line staff. 
Public Health Nutr 2014; 17: 700–07
.
58 Baird J, Jarman M, Lawrence W, et al. The effect of a behaviour 
change intervention on the diets and physical activity levels of 
women attending Sure Start Children’s Centres: results from a 
complex public health intervention. BMJ Open 2014; 4: e005290.
59 Lawrence W, Black C, Tinati T, et al. ‘Making every contact count’: 
longitudinal evaluation of the impact of training in behaviour 
change on the work of health and social care practitioners. 
J Health Psychol 2016; 21: 138–51.
60 Gaziano TA, Abrahams-Gessel S, Denman CA, et al. An assessment 
of community health workers’ ability to screen for cardiovascular 
disease risk with a simple, non-invasive risk assessment 
instrument in Bangladesh, Guatemala, Mexico, and South Africa: 
an observational study. Lancet Glob Health 2015; 3: e556–63.
61 
Patel V, Weobong B, Weiss HA, et al. The Healthy Activity Program 
(HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for 
severe depression, in primary care in India: a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 176–185.
62 Pechey R, Monsivais P. Supermarket choice, shopping behavior, 
socioeconomic status, and food purchases. Am J Prev Med 2015; 
49: 868–77
.
63 Vogel C, Ntani G, Inskip H, et al. Education and the relationship 
between supermarket environment and diet. Am J Prev Med 2016; 
51: e27–34.
64 
Hawkes C, Fanzo J, Udomkesmalee E, et al. Global Nutrition Report 
2017: Nourishing the SDGs. November, 2017
. http://scalingup 
nutrition.org/news/global-nutrition-report-2017-nourishing-sdgs/ 
(accessed March 6, 2018).
65 Hawkes C. Dietary implications of supermarket development: 
a global perspective. Dev Policy Rev 2008; 26: 657–92.
66 Hammiche F, Laven JS, van Mil N, et al. Tailored preconceptional 
dietary and lifestyle counselling in a tertiary outpatient clinic in 
The Netherlands. Hum Reprod 2011; 26: 2432–41.
67 
Twigt JM, Bolhuis ME, Steegers EA, et al. The preconception diet is 
associated with the chance of ongoing pregnancy in women 
undergoing IVF/ICSI treatment. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 2526–31.
68 van Dijk MR, Koster MPH, Willemsen SP, Huijgen NA, Laven JSE, 
Steegers-Theunissen RPM. Healthy preconception nutrition and 
lifestyle using personalized mobile health coaching is associated with 
enhanced pregnancy chance. Reprod Biomed Online 2017; 35: 453–60.
 Series
12 
www.thelancet.com   Published online April 16, 2018   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30313-1
69 van Dijk MR, Huijgen NA, Willemsen SP, Laven JSE, Steegers EAP, 
Steegers-Theunissen RPM. Impact of an mhealth platform for 
pregnancy on nutrition and lifestyle of the reproductive population: 
a survey. JMIR mHealth uHealth 2016; 4: e53.
70 
Lee SH, Nurmatov UB, Nwaru BI, Mukherjee M, Grant L, Pagliari C. 
Effectiveness of mHealth interventions for maternal, newborn and 
child health in low- and middle-income countries: systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Glob Health 2016; 6: 010401.
71 
Dennison L, Morrison L, Lloyd S, et al. Does brief telephone support 
improve engagement with a web-based weight management 
intervention? Randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2014; 
16: e95.
72 
Muktabhant B, Lawrie TA, Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M. Diet or 
exercise, or both, for preventing excessive weight gain in pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 6: CD007145.
73 
Tanentsapf I, Heitmann BL, Adegboye ARA. Systematic review of 
clinical trials on dietary interventions to prevent excessive weight 
gain during pregnancy among normal weight, overweight and 
obese women. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2011; 11: 81.
74 
Gardner B, Wardle J, Poston L, Croker H. Changing diet and 
physical activity to reduce gestational weight gain: a meta-analysis. 
Obes Rev 2011; 12: e602–20.
75 
Flynn AC, Seed PT, Patel N, et al. Dietary patterns in obese 
pregnant women; influence of a behavioral intervention of diet and 
physical activity in the UPBEAT randomized controlled trial. 
Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2016; 13: 124.
76 
Dodd JM, Cramp C, Sui Z, et al. The effects of antenatal dietary and 
lifestyle advice for women who are overweight or obese on maternal 
diet and physical activity: the LIMIT randomised trial. 
BMC Med 2014; 12: 161.
77 
Ramakrishnan U, Grant F, Goldenberg T, Zongrone A, Martorell R. 
Effect of women’s nutrition before and during early pregnancy on 
maternal and infant outcomes: a systematic review. 
Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2012; 26 (suppl 1): 285–301.
78 
Morrison J, Dulal S, Harris-Fry H, et al. Formative qualitative 
research to develop community-based interventions addressing low 
birth weight in the plains of Nepal. Public Health Nutr 2018; 
21: 377–84.
79 
Chorghade GP, Barker M, Kanade S, Fall CHD. Why are rural 
Indian women so thin? Findings from a village in Maharashtra. 
Public Health Nutr 2006; 9: 9–18.
80 Barker M, Chorghade G, Crozier S, Leary S, Fall C. Gender 
differences in body mass index in rural India are determined by 
socio-economic factors and lifestyle. J Nutr 2006; 136: 3062–68.
81 
Huseinovic E, Bertz F, Leu Agelii M, Hellebo Johansson E, 
Winkvist A, Brekke HK. Effectiveness of a weight loss intervention 
in postpartum women: results from a randomized controlled trial 
in primary health care. Am J Clin Nutr 2016; 104: 362–70.
82 Peacock AS, Bogossian FE, Wilkinson SA, Gibbons KS, Kim C, 
McIntyre HD. A randomised controlled trial to delay or prevent type 2 
diabetes after gestational diabetes: walking for exercise and nutrition 
to prevent diabetes for you. Int J Endocrinol 2015; 2015: 423717
.
83 van der Pligt P, Willcox J, Hesketh KD, et al. Systematic review of 
lifestyle interventions to limit postpartum weight retention: 
implications for future opportunities to prevent maternal overweight 
and obesity following childbirth. Obes Rev 2013; 14: 792–805.
84 
Lim S, O’Reilly S, Behrens H, Skinner T, Ellis I, Dunbar JA. 
Effective strategies for weight loss in post-partum women: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev 2015; 16: 972–87
.
85 Ritchie LD, Whaley SE, Spector P, Gomez J, Crawford PB. 
Favorable impact of nutrition education on California WIC families. 
J Nutr Educ Behav 2010; 42 (3 suppl): S2–10.
86 Herman DR, Harrison GG, Jenks E. Choices made by low-income 
women provided with an economic supplement for fresh fruit and 
vegetable purchase. J Am Diet Assoc 2006; 106: 740–44.
87 
Neville CE, McKinley MC, Holmes VA, Spence D, Woodside JV. 
The effectiveness of weight management interventions in 
breastfeeding women—a systematic review and critical evaluation. 
Birth 2014; 41: 223–36.
88 Phelan S, Hagobian T, Brannen A, et al. Effect of an internet-based 
program on weight loss for low-income postpartum women: 
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017; 317: 2381–91.
89 Poston L, Caleyachetty R, Cnattingius S, et al. Preconceptional and 
maternal obesity: epidemiology and health consequences. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016; 4: 1025–36.
90 WHO. Global nutrition targets 2025: stunting policy brief. 2014. 
http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/globaltargets2025_
policybrief_stunting/en/ (accessed March 6, 2018).
91 
Monteiro CA, Benicio MH, Conde WL, et al. Narrowing 
socioeconomic inequality in child stunting: the Brazilian experience, 
1974–2007
. Bull World Health Organ 2010; 88: 305–11.
92 Adams J, Mytton O, White M, Monsivais P. Why are some 
population interventions for diet and obesity more equitable and 
effective than others? The role of individual agency. PLoS Med 2016; 
13: e1001990.
93 Lorenc T, Petticrew M, Welch V, Tugwell P. What types of 
interventions generate inequalities? Evidence from systematic 
reviews. J Epidemiol Community Health 2013; 67: 190–93.
94 
Kelly MP, Barker M. Why is changing health-related behaviour so 
difficult? Public Health 2016; 136: 109–16.
95 Shove E, Pantzar M, Watson M. The dynamics of social practice: 
everyday life and how it changes. London: Sage, 2012.
96 Birdwell L. A study of the influence of image congruence on 
consumer choice. J Bus 1968; 41: 76–88.
97 
Last A. Business on a Mission: How to Build a Sustainable Brand. 
Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2016.
98 Unilever. Knorr’s green food steps to improve health and 
livelihoods. June, 2015. https://www.unilever.com/news/news-and-
features/Feature-article/2015/knorrs-green-food-steps-to-improve-
health-and-livelihoods.html (accessed March 6, 2018).
99 Brady JP. Marketing breast milk substitutes: problems and perils 
throughout the world. Arch Dis Child 2012; 97: 529–32.
100 Swinburn B, Kraak V, Rutter H, et al. Strengthening of accountability 
systems to create healthy food environments and reduce global 
obesity. Lancet 2015; 385: 2534–45.
101 Weible C, Sabatier P. A guide to the advocacy coalition framework. 
In: Fischer F, Miller G, Sidney M, eds. Handbook of public policy 
analysis: theory, politics, and methods. FL, USA: Taylor and Francis 
Group, 2007: 123–36.
102 WHO. Meeting to develop a global consensus on preconception 
care to reduce maternal and childhood mortality and morbidity, 
6–7 February 2012. 2013. http://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/78067 (accessed March 6, 2018).
103 Acosta AM. Examining the political, institutional and governance 
aspects of delivering a national multi-sectoral response to reduce 
maternal and child malnutrition. Analysing nutrition governance: 
Brazil country report. September, 2011. https://www.ids.ac.uk/files/
dmfile/DFID_ANG_Brazil_Report_Final.pdf (accessed 
March 6, 2018).
104 Kirkpatrick S, Maynard M, Raffoul A, Stapleton J. Population health 
interventions to curb intake of sugars: gaps in the evidence. 
FASEB J 2017; 31 (suppl 1): 640.26 (abstr).
105 Saville NM, Shrestha BP, Style S, et al. Protocol of the Low Birth 
Weight South Asia Trial (LBWSAT), a cluster-randomised controlled 
trial testing impact on birth weight and infant nutrition of 
Participatory Learning and Action through women’s groups, with 
and without unconditional transfers of fortified food or cash during 
pregnancy in Nepal. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2016; 16: 320.
