 Research Paper
Identification of Host Proteins Predictive of Early Stage Mycobacterium
tuberculosis Infection
Charles M. Bark a,c,f,⁎, Ameur M. Manceur b, LaShaunda L. Malone a,c, Mary Nsereko c, Brenda Okware c,
Harriet K. Mayanja c,d, Moses L. Joloba c,e, Isabelle Rajotte b, Marija Mentinova b, Phyla Kay b, Seydina Lo b,
Patrick Tremblay b, Catherine M. Stein a,c, W. Henry Boom a,c, Eustache Paramithiotis b
a Tuberculosis Research Unit, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
b Caprion Biosciences, 201 President-Kennedy Ave., Montreal, H2X 3Y7, Quebec, Canada
c Uganda-Case Western Reserve University Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda
d Department of Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda
e Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda
f Division of Infectious Diseases, MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 18 December 2016
Received in revised form 23 May 2017
Accepted 19 June 2017
Available online 20 June 2017
The objective of this study was to identify blood-based protein biomarkers of early stage Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb) infection. We utilized plasma and serum specimens from TB patients and their contacts (age ≥ 12) enrolled
in a household contact study in Uganda. In the discovery phase cross-sectional samples from 104 HIV-uninfected
persons classified as either active TB, latent Mtb infection (LTBI), tuberculin skin test (TST) converters, or persis-
tent TST-negative were analyzed. Two hundred eighty-nine statistically significant (false discovery rate
corrected p b 0.05) differentially expressed proteins were identified across all comparisons. Proteins associated
with cellular immunity and lipid metabolism were induced early after Mtb infection. One hundred and fifty-
nine proteins were selected for a targeted mass spectrometry assay. A set of longitudinal samples from 52
TST-negative subjects who converted to TST-positive or remained TST-negative were analyzed, and multivariate
logistic regression was used to identify unique protein panels able to predict TST conversion with cross-validated
AUC N 0.85. Panel performance was confirmed with an independent validation set of longitudinal samples from
16 subjects. These candidate protein biomarkers may allow for the identification of recently Mtb infected individ-
uals at highest risk for developing active TB and most likely to benefit from preventive therapy.
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Tuberculosis
Proteomics
LTBI
Converter
1. Introduction
Approximately one-third of the world's population is latently infect-
ed with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, meaning they do not have symp-
toms, chest radiographic abnormalities, or other findings of active
tuberculosis (TB). People with latent Mtb infection (LTBI) are the prima-
ry source of future TB cases, and their identification is important for TB
control. Diagnosis of LTBI is based on immunological activity suggesting
current or previous infection, commonly measured by either the tuber-
culin skin test (TST) or interferon gamma release assay (IGRA). Neither
test is able to differentiate between LTBI and active TB, nor distinguish
recent from remote infection. This is an important distinction since re-
cent infection is a strong risk factor for progression to active TB, and in
some high incidence areas, the majority of TB cases are likely due to
recent infections from ongoing TB transmission (Chin et al., 1998;
Verver et al., 2004). Developing a diagnostic assay that identifies recent
Mtb infection would allow for targeted treatment of those persons most
likely to progress to active TB and is a priority among international TB
agencies (Pai and Schito, 2015).
Mass spectrometry (MS) coupled with multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM-MS) allows for rapid detection and quantification of proteins
with high sensitivity and precision (Hunter and Paramithiotis, 2010). Pre-
vious studies have used MRM-MS proteomic assays to identify new bio-
markers of LTBI by detecting both Mtb (Kruh-Garcia et al., 2014) and
human host proteins in peripheral blood (Sandhu et al., 2012; Zhang et
al., 2014). In these previous cross-sectional studies, LTBI was diagnosed
by TST or IGRA, but it was not known when the subject was infected
with Mtb (recent vs remote infection). In this study, we analyzed blood
samples from a prospective TB household contact cohort using MRM-
MS to assess the host-protein proteomic profiles in blood from household
contacts who converted from TST-negative to TST-positive. Here we re-
port changes in circulating host-proteins as a person develops LTBI.
EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
⁎ Corresponding author at: Tuberculosis Research Unit, Case Western Reserve
University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
E-mail address: cmb148@case.edu (C.M. Bark).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.06.019
2352-3964/© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Design and Subjects
Participants for this study were enrolled between 2002 and 2012 in
the Kawempe Community Health Study (KCHS), a prospective cohort of
adult pulmonary TB index cases and their household contacts (Whalen
et al., 2006). Kawempe is located in Kampala, Uganda, which is a high-
burden country with an annual TB incidence of approximately 202 TB
cases per 100,000 population (World Health Organization, 2016).
Index cases were defined as adults (age 18 years and older) with initial
episodes of newly diagnosed culture-positive pulmonary TB (Stein et al.,
2013). A household contact was defined as a person living within the
same building as an index case for at least one week during the three-
month period immediately preceding the diagnosis of TB in the index
case. Contacts included in this sub-study were age 12 years and older.
TST was performed by Mantoux method with 5 TU of purified protein
derivative (PPD). After the initial evaluation, participants were evaluat-
ed at 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 months for active TB and with repeat TST at
months 3, 6, 12, and 24 if their first and subsequent TST remained neg-
ative. Converters were defined as household contacts, with an initial TST
b 10 mm at baseline visit, who subsequently converted their skin test to
positive (TST ≥ 10 mm and an increment of 6 mm) during follow-up
testing. Subjects that remained TST-negative and did not convert their
TST were considered to be persistently not infected (NI) (Ma et al.,
2014). All subjects with a positive TST (at baseline or conversion during
follow-up) were offered treatment with isoniazid preventive therapy
(IPT) (10–20 mg/kg or a maximum dose of 300 mg/day) for 9 months.
All subjects included in this sub-study were HIV negative. The study
was approved by the responsible institutional review boards in Uganda
and the U.S and all participants provided written informed consent.
2.2. Sample Processing
Sera and plasma were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C until testing.
Samples were grouped into blocks containing each of the clinical groups
(active TB, LTBI, converters, and NI) and the order of the samples within
each block was randomized. Samples were depleted of abundant proteins
using an HSA/IgG column (Agilent Technologies, Mississauga, ON) in tan-
dem with an IgY14 and Supermix (Sigma, Oakville, Ontario) column and
the flow through was digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a
trypsin to protein ratio of 1:10. The digested samples were freeze-dried,
resolubilized, and treated with TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine] to
reduce disulfide bonds. Samples were desalted by solid phase extraction
using a 3M Empore C18 desalting plate and distributed into 96-well
plates and vacuum evaporated. Peptides were stored at −20 °C until
use. Sample processing variability was measured using aliquots of pooled
plasma that were inserted at regular intervals among the study samples
and taken through the entire analysis. For the Discovery study the
process quality control sample CV was 20.45%, and for Verification
study 1 and 2 the CVs were 10.99% and 4.3%, respectively.
2.3. Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Samples were resuspended in 92.5/7.5 water/ACN + 0.2% formic
acid and analyzed by LC-MS (nanoAcquity UPLC and Q Exactive mass
spectrometer). Peptide separation was achieved using a Waters
nanoAcquity Symmetry UPLC Trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm par-
ticle size) and a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC BEH130 analytical column
(150 μm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm particle size). The mobile phases were (A)
0.2% formic acid in water and (B) 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. For
each sample approximately 2.5 μg was loaded onto the analytical col-
umn. Peptides were separated using a 52.5 min gradient (92.5% A to
40% A) at a flow rate of 1.8 μL/min. MS spectra were acquired from
400 to 1800 Da. The MS method consisted of a Full MS scan followed
by a dd-MS2 scan of the top 12 ions. The Full MS scan was achieved at
a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC value of 3e6 and a maximum IT of
30 ms. The dd-MS2 scan was performed at a resolution of 17,500 with
an AGC target value of 5e4 and a maximum IT of 60 ms.
Components, defined as ions that have been identified by their
mass/charge ratios, retention times, and intensities but do not yet
have sequence information, were detected and matched across all sam-
ples using the Elucidator software version 3.3 (Rosetta Biosoftware, Se-
attle, WA). Presence of unusual modifications was determined using
Preview Software (Protein Metrics). Fragmentation patterns were
matched to the corresponding sequences found in a combined database
containing Human (reviewed entries only) downloaded on 20,121,206
from Uniprot, using Mascot software version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science,
Boston, MA). The following parameters were used for the searches:
enzyme = trypsin, allowed missed cleavages = 2, peptide tolerance =
20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.4 Da, variable modifications =
Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), Acetaldehyde (N-term). A decoy re-
verse database was used to evaluate false positive error rate. Peptide/Pro-
tein Teller helped derive the simplest list of proteins to explain observed
peptides, at a FDR of 5%. All intensities were log (base e) transformed.
42,654 peptides, whose intensities reached LOD (=50,000) in at least
15 samples, were included in subsequent analyses. The overall intensity
bias was corrected so that, between each pair of samples, the median of
the difference of the peptide intensities (in log scale) of the two samples
over all the peptides was 0, or close to. For batch-effect correction, a
one-way ANOVA model Iij = M + Di + εij (I: intensity, M: overall inter-
ception, and D: batch–factor) was solved and parameters Di (i = 1…5)
under the constraint of Σi = 1
10
(Ni ∗ Di) = 0 were obtained; the Di's were
then subtracted from the normalized intensities to form the ‘batch-ef-
fect corrected’ intensities. Intensities below an intensity threshold
(IT), IT = 50,000, were transformed to avoid spurious large fold changes
as follows: I ➔ (I + IT) / 2 (i.e. intensity in the range of (0, IT) was
linearly mapped to the range of (IT/2, IT)). ANOVA analysis was then ap-
plied to identify differentially expressed peptides. ANOVA model: Iij =
M + Ti + εij where I is peptide intensity, M is overall average intensity,
t is ‘condition’ factor, and ε random error (Keeping, 1995; Montgomery,
2001). False detection rate and q-value were calculated based on the p-
values obtained from the ANOVA using Storey's method to make multi-
ple testing adjustments (implemented in MATLAB) (Storey, 2002). ‘Post
hoc’ contrast analyses were conducted using Tukey's hsd method to cal-
culate p-values for each pair wise comparison (Hochberg and Tamhane,
2008). A protein level analysis was then applied by introducing a ‘pep-
tide factor’ in the ANOVA used above: Iijk = M + Ti + Pj + εijk where I is
protein intensity, M overall constant, T ‘condition’, and P peptide factor.
The number of the levels for P is protein-dependent, equal to the num-
ber of peptides for the protein. Proteins were considered to be differen-
tially expressed if they met the following thresholds: p- and q-values
Table 1
Characteristics of included subjects by study phase and clinical cohort.
Discovery (N = 104)
Verification 1 (N = 52)
Verification 2 (N = 16)
Non-Infected
Converter
LTBI
Active TB
Non-infected (longitudinal)
Converter (longitudinal)
Non-infected (longitudinal)
Converter (longitudinal)
n
8
21
38
37
15
37
3
13
Age (median)
20
25
25
25
20
16
25
21
Sex (% male)
63
24
40
43
40
27
0
31
BMI (median)
21
22
22
19
21
21
21
22
151
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
 b0.05 and differential intensity (DI) N 1.1-fold change (or b0.9 for
decrease).
2.4. Multiple Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry
The MRM experiments were done as described previously (Achkar
et al., 2015). Three hundred ninety-two (392) peptides representing
163 host proteins were synthesized (JPT Peptide Technologies, Berlin,
Germany) and resolubilized in 25/75 DMSO/water (v/v), pooled and di-
luted with water + 0.2% formic acid to a concentration of 200 pmol/mL.
This peptide mix was used to develop the MRM assay on a nanoAcquity
UPLC (Waters) coupled to a QTRAP 5500 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex).
Peptide separation was achieved using a BioBasic C18 column (Thermo)
(320 μm × 150 mm, 5 μm particle size). The mobile phases were (A)
0.2% formic acid in water and (B) 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. Gradi-
ent time was 30 min and the flow rate was 10 μL/min. The optimal 2
Fig. 1. Cross-sectional comparison of changes in sera from non-infected (NI), baseline TST-negative future converters (CO), baseline TST-positive (LTBI), and active TB (ATB) groups. Shown
are protein expression change ratios. The significant changes (p b 0.05) are color-coded red for increased and blue for decreased expression ratios, respectively.
152
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
 transitions per peptide were determined using selected reaction moni-
toring (SRM)-triggered MS/MS on a QTRAP 5500 instrument (AB Sciex).
The MRM-MS/MS method was developed by calculating, for each pep-
tide, the precursor mass of the doubly and triply charged peptide ions
and the first and second y fragment ions with a m/z greater than [m/z
(precursor) + 20 Da]. If these transitions were observed during the
MRM scan a full MS/MS spectrum of the precursor peptide ion was ac-
quired. The two most intense fragment ions (b or y fragment ions
only) in the MS/MS spectrum and its elution time were determined
for each acquired peptide and the collision energy (CE) was optimized
for all of the chosen transitions. Sample analysis utilized an MRM detec-
tion window of 140 s (±70s around the RT of each peptide) and a cycle
time of 1.5 s. The developed MRM assay was then applied for the anal-
ysis of the study samples.
Expression analysis of MRM-MS data acquired from the verification
samples was performed using R version 2.14.0, platform x86_64-pc-
mingw32/x64 (64-bit). An IT below which the measure is deemed less
reliable was determined empirically and set to 10,000 pre-normaliza-
tion. A detection rate (DR) was defined as the proportion of samples
within a group with a raw intensity value greater or equal to the IT.
Transitions with DR below 50% for one of the two groups being
compared were excluded from expression analysis. Differential intensi-
ty (DI) ratios were calculated in pair wise comparisons for each transi-
tion as the ratio of the average normalized intensities of each group.
Prior to calculating the DI ratios, all intensity values that were below
IT in the raw data prior to normalization were replaced by the half-IT
value. Student's t-test was applied for the expression analysis. Protein-
level statistics were also computed by linearly combining the transitions
of a given protein into a single variable and then applying a t-test. The
average was a weighted average, where the weights were derived
from the first principal component of the transition covariance matrix.
The calculation of q-values was done using function “qvalue” from
Storey's package “qvalue” version 1.24.0 (Storey, 2002).
2.5. Network Analysis
Data were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Ingenu-
ity® Systems, Redwood City, CA). Right-tailed Fisher's exact test was
used to calculate a p-value determining the probability that each biolog-
ical function and/or disease assigned to that data set was due to chance
alone.
Fig. 2. Longitudinal comparison of changes in selected* plasma proteins from baseline TST-negative subjects (N = 52) that converted to TST-positive (N = 37) or remained TST-negative
(N = 15). Shown are protein expression change ratios between each individual's baseline TST-negative sample and the TST-positive conversion sample or corresponding TST-negative
sample. The significant changes (p b 0.05) are color-coded red for increased and blue for decreased expression ratios, respectively. *We selected 159 proteins from the cross-sectional
discovery phase using the following combination of biological and statistical criteria. All of the significantly differentially expressed proteins from the baseline converter vs NI and LTBI
vs NI comparisons were selected along with the most differentially expressed proteins from comparisons to active TB. We also included the significant proteins described in the MRM-
MS assay of Achkar et al. (2015).
153
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
 2.5.1. Panel Selection and Receiver Operating Characteristics
The area under the curve (AUC) was the result of a nested cross-val-
idation procedure that used stratified sampling to split the data at ran-
dom into five test sets. For each test set, the remaining four fifths (4/
5) of the data were defined to be that test set's corresponding training
set. To facilitate the selection of panels of interest, the following proce-
dure was carried out for all possible panels with up to four proteins
out of all the candidate biomarkers. Each training set was again split at
random by stratified sampling into two halves. One half was used to fit
a logistic regression model, which was then used to calculate out-of-
sample predictive scores for the other half. This random half-and-half
split procedure was repeated a number of times equal to three times
the sample size of the training set; out-of-sample predictive scores and
the corresponding true outcomes were aggregated over all random splits
and AUCs were estimated from these. Since there are five training sets,
five such AUC estimates were generated for each panel, which were
then averaged. Panel selection was carried out by examining various
summaries of protein performance, and also direct examination of the
panels with the best AUC estimates. We used a predetermined selection
parameter of AUC N 0.85. To compute the final AUC estimates of the se-
lected panels, each test set was scored by a logistic regression model fit
to the corresponding training set; the resulting out-of-sample predictive
scores and true outcomes aggregated over all five test sets, forming the
final set from which AUCs were estimated.
2.6. Data Submission
Data submissions conformed to published guidelines (Martinez-
Bartolome et al., 2013). LCMS data are accessible at http://
proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org, identifier PXD000582. MRM
data are available at http://www.peptideatlas.org/passel/, identifier
PASS00343 for the MRM assay qualification data on the discovery sam-
ples, PASS00344 and PASS00959 for verification 1 and 2, respectively.
Expression data are accessible at http://enews.patricbrc.org/niaid-
clinical-proteomics/, identifier ZDN for the discovery data, ZHH for the
MRM qualification data, and ZHS for Verification 1 data.
3. Results
3.1. Demographics and Discovery Phase
Peripheral blood specimens previously collected from 172 TB pa-
tients and household contacts were used for this study. Their clinical
characteristics are shown in Table 1. The discovery phase was conduct-
ed by a cross-sectional analysis of proteomic expressions among base-
line samples from 37 index cases with active TB, 8 TST-negative
contacts who remained TST-negative and non-infected (NI), 21 TST-
negative contacts who later converted their TST at either 3 or 6 months
(converters), and 38 TST-positive contacts with LTBI at baseline. Fig. 1
Fig. 3. Changes in plasma protein expression after TST-positive conversion. Shown are protein expression change ratios in subjects (N = 19) with samples at baseline (D1), 3 months (M3),
and 6 months (M6) that had converted to TST-positive at M3. The significant changes (p b 0.05) are color-coded red for increased and blue for decreased expression ratios, respectively.
154
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
 shows cross-sectional comparisons of changes in blood protein expres-
sion ratios from the baseline samples. The significant changes (p b 0.05)
are color-coded. We found that when compared to the NI group, the
number of differentially expressed proteins increased by the following
group order: converters, LTBI, and active TB. The largest absolute differ-
ences in protein expression were observed between NI participants and
patients with active TB. We also found differences in protein expression
when looking at changes grouped by biological processes. Most protein
changes associated with inflammation, immune response, tissue repair,
cellular migration and proliferation were observed in subjects with ac-
tive TB. Among the LTBI and converter groups, smaller changes were ob-
served in these processes, as well as changes in proteins associated with
lipid metabolism and the innate immune response (Fig. 1). The results
are consistent with a low level of distinct observable changes in Mtb in-
fection, including very recent infection, exhibited by the baseline TST-
negative future converters who were in the process of developing LTBI.
3.2. MRM-MS Assay Development and Initial Testing (Verification 1)
A targeted MRM-MS assay was developed for 159 proteins selected
from each comparison in the cross-sectional discovery phase using the
following combination of biological and statistical criteria. All of the sig-
nificantly differentially expressed proteins from the baseline converter
vs NI and LTBI vs NI comparisons were selected along with the most dif-
ferentially expressed proteins from comparisons to active TB. We also
included the significant proteins described in the MRM-MS assay of
Achkar et al. (2015). Re-analysis of the discovery samples with the
MRM-MS assay confirmed the differential expression observed in the
discovery phase (Supplemental Fig. 1). Next, an independent set of
161 longitudinal samples collected from 52 subjects who were initially
all TST-negative and either converted to TST-positive (N = 37) or
remained TST-negative (N = 15) were tested with the prioritized can-
didate biomarkers. The changes in plasma proteins at baseline and at a
minimum of 2 additional time points over a 6 month period were calcu-
lated. Fig. 2 shows protein expression change ratios between each
individual's baseline TST-negative sample and the longitudinal TST-pos-
itive conversion sample or corresponding TST-negative sample. The sig-
nificant changes (p b 0.05) are color-coded. As expected, subjects who
became TST-positive had a more extensive host response than the sub-
jects that remained TST-negative. In an analysis of subjects that convert-
ed by 3 months, most of the proteins associated with inflammatory,
innate and adaptive immune responses were elevated at month 3,
when TST conversion was recorded, but returned to baseline levels by
month 6. In contrast, most of the proteins associated with cellular
movement and tissue repair remained elevated through month 6
(Fig. 3). Converters were treated with isoniazid preventive therapy for
9 months after TST conversion, and this may have had an effect on pro-
tein expression measured at month 6.
3.3. Selection of Protein Panels Predicting TST Conversion and Validation
Testing (Verification 2)
Next, the ability of plasma protein biomarker panels to predict TST
conversion was evaluated. Classification analysis of combinations of all
159 targeted proteins was conducted using multivariable logistic re-
gression with multiple training and testing subsets to classify a patient
as either a TST-negative persister or a TST converter, based on the
patient's baseline (TST-negative) plasma protein expression. This classi-
fication revealed a small pool of defined panels that were able to predict
TST conversion with an AUC N 0.85. These high performing protein com-
bination signatures were further tested using an independent second
set of 48 longitudinal samples from 16 household contacts. Fig. 4
shows the performance in prediction of TST conversion in both verifica-
tion studies of one representative high-performing panel containing
proteins that were frequently observed in the high-performing panels.
The composition of this panel is shown in Table 2.
4. Discussion
In this study that included analysis of serum and plasma protein ex-
pression from 172 TB patients and their household contacts, we found
that the extent of host response changes was associated with progres-
sion from Mtb exposure to infection, with the most widespread changes
occurring during active TB. Early infection was associated with specific
host response processes related to inflammation, immune-response,
and lipid metabolism. These specific changes allowed for the identifica-
tion of protein panels predicting TST conversion. Other host response
processes, such as those associated with tissue remodelling and cellular
migration became most differentially expressed during active disease.
Table 2
Composition of a predictive biomarker panel.
Protein
Functional category
CLEC3B
Transport
ECM1
Tissue development & remodelling
IGFALS, SELL
Cell migration & adhesion
IGFBP3
Cell proliferation
VWF
Coagulation
Fig. 4. Small plasma protein biomarker panels can predict TST conversion. Combinations of up to 6 proteins using the 159 targeted proteins detected were used to define biomarker panels
able to predict conversion with AUC N 0.85. The initial verification study (Verification 1: N = 52 subjects, 3 longitudinal samples per subject) defined high performing biomarker panels
whose performance was confirmed using an independent set of longitudinal samples (Verification 2: N = 16 subjects, 3 longitudinal samples per subject). Shown is the performance of
one 6-protein panel in prediction of TST-positive conversion in both verification studies. The AUC values shown did not differ significantly from each other.
155
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
 These observations were consistent with previous reports (Achkar et al.,
2015; De Groote et al., 2013).
Lipid metabolism was the only host process with a qualitatively dif-
ferent induction early in Mtb infection. Host lipid metabolism is known
to be significantly impacted by Mtb infection. Fatty acids are accessed by
mycobacteria during host cell infection (Lee et al., 2013), and host genes
involved in lipid metabolism are highly expressed in caseous TB granu-
lomas (Kim et al., 2010). Host lipid metabolism is also systemically
affected by the acute phase response, for example by reducing levels
of high density lipoprotein (HDL) and proteins such as LCAT
(Khovidhunkit et al., 2004). Early in infection we observed an increase
in lipid metabolism associated proteins which was reversed during
active disease. This suggests that initially plasma levels of these proteins
may reflect localized remodelling in the lung, an effect later
overwhelmed by the influence of the acute phase response during ac-
tive disease. We conclude that lipid metabolism associated peripheral
blood proteins may be used to follow progression of Mtb infection.
Small panels of candidate biomarkers representing key host re-
sponse processes were able to predict 3–6 months ahead of time the
conversion from a TST-negative to a TST-positive state and thus predict-
ed the establishment of LTBI. The key host response processes were rep-
resented by several different host proteins, though the most frequently
observed are presented in the panel reported in Table 2. This panel in-
cluded two proteins, CLEC3B and ECM1, involved in tissue remodelling
(Holtet et al., 1997; Chan, 2004). ECM1 levels have also been linked with
response to TB therapy (Nahid et al., 2014). Two other panel proteins,
IGFALS and IGFBP3, are members of the insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) pathway. Both proteins are found in ternary complexes with IGF,
which substantially prolong IGF half-life and help regulate its activity
(Boisclair et al., 2001). In active TB, we observed that IGFALS and
IGFBP3 as well as IGFBP5, IGFBP6, IGF1 and IGF2 were reduced. Plasma
levels of IGFBP3 have also been shown to be reduced in active M. leprae
infection (Rodrigues et al., 2011) but increased in PBMC cultures from
LTBI subjects (Stern et al., 2009). The IGFs display pleiotropic properties
and can be negatively regulated by pro-inflammatory cytokines
(O'Connor et al., 2008), suggesting that the elevated inflammatory
response during active TB might be responsible for the observed reduc-
tion. Early in infection, however, IGF2, IGFBP3, and IGFALS were elevat-
ed in subjects that would become TST-positive, although that appeared
to be a short-term change as only IGFBP3 remained significantly elevat-
ed 3 months after TST conversion. Currently it remains unclear which of
the many functions of the IGF pathway are induced at this stage of Mtb
infection. The two remaining panel proteins, SELL and VWF, have roles
in the host immune response. SELL is involved in leukocyte homing
and infiltration (Wedepohl et al., 2012), and was part of a host blood
panel of proteins able to distinguish active TB from other respiratory
diseases (Achkar et al., 2015). VWF promotes adhesion of platelets to
sites of vascular injury, and is thus involved not only in tissue repair
but also in the modulation of the inflammatory response (Lenting et
al., 2012; Schattner, 2014). However, it is unclear if this number of
host proteins represented the minimum combination necessary. Fur-
ther studies may help elucidate this question.
Limitations of this study include that specimens used for the discov-
ery and validation studies were from HIV-negative participants in a
single cohort, and may not be generalizable to other settings and popu-
lations. The second verification sample size was small, which could limit
the reproducibility of our findings. Additionally, household contacts
were identified after the index case was diagnosed with active TB, and
therefore were likely exposed and potentially already had early Mtb in-
fection at the time of their baseline evaluation. Therefore, our TST-neg-
ative household contacts do not represent truly unexposed persons at
baseline. Despite this we were able to identify protein signatures that
predicted TST conversion, and these could be useful in TB contact inves-
tigations to identify and treat TST-negative contacts who would later
develop LTBI. Similarly, given the extent of Mtb exposure in household
contacts, as well as in the general population of this study, the NI
contacts could represent a subgroup of people who may be resistant
to LTBI (Ma et al., 2014). These individuals might have different periph-
eral protein expression from persons who are not exposed to Mtb. Alter-
natively, some may have had depressed immunity due to conditions
such as malnutrition. Given these limitations, further study and verifica-
tion of these protein signature biomarkers in a low TB-incidence popu-
lation would be useful. This would allow for further distinction of very
recent and remote Mtb infection. Strengths of our study include a
well-characterized epidemiological cohort of patients with newly-diag-
nosed culture-confirmed smear positive pulmonary TB, and contacts
followed serially for TST conversion with testing done using standard-
ized methods by a well-trained staff.
The discovery of peripheral blood protein signatures capable of
predicting the development of LTBI could offer substantial clinical ben-
efit. Use of these protein signatures in a clinical assay would enable the
rapid identification of TB contacts who will develop LTBI and who
would most benefit from preventive therapy, eliminating the need for
follow-up testing of large numbers of TB contacts. Additionally, as LTBI
represents an immunologically controlled infection, these protein bio-
markers may be useful in predicting treatment response and relapse.
We plan to further test these biomarkers of LTBI in low TB incidence
populations and investigate their association with treatment response
in active TB.
Funding
This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/Na-
tional Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) contract
HHSN272200800047C to EP. The Kawempe Community Health Study
was funded entirely by the Tuberculosis Research Unit (grant N01-
AI95383 and HHSN266200700022C/N01-AI70022 from the National In-
stitutes of Health National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
awarded to WHB). CMB is supported by a grant from the NIH/NCRR
CTSA KL2TR000440.
Author Contributions
Study conception and design: CMB, WHB, EP.
Acquisition of data: MN, BO, HKM, MLJ, CMS.
Analysis and interpretation of data: AMM, LLM, IR, MM, PK, SL, PT,
CMB, WHB, EP.
Drafting of manuscript: CMB, EP.
Critical revision: CMB, EP, WHB, BO, CMS.
Conflicts of Interest
AM, IR, MM, PK, SL, PT, and EP were employees of Caprion Biosci-
ences Inc. at the time the work was performed. A patent application
with CMB, WHB, and EP as inventors was also submitted.
Acknowledgements
This study would not be possible without the generous participation
of the Ugandan patients and families. We would also like to acknowl-
edge the contributions made by senior physicians, medical officers,
health visitors, laboratory and data personnel: Dr. Roy Mugerwa, Dr.
Deo Mulindwa, Dr. Lorna Nshuti, Dr. Alphonse Okwera, Dr. Chris Whalen,
Dr. Sarah Zalwango, Denise Johnson, Allan Chiunda, Mark Breda, Dennis
Dobbs, Mary Rutaro, Albert Muganda, Richard Bamuhimbisa, Yusuf
Mulumba, Deborah Nsamba, Barbara Kyeyune, Faith Kintu, Gladys
Mpalanyi, Janet Mukose, Grace Tumusiime, Pierre Peters, Annet
Kawuma, Saidah Menya, Joan Nassuna, Keith Chervenak, Karen Morgan,
Alfred Etwom, Micheal Angel Mugerwa, Emily Hellwig, and Lisa
Kucharski. We would like to acknowledge Dr. Francis Adatu Engwau,
former Head of the Uganda National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Program,
for supporting this project. We would like to acknowledge the medical
156
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
 officers, nurses and counselors at the National Tuberculosis Treatment
Centre, Mulago Hospital, the Ugandan National Tuberculosis and Lepro-
sy Program and the Uganda Tuberculosis Investigation Bacteriological
Unit, Wandegeya, for their contributions to this study.
The authors thank John L Johnson, MD, Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity, for critical review of the manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.06.019.
References
Achkar, J.M., Cortes, L., Croteau, P., Yanofsky, C., Mentinova, M., Rajotte, I., Schirm, M.,
Zhou, Y., Junqueira-Kipnis, A.P., Kasprowicz, V.O., Larsen, M., Allard, R., Hunter, J.,
Paramithiotis, E., 2015. Host protein biomarkers identify active tuberculosis in HIV
uninfected and co-infected individuals. EBioMedicine 2, 1160–1168.
Boisclair, Y.R., Rhoads, R.P., Ueki, I., Wang, J., Ooi, G.T., 2001. The acid-labile subunit (ALS)
of the 150 kDa IGF-binding protein complex: an important but forgotten component
of the circulating IGF system. J. Endocrinol. 170, 63–70.
Chan, I., 2004. The role of extracellular matrix protein 1 in human skin. Clin. Exp.
Dermatol. 29, 52–56.
Chin, D.P., Deriemer, K., Small, P.M., De Leon, A.P., Steinhart, R., Schecter, G.F., Daley, C.L.,
Moss, A.R., Paz, E.A., Jasmer, R.M., Agasino, C.B., Hopewell, P.C., 1998. Differences in
contributing factors to tuberculosis incidence in U.S. -born and foreign-born persons.
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 158, 1797–1803.
De Groote, M.A., Nahid, P., Jarlsberg, L., Johnson, J.L., Weiner, M., Muzanyi, G., Janjic, N.,
Sterling, D.G., Ochsner, U.A., 2013. Elucidating novel serum biomarkers associated
with pulmonary tuberculosis treatment. PLoS One 8, e61002.
Hochberg, Y., Tamhane, A.C., 2008. Multiple Comparison Procedures. Wiley.
Holtet, T.L., Graversen, J.H., Clemmensen, I., Thogersen, H.C., Etzerodt, M., 1997.
Tetranectin, a trimeric plasminogen-binding C-type lectin. Protein Sci. 6, 1511–1515.
Hunter, J.M., Paramithiotis, E., 2010. Protein biomarker quantification by mass spectrom-
etry. Expert Opin. Med. Diagn. 4, 11–20.
Keeping, E.S., 1995. Introduction to Statistical Inference. Dover Publication.
Khovidhunkit, W., Kim, M.S., Memon, R.A., Shigenaga, J.K., Moser, A.H., Feingold, K.R.,
Grunfeld, C., 2004. Effects of infection and inflammation on lipid and lipoprotein me-
tabolism: mechanisms and consequences to the host. J. Lipid Res. 45, 1169–1196.
Kim, M.J., Wainwright, H.C., Locketz, M., Bekker, L.G., Walther, G.B., Dittrich, C., Visser, A.,
Wang, W., Hsu, F.F., Wiehart, U., Tsenova, L., Kaplan, G., Russell, D.G., 2010. Caseation
of human tuberculosis granulomas correlates with elevated host lipid metabolism.
EMBO Mol. Med. 2, 258–274.
Kruh-Garcia, N.A., Wolfe, L.M., Chaisson, L.H., Worodria, W.O., Nahid, P., Schorey, J.S.,
Davis, J.L., Dobos, K.M., 2014. Detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis peptides in
the exosomes of patients with active and latent M. tuberculosis infection using
MRM-MS. PLoS One 9, e103811.
Lee, W., Vanderven, B.C., Fahey, R.J., Russell, D.G., 2013. Intracellular Mycobacterium tu-
berculosis exploits host-derived fatty acids to limit metabolic stress. J. Biol. Chem.
288, 6788–6800.
Lenting, P.J., Casari, C., Christophe, O.D., Denis, C.V., 2012. von Willebrand factor: the old,
the new and the unknown. J. Thromb. Haemost. 10, 2428–2437.
Ma, N., Zalwango, S., Malone, L.L., Nsereko, M., Wampande, E.M., Thiel, B.A., Okware, B.,
Igo Jr., R.P., Joloba, M.L., Mupere, E., Mayanja-Kizza, H., Boom, W.H., Stein, C.M.,
Tuberculosis Research, U., 2014. Clinical and epidemiological characteristics of indi-
viduals resistant to M. tuberculosis infection in a longitudinal TB household contact
study in Kampala, Uganda. BMC Infect. Dis. 14, 352.
Martinez-Bartolome, S., Deutsch, E.W., Binz, P.A., Jones, A.R., Eisenacher, M., Mayer, G.,
Campos, A., Canals, F., Bech-Serra, J.J., Carrascal, M., Gay, M., Paradela, A., Navajas, R.,
Marcilla, M., Hernaez, M.L., Gutierrez-Blazquez, M.D., Velarde, L.F., Aloria, K.,
Beaskoetxea, J., Medina-Aunon, J.A., Albar, J.P., 2013. Guidelines for reporting quanti-
tative mass spectrometry based experiments in proteomics. J. Proteome 95, 84–88.
Montgomery, D.C., 2001. Design and Analysis of Experiments. Wiley.
Nahid, P., Bliven-Sizemore, E., Jarlsberg, L.G., De Groote, M.A., Johnson, J.L., Muzanyi, G.,
Engle, M., Weiner, M., Janjic, N., Sterling, D.G., Ochsner, U.A., 2014. Aptamer-based
proteomic signature of intensive phase treatment response in pulmonary tuberculo-
sis. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 94, 187–196.
O'Connor, J.C., McCusker, R.H., Strle, K., Johnson, R.W., Dantzer, R., Kelley, K.W., 2008. Reg-
ulation of IGF-I function by proinflammatory cytokines: at the interface of immunol-
ogy and endocrinology. Cell. Immunol. 252, 91–110.
Pai, M., Schito, M., 2015. Tuberculosis diagnostics in 2015: landscape, priorities, needs,
and prospects. J Infect Dis 211 (Suppl. 2), S21–S28.
Rodrigues, L.S., Hacker, M.A., Illarramendi, X., Pinheiro, M.F., Nery, J.A., Sarno, E.N.,
Pessolani, M.C., 2011. Circulating levels of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) corre-
late with disease status in leprosy. BMC Infect. Dis. 11, 339.
Sandhu, G., Battaglia, F., Ely, B.K., Athanasakis, D., Montoya, R., Valencia, T., Gilman, R.H.,
Evans, C.A., Friedland, J.S., Fernandez-Reyes, D., Agranoff, D.D., 2012. Discriminating
active from latent tuberculosis in patients presenting to community clinics. PLoS
One 7, e38080.
Schattner, M., 2014. Platelets and galectins. Ann. Transl. Med. 2, 85.
Stein, C.M., Hall, N.B., Malone, L.L., Mupere, E., 2013. The household contact study design
for genetic epidemiological studies of infectious diseases. Front. Genet. 4, 61.
Stern, J.N., Keskin, D.B., Romero, V., Zuniga, J., Encinales, L., Li, C., Awad, C., Yunis, E.J., 2009.
Molecular signatures distinguishing active from latent tuberculosis in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, after in vitro antigenic stimulation with purified protein de-
rivative of tuberculin (PPD) or Candida: a preliminary report. Immunol. Res. 45, 1–12.
Storey, J.D., 2002. A direct approach to falso discovery rates. J. R. Stat Soc. Ser B 64,
479–498.
Verver, S., Warren, R.M., Munch, Z., Vynnycky, E., Van Helden, P.D., Richardson, M., Van
Der Spuy, G.D., Enarson, D.A., Borgdorff, M.W., Behr, M.A., Beyers, N., 2004. Transmis-
sion of tuberculosis in a high incidence urban community in South Africa. Int.
J. Epidemiol. 33, 351–357.
Wedepohl, S., Beceren-Braun, F., Riese, S., Buscher, K., Enders, S., Bernhard, G., Kilian, K.,
Blanchard, V., Dernedde, J., Tauber, R., 2012. L-selectin–a dynamic regulator of leuko-
cyte migration. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 91, 257–264.
Whalen, C.C., Chiunda, A., Zalwango, S., Nshuti, L., Jones-Lopez, E., Okwera, A., Hirsch, C.,
Peters, P., Boom, W.H., Mugerwa, R.D., 2006. Immune correlates of acute Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis infection in household contacts in Kampala, Uganda. Am. J. Trop.
Med. Hyg. 75, 55–61.
World Health Organization, 2016. Global Tuberculosis Report 2016. World Health Organi-
zation, Geneva.
Zhang, X., Liu, F., Li, Q., Jia, H., Pan, L., Xing, A., Xu, S., Zhang, Z., 2014. A proteomics ap-
proach to the identification of plasma biomarkers for latent tuberculosis infection.
Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 79, 432–437.
157
C.M. Bark et al. / EBioMedicine 21 (2017) 150–157
