 Engagement of MHC class I by the inhibitory receptor LILRB1 
suppresses macrophages and is a target of cancer 
immunotherapy
Amira A. Barkal1, Kipp Weiskopf1,2, Kevin S. Kao1, Sydney R. Gordon1, Benyamin 
Rosental1, Ying Y. Yiu1, Benson M. George1, Maxim Markovic1, Nan G. Ring1, Jonathan M. 
Tsai1, Kelly M. McKenna1, Po Yi Ho1, Robin Z. Cheng1, James Y. Chen1, Layla J. Barkal3, 
Aaron M. Ring4, Irving L. Weissman1,5,6,7,*, and Roy L. Maute1,8,*
1Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
2Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
4Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
5Ludwig Center for Cancer Stem Cell Research and Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
6Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
7Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
Abstract
Exciting progress in the field of cancer immunotherapy has renewed the urgency of the need for 
basic studies of immunoregulation in both adaptive cell lineages and innate cell lineages. Here we 
found a central role for major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I in controlling the 
phagocytic function of macrophages. Our results demonstrated that expression of the common 
MHC class I component β2-microglobulin (β2M) by cancer cells directly protected them from 
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
*Correspondence and requests for materials: should be addressed to I.L.W. or R.L.M.: irv@stanford.edu; rmaute@stanford.edu.
8Present address: Ab Initio Biotherapeutics, South San Francisco, CA, USA. Amira A. Barkal, Kipp Weiskopf, Irving L. Weissman 
and Roy L. Maute contributed equally to this work.
Author contributions
A.A.B., K.W., I.L.W. and R.L.M. wrote the manuscript; A.A.B., K.W., A.M.R., I.L.W. and R.L.M. conceived of and designed all 
experiments; K.W. and R.L.M. performed LegendScreen analysis of tumor cell lines; K.S.K., S.R.G., B.M.G. and R.Z.C. assisted with 
mouse experiments; B.R. and Y.Y.Y. performed receptor-Fc staining experiments; M.M. assisted with tumor measurements and 
injections and provided sample preparation for primary human macrophages; N.G.R. generated human macrophages and tested the in 
vitro growth kinetics of DLD1 sublines; J.M.T. performed histology and immunofluorescence staining; K.M.M. generated NSG 
macrophages; K.M.M., P.Y.H. and R.L.M. tested CD47 expression in tumor cell lines; J.Y.C. assisted with generating knockout cell 
lines; L.J.B. assisted with statistical analysis; A.M.R. generated Fab fragments of W6/32; and I.L.W. supervised the research and 
edited the manuscript.
Competing interests
K.W., A.M.R., I.L.W. and R.L.M. and are co-inventors on patent application PCT/US2015/057233, which is related to this work, and 
own stock of FortySeven, which is pursing clinical approval of antibody Hu5F9-G4, directed against human CD47.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-017-0004-z.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Immunol. 2018 January ; 19(1): 76–84. doi:10.1038/s41590-017-0004-z.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phagocytosis. We further showed that this protection was mediated by the inhibitory receptor 
LILRB1, whose expression was upregulated on the surface of macrophages, including tumor-
associated macrophages. Disruption of either MHC class I or LILRB1 potentiated phagocytosis of 
tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo, which defines the MHC class I–LILRB1 signaling axis as an 
important regulator of the effector function of innate immune cells, a potential biomarker for 
therapeutic response to agents directed against the signal-regulatory protein CD47 and a potential 
target of anti-cancer immunotherapy.
When properly stimulated, effector cells of both the innate immune system and adaptive 
immune system possess the ability to attack cancer cells. Clinical successes have highlighted 
the potential of this approach, but more complete understanding of immunoregulation is 
critical for the development of new therapeutic strategies.
Tumor-binding antibodies have been used in the clinic to treat many cancers, including 
lymphomas, breast cancer and colon cancer, among others1. These antibodies often exhibit 
multiple modes of action, but their efficacy is linked, in part, to their ability to stimulate 
antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis of cancer cells2. However, the potency of this 
response is dampened by the expression, on the surface of cancer cells, of the signal-
regulatory protein CD47, which engages the inhibitory receptor SIRPα on macrophages and 
functions as an anti-phagocytic ‘don’t eat me’ signal3,4.
Therapeutic blockade of the CD47–SIRPα interaction greatly increases the antibody-
induced phagocytosis of cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo5–8. Biological agents directed 
against this axis are currently in clinical trials for multiple indications and represent a 
promising immunotherapeutic strategy9. However, redundant inhibitory signals are 
commonplace in immunoregulation, and the CD47–SIRPα axis is probably not the only 
important therapeutic target for engaging macrophages to attack cancer cells. In order to 
identify additional regulators of these cells, we undertook a targeted screen for cancer-
relevant ‘don’t eat me’ signals. Through this screen, we identified major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) class I as a critical regulator of the effector function of macrophages within 
the tumor microenvironment.
Results
Expression of MHC class I correlates with resistance to phagocytosis
Drugs targeting the CD47–SIRPα pathway have broad efficacy in inducing the phagocytosis 
of cancer cells, yet some cells exhibit intrinsic resistance largely independent of disease 
subtype or tissue of origin5–8. To investigate this phenomenon further, we assessed the 
phagocytosis, by primary human macrophages, of a diverse panel of human cancer cell lines. 
Phagocytosis was quantified by a flow cytometry–based assay validated by cell-sorting 
experiments8,10 and high-throughput microscopy (Supplementary Fig. 1). We found that the 
clinical-stage CD47-blocking antibody Hu5F9-G4 (anti-CD47)11 significantly increased 
phagocytosis of the majority of cancer cell lines tested (Fig. 1a). However, despite the broad 
efficacy of this antibody, some cancer cell lines were not significantly phago-cytosed after 
treatment with anti-CD47, and among the responding cell lines, the magnitude of induced 
Barkal et al.
Page 2
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phagocytosis varied widely (Fig. 1a). These differences did not correlate with cancer 
subtype, nor did they correlate with surface expression of CD47, which was high in all cell 
lines tested (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Anti-CD47 induces phagocytosis both by blocking 
CD47–SIRPα signaling and by opsonizing cells via its functional immunoglobulin G4 
crystallizable fragment (Fc) and thereby providing an ‘eat me’ signal that activates Fc 
receptors on macrophages. We therefore speculated that the anti-CD47-resistant lines 
probably expressed one or more co-dominant inhibitory signals in addition to CD47.
In order to identify those signals, we used an antibody array system to characterize the 
surface immunophenotype of five cell lines that spanned a broad spectrum of human tumor 
types and a wide range of sensitivity to phagocytosis after treatment with anti-CD47 
(Hu5F9-G4): the colon-cancer lines DLD1 and HCT116; the small-cell lung-cancer lines 
NCI-H82 and NCI-H196; and the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor line APL1 (ref. 12). In 
analyzing the data from these arrays, we identified a putative relationship between high 
expression of MHC class I proteins and resistance to anti-CD47-induced phagocytosis by 
macrophages (Supplementary Fig. 2b).
HLA α-chains and β2-microglobulin (β2M) assemble to form the MHC class I complex13, 
which has well-studied and essential roles in the regulation of T cells and natural killer (NK) 
cells but a comparatively limited function described for the regulation of macrophages14,15. 
Nonetheless, analysis of HLA expression across our broader panel of 18 cancer cell lines 
revealed a highly significant correlation between overall levels of MHC class I and 
resistance to macrophage-mediated phagocytosis (Fig. 1b). We observed no discernable 
relationship between the particular HLA phenotype of the cell lines and their sensitivity to 
phagocytosis (Supplementary Table 1). This correlation raised the possibility that expression 
of MHC class I is directly protective against macrophage attack.
MHC class I directly protects cells from macrophage attack
In order to investigate the functional implications of the correlation noted above, we 
undertook a series of genetic experiments using two lines from our ‘discovery panel’: APL1 
and DLD1. These lines were chosen because both are highly positive for expression of 
CD47, but APL1 cells naturally have high expression of MHC class I, while DLD1 cells are 
negative for surface expression of MHC class I due to biallelic inactivation of the B2M 
locus16. Through stable genome engineering and sequential rounds of sorting by flow 
cytometry, we generated polyclonal sub-lines of both APL1 cells and DLD1 cells with all 
four permutations of positive or negative expression of MHC class I and CD47 (Fig. 2a,b).
Co-culture of those lines with donor-derived human macrophages revealed that in the 
absence of further stimulation, deletion of surface MHC class I was sufficient to modestly 
but significantly increase spontaneous phagocytosis in some cases (Fig. 2c). We further 
found that MHC class I–negative (MHCI−) cells were significantly more sensitive to anti-
CD47-induced phagocytosis than were their MHCI+ counterparts (Fig. 2c,d). After being 
treated with an independent opsonizing antibody, cells lacking expression of both CD47 and 
MHC class I were the most sensitive to phagocytosis, while expression of either MHC class 
I or CD47 or expression of both simultaneously provided significant protection against 
Barkal et al.
Page 3
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 macrophage attack (Fig. 2e,f). Thus, our data demonstrated that MHC class I and CD47 
were independent anti-phagocytic signals that might also work cooperatively.
To extend those results, we generated a Fab fragment from a monoclonal antibody that 
blocks HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C17,18. Consistent with our expectations, blockade via the 
HLA-binding Fab in absence of antibody Fc had no effect on the phagocytosis of the MHCI− 
cell line DLD1 (Fig. 2g). However, when applied to a panel of MHCIhi cells (Supplementary 
Fig. 2c), the HLA-binding Fab significantly increased anti-CD47-induced phagocytosis for 
four of six lines tested (Fig. 2f). Some cell lines (U2OS and SAOS2) were still resistant to 
phagocytosis after simultaneous blockade of CD47, blockade of MHC class I and 
opsonization (Fig. 2g), which suggested that such cells probably expressed additional anti-
phagocytic signals.
LILRB1 detects MHC class I and suppresses phagocytosis
In order to further investigate the phenomenon of the inhibition of macrophage phagocytosis 
by MHC class I, we sought to identify the receptor or receptors involved in the detection of 
MHC. Monocyte-lineage cells have been reported to express various MHC-binding proteins, 
notably members of the LILR family19,20. Structural studies suggest that two members of 
this family, LILRB1 and LILRB2, bind MHC class I and also contain immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs involved in the intracellular transduction of inhibitory 
signaling20,21, which establishes them as strong candidates for MHC class I–mediated 
suppression of phagocytosis.
Analysis of human peripheral blood monocytes from four independent donors revealed that 
in addition to SIRPα, LILRB1 was expressed on the majority of monocytes, with only a 
subset being LILRB2+ (Fig. 3a,b). Primary mature macrophages from normal human spleen 
were positive for SIRPα expression, and approximately one third of the cells were 
LILRB1+; nearly all cells were LILRB2− (Fig. 3a,b). In primary macrophages isolated from 
ascites fluid of patients with ovarian carcinoma, expression of both SIRPα and LILRB1 was 
uniformly positive and very high; in contrast, there was minimal expression of LILRB2 (Fig. 
3a,b). In tumor-associated macrophages from primary human colon carcinomas, we 
similarly saw higher expression of LILRB1 than of LILRB2 (Fig. 3a,b). We observed no 
significant difference between M1-like tumor-associated macrophages and M2-like tumor-
associated macrophages in their expression of LILRB1 or LILRB2 and detected no 
expression of either LILRB1 or LILRB2 by non-immune tumor cells (Supplementary Fig. 
3a,b). The pattern of high expression of LILRB1 but low expression of LILRB2 was also 
replicated by ex vivo–differentiated primary macrophages (Supplementary Fig. 3c,d), which 
suggested that our in vitro experiments correctly reflected the expression profile of tumor-
associated macrophages.
On the basis of those observations, we investigated whether direct blockade of LILRB1 
could increase the phagocytosis of MHCI+ cells. Indeed, we found that treatment with a 
blocking monoclonal antibody to LILRB1 (ref. 22) significantly increased the anti-CD47-
induced phagocytosis of MHCI+ cells but not that of their MHCI− counterparts (Fig. 3c and 
Supplementary Fig. 3e). As expected on the basis of the low or negative expression of 
LILRB2 by mature macrophages, treatment with an LILRB2-blocking antibody23 had no 
Barkal et al.
Page 4
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significant effect on the phagocytosis of either MHCI+ cells or MHCI− cells (Fig. 3c and 
Supplementary Fig. 3e).
In order to further investigate that relationship, we optimized and implemented a protocol to 
genetically modify the expression of LILRB1 in primary in vitro–derived human 
macrophages using the CRISPR–Cas9 ribonucleoprotein system. We observed a 42% 
reduction in population-wide expression of LILRB1 48 h following nucleofection with 
single guide RNA (sgRNA) targeting the LILRB1 locus, relative to its expression in cells 
treated with the control sgRNA (Supplementary Fig. 3f). The corresponding knockout of 
LILRB1 in nearly 50% of alleles was confirmed through the use of TIDE software for 
quantitative assessment of genome editing24 (Supplementary Fig. 3g). In the presence of 
anti-CD47-mediated blockade, LILRB1-null macrophages demonstrated significantly 
greater phagocytic ability than that of macrophages treated with the off-target control 
sgRNA (Fig. 3d), which further demonstrated that the elimination of surface LILRB1 was 
sufficient to potentiate the phagocytosis of MHCI+ cells in vitro.
Together these data identified LILRB1—and largely excluded the possibility of involvement 
of LILRB2—as a primary mediator of repressive MHC class I signaling in many human 
macrophage populations, especially in the context of cancer immunotherapy.
β2M confers species-specific protection against macrophages
The assays reported above used cells derived from multiple independent macrophage donors, 
with no prior analysis or matching between macrophages and cancer cells on the basis of 
HLA haplotype, which suggested a much broader mechanism for the detection of MHC 
class I by LILRB1 than that of the mostly allele-specific mechanisms employed by T cells 
and NK cells25–27. Consistent with that, examination of the previously solved crystal 
structure of LILRB1 bound to the human MHC class I complex20 revealed that the majority 
of contact residues between LILRB1 and MHC class I were within the invariant β2M 
subunit28 rather than the highly polymorphic HLA α-chain (Fig. 4a). Alignment of the 
human and mouse β2M protein sequences revealed an identity mismatch of approximately 
30%, including several key amino acids in the region of predicted contact between human 
β2M and proteins of the LILRB family (Fig. 4a, inset), which led us to hypothesize that 
these residues might be involved in species-specific signaling to macrophages.
Mouse β2M is unable to form stable complexes with human HLA α-chains; transgenic 
expression of the gene encoding mouse β2M in human β2M− cells led to only low surface 
expression of MHC class I, as measured by an HLA-A-, HLA-B- and HLA-C-binding 
antibody (Supplementary Fig. 4). To circumvent that limitation, we generated a chimeric 
β2M in which the human β2M protein was altered to include the amino acids of mouse 
sequence only within the predicted region of interaction with proteins of the LILRB family 
(Fig. 4a, inset). Expression of the chimeric β2M in either β2M− parental DLD1 cells or in 
APL1 cells with deletion of B2M enabled robust surface expression of HLA comparable to 
that achieved with fully human β2M protein (Fig. 4b). However, unlike cells expressing 
fully human MHC class I, these chimeric MHC class I cells no longer interacted with an 
LILRB1–Fc fusion protein (Fig. 4b), which suggested that they would probably no longer be 
Barkal et al.
Page 5
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 efficiently protected from phagocytosis and raised the possibility that chimeric MHC class I 
complexes might, conversely, be recognized by mouse macrophages.
We confirmed that although expression of fully human β2M strongly protected target cells 
against phagocytosis by human macrophages (Fig. 4c), it was less efficient in protecting the 
target cells against mouse macrophages (Fig. 4c); in contrast, expression of chimeric β2M 
offered a more-efficient protection against mouse macrophages than against human 
macrophages (Fig. 4c). Thus, the amino acid substitutions of the chimeric β2M had switched 
the species-specific bias of this signaling interaction. This genetic analysis suggested that the 
amino acid residues in the LILRB-interacting region of β2M were critical for the detection 
of MHC class I by both human macrophages and mouse macrophages.
MHC class I protects cells from macrophage attack in vivo
Mice of the non-obese diabetic–severe combined immunodeficiency strain with homozygous 
deficiency in the gene encoding the common γ-chain (Il2rg−/−) (NSG mice) produce 
functional cells of the myeloid lineage, but lack T cells, B cells and NK cells and therefore 
can efficiently accept human cellular transplants29. We injected either MHCI− tumor cells or 
human–mouse chimeric MHCI+ tumor cells (with all cells engineered to express green 
fluorescent protein, and with the MHCI− population further engineered to express red 
fluorescent protein for the analyses in Fig. 5d only) subcutaneously into NSG mice and used 
quantitative in vivo bioluminescent imaging to follow tumor growth. After several weeks, 
chimeric MHCI+ tumors had grown significantly larger than MHCI− tumors had (Fig. 5a); 
this growth difference ultimately manifested as a significant survival advantage for mice 
engrafted with MHCI− tumors (Fig. 5b).
We also injected a mixed population of cells composed of 50% MHCI− cells and 50% 
human–mouse chimeric MHCI+ cells into host mice and followed the evolution of these 
tumors over time. Tumors initially contained an approximately equal frequency of MHCI+ 
cells and MHCI− cells (Fig. 5c,d, pre-injection and day 7), but after several weeks of growth, 
the tumors had become almost uniformly MHCI+, as measured by flow cytometry (Fig. 5c,d, 
day 28). Whole-mount fluorescence microscopy of tumors showed an even distribution of 
MHCI− cells and MHCI+ cells at early time points, but this gave way to a punctate 
distribution of only small clusters of MHCI− cells by 14 d or 28 d (Fig. 5e), consistent with 
selective pressure by macrophages against the MHCI− cells.
The sub-lines assessed above had no measurable cell-autonomous differences in 
proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Furthermore, expression of fully human MHC class I, 
rather than human–mouse chimeric MHC class I, provided no significant growth advantage 
relative to the growth of MHCI− cells in vivo (Supplementary Fig. 5b). Along with the fact 
that NSG mice lack all immune cell subsets classically considered the main sensors of MHC 
class I (for example, T cells or NK cells) and that we readily observed phagocytosis of tumor 
cells by macrophages, via histology (Supplementary Fig. 5c), these results supported the 
proposal of a macrophage-mediated, MHC class I–driven immunosurveillance mechanism.
In order to determine whether the protection against phagocytosis and tumor growth 
conferred by the chimeric MHC class I complex could also be recapitulated in a syngeneic 
Barkal et al.
Page 6
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mouse system, we generated stable lines of the mouse melanoma B16-F10 with all four 
permutations of positive or negative expression of mouse MHC class I and CD47 (Fig. 6a) 
and engrafted them into lymphocyte-deficient (Rag2−/−Il2rg−/−) mice. After 20 d of in vivo 
growth, there was no significant difference between the volume of β2M− tumors and that of 
CD47− tumors (Fig. 6b). However, tumors lacking both β2M and CD47 grew significantly 
less than wild-type tumors did (Fig. 6b). Given that Rag2−/−Il2rg−/− hosts lack NK cells, 
innate lymphoid cells and T cells, this effect served as demonstration of a macrophage-
mediated, MHC class I–regulated anti-tumor effect.
We next sought to investigate the therapeutic potential of antagonizing the signaling axis 
noted above in an immunocompetent in vivo model. In contrast to studies of lymphocyte-
free models, studies of immunocompetent hosts can elucidate the contributions of additional 
cell types such as T cells and NK cells and can serve as a system with which to investigate 
communication and supportive signaling between the adaptive immune system and innate 
immune system. In order to parse the individual anti-tumor effects of macrophages and NK 
cells, we compared the engraftment and growth of wild type, B2m−/−, Cd47−/− and B2m
−/−Cd47−/− B16-F10 tumors in fully immunocompetent hosts and wild-type hosts depleted 
of NK cells or macrophages.
At 25 d after engraftment, we observed that the growth of wild-type B16-F10 tumors was 
significantly greater after depletion of either NK cells or macrophages (Fig. 6c), which 
demonstrated that both cell types contributed to anti-tumor immunity in this model. We 
hypothesized that although deletion of B2m might sensitize tumor cells to killing by either 
NK cells or macrophages, it also liberated them from detection and killing mediated by the 
T cell antigen receptor. Indeed, we found that tumors in which B2m was deleted grew larger 
than did wild-type tumors and were not significantly affected by depletion of either 
macrophages or NK cells (Fig. 6c). In contrast, for tumors in which both B2m and Cd47 
were deleted, depletion of macrophages significantly reduced anti-tumor immunity and led 
to increased tumor growth, but depletion of NK cells did not (Fig. 6c).
We also compared the engraftment and growth of B2m−/−, Cd47−/− and B2m−/−Cd47−/− 
B16-F10 tumors in fully immunocompetent hosts with that in Ccr2−/− hosts, which are 
specifically defective in the tumor-homing activity of monocyte-derived macrophages. We 
observed no significant difference in the engraftment or growth of wild type B16-F10 cells 
in immunocompetent hosts relative to their engraftment and growth in Ccr2−/− hosts, but 
B2m−/−, Cd47−/− and B2m−/−Cd47−/− tumors showed significantly greater engraftment and 
growth in the Ccr2−/− hosts than in immunocompetent hosts (Supplementary Fig. 6a). 
Together these findings confirmed an important macrophage-mediated role for MHC class I 
signaling and, together with our in vitro data, supported the proposal of cooperativity of the 
MHC class I and CD47 signaling axes.
In addition to assessing net effects on tumor mass, we were able to investigate the effect of 
deletion of B2m and Cd47 on the infiltration of a variety of subpopulations of immune cells 
in surviving mice. Analysis of dissociated tumors from immunocompetent hosts by flow 
cytometry demonstrated that specifically in B2m−/− Cd47−/− tumors, there was increased 
infiltration of all varieties of immune cells assessable by our marker panel. In particular, this 
Barkal et al.
Page 7
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 increase included immune cells involved in the adaptive immune response, such as T cells 
and dendritic cells (Fig. 6d; gating strategy, Supplementary Fig. 6e). Critically, these effects 
were abolished by depletion of macrophages (Fig. 6d), suggestive of an important 
immunoregulatory role for these cells in the tumor microenvironment that was influenced by 
signaling via MHC class I and CD47 to macrophages. Elimination of multiple ‘don’t eat me’ 
signals might thus lead macrophages to promote a robust shift toward a more immunogenic, 
anti-tumor phenotype.
The polarization of macrophages to either an inflammatory, M1, ‘anti-tumor’ state or anti-
inflammatory, M2, ‘pro-tumor’ state has an important role in the net effect of macrophages 
on the tumor microenvironment30, and we hypothesized that inhibitory signaling through 
LILRB1 might contribute to a tumor-promoting macrophage phenotype. Analysis by flow 
cytometry revealed that deletion of LILRB1 from macrophages in vitro resulted in a 
significantly greater abundance of cells with an M1-like surface profile than that among 
macrophages treated with an off-target control sgRNA (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Given that 
we observed this shift in the absence of non-macrophage cells, this result was consistent 
with a possible role either for in cis LILRB1–MHC class I signaling or perhaps signaling 
between LILRB1 and MHC class I on adjacent macrophage cells in culture.
Discussion
The data presented here have demonstrated MHC class I to be a regulatory signal for the 
effector functions of macrophages and have thus expanded the understanding of one of 
immunology’s best-studied and most important signaling complexes, and have also 
highlighted the central role of MHC class I in coordinating the activity of both the adaptive 
immune system and the innate immune system. MHC class I–LILRB1 signaling has been 
previously studied in a subset of NK cells17,31,32, and it has been studied in the myeloid 
lineage for its role in monocyte activation19. Our data suggest that the regulation of 
phagocytosis by macrophages is an additional key role of LILRB1 signaling. LILRB1 
recognizes a wide variety of HLA haplotypes33 due to its interaction with the invariant β2M 
subunit of MHC class I20, which suggests that this signaling axis is relevant across diverse 
patient populations.
Although we were able to demonstrate that the MHC class I–to–macrophage signaling axis 
was active in both immunocompromised mice and immunocompetent mice, in our current 
work we did not identify the functional equivalent of human LILRB1 in mouse 
macrophages. Several candidates, including the mouse receptor PirB, have been reported to 
bind MHC class I34 and have expression patterns in immune cells consistent with a LILRB1-
like function. However, full characterization of the mouse system will be an important step 
in understanding signaling via MHC class I to macrophages during normal immunity and in 
the tumor microenvironment.
Our results have important implications for several aspects of macrophage biology. Viruses 
can avoid the presentation of foreign peptides to T cells by the downregulation of surface 
MHC class I, which can consequently activate NK cell attack due to lack of binding of MHC 
by killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors35. We hypothesize that the MHC class I–
Barkal et al.
Page 8
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 LILRB1 signaling axis might serve a similar role in the immunosurveillance of infected 
cells. Consistent with our hypothesis, the human cytomegalovirus (CMV) family has 
evolved to encode a protein, UL-18, that structurally mimics the MHC class I α-chain but 
prevents binding by T cells20. It binds LILRB1 with > 1,000-fold higher affinity than do 
native MHC complexes and, according to published reports, inhibits the subset of NK cells 
that express LILRB1 (ref. 32). Given the high expression of LILRB1 in mature macrophages, 
UL-18 probably similarly modulates the macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of CMV-
infected cells, which might influence the pathology of CMV infection.
MHC class I–LILRB1 signaling is also probably important in the dynamics of programmed 
cell removal. As erythrocytes age, their effective CD47 signaling gradually decreases and 
eventually drops below a critical threshold, which enables the phagocytosis of red blood 
cells by macrophages4,36. The majority of normal human cells, including erythrocyte 
precursors, express MHC class I, but mature red blood cells lack or have considerably 
diminished surface expression of this protein. This loss of MHC class I during erythrocyte 
differentiation might serve to explain the potent erythrophagocytosis and transient anemia 
induced by anti-CD47 or CD47-binding Fc fusion proteins when used as cancer therapy7,8.
As demonstrated by our results both in vitro and in vivo, loss of MHC expression sensitized 
cancer cells to macrophage attack. Many cancers exhibit compromised or absent expression 
of surface MHC37,38 and, due to the resulting impaired presentation of cancer neo-antigens, 
patients with such cancers might be poor candidates for T cell–focused therapies. However, 
our results suggest that they might in fact be the ideal candidates for macrophage-mediated 
immunotherapy, and thus while low MHC expression might be used as a negative biomarker 
for the efficacy of T cell–focused therapies, it might instead be a positive biomarker for the 
efficacy of anti-CD47 or anti-SIRPα drugs in development. SIRPα and LILRB1 also show 
variable expression in primary patient macrophages, probably due to variable conditions of 
immunological and inflammatory signaling, and might themselves be useful biomarkers.
In patients with tumors that have normal or high expression of MHC class I, agents directed 
against the MHC class I–LILRB1 axis might facilitate an anti-tumor immune response and 
could potentially act together with agents directed against CD47 or SIRPα. Like CD47, 
MHC class I is ubiquitously expressed by normal cells; in considerations of this axis as a 
therapeutic target, key questions arise about safety and specificity. To this point, we note that 
apart from depletion of MHCI− erythrocytes, which would not be further exacerbated by 
blockade of MHC class I–LILRB1 signaling, toxicity in normal tissues has thus far not been 
reported for anti-CD47 agents in animal models7,8. This is despite the fact that some normal 
cells, such as those of the central nervous system, have low expression of MHC class I. We 
also note that B2m−/− mice have been reported to present few if any phenotypes that are 
attributable to the attack of normal cells by macrophages39,40. Finally, our in vitro 
experiments demonstrated that some cell lines (U2OS and SAOS2) remained highly resistant 
to phagocytosis even after simultaneous blockade of both CD47–SIRPα and MHC class I–
LILRB1 signaling, a result potentially consistent with the expression of additional, as-yet-
unidentified ‘don’t eat me’ signals. Normal tissues might similarly express such redundant 
signals. Nonetheless, careful evaluation of macrophage-mediated autoimmune responses 
will be a critical subject of future work on this signaling axis.
Barkal et al.
Page 9
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The immunotherapy field has been energized by the tremendous success of T cell–mediated 
anti-cancer treatments, and the innate immune system presents a substantial future 
therapeutic opportunity. Macrophage antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis can increase 
the cross-presentation of tumor antigens to T cells and might thereby enhance the potency of 
an adaptive anti-tumor immune response41. Our results indicate that blocking both the MHC 
class I–LILRB1 signaling axis and CD47–SIRPα signaling axis might sensitize tumors to 
macrophage attack and might indirectly enhance the function of other immune cells. If 
properly applied, agents directed against the MHC class I–LILRB1 signaling axis might be 
an important component of therapeutic regimens that aim to engage the key effector 
functions of macrophages.
Methods
Cell culture
All cell lines were obtained from ATCC with the exception of APL1, which was a gift from 
G. Krampitz (Stanford University)12. DLD-1, NCI-H69, NCI-H82, NCI-H1688, NCI-H196, 
NCI-H524, Bon and APL1 cells were grown in RPMI + GlutaMax (Life Technologies) 
supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone) and 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin (Life 
Technologies). NCI-H128 cells were grown in RPMI + GlutaMax (Life Technologies) 
supplemented with 20% FBS (Hyclone) and 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin (Life 
Technologies). HT-29, SkBr3 and SkMel3 cells were grown in McCoy’s 5A + GlutaMax 
(Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone), and 100 U/ml penicillin and 
streptomycin (Life Technologies). LS-174T, MCF7 and SkMel28 cells were grown in 
Eagle’s Minimum Essential Media (ATCC) supplemented with GlutaMax (Life 
Technologies), 10% FBS (Hyclone) and 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin (Life 
Technologies). When necessary, cells were detached from plates and disaggregated using 
TrypLE Express (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s indications. Unless 
otherwise indicated, cell lines were propagated and subcultured according to ATCC 
guidelines.
Generation of lentiviral particles
HIV-based replication-incompetent lentiviral particles were generated in 293 Lenti-X cells 
(Clontech) by co-transfection of pMDG.2 vector (Addgene), psPAX2 (Addgene) and a third 
vector specific to the lentiviral application, using the Xtremegene HD transfection reagent 
(Roche) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Vectors were transfected at a mass ratio 
of 4:2:1, lenti-specific vector:psPAX2:pMDG.2. After transfection, cell culture media 
supernatant was collected at 36 h and 60 h. Lentiviral particles were concentrated either by 
ultracentrifugation for 2.5 h at 50,000g or with PEG-it (Systems Biosciences) according to 
the manufacturer’s indications. Proper biosafety and disposal techniques were followed 
whenever using lentiviral reagents, according to Stanford University guidelines.
Generation of DLD1 and APL1 cell sub-lines
In order to generate sub-lines of DLD1 and APL1 cells, parental, unmodified cells were 
harvested in single-cell suspensions and were mixed with pre-warmed growth media, 
concentrated lentivirus and 10 μg/ml polybrene (Sigma). Cells were then centrifuged at 
Barkal et al.
Page 10
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1,800 r.p.m., room temperature for 45 min. Lentiviral pools included at least three distinct 
viral species: one encoding the Cas9 nuclease, and two others encoding different CRISPR 
small guide RNAs (sgRNAs) targeting the first exon of either CD47 or B2M, as appropriate. 
CRISPR sgRNAs were designed using online tools (http://genome-engineering.org) and 
were of the following sequences: sgCD47-1: GCTACTGAAGTATACGTAAAG, sgCD47-2: 
GCTTGTTTAGAGCTCCATCAA, sgβ2M-1: GAGTAGCGCGAGCACAGCTA, sgβ2M-2: 
GGCCGAGATGTCTCGCTCCG. 7 d after infection, cells were assessed for expression 
status by flow cytometry. CD47 was assessed by staining with APC-conjugated B6H12 
(Biolegend), and HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C was assessed by staining with PE-Cy7-
conjugated W6/32 (Biolegend). Cells were sorted on a FACSAria II cell sorter (BD 
Biosciences). Typically, each cell line was sorted three times, separated by several days of 
recovery and expansion between rounds. Wild-type human B2M (NC_000015.10), wild-type 
mouse B2m (NC_000068.7), or chimeric human–mouse B2M (hmcβ2M; sequence below) 
were cloned into the NheI and NotI sites of the pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-Puro vector 
(Systems Biosciences), and these vectors were used to produce lentivirus and introduce 
transgenes, as appropriate. DLD1-Δ(CD47) was generated by transient co-transfection of 
CD47-targeting TALEN vectors, described below, using Xtremegene HD (Roche) according 
to the manufacturer’s indicated protocol. All other genetic modifications were induced using 
lentiviral delivery of transgenes, or lentiviral delivery of Cas9 and corresponding sgRNAs, 
as described above.
TALEN design and construction
TALENs were designed and assembled as described29. The genomic locus of human CD47 
(NC_000003.12) was scanned for putative TALEN binding pairs. Exon 2 was ultimately 
selected for targeting and the TALEN pairs TGTCGTCATTCCATGCTTTG and 
TATACTTCAGTAGTGTTTTG were respectively cloned into the pTALEN backbone.
GFP-luciferase and RFP-luciferase transduction
In order to facilitate both the flow cytometry–based phagocytosis assay and in vivo imaging, 
we generated sublines of DLD1, HT-29, LS-174T, SkBr3, Bon, APL1, SkMel28 and 
SkMel3 cells engineered via lentiviral infection to stably express a green fluorescent protein 
(GFP)–luciferase fusion protein (Systems Biosciences, catalog number BLIV100PA/VA-1). 
U2OS and SAOS2 were engineered via lentiviral infection to stably express a red 
fluorescent protein (RFP)–luciferase fusion protein (Systems Biosciences, catalog number 
BLIV101PA/VA-1). The MHCI-APL1 cells used in Fig. 5d were engineered to express both 
GFP-luciferase and RFP-luciferase with the vectors described above. Parental cells were 
harvested in single-cell suspensions and were mixed with pre-warmed growth medium, 
concentrated lentivirus and 10 μg/ml polybrene (Sigma). Cells were then centrifuged at 
1,800 r.p.m., room temperature for 45 min. Uniform GFP+ or RFP+ populations were then 
generated by sequential rounds of cell sorting on a FACSAria II cell sorter (BD 
Biosciences).
Macrophage generation
Leukocyte reduction system (LRS) chambers from anonymous donors were obtained from 
the Stanford Blood Center. Monocytes were purified from these samples on an autoMACS 
Barkal et al.
Page 11
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pro Separator (Miltenyi) using anti-CD14 microbeads optimized for whole-blood separation 
(Miltenyi) according to the manufacturer’s suggested protocol. Monocytes were then 
differentiated to macrophages by 7–10 d of culture in IMDM + GlutaMax (Life 
Technologies) supplemented with 10% AB Human Serum (Life Technologies) and 100 U/ml 
penicillin and streptomycin (Life Technologies). NSG macrophages were generated as 
previously described17. In brief, bone marrow cells were harvested from the lower limbs of 
6- to 8-week-old NSG mice, and were cultured for 7 d in IMDM + GlutaMax13 (Life 
Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone), 100 U/ml penicillin and 
streptomycin and 10 ng/ml murine M-CSF (Peprotech).
Flow cytometry–based phagocytosis assay
Each phagocytosis reaction reported in this work was performed by co-culture of 100,000 
target cells and 50,000 macrophages for 2 h in ultra-low-attachment 96-well U-bottom plates 
(Corning) in IMDM + GlutaMax (Life Technologies) without antibiotics or serum added. 
Macrophages were generated as described above and were harvested from plates using 
TrypLE Express (Life Technologies). Target cells were either engineered to stably express 
GFP or RFP, as described above, or were stained with Calcein AM (Life Technologies) 
according to the manufacturer’s indications before co-culture. Treatment antibodies, 
including anti-CD47 (clone Hu5F9-G4, cetuximab, Bristoll-Myers Squibb), anti-LILRB1 
(clone GHI/75, BioLegend) and anti-LILRB2 (clone 27D2, Biolegend) were added to 
reactions at a concentration of 10 μg/ml. After co-culture, reactions were stained were 
stained with APC-labeled anti-CD45 (clone HI30, BioLegend) to identify human 
macrophages, and with PE-Cy7-labeled anti-F4/80 (clone BM8, BioLegend) to identify 
NSG mouse macrophages. DAPI staining was used to exclude dead cells from the analysis 
(Sigma). Reactions were run on an LSRFortessa Analyzer outfitted with a high-throughput 
auto-sampler (BD Biosciences). Phagocytosis was evaluated as a sum of the GFP+ 
macrophages, expressed as a percentage of the total macrophages, as analyzed using FlowJo 
v.9.4.10 (Tree Star) and was normalized as indicated in the figure legends. Unless otherwise 
stated, each replicate represents a true biological replicate (i.e., an independent human 
macrophage donor), and unless otherwise indicated, replicates were split between a 
minimum of two independent experimental instances (for example, four independent donors 
evaluated on day 1, with an additional four independent donors evaluated on day 2). Sample 
size was chosen to ensure a greater than 95% probability of identifying, by the two-tailed t-
test, an effect of > 20%, assuming a technical variation of 15%.
Antibody array
We used the LegendScreen antibody array system (BioLegend) to assess the surface 
phenotype of the NCI-H69, NCI-H82, NCI-H524 and NCI-H196 cell lines. The cells were 
harvested and disaggregated with TrypLE (Life Technologies), and NCI-H82 and NCI-H69 
cells were stained using Calcein AM (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol. NCI-H82 (calcein-stained) cells and NCI-H524 (unstained) cells were run together 
in a multiplex fashion, as were NCI-H69 (calcein-stained) cells and NCI-H196 (unstained) 
cells. Cells were distributed among antibody-containing wells, then were stained and washed 
according to the manufacturer’s indications. Samples were subsequently run on an 
LSRFortessa Analyzer outfitted with a high-throughput auto-sampler (BD Biosciences). 
Barkal et al.
Page 12
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fluorescence levels were evaluated using FlowJo v.9.4.10 (Tree Star). Calcein staining 
signal was used to deconvolute multiplexed samples.
Antibody staining
Flow cytometry was performed either on a FACSAria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences) or on 
an LSRFortessa Analyzer (BD Biosciences). Surface CD47 was assessed by antibody 
staining with clone B6H12 (BioLegend) at a dilution of 1:100. HLA-A/B/C was assessed by 
antibody staining with clone W6/32 (BioLegend) at a dilution of 1:50. LILRB1 was assessed 
by antibody staining with clone GHI/75 (BioLegend) at a dilution of 1:25. LILRB2 was 
assessed by antibody staining with clone 27D2 (BioLegend) at a dilution of 1:25. The M1-
like macrophage panel was as follows: DAPI−CD11b+CD206−CD64+. The M2-like 
macrophage panel was as follows: DAPI−CD45+CD11b+CD64−CD206+. All stains were 
performed on ice for 30 min, then were washed and resuspended according to standard 
practice.
LILRB1-Fc staining
Cells were incubated with LILRB1-Fc or human Fc control (R&D Systems, 40 μg/ml) for 
1.5 h at 4 °C, and washed and stained with APC-conjugated F(ab′)2 goat anti–human 
immunoglobulin G (Jackson, 109-136-098). Staining and washing buffer consisted of 0.2% 
(w/v) BSA and 0.05% sodium azide in PBS
Human-mouse chimeric β2M
Chimeric β2M was designed to incorporate C-terminal amino acid differences from mouse 
β2M into a primarily human β2M sequence. The sequence (indicated below) was chemically 
synthesized (IDT), and cloned into the NheI and NotI sites of pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-Puro. 
Sequence of mouse origin is in lower case.
> 
hmcβ
2M_geneblockTTTAAGCTAGCATGTCTCGCTCCGTGGCCTTAGCTGTGCTCGCGCTA
CTCTCTCTTTCTGGCCTGGAGGCTATCCAGCGTACTCCAAAGATTCAGGTTTACTC
ACGTCATCCAGCAGAGAATGGAAAGTCAAATTTCCTGAATTGCTATGTGTCTGGG
TTTCATCCATCCGACATTGAAGTTGACTTACTGAAGAATGGAGAGAGAATTGAAA
AAGTGGAGCATTCAGACTTGTCTTTCAGCAAGGACTGGTCTTTCTATCTCTTGTAC
TACACTGAATTCACCCCCACTGAAAAAGATGAGTATGCCtgcagagttaagcatgccagtatggc
cgagcccaagaccgtctactgggatcgagacatgtgaGCGGCCGCAATTT
Generation of W6/32 Fab fragments
W6/32 antibody (BioXcell) was desalted into a solution of 20 mM sodium citrate, pH 6.0, 
25 mM cysteine and 5 mM EDTA and was diluted to a concentration of 4 mg/ml. Protease 
digestion was achieved by mixing with 250 μl immobilized ficin resin (Thermo Scientific) 
per ml of antibody. The mixture was incubated with rotation at 37 °C for 5 h. After 
incubation, Fab fragments were purified from undigested antibody and Fc fragments were 
purified by ion-exchange chromatography with a monoQ column, followed by size-
Barkal et al.
Page 13
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exclusion chromatography with a Superdex-200 column. Fab fragments were quantified by 
Nanodrop, and checked for purity by Coomassie stain.
Crystal structure images
Crystal structure images were generated with MacPyMol v. 1.7.0.3 from a published 
structure (Protein Data Bank accession code IP7Q)22.
Mice
Nod.Cg-Prkdcscid IL2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice were used for all in vivo xenograft 
experiments. BALB/c Rag2−/−IL2rg−/− mice, B6.129(Cg)-Ccr2tm2.1Ifc/J mice (Jackson Labs) 
and C57BL/6 mice (Jackson Labs) were used for B16 tumor models. Mice were engrafted 
with tumors at approximately 6–12 weeks of age, and experiments were performed with age- 
and sex-matched cohorts. Mice were maintained in a barrier facility under the care of the 
Stanford Veterinary Services Center and handled according to protocols approved by the 
Stanford University Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal Care.
In vivo growth experiments
NSG mice were given subcutaneous injection into the right flank of 100,000 GFP-luciferase-
labeled APL1-Δ(β2M) (30 mice) or APL1-Tg(hmcB 2M)-Δ(β2M) cells (30 mice) and were 
randomized into treatment cohorts using online list randomization tools (https://
www.random.org/). Sample size was chosen to ensure a greater than 95% probability of 
identifying, by the two-tailed t-test, an effect of > 50%, assuming a technical variation of 
50%. Starting on day 14, mice were treated once per week by intraperitoneal injection of 
either 100 μl of PBS or 250 μg Hu5F9-G4 at a concentration of 2.5 mg/ml. Tumor 
luminescence was measured once per week using an IVIS Spectrum imager (Perkin Elmer). 
Measurements were discontinued when tumors in a measurement group began to exceed 5 × 
1010 total flux, which is, in our experience, a threshold above which bioluminescent signals 
are less accurate. Across additional experiments, including pilot experiments, additional 
mice were engrafted subcutaneously with these cell lines and treated with PBS but were not 
included as part of this data set. One additional cage of four mice was engrafted with each 
APL1-Δ(β2M) and APL1-Tg(hmcβ2M)-Δ(β2M) and received once-weekly Hu5F9-G4 
treatment but were ultimately not included in the final analysis of the experiment. Mouse 
experiments were performed in a non-blinded fashion.
For B16 melanoma models, mice were engrafted with 500,000 melanoma cells in PBS. 
Tumor volumes were measured on day 15, day 20 or day 25, as indicated.
Macrophage- and NK cell–depletion studies
Female C57Bl/6J mice (Jackson Laboratory) were depleted of macrophages or NK cells by 
intraperitoneal injection of 400 μg CSFR-1 antibody (BioXCell, Clone AFS98) and 350 μg 
NK1.1 depleting antibody (BioXCell, Clone PK136), respectively, three times weekly with 
beginning 3 weeks before tumor implantation and continuing for the duration of the study. 
Non-depleted control animals were given intraperitoneal injection of PBS following the 
same dosing schedule. Macrophage depletion and NK depletion were verified separately by 
flow cytometry of peritoneal lavage, splenic cells, and peripheral blood, from a separate 
Barkal et al.
Page 14
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cohort of mice at the time of tumor implantation. Macrophage-depleted, NK-depleted, and 
control mice were given subcutaneous injection of 1.5 × 105 of B16F10-WT, B16F10-
Δβ2M, B16F10-ΔCD47 or B16F10-Δβ2M,CD47 cells into the lower dorsal region of the 
mouse. Beginning 2 weeks after tumor injection, tumor measurements were taken three 
times weekly. When tumors reached 20 mm in diameter, tissue was harvested to asses for 
infiltrating immune cells, including NK cells (CD45+TCRβ−NK1.1+) and mature 
macrophages (CD45+TCRβ−Gr1lo−negCD11b+F4/80+) to ensure sufficient depletion.
Isolation of tumor-infiltrating immune cells
Mouse tumor samples were excised and incubated with 10 ml RPMI supplemented with 10 
μg/ml DNase I (Sigma Aldrich) and 25 μg/ml Liberase (Roche) for 10–15 min at 37 °C. 
Tumors were homogenized by pipetting and filtering through a 100-μm nylon filter. 
Following the dissociation, 5 × 106 cells were pelleted and resuspended in FACS buffer and 
blocked with monoclonal antibody to CD16/32 (Trustain fcX, Biolegend) for 10 min before 
staining. All tumors were stained with anti-CD45 (Biolegend, Clone 30-F11), anti-
TCRβ(BD, Clone H57-97), anti-NK1.1 (eBioscience, Clone PK136), anti-CD11b 
(Biolegend, Clone M1/70), anti-F4/80 (Biolegend, Clone BM8), anti-Ly6C (BD, Clone 
AL-21), anti-CD11c (Biolegened, Blone N418) and anti-Gr-1 (Biolegend, Clone RB6-8C5). 
Dead cells were eliminated from analysis by excluding Hoechst+ cells. All samples were 
assayed using a FACSAria cell sorter (BD Biosciences), and channel compensations were 
performed using single-stained UltraComp eBeads (Affymetrix) or cells. Data were 
analyzed using FlowJo, and outliers in each group were removed using Prism Outlier 
Calculator (http://graphpad.com/quickcalcs/Grubbs1.cfm).
Macrophage genetic alteration
sgRNA molecules targeting the LILRB1 locus and off-target loci were purchased as 
modified, hybridized RNA molecules from Synthego. The sgRNA sequences were as 
follows: sgRNA LILRB1, 5′-GAGACCCUGACUCUGCAGUG-3′; and off-target sgRNA, 
5′-AGGCCCCCUCCCAGGCGUAG-3′. Cas9-3NLS protein was purchased from IDT. 
Cas9 ribonucleoproteins were formed by incubatio of Cas9 protein and modified RNAs at a 
molar ratio of 1:2.5, respectively, at 37 °C for 30 min. Day 7, in vitro–derived human 
macrophages were electroporated with pre-formed ribonucleoprotein using the Lonza 
Nucleofector 4D and the P3 Primary Cell Nucleofction Kit (V4XP-3024). Following 
nucleofection, macrophages were cultured for an additional 48 h, after which genomic DNA 
was collected and INDEL frequencies were analyzed using TIDE (‘tracking of indels by 
decomposition’) software, as described previously24. Phagocytosis experiments were 
performed with biological replicates using macrophages from two human donors.
Histology
APL1 tumors were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4 °C. Tissue was embedded 
and frozen in optimal cutting temperature compound O.C.T (Sakura) or embedded in 
paraffin. Frozen sections were cut at 4–7 μm and were saved for immunofluorescence.
Barkal et al.
Page 15
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence studies were performed on frozen sections. Frozen sections were 
thawed at room temperature for 10 min and washed in PBS twice. Slides were blocked in 
5% serum for 30 min at room temperature. Sections were subsequently stained with primary 
antibodies to F4:80 (1:100, rat monoclonal, Abcam) overnight at 4 °C and were washed 
three times in PBS. Slides were stained were incubated with secondary antibodies 
conjugated to AlexaFluor 647 for 1–2 h at room temperature. Stains were washed once with 
PBST and three times with PBS before nuclear staining with Hoechst 33342 (Life 
Technologies), for 2 min, and were mounted with Fluoromount G (Southern Biotech). Basic 
photo processing, including fluorescence channel false-coloring, channel merge, and 
brightness and contrast adjustment were performed using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe).
Life Sciences Reporting Summary
Further information on experimental design and reagents is available in the Life Sciences 
Reporting Summary.
Data availability statement
The primary data underlying the flow cytometry and associated analyses for all figures and 
supplementary figures are available from the corresponding authors upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the members of the Weissman laboratory and the Stanford Stem Cell Center community for discussion 
and assistance; J.P. Volkmer, R. Majeti, K. Loh, N. Fernhoff, M. McCracken and J. Zee for input and advice; T. 
Storm, T. Naik, A. McCarty, F. Khameneh, J. Ho and P. Lovelace for logistical support; and G. Krampitz (Stanford 
University) for the APL1 cell line. Supported by the D.K. Ludwig Fund for Cancer Research (NIH R01CA086017 
and NIHG R01GM100315 to I.L.W.), the Cancer Research Institute (Irvington Fellowship to R.L.M.), the Human 
Frontier Science Program Organization (postdoctoral fellowship to B.R.), the NIH (hematology training grant T32 
HL120824-03 to B.R.), the University of Wisconsin Medical Scientists Training Program (GM008692 to L.J.B.), 
the National Research Service Award 1F30DK108561, the Paul and Daisy Soros Fellowship for New Americans (to 
J.M.T.) and the Stanford Medical Scientist Training Program (NIH GM07365 to A.A.B., K.W., A.M.R., J.M.T., 
B.M.G. and J.Y.C.).
References
1. Weiner LM, Dhodapkar MV, Ferrone S. Monoclonal antibodies for cancer immunotherapy. Lancet. 
2009; 373:1033–1040. [PubMed: 19304016] 
2. Weiskopf K, Weissman IL. Macrophages are critical effectors of antibody therapies for cancer. 
MAbs. 2015; 7:303–310. [PubMed: 25667985] 
3. Jaiswal S, et al. CD47 is upregulated on circulating hematopoietic stem cells and leukemia cells to 
avoid phagocytosis. Cell. 2009; 138:271–285. [PubMed: 19632178] 
4. Oldenborg PA, et al. Role of CD47 as a marker of self on red blood cells. Science. 2000; 288:2051–
2054. [PubMed: 10856220] 
5. Majeti R, et al. CD47 is an adverse prognostic factor and therapeutic antibody target on human acute 
myeloid leukemia stem cells. Cell. 2009; 138:286–299. [PubMed: 19632179] 
6. Chao MP, et al. Anti-CD47 antibody synergizes with rituximab to promote phagocytosis and 
eradicate non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Cell. 2010; 142:699–713. [PubMed: 20813259] 
Barkal et al.
Page 16
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Willingham S, et al. The CD47-SIRPa interaction is a therapeutic target for human solid tumors. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:6662–6667. [PubMed: 22451913] 
8. Weiskopf K, et al. Engineered SIRPα variants as immunotherapeutic adjuvants to anticancer 
antibodies. Science. 2013; 341:88–91. [PubMed: 23722425] 
9. Weiskopf K. Cancer immunotherapy targeting the CD47/SIRPα axis. Eur J Cancer. 2017; 76:100–
109. [PubMed: 28286286] 
10. Weiskopf K, et al. CD47-blocking immunotherapies stimulate macrophage-mediated destruction of 
small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Invest. 2016; 126:2610–2620. [PubMed: 27294525] 
11. Liu J, et al. Pre-clinical development of a humanized anti-CD47 antibody with anti-cancer 
therapeutic potential. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0137345. [PubMed: 26390038] 
12. Krampitz GW, et al. Identification of tumorigenic cells and therapeutic targets in pancreatic 
neuroendocrine tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:4464–4469. [PubMed: 27035983] 
13. Bjorkman PJ, et al. Structure of the human class I histocompatibility antigen, HLA-A2. Nature. 
1987; 329:506–512. [PubMed: 3309677] 
14. Klein J, Sato A. The HLA system. First of two parts. N Engl J Med. 2000; 343:702–709. [PubMed: 
10974135] 
15. Klein J, Sato A. The HLA system. Second of two parts. N Engl J Med. 2000; 343:782–786. 
[PubMed: 10984567] 
16. Bicknell DC, Rowan A, Bodmer WF. β2-microglobulin gene mutations: a study of established 
colorectal cell lines and fresh tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1994; 91:4751–4755. [PubMed: 
8197130] 
17. Borges L, Hsu ML, Fanger N, Kubin M, Cosman D. A family of human lymphoid and myeloid Ig-
like receptors, some of which bind to MHC class I molecules. J Immunol. 1997; 159:5192–5196. 
[PubMed: 9548455] 
18. Barnstable CJ, et al. Production of monoclonal antibodies to group A erythrocytes, HLA and other 
human cell surface antigens-new tools for genetic analysis. Cell. 1978; 14:9–20. [PubMed: 
667938] 
19. Fanger NA, et al. The MHC class I binding proteins LIR-1 and LIR-2 inhibit Fc receptor-mediated 
signaling in monocytes. Eur J Immunol. 1998; 28:3423–3434. [PubMed: 9842885] 
20. Willcox BE, Thomas LM, Bjorkman PJ. Crystal structure of HLA-A2 bound to LIR-1, a host and 
viral major histocompatibility complex receptor. Nat Immunol. 2003; 4:913–919. [PubMed: 
12897781] 
21. Cheng H, et al. Crystal structure of leukocyte Ig-like receptor LILRB4 (ILT3/LIR-5/CD85k): a 
myeloid inhibitory receptor involved in immune tolerance. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:18013–18025. 
[PubMed: 21454581] 
22. Pulford K, Micklem K, Thomas J, Jones M, Mason DY. A 72-kD B cell-associated surface 
glycoprotein expressed at high levels in hairy cell leukaemia and plasma cell neoplasms. Clin Exp 
Immunol. 1991; 85:429–435. [PubMed: 1893623] 
23. Allan DSJ, et al. Tetrameric complexes of human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G 
bind to peripheral blood myelomonocytic cells. J Exp Med. 1999; 189:1149–1156. [PubMed: 
10190906] 
24. Brinkman EK, Chen T, Amendola M, van Steensel B. Easy quantitative assessment of genome 
editing by sequence trace decomposition. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:e168. [PubMed: 25300484] 
25. Garcia KC, et al. An alphabeta T cell receptor structure at 2.5 A and its orientation in the TCR-
MHC complex. Science. 1996; 274:209–219. [PubMed: 8824178] 
26. Garboczi DN, et al. Structure of the complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide and 
HLA-A2. Nature. 1996; 384:134–141. [PubMed: 8906788] 
27. Boyington JC, Motyka SA, Schuck P, Brooks AG, Sun PD. Crystal structure of an NK cell 
immunoglobulin-like receptor in complex with its class I MHC ligand. Nature. 2000; 405:537–
543. [PubMed: 10850706] 
28. Sanderson AR. HLA “help” for human B2-microglobulin across species barriers. Nature. 1977; 
269:414–417. [PubMed: 71662] 
Barkal et al.
Page 17
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Shultz LD, et al. Human lymphoid and myeloid cell development in NOD/LtSz-scid IL2Rγ null 
mice engrafted with mobilized human hemopoietic stem cells. J Immunol. 2005; 174:6477–6489. 
[PubMed: 15879151] 
30. Mantovani A, et al. The chemokine system in diverse forms of macrophage activation and 
polarization. Trends Immunol. 2004; 25:677–686. [PubMed: 15530839] 
31. Cosman D, et al. A novel immunoglobulin superfamily receptor for cellular and viral MHC class I 
molecules. Immunity. 1997; 7:273–282. [PubMed: 9285411] 
32. Prod’homme V, et al. The human cytomegalovirus MHC class I homolog UL18 inhibits LIR-1+ but 
activates LIR-1− NK cells. J Immunol. 2007; 178:4473–4481. [PubMed: 17372005] 
33. Baía D, et al. Interaction of the LILRB1 inhibitory receptor with HLA class Ia dimers. Eur J 
Immunol. 2016; 46:1681–1690. [PubMed: 27109306] 
34. Kim T, et al. Human LilrB2 is a β-amyloid receptor and its murine homolog PirB regulates 
synaptic plasticity in an Alzheimer’s model. Science. 2013; 341:1399–1404. [PubMed: 24052308] 
35. Campbell KS, Purdy AK. Structure/function of human killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors: 
lessons from polymorphisms, evolution, crystal structures and mutations. Immunology. 2011; 
132:315–325. [PubMed: 21214544] 
36. Lv Z, et al. Loss of cell surface CD47 clustering formation and binding avidity to SIRPα facilitate 
apoptotic cell clearance by macrophages. J Immunol. 2015; 195:661–671. [PubMed: 26085683] 
37. Garcia-Lora A, Algarra I, Garrido F. MHC class I antigens, immune surveillance, and tumor 
immune escape. J Cell Physiol. 2003; 195:346–355. [PubMed: 12704644] 
38. Challa-Malladi M, et al. Combined genetic inactivation of β2-microglobulin and CD58 reveals 
frequent escape from immune recognition in diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Cancer Cell. 2011; 
20:728–740. [PubMed: 22137796] 
39. Zijlstra M, et al. Beta 2-microglobulin deficient mice lack CD4−8+ cytolytic T cells. Nature. 1990; 
344:742–746. [PubMed: 2139497] 
40. Koller BH, Marrack P, Kappler JW, Smithies O. Normal development of mice deficient in β2M, 
MHC class I proteins, and CD8+ T cells. Science. 1990; 248:1227–1230. [PubMed: 2112266] 
41. Tseng D, et al. Anti-CD47 antibody-mediated phagocytosis of cancer by macrophages primes an 
effective antitumor T-cell response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:11103–11108. [PubMed: 
23690610] 
Barkal et al.
Page 18
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Resistance to macrophage phagocytosis correlates with MHC class I expression
a, Flow cytometry–based measurement of the phagocytosis of a panel of 18 cancer cell lines 
(horizontal axis), including colon carcinoma (CC), small cell lung cancer (SCLC), breast 
carcinoma (BC), pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET), melanoma (Mel) and 
osteosarcoma (OS), by donor-derived human macrophages in the presence of PBS or anti-
CD47 (key); results normalized to those of DLD1 cells (index control). Each symbol 
represents an individual donor. Error bars, s.d. of n = 3 donors (H128, H1688 and SkBr3 
cells) or n = 4 donors (all other cell lines). NS, not significant (P > 0.05); *P < 0.05 
(Student’s two-sided t-test without multiple-comparisons correction). b Phagocytosis 
induced by anti-CD47 (vertical axis; log-transformed averages of values in a plotted against 
mean fluorescence intensity of MHC class I (horizontal axis): each symbol represents an 
individual cell line (categories in key); solid diagonal line, best-fit curve; dashed lines, 95% 
confidence interval (R2 = 0.411; P = 0.002 (linear regression t-test)).
Barkal et al.
Page 19
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. MHC class I directly protects cells from macrophage attack
a,b, Summary (left) of the presence (+ ) or absence (−) of expression of CD47 and MHC 
class I (above plot) by APL1 parental cells and genetically engineered sub-lines of APL1 
cells lacking expression of β2M (ΔB2M) or CD47 (ΔCD47) or both (ΔB2M,CD47) (left 
margin) a or by DLD1 parental cells and genetically engineered sub-lines of DLD1 cells 
with transgenic expression of β2M (TgB2M) or lacking expression of CD47 (ΔCD47) or 
both (TgB2M-ΔCD47) (left margin) b, and flow cytometry (right) analyzing the expression 
of CD47 and MHC class I (HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C) by cells as at left (colors in plot 
match colors at left). c,d, Flow cytometry–based measurement of the phagocytosis of MHCI
+ parental APL1 cells and MHCI− (ΔB2M) APL1 cells (key) c or of MHCI− parental DLD1 
cells and MHCI+ transgenic (TgB2M) DLD1 cells (key) d by co-cultured human 
macrophages, in the presence (+ ) or absence (−) of anti-CD47 (horizontal axis); results 
normalized to the maximum phagocytosis in each independent replicate experiment. Error 
bars, s.d. of n = 8 donors. e,f, Flow cytometry–based measurement of the phagocytosis of 
genetic variants (key) of APL1 cells e or DLD1 cells f by co-cultured human macrophages, 
in the presence or absence of antibody to the adhesion molecule EpCam e or the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) f (horizontal axis); results normalized as in c,d. Error bars, 
s.d. of n = 8 donors. *P < 0.05 and ***P < 0.001 (two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
with multiple-comparisons correction). g, Flow cytometry–based measurement of 
phagocytosis of the MHCI− DLD1 cell line (far left) and the MHCI+ cell lines U2OS, 
SAOS2, SKMel3, NCI-H196, HCT11 and APL1 (middle and right) by donor-derived 
macrophages, in the presence of various combinations (grid below plot) of antibody to HLA 
or CD47; results normalized as in c,d. Error bars, s.d. of n = 4 donors. *P < 0.05 (Student’s 
Barkal et al.
Page 20
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 t-test without multiple-comparisons correction). Each symbol (c–g) represents an individual 
donor.
Barkal et al.
Page 21
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. LILRB1 mediates the detection of MHC class I by human macrophages
a, Flow cytometry analyzing the expression of SIRPα, LILRB1 or LILRB2 (blue shaded 
curves) by primary human macrophages (left margin); red lines, fluorescence-minus-one 
control. Numbers above bracketed lines indicate percent cells positive for expression of 
molecule along horizontal axis. b, Frequency of primary monocytes (n = 4 donors), primary 
splenic macrophages (n = 4 donors), primary macrophages in ascites fluid (n = 6 donors) 
and primary tumor-associated macrophages (n = 4 donors) (below plots) positive for SIRPα, 
LILRB1 or LILRB2 (key), among total macrophages, as determined by fluorescence-minus-
one controls. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 (one-way ANOVA with multiple-
comparisons correction). c, Flow cytometry–based measurement of the phagocytosis of 
MHCI+ parental APL1 cells and MHCI− (ΔB2M) APL1 cells (key) by donor-derived 
macrophages, in the presence of various combinations of antibodies (grid below plot); 
results normalized to the maximum phagocytosis in a replicate. Error bars, s.d. of n = 8 
donors. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 (two-way ANOVA with multiple-comparisons 
correction). d, Flow cytometry–based measurement of the phagocytosis of APL1 cells by 
genetically modified donor-derived macrophages electroporated with off-target sgRNA or 
sgRNA targeting LILRB1, in the presence or absence of anti-CD47 (key); results normalized 
as in c. Error bars, s.d. of n = 4 technical replicates with n = 2 donors. ***P < 0.001 and 
****P < 0.0001 (one-way ANOVA with multiple-comparisons correction). Each symbol b–
d represents an individual donor; small horizontal lines b indicate the mean ( ± s.d.).
Barkal et al.
Page 22
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. β2M confers species-specific protection against phagocytosis by macrophages
a, Crystal structure of the LILRB1–β2M–HLA-A2 complex, generated from published 
structure data (Protein Data Bank accession code IP7Q)22; inset, residues within 5 Å of 
LILRB1 that differ between human β2M and mouse β2M (orange), which were altered 
(labels in inset) to form a human–mouse chimeric β2M. b, Flow cytometry–based 
measurement of the surface expression of MHC class I (left plot of each pair) and binding of 
LILRB1-Fc (right plot of each pair) by variants (key) of DLD1 cells (left half) or APL1 cells 
(right half). c, Flow cytometry–based measurement of the phagocytosis of parental MHCI− 
(β2M−) cells, MHCI+ (β2M+) cells or chimeric MHCI+ cells (key; specific identification in 
plot) by co-cultured primary human macrophages (vertical axis) or NSG mouse 
macrophages (horizontal axis). Vertical error bars, s.d. of n = 8 human donors; horizontal 
error bars, s.d. of n = 8 replicates of macrophages pooled from n = 5 mice.
Barkal et al.
Page 23
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. Expression of MHC class I protects tumor cells from macrophages in vivo
a, Tumor bioluminescence (total flux in photons per second) of MHCI− and chimeric MHCI
+ APL1 cells (key) at various times (horizontal axis) after subcutaneous engraftment into the 
flanks of NSG mice. Each symbol represents an individual host mouse; small horizontal 
lines indicate the mean. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.005 (two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s 
multiple-comparisons correction). b, Survival of NSG mice at various times (horizontal axis) 
after engraftment of MHCI− or chimeric MHC I+ APL1 tumors (key). P < 0.005 (Mantel-
Cox test). c, Flow cytometry analyzing the expression of HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C in 
mixed-chimeric MHC I+ and MHC I− DLD1 tumor cells before injection (far left) and in 
dissociated tumors at days 7, 14, and 28 after injection (above plots) as in a. Numbers in 
outlined areas indicate percent cells in each. d, Whole-mount fluorescence microscopy of 
mixed-chimeric MHC I+ and MHC I− APL1 tumors on days 7, 14, and 28 after injection 
(left margin) as in a. GFP, green fluorescent protein; RFP, red fluorescent protein. Scale 
bars, 1 mm (top two rows) or 5 mm (bottom row). e, Flow cytometry–based quantification of 
the frequency of chimeric MHC I+ DLD1 cells and MHC I− DLD1 cells (key) on days 7, 14, 
and 28 after injection (horizontal axis) as in a. Each symbol represents an individual host 
mouse. Error bars, s.d. of n = 10 mice, in two independent experiments. **P < 0.005 (two-
way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple-comparisons correction).
Barkal et al.
Page 24
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. Expression of MHC class I protects tumor cells from macrophages in a syngeneic, 
immunocompetent setting
a, Summary (left) of the expression of CD47 and H-2K (MHCI) (above plot) by B16-F10 
cells and four genetically engineered sub-lines of B16-F10 cells lacking expression of β2M 
or CD47 or both (left margin), and flow cytometry (right) analyzing the expression of CD47 
and MHC class I (H-2K) by cells as at left (colors in plot match colors at left). b, Tumor 
volume of MHC I+CD47+ (WT), MHCI−CD47+ (β2M), MHCI+CD47− (ΔCD47) and MHCI
−CD47− (Δβ2M,CD47) B16-F10 cells (horizontal axis) 20 d after engraftment into Rag
−/−Il2rg−/− BALB/c mice. **P < 0.001 (one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple-
comparisons correction). c, Tumor volume of B16-F10 variants (above plot) 25 d after 
engraftment into fully immunocompetent C57BL/6 wild-type mice (WT) or C57BL/6 mice 
depleted of NK cells or macrophages (host, key). *P < 0.01 and **P < 0.001 (one-way 
ANOVA with multiple-comparisons correction). d, Frequency of all CD45+ immune cells 
(left), or of T cells (middle) or dendritic cells (right) among CD45+ immune cells, in B16-
F10 variant tumors (key) 25 d after engraftment into fully immunocompetent C57Bl/6 wild 
type mice (filled circles) or C57Bl/6 mice depleted of macrophages (open triangles) (host, 
horizontal axis).
Barkal et al.
Page 25
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
