 Clinical Infectious Diseases
I D S A G U I D E L I N E
Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program:
Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America
Tamar F. Barlam,1,a Sara E. Cosgrove,2,a Lilian M. Abbo,3 Conan MacDougall,4 Audrey N. Schuetz,5 Edward J. Septimus,6 Arjun Srinivasan,7 Timothy H. Dellit,8
Yngve T. Falck-Ytter,9 Neil O. Fishman,10 Cindy W. Hamilton,11 Timothy C. Jenkins,12 Pamela A. Lipsett,13 Preeti N. Malani,14 Larissa S. May,15
Gregory J. Moran,16 Melinda M. Neuhauser,17 Jason G. Newland,18 Christopher A. Ohl,19 Matthew H. Samore,20 Susan K. Seo,21 and Kavita K. Trivedi22
1Section of Infectious Diseases, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; 2Division of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;
3Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida; 4Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco;
5Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical Center/New York–Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York; 6Department of Internal Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center College of
Medicine, Houston; 7Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; 8Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle; 9Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio; 10Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Health System, Philadelphia; 11Hamilton House, Virginia Beach, Virginia; 12Division of Infectious Diseases, Denver Health, Denver, Colorado; 13Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University Schools of Medicine and Nursing, Baltimore, Maryland; 14Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor; 15Department of
Emergency Medicine, University of California, Davis; 16Department of Emergency Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center, Sylmar;
17Department of Veterans Affairs, Hines, Illinois; 18Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, Missouri; 19Section on Infectious Diseases, Wake Forest University
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; 20Department of Veterans Affairs and University of Utah, Salt Lake City; 21Infectious Diseases, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York; and 22Trivedi Consults, LLC, Berkeley, California
Evidence-based guidelines for implementation and measurement of antibiotic stewardship interventions in inpatient populations in-
cluding long-term care were prepared by a multidisciplinary expert panel of the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the Society
for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. The panel included clinicians and investigators representing internal medicine, emergency
medicine, microbiology, critical care, surgery, epidemiology, pharmacy, and adult and pediatric infectious diseases specialties. These
recommendations address the best approaches for antibiotic stewardship programs to influence the optimal use of antibiotics.
Keywords.
antibiotic stewardship; antibiotic stewardship programs; antibiotics; implementation.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Antibiotic stewardship has been defined in a consensus state-
ment from the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA),
the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA),
and the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS) as “coordi-
nated interventions designed to improve and measure the ap-
propriate use of [antibiotic] agents by promoting the selection
of the optimal [antibiotic] drug regimen including dosing, du-
ration of therapy, and route of administration” [1]. The benefits
of antibiotic stewardship include improved patient outcomes,
reduced adverse events including Clostridium difficile infection
(CDI), improvement in rates of antibiotic susceptibilities to tar-
geted antibiotics, and optimization of resource utilization across
the continuum of care. IDSA and SHEA strongly believe that
antibiotic stewardship programs (ASPs) are best led by infec-
tious disease physicians with additional stewardship training.
Summarized below are the IDSA/SHEA recommendations for
implementing an ASP. The expert panel followed a process used in
the development of other IDSA guidelines, which included a sys-
tematic weighting of the strength of recommendation and quality
of evidence using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations As-
sessment, Development and Evaluation) system (Figure 1) [2–5].
A detailed description of the methods, background, and evidence
summaries that support each of the recommendations can be
found online in the full text of the guidelines. For the purposes
of this guideline, the term antibiotic will be used instead of anti-
microbial and should be considered synonymous.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING AN
ANTIBIOTIC STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM
Interventions
I. Does the Use of Preauthorization and/or Prospective Audit and Feedback
Interventions by ASPs Improve Antibiotic Utilization and Patient Outcomes?
Recommendation
1. We recommend preauthorization and/or prospective audit
and feedback over no such interventions (strong recommen-
dation, moderate-quality evidence).
Received 22 February 2016; accepted 23 February 2016; published online 13 April 2016.
aT. F. B. and S. E. C. contributed equally to this work as co-chairs.
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among
patients. They are not intended to supplant clinician judgment with respect to particular patients
or special clinical situations. IDSA considers adherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with
the ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by the clinician in the light of
each patient’s individual circumstances.
Correspondence: T. F. Barlam, Boston Medical Center, One Boston Medical Center Place, Bos-
ton, MA 02118 (tamar.barlam@bmc.org).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®
2016;62(10):e51–e77
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw118
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e51
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Comment: Preauthorization and/or prospective audit and
feedback improve antibiotic use and are a core component of
any stewardship program. Programs should decide whether
to include one strategy or a combination of both strategies
based on the availability of facility-specific resources for con-
sistent implementation, but some implementation is
essential.
II. Is Didactic Education a Useful Antibiotic Stewardship Intervention
for Reducing Inappropriate Antibiotic Use?
Recommendation
2. We suggest against relying solely on didactic educational
materials for stewardship (weak recommendation, low-
quality evidence).
Comment: Passive educational activities, such as lectures
or informational pamphlets, should be used to complement
other stewardship activities. Academic medical centers
and teaching hospitals should integrate education on
fundamental antibiotic stewardship principles into their pre-
clinical and clinical curricula.
III. Should ASPs Develop and Implement Facility-Specific Clinical
Practice Guidelines for Common Infectious Diseases Syndromes to
Improve Antibiotic Utilization and Patient Outcomes?
Recommendation
3. We suggest ASPs develop facility-specific clinical practice
guidelines coupled with a dissemination and implementation
strategy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Facility-specific clinical practice guidelines and
algorithms can be an effective way to standardize prescribing
practices based on local epidemiology. ASPs should develop
those guidelines, when feasible, for common infectious dis-
eases syndromes. In addition, ASPs should be involved in
writing clinical pathways, guidelines, and order sets that ad-
dress antibiotic use and are developed within other depart-
ments at their facility.
Figure 1.
Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology (unrestricted use of this figure granted by the US GRADE Network).
e52 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 IV. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Improve Antibiotic Use and
Clinical Outcomes That Target Patients With Specific Infectious
Diseases Syndromes?
Recommendation
4. We suggest ASPs implement interventions to improve anti-
biotic use and clinical outcomes that target patients with spe-
cific infectious diseases syndromes (weak recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
Comment: ASP interventions for patients with specific in-
fectious diseases syndromes can be an effective way to im-
prove prescribing because the message can be focused,
clinical guidelines and algorithms reinforced, and sustain-
ability improved. ASPs should regularly evaluate areas for
which targeted interventions are needed and adapt their ac-
tivities accordingly. This approach is most useful if the ASP
has a reliable way to identify patients appropriate for review.
V. Should ASPs Implement Interventions Designed to Reduce the Use of
Antibiotics Associated With a High Risk of CDI?
Recommendation
5. We recommend antibiotic stewardship interventions de-
signed to reduce the use of antibiotics associated with a
high risk of CDI compared with no such intervention (strong
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: The goal of reducing CDI is a high priority for
all ASPs and should be taken into consideration when craft-
ing stewardship interventions.
VI. Do Strategies to Encourage Prescriber-Led Review of
Appropriateness of Antibiotic Regimens, in the Absence of Direct Input
From an Antibiotic Stewardship Team, Improve Antibiotic Prescribing?
Recommendation
6. We suggest the use of strategies (eg, antibiotic time-outs,
stop orders) to encourage prescribers to perform routine re-
view of antibiotic regimens to improve antibiotic prescribing
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Published data on prescriber-led antibiotic re-
view are limited, but successful programs appear to require a
methodology that includes persuasive or enforced prompt-
ing. Without such a mechanism, these interventions are like-
ly to have minimal impact.
VII. Should Computerized Clinical Decision Support Systems Integrated
Into the Electronic Health Record at the Time of Prescribing be
Incorporated as Part of ASPs to Improve Antibiotic Prescribing?
Recommendation
7. We suggest incorporation of computerized clinical decision
support at the time of prescribing into ASPs (weak recom-
mendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Computerized clinical decision support for
prescribers should only be implemented if information
technology resources are readily available. However, comput-
erized surveillance systems that synthesize data from the
electronic health record and other data sources can stream-
line the work of ASPs by identifying opportunities for
interventions.
VIII. Should ASPs Implement Strategies That Promote Cycling or Mixing
in Antibiotic Selection to Reduce Antibiotic Resistance?
Recommendation
8. We suggest against the use of antibiotic cycling as a steward-
ship strategy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Available data do not support the use of anti-
biotic cycling as an ASP strategy, and further research is un-
likely to change that conclusion. Because clinical data are
sparse for antibiotic mixing, we cannot give any recommen-
dation about its utility.
Optimization
IX. In Hospitalized Patients Requiring Intravenous (IV) Antibiotics, Does
a Dedicated Pharmacokinetic (PK) Monitoring and Adjustment Program
Lead to Improved Clinical Outcomes and Reduced Costs?
Recommendations
9. We recommend that hospitals implement PK monitoring
and adjustment programs for aminoglycosides (strong rec-
ommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
10. We suggest that hospitals implement PK monitoring and
adjustment programs for vancomycin (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Comment: PK monitoring and adjustment programs can
reduce costs and decrease adverse effects. The ASP should
encourage implementation and provide support for train-
ing and assessment of competencies. The conduct of
those programs should be integrated into routine pharma-
cy activities.
X. In Hospitalized Patients, Should ASPs Advocate for Alternative
Dosing Strategies Based on PK/Pharmacodynamic Principles to
Improve Outcomes and Decrease Costs for Broad-Spectrum ß-Lactams
and Vancomycin?
Recommendation
11. In hospitalized patients, we suggest ASPs advocate for the
use of alternative dosing strategies vs standard dosing for
broad-spectrum β-lactams to decrease costs (weak recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although data for improved outcomes for
broad-spectrum β-lactam dosing with this approach are
still limited, these interventions are associated with antibiotic
cost savings. ASPs should consider implementation but must
take into account logistical issues such as nursing and
pharmacy education and need for dedicated IV access.
Considering the limited evidence, we cannot give any
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e53
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 recommendation about the utility of alternative dosing strat-
egies for vancomycin.
XI. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Increase Use of Oral
Antibiotics as a Strategy to Improve Outcomes or Decrease Costs?
Recommendation
12. We recommend ASPs implement programs to increase
both appropriate use of oral antibiotics for initial therapy
and the timely transition of patients from IV to oral antibi-
otics (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Programs to increase the appropriate use of
oral antibiotics can reduce costs and length of hospital
stay. IV-to-oral conversion of the same antibiotic is less
complicated than other strategies and is applicable to
many healthcare settings. The conduct of those programs
should be integrated into routine pharmacy activities.
ASPs should implement strategies to assess patients who
can safely complete therapy with an oral regimen to reduce
the need for IV catheters and to avoid outpatient parenteral
therapy.
XII. In Patients With a Reported History of ß-Lactam Allergy, Should
ASPs Facilitate Initiatives to Implement Allergy Assessments With the
Goal of Improved Use of First-Line Antibiotics?
Recommendation
13. In patients with a history of β-lactam allergy, we suggest
that ASPs promote allergy assessments and penicillin
(PCN) skin testing when appropriate (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Allergy assessments and PCN skin testing
can enhance use of first-line agents, but it is largely unstudied
as a primary ASP intervention; however, ASPs should pro-
mote such assessments with providers. In facilities with ap-
propriate resources for skin testing, the ASPs should actively
work to develop testing and treatment strategies with
allergists.
XIII. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Reduce Antibiotic Therapy
to the Shortest Effective Duration?
Recommendation
14. We recommend that ASPs implement guidelines and strat-
egies to reduce antibiotic therapy to the shortest effective du-
ration (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Recommending a duration of therapy based on
patient-specific factors is an important activity for ASPs.
Suitable approaches include developing written guidelines
with specific suggestions for duration, including duration
of therapy recommendations as part of the preauthorization
or prospective audit and feedback process, or specifying du-
ration at the time of antibiotic ordering (eg, through an elec-
tronic order entry system).
Microbiology and Laboratory Diagnostics
XIV. Should ASPs Work With the Microbiology Laboratory to Develop
Stratified Antibiograms, Compared With Nonstratified Antibiograms?
Recommendation
15. We suggest development of stratified antibiograms over
solely relying on nonstratified antibiograms to assist ASPs
in developing guidelines for empiric therapy (weak recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although there is limited evidence at this time
that stratified antibiograms (eg, by location or age) lead to
improved empiric antibiotic therapy, stratification can expo-
se important differences in susceptibility, which can help
ASPs develop optimized treatment recommendations and
guidelines.
XV. Should ASPs Work With the Microbiology Laboratory to Perform
Selective or Cascade Reporting of Antibiotic Susceptibility Test
Results?
Recommendation
16. We suggest selective and cascade reporting of antibiotics
over reporting of all tested antibiotics (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although data are limited that demonstrate di-
rect impact of those strategies on prescribing, some form of
selective or cascaded reporting is reasonable. After imple-
mentation, ASPs should review prescribing to ensure there
are no unintended consequences.
XVI. Should ASPs Advocate for Use of Rapid Viral Testing for
Respiratory Pathogens to Reduce the Use of Inappropriate Antibiotics?
Recommendation
17. We suggest the use of rapid viral testing for respiratory
pathogens to reduce the use of inappropriate antibiotics
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although rapid viral testing has the potential to
reduce inappropriate use of antibiotics, results have been in-
consistent. Few studies have been performed to assess wheth-
er active ASP intervention would improve those results.
XVII. Should ASPs Advocate for Rapid Diagnostic Testing on Blood
Specimens to Optimize Antibiotic Therapy and Improve Clinical
Outcomes?
Recommendation
18. We suggest rapid diagnostic testing in addition to conven-
tional culture and routine reporting on blood specimens if
combined with active ASP support and interpretation
(weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Availability of rapid diagnostic tests is expected
to increase; thus, ASPs must develop processes and interven-
tions to assist clinicians in interpreting and responding
appropriately to results.
e54 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 XVIII. In Adults in Intensive Care Units (ICUs) With Suspected Infection,
Should ASPs Advocate Procalcitonin (PCT) Testing as an Intervention to
Decrease Antibiotic Use?
Recommendation
19. In adults in ICUs with suspected infection, we suggest the
use of serial PCT measurements as an ASP intervention to
decrease antibiotic use (weak recommendation, moderate-
quality evidence).
Comment: Although randomized trials, primarily in
Europe, have shown reduction in antibiotic use through im-
plementation of PCT algorithms in the ICU, similar data are
lacking for other regions including the United States where the
patterns of antibiotic prescribing and approach to stewardship
may differ. If implemented, each ASP must develop processes
and guidelines to assist clinicians in interpreting and respond-
ing appropriately to results, and must determine if this inter-
vention is the best use of its time and resources.
XIX. In Patients With Hematologic Malignancy, Should ASPs Advocate
for Incorporation of Nonculture-Based Fungal Markers in Interventions
to Optimize Antifungal Use?
Recommendation
20. In patients with hematologic malignancy at risk of con-
tracting invasive fungal disease (IFD), we suggest incorporat-
ing nonculture-based fungal markers in ASP interventions to
optimize antifungal use (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
Comment: ASPs with an existing intervention to optimize
antifungal use in patients with hematologic malignancy can
consider algorithms incorporating nonculture-based fungal
markers. Those interventions must be done in close collabo-
ration with the primary teams (eg, hematology-oncology).
Antibiotic stewards must develop expertise in antifungal
therapy and fungal diagnostics for the programs to be suc-
cessful. The value of those markers for interventions in
other populations has not been demonstrated.
Measurement
XX. Which Overall Measures Best Reflect the Impact of ASPs and Their
Interventions?
Recommendation
21. We suggest monitoring antibiotic use as measured by days
of therapy (DOTs) in preference to defined daily dose (DDD)
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Every ASP must measure antibiotic use, strati-
fied by antibiotic. DOTs are preferred, but DDDs remain an
alternative for sites that cannot obtain patient-level antibiotic
use data. ASPs should consider measurement of appropriate
antibiotic use within their own institutions by examining
compliance with local or national guidelines, particularly
when assessing results of a targeted intervention, and share
that data with clinicians to help inform their practice. Al-
though rates of CDI or antibiotic resistance may not reflect
ASP impact (because those outcomes are affected by patient
population, infection control, and other factors), those out-
comes may also be used for measurement of targeted
interventions.
XXI. What is the Best Measure of Expenditures on Antibiotics to Assess
the Impact of ASPs and Interventions?
Recommendation
22. We recommend measuring antibiotic costs based on pre-
scriptions or administrations instead of purchasing data
(good practice recommendation).
XXII. What Measures Best Reflect the Impact of Interventions to Improve
Antibiotic Use and Clinical Outcomes in Patients With Specific
Infectious Diseases Syndromes?
Recommendation
23. Measures that consider the goals and size of the syndrome-
specific intervention should be used (good practice
recommendation).
Special Populations
XXIII. Should ASPs Develop Facility-Specific Clinical Guidelines
for Management of Fever and Neutropenia (F&N) in Hematology-
Oncology Patients to Reduce Unnecessary Antibiotic Use and Improve
Outcomes?
Recommendation
24. We suggest ASPs develop facility-specific guidelines for
F&N management in hematology-oncology patients over
no such approach (weak recommendation, low-quality evi-
dence).
Comment: Clinical guidelines with an implementation
and dissemination strategy can be successfully used in the
care of cancer patients with F&N and are strongly
encouraged.
XXIV. In Immunocompromised Patients Receiving Antifungal Therapy,
do Interventions by ASPs Improve Utilization and Outcomes?
Recommendation
25. We suggest implementation of ASP interventions to
improve the appropriate prescribing of antifungal treatment
in immunocompromised patients (weak recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
Comment: In facilities with large immunocompromised
patient populations, ASP interventions targeting antifungal
therapy can show benefit. Those interventions must be
done in close collaboration with the primary teams (eg he-
matology-oncology, solid organ transplant providers). Anti-
biotic stewards must develop expertise in antifungal therapy
and fungal diagnostics for the programs to be successful.
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e55
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 XXV. In Residents of Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facilities, do
Antibiotic Stewardship Strategies Decrease Unnecessary Use of
Antibiotics and Improve Clinical Outcomes?
Recommendation
26. In nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities, we suggest
implementation of antibiotic stewardship strategies to de-
crease unnecessary use of antibiotics (good practice recom-
mendation).
Comment: Implementing ASPs at nursing homes and
skilled nursing facilities is important and must involve
point-of-care providers to be successful. The traditional phy-
sician–pharmacist team may not be available on-site, and fa-
cilities might need to investigate other approaches to review
and optimize antibiotic use, such as obtaining infectious dis-
eases expertise through telemedicine consultation.
XXVI. In Neonatal Intensive Care Units (NICUs), do Antibiotic
Stewardship Interventions Reduce Inappropriate Antibiotic Use and/or
Resistance?
Recommendation
27. We suggest implementation of antibiotic stewardship
interventions to reduce inappropriate antibiotic use and/or
resistance in the NICU (good practice recommendation).
XXVII. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Reduce Antibiotic
Therapy in Terminally Ill Patients?
Recommendation
28. In terminally ill patients, we suggest ASPs provide support
to clinical care providers in decisions related to antibiotic
treatment (good practice recommendation).
INTRODUCTION
The discovery of antibiotics in the early 20th century trans-
formed healthcare, dramatically reducing morbidity and mor-
tality from infectious diseases and allowing for major
advancements in medicine. The increase in organisms with re-
sistance to antibiotics in our armamentarium, however, com-
bined with the slow pace of development of new antibiotics
threatens those gains. Approaches to optimize the use of both
existing antibiotics and newly developed antibiotics are of crit-
ical importance to ensure that we continue to reap their benefits
and provide the best care to patients.
The need for antibiotic stewardship across the spectrum of
healthcare has been recognized in the National Action Plan
for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria issued by the
White House in March 2015 [6]. This plan calls for establish-
ment of ASPs in all acute care hospitals by 2020 and for the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to issue a Condi-
tion of Participation that participating hospitals develop pro-
grams based on recommendations from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Core Elements of
Hospital Antibiotic Stewardship Programs [7]. Expansion of
stewardship activities to ambulatory surgery centers, dialysis
centers, nursing homes and other long-term care facilities,
and emergency departments and outpatient settings is also
recommended.
The purpose of this guideline is to comprehensively evaluate
the wide range of interventions that can be implemented by
ASPs in emergency department, acute inpatient, and long-
term care settings as they determine the best approaches to in-
fluence the optimal use of antibiotics within their own institu-
tional environments. In addition, this guideline addresses
approaches to measure the success of these interventions.
This guideline does not specifically address the structure of an
ASP, which has been well outlined in a previous guideline [8]
and in the CDC’s Core Elements of Hospital Antibiotic
Stewardship Programs and Core Elements of Antibiotic
Stewardship for Nursing Homes [7, 9]. These documents em-
phasize the importance of physician and pharmacist leadership
for an ASP, the need for infectious diseases expertise, and the
role of measurement and feedback as critical components of
ASPs. This guideline does not address antibiotic stewardship
in outpatient settings.
Although not all of the antibiotic stewardship interventions,
optimization measures, diagnostic approaches, and program
measurements described in this guideline have been imple-
mented or evaluated in all populations or clinical settings, the
majority could be considered for use in pediatrics, oncology,
community hospitals, small hospitals, and nursing home and
long-term care environments, and not limited to acute care fa-
cilities. Any antibiotic stewardship intervention must be cus-
tomized based on local needs, prescriber behaviors, barriers,
and resources. In contrast to other guidelines, this guideline
provides comments that supplement the formal recommenda-
tions and contain practical input from the expert panel to better
guide ASPs in determining which interventions to implement.
METHODS
Panel Composition
Led by Co-chairs Tamar Barlam and Sara Cosgrove, a panel of
18 multidisciplinary experts in the management of ASPs was
convened per the IDSA Handbook on Clinical Practice Guide-
line Development [10] in 2012. In addition to members of
IDSA and the SHEA, representatives from diverse geographic
areas, pediatric and adult practitioners, and a wide breadth of
specialties representing major medical societies were included
among the panel’s membership (American College of Emergen-
cy Physicians [ACEP], American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists [ASHP], American Society for Microbiology
[ASM], PIDS, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine
[SAEM], Society of Infectious Diseases Pharmacists [SIDP],
and the Surgical Infection Society [SIS]). A guideline
e56 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 methodologist and member of the GRADE Working Group and
a medical writer were added to assist the panel.
Literature Review and Analysis
PubMed, which includes Medline (1946 to present), was
searched to identify relevant studies for each of the antibiotic
stewardship guideline PICO (population/patient, intervention/
indicator, comparator/control, outcome) questions. Search
strategies were developed and built by 2 independent health sci-
ences librarians from the Health Sciences Library System, Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh. For each PICO question, the librarians
developed the search strategies using PubMed’s command lan-
guage and appropriate search fields. Medical Subject Headings
terms and keywords were used for the main search concepts of
each PICO question. A data supplement that includes search
strings can be found following publication on the IDSA website
[11]. Articles in all languages and all publication years were in-
cluded. Initial searches were created and confirmed with input
from the guideline committee chairs and group leaders from
February through mid-July 2013. The searches were finalized
and delivered between late July and September 2013. After the
literature searches were performed, authors continued to review
the literature and added relevant articles as needed.
Process Overview
To evaluate evidence, the panel followed a process consistent
with other IDSA guidelines. The process for evaluating the
evidence was based on the IDSA Handbook on Clinical Practice
Guideline Development [10] and involved a systematic
weighting of the quality of the evidence and the grade of re-
commendation using the GRADE system (Figure 1) [2–5].
Unless otherwise stated, each PICO comparator was usual
practice.
For recommendations in the category of good practice state-
ments, we followed published principles by the GRADE work-
ing group on how to identify such recommendations and use
appropriate wording choices. Accordingly, a formal GRADE
rating was not pursued for those statements [12].
Panel members were divided into 5 subgroups: (1) interven-
tions, (2) optimization of antibiotic administration, (3) micro-
biology and laboratory diagnostics, (4) measurement and
analysis, and (5) antibiotic stewardship in special populations.
Each author was asked to review the literature, evaluate the
evidence, and determine the initial strength of the re-
commendations along with an evidence summary supporting
each recommendation in his/her assigned subgroup. The evi-
dence was graded based on the effectiveness of the antibiotic
stewardship intervention, not the underlying data that provided
the groundwork for the intervention. The panel reviewed
all recommendations, along with their strength and the quality
of the evidence. Discrepancies were discussed and resolved,
and all panel members are in agreement with the final
recommendations.
Consensus Development Based on Evidence
The panel met face to face on 3 occasions and conducted nu-
merous teleconferences to complete the work of the guideline.
The purpose of the meetings and teleconferences was to develop
and discuss the clinical questions to be addressed, assign topics
for review and writing of the initial draft, and develop recom-
mendations. The whole panel reviewed all sections. The guide-
line was reviewed and approved by the IDSA Standards and
Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC), the IDSA Board of Di-
rectors, the SHEA Guidelines Committee, and the SHEA Board
of Directors, and was endorsed by ACEP, ASHP, ASM, PIDS,
SAEM, SIDP, and SIS.
Guidelines and Conflicts of Interest
The expert panel complied with the IDSA policy on conflicts
of interest, which requires disclosure of any financial or other
interest that may be construed as constituting an actual,
potential, or apparent conflict. Panel members were provided
IDSA’s conflicts of interest disclosure statement and were
asked to identify ties to companies developing products that
may be affected by promulgation of the guideline. Informa-
tion was requested regarding employment, consultancies,
stock ownership, honoraria, research funding, expert tes-
timony, and membership on company advisory committees.
Decisions were made on a case-by-case basis as to whether
an individual’s role should be limited as a result of a conflict.
Potential conflicts of interests are listed in the Notes section at
the end of the guideline.
Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the panel chair, the SPGC liaison advisor,
and the chair of the SPGC will determine the need for revisions
to the guideline based on an examination of current literature. If
necessary, the entire panel will reconvene to discuss potential
changes. When appropriate, the panel will recommend revision
of the guideline to the IDSA SPGC and SHEA guidelines
committees.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING AN
ANTIBIOTIC STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM
Interventions
I. Does the Use of Preauthorization and/or Prospective Audit and
Feedback Interventions by ASPs Improve Antibiotic Utilization and
Patient Outcomes?
Recommendation
1. We recommend preauthorization and/or prospective audit
and feedback over no such interventions (strong recommen-
dation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Preauthorization and/or prospective audit and
feedback improve antibiotic use and are a core component
of any stewardship program. Programs should decide whether
to include one strategy or a combination of both strategies
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e57
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 based on the availability of facility-specific resources for con-
sistent implementation, but some implementation is essential.
Evidence Summary
Preauthorization is a strategy to improve antibiotic use by re-
quiring clinicians to get approval for certain antibiotics before
they are prescribed. Prospective audit and feedback (PAF) is
an intervention that engages the provider after an antibiotic is
prescribed. Each type is associated with unique advantages
and disadvantages (Table 1).
Preauthorization has been associated with a significant re-
duction in the use of the restricted agents and of associated
costs [13–16]. Outcome studies with preauthorization have
shown decreased antibiotic use and decreased antibiotic resis-
tance, particularly among gram-negative pathogens [13–15,
17]. Preauthorization studies have demonstrated no adverse ef-
fects for patients [13, 14]. White et al [13] reported that initia-
tion of a preauthorization requirement for selected antibiotics at
a county teaching hospital was associated with a 32% decrease
in total parenteral antibiotic expenditures (P < .01) and in-
creased percentages of susceptible gram-negative isolates—all
without changes in hospital length of stay and survival. For ex-
ample, Pseudomonas aeruginosa susceptibility to imipenem in-
creased for isolates recovered in the ICU (percentage of
susceptible isolates before vs after preauthorization: 65% vs
83%; P ≤ .01) and other inpatient settings (83% vs 95%;
P ≤ .01). Overall 30-day survival rates were unchanged in pa-
tients with gram-negative bacteremia (79% vs 75%; P = .49)
[13]. In addition, restrictive policies such as preauthorization
have been shown to be more effective than persuasive strategies
in reducing CDI, according to a meta-analysis evaluating anti-
biotic stewardship and CDI [18].
There are several factors to consider when implementing a
preauthorization intervention. The skills of the person provid-
ing approval are important. Antibiotic approval by an antibiotic
stewardship team consisting of a clinical pharmacist and an in-
fectious diseases attending physician was more effective than
off-hour approval by infectious diseases fellows in recommen-
dation appropriateness (87% vs 47%; P < .001), cure rate (64%
vs 42%; P = .007), and treatment failures (15% vs 28%; P = .03)
[19]. Inaccuracy in communication of the clinical scenario by
the requesting prescriber to the antibiotic stewardship team in-
creases the likelihood of inappropriate recommendations [20].
Direct chart review optimizes preauthorization. It is also impor-
tant to consider the alternative treatments that clinicians may
choose when antibiotics are restricted and monitor changes in
usage patterns. Rahal et al [21] implemented a preauthorization
requirement for cephalosporins. This was associated with a re-
duction in the incidence of ceftazidime-resistant Klebsiella, but
imipenem use increased and a 69% increase in the incidence of
imipenem-resistant P. aeruginosa was seen. Preauthorization re-
quires real-time availability of the person providing approval.
Institutions that use preauthorization often allow administra-
tion of the restricted antibiotic overnight until approval can
be obtained the next day. To provide 24-hour availability and
to facilitate communication without impeding provider work-
flow, Buising et al [14] developed a computerized approval sys-
tem based on defined indications for restricted agents,
demonstrating reduced antibiotic consumption and increased
Pseudomonas susceptibility rates over a 2-year period.
PAF interventions also have been shown to improve anti-
biotic use, reduce antibiotic resistance, and reduce CDI rates
[22–27], without a negative impact on patient outcomes [26,
28–30]. For instance, PAF conducted by a clinical pharmacist
and infectious diseases physician at a community hospital led
to a 22% reduction in the use of parenteral broad-spectrum an-
tibiotics as well as a reduction in rates of CDI and nosocomial
infections due to antibiotic-resistant Enterobacteriaceae over a
7-year period of time [22]. PAF has also been effective in the
ICU [24, 25]. For example, a PAF intervention in multiple
ICUs at a large academic institution demonstrated decreased
meropenem resistance and decreased CDIs (P = .04) without
adversely affecting mortality [25]. PAF has been effective in
children’s hospitals by significantly reducing antibiotic use
and dosing errors while limiting the development of antibiotic
resistance [26, 27]. PAF can also be a strategy to improve
Table 1.
Comparison of Preauthorization and Prospective Audit and
Feedback Strategies for Antibiotic Stewardship
Preauthorization
Prospective Audit and Feedback
Advantages
•
Reduces initiation of
unnecessary/ inappropriate
antibiotics
•
Optimizes empiric choices and
influences downstream use
•
Prompts review of clinical data/
prior cultures at the time of
initiation of therapy
•
Decreases antibiotic costs,
including those due to high-cost
agents
•
Provides mechanism for rapid
response to antibiotic shortages
•
Direct control over antibiotic use
•
Can increase visibility of
antimicrobial stewardship program
and build collegial relationships
•
More clinical data available for
recommendations, enhancing
uptake by prescribers
•
Greater flexibility in timing of
recommendations
•
Can be done on less than daily
basis if resources are limited
•
Provides educational benefit to
clinicians
•
Prescriber autonomy maintained
•
Can address de-escalation of
antibiotics and duration of therapy
Disadvantages
•
Impacts use of restricted agents
only
•
Addresses empiric use to a much
greater degree than downstream
use
•
Loss of prescriber autonomy
•
May delay therapy
•
Effectiveness depends on skill of
approver
•
Real-time resource intensive
•
Potential for manipulation of
system (eg, presenting request in
a biased manner to gain approval)
•
May simply shift to other
antibiotic agents and select for
different antibiotic-resistance
patterns
•
Compliance voluntary
•
Typically labor-intensive
•
Success depends on delivery
method of feedback to prescribers
•
Prescribers may be reluctant to
change therapy if patient is doing
well
•
Identification of interventions may
require information technology
support and/or purchase of
computerized surveillance
systems
•
May take longer to achieve
reductions in targeted antibiotic
use
e58 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 antibiotic use in hematology-oncology patients. In one study,
the addition of PAF led to a significant decrease in the use of
restricted antibiotics during the intervention period from
574.4 to 533.8 study-antibiotic days per 1000 patient-days (in-
cidence rate ratio, 0.93; 95% confidence interval [CI], .88–.97;
P = .002), although neutropenic patients and those undergoing
hematopoietic stem cell transplant were excluded [31].
The effectiveness of PAF may depend on the infrastructure in
place at an institution. A multicenter study of a PAF program
added to existing ASPs found overall that 27.3% of antibiotic
courses were determined to be unjustified, and clinicians ac-
cepted recommendations to change or stop the antibiotics in
66.7% of these. In the 2 sites with established ASPs and dedicat-
ed personnel, the addition of PAF led to significant reductions
in antibiotic usage; however, among the 3 centers without estab-
lished resources, no impact was identified [31].
PAF can be very labor intensive, and identification of appro-
priate patients for intervention can be challenging and require
computerized surveillance systems; however, where daily review
or preauthorization is not feasible, limited PAF can still have
an impact [32]. A pharmacist-driven PAF intervention conduct-
ed 3 days a week at a 253-bed community hospital demonstrated
a 64% decline in DOTs per 1000 patient-days after imple-
mentation, a 37% reduction in total antibiotic expenditures,
and a decrease in use of carbapenems, vancomycin, and levo-
floxacin [33].
The benefit of preauthorization compared with PAF has had
limited study. Restrictive measures such as preauthorization
were compared with persuasive measures such as PAF in a
meta-analysis of 52 interrupted time series in a Cochrane review
[34]. Persuasive interventions included PAF, dissemination of
educational resources, reminders, and educational outreach. Al-
though equivalent to persuasive measures at 12 or 24 months,
restrictive interventions had statistically greater effect size on
prescribing outcomes at 1 month (+32%; 95% CI, 2%–61%;
P = .03) and on colonization or infection with C. difficile or
antibiotic-resistant bacteria at 6 months (+53%; 95% CI,
31%–75%; P = .001). The authors concluded that restrictive in-
terventions are preferred when the need is urgent [34]. Another
study [35] at an academic institution demonstrated that when a
preauthorization strategy was switched to a PAF strategy, overall
antibiotic use increased (preauthorization vs PAF: –9.75 vs
+9.65 DOTs per 1000 patient-days per month; P < .001), as
did hospital length of stay (–1.57 vs +1.94 days per 1000 pa-
tient-days; P = .016).
Whether one chooses preauthorization, PAF, or a combina-
tion of those strategies, implementation should serve as the
foundation of a comprehensive ASP. Effective implementation
requires the support of hospital administration, allocation
of necessary resources for a persistent effort by dedicated,
well-trained personnel, and ongoing communication with
clinicians.
II. Is Didactic Education a Useful Antibiotic Stewardship Intervention
for Reducing Inappropriate Antibiotic Use?
Recommendation
2. We suggest against relying solely on didactic educational
materials for stewardship (weak recommendation, low-
quality evidence).
Comment: Passive educational activities, such as lectures
or informational pamphlets, should be used to complement
other stewardship activities. Academic medical centers and
teaching hospitals should integrate education on fundamen-
tal antibiotic stewardship principles into their preclinical and
clinical curricula.
Evidence Summary
Education is a common tool for ASPs. Strategies include educa-
tional meetings with didactic lectures and distribution of educa-
tional pamphlets and materials. No comparative studies are
available to determine which educational strategy is most effective.
Dissemination of educational materials in the context of a
focused stewardship goal can be successful. For example, in a Co-
chrane review published in 2013 [34],dissemination of education-
al materials via printed forms or meetings was associated with
improved antibiotic use in 5 of 6 studies; the median effect size
based on the type of study ranged from 10.6% to 42.5%. Educa-
tion alone, however, can result in nonsustainable improvements
in antibiotic prescribing. Landgren et al [36] performed a cross-
over study with an educational marketing campaign that targeted
perioperative prophylaxis. Prescribing improved during the inter-
vention period but was not sustained over the next 12 months
[36]. Educational strategies are likely most effective when com-
bined with other stewardship strategies such as PAF [34].
Educational strategies should include medical, pharmacy,
physician assistant, nurse practitioner, and nursing students
and trainees. In a survey of fourth-year medical students at 3
schools in the United States [37],90% of respondents confirmed
that they would like more education on appropriate antibiotic
use. In addition, they had low mean knowledge scores on this
topic, suggesting the need for instruction in fundamental anti-
biotic stewardship principles. The Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education announced its commitment to an-
tibiotic stewardship in 2015 and will provide resources and ma-
terials to postgraduate training hospitals [38].
III. Should ASPs Develop and Implement Facility-Specific Clinical
Practice Guidelines for Common Infectious Diseases Syndromes to
Improve Antibiotic Utilization and Patient Outcomes?
Recommendation
3. We suggest ASPs develop facility-specific clinical practice
guidelines coupled with a dissemination and implementation
strategy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Facility-specific clinical practice guidelines and al-
gorithms can be an effective way to standardize prescribing
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e59
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 practicesbasedonlocalepidemiology.ASPsshoulddevelopthose
guidelines, when feasible, for common infectious diseases syn-
dromes. In addition, ASPs should be involved in writing clinical
pathways, guidelines, and order sets that address antibiotic use
and are developed within other departments at their facility.
Evidence Summary
Implementation of facility-specific clinical practice guidelines can
lead to substantial changes in antibiotic use for infections com-
monly treated in hospitals. Most published studies of clinical
practice guidelines have involved pneumonia, including commu-
nity-acquired pneumonia (CAP) in adults [39–41] and children
[42], and healthcare-associated pneumonia [43–46]. One study
involved cellulitis and cutaneous abscesses [47]. Several of these
studies described a process of interdisciplinary guideline de-
velopment along with a multifaceted dissemination and im-
plementation strategy to increase awareness and uptake of the
guideline [40, 43, 45, 47]. Such strategies included guideline
dissemination in electronic or hard-copy formats, provider edu-
cation, engagement of peer champion advocates, audit and feed-
back of prescribing practices to providers, checklists, and
incorporation of recommendations into electronic order sets.
Specific improvements in antibiotic use associated with im-
plementation of facility-specific guidelines have included statis-
tically significant increases in likelihood of adequate initial
therapy [40, 46], use of narrower-spectrum antibiotic regimens
[41, 42, 47], earlier switch from IV to oral therapy [39], and
shorter duration of treatment [39, 41, 45–47]—all without ad-
verse effects on other clinical outcomes. For those studies pow-
ered to detect differences in clinical outcomes, reductions in
mortality [40], length of hospital stay [39–41, 43, 44], adverse
events [39, 48], recurrence or readmission [46], and treatment
costs [40, 44] have been demonstrated.
The sustainability of the effects of guideline implementation
has not been well established. In one study, changes in prescrib-
ing and outcomes were sustained 3 years after guideline imple-
mentation [43];however, in another study, removal of measures
to promote guideline adherence after 1 year was associated with
a reduction in adherence [49]. Therefore, interventions to main-
tain guideline adherence over time may be necessary, and
intended outcomes should be monitored.
IV. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Improve Antibiotic Use and
Clinical Outcomes That Target Patients With Specific Infectious
Diseases Syndromes?
Recommendation
4. We suggest ASPs implement interventions to improve anti-
biotic use and clinical outcomes that target patients with spe-
cific infectious diseases syndromes (weak recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
Comment: ASP interventions for patients with specific
infectious diseases syndromes can be an effective way to
improve prescribing because the message can be focused,
clinical guidelines and algorithms reinforced, and sustain-
ability improved. ASPs should regularly evaluate areas for
which targeted interventions are needed and adapt their ac-
tivities accordingly. This approach is most useful if the ASP
has a reliable way to identify patients appropriate for review.
Evidence Summary
In addition to hospital-wide activities, such as preauthorization
or development of clinical guidelines, a strategy for targeted ef-
forts to improve antibiotic use and clinical outcomes for a spe-
cific infectious diseases issue has been shown to be effective.
Studies have involved skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs),
asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB), or CAP.
For example, to reduce the use of broad-spectrum therapy
and shorten the duration of treatment for adults with uncom-
plicated SSTIs, an intervention was developed that included dis-
semination of a treatment algorithm, electronic order sets,
recruitment of physician champions, and quarterly feedback
to providers of compliance with the guideline. This study of
169 adults demonstrated a 3-day reduction in the length of ther-
apy, 30% reduction in broad-spectrum antibiotic prescribing,
and 0.3% reduction in clinical failure [47].
Interventions to reduce inappropriate treatment of ASB at ge-
riatric or long-term care institutions have resulted in significant
decreases in antibiotic use [50, 51]. For example, Zabarsky et al
[50] developed an intervention that discouraged both nurses
from collecting urine cultures from asymptomatic patients
and primary care providers from treating ASB. After the inter-
vention, urine cultures decreased from 2.6 to 0.9 per 1000 pa-
tient-days (P < .0001), ASB overall rate of treatment declined
from 1.7 to 0.6 per 1000 patient-days (P = .0017), and total
days of antibiotic therapy were reduced from 167.7 to 117.4
per 1000 patient-days (P < .001). The improvements were sus-
tained for 30 months of follow-up.
ASP interventions for CAP have increased the proportion of
patients receiving appropriate therapy (54.9% to 93.4% in one
hospital and 64.6% to 91.3% in a second hospital) [52]. In a pe-
diatric population, a CAP intervention resulted in an increase in
the proportion of patients receiving empiric ampicillin from
13% to 63% and a decrease in the proportion of patients receiv-
ing empiric ceftriaxone from 72% to 21%, without an increased
risk of treatment failure. [42]. Other studies have demonstrated
optimization of antibiotic use, such as reduced time to oral an-
tibiotic conversion by 1–2 days [39, 53], decreased duration of
therapy from a median of 10 to 7 days [54] with 148 days of an-
tibiotic therapy avoided in the 6-month study period, and im-
proved appropriate narrowing of antibiotic therapy from 19% to
67%. There was no difference between the baseline and inter-
vention periods in the proportions of patients who were read-
mitted within 30 days (14.5% vs 7.7%; P = .22) or who
developed CDI (4.8% vs 1.5%; P = .28). In a study involving 5
e60 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 hospitals, implementation of a guideline that included criteria
for oral conversion and hospital discharge reduced length of
stay from 7.3 to 5.7 days (P < .001); 30-day readmission propor-
tions did not differ (1.9% vs 2.4%; P = .6) [53].
An alternative approach is assessing patients with blood cul-
tures growing specific pathogens. Patients with bacteria or yeast
in their blood can usually be identified through communication
with the microbiology laboratory or through alerts from com-
puterized surveillance systems. For example, Antworth et al
[55] described the impact of a candidemia-care bundle in
which patients were identified by electronic medical records
and clinical microbiology reports. Implementation of this bun-
dle was associated with improved care related to both drug ther-
apy (eg, appropriate antifungal therapy selection rates for
bundle vs historic control: 100% vs 86.5%; P < .05) and nondrug
therapy (eg, ophthalmologic examination rates: 97.6% vs 75.7%;
P = .01). Similarly, Borde et al [56] observed improvements in
both drug therapy (appropriate initial anti-infective therapy:
85% vs 4%; P < .001) and nondrug therapy (follow-up cultures:
65% vs 33%; P < .001)—as well as decreased mortality (10% vs
44%; P < .001) after implementing an ASP bundle targeting
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. In a study targeting gram-
negative bacteremia, Pogue et al [57] combined active alerting
of positive blood cultures with ASP intervention. In the sub-
group of patients not on appropriate antibiotic therapy at the
time of the initial positive blood culture, the intervention was
associated with reduced mortality (odds ratio [OR], 0.24; 95%
CI, .08–.76) and length of stay (OR, 0.76; 95% CI, .66–.86). In
all patients, the intervention group had shorter time to appro-
priate therapy (8 vs 14 hours; P = .01) and length of stay (7 vs 8
days; P < .001).
V. Should ASPs Implement Interventions Designed to Reduce the Use of
Antibiotics Associated With a High Risk of CDI?
Recommendation
5. We recommend antibiotic stewardship interventions de-
signed to reduce the use of antibiotics associated with a
high risk of CDI compared with no such intervention (strong
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: The goal of reducing CDI is a high priority for
all ASPs and should be taken into consideration when craft-
ing stewardship interventions.
Evidence Summary
ASPs have been shown to reduce hospital-onset CDI. The pri-
mary ASP interventions were restriction of high-risk antibiotics
such as clindamycin [58–61] and/or broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics, especially cephalosporins [59–64] and fluoroquinolones
[59–63, 65]. Climo et al [58] were among the first to report
that restriction of clindamycin was associated with decreased
clindamycin use, decreased CDI (P < .001), increased clindamy-
cin susceptibility (P < .001), and overall cost savings attributable
to fewer cases of CDI [58]. More recent studies have been con-
ducted in a variety of hospital settings. Some have been prompt-
ed by outbreaks [59, 65], whereas others were performed in
endemic situations [22, 63].
Implementation of ASPs has been associated with statistically
significant sudden or linear-trend decreases in nosocomial CDI
rates [22, 58–61, 63–65], which have been sustained for up to 7
years [22]. A meta-analysis [18] highlights the effectiveness of
stewardship for CDI prevention and outlines ASP intervention
strategies. Other studies support that antibiotic restriction can
further reduce CDI rates when added to previous infection con-
trol measures [58, 59]. In fact, Valiquette et al [59] reported that
simply strengthening basic infection control measures did not re-
duce the CDI rate. CDI rates, however, declined (P < .007) with
antibiotic stewardship interventions to reduce the use of second-
and third-generation cephalosporins, clindamycin, macrolides,
and fluoroquinolones through dissemination of local treatment
guidelines, PAF, and reduction in duration of therapy.
VI. Do Strategies to Encourage Prescriber-Led Review of
Appropriateness of Antibiotic Regimens, in the Absence of Direct Input
From an Antibiotic Stewardship Team, Improve Antibiotic Prescribing?
Recommendation
6. We suggest the use of strategies (eg, antibiotic time-outs,
stop orders) to encourage prescribers to perform routine re-
view of antibiotic regimens to improve antibiotic prescribing
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Published data on prescriber-led antibiotic re-
view are limited, but successful programs appear to require a
methodology that includes persuasive or enforced prompt-
ing. Without such a mechanism, these interventions are like-
ly to have minimal impact.
Evidence Summary
Strategies to prompt prescribers to assess antibiotic therapy
without formal ASP intervention have undergone only limited
evaluation. Lee et al [66] developed a structured electronic
checklist for antibiotic time-out audit to be performed twice
weekly by a senior resident on the medical care team (referred
to as “self-stewardship”). Unit pharmacists reminded residents
to complete the checklist and compliance was 80%. Initially, the
time-outs resulted in changes in antibiotic therapy in 15% of
cases; however, the magnitude of change diminished over the
18-month study period. CDI rates decreased by 19% and annual
antibiotic costs decreased by 46% (from $149 743 to $80 319),
but overall antibiotic use did not [66]. Checklists to guide pro-
cess of care in a medical ICU have been studied [67, 68]. In one
study [67], physicians received face-to-face prompting if they
overlooked the antibiotic review on the checklist. Prompting
improved compliance with the checklist and was associated
with a reduced duration of antibiotic therapy and a lower
risk-adjusted mortality than no prompting in patients receiving
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e61
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 empiric antibiotics (OR, 0.41; 95% CI, .18–.92; P = .03) [67].
Even with prompting, prescribers may have difficulty perform-
ing self-stewardship. For example, in a study by Lesprit et al
[69], clinicians were prompted to review IV therapy at 72
hours. There was no significant change in the frequency of an-
tibiotic regimen modification compared with the control group;
however, requests for infectious diseases input increased.
Antibiotic stop orders are another approach to requiring
physicians to review their antibiotic use. This has been best
studied for 3-day stop orders for vancomycin [70, 71]. Gugliel-
mo et al [70] reported that the stop order was associated with
less continuation of vancomycin in the absence of documented
gram-positive infection (33/133 [25%] vs 15/142 [11%];
P = .002) and less use of vancomycin in febrile neutropenia
(37/133 [28%] vs 22/142 [15%]; P < .013). Hospital-wide vanco-
mycin use decreased as well (160 g vs 100–120 g per 1000 pa-
tient-days; P not stated) [70]. A safety mechanism should be
paired with stop orders to avoid unintended interruptions
and to prevent alienating prescribers against antibiotic steward-
ship interventions.
Collectively, these findings suggest that antibiotic review by
the prescriber can have an important stewardship impact if
done with appropriate reminders or prompting, but available
data do not confirm feasibility or sustainability.
VII. Should Computerized Clinical Decision Support Systems Integrated
Into the Electronic Health Record at the Time of Prescribing be
Incorporated as Part of ASPs to Improve Antibiotic Prescribing?
Recommendation
7. We suggest incorporation of computerized clinical decision
support at the time of prescribing into ASPs (weak recom-
mendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Computerized clinical decision support for
prescribers should only be implemented if information tech-
nology resources are readily available. However, computer-
ized surveillance systems that synthesize data from the
electronic health record and other data sources can stream-
line the work of ASPs by identifying opportunities for
interventions.
Evidence Summary
Computerized decision support systems are designed to im-
prove antibiotic use by providing treatment recommendations
to clinicians at the time of prescribing [72–77].
Implementation of computerized decision support systems
for prescribers has been associated with reduced use of broad-
spectrum antibiotics [73, 74], improved antibiotic dosing [75],
reduced antibiotic resistance [74], more appropriate antibiotic
selection [73, 77], fewer prescribing errors [72, 75, 78], reduced
adverse events [72, 76], reduced antibiotic costs [72, 73, 75, 76],
reduced length of stay [72], and reduced mortality [76]. Com-
puterized surveillance systems for ASPs may improve efficiency
by facilitating more PAF interventions and reducing the time
for such interventions [79–81]. Use of those systems by ASPs
has been associated with reduced use of broad-spectrum antibi-
otics [81] and reduced antibiotic costs [79].
Among the potential disadvantages of computer decision
support and surveillance systems are the time and financial re-
sources required for implementation and maintenance, and the
potential for a high proportion of nonactionable alerts that may
lead to “alert fatigue” [80, 81].
VIII. Should ASPs Implement Strategies That Promote Cycling or Mixing
in Antibiotic Selection to Reduce Antibiotic Resistance?
Recommendation
8. We suggest against the use of antibiotic cycling as a steward-
ship strategy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Available data do not support the use of anti-
biotic cycling as an ASP strategy, and further research is un-
likely to change that conclusion. Because clinical data are
sparse for antibiotic mixing, we cannot give any recommen-
dation about its utility.
Evidence Summary
Antibiotic cycling involves withdrawal of an antibiotic or anti-
biotic class from general use (within a ward or an institution)
for a designated period of time and substitution with antibiotics
from a different class having a comparable spectrum of activity
but for which bacteria may have different resistance mecha-
nisms. Antibiotic cycling is difficult to achieve, labor intensive,
and impractical for most inpatient facilities.
Many studies have been performed, but they fail to provide
compelling evidence of the benefit of antibiotic cycling, partly
because of methodologic shortcomings. Common weaknesses
include single-center setting (usually in ICUs), before-and-
after time-series analysis, lack of adherence to prescribing pro-
tocols, multiple simultaneous interventions (including infection
prevention and guideline implementation), and lack of long-
term follow-up. Brown and Nathwani [82] performed a system-
atic review of antibiotic cycling in 2005 and concluded that
available study results did not permit conclusions regarding
the efficacy of cycling.
In contrast to cycling that is performed at the level of the
medical facility or patient care ward, a strategy known as anti-
biotic mixing is performed at the level of the individual patient,
in which consecutive patients with the same diagnosis receive
an antibiotic from a different class in rotation. Mathematical
modeling suggests that antibiotic mixing is a more promising
strategy for limiting emergence of resistance than cycling, but
few clinical studies validate these models [83, 84]. Comprehen-
sive reviews published in 2010 [85, 86] concluded that more
work is needed to demonstrate the usefulness of antibiotic
mixing.
e62 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Optimization
IX. In Hospitalized Patients IV Intravenous Antibiotics, Does a
Dedicated PK Monitoring and Adjustment Program Lead to Improved
Clinical Outcomes and Reduced Costs?
Recommendations
9. We recommend that hospitals implement PK monitoring
and adjustment programs for aminoglycosides (strong rec-
ommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
10. We suggest that hospitals implement PK monitoring and
adjustment programs for vancomycin (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Comment: PK monitoring and adjustment programs can
reduce costs and decrease adverse effects. The ASP should
encourage implementation and provide support for training
and assessment of competencies. The conduct of those pro-
grams should be integrated into routine pharmacy activities.
Evidence Summary
In randomized studies, individualized PK monitoring and adjust-
ment of aminoglycoside dosing compared with standard dosing is
associated with increased likelihood of obtaining serum concentra-
tions within therapeutic range [87, 88] and reduced institutional
costs [87, 89]. Reductions in nephrotoxicity, hospital length of
stay, and mortality [87,90–92]have been observed in some studies.
Leehey et al [88]randomized patients receiving aminoglycosides to
dosing directed by one of 3 groups: (1) physicians with PK mon-
itoring input from a pharmacist; (2) physician–pharmacist PK
monitoring team; or (3) physicians with no external input (control
group). The PK monitoring groups achieved higher peak and mar-
ginally lower trough concentrations; however, there was no statisti-
cally significant difference in the likelihood of nephrotoxicity
among groups 1, 2, and 3 (27%, 16%, and 16%, respectively;
P = .31). Clinical failure was less common in the PK-monitored
groups across all patients (1%, 0%, and 11%, respectively;
P = .004), but not among patients with microbiologically proven
infection. Bartal et al [90] compared the outcomes of usual care
vs an intensive PK monitoring program among patients receiving
initial high-dose extended-interval gentamicin dosing. Nephrotox-
icity was lower in the PK monitoring group (5% vs 21%; P = .03),
with similar proportions of patients experiencing cure of infection
or death at 28 days between the groups.
Only one randomized controlled study [93] has been per-
formed assessing the impact of a PK monitoring and adjustment
program for vancomycin; no difference in efficacy in the concen-
tration-monitoring arm was demonstrated, but there was a lower
incidence of nephrotoxicity (adjusted OR, 0.04; 95% CI, .006–.30)
at a cost per case of nephrotoxicity avoided of $435. Observation-
al studies [93–96] of vancomycin dose individualization showed
similar effects, with costs stable or lower.
Broader interventions directed at antibiotic dosing, usually
involving integration of dosing support into computerized phy-
sician order-entry systems, have shown improved adherence to
dosing guidelines as well as fewer adverse effects, but no differ-
ence in effectiveness (eg, clinical cure, hospital mortality, or
length of stay) [97–99]. No studies have examined the relation-
ship between PK monitoring and adjustment programs and in-
stitutional antibiotic resistance prevalence.
X. In Hospitalized Patients, Should ASPs Advocate for Alternative
Dosing Strategies Based on PK/Pharmacodynamic Principles to
Improve Outcomes and Decrease Costs for Broad-Spectrum ß-Lactams
and Vancomycin?
Recommendation
11. In hospitalized patients, we suggest ASPs advocate for the
use of alternative dosing strategies vs standard dosing for
broad-spectrum β-lactams to decrease costs (weak recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although data for improved outcomes for broad-
spectrum β-lactam dosing with this approach are still limited,
these interventions are associated with antibiotic cost savings.
ASPs should consider implementation but must take into ac-
count logistical issues such as nursing and pharmacy education
and need for dedicated IV access. Considering the limited ev-
idence, we cannot give any recommendation about the utility
of alternative dosing strategies for vancomycin.
Evidence Summary
Dosing strategies based on PK/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD)
principles for aminoglycosides, such as once-daily dosing,
have been shown to be effective in reducing nephrotoxicity
and, in some studies, improve clinical outcomes [100, 101].
The effectiveness of alternative dosing schemes for β-lactam an-
tibiotics and vancomycin based on PK/PD principles is unclear.
For β–lactam antibiotics, one meta-analysis showed de-
creased mortality (risk ratio, 0.59; 95% CI, .41–.83) among
patients receiving continuous infusions of carbapenems or
piperacillin-tazobactam vs standard infusions. This meta-
analysis included 3 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that
comprised only 25% of the patient outcomes analyzed [102].
In contrast, another meta-analysis that included 14 RCTs did
not support improved outcomes using prolonged infusions of
broad-spectrum β-lactam antibiotics (either extended or con-
tinuous infusion) [103]. A Cochrane review [104] and a recent
randomized trial [105] in critically ill patients of continuous in-
fusions of β-lactam antibiotics compared with standard inter-
mittent dosing also did not demonstrate benefits in outcome.
For vancomycin, continuous infusion has not been shown to
improve clinical outcomes in adults but has been associated
with decreased nephrotoxicity in a meta-analysis [106].Similar-
ly, continuous-infusion vancomycin has been associated with
few adverse effects and no nephrotoxicity in children [107].
Alternative dosing strategies for β-lactam antibiotics [108]
and vancomycin [109] were associated with significantly lower
costs than intermittent infusions in randomized studies. Savings
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e63
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 were attributable to lower acquisition costs of β-lactam antibiot-
ics but not overall hospital expenses [108], and lower costs of
vancomycin acquisition and monitoring [109].
XI. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Increase Use of Oral
Antibiotics as a Strategy to Improve Outcomes or Decrease Costs?
Recommendation
12. We recommend ASPs implement programs to increase
both appropriate use of oral antibiotics for initial therapy
and the timely transition of patients from IV to oral antibi-
otics (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Programs to increase the appropriate use of
oral antibiotics can reduce costs and length of hospital stay.
IV-to-oral conversion of the same antibiotic is less compli-
cated than other strategies and is applicable to many health-
care settings. The conduct of those programs should be
integrated into routine pharmacy activities. ASPs should im-
plement strategies to assess patients who can safely complete
therapy with an oral regimen to reduce the need for IV cath-
eters and to avoid outpatient parenteral therapy.
Evidence Summary
The findings of many studies [110–116] have shown that pro-
grams aimed to increase the use of oral antibiotics are associated
with reduced drug costs and length of hospital stay without
compromising efficacy or safety. For example, Omidvari et al
[115] reported that patients with CAP randomized to receive an
abbreviated course of IV cephalosporin followed by oral cephalo-
sporin had a lower total cost of care ($5002 vs $2953; P < .05) and
shorter hospital stay (10 vs 7 days; P = .01) than those treated with
conventional IV cephalosporin therapy. There were no differences
in clinical course, cure rate, survival, or resolution of chest radio-
graphs [115]. Laing et al [116] reported that the incidence of line
complications was lower in patients who were switched to oral
therapy than in those who remained on IV therapy (17/81 vs
26/81), but this difference was not significant (P = .077).
Unlike automatic conversion from IV to oral formulations of
the same antibiotic, switching from IV antibiotics without an
equivalent oral formulation needs more advanced assistance.
Mertz et al [114] reported that early switching on medical
wards was associated with a shorter duration of IV antibiotic
treatment (reduction in median days, 19%; 95% CI, 9%–29%;
P = .001), a trend toward a decreased overall duration of antibi-
otic treatment, and economic savings—all without significant
changes in mortality or readmissions; however, only 151 of
246 (61.1%) of potential cases were switched. This might have
been partly attributable to the lack of precise recommendations
for switching when an oral equivalent was not available (eg, pi-
peracillin-tazobactam or meropenem) as switching occurred
less often in such patients. In contrast, Sevinç et al [112] report-
ed an increased percentage of eligible patients being converted
from IV to oral antibiotics (52/97 [54%] vs 66/80 [83%];
difference, 29%; 95% CI, 16%–42%; P < .001) after implementa-
tion of guidelines for switching therapy. They directed providers
to seek infectious diseases consultation for patients on IV for-
mulations without an oral equivalent. ASPs can have an impor-
tant role with more complicated IV-to-oral transitions.
Another example of the potential benefit of IV-to-oral transi-
tion is reduction in the need for outpatient parenteral antibiotic
therapy (OPAT). For example, Conant et al [117] reported out-
comes in 56 patients who received oral (n = 50) or no additional
antibiotics (n = 6) after mandatory infectious diseases approval of
OPAT. Denial of OPAT was associated with true clinical failure in
only 1 of 56 patients and a per-patient cost savings of $3847.
XII. In Patients With a Reported History of ß-Lactam Allergy, Should
ASPs Facilitate Initiatives to Implement Allergy Assessments With the
Goal of Improved Use of First-Line Antibiotics?
Recommendation
13. In patients with a history of β-lactam allergy, we suggest
that ASPs promote allergy assessments and PCN skin testing
when appropriate (weak recommendation, low-quality evi-
dence).
Comment: Allergy assessments and PCN skin testing can
enhance use of first-line agents, but it is largely unstudied as
a primary ASP intervention; however, ASPs should promote
such assessments with providers. In facilities with appropriate
resources for skin testing, the ASPs should actively work to de-
velop testing and treatment strategies with allergists.
Evidence Summary
PCN is the most common drug “allergy” noted at hospital ad-
mission, and is reported in 10%–15% of patients and 15%–24%
of those requiring antibiotic therapy [118, 119]. Compared with
nonallergic patients, patients labeled as having a PCN allergy
are exposed to more alternative antibiotics; have increased prev-
alence of C. difficile, methicillin-resistant S. aureus, and vanco-
mycin-resistant enterococcal infections; and have longer
hospital stays [118].
Properly performed skin testing using major and minor PCN
determinant reagents has a negative predictive value of 97%–99%
and a positive predictive value of 50%. Studies demonstrate that
PCN and other β-lactam antibiotics can be safely given to patients
with a putative PCN allergy who have had an allergy assessment
and negative PCN skin testing [119, 120]. Rimawi et al [121] re-
ported that all but one of 146 patients with a history of PCN al-
lergy who had a negative skin test tolerated β-lactam therapy,
resulting in a negative predictive value of >99%. They also
found that the use of skin testing to guide antibiotic therapy yield-
ed an annual savings of $82 000 at a university teaching hospital.
Using structured drug allergy assessments has been associat-
ed with improved antibiotic stewardship as demonstrated by an-
tibiotic selection, reduced alternative antibiotic use, decreased
length of hospital stay and costs, and increased guideline
e64 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 adherence [119,120].For example, Park et al [122] reported that
collaboration between trained pharmacists and allergists was as-
sociated with increased β-lactam prescriptions in patients with a
history of PCN allergy. ASPs should encourage mechanisms
that ensure allergy assessments are performed.
XIII. Should ASPs Implement Interventions to Reduce Antibiotic Therapy
to the Shortest Effective Duration?
Recommendation
14. We recommend that ASPs implement guidelines and
strategies to reduce antibiotic therapy to the shortest effective
duration (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment:Recommendingadurationoftherapybasedonpa-
tient-specific factors is an important activity for ASPs. Suitable
approaches include developing written guidelines with specific
suggestions for duration, including duration of therapy recom-
mendations as part of the preauthorization or prospective audit
and feedback process, or specifying duration at the time of anti-
biotic ordering (eg, through an electronic order entry system).
Evidence Summary
Findings from 2 pre–post investigations suggest that antibiotic
stewardship interventions aimed at reducing the duration of an-
tibiotic therapy lead to similar clinical outcomes compared with
the preintervention period. Specifically, education and PAF for
adult inpatients with CAP led to a median decrease in antibiotic
use from 10 to 7 days (P < .001), with no significant differences
in length of stay or 30-day readmission rates [54]. A second
study [47] found reduced antibiotic utilization and duration
of therapy (from 13 to 10 days; P < .001) after implementation
of a guideline for inpatients with SSTIs. There are limited stud-
ies specifically evaluating the impact of ASP interventions to re-
duce duration of antibiotic therapy on clinical outcomes;
however, evidence from systematic reviews [123–126] and
RCTs [127–136] demonstrated that prescription of shorter
courses of antibiotic therapy is associated with outcomes similar
to those with longer courses in both adults and children with a
variety of infection types (Table 2) and few adverse events.
Microbiology and Laboratory Diagnostics
XIV. Should ASPs Work With the Microbiology Laboratory to Develop
Stratified Antibiograms, Compared With Nonstratified Antibiograms?
Recommendation
15. We suggest development of stratified antibiograms over
solely relying on nonstratified antibiograms to assist ASPs
in developing guidelines for empiric therapy (weak recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although there is limited evidence at this time
that stratified antibiograms (eg, by location or age) lead to
improved empiric antibiotic therapy, stratification can expo-
se important differences in susceptibility, which can help
ASPs develop optimized treatment recommendations and
guidelines.
Evidence Summary
Institutional antibiograms are helpful to ASPs for the development
of guidelines for empiric therapy. The Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute [137] provides guidelines for antibiogram con-
struction and reporting, both for routine cumulative antibiograms
and for enhanced antibiograms, which may be stratified by various
parameters including patient location or population if at least 30
isolates are available for each organism. A single institutional, or
hospital-wide, antibiogram may mask important susceptibility dif-
ferences acrossunits within the institution. Forexample, certain an-
tibiotic-resistant organisms are often significantly more common
in ICU than in non-ICU settings. At one medical center, the per-
centages of bacterial isolates resistant to antibiotics were signifi-
cantly higher in medical and surgical ICUs than were those
predictedbythehospital-wideantibiogram,whereasthepercentage
of isolates susceptible to antibiotics was higher in non-ICU units,
compared with the hospital overall [138]. Similarly, antibiograms
can be stratified by population age group (eg, pediatrics) [139], by
infection site (eg, blood or respiratory vs all sources) [140, 141], by
patient comorbidities (eg, cystic fibrosis) [142],or by acquisition in
the community vs healthcare setting [143].
One institution [144] constructed a pediatric-specific antibio-
gram for Escherichia coli and compared it with antibiograms gen-
erated from combined data from both adult and pediatric isolates.
There were significant antibiotic susceptibility differences be-
tween E. coli isolates obtained from pediatric patients vs the hos-
pital-wide antibiogram data [144]. Provision of pediatric-specific
data optimized prescribing choice when compared with no anti-
biogram and also with the hospital-wide antibiogram. Another
institution [139] also found age-specific differences with overes-
timation of resistance in E. coli and S. aureus for children and un-
derestimation for the elderly.
XV. Should ASPs Work With the Microbiology Laboratory to Perform
Selective or Cascade Reporting of Antibiotic Susceptibility Test
Results?
Recommendation
16. We suggest selective and cascade reporting of antibiotics
over reporting of all tested antibiotics (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although data are limited that demonstrate di-
rect impact of those strategies on prescribing, some form of
selective or cascaded reporting is reasonable. After imple-
mentation, ASPs should review prescribing to ensure there
are no unintended consequences.
Evidence Summary
Selective reporting is the practice of reporting susceptibility re-
sults for a limited number of antibiotics instead of all tested
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e65
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 antibiotics. For example, a laboratory that practices selective re-
porting would routinely release linezolid and daptomycin re-
sults only when enterococci are nonsusceptible to ampicillin
and vancomycin. In a randomized study for urinary tract infec-
tions, Coupat et al [145] used a case-vignette format and ran-
domly assigned residents to an intervention group, which
received antibiotic susceptibility results for 2–4 antibiotics, or
to a control group, which received full-length results for all 25
antibiotics tested. The increase in appropriateness of antibiotic
prescription with the use of selective reporting ranged from 7%
to 41%, depending upon the clinical scenario. Similar results
have been seen in some prospective surveys [146, 147].
Cascade reporting is one type of selective reporting in which
susceptibility results of secondary antibiotics (either more costly
or broader spectrum) are only reported if an organism is resis-
tant to the primary antibiotic within the particular antibiotic
class (eg, if the organism is cefazolin susceptible, ceftriaxone
would not be reported). There are no published guidelines for
cascade antibiotic reporting. The Clinical and Laboratory Stan-
dards Institute [148] provides guidance for testing and report-
ing susceptibilities for certain organisms, but does not cover all
organism-antibiotic combinations. ASPs should work with the
microbiology laboratory to assess the impact these strategies
may have on development of the antibiogram (eg, susceptibility
data for suppressed results may not be available for inclusion).
XVI. Should ASPs Advocate for Use of Rapid Viral Testing for
Respiratory Pathogens to Reduce the Use of Inappropriate Antibiotics?
Recommendation
17. We suggest the use of rapid viral testing for respiratory
pathogens to reduce the use of inappropriate antibiotics
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: Although rapid viral testing has the potential to
reduce inappropriate use of antibiotics, results have been in-
consistent. Few studies have been performed to assess wheth-
er active ASP intervention would improve those results.
Evidence Summary
Studies of the value of ASP interventions based on rapid testing
for respiratory viruses are lacking. However, some data are avail-
able on decreased inappropriate antibiotic use with rapid viral
testing. Those studies have been performed primarily in pediatric
populations such as children presenting to physicians’ offices
[149] or emergency departments [150–152], or children
requiring hospitalization [153]. One study focused specifically
on immunocompromised children [154] and 2 focused on adults
[155, 156].
Findings from some trials showed that rapid diagnostic testing
for respiratory viruses by rapid antigen, rapid immunoassay, or
direct fluorescent antigen was associated with decreased ancillary
test orders (eg, chest radiograph, urinalysis) [150, 157], decreased
Table 2.
Meta-analyses and Examples of Randomized Clinical Studies Comparing Shorter Versus Longer Duration of Antibiotics
Reference
Clinical Condition/Population
Treatment
Duration, d
Clinical Outcomea
Meta-analyses
Dimopoulos et al, 2008 [123]
Adults and children with CAP
3–7 vs 5–10
Clinical success, relapse, mortality, adverse events
Pugh et al, 2011 [124]
Adults with VAP
7–8 vs 10–15
Antibiotic-free daysb, recurrenceb
Dimopoulos et al, 2013 [125]
Adults with VAP
7–8 vs 10–15
Relapse, mortality, antibiotic-free daysc
Randomized clinical trials
Chastre et al, 2003 [127]
Adults with VAP
8 vs 15
Mortality, recurrent infectionsd
El Moussaoui et al, 2006 [128]
Adults with CAP
3 vs 5
Clinical and radiological success
Greenberg et al, 2014 [129]
Children with CAP
5 vs 10
Treatment failuree
Hepburn et al, 2004 [130]
Adults with cellulitis
5 vs 10
Clinical success
Sandberg et al, 2012 [131]
Adult females with acute pyelonephritis
7 vs 14
Clinical efficacy, adverse events
Talan et al, 2000 [132]
Women with acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis
7 vs 14
Bacteriologic and clinical curef
Runyon et al, 1991 [133]
Adults with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
5 vs 10
Mortality, bacteriologic cure, recurrence
Saini et al, 2011 [134]
Neonatal septicemia
2–4 vs 7 (with
sterile culture)
Treatment failure
Sawyer et al, 2015 [135]
Adults with intra-abdominal infection
4 vs ≤10
Composite of surgical site infection, recurrent
intra-abdominal infection, or death
Bernard et al, 2015 [136]
Adults with vertebral osteomyelitis
42 vs 84
Cure at 1 y by independent committee and
secondary outcomes
Abbreviations: CAP, community-acquired pneumonia; VAP, ventilator-associated pneumonia.
a There were no statistically significant between-group differences in outcomes unless otherwise noted.
b Shorter course was associated with more antibiotic-free days (mean difference, 4.02; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.26–5.78) and fewer VAP recurrences due to multidrug-resistant organisms
(odds ratio [OR], 0.44; 95% CI, .21–.95), without adverse effects on other outcomes. For VAP due to nonfermenting gram-negative bacilli, however, shorter course was associated with more
recurrences (OR, 2.18; 95% CI, 1.14–4.16).
c Shorter course was associated with more antibiotic-free days (mean difference, 3.40 days; 95% CI, 1.43–5.37).
d Shorter course was associated with more antibiotic-free days (13.1 v 8.7 days; P < .001) and no increase in recurrent infection except in the subset with nonfermenting gram-negative bacilli.
e The 5-day, but not the 3-day, course was not inferior to the 10-day course.
f Shorter course was associated with higher bacteriologic (99% vs 89%; 95% CI, .04–.16; P = .004) and clinical cure rates (96% vs 83%; 95% CI, .06–.22; P = .002).
e66 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 antibiotic use [149, 150, 153, 156, 157],and increased antiviral use
[149,150,157].For example, Bonner et al [150] reported that phy-
sician awareness of positive influenza results by a rapid immuno-
assay reduced the number of laboratory tests ordered (P = .01),
the number of radiographs ordered (P < .001), and the associated
charges (P < .001). The authors also noted decreased antibiotic
use (P < .001), increased antiviral use (P = .02), and shortened
time to discharge (P < .001). There was no impact on the above
outcomes for patients with negative rapid test results.
Kadmon et al [154] recently reported that polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) test results prompted initiation of specific anti-
viral therapy and avoidance of unnecessary antibiotics in 17 of
50 episodes (34%). Other studies [152, 155], however, have
failed to detect statistically significant benefits in antibiotic
use, hospital stays, or hospital admissions when reporting
PCR or direct fluorescent antigen results. The lack of an appre-
ciable benefit was attributable in part to the time to reporting of
PCR results, which ranged from 12 to 24 hours in one study
[152] to a mean of 30 hours in another study [155].
XVII. Should ASPs Advocate for Rapid Diagnostic Testing on Blood
Specimens to Optimize Antibiotic Therapy and Improve Clinical
Outcomes?
Recommendation
18. We suggest rapid diagnostic testing in addition to con-
ventional culture and routine reporting on blood specimens
if combined with active ASP support and interpretation
(weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Comment: Availability of rapid diagnostic tests is expected
to increase; thus, ASPs must develop processes and interven-
tions to assist clinicians in interpreting and responding ap-
propriately to results.
Evidence Summary
The use of rapid molecular assays and mass spectrometry to
identify bacterial species and susceptibility in blood cultures
has been associated with statistically significant improvements
in time to initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy [158–
162], rates of recurrent infection [159], mortality [159, 163],
length of stay [159, 161], and hospital costs [160, 161]. For ex-
ample, Forrest et al [163] described the use of peptide nucleic
acid fluorescence in situ hybridization (PNA-FISH) for entero-
cocci. Compared with pre–PNA-FISH, rapid testing coupled
with antibiotic stewardship team support was associated with
more rapid identification of Enterococcus faecalis (1.1 vs 4.1
days) and Enterococcus faecium (1.1 vs 3.4 days), faster time to
effectivetherapy(1.3vs3.1days),anddecreased 30-daymortality
for E. faecium (26% vs 45%) (all P < .05) [163]. Matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass
spectrometry can rapidly identify bacteria, including rare
species not ordinarily associated with clinical infection or path-
ogens that are difficult to grow or to identify to the species level
[164]. In the study by Huang et al [159], the stewardship team
received immediate notification of blood culture Gram stain,
MALDI-TOF identification, and susceptibility results, and
then gave recommendations. MALDI-TOF was associated with
more rapid identification of organisms (55.9 vs 84.0 hours;
P < .001). Identification of organisms with MALDI-TOF in
combination with real-time ASP review and intervention was
associated with faster time to initiation of both effective (20.4
vs 30.1 hours; P = .021) and optimal antibiotic therapy (47.3
vs 90.3 hours; P < .001). A recent RCT [162] compared standard
blood culture processing (that included MALDI-TOF for or-
ganism identification) with rapid multiplex PCR (rmPCR)
with templated comments, and rmPCR with templated com-
ments and real-time ASP audit and feedback (rmPCR/AS).
Both interventions were associated with greater use of nar-
row-spectrum β-lactams (rmPCR 71 hours and rmPCR/AS 85
hours vs control 42 hours; P = .04) and faster time to appropri-
ate escalation (rmPCR 6 hours and rmPCR/AS 5 hours vs con-
trol 24 hours; P = .04). The intervention with ASP involvement
was also associated with more rapid appropriate de-escalation
(21 hours vs control 34 hours and rmPCR 38 hours;
P < .0001). These interventions were not, however, associated
with improved mortality, length of stay, or cost, possibly be-
cause of the use of other rapid tests and ASP support at the
institution.
These studies underscore the importance of combining use of
rapid testing with 2 strategies to maximize the benefits and like-
lihood of a favorable impact on outcomes. First, ASP support
[159–163] or rapid notification of results [158, 162] was a con-
sistent feature of the studies that found statistically significant
associations between rapid testing and outcomes. In contrast,
studies lacking these features often did not find evidence of as-
sociations between rapid testing and improved antibiotic use
[165], time to initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy
[166], or length of stay benefit [165]—despite shortening the
time to pathogen identification. Second, rapid testing should
be performed continuously (ie, 24/7) or at least in frequent
batches [167,168]. The optimal implementation of rapid testing
requires increased laboratory resources and additional costs.
XVIII. In Adults in ICUS With Suspected Infection, Should ASPs
Advocate PCT Testing as an Intervention to Decrease Antibiotic Use?
Recommendation
19. In adults in ICUs with suspected infection, we suggest the
use of serial PCT measurements as an ASP intervention to de-
crease antibiotic use (weak recommendation, moderate-quality
evidence).
Comment: Although randomized trials, primarily in
Europe, have shown reduction in antibiotic use through im-
plementation of PCT algorithms in the ICU, similar data are
lacking for other regions including the United States where the
patterns of antibiotic prescribing and approach to stewardship
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e67
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 may differ. If implemented, each ASP must develop processes
and guidelines to assist clinicians in interpreting and respond-
ing appropriately to results, and must determine if this inter-
vention is the best use of its time and resources.
Evidence Summary
PCT has been assessed for its role in (1) shortening the duration
of antibiotic therapy for bacterial infection based on serial mea-
surements of PCT levels, and (2) avoidance of initiation of an-
tibiotic therapy when the PCT level is low. Evidence from
several prospective RCTs supports the use of PCT in decisions
concerning discontinuation of antibiotic therapy in critically ill
patients in ICUs [169–172]. In general, trials assessing PCT-
guided discontinuation of antibiotic therapy report significantly
more antibiotic-free days (2–4 days) in the PCT arm, without a
negative effect on mortality. A meta-analysis focusing exclusive-
ly on critically ill ICU patients with severe sepsis or septic shock
(including 7 studies and 1075 patients) showed no significant
difference in 28-day mortalityor hospital mortalityand a median
reduction of approximately 2 days in the length of antibiotic
therapy with PCT guidance [173]. In a European multicenter
study, Bouadma et al [172] examined de-escalation of therapy
in 621 septic patients and demonstrated 2.7 more antibiotic-
free days in the PCT group (P < .001), although days of antibiotic
exposure per 1000 inpatient-days were high for each group (653
PCT vs 812 control) [172]. Available evidence does not support
the use of PCT to avoid initiation of antibiotics in the critically
ill ICU population when the PCT result is negative [174, 175].
XIX. In Patients With Hematologic Malignancy, Should ASPs Advocate
for Incorporation of Nonculture-Based Fungal Markers in Interventions
to Optimize Antifungal Use?
Recommendation
20. In patients with hematologic malignancy at risk of con-
tracting IFD, we suggest incorporating nonculture-based
fungal markers in ASP interventions to optimize antifungal
use (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Comment: ASPs with an existing intervention to optimize
antifungal use in patients with hematologic malignancy can
consider algorithms incorporating nonculture-based fungal
markers. Those interventions must be done in close collabo-
ration with the primary teams (eg, hematology-oncology).
Antibiotic stewards must develop expertise in antifungal
therapy and fungal diagnostics for the programs to be suc-
cessful. The value of those markers for interventions in
other populations has not been demonstrated.
Evidence Summary
Some studies have demonstrated that the use of nonculture-
based fungal markers can safely reduce antifungal treatments
for patients with hematologic malignancy at high risk for
IFD. Although not specifically studied as part of an ASP inter-
vention, incorporation into existing ASPs for antifungal
stewardship in that population may be useful. A variety of fun-
gal tests such as galactomannan (GM), (1,3)-β-D-glucan
(BDG), or single- or multipathogen fungal PCR have been stud-
ied. For example, Cordonnier et al [176] compared a preemptive
approach (antifungal treatment initiation using both clinical
and GM evidence of IFD) with an empiric strategy (antifungal
treatment for any high-risk patient with suggestive clinical signs
of IFD). The preemptive approach was associated with de-
creased antifungal treatment (39.2% vs 61.3%; P < .001) and
no detrimental effect on mortality.
Few studies assessed utilization of BDG or PCR to target
therapy. An RCT [177] of Aspergillus and Candida PCR com-
pared survival between allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients
who received empiric antifungal treatment with those who re-
ceived empiric plus PCR-based antifungal treatment. The au-
thors demonstrated improved 30-day survival in the group in
which treatment decisions were in part based upon PCR, but
survival did not differ by day 100.
There are limited data assessing the value of fungal markers
in other patient populations. Pediatric data are limited, but
studies [178] have shown that GM assay is a useful adjunctive
tool when monitored twice weekly in hospitalized children with
hematologic malignancies and fever.
Measurement
XX. Which Overall Measures Best Reflect the Impact of ASPs and Their
Interventions?
Recommendation
21. We suggest monitoring antibiotic use as measured by
DOTs in preference to DDD (weak recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
Comment: Every ASP must measure antibiotic use, strati-
fied by antibiotic. DOTs are preferred, but DDDs remain an
alternative for sites that cannot obtain patient-level antibiotic
use data. ASPs should consider measurement of appropriate
antibiotic use within their own institutions by examining com-
pliance with local or national guidelines, particularly when as-
sessing results of a targeted intervention, and share that data
with clinicians to help inform their practice. Although rates
of CDI or antibiotic resistance may not reflect ASP impact (be-
cause those outcomes are affected by patient population, infec-
tion control, and other factors), those outcomes may also be
used for measurement of targeted interventions.
Evidence Summary
DOTs and DDDs are standardized methods for measurement
of antibiotic use. Both are useful for facility-level monitoring
and interfacility comparisons. DOTs have some important ad-
vantages. DOTs are not impacted by dose adjustments and can
be used in both adult and pediatric populations, whereas DDDs
have more limited use in pediatrics due to weight-based dosing.
In addition, the Antimicrobial Use and Resistance Module in
e68 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 the CDC’s National Healthcare Safety Network requires report-
ing of antibiotic use by DOTs [179].DOTs, however, require pa-
tient-level antibiotic use data, which currently may not be
feasible at every facility [180–182]. Either method can be used
to examine overall use or specific use by unit, provider, or ser-
vice in the hospital. In addition to measurement of antibiotic
use, appropriateness of prescribing can be assessed by deter-
mining compliance with facility-specific antibiotic treatment
guidelines. This is particularly useful when assessing the success
of a targeted intervention.
Measurement of ASP impact on patient outcomes is impor-
tant but is more challenging than measurement of antibiotic use
or guideline compliance. For example, using CDI rates to mea-
sure the effectiveness of stewardship interventions has sig-
nificant limitations. Although implementation of ASPs has
been associated with reduced CDI rates in quasi-experimental
studies [18], the quantitative relationships between changes in
antibiotic use and CDI incidence are largely unknown. Because
CDI rates are affected by other practices besides antibiotic use,
such as compliance with infection control measures, they may
be a relatively insensitive metric for judging the effectiveness of
ASPs. Moreover, traditional statistical techniques have signifi-
cant limitations when applied to nonindependent events such
as CDI. Despite this, when implementing ASP interventions di-
rected at reduction of antibiotics considered to be high risk for
promoting CDI (eg, cephalosporins, clindamycin, fluoroquino-
lones), including rates of healthcare-facility-onset CDI as a sec-
ondary outcome measure is recommended in that population.
Antibiotic resistance is an even more complex metric than CDI
because the development and spread of resistance is impacted by
many factors. Implementation of stewardship interventions has
been associated with reduced resistance in both gram-positive
and gram-negative bacteria [34]; however, observed effects on re-
sistance are unpredictable because of confounding variables and
many pathogen and host factors. Still, measurement of resistance
may be useful for selected bacterial pathogens and in focused pa-
tient populations receiving a targeted ASP intervention.
ASPs have the potential to decrease length of stay, primarily
as a consequence of timely switching from IV to oral antibiotics
or by stopping unnecessary IV antibiotics; however, the impact
depends on the preexisting contribution of prolonged adminis-
tration of parenteral antibiotics to excess length of stay. Days of
hospitalization avoided is a better measure of the effectiveness
of ASP. Parenteral therapy and days of central venous access
avoided are other metrics that can be useful.
XXI. What is the Best Measure of Expenditures on Antibiotics to Assess
the Impact of ASPs and Interventions?
Recommendation
22. We recommend measuring antibiotic costs based on pre-
scriptions or administrations instead of purchasing data
(good practice recommendation).
Evidence Summary
ASPs result in cost savings for facilities [183]. It is important to
monitor program costs in addition to measuring antibiotic use
as one way to justify continued administrative support for ASP
activities. Antibiotic costs should be measured based on pre-
scriptions or administrations instead of purchasing data [184]
and normalized to account for patient census (eg, antibiotic
cost per patient-day) [184]. Program costs (eg, salary for stew-
ardship personnel) [19, 185] and adjustment for inflation or
standardizing costs across years [185] should be considered.
Analyses that measure the effects of an intervention over time
should compare actual costs after the initiation of the interven-
tion vs projected costs in the absence of the intervention, as di-
rect cost reductions tend to plateau [185, 186]. More robust
analyses include expenditures beyond drug acquisition such as
those for drug administration, therapeutic drug monitoring,
and toxicities [187]. If resources are available, programs should
analyze broader effects on budgets, such as total hospitalization
costs [58, 160, 188].
XXII. What Measures Best Reflect the Impact of Interventions to Improve
Antibiotic Use and Clinical Outcomes in Patients With Specific
Infectious Diseases Syndromes?
Recommendation
23. Measures that consider the goals and size of the syndrome-
specific intervention should be used (good practice
recommendation).
Evidence Summary
The choice of metrics for syndrome-specific interventions (see
Section IV) to improve therapy can measure process or outcome
(Table 3) [39, 50–57, 189–191]. For example, interventions de-
signed to increase compliance with a guideline should evaluate
the proportion of patients in each period who are compliant.
Evidence of unintended negative effects such as hospital read-
mission or increase in rates of hospital-acquired CDI should
also be monitored. The major limitation to these metrics is
the availability of reliable data.
Special Populations
XXIII. Should ASPs Develop Facility-Specific Clinical Guidelines for
Management of F&N in Hematology-Oncology Patients to Reduce
Unnecessary Antibiotic Use and Improve Outcomes?
Recommendation
24. We suggest ASPs develop facility-specific guidelines for
F&N management in hematology-oncology patients over
no such approach (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
Comment: Clinical guidelines with an implementation
and dissemination strategy can be successfully used in
the care of cancer patients with F&N and are strongly
encouraged.
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e69
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Evidence Summary
Implementing clinical pathways for management of F&N can
reduce unnecessary antibiotic use without adverse outcomes
in hematology-oncology units, although data are limited.
Nucci et al [192] reported that adoption of 1997 IDSA guide-
lines in patients with hematologic malignancies or who were
undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplant was associated
with reductions in empiric glycopeptide use (pre- vs postguide-
lines: 33% vs 7% of F&N episodes; P < .0001) and total glyco-
peptide use (73% vs 43% of F&N episodes; P = .0008). Success
rates for empiric regimen, time to defervescence, duration of an-
tibiotic therapy, and death rates were similar before and after
guideline adoption. No deaths were attributed to infections
due to gram-positive organisms [192].
Studies have shown that adherence to treatment guidelines
resulted in improvement in important clinical outcomes. For
example, Pakakasama et al [193] demonstrated that implemen-
tation of clinical guidelines in pediatric cancer patients resulted
in statistically significant reductions in septic shock (interven-
tion vs control: 3.5% vs 10.9%; P = .011), ICU admissions
(2.9% vs 9.4%; P = .016), and death (0% vs 6.5%; P = .001). In
another study [194], adherence to an ASP protocol for initial
antibiotic therapy based on IDSA guidelines was associated
with lower mortality (hazard ratio, 0.36; 95% CI, .14–.92) in
169 adult patients with 307 episodes of F&N (79% with hema-
tologic malignancy).
XXIV. In Immunocompromised Patients Receiving Antifungal Therapy,
do Interventions by ASPs Improve Utilization and Outcomes?
Recommendation
25. We suggest implementation of ASP interventions to im-
prove the appropriate prescribing of antifungal treatment
in immunocompromised patients (weak recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
Comment: In facilities with large immunocompromised
patient populations, ASP interventions targeting antifungal
therapy can show benefit. Those interventions must be done
in close collaboration with the primary teams (eg, hematology-
oncology, solid organ transplant providers). Antibiotic stew-
ards must develop expertise in antifungal therapy and fungal
diagnostics for the programs to be successful.
Evidence Summary
Programs that have successfully implemented antifungal steward-
ship interventions have used a multipronged approach that in-
cluded PAF, education, and development of clinical guidelines
[195–198]. Published studies have not focused exclusively on
immunocompromised patients, but those patients accounted
for the largest group in most reports. Patients in the ICU
made up the second-largest group. One study [196] reviewed
636 antifungal prescriptions for 6 years after implementing an
antifungal ASP, of which 72% were from the adult and pediatric
hematology services. That study utilized their ASP to provide
feedback to the primary teams regarding fungal diagnosis, sero-
logic and radiographic investigations, drug therapeutic moni-
toring, and/or starting, stopping, or modifying antifungal
therapy. The primary teams had a high compliance rate
(88%) with the ASP recommendations. Process of care mea-
sures for the management of candidemia and aspergillosis
(eg, optimal voriconazole monitoring, use of recommended
first-line therapy) improved. Patient outcomes were favorable
in 47 of 63 (75%) patients with aspergillosis and 52 of 60
(87%) with candidemia, and did not change significantly during
the observation period—although the study was underpowered
to demonstrate improvement. The total cost of antifungals was
considered to be stable and actually decreased in the year just
after the formal study ended.
In a second study [197], the stewardship team focused on high-
cost antifungals at a tertiary hospital in 173 patients over a 12-
month period. The following antifungal agents were successfully
stopped or switched: liposomal amphotericin B (51/125 [41%]),
caspofungin (8/11 [73%]), micafungin (33/51 [65%]), and combi-
nation therapy (5/10 [50%]). In contrast, voriconazole was
stopped or switched in only 16 of 89 (18%) patients. The total an-
nual cost for these 4 antifungal agents fell from ₤1.835 million be-
fore the ASP intervention to ₤1.656 million during intervention,
resulting in a crude savings of ₤179 000.
XXV. In Residents of Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facilities, do
Antibiotic Stewardship Strategies Decrease Unnecessary Use of
Antibiotics and Improve Clinical Outcomes?
Recommendation
26. In nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities, we suggest
implementation of antibiotic stewardship strategies to decrease
unnecessary use of antibiotics (good practice recommendation).
Comment: Implementing ASPs at nursing homes and
Table 3.
Possible Metrics for Evaluation of Interventions to Improve
Antibiotic Use and Clinical Outcomes in Patients With Specific
Infectious Diseases Syndromes
Process Measures
Outcome Measures
Excess days of therapy (ie,
unnecessary days of therapy
avoided based on accepted targets
and benchmarks)a
Duration of therapy
Proportion of patients compliant with
facility-based guideline or treatment
algorithma
Proportion of patients with revision of
antibiotics based on microbiology
data
Proportion of patients converted to oral
therapy
Hospital length of stay
30-day mortality
Unplanned hospital readmission
within 30 d
Proportion of patients diagnosed
with hospital-acquired Clostridium
difficile infection or other adverse
event(s) related to antibiotic
treatmenta
Proportion of patients with clinical
failure (eg, need to broaden
therapy, recurrence of infection)
Sources: [39, 50–57, 189–191].
a These metrics are applicable for antibiotic stewardship program interventions to reduce
antibiotic treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria, which, in most cases, should not be
treated; therefore, the other metrics do not apply.
e70 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 skilled nursing facilities is important and must involve point-
of-care providers to be successful. The traditional physician–
pharmacist team may not be available on-site, and facilities
might need to investigate other approaches to review and op-
timize antibiotic use, such as obtaining infectious diseases ex-
pertise through telemedicine consultation.
Evidence Summary
Nursing homes are significant reservoirs for multidrug-resistant
organisms [199]. Developing approaches to improve antibiotic
use is important; however, few studies have shown an impact on
clinical outcomes.
Jump et al [200] reported a decrease in systemic antibiotic use
by 30.1% (P < .001) and fewer positive C. difficile tests (P = .04)
after initiating an infectious diseases consultation service at a single
Veterans Affairs long-term care facility. The intervention included
24/7 consultation availability by telephone, with weekly on-site
case review by an infectious diseases physician and a nurse prac-
titioner. This model, however, may not be possible in many US
nursing homes given resource restraints such as lack of finances,
availability of an infectious diseases physician, and interest.
Schwartz et al [201] conducted an intervention that included
physician education, guideline implementation, and presenta-
tion of local baseline antibiotic use data in a public long-term
care facility with 20 salaried internists. Antibiotic starts de-
creased by 25.9%, and antibiotic DOTs decreased by 29.7%;
those decreases were sustained for a 2-year follow-up period.
This level of physician staffing, however, is not typical of most
facilities.
Stewardship interventions inclusive of the nursing staff have
been successful in reducing antibiotic use, but the effect on clin-
ical outcome is not usually reported. Fleet et al [202] evaluated
the impact of the Resident Antimicrobial Management Plan at
30 nursing homes in England. The nursing staff received writ-
ten educational materials and used this tool to record compli-
ance with good practice points at treatment initiation and 48–72
hours later. Antibiotic consumption over 12 weeks decreased by
4.9% (95% CI, 1.0%–8.6%; P = .02) in the intervention group
and increased by 5.1% (95% CI, .2%–10.2%; P = .04) in the con-
trol group. Loeb et al [189] studied a multifaceted educational
intervention for urinary tract infections that included a diagnos-
tic and treatment algorithm at 24 nursing homes in Ontario,
Canada and Idaho. Antibiotic use for suspected urinary tract in-
fection was lower at intervention than at usual-care nursing
homes (1.17 vs 1.59 courses per 1000 resident-days; weighted
mean difference, −0.49; 95% CI, −.93 to −.06). Zimmerman
et al [203] assessed a quality improvement program at 12 nurs-
ing homes in North Carolina. This multifaceted program con-
sisted of guideline education for providers, sensitization to
antibiotic prescribing matters for nursing staff and family mem-
bers, and prescribing feedback for providers and nursing staff.
Between baseline and follow-up at 9 months, prescription rates
dropped more at intervention homes (13.16 vs 9.51 per 1000
resident-days) than at comparison homes (12.70 vs 11.80 per
1000 resident-days; pooled difference in differences, −2.75;
P = .05).
XXVI. In NICUs, do Antibiotic Stewardship Interventions Reduce
Inappropriate Antibiotic Use and/or Resistance?
Recommendation
27. We suggest implementation of antibiotic stewardship
interventions to reduce inappropriate antibiotic use and/or
resistance in the NICU (good practice recommendation).
Evidence Summary
Limited evidence is available to determine the most effective
ASP strategies in the NICU, but general principles should
apply [204].
Antibiotic policy and guidelines have been shown to be effec-
tive in the NICU [205]. After implementing a vancomycin
guideline, Chiu et al [206] saw a 35% reduction in the initiation
of vancomycin and a 65% overall decrease in exposure to van-
comycin compared with the preimplementation period. Zingg
et al [205] evaluated antibiotic use after initiating a policy to
shorten antibiotic therapy for sepsis and coagulase-negative
staphylococcal infection, and to stop preemptive treatment if
blood cultures were negative. They found an overall 2.8% yearly
reduction in antibiotic use (P < .001) without increasing mortal-
ity. Antibiotic restriction interventions can be successful in the
NICU. For example, Murki et al [207] reported that restricting
all cephalosporin classes was associated with a 22% decreased in-
cidence of extended-spectrum β-lactamase–producing, gram-
negative infections compared with the previous year (P = .03).
The proportion of ampicillin use increased from 12.8% to
25.7% (P < .001) after the intervention, and the proportion of
cephalosporin use declined from 15.8% to 3.0% (P < .001).
XXVII. Should Antimicrobial Stewardship Programs Implement
Interventions to Reduce Antibiotic Therapy in Terminally Ill Patients?
Recommendation
28. In terminally ill patients, we suggest ASPs provide support
to clinical care providers in decisions related to antibiotic
treatment (good practice recommendation).
Evidence Summary
End of life is defined as the final days or weeks of life in patients
under hospice care where the primary goals are managing
symptoms, improving comfort, and optimizing quality of life—
not prolonging survival. In contrast, palliative care is more ge-
neral and can be pursued along with curative therapies.
Antibiotic use, frequently with multiple antibiotics, is com-
mon in patients with terminal cancer. Therapy is often contin-
ued after transition to comfort care and discontinued less than 1
day prior to death [208]. Patients with advanced dementia also
have high exposure to antibiotics, especially in the weeks prior
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e71
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 to death [209]. Therefore, older adults with advanced dementia
or who are in long-term care facilities [209] and patients receiv-
ing end-of-life treatment in the ICU [210] may become reser-
voirs for resistant bacteria. For example, end-of-life antibiotic
treatment in the ICU was independently associated with acqui-
sition of resistant bacteria in a logistic regression analysis [210].
For patients under hospice care, the impact of antibiotic ther-
apy on symptom alleviation should be considered in the context
of specific infections [208, 211]. For example, treating urinary
tract infection may improve dysuria and treating thrush may
improve dysphagia [211, 212], but the impact of antibiotics on
the symptoms of respiratory tract infection is less clear [213–
216]. Givens et al [213] reported that, compared with no antibi-
otic therapy, antibiotic treatment of suspected pneumonia in
patients with advanced dementia via any route of administra-
tion was associated with improved survival but less comfort
(P < .001 for all comparisons) as measured by the Symptom
Management at End of Life Dementia scale. In contrast, antibi-
otic treatment of pneumonia in nursing home residents with
dementia was associated with fewer symptoms in 2 Dutch stud-
ies. Van der Steen et al [214] reported that the level of discom-
fort was generally higher in patients for whom antibiotic
therapy was withheld in nonsurvivors compared with surviving
patients treated with antibiotics; however, those nonsurvivor
patients had more discomfort before pneumonia developed.
Subsequently, Van der Steen et al [215] reported fewer symp-
toms if pneumonia was treated with antibiotics rather than
just fluids in patients with dementia even if death was immi-
nent; the majority of patients received oral therapy. If prolong-
ing survival is not a primary goal, withholding antibiotic agents
should be considered. If treatment is desired, antibiotic agents
should be administered orally whenever possible.
Patients and their surrogates should be engaged in the deci-
sion to use antibiotic agents at end of life. Stiel et al [217]report-
ed that families of terminally ill cancer patients are often
consulted about stopping antibiotics, but the decision to start
therapy is usually made by clinicians without much discussion.
Similarly, Givens et al [218] reported that most infectious epi-
sodes in nursing home residents with advanced dementia did
not involve healthcare proxies in decision making.
Given significant treatment burdens, potential for adverse ef-
fects such as CDI, and public health risks, antibiotic therapy
should be viewed as aggressive care in the end-of-life setting.
CONCLUSIONS
This guideline discusses a broad range of possible ASP interven-
tions. We have emphasized the need for each site to assess its
clinical needs and available resources and individualize its
ASP with that assessment in mind.
A powerful way to support antibiotic stewardship is to im-
prove the scientific basis for ASP interventions. As outlined in
Section XIII, ASPs can successfully intervene to reduce the
duration of therapy for many infections because well-construct-
ed, randomized controlled clinical trials have demonstrated that
clinical outcomes are equivalent. Rigorous published evidence is
often needed to convince clinicians to alter well-established,
albeit suboptimal, practice. For example, ASPs can cite high-
quality data to reduce unnecessary antibiotic treatment of
uncomplicated diverticulitis [219], or ASB (eg, in women 60
years or younger, diabetic patients, or the elderly) [220]. Addi-
tional clinical trials that incorporate consideration of antibiotic
stewardship in their design are critically needed.
Another significant gap is the dearth of implementation re-
search in this area [28]. Although the National Action Plan
for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria [6] will require
the institution of ASPs across healthcare facilities, little effort
and limited research funding have been allocated to study
how best to achieve large-scale implementation. Qualitative as-
sessments that can examine the impact of factors such as orga-
nizational culture, prescriber attitudes, and the self- efficacy of
the antibiotic steward (ie, the extent to which he/she believes
his/her goals can be reached) are lacking and are important to
establish the context in which ASP implementation occurs [221,
222]. There is inadequate information on the best model for an
ASP. For example, should stewards use the “bundle” approach
that has been applied to ventilator-associated pneumonia [223]
and central line–associated bloodstream infection with great
success [224]? Although ASPs have studied application of a
combination of interventions, they are not comparable to exist-
ing bundles because they require interpretation, expertise, and
persuasion [225]. A new or adapted model for ASP is likely
needed and best developed through application of rigorous im-
plementation science.
Despite the recognition that much more research is needed,
this guideline identifies core interventions for all ASPs as well as
other interventions that can be implemented based on facility-
specific assessments of need and resources. Every healthcare fa-
cility is able to perform stewardship, and institution of an ASP is
attainable and of great importance to public health.
Notes
Acknowledgments.
The expert panel expresses its gratitude to Drs Eliz-
abeth Dodds Ashley, Annie Wong-Beringer, and Stan Deresinski for their
thoughtful reviews of earlier drafts of the guideline. The panel greatly appre-
ciates the work of Charles B. Wessels and Michele Klein Fedyshin of the
Health Sciences Library System of the University of Pittsburgh for the de-
velopment and execution of the systematic literature searches for this guide-
line, and Jennifer J. Padberg, MPH, for her administrative assistance
throughout the guideline development process.
Financial support.
Support for these guidelines was provided by the In-
fectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the Society for Healthcare
Epidemiology of America.
Potential conflicts of interest.
The following list is a reflection of what
has been reported to IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, IDSA re-
quires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the guide-
line topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conflicts of interest is
determined by a review process that includes assessment by the Standards
and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC) chair, the SPGC liaison to the
e72 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 development panel, and the board of directors liaison to the SPGC, and, if
necessary, the Conflicts of Interest (COI) Task Force of the Board. This as-
sessment of disclosed relationships for possible COI will be based on the rel-
ative weight of the financial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the
relevance of the relationship (ie, the degree to which an association might
reasonably be interpreted by an independent observer as related to the
topic or recommendation of consideration). The reader of these guidelines
should be mindful of this when the list of disclosures is reviewed. S. E. C. has
received grants from Pfizer Grants for Learning and Change, and personal
fees from Novartis, outside the submitted work. C. M. has received personal
fees from Actavis Pharmaceuticals and grants from Cubist Pharmaceuticals,
outside the submitted work. A. N. S. has received nonfinancial support from
Bruker Diagnostics, outside the submitted work. C. W. H. has received pay-
ments for manuscript preparation from IDSA, during the conduct of the
work, and payments from Cardeas, Johnson & Johnson, and Sanofi Aventis,
outside the submitted work. T. C. J. has been a member of an advisory com-
mittee for Durata Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. P. A. L. has re-
ceived personal fees from JAMA Surgery and Oakstone General Surgery,
outside the submitted work. L. S. M. has received grants and nonfinancial
support from, and has served on advisory boards for, Cepheid and Durata,
and has received honoraria from Alere, outside the submitted work.
G. J. M. has received grants from Cempra Pharmaceuticals, Cerexa, and
AstraZeneca, and has participated as coauthor on a manuscript for Cubist
Pharmaceuticals, outside the submitted work. J. G. N. has served as a con-
sultant for RPS Diagnostics and has received grants from Pfizer, outside the
submitted work. C. A. O. has received personal fees from Astellas and Bayer
Pharmaceuticals, outside the submitted work. K. K. T. has received personal
fees from Premier, Diatherix, the American Institutes of Research, University
of Rochester, and Dignity Health, and has received grants from Pew Charita-
ble Trusts, the CDC Foundation, and the Association of State and Territorial
Health Officials, outside the submitted work. All other authors report no po-
tential conflicts of interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider
relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Fishman N. Policy statement on amtimicrobial stewardship by the Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), the Infectious Diseases Society
of America (IDSA), and the Pediatric Diseases Society (PIDS). Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:322–7.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Going from evidence to recommenda-
tions. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
3. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Incorporating considerations of resources
use into grading recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:1170–3.
4. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al. Use of GRADE grid to reach decisions
on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is elusive. BMJ 2008; 337:a744.
5. US GRADE Network. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evi-
dence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE methodology,
2015. Available at: http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/. Accessed 17 July 2015.
6. The White House. National action plan for combating antibiotic-resistant bacte-
ria, 2015. Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/
national_action_plan_for_combating_antibotic-resistant_bacteria.pdf. Accessed
14 May 2015.
7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Core elements of hospital
antibiotic stewardship programs, 2014. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
getsmart/healthcare/pdfs/core-elements.pdf. Accessed 8 May 2014.
8. Dellit TH, Owens RC, McGowan JE Jr, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of
America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America guidelines
for developing an institutional program to enhance antimicrobial stewardship.
Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:159–77.
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The core elements of anti-
biotic stewardship for nursing homes, 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
longtermcare/index.html. Accessed 22 September 2015.
10. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Handbook on clinical practice guideline
development, 2015. Available at: http://www.idsociety.org/uploadedFiles/IDSA/
Guidelines-Patient_Care/IDSA_Practice_Guidelines/IDSA%20Handbook%
20on%20CPG%20Development%2010.15.pdf. Accessed 5 January 2015.
11. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Data supplement for “Implementing an
Antibiotic Stewardship Program: guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of
America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America,” 2016.
Available at: http://www.idsociety.org/Antimicrobial_Agents/#Implementing
anAnti bioticStewardshipProgram. Accessed 6 January 2016.
12. Guyatt GH, Schunemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, Akl EA. Guideline panels should
not GRADE good practice statements. J Clin Epidemiol 2015; 68:597–600.
13. White AC Jr, Atmar RL, Wilson J, Cate TR, Stager CE, Greenberg SB. Effects of
requiring prior authorization for selected antimicrobials: expenditures, suscepti-
bilities, and clinical outcomes. Clin Infect Dis 1997; 25:230–9.
14. Buising KL, Thursky KA, Robertson MB, et al. Electronic antibiotic stewardship—
reduced consumption of broad-spectrum antibiotics using a computerized antimi-
crobial approval system in a hospital setting. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008;
62:608–16.
15. Pakyz AL, Oinonen M, Polk RE. Relationship of carbapenem restriction in 22
university teaching hospitals to carbapenem use and carbapenem-resistant Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009; 53:1983–6.
16. Metjian TA, Prasad PA, Kogon A, Coffin SE, Zaoutis TE. Evaluation of an anti-
microbial stewardship program at a pediatric teaching hospital. Pediatr Infect Dis
J 2008; 27:106–11.
17. Lewis GJ, Fang X, Gooch M, Cook PP. Decreased resistance of Pseudomonas aer-
uginosa with restriction of ciprofloxacin in a large teaching hospital’s intensive
care and intermediate care units. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;
33:368–73.
18. Feazel LM, Malhotra A, Perencevich EN, Kaboli P, Diekema DJ, Schweizer ML.
Effect of antibiotic stewardship programmes on Clostridium difficile incidence: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:1748–54.
19. Gross R, Morgan AS, Kinky DE, Weiner M, Gibson GA, Fishman NO. Impact of
a hospital-based antimicrobial management program on clinical and economic
outcomes. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:289–95.
20. Linkin DR, Fishman NO, Landis JR, et al. Effect of communication errors during
calls to an antimicrobial stewardship program. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2007; 28:1374–81.
21. Rahal JJ, Urban C, Horn D, et al. Class restriction of cephalosporin use to
control total cephalosporin resistance in nosocomial Klebsiella. JAMA 1998;
280:1233–7.
22. Carling P, Fung T, Killion A, Terrin N, Barza M. Favorable impact of a multidis-
ciplinary antibiotic management program conducted during 7 years. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2003; 24:699–706.
23. Fridkin SK, Lawton R, Edwards JR, Tenover FC, McGowan JE Jr, Gaynes RP.
Monitoring antimicrobial use and resistance: comparison with a national bench-
mark on reducing vancomycin use and vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Emerg
Infect Dis 2002; 8:702–7.
24. DiazGranados CA. Prospective audit for antimicrobial stewardship in intensive
care: impact on resistance and clinical outcomes. Am J Infect Control 2012;
40:526–9.
25. Elligsen M, Walker SA, Pinto R, et al. Audit and feedback to reduce broad-
spectrum antibiotic use among intensive care unit patients: a controlled inter-
rupted time series analysis. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:354–61.
26. Newland JG, Stach LM, DeLurgio SA, et al. Impact of a prospective-audit-with
feedback antimicrobial stewardship program at a children’s hospital. J Pediatr In-
fect Dis 2012; 1:179–86.
27. Di Pentima MC, Chan S, Hossain J. Benefits of a pediatric antimicrobial steward-
ship program at a children’s hospital. Pediatrics 2011; 128:1062–70.
28. Wagner B, Filice GA, Drekonja D, et al. Antimicrobial stewardship programs in
inpatient hospital settings: a systematic review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2014; 35:1209–28.
29. van Kasteren ME, Mannien J, Kullberg BJ, et al. Quality improvement of surgical
prophylaxis in Dutch hospitals: evaluation of a multi-site intervention by time
series analysis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2005; 56:1094–102.
30. Yeo CL, Chan DS, Earnest A, et al. Prospective audit and feedback on antibiotic
prescription in an adult hematology-oncology unit in Singapore. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2012; 31:583–90.
31. Cosgrove SE, Seo SK, Bolon MK, et al. Evaluation of postprescription review and
feedback as a method of promoting rational antimicrobial use: a multicenter in-
tervention. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:374–80.
32. LaRocco A Jr. Concurrent antibiotic review programs—a role for infectious
diseases specialists at small community hospitals. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37:742–3.
33. Vettese N, Hendershot J, Irvine M, Wimer S, Chamberlain D, Massoud N. Out-
comes associated with a thrice-weekly antimicrobial stewardship programme in a
253-bed community hospital. J Clin Pharm Ther 2013; 38:401–4.
34. Davey P, Brown E, Charani E, et al. Interventions to improve antibiotic prescrib-
ing practices for hospital inpatients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 4:
CD003543.
35. Mehta JM, Haynes K, Wileyto EP, et al. Comparison of prior authorization and
prospective audit with feedback for antimicrobial stewardship. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 35:1092–9.
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e73
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 36. Landgren FT, Harvey KJ, Mashford ML, Moulds RF, Guthrie B, Hemming M.
Changing antibiotic prescribing by educational marketing. Med J Aust 1988; 149:
595–9.
37. Abbo LM, Cosgrove SE, Pottinger PS, et al. Medical students’ perceptions and
knowledge about antimicrobial stewardship: how are we educating our future
prescribers? Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:631–8.
38. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. ACGME invited to
White House Forum; commits to antibiotic stewardship efforts, 2015. Available
at: http://www.acgme.org/acgmeweb/tabid/478/About/ACGMECommitstoAnti
bioticStewardshipEfforts.aspx. Accessed 9 June 2015.
39. Carratala J,Garcia-Vidal C, Ortega L,et al.Effectof a 3-stepcritical pathway to reduce
duration of intravenous antibiotic therapy and length of stay in community-acquired
pneumonia: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 2012; 172:922–8.
40. Hauck LD, Adler LM, Mulla ZD. Clinical pathway care improves outcomes
among patients hospitalized for community-acquired pneumonia. Ann Epide-
miol 2004; 14:669–75.
41. Marrie TJ, Lau CY, Wheeler SL, Wong CJ, Vandervoort MK, Feagan BG, CAP-
ITAL Study Investigators. A controlled trial of a critical pathway for treatment of
community-acquired pneumonia. Community-Acquired Pneumonia Interven-
tion Trial Assessing Levofloxacin. JAMA 2000; 283:749–55.
42. Newman RE, Hedican EB, Herigon JC, Williams DD, Williams AR, Newland JG.
Impact of a guideline on management of children hospitalized with community-
acquired pneumonia. Pediatrics 2012; 129:e597–604.
43. Benenson R, Magalski A, Cavanaugh S, Williams E. Effects of a pneumonia clin-
ical pathway on time to antibiotic treatment, length of stay, and mortality. Acad
Emerg Med 1999; 6:1243–8.
44. Worrall CL, Anger BP, Simpson KN, Leon SM. Impact of a hospital-acquired/
ventilator-associated/healthcare-associated pneumonia practice guideline on
outcomes in surgical trauma patients. J Trauma 2010; 68:382–6.
45. Dellit TH, Chan JD, Skerrett SJ, Nathens AB. Development of a guideline for the
management of ventilator-associated pneumonia based on local microbiologic
findings and impact of the guideline on antimicrobial use practices. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2008; 29:525–33.
46. Ibrahim EH, Ward S, Sherman G, Schaiff R, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. Experience
with a clinical guideline for the treatment of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Crit Care Med 2001; 29:1109–15.
47. Jenkins TC, Knepper BC, Sabel AL, et al. Decreased antibiotic utilization after
implementation of a guideline for inpatient cellulitis and cutaneous abscess.
Arch Intern Med 2011; 171:1072–9.
48. Fine MJ, Stone RA, Lave JR, et al. Implementation of an evidence-based guideline
to reduce duration of intravenous antibiotic therapy and length of stay for pa-
tients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Am J Med 2003; 115:343–51.
49. Wilde AM, Nailor MD, Nicolau DP, Kuti JL. Inappropriate antibiotic use due to
decreased compliance with a ventilator-associated pneumonia computerized
clinical pathway: implications for continuing education and prospective feed-
back. Pharmacotherapy 2012; 32:755–63.
50. Zabarsky TF, Sethi AK, Donskey CJ. Sustained reduction in inappropriate treat-
ment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in a long-term care facility through an educa-
tional intervention. Am J Infect Control 2008; 36:476–80.
51. Bonnal C, Baune B, Mion M, et al. Bacteriuria in a geriatric hospital: impact of an
antibiotic improvement program. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2008; 9:605–9.
52. Ostrowsky B, Sharma S, DeFino M, et al. Antimicrobial stewardship and auto-
mated pharmacy technology improve antibiotic appropriateness for community-
acquired pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:566–72.
53. Capelastegui A, Espana PP, Quintana JM, et al. Improvement of process-of-care
and outcomes after implementing a guideline for the management of communi-
ty-acquired pneumonia: a controlled before-and-after design study. Clin Infect
Dis 2004; 39:955–63.
54. Avdic E, Cushinotto LA, Hughes AH, et al. Impact of an antimicrobial steward-
ship intervention on shortening the duration of therapy for community-acquired
pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:1581–7.
55. Antworth A, Collins CD, Kunapuli A, et al. Impact of an antimicrobial steward-
ship program comprehensive care bundle on management of candidemia. Phar-
macotherapy 2013; 33:137–43.
56. Borde JP, Batin N, Rieg S, et al. Adherence to an antibiotic stewardship bundle
targeting Staphylococcus aureus blood stream infections at a 200-bed community
hospital. Infection 2014; 42:713–9.
57. Pogue JM, Mynatt RP, Marchaim D, et al. Automated alerts coupled with
antimicrobial stewardship intervention lead to decreases in length of stay in patients
with gram-negative bacteremia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 35:132–8.
58. Climo MW, Israel DS, Wong ES, Williams D, Coudron P, Markowitz SM. Hos-
pital-wide restriction of clindamycin: effect on the incidence of Clostridium dif-
ficile-associated diarrhea and cost. Ann Intern Med 1998; 128(12 pt 1):989–95.
59. Valiquette L, Cossette B, Garant MP, Diab H, Pepin J. Impact of a reduction in
the use of high-risk antibiotics on the course of an epidemic of Clostridium dif-
ficile-associated disease caused by the hypervirulent NAP1/027 strain. Clin Infect
Dis 2007; 45(suppl 2):S112–21.
60. Aldeyab MA, Kearney MP, Scott MG, et al. An evaluation of the impact of anti-
biotic stewardship on reducing the use of high-risk antibiotics and its effect on
the incidence of Clostridium difficile infection in hospital settings. J Antimicrob
Chemother 2012; 67:2988–96.
61. Talpaert MJ, Gopal Rao G, Cooper BS, Wade P. Impact of guidelines and en-
hanced antibiotic stewardship on reducing broad-spectrum antibiotic usage
and its effect on incidence of Clostridium difficile infection. J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2011; 66:2168–74.
62. Dancer SJ, Kirkpatrick P, Corcoran DS, Christison F, Farmer D, Robertson C.
Approaching zero: temporal effects of a restrictive antibiotic policy on
hospital-acquired Clostridium difficile, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-pro-
ducing coliforms and meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Int J Antimicrob
Agents 2013; 41:137–42.
63. Price J, Cheek E, Lippett S, et al. Impact of an intervention to control Clostridium
difficile infection on hospital- and community-onset disease; an interrupted time
series analysis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2010; 16:1297–302.
64. Fowler S, Webber A, Cooper BS, et al. Successful use of feedback to improve an-
tibiotic prescribing and reduce Clostridium difficile infection: a controlled inter-
rupted time series. J Antimicrob Chemother 2007; 59:990–5.
65. Kallen AJ, Thompson A, Ristaino P, et al. Complete restriction of fluoroquino-
lone use to control an outbreak of Clostridium difficile infection at a community
hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 30:264–72.
66. Lee TC, Frenette C, Jayaraman D, Green L, Pilote L. Antibiotic self-stewardship:
trainee-led structured antibiotic time-outs to improve antimicrobial use. Ann In-
tern Med 2014; 161(suppl 10):S53–8.
67. Weiss CH, Persell SD, Wunderink RG, Baker DW. Empiric antibiotic, mechan-
ical ventilation, and central venous catheter duration as potential factors mediat-
ing the effect of a checklist prompting intervention on mortality: an exploratory
analysis. BMC Health Serv Res 2012; 12:198–204.
68. Weiss CH, Dibardino D, Rho J, Sung N, Collander B, Wunderink RG. A clinical
trial comparing physician prompting with an unprompted automated electronic
checklist to reduce empirical antibiotic utilization. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:2563–9.
69. Lesprit P, Landelle C, Girou E, Brun-Buisson C. Reassessment of intravenous an-
tibiotic therapy using a reminder or direct counselling. J Antimicrob Chemother
2010; 65:789–95.
70. Guglielmo B, Dudas V, Maewal I, et al. Impact of a series of interventions in van-
comycin prescribing on use and prevalence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci.
Jt Comm Qual Patient Saf 2005; 31:469–75.
71. Connor DM, Binkley S, Fishman NO, Gasink LB, Linkin D, Lautenbach E. Im-
pact of automatic orders to discontinue vancomycin therapy on vancomycin use
in an antimicrobial stewardship program. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007;
28:1408–10.
72. Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, Classen DC, et al. A computer-assisted management pro-
gram for antibiotics and other antiinfective agents. N Engl J Med 1998;
338:232–8.
73. Paul M, Andreassen S, Tacconelli E, et al. Improving empirical antibiotic treat-
ment using TREAT, a computerized decision support system: cluster randomized
trial. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 58:1238–45.
74. Yong MK, Buising KL, Cheng AC, Thursky KA. Improved susceptibility of gram-
negative bacteria in an intensive care unit following implementation of a comput-
erized antibiotic decision support system. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010;
65:1062–9.
75. Mullett CJ, Evans RS, Christenson JC, Dean JM. Development and impact of a
computerized pediatric antiinfective decision support program. Pediatrics 2001;
108:E75.
76. Pestotnik SL, Classen DC, Evans RS, Burke JP. Implementing antibiotic practice
guidelines through computer-assisted decision support: clinical and financial
outcomes. Ann Intern Med 1996; 124:884–90.
77. Filice GA, Drekonja DM, Thurn JR, et al. Use of a computer decision support
system and antimicrobial therapy appropriateness. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 2013; 34:558–65.
78. Kaushal R, Shojania KG, Bates DW. Effects of computerized physician order
entry and clinical decision support systems on medication safety: a systematic re-
view. Arch Intern Med 2003; 163:1409–16.
79. McGregor JC, Weekes E, Forrest GN, et al. Impact of a computerized clinical de-
cision support system on reducing inappropriate antimicrobial use: a randomized
controlled trial. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2006; 13:378–84.
80. Hermsen ED, VanSchooneveld TC, Sayles H, Rupp ME. Implementation of a
clinical decision support system for antimicrobial stewardship. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:412–5.
e74 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 81. Patel J, Esterly JS, Scheetz MH, Bolon MK, Postelnick MJ. Effective use of a clin-
ical decision-support system to advance antimicrobial stewardship. Am J Health
Syst Pharm 2012; 69:1543–4.
82. Brown EM, Nathwani D. Antibiotic cycling or rotation: a systematic review of the
evidence of efficacy. J Antimicrob Chemother 2005; 55:6–9.
83. Bergstrom CT, Lo M, Lipsitch M. Ecological theory suggests that antimicrobial
cycling will not reduce antimicrobial resistance in hospitals. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2004; 101:13285–90.
84. Beardmore RE, Pena-Miller R. Antibiotic cycling versus mixing: the difficulty of
using mathematical models to definitively quantify their relative merits. Math Bi-
osci Eng 2010; 7:923–33.
85. Bal AM, Kumar A, Gould IM. Antibiotic heterogeneity: from concept to practice.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010; 1213:81–91.
86. Masterton RG. Antibiotic heterogeneity. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2010;
36(suppl 3):S15–8.
87. Kemme DJ, Daniel CI. Aminoglycoside dosing: a randomized prospective study.
South Med J 1993; 86:46–51.
88. Leehey DJ, Braun BI, Tholl DA, et al. Can pharmacokinetic dosing decrease
nephrotoxicity associated with aminoglycoside therapy. J Am Soc Nephrol
1993; 4:81–90.
89. Streetman DS, Nafziger AN, Destache CJ, Bertino AS Jr. Individualized pharma-
cokinetic monitoring results in less aminoglycoside-associated nephrotoxicity
and fewer associated costs. Pharmacotherapy 2001; 21:443–51.
90. Bartal C, Danon A, Schlaeffer F, et al. Pharmacokinetic dosing of aminoglyco-
sides: a controlled trial. Am J Med 2003; 114:194–8.
91. Bond CA, Raehl CL. Clinical and economic outcomes of pharmacist-managed
aminoglycoside or vancomycin therapy. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2005;
62:1596–605.
92. Whipple JK, Ausman RK, Franson T, Quebbeman EJ. Effect of individualized
pharmacokinetic dosing on patient outcome. Crit Care Med 1991; 19:
1480–5.
93. Fernandez de Gatta MD, Calvo MV, Hernandez JM, Caballero D, San Miguel JF,
Dominguez-Gil A. Cost-effectiveness analysis of serum vancomycin concentra-
tion monitoring in patients with hematologic malignancies. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1996; 60:332–40.
94. Iwamoto T, Kagawa Y, Kojima M. Clinical efficacy of therapeutic drug monitor-
ing in patients receiving vancomycin. Biol Pharm Bull 2003; 26:876–9.
95. Karam CM, McKinnon PS, Neuhauser MM, Rybak MJ. Outcome assessment of
minimizing vancomycin monitoring and dosing adjustments. Pharmacotherapy
1999; 19:257–66.
96. Welty TE, Copa AK. Impact of vancomycin therapeutic drug monitoring on pa-
tient care. Ann Pharmacother 1994; 28:1335–9.
97. Jiang SP, Zhu ZY, Ma KF, Zheng X, Lu XY. Impact of pharmacist antimicrobial
dosing adjustments in septic patients on continuous renal replacement therapy in
an intensive care unit. Scand J Infect Dis 2013; 45:891–9.
98. Wang HY, Lu CL, Wu MP, Huang MH, Huang YB. Effectiveness of an integrated
CPOE decision-supporting system with clinical pharmacist monitoring practice
in preventing antibiotic dosing errors. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012;
50:375–82.
99. Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, Classen DC, Burke JP. Evaluation of a computer-assisted
antibiotic-dose monitor. Ann Pharmacother 1999; 33:1026–31.
100. Freeman CD, Strayer AH. Mega-analysis of meta-analysis: an examination of
meta-analysis with an emphasis on once-daily aminoglycoside comparative tri-
als. Pharmacotherapy 1996; 16:1093–102.
101. Barza M, Ioannidis JP, Cappelleri JC, Lau J. Single or multiple daily doses of ami-
noglycosides: a meta-analysis. BMJ 1996; 312:338–45.
102. Falagas ME, Tansarli GS, Ikawa K, Vardakas KZ. Clinical outcomes with extend-
ed or continuous versus short-term intravenous infusion of carbapenems and pi-
peracillin/tazobactam: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis
2013; 56:272–82.
103. Tamma PD, Putcha N, Suh YD, Van Arendonk KJ, Rinke ML. Does prolonged
beta-lactam infusions improve clinical outcomes compared to intermittent infu-
sions? A meta-analysis and systematic review of randomized, controlled trials.
BMC Infect Dis 2011; 11:181–93.
104. Shiu J, Wang E, Tejani AM, Wasdell M. Continuous versus intermittent infusions
of antibiotics for the treatment of severe acute infections. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2013; 3:CD008481.
105. Dulhunty JM, Roberts JA, Davis JS, et al. A multicenter randomized trial of con-
tinuous versus intermittent β-lactam infusion in severe sepsis. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2015; 192:1298–305.
106. Cataldo MA, Tacconelli E, Grilli E, Pea F, Petrosillo N. Continuous versus
intermittent infusion of vancomycin for the treatment of gram-positive infec-
tions: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2012;
67:17–24.
107. McKamy S, Chen T, Lee M, Ambrose PJ. Evaluation of a pediatric continuous-
infusion vancomycin therapy guideline. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2012;
69:2066–71.
108. McNabb JJ, Nightingale CH, Quintiliani R, Nicolau DP. Cost-effectiveness of cef-
tazidime by continuous infusion versus intermittent infusion for nosocomial
pneumonia. Pharmacotherapy 2001; 21:549–55.
109. Wysocki M, Delatour F, Faurisson F, et al. Continuous versus intermittent infu-
sion of vancomycin in severe staphylococcal infections: prospective multicenter
randomized study. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001; 45:2460–7.
110. Goff DA, Bauer KA, Reed EE, Stevenson KB, Taylor JJ, West JE. Is the “low-
hanging fruit” worth picking for antimicrobial stewardship programs? Clin Infect
Dis 2012; 55:587–92.
111. Jones M, Huttner B, Madaras-Kelly K, et al. Parenteral to oral conversion of flu-
oroquinolones: low-hanging fruit for antimicrobial stewardship programs? Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:362–7.
112. Sevinç F, Prins JM, Koopmans RP, et al. Early switch from intravenous to oral
antibiotics: guidelines and implementation in a large teaching hospital. J Antimi-
crob Chemother 1999; 43:601–6.
113. Davis SL, Delgado G Jr, McKinnon PS. Pharmacoeconomic considerations asso-
ciated with the use of intravenous-to-oral moxifloxacin for community-acquired
pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41(suppl 2):S136–43.
114. Mertz D, Koller M, Haller P, et al. Outcomes of early switching from intravenous
to oral antibiotics on medical wards. J Antimicrob Chemother 2009; 64:188–99.
115. Omidvari K, de Boisblanc BP, Karam G, Nelson S, Haponik E, Summer W. Early
transition to oral antibiotic therapy for community-acquired pneumonia: dura-
tion of therapy, clinical outcomes, and cost analysis. Respir Med 1998; 92:1032–9.
116. Laing RB, Mackenzie AR, Shaw H, Gould IM, Douglas JG. The effect of intrave-
nous-to-oral switch guidelines on the use of parenteral antimicrobials in medical
wards. J Antimicrob Chemother 1998; 42:107–11.
117. Conant MM, Erdman SM, Osterholzer D. Mandatory infectious diseases approv-
al of outpatient parenteral antimicrobial therapy (OPAT): clinical and economic
outcomes of averted cases. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:1695–700.
118. Macy E, Contreras R. Health care use and serious infection prevalence associated
with penicillin “allergy” in hospitalized patients: a cohort study. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2014; 133:790–6.
119. Unger NR, Gauthier TP, Cheung LW. Penicillin skin testing: potential implica-
tions for antimicrobial stewardship. Pharmacotherapy 2013; 33:856–67.
120. Trubiano J, Phillips E. Antimicrobial stewardship’s new weapon? A review of an-
tibiotic allergy and pathways to ‘de-labeling.’ Curr Opin Infect Dis 2013;
26:526–37.
121. Rimawi RH, Cook PP, Gooch M, et al. The impact of penicillin skin testing on
clinical practice and antimicrobial stewardship. J Hosp Med 2013; 8:341–5.
122. Park MA, McClimon BJ, Ferguson B, et al. Collaboration between allergists and
pharmacists increases β-lactam antibiotic prescriptions in patients with a history
of penicillin allergy. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2011; 154:57–62.
123. Dimopoulos G, Matthaiou DK, Karageorgopoulos DE, Grammatikos AP, Atha-
nassa Z, Falagas ME. Short- versus long-course antibacterial therapy for commu-
nity-acquired pneumonia: a meta-analysis. Drugs 2008; 68:1841–54.
124. Pugh R, Grant C, Cooke RP, Dempsey G. Short-course versus prolonged-course
antibiotic therapy for hospital-acquired pneumonia in critically ill adults. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2011:CD007577.
125. Dimopoulos G, Poulakou G, Pneumatikos IA, Armaganidis A, Kollef MH,
Matthaiou DK. Short-versus long-duration antibiotic regimens for ventilator-
associated pneumonia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2013;
144:1759–67.
126. Abbo LM, Hooton TM. Antimicrobial stewardship and urinary tract infections.
Antibiotics 2014; 3:174–92.
127. Chastre J, Wolff M, Fagon JY, et al. Comparison of 8 vs 15 days of antibiotic ther-
apy for ventilator-associated pneumonia in adults: a randomized trial. JAMA
2003; 290:2588–98.
128. el Moussaoui R, de Borgie CA, van den Broek P, et al. Effectiveness of discontin-
uing antibiotic treatment after three days versus eight days in mild to moderate-
severe community acquired pneumonia: randomised, double blind study. BMJ
2006; 332:1355–62.
129. Greenberg D, Givon-Lavi N, Sadaka Y, Ben-Shimol S, Bar-Ziv J, Dagan R. Short-
course antibiotic treatment for community-acquired alveolar pneumonia in am-
bulatory children: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Pediatr
Infect Dis J 2014; 33:136–42.
130. Hepburn MJ, Dooley DP, Skidmore PJ, Ellis MW, Starnes WF, Hasewinkle WC.
Comparison of short-course (5 days) and standard (10 days) treatment for un-
complicated cellulitis. Arch Intern Med 2004; 164:1669–74.
131. Sandberg T, Skoog G, Hermansson AB, et al. Ciprofloxacin for 7 days versus 14
days in women with acute pyelonephritis: a randomised, open-label and double-
blind, placebo-controlled, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2012; 380:484–90.
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e75
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 132. Talan DA, Stamm WE, Hooton TM, et al. Comparison of ciprofloxacin (7 days)
and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (14 days) for acute uncomplicated pyelone-
phritis pyelonephritis in women: a randomized trial. JAMA 2000; 283:1583–90.
133. Runyon BA, McHutchison JG, Antillon MR, Akriviadis EA, Montano AA. Short-
course versus long-course antibiotic treatment of spontaneous bacterial peritoni-
tis. A randomized controlled study of 100 patients. Gastroenterology 1991;
100:1737–42.
134. Saini SS, Dutta S, Ray P, Narang A. Short course versus 7-day course of intrave-
nous antibiotics for probable neonatal septicemia: a pilot, open-label, random-
ized controlled trial. Indian Pediatr 2011; 48:19–24.
135. Sawyer RG, Claridge JA, Nathens AB, et al. Trial of short-course antimicrobial
therapy for intraabdominal infection. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:1996–2005.
136. Bernard L, Dinh A, Ghout I, et al. Antibiotic treatment for 6 weeks versus 12
weeks in patients with pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis: an open-label, non-
inferiority, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 385:875–82.
137. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Analysis and presentation of cumu-
lative antimicrobial susceptibility test data; approved guideline. 4th ed. CLSI
document M39-A4, 2014. Wayne, PA: CLSI, 2014.
138. Binkley S, Fishman NO, LaRosa LA, et al. Comparison of unit-specific and
hospital-wide antibiograms: potential implications for selection of empirical
antimicrobial therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2006; 27:682–7.
139. Swami SK, Banerjee R. Comparison of hospital-wide and age and location—
stratified antibiograms of S. aureus, E. coli, and S. pneumoniae: age- and loca-
tion-stratified antibiograms. Springerplus 2013; 2:63–7.
140. Green DL. Selection of an empiric antibiotic regimen for hospital-acquired pneu-
monia using a unit and culture-type specific antibiogram. J Intensive Care Med
2005; 20:296–301.
141. Kuster SP, Ruef C, Zbinden R, et al. Stratification of cumulative antibiograms in
hospitals for hospital unit, specimen type, isolate sequence and duration of hos-
pital stay. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008; 62:1451–61.
142. Bosso JA, Mauldin PD, Steed LL. Consequences of combining cystic fibrosis- and
non-cystic fibrosis-derived Pseudomonas aeruginosa antibiotic susceptibility re-
sults in hospital antibiograms. Ann Pharmacother 2006; 40:1946–9.
143. Anderson DJ, Miller B, Marfatia R, Drew R. Ability of an antibiogram to predict
Pseudomonas aeruginosa susceptibility to targeted antimicrobials based on hos-
pital day of isolation. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:589–93.
144. Boggan JC, Navar-Boggan AM, Jhaveri R. Pediatric-specific antimicrobial
susceptibility data and empiric antibiotic selection. Pediatrics 2012; 130:e615–22.
145. Coupat C, Pradier C, Degand N, Hofliger P, Pulcini C. Selective reporting of an-
tibiotic susceptibility data improves the appropriateness of intended antibiotic
prescriptions in urinary tract infections: a case-vignette randomised study. Eur
J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2013; 32:627–36.
146. Tan TY, McNulty C, Charlett A, Nessa N, Kelly C, Beswick T. Laboratory anti-
biotic susceptibility reporting and antibiotic prescribing in general practice.
J Antimicrob Chemother 2003; 51:379–84.
147. McNulty CA, Lasseter GM, Charlett A, et al. Does laboratory antibiotic suscept-
ibility reporting influence primary care prescribing in urinary tract infection and
other infections? J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:1396–404.
148. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Performance standards for antimi-
crobial susceptibility testing; 23rd informational supplement. CLSI document
M100-S24. Wayne, PA: CLSI, 2014.
149. Jennings LC, Skopnik H, Burckhardt I, Hribar I, Del Piero L, Deichmann KA.
Effect of rapid influenza testing on the clinical management of paediatric influ-
enza. Influenza Other Respir Viruses 2009; 3:91–8.
150. Bonner AB, Monroe KW, Talley LI, Klasner AE, Kimberlin DW. Impact of the
rapid diagnosis of influenza on physician decision-making and patient manage-
ment in the pediatric emergency department: results of a randomized, prospec-
tive, controlled trial. Pediatrics 2003; 112:363–7.
151. Doan QH, Kissoon N, Dobson S, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of the impact
of early and rapid diagnosis of viral infections in children brought to an emergency
department with febrile respiratory tract illnesses. J Pediatr 2009; 154:91–5.
152. Wishaupt JO, Russcher A, Smeets LC, Versteegh FG, Hartwig NG. Clinical im-
pact of RT-PCR for pediatric acute respiratory infections: a controlled clinical
trial. Pediatrics 2011; 128:e1113–20.
153. Byington CL, Castillo H, Gerber K, et al. The effect of rapid respiratory viral di-
agnostic testing on antibiotic use in a children’s hospital. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med 2002; 156:1230–4.
154. Kadmon G, Levy I, Mandelboim M, et al. Polymerase-chain-reaction-based diag-
nosis of viral pulmonary infections in immunocompromised children. Acta Pae-
diatr 2013; 102:e263–8.
155. Oosterheert JJ, van Loon AM, Schuurman R, et al. Impact of rapid detection of
viral and atypical bacterial pathogens by real-time polymerase chain reaction
for patients with lower respiratory tract infection. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:
1438–44.
156. Falsey AR, Murata Y, Walsh EE. Impact of rapid diagnosis on management of
adults hospitalized with influenza. Arch Intern Med 2007; 167:354–60.
157. Petrozzino JJ, Smith C, Atkinson MJ. Rapid diagnostic testing for seasonal influ-
enza: an evidence-based review and comparison with unaided clinical diagnosis. J
Emerg Med 2010; 39:476–90 e1.
158. Parta M, Goebel M, Thomas J, Matloobi M, Stager C, Musher DM. Impact of an
assay that enables rapid determination of Staphylococcus species and their drug
susceptibility on the treatment of patients with positive blood culture results. In-
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010; 31:1043–8.
159. Huang AM, Newton D, Kunapuli A, et al. Impact of rapid organism identifica-
tion via matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight combined with
antimicrobial stewardship team intervention in adult patients with bacteremia
and candidemia. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:1237–45.
160. Bauer KA, West JE, Balada-Llasat JM, Pancholi P, Stevenson KB, Goff DA. An
antimicrobial stewardship program’s impact with rapid polymerase chain reac-
tion methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus/S. aureus blood culture test in
patients with S. aureus bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51:1074–80.
161. Perez KK, Olsen RJ, Musick WL, et al. Integrating rapid pathogen identification
and antimicrobial stewardship significantly decreases hospital costs. Arch Pathol
Lab Med 2013; 137:1247–54.
162. Banerjee R, Teng CB, Cunningham SA, et al. Randomized trial of rapid multiplex
polymerase chain reaction-based blood culture identification and susceptibility
testing. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:1071–80.
163. Forrest GN, Roghmann MC, Toombs LS, et al. Peptide nucleic acid fluorescent in
situ hybridization for hospital-acquired enterococcal bacteremia: delivering earlier
effective antimicrobial therapy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008; 52:3558–63.
164. Seng P, Abat C, Rolain JM, et al. Identification of rare pathogenic bacteria in a
clinical microbiology laboratory: impact of matrix-assisted laser desorption ion-
ization-time of flight mass spectrometry. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:2182–94.
165. Holtzman C, Whitney D, Barlam T, Miller NS. Assessment of impact of peptide
nucleic acid fluorescence in situ hybridization for rapid identification of coagu-
lase-negative staphylococci in the absence of antimicrobial stewardship interven-
tion. J Clin Microbiol 2011; 49:1581–2.
166. Frye AM, Baker CA, Rustvold DL, et al. Clinical impact of a real-time PCR assay
for rapid identification of staphylococcal bacteremia. J Clin Microbiol 2012;
50:127–33.
167. Schneiderhan W, Grundt A, Worner S, Findeisen P, Neumaier M. Workflow
analysis of around-the-clock processing of blood culture samples and integrated
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry analysis for the diagnosis of bloodstream infec-
tions. Clin Chem 2013; 59:1649–56.
168. Bloos F, Sachse S, Kortgen A, et al. Evaluation of a polymerase chain reaction
assay for pathogen detection in septic patients under routine condition: an ob-
servational study. PLoS One 2012; 7:e46003.
169. Nobre V, Harbarth S, Graf JD, Rohner P, Pugin J. Use of procalcitonin to shorten
antibiotic treatment duration in septic patients: a randomized trial. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2008; 177:498–505.
170. Schroeder S, Hochreiter M, Koehler T, et al. Procalcitonin (PCT)-guided algo-
rithm reduces length of antibiotic treatment in surgical intensive care patients
with severe sepsis: results of a prospective randomized study. Langenbecks
Arch Surg 2009; 394:221–6.
171. Hochreiter M, Kohler T, Schweiger AM, et al. Procalcitonin to guide duration of
antibiotic therapy in intensive care patients: a randomized prospective controlled
trial. Crit Care 2009; 13:R83–9.
172. Bouadma L, Luyt CE, Tubach F, et al. Use of procalcitonin to reduce patients’
exposure to antibiotics in intensive care units (PRORATA trial): a multicentre
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2010; 375:463–74.
173. Prkno A, Wacker C, Brunkhorst FM, Schlattmann P. Procalcitonin-guided ther-
apy in intensive care unit patients with severe sepsis and septic shock—a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2013; 17:R291–301.
174. Jensen JU, Hein L, Lundgren B, et al. Procalcitonin-guided interventions against
infections to increase early appropriate antibiotics and improve survival in the
intensive care unit: a randomized trial. Crit Care Med 2011; 39:2048–58.
175. Layios N, Lambermont B, Canivet JL, et al. Procalcitonin usefulness for the ini-
tiation of antibiotic treatment in intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med 2012;
40:2304–9.
176. Cordonnier C, Pautas C, Maury S, et al. Empirical versus preemptive antifungal
therapy for high-risk, febrile, neutropenic patients: a randomized, controlled
trial. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1042–51.
177. Hebart H, Klingspor L, Klingebiel T, et al. A prospective randomized controlled
trial comparing PCR-based and empirical treatment with liposomal amphoteri-
cin B in patients after allo-SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 2009; 43:553–61.
178. Jha AK, Bansal D, Chakrabarti A, Shivaprakash MR, Trehan A, Marwaha RK.
Serum galactomannan assay for the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in children
with haematological malignancies. Mycoses 2013; 56:442–8.
e76 • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • Barlam et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
 179. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Healthcare Safety Network
(NHSN). Surveillance for antimicrobial use and antimicrobial resistance options.
Protocols: Antimicrobial use and resistance (AUR) module, 2015. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/acute-care-hospital/aur/index.html. Accessed 17 June
2015.
180. Polk RE, Fox C, Mahoney A, Letcavage J, MacDougall C. Measurement of adult
antibacterial drug use in 130 US hospitals: comparison of defined daily dose and
days of therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:664–70.
181. Polk RE, Hohmann SF, Medvedev S, Ibrahim O. Benchmarking risk-adjusted
adult antibacterial drug use in 70 US academic medical center hospitals. Clin Infect
Dis 2011; 53:1100–10.
182. Ibrahim OM, Polk RE. Antimicrobial use metrics and benchmarking to improve
stewardship outcomes: methodology, opportunities, and challenges. Infect Dis
Clin North Am 2014; 28:195–214.
183. Standiford HC, Chan S, Tripoli M, Weekes E, Forrest GN. Antimicrobial
stewardship at a large tertiary care academic medical center: cost analysis before,
during, and after a 7-year program. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:338–45.
184. Nowak MA, Nelson RE, Breidenbach JL, Thompson PA, Carson PJ. Clinical and
economic outcomes of a prospective antimicrobial stewardship program. Am J
Health Syst Pharm 2012; 69:1500–8.
185. Beardsley JR, Williamson JC, Johnson JW, Luther VP, Wrenn RH, Ohl CC. Show
me the money: long-term financial impact of an antimicrobial stewardship pro-
gram. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:398–400.
186. Wagner AK, Soumerai SB, Zhang F, Ross-Degnan D. Segmented regression anal-
ysis of interrupted time series studies in medication use research. J Clin Pharm
Ther 2002; 27:299–309.
187. Kerr JR, Barr JG, Smyth ET, O’Hare J, Bell PM, Callender ME. Antibiotic phar-
macoeconomics: an attempt to find the real cost of hospital antibiotic prescribing.
Ulster Med J 1993; 62:50–7.
188. Gums JG, Yancey RW Jr, Hamilton CA, Kubilis PS. A randomized, prospective
study measuring outcomes after antibiotic therapy intervention by a multidisci-
plinary consult team. Pharmacotherapy 1999; 19:1369–77.
189. Loeb M, Brazil K, Lohfeld L, et al. Effect of a multifaceted intervention on num-
ber of antimicrobial prescriptions for suspected urinary tract infections in resi-
dents of nursing homes: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2005; 331:669.
190. Pavese P, Saurel N, Labarere J, et al. Does an educational session with an infec-
tious diseases physician reduce the use of inappropriate antibiotic therapy for in-
patients with positive urine culture results? A controlled before-and-after study.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 30:596–9.
191. Polgreen PM, Chen YY, Cavanaugh JE, et al. An outbreak of severe Clostridium
difficile-associated disease possibly related to inappropriate antimicrobial therapy
for community-acquired pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007;
28:212–4.
192. Nucci M, Landau M, Silveira F, Spector N, Pulcheri W. Application of the IDSA
guidelines for the use of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients: impact on
reducing the use of glycopeptides. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001; 22:651–3.
193. Pakakasama S, Surayuthpreecha K, Pandee U, et al. Clinical practice guidelines
for children with cancer presenting with fever to the emergency room. Pediatr
Int 2011; 53:902–5.
194. Rosa RG, Goldani LZ, dos Santos RP. Association between adherence to an an-
timicrobial stewardship program and mortality among hospitalised cancer pa-
tients with febrile neutropaenia: a prospective cohort study. BMC Infect Dis
2014; 14:286–93.
195. Lopez-Medrano F, San Juan R, Lizasoain M, et al. A non-compulsory stewardship
programme for the management of antifungals in a university-affiliated hospital.
Clin Microbiol Infect 2013; 19:56–61.
196. Mondain V, Lieutier F, Hasseine L, et al. A 6-year antifungal stewardship pro-
gramme in a teaching hospital. Infection 2013; 41:621–8.
197. Micallef C, Aliyu SH, Santos R, Brown NM, Rosembert D, Enoch DA. Introduction
of an antifungal stewardship programme targeting high-cost antifungals at a
tertiary hospital in Cambridge, England. J Antimicrob Chemother 2015; 70:
1908–11.
198. Alfandari S, Berthon C, Coiteux V. Antifungal stewardship: implementation in a
French teaching hospital. Med Mal Infect 2014; 44:154–8.
199. Mitchell SL, Shaffer ML, Loeb MB, et al. Infection management and multidrug-
resistant organisms in nursing home residents with advanced dementia. JAMA
Intern Med 2014; 174:1660–7.
200. Jump RL, Olds DM, Seifi N, et al. Effective antimicrobial stewardship in a long-
term care facility through an infectious disease consultation service: keeping a
LID on antibiotic use. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:1185–92.
201. Schwartz DN, Abiad H, DeMarais PL, et al. An educational intervention to im-
prove antimicrobial use in a hospital-based long-term care facility. J Am Geriatr
Soc 2007; 55:1236–42.
202. Fleet E, Gopal Rao G, Patel B, et al. Impact of implementation of a novel antimi-
crobial stewardship tool on antibiotic use in nursing homes: a prospective cluster
randomized control pilot study. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:2265–73.
203. Zimmerman S, Sloane PD, Bertrand R, et al. Successfully reducing antibiotic pre-
scribing in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2014; 62:907–12.
204. Patel SJ, Saiman L. Principles and strategies of antimicrobial stewardship in the
neonatal intensive care unit. Semin Perinatol 2012; 36:431–6.
205. Zingg W, Pfister R, Posfay-Barbe KM, Huttner B, Touveneau S, Pittet D. Secular
trends in antibiotic use among neonates: 2001–2008. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2011;
30:365–70.
206. Chiu CH, Michelow IC, Cronin J, Ringer SA, Ferris TG, Puopolo KM. Effective-
ness of a guideline to reduce vancomycin use in the neonatal intensive care unit.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 2011; 30:273–8.
207. Murki S, Jonnala S, Mohammed F, Reddy A. Restriction of cephalosporins and
control of extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing gram negative bacteria in
a neonatal intensive care unit. Indian Pediatr 2010; 47:785–8.
208. Thompson AJ, Silveira MJ, Vitale CA, Malani PN. Antimicrobial use at the end of
life among hospitalized patients with advanced cancer. Am J Hosp Palliat Care
2012; 29:599–603.
209. D’Agata E, Mitchell SL. Patterns of antimicrobial use among nursing home res-
idents with advanced dementia. Arch Intern Med 2008; 168:357–62.
210. Levin PD, Simor AE, Moses AE, Sprung CL. End-of-life treatment and bacterial
antibiotic resistance: a potential association. Chest 2010; 138:588–94.
211. Reinbolt RE, Shenk AM, White PH, Navari RM. Symptomatic treatment of in-
fections in patients with advanced cancer receiving hospice care. J Pain Symptom
Manage 2005; 30:175–82.
212. Clayton J, Fardell B, Hutton-Potts J, Webb D, Chye R. Parenteral antibiotics in a
palliative care unit: prospective analysis of current practice. Palliat Med 2003;
17:44–8.
213. Givens JL, Jones RN, Shaffer ML, Kiely DK, Mitchell SL. Survival and comfort after
treatment of pneumonia in advanced dementia. Arch Intern Med 2010; 170:1102–7.
214. van der Steen JT, Ooms ME, van der Wal G, Ribbe MW. Pneumonia: the de-
mented patient’s best friend? Discomfort after starting or withholding antibiotic
treatment. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002; 50:1681–8.
215. Van Der Steen JT, Pasman HR, Ribbe MW, Van Der Wal G, Onwuteaka-
Philipsen BD. Discomfort in dementia patients dying from pneumonia and its
relief by antibiotics. Scand J Infect Dis 2009; 41:143–51.
216. van der Steen JT. Prolonged life and increased symptoms vs prolonged dying and
increased comfort after antibiotic treatment in patients with dementia and pneu-
monia. Arch Intern Med 2011; 171:93–4; author reply 94.
217. Stiel S, Krumm N, Pestinger M, et al. Antibiotics in palliative medicine—results
from a prospective epidemiological investigation from the HOPE survey. Support
Care Cancer 2012; 20:325–33.
218. Givens JL, Spinella S, Ankuda CK, et al. Healthcare proxy awareness of suspected
infections in nursing home residents with advanced dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc
2015; 63:1084–90.
219. Chabok A, Pahlman L, Hjern F, Haapaniemi S, Smedh K, Group AS. Random-
ized clinical trial of antibiotics in acute uncomplicated diverticulitis. Br J Surg
2012; 99:532–9.
220. Zalmanovici Trestioreanu A, Lador A, Sauerbrun-Cutler MT, Leibovici L. Anti-
biotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 4:
CD009534.
221. Charani E, Castro-Sanchez E, Sevdalis N, et al. Understanding the determinants
of antimicrobial prescribing within hospitals: the role of “prescribing etiquette.”
Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:188–96.
222. Pakyz AL, Moczygemba LR, VanderWielen LM, Edmond MB, Stevens MP, Kuzel
AJ. Facilitators and barriers to implementing antimicrobial stewardship strate-
gies: results from a qualitative study. Am J Infect Control 2014; 42(suppl 10):
S257–63.
223. Berenholtz SM, Pham JC, Thompson DA, et al. Collaborative cohort study of an
intervention to reduce ventilator-associated pneumonia in the intensive care unit.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:305–14.
224. Pronovost P, Needham D, Berenholtz S, et al. An intervention to decrease
catheter-related bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2006;
355:2725–32.
225. Toth NR, Chambers RM, Davis SL. Implementation of a care bundle for antimi-
crobial stewardship. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2010; 67:746–9.
Guideline for Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program • CID 2016:62 (15 May) • e77
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/10/e51/2462846 by guest on 02 June 2019
