 A mutation associated with stuttering alters mouse pup 
ultrasonic vocalizations
Terra D. Barnesa, David Wozniakb, Joanne Gutierrezc, Tae-Un Hanc, Dennis Draynac, and 
Timothy E. Holya
Terra D. Barnes: terra.barnes@gmail.com; Dennis Drayna: drayna@nidcd.nih.gov; Timothy E. Holy: holy@wustl.edu
aDepartment of Neuroscience, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine, Campus 
Box 8108, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093
bDepartment of Psychiatry, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine, Campus Box 
8108, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093 and the Taylor Family Institute for 
Innovative Psychiatric Research
cNational Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA
Summary
A promising approach to understanding the mechanistic basis of speech is to study disorders that 
affect speech without compromising other cognitive or motor functions. Stuttering, also known as 
stammering, has been linked to mutations in the lysosomal enzyme-targeting pathway, but how 
this remarkably specific speech deficit arises from mutations in a family of general “cellular 
housekeeping” genes is unknown. To address this question, we asked whether a missense mutation 
associated with human stuttering causes vocal or other abnormalities in mice. We compared 
vocalizations from mice engineered to carry a mutation in the Gnptab (N-acetylglucosamine-1-
phosphotransferase subunits alpha/beta) gene with wild type littermates. We found significant 
differences in the vocalizations of pups with the Gnptab stuttering mutation compared to littermate 
controls. Specifically, we found that mice with the mutation emitted fewer vocalizations per unit 
time, had longer pauses between vocalizations, and that the entropy of the temporal sequence was 
significantly reduced. Furthermore, Gnptab missense mice were similar to wild type mice on an 
Correspondence to: Terra D. Barnes, terra.barnes@gmail.com.
Contact Information: Terra D. Barnes, Ph.D. Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South 
Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Mo, 63132
Timothy E. Holy, Ph.D. Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. 
Louis, Mo, 63132
Dennis Drayna, Ph.D. Laboratory of Communication Disorders, Section on Systems Biology of Communication Disorders, National 
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD), Porter Neuroscience Research Center, 35A Convent Drive 
1F-127, Bethesda, MD 20892-3729
Author Contributions: T.D.B. designed experiments, gathered mouse vocalization data, analyzed human and mouse vocalization 
data, and wrote the paper. D.F.W. directed the non-vocalization behavioral studies, which involved statistical and graphical analyses of 
the results and wrote the paper. T.U.H. provided comments on the manuscript and made Figure S1. D.D., had the original idea for the 
paper, recruited human subjects, designed knock-in mice, supervised experiments, and wrote the paper. J.G. recruited subjects and 
obtained speech recordings from scripts. T.E.H supervised mouse experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the paper.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 extensive battery of non-vocal behaviors. We then used the same language-agnostic metrics for 
auditory signal analysis of human speech. We analyzed speech from people who stutter with 
mutations in this pathway and compared it to control speech, and found abnormalities similar to 
those found in the mouse vocalizations. These data show that mutations in the lysosomal enzyme 
targeting pathway produce highly specific effects in mouse pup vocalizations, and establish the 
mouse as an attractive model for studying this disorder.
Abstract
Introduction
Speech disorders affect millions of people worldwide and are usually treated with behavioral 
therapy[1, 2]. A better understanding of human speech disorders may lead to a wider array 
of treatment options, and can provide insights into the genetic and neural underpinnings of 
human speech. To date, there are remarkably few speech disorders with a clearly identified 
genetic component [3-5]. Developmental stuttering is one of the most common speech 
disorders, with the persistent form of the disorder affecting 3 million adults in the United 
States. The disorder is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of syllables or 
words, or speech that has frequent hesitations or pauses – known as “blocks” – that disrupt 
the smooth flow of speech [1]. As an inroad into mechanisms of speech production, 
stuttering is remarkable because affected individuals are, on average, normal by all other 
known measures of language, cognitive, and motor function [1]. Recently, it was found that 
persistent developmental stuttering unaccompanied by other deficits or symptoms can be 
linked to mutations in the lysosomal enzyme-targeting pathway (LETP) [6]. Mutations in the 
LETP pathway account for 9-16% of all cases of persistent nonsyndromic stuttering[7].
Lysosomes are degradative cellular organelles that contain acid hydrolases. These enzymes 
are targeted to lysosomes by tagging them with mannose 6-phosphate[8]. The mannose 6-
phosphate is added to these acid hydrolases in a two-step process carried out by the products 
of three genes. Mutations in all three of these genes have been found in humans who stutter 
Barnes et al.
Page 2
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 [6, 7]. However, the mechanisms by which mutations in an apparent “housekeeping gene” 
produce a deficit with the remarkable specificity of stuttering remain unclear.
While humans are irreplaceable for discovery of the genetic underpinnings of speech 
disorders, they have a number of disadvantages for analysis of the underlying mechanisms. 
An animal model would be an invaluable tool for investigations into the circuit and cellular 
mechanisms of a vocal disorder, despite the obvious difficulties in comparing human speech 
with any animal vocalization [3]. While no exact correspondence with human speech can be 
expected, it is possible that one or more “low-level” features—such as planning, initiation, 
timing, breath control, and/or temporal sequencing—may be shared both in phenotype and 
underlying neuronal circuitry across mammalian species.
Mouse vocalizations have been extensively studied and have been used successfully in the 
study of several disorders [9-13]. Mice produce ultrasonic vocalizations in a range of social 
situations. These vocalizations have repeated syllables and complex structure, and have been 
characterized as “songs” [14]. One type of innate mouse vocalization is the isolation call of 
pups which has also been extensively studied, especially in disease [3, 11, 15-20]. Mouse 
pups, when separated from their mother during the first two weeks of life, spontaneously 
vocalize [20]. The rate of vocalization peaks at around 5-7 days postnatal and decrease 
thereafter.
This approach is exemplified by studies of the speech disorder associated with mutations of 
the FOXP2 transcription factor. The Foxp2 gene is conserved across species [21]. In mice, 
disruption of the Foxp2 gene has been shown to cause changes in pup isolation calls [15-17, 
22] (though not necessarily in adults [23]); in turn, such studies have been used to obtain 
numerous insights into the molecular and cellular functions of this gene and its role in 
human speech [3, 4, 11, 15-17, 24].
Here, we analyze pup isolation calls and other behaviors of mice with a knock-in mutation in 
the Gnptab gene, for which the equivalent mutation has been shown to cause stuttering in 
humans [6]. We show that such mice exhibit alterations in timing and sequencing of 
vocalization that are reminiscent of specific deficits observed in human stuttering.
Results
We engineered mice to carry a homozygous Glu1179Lys mutation in Gnptab (Gnptab
mut/mut), homologous to the Glu1200Lys mutation in human GNPTAB well characterized for 
its role in stuttering [6, 25]. Mice were constructed on a pure BALB/c background (Figure 
1A and S1), using a heterozygote × heterozygote breeding strategy to ensure the availability 
of littermate controls with matched pre- and post-natal environment. We recorded pup 
isolation calls on postnatal day 3, 5, and 8; data from all days are presented in figure 
supplements, with data from day 8 presented in the main figures below.
Mouse vocalizations: rate, spectral characteristics, and timing
We first asked whether Gnptab mut/mut mice vocalized. Both wild-type littermates (Gnptab
wt/wt), and Gnptab mut/mut mice produced vocalizations over the 3.5 minute recording session 
Barnes et al.
Page 3
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that appeared to have normal amplitude and spectral characteristics (Figure 1B-1D). We 
found that Gnptab mut/mut mice exhibited significantly fewer vocalizations compared to 
littermate controls (Gnptab mut/mut 64.2 ± 34.8 vocalizations; Gnptab wt/wt 184.5 ± 39.4 
vocalizations; t-test p<0.034, Figure 2A) in the three and half minutes of a recording.
The difference in rate of vocalizing in the homozygous mutants could be due to the length of 
vocalizations increasing, the length of pauses increasing, or a mixture of these. We found no 
significant difference in the duration of the vocalizations between the two groups of mice (t-
test, p >0.5, Figure 2B). However, there was a significant difference in the mean pause 
length between vocalizations (Gnptab mut/mut 6.18 ± 1.23 s; Gnptab wt/wt 2.72 ± 0.69 s; t-test 
p<0.02, Figure 2C). This increase in the mean pause length in the Gnptab mut/mut could be 
due to increased duration of all pauses or an increase in a specific subset of pauses. Much 
like humans, mice exhibit “bouts” of vocalizations, separated by longer pauses (see Figure 
1B and 1C). We found that the Gnptab mut/mut showed no difference in the length of intra-
bout pauses, those short pauses between vocalizations inside a bout (Figure S2 and 
Experimental Procedures). Similarly, Gnptab mut/mut had a similar proportion of large pauses 
when the criterion for large pauses was not stringent (less than 0.8 seconds). However, using 
more stringent criteria for large pauses (setting the cutoff to 0.8 seconds or higher), the 
proportion of long pauses was increased in the Gnptab mut/mut mice (Figure S3). This result 
suggests that the key factor contributing to the reduced number of vocalizations in Gnptab
mut/mut animals compared to their wild-type littermate controls was an increase in the 
duration of long pauses between bouts of vocalization.
We analyzed the same features of the vocalizations from heterozygous Gnptab mut/wt 
littermates, and found them to be more similar to the wildtype Gnptab wt/wt mouse 
vocalizations (Figure S3). We also found that the vocalization anomalies of the Gnptab
mut/mut animals became more pronounced from day 3 to day 8 (Figure S3).
To obtain further insight into the changes in number of vocalizations, we also examined the 
number of bouts per recording and the number of vocalizations per bout in the Gnptab
mut/mut mice. As expected from the increase in duration of long pauses, the number of bouts 
per recording was smaller in the Gnptab mut/mut mice (Gnptab mut/mut 14.74 ± 4.3 bouts; 
Gnptab wt/wt 45.35 ± 7.8 bouts; t-test p < .0023) (Figure 3A). There was no difference in the 
average number of vocalizations per bout (Gnptab mut/mut 3.0 ± .3 vocalizations; Gnptab
wt/wt 3.6 ± .3 vocalizations; t-test p > .65, Figure 3B). In the Gnptab mut/mut mice, there was 
a small but significant increase in the percentage of bouts that contained only one 
vocalization compared to their wild type littermates (Gnptab mut/mut 45.5% ± .04%, Gnptab
wt/wt 34.2% ± .03%, p <0.029). The percentage of bouts that contained two vocalizations 
was slightly smaller in the homozygous mutants mice (Gnptab mut/mut 13.0 % ± .02% 
Gnptab wt/wt 20.0% ± .03, p<0.05). There was no difference in the percentage of bouts that 
contained 3, 4, or 5 syllables (Figure 3C).
Mouse vocalizations: usage and temporal sequencing of syllables
In humans, some of the disfluencies in stuttering consist of silent blocks, but others—such as 
sound or syllable repetitions—are voiced. To ascertain whether Gnptab mut/mut mice showed 
such abnormalities in their vocalizations, we analyzed both the usage and temporal 
Barnes et al.
Page 4
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sequencing of syllable types as categorized by an established classification scheme based on 
presence and size of abrupt pitch jumps [10, 14] (Figure 4A). We chose this scheme because 
it was initially introduced based on quantitative observations of clustering, which makes it 
easy to automate and therefore unbiased. Several other syllable classification schemes have 
been used [11, 12, 18, 23, 26]; these alternative schemes differ primarily in the classification 
of syllables lacking pitch jumps, but they also exhibit many points of commonality. Wild 
type Gnptab wt/wt and knock-in Gnptab mut/mut mice were indistinguishable in the syllable 
types and their usage (see Experimental Procedures, p>.39, Figure S4). This indicates that 
these mutations do not affect the ability to produce different syllable types.
We next looked at syllable repetition. Wild type mice normally exhibit a strong tendency 
towards syllable repetition, with doublets (defined as two of the same syllable type in a row, 
in bouts of two or more syllables) occurring 38% of the time. We found no significant 
increase in the presence of doublets (Figure 4C) in the vocalizations of the Gnptab mut/mut 
mice. However, within bouts, Gnptab mut/mut mice exhibited a higher percentage of syllables 
of a single type, suggesting that Gnptab mut/mut mice might be more stereotyped in their 
vocalizations (Figure 4D). We tested this possibility using a first order Markov process 
model to compare the entropy present in the temporal structure of these vocalizations, and 
found a tendency towards increased repetition in the vocalizations of the Gnptab mut/mut 
animals (t-test, p<0.022, Figure S5), indicating an overall reduction in temporal diversity. 
Consequently, Gnptab mut/mut mice use all syllable types in proportions similar to wild-type, 
but exhibit higher stereotypy in temporal sequencing.
Non-vocal phenotypes
We also asked whether phenotypic differences between wildtype Gnptab wt/wt and 
homozygous knock-in Gnptab mut/mut mice were specific to vocal behavior. Gnptab mut/mut 
pups exhibited normal weights (Figure S5).
We next examined adult wild type and homozygous knock-in mice using a wide variety of 
behavioral tests. Mice were evaluated first on a 1-h locomotor activity test. There was a 
significant decrease in ambulatory activity (total ambulations) on the part of the 
Gnptabmut/mut mice across the 60-min test session (Figure 5A, p=0.0498). In contrast, no 
differences were found between groups with regard to vertical rearing frequency, or time 
spent, entries made, or distance traveled in the central zone of the test field.
The mice were then tested on a battery of sensorimotor measures to assess possible 
functional deficits. No performance differences were observed between groups on the ledge 
(Figure 5B), pole (Figure 5C), inverted screen tests (Figure 5D), or on the walking initiation, 
platform, or inclined screens tests. These results suggest that balance, strength, co-
ordination, and initiation of movement were not grossly disturbed in the Gnptabmut/mut mice. 
These animals and their wild type littermates also performed equivalently on tests of 
acoustic startle (Figure 5E), prepulse inhibition of startle (PPI) (Figure 5F), and rotarod tests 
(Figure 5G).
Spatial learning and memory capabilities of the Gnptabmut/mut mice were assessed using the 
Morris water maze task with a computerized tracking system as previously described [27]. 
Barnes et al.
Page 5
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cued (visible platform, variable location), and place (submerged, hidden platform, constant 
location) trials were conducted. No significant effects involving genotype were found 
(Figure 5H and 5I).
We next examined the sociability of the mice as assessed by measuring the time 
investigating a conspecific stimulus mouse that was loosely sequestered in a small 
withholding cage compared to the investigation times observed for an empty cage and found 
no significant differences between genotypes [28] (Figure 5J).
Mice were next evaluated for differences in exploratory behaviors and olfactory preference 
using a previously published procedure [29], where hole poking with the nose served as the 
main behavioral response. The apparatus contained 4 corner and 4 side holes in the floor. 
One corner hole contained a familiar odorant and the diagonally opposite corner hole 
contained a novel odorant. Gnptabmut/mut and control mice performed similarly on several 
test variables including the frequency of nose pokes made into the side or corner holes, and 
with regard to pokes made into odorant-containing versus empty corner holes, and for pokes 
made into the corner holes containing a novel versus a familiar odorant. However, wild type 
mice showed a significant preference for the hole containing the familiar odorant (p=0.006) 
while the Gnptabmut/mut mice did not show a significant preference for the familiar odorant, 
though there was a trend in that direction (p=0.11). In addition, the Gnptabmut/mut mice had 
decreased poke durations on average across empty and odorant-containing holes as indicated 
by a significant Genotype effect (Figure 5K, p=0.028). The Gnptabmut/mut and Wild type 
groups each had significantly longer poke durations for the odorant-containing holes versus 
the empty ones, (p=0.024 and 0.012, respectively).
People who stutter (PWS) have been shown to have a higher incidence of anxiety disorders 
[30]. Therefore we assessed anxiety-like behaviors using the elevated plus maze (EPM) and 
fear conditioning. Analysis of the classic open arm variables in the EPM including time 
spent, entries made, and distance traveled in the open arms did not yield any significant 
effects involving genotype (Figure 5L). We also evaluated the performance of Gnptabmut/mut 
mice on a fear-associated Pavlovian conditioning test and found no genotype differences 
(Figure 5M).
Human Vocalizations
Given that the deficits of mice were primarily vocal in nature, we compared these vocal 
deficits with those of PWS. Stuttered and normal speech have been compared using a wide 
variety of language-based and acoustic analyses [1, 31-37]. To ensure optimal comparability, 
we applied our mouse-centric analyses to the vocalizations of PWS. Moreover, we were able 
to analyze vocalizations from normally fluent human controls (CT), PWS, and PWS and 
carry a well-characterized mutation in one of the three genes encoding the LETP (PWS-L) 
(Table S1). We thus tested whether the vocal abnormalities found in the Gnptab mut/mut mice 
could be seen in the more complex vocalizations of humans. We obtained recorded speech 
samples using a standard 500-word stuttering diagnostic reading passage containing 
balanced representation of all speech sound classes [38]. To ensure comparability with 
mouse data, no language-specific criteria were used to determine vocalization segments. 
Barnes et al.
Page 6
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Computer-assigned vocalization segments could therefore include more than one syllable or 
word.
We compared the rate of vocalizations in PWS versus controls (CT). Consistent with 
previous studies [1, 39-41], stuttering case subjects had significantly fewer vocalizations per 
minute (PWS, 90.2 ± 3.0 vocalizations; CT, 124.9 ± 3.1; mean ± s.e.m.; t-test, p< 10-11, 
Figure 6B). Like the Gnptab mut/mut mice, the PWS-L group also displayed significantly 
fewer vocalizations per minute than controls (PWS-L, 81.1 ± 4 vocalizations per minute; t-
test, p< 10-11, Figure 6B). These differences were comparable to the difference found 
between the Gnptab mut/mut mice and Gnptab wt/wt mice.
An analysis of the durations of vocalizations revealed no significant difference between the 
general stuttering cases and controls (PWS mean 0.335 ± 0.020 sec; CT mean 0.313 ± 0.012 
sec; t-test, p>0.3). However, there was a significant increase in the duration of the 
vocalizations in stuttering cases carrying an identified mutation in the LETP (PWS-L mean 
0.385 ± 0.033 sec, t-test, p < 0.02, Figure 6C).
A primary feature of stuttering is involuntary pauses known as blocks, and such pauses have 
been found to be important in assessing fluency of speech [11, 34]. Like the differences in 
the pause lengths in the Gnptab mut/mut mice and Gnptab wt/wt mouse vocalizations, the 
speech of PWS had significantly longer pauses between vocalizations compared to that of 
control subjects (PWS 0.385 ± 0.021 sec; CT, 0.170 ± 0.005 sec; t-test, p < 10-12, Figure 
6D). This was also true for case subjects carrying an LETP mutation (PWS-L, 0.375 ± .038 
sec; t-test, p <10-9). Moreover, we found a significantly greater proportion of long pauses in 
both case groups compared to the control subjects over a wide range of cutoff values for 
defining “long” pauses (Figure 6E). These data indicate that we can detect a statistically 
significant difference in specific features of vocalization in PWS using the same methods 
used to analyze the mouse data. Such measures are “language agnostic” because they do not 
depend on detailed features (formant structure, vowels and consonants, etc.) of human 
speech. Using just two such features, number of vocalizations per minute and length of 
pauses, a k-nearest neighbor classifier could distinguish a PWS from a control subject 79% 
of the time, significantly better than chance (shuffled data, p < 10-5).
To determine whether these same phenomena apply to stuttering during extemporaneous 
speech, we also examined the length and number of speech intervals in 80 three-minute 
samples obtained from publicly-available podcasts, for both controls and PWS. Consistent 
with the results from people reading a script, we found that in extemporaneous speech, PWS 
had fewer vocalizations per unit time compared to controls. This difference was significant 
(PWS 274.7 ± 8.4 vocalizations; CT 434.8 ± 6.5 vocalizations; t-test p < 10-12, Figure 7A). 
The average length of vocalization also differed significantly between groups (PWS 415 
± 17 ms; CT 258 ± 6; t-test p < 10-10; Figure 7B). We also found that the mean length of 
pauses between speech intervals was significantly longer in PWS compared to controls 
(PWS 255 ± 12 ms; CT 160 ± 3; t-test p < 10-8, Figure 7C).
Barnes et al.
Page 7
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
Vocal alterations: mice
Identification of some of the genetic underpinnings of human stuttering has created an 
opportunity to study whether homologous mutations could affect vocalization in a 
genetically-tractable animal model. We found that the vocalizations of Gnptab mut/mut mice 
were significantly different than those of their Gnptab wt/wt littermates. Gnptab mut/mut mice 
had fewer vocalizations per unit time and showed an increased incidence of long pauses. 
Gnptab mut/mut mice produced all the same syllables as their wildtype littermates, and used 
them in similar proportions. We note that these conclusions are specific to the syllable 
classification scheme adopted here, and it remains possible that other classification schemes 
would come to a different conclusion. From manual inspection of the sonograms, at present 
we have not seen evidence leading us to suspect any kind of difference in syllable repertoire.
However, by two measures mice with an LETP mutation showed more temporal stereotypy 
in their vocalizations. First, during bouts of vocalization, a higher percentage of syllables 
were of a single type. Second, the entropy of the first order Markov process was reduced, 
indicating an overall reduction in temporal diversity.
Vocal alterations: human
The techniques used to analyze mouse vocalization were validated by applying them to 
human speech from PWS, PWS with a mutation in the LETP, and controls. Stuttered speech 
has been extensively analyzed using a variety of measures including words per minute, voice 
onset time, formant frequencies of consecutive glottal periods, and other language-based 
acoustic techniques [31, 33, 34, 40]. Previous studies have demonstrated that stuttering is 
strongly correlated with fewer vocalizations per unit time and an increase in pause length 
[39, 40]. We confirmed and extended these results using language agnostic measures 
designed to be generalizable to mice. In addition, we found that using just three such 
language-agnostic features (number of vocalizations per minute, length of syllables and 
length of pauses), we could classify a recording as coming from a PWS or control.
Stuttering is heterogeneous disorder, and there have been many proposed subtypes of 
stuttering [42]. Here we have analyzed the speech of a subset of PWS with a genetically 
identified etiology and compared it to the speech of a general group of PWS. Our results 
show that using our language-agnostic analyses, PWS with a known mutation in the LETP 
showed similar abnormalities as those displayed by PWS of an unknown etiology.
Vocal alterations: comparison between mouse and human
Human speech is produced by air flow induced vocal fold vibrations [43]. In contrast, mouse 
vocalizations are thought to be a form of whistle [44]. Many types of comparisons between 
human speech and mouse vocalization are unlikely to be informative due to anatomical 
differences and the complex and communicative nature of human speech. In the case of 
stuttering, it is important to note that while stuttering may manifest as deficiencies in the 
control of vocal tract movements, there is no evidence that these are the proximal cause of 
the disorder. In fact, there is evidence that persons who are deaf or hearing impaired stutter 
Barnes et al.
Page 8
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 when using sign language suggesting the cause of stuttering resides elsewhere [45]. In 
addition, mouse vocalizations require control of airflow, subglottal pressure, and glottal 
adduction and these share some common neural pathways with human vocal production [3, 
10, 44]. Moreover, there is evidence linking these more cognitive pathways to stuttering [46, 
47].
GNPTAB mutations exhibit several common features in both organisms. PWS, and 
specifically subjects carrying an LETP mutation (PWS-L), showed fewer vocalizations per 
unit time and as fluency blocks, which acoustically correspond to large pauses. Also like the 
mouse, the tendency towards syllable repetition is a defining characteristic of human 
stuttering. That some of the prominent features of human stuttering are recapitulated by the 
mouse model suggests that such a model may be useful in discovering the circuit and 
neurochemical underpinnings of at least some aspects of stuttering. One interpretation of 
these results is that a primary deficit in stuttered speech is the inability to initiate 
vocalization sequences, and that this specific aspect of the behavior is shared between 
organisms and can be disrupted by similar genetic means.
It is worth noting that mice are deaf during the postnatal period until at least P10 depending 
on the frequency [48]. Auditory feedback in humans has been alternatively shown to reduce 
or increase stuttering [49]. However with humans being able to hear is not necessary for 
stuttering behavior. It has been found that people that are hard of hearing and people who are 
deaf, stutter, both in oral speech and sign language [45, 50].
We also noted some differences between human stuttering and the mouse model. There have 
been several cases of PWS who are heterozygous for a mutation in the LETP; in contrast, we 
found that the vocalizations of heterozygous mice were more similar to those of wild type 
controls. In humans, repetition of a single syllable is unusual and strongly indicative of 
stuttered speech; in mice, syllable repetition is commonplace, with the consequence that 
only longer sequences of repetition exhibited significant differences. Finally, an important 
outstanding question is whether the Gnptab mut/mut mice were attempting to vocalize during 
the abnormal pauses or simply remaining quiet.
Non-vocal behaviors
We examined sensory-motor function and learning in a series of non-vocal behavioral 
paradigms. We ran an exhaustive behavioral screening on these animals including 50 
statistical comparisons. We found that Gnptab mut/mut mice were normal over the large 
majority of these measurements. Two measures which did exhibit differences were general 
ambulatory activity (p = 0.007 (corrected for 6 bins, p=.042) during the final time bin, or p = 
0.049 over the entire time interval) and exploratory behaviors related to hole pokes (p = 
0.01-0.03). This is not significantly better than chance (one would expect 2.5 tests to pass 
this criterion by chance). Nor was any single p-value sufficiently strong to survive 
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. With such an extensive battery of tests we 
therefore conclude that our finding appears to be a specific abnormality in vocalization. An 
alternative interpretation of these findings is that Gnptab mut/mut mice may show reduced 
rate of certain spontaneous behaviors.
Barnes et al.
Page 9
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Summary
Our data show that mutations in the lysosomal enzyme targeting pathway affect mouse pup 
isolation calls and human speech in similar ways, suggesting that there is a commonly 
disrupted vocalization function in both. We suggest that this animal model could allow the 
large array of genetic and neurobiological tools that exist in mice to be applied to the study 
of the cellular and molecular features of stuttering and perhaps normal speech.
Experimental Procedures
Data Acquisition
Studies were conducted under institutionally reviewed and approved animal study protocols. 
(NIDCD/NIH #1318-13, D.D. Principal Investigator and Washington University protocol 
20130179, T.H. Principal Investigator, and 20120110, D.W., Principal Investigator). Knock-
in mice were constructed on a BALB/c background using the strategy shown in Figure S1. 
To generate test subjects, heterozygous mice were mated. Females were separated from all 
other mice before they gave birth. Dams were checked for pups daily and the first day that a 
litter was discovered was considered as postnatal day zero (P0). Mice came from a total of 
18 litters. We recorded from mice on postnatal three (P3), five (P5), and eight (P8). Mouse 
data were collected blind to genotype.
Analysis of Vocalizations—All analyses were done using in-house MATLAB software, 
available online at http://holylab.wustl.edu/. Analysis code implemented a fully-automated 
algorithm and were therefore blind to genotype. For mice, waveforms were pre-processed, 
band-pass filtered (25–110 kHz), and vocalizations identified using mean frequency, 
“spectral purity” (fraction of total power concentrated into a single frequency bin), and the 
“spectral discontinuity” (the change in the allocation of power across frequencies between 
two adjacent time bins) [14]. Stored acoustical waveforms were processed using MATLAB 
to compute the sonogram (512 samples/block, half-overlap, resulting in a time resolution of 
1.02 ms and a frequency resolution of 0.98 kHz). We also examined broad band ‘clicks’ in 
the mouse vocalizations that were defined as non-contiguous milliseconds where less than 
200 of the 512 sampled half frequencies were empty. No difference in the number of clicks 
was detected between groups. Stored acoustical waveforms were processed in MATLAB to 
compute the sonogram (512 samples/block, half-overlap, resulting in a time resolution of 
1.02 ms and a frequency resolution of 0.98 kHz).
For humans, vocalizations were identified in terms of supra-threshold power in either of two 
frequency bands (0.6 -1.6 kHz and 5.6-9.6 kHz). Vocalization periods separated by gaps 
shorter than 20 ms were merged. Comparison with manual scoring demonstrated that 
breathing and other non-speech noises were excluded (Figure 5A). We examined the length 
and number of speech intervals and non-speech intervals (pauses between speech) in the 
speech samples. These intervals did not necessarily have only one word; many times words 
were run together without an appreciable non-speech interval.
To calculate the number of syllables and the duration of syllables and pauses, each 
vocalization or pause contributed to the mean for each animal or subject; each individual's 
Barnes et al.
Page 10
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mean was then averaged to obtain the group average. A t-test was then performed to 
compare groups with each individual's mean. An alternative analysis, where each syllable 
contributes to the overall mean was also performed and produced comparable results, not 
shown.
For the syllable analysis, the definitions set forth in Arriaga et al. were used, with the 
exception of classes “i, j, k” these syllable types were grouped into the category ‘other’ [10, 
14]. This classification was done using a fully-automated algorithm. To determine whether 
the usage frequency differed significantly between genotypes, we first picked a random pair 
of recordings from the Gnptab mut/mut mice. We performed a bootstrap analysis of the 
differences in syllable usage between two individual mice, measuring the difference by
where s is the syllable type index, and ãs and b̃s are the normalized numbers of observed or 
predicted syllables of type s. The normalization was performed in terms of A = Σas and B = 
Σbs (where variables without ∼ denote raw counts), scaling 
 and 
. As a consequence, the recording with more syllables was scaled to a 
number equal to that of the recording with fewer syllables, and the one with fewer was 
unmodified. The bootstrap was calculating the mean difference D among randomly-selected 
pairs of Gnptab mut/mut mice, and then comparing this mean against the distribution of mean 
D obtained from an identical number of wildtype/mut pairs, with wildtypes resampled to 
match the number of syllables produced by mut animals.
We used a t-test to compare the number of doublets and found no difference between 
experimental groups. Bout-level analyses defined bouts based on histograms of pause 
lengths for all groups of mice in each day we recorded. Histograms were constructed with a 
range of bin sizes (50 ms to 300 ms). The middle of minimum bin in the range of 0.15 to 
0.33 seconds was averaged across all bin sizes to determine the criteria for an inter-bout 
pause. The resulting minimum intra-bout/inter-bout cutoff was determined to be 0.33 s in 
day 3 recordings, 0.28 s in day 5 and 0.22 s in day 8 recordings. To analyze bout-level 
repetition, the syllables in each bout were analyzed to determine how many of the syllables 
in each bout were the same type as the mode of that bout. In Figure 4D, the confidence 
intervals were calculated by bootstrapping bouts; bout-sizes with fewer than 3 exemplars are 
depicted only in terms of their mean. Entropy of syllable usage was calculated from the 
proportion of different syllable types; entropy for the temporal sequence (modeled as a first-
order Markov process) was given by H2 = −Σp(X)Σp(X|Y) log2p (X|Y) with X and Y being 
each syllable type [19].
For the classification analysis, the number of vocalizations per minute, the average duration 
of each vocalization and the average duration of each pause were normalized to a range of 
0-1 and plotted in 3 dimensional space. We then categorized each recording as being either 
Barnes et al.
Page 11
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from a control or person who stutters based on nearest neighbors. Choices of 1, 3, and 5 
closest neighbors all yielded very similar results. We analyzed three cases: 1) all recordings 
from controls and PWS, 2) controls and PWS with an unknown cause, and 3) controls and 
PWS with a known mutation in the LETP. Data in all cases were significant compared to 
empirically calculated p value of .05 (data labels (e.g. controls, person who stutters) shuffled 
10,000 times, 95% confidence intervals).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Hollins Communication Research Institute (HCRI) for assistance with subject recruitment and 
stuttering diagnosis. We thank Peter Rietzes of StutterTalk for help with speech samples from PWS. We thank 
Grace Liao and Cassandra Roberts for help with vocal recordings of mice, Wayne Barnes and Thanh Loan Nguyen 
for their help with mouse genotyping, and Sara Conyers for her work involving the non-vocalization behavioral 
testing. This work was supported by the NIH Director's Pioneer Award (DP1 OD006437), Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities Research Center grant (P30 HD062171), and NIDCD Intramural grant Z1A-000046-15
References
1. Bloodstein, O.; Bernstein Ratner, N., editors. A Handbook on Stuttering. 6th. 2008. 
2. Conture, EG. Stuttering: Its Nature, Dignosis, and Treatment. Allyn and Bacon; 2001. 
3. Fisher SE, Lai CSL, Monaco AP. Deciphering the Genetic Basis of Speech and Language Disorders. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience. 2003; 26:57–80.
4. MacDermot KD, Bonora E, Sykes N, Coupe AM, Lai CSL, Vernes SC, Vargha-Khadem F, 
McKenzie F, Smith RL, Monaco AP, et al. Identification of FOXP2 Truncation as a Novel Cause of 
Developmental Speech and Language Deficits. The American Journal of Human Genetics. 2005; 
76:1074–1080. [PubMed: 15877281] 
5. Fedorenko E, Morgan A, Murray E, Cardinaux A, Mei C, Tager-Flusberg H, Fisher SE, Kanwisher 
N. A highly penetrant form of childhood apraxia of speech due to deletion of 16p11. 2. European 
Journal of Human Genetics. 2015
6. Kang C, Riazuddin S, Mundorff J, Krasnewich D, Friedman P, Mullikin JC, Drayna D. Mutations in 
the Lysosomal Enzyme–Targeting Pathway and Persistent Stuttering. New England Journal of 
Medicine. 2010; 362:677–685. [PubMed: 20147709] 
7. Raza MH, Domingues CEF, Webster R, Sainz E, Paris E, Rahn R, Gutierrez J, Chow HM, Mundorff 
J, Kang Cs, et al. Mucolipidosis types II and III and non-syndromic stuttering are associated with 
different variants in the same genes. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015
8. Kornfeld S. Trafficking of lysosomal enzymes. The FASEB Journal. 1987; 1:462–468. [PubMed: 
3315809] 
9. Fischer J, Hammerschmidt K. Ultrasonic vocalizations in mouse models for speech and socio-
cognitive disorders: insights into the evolution of vocal communication. Genes, Brain and Behavior. 
2010:no–no.
10. Arriaga G, Zhou EP, Jarvis ED. Of Mice, Birds, and Men: The Mouse Ultrasonic Song System Has 
Some Features Similar to Humans and Song-Learning Birds. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e46610. 
[PubMed: 23071596] 
11. Enard W, Gehre S, Hammerschmidt K, Hölter SM, Blass T, Somel M, Brückner MK, Schreiweis 
C, Winter C, Sohr R, et al. A Humanized Version of Foxp2 Affects Cortico-Basal Ganglia Circuits 
in Mice. Cell. 2009; 137:961–971. [PubMed: 19490899] 
12. Scattoni ML, Ricceri L, Crawley JN. Unusual repertoire of vocalizations in adult BTBR T+ tf/J 
mice during three types of social encounters. Genes, Brain and Behavior. 2011; 10:44–56.
Barnes et al.
Page 12
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13. Anne-Marie EENT, Sourd L, Boeckers CSLTM, Thomas PF. The Autism ProSAP1/Shank2 Mouse 
Model Displays Quantitative and Structural Abnormalities in Ultrasonic Vocalisations. 2013
14. Holy TE, Guo Z. Ultrasonic Songs of Male Mice. PLoS Biol. 2005; 3:e386. [PubMed: 16248680] 
15. Fujita E, Tanabe Y, Shiota A, Ueda M, Suwa K, Momoi MY, Momoi T. Ultrasonic vocalization 
impairment of Foxp2 (R552H) knockin mice related to speech-language disorder and abnormality 
of Purkinje cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2008; 105:3117–3122.
16. Gaub S, Groszer M, Fisher SE, Ehret G. The structure of innate vocalizations in Foxp2-deficient 
mouse pups. Genes, Brain and Behavior. 2010; 9:390–401.
17. Shu W, Cho JY, Jiang Y, Zhang M, Weisz D, Elder GA, Schmeidler J, De Gasperi R, Sosa MAG, 
Rabidou D, et al. Altered ultrasonic vocalization in mice with a disruption in the Foxp2 gene. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005; 
102:9643–9648. [PubMed: 15983371] 
18. Grimsley JMS, Monaghan JJM, Wenstrup JJ. Development of Social Vocalizations in Mice. PLoS 
ONE. 2011; 6:e17460. [PubMed: 21408007] 
19. Ey E, Torquet N, Le Sourd AM, Leblond CS, Boeckers TM, Faure P, Bourgeron T. The Autism 
ProSAP1/Shank2 mouse model displays quantitative and structural abnormalities in ultrasonic 
vocalisations. Behavioural Brain Research. 2013; 256:677–689. [PubMed: 23994547] 
20. Ehret G. Categorical perception of mouse-pup ultrasounds in the temporal domain. Animal 
Behaviour. 1992; 43:409–416.
21. Lai CSL, Fisher SE, Hurst JA, Vargha-Khadem F, Monaco AP. A forkhead-domain gene is mutated 
in a severe speech and language disorder. Nature. 2001; 413:519–523. [PubMed: 11586359] 
22. Groszer M, Keays DA, Deacon RMJ, de Bono JP, Prasad-Mulcare S, Gaub S, Baum MG, French 
CA, Nicod J, Coventry JA, et al. Impaired Synaptic Plasticity and Motor Learning in Mice with a 
Point Mutation Implicated in Human Speech Deficits. Current biology : CB. 2008; 18:354–362. 
[PubMed: 18328704] 
23. Hammerschmidt K, Schreiweis C, Minge C, Pääbo S, Fischer J, Enard W. A humanized version of 
Foxp2 does not affect ultrasonic vocalization in adult mice. Genes, Brain and Behavior. 2015; 
14:583–590.
24. Groszer M, Keays DA, Deacon RMJ, de Bono JP, Prasad-Mulcare S, Gaub S, Baum MG, French 
CA, Nicod J, Coventry JA, et al. Impaired Synaptic Plasticity and Motor Learning in Mice with a 
Point Mutation Implicated in Human Speech Deficits. Current Biology. 2008; 18:354–362. 
[PubMed: 18328704] 
25. Fedyna A, Drayna D, Kang C. Characterization of a mutation commonly associated with persistent 
stuttering: evidence for a founder mutation. J Hum Genet. 2011; 56:80–82. [PubMed: 20944643] 
26. Grimsley JM, Gadziola MA, Wenstrup JJ. Automated classification of mouse pup isolation 
syllables: from cluster analysis to an Excel-based “mouse pup syllable classification calculator”. 
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience. 2013; 6:89. [PubMed: 23316149] 
27. Wozniak DF, Hartman RE, Boyle MP, Vogt SK, Brooks AR, Tenkova T, Young C, Olney JW, 
Muglia LJ. Apoptotic neurodegeneration induced by ethanol in neonatal mice is associated with 
profound learning/memory deficits in juveniles followed by progressive functional recovery in 
adults. Neurobiology of disease. 2004; 17:403–414. [PubMed: 15571976] 
28. Dougherty JD, Maloney SE, Wozniak DF, Rieger MA, Sonnenblick L, Coppola G, Mahieu NG, 
Zhang J, Cai J, Patti GJ. The disruption of Celf6, a gene identified by translational profiling of 
serotonergic neurons, results in autism-related behaviors. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2013; 
33:2732–2753. [PubMed: 23407934] 
29. Wozniak DF, Diggs-Andrews KA, Conyers S, Yuede CM, Dearborn JT, Brown JA, Tokuda K, 
Izumi Y, Zorumski CF, Gutmann DH. Motivational disturbances and effects of L-dopa 
administration in neurofibromatosis-1 model mice. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e66024. [PubMed: 
23762458] 
30. Menzies RG, Onslow M, Packman A. Anxiety and stuttering: Exploring a complex relationship. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology. 1999; 8:3.
31. Czyzewski A, Kaczmarek A, Kostek B. Intelligent Processing of Stuttered Speech. Journal of 
Intelligent Information Systems. 2003; 21:143–171.
Barnes et al.
Page 13
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Healey EC, Ramig PR. Acoustic Measures of Stutterers' and Nonstutterers' Fluency in Two Speech 
Contexts. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. 1986; 29:325–331.
33. Howell P, Sackin S, Glenn K. Development of a Two-Stage Procedure for the Automatic 
Recognition of Dysfluencies in the Speech of Children Who Stutter: II. ANN Recognition of 
Repetitions and Prolongations With Supplied Word Segment Markers. Journal of speech, 
language, and hearing research : JSLHR. 1997; 40:1085–1096.
34. Lustyk T, Bergl P, Cmejla R. Evaluation of disfluent speech by means of automatic acoustic 
measurements. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 2014; 135:1457–1468. 
[PubMed: 24606282] 
35. Riper, Cv. The nature of stuttering. Englewood Cliffs, nj: Prentice–Hall; 1982. 
36. Robb M, Blomgren M, Chen Y. Formant frequency fluctuation in stuttering and nonstuttering 
adults. Journal of Fluency Disorders. 1998; 23:73–84.
37. Seery CH, Watkins RV, Mangelsdorf SC, Shigeto A. Subtyping stuttering II: Contributions from 
language and temperament. Journal of Fluency Disorders. 2007; 32:197–217. [PubMed: 
17825669] 
38. Webster RL. Empirical considerations regarding stuttering therapy. Controversies about stuttering 
therapy. 1979:209–240.
39. Andrade, CRFd; Cervone, LM.; Sassi, FC. Relationship between the stuttering severity index and 
speech rate. Sao Paulo Medical Journal. 2003; 121:81–84. [PubMed: 12870056] 
40. Johnson W. Measurements of oral reading and speaking rate and disfluency of adult male and 
female stutterers and nonstutterers. The Journal of speech and hearing disorders. 1961:1.
41. Ryan BP. Articulation, Language, Rate, and Fluency Characteristics of Stuttering and 
Nonstuttering Preschool Children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research. 1992; 
35:333–342.
42. Yairi E. Subtyping stuttering I: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders. 2007; 32:165–196. 
[PubMed: 17825668] 
43. Honda M. Human speech production mechanisms. NTT Technical Review. 2003; 1:24–29.
44. Johnson AM, Ciucci MR, Russell JA, Hammer MJ, Connor NP. Ultrasonic output from the excised 
rat larynx. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 2010; 128:EL75–EL79. [PubMed: 
20707418] 
45. Montgomery BM, Fitch JL. The prevalence of stuttering in the hearing-impaired school age 
population. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders. 1988; 53:131–135. [PubMed: 3361855] 
46. Fox PT, Ingham RJ, Ingham JC, Zamarripa F, Xiong JH, Lancaster JL. Brain correlates of 
stuttering and syllable production. Brain. 2000; 123:1985–2004. [PubMed: 11004117] 
47. Rosenbek J, Messert B, Collins M, Wertz RT. Stuttering following brain damage. Brain and 
language. 1978; 6:82–96. [PubMed: 698787] 
48. Ehret G. Development of absolute auditory thresholds in the house mouse (Mus musculus). Ear 
and Hearing. 1976; 1:179–184.
49. Kalinowski J, Armson J, Stuart A, Gracco VL. Effects of alterations in auditory feedback and 
speech rate on stuttering frequency. Language and Speech. 1993; 36:1–16. [PubMed: 8345771] 
50. Snyder, G. Unpublished manuscript. University of Mississippi, University; 2006. The existence of 
stuttering in sign language and other forms of expressive communication: Sufficient cause for the 
emergence of a new stuttering paradigm. 
Barnes et al.
Page 14
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Mutations in the lysosomal enzyme-targeting pathway cause stuttering 
in humans
•
Mice with a mutation in this pathway also show abnormalities in 
vocalizations
•
Other behaviors in the knock-in mice appear largely intact
•
People who stutter with this type of mutation have similar features in 
their speech
Barnes et al.
Page 15
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Experimental scheme
(A) Knock-in mice with a Glu1179Lys mutation in exon 19 of the Gnptab gene were 
constructed on a BALB/c background. Recordings were performed on mice pups separated 
from dam for recording on postnatal day 3, 5 and 8. (B) Frequency distribution of mouse 
pup vocalizations on day 8 in wild type littermates from the Gnptab wt/wt mice (green, n=20) 
and Gnptab mut/mut mice (red, n=19) (C) Sonogram of a wild type mouse pup vocalizing in 
isolation. Lower window is an expanded version of one portion, showing the repeated 
structure in the mouse vocalizations. Red bars indicate a detected vocalization. (D) 
Sonogram of a Gnptab mut/mut as in c. See also Figure S1.
Barnes et al.
Page 16
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Differences in the vocalizations of mice with a mutation in the LETP compared to wild 
type littermates
(A) Vocalizations per recording in mouse pup vocalizations in wild type littermates (Gnptab
wt/wt, green, n=20), and mice homozygous for the Glu1179Lys mutation (Gnptab mut/mut, 
red, n=19). Note the significant decrease in the Gnptab mut/mut mice compared Gnptab wt/wt 
littermates (t-test, p < 0.034). (B) Duration of vocalization in Gnptab wt/wt and Gnptab 
mut/mut mice. No significant difference was found. (C) Pause duration between 
vocalizations, with a significant increase in the duration of pauses in the Gnptab wt/wt 
compared to the Gnptab mut/mut mice (t-test p<0.020). (D) Proportion of long pauses with a 
steadily increasing criterion for criterion for ‘long pauses’. Gnptab mut/mut mice had 
significantly more long pauses. Each dot represents the mean of one subject. Error bars 
represent standard error of the mean across individuals. Color scheme as in panels A-C. See 
also Figure S2 and S3.
Barnes et al.
Page 17
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Number of bouts in Gnptab wt/mut mice vocalizations compared to Gnptab mut/mut and 
Gnptab wt/wt mice across days
(A) Number of bouts per recording in mouse pup vocalizations in wild type littermates 
(Gnptab wt/wt, green), (Gnptab wt/mut, blue) and mice homozygous for the Glu1179Lys 
mutation (Gnptab mut/mut, red). Note there was a significant difference between Gnptab wt/wt 
and Gnptab mut/mut mice (t-test p < .0023). Error bars represent standard error of the mean 
across individuals. (B) No significant difference was found in the number of vocalizations 
per bout. (C) Percentage of bouts containing 1 (Gnptab mut/mut, red, 45.5% ± .04%, Gnptab
wt/wt, green, 34.2% ± .03%, p < .029), 2 (Gnptab mut/mut 13.0 % ± .02% Gnptab wt/wt 20.0% 
± .03, p<.05), 3, 4 or 5 vocalizations.
Barnes et al.
Page 18
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Mouse vocalizations from Gnptab wt/wt compared to vocalizations of Gnptab mut/mut
(A) Syllable identification scheme showing examples of each type of syllable. (B) 
Percentage of each type of syllable in wild type and knock-in mice. Differences were not 
statistically significant. Each color represents one syllable type. (C) Percentage of times that 
one syllable type was followed by the same syllable type. Differences were not statistically 
significant. (D) Percentage of syllables that were of the same type as the mode of each bout, 
for bout sizes ranging from 1 to 20. Data from Gnptab wt/wt and Gnptab mut/mut . Shaded 
areas represent 95% confidence intervals. (E) Diversity of vocalization sequences as 
quantified by the entropy of the corresponding first order Markov process (t-test, p<0.022). 
See also Figure S4 and S5.
Barnes et al.
Page 19
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Non-vocal behavioral test results from Gnptab wt/wt and Gnptab mut/mut mice
(A) Ambulatory activity was significantly decreased (*p<0.05) in mice homozygous for the 
Glu1179Lys mutation (Gnptab mut/mut, red, n=15) compared to wild type (Gnptab wt/wt, 
green, n=15) mice with differences being greatest during block 6 (**p=0.017). (B-D) The 
two groups of mice did not differ on several sensorimotor tests such as the time spent on an 
elevated ledge (B), the time to climb down a pole (C), or the time spent hanging upside 
down on an inverted screen before falling (D). (E-F) The Gnptab wt/wt and Gnptab mut/mut 
mice also exhibited similar magnitudes of the acoustic startle response (arbitrary units) (E) 
and PPI (F). (G) Time spent on accelerating rotorod before falling. No significant 
differences were found. (H) Path length on Morris Water maze for place trials. (I-J) The 
performance of the Gnptab mut/mut mice was not impaired during the spatial learning (place) 
trials (I) nor in terms of retention performance during a probe trial where each group showed 
spatial bias for the target quadrant by spending significantly more time in it versus the times 
spent in each of the other quadrants (p<0.00005). (J) The Gnptab wt/wt and Gnptab mut/mut 
mice showed comparable levels of sociability in that each group spent significantly more 
time in an investigation zone surrounding a stimulus mouse that remained inside a 
withholding cage compared to levels exhibited toward an empty cage (p<0.00005), although 
there were no differences between the two groups for either of the two conditions. (K) For 
each group, the duration of hole pokes was significantly greater for the odorant-containing 
versus the empty holes (p<0.024), although the Gnptab wt/wt mice had significantly higher 
poke durations on average across the two hole types (*p=0.028). (L) The two groups did not 
differ in levels of anxiety-related behaviors in the elevated plus maze as exemplified by the 
lack of significant effects involving genotype on the percentage of distance traveled in the 
open arms out of the total distances traveled in all of the arms. (M) The absence of any 
Barnes et al.
Page 20
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significant effects involving genotype suggested that there were no differences in contextual 
fear conditioning between the groups.
Barnes et al.
Page 21
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Vocalizations of human controls, PWS, and PWS with a known mutation in the LETP, 
as measured by a language agnostic analysis
(A) Sonogram of a person saying, “(Breath) One of big…the…one of the big advantages of 
nylon over” while reading from a standard diagnostic script. Red bars indicate detected 
vocalization intervals. (B) Vocalizations per minute in the control subjects reading the script 
(CT; green, n=51), PWS (PWS; gray, n=74), and PWS with a known mutation in the LETP 
reading the same script (PWS-L; black, n=26). Each dot represents the mean of one subject. 
Error bars represent standard error of the mean across individuals. Brackets and stars 
indicate significance. There was a significant decrease in the number of vocalizations in 
PWS group (t-test, p<10-11), and in the PWS-L (t-test, p<10-11) group compared to the CT 
group. Data on log scale. (C) Duration of vocalizations. Note there was no significant 
difference in the duration of vocalizations between the CT and PWS groups while there was 
a significant difference between the CT and PWS-L groups (t-test, p<0.02). (D) Mean pause 
duration between vocalizations, with a significant increase in the PWS group (t-test, p< 
10-12) as well as in the PWS-L group (t-test, p< 10-9) compared to the CT group. (E) 
Proportion of long pauses, with a steadily increasing criterion for ‘long pauses’, in the 
recordings of the subjects reading the script using the same color scheme as in panels B-D 
showing that over a range of criteria, PWS in both categories had more ‘long’ pauses. Bars 
indicate standard error of mean. See also Table S1.
Barnes et al.
Page 22
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Extemporaneous vocalizations of human controls and PWS
(A) Vocalizations per minute in podcast segments from controls (CT; green, n=68), and 
PWS (PWS; black, n=28, t-test; p<10-21). Each dot represents the mean of one subject. Error 
bars represent standard error of the mean across individuals. (B) Duration of vocalization 
periods. Note the significant increase in PWS group (t-test, p< p<10-12) compared to the CT 
group. (C) Pause duration between vocalizations, with a significant increase in the duration 
of pauses in the PWS group (t-test, p<10-17) compared to the CT group. (D) Proportion of 
long pauses with a steadily increasing criterion for ‘long pauses’, in the recordings of the 
controls subjects reading the script (CT; green), and PWS (ST; black). Bars indicate standard 
error of the mean. These results are similar to that of reading a script Figure 6.
Barnes et al.
Page 23
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
