 The Challenging Experience Questionnaire: Characterization of 
challenging experiences with psilocybin mushrooms
Frederick S. Barrett1, Matthew P. Bradstreet1, Jeannie-Marie S. Leoutsakos1, Matthew W. 
Johnson1, and Roland R. Griffiths1,2
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine
2Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Abstract
Acute adverse psychological reactions to classic hallucinogens (“bad trips”, or “challenging 
experiences”), while usually benign with proper screening, preparation, and support in controlled 
settings, remain a safety concern in uncontrolled settings (such as illicit use contexts). Anecdotal 
and case reports suggest potential adverse acute symptoms including affective (panic, depressed 
mood), cognitive (confusion, feelings of losing sanity), and somatic (nausea, heart palpitation) 
symptoms. Responses to items from several hallucinogen-sensitive questionnaires (Hallucinogen 
Rating Scale, the States of Consciousness Questionnaire, and the 5-Dimensional Altered States of 
Consciousness questionnaire) in an internet survey of challenging experiences with the classic 
hallucinogen psilocybin were used to construct and validate a Challenging Experience 
Questionnaire (CEQ). The stand-alone CEQ was then validated in a separate sample. Seven CEQ 
factors (grief, fear, death, insanity, isolation, physical distress, and paranoia) provide a 
phenomenological profile of challenging aspects of experiences with psilocybin. Factor scores 
were associated with the difficulty, meaningfulness, spiritual significance, and change in well-
being attributed to the challenging experiences. The factor structure did not differ based on gender 
or prior struggle with anxiety or depression. The CEQ provides a basis for future investigation of 
predictors and outcomes of challenging experiences with psilocybin, and should be explored as a 
measure of challenging experiences with the broad class of classic hallucinogens.
Keywords
psilocybin; challenging experiences; scale development; factor analysis; psychedelics
Introduction
Classic psychedelic hallucinogens, such as psilocybin, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 
mescaline, and dimethyltryptamine (DMT; contained in the sacramental beverage 
Corresponding Author: Frederick S. Barrett, Ph.D. Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, 5510 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA, fbarrett@jhmi.edu, Phone: 410-550-9777. 
Declaration of Conflicting of Interests
RRG is a member of the Board of Directors of the Heffter Research Institute.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Psychopharmacol. 2016 December ; 30(12): 1279–1295. doi:10.1177/0269881116678781.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ayahuasca) share a primary pharmacological site of action at the 5HT2a receptor, and 
display striking similarities in their subjective effects (Halberstadt, 2015; Nichols, 2016). 
The first era of modern human research on psychedelics, from roughly the 1950s to the 
1970s, capitalized on the powerful effects of psychedelics on perception, emotions, and 
consciousness by investigating the therapeutic and psychotomimetic properties of these 
substances.
The recent resurgence of empirical research on psychedelics has revived their investigation 
as therapeutic agents (Bogenschutz et al., 2015; Carhart-Harris et al., 2012; Carhart-Harris, 
Bolstridge et al., 2016; Griffiths et al., in press; Grob et al., 2011; Johnson, Garcia-Romeu, 
Cosimano, & Griffiths, 2014; Ross et al., in press) and tools to understand psychosis 
(Schmid et al., 2015; Vollenweider, Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, Babler, Vogel, & Hell, 
1998; Vollenweider, Csomor, Knappe, Geyer, & Quednow, 2007). Recent studies have also 
examined mystical-type (Barrett, Johnson, & Griffiths, 2015; Griffiths, Richards, McCann, 
& Jesse, 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011) or spiritual (Kometer, Pokorny, Seifritz, & 
Volleinweider, 2015) experiences, changes in self-referential processing or “ego dissolution” 
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016), altered social processing (Preller et 
al., 2016), visual imagery (Kaelen et al., 2016), changes in emotional experience (Kaelen et 
al., 2015; Kraehenmann et al., 2015), personality change (Carhart-Harris, Kaelen et al., 
2016; Lebedev et al., 2016; MacLean, Johnson, & Griffiths, 2011), positive mental health 
outcomes (Hendricks, Thorne, Clark, Coombs, & Johnson, 2015; Johansen & Krebs, 2015), 
and enduring positive changes in attitudes, mood and behavior (Griffiths, Richards, Johnson, 
McCann, & Jesse, 2008; Griffiths et al., 2011) occasioned by these compounds. However, 
both recent experimental reports (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 
2014; Studerus, Kometer, Hasler, & Vollenweider, 2011) and past clinical reports (Cohen, 
1960; Strassman, 1984) indicate that challenging psychological experiences during the acute 
effects of psychedelics are not uncommon.
Phenomenology of challenging psychedelic experiences
An early summary of reports from investigators conducting therapeutic research with LSD 
and mescaline (for almost 5,000 individuals and more than 25,000 separate drug 
administrations) noted instances of fear, delusions, dissociation, depersonalization, and 
sympathetic nervous system responses during acute effects of these drugs (Cohen, 1960). 
Reports of psychosis lasting more than 48 hours were exceedingly rare (<0.001% of healthy 
individuals, and <0.002% of individuals undergoing therapy), however this summary must 
be viewed tentatively, given numerous limitations, including, for example, that none of the 
reporting investigators had conducted follow-up with their patients (Novak, 1997).
A subsequent review, integrating both clinical literature (including emergency department 
reports) and research literature, presented a summary of acute adverse effects of classic 
hallucinogens that included frightening illusions and hallucinations, overwhelming anxiety 
or panic, confusion, aggression and possible violence, depression with suicidal ideation, 
gestures, or attempts, and fear to the point of paranoid delusions (Strassman, 1984). When 
encountered, these symptoms typically responded to verbal reassurance and typically 
subsided within 48 hours, often spontaneously. If severe, these symptoms typically 
Barrett et al.
Page 2
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 responded to medication. However, the review noted that emergency department reports 
(McCabe, 1977; Taylor, Maurer, & Tinklenberg, 1970) are limited by uncertainty of 
substance ingested and unknown mental state of the patient prior to putative ingestion of a 
psychoactive substance. Recent research reports that address challenging aspects of 
experiences with psychedelics (hereby referred to as “challenging experiences” for brevity) 
are more specific with regards to substance and dose administered.
Approximately 30% of participants in each of three highly controlled experimental studies 
(total sample: 69 participants and 204 sessions – Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; 
Johnson et al., 2014) involving a high dose of psilocybin (0.429 mg/kg psilocybin) 
experienced marked periods of anxiety or fear, while between 17% and 39% experienced 
paranoia (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011). Only 3 of 42 (7.1%) participants 
receiving up to a moderate dose of psilocybin (0.315 mg/kg psilocybin) in a separate series 
of studies reported marked periods of anxiety, fear, or dysphoria, while only one (2.4%) of 
those participants reported prolonged symptoms (Studerus et al., 2011).
Clinical and experimental literature on psychedelics suggests a possible profile of 
challenging experiences that includes the following categories of experience: fear or panic, 
paranoia, sadness or depressed mood, anger, cognitive effects (e.g. confusion, loss of ego, 
loss of sanity, delusions, dissociation, depersonalization), perceptual effects (e.g. illusions), 
and physiological symptoms (e.g. increased heart rate, nausea/emesis, sympathetic system 
response). These categories are supported both by reviews of the safety of hallucinogens 
(Frecska & Luna, 2006; Johnson, Richards, & Griffiths, 2008) and published clinical 
guidelines for the assessment and management of adverse reactions to hallucinogens 
(McCabe, 1977). While these categories of experience appear in aggregate in the literature, 
they may not all appear in any single instance of a challenging experience.
Current assessments of challenging experiences
The two most widely used questionnaire instruments assessing the subjective effects of 
classic hallucinogens are the Hallucinogen Rating Scale (HRS) (Strassman, Qualls, 
Uhlenhuth, & Kellner, 1994; Strassman, 1995) and the various forms of Dittrich’s Altered 
States of Consciousness questionnaires (Dittrich, 1975; Dittrich, 1998; Studerus, Gamma, & 
Vollenweider, 2010), including the Altered States of Consciousness Rating Scale (OAV) and 
the 5-Dimensional Altered States of Consciousness Rating Scale (5DASC). While some of 
the sub-scales of these instruments, and many items within these instruments, assess some 
aspect of cognitive, emotional, or physiological experiences that may be challenging, no 
questionnaire includes a comprehensive list of clearly defined sub-scales that separately 
measure the categories of challenging experience that are suggested by previous literature.
The Hallucinogen Rating Scale (HRS) was developed explicitly as a means to quantify the 
subjective effects of classic hallucinogens (Strassman et al., 1994). Of the six sub-scales of 
the HRS (i.e. affect, cognition, intensity, perception, somaesthesia, and volition), one might 
hypothesize that the affect, cognition, and somaesthesia sub-scales might be most sensitive 
to challenging experiences. However, although the affect scale includes items that assess 
negative affect (e.g. anxious, frightened, panic), it also includes items that assess positive 
affect (e.g. euphoria, love, awe). Items in the cognition and somaesthesia scales include 
Barrett et al.
Page 3
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 items that assess possibly challenging cognitions and sensations (e.g. “sense of chaos” or 
“nausea”), but they also include items that assess general but not necessarily “challenging” 
cognitions and sensations (e.g. “new thoughts” or “change in body temperature”). Thus, 
scores on the six scales of the HRS do not distinguish between very strong challenging 
experiences and very strong non-challenging experiences.
The OAV and 5DASC (and the preceding Abnormal Mental States, or APZ, questionnaire) 
have been widely used in behavioral and neuroimaging research of pharmacologically 
(Gouzoulis-Mayfrank et al., 2005; Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; Vollenweider 
et al., 1998) as well as non-pharmacologically induced altered states of consciousness 
(Hübner, 2007; Kjellgren, Sundequist, Sundholm, Norlander, & Archer, 2004; Walach & 
Kaseberg, 1998). The OAV sub-scale “dread of ego dissolution” (DED) covers a wide range 
of negative experiences, and is generally considered an overall “bad trip” scale (Studerus et 
al., 2010). This meta-scale of possible negative effects covers many (e.g. panic, loss of ego/
control, feelings of insanity) but not all (e.g. sadness/grief/depression) possible categories of 
challenging experiences. The DED scale also averages responses from a number of proposed 
categories of experience (panic, loss of ego, insanity) rather than giving an individual score 
for each. Studerus and colleagues (2010) revealed a rescoring of the 5DASC that includes a 
separate scale for impaired control and cognition, and for anxiety. While these represent 
psychometrically justifiable subscales, these two sub-scales do not address shortcomings of 
the DED scale (e.g. they do not address the wide range of potential dimensions of 
challenging experience that are suggested by previous literature).
Many other instruments were either used or developed to assess various aspects of subjective 
experience of hallucinogens, including the Linton-Langs questionnaire (Linton & Langs, 
1962), the Abramson questionnaire (Abramson, 1960), the Phenomenology of 
Consciousness Inventory (Pekala, 1986), the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(Belleville, 1956), the States of Consciousness Questionnaire (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths 
et al., 2011), and the Addiction Research Center Inventory (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et 
al., 2011; Haertzen, 1966; Riba et al., 2001). These scales all suffer from at least one of the 
shortcomings of the 5DASC and HRS, namely: lack of specificity (i.e. lack of separable or 
independent scales that measure fine-grained facets of a challenging experience), lack of 
content coverage (missing a proposed dimension of challenging experience), or lack of 
sensitivity (i.e. not sensitive to the degree of challenge in an experience) to challenging 
experiences.
Why an assessment of dimensions of challenging experience is needed
With the recognition of the importance of set (participant psychological state) and setting 
(interpersonal and physical environment), acute adverse effects of psychedelics may 
generally be minimized and successfully managed in research contexts (Johnson et al., 2008; 
Metzner, Litwin, & Weil, 1965; Studerus, Gamma, Kometer, & Vollenweider, 2012). 
Guidelines have been described to minimize adverse reactions in controlled settings 
(Johnson et al., 2008), and incidence of lasting symptoms (including psychosis) related to 
administration of classic hallucinogens in controlled settings is quite low (Griffiths et al., 
2006; Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; Griffiths et al., 2011; Strassman, 1984; 
Barrett et al.
Page 4
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Strassman, 1984; Studerus et al., 2011; Studerus et al., 2011). However, challenging 
experiences can still occur in the presence of substantially controlled and supportive 
conditions (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; Studerus et al., 2011), and occurrence 
of acute and persisting adverse effects of psychedelics may be greater in uncontrolled 
settings, or with unscreened individuals (Carbonaro et al., 2016)
Little is known regarding the interdependence, causes, and consequences of any one of the 
individual categories of challenging experience suggested by the clinical and prior research 
literature. It is of interest to basic science and clinical application of classic hallucinogens to 
understand, for example, whether a challenging experience primarily involving panic and 
physiological distress might lead to persisting effects that differ from those that persist after 
a challenging experience primarily involving depression or confusion. If that is the case, it 
would be of value to know whether there are reliable indicators that could be used to predict 
whether an individual is more likely to experience panic or grief. Various facets of 
challenging experience may generally covary, but they may not necessarily be 
interdependent or collinear. Different facets of challenging experiences may lead to different 
outcomes.
Psychedelics offer a tool for studying the biological basis of emotional experiences using 
modern neuroscientific tools such as brain imaging. Anger, fear, and sadness have putatively 
different neural substrates as well as behavioral implications (Panksepp, 1998). To the extent 
that challenging experiences are encountered in brain imaging studies, it may be necessary 
to parse inter-individual differences in challenging experience during acute effects of 
psychedelics in order to be able to fully appreciate the neural basis of psychedelic 
experiences.
The field is lacking an empirically derived measurement instrument that can assess 
individual differences in challenging experiences, provide a “profile” of challenging 
experiences, and be applied to study predictors and persisting effects of challenging 
experiences. Such a fine-grained knowledge regarding the profile of challenging experiences 
and the consequences of these experiences will be of value both to optimize our 
understanding of the neurobiology of psychedelics and to optimize their use in treatment 
settings.
Aim of the current studies
In the following two studies, a Challenging Experience Questionnaire (CEQ) was 
constructed. Study 1 consisted of a psychometric analysis of responses to pooled items from 
a series of questionnaires (the 5DASC, HRS, and an additional measure, the States of 
Consciousness Questionnaire or SOCQ) that have been used in an online survey of 
challenging experiences with psilocybin (Carbonaro et al., 2016) to establish, replicate, and 
validate the factor structure and factor scores of the CEQ in a pair of stratified sub-samples. 
In Study 2, administration of the CEQ as a stand-alone instrument in an online survey 
demonstrated both replication of the CEQ factor structure and validation of the CEQ factor 
scores.
Barrett et al.
Page 5
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Study 1
This study is a secondary analysis of data from an online survey of challenging experiences 
with psilocybin (Carbonaro et al., 2016). Participants in this survey completed a series of 
questionnaires in reference to a self-identified challenging experience. The survey sample 
was stratified into two demographically matched groups. Though the HRS, 5DASC, and 
SOCQ do not have sub-scales that measure all facets of challenging experience suggested by 
the clinical literature, they all have individual items that assess these facets. Thus, the 
combined items from the HRS, 5DASC, and SOCQ that address potential aspects of 
challenging experience form a desirable initial item pool for the development of the CEQ. 
Exploratory factor analysis was applied to items from the HRS, 5DASC, and SOCQ in the 
first stratum that could reasonably assess an aspect of challenging experience. The resulting 
factor structure was validated using confirmatory factor analysis in the second stratum.
Structural equation modeling was applied to the entire sample to demonstrate factorial 
invariance of the instrument across levels of gender. Clinical literature indicates that lasting 
psychosis related to challenging experiences may be present in those who have a personal or 
family history of psychological difficulty. Therefore, factorial invariance of the instrument 
was also assessed across levels of struggle with a psychiatric disorder that preceded the 
reported challenging experience. Ratings of the meaningfulness, spiritual significance, and 
difficulty of the experience, as well as ratings of the impact of the experience on a person’s 
overall well-being, have been used in the past to assess the overall impact of psilocybin 
experiences on an individual (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011). Therefore, ratings 
of the overall impact of the challenging experience in this sample were regressed on CEQ 
factor scores to assess the relationship between these outcome measures and aspects of 
challenging experience. A description of measures analyzed in the current report is provided 
below. A more detailed description of the complete methods, measures, and initial findings 
of the online survey can be found in the original report (Carbonaro et al., 2016).
Method
Participants
The Bad Trip Survey (Carbonaro et al., 2016) was completed by 2085 participants. 
Participants were recruited via internet advertisements, email invitation, and word of mouth. 
An internet link to the survey was posted on websites, such as Erowid (an online information 
library on psychoactive substances, www.erowid.com), that are frequented by individuals 
interested in hallucinogens. Participants were not provided compensation for their responses. 
Inclusion criteria consisted of reading, writing, and speaking fluency in English, having 
ingested an active dose of psilocybin mushrooms that produced moderate to strong 
psychoactive effects, having had a difficult or challenging experience (i.e. “bad trip”) after 
ingesting psilocybin mushrooms, age of 18 years or older at the time of completing the 
survey, and age of between 18 and 70 years old at the time of the reported challenging 
experience. Participants who did not meet inclusion criteria after providing demographic 
information were directed to an abbreviated version of the survey, and their data were not 
included in the analysis. This approach was taken to obscure to participants the fact that they 
were excluded, and therefore discourage them from re-taking the survey with false responses 
Barrett et al.
Page 6
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in an attempt to be included. Participants were also asked to refrain from completing the 
survey more than once. Data from completed participants were excluded if they reported that 
their challenging experience was a) encountered in the context of a research study, b) 
experienced by another person, or c) attributed to another substance in addition to 
psilocybin. Participants were also excluded if free-response comments provided at the end of 
the survey raised concerns about the validity of their reports. Data for 92 completing 
participants were excluded, yielding a sample of 1993 participants.
Measures
Participants completed an online survey consisting of the below-referenced questionnaires 
(the Hallucinogen Rating Scale, or HRS, the 5-Dimensional Altered States of Consciousness 
questionnaire, or 5-DASC, and the States of Consciousness Questionnaire, or SOCQ) among 
a series of other questions regarding demographics, substance use behaviors, and details of 
the participant’s reported challenging experience. A more detailed description of the full 
complement of measures administered in the online survey can be found in the original 
report (Carbonaro et al., 2016). We identified 64 items from the HRS, 5-DASC, and SOCQ 
(listed in Appendix 2) that unambiguously assessed a challenging aspect of experience with 
classic hallucinogens, and treated these 64 items, as worded and responded to in their 
original form in the HRS, 5-DASC, and SOCQ, as an initial item pool for the construction of 
the initial form of the CEQ.
Additional items (including questions regarding the overall impact of the challenging 
experience, and previous struggle with a psychiatric disorder) were used in regression and 
factorial invariance analyses, respectively, after the generation of the CEQ. Finally, 
demographic variables were assessed and used to describe the sample and also to generate 
two demographically matched strata for separate analyses within this study.
The Hallucinogen Rating Scale (HRS)—The HRS is a 99-item instrument that is rated 
on a 5 point scale (1 – “not at all”, 2 – “slightly”, 3 – “moderately”, 4 – “ very much”, 5 – 
“extremely”). It assesses the greatest degree to which a respondent encountered different 
subjective effects during the course of an experience with a specified drug. It consists of six 
subscales assessing general dimensions of subjective experience (intensity, somaesthesia, 
affect, perception, cognition, and volition). Twenty-seven items (spanning all six scales of 
the HRS) that were judged by the authors to assess a potentially challenging aspect of 
experience with classic hallucinogens were retained for the initial item pool for the CEQ.
The 5-Dimensional Altered States of Consciousness Questionnare (5DASC)—
The 5DASC (Dittrich, Lamparter, & Maurer, 2010; Studerus et al., 2010) is the latest version 
of the Altered States of Consciousness (APZ) questionnaire (Dittrich, 1975), which was 
designed to assess subjective aspects of a wide range of altered states of consciousness, 
including but not limited to those occasioned by classic hallucinogens. The 5DASC consists 
of 94 items that were rated on a 20-point rating scale with two anchors: 1 – “No, not more 
than usually” and 20 – “Yes, much more than usually”. A recent psychometric analysis 
identified 11 plausible sub-scales of the 5DASC, which include the impaired cognition and 
control (ICC), and anxiety (ANX) scales (Studerus et al., 2010). The 13 items of the 5DASC 
Barrett et al.
Page 7
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that constitute the ICC and ANX sub-scales were retained for the initial item pool for the 
CEQ. While the 5DASC was originally developed in German and has not been empirically 
validated in English, this does not undermine the use of items from this questionnaire in the 
current study, as these items contribute to an initial item pool for validation of a new 
questionnaire (the CEQ).
The States of Consciousness Questionnaire (SOCQ)—The SOCQ is a 100-item 
questionnaire that is rated on a 6 point scale [0 – “none; not at all”, 1 – “so slight cannot 
decide”, 2 – “slight”, 3 – “moderate”, 4 – “strong (equivalent in degree to any previous 
strong experience or expectation of this description)”, 5 – “extreme (more than ever before 
in my life and stronger than 4)”]. The SOCQ contains 43 items from the Mystical 
Experiences Questionnaire (MEQ43) (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; Pahnke, 
Kurland, Goodman, & Richards, 1969; Richards, Rhead, DiLeo, Yensen, & Kurland, 1977), 
which was developed to assess several domains of mystical experience. The other 57 items 
of the SOCQ were based on a wide range of possible subjective effects of classic 
hallucinogens that were suggested by a sample of clinicians, but these items have not 
previously been analyzed, and they are typically treated as distractor items. Twenty-four of 
these distractor items were identified and retained for the initial item pool for the CEQ. 
These 24 distractor items assess potentially challenging aspects of experiences with classic 
hallucinogens (such as emotional, social, and physical discomfort, pain, and suffering, 
disorientation, ego loss, loss of perception of time, isolation, and confusion). No items from 
the MEQ43 were included in the present analysis. While these items have not been a part of 
an independently validated questionnaire, this does not undermine the use of these items to 
contribute to an initial item pool for development and validation of the CEQ.
Questions Regarding the Overall Impact of the Challenging Experience—These 
questions comprise a set of items that have been administered in laboratory studies of the 
acute and persisting effects of psilocybin (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; 
Johnson et al., 2014). Participants were asked to report on the meaningfulness and difficulty 
of their reported psilocybin experience using the following response options: “no more than 
routine, everyday experiences”, “similar to [difficult or challenging/meaningful] experiences 
that occur on average once a week”, “similar to [difficult or challenging/meaningful] 
experiences that occur on average once a month”, “similar to [difficult or challenging/
meaningful] experiences that occur on average once a year”, “similar to [difficult or 
challenging/meaningful] experiences that occur on average once every 5 years”, “among the 
top 10 most [difficult or challenging/meaningful] experiences of my life”, “among the top 5 
most [difficult or challenging/meaningful] experiences of my life”, and “the single most 
[difficult or challenging/meaningful] experience of my life”. Participants indicated the 
degree to which the experience was spiritually significant to them, using the following rating 
scale: “not at all”, “slightly”, “moderately”, “very much”, “among the top 5 most spiritually 
significant experiences of my life”, and “the single most spiritually significant experience of 
my life”. Participants also responded to a question inquiring about the effect of the 
challenging experience on their well-being or life satisfaction (“Do you believe that the 
experience and your contemplation of that experience have led to a change in your current 
sense of personal well-being or life satisfaction?”) using the following rating scale: 
Barrett et al.
Page 8
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 “Increased very much (+3)”, “Increased moderately (+2)”, “Increased slightly (+1)”, “No 
change (0)”, “Decreased slightly (−1)”, “Decreased moderately (−2)”, “Decreased very 
much (−3)”. These inquiries conform to previous methods of measuring participants’ 
assessment of the overall impact of a psilocybin session (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et 
al., 2011). Meaningfulness, spirituality, difficulty, and well-being were regressed on latent 
variable (i.e. factor) scores derived from the CEQ.
Previous Struggle with a Psychiatric Disorder—Participants were asked to indicate 
whether they had struggled with a psychiatric disorder at some point before their reported 
challenging experience. Participants were then able to separately endorse having struggled 
with the following disorders (“Please select all psychiatric disorders you have struggled 
with:”): anxiety, depression, substance use disorder, or “other psychiatric disorder (e.g. 
schizophrenia)”. This variable was coded “1” to indicate any endorsement of previous 
struggle with a psychiatric disorder, or “0” to indicate no endorsement of previous struggle 
with a psychiatric disorder. This coded variable was used to indicate group membership in 
later factorial invariance analyses.
Demographic Questions—These included age, gender, education, race, and total 
incidence of past hallucinogen use. Age was originally coded as interval data and was 
converted to an ordinal category variable, with the following five categories: < 25, 25 to 34, 
35 to 44, 45 to 54, 55 to 64, and >= 65. Participants used the following categories to rate the 
total number of times of past hallucinogen use: 1, 2–5, 6–10, 11–20, 21–50, 51–100, 101–
300, >300). Gender, education, and race were coded as categorical data.
Analysis
Matched exploratory and confirmatory analysis strata—The sample of 1993 
participants was stratified into two sub-samples that were matched on age, sex, education, 
race, and total incidence of past hallucinogen use. Stratification was carried out with the 
strata function of the sampling package (Tillé & Matei, 2012) in R (R Core Team, 2012), 
using simple random sampling without replacement. Before stratification, frequencies were 
calculated for each cell in the factorial model assumed by the stratification variables to 
verify that there were no cells with fewer than 2 observations. 226 observations were 
removed in this procedure, yielding a final total analysis sample of 1767 (exploratory 
stratum n = 833, confirmatory stratum n = 934). After stratification, demographic data were 
compared between strata using a two-sample t-test for age, and chi-squared independence 
tests for all other demographic data. Demographic data for the strata are presented in the 
left-hand portion of Table 1. No variables differed significantly between strata.
Initial scale construction—The first stratum (n = 833) was used to identify the latent 
structure of the items of the CEQ, using item analysis and exploratory factor analysis. 
Distributional properties of items were assessed to identify and remove items with restricted 
range or heavily non-normal distribution. The mixed.cor function from the psych package in 
R (Revelle, 2013) was then used to estimate the correlations between the remaining response 
variables in the exploratory stratum. The mixed.cor function calculates Pearson product 
moment correlations between continuous variables, polychoric correlations between 
Barrett et al.
Page 9
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 polytomous variables, tetrachoric correlations between dichotomous variables, and 
polyserial or biserial correlations between mixed variables, thus generating a ‘mixed’ 
correlation matrix. Exploratory factor analysis was conducted on this mixed correlation 
matrix using the fa function in the psych toolbox in R (Revelle, 2013), with maximum 
likelihood factor extraction and oblimin rotation. Latent variables that contribute to the 
concept of a challenging experience may reasonably be expected to co-vary. Therefore, an 
oblique factor rotation (oblimin) was chosen over an orthogonal rotation. Visual inspection 
of the scree plot and parallel analysis with the fa.parallel function in the psych toolbox in R 
was used to determine the number of factors to extract.
An initial exploratory factor analysis was fit to the data to identify common factors. Items 
with no loading above 0.4 on any factor were discarded. The remaining items were entered 
into iterative scale analyses. An initial scale was created for each factor from the items that 
loaded most strongly onto that factor. For each scale, at each iteration, a parallel analysis 
was conducted on the surviving items for that scale to assess dimensionality of the scale. 
When more than 2 underlying dimensions were identified for a given scale, McDonald’s 
omega was used to estimate the reliability of the scale. Otherwise, Cronbach’s alpha was 
used to calculate scale reliability. Item-total correlations were calculated at each iteration, as 
well as change in scale reliability with removal of each item. Items were removed from a 
scale if they demonstrated low item-total correlation (below 0.4) and if their removal 
increased scale reliability and average item-total correlation for the scale. The final 
remaining items were entered into an exploratory factor analysis to determine the initial 
model for the CEQ.
Model replication—The resulting exploratory factor model was replicated using 
confirmatory factor analysis in the second stratum (N = 934). Confirmatory factor analysis 
in a separate sample is a conservative test of an exploratory factor model, and it establishes 
reliability and internal validity of the structure of the CEQ. A combination of fit indices was 
used to assess confirmatory factor model fit, including the comparative fit index (CFI) 
(Bentler, 1990) the standardized root mean square residual (SRMR) (Hu & Bentler, 1999), 
and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) (Browne & Cudeck, 1993). 
Values of SRMR and RMSEA < .1, and CFI > .90 (Browne & Cudeck, 1993; Hu & Bentler, 
1999) indicate acceptable model fit. Consideration of a combination of fit indices, with 
“good fit” values of SRMR < .09, and CFI > .90, have been shown to minimize both Type I 
and Type II error (Hu & Bentler, 1999).
Factorial invariance—Factorial invariance analysis is a formal test of whether a set of 
variables has a similar (or “invariant”) factor structure in different groups (i.e. that they show 
“factorial invariance” across groups). Factorial invariance analysis is conducted by 
performing a series of multiple-group confirmatory factor analyses, adding more constraints 
in each sequential model for parameters to be equal across groups and then testing to see 
whether model fit improves or degrades across sequential models (Kline, 2005; Lomax, 
1983; Widaman & Reise, 1997). Configural factorial invariance sets the number of factors 
between groups to be equal, with the same items loading onto the same factors in each 
group. Weak factorial invariance adds the additional constraint of the factor loading 
Barrett et al.
Page 10
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 parameter estimates of each item to be equal across groups. Strong factorial invariance 
additionally constrains the intercepts of the observed variables to be equal across groups. 
Strict factorial invariance additionally constrains measurement residuals to be equal across 
groups.
Demonstrating strong or strict factorial invariance provides evidence that the CEQ is 
measuring constructs in a similar fashion in each group being compared (men vs women, or 
having vs not having previous struggle with a psychiatric disorder). Establishing strong or 
strict factorial invariance also allows direct comparison of latent variable means between 
groups. This is accomplished by setting the latent variable means for the comparison group 
to 0, and estimating the latent variable means for the other group. This identifies the model 
and standardizes latent variable mean estimates for the other group. Latent variable means in 
the other group that are significantly different from zero indicate that latent variables are 
significantly different from those in the comparison group.
Factorial invariance was assessed in a series of multiple-group confirmatory factor models 
using the cfa function in the lavaan toolbox in R (Rossell, 2012), with maximum likelihood 
estimation. Model fit in factorial invariance models was assessed using a combination of 
change in the CFI, SRMR, and RMSEA. These fit indices have been shown through 
simulation to be sensitive to both measurement invariance and lack of measurement 
invariance at the three levels (factor loadings, intercepts, and residuals, or weak, strong, and 
strict invariance) that are tested within the current sample (Chen, 2007). Decrease in CFI > 
0.01, increase in RMSEA > 0.015, and increase in SRMR > 0.01 between levels of factorial 
invariance (i.e. change between modeling steps) indicates noninvariance (Chen, 2007).
CEQ and overall impact of the challenging experience—The confirmatory factor 
model for the entire sample was then extended to a structural regression model with a 
measurement component to test the relationship between latent variable scores of the CEQ 
and ratings of the overall impact of the challenging experience (difficulty of the experience, 
meaningfulness of the experience, spiritual significance of the experience, and effect of the 
experience on well-being). Regression of CEQ factor scores on ratings of difficulty of the 
experience provides evidence for the convergent validity of the CEQ. Structural equation 
modeling was conducted using the sem function in the lavaan toolbox in R (Rossell, 2012), 
with maximum likelihood estimation.
Results
Initial Scale Construction
Descriptive statistics were calculated for each of the 64 potential CEQ items in the 
exploratory stratum, and distributional properties of each item (skew and kurtosis) were 
inspected for each item. Nine items had a skew or kurtosis greater than 1.5. After removing 
the nominally skewed and kurtotic items, the response distributions of remaining items were 
visually inspected to verify that the full range of responses had been utilized in each item. 
The following procedures were repeated after returning these nominally skewed and kurtotic 
items to the item pool, and there was no change in the outcome.
Barrett et al.
Page 11
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 An initial exploratory factor model was estimated to identify both a general factor structure 
for the response data and the best-loading items on each factor. A Scree plot and parallel 
analysis indicated that a 6-factor solution is appropriate for the dataset. The 7-factor solution 
yielded one clear junk factor, and the 5-factor solution did not yield a very clear qualitative 
interpretation. The 6-factor solution yielded factors with a cohesive qualitative 
interpretation: physiological distress (factor 1), grief (factor 2), fear (factor 3), insanity 
(factor 4), isolation (factor 5), and death (factor 6). The 6-factor solution was used as the 
basis of further item removal. Items with no loading above 0.4 on any factor were discarded. 
A total of 19 items were removed in this step. Items were removed from a scale if they 
demonstrated low item-total correlation (below 0.4) and if their removal increased scale 
reliability and average item-total correlation for the scale. An additional 12 items were 
removed in this step, yielding a final set of 24 items.
An exploratory factor analysis was conducted on the 24 remaining items. The final 
exploratory factor structure, factor intercorrelations, and factor reliabilities are reported in 
Table 2. The factors in this solution explained a cumulative 67% of variance in the observed 
data. Measures of sampling adequacy, including the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin test (KMO = 0.92) 
and Bartlett’s test of sphericity (χ2 = 44899, df=25, p < 0.0001), indicated suitability of the 
data for factor analysis.
Addition of a Paranoia Factor—Clinical literature and anecdotal reports indicate that 
paranoia is a subjective experience frequently represented in challenging experiences with 
classic hallucinogens (Cohen, 1960; Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2011; Strassman, 
1984). While a clear paranoia factor did not emerge from the exploratory factor analyses, the 
initial item pool for construction of the CEQ did contain two items directly related to 
paranoia (SOCQ item 40 “Feeling that people were plotting against you” and SOCQ item 72 
“Experience of antagonism toward people around you”). Interestingly, there are no items in 
either the HRS or the 5DASC that directly assess paranoia. When conducting confirmatory 
factor analysis of the second stratum in the current sample, the identified 24-item, 6 factor 
CEQ model was amended by adding the two paranoia items, both loading onto a seventh 
factor.
Model Replication
A mixed correlation matrix was calculated for the confirmatory stratum, using the items 
from the final exploratory factor model (Table 2) as well as two additional items loading 
onto a seventh factor for paranoia. A confirmatory factor model was fit to this correlation 
matrix, setting positive loadings of each item onto its intended factor, with all other item 
loadings equal to zero. The model was identified, and factor loadings standardized, by 
setting the variance of each latent factor to 1.
An initial model was fit including the 24-item 6-factor structure identified in exploratory 
analyses of the first stratum. Fit indices for this model (RMSEA = .070 [90% CI: .067–.
074], SRMR = .054, CFI = .913) indicate acceptable model fit (Hu & Bentler, 1999). A 
subsequent model was then fit that also included two additional items (SOCQ items 40 and 
72) that loaded onto a seventh factor for paranoia. Fit indices for this model (RMSEA = .066 
Barrett et al.
Page 12
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 [90% CI: .063–.070], SRMR = .052, CFI = .912) also indicate acceptable model fit (Hu & 
Bentler, 1999). Fit indices, as well as factor loadings, factor correlations, and factor 
reliabilities for the first six factors did not differ substantially from the original model. This 
confirms both the initial 24-item 6-factor structure of the CEQ, and supports inclusion of a 
seventh factor for paranoia. Factor structure for the 26-item, 7-factor confirmatory model is 
presented in Table 3. Factor correlations and factor reliabilities for this model are presented 
in the top portion of Table 4.
Factorial Invariance of the CEQ
Factorial invariance was tested separately for two levels of sex and for two levels of previous 
struggle with a psychiatric disorder (having vs not having had previous struggle). Model fit 
indices for consecutive factorial invariance models are presented in Table 5. Fit indices 
showed negligible change between all levels of factorial invariance for sex and previous 
struggle with a psychiatric disorder, which indicates strict factorial invariance between 
categories in both sets of groups. Factor correlations for each level of gender and previous 
struggle with a psychiatric disorder, and differences in factor scores between levels, are 
presented in the middle and lower portion of Table 4.
Overall Impact of the Challenging Experiences
Model fit indices for the structural equation model regressing overall impact ratings on CEQ 
factor scores indicated good fit (CFI = .915, RMSEA = .060 [90% CI: .058–.062], SRMR = .
045). Regression estimates are presented in Table 6. Scores on the CEQ death factor were 
associated with a decrease in wellbeing attributed to the experience, and were positively 
associated with all other ratings of overall impact. Scores on fear were positively associated 
with ratings of the difficulty of the experience and change in wellbeing, and were negatively 
associated with the spiritual significance and meaningfulness of the experience. Isolation 
scores were positively associated with an increase in wellbeing and negatively associated 
with meaningfulness and spiritual significance of the experience. Scores on both insanity 
and grief were positively associated with rated difficulty of the experience, meaningfulness 
and spiritual significance of the experience. Physical distress was positively associated with 
ratings of spiritual significance and associated with a decrease in wellbeing. Factor scores on 
paranoia were not associated with any overall impact ratings.
Study 2
The items comprising the CEQ in Study 1 were taken from three separate and extensive 
instruments (the HRS, with 104 items total, the SOCQ with 100 items total, and the 5DASC 
with 42 items), each with a different response format. In Study 2, the 26-item CEQ was 
validated as a stand-alone instrument (i.e. outside of the context of the other items in the 
HRS, SOCQ, and 5DASC). Item text from the HRS and 5-DASC items was altered to match 
the prose of the items from the SOCQ, and the 6-item SOCQ response format was adopted 
for all items of the CEQ. Side-by-side comparison of original and altered items is presented 
in Appendix 2. Items of the stand-alone CEQ were administered along with demographic 
measures and measures of the overall impact of the reported challenging experience used in 
Barrett et al.
Page 13
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Study 1 and analyzed in order to replicate the factor structure and regression results obtained 
in Study 1.
Method
Participants
1052 participants were recruited through word of mouth and online advertisement (in a 
fashion similar to Study 1), and completed an online survey (separate from the survey in 
Study 1) exploring challenging experiences with psilocybin. Participants were informed on 
the first page of the survey to not continue if they had previously completed a Johns Hopkins 
survey of “bad trips” or challenging experiences with psilocybin. Participants were asked on 
the second page of the survey to confirm that they had not previously completed this or any 
similar survey. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for this survey were identical to those used in 
Study 1. Participants were not compensated for their participation. Seventy-one completing 
participants were excluded based on the criteria specified in Study 1, which yielded a final 
dataset of 981 participants.
Measures
Demographic questions and questions regarding the overall impact of the challenging 
experience utilized in Study 1 were also presented in this study. Demographics for 
participants in Study 2 are presented in the right-hand portion of Table 1. Demographic data 
were compared between Study 1 and Study 2 using a two-sample t-test for age, and chi-
squared independence tests for all other demographic variables.
Challenging Experience Questionnaire (CEQ)—26 items identified in Study 1 
(including two paranoia items) were presented in fixed pseudorandom order, with the same 
response format for each item (“0 – none; not at all”; “1 – so slight cannot decide”; “2 – 
slight”; “3 – moderate”; “4 –strong”; “5 – extreme (more than ever before in my life)”). 
Since the original items from the 5-DASC, HRS, and SOCQ differed between scales in style 
and prose, modifications were made to the text of the 5-DASC and HRS items in order to 
better match the prose of these items in the stand-alone CEQ. Side-by-side comparison of 
original and altered items is presented in Appendix 2. The stand-alone CEQ is provided for 
reference and for research use in Appendix 1.
Analysis
A series of multiple-group confirmatory factor analyses were estimated to test for factorial 
invariance of the 26 items of the CEQ between the sample in Study 1 and the sample in 
Study 2. Factorial invariance procedures and assessment of model fit follow those 
procedures used in Study 1. Factor means were compared between Study 1 and Study 2. 
Finally, a structural equation model was fit in the Study 2 sample, regressing ratings of the 
overall impact of the challenging experience (difficulty, meaningfulness, spiritual 
significance, and change in well-being attributed to the challenging experience) on CEQ 
latent variables.
Barrett et al.
Page 14
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results
Study 2 differed from Study 1 on all demographic variables (Table 1, right-hand portion). 
Participants in Study 2 were older, more highly educated, and more racially and ethnically 
diverse. Study 2 contained a greater percentage of females than Study 1. Participants in 
Study 2 also reported a greater number of experiences with classic hallucinogens in general 
and more specifically psilocybin mushrooms than participants in Study 1. Finally, 
participants in Study 2 rated their experiences as overall slightly less difficult, and slightly 
more individuals on average in Study 2 indicated that they would repeat their reported 
experience, including the challenging portion, if given the opportunity.
Measures of sampling adequacy, including the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin test (KMO = 0.89) and 
Bartlett’s test of sphericity (χ2 = 538.01, df=26, p < 0.0001), indicated suitability of the data 
for factor analysis. Model fit indices for factorial invariance models are presented in the 
lower portion of Table 5. Change in fit indices for each level of factorial invariance between 
Study 1 and Study 2 did not exceed critical values for noninvariance. This supports strict 
factorial invariance of the 26-item CEQ between Study 1 and Study 2. Factor correlations 
and reliabilities for the stand-alone CEQ are presented in the top portion of Table 7. Factor 
score differences between Study 1 and Study 2 are presented in the bottom portion of Table 
7. Factor scores were significantly higher in Study 2 on fear and physical distress factors, 
and significantly lower on insanity and paranoia factors than in Study 1.
Model fit indices for the structural equation model regressing overall impact ratings on CEQ 
factor scores indicated good fit (CFI = .912, RMSEA = .064 [90% CI: .061–.067], SRMR = .
048). Regression estimates are presented in Table 8. Scores on the CEQ death factor were 
negatively associated with ratings of change in wellbeing attributed to the experience, and 
positively associated with all other ratings of overall impact. Scores on fear were positively 
associated with ratings of the difficulty of the experience and change in wellbeing, and 
negatively associated with the spiritual significance of the experience. Scores on insanity 
were positively associated with rated difficulty of the experience and meaningfulness of the 
experience. Grief and physical distress were positively and negatively associated with 
ratings of the difficult of the experience, respectively, and paranoia factor scores were 
positively associated with change in wellbeing attributed to the experience, but neither factor 
score were associated with other impact ratings. Factor scores on isolation were not 
associated with any overall impact ratings.
General Discussion
The CEQ was developed from responses to an internet survey of challenging experiences, 
and the stand-alone CEQ was validated in responses to a separate internet survey of 
challenging experiences. The seven factors of the CEQ display a simple factor structure, 
have high face validity, and represent a wide sampling of challenging aspects of psychedelic 
experience (referred to as “challenging experiences” for brevity) that aligns well with 
previous reports of presenting symptoms of acute adverse reactions to hallucinogenic 
substances (Cohen, 1960; Strassman, 1984; Ungerleider, Fisher, & Fuller, 1966; 
Ungerleider, Fisher, Fuller, & Caldwell, 1968). This includes affective (fear and grief), 
Barrett et al.
Page 15
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 physiological (physical distress), and cognitive/affective (feelings of isolation, paranoia, 
feelings of insanity or loss of sanity, and the subjective experience of death) categories of 
subjective experience.
Internal and external validity of the CEQ
The factor structure of the CEQ was identified and confirmed in Study 1 within separate 
sub-samples of the data, and was shown to be invariant across levels of gender and struggle 
with psychiatric illnesses before the reported challenging experience. The factor structure of 
the stand-alone CEQ was validated in Study 2. While demographic variables did not differ in 
extreme ways between Study 1 and Study 2, they all differed significantly. Factorial 
invariance between Study 1 and Study 2 in spite of demographic differences provides 
evidence for internal validity of the CEQ and makes a case for the resilience of the CEQ 
factor structure.
Participants provided ratings of the degree of difficulty of the challenging experience that 
they reported. Scores on the fear, grief, insanity, and death factors of the CEQ were 
consistently positively associated with these difficulty ratings in both Study 1 and Study 2, 
providing evidence for external validity of the CEQ. The experiences represented by the 
items in these four factors may constitute the core of what may be considered a challenging 
experience, while the remaining three factors may represent less reliable aspects of 
challenging experience.
Differences in factor scores between samples in four scales (fear, physical distress, insanity, 
and paranoia) were observed (Table 7), and should be explored further in future studies. 
Greater fear and physical distress scores, and lower paranoia and insanity scores, were 
observed in Study 2 when compared to Study 1. These differences may be attributable to 
differences between Study 1 and Study 2 samples in demographics, but it is equally if not 
more compelling to consider that additional factors that were not controlled in these 
samples, such as psilocybin dose and details of set and setting, may be associated with 
differences in CEQ scores.
An accepted clinical definition of “paranoia” is “unfounded fears that others intend harm to 
the individual” (Freeman et al., 2015). While one item of the paranoia scale of the CEQ is 
consistent with this definition (“feeling that people were plotting against you”), the other 
(“experience of antagonism toward people around you”), while likely related, is not closely 
consistent with this definition. Thus, the CEQ paranoia scale may be viewed as a crude 
measure of the clinical construct of “paranoia”, and the external validity of the paranoia 
scale may be somewhat restricted by this limitation.
Challenging experiences and the overall impact of experiences with psilocybin
Previous studies of the subjective effects of psilocybin have used ratings of the 
meaningfulness and spiritual significance of the experience to provide a very general 
characterization of the effects of psilocybin, in relation to other experiences that a volunteer 
has had (Griffiths et al., 2006; Griffiths et al., 2008; Griffiths et al., 2011). A consistent 
finding has been that moderate to high doses of psilocybin (20+ mg/70 kg) occasion 
experiences that are frequently rated in the top 5 most meaningful and spiritually significant 
Barrett et al.
Page 16
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiences of a participant’s life. Participants have also attributed positive change in well-
being to their psilocybin experience, and this change in well-being has been shown to 
correlate positively with mystical experience (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2015) and ego-
dissolution (Nour et al., 2016). Preliminary research further suggests positive psilocybin-
occasioned behavior change in the context of addiction treatment (Bogenschutz et al., 2015; 
Garcia-Romeu, Griffiths, & Johnson, 2015; Johnson et al., 2014), providing a general 
characterization of the longer-term impact of these experiences. The associations between 
CEQ factor scores and the overall impact ratings of meaningfulness, spiritual significance, 
and change in well-being were assessed in the current samples.
Scores on the insanity and death factors of the CEQ were positively associated with ratings 
of the meaningfulness of the reported experience in both Study 1 and Study 2. Scores on the 
fear factor were negatively associated with spiritual significance, while scores on the death 
factor were positively associated with spiritual significance of reported experiences in both 
studies. To the extent that individuals might construe or relate the loss of self-referential 
processing that is often reported during mystical experiences as feeling as though they are 
losing a sense of sanity or experiencing their own death, an encounter with this facet of 
challenging experience may be expected to covary with both the meaningfulness and the 
spiritual significance of an experience. The subjective experience of one’s own death and 
loss of control of the mind might somehow allow for the type of unity experience that leads 
to spiritual and meaningful experiences. However, scores on the death factor of the CEQ 
were negatively associated with change in well-being attributed to challenging experiences. 
While the experience of ego dissolution (Nour et al., 2016) and mystical experience (Barrett 
et a., 2015) are positively associated with well-being, it is not completely clear that the items 
of the ‘death’ subscale of the CEQ (“Profound experience of your own death” and “Feel as if 
dead or dying”) are collinear with either mystical experience or ego dissolution. The positive 
association between wellbeing and both mystical experience and ego-dissolution, contrasted 
against the negative association between wellbeing and the ‘death’ scale of the CEQ in both 
Study 1 and Study 2, suggests that there may be something unique about the subjective 
experience described as ‘death’ or ‘dying’ during a challenging experience that may detract 
from wellbeing, and this may have implications for therapeutic efficacy of psychedelics in 
clinical trials. Thus, future work may benefit from further elucidating the relationship 
between ego dissolution or mystical experience and the ‘death’ factor of the CEQ. Scores on 
the fear factor of the CEQ were associated with an increase in well-being attributed to 
challenging experiences and negatively predicted meaningfulness and spiritual significance 
of challenging experiences. Fear may generally detract from a spiritual experience, but the 
crucible of panic during a challenging experience might still lead to positive outcomes.
Some discrepancies between Study 1 and Study 2 are noted in the significant predictors of 
meaningfulness, spiritual significance, and change in well-being attributed to experiences. 
Scores on the paranoia factor were negatively associated with the rated difficulty of the 
experience in Study 1 but not Study 2, while scores on the physical distress factor were 
negatively associated with the rated difficulty of the experience in Study 2 but not Study 1, 
and scores on the isolation factor were not associated with rated difficulty of the experience 
in either study. While fear and isolation were negatively associated and grief was positively 
associated with the rated meaningfulness of the experience in Study 1, they were not 
Barrett et al.
Page 17
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significantly associated with this rating in Study 2. Grief, physical distress, and insanity 
were positively associated, and isolation was negatively associated, with spiritual 
significance of an experience in Study 1, but not Study 2. Further, physical distress was 
negatively associated and isolation was positively associated with change in well-being in 
Study 1 but not Study 2, while paranoia was positively associated with change in wellbeing 
in Study 2 but not Study 1.
It is possible that demographic differences between the samples in each study or the 
difference between studies in the relative rated difficulty of challenging experiences may 
have contributed to observed discrepancies in the associations between CEQ factor scores 
and ratings of the overall impact of the experiences (difficulty, meaningfulness, spiritual 
significance, and change in well-being attributed to the experience). It may also be that 
aspects of experience that were not controlled in these studies, such as particular features of 
set and setting, psilocybin dose ingested (which can not be precisely known, especially from 
retrospective reports of ingested fungal matter), or traits of individuals such as personality or 
attachment type, interact with the relationship between factor scores and ratings of the 
overall impact of the experiences. Another limitation of this study is that individuals who 
have a positive attitude towards psychedelics were probably more likely to complete the 
survey than those with a negative attitude towards psychedelics, given that the main sources 
of recruitment were websites that are typically frequented by those with a positive attitude 
towards psychedelics. It may be that the relationships between CEQ scores and measures of 
the overall impact of the experiences could be different for those with a different regard 
towards psychedelics. While these questions deserve prospective scrutiny in controlled 
environments, it is encouraging that consistencies were found between studies (e.g. the 
relationship between fear, grief, insanity, and death factor scores and rated difficulty of the 
experience).
Potential Risk Factors for Challenging Experiences
Factor scores in Study 1 did not differ by gender (except for slightly greater scores on the 
fear factor for women compared to men). In contrast to gender, factor scores were 
significantly greater in those who had previously struggled with a psychiatric disorder, 
compared to those who had not, for all factors except for paranoia. While this may seem to 
suggest that individuals with a history of psychiatric disorders may be more prone to a 
greater degree of challenge with psilocybin, it is not clear that such a generalization is 
warranted. The current survey does not inform or address the frequency or likelihood of a 
challenging experience, but rather the potential profile of subjective experience when a 
challenging experience is encountered. Also, the designation of having previously struggled 
with a psychiatric disorder is a coarse designation at best. This categorization does not 
differentiate well among many important and distinct disorders, including mood disorders or 
psychosis. Those who suffer from disorders on the psychotic spectrum, which can be 
accompanied by delusions, ideas of reference, and paranoia, may be at increased risk of 
experiencing paranoia while experiencing the effects of a classic hallucinogen. Also, 
reliance on self-identified struggle with a psychiatric disorder is imperfect for diagnostic 
purposes.
Barrett et al.
Page 18
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While recommendations for safe conduct of hallucinogen research indicate a 
contraindication for individuals with personal or family history of psychosis (Johnson et al., 
2008), non-psychotic depression may not be contraindicated. Recent empirical work has 
shown the potential value of psilocybin as a treatment for depression (Carhart-Harris et al., 
2016; Grob et al., 2011) and anxiety secondary to a life-threatening cancer diagnosis 
(Griffiths et al., in press; Ross et al., in press), and recent large-sample surveys have 
demonstrated a lower risk for psychological distress and suicidality in those who have 
endorsed having consumed a classic hallucinogen in the past (Hendricks et al., 2015; 
Johansen & Krebs, 2015). Future studies should explore a more fine-grained understanding 
of the relationship of previous history with various psychiatric disorders to challenging 
experiences with psilocybin or other classic hallucinogens and clinical outcomes of 
psychedelic therapies.
Towards a Model of Challenging Experiences
With the Challenging Experience Questionnaire, one may begin to consider an empirical 
model for challenging experiences. A full model of challenging experiences should include 
the acute effects of challenging experiences, the conditions that may predict a challenging 
experience, and the persisting effects of that experience. The CEQ provides a structure to the 
acute effects of challenging experiences that may be used in prospective studies. Additional 
categories of challenging experience have been suggested in the literature, such as the 
experience of karmic or “astral” experiences, experience of “kundalini” energy, or the 
experience of such phenomena as age regression (McCabe, 1977). Some of these 
experiences may be culturally bound or framed explanations of intense emotional or 
physiological responses to drug conditions. Moreover, such experiences could arise during 
both challenging and non-challenging experiences, but that are not representative of or 
restricted to challenging experiences.
There are many questions that can be asked regarding challenging experience, including the 
nature of challenging experiences, the predictors of emergence of challenging experiences, 
and the consequences of having had a challenging experience. The current findings deal 
primarily with challenging aspects of experiences with psilocybin, as reported by the study 
volunteers regarding their primary subjective experience. Future studies may benefit from 
this understanding, and will be able to use the CEQ to investigate predictors and 
consequences of challenging experiences.
Conclusion
The Challenging Experience Questionnaire (CEQ) as validated in this report may serve as a 
valuable tool for characterizing psychologically difficult aspects of experiences occasioned 
by psilocybin and, very likely, by other classic hallucinogens. Better understanding of 
challenging experiences with classic hallucinogens may increase the precision of our 
understanding of both the psychological nature of and neural mechanisms underlying the 
effects of these drugs. Understanding challenging experiences with classic hallucinogens 
may also facilitate the optimization of therapeutic application of drugs within this class. 
Thus, the Challenging Experience Questionnaire developed in this report makes a significant 
Barrett et al.
Page 19
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contribution to methods of assessment of acute psychologically adverse reactions to 
psilocybin, and with further validation, will likely make a significant contribution to 
methods of assessment of such experiences with other classic hallucinogens.
Acknowledgments
Funding
This research was supported by NIH grants RO1DA03889 and 5T32 DA007209 and grants from the Heffter 
Research Institute and the Council on Spiritual Practices.
Appendix 1: The Challenging Experience Questionnaire
Instructions: Looking back on the entirety of your session, please rate the degree to which at 
any time during that session you experienced the following phenomena. Answer each 
question according to your feelings, thoughts, and experiences at the time of the session. In 
making each of your ratings, use the following scale:
0 – none; not at all
1 – so slight cannot decide
2 – slight
3 – moderate
4 – strong
5 – extreme (more than ever before in my life)
______ 1. Isolation and loneliness
______ 2. Sadness
______ 3. Feeling my heart beating
______ 4. I had the feeling something horrible would happen
______ 5. Feeling my body shake/tremble
______ 6. Feelings of grief
______ 7. Experience of fear
______ 8. Fear that I might lose my mind or go insane
______ 9. I felt like crying
______ 10. Feeling of isolation from people and things
______ 11. Feelings of despair
______ 12. I had the feeling that people were plotting against me
______ 13. I was afraid that the state I was in would last forever
______ 14. Anxiousness
______ 15. I felt shaky inside
Barrett et al.
Page 20
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ______ 16. I had the profound experience of my own death
______ 17. I felt my heart beating irregularly or skipping beats
______ 18. Pressure or weight in my chest or abdomen
______ 19. I experienced a decreased sense of sanity
______ 20. I felt as if I was dead or dying
______ 21. Panic
______ 22. Experience of antagonism toward people around me
______ 23. Despair
______ 24. I felt isolated from everything and everyone
______ 25. Emotional and/or physical suffering
______ 26. I felt frightened
CEQ – Standalone version
1.
transform all item-level data into “percentage of maximum possible”
a.
make sure responses are on a 0-origin scale (if your response data have 
a range of 1–6, subtract “1” from each response)
b.
divide each response by the maximum response (if your response data 
are on a 0-origin scale, divide by 5)
2.
Compute the average of all transformed item scores for the items in each 
subscale to get that subscale score
3.
Compute the average all transformed item scores across all items to get the CEQ 
total score
Factor
Item
Item Text
Fear
4
I had the feeling something horrible would happen
7
Experience of fear
14
Anxiousness
21
Panic
26
I felt frightened
Grief
2
Sadness
6
Feelings of grief
9
I felt like crying
11
Feelings of despair
23
Despair
25
Emotional and/or physical suffering
Barrett et al.
Page 21
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Factor
Item
Item Text
Physical Distress
3
Feeling my heart beating
5
Feeling my body shake/tremble
15
I felt shaky inside
17
I felt my heart beating irregularly or skipping beats
18
Pressure or weight in my chest or abdomen
Insanity
8
Fear that I might lose my mind or go insane
13
I was afraid that the state I was in would last forever
19
I experienced a decreased sense of sanity
Isolation
1
Isolation and loneliness
10
Feeling of isolation from people and things
24
I felt isolated from everything and everyone
Death
16
I had the profound experience of my own death
20
I felt as if I was dead or dying
Paranoia
12
I had the feeling that people were plotting against me
22
Experience of antagonism toward people around me
CEQ – Scored from responses to the SOCQ, 5D-ASC, and HRS
1.
transform all item-level data into “percentage of maximum possible”
a.
make sure responses are on a 0-origin scale (if the minimum value of 
your response data is “1”, subtract “1” from each response)
b.
divide each response by the maximum response, after converting to a 0-
origin scale (if the range for a given item before transformation was 1–
5, the new range should be 0–4, so divide your transformed response 
item by 4)
2.
Compute the average of all transformed item scores for the items in each 
subscale to get that subscale score
3.
Compute the average all transformed item scores across all items to get the CEQ 
total score
Factor
Scale
Item
Item Text
Fear
HRS
26
Frightened
Barrett et al.
Page 22
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Factor
Scale
Item
Item Text
HRS
27
Panic
SOCQ
52
Experience of fear
HRS
25
Anxious
5DASC
63
I had the feeling something horrible would happen
Grief
HRS
36
Sad
SOCQ
91
Feelings of grief
HRS
38
Despair
HRS
39
Feel like crying
SOCQ
16
Feelings of despair
SOCQ
13
Emotional and/or physical suffering
Physical Distress
HRS
12
Feel heart beating
HRS
13
Feel heart skipping beats or beating irregularly
HRS
11
Feel body shake/tremble
HRS
10
Shaky feelings inside
HRS
09
Pressure or weight in chest or abdomen
Insanity
SOCQ
85
Fear that you might lose your mind or go insane
HRS
88
Change in sense of sanity
5DASC
19
I was afraid that the state I was in would last forever
Isolation
5DASC
44
I felt isolated from everything and everyone
HRS
44
Feel isolated from people and things
SOCQ
45
Isolation and loneliness
Death
SOCQ
70
Profound experience of your own death
HRS
70
Feel as if dead or dying
Paranoia
SOCQ
40
Feeling that people were plotting against you
SOCQ
72
Experience of antagonism toward people around you
Appendix 2: Initial Item Pool for CEQ development
SOCQ Items
Question 4
Feelings of anger or aggression
Question 13
Emotional and/or physical suffering
Question 16
Feelings of despair
Question 21
Experience of confusion, disorientation and/or chaos
Barrett et al.
Page 23
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Question 28
Sense of being trapped and helpless
Question 37
Visions of demons, devils or other wrathful deities
Question 39
Experience of repulsive biological material (urine, feces, pus, dead flesh, etc.)
Question 40
Feeling that people were plotting against you
Question 44
Thoughts and ideas flashing by very rapidly
Question 45
Experience of isolation and loneliness
Question 52
Experience of fear
Question 57
Feeling of being rejected or unwanted
Question 61
Experience of meaninglessness and absurdity of life
Question 66
Frustrating attempt to control the experience
Question 70
Profound experience of your own death
Question 72
Experience of antagonism toward people around you
Question 75
Convincing feeling of contact with people who have died
Question 76
Sense of being separated from the normal world, as though you were enclosed in a thick, silent glass chamber
Question 84
Feeling of disintegration, falling apart
Question 85
Fear that you might lose your mind or go insane
Question 88
Feelings of guilt
Question 89
Experiences of intense pressures on various parts of your body
Question 91
Feelings of grief
Question 93
Experience of physical distress (e.g. nausea, vomiting, sweating, rapid heartbeat, etc.).
HRS Items
Question 9
Pressure or weight in chest or abdomen
Question 10
Shaky feelings inside
Question 11
Feel body shake/tremble
Question 12
Feel heart beating
Question 13
Feel heart skipping beats or beating irregularly
Question 14
Nausea
Question 16
Physcially restless
Question 18
Urge to urinate
Question 19
Urge to move bowels
Question 21
Feel removed, detached, separated from body
Question 23
Sweating
Question 24
Headache
Question 25
Anxious
Question 26
Frightened
Question 27
Panic
Question 36
Sad
Question 38
Despair
Question 39
Feel like crying
Question 44
Feel isolated from people and things
Question 48
How soon would you like to repeat the experience
Question 70
Feel as if dead or dying
Question 74
Contradictory feelings at same time (happy and sad; hopeful and hopeless)
Barrett et al.
Page 24
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Question 75
Sense of chaos
Question 88
Change in sense of sanity
Question 89
Urge to close eyes
Question 94
In control
Question 96
Able to remind yourself of being in research room, being administered a drug, the temporary nature of the experience
5DASC Items
Impaired cognition/control subscale
5.
I felt like a marionette.
16.
I had difficulty making even the smallest decision.
24.
I had difficulty in distinguishing important from unimportant things.
33.
I felt as though I were paralyzed.
44.
I felt isolated from everything and everyone.
45.
I was not able to complete a thought, my thought repeatedly became disconnected.
53.
I had the feeling that I no longer had a will of my own.
Anxiety subscale
19.
I was afraid that the state I was in would last forever.
29.
I was afraid without being able to say exactly why.
30.
I experienced everything terrifyingly distorted.
32.
I experienced my surroundings as strange and weird.
38.
I felt threatened.
63.
I had the feeling something horrible would happen.
Items that were re-worded for use in the stand-alone version of the CEQ
Original Text
Modified Text for the Stand-Alone CEQ
Frightened
I felt frightened
Anxious
Anxiousness
Sad
Sadness
Feel like crying
I felt like crying
Feel heart beating
Feeling my heart beating
Feel heart skipping beats or beating irregularly
I felt my heart beating irregularly or skipping beats
Feel body shake/tremble
Feeling my body shake/tremble
Shaky feelings inside
I felt shaky inside
Pressure or weight in chest or abdomen
Pressure or weight in my chest or abdomen
Change in sense of sanity
I experienced a decreased sense of sanity
Feel isolated from people and things
Feeling of isolation from people and things
Feel as if dead or dying
I felt as if I was dead or dying
Barrett et al.
Page 25
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Abramson HA. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). XXXI. comparison by questionnaire of 
psychotomimetic activity of congeners on normal subjects and drug addicts. The Journal of Mental 
Science. 1960; 106:1120–1123. [PubMed: 13681136] 
Barrett FS, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Validation of the revised mystical experience questionnaire in 
experimental sessions with psilocybin. Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015; 
29(11):1182–1190. DOI: 10.1177/0269881115609019
Belleville RE. MMPI score changes induced by lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). Journal of 
Clinical Psychology. 1956; 12(3):279–282. [PubMed: 13332097] 
Bentler PM. Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychological Bulletin. 1990; 107(2):238–
246. [PubMed: 2320703] 
Bogenschutz MP, Forcehimes AA, Pommy JA, Wilcox CE, Barbosa PC, Strassman RJ. Psilocybin-
assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: A proof-of-concept study. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015; 29(3):289–299. DOI: 10.1177/0269881114565144
Browne, MW., Cudeck, R. Alternative ways of testing model fit. In: Bollen, KA., Long, JS., editors. 
Testing structural equation models. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1993. p. 136-136-162.
Carbonaro TM, Bradstreet MP, Barrett FS, MacLean KA, Jesse R, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Survey 
study of challenging experiences after ingesting psilocybin mushrooms: Acute and enduring 
positive and negative consequences. Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2016 doi:
0269881116662634 [pii]. 
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, Day CMJ, Erritzoe D, Kaelen M, Nutt DJ. Psilocybin with 
psychological support for treatment-resistant depression: An open-label feasibility study. Lancet 
Psychiatry. 2016 May 17. 2016. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30087-6
Carhart-Harris RL, Kaelen M, Bolstridge M, Williams TM, Williams LT, Underwood R, Nutt DJ. The 
paradoxical psychological effects of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Psychological Medicine. 
2016; 46(7):1379–1390. DOI: 10.1017/S0033291715002901 [PubMed: 26847689] 
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Hellyer PJ, Shanahan M, Feilding A, Tagliazucchi E, Nutt D. The 
entropic brain: A theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic 
drugs. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2014; 8:20.doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020 [PubMed: 
24550805] 
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, Erritzoe D, Abbasi N, Bargiotas T, Nutt DJ. Implications 
for psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy: Functional magnetic resonance imaging study with 
psilocybin. The British Journal of Psychiatry : The Journal of Mental Science. 2012; 200(3):238–
244. DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.103309 [PubMed: 22282432] 
Chen FF. Sensitivity of goodness of fit indexes to lack of measurement invariance. Structural Equation 
Modeling. 2007; 14(3):464–464-503.
Cohen S. Lysergic acid diethylamide: Side effects and complications. The Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease. 1960; 130:30–40. [PubMed: 13811003] 
Dittrich A. Zusammenstellung eines fragebogens (APZ) zur erfassung abnormer psychischer zustände 
[construction of a questionnaire (APZ) for assessing abnormal mental states]. Z Klin Psychol 
Psychiatr Psychother. 1975; 23:12–12-20.
Dittrich A. The standardized psychometric assessment of altered states of consciousness (ASCs) in 
humans. Pharmacopsychiatry. 1998; 31:80–80-84. DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-979351 [PubMed: 
9754838] 
Dittrich, A., Lamparter, D., Maurer, M. 5D-ASC: Questionnaire for the assessment of altered states of 
consciousness. A short introduction. Zürich, Switzerland: PSIN PLUS; 2010. 
Frecska E, Luna LE. The adverse effects of hallucinogens from intramural perspective. 
Neuropsychopharmacologia Hungarica : A Magyar Pszichofarmakologiai Egyesulet Lapja = 
Official Journal of the Hungarian Association of Psychopharmacology. 2006; 8(4):189–200. 
[PubMed: 17211054] 
Garcia-Romeu A, Griffiths RR, Johnson MW. Psilocybin-occasioned mystical experiences in the 
treatment of tobacco addiction. Current Drug Abuse Reviews. 2015; 7:157–157-164.
Barrett et al.
Page 26
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gouzoulis-Mayfrank E, Heekeren K, Neukirch A, Stoll M, Stock C, Obradovic M, Kovar KA. 
Psychological effects of (S)-ketamine and N, N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT): A double-blind, 
cross-over study in healthy volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2005; 38(6):301–311. DOI: 10.1055/
s-2005-916185 [PubMed: 16342002] 
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Carducci MA, Umbricht A, Richards WA, Richards BD, Klinedinst MA. 
Psilocybin produces substantial and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety in patients with 
life-thretening cancer: A randomized double-blind trial. Journal of Psychopharmacology. (in 
press). 
Griffiths RR, Johnson MW, Richards WA, Richards BD, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin occasioned 
mystical-type experiences: Immediate and persisting dose-related effects. Psychopharmacology. 
2011; 218(4):649–665. DOI: 10.1007/s00213-011-2358-5 [PubMed: 21674151] 
Griffiths RR, Richards W, Johnson MW, McCann U, Jesse R. Mystical-type experiences occasioned by 
psilocybin mediate the attribution of personal meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2008; 22(6):621–632. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881108094300
Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences 
having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance. 
Psychopharmacology. 2006; 187(3):268–83. discussion 284–92. DOI: 10.1007/s00213-006-0457-5 
[PubMed: 16826400] 
Grob CS, Danforth AL, Chopra GS, Hagerty M, McKay CR, Halberstadt AL, Greer GR. Pilot study of 
psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients with advanced-stage cancer. Archives of General 
Psychiatry. 2011; 68(1):71–78. DOI: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.116 [PubMed: 20819978] 
Haertzen CA. Development of scales based on patterns of drug effects, using the addiction research 
center inventory (ARCI). Psychological Reports. 1966; 18(1):163–194. DOI: 10.2466/
pr0.1966.18.1.163 [PubMed: 5908477] 
Halberstadt AL. Recent advances in the neuropsychopharmacology of serotonergic hallucinogens. 
Behavioural Brain Research. 2015; 277:99–120. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.016 [PubMed: 
25036425] 
Hendricks PS, Thorne CB, Clark CB, Coombs DW, Johnson MW. Classic psychedelic use is 
associated with reduced psychological distress and suicidality in the united states adult population. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015; 29(3):280–288. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881114565653
Hu L, Bentler PM. Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Convential criteria 
versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: An Interdisciplinary Journal. 1999; 6(1):1–
1-55.
Hübner C. EnTrance: Entrance to wider worlds, or mystifcation of mere relaxation? Music Therapy 
Today. 2007; 8:257–257-293.
Johansen PO, Krebs TS. Psychedelics not linked to mental health problems or suicidal behavior: A 
population study. Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2015; 29(3):270–279. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881114568039
Johnson MW, Garcia-Romeu A, Cosimano MP, Griffiths RR. Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist 
psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, 
England). 2014; 28(11):983–992. DOI: 10.1177/0269881114548296
Johnson MW, Richards W, Griffiths RR. Human hallucinogen research: Guidelines for safety. Journal 
of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2008; 22(6):603–620. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881108093587
Kaelen M, Barrett FS, Roseman L, Lorenz R, Family N, Bolstridge M, Carhart-Harris RL. LSD 
enhances the emotional response to music. Psychopharmacology. 2015; 232(19):3607–3614. DOI: 
10.1007/s00213-015-4014-y [PubMed: 26257162] 
Kaelen M, Roseman L, Kahan J, Santos-Ribeiro A, Orban C, Lorenz R, Carhart-Harris R. LSD 
modulates music-induced imagery via changes in parahippocampal connectivity. European 
Neuropsychopharmacology : The Journal of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2016 doi:S0924-977X(16)30016-5 [pii]. 
Barrett et al.
Page 27
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kjellgren A, Sundequist U, Sundholm U, Norlander T, Archer T. Altered consciousness in flotation-
REST and chamber-REST: Experience of experimental pain and subjective stress. Soc Behav Pers. 
2004; 32:103–103-115. DOI: 10.2224/sbp.2004.32.2.103
Kline, RB. Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York: Guilford; 2005. 
Kometer M, Pokorny T, Seifritz E, Volleinweider FX. Psilocybin-induced spiritual experiences and 
insightfulness are associated with synchronization of neuronal oscillations. Psychopharmacology. 
2015; 232(19):3663–3676. DOI: 10.1007/s00213-015-4026-7 [PubMed: 26231498] 
Kraehenmann R, Preller KH, Scheidegger M, Pokorny T, Bosch OG, Seifritz E, Vollenweider FX. 
Psilocybin-induced decrease in amygdala reactivity correlates with enhanced positive mood in 
healthy volunteers. Biological Psychiatry. 2015; 78(8):572–581. DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.
2014.04.010 [PubMed: 24882567] 
Lebedev AV, Kaelen M, Lovden M, Nilsson J, Feilding A, Nutt DJ, Carhart-Harris RL. LSD-induced 
entropic brain activity predicts subsequent personality change. Human Brain Mapping. 2016; doi: 
10.1002/hbm.23234
Linton HB, Langs RJ. Placebo reactions in a study of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25). Archives 
of General Psychiatry. 1962; 6:369–383. [PubMed: 14465662] 
Lomax RG. A guide to multiple-sample structural equation modeling. Behavior Research Methods & 
Instrumentation. 1983; 15(6):580–580-584.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Mystical experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen 
psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain of openness. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2011; 25(11):1453–1461. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881111420188
McCabe OL. Psychedelic drug crises: Toxicity and therapeutics. J Psychedelic Drugs. 1977; 9:107–
107-121.
Metzner R, Litwin G, Weil G. The relation of expectation and mood to psilocybin reactions: A 
questionnaire study. Psychedelic Review. 1965; 5:3–3-39.
Nichols DE. Psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews. 2016; 68(2):264–355. DOI: 10.1124/pr.
115.011478 [PubMed: 26841800] 
Novak SJ. LSD before leary. sidney cohen’s critique of 1950s psychedelic drug research. Isis; an 
International Review Devoted to the History of Science and its Cultural Influences. 1997; 88(1):
87–110. [PubMed: 9154737] 
Pahnke WN, Kurland AA, Goodman LE, Richards WA. LSD-assisted psychotherapy with terminal 
cancer patients. Current Psychiatric Therapies. 1969; 9:144–152. [PubMed: 5348915] 
Panksepp, J. Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 1998. 
Pekala RJ. Measurement of phenomenological experience: Phenomenology of consciousness 
inventory. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 1986; 63:983–983-989.
Preller KH, Pokorny T, Hock A, Kraehenmann R, Stampfli P, Seifritz E, Vollenweider FX. Effects of 
serotonin 2A/1A receptor stimulation on social exclusion processing. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2016; 113(18):5119–5124. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1524187113 [PubMed: 27091970] 
R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation 
for Statistical Computing; 2012. doi:http://www.R-project.org
Revelle, W. Psych: Procedures for personality and psychological research. Northwestern University; 
Evanston, Illinois, USA: 2013. R package version 1.3.2. doi:http://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=psych
Riba J, Rodriguez-Fornells A, Urbano G, Morte A, Antonijoan R, Montero M, Barbanoj MJ. 
Subjective effects and tolerability of the south american psychoactive beverage ayahuasca in 
healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology. 2001; 154(1):85–95. [PubMed: 11292011] 
Richards WA, Rhead JC, DiLeo FB, Yensen R, Kurland AA. The peak experience variable in DPT-
assisted psychotherapy with cancer patients. J Psychedelic Drugs. 1977; 9:1–1-10.
Ross S, Bossis A, Guss J, Agin-Liebes G, Malone T, Cohen B, Schmidt BL. Rapid and sustained 
symptom reduction following psilocybin treatment for anxiety and depression in patients with life-
threatening cancer: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Psychopharmacology. (in press). 
Barrett et al.
Page 28
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rossell Y. Lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of Statistical Software. 
2012; 48(2):1–1-36. doi:http://www.jstatsoft.org/v48/i02/. 
Schmid Y, Enzler F, Gasser P, Grouzmann E, Preller KH, Vollenweider FX, Liechti ME. Acute effects 
of lysergic acid diethylamide in healthy subjects. Biological Psychiatry. 2015; 78(8):544–553. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.015 [PubMed: 25575620] 
Strassman RJ. Adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs. A review of the literature. The Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease. 1984; 172(10):577–595. [PubMed: 6384428] 
Strassman RJ. Hallucinogenic drugs in psychiatric research and treatment. perspectives and prospects. 
The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 1995; 183(3):127–138. [PubMed: 7891058] 
Strassman RJ, Qualls CR, Uhlenhuth EH, Kellner R. Dose-response study of N,N-dimethyltryptamine 
in humans. II. subjective effects and preliminary results of a new rating scale. Archives of General 
Psychiatry. 1994; 51(2):98–108. [PubMed: 8297217] 
Studerus E, Gamma A, Kometer M, Vollenweider FX. Prediction of psilocybin response in healthy 
volunteers. PloS One. 2012; 7(2):e30800.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030800 [PubMed: 22363492] 
Studerus E, Gamma A, Vollenweider FX. Psychometric evaluation of the altered states of 
consciousness rating scale (OAV). PloS One. 2010; 5(8):e12412.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0012412 [PubMed: 20824211] 
Studerus E, Kometer M, Hasler F, Vollenweider FX. Acute, subacute and long-term subjective effects 
of psilocybin in healthy humans: A pooled analysis of experimental studies. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2011; 25(11):1434–1452. DOI: 
10.1177/0269881110382466
Tagliazucchi E, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Orban C, Muthukumaraswamy SD, Murphy K, Carhart-Harris 
R. Increased global functional connectivity correlates with LSD-induced ego dissolution. Current 
Biology : CB. 2016; 26(8):1043–1050. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.010 [PubMed: 27085214] 
Taylor RL, Maurer JI, Tinklenberg JR. Management of “bad trips” in an evolving drug scene. Jama. 
1970; 213(3):422–425. [PubMed: 5468015] 
Tillé, Y., Matei, A. Sampling: Survey sampling. 2012. R package version 2.5. doi:http://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=sampling
Ungerleider JT, Fisher DD, Fuller M. The dangers of LSD. analysis of seven months’ experience in a 
university hospital’s psychiatric service. Jama. 1966; 197(6):389–392. [PubMed: 5952725] 
Ungerleider JT, Fisher DD, Fuller M, Caldwell A. The “bad trip”–the etiology of the adverse LSD 
reaction. The American Journal of Psychiatry. 1968; 124(11):1483–1490. DOI: 10.1176/ajp.
124.11.1483 [PubMed: 4384739] 
Vollenweider FX, Csomor PA, Knappe B, Geyer MA, Quednow BB. The effects of the preferential 5-
HT2A agonist psilocybin on prepulse inhibition of startle in healthy human volunteers depend on 
interstimulus interval. Neuropsychopharmacology : Official Publication of the American College 
of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007; 32(9):1876–1887. doi:1301324 [pii]. [PubMed: 17299516] 
Vollenweider FX, Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen MF, Babler A, Vogel H, Hell D. Psilocybin induces 
schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action. Neuroreport. 1998; 9(17):
3897–3902. [PubMed: 9875725] 
Walach H, Kaseberg E. Mind machines: A controlled study on the effects of electromagnetic and 
optic-acoustic stimulation on general well-being, electrodermal activity, and exceptional 
psychological experiences. Behavioral Medicine (Washington, D.C.). 1998; 24(3):107–114. DOI: 
10.1080/08964289809596388
Widaman, KF., Reise, SP. Exploring the measurement invariance of psychological instruments: 
Applications in the substance use domain. In: Bryant, KJ.Windle, M., West, SG., editors. The 
science of prevention: Methodological advances from alcohol and substance abuse research. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; 1997. p. 281-281-324.
Barrett et al.
Page 29
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 30
Table 1
Comparison of Demographic Variables Between Stratification Groups and Studies.
Study 1
exploratory
Strata
confirmatory
Study 1
total
Study 2
total
N
833
934
1767
981
t
df
p
t
df
p
Age
0.8791
1765
0.3794
6.3607
1763
< 0.0001
Mean
28.77
29.13
28.96
31.38
Std
8.36
8.71
8.55
10.06
χ2
df
p
χ2
df
p
Education
0.7462
5
0.9803
29.7703
5
< 0.0001
<HS
1.3%
1.5%
1.4%
2.9%
HS diploma
11.0%
11.1%
11.1%
9.8%
Some college
37.7%
36.9%
37.3%
32.4%
College
26.7%
26.0%
26.3%
23.5%
Some grad
6.6%
7.5%
7.1%
10.9%
Grad/prof
16.7%
16.9%
16.8%
20.5%
Sex
0.4888
1
0.4845
20.2475
1
< 0.0001
Male
81.5%
80.1%
80.8%
73.3%
Female
18.5%
19.9%
19.2%
26.7%
Race
0.7345
4
0.9470
48.8493
4
< 0.0001
AmerInd
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
1.3%
Asian
0.4%
0.3%
0.3%
1.7%
White
94.8%
94.0%
94.4%
87.2%
Other
0.5%
0.6%
0.6%
2%
Multiple
3.8%
4.5%
4.2%
7.8%
Ethnicity
0.0096
1
0.9219
21.5225
1
< 0.0001
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 31
Study 1
exploratory
Strata
confirmatory
Study 1
total
Study 2
total
N
833
934
1767
981
t
df
p
t
df
p
Hispanic
4.6%
4.4%
4.5%
9.1%
Non-Hispanic
93.6%
94.6%
94.2%
90.9%
Incidence of Serotonergic Hallucinogen Use
0.6211
7
0.9989
54.2779
7
< 0.0001
1×
3.2%
3.6%
3.5%
2.2%
2–5
18.4%
17.5%
17.9%
11.3%
6–10
19%
19.3%
19.1%
16.2%
11–20
20.6%
20.1%
20.4%
18.5%
21–50
19.7%
19.7%
19.7%
22.7%
51–100
9.5%
9.7%
9.6%
13.7%
101–300
7.2%
7.5%
7.4%
10.5%
>300
2.4%
2.6%
2.5%
4.8%
Incidence of Psilocybin Mushroom Use
2.7610
7
0.9062
38.2196
7
< 0.0001
1×
6.6%
5.9%
6.2%
4.1%
2–5
30.9%
31.9%
31.4%
25.5%
6–10
23.3%
24.1%
23.7%
21.7%
11–20
19.0%
17.6%
18.2%
20.4%
21–50
12.5%
12.3%
12.4%
14.7%
51–100
4.4%
5.5%
5.0%
7.8%
101–300
2.9%
2.2%
2.5%
4.5%
>300
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
1.2%
Relative Psychological Difficulty of the Reported Bad Trip
11.0153
7
0.1380
14.1258
7
0.0490
Routine, Everyday Experience
2.3%
1.3%
1.8%
1.4%
Similar to Weekly Occurences
1.2%
0.6%
0.9%
1.7%
Similar to Monthly Occurences
6.6%
4.5%
5.5%
4.7%
Similar to Yearly Occurences
13.0%
14.3%
13.7%
13.6%
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 32
Study 1
exploratory
Strata
confirmatory
Study 1
total
Study 2
total
N
833
934
1767
981
t
df
p
t
df
p
Similar to 5-Year Occurences
14.2%
16.5%
15.4%
18.9%
Top 10 Most Challenging
23.4%
23.2%
23.3%
21.1%
Top 5 Most Challenging
27.6%
29.2%
28.5%
29.8%
Single Most Challenging
11.8%
10.3%
11.0%
8.8%
Would Repeat the Reported Experience, Including the Challenging Portion
0.2740
1
0.6007
8.1741
1
0.0042
No
54.1%
52.8%
53.4%
52.3%
Yes
45.9%
47.2%
46.6%
47.7%
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 33
Table 2
Exploratory Factor Structure, Correlations, and Reliabilities in Study 1.
Scale
Item
Fear
Grief
Physical
Distress
Insanity
Isolation
Death
h2
HRS
26
.95
−.02
−.05
−.01
.02
.04
0.88
HRS
27
.84
.06
.04
.07
−.06
−.04
0.79
SOCQ
52
.72
.06
.00
.04
.04
.12
0.72
HRS
25
.58
.06
.19
.05
.10
−.19
0.54
5DASC
63
.55
.03
.09
.02
.09
.07
0.48
HRS
39
−.06
.80
−.03
−.03
.03
−.04
0.58
HRS
42
.14
.72
−.06
.08
.09
−.01
0.78
SOCQ
91
.02
.72
.10
−.07
−.01
.12
0.59
HRS
43
−.02
.66
.14
−.04
−.06
.00
0.42
SOCQ
16
.10
.61
−.05
.21
.12
−.01
0.71
SOCQ
13
.17
.59
.01
.02
.01
.10
0.57
HRS
12
.01
.02
.85
.01
−.05
.02
0.74
HRS
13
.04
−.09
.81
.04
.05
−.03
0.68
HRS
11
−.06
.08
.67
.11
.02
.02
0.52
HRS
10
.00
.09
.64
.07
.06
−.03
0.50
HRS
9
.06
−.01
.63
−.16
.00
.12
0.41
SOCQ
85
.01
−.01
.03
.93
−.03
.02
0.90
HRS
92
−.03
.05
.05
.75
.02
.03
0.63
5DASC
19
.11
−.06
−.05
.68
.05
.03
0.57
5DASC
44
.03
−.07
.01
−.01
.93
.01
0.81
HRS
48
−.01
.07
.02
.00
.83
−.01
0.74
SOCQ
45
−.04
.32
−.03
.11
.54
.08
0.67
SOCQ
70
−.02
−.01
−.02
.02
.00
1.01
1.00
HRS
74
.12
.07
.11
.05
.03
.70
0.74
Fear
.88
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 34
Scale
Item
Fear
Grief
Physical
Distress
Insanity
Isolation
Death
h2
Grief
.51
.89
Physical Distress
.36
.23
.87
Insanity
.68
.40
.34
.84
Isolation
.43
.55
.17
.43
.85
Death
.34
.31
.23
.38
.22
.84
The upper matrix presents loadings of items onto exploratory factors for the final item set. Factor loadings greater than .4 are in bold. The h2 column shows the communality of each item. The lower matrix 
includes factor intercorrelations below the diagonal in non-italicized typeface, and factor reliabilities on the diagonal in italics.
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 35
Table 3
Confirmatory factor structure of the Challenging Experience Questionnaire in Study 1
Factor
Scale
Item
Estimate
SE
Item Text
Fear
HRS
26
0.903
0.026
Frightened
HRS
27
0.853
0.027
Panic
SOCQ
52
0.797
0.028
Experience of fear
HRS
25
0.719
0.029
Anxious
5DASC
63
0.667
0.030
I had the feeling something horrible would happen
Grief
HRS
36
0.690
0.030
Sad
SOCQ
91
0.650
0.030
Feelings of grief
HRS
38
0.841
0.027
Despair
HRS
39
0.636
0.031
Feel like crying
SOCQ
16
0.801
0.028
Feelings of despair
SOCQ
13
0.704
0.030
Emotional and/or physical suffering
Physical Distress
HRS
12
0.618
0.032
Feel heart beating
HRS
13
0.505
0.033
Feel heart skipping beats or beating irregularly
HRS
11
0.826
0.029
Feel body shake/tremble
HRS
10
0.838
0.029
Shaky feelings inside
HRS
09
0.526
0.033
Pressure or weight in chest or abdomen
Insanity
SOCQ
85
0.853
0.028
Fear that you might lose your mind or go insane
HRS
88
0.813
0.028
Change in sense of sanity
5DASC
19
0.749
0.029
I was afraid that the state I was in would last forever
Isolation
5DASC
44
0.819
0.029
I felt isolated from everything and everyone
HRS
44
0.816
0.029
Feel isolated from people and things
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 36
Factor
Scale
Item
Estimate
SE
Item Text
SOCQ
45
0.768
0.029
Experience of Isolation and loneliness
Death
SOCQ
70
0.736
0.033
Profound experience of your own death
HRS
70
0.986
0.034
Feel as if dead or dying
Paranoia
SOCQ
40
0.677
0.040
Feeling that people were plotting against you
SOCQ
72
0.711
0.040
Experience of antagonism toward people around you
The table presents confirmatory factor loadings, in which items were only allowed to load onto their intended factor. All other loadings were set to zero. Scale = parent instrument (SOCQ, HRS, or 5DASC) 
for a given item; Item = item number from parent instrument; Estimate = standardized factor loading; SE = standard error of the parameter estimate.
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 37
Table 4
Factor correlations, reliabilities, and means for the entire sample, by gender, and by previous struggle with a psychiatric disorder in Study 1.
Fear
Grief
Physical
Distress
Insanity
Isolation
Death
Paranoia
Factor correlations and reliabilities for the entire sample
Fear
.89
Grief
.685 (.016)
.87
Physical Distress
.469 (.022)
.363 (.024)
.80
Insanity
.730 (.015)
.535 (.021)
.410 (.024)
.84
Isolation
.534 (.020)
.677 (.017)
.291 (.026)
.498 (.022)
.84
Death
.456 (.020)
.421 (.021)
.347 (.023)
.473 (.020)
.315 (.023)
.84
Paranoia
.375 (.028)
.377 (.029)
.247 (.031)
.327 (.030)
.513 (.027)
.143 (.029)
.65
By Gender
Standardized Factor scores
M†
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
F
0.156
(0.077)*
0.059
(0.059)
0.066
(0.054)
0.087
(0.102)
0.710
(0.375)
−0.069
(0.089)
0.105
(0.084)
Factor correlations and reliabilities for females (above the diagonal) and males (below the diagonal)
Fear
.718 (.032)
.467 (.050)
.708 (.034)
.537 (.045)
.449 (.050)
.313 (.061)
Grief
.675 (.018)
.426 (.052)
.613 (.042)
.694 (.035)
.455 (.050)
.362 (.061)
Physical Distress
.471 (.025)
.345 (.028)
.431 (.054)
.390 (.055)
.425 (.053)
.184 (.067)
Insanity
.735 (.016)
.513 (.024)
.405 (.027)
.531 (.048)
.486 (.051)
.251 (.065)
Isolation
.533 (.023)
.672 (.019)
.266 (.030)
.489 (.025)
.363 (.054)
.518 (.058)
Death
.464 (.022)
.416 (.024)
.333 (.026)
.475 (.023)
.306 (.026)
.117 (.063)
Paranoia
.396 (.032)
.379 (.032)
.259 (.035)
.343 (.034)
.503 (.031)
.154 (.033)
By Previous Struggle with a Psychiatric Disorder
Standardized Factor scores
Y†
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N
−0.190
(0.060)***
−0.223
(0.047)***
−0.109
(0.042)**
−0.229
(0.082)**
−0.747
(0.299)*
−0.144
(0.071)*
−0.110
(0.068)
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 38
Fear
Grief
Physical
Distress
Insanity
Isolation
Death
Paranoia
Factor correlations and reliabilities for those with (above the diagonal) and without (below the diagonal) previous struggle
Fear
.691 (.025)
.443 (.036)
.655 (.028)
.547 (.032)
.435 (.035)
.352 (.046)
Grief
.676 (.020)
.312 (.041)
.486 (.036)
.692 (.027)
.419 (.036)
.369 (.047)
Phys.Dist
.481 (.028)
.388 (.031)
.354 (.041)
.225 (.044)
.315 (.039)
.071 (.052)
Insanity
.773 (.017)
.562 (.025)
.435 (.030)
.491 (.036)
.458 (.036)
.282 (.050)
Isolation
.523 (.026)
.666 (.022)
.322 (.033)
.498 (.028)
.304 (.039)
.479 (.045)
Death
.463 (.028)
.414 (.029)
.355 (.030)
.472 (.028)
.313 (.031)
.125 (.047)
Paranoia
.391 (.036)
.378 (.037)
.348 (.038)
.355 (.038)
.530 (.034)
.150 (.038)
Correlations and factor scores are presented with standard error in parentheses.
†= comparison group (males, and those with previous struggle with a psychiatric disorder).
*p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001.
Factor reliabilities for the entire sample (calculated as Cronbach’s alpha) are presented in italics on the diagonal at the top of the table.
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 39
Table 5
Model Fit Indices for Tests of Factorial Invariance.
Model
CFI
∆CFI
RMSEA
∆RMSEA
SRMR
∆SRMR
Gender in Study 1
1 (configural)
0.911
0.066
0.048
2 (weak)
0.910
−0.001
0.065
−0.001
0.050
0.002
3 (strong)
0.906
−0.004
0.066
+0.001
0.051
0.001
4 (strict)
0.905
−0.001
0.065
−0.001
0.051
0.000
Struggle with a Psychiatric Disorder in Study 1
1 (configural)
0.914
0.065
0.047
2 (weak)
0.914
0.000
0.063
−0.002
0.049
0.002
3 (strong)
0.914
0.000
0.063
0.000
0.049
0.000
4 (strict)
0.913
−0.001
0.061
−0.002
0.049
0.000
Comparing Study 1 and Study 2
1 (configural)
0.913
0.066
0.047
2 (weak)
0.912
−0.001
0.065
−0.001
0.050
+0.003
3 (strong)
0.912
0.000
0.064
−0.001
0.050
0.000
4 (strict)
0.902
−0.010
0.066
+0.002
0.048
−0.002
Critical values for the rejection of the null hypothesis of factorial invariance at any level is decrease in CFI > 0.01, increase in RMSEA > 0.015, and increase in SRMR > 0.01 (Chen 2007). No changes in 
model fit indices exceeded these values.
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 40
Table 6
Regression of Ratings of Overall Impact of the Experience on CEQ Factor Scores for Study 1
CEQ Factor
PE
SE
z
p
Difficulty of the experience = …
fear
0.161
0.043
3.747
0.000
grief
0.132
0.040
3.334
0.001
physical distress
−0.038
0.026
−1.462
0.144
insanity
0.276
0.038
7.198
0.000
isolation
0.009
0.038
0.228
0.820
death
0.156
0.027
5.778
0.000
paranoia
−0.085
0.032
−2.626
0.009
Meaningfulness of the experience = …
fear
−0.240
0.049
−4.954
0.000
grief
0.162
0.045
3.629
0.002
physical distress
0.021
0.030
0.721
0.471
insanity
0.277
0.043
6.395
0.000
isolation
−0.194
0.042
−4.576
0.000
death
0.254
0.031
8.250
0.000
paranoia
−0.033
0.036
−0.897
0.370
Spiritual significance of the experience = …
fear
−0.327
0.048
−6.808
0.000
grief
0.190
0.044
4.290
0.000
physical distress
0.106
0.029
3.629
0.000
insanity
0.149
0.043
3.494
0.000
isolation
−0.251
0.042
−5.973
0.000
death
0.319
0.031
10.386
0.000
paranoia
−0.047
0.036
−1.292
0.196
Change in wellbeing attributed to the experience1 = …
fear
0.282
0.049
5.728
0.000
grief
−0.043
0.045
−0.947
0.343
physical distress
−0.108
0.030
−3.599
0.000
insanity
−0.073
0.044
−1.674
0.094
isolation
0.122
0.043
2.848
0.004
death
−0.219
0.031
−7.042
0.000
paranoia
0.065
0.037
1.752
0.080
PE: parameter estimate, SE: standard error
1Positive scores indicate increased well-being
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 41
Table 7
Factor correlations, factor reliabilities, and factor scores for Study 2.
Fear
Grief
Phys.Dist
Insanity
Isolation
Death
Paranoia
Factor correlations and reliabilities
Fear
.84
Grief
.447 (.029)
.86
Phys.Dist
.491 (.030)
.303 (.034)
.81
Insanity
.654 (.023)
.416 (.031)
.403 (.034)
.76
Isolation
.298 (.032)
.634 (.022)
.211 (.035)
.398 (.031)
.77
Death
.434 (.029)
.283 (.032)
.346 (.033)
.463 (.030)
.213 (.032)
.85
Paranoia
.261 (.038)
.246 (.038)
.240 (.040)
.207 (.040)
.321 (.036)
.091 (.038)
.7
Standardized Factor Scores
Study 1†
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Study 2
.616 (.057)***
.052 (.043)
.333 (.043)***
−1.408 (.052)***
−.070 (.065)
−0.010 (.061)
−0.180 (0.050)***
†= comparison group.
*p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001.
Factor reliabilities (calculated as Cronbach’s alpha) are presented in italics on the diagonal.
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Barrett et al.
Page 42
Table 8
Regression of Ratings of Overall Impact of the Experience on CEQ Factor Scores for Study 2
DV
PE
SE
z
p
Difficulty of the experience
fear
0.164
0.047
3.456
0.001
grief
0.177
0.043
4.081
0.001
physical distress
−0.099
0.039
−2.543
0.011
insanity
0.165
0.049
3.393
0.001
isolation
0.005
0.042
−0.126
0.900
death
0.214
0.037
5.834
0.000
paranoia
−0.038
0.037
−1.030
0.303
Meaningfulness of the experience
fear
−0.080
0.052
−1.549
0.121
grief
0.013
0.047
0.270
0.787
physical distress
−0.024
0.043
−0.572
0.567
insanity
0.126
0.053
2.379
0.017
isolation
−0.010
0.046
−0.225
0.822
death
0.256
0.040
6.360
0.000
paranoia
0.009
0.041
0.231
0.814
Spiritual significance of the experience
fear
−0.116
0.052
−2.229
0.026
grief
−0.048
0.047
−1.004
0.315
physical distress
0.025
0.043
0.586
0.558
insanity
0.045
0.053
0.855
0.393
isolation
−0.018
0.046
−0.396
0.692
death
0.303
0.040
7.495
0.000
paranoia
−0.017
0.041
−0.412
0.680
Change in wellbeing attributed to the experience
fear
0.116
0.053
2.200
0.028
grief
−0.052
0.048
−1.073
0.283
physical distress
−0.053
0.043
−1.211
0.226
insanity
−0.061
0.054
1.130
0.258
isolation
0.027
0.047
−0.570
0.569
death
−0.185
0.041
−4.530
0.000
paranoia
0.105
0.041
2.528
0.011
PE: parameter estimate, SE: standard error
J Psychopharmacol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
