 Public Support for Gun Violence Prevention
Policies Among Gun Owners and Non–Gun Owners
in 2017
Colleen L. Barry, PhD, MPP, Daniel W. Webster, ScD, MPH, Elizabeth Stone, BMus, Cassandra K. Crifasi, PhD, MPH, Jon S. Vernick, JD, MPH,
and Emma E. McGinty, PhD, MS
Objectives. To compare public support for 24 different gun policies between gun
owners and non–gun owners in 2017.
Methods. We fielded a national public opinion survey in January 2017 using an online
panel to measure US adults’ support for 24 gun policies. We compared support among
gun owners and non–gun owners.
Results. For 23 of the 24 policies examined, most respondents supported restricting
or regulating gun ownership. Only 8 of 24 policies had greater than a 10-point support
gap between gun owners and non–gun owners.
Conclusions. Policies with high public support and minimal support gaps by gun
ownership status included universal background checks, greater accountability for li-
censed gun dealers unable to account for their inventory, higher safety training stan-
dards for concealed carry permit holders, improved reporting of records related to
mental illness for background checks, gun prohibitions for persons subject to temporary
domestic violence restraining orders, and gun violence restraining orders.
Public Health Implications. Although there are important areas where Americans
disagree on guns, large majorities of both gun owners and non–gun owners strongly
support measures to strengthen US gun laws. (Am J Public Health. 2018;108:878–881.
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2018.304432)
See also Galea and Vaughan, p. 856; and the Gun Violence Prevention Section,
pp. 858–888.
T
he 2012 mass shooting at Sandy Hook
Elementary School catalyzed a national di-
alogue about firearm policy. In the intervening
years, thousands of lives have been lost to mass
shootings in the United States; firearms were
responsible for 38658 deaths in 2016 alone.1
Following the 2017 and 2018 mass shootings in
Las Vegas, Nevada; Sutherland Springs, Texas;
and Parkland, Florida, one prominent message in
the US news headlines has been the deep divide
among Americans on gun policy.2 Media reports
such as this described a chasm separating gun
owners from non–gun owners: 1 headline de-
scribed a staggering gap that made abortion look
like an issue with a minor divide. The perception
thatthepublicisdeeplydividedbygunownership
status has been characterized as a stumbling block
to the passage of policies to reduce gun violence.
To understand the nature of the partisan
divide, we fielded a national survey assessing
Americans’ attitudes about 24 different poli-
cies to reduce gun violence in 2017 and
measured the size of the gaps in support be-
tween gun owners and non–gun owners. In
this study, we have updated what was known
about public opinion, by gun ownership
status, directly following the mass shooting at
Sandy Hook Elementary3 and 2 years later in
2015,4 and examined a broader set of policy
options than has been studied elsewhere.5 In
the context of renewed interest in policy
action following the Parkland tragedy, our
intent was to identify policies with the highest
overall public support levels and the smallest
partisan gaps for consideration.
METHODS
We fielded the national survey with
NORC’s AmeriSpeaks online panel from
January 2 to 16, 2017 (n = 2124). The
probability-based panel was designed to
be representative of the US population;
we used random-digit dialing and address-
based sampling covering 95% of US
households. Panelists include households
with listed and unlisted telephone numbers
or with only cell phones and were aged 18
years and older. The survey completion rate
was 75%.
We conducted analyses using survey
weights to adjust for known sampling de-
viations and survey nonresponse (Appendix
A, available as a supplement to the online
version of this article at http://www.ajph.
org). We oversampled gun owners and
compared policy support by gun ownership
status with the Pearson c2 test.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Colleen L. Barry, Daniel W. Webster, Cassandra K. Crifasi, Jon S. Vernick, and Emma E. McGinty are with the Department
of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Center for Gun Policy and Research, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, MD. Elizabeth Stone is with the Division of General Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
Correspondence should be sent to Colleen L. Barry, PhD, MPP, Fred and Julie Soper Professor and Chair, Department of Health
Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Center for Gun Policy and Research, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 624
N Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21205 (e-mail: cbarry@jhu.edu). Reprints can be ordered at http://www.ajph.org by clicking the
“Reprints” link.
This article was accepted March 14, 2018.
doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2018.304432
878
Research
Peer Reviewed
Barry et al.
AJPH
July 2018, Vol 108, No. 7
AJPH GUN VIOLENCE PREVENTION
 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% Support
Requiring a background check system for all gun sales to make sure a purchaser is not legally
prohibited from having a gun  
Allowing the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to temporarily take away a gun dealer’
s
license if an audit reveals record-keeping violations and the dealer cannot account for 20 or
more of his guns
A person who can legally carry a concealed gun should be required to pass a test
demonstrating they can safely and lawfully handle a gun in common situations they might
encounter
Requiring states to report a person to the background check system who is prohibited from
buying a gun due either to involuntary commitment to a hospital for psychiatric treatment or
to being declared mentally incompetent by a court of law  
Prohibiting a person subject to a temporary domestic violence restraining order from having a
gun for the duration of the order
Allowing family members to ask the court to temporarily remove guns from a relative who
they believe is at risk of harming himself or others 
Requiring a person to obtain a license from a local law enforcement agency before buying a
gun to verify their identity and ensure that they are not legally prohibited from having a gun
Prohibiting a person convicted of a serious crime as a juvenile from having a gun for 10 years 
Allowing cities to sue licensed gun dealers when there is strong evidence that the gun dealer’
s
careless sales practices allowed many criminals to obtain guns 
Authorizing law enforcement officers to temporarily remove guns from individuals who the
officer determines pose an immediate threat of harm to self or others 
Requiring a mandatory minimum sentence of two years in prison for a person convicted of
knowingly selling a gun to someone who cannot legally have a gun 
Prohibiting a person convicted of public display of a gun in a threatening manner, excluding
self-defense, from having a gun for 10 years 
Requiring by law that a person lock up the guns in their home when not in use to prevent
handling by children or teenagers without adult supervision
Allowing the information about which gun dealers sell the most guns used in crimes to be
available to the police and the public so that those gun dealers can be prioritized for greater
oversight 
Prohibiting a person convicted of two or more misdemeanor crimes involving illegal drugs in a
five-year period from having a gun for five years 
Prohibiting a person under the age of 21 from having a handgun 
Banning the sale of military-style, semi-automatic assault weapons that are capable of
shooting more than 10 rounds of ammunition without reloading 
Banning the sale of large-capacity ammunition clips or magazines that allow some guns to 
shoot more than 10 bullets before reloading
Prohibiting a person convicted of assault and battery that does not result in serious injury or
involve a lethal weapon from having a gun for 10 years 
Prohibiting a person convicted of carrying a concealed gun without a permit from having a gun
for 10 years 
Prohibiting a person convicted of two or more DWIs or DUIs in a five-year period from having a
gun for five years 
Allowing people who have lost the right to have a gun due to involuntary commitment for
mental illness to have that right restored if they are determined not to be dangerous 
Prohibiting a person convicted of drunk and disorderly conduct from having a gun for 10 years 
Allowing a person who can legally carry a concealed gun to bring that gun onto school grounds
for kindergarten through 12th grade 
= Gun owner 
=  Non-gun owner 
FIGURE 1—Gaps in Public Support Between Gun Owners and Non–Gun Owners for US Gun Policies in 2017
AJPH GUN VIOLENCE PREVENTION
July 2018, Vol 108, No. 7
AJPH
Barry et al.
Peer Reviewed
Research
879
 RESULTS
For 23 of the 24 policies, most respondents
supported restrictions or regulations on gun
ownership (Appendix B, available as a sup-
plement to the online version of this article at
http://www.ajph.org). Gun policies with the
highest support were universal background
checks (87.8%); stronger measures requiring
accountability by gun dealers unable to ac-
count for missing (e.g., lost or stolen) guns
(84.8%); requiring a person who can legally
carry a concealed gun to pass a test demon-
strating safe and lawful handling (84.7%);
improved reporting of people disqualified
from owning a gun on the basis of mental
health criteria tothefirearmbackgroundcheck
system (83.6%); gun prohibitions on persons
subject to temporary domestic violence
restraining orders (81%); and laws creating
a civil process for families to petition the court
for temporary removal of a firearm from an
individual deemed to be at serious risk for
harming himself or herself or others (78.9%).
Figure 1 indicates that 8 of the 24 policies
had a greater than 10-point support gap be-
tween gun owners and non–gun owners, in-
cluding banning the sale of large-capacity
magazines (41% vs 67%); banning the sale of
semiautomatic assault weapons (44% vs 68%);
allowing a person to carry a concealed gun
onto school grounds for kindergarten through
grade 12 (43% vs 19%); requiring that a person
lock up guns in their home when not in use to
prevent handling by children or adolescents
without supervision (58% vs 79%); prohibit-
ing a person younger than 21 from having
a handgun (50% vs 68%); requiring a person to
obtain a license from local law enforcement
before buying a gun to verify identity and
ensure no legal prohibition from having a gun
(63% vs 81%); prohibiting a person convicted
of assault and battery that does not result in
serious injury or involve a lethal weapon from
having a gun for 10 years (45% vs 59%); and
allowingcitiestosuelicensedgundealerswhen
strong evidence indicates that the gun dealer’s
careless sales practices allowed criminals
to obtain guns (67% vs 78%).
DISCUSSION
Only 8 of the 24 policies to restrict or
regulate firearms had support gaps by gun
ownership status exceeding 10points. Policies
with the highest overall public support and
minimal support gaps by gun ownership status
included universal background checks,
greater accountability for licensed gun dealers
unable to account for their inventory, higher
safety training standards for concealed carry
permit holders, improved reporting of records
related to mental illness, gun prohibitions for
persons subject to temporary domestic vio-
lence restraining orders, and gun violence
restraining orders.
Policies with high overall support and
minimal support gaps may be the most feasible
to enact, and some have strong evidence to
support their promise in reducing gun vio-
lence. For example, universal background
checks are associated with lower levels of guns
diverted for criminal use.6 Even though
changes in these laws have not been linked to
changes in homicide or suicide rates,7 in-
sufficient enforcement of and compliance
with these laws limit their effects.8 Universal
background checks coupled with handgun
purchaser licensing, however,appear to reduce
rates of homicides,9 suicides,10 and law en-
forcement officers being shot in the line of
duty.11 Likewise, research indicates that access
to firearms by domestic violence abusers in-
creases the risk of intimate partner homicide by
5-fold compared with unarmed abusers, and
laws restricting access to guns by perpetrators
of domestic violence reduce those risks.12
Three states have recently enacted and 16
additional state legislatures are currently
considering gun violence restraining order
laws authorizing law enforcement officers to
remove guns from individuals deemed to be at
immediate, serious risk of harming themselves
and allowing family members to petition the
court to remove guns temporarily from
a relative believed to be at risk for harming
himself or herself or others. A related firearm
removal law in Connecticut suggests that this
policy could reduce suicide by firearm.
Itisalsoworthhighlightingthatsupportwas
high (84%; results not shown) for requiring
individuals with a concealed carry permit to
pass a safe handling test, even among res-
pondents living in states with minimal or no
restrictions on concealed gun carrying by
civilians (so-called right to carry states).
Our study had some limitations. Online
survey panels raise various methodological
concerns that we have taken steps to
overcome, including use of probability-based
recruitment consistent with well-established
standards and comparison of respondent
characteristics in our data with national
rates. Also, although our study was national
in scope, gun policies are often considered
in state or local jurisdictions, and it is
critical to take into consideration geo-
graphic variation in attitudes by gun
ownership.
PUBLIC HEALTH IMPLICATIONS
Our research indicates that many policy
options have wide public support and that
consensus exists between gun owners and
those who do not own guns. Given that gun
issues are connected tightly to cultural and
identity politics in America, it is noteworthy
how much agreement we found in support
for policies to regulate the ways people
acquire and carry guns.
CONTRIBUTORS
C. L. Barry contributed to the conceptualization and
design of the study, statistical analyses, interpretation of
the data, drafting of the article, and review and revision of
the article. D. W. Webster, E. Stone, C. K. Crifasi, and
J. S. Vernick contributed to the conceptualization and
design of the study and interpretation of the data and
critically reviewed and revised the article. E. E. McGinty
contributed to the conceptualization and design of the
study, conducted the statistical analyses, interpreted the
data, and critically reviewed and revised the article. All
authors approved the final article as submitted and agree to
be accountable for all aspects of the work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding for data collection came from internal Johns
Hopkins University sources and a gift from Bloomberg
Philanthropies to the Johns Hopkins Center for Gun
Policy and Research. D. W. Webster gratefully ac-
knowledges additional support from the Smart Family
Foundation.
Note. Funders had no role in the study design, sta-
tistical analysis, interpretation of the data, or drafting of
this article.
HUMAN PARTICIPANT PROTECTION
The study was exempted by the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health institutional review
board.
REFERENCES
1. Data from CDC’s WISQARS (Web-based Injury
Statistics Query and Reporting System) for 2016.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/
index.html. Accessed April 26, 2018.
2. America deeply divided on gun control issues.
ABC World News Tonight. Available at: http://abcnews.
go.com/WNT/video/americans-deeply-divided-
gun-control-issues-3560136. Accessed April 26,
2018.
AJPH GUN VIOLENCE PREVENTION
880
Research
Peer Reviewed
Barry et al.
AJPH
July 2018, Vol 108, No. 7
 3. Barry CL, McGinty EE, Vernick JS, Webster DW.
After Newton—public opinion on gun policy and mental
illness. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(12):1077–1081.
4. Barry CL, McGinty EE, Vernick JS, Webster DW.
Two years after Newtown—public opinion on gun
policy revisited. Prev Med. 2015;79:55–58.
5. Parker K, Horowitz J, Igielnik R, Oliphant B, Brown
A; Pew Research Center. America’s Complex Re-
lationship With Guns. June 2017. Available at: http://
www.pewsocialtrends.org/2017/06/22/americas-
complex-relationship-with-guns. Accessed April 13,
2018.
6. Webster DW, Vernick JS, Bulzacchelli MT. Effects of
state-level firearm seller accountability policies on fire-
arms trafficking. J Urban Health. 2009;86(4):525–537.
7. Kagawa RM, Castillo-Carniglia A, Vernick JS, et al.
Repeal of comprehensive background check policies and
firearm homicide and suicide. Epidemiology. 2018;Epub
ahead of print.
8. Castillo-Carniglia A, Kagawa RM, Webster DW,
Vernick JS, Cerda M, Wintemute GJ. Comprehensive
background check policy and firearm background checks
in three US states. Inj Prev. 2017;Epub ahead of print.
9. Rudolph KE, Stuart EA, Vernick JS, Webster DW.
Association between Connecticut’s permit-to-purchase
handgun law and homicides. Am J Public Health. 2015;
105(8):e49–e54.
10. Crifasi CK, Meyers JS, Vernick JS, Webster DW.
Effects of changes in permit-to-purchase handgun laws in
Connecticut and Missouri on suicide rates. Prev Med.
2015;79:43–49.
11. Crifasi CK, Pollack KM, Webster DW. Effects of
state-level policy changes on homicide and nonfatal
shootings of law enforcement officers. Inj Prev. 2016;
22(4):274–278.
12. Zeoli AM, McCourt A, Buggs S, Frattaroli S, Lilley D,
Webster DW. Analysis of the strength of legal firearms
restrictions for perpetrators of domestic violence and their
association with intimate partner homicide. Am J Epi-
demiol. 2017;Epub ahead of print.
AJPH GUN VIOLENCE PREVENTION
July 2018, Vol 108, No. 7
AJPH
Barry et al.
Peer Reviewed
Research
881
