 Running retraining to treat lower limb injuries:
a mixed-methods study of current evidence
synthesised with expert opinion
C J Barton,1,2,3,4 D R Bonanno,1,5 J Carr,2,6 B S Neal,3,4 P Malliaras,1,2,4
A Franklyn-Miller,7,8 H B Menz1,5
▸ Additional material is
published online only. To view
please visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-095278).
1Sport and Exercise Medicine
Research Centre, School of
Allied Health, La Trobe
University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia
2Complete Sports Care,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
3Pure Sports Medicine,
London, UK
4Centre for Sport and Exercise
Medicine, Queen Mary
University of London, London,
UK
5Discipline of Podiatry, School
of Allied Health, La Trobe
University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia
6Back on Track Physiotherapy,
Albury, New South Wales,
Australia
7Sports Surgery Clinic Research
Unit, Santry Demesne, Dublin,
Republic of Ireland
8Centre for Health, Exercise
and Sports Medicine, University
of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia
Correspondence to
Dr CJ Barton, Centre for Sport
and Exercise Medicine, Queen
Mary University of London,
London E14DG, UK;
christian@completesportscare.
com.au
Accepted 12 December 2015
Published Online First
16 February 2016
To cite: Barton CJ,
Bonanno DR, Carr J, et al.
Br J Sports Med
2016;50:513–526.
ABSTRACT
Importance Running-related injuries are highly
prevalent.
Objective Synthesise published evidence with
international expert opinion on the use of running
retraining when treating lower limb injuries.
Design Mixed methods.
Methods A systematic review of clinical and
biomechanical findings related to running retraining
interventions were synthesised and combined with
semistructured interviews with 16 international experts
covering clinical reasoning related to the implementation
of running retraining.
Results Limited evidence supports the effectiveness of
transition from rearfoot to forefoot or midfoot strike and
increase step rate or altering proximal mechanics in
individuals with anterior exertional lower leg pain; and
visual and verbal feedback to reduce hip adduction in
females with patellofemoral pain. Despite the paucity of
clinical evidence, experts recommended running
retraining for: iliotibial band syndrome; plantar
fasciopathy (fasciitis); Achilles, patellar, proximal
hamstring and gluteal tendinopathy; calf pain; and
medial tibial stress syndrome. Tailoring approaches to
each injury and individual was recommended to optimise
outcomes. Substantial evidence exists for the immediate
biomechanical effects of running retraining interventions
(46 studies), including evaluation of step rate and strike
pattern manipulation, strategies to alter proximal
kinematics and cues to reduce impact loading variables.
Summary and relevance Our synthesis of published
evidence related to clinical outcomes and biomechanical
effects with expert opinion indicates running retraining
warrants consideration in the treatment of lower limb
injuries in clinical practice.
INTRODUCTION
Running as a means of exercise is popular for both
recreation,
and
as
a
sport
in
its
own
right.
However, running is not risk free. Injury incidence
ranges from 19% to 78% among studies with
follow-up
periods
between
1 week
and
18
months.1–2 Common running injuries include exer-
tional lower leg pain, plantar fasciopathy, Achilles
tendinopathy, calf pain, medial tibial stress syn-
drome, patellofemoral pain (PFP), iliotibial band
syndrome (ITBS), patellar tendinopathy, hamstring
injury including proximal tendinopathy and gluteal
tendinopathy.1
Proposed
intrinsic
factors
for
running-related injury include older age,3 higher
body mass index,4 history of prior injury,1 limb
length discrepancy,5 abnormal anatomical align-
ment5 and foot posture,6 7 and faulty foot loading
patterns.8 9 Proposed extrinsic factors include level
of competition,10 training accumulation,11 shoe
type5 and training surface.12 Multiple interventions
have been developed in an attempt to mitigate
these risks and treat injuries that develop, including
exercise programmes to improve strength, neuro-
muscular control
and
flexibility,13
14
footwear
modification,13 15 foot orthoses,13 16 17 and taping
techniques.13 18 Despite extensive research in all
areas, a lack of effective long-term treatment strat-
egies remains a source of frustration for many
runners and clinicians.
Alteration to running technique may help to
treat running injuries by reducing load in certain
muscle groups and joints.19
20 This theory was
tested by Davis21 introducing the coaching concept
of running retraining to treat lower limb injuries in
a case series of five patients who reported pain
reduction and maintained a changed running tech-
nique. The process involved (1) identifying any the-
oretical abnormal running mechanics which may be
contributing to tissue overload; (2) establishing if
running mechanics could be altered; and (3) facili-
tating the desired running mechanics changes and
encouraging motor learning to ensure maintenance
of any change. Despite nearly 10 years since the
publication of this paper, only four small case
series
evaluating
the
effectiveness
of
running
retraining interventions in reducing pain have been
published.22–25
Biomechanical studies in asymptomatic popula-
tions have examined retraining strategies exten-
sively (including altering step rate, strike pattern,
hip and knee motion, trunk position, step width,
and impact loading variables), and reported to
change running kinematics, kinetics and electro-
myography. A recent systematic review by Napier
et al26 concluded a number of biomechanical vari-
ables can be altered by running retraining interven-
tions.
Additionally,
they
concluded
the
most
effective strategy for reducing impact loading vari-
ables including vertical impact peak, and average
and instantaneous loading rate was provision of
real-time feedback related to kinetics and/or kine-
matics. However, the importance of these impact
loading variables to injury are not supported by
strong evidence, and the review by Napier et al26
did not provide a synthesis of current published
clinical outcomes, despite emerging evidence.22–25
Many interventions studied in previous running
retraining research may not translate to clinical
Editor’s choice
Scan to access more
free content
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
1 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 practice well, due to issues with practicality (eg, real-time three-
dimensional (3D) motion analysis feedback), and the ‘one size
fits all’ approach of associated methodology (eg, all participants
transition from a rearfoot to forefoot strike). It also remains
unclear how running retraining may interact with other inter-
ventions with an established evidence base such as exercise
rehabilitation.27–29 Given this lack of evidence to guide clini-
cians and researchers in the practical implementation of running
retraining, consultation with those already prescribing running
retraining in clinical practice may provide valuable insight. Such
consultation is part of evidence-based practice, particularly
where clinical trials are lacking.30
Our mixed-methods study had three objectives: (1) to system-
atically review and summarise the clinical and biomechanical
evidence for implementing running retraining to treat lower
limb injuries; (2) explore the clinical reasoning related to the
use of running retraining by international experts; and (3) syn-
thesise these elements to provide guidance for clinicians and
researchers who seek to implement and evaluate running
retraining interventions in the future.
METHODS
Systematic review
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Running retraining was defined as ‘the implementation of any
cue or strategy to alter an individual’s running technique’.21
Studies evaluating other interventions in conjunction with
running retraining were considered if the effects of retraining
could be clearly delineated (eg, altering footwear combined with
instruction of strike pattern, compared with altering footwear
alone). T
wo streams of studies were sought:
1. Studies evaluating clinical outcomes (ie, changes to pain and/
or function) following running retraining interventions in
symptomatic running populations;
2. Studies evaluating changes to lower limb biomechanics
(kinetic, kinematic or neuromotor) during running in symp-
tomatic and asymptomatic populations.
Studies with less than 10 participants in total or in the
running retraining intervention group were excluded. This cri-
teria were applied to minimise the risk of potentially false-
positive or false-negative findings influencing the evidence
synthesis.
Search strategy
MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and Current Contents were
searched in June 2015. The search strategy and results for each
data base can be found in online supplementary file 1.
Review process
Titles and abstracts found during the initial electronic search
were uploaded into Endnote X6 (Thomson Reuters, New York,
USA), duplicates removed, and each screened for inclusion by
two independent reviewers (DRB and BSN). To resolve disagree-
ment about exclusion, a third reviewer (CJB) was available.
Where necessary, the full text was retrieved.
Quality assessment
T
wo independent reviewers (CJB and DRB) evaluated the meth-
odological quality of each included study using the Downs and
Black quality index which consists of 27 items (maximum score
of 28).31 A third reviewer (BSN) was available to resolve any
disagreements. Based on quality assessment scores, studies were
categorised as high quality (≥20), moderate quality (17–19) or
low quality (≤16). Owing to the lack of randomised controlled
trials and high-quality studies identified, meta-analysis was not
performed. However, where possible, similar findings were com-
bined in results tables for various retraining interventions, and
the quality of these associated studies subsequently used to
determine the level of evidence for each finding based on a
modified version of the van T
ulder et al32 criteria:
1. Strong=consistent findings among multiple studies including
at least three high-quality studies;
2. Moderate=consistent findings among multiple trials, includ-
ing at least three moderate-quality/high-quality studies or
two high-quality studies;
3. Limited=consistent findings among multiple low-quality/
moderate-quality studies, or one high-quality study;
4. Very
limited=findings
from
one
low-quality/moderate-
quality study.
Semistructured interviews
Participants
Prospective interview participants were initially identified from
author lists of running retraining-related literature. Experts were
required to be actively participating in running retraining
research, have at least 5 years clinical experience, and be pre-
scribing running retraining regularly to treat patients with
running injuries. It was felt that experts with a good blend of
clinical experience and research knowledge would be able to
provide the best information on the perceptions of current evi-
dence (published and unpublished), and its external applicability
for clinical practice. Sixteen international experts from the UK,
the USA, Canada and Australia were included and interviewed.
Among them were 11 physiotherapists, 2 physical therapists,
1 sports physician, 1 medical doctor and 1 running coach.
Further details related to participant characteristics are detailed
in online supplementary file 2. Ethical approval was granted by
La Trobe University’s Faculty of Human Ethics Committee
(FHEC13/151). Each participant provided informed consent.
Interview process
One interviewer ( JC) completed and recorded all interviews via
Skype or in person where possible. Each was then transcribed
for further analysis. The interviewer was a physiotherapist with
9 years clinical experience, and used running retraining inter-
ventions as part of their clinical practice. To facilitate discussion,
a topic guide (see online supplementary file 3) was presented to
each participant during the interview process. Content of the
topic guide was based on a preliminary review of the literature
and discussion between the research team.
Data analysis
Qualitative data were evaluated using a ‘Framework’ approach33
by a physiotherapist (CJB) with experience in conducting inter-
views and evaluating data related to qualitative research. Each
transcript was read to gain familiarity, and then a thematic
framework was formed by mapping the ideas and opinions
stated by the interviewees and combining these to generate
themes and subthemes, subsequently tabulated with each inter-
viewee being coded to enable anonymous quote attribution.
Additional interviews were performed until data saturation,
whereby no new themes were identified. An additional physio-
therapist (PM) and sports physician (AF-M) also read through
each interview transcript to reinforce the analysis. Of particular
interest was information related to the current evidence base,
appropriateness of running retraining to treat lower limb injur-
ies, specific lower limb conditions and associated retraining
strategies which may be effective in clinical practice, and the
2 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 practical application of specific running retraining strategies and
their interaction with other interventions. Triangulation was by
means of respondent validation and performed by presenting
each interviewee with the final themes, subthemes and accom-
panying findings, and requesting any free comment. Any new
comment was added to the framework analysis.
Synthesis of review findings with expert opinion
For the purpose of synthesising evidence with expert opinion,
retraining interventions discussed and suggested for various
lower limb injuries were tabulated along with illustrative quotes
and potential biomechanical rationale identified in the system-
atic review.
RESULTS
Search results
After screening title and abstract, full texts were obtained for 70
studies. The primary reason for exclusion on obtainment of full
text was inadequate participant numbers (ie, less than 10 partici-
pants per group), and included six studies on step rate manipu-
lation,34–38 five studies on strike pattern comparison36
39–42
including one in a PFP population,41 one study on step width
manipulation,43 one study on cues to reduce hip adduction,44
two studies on reducing impact loading variables45 46 and three
combination studies.40 47–49 Additional reasons for exclusion
included one combination study for absence of clinical or bio-
mechanical analysis,50 one combination study for including
transition to minimalist footwear during gait retraining,51 two
step rate manipulation studies52 53 for absence of statistical com-
parison of biomechanical differences and one step rate manipu-
lation study54 which combined hill running. A total of 46
studies met the inclusion criteria. A flow chart of the search
results can be found in online supplementary file 1.
Quality assessment
Results of the quality assessment can be found in online supple-
mentary file 4. Of the 46 included studies, 13 were high quality,
25 were moderate quality and 8 were low quality. Of particular
note, no study attempted to blind the participants or assessors;
only 6 studies22 55–59 reported whether adverse events were
experienced by participants, and 21 of the 46 studies did not
report actual probability values. Additionally, 27 of the 46
studies lacked adequate justification of the statistical tests used
to assess the main outcome data, commonly using parametric
tests without describing whether the distribution of data was
screened for normality prior to analysis. Accordingly, the use of
parametric tests was considered inappropriate for such studies.
Evidence for clinical outcomes following running retraining
Four studies22–25 investigating clinical outcomes were identified
(table 1). Limited evidence indicates 6-weeks of visual (video) and
verbal feedback to transition from
rearfoot strike (RFS) to
midfoot strike (MFS) or forefoot strike (FFS) and increased step
rate can reduce pain24
25 and compartmental pressures24 in
Table 1
Clinical findings related to running-related pain in injured populations
Study
(year)
Study
design
Sample
Outcome
measures
Intervention
Significant clinical
results
Significant
biomechanical results
PFP
Noehren
(2010)
Case series
1-month
follow-up
10 female runners
Running at least three
times and 6 miles per week
At least 20° peak hip
adduction
Running-related
pain VAS
2-weeks (eight sessions) of visual
(real time 3D feedback) and
verbal faded feedback to reduce
hip adduction
↓ Pain following 2-week
intervention and at
1-month follow-up
↓ Peak hip adduction
following 2-week
intervention and at
1-month follow-up
↓ Vertical impact peak and
loading rates following
2-week intervention
Willy
(2011)
Case series
3-month
follow-up
10 female runners
Running at least 10 km per
week
At least 20° peak hip
adduction
Running-related
pain VAS
2-weeks (eight sessions) of visual
(mirror) and verbal faded
feedback to reduce hip adduction
↓ Pain following 2-week
intervention and at
1-month and 3-month
follow-up
↓ Peak hip adduction and
contralateral pelvic drop
following 2-week
intervention and at
3-month follow-up
Anterior exertional lower leg pain
Diebal
(2012)
Case series
12-month
follow-up
10 military personnel
diagnosed with
compartment syndrome and
indicated for surgery
(fasciotomy) by an
orthopaedic surgeon
Running-related
pain VAS
Running distance
tolerated
Intracompartmental
pressures
6-weeks of visual (video) and
verbal feedback to transition
from RFS to FFS and increase
step rate towards 180 per minute
↓ Pain during running and
a reduction in postrunning
compartmental pressures
following 6-week
intervention
Improved 2 mile running
time and SANE scores at
12-months follow-up
No patient required a
fasciotomy
↓ Step length and contact
times
↓Peak vertical GRF,
impulses, and weight
acceptance rates
↑ Step rate (163–172)
Breen
(2015)
Case series
12-month
follow-up
10 runners (nine M, one F)
presenting to sports
medicine clinic with
anterior exertional lower
leg pain causing cessation
of running
EILP questionnaire
Global rating of
change
Running distance
6-weeks of individualised
feedback to reduced ankle DF at
foot strike (options included
instructing MFS, increasing hip
flexion, promoting earlier push
off, and running more upright)
Three sessions of retraining
completed independently each
week with two follow-up
sessions
↓ Pain during running
Eight participants running
pain free over 30 min
Improved EILP following
6-week intervention and at
12-month follow-up
↓ Ankle DF at foot strike
↓ Tibial angle (ie, more
vertical)
↑ Peak hip flexion angle
↓ Stride length
3D, three-dimensional; DF, dorsiflexion; EILP, exercise-induced lower leg pain; F, female; RF, ground reaction force; M, male; PFP, patellofemoral pain; SANE, single assessment numeric
evaluation; VAS, visual analogue scale.
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
3 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 patients with running-related anterior exertional lower leg pain.24
Limited evidence indicates 2-weeks (eight sessions) of visual and
verbal feedback to reduce peak hip adduction in female patients
with PFP possessing more than 20° peak hip adduction can
reduce pain at 1-month22 23 and 3-month follow-up.22
Biomechanical effects of running retraining interventions
Forty-six studies evaluating the biomechanical effects of running
retraining interventions met the inclusion criteria,22–25
55–96
including evaluation of step rate manipulation (see online sup-
plementary file 5); altering strike pattern (see online supplemen-
tary
file
6);
proximal
retraining
strategies
(see
online
supplementary file 7); and modifying impact loading variables,
contact time and stiffness (see online supplementary file 8).
Nineteen studies59–75 96 evaluated the biomechanical effects of
step rate manipulation in isolation, with one including a symp-
tomatic population,75 and one also examining the effects of
altering contact time.70 Fifteen studies56–58
76–82
90
92–94
96
evaluated the biomechanical effects of altering strike pattern, all
in asymptomatic participants. T
wo studies evaluated the bio-
mechanical effects of a retraining intervention combining transi-
tion from rearfoot to forefoot or midfoot strike pattern with
other retraining interventions including an increase to step
rate24
and
cues
to
alter
proximal
mechanics.25
Three
studies55 83 95 evaluated the biomechanical effects of cues to
reduce impact loading variables at foot strike. Four studies84–87
evaluated the biomechanical effects of altering step width, but
none of these included symptomatic participants. Three studies
evaluated the biomechanical effects of cues to alter proximal
mechanics,22 23 88 with two aiming to reduce hip adduction,22 23
and one to increase forward trunk lean.88 One additional
study89 evaluated the biomechanical effects of a combination of
retraining strategies on biomechanics, but this was excluded
from further analysis due to poor transparency regarding the
specific intervention used.
Expert opinion
Interview transcript analysis identified 10 sections with 29
themes and 75 subthemes. Three sections included ‘current evi-
dence base’ (see online supplementary file 9.1; 2 themes, 9 sub-
themes), ‘appropriateness of running retraining’ (see online
supplementary file 9.2; 1 theme, 4 subthemes) and ‘specific con-
ditions’ (tables 2 and 3 and online supplementary file 9.3; 4
themes, 11 subthemes). Four sections were related to the prac-
tical application of running retraining strategies, including a
reduction in overstride (ie, horizontal distance from foot strike
to centre of mass (COM)) and increase in step rate (table 4; two
themes, four subthemes); alteration to strike pattern (table 5;
one theme, four subthemes); proximal retraining strategies
(table 6; four themes, five subthemes); and approaches to
modify impact loading variables, contact time and stiffness
(table 7; two themes, four subthemes). Additional themes and
subthemes included barriers and facilitators to running retrain-
ing implementation (see online supplementary file 10.1; 5
themes, 15 subthemes), the influence and relative importance of
adjunctive interventions (see online supplementary file 10.2;
7 themes, 16 subthemes), and the potential for running retrain-
ing to prevent injuries or improve performance (see online sup-
plementary file 10.3; 1 theme, 3 subthemes).
Synthesis of review findings with expert opinion
A summary of running retraining considerations discussed and
potential biomechanical rationale identified in the systematic
review are provided in tables 2 and 3.
DISCUSSION
There is limited evidence to support running retraining in the
treatment of exertional lower leg pain24
25 and PFP
.22
23
Additionally, the expert panel were advocates of running
retraining for cases of chronic or recurrent injury, and where
potential biomechanical deficiencies linked to injury can be
established (see online supplementary file 9.2). Experts inter-
viewed suggested lower limb injuries which may benefit from
running retraining include (but are not limited to) exertional
lower leg pain, plantar fasciopathy, Achilles tendinopathy, calf
pain, medial tibial stress syndrome, PFP
, ITBS, patellar tendi-
nopathy, hamstring injury including proximal tendinopathy
and gluteal tendinopathy (tables 2 and 3; and online supple-
mentary file 9.3). Despite a paucity of current evidence in
injured
populations,
there
is
substantial
evidence
for
the
immediate biomechanical effects of running retraining inter-
ventions in an uninjured population (see online supplementary
files 5–8). Given the current state of evidence, this informa-
tion is important to assist guidance of current clinical practice
and
future
research,
and
is
incorporated
throughout
the
discussion.
Conditions with limited empirical evidence
Limited evidence indicates that transitioning from a rearfoot to
forefoot or midfoot strike pattern combined with increasing
step rate, or altering proximal mechanics to facilitate hip flexion
is effective in managing anterior exertional lower leg pain over a
6-week period, with positive clinical outcomes sustained for up
to a year following the intervention24
25 (table 1). This
approach was strongly supported by experts interviewed, and
further biomechanical support is provided by very limited to
limited evidence demonstrating reduced tibialis anterior muscle
activity81 90 and forces80 with a forefoot strike (see online sup-
plementary file 6), and limited evidence indicating reduced tibi-
alis anterior muscle activity60 and ankle dorsiflexion61 71 72
around the time of foot strike with increased step rate (see online
supplementary file 5). Additional running retraining recommen-
dations for anterior exertional lower leg pain included other
strategies to reduce overstride (eg, altering proximal mechanics),
with some experts suggesting this may be more important than
changing the strike pattern, and cues to reduce impact loading
variables which may reduce ankle dorsiflexion at foot strike83
(see online supplementary file 8). Further research is needed to
identify which running retraining strategies have the greatest
effect on biomechanics and symptoms in individuals with exer-
tional lower leg pain.
Limited evidence indicates visual and verbal feedback to
reduce peak hip adduction in females with PFP possessing
greater than 20° peak hip adduction is effective in its treat-
ment,22 23 with positive clinical outcomes sustained for up to
3 months post-intervention22 (see table 1). This approach is
generally supported by expert opinion (table 3), and recent pro-
spective findings implicating excessive hip adduction as a risk
factor
for
PFP
.97
Reducing
overstride
through
various
approaches including increasing step rate was also suggested as
important in the treatment of PFP (table 3). Importantly, there
is strong evidence indicating reduced patellofemoral joint (PFJ)
stress/load,68
75
96 moderate evidence indicating peak knee
flexion,66 68 75 and limited evidence indicating reduced knee
power
absorption,63
66
internal
knee
extensor
moments63
71
73
75 and peak hip adduction59
66 with an
increased step rate (see online supplementary file 5).
Other suggested running retraining interventions for PFP
included increasing forward trunk lean, which limited evidence
4 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 Table 2
Summary of running retraining considerations for foot and lower leg pathologies, including potential biomechanical rationale for
retraining strategies
Retraining considerations
Illustrative quotes
Potential biomechanical rationale for
retraining considerations
Anterior exertional lower leg pain
Running retraining strongly advocated
Consider increasing step rate,* strategies
to reduce overstride and impact loading
variables, and transitioning from rearfoot
to forefoot or midfoot strike*
“It may just make a lot, a lot, a lot of sense to retrain someone who’s
got a compartment syndrome, A, because nothing else works and B,
because once you start getting the calf working, they’re going to absorb
loads much better.” (5) “(For anterior compartment syndrome) try and
reduce that over-stride, getting weight more under their body, getting
them to come often to a very almost heavy forefoot strike to start with
just so you completely unload tib ant is often the best way to go and
then eventually working them back towards a midfoot strike pattern.”
(6) “For example, if somebody presents with very acute anterior
compartment syndrome, then I’m gonna want to switch into a forefoot
position pretty quickly.” (11) “My approach tends to be to try and
change the kinematics of that whole leg with an outcome hopefully of
changing Tib ant activity at footfall. I don’t start by saying, I want you
stop landing on your heel and running on your toes.” (16)
Transition from rearfoot to forefoot or midfoot
strike*—limited evidence indicates ↓ muscle
forces80 and stance phase activation81 of tibialis
anterior
Increasing step rate*—limited evidence indicates
↓ ankle dorsiflexion at foot strike61 71 72 and
tibialis anterior muscle activity during late
swing60
Cues to reduce impact loading variables—limited
evidence indicates ↓ dorsiflexion at foot strike83
Plantar fasciopathy
Poor agreement among experts on whether
running retraining can be effective and if so,
the best way to implement, especially in
relation to strike pattern
Consider strategies to reduce overstride and
impact loading variables (eg, vertical loading
rate), increasing step rate
“If you switch to a more forefoot strike, then you’ll increase the load on
the plantar fascia, so (transitioning strike pattern) might not be the best
option on the short term.” (1) “I think it has a quite a big role and I
think when we’re talking about plantar fascia … I’d say that if you’ve
got someone who’s got a significant over-stride, then I would be
looking at (correcting) that … Most commonly, you don’t often see
someone and think, “Oh god, that’s a terrible forefoot strike pattern.”
We need to change that. It’s often that it’ll be at the other end of the
spectrum. It’s terrible that over-stride, heel strike, we need to change
that.” (5) “I know there’s some evidence on loading rates and plantar
fasciitis … but I’m not really convinced that there is a real strong
rationale there.” (8) “I will say I will promote better impact moderating
behaviour for chronic one (plantar fasciopathy). First of all, increase
cadence, doing less noise and more minimalist shoes … if it’s not
enough, I can play with the foot position, decrease the heel strike” (10)
“Plantar fasciopathy is a tough one and I‘ve not had good response to
gait retraining on that one.” (14)
Cues to reduce impact loading variables—limited
evidence indicates ↓ VALR and VILR55 83
Increasing step rate—limited evidence indicates ↓
VIP, VILR and VALR59 67
Achilles tendinopathy
Running retraining advocated by some experts
Consider strategies to reduce overstride,
increase lower limb stiffness, and increase hip
extension, and transition from a forefoot to
rearfoot or midfoot strike
“I would be looking at other interventions and normalizing (reducing)
that over-stride rather than actually going (from a rearfoot) to a
forefoot run.” (5) “Those crazy runners who have decided that
barefoot running is for them and they’ve decided that they’re gonna
forefoot strike and they’ll come in and they’ll literally be toe striking
… In which case, you just need to get them back to rearfoot striking
and often they’ll get a lot better.” (6) “Clinically, we find that when
you stiffen people up (reduce knee and ankle dorsi-flexion), we get a
very good result in terms of their pain and their recovery with Achilles
tendinopathy … I think it’s related primarily as reducing the
dorsiflexion moment.” (9) “I targeted hip extension in my people who
have calf Achilles problem.” (15) “I would look at insertional Achilles
as something that I need to rehabilitate and then through a graduated
return to running-load management process to deal with (rather than
focusing on running retraining.” (15) “Sometimes, I’ll even switch
them (Achilles tendinopathy patients) to a heel strike … I’ll just do
like that gentle heel strike rather than mid and forefoot.” (17)
Increasing step rate—limited evidence indicates ↓
ankle dorsiflexion at midstance68 and ↓ soleus
muscle forces during stance68
Transition from forefoot to rearfoot strike—
limited evidence for↓ plantar flexor impulse (force
production);79 92 and very limited evidence for ↓
gastrocnemius and soleus muscle forces80
Calf pain
Strength and exercise approach may be more
relevant than running retraining
Consider increasing step rate and transitioning
from forefoot to midfoot or rearfoot strike
“We believe there’s perhaps too much contraction of the calf muscle
or it’s happening too quickly … We’re trying to activate the big
muscle (with retraining) there, the quads, hamstrings, etcetera and
reduce the load.” (9) “They often have strength deficit, particularly
strength and endurance deficits initially … The formation of their SSC
(stretch shortening cycle) calf ability, it’s usually not great and that
leads to their recurring injury problems.” (11) “With those ones, I’d
get best results from just really strengthening that calf up, lots and lots
of calf raises … Get them pretty strong and then maybe do some
plyometric stuff as well. So, you’re improving the muscle’s ability to
handle force. Maybe rather than necessarily changing their gait too
much.” (12) “Have they (runners with calf pain) got an over
pronounced forefoot strike addressing that? Are they running with a
very low, slow cadence? Picking that up, getting them faster.” (13) “I
think there’s a role (for running retraining in calf pain).” (16)
Increasing step rate—limited evidence indicates ↓
ankle dorsiflexion at midstance68 and ↓ soleus
muscle forces during stance68
Transition from forefoot to rearfoot strike—
limited evidence for↓ plantar flexor impulse (force
production);79 92 and very limited evidence for ↓
gastrocnemius and soleus muscle forces80
Continued
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
5 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 indicates will reduced PFJ stress;88 and cues to reduce impact
loading variables (see online supplementary file 8). Interestingly,
transitioning from a rearfoot to a forefoot strike in runners with
PFP did not emerge as a strong theme among experts, despite
limited evidence indicating reduced peak and accumulative PFJ
reaction force and PFJ stress when transitioning to forefoot
striking.94
96 Additionally, reductions in running-related pain
have previously been reported in a small case series of three
runners with PFP when transitioning to a forefoot strike.41
Further research is needed to establish the potential therapeutic
value of transitioning from rearfoot to forefoot striking in
runners with PFP
. Considering PFP is a multifactorial condi-
tion,98 it is likely that a tailored retraining strategy is needed in
a clinical setting, and further research is required to understand
the interaction of running retraining strategies with other
evidence-based interventions.99
Conditions with support for running retraining from
expert opinion
Poor agreement exists among experts on the value of running
retraining in plantar fasciopathy treatment (table 2). Running
retraining suggestions included reducing overstride, increasing
step rate and feedback to reduce impact loading variables, based
on evidence linking high loading rates to plantar fasciopathy.100
Supporting this proposal is limited evidence for reduced loading
rates with cues to reduce impact loading variables55
83 (see
online supplementary file 8) and increase step rate59 67 (see
online supplementary file 5). Some experts recommended that
transitioning from a rearfoot to a forefoot or midfoot strike to
reduce loading rates81 may assist in plantar fasciopathy treat-
ment, while others suggested that this may be detrimental due
to increased arch strain in forefoot compared with rearfoot
strike running79 (see online supplementary file 6). Further
research on the effects of strike pattern manipulation in plantar
fasciopathy is needed to provide clarity on these differing
opinions.
Running retraining for Achilles tendinopathy and calf pain
was cautiously recommended by some but not all experts inter-
viewed (table 2), and adequate rehabilitation exercise was gener-
ally
considered
more
important.
Recommended
retraining
strategies for Achilles tendinopathy included reducing overstride
and increasing step rate, which limited evidence indicates will
reduced stance phase soleus muscle forces68 and ankle dorsiflex-
ion at midstance68 (see online supplementary file 5). Additional
considerations
lacking
supporting
biomechanical
evidence
included reducing impact loading variables, increasing lower
limb stiffness to reduce midstance ankle dorsiflexion, and
increasing hip extension to reduce power requirements of the
gastrocnemius-soleus complex during propulsion (see online
supplementary file 8). Transitioning individuals with a pro-
nounced forefoot strike to a rearfoot or midfoot strike was
another proposed strategy for Achilles tendinopathy and calf
pain (table 2), supported by very limited to limited evidence for
reductions
in
plantar
flexor
impulses
and
internal
joint
moments,79 92 and gastrocnemius-soleus muscle forces80 (see
online supplementary file 8). Running retraining strategies
including reducing overstride and increasing step rate, reducing
impact loading variables and transitioning strike pattern towards
a midfoot strike was advocated by most experts for medial tibial
stress syndrome (table 2). Additional consideration to reducing
hip adduction and increasing step width was also suggested,
which limited to very limited evidence indicates may reduce
peak rearfoot eversion;84
87 rearfoot eversion and forefoot
dorsiflexion
excursion;87
peak
internal
ankle
inversion
moment;84 and tension, compression and shear stresses on the
tibia86 (see online supplementary file 7).
Similar to PFP
, cues to reduce peak hip adduction and
internal rotation were recommended by some experts in the
Table 2
Continued
Retraining considerations
Illustrative quotes
Potential biomechanical rationale for
retraining considerations
Medial tibial stress syndrome
Running retraining advocated by most experts
Consider strategies to reduce impact loading
variables and overstride, reduce hip
adduction/IR and increase step width (address
cross over gait), and increase hip extension
“I think it (running retraining) works pretty well within the medial
tibial stress syndrome, to work on decreasing the impact force. Again,
that’s not a condition that I would push on a forefoot strike pattern
because of the tension in the soleus … I would consider that mid-foot
strike would be the best option on the short term.” (1) “You’ll get
over-striding (in runners with medial tibial stress syndrome) because
it’s gonna really increase your impacts, your loading rates, also
cross-over gait pattern. … Excessive hip adduction can really increase
the bending moment in the tibia so that’s the other mechanic that I
really consider in addressing.” (2) “Particularly MTSS, they tend to lack
normal hip extension. So, it’s usually more to do with the propulsive
phase, rather than landing phase sometimes, so, it’s a combination
of both (you need to address).” (6) “If they’re getting a lot of hip
adduction, internal rotation, that’s gonna increase torsional stress
more distally so looking at trying to control that (in runners with
medial tibial stress syndrome), if that’s existent and that sometimes
just changing hip mechanics, getting them to tighten their glutes,
think about reducing hip adduction will also reduce the load.” (6)
“You wanna decrease the vertical loading rate (in runners with medial
tibial stress syndrome) and for that you see, we increase the cadence
and you change your shoes.” (10) “The chronic group one—So those
people who are coming in and giving you a three or four-year history
of medial tibial stress syndrome … I’ll use gait training reasonably
early and reasonably constantly and I think, with some degree, success
as well.”(16)
Increasing step rate—limited evidence indicates ↓
ankle dorsiflexion at midstance68 and ↓ peak
tibial acceleration (limited);61 65 69 and very
limited evidence indicates ↓ tibial contact forces64
Cues to increase step width—limited evidence
indicates ↓ peak rearfoot eversion;84 87 and very
limited evidence indicates ↓ peak internal ankle
inversion moment,84 ↓ anterior tension, posterior
compression and medial compression of the
tibia,87 and ↓ shear stress on the anterior,
posterior, medial and lateral tibia87
Cues to reduce impact loading variables—limited
evidence indicates ↓ peak tibial
acceleration55 83 95
*Retraining strategy part of successful case series intervention in this condition.
IR, internal rotation; VALR, vertical average loading rate; VILR, vertical instantaneous loading rate; VIP, vertical impact peak.
6 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 Table 3
Summary of running retraining considerations for knee and hip pathologies, including potential biomechanical rationale for retraining
strategies
Retraining considerations
Illustrative quotes
Potential biomechanical rationale for
retraining considerations
PFP
Running retraining strongly advocated
Consider increasing step rate, strategies to
reduce overstride and impact loading variables,
reduce peak hip adduction* and internal
rotation, and promote more forward trunk lean
“Most common thing with patellofemoral would be over-striding and
also medial collapse, particularly the females … Then the third one
would be the one that I would call the very upright running posture
with the trunk. The runners that tend to run like that, they tend to
have very low hip moments and very high knee extensor moments. So
for those folks, we’d work on some anterior trunk lean.” (2) “Probably
two major things which will lead to patellofemoral pain … there will
be excessive hip adduction, internal rotation. So, that’s something you
often look to change. And the other thing will often be that the
runner will be over-striding and landing with a particularly heavy heel
strike.” (6) “With patellofemoral, again we found that by changing
those sagittal plane kinematics (reducing over-striding and increasing
cadence), we noticed a change in frontal plane kinematics as well …
some of that knee valgus and hip adduction was reduced as well.” (9)
“The one area that has the most evidence would be patellofemoral
pain … if you see them banging really hard, over striding and hitting
with those high impact forces, then you might try to soften those
impact forces.” (14)
Cues to reduce hip adduction*—limited
evidence indicates ↓ peak hip adduction and
contralateral pelvic 3 months follow-up in a PFP
population22 23
Increasing step rate—strong evidence indicates
↓ peak PFJ stress/load including in a PFP
population68 75 96 and ↓ peak knee
flexion66 75 68; and limited evidence indicates ↓
knee energy absorption,59 63 66 and ↓ internal
knee extensor moment63 71 73 75
Cues to increase forward trunk lean—limited
evidence indicates ↓ PFJ stress and reaction
force, ↑ PFJ contact area, and ↓ internal knee
extensor moment and knee flexion at time of
peak PFJ stress88
Transition from rearfoot to forefoot strike—
limited evidence indicates ↓ peak and
accumulative PFJ reaction force and PFJ
stress94 96
ITB syndrome
Running retraining advocated by some experts
Consider strategies to reduce hip adduction and
increase step width (address cross over gait)
“The pathomechanics (to change) would be medial collapse
mechanics, excessive hip adduction and the other one would be
cross-over gait pattern.” (2) “We have success with people who have
not had any success with the typical strengthening of their glutes and
stretching of the IT band and rolling, form rolling. It’s amazing! And
all we do is (reduce) their hip adduction.” (4) “We reduced tension
within the ITB by, with a wider stance of gait. And sometimes I think
you know, that does help … I found that the biggest change to ITB
has been activating those big muscles. Again coming back to that high
knee lift which then results in a greater activation, I think, of hip
extensors of the opposite side.” (9) “With IT band, it tends to be more
dealing with the problems rather than the gait retraining component
of it … I can think of a couple of patients that were—That crossed
over and they got IT band. They would get IT band syndrome because
they crossed over. And then in those cases, you do think about
(promoting) maybe a little bit wider stride.” (14)
Cues to reduce hip adduction—limited evidence
indicates ↓ peak hip adduction and contralateral
pelvic drop at 3 months follow-up22 23
Cues to increase step width—very limited
evidence indicates ↓ peak internal knee
abduction moment,84 ↓ internal knee abduction
impulse,84 ↓ ITB strain and strain rate,85 and ↓
peak hip adduction84 85
Patellar tendinopathy
Cautious recommendations for running
retraining to assist by some
Consider increasing step rate, strategies to
reduce overstride and impact loading variables,
and transition from rearfoot to forefoot strike
“You often find these individuals very different to patellofemoral pain
where you’ll get a greater hip adduction. They often have good hip
control, but they do have the over-stride pattern where they’re landing
quite heavy on the heel (which should be changed). And essentially,
they’re just not absorbing any shock to their foot and ankle, it’s all
going straight to the knee, which means you’re gonna load up the
patellar tendon.” (6) “Patellar tendinopathy … My first part of the
treatment will be to protect the tendon if it’s acute, I will say to the
patient, okay, just increase the cadence, lowering the shoes so more
minimalist shoes in acute condition, and be sure that you don’t cause
another problem in another place at the same time, less noise, and if
it’s not enough, forefoot striking.” (10)
Increasing step rate—moderate evidence
indicates ↓ peak knee flexion66 68 75; and
limited evidence indicates ↓ knee energy
absorption,59 63 66 ↓ internal knee extensor
moment,63 71 73 75 ↓ patellar tendon force in
midstance68, and ↓ quadriceps (vastii) muscle
forces during stance68
Transition from rearfoot to forefoot strike—
limited evidence indicates ↓ knee power
absorption92
Hamstring, including proximal hamstring tendinopathy
Running retraining generally advocated but
some inconsistent beliefs regarding how,
particularly in relation to trunk position
Consider strategies to reduce over stride and
impact loading variables, reduce anterior pelvic
tilt and knee extension at foot strike, and
increase swing phase hip and knee flexion
“Yep and I often see over-striders … I often see kinematically that
they are, have got a very stiff knee strategy (which needs to be
changed). (5) “Hamstring is always a classic over-stride pattern … Just
changing that and getting them to try and often think about landing
more softly, so that they land a lot more under their body” (6)
“These guys at the foot strike position were leaning forward a bit too
much and over-extending the knee. So if we reduce the knee extension
at the foot strike and straighten the body up as well, perhaps that
reduced the stretch or the tension within either the hamstring or some
of those neural structures.” (9) “I would be looking for anterior pelvic
tilt, control of anterior pelvic tilt, and then maybe control of even
internal rotation of the hip (with running retraining).” (14) “I think the
high hamstring group often tend to, again, have really poor swing
phase hip mechanics … The running mechanic that I might wanna
look to (change) is actually trying to reinforce that capacity to have
good hip-knee flexion during swing phase.” (16)
Increasing step rate—limited evidence indicates
↓ hip energy absorption63 66 ↓ peak internal hip
extensor moment66 71
Continued
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
7 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 treatment of ITBS (table 3), an approach supported by findings
that greater peak adduction in female runners may be a risk
factor for ITBS development.101 Additionally, increasing step
width to reduce cross-over gait (hip adduction at foot strike)
was suggested (table 3), and this is supported by very limited to
limited evidence for reduced peak internal knee abduction
moment and impulse,84 ITB strain and strain rate,85 and peak
hip adduction84
85 (see online supplementary file 7). There
were inconsistent beliefs regarding the potential for running
retraining to assist in the treatment of patellar tendinopathy
(table 3), with some cautious recommendations to consider
reducing
overstride,
increasing
step
rate,
reducing
impact
loading variables, and transitioning from a rearfoot to a
midfoot or forefoot strike. Limited-to-moderate evidence indi-
cating reduced patellar tendon forces in midstance,68 internal
knee extensor moments,63 73 75 knee power absorption63 66 96
and peak knee flexion66 75 68 supports increasing step rate (see
online
supplementary
file
5).
Biomechanical
rationale
to
support a transition from a rearfoot to a forefoot strike is less
clear, with limited evidence indicating a reduction in knee
power absorption,82
92 but conflicting evidence related to
internal knee extensor moment80 92 93 (see online supplemen-
tary file 6). This, combined with potential increases to tissue
stresses more distally with a transition to a forefoot strike (eg,
increased ankle power absorption; see online supplementary
file 6), indicate that caution may be needed when considering
this strategy for patellar tendinopathy and other conditions.
Considering comparable reductions in knee, loading can be
achieved by increasing step rate by 10%59; this may be a safer
approach.
Running retraining for hamstring injury including proximal
hamstring tendinopathy was generally supported (table 3).
Recommendations included cues to reduce impact loading vari-
ables and anterior pelvic tilt, along with various methods to
reduce overstriding, including increased step rate and promoting
more hip and knee flexion during swing. While there is a
paucity of biomechanical evidence examining the effects of pro-
moting increased hip and knee flexion, there are a number of
considerations from the biomechanical literature relating to
increased step rate. First, limited evidence indicates greater
hamstring muscle forces68 and activity during late swing60 with
increased step rate (see online supplementary file 5), which in
theory may place greater load on the hamstring muscle or
tendon. However, limited evidence also indicates increasing step
rate may reduce hip energy absorption63 66 and peak internal
hip extensor moment66 71 (see online supplementary file 5), and
thus reduce hamstring muscle and tendon load during early
stance. Further research evaluating the effects of increasing step
rate on symptoms in individuals with hamstring injury is needed
to clarify
the importance of these
various biomechanical
changes.
When managing gluteal tendinopathy, running retraining
strategies including reducing overstride, increasing step rate, and
cues to reduce hip adduction/internal rotation and contralateral
pelvic drop were generally advocated (table 3). W
e did not find
any studies evaluating strategies specifically targeting contralat-
eral pelvic drop, but very limited to limited evidence indicates
visual and verbal cues to reduce hip adduction also reduces
contralateral pelvic drop22 23 and peak internal hip abduction
moments22 up to 3 months following a 2-week intervention (see
online supplementary file 7). When increasing step rate, very
limited to limited evidence indicates reduced gluteal muscle
forces,68 and hip energy absorption during stance;63 66 peak
internal hip extensor,66 71 abduction66 and external rotation66
moments; and peak hip adduction59 66 (see online supplemen-
tary file 7).
Practical application of running retraining
Addressing overstride and increasing step rate
Addressing the presence of overstriding was considered one of
the most beneficial running retraining strategies (table 4), with
experts frequently discussing the importance of the foot landing
closer to a runner’s COM. Despite strong recommendation
from experts, evidence to support the importance of overstrid-
ing or horizontal distance between foot strike and COM to
running injury is lacking. Defining what constitutes overstriding
(eg, the distance which may lead to injury), how this relates to
injury and how to address it should be priorities for future
research. Increasing step rate will move foot strike closer to the
COM,66 and was suggested to be beneficial for many injuries.
One key recommendation is that increases to step rate should be
gradual (between 5% and 10% at a time) to ensure manageable
changes and avoid excessive fatigue.66 Experts proposed a range
of cues to increase step rate, including metronomes, music and
verbal cues (eg, ‘take shorter faster steps’), and all could be con-
sidered clinically.
Table 3
Continued
Retraining considerations
Illustrative quotes
Potential biomechanical rationale for
retraining considerations
Gluteal tendinopathy
Running retraining advocated by most experts
Consider reducing overstride and increasing
step rate, and reducing hip adduction, internal
rotation and contralateral pelvic drop
“(In gluteal tendinopathy) One (variable to change) would be
over-striding and then the other one would be excessive hip adduction,
specifically excessive pelvic drop.” (2) “It’s more just controlling that
femoral internal rotation adduction and try to get them think about
tightening their glutes, opening their knees up, and often that tends
to make a big difference with them (gluteal tendinopathy patients).”
(6) “I’m interested in what’s happening through that sagittal plane (in
runners with gluteal tendinopathy), but I’m really interested in what’s
happening through coronal plane and rotational as well. So I wanna
decrease that hip adduction-internal rotation that’s potentially
compressing that tissue and I will do that through rehabilitation and I
will, again, because I don’t think rehabilitation on its own changes
gait, and I’ll also do that through gait modification.” (16)
Increasing step rate—limited evidence indicates
↓ hip energy absorption,63 66 ↓ peak internal hip
extensor moment,66 71 ↓ peak hip
adduction22 23 and ↓ gluteal muscle forces
during stance68; and very limited evidence
indicates ↓ peak internal hip abduction and
external rotation moments66
Cues to reduce hip adduction—limited evidence
indicates ↓ peak internal hip abduction moment
at 1-month follow-up,22 and ↓ peak hip
adduction and ↓ contralateral pelvic drop at
3 months follow-up22 23
*Retraining strategy part of successful case series intervention in this condition.
†Concurrent conflicting expert opinion regarding this retraining strategy.
ITB, Iliotibial band; PFP, patellofemoral pain.
8 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 Strike pattern alteration
Experts proposed a range of potential benefits of strike pattern
alteration, including both transition from rearfoot towards fore-
foot or midfoot (eg, knee injuries), and from forefoot towards
rearfoot or midfoot strike (eg, Achilles tendinopathy and calf
pain). However, caution was recommended when considering
changing a runner’s strike pattern, with a substantial adaptation
period suggested if choosing to make alterations, especially
towards a forefoot strike pattern (table 5). Additionally, poten-
tially greater importance of other retraining interventions was
stressed, including reducing overstride, which transitioning from
a
rearfoot
to
forefoot
strike
may
be
detrimental
to.81
Additionally, other interventions including proximal retraining
strategies, increasing step rate,61 71 72 and use of minimalist
Table 4
Expert opinion related to practical implementation of strategies to reduce overstride and increase step rate
Themes
Subthemes
Illustrative quotes
Strategies to reduce overstride
Various methods of correcting overstride,
including increased step rate
“It’s getting people holding the hips over the landing foot (to reduce over-striding) … We can try and change those things
constructively by simple cues like giving—lifting up through the hips, getting the right mobility exercises in place to try
and deliver the mobility through the hips.” (3)
“The main thing that I’ll do there is (increase) cadence (to reduce over-stride).” (5)
“In terms of trying to change strike pattern or prevent that overstride it’s more just thinking about landing softly is often
enough.” (6)
“I find that cadence looks after overstriding in most cases.” (8)
“If you significantly change cadence with people, you tend to find the overstriding reduced. It’s very difficult to overstride
with a higher cadence, but I tend to use the cue of shorter, quicker, lighter steps.” (11)
“Perhaps trying to get hip flexion and knee flexion occurring, together is another way of reducing stride length.” (12)
“if you look, if your head’s up and you can see your foot out in front of you, try and make your foot disappear, that’s
another thing, just for over striding.” (14)
“I might tell them to land their foot a little closer underneath their body rather than out so far out in front of them
(to reduce over-striding).” (15)
Cues to increase step rate
Step rate considerations and potential benefits
Need to gradually increase step rate (cadence)
and the relevance of working toward 180 steps
per minute
Various methods to increase step rate
“A lot a time, I’ve had a lot of success there just working with cadence (to manage running injuries).” (3)
“Sometimes, the only cue you need to use is just get them to increase their cadence and it will change their strike pattern,
it’ll change their landing pattern, where they’re landing relative to their centre of mass. And also, often change frontal and
transverse plane motion of the hip as well.” (6)
“Even by altering step rate you can significantly alter the degree of forefoot or rearfoot pronation.” (7)
“Cadence again. It’s probably a good thing for even for a foot problem, it’s probably one of the key things you can do to
decrease the load in general.” (10)
“Changing the cadence, we often observe positive changes in all of the things that we would like to see (to manage
running injuries).” (11)
“One of the issues with cadence is that it doesn’t shift centre of gravity. So it is essentially the same movement pattern.
It’s just a bit truncated and it’s just a bit faster.” (13)
“For cadence, it depends on what was the initial cadence of that person … If I have a runner coming in with a cadence of
145, which is extremely low, I try to bring that person to 180, it will not work for sure. So, usually I go through a couple
sessions; first time I go up to 155, 160, and then go up again.” (1)
“I can subscribe also to the kind of “at 5% rule” (for how much to increase cadence).” (3)
“I get them to download a metronome app, which you can download for free for your smart phone and get them to run
at a beats-per-minute that matches what (step rate) they’re running at naturally … Make sure they find what their
beats-per-minute is and then increase it by five, and then if that feels comfortable, increase it by five again ‘til you get
them up to 170, 175, 180 in a progressive manner.” (5)
“Probably don’t wanna change it (step rate) more than about 10%.” (6)
“I think we can increase cadence quite easily from five to ten percent.” (9)
“I am pretty sure that it’s around the 180 that we can find the best protective biomechanics … So my range is between
170 to 190.” (10)
“Evidence tells us that it’s easy for people to make five percent changes (to their step rate).” (14)
“Some people, when you increase the cadence, they tend to increase the speed … So I think that the treadmill is the best
place to do it (increase step rate).” (1)
“People who like to run with ear buds and iPhones and that kind of thing, I recommend them to use some apps that it
can plan for playing music that have that specific cadence (they are instructed to run at).” (1)
“(I use) a device made by Garmin. It has real-time icon and step rate, so I use that. By looking at your step rate on the
watch and real-time, that could be considered as external focus and that what I intend to work on most with them (to
increase step rate).” (2)
“I do use metronomes (to increase step rate). I think they’re great tools.” (3)
“I used to try and use metronomes and songs and things like that a lot (to increase step rate) … Most people can do it
without—just getting to think about faster step rate.” (6)
“You tell them and say, ‘you need to take shorter strides’. (to increase step rate).” (8)
“Some people are more visual, so they look the second on the board and I guess say its three sets per second, one, two,
three, one, two, three, one, two, three, so I combine the visual with the auditory. And for most of the people, that works
(to increase step rate).” (10)
“I’m not fond of using music generally (to increase step rate) … if they’ve got music pumping through their ears, they’re
really not aware of how heavy or not that foot strike potentially is.” (11)
“Maybe music would be less noxious than the metronome (to increase step rate). I think I just don’t really like the
metronome. I find it kind of annoying.” (15)
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
9 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 footwear or barefoot running102 were proposed to potentially
have desired effects on foot strike.
Proximal retraining (cues to modify hip, pelvic and trunk
mechanics)
A number of strategies additional to visual (3D motion feed-
back or mirrors) and verbal (‘tighten your buttocks’ and ‘point
your knees straight ahead’) cues published in the literature
were proposed to reduce hip adduction and internal rotation
(table 6). Considerations to both internal (eg, squeeze gluteals)
and external (eg, point knees forward) cues were apparent, but
consensus
was
lacking
regarding
the
most
appropriate
approach, and it is possible the most effective cue may be spe-
cific to the individual. A number of retraining interventions
may indirectly reduce peak hip adduction, including increasing
step rate66 or step width.84 85 Possible cues to increase step
width used in the literature include both visual (taped lines on
the
floor)84
87
and
verbal
instruction
(eg,
‘widen
your
stance’).85
86 Although verbal instruction may be easier to
implement in clinical practice, experts stressed the need to
ensure individuals do not ‘overcorrect’ (table
6).
Further
research is needed to determine the most effective cues for
reducing hip adduction and increasing step width and its effect
of running-related pain.
Reducing impact loading variables
Some experts considered kinetic variables, including joint forces,
tibial accelerations and loading rates, may be more important in
relation to injury than kinematic variables (table 4), although
evidence to support this premise is lacking. Additionally, most
clinicians lack the required equipment to directly measure
kinetics during running. It was suggested that impact noise
during running may be closely related to actual impact loading
variables such as vertical loading rates, and therefore may be
used as a proxy measure. Additionally, moderate relationships
between
sagittal
plane
kinematics
and
subsequent
loading
(kinetic) variables during stance of running were recently
reported, including increased step rate, decreased vertical COM
excursion, decreased foot inclination angle at foot strike, and
reduced horizontal distance between foot strike and COM
(ie, decreased overstride).103 Considering these variables along
with strategies to reduce impact noise may be a focus of
Table 5
Expert opinion related to practical implementation of strike pattern alteration
Themes
Subthemes
Illustrative quotes
Strike pattern implication and potential benefits
Potential dangers of changing foot strike
Foot strike may change through other
interventions—barefoot or minimal shoes,
proximal focuses
Importance of other running mechanics in
comparison to strike pattern
“For runners who are, I would say, big heel strikers and I would like to promote more forefoot or mid-foot strike pattern” (1)
“With an anterior tibial compartment syndrome, I’ve seen great benefit from forcing someone on to the forefoot who is a
real heavy heel striker but they need to take the time to do it.” (3)
“Once you start shifting to more of a forefoot, you have less stress in the proximal chain and then vice versa. So for that
reason, it is a horses for courses type of approach in terms of what you shift, which way.” (5)
“If you get someone with a real forefoot strike pattern, you may go the other way (change from forefoot to rearfoot
strike) … It’s difficult for someone who is a real sort of natural forefoot runner. So I try not to change their natural
pattern unless it’s completely hideous.” (5)
“(If forefoot striking) reduces the forces at the knee, which we know it does, then it would seem logical that there would
be a potential decrease in the pain in that area.” (14)
“I think that if I just give the advice of someone to really change the foot strike, it could be dangerous.” (1)
“I’m not advocating a strong, a severe forefoot strike pattern but a mild one.” (4)
“They (runners who transition to a forefoot strike) tend to go very, very quickly and end up with delayed onset muscle
soreness and Achilles tendinopathy or metatarsal stress fractures because they impose a kind of a novel loading
environment on tissues that haven’t had time to adapt.” (8)
“We found initially that we were promoting a fore foot strike. A lot of the guys were really suffering with calf pain during
that adaption period.” (9)
“I think changing foot strike is quite a big intervention, and I think you often create problems from that.” (12)
“I never give a cue around foot strike. I think that’s quite dangerous.” (13)
“Talking about changing the foot strike pattern, usually I go more indirectly by changing the cadence and by asking to do
less noise, less impact forces. If these strategies are not working, then I try the barefoot condition and or the minimal
shoes if the person has minimal shoe already.” (1)
“We usually start with four sessions of retraining to get them off their heels (and onto forefoot striking) and we do them
barefoot on our treadmill regardless of whether they’re gonna run barefoot or not.” (4)
“One of the easier ways to change that foot strike was to increase flexion. So (encouraging) a slightly higher knee, gait if
you like.” (9)
“I tend to find that if you work proximally, the foot strike looks after itself.” (11)
“If I had somebody who I thought was excessively dorsiflexed through mid to late swing phase, then I would try to give
them a cue to be—To relax their ankle during swing phase rather than to think about landing on the ball of your foot when
you hit the ground. So I’d still try and change swing phase mechanics to set up a change during landing phase.” (16)
“If you’re landing closer to the centre of the mass, I’m seeing less of a heel strike, so I think I’m probably seeing a shift
towards a mid-foot gait pattern.” (16)
“For me it’s not about changing strike pattern … “You don’t need to go down the path of changing it just because it is heel
strike. As long as you’re not overstriding.” (5)
“Try and change, not just their strike pattern, but also whereabouts their foot’s landing relative to their centre of mass.” (6)
“First approach is to try and decrease vertical loading rates by looking at the cadence, where foot strikes relative to the
centre of gravity, the actual foot strike pattern itself to a certain extent, but that’s sort of less important.” (13)
“From the perspective of a stress fracture, I’d be thinking about impact. And I’d be thinking about—Well, what’s causing
that impact? Are they in fact over striding or do they have more vertical oscillation and they’re just pounding down? Or do
they have a really stiff knee, for instance, that could be causing that impact? So it’s not always just strike position or foot
strike pattern.” (14)
“I won’t cue that (strike pattern) by primary cues around foot contact … I can’t think of a case where my starting point is,
“I want you to land on this part of your foot.” (16)
10 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 Table 6
Expert opinion related to practical implementation of proximal retraining strategies
Themes
Subthemes
Illustrative quotes
Trunk and pelvic position
Various cues and beliefs related to trunk and pelvic
position changes
“We would use a variety of cues to try and get the torso as upright as we can … resting your chin on the top of a
wall whilst running and trying to imagine a hook through your nose lifting your head up to try to maintain that body
position (can help a runner be more upright).” (7)
“I’ll be looking at sort of pelvic drop, rather than necessarily anterior posterior pelvic position per se … try to get them
to focus on a high pelvis on the opposite side. So on the swing leg, so they’re not letting it drop as they run.” (12)
“Cueing around lengthening spine, lifting chest, their sort of upper body postural shoulder girdle cues to get their
core engaged, to get their pelvis stabilised and straightened up and to get them pushing their centre of gravity
forward over their foot … That usually fixes all of the (running technique issues).” (13)
“Tell them to stand up taller, they’ll stop over striding and they’ll hit the grounds more times per minute (ie, increase
step rate).” (14)
“Anterior pelvic tilt is hard and I tend to work (on correcting this) before I even get them up on the treadmill and
gait retrain them, I tend to work on a more on a static position, so running in place, bridging. Trying to work on high
knees, even getting into a plank position… Feel what it’s like to have it in posterior pelvic tilt, have a tight abs and
tight gluts, but then still be able to turn their feet over and then try to transfer it over to the treadmill.” (14)
“I haven’t addressed forward lean (as part of running retraining). I haven’t seen a lot of leaners in my experience.” (15)
“I will usually go through a process of giving people a sense of being tall and what that feels … I might talk about
people being lifted by the top of their crown so they have a sense of tall … Once I’ve got people in that sense of tall
—I’ll either talk to people about being lifted up and slightly forward through the crown of their head or I will talk to
people about subtly leaning forward from their ankles.” (16)
Visual and verbal cues to reduce hip adduction
Considerations and varying methods to change
transverse/coronal plane hip and knee kinematics
Changing pelvic, hip and knee mechanics in the
frontal/transverse plane through increased step rate
and sagittal plane changes
“I’ve been working more on external focus of push their knees outwards (to reduce hip adduction) … It seems like
the runners tend to get it much faster … They don’t start getting some of these maladaptations that I saw previously
when I had people really squeeze their glutes a lot.“ (2)
“Their squeezing their buns and trying to get their knees apart (to reduce hip adduction) … you look at it frame by
frame you can actually compare their pre and post and see a little more space between their knees so we give them
that feedback.” (4)
“If I’m trying to change someone’s femoral adduction, it will be something like try and maintain some distance
between your knees.” (5)
“Trying to get them to think about tightening their glutes, sometimes think about tightening through their core
(to reduce hip adduction and internal rotation.” (6)
“I usually start with sort of—kind of the usual ones (to reduce hip adduction) … keep your knees apart, you can say
squeeze your buns … tell them to focus on something outside the body … your knees are headlights, your knees are
flashlights, keep them pointed straight ahead.” (8)
“Look at what happens at the hip and the knee to make sure that they’re actually creating it (space between their
knees) by reducing hip adduction and internal rotation, rather than just bringing the feet apart and keeping their
knees quite pinched in.” (12)
“would use mirror training (to reduce hip adduction and internal rotation). Other cues, I would kind of cue them to
try to tighten the gluteals.” (15)
“If you increase the cadence, you don’t have much time to collapse your knee in, you don’t have much time to do
the pelvic drop, so I work a lot more with that.” (1)
“When we change sagittal plane kinematics, we notice a change in frontal plane kinematics (of the hip) as well.” (9)
“I mean, my experience again, it seems everything comes back to cadence … if we can improve that cadence by ten
to 20 percent from the baseline level, then that usually looks after what’s going on with (hip) internal rotation
adduction, unless it’s related to crossover gait.” (11)
Increasing step width/hip abduction at foot strike
Step width considerations and potential benefits
“Sometimes (a narrow) step width is an issue, you know, if they are crossing over for example, if they are scissoring,
I’ll give them some cues on foot placement, trying to run on a line or outside of a line (to increase step width).” (8)
“You often get an affect of being quite narrow with the stride width on the rest of the chain. So you often see that
(narrow step width is) accompanied by a hip adduction and maybe hip internal rotation.” (12)
“You just have to be careful (increasing step width) because you don’t wanna go too wide because you can create a
whole new set of other issues … When they’re running occasionally on a treadmill it works a bit better to give them
either a mirror or sort of cue them to sort of land with their feet a little farther apart, maybe more underneath their
hip as compared to underneath their belly button, that cue has worked well (to increase step width).” (15)
“Sometimes I will cue people to “Imagine that you’re running on a train line. You wanna keep your feet a little bit
wider,” particularly if they have that negative cross over gait.” (16)
Cues to increase hip extension
Hip extension considerations
“You’ve gotta give them the underlying strength and flexibility in that terminal extension range … get them to drive
through their hips when they’re running. So drive through your hips so really try and extend your hip when you’re
running and that works (to increase hip extension) for some people.” (5)
“I tend to find if I ask people to actively extend their hip, then all they do is overextend their lower back and it
doesn’t tend to lead to positive change in the gait pattern, whereas if I ask them to apply positive downward
pressure into the treadmill or the ground, they tend to get a nice hip extension that’s appropriate for the speed of
running.” (11)
“I do think if the extension is a tricky one to restore … I think you can do it by actually encouraging the patient to
flex at the hip more, and as a consequence to that, they tend to naturally extend their hip more … but also they
want to look at making sure they’ve actually got the range in the first place, if there is any restriction in the hip joint
extension, or tightness in the hip flexor region, that’s going to make you very difficult for them to get any
extension.” (12)
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
11 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 retraining interventions where clinicians seek to reduce impact
loading variables.
Barriers and facilitators
Pain and irritability may prevent the implementation of running
retraining in the early stages of rehabilitation (see online supple-
mentary file 10.1 which summarises expert discussion of bar-
riers and facilitators to running retraining implementation).
Inconsistent beliefs related to whether a runner should be
allowed to run in pain or not were evident. Importantly, experts
suggesting running-related pain could be allowed, believed so
only if pain was minimal (eg, 3/10). This fits with previous
research in Achilles tendinopathy, which indicates that continued
sports participation with minimal pain did not impair rehabilita-
tion outcomes if guided by a similar pain monitoring model.29
An additional consideration is that pain reduction may provide
vital feedback to aid compliance to running retraining interven-
tions.104 Other key potential barriers discussed included muscle
function capacity, joint flexibility and skeletal structure. Further
research is needed to determine how these variables impact on
biomechanical and clinical outcomes with running retraining.
Fatigue resulting from running retraining was suggested to limit
how much could be changed at once (eg, magnitude of step rate
increase), and the duration runners may be able to maintain
these changes. However, it was suggested that fatigue associated
with running retraining was likely to diminish with habituation.
Of the studies providing limited evidence for running retrain-
ing to reduce pain,22–25 two evaluated a programme including
eight sessions of up to 30 min over a 2-week period,22
23
another used 18 sessions over 6-weeks24 and one used just 3 ses-
sions over 6-weeks.25 Three22–24 of these four approaches are
unlikely to reflect clinical practice due to associated costs they
would entail, and are more intensive then those proposed by
experts interviewed. The optimum number of sessions and time
frame suggested to facilitate required changes varied among
experts, and it was suggested this may be different for each
runner. Some runners may be able to make clinically significant
changes immediately, while others may take many months due
to barriers such as pathology and associated pain, weakness,
flexibility deficits, and intrinsic motivation. Importantly, experts
highlighted these barriers may need to be addressed concur-
rently or prior to attempts to retraining running technique.
Variable beliefs exist regarding the potential for changes as a
result of running retraining to become habitual. Although few
Table 7
Expert opinion related to practical implementation of modifying impact loading variables, contact time and stiffness
Themes
Subthemes
Illustrative quotes
Cues to reduce impact loading variables
On the importance of considering loading and
impact forces
Comparison of importance between loading
(kinetics) and kinematics
Methods to measure and reduce impact loading
variables in the clinic
“So I put a lot of emphasis on (reducing) the loading rate (to manage running injuries).” (1)
“I have a sense that many injuries are related to loading so we try to get everyone off their heels just because I know
that reduces the rate of loading.” (4)
“I think loading rate anywhere is always a consideration and I think it’s definitely related to injury wherever you’re
looking.” (5)
“I feel like injuries are the result of forces … We are trying to create a loading environment that promotes healing or
prevents injuries.” (8)
“A lot of people believe that vertical loading rates are (important and) have been shown to be causally related, but I
think the evidence is far too weak.” (13)
“Any intervention that decrease the vertical loading rate and will promote better impact behaviour, it means forefoot
striking, higher cadence, landing closer to the centre of gravity, more knee bend, all those interventions will decrease
anterior compartment syndrome and all the knee pathologies, the hip pathologies and the lower back … I don’t believe
that kinematics is really linked with pathology.” (10)
“As far as I’m aware, really, it’s the kinetics that cause injury, not necessarily kinematics.” (11)
“And obviously there’s issues around that (just looking at movement) because you’re not measuring forces. So you’re
making a lot of assumptions.” (13)
“The rate of loading, I think, is directly correlated with the noise, with the sound when running.” (1)
“Some people use an increase in the cadence (to reduce impact) and I think that’s a good broad global way to tell
people who aren’t gonna be followed closely.” (4)
“Running softly. I’ve heard that before. I’ve used that (to reduced impact loading variables). I don’t, didn’t find that was
for me, one that has a lot of success with a lot people, they just struggle with exactly what to do when it comes to
running softly.” (5)
“Probably the main measure of that (loading rate) clinically is—and the runner will say this—you can ‘hear’ the
difference or ‘feel’ the difference.” (6)
“Talking to them about trying to land slightly softer as well as part of that. So they tend to, again, if you ask them to do
that, it’ll often shorten the stride, so the knee flexes a little bit, so they’re not landing on a straight knee.” (12)
“Using those sort of cues around running softly, lightly, getting people to try and adjust their stride to decrease those
impact forces.” (13)
Cues to reduce contact time
Consideration related to stiffness and an optimal
range—implications to performance and injury
“Increase in the lower limb stiffness improves performance, power production, rate of force development, and therefore
will improve significantly their running performance.” (7)
“Stiffness can be—can help you to become more efficient, more economical.” (10)
“If we can create more plantar flexion stiffness then we can see a more efficient motor unit.” (11)
“Kick your heels towards your butt and we like that one just because it reduces the inertial parameters of the swing …
what it does is it allows people to use their hamstrings, get them a little bit more stiffness (to improve performance).” (14)
“If I see the increased knee stiffness, I honestly encourage them to run softer so they can flex their knees a little bit
more … Too much (stiffness) and you’re really putting a lot on the tendons and the muscles. And too little of it is going
through the skeletal systems.” (15)
“(Referring to stiffness) Some people might be Nerf balls, some people might be golf balls. And I think they are, and I
think the evidence is really clear that they are very intrinsic tissue capabilities … Everybody doesn’t have the same
stiffness (in their) tendons.” (16)
12 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 studies have explored this, limited evidence indicates a reduction
in both peak hip adduction and running-related pain at
1–3 months follow-up can be achieved in females with PFP
.22 23
Further longer term studies are needed to determine if habitu-
ation from running retraining interventions in injured runners
can be facilitated.
Limiting cues to one or two at a time was recommended.
Additionally, an individual response to cues is considered likely,
meaning clinicians need to be able to adapt and tailor cues to
ensure desired biomechanical changes. Video analysis and feed-
back may assist compliance, allowing visualisation of running
technique before and after the running retraining. Use of
mirrors was suggested by some experts to assist reductions in
hip adduction and knee valgus, and changes to trunk position
and strike pattern. However, this was not recommended by all
experts interviewed. With just one study published supporting
the use of mirrors in running retraining,22 further research is
needed to establish their usefulness, along with other forms of
clinically feasible biofeedback.
Undertaking running retraining on a treadmill was suggested
to be practically easier than overground, although potential lim-
itations in carry over to overground running gait were acknowl-
edged. Vertical ground reaction forces have been reported to be
similar between conditions.105 However, treadmill running
has
been
reported
to
decrease
peak
and
range
of
knee
flexion,106–111 decrease ankle dorsiflexion range of motion,
velocity and peak,111 112 and increase peak rearfoot/ankle ever-
sion110
111
113 when compared with overground running.
Further research is needed to establish to what extent clinical
and biomechanical effects of running retraining on a treadmill
translate to overground running.
Adjunctive interventions
Experts highlighted that running retraining is only part of the
solution for the treatment of running injuries (see online supple-
mentary file 10.2 which summarises expert discussion of adjunct-
ive interventions during running retraining implementation). The
importance of concurrently addressing muscle function and flexi-
bility deficits was frequently discussed. References were made to
both strength and motor control, with the latter being considered
by some to be more important to an individual’s ability to make
changes to running technique. Manual therapy to address soft
tissue flexibility and joint mobility restrictions was also consid-
ered as a potential adjunctive intervention by some experts.
Further research to establish the impact of addressing muscle
function and flexibility deficits through exercise and manual
therapy on running retraining outcomes is needed.
The influence of footwear on injury and running retraining
appears to be a divisive topic. While some experts believed foot-
wear had minimal impact on outcomes, others considered foot-
wear as vitally important. Those emphasising the importance of
footwear generally promoted a more minimalistic approach, to
assist in reducing impact loading variables and overstride, and
transitioning towards a midfoot or forefoot strike. Importantly,
caution and slow transition towards minimalist footwear was
encouraged if choosing to implement this as an intervention,
which is supported by recent evidence indicating an increased
risk of pain and injury,114 and foot bone marrow oedema115
during 10–12-week transition periods. Barefoot running was
suggested by some experts to potentially facilitate increased step
rate, a more forefoot or midfoot strike, and reduced impact
loading
variables.
Biomechanical
rationale
supports
this
premise,102 but importantly, some experts suggested barefoot
running may be injurious if the transition is too fast or running
retraining is not concurrently implemented. The interaction of
barefoot running and footwear modification with running
retraining interventions requires investigation.
Substantial supporting evidence for the effectiveness of foot
orthoses to treat lower limb injuries exists.16 17 However, the per-
ceived value of foot orthoses in running injury treatment varied
among experts, with some considering them only as a ‘last
resort’. Additionally, those advocating their use generally saw
them as only a temporary solution or a tool to facilitate desired
running retraining strategies. Taping was viewed in similar light,
with its value perceived to be in reducing symptoms in the short
term and facilitating desired running retraining changes.
Prevention, performance and ideal running pattern
Some experts suggested running retraining may play a role in
injury prevention, although a lack of available evidence to guide
implementation exists (see online supplementary file 10.3 which
summarises expert discussion of prevention, performance and
and ideal running pattern in relation to running retraining). One
commonly discussed approach was reducing impact loading vari-
ables such as vertical loading rates, indicating research to investi-
gate the merits of this may be warranted in the future. When
discussing running performance and economy, experts suggested
acute changes may reduce running economy. However, some, but
not all experts, suggested that economy may then improve over
the first couple of months, with possible improvements to per-
formance in the longer term with interventions such as increasing
step rate.
Beliefs related to the presence of an ideal running pattern in
relation to both injury and performance were inconsistent, with
some experts suggesting this to be individual to each patient.
Others stated certain running characteristics could be considered
better than others for all runners, including higher step rates
and a forefoot/midfoot strike. The topic of strike pattern is con-
troversial, with the recent growing interest of barefoot running
leading to a strong promotion of rearfoot runners to transition
to a forefoot strike to both treat injury and improve perform-
ance.116 Considering the lack of evidence to support this notion
in relation to injury102 and performance,42 79 further research is
needed on this topic.
Limitations and future research directions
This study provides what might be reported as a biased sample
of ‘experts’ because we selected those who use and study
running retraining. A sports biomechanics researcher or clinician
who has moved away from this area of research because he/she
feels it is not effective would not be included among our
‘experts’. The topic guide (see online supplementary file 3) used
to facilitate discussion between the researcher and interviewee
was based primarily on literature included in the systematic
review, which may have biased discussions towards topics with
current biomechanical evidence. To address this, the topic guide
included scope for and encouraged discussion of clinical reason-
ing regarding interventions lacking evidence.
Initial evaluation and framework analysis was completed by an
experienced physiotherapist with more than 5 years’ experience
of providing running retraining as a specialist focus in clinical
practice (CJB), which is another potential source of bias. To
remove one level of bias, data accuracy and interpretation were
checked by an additional researcher with qualitative research
experience (PM), and two other researchers were also involved
(AF-M and JC). Validity of qualitative findings was then further
strengthened through triangulation of findings via respondent
validation.
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
13 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 Only 5 of 46 studies included investigated an injured popula-
tion, limiting the clinical applicability of findings from the evi-
dence synthesis. W
e believe randomised controlled trials of
running retraining efficacy in symptomatic populations are justi-
fied on the basis of current evidence. Such trials should also
consider evaluating potential clinical predictors and biomechan-
ical mechanisms, which may help tailor running retraining inter-
ventions to individuals and specific conditions. Other priorities
highlighted by experts include development of technologies to
provide more efficient feedback, developing options to allow
mobile monitoring of compliance, and investigating the inter-
action of running retraining with other evidence-based interven-
tions (see online supplementary file 9.1).
Summary
Expert clinical reasoning has been combined with a comprehen-
sive evidence synthesis to guide clinicians and researchers who
seek to implement and evaluate running retraining in the treat-
ment of lower limb injury. Various options require consideration,
including strategies to reduce overstride and increase step rate,
altering strike pattern, reducing impact loading variables, increas-
ing step width and altering proximal kinematics. Currently,
limited evidence supports the effectiveness of transition from
rearfoot to forefoot strike and increase step rate or altering prox-
imal mechanics in individuals with anterior exertional lower leg
pain, and visual and verbal feedback to reduce hip adduction in
females with PFP
. According to current expert opinion, other
lower limb injuries which may benefit from running retraining
include plantar fasciopathy, Achilles tendinopathy, calf pain,
medial tibial stress syndrome, ITBS, patellar tendinopathy, prox-
imal hamstring tendinopathy and gluteal tendinopathy. Tailoring
approaches to each injury and individual is likely to be required
to optimise outcomes, and running retraining should only be
considered part of the solution when managing running injuries.
Key messages
Tailoring running retraining strategies to each injury and
individuals is needed to optimise outcomes.
What are the findings?
▸ There is limited evidence for running retraining in the
treatment of patellofemoral pain and anterior exertional
lower leg pain.
▸ Based on sound biomechanical rationale, running retraining
may assist in the treatment of lower limb injuries including
exertional lower leg pain, plantar fasciopathy, Achilles
tendinopathy, calf pain, medial tibial stress syndrome,
patellofemoral pain, iliotibial band syndrome, patellar
tendinopathy, hamstring injury including proximal
tendinopathy and gluteal tendinopathy.
▸ The running retraining options that clinicians and patients
might consider in clinical practice include strategies to
reduce overstride and increase step rate, altering strike
pattern, reducing impact loading, increasing step width and
altering proximal kinematics.
▸ Substantial evidence exists for the immediate biomechanical
effects of running retraining interventions in uninjured
populations.
Twitter Follow Christian Barton at @DrChrisBarton
Contributors CJB conceived the study concept and design. DRB, BSN and CJB
completed literature searching. CJB and DRB completed quality assessment. CJB
completed evidence synthesis. JC completed all interviews. CJB, PM and AF-M
were responsible for qualitative data analysis and initial interpretation. All authors
contributed to interpretation of findings, manuscript write up and final approval.
Funding Interview transcription was funded by La Trobe University’s Lower
Extremity Gait Studies (LEGS) programme.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
van Gent RN, Siem D, van Middelkoop M, et al. Incidence and determinants of
lower extremity running injuries in long distance runners: a systematic review.
Br J Sports Med 2007;41:469–80.
2
Yamato TP, Saragiotto BT, Hespanhol Junior LC, et al. Descriptors used to define
running-related musculoskeletal injury: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther 2015;45:366–74.
3
Satterthwaite P, Norton R, Larmer P, et al. Risk factors for injuries and other
health problems sustained in a marathon. Br J Sports Med 1999;33:22–6.
4
Buist I, Bredeweg SW, Bessem B, et al. Incidence and risk factors of
running-related injuries during preparation for a 4-mile recreational running event.
Br J Sports Med 2010;44:598–604.
5
Wen DY, Puffer JC, Schmalzried TP. Injuries in runners: a prospective study of
alignment. Clin J Sport Med 1998;8:187–94.
6
Bennett JE, Reinking MF, Rauh MJ. The relationship between isotonic plantar
flexor endurance, navicular drop, and exercise-related leg pain in a cohort of
collegiate cross-country runners. Int J Sports Phys Ther 2012;7:267–78.
7
Neal BS, Griffiths IB, Dowling GJ, et al. Foot posture as a risk factor for lower limb
overuse injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Foot Ankle Res 2014;7:55.
8
Dowling GJ, Murley GS, Munteanu SE, et al. Dynamic foot function as a risk factor
for lower limb overuse injury: a systematic review. J Foot Ankle Res 2014;7:53.
9
Ghani Zadeh Hesar N, Van Ginckel A, Cools A, et al. A prospective study on
gait-related intrinsic risk factors for lower leg overuse injuries. Br J Sports Med
2009;43:1057–61.
10
Van Middelkoop M, Kolkman J, Van Ochten J, et al. Risk factors for lower
extremity injuries among male marathon runners. Scand J Med Sci Sports
2008;18:691–7.
11
McKean KA, Manson NA, Stanish WD. Musculoskeletal injury in the masters
runners. Clin J Sport Med 2006;16:149–54.
12
Wen DY, Puffer JC, Schmalzried TP. Lower extremity alignment and risk of overuse
injuries in runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1997;29:1291–8.
13
Yeung SS, Yeung EW, Gillespie LD. Interventions for preventing lower limb
soft-tissue running injuries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;(7):CD001256.
14
Lauersen JB, Bertelsen DM, Andersen LB. The effectiveness of exercise
interventions to prevent sports injuries: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:871–7.
15
Knapik JJ, Trone DW, Tchandja J, et al. Injury-reduction effectiveness of prescribing
running shoes on the basis of foot arch height: summary of military investigations.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2014;44:805–12.
16
Collins N, Bisset L, McPoil T, et al. Foot orthoses in lower limb overuse conditions:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Foot Ankle Int 2007;28:396–412.
17
Hume P, Hopkins W, Rome K, et al. Effectiveness of foot orthoses for treatment
and prevention of lower limb injuries: a review. Sports Med 2008;38:759–79.
18
Barton C, Balachandar V, Lack S, et al. Patellar taping for patellofemoral pain:
a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate clinical outcomes and
biomechanical mechanisms. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:417–24.
19
Mueller MJ, Maluf KS. Tissue adaptation to physical stress: a proposed “Physical
Stress Theory” to guide physical therapist practice, education, and research. Phys
Ther 2002;82:383–403.
20
Franklyn-Miller A, Roberts A, Hulse D, et al. Biomechanical overload syndrome:
defining a new diagnosis. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:415–16.
21
Davis I. Gait retraining in runners. Orthop Pract 2005;17:8–13.
22
Willy RW, Scholz JP, Davis IS. Mirror gait retraining for the treatment of
patellofemoral pain in female runners. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon)
2012;27:1045–51.
23
Noehren B, Scholz J, Davis I. The effect of real-time gait retraining on hip
kinematics, pain and function in subjects with patellofemoral pain syndrome.
Br J Sports Med 2011;45:691–6.
24
Diebal AR, Gregory R, Alitz C, et al. Forefoot running improves pain and disability
associated with chronic exertional compartment syndrome. Am J Sports Med
2012;40:1060–7.
25
Breen DT, Foster J, Falvey E, et al. Gait re-training to alleviate the symptoms of
anterior exertional lower leg pain: a case series. Int J Sports Phys Ther
2015;10:85–94.
14 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 26
Napier C, Cochrane CK, Taunton JE, et al. Gait modifications to change lower
extremity gait biomechanics in runners: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med
2015;49:1382–8.
27
Ferber R, Kendall KD, Farr L. Changes in knee biomechanics after a hip-abductor
strengthening protocol for runners with patellofemoral pain syndrome. J Athl Train
2011;46:142–9.
28
Earl JE, Hoch AZ. A proximal strengthening program improves pain, function, and
biomechanics in women with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Am J Sports Med
2011;39:154–63.
29
Silbernagel KG, Thomeé R, Eriksson BI, et al. Continued sports activity, using a
pain-monitoring model, during rehabilitation in patients with Achilles
tendinopathy: a randomized controlled study. Am J Sports Med 2007;35:897–906.
30
Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA, et al. Evidence based medicine: what it is
and what it isn’t. BMJ 1996;312:71–2.
31
Downs SH, Black N. The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the
methodological quality both of randomised and non-randomised studies of health
care interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health 1998;52:377–84.
32
van Tulder M, Furlan A, Bombardier C, et al. Updated method guidelines for
systematic reviews in the Cochrane collaboration back review group. Spine
2003;28:1290–9.
33
Mays N, Pope C, eds. Qualitative research in healthcare: analysing qualitative data.
2nd edn. BMJ Books, 1999.
34
Cavagna GA, Willems PA, Franzetti P, et al. The two power limits conditioning
step frequency in human running. J Physiol (Lond) 1991;437:95–108.
35
Farley CT, González O. Leg stiffness and stride frequency in human running.
J Biomech 1996;29:181–6.
36
Giandolini M, Arnal PJ, Millet GY, et al. Impact reduction during running:
efficiency of simple acute interventions in recreational runners. Eur J Appl Physiol
2013;113:599–609.
37
Hafer JF, Brown AM, deMille P, et al. The effect of a cadence retraining protocol on
running biomechanics and efficiency: a pilot study. J Sports Sci 2015;33:724–31.
38
Stergiou N, Bates BT, Kurz MJ. Subtalar and knee joint interaction during running
at various stride lengths. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 2003;43:319–26.
39
Williams D, McClay I, Manal K. Lower extremity mechanics in runners with a
converted forefoot strike pattern. J Appl Biomech 2000;16:210–18.
40
Chow J, Woo M, Koh M. Effects of external and internal attention focus training
on foot-strike patterns in running. Int J Sports Sci Coaching 2014;9:307–20.
41
Cheung RT, Davis IS. Landing pattern modification to improve patellofemoral pain
in runners: a case series. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2011;41:914–19.
42
Ardigò LP, Lafortuna C, Minetti AE, et al. Metabolic and mechanical aspects of
foot landing type, forefoot and rearfoot strike, in human running. Acta Physiol
Scand 1995;155:17–22.
43
Williams K, Ziff J. Changes in distance running mechanics due to systematic
variations in running style. Int J Sport Biomech 1991;7:76–90.
44
Willy RW, Davis IS. Varied response to mirror gait retraining of gluteus medius
control, hip kinematics, pain, and function in 2 female runners with patellofemoral
pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2013;43:864–74.
45
Crowell HP, Milner CE, Hamill J, et al. Reducing impact loading during running
with the use of real-time visual feedback. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
2010;40:206–13.
46
Wood CM, Kipp K. Use of audio biofeedback to reduce tibial impact accelerations
during running. J Biomech 2014;47:1739–41.
47
Arendse RE, Noakes TD, Azevedo LB, et al. Reduced eccentric loading of the knee
with the pose running method. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2004;36:272–7.
48
Dallam GM, Wilber RL, Jadelis K, et al. Effect of a global alteration of running
technique on kinematics and economy. J Sports Sci 2005;23:757–64.
49
Fletcher G, Romanov N, Bartlett R. Pose method technique improves running
performance without economy changes. Int J Sports Sci Coaching 2008;3:365–80.
50
Eriksson M, Halvorsen KA, Gullstrand L. Immediate effect of visual and auditory
feedback to control the running mechanics of well-trained athletes. J Sports Sci
2011;29:253–62.
51
Warne JP, Kilduff SM, Gregan BC, et al. A 4-week instructed minimalist running
transition and gait-retraining changes plantar pressure and force. Scand J Med Sci
Sports 2014;24:964–73.
52
Karamanidis K, Arampatzis A, Brüggemann GP. Symmetry and reproducibility of
kinematic parameters during various running techniques. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2003;35:1009–16.
53
Karamanidis K, Arampatzis A, Brüggemann GP. Reproducibility of
electromyography and ground reaction force during various running techniques.
Gait Posture 2004;19:115–23.
54
Padulo J, Degortes N, Migliaccio GM, et al. Footstep manipulation during uphill
running. Int J Sports Med 2013;34:244–7.
55
Crowell HP, Davis IS. Gait retraining to reduce lower extremity loading in runners.
Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 2011;26:78–83.
56
Kirby RL, McDermott AG. Anterior tibial compartment pressures during running
with rearfoot and forefoot landing styles. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1983;64:296–9.
57
Pohl MB, Buckley JG. Changes in foot and shank coupling due to alterations in
foot strike pattern during running. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 2008;23:334–41.
58
Giandolini M, Horvais N, Farges Y, et al. Impact reduction through long-term
intervention in recreational runners: midfoot strike pattern versus low-drop/
low-heel height footwear. Eur J Appl Physiol 2013;113:2077–90.
59
Willy RW, Buchenic L, Rogacki K, et al. In-field gait retraining and mobile
monitoring to address running biomechanics associated with tibial stress fracture.
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2015; in press doi:10.1111/sms.12413
60
Chumanov ES, Wille CM, Michalski MP, et al. Changes in muscle activation
patterns when running step rate is increased. Gait Posture 2012;36:231–5.
61
Clarke TE, Cooper LB, Hamill CL, et al. The effect of varied stride rate upon shank
deceleration in running. J Sports Sci 1985;3:41–9.
62
Connick MJ, Li FX. Changes in timing of muscle contractions and running
economy with altered stride pattern during running. Gait Posture
2014;39:634–7.
63
Derrick T, Caldwell G, Hamill J. Modeling the stiffness characteristics of the
human body while running with various stride lengths. J Appl Biomech
2000;16:36–51.
64
Edwards WB, Taylor D, Rudolphi TJ, et al. Effects of stride length and running
mileage on a probabilistic stress fracture model. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2009;41:2177–84.
65
Hamill J, Derrick T, Holt J. Shock attenuation and stride frequency during running.
Hum Mov Sci 1995;14:45–60.
66
Heiderscheit BC, Chumanov ES, Michalski MP, et al. Effects of step rate
manipulation on joint mechanics during running. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2011;43:296–302.
67
Hobara H, Sato T, Sakaguchi M, et al. Step frequency and lower extremity loading
during running. Int J Sports Med 2012;33:310–13.
68
Lenhart RL, Thelen DG, Wille CM, et al. Increasing running step rate reduces
patellofemoral joint forces. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:557–64.
69
Mercer JA, Devita P, Derrick TR, et al. Individual effects of stride length and
frequency on shock attenuation during running. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2003;35:307–13.
70
Morin JB, Samozino P, Zameziati K, et al. Effects of altered stride frequency and
contact time on leg-spring behavior in human running. J Biomech 2007;40:3341–8.
71
Seay J, Selbie WS, Hamill J. In vivo lumbo-sacral forces and moments during
constant speed running at different stride lengths. J Sports Sci 2008;26:1519–29.
72
Sheehan RC, Gottschall JS. Preferred step frequency during downhill running may
be determined by muscle activity. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2013;23:826–30.
73
Thompson MA, Gutmann A, Seegmiller J, et al. The effect of stride length on the
dynamics of barefoot and shod running. J Biomech 2014;47:2745–50.
74
Wellenkotter J, Kernozek TW, Meardon S, et al. The effects of running cadence
manipulation on plantar loading in healthy runners. Int J Sports Med
2014;35:779–84.
75
Willson JD, Sharpee R, Meardon SA, et al. Effects of step length on patellofemoral
joint stress in female runners with and without patellofemoral pain. Clin Biomech
(Bristol, Avon) 2014;29:243–7.
76
Enders H, von Tscharner V, Nigg BM. The effects of preferred and non-preferred
running strike patterns on tissue vibration properties. J Sci Med Sport
2014;17:218–22.
77
Laughton C, McClay Davis I, Hamill J. Effect of strike pattern and orthotic
intervention on tibial shock during running. J Appl Biomech 2003;19:153–68.
78
Oakley T, Pratt DJ. Skeletal transients during heel and toe strike running and the
effectiveness of some materials in their attenuation. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon)
1988;3:159–65.
79
Perl DP, Daoud AI, Lieberman DE. Effects of footwear and strike type on running
economy. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012;44:1335–43.
80
Rooney BD, Derrick TR. Joint contact loading in forefoot and rearfoot strike
patterns during running. J Biomech 2013;46:2201–6.
81
Shih Y, Lin KL, Shiang TY. Is the foot striking pattern more important than
barefoot or shod conditions in running? Gait Posture 2013;38:490–4.
82
Williams DS, Green DH, Wurzinger B. Changes in lower extremity movement and
power absorption during forefoot striking and barefoot running. Int J Sports Phys
Ther 2012;7:525–32.
83
Clansey AC, Hanlon M, Wallace ES, et al. Influence of tibial shock feedback
training on impact loading and running economy. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2014;46:973–81.
84
Brindle RA, Milner CE, Zhang S, et al. Changing step width alters lower extremity
biomechanics during running. Gait Posture 2014;39:124–8.
85
Meardon SA, Campbell S, Derrick TR. Step width alters iliotibial band strain during
running. Sports Biomech 2012;11:464–72.
86
Meardon SA, Derrick TR. Effect of step width manipulation on tibial stress during
running. J Biomech 2014;47:2738–44.
87
Pohl MB, Messenger N, Buckley JG. Changes in foot and lower limb coupling due to
systematic variations in step width. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 2006;21:175–83.
88
Teng HL, Powers CM. Sagittal plane trunk posture influences patellofemoral joint
stress during running. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2014;44:785–92.
89
Messier SP, Cirillo KJ. Effects of a verbal and visual feedback system on running
technique, perceived exertion and running economy in female novice runners.
J Sports Sci 1989;7:113–26.
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
15 of 16
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
 90
Landreneau LL, Watts K, Heitzman JE, et al. Lower limb muscle activity during
forefoot and rearfoot strike running techniques. Int J Sports Phys Ther
2014;9:888–97.
91
Lenhart R, Thelen D, Heiderscheit B. Hip muscle loads during running at various
step rates. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2014;44:766–74, A1–4.
92
Stearne SM, Alderson JA, Green BA, et al. Joint kinetics in rearfoot versus forefoot
running: implications of switching technique. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2014;46:1578–87.
93
Valenzuela KA, Lynn SK, Mikelson LR, et al. Effect of acute alterations in foot
strike patterns during running on sagittal plane lower limb kinematics and kinetics.
J Sports Sci Med 2015;14:225–32.
94
Vannatta CN, Kernozek TW. Patellofemoral joint stress during running with
alterations in foot strike pattern. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2015;47:1001–8.
95
Creaby MW, Franettovich Smith MM. Retraining running gait to reduce tibial loads
with clinician or accelerometry guided feedback. J Sci Med Sport 2015; In Press
doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2015.05.003
96
Willson JD, Ratcliff OM, Meardon SA, et al. Influence of step length and landing
pattern on patellofemoral joint kinetics during running. Scand J Med Sci Sports
2015;25:736–43.
97
Noehren B, Hamill J, Davis I. Prospective evidence for a hip etiology in
patellofemoral pain. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2013;45:1120–4.
98
Witvrouw E, Callaghan MJ, Stefanik JJ, et al. Patellofemoral pain: consensus
statement from the 3rd International Patellofemoral Pain Research Retreat held in
Vancouver, September 2013. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:411–14.
99
Barton CJ, Lack S, Hemmings S, et al. The ‘Best Practice Guide to Conservative
Management of Patellofemoral Pain’: incorporating level 1 evidence with expert
clinical reasoning. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:923–34.
100
Pohl MB, Hamill J, Davis IS. Biomechanical and anatomic factors associated with
a history of plantar fasciitis in female runners. Clin J Sport Med 2009;19:372–6.
101
Noehren B, Davis I, Hamill J. ASB clinical biomechanics award winner 2006
prospective study of the biomechanical factors associated with iliotibial band
syndrome. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 2007;22:951–6.
102
Hall JP, Barton C, Jones PR, et al. The biomechanical differences between barefoot
and shod distance running: a systematic review and preliminary meta-analysis.
Sports Med 2013;43:1335–53.
103
Wille CM, Lenhart RL, Wang S, et al. Ability of Sagittal kinematic variables to
estimate ground reaction forces and joint kinetics in running. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther 2014;44:825–30.
104
Heiderscheit BC. Gait retraining for runners: in search of the ideal. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther 2011;41:909–10.
105
Kluitenberg B, Bredeweg SW, Zijlstra S, et al. Comparison of vertical ground
reaction forces during overground and treadmill running. A validation study. BMC
Musculoskelet Disord 2012;13:235.
106
Riley PO, Paolini G, Della Croce U, et al. A kinematic and kinetic comparison of
overground and treadmill walking in healthy subjects. Gait Posture
2007;26:17–24.
107
Strathy GM, Chao EY, Laughman RK. Changes in knee function associated with
treadmill ambulation. J Biomech 1983;16:517–22.
108
Murray MP, Spurr GB, Sepic SB, et al. Treadmill vs. floor walking: kinematics,
electromyogram, and heart rate. J Appl Physiol 1985;59:87–91.
109
Matsas A, Taylor N, McBurney H. Knee joint kinematics from familiarised treadmill
walking can be generalised to overground walking in young unimpaired subjects.
Gait Posture 2000;11:46–53.
110
Riley PO, Dicharry J, Franz J, et al. A kinematics and kinetic comparison of
overground and treadmill running. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008;40:1093–100.
111
Sinclair J, Richards J, Taylor PJ, et al. Three-dimensional kinematic comparison of
treadmill and overground running. Sports Biomech 2013;12:272–82.
112
Fellin RE, Manal K, Davis IS. Comparison of lower extremity kinematic
curves during overground and treadmill running. J Appl Biomech
2010;26:407–14.
113
Nigg BM, De Boer RW, Fisher V. A kinematic comparison of overground and
treadmill running. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1995;27:98–105.
114
Ryan M, Elashi M, Newsham-West R, et al. Examining injury risk and pain
perception in runners using minimalist footwear. Br J Sports Med
2014;48:1257–62.
115
Ridge ST, Johnson AW, Mitchell UH, et al. Foot bone marrow edema after a
10-wk transition to minimalist running shoes. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2013;45:1363–8.
116
Lieberman DE. Human evolution: those feet in ancient times. Nature
2012;483:550–1.
16 of 16
Barton CJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:513–526. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095278 on 16 February 2016. Downloaded from 
