 ‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’:
the creation of an education leaflet
for patients
Christian J Barton,1,2,3,4 Michael S Rathleff5,6,7
To cite: Barton CJ,
Rathleff MS. ‘Managing My
Patellofemoral Pain’:
the creation of an education
leaflet for patients. BMJ Open
Sport Exerc Med 2016;2:
e000086. doi:10.1136/
bmjsem-2015-000086
▸ Prepublication history and
additional material is
available. To view please visit
the journal (http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmjsem-2015-
000086).
Accepted 2 January 2016
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Christian J Barton;
christian@
completesportscare.com.au
ABSTRACT
Study design: Qualitative, including consultation with
international experts and patients.
Purpose: Develop a brief yet comprehensive evidence-
based education leaflet to be used as an adjunct in the
management of patellofemoral pain (PFP) through
consultation with both experts (clinical academics) and
individuals with PFP.
Background: Appropriate patient education is an
essential component of effective PFP management.
However, there are currently no published educational
resources for clinicians and researchers treating
individuals with PFP to help translate current evidence
into clinical practice.
Methods: A preliminary education leaflet titled
‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’ was created using
information from the ‘Best Practice Guide to
Conservative Management of Patellofemoral Pain’ and
educational content used in published research.
Feedback was sought from 21 experts (clinical
academics) for accuracy, adequacy and clarity of the
information in the leaflet using a semistructured
questionnaire, and a number of suggested
modifications were made as a result. Further feedback
was sought from 20 patients diagnosed with PFP
regarding the clarity and adequacy of information
contained in the leaflet, and to determine additional
educational resource needs.
Results: The leaflet created is titled ‘Managing My
Patellofemoral Pain’ and the main topics of the leaflet
are ‘What might cause my knee pain?’ and ‘Treatment
options’, which are divided into exercise and additional
treatments. Patient feedback was positive, and included
a number of considerations for further education
resource development.
Conclusions: The ‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’
education leaflet may provide a valuable resource for
patients, clinicians and researchers to assist the
provision of education and translation of the current
evidence.
BACKGROUND
Patellofemoral pain (PFP) is a prevalent
multifactorial knee condition, accounting for
16.5% of all consultations in sports medicine
clinics.1 We recently created a ‘Best Practice
Guide
to
Conservative
Management
of
Patellofemoral Pain’ based on current level 1
evidence (ie, high-quality systematic reviews)
and
international
expert
opinion.2
Multimodal interventions possess the stron-
gest evidence in the longer term manage-
ment of PFP
, and commonly consisted of
quadriceps and gluteal exercises, stretching,
massage, patellar mobilisation and patellar
taping.2 International expert opinion high-
lighted
that
tailoring
this
multimodal
approach, along with appropriate patient
education, is essential for effective PFP man-
agement.2 Importantly, this recommendation
fits with previous evidence supporting the
efficacy of patient education alongside multi-
modal intervention in conditions including
hip and knee osteoarthritis.3
The question is how to provide patient
education
in
clinical
practice?
Previous
research indicates poor knowledge retention
when information is only provided verbally,4 5
highlighting
the
need
for
education
resources to facilitate effective education of
PFP patients, and the translation of the
current evidence base into clinical practice.
Currently,
no
published
educational
resources for PFP exist. Previously published
studies have used educational interventions
as comparisons6 or in conjunction with other
treatments.7–9 However, the material is rarely
What are the new findings
▪ The ‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’ education
leaflet developed through consultation with inter-
national experts is the first published freely avail-
able
educational
resource
for
patients
with
patellofemoral pain (PFP).
▪ The leaflet provides a valuable resource for
patients, clinicians and researchers to assist the
provision of education and to help translate the
current evidence base into clinical practice.
▪ The leaflet aims to impact on health behaviour,
knowledge retention and patient outcomes, and
research is now needed to confirm its potential
related to these outcomes.
Barton CJ, Rathleff MS. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2016;2:e000086. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086
1
Open Access
Research
copyright.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://bmjopensem.bmj.com/
BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med: first published as 10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086 on 24 March 2016. Downloaded from 
 described in enough detail to allow use outside the
study, and is based on the researcher’s own experience
without input from other experts.
The purpose of this study was to develop a brief yet
comprehensive evidence-based education leaflet to be
used as an adjunct in the management of PFP through
consultation with both experts (clinical academics) and
individuals with PFP
. The hope is that this resource will
improve the translation of the current evidence base
related to PFP management into clinical practice.
METHODS
Initial development (phase 1)
A preliminary education leaflet was created using infor-
mation from the ‘Best Practice Guide to Conservative
Management of Patellofemoral Pain’2 and educational
content used in published research.6 8 9 To ensure that
the leaflet was comprehensive, attempts were made to
include all information from the ‘Best Practice Guide to
Conservative Management of Patellofemoral Pain’2 in
the leaflet, with language simplified to enhance read-
ability. Information related to specific manual therapy
options which may assist in the management of PFP was
not included, since this was largely based on expert
opinion and experts have previously stated that manual
therapy specifics and needs are highly variable.2
Consultation with international experts (phase 2)
Using semistructured questions constructed in ‘Survey
Monkey,’ feedback was sought from international experts
for accuracy, adequacy and clarity of the information in
the leaflet (see online supplementary file 1). Defining
expertise is difficult, but for the purpose of this study
experts were required to have had at least 5 years clinical
experience, be actively involved in PFP research and be
contributing to specialist international meetings. It was felt
that experts with a good blend of clinical experience and
research knowledge would provide the most valuable infor-
mation regarding potential validity and improvements
related to the leaflet. Initial invitations were sent to atten-
dees of the 3rd International Patellofemoral Pain Retreat
held in Vancouver, 2013.10 Twenty-one experts volun-
teered, with participants working in ‘The USA’ (n=5),
‘The UK’ (n=4), ‘The Netherlands’ (n=3), ‘Canada’
(n=3), ‘Brazil’ (n=3), ‘Denmark’ (n=1) and ‘Australia’
(n=1). Academically, four were professors, three were asso-
ciate professors, three were assistant professors, nine were
PhD candidates, one was a master’s student, and one was a
clinical scientist. Average research experience ranged from
2 to 20 (mean=7.3) years. Importantly, 14 of the 21 partici-
pants were still actively treating patients with PFP
, seeing
on average 7 new patients with PFP per month. Clinical
backgrounds included physiotherapists (n=11), physical
therapists (n=3), athletic trainers (n=2), medical doctors
(n=4) and one podiatrist.
Survey
data
were
evaluated
using
a
‘Framework
Analysis’
approach.11
First,
the
investigator
(CJB)
familiarised himself with the survey data, after which a
thematic framework of themes and subthemes was
created. The framework was indexed, and this was
applied to the sections of text from the survey data. Data
for each main theme were divided into relevant sub-
themes. Each table allowed for emerging concepts or sug-
gestions to be identified, and was used to determine
associated changes to the leaflet required. Accuracy of
information and themes in tables were checked by a
second investigator (MSR) before changes to the leaflet
were made. In the presence of conflicting suggestions
between different experts or compared to the current evi-
dence base, choice of action was made following discus-
sion between the two investigators. The Framework
Analysis, and changes in response or concerns regarding
changes, were provided to each of the participating
experts, and further feedback was sought.
Feedback from patients (phase 3)
We asked 20 patients diagnosed with PFP from 7 clinics or
outpatient departments to provide feedback related to the
clarity and adequacy of information contained in the final
version of the leaflet (ie, following the second round of
feedback from the experts), and to determine additional
educational resource needs (see online supplementary file
2). To ensure wider external applicability of the leaflet and
education resources developed in the future, we consulted
patients of therapists from both private and public sectors
in a range of English speaking countries (Australia, New
Zealand, the USA, Canada and the UK). Age and duration
of symptoms of patients with PFP surveyed ranged from 18
to 58 (average=33) years and 1 to 360 (average=55)
months, respectively. Of the 15 who chose to provide their
professional backgrounds, 9 worked in jobs requiring a
university degree (eg, lawyer), three worked in fields
which did not necessitate tertiary education (eg, trades-
man), and three were university students. Findings and
suggestions from this process were clustered together and
tabulated where possible.
RESULTS
The ‘Framework Analysis’ derived via expert consultation
(phase 2) identified five themes (24 subthemes), includ-
ing ‘General format’, ‘General considerations’, suggestions
for changes to
‘Why
do
I
have
knee
pain?’
and
‘Management’ sections, and ‘Figures’ (see online supple-
mentary file 3). Changes in response or concerns regard-
ing suggested changes resulting from expert consultation
are outlined in the same tables (see online supplementary
file 3). Key changes to the leaflet included the use of the
term ‘therapist’ instead of ‘physiotherapist’ to make the
leaflet more applicable to different health professions,
stating that rest may be needed to settle symptoms before
starting exercise rehabilitation, reducing emphasis on bio-
mechanics and emphasising ‘overuse’ may be the key
reason behind PFP development, emphasising the need
for
assessment
and
appropriate
guidance
from
the
2
Barton CJ, Rathleff MS. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2016;2:e000086. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086
Open Access
copyright.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://bmjopensem.bmj.com/
BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med: first published as 10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086 on 24 March 2016. Downloaded from 
 patient’s treating therapist, and removing direct reference
to acupuncture as a possible pain reducing intervention,
which is consistent with the final published guide.2
Further feedback following additional consultation with
experts was provided by 11 of the 21 experts, and involved
only typographical errors and sentence structure (see
online supplementary file 4). No further changes to
content or structure were suggested.
Feedback derived from patients (phase 3) was gener-
ally positive (see online supplementary file 5), and no
Figure 1
The ‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’ education leaflet.
Barton CJ, Rathleff MS. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2016;2:e000086. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086
3
Open Access
copyright.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://bmjopensem.bmj.com/
BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med: first published as 10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086 on 24 March 2016. Downloaded from 
 further modifications were made to the leaflet. Patients
also provided a number of suggestions for additional
education resources (see online supplementary file 5).
These included a dedicated website to facilitate patient
education; further guidance and videos related to bene-
ficial exercises; more detailed information on diagnosis,
causation, management and prognosis; and a list of
therapists who could be recommended to help.
The title of the leaflet is ‘Managing My Patellofemoral
Pain’ and the main topics include ‘What might cause my
knee pain?’, and ‘Treatment options’, which are divided
into exercise and additional treatments. The resulting
leaflet can be seen in figure 1. This version of the leaflet
is structured to print double-sided on A4 paper and be
folded, allowing easy use in physical form as an adjunct
to facilitate education with patients. Additionally, a freely
available online version can be found here (http://bit.
ly/11u1TtE). Readability of the text contained in the
final version of the leaflet was calculated as 10.5 using
the ‘Fleish-Kincaid Grade Level’ in Microsoft Word.
DISCUSSION
Appropriate patient education is essential to effective PFP
management.2 The ‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’
education leaflet developed in this study provides a valu-
able resource for patients, clinicians and researchers to
assist the provision of education and improve knowledge
retention. The leaflet is designed as an adjunct to facilitate
patient education when providing tailored multimodal
intervention to individuals with PFP
,2 and should not be
used as a stand-alone intervention. Patient education has
proven effective in several long-standing musculoskeletal
conditions, and it is therefore an essential part of multi-
modal treatment.3
12 Importantly, however, knowledge
retention from education interventions is usually low if
information is only provided verbally.4 5 Therefore, the
patient education leaflet created may enhance knowledge
retention and ultimately improve patient care for indivi-
duals with PFP
. There are no specific rules/guides on how
the leaflet should be used in clinical practice, and its imple-
mentation may depend on available time, and individual
therapist and patient preferences. However, the therapist is
recommended to go through the leaflet with their patient
and allow time for, and encourage, additional questions
not covered by the leaflet.
Limitations
Not all experts agreed on all content in the leaflet, but
this is an inherent limitation in this form of qualitative
research. For example, there were some suggestions from
experts to reduce the leaflet’s content, while other sugges-
tions indicated that the leaflet’s comprehensiveness was
its strength. Considering that shortening the leaflet would
require removal of information included in the ‘Best
Practice Guide to Patellofemoral Pain Management’,2
maintaining the same level of content was determined to
be the most appropriate action. This decision was
validated with positive patient feedback during phase 3,
including praise for the leaflet’s comprehensiveness (see
online supplementary file 5).
Additional patient feedback indicated that the educa-
tion leaflet does not answer all their questions. Instead
of writing a more extensive and longer patient education
leaflet, only the most relevant information based on the
recently published ‘Best Practice Guide to Conservative
Management of Patellofemoral Pain’2 was included in
the final version. This choice was made since increasing
the leaflet’s length may cause some patients to lose inter-
est and not read the entire content, or it may take too
long to go through the entire leaflet in clinical practice
where time is often limited. When using the leaflet, it is
important for the therapist and patient to understand
that it is intended to be an adjunct, and the therapist
should possess the knowledge to answer additional ques-
tions and provide further relevant education.
The ‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’ education leaflet
was designed for adult patients, and only feedback from
adults with PFP was sought. Since PFP is very common
among adolescents,13 future iterations of the leaflet should
consider
including
an
adolescents-specific
version.
Information for this specific population may need to be
delivered in another format, for example, video or online.
Future research
Future studies should investigate the impact of the
‘Managing My Patellofemoral Pain’ education leaflet on
health behaviour, knowledge retention and patient out-
comes. Continued development of the leaflet is also
needed as new knowledge accumulates. Furthermore, to
improve its wider applicability, there is a need to trans-
late it to non-English languages and integrate its con-
tents into other media platforms including video, audio
and web-based applications.
To address the need for more information and educa-
tion resources, feedback from patients in this study sug-
gested the need for a dedicated website to facilitate
patient education. It was suggested that this should
include further guidance and videos related to benefi-
cial exercises; more detailed information on diagnosis,
causation, management and prognosis; and a list of
therapists who could be recommended to help. Further
work is now needed to improve available resources to
complement information provided in the ‘Managing My
Patellofemoral Pain’ education leaflet.
CONCLUSION
The
‘Managing
My
Patellofemoral
Pain’
education
leaflet begins to address the absence of educational
resources for PFP management, and provides a valuable
resource for patients, clinicians and researchers to use
alongside a multimodal approach to PFP management.
Importantly, the leaflet may enhance the translation of
the
current
evidence
base
into
clinical
practice.
Investigating the leaflet’s impact on health behaviour,
4
Barton CJ, Rathleff MS. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2016;2:e000086. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086
Open Access
copyright.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://bmjopensem.bmj.com/
BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med: first published as 10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086 on 24 March 2016. Downloaded from 
 knowledge retention and patient outcomes, alongside
translation to non-English languages, is now needed.
Furthermore, integration and expansion of the leaflet’s
contents into other media platforms including video,
audio and web-based applications may enhance its cap-
acity to improve patient care.
Author affiliations
1Complete Sports Care, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
2La Trobe Sport and Exercise Medicine Research Centre, School of Allied
Health, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
3Pure Sports Medicine, London, UK
4Centre for Sports and Exercise Medicine, Queen Mary University of London,
UK
5Department of Health Science and Technology, Faculty of Medicine, Center
for Sensory-Motor Interaction (SMI), Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
6Department of Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy, Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark
7Research Unit for General Practice and Department of Clinical Medicine,
Aalborg University, Denmark
Twitter Follow Christian Barton at @DrChrisBarton
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the 21 experts who gave
their precious time and expertise; and the 20 patients with patellofemoral pain
who provided further insight into the education leaflet’s value. Additionally,
thanks to Esther Williams for help with designing the layout and producing
the preliminary and final versions of the education leaflet.
Contributors CJB and MSR conceived and planned the study. CJB collected
the survey responses. CJB and MSR analysed and interpreted all data and
completed the write-up of the manuscript.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided
the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
Taunton JE, Ryan MB, Clement DB, et al. A retrospective
case-control analysis of 2002 running injuries. Br J Sports Med
2002;36:95–101.
2.
Barton CJ, Lack S, Hemmings S, et al. The ‘Best Practice Guide to
Conservative Management of Patellofemoral Pain’: incorporating
level 1 evidence with expert clinical reasoning. Br J Sports Med
2015;49:923–34.
3.
Fernandes L, Hagen KB, Bijlsma JW, et al. EULAR
recommendations for the non-pharmacological core
management of hip and knee osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis
2013;72:1125–35.
4.
Oshodi TO. The impact of preoperative education on postoperative
pain. Part 1. Br J Nurs 2007;16:706–10.
5.
Johnson A, Sandford J. Written and verbal information versus verbal
information only for patients being discharged from acute hospital
settings to home: systematic review. Health Educ Res
2005;20:423–9.
6.
Rathleff MS, Roos EM, Olesen JL, et al. Exercise during school
hours when added to patient education improves outcome for 2
years in adolescent patellofemoral pain: a cluster randomised trial.
Br J Sports Med 2015;49:406–12.
7.
Collins N, Crossley K, Beller E, et al. Foot orthoses and
physiotherapy in the treatment of patellofemoral pain syndrome:
randomised clinical trial. BMJ 2008;337:a1735.
8.
Clark DI, Downing N, Mitchell J, et al. Physiotherapy for anterior knee
pain: a randomised controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2000;59:700–4.
9.
van Linschoten R, van Middelkoop M, Berger MY, et al. Supervised
exercise therapy versus usual care for patellofemoral pain syndrome: an
open label randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2009;339:b4074.
10.
Witvrouw E, Callaghan MJ, Stefanik JJ, et al. Patellofemoral pain:
consensus statement from the 3rd International Patellofemoral Pain
Research Retreat held in Vancouver, September 2013. Br J Sports
Med 2014;48:411–14.
11.
Mays N, Pope C. Qualitative research in healthcare: analysing
qualitative data. 2nd edn. BMJ Books, 1999.
12.
Riemsma RP, Kirwan JR, Taal E, et al. Patient education for adults
with rheumatoid arthritis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(2):
CD003688.
13.
Rathleff MS, Roos EM, Olesen JL, et al. Lower mechanical
pressure pain thresholds in female adolescents with
patellofemoral pain syndrome. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
2013;43:414–21.
Barton CJ, Rathleff MS. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2016;2:e000086. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086
5
Open Access
copyright.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by
http://bmjopensem.bmj.com/
BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med: first published as 10.1136/bmjsem-2015-000086 on 24 March 2016. Downloaded from 
