 T
he National Poultry Improvement Plan (NPIP)  
was started in the early 1930s to coordinate  
State programs aimed at eliminating pullorum 
from commercial poultry.  In those days, many poultry 
breeders served the needs of thousands of small 
flock owners.  Today, there are only a very few breed-
ers of commercial poultry to serve the commercial 
poultry industry, which produces billions of chickens 
and millions of turkeys annually.  Today, the NPIP 
concerns itself with certifying that flocks are free of 
the following diseases:
• Pullorum—An egg-transmitted disease of poultry, 
caused by Salmonella pullorum, that kills a high 
proportion (60–80 percent) of baby poultry
• Fowl typhoid—An egg-transmitted disease of 
poultry, caused by Salmonella gallinarum, that  
may result in significant mortality in both baby 
poultry and adult birds
• Avian mycoplasmas—The species of Myco-
plasma that are most pathogenic to poultry are the 
ones covered by the testing program in the NPIP:  
Mycoplasma gallisepticum (MG), Mycoplasma 
synoviae (MS), or Mycoplasma meleagridis (MM).
• Salmonella enterica*—An egg-transmitted 
disease of poultry, caused by the organism of the 
same name, that may also have human health im-
plications through consumption of contaminated 
table eggs
• Avian influenza—A worldwide viral infection of 
several species of poultry
 
Pullorum disease, discovered in 1899, is a 
worldwide disease of chickens.  The main reservoirs 
of infection are the egg-producing organs of the 
infected hen.  Chicks from diseased hens are infected 
at conception inside the egg. 
 
Pullorum disease will also affect turkeys, ducks, 
guinea fowl, pheasants, sparrows, quail, bittern, 
geese, pigeons, doves, parakeets, and canaries.  The 
causative organism, Salmonella pullorum, rarely  
affects mammals.  
 
Once called bacillary white diarrhea of chicks, 
pullorum has been a devastating disease of poul-
try for more than 50 years.  It causes heavy losses 
in chicks and poultry and reduces the productivity 
of adult birds.  Young birds die during their first 3 
weeks.  Losses may be as high as 80–90 percent  of 
the brood.  Death from pullorum rarely occurs after  4 
weeks of age.  Infected adult birds normally show no 
outward evidence of infection, but they are disease 
carriers for life. 
 
The infection may spread by breathing contami-
nated dust or coming into contact with down from in-
fected poultry or with other material in the incubator, 
shipping box, brooder, or pen that has been touched 
by infected birds.  Infected feces in litter and feed or 
water can transmit the disease to other brood-mates. 
 
One chick might infect an entire hatch of birds.  If 
young birds have other diseases, pullorum tends to 
spread faster. 
 
Carrier hens lay infected eggs, and the hatchlings 
are infected.  Hens can be infected by eating con-
taminated feed, infected eggs, or manure from other 
infected chickens.  
 
Blood-testing adult breeding birds, biosecurity, 
and sanitation have all but eliminated the disease in 
the United States.  Pullorum–typhoid testing is avail-
able through State agencies as a free service or at 
a nominal charge.  Individual poultry raisers may be 
certified by these State agencies as testing agents in 
some States. 
 
Pullorum can be controlled and eradicated by 
eliminating infected carrier birds and thus breaking 
the disease cycle.  Blood-testing potential breed-
ing animals and culling infected birds are the steps 
needed to eliminate the eggborne disease.  Breeders 
that have tested negative produce noninfected eggs 
and thus noninfected chicks. 
 
The official blood tests of the NPIP for pullorum–
typhoid are the rapid whole-blood plate agglutination 
test, the rapid serum plate test, the standard tube 
agglutination test, and the microagglutination test.  
 
These tests use whole blood or serum of 
infected birds, which contains antibodies that will 
clump (stick together, agglutinate) when mixed with 
stained pullorum organisms. 
 
MG, MS, and MM are the species of 
Mycoplasma that are pathogenic to poultry. 
 
MG is commonly called chronic respiratory 
disease in chickens and infectious sinusitis in turkeys. 
Producers with MG-affected flocks suffer economic 
losses from downgraded carcasses, lowered egg-
production efficiency, and increased medication 
costs.  MS can become systemic and cause acute 
synovitis of chickens and turkeys.  MM’s primary 
lesion is airsacculitis in baby turkeys. 
 
Avian influenza is a worldwide viral infection of 
poultry.  An influenza virus has the ability to mutate, 
or change its genetic character, so that it can infect 
a host animal in one of several ways.  The host 
responses from influenza infection can range from no 
apparent signs to mild and moderate illness to death. 
 
Because of the different symptoms of influenza, three 
levels of host disease are described:  nonpathogenic, 
low-pathogenic, and highly pathogenic avian 
influenza. 
Figure 1—Results of the rapid whole-blood 
plate agglutination test for pullorum are 
positive (top left), suspect (top right), and 
negative (bottom). (Photo by Gene Lambert 
of Paradigm Media; reproduced by permis-
sion.)
  
The agar gel immunodiffusion test is the official 
test for avian influenza under the NPIP
.  The test must 
be conducted only in laboratories authorized under 
the NPIP
, and tissues from all suspects are subtyped 
at the National Veterinary Services Laboratories, 
Ames, IA. 
 
Fowl typhoid is a salmonella infection similar to 
pullorum but caused by Salmonella gallinarum.   Both 
diseases elicit common antigenic reactions.  The 
same blood test works for both diseases.  Since 
1954, breeders are considered negative for both 
diseases on the results of the same test. 
 
Salmonella enterica-infected chickens often 
display no symptoms at all.  But because this disease 
is egg-transmitted, like pullorum, it can be passed 
in the intact egg.  Because Salmonella enterica is a 
human pathogen, it must be eliminated from breeding 
chickens. 
 
For more information, visit 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/animal_
dis_spec/poultry/
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, 
and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial 
status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, 
genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or part of an individual’s income is 
derived from any public assistance program.  (Not 
all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)  Persons 
with disabilities who require alternative means for 
communication of program information (Braille, 
large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s 
TARGET Center at (202) 720–2600 (voice and TDD).  
To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, 
Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence 
Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250–9410, or 
call (800) 795–3272 (voice) or (202) 720–6382 (TDD).  
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
Issued November 2001
Slightly revised June 2009
National Poultry Improvement Plan
1498 Klondike Road, Suite 101
Conyers, GA  30094
Phone: (770) 922–3496
Fax: 
(770) 922–3498
United States Department of Agriculture
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Program Aid No. 1708
Helping You, 
the Poultry  
Breeder, Prevent 
Disease
