 RESEARCH ARTICLE
The mechanics of head-supported load carriage by
Nepalese porters
G. J. Bastien, P. A. Willems, B. Schepens* and N. C. Heglund
ABSTRACT
In the Everest valley of Nepal, because of the rugged mountain
terrain, roads are nothing more than dirt paths and all material must be
conveyed on foot. The Nepalese porters routinely carry head-
supported loads, which often exceed their body mass, over long
distances up and down the steep mountain footpaths. In Africa,
women transport their loads economically thanks to an energy-saving
gait adaptation. We hypothesized that the Nepalese porters may
have developed a corresponding mechanism. To investigate this
proposition, we measured the mechanical work done during level
walking in Nepalese porters while carrying different loads at several
speeds. Our results show that the Nepalese porters do not use
an equivalent mechanism as the African women to reduce work.
In contrast, the Nepalese porters develop an equal amount of total
mechanical work as Western control subjects while carrying loads
of 0 to 120% of their body mass at all speeds measured (0.5–
1.7 m s−1), making even more impressive their ability to carry loads
without any apparent mechanically determined tricks. Nevertheless,
our results show that the Nepalese porters have a higher efficiency, at
least at slow speeds and high loads.
KEY WORDS: Load carrying, Locomotion, Walking, Muscular work,
Efficiency, Mechanics
INTRODUCTION
Fit European or North American adults can comfortably carry a
backpack load weighing approximately one-quarter of their body
mass over an entire day’s trek (Bastien et al., 2005b). However, a
load greater than 60% of body mass (Mb) cannot be carried for more
than about an hour, and loads exceeding 100% Mb can only be
moved with great difficulty. Meanwhile, many other populations
carry much heavier loads for hours, sometimes for days, because no
other means of transport is available. Among these populations,
African women have shown a striking adaptation for load carriage.
In 1986, Maloiy et al. showed that Kenyan women carry loads much
more economically than Western subjects. In a subsequent study,
Heglund et al. (1995) showed that, while carrying head-supported
loads, these women increase their pendulum-like transfer of energy,
which is characteristic of the walking gait (Cavagna et al., 1976).
In other words, they have developed a strategy to limit the muscular
work required to carry a load by becoming a ‘better pendulum’.
More recently, Cavagna
et al. (2002) have increased our
understanding of this strategy and identified in which part of the
walking step the increased energy saving occurred.
Whether other populations have adapted the strategy developed
by the African women to carry loads remains an open question.
Nepalese porters routinely carry head-supported loads that are two
times heavier than the maximum loads carried by the African
women (Bastien et al., 2005a). In the Everest valley, where no roads
exist, load carriage is a daily task that everyone experiences from
early childhood. Malville (1999) reported that young Nepalese
commercial porters, only 11 years old and weighing 29.9 kg, carry
loads up to 36.5 kg or 123% Mb. Not surprisingly, this population
has developed a renowned ability for load carrying. Full-time
professional porters convey food and material from Jiri (the end of
the road heading towards Mt Everest from Kathmandu) to Namche,
the principal marketplace for the region. This 7–9 day trip on dirt
footpaths covers a horizontal distance of ∼100 km with >8000 m of
total ascents and >6300 m of total descents. We measured 113
porters on the last day of this trip and found that the average load of
male porters was 89% Mb, with 20% of the men carrying more than
125% Mb (Basnyat and Schepens, 2001). The average female
Nepalese porter’s load was 70% Mb, i.e. 10% Mb, greater than the
maximum load carried by the African women. Malville (1999)
measured the loads carried by 635 porters and reported an average
load for adult males of 146±30% Mb at the start of the trek to
Namche.
With the studies on African women in mind, we set out to
determine whether the Nepalese porters could also use an energy-
saving strategy that would allow them to carry economically their
very heavy loads over long distances. Few studies on the energy
consumption and biomechanics of people carrying loads have been
published (Heglund et al., 1995; Laursen et al., 2000; Griffin et al.,
2003; Minetti et al., 2006). Here, we compare the gait mechanics of
the Nepalese porters with those of the African women and Western
control subjects with an analysis of the mechanical work and
efficiency during walking under different loading and speed
conditions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The total positive mechanical work required to walk on the level at a
constant average speed while carrying a load falls naturally into two
categories: the external work and the internal work. External work
(Wext) derives from the resultant of all the external forces acting
upon the centre of mass of the whole system (COM), which includes
the body mass (Mb) plus any load the subject may be carrying.
Internal work is the result of internal forces (i.e. forces that do not
result in a displacement of the COM), and can be divided into
several sub-categories: the work performed to accelerate the
segments relative to the COM (Wint,k), the work done by one leg
against the other during the double contact (DC) phase in walking
(Wint,dc), plus the work that is not directly measurable (the work
done during antagonistic co-contractions, by internal friction, etc.),
Received 31 May 2016; Accepted 7 September 2016
Institute of Neuroscience, Laboratoire de physiologie et biomécanique de la
locomotion, Université catholique de Louvain, Place P. de Coubertin, 1, Louvain-la-
Neuve B-1348, Belgium.
*Author for correspondence (benedicte.schepens@uclouvain.be)
B.S., 0000-0002-8352-1244
3626
© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 plus any work that is not directly related to locomotion (respiration,
circulation, etc.). The first part, Wint,k, has previously been referred
to simply as Wint and can be measured using a cinematographic
system (Cavagna and Kaneko, 1977; Willems et al., 1995). The
second part, Wint,dc, involves individual force recordings for each
foot on separate force plates (Donelan et al., 2002; Bastien et al.,
2003). During unloaded walking, Wint,k represents up to ∼55% and
Wint,dc up to ∼17% of the total mechanical work done (Schepens
et al., 2004).
Positive external work
Wext was calculated as the sum of the increments in the energy–time
curve of the COM (Eext). The methods used to compute the external
work are described in detail in Cavagna (1975) and Willems et al.
(1995) and will only be summarized here.
The mechanical energy changes of the COM due to its motion in
the sagittal plane during a walking stride were determined from the
vertical and horizontal components of the ground reaction forces.
The mechanical energy changes due to the lateral movements of the
COM are small in adults (Cavagna et al., 1963; Tesio et al., 1998)
and were neglected here.
The ground reaction forces were measured by means of a force
platform (3 m long and 0.4 m wide) mounted at ground level. The
force platform comprised five separate plates, conceptually similar
to those described by Heglund (1981). The plates were sensitive to
forces in the fore–aft and vertical directions, and had a natural
frequency of 250 Hz and a linear response to within 1% of the
measured value for forces up to 3000 N. The individual signals from
the four bi-axial transducers in each of the plates were digitalized by
a 12-bit analog-to-digital converter every 5 ms and processed by
means of a personal computer.
A complete stride was selected for analysis only when the subject
walked at a relatively constant average height and speed.
Specifically, the sum of the increments in both the forward and
vertical velocity of the COM could not differ by more than 25%
from the sum of the decrements (Cavagna et al., 1977). According to
these criteria, the average difference in the forward velocity of
the COM at the beginning and at the end of the selected stride
was 0.2±4.0% (mean±s.d., n=1651) of the average walking speed
during the stride, and the mean vertical force during the selected
stride differed from Mb plus any load the subject may be carrying by
0.1±0.8%.
The integration of the vertical and forward components of the
force/mass ratio yields the vertical and forward velocity changes of
the COM, from which the kinetic energy (Ekv and Ekf) can be
calculated after evaluation of the integration constants (Cavagna,
1975; Willems et al., 1995). Integration of the vertical velocity
yields the vertical displacement of the COM, from which the
gravitational-potential energy (Ep) can be calculated.
The total mechanical energy of the COM at any instant (Eext) is
the sum of Ep+Ekv and Ekf (Fig. 1). The sum of the increments in
the Eext curve represents the positive Wext done to maintain the
movements of the COM relative to the surroundings. Similarly, the
positive work done to accelerate the COM forwards (Wkf) is the sum
of the increments in the Ekf versus time curve, and the positive work
done to move the COM against gravity (Wv) is the sum of the
increments in the Ep+Ekv versus time curve. In order to reduce
the effect of noise, the increments in mechanical energy were
considered to represent positive work actually done by the muscles
and tendons only if the time between two successive maxima was
greater than 20 ms.
Walking can be compared to an inverted pendulum in which the
potential energy of the COM is transformed into kinetic energy and
vice versa (Cavagna et al., 1976). The energy recovered through the
pendulum-like mechanism (R) is calculated as:
R ¼ 100 Wkf þ Wv � Wext
Wkf þ Wv
;
ð1Þ
where Wkf is the positive work due to the velocity changes of the
COM in the fore–aft direction, Wv is the positive work due to its
vertical movements and Wext is the positive external work.
Positive kinetic internal work
The kinetic internal work (Wint,k) is the positive work done to sustain
the translational and rotational kinetic energy changes of the
body and load segments due to their movements relative to the
COM. The method used here is similar to the one used in Willems
et al. (1995), which was derived from Cavagna and Kaneko (1977).
Consequently, the method is only described briefly here.
Wint,k was computed from the movements of the body segments
by cinematography. The body was divided into 10 rigid segments:
head/neck/trunk, load, two thighs, two ‘shank+foot’ segments, two
upper arms and two ‘forearm+hand’ segments. Each segment of the
right side of the subject is delimited by markers placed at the chin–
neck intersection, the great trochanter, the lateral condyle of the
femur, the lateral malleolus, the glenohumeral joint, the lateral
condyle of the humerus, the dorsal wrist and on the load. The
List of symbols and abbreviations
COM
centre of mass of the whole system (body plus load)
DC
double contact (phase of walking)
Eext
energy of the COM relative to the surroundings
Ell
int
internal energy of the lower limbs (Ell
int;k+Wint,dc)
Ell
int;k
kinetic energy change of the lower limbs relative to the COM
Elo
int;k
kinetic energy change of the load relative to the COM
Etr
int;k
kinetic energy change of the trunk relative to the COM
Eul
int;k
kinetic energy change of the upper limbs relative to the COM
Ekf
forward kinetic energy of the COM relative to the surroundings
Ekv
vertical kinetic energy of the COM relative to the surroundings
Ep
gravitational potential energy of the COM relative to the
surroundings
fs
step frequency
Mb
body mass
Mtot
total mass (Mb+load)
R
recovery of energy due to the pendulum-like transfer of energy
of the COM
Wback
work done by the back leg during double contact
Wext
work done to raise and accelerate the COM relative to the
surroundings
Wfront
work done by the front leg during double contact
Wint
work done to accelerate the body segments relative to the COM
Wint,dc
work done by one leg against the other during double contact
Wint,k
work done to accelerate the body segments relative to the COM
W ll
int;k
work done due to the movements of the lower limbs relative to
the COM
W lo
int;k
work done due to the movements of the load relative to the
COM
W tr
int;k
work done due to the movements of the trunk relative to the
COM
W ul
int;k
work done due to the movements of the upper limbs relative to
the COM
Wkf
work done to accelerate forward the COM relative to the
surroundings
Wtot
total positive muscle-tendon work done to maintain locomotion
Wv
work done to raise the COM relative to the surroundings
θ
maximal knee flexion during weight acceptance
3627
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 subjects were filmed by a single video camera (PAL, 50 Hz), 6 m
lateral and normal to the axis of progression on the force platform.
The images were synchronized to the stride selected for the Wext
measurements by superimposing the heel strike on the force records
to the corresponding frame of the film.
A ‘stick man’ of the right side of the body was constructed
numerically each frame. The left side of the body was reconstructed
from the right side data on the assumption that the movements of the
segments of left side were equal and 180 deg out of phase with
the measurements of the right side. The position of the centre of mass
and the moment of inertia of the body segments were calculated using
the anthropometric tables of Dempster and Gaughran (1967).
The position of the centre of mass and the moment of inertia of
the ‘load segment’ were calculated by assimilating the load into a
cone frustum and assuming that the load in the backpack/basket was
homogeneously distributed. The dimensions of the frustum, the
load mass and the moment of inertia were calculated for each
individual load.
The angular velocity of each segment and the translational
velocity of its centre of mass relative to the COM were calculated
from the derivative of their position versus time relationship in order
to compute the kinetic energy of each segment, i.e. the load Elo
int;k,
the trunk Etr
int;k, the upper limbs Eul
int;k and the lower limbs Ell
int;k
(Fig. 1).
The kinetic energy versus time curves of the segments within a
limb were summed. The positive internal work due to the
movements of the limb was then calculated by adding the positive
increments in its kinetic energy versus time curve. In order to
minimize errors due to noise, the increments in kinetic energy were
considered to represent positive work actually done only if the time
between two successive maxima was greater than 10–80 ms,
depending upon the walking speed. This process was used to
Unloaded
Loaded (120% Mb)
Ekf
Ep+kv
Eext
Eint,k
lo
Eint,k
tr
Eint,k
ul
Eint,k
ll
Wint,dc
Eint
ll
50 J
 1 J
20 J
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (% stride period)
Fig. 1. Typical traces of mechanical
work in load carrying. The fluctuations in
the external and internal mechanical
energy are presented as a function of time
for an unloaded and loaded (120% Mb)
walking stride at approximately the
optimal speed. Both trials lasted 1.3 s.
The three upper traces present the
mechanical energy changes of the centre
of mass of the body plus load (COM): Ekf,
Ep+Ekv and Eext. The following four traces
are the kinetic energy changes of the load
(Elo
int;k), trunk (Etr
int;k), upper limbs (Eul
int;k)
and lower limbs (Ell
int;k) due to their velocity
relative to the COM. The eighth trace
presents the internal work (Wint,dc) made
by one leg against the other. The bottom
trace, the internal energy curve of the
lower limb Ell
int, is the sum of the Ell
int;k and
Wint,dc curves (see Materials and
methods). The ‘stick man’ figures show
the position of the limb segments each
20% of the stride. Thick lines refer to the
segments on the right side (camera side)
of the body; thin lines refer to the
segments of the left side of the body. The
curves are from a 26-year-old male
Nepalese porter (body mass 67.0 kg)
walking unloaded at 1.06 m s−1 and
loaded at 1.08 m s−1.
3628
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 compute the internal work of the load W lo
int;k, the trunk W tr
int;k, the
upper limbs W ul
int;k and the lower limbs W ll
int;k. Then Wint,k was
computed as the sum of W lo
int;k, W tr
int;k, W ul
int;k and W ll
int;k. This
procedure allowed energy transfers to occur between the segments
of the same limb, but disallowed any energy transfers between the
different limbs or the trunk or the load (Willems et al., 1995;
Schepens et al., 2004).
Positive internal work done by one leg against the other
The methods used to compute the internal work done by one
leg against the other during the period of double contact (Wint,dc)
are the same as in Bastien et al. (2003), and are presented only
briefly here.
In walking, during the DC phase when both feet are on the
ground, positive work is done by the back leg pushing forwards
while negative work is done by the front leg pushing backwards.
The positive work done by the ground reaction forces was calculated
independently for the back (Wback) and the front (Wfront) limb from
the time-integral of the power curves taking into account energy
transfers, as explained in detail in Bastien et al. (2003). In order to
count only the work that is not already measured in Wext, the positive
muscular work realized by one leg against the other (Wint,dc) during
the DC phase (Fig. 1) was evaluated by:
Wint;dc ¼ Wback þ Wfront � Wext:
ð2Þ
Wint,dc was measured on a single DC phase of the stride and the
results obtained were doubled to obtain the Wint,dc for the whole
stride (Bastien et al., 2003).
Total positive muscular work
The total work done (Wtot) during walking is the sum of the external
and internal work. However, some energy transfers must be taken
into account in order to avoid counting the same work twice. Wtot is
best evaluated when no transfers of energy are allowed between the
energy of the COM and the kinetic energy of each segment
(Willems et al., 1995). Schepens et al. (2004) discussed the possible
energy transfers between Ell
int;k and Wint,dc and concluded that
both curves should be added instant-by-instant. The sum of the
increments of the resulting curve Ell
int (Fig. 1) represents the internal
work done on a lower limb (W ll
int).
Consequently Wtot was computed as:
Wtot ¼ Wext þ Wint ¼ Wext þ W ll
int þ W ul
int;k þ W tr
int;k þ W lo
int;k: ð3Þ
Calculation of the muscular efficiency
The muscular efficiency was calculated as the ratio of the
mechanical power to the net metabolic power. More precisely, the
equations for efficiency were computed from the equations of mass-
specific total average power (computed as the total mass-specific
work done each stride divided by the stride period, in W kg−1) and
the net mass-specific energy consumption rate (in W kg−1)
measured on the same subjects (Bastien et al., 2005a).
Subjects and experimental procedure
Experiments were conducted at Phakding (altitude 2800 m in the Mt
Everest valley), in the Solo-Khumbu region of Nepal. Experiments
were carried out on 21 Nepalese porters (from the Rai, Sherpa or
Tamang ethnic groups) and three European control subjects. All
Nepalese subjects carried loads in a wicker basket (doko) supported
only by a strap (naamlo) looped over their head (Bastien et al.,
2005a). All control subjects carried loads in typical trekker’s
backpacks with shoulder and hip support. The experiments involved
little discomfort, were performed according to the Declaration of
Helsinki, and were approved by the local ethics committees (the
Nepal Health Research Council in Kathmandu, and the Commission
d’éthique
Hospitalo-Facultaire
de
l’Université
catholique
de
Louvain). Informed written consent was obtained for all subjects.
The kinetic internal work was measured simultaneously with the
external work in the 11 Nepalese porters and three European adults
at speeds ranging from 0.38 to 2.02 m s−1 with loads ranging from 0
up to 127% Mb. A total of 1620 strides were analyzed. An additional
10 porters were also included in the external work measurements
while walking slowly or fast, unloaded or carrying their own load
(114% Mb on average). Table 1 summarizes the subject groups and
their physical characteristics.
The control data collected in the present study (three subjects) are
in agreement with previously published external work data
(Heglund et al., 1995) on 12 European adults carrying backpack
loads (P=0.528, F=0.398, three-way ANOVA, with Wext in
J kg−1 m−1 as the dependent variable, over a speed range of 1.0–
1.5 m s−1 and a load range of 0–45% Mb). Unfortunately, because
the load and speed ranges/classes used in Heglund et al. (1995) are
more restrained and different from those used in the present study,
the control data from both studies could not be satisfactorily
combined.
Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using SuperAnova (v1.11,
Abacus Concepts). The type of statistical tests and results are given
in the text as needed.
RESULTS
External mechanical work
The recovery of mechanical energy (R) and the mass-specific
external work per unit distance (Wext, in J kg−1 m−1) during walking
at different speeds under different loading conditions are shown in
Fig. 2. R is independent of load for all subjects, and attains a
maximum of approximately 65% at a speed of 1.1 m s−1 for the
Nepalese porters and 1.4 m s−1 for the control subjects. At high
speeds (≥1.4 m s−1), the average R is ∼30% smaller in the Nepalese
porters carrying heavy loads (≥100% Mb) than in the control
subjects. Although there is no evident explanation for the reduction
in the average R in the Western subjects, the smaller average R in
Nepalese porters is due to a drastic decrease in R for a few Nepalese
subjects who clearly show a modification of their walking gait at
this extreme load–speed combination. These few porters no longer
use a classic walking gait; however, their gait can not be classified
Table 1. Subject characteristics
Total n (F)
Age (years)
Body mass (kg)
Height (m)
Speed range (m s−1)
Load range (% Mb)
Nepalese porters
11 (3)
30.4±8.9
57.5±6.6
1.60±0.06
0.38–2.02
0–127
Extra porters
10 (0)
24.9±7.9
50.3±4.0
n.d.
0.56–1.83
0–154
Controls
3 (1)
28.0±6.1
68.8±10.9
1.82±0.10
0.43–1.85
0–75
Values for age, body mass and height are means±s.d. F indicates female subjects. Extra porters are Nepalese porters measured only for external work while
unloaded and with their own load. n.d., not determined.
3629
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 Recovery
(%)
Extenal work
(J kg–1 m–1)
Step frequency
(Hz)
Internal work (J kg–1 m–1)
Total work
(J kg–1 m–1)
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
Mtot/Mb
80
40
0
0.8
0.4
0
3
2
1
0
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
0.4
0.2
0
R
Wext
fs
Wint,k
Wint,dc
Wint
Wtot
0.5 m s–1
0.8 m s–1
1.1 m s–1
1.4 m s–1
1.7 m s–1
Wext
Wint
Wext
Wint
Wext
Wint
Wext
Wint
Wext
Wint
Fig. 2. Effects of load and speed on the mechanical work. Recovery (R, in %), mass-specific external work (Wext, in J kg−1 m−1), step frequency ( fs, in Hz),
mass-specific internal work and its sub-components (Wint,k, Wint,dc and Wint, in J kg−1 m−1) and mass-specific total work (Wtot, in J kg−1 m−1) are presented as a
function of the total mass (expressed as the ratio of the total mass over body mass, Mtot/Mb) for different walking speeds (m s−1). The speeds indicated at the top of
each column are ±0.15 m s−1 in each speed class. Solid symbols are mean values for Nepalese porters (n=11, except for fs and Wext, where n=21) and open
symbols are mean values for control subjects (n=3, except for fs, where n=15). The vertical and horizontal bars indicate the standard deviations when their length
exceeds the size of the symbol. The horizontal solid and dashed lines are either the mean values (first two rows) or the linear fits (Kaleidagraph®) through the data
(fourth and sixth rows) for the Nepalese porters and control subjects, respectively. The solid lines of the seventh row are copied from the second and sixth rows.
Data from African women (from Heglund et al. 1995) have been added in the middle panels of the first two rows (open triangles). The continuous grey line is the
linear fit through the data for the first row (R) and the polynomial fit for the second row (Wext).
3630
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 as running, as R is >10% and there is no aerial phase (Cavagna et al.,
1991). In contrast, at low speed (0.5 m s−1), the average R is
smaller in the control subjects carrying light loads than in Nepalese
porters.
The mass-specific external work per unit distance Wext is
independent of load at any given speed in both the Nepalese and
control subjects (Fig. 2). This is to be expected because both Ep+Ekv
and Ekf are proportional to the total mass and R does not change with
load. The external work in J m−1 must therefore increase in
proportion to the added mass, and, when normalized per unit of total
mass, Wext must be independent of load at any speed (Fig. 2).
Whatever the load carried, Wext is at a minimum at 0.8 m s−1 for the
Nepali porters and at 1.1 m s−1 for control subjects. At lower and
higher speeds, Wext increases (Fig. 2).
Internal mechanical work
The internal work as measured in this study includes the work done
to accelerate the body and load segments relative to the COM and
the work done by one leg against the other during the DC phase of
walking. The mass-specific internal work done per unit distance to
move the segments relative to the COM (Wint,k, in J kg−1 m−1) is
shown in Fig. 2. The kinetic internal work of the trunk, load
and upper limbs segments represents less than 0.05 J kg−1 m−1 at
any speed and load because their rotational and translational
movements relative to the COM are small. On the contrary, the
kinetic internal work due to the lower limbs accounts for almost
all the total kinetic internal work. Wint,k increases rapidly with
walking speed, but at any given speed decreases with increasing
load. For example, when walking unloaded in both subject groups,
Wint,k increases from 0.1 to 0.4 J kg−1 m−1 when speed increases
from 0.5 to 1.7 m s−1. However, when walking at 1.4 m s−1, Wint,k
decreases from 0.3 to 0.2 J kg−1 m−1 when load increases from 0 to
100% Mb.
At all speed–load combinations, Nepalese porters and control
subjects do not show major differences in kinetic internal work.
However, the mean Wint,k values for the Nepalese porters tend to be
slightly above those of control subjects, particularly at the highest
speeds. The latter can be explained by a somewhat higher step
frequency at all speeds (particularly the highest speeds) in the
Nepalese porters (Fig. 2). Furthermore, in the control subjects, the
step frequency is nearly independent of load at all speeds while, for
the Nepalese porters, it tends to increase very smoothly as a function
of the load at each walking speed. This results in Wint,k for the
Nepalese porters being clearly above those of control subjects for
heavy loads and high walking speeds.
The work done by one leg against the other during the DC phase
(Wint,dc, J kg−1 m−1) is close to zero at low speed during unloaded
walking, increasing to its maximum at intermediate speed and
decreasing again at higher speeds (Fig. 2). Furthermore, for speeds
<1.4 m s−1, Wint,dc increases as a function of load whereas at higher
speeds it is relatively independent of load. At low speeds, Nepalese
porters present a higher Wint,dc as compared with control subjects.
Above 1.1 m s−1, it decreases more rapidly with speed for the
Nepalese porters, thus ending up with lower Wint,dc values than
control subjects at high walking speeds (Fig. 2).
As explained in detail in Schepens et al. (2004), energy transfers
can occur between Wint,dc and W ll
int;k, meaning that the internal work
is not simply the sum of Wint,k and Wint,dc. Nevertheless, Wint,dc can
represent a large fraction of the total internal work (up to ∼52% in
Nepalese porters) at intermediate walking speeds while carrying
heavy loads (see comparison between Wint and Wint,k in Fig. 2).
When the calculation of internal work accounts for the positive
work done to accelerate the segments relative to the COM (Wint,k)
and for the positive work done by the back leg against the front
leg during the DC phase (Wint,dc), then our results (Fig. 2) show
that in load carrying: (1) the mass-specific internal work (Wint)
is approximately equivalent for the Nepalese porters and the
control subjects; and (2) Wint increases with increasing walking
speed but differently according to the loading condition because (3)
Wint is independent of load for walking speeds up to 1.1 m s−1
but (4) Wint decreases markedly as a function of the load at
higher speeds.
Total mechanical work
The mass-specific total work per unit distance Wtot (J kg−1 m−1) is
the sum of the external and internal work. Both Wext and Wint are
independent of load at speeds up to 1.1 m s−1; therefore, Wtot is also
independent of the increasing total mass at these walking speeds
(Fig. 2). On the contrary, at speeds ≥1.1 m s−1, although Wext
remains constant, Wint decreases with increasing load; therefore,
Wtot also decreases with the increasing total mass at these walking
speeds (Fig. 2). The differences observed between the external or
internal work of Nepalese porters and of control subjects tend to
cancel when both Wext and Wint are summed; the total mechanical
work during load carrying, Wtot, is equivalent for all subjects at any
load–speed combination.
Muscular efficiency of load carrying
For the Nepalese porters, the muscular efficiency is nearly
independent of load, showing a slight increase with speed
(Fig. 3). This efficiency tends to increase slightly with speed also
in the control subjects, although it decreases asymptotically with
load. Consequently, the Nepalese porters tend to have a lower
efficiency than the control subjects when carrying light loads, and a
higher efficiency when carrying heavy loads. For example at
0.8 m s−1, the controls are more efficient with loads <35% Mb, but
the Nepalese porters are more efficient with heavier loads. The
Nepalese porters, within the limits of the speeds/loads studied, show
Mtot/Mb
0.4
0.2
0
0.5 m s–1
0.8 m s–1
1.1 m s–1
1.4 m s–1
1.7 m s–1
1
1.4
1.8
1
1.4
1.8
1
1.4
1.8
1
1.4
1.8
1
1.4
1.8
Efficiency
Fig. 3. Efficiency of load carrying. The efficiency of load carrying is presented as a function of the total mass (expressed as the ratio of the total mass over body
mass, Mtot/Mb) for different walking speeds. The solid lines are for the Nepalese porters and the dashed lines for the control subjects.
3631
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 a muscular efficiency between 0.15 and 0.3 and the control subjects
between 0.15 and 0.4.
DISCUSSION
This study was intended to test the hypothesis that the same
mechanical energy saving strategy is used during load carrying in
Nepalese porters as was found in African women by Heglund et al.
(1995). To test this hypothesis, mechanical work was measured
during different loading conditions in Nepalese porters and control
subjects. This study also presents for the first time the total
mechanical work done during walking with a load, where the total
work includes the external work (Wext), the kinetic internal work
(Wint,k) and the DC phase internal work (Wint,dc). In addition, these
biomechanical measurements were done in parallel with the
metabolic measurements published by Bastien et al. (2005a),
under the same loading and walking speed conditions. Combining
both data sets allows the calculation of the efficiency of load
carrying.
It was shown previously that African women could carry loads up
to 20% Mb without any significant increase in their energy
consumption (Maloiy et al., 1986). For greater loads, their gross
metabolic power increased in proportion to the added mass but the
first ‘free’ 20% was conserved. This was possible because Wext was
decreasing as the load increased (Heglund et al., 1995). The African
women could reduce their muscular work because loading
improved their recovery (R) during walking; specifically, the
energy transduction between Ep+Ekv and Ekf within a stride was
significantly increased during the descent of the COM (Cavagna
et al., 2002). On the contrary, no adaptation of the pendulum-like
mechanism to load carriage was found in the Western control
subjects.
Although Nepalese porters and Kenyan Kikuyu women use a
similar type of head-supported load carriage, using a strap looped
over the forehead that supports the load, the similarities seem to stop
there. In particular, R in the Nepalese porters does not increase with
increasing load (Fig. 2), and as a consequence they have
approximately equivalent
R
as
compared
with
the
control
subjects. At best, R reaches 65% regardless of the loading
condition. As a result, at any given walking speed Wext is constant
regardless of the load carried, just as in control subjects. For
example, during level walking at 1.1 m s−1, the positive work
required to maintain the displacements of the COM over 1 m is
0.34 J for each kilogram of mass, whether it is body or load.
Consequently, the speed at which Wext is minimal and the speed at
which R is maximal are not different whether the subjects walked
unloaded or loaded. For instance, walking at 1.1 m s−1 gives the
Nepalese their best percent of energy recovery for loads up to 150%
Mb. This cannot be compared with the African women because the
effect of speed was not studied in the African women (Heglund
et al., 1995).
Perhaps it is not too surprising that the Nepalese porters are
unable to exploit the same energy-saving gait mechanism as the
African women (Fig. 2). With the exception of the porters in the low
flatlands, the Nepalese typically walk on very hilly terrain where
there are hardly ever two steps taken at the same level (Minetti et al.,
2006). In preliminary experiments in our laboratory, we have found
that a change in height within one step of only 0.09 m (equivalent to a
grade of ∼10%) is sufficient to decrease R from 64.4±2.4% to 36.9±
8.6% (mean±s.d., n=12) at ∼1.35 m s−1. Nepalese porters only rarely
have the opportunity to achieve the full R=65% energy savings. It
remains unknown whether the Nepalese porters and control subjects
have identical energy recovery (R) on a gradient.
Although the Nepalese porters have not developed the ‘African’
energy-saving mechanism, they may well have developed other
strategies to limit the total muscular work that is due to load
carriage. For instance, they could have minimized the internal work
done during load carrying.
A few opportunities to limit or reduce the internal work can be
identified. First, the internal work required to move the body
segments or the load relative to the COM (Wint,k). It could be
minimized by reducing the movements of upper and lower limbs
via changes in the step rate or step length, or reducing the
movements of the load and trunk relative to the COM. Second,
the internal work done during the DC phase of walking (Wint,dc)
that is due to one leg pushing against the other could be reduced;
it has been shown that this work was non-negligible in level
unloaded walking at intermediate walking speeds (Bastien et al.,
2003). In load carrying, the ground reaction forces acting under
each foot increase in proportion to the total mass, and as a
consequence the work done by each leg against the other is thought
to increase at a given speed because of loading. However, this work
could also be minimized by shortening the DC period, or by
changing the phase between pushing and braking forces during this
period of the step.
Kinetic internal work in load carrying
When carrying a load, the kinetic internal work (Wint,k) could be
modified by changes in the step frequency and/or the trajectory of
the limb segments. The study on African women (Maloiy et al.,
1986) showed that, for walking between 0.8 to 1.7 m s−1, the step
frequency was unaffected by load. The authors assumed, therefore,
that the energy requirements for moving the legs and arms relative to
the COM would remain the same in unloaded and loaded walking.
The factors that influence Wint,k during load carrying are discussed
below.
Step frequency
Compared with controls at the same load and speed, Nepalese
porters show higher step frequencies, most likely because of their
small stature and shorter legs (Table 1). Our data show that the step
frequency increases with load at a given walking speed for both
control subjects and Nepalese porters (respectively, P<0.001,
F=7.89 and P<0.001, F=24.21, two-way ANOVA), even though
this increase is small compared with unloaded walking (e.g. at
1.1 m s−1, +6% with a 75% Mb load for controls, and +7% with a
150% Mb load for Nepalese porters; Fig. 2). These results are in
agreement with the studies of Martin and Nelson (1986) and
LaFiandra et al. (2003).
In unloaded walking, the pelvis and the shoulders counter-rotate
in the horizontal plane, particularly at high walking speed.
However, in load carrying, the moment of inertia of the upper
body is increased by the load, as suggested by LaFiandra et al.
(2003). Probably to avoid excessive torques and unbalance, subjects
clearly decrease both pelvic and thoracic rotations when carrying
loads (LaFiandra et al., 2002). Because decreasing pelvic rotation
decreases step length, it is not surprising to find a slight increase in
step frequency at a given speed with increasing load.
The differences in step frequency observed between Nepalese
porters and controls could explain the differences in the kinetic
internal work between the two groups. At speeds above 1.1 m s−1,
Nepalese porters and controls have equivalent Wint,k values when no
load is carried, but as load increases the Wint,k diverges between the
groups because of a more pronounced increase in step frequency
due to loading in Nepalese porters (Fig. 2).
3632
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 Trunk inclination and movement
When carrying loads, the trunk inclination changes in order to keep
the COM over the centre of support on the ground. In our control
subjects, the trunk inclination increases up to ∼45 deg for 75% Mb
loads. To a lesser extent, this was also observed in backpack load
carriage by Martin and Nelson (1986) and Kinoshita (1985).
Nepalese porters also increase the trunk inclination, reaching a
plateau of ∼40 deg for loads greater than 75% Mb.
The rotational movement of the trunk in the sagittal plane during
the walking stride does not change significantly with load and
is equivalent for controls and Nepalese porters (3.50±1.05 and
3.56±1.15 deg for the two groups, respectively). Therefore, the
work required to move the trunk (W tr
int;k) relative to the COM is small
in load carrying as well as in unloaded walking. For example, at
1.1 m s−1, with loads of 0–75% Mb, W tr
int;k represents less than 4% of
the kinetic internal work in Nepalese porters as well as in controls.
Lower limb movements
During the initial weight-bearing phase of the walking stride, the knee
joint flexes, absorbing the shock during heel strike. In unloaded
walking, it has been shown that this flexion increases with walking
speed (Perryet al., 1977; Holt et al., 2003). In load carrying, Kinoshita
(1985) reported a decrease in knee angle during the initial weight-
bearing phase due to loads as small as 20% Mb, although no angle
values were reported inthe study. Onthe contrary, Ghori and Luckwill
(1985) and Holt et al. (2003) did not report any change in knee flexion
during the stance phase while carrying loads up to 50% Mb.
Because modifications of the walking gait pattern may result in an
increase or decrease in mechanical work performed, the knee flexion
as a function of both speed and load was evaluated using the present
data. The maximal knee flexion during weight acceptance (θ) was
measured as the difference between the knee angle at heel strike and
at the moment of maximal flexion at mid-stance. We found that,
under any loading condition, θ clearly increases with speed by
approximately 15 deg over the 0.5–1.7 m s−1 speed range studied
(P<0.0001, F=86.82 and P<0.0001, F=29.61; two-way ANOVA for
the Nepalese porters and controls, respectively). For example, in the
unloaded condition, θ is approximately 5 deg at the slowest walking
speeds and 20–25 deg at the fastest speeds. Furthermore, for a given
walking speed, θ increases significantly with load (P<0.0001,
F=5.61 and P<0.0001, F=6.77; two-way ANOVA for the Nepalese
porters and controls, respectively). However, for any load–speed
combination, θ is always less than 30 deg, and the extra knee flexion
due to load is less than 10 deg. The knee flexion at weight acceptance
due to increased loading has, in fact, no clear effect on the lower limb
kinetic internal work (W ll
int;k) and thus on Wint,k, because the flexion
is modest and occurs when the displacement of the lower limb
relative to the COM is slow.
The upper limb and load movements
During unloaded walking, W ul
int;k tends to increase with the speed of
progression, and accounts for up to ∼18% of Wint,k at the highest
walking speed. However, when carrying loads above 15% Mb,
Nepalese porters and control subjects generally have little arm
movement relative to the COM because they usually grasp straps
attached to the load, and as a consequence, W ul
int;k is nearly zero
(∼1% of Wint,k) at any walking speed.
The internal work done to move the load relative to the COM
(W lo
int;k, in J kg−1 m−1) is similar in the porters and the control
subjects at the same load and speed. For example, W lo
int;k represents
on average ∼5% of Wint,k for controls and ∼6% for Nepalese porters
when they carry a load of 75% Mb.
Internal work during double contact
The internal work done during the DC phase (Wint,dc) was measured
during load carrying for the first time in the present study. Clearly,
Wint,dc is not negligible particularly at intermediate walking speeds
with heavy loads (Fig. 2). In such conditions and even though all
energy transfers are taken into consideration (as explained in the
Materials and methods), Wint,dc accounts for up to 50% of the total
internal work and up to 25% of the total mechanical work done.
During load carrying at constant speed, the forward component of
the ground reaction forces under each foot increases simply because
the total mass increases. As a consequence, if no other influencing
factor changes with load, the work done by one foot against the
other during the DC phase can be expected to be proportional to the
load and thus to be independent of load when normalized per unit
mass (J kg−1). Nevertheless, the mass-specific Wint,dc per unit
distance (J kg−1 m−1) tends to slightly increase with increasing load
at speeds <1.4 m s−1, whereas it is independent of load at the highest
speeds. The slight increase in Wint,dc with load can be explained at
least partially by the increase in step frequency (compensating the
decrease in step length as explained previously) while the DC phase
duration remains unchanged.
As mentioned by Bastien et al. (2003), other factors may also lead
to more work being done by one leg against the other, as, for
example, the timing of the peak of the forward component of the
ground reaction force acting upon the back leg. For instance, that
peak is delayed with increasing load, thereby increasing the
opportunity to do more Wint,dc. Also, the inclined posture
accompanying the backpack load carriage may result in more
forward-oriented ground reaction force vectors under each foot, as
suggested by Kinoshita (1985), and thereby may affect Wint,dc. It is
worth noting that when Wint,dc is taken into account, Wint (in
J kg−1 m−1) is independent of load for speeds up to 1.1 m s−1;
meaning that at low walking speeds, the internal mechanical work
done clearly increases in proportion to the load (Fig. 2). So, the idea
that the Nepalese porters might be able to limit this futile work done
during the DC phase in order to ‘save’ some mechanical work
during load carrying is not supported.
Total mechanical work
As discussed previously, our results do not show any mechanical
work saving strategy during load carrying in Nepalese porters. As
for control subjects, they are unable to minimize either external
work or internal work at any speed between 0.5 and 1.7 m s−1.
Consequently, at a given load and speed, the total mechanical work
(Wtot) is equivalent for Nepalese porters and control subjects. As in
unloaded walking, Wtot (in J kg−1 m−1) in load carrying increases
with the speed almost linearly within the 0.8–1.7 m s−1 range, but
also tends to increase again at the very lowest speeds. For speeds
<1.4 m s−1, Wext and Wint are independent of load, thereby Wtot is
also independent of load, meaning that the total mechanical work
done to move 1 kg of body mass or load mass over 1 m is the same
whatever the load carried. For speeds ≥1.4 m s−1, Wext is
independent of load but Wint decreases with speed, thus Wtot also
decreases with load, meaning that at these speeds more mechanical
work is done to move 1 kg of body mass over 1 m than to move 1 kg
of load.
Muscular efficiency
At all walking speeds, the muscular efficiency of load carrying is
independent of load in the Nepalese porters and decreases with load
in the control subjects (Fig. 3). Consequently, for small loads,
control subjects are more efficient, whereas for loads ≥35% Mb,
3633
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
 Nepalese porters tend to be more efficient. This is due to the fact that
(1) the total mechanical work (in J kg−1 m−1) in loaded walking is
similar for both groups, and (2) the Nepalese porters have a smaller
metabolic cost of carrying 1 kg of load over a distance of 1 m (see
fig. 1B in Bastien et al., 2005a).
Our results have been echoed by the on-field load-carrying
measurements of Minetti et al. (2006) in the Khumbu valley in
Nepal. They highlighted the higher efficiency of the Nepalese
porters compared with trained Caucasian mountaineers during both
uphill and downhill loaded walking. Our measurements suggest that
Nepalese porters are particularly optimized (i.e. the most efficient)
when walking slowly with heavy loads; and in fact this speed–load
combination is the only one they use. For example, when porters
were behind schedule for arriving at the market place, they would
consistently walk for longer times, often into the middle of the
night, but never at higher speeds.
In conclusion, Nepalese porters accomplish their impressive load
carrying without any apparent mechanically determined tricks.
Hauling loads roughly equivalent to body mass up 8000 m and
down 6300 m in about a week is, by Western standards, an
unimaginable feat. The Nepalese porters do the same amount of
total mechanical work as control Western subjects when walking at
0.5–1.7 m s−1 while carrying loads ranging from 0 to 120% of body
mass. Owing to our experimental design, we can conclude that the
Nepalese porters’ better economy during load carrying is not related
to a reduction in the work to displace the COM, nor in the work to
displace the body segments including the trunk and the load, nor in
the work done during the DC phase. It seems that the Nepalese
porters are optimized for walking slowly with heavy loads. At that
speed–load combination, their muscular efficiency is higher than
that of the control subjects because they perform approximately the
same mechanical work but at a lower net metabolic cost. One of the
remaining explanations is that Nepalese porters have developed a
skill in minimizing co-contractions to reduce the metabolic cost,
without mentioning their high metabolic capacity, thanks to their
training, anatomy and adaptation to high altitude. Moreover, the
strategy of short intense exercise periods followed by frequent rest
periods allows them to work at a high intensity level, spread out over
many hours each day.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Buddha Basnyat (Nepal International Clinic, Kathmandu, Nepal) and
all the members of the Sherpa and Tamang communities in the Sagarmatha region
for their help during the scientific expedition.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: P.A.W., N.C.H.; Methodology: G.J.B., B.S., P.A.W., N.C.H.;
Software: G.J.B.; Formal analysis: G.J.B.; Investigation: G.J.B., B.S., P.A.W.,
N.C.H.; Resources: B.S., P.A.W., N.C.H.; Data Curation: G.J.B.; Writing – original
draft preparation: G.J.B., N.C.H.; Writing – review and editing: G.J.B., B.S., P.A.W.,
N.C.H.; Visualization: G.J.B., N.C.H.; Supervision: P.A.W., N.C.H.; Project
administration: P.A.W., N.C.H.; Funding acquisition: P.A.W., N.C.H.
Funding
This study was supported by the National Geographic Society; the Fonds de la
Recherche Scientifique – FNRS; and the Fonds Spécial de Recherche of the
Université catholique de Louvain.
References
Basnyat, B. and Schepens, B. (2001). The burden of the Himalayan porter. High
Alt. Med. Biol. 2, 315-316.
Bastien, G. J., Heglund, N. C. and Schepens, B. (2003). The double contact phase
in walking children. J. Exp. Biol. 206, 2967-2978.
Bastien, G. J., Schepens, B., Willems, P. A. and Heglund, N. C. (2005a).
Energetics of load carrying in Nepalese porters. Science 308, 1755.
Bastien, G. J., Willems, P. A., Schepens, B. and Heglund, N. C. (2005b). Effect of
load and speed on the energetic cost of human walking. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 94,
76-83.
Cavagna, G. A. (1975). Force platforms as ergometers. J. Appl. Physiol. 39,
174-179.
Cavagna, G. A. and Kaneko, M. (1977). Mechanical work and efficiency in level
walking and running. J. Physiol. 268, 467-481.
Cavagna, G. A., Saibene, F. P. and Margaria, R. (1963). External work in walking.
J. Appl. Physiol. 18, 1-9.
Cavagna, G. A., Thys, H. and Zamboni, A. (1976). The sources of external work in
level walking and running. J. Physiol. 262, 639-657.
Cavagna, G. A., Heglund, N. C. and Taylor, C. R. (1977). Mechanical work in
terrestrial locomotion: two basic mechanisms for minimizing energy expenditure.
Am. J. Physiol. 233, 243-261.
Cavagna, G. A., Willems, P. A., Franzetti, P. and Detrembleur, C. (1991). The two
power limits conditioning step frequency in human running. J. Physiol. 437, 95-108.
Cavagna, G. A., Willems, P. A., Legramandi, M. A. and Heglund, N. C. (2002).
Pendular energy transduction within the step in human walking. J. Exp. Biol. 205,
3413-3422.
Dempster, W. T. and Gaughran, G. R. L. (1967). Properties of body segments
based on size and weight. Am. J. Anat. 120, 33-54.
Donelan, J. M., Kram, R. and Kuo, A. D. (2002). Simultaneous positive and
negative external mechanical work in human walking. J. Biomech. 35, 117-124.
Ghori, G. M. U. and Luckwill, R. G. (1985). Responses of the lower limb to load
carrying in walking man. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 54, 145-150.
Griffin, T. M., Roberts, T. J. and Kram, R. (2003). Metabolic cost of generating
muscular force in human walking: insights from load-carrying and speed
experiments. J. Appl. Physiol. 95, 172-183.
Heglund, N. C. (1981). A simple design for a force-platform to measure ground
reaction forces. J. Exp. Biol. 97, 41-56.
Heglund, N. C., Willems, P. A., Penta, M. and Cavagna, G. A. (1995). Energy-
saving gait mechanics with head-supported loads. Nature 375, 52-54.
Holt, K. G., Wagenaar, R. C., LaFiandra, M. E., Kubo, M. and Obusek, J. P.
(2003). Increased musculoskeletal stiffness during load carriage at increasing
walking speeds maintains constant vertical excursion of the body center of mass.
J. Biomech. 36, 465-471.
Kinoshita, H. (1985). Effects of different loads and carrying systems on selected
biomechanical parameters describing walking gait. Ergonomics. 28, 1347-1362.
LaFiandra, M., Holt, K. G., Wagenaar, R. C. and Obusek, J. P. (2002). Transverse
plane kinetics during treadmill walking with and without a load. Clin. Biomech. 17,
116-122.
LaFiandra, M., Wagenaar, R. C., Holt, K. G. and Obusek, J. P. (2003). How do load
carriage and walking speed influence trunk coordination and stride parameters?
J. Biomech. 36, 87-95.
Laursen, B., Ekner, D., Simonsen, E. B., Voigt, M. and Sjogaard, G. (2000).
Kinetics and energetics during uphill and downhill carrying of different weights.
Appl. Ergon. 31, 159-166.
Maloiy, G. M. O., Heglund, N. C., Prager, L. M., Cavagna, G. A. and Taylor, C. R.
(1986). Energetic cost of carrying loads: have African women discovered an
economic way? Nature 319, 668-669.
Malville, N. J. (1999). Porters of the eastern hills of Nepal: body size and load
weight. Am. J. Hum. Biol. 11, 1-11.
Martin, P. E. and Nelson, R. C. (1986). The effect of carried loads on the walking
patterns of men and women. Ergonomics 29, 1191-1202.
Minetti, A. E., Formenti, F. and Ardigò, L. P. (2006). Himalayan porter’s
specialization: metabolic power, economy, efficiency and skill. Proc. Biol.
Sci.273, 2791-2797.
Perry, J., Norwood, L. and House, K. (1977). Knee posture and biceps and
semimembranous muscle action in running and cutting (an EMG study).
Transactions of the 23rd Annual Meeting, Orthopaedic Research Society. 2, 258.
Schepens, B., Bastien, G. J., Heglund, N. C. and Willems, P. A. (2004). Mechanical
work and muscular efficiency in walking children. J. Exp. Biol. 207, 587-596.
Tesio, L., Lanzi, D. and Detrembleur, C. (1998). The 3-D motion of the centre of
gravity of the human body during level walking. I. Normal subject at low and
intermediate walking speeds. Clin. Biomech. 13, 77-82.
Willems, P. A., Cavagna, G. A. and Heglund, N. C. (1995). External, internal and
total work in human locomotion. J. Exp. Biol. 198, 379-393.
3634
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Journal of Experimental Biology (2016) 219, 3626-3634 doi:10.1242/jeb.143875
Journal of Experimental Biology
