 Laminar recordings in frontal cortex suggest distinct
layers for maintenance and control of working memory
André M. Bastosa,b,1, Roman Loonisa,b,1, Simon Kornblitha,b, Mikael Lundqvista,b, and Earl K. Millera,b,2
aThe Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; and bDepartment of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
Edited by Peter L. Strick, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, and approved December 20, 2017 (received for review June 14, 2017)
All of the cerebral cortex has some degree of laminar organization.
These different layers are composed of neurons with distinct
connectivity patterns, embryonic origins, and molecular profiles.
There are little data on the laminar specificity of cognitive
functions in the frontal cortex, however. We recorded neuronal
spiking/local field potentials (LFPs) using laminar probes in the
frontal cortex (PMd, 8A, 8B, SMA/ACC, DLPFC, and VLPFC) of
monkeys performing working memory (WM) tasks. LFP power in
the gamma band (50–250 Hz) was strongest in superficial layers,
and LFP power in the alpha/beta band (4–22 Hz) was strongest
in deep layers. Memory delay activity, including spiking and
stimulus-specific gamma bursting, was predominately in superfi-
cial layers. LFPs from superficial and deep layers were synchro-
nized in the alpha/beta bands. This was primarily unidirectional,
with alpha/beta bands in deep layers driving superficial layer ac-
tivity. The phase of deep layer alpha/beta modulated superficial
gamma bursting associated with WM encoding. Thus, alpha/beta
rhythms in deep layers may regulate the superficial layer gamma
bands and hence maintenance of the contents of WM.
cortical layers | oscillations | working memory | frontal cortex
W
orking memory (WM) is associated with neural activity
during a memory delay. This is thought to be due to re-
current connections between columns of pyramidal neurons in
superficial cortical layers (1), but support for this has been
mixed. One study found that delay activity was shared across
superficial and deep layer neurons (2), whereas another reported
delay activity neurons (“late storage units”) at more superficial
depths (3). This uncertainty may be due to the previous use of
single-contact electrodes, which make it difficult to assess the
depth of the recorded signals.
Another question is whether the frontal cortex shows similar
layer-specific properties as the visual cortex (4–7). In the visual
cortex, multiple-contact “laminar” electrodes have revealed that
gamma (>30 Hz) oscillations are prominent in superficial/middle
layers, while slower oscillations (alpha/beta; 10–30 Hz) are
prominent in deep layers (5, 7, 8). Deep layer alpha activity
drives superficial alpha activity (4, 6), and the phase of deep
layer alpha modulates the amplitude of superficial layer gamma
(9). Similar tests in the supplemental eye fields have reported
gamma power in superficial layers (10, 11); however, one of
those studies failed to find evidence of deep layer low-frequency
oscillations coupled with superficial gamma (11), leading to the
conclusion that frontal cortex laminar dynamics might be fun-
damentally different. Neither study examined WM-related ac-
tivity in the frontal cortex with laminar electrodes.
We recorded both spiking and local field potential (LFP) ac-
tivity with multilaminar electrodes in six frontal cortex areas
(PMd, 8A, 8B, SMA/ACC, DLPFC, and VLPFC) in three WM
tasks. This revealed delay period spiking predominately in su-
perficial layers and laminar dynamics in frontal cortex similar to
those in visual cortex, suggesting a layer-specific pattern of re-
curring dynamics between visual and frontal cortices.
Results
Gamma Power Peaks in Superficial Layers and Alpha/Beta Peaks in
Deep Layers. Three monkeys performed three different WM tasks
(Fig. 1 A–C). Either spatial or object identity information had to
be retained during a delay period. Laminar probes with spacing
of 100–200 μm between contacts recorded LFPs and neuronal
spiking from all cortical layers (Fig. 1 D–F). They were lowered
as perpendicular as possible to the cortex to ensure an even
sampling of the different layers. We completed a total of 60 U/V
probe recordings in frontal cortex (Fig. 1G and SI Appendix,
Table S1). The middle cortical layer (bottom of layer 3/layer 4)
was identified, using current source density (CSD) analysis, by
the presence of a current sink in response to a visual stimulus
(see SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures). We aligned all of the
data from all electrodes to the middle layer (i.e., the contact with
the first significant CSD sink; see SI Appendix, Fig. S1 for the
average CSD profiles).
We calculated power from 200 ms before the visual stimulus to
500 ms post stimulus. High frequency power peaked in superfi-
cial layers and low frequencies peaked in deep layers. Fig. 1H
plots examples of low- and high-passed LFPs from one laminar
recording, and Fig. 1I is a power spectrum, illustrating that high
frequencies (above ∼40 Hz) dominated in superficial layers and
low frequencies (below ∼20 Hz) dominated in deep layers. To
quantify these differences in power across each laminar probe,
we normalized power at each frequency (1–500 Hz) and each
contact by the maximal power at that frequency across contacts.
For each frequency and each session, the contact with maximal
Significance
The anatomy and dynamics of different layers of the cerebral
cortex are distinct. Physiological work in the sensory cortex has
investigated how different layers process sensory inputs, and
how they are engaged during attention tasks. In the frontal and
prefrontal cortices, where lamination is present, very few stud-
ies have investigated the role of distinct layers for cognition. We
studied frontal cortex laminar neuronal activity as monkeys
performed working memory tasks. Spiking and gamma-band
activity (50–150 Hz) in the superficial layers reflected active
maintenance of working memories. Alpha/beta frequencies (4–
22 Hz) in the deep layers modulated the gamma activity in the
superficial layers. This might serve a control function, allowing
information to enter or exit active storage in superficial layers.
Author contributions: A.M.B., R.L., and E.K.M. designed research; A.M.B., R.L., and S.K.
performed research; A.M.B., R.L., and M.L. analyzed data; A.M.B., R.L., M.L., and E.K.M.
wrote the paper; and E.K.M. supervised the study.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
1A.M.B. and R.L. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: ekmiller@mit.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1710323115/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710323115
PNAS
|
January 30, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 5
|
1117–1122
NEUROSCIENCE
 power had a value of 1 and other contacts had values relative to
this maximum.
Fig. 2A shows the mean power profile across the entire data-
set. The middle cortical layer is at depth 0 (where the early sink
was detected), negative depths are superficial layers (layers 1–3),
and positive depths are deep layers (layers 5–6). Red colors in-
dicate the maximal power and blue the minimal. The super-
imposed black line is the mean depth at which the maximal
power occurred for each frequency. We tested whether each
frequency consistently peaked away from zero. Lower frequen-
cies (4–22 Hz) had their maximal power at sites significantly
deeper than depth zero, while a continuous band of higher fre-
quencies (58–260 Hz) had their maximal power above zero, in
superficial layers (sign test across sessions, Bonferroni corrected
for multiple comparisons, P < 0.05).
We collapsed Fig. 2A into two separate profiles by averaging
across the alpha/beta (4–22 Hz) and gamma (58–260 Hz) frequency
bands (Fig. 2B). The peak gamma power (red line) occurred in
superficial layers, 400 μm above the sink, and the peak alpha/beta
power (blue line) occurred in deep layers, 600 μm below the sink.
The cross-over point between the profiles (the intersection of the
blue and red lines) occurred between −100 and −200 um, nearly
identical to the location of the CSD sink. Thus, gamma power was
prominent in superficial layers, and alpha/beta in deep. In middle
layers (from 200 μm above to 300 μm below the sink), there was a
transition zone in which neither gamma nor alpha/beta predomi-
nated. These results were present in each of the three tasks (Fig. 2
C–E) and in all of the individual areas that we sampled (SI
Appendix, Fig. S2), with the exception of the alpha/beta profile
for one area (8B), which was qualitatively similar. This pattern
was also observed when we defined the middle layer based on
CSD analysis time locked either to a monitor screen flash or to
sample onset during the WM task (SI Appendix, Fig. S1).
Delay Period Activity in Superficial Layers. WM has been linked to
persistent modulation of delay period spiking activity, but
whether this activity is layer-specific is unclear. We found that
delay period spiking was largely localized to superficial layers. To
measure multiunit activity (MUA), we used rectified, high-pass
signals >500 Hz. To assess delay period modulation, we took the
absolute value of the mean change in MUA between the delay
and the baseline (the presample fixation window), and z-scored it
by the SD of delay period MUA across trials (SI Appendix, Ex-
perimental Procedures). This normalization step ensured that
differences in the overall strength of MUA across sessions were
deemphasized before pooling. We used the absolute values because
activity in delays could increase or decrease relative to baseline (12).
A
B
C
G
H
I
D
E
F
Fig. 1.
(A) Visual search task. A match between sample and test image was
chosen after a delay (0.5–1.2 s) by making a saccade to the match. Each
image was positioned randomly at any one of four possible locations (Upper
Right, Lower Right, Upper Left, and Lower Left). (B) Masked delayed sac-
cade. After a sample period, during which a single spatial location was cued
(one of six possible locations), the animal had to hold fixation through a
variable delay (2.2–2.7 s) and the presentation of the visual mask. After this
delay, and when the fixation point color changed, the animal had to saccade
to the previously cued location. (C) Delayed saccade. After a sample period,
during which a single spatial location was cued (one of four possible loca-
tions), the animal had to hold fixation through a fixed delay (0.99 s) and
saccade to the cued location when the fixation dot disappeared. (D and E) The
small red lines indicate sample trajectories chosen to be as perpendicular as
possible to cortex. (F) The small red lines indicate sample trajectories that were
possible given the recording hardware. Only the third trajectory from the left
was used for laminar recordings. (G) We recorded across frontal cortex. The
different colored dots indicate the task, and the letters indicate the corre-
sponding anatomic region. In addition to those labeled, we recorded from the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the supplementary motor area (SMA) (SI
Appendix, Fig. S12). (H) Sample LFP recordings were bandpass-filtered at 10–25
Hz (Left) and 40–160 Hz (Right). The red line marks the location of the first
significant CSD sink and the border between the superficial and deep layers.
(I) A sample power spectrum with a clear alpha/beta bump (between 10 and
25 Hz) and broadband gamma (>40 Hz). The variations across layers are
plotted as a color gradient (black, superficial to red, deep).
C
D
E
B
A
Fig. 2.
(A) Number of LFP recordings performed per depth (Left) and nor-
malized power averaged across multicontact probes with respect to depth
and frequency (Right). Red indicates greater power at a particular depth;
blue, less power. The black line represents the average depth at which the
power at each frequency peaks. Error bars ± 1 SEM. The black stars indicate
frequency bins at which the mean depth was significantly different from
zero (Bonferroni- corrected for multiple comparisons). (B) Normalized power
averaged across low (4–22 Hz, blue line) and high (50–250 Hz, red line)
frequencies. Error bars ± 1 SEM. (C–E) Normalized power profiles across low
and high frequencies for each task. Error bars ± 1 SEM.
1118
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710323115
Bastos et al.
 Fig. 3 A, C, and E shows the time-resolved delay period MUA
modulation averaged across sessions for each task. In the figure,
red indicates a change in MUA from the presample fixation
baseline, and blue indicates little or no change. In all tasks, the
greatest change in MUA was in superficial layers. Fig. 3 B, D,
and F illustrates the time-averaged delay period modulation. It
shows that the greatest modulations were in superficial layers.
Averaging across all tasks, delay MUA peaked at 400 μm above
the sink and dropped in deeper cortical layers (P < 0.002, sign
test across sessions; Fig. 3G). This was the same depth at which
gamma power peaked in the LFP (Fig. 2B). Moreover, the
laminar profile of the average modulation of delay period MUA
was positively correlated (Spearman rank correlation across
depth from −900 to 1,500 μm, ρ = 0.84; P = 2E-6) with the
laminar profile of gamma power (compare with Fig. 2B) and
negatively correlated with alpha/beta power (Spearman rank
correlation, ρ = −0.67; P = 3E-4). This correlation was present in
each task individually (Spearman rank correlation, visual search;
gamma: ρ= 0.79, P < 1E-5; alpha/beta: ρ = −0.57, P = 0.003;
masked delayed saccade, gamma: ρ = 0.80, P < 1E-5, alpha/beta:
ρ = −0.66, P < 0.001; delayed saccade, gamma: ρ = 0.86, P < 1E-
5, alpha/beta: ρ = −0.68, P < 0.001). In addition, the peak delay
period MUA was in superficial layers for all six areas (P = 0.03,
sign test; SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
The rectified, high-pass signal that we used to measure MUA
(“analog MUA”) is thought to capture the mean of all spiking
activity within the local vicinity of the recording contact (13).
However, we noted some spectral overlap between this signal
and the gamma power in superficial layers, raising the possibility
that the greater gamma power was due to the MUA (or vice
versa). To address this, we used a thresholded signal to measure
the spike rate. This signal was more conservative than the MUA
signal, capturing only small groups of units with large spikes near
the contact (hereinafter referred to as “units”). Representative
spike waveforms and firing rates for a single session are shown in
SI Appendix, Fig. S4. We identified a total of 423 units.
Analysis of delay period modulation based on spike rates
confirmed that the proportion of units with delay activity was
higher in superficial layers compare with deep layers (53% vs.
34%; P = 3E-4, χ2 proportion test; SI Appendix, Fig. S5B, Inset).
Spiking during the delay period carried significant information
about the sample, as measured by percent explained variance
(PEV) (SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures and Fig. S6). In
addition, the peak spike PEV value was observed in superficial
layers at a depth of −400 um, the same depth at which gamma
power peaked. The greater proportion of modulated units in
superficial layers was not the result of a poor signal-to-noise ratio
or lack of units in deep layers. In fact, baseline firing rates were
higher in the deep layers (SI Appendix, Fig. S5C), as were unit
C
D
F
B
A
G
H
E
Fig. 3.
(A, C, and E) Delay period, MUA modulation across cortical depth and time, plotted from 150 ms after sample offset to 1 s into the delay, for the visual
search, masked delayed saccade, and delayed saccade tasks. (B, D, and F) The mean delay period MUA modulation per cortical depth for each task. Error
bars ± 1 SEM. (G) The delay period MUA modulation averaged across all tasks per cortical depth. Error bars ± 1 SEM. (H) The mean MUA modulation averaged
across all tasks, and all superficial or deep contacts. Error bars ± 1 SEM.
Bastos et al.
PNAS
|
January 30, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 5
|
1119
NEUROSCIENCE
 yields (SI Appendix, Fig. S5D). A similar delay period profile was
seen when we aligned depth based on the transition between ce-
rebrospinal fluid and the gray matter (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Finally,
MUA in superficial layers did not dominate all task periods. During
sample processing, MUA activity was more prominent in middle
layers (in granular areas), and during saccade generation, both
deep and superficial layers became active (SI Appendix, Fig. S8).
Gamma Bursts in Superficial Layers Encode Stimulus Information
During the Delay. Recent work has shown that oscillatory gamma
bursting in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is associated with encoding
of stimuli in WM (14). We tested for its layer-specificity. To dis-
tinguish this from the power analyses described above, we defined
bursts as periods in which the power in the alpha/beta (4–22 Hz)
and gamma (50–150 Hz) bands exceeded the mean power at each
frequency band by 2 SD for three oscillation cycles (SI Appendix,
Experimental Procedures). The gamma and alpha/beta burst rates
during the delay and presample fixation baseline periods are shown
in Fig. 4 A and C. The average gamma burst rate increased during
the delay relative to the baseline (P = 0.004, sign test; Fig. 4A), and
the alpha/beta burst rate decreased (P < 1E-8, sign test; Fig. 4C).
We tested whether delay period gamma and alpha/beta bursts
carried information about which cue was held in WM by calcu-
lating the PEV between the burst rate and cued object/location
during the delay (SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures). Fig. 4B
shows the profile of information in gamma bursts by layer, and
Fig. 4D for alpha/beta bursts. Over sessions, gamma bursting was
more informative in superficial layers than in deep layers (P =
0.004, sign test over sessions; Fig. 4B, Inset). Furthermore, the
amount of gamma bursting information per layer was strongly
correlated with gamma power (Spearman’s rank correlation, ρ =
0.82; P < 3E-6). Information from alpha/beta bursting was
weaker, as might be expected given the very low burst rate during
the delay. Information in alpha/beta bursting was not signifi-
cantly different between deep and superficial layers, but trended
toward an increase in deep layers (Fig. 4D). The amount of in-
formation in alpha/beta bursting correlated with the laminar
alpha/beta power profile (ρ = 0.51; P < 0.02).
Alpha/Beta Oscillations in Deep Layers Modulate Superficial Layers,
and Coupling Is Reduced During the Delay. We next tested for interac-
tions between oscillatory activity and layers. To assess frequency-
resolved directed interactions, we applied nonparametric Granger
causality (GC; a measure of statistical prediction between time series;
SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures) analysis to LFPs within su-
perficial and deep layers. We found that the GC spectrum had peaks
in the alpha/beta range, and that directed interactions were asym-
metric. Deep layer alpha/beta drove superficial layer alpha/beta more
than the other way around (4–22 Hz, P = 0.002, sign test; Fig. 5A).
GC is a linear measurement of interlaminar interactions, in
the sense that interactions are only tested between different chan-
nels at the same frequency. To test for cross-frequency (nonlinear)
interactions, we next investigated cross-frequency coupling (CFC)
between superficial and deep layers. To test whether the phase of
the slower frequency band (alpha/beta band) coupled with the am-
plitude of the higher-frequency band (gamma band), we used the
modulation index (15), a measure of how nonuniformly distributed
the amplitudes of one frequency band are across the phase space of
another (SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures). We systematically
calculated CFC at every possible combination of (alpha/beta) phase-
providing channel and (gamma) amplitude-providing channel.
We found that the influence of the deep alpha/beta phase
coupled with superficial gamma amplitude was stronger in the
ascending (deep to superficial) direction than in the reverse di-
rection (P < 1E-4, sign test over sessions; Fig. 5 B and C). This
laminar profile of deep layer alpha/beta phasic modulation of
gamma power in superficial layers was largely preserved across all
six cortical areas (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). The GC and CFC results
were basically consistent, with both indicating an ascending (deep
to superficial) direction of influence or modulation.
To test whether deep to superficial coupling was task-modulated,
we tested whether CFC and GC changed during presample fix-
ation baseline vs. delay. CFC was significantly reduced during
delay relative to baseline (P < 0.0005, sign test over sessions;
Fig. 5D and SI Appendix, Fig. S10). In contrast, we found no
significant differences in GC influence in the delay vs. baseline
contrast (P > 0.2).
To test whether the interlaminar coupling between gamma
and alpha/beta was excitatory or inhibitory, we performed power-
power correlation analysis between all possible combinations of
layers (SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures). Deep layer alpha/beta
power was negatively correlated with superficial gamma power,
consistent with an inhibitory influence (Fig. 5E). Power-power cor-
relation in this compartment was significantly more negative than
deep gamma power correlations with both deep and superficial
alpha/beta power (P < 0.05, sign test over sessions; Fig. 5F). This
suggests that deep layer alpha/beta regulates superficial alpha/
beta (via ascending GC influence), which in turn regulates superfi-
cial layer gamma (via both CFC and negative power correlation).
Discussion
Evidence for Recurring Dynamics. Superficial and deep layers of
frontal cortex exhibited distinct dynamics. Gamma power peaked
in superficial layers, while alpha/beta power peaked in deep
layers. The phase of these deep-layer alpha/beta oscillations
modulated the amplitude of superficial gamma. Delay-period
activity peaked in superficial layers. These dynamics were con-
sistent across six distinct cortical areas (SI Appendix, Figs. S2, S3,
and S9) spanning from premotor cortex to prefrontal cortex in
our dataset, and match closely with reported results from visual
cortex (4–9). The consistency and the specificity of these physi-
ological effects suggest an underlying pattern of recurring neu-
ronal dynamics shared between visual and frontal cortices (16,
17). Along with these consistencies, we also observed some
qualitative deviations from these patterns, possibly as a result of
comparing different tasks. Moreover, although many aspects of
the dynamics were shared, this does not imply that each laminar
A
C
B
D
Fig. 4.
(A) Gamma burst rates at baseline (blue) and during the delay (red).
(B) Percentage of explained variance (omega-squared) of the gamma bursts
across different cortical depths. Red asterisks indicate depths at which there
is significantly nonzero PEV across sessions (P < 0.05, Bonferroni-corrected).
(Inset) Mean PEV across all superficial and deep contacts, respectively. Error
bars ± 1 SEM. (C) Same as A, but for alpha/beta. (D) PEV of alpha/beta bursts
across different cortical depths. Error bars ± 1 SEM.
1120
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710323115
Bastos et al.
 circuit is identical. Therefore, further studies are needed to de-
termine to what extent and in what areas these laminar dynamics
are shared, and the functional consequence of this.
Delay Activity in Superficial Layers. Delay period spiking and
gamma bursting encoding the contents of WM were most
prominent in superficial layers. The co-occurrence of these two
phenomena is consistent with reports that gamma bursts are
associated with spiking that encodes a stimulus in WM (14). The
relationship between layer 2/3 gamma and WM was also pre-
dicted by a WM model (18), which itself was based on known
superficial layer connectivity and sparse activity patterns (1, 19,
20). The broadband nature of the average power spectrum in the
gamma range (which lacked a clear peak) does not necessarily
imply the lack of an oscillatory phenomenon, which could manifest
as bursts of varying frequency within individual trials (14). Indeed,
we found gamma bursts that increased in the delay and carried
stimulus-related information, especially in superficial layers. The
lower baseline firing rates in superficial layers, together with
higher delay period information in gamma bursting argues against
contamination of gamma by spiking activity, and in favor of a more
sparse and selective neural code in these layers.
During the WM delay, both alpha/beta bursts and coupling
between deep layer alpha/beta and superficial layer oscillations
decreased relative to baseline. Alpha/beta oscillations are pur-
ported to be an inhibitory rhythm responsible for suppressing
behaviorally dominant rules and disregarding distracting stimuli
(21–24). Low frequencies in the theta and alpha range modulate
high-frequency gamma activity (9, 25–27). We hypothesize that
low-frequency coupling between deep and superficial layers may
serve a control function, by suppressing access to superficial layers
via rhythmic alpha/beta inhibition. The putative control function
of deep to superficial layers that we have hypothesized here will be
explicitly tested by manipulating WM control in a future study.
WM activity, according to this logic, may be a consequence of
deep layer low-frequency modulation of superficial gamma. A
decrease in coupling might release inhibition from deep to su-
perficial layers, and allow layer 2/3 spiking and gamma bursting
to maintain cue information. There, this information could be
stored through recurrent lateral connections that result, on av-
erage, in sustained neuronal activity but within a single trial as
short-lived bursts of gamma and spiking that reactivate the WM
trace (14). This is consistent with PFC anatomy that shows strong
and input specific recurrent connectivity within supragranular,
but not infragranular, layers (1, 28).
A
C
F
D
E
B
Fig. 5.
(A) The Granger causal (GC) influence across
frequency during the delay period. The red line is the
GC of deep to superficial layers, and the blue is the
reverse. Only sessions in which two laminar probes
were placed within 2–4 mm of one another were
used (see SI Appendix, Experimental Procedures). (B)
Cross Frequency Coupling (CFC) between the phase
of alpha/beta oscillations and the amplitude of
gamma oscillations. Plotted across both axes is the
CFC between specific cortical depths. (C) The mean
CFC across all four possible laminar combinations
during the delay-period: superficial phase to super-
ficial amplitude (Left, 1), deep phase to deep am-
plitude (Middle-Left, 2), superficial phase to deep
amplitude (Middle-Right, 3), and deep phase to su-
perficial amplitude (Right, 4). (D) CFC between deep
phase to superficial amplitude during the delay
(Left) and the baseline (Right). (E) Correlation map
between the power of alpha/beta and gamma over
the delay period. Only recordings with a fixed delay
period were used (four recordings from the delayed
saccade task, nine from the search task). (F) Average
power correlation between alpha/beta and gamma
for all four possible laminar combinations. Same
numbering scheme for laminar combinations as in C.
Error bars ± 1 SEM. Lines indicate significantly differ-
ent comparisons at P < 0.05.
Superficial
Deep
Excitatory cells
Inhibitory cells
Sensory inputs 
(from earlier cor�cal areas)
Fig. 6.
A model of WM. Denoted by two rectangular, dashed boxes, two
cortical compartments, superficial and deep, are made up of densely inter-
connected pyramidal (black) and inhibitory (red) neurons. Inhibitory connections
are line segments with a red, rounded end, and excitatory connections are line
segments with a black, arrow end. The looping arrow returning on itself rep-
resents the recurrent connectivity found within layer 3 pyramidal cell networks
in prefrontal cortex. The sinusoidal red-line in deep layers reflects the pre-
dominance of alpha/beta oscillations deep and their driving influence on su-
perficial alpha/beta oscillations (the sinusoidal blue line). Alpha/beta oscillations
are coupled with gamma oscillations (blue squiggly lines), and these gamma
oscillations organize informative spiking (straight black marks). Over time,
moving from left to right in the figure, the deep alpha/beta suppresses both
superficial gamma and spiking, which would “clear out” the contents of WM.
Bastos et al.
PNAS
|
January 30, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 5
|
1121
NEUROSCIENCE
 In Fig. 6, we summarize this model. We note that both su-
perficial and deep layers are comprised of networks of deeply
interconnected excitatory pyramidal (black) neurons and in-
hibitory (red) interneurons. Circuits in both layers are capable of
oscillating within the alpha/beta range (the red sine wave below,
the blue line above) but the drive is directional. Deep layers
(as seen in the red arrows) drive superficial layers to resonate
within the alpha/beta frequency. These alpha/beta oscillations
are coupled with superficial layer gamma oscillations. Strong
deep to superficial layer coupling and/or deep-layer alpha/beta
suppresses gamma-related activity. These dynamics have been
previously observed in visual cortex and studied in computational
modeling work (29). With a few modifications, this circuit could
also implement WM. During the memory delay, we propose that
this default suppression of gamma band activity is released, and
as a result, the recurrent excitation of layer 2/3 neurons (as in-
dicated by the loop arrow) is allowed to persist. This recurrent
excitation generates gamma activity as well as the dominance of
a particular ensemble (i.e., one encoding the cue information;
ref. 18). We also note that middle and deep layers of PFC are
reciprocally connected with the mediodorsal nucleus of the
thalamus, with layer 4 receiving thalamic input and layer 5/6
sending output to the thalamus (30). Delay period spiking ac-
tivity is prominent in MD thalamus (31), and beta band co-
herence has been reported between PFC and thalamus during
WM maintenance (32). Thus, the modulatory role of alpha/beta
activity in the deep layers for WM control might be in part
regulated by the thalamocortical loop.
Previously, we linked gamma-band dynamics with feedforward
mechanisms (21, 33). In that earlier work, gamma was found to
signal sensory stimuli from lower to higher visual cortex (6, 33, 34)
and to drive stimulus-driven attention (21). Here we find that
gamma dynamics are associated with WM maintenance. It has been
hypothesized that each cortical area expands on the processing of
the previous area with largely conserved laminar circuitry (17) and
dynamics (16). In the visual system, the function of superficial layer
cells, with gamma band dynamics, is thought to involve feedforward
information transmission (35). In PFC cortex, we find preservation
of this feature of the laminar circuit (superficial layer gamma-
dominated dynamics). At the highest levels of the cortical hierarchy
(e.g., PFC), the function of feedforward connections is undefined
(36). We suggest that in the absence of further levels to the hierarchy,
these superficial layers take on a new role, namely WM.
Experimental Procedures
We performed multilaminar recordings using linear array U and V probes
(Plexon). We recorded spiking and LFP activity in frontal and prefrontal
cortices of three macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta) while the animals
performed tasks requiring either spatial or object-based information to be
held in WM. We performed CSD analysis of the LFPs in response to visual
stimulation. The earliest reliable current sink was used as the zero point to
align sessions. All surgical and animal care procedures were approved by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s (MIT) Committee on Animal Care
and were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the National
Institute of Health and MIT’s Department of Comparative Medicine. A de-
tailed descriptions of the study methodology is provided in SI Appendix,
Experimental Procedures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Scott Brincat, Morteza Moazami, and
Jefferson Roy for assistance during the surgeries and behavioral training;
Nancy Kopell and the Cognitive Rhythms Collaborative for fruitful discussions
regarding our statistical analyses; and the MIT veterinary staff and animal
caretakers for their excellent support. This work was supported by National
Institutes of Mental Health Grant R37MH087027, Office of Naval Research
Multidisciplinary University Research Initiatives Grant N00014-16-1-2832, and
the MIT Picower Institute Innovation Fund.
1. Goldman-Rakic PS (1996) Regional and cellular fractionation of working memory.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:13473–13480.
2. Sawaguchi T, Matsumura M, Kubota K (1990) Catecholaminergic effects on neuronal
activity related to a delayed response task in monkey prefrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol
63:1385–1400.
3. Markowitz DA, Curtis CE, Pesaran B (2015) Multiple component networks support
working memory in prefrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:11084–11089.
4. Bollimunta A, Mo J, Schroeder CE, Ding M (2011) Neuronal mechanisms and atten-
tional modulation of corticothalamic α oscillations. J Neurosci 31:4935–4943.
5. Buffalo EA, Fries P, Landman R, Buschman TJ, Desimone R (2011) Laminar differences
in gamma and alpha coherence in the ventral stream. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:
11262–11267.
6. van Kerkoerle T, et al. (2014) Alpha and gamma oscillations characterize feedback
and feedforward processing in monkey visual cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:
14332–14341.
7. Maier A, Adams GK, Aura C, Leopold DA (2010) Distinct superficial and deep laminar
domains of activity in the visual cortex during rest and stimulation. Front Syst
Neurosci 4:31.
8. Smith MA, Jia X, Zandvakili A, Kohn A (2013) Laminar dependence of neuronal cor-
relations in visual cortex. J Neurophysiol 109:940–947.
9. Spaak E, Bonnefond M, Maier A, Leopold DA, Jensen O (2012) Layer-specific en-
trainment of γ-band neural activity by the α rhythm in monkey visual cortex. Curr Biol
22:2313–2318.
10. Godlove DC, Maier A, Woodman GF, Schall JD (2014) Microcircuitry of agranular
frontal cortex: Testing the generality of the canonical cortical microcircuit. J Neurosci
34:5355–5369.
11. Ninomiya T, Dougherty K, Godlove DC, Schall JD, Maier A (2015) Microcircuitry of
agranular frontal cortex: Contrasting laminar connectivity between occipital and
frontal areas. J Neurophysiol 113:3242–3255.
12. Miller EK, Erickson CA, Desimone R (1996) Neural mechanisms of visual working
memory in prefrontal cortex of the macaque. J Neurosci 16:5154–5167.
13. Siegel M, Buschman TJ, Miller EK (2015) Cortical information flow during flexible
sensorimotor decisions. Science 348:1352–1355.
14. Lundqvist M, et al. (2016) Gamma and beta bursts underlie working memory. Neuron
90:152–164.
15. Tort ABL, Komorowski R, Eichenbaum H, Kopell N (2010) Measuring phase-amplitude
coupling between neuronal oscillations of different frequencies. J Neurophysiol 104:
1195–1210.
16. Bastos AM, et al. (2012) Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron 76:
695–711.
17. Douglas RJ, Martin KA (1991) A functional microcircuit for cat visual cortex. J Physiol
440:735–769.
18. Lundqvist M, Herman P, Lansner A (2011) Theta and gamma power increases and
alpha/beta power decreases with memory load in an attractor network model. J Cogn
Neurosci 23:3008–3020.
19. Sakata S, Harris KD (2009) Laminar structure of spontaneous and sensory-evoked
population activity in auditory cortex. Neuron 64:404–418.
20. Kampa BM, Letzkus JJ, Stuart GJ (2006) Cortical feed-forward networks for binding
different streams of sensory information. Nat Neurosci 9:1472–1473.
21. Buschman TJ, Miller EK (2007) Top-down versus bottom-up control of attention in the
prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. Science 315:1860–1862.
22. Buschman TJ, Denovellis EL, Diogo C, Bullock D, Miller EK (2012) Synchronous oscil-
latory neural ensembles for rules in the prefrontal cortex. Neuron 76:838–846.
23. Jensen O, Mazaheri A (2010) Shaping functional architecture by oscillatory alpha
activity: Gating by inhibition. Front Hum Neurosci 4:186.
24. Haegens S, Nácher V, Luna R, Romo R, Jensen O (2011) α-Oscillations in the monkey
sensorimotor network influence discrimination performance by rhythmical inhibition
of neuronal spiking. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:19377–19382.
25. Canolty RT, et al. (2006) High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in
human neocortex. Science 313:1626–1628.
26. Lakatos P, et al. (2005) An oscillatory hierarchy controlling neuronal excitability and
stimulus processing in the auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol 94:1904–1911.
27. Colgin LL, et al. (2009) Frequency of gamma oscillations routes flow of information in
the hippocampus. Nature 462:353–357.
28. Luebke JI (2017) Pyramidal neurons are not generalizable building blocks of cortical
networks. Front Neuroanat 11:11.
29. Mejias JF, Murray JD, Kennedy H, Wang X-J (2016) Feedforward and feedback
frequency-dependent interactions in a large-scale laminar network of the primate
cortex. Sci Adv 2:e1601335.
30. Giguere M, Goldman-Rakic PS (1988) Mediodorsal nucleus: Areal, laminar, and tan-
gential distribution of afferents and efferents in the frontal lobe of rhesus monkeys.
J Comp Neurol 277:195–213.
31. Watanabe Y, Funahashi S (2004) Neuronal activity throughout the primate medi-
odorsal nucleus of the thalamus during oculomotor delayed-responses, I: Cue-, delay-,
and response-period activity. J Neurophysiol 92:1738–1755.
32. Parnaudeau S, et al. (2013) Inhibition of mediodorsal thalamus disrupts thalamo-
frontal connectivity and cognition. Neuron 77:1151–1162.
33. Bastos AM, et al. (2015) Visual areas exert feedforward and feedback influences
through distinct frequency channels. Neuron 85:390–401.
34. Michalareas G, et al. (2016) Alpha-beta and gamma rhythms subserve feedback and
feedforward influences among human visual cortical areas. Neuron 89:384–397.
35. Roberts MJ, et al. (2013) Robust gamma coherence between macaque V1 and V2 by
dynamic frequency matching. Neuron 78:523–536.
36. Markov NT, et al. (2013) The anatomy of hierarchy: Feedforward and feedback
pathways in macaque visual cortex. J Comp Neurol 522:225–259.
1122
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1710323115
Bastos et al.
