 RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
BRAIN CIRCUITS
Gating of hippocampal activity,
plasticity, and memory by entorhinal
cortex long-range inhibition
Jayeeta Basu,* Jeffrey D. Zaremba, Stephanie K. Cheung, Frederick L. Hitti,
Boris V. Zemelman, Attila Losonczy, Steven A. Siegelbaum*
INTRODUCTION: The precise association of
contextual cues with a behavioral experience
enables an animal to discriminate between sa-
lient (harmful or rewarding) versus neutral en-
vironments. What signaling mechanisms during
learning help select specific contextual signals to
be stored as long-term memories? Hippocampal
CA1 pyramidal neurons integrate di-
rect multisensory excitatory input
from entorhinal cortex (EC) with in-
direct, mnemonic excitatory input
fromtheupstreamhippocampalCA3
area, and both pathways have been
implicatedinmemorystorage.Paired
activation of the direct and indirect
inputs at a precise 20-ms timing in-
terval that matches the dynamics of
thecortico-hippocampalcircuitindu-
ces a long-term enhancement of the
activation of CA1 neurons by their
CA3 inputs (input timing–dependent
plasticity or ITDP). However, EC
additionally sends long-range inhib-
itory projections (LRIPs) to CA1, the
functionofwhichislargelyunknown.
Here,weexploretheroleoftheLRIPs
in regulating hippocampal synaptic
activity and memory.
RATIONALE: GABAergic neurons
(which release the inhibitory trans-
mitterγ-aminobutyricacidorGABA)
in medial entorhinal cortex (MEC)
were recently found to send to hip-
pocampus LRIPs that form relative-
ly weak and sparse synapses on
CA1 GABAergic interneurons. As lat-
eral entorhinal cortex (LEC) conveys
important contextual and object-
related information to hippocampus,
we examined whether this region also
sends LRIPs to CA1. We expressed
channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) selec-
tively in LEC inhibitory neurons and
examined the synaptic effects of
LRIP photostimulation. The behav-
ioral impact of the LRIPs was deter-
mined by selectively silencing these
inputs locally in CA1 during contextual fear
conditioning (CFC) and novel object recog-
nition (NOR) tasks. We also used in vivo Ca2+
imaging to assess how different sensory and
behavioral stimuli that typically make up a
contextual experience activate the LEC LRIPs.
Finally, we examined how the LRIPs influ-
ence information flow through the cortico-
hippocampal circuit and contribute to ITDP.
RESULTS: LRIPs from LEC produced strong in-
hibitory postsynaptic potentials in a large frac-
tion of CA1 interneurons located in the region
of theECinputs. Although
pharmacogenetic silenc-
ing of LRIPs in hippocam-
pus did not prevent CFC
or NOR memory, it caused
mice to show an inappro-
priate fear response to a
neutral context and a diminished ability to dis-
tinguish a novel object from a familiar object.
Calcium imaging revealed that the LRIP axons
and presynaptic terminals responded to various
sensory stimuli. Moreover, pairing such signals
with appetitive or aversive stimuli increased
LRIP activity, consistent with a role of the LRIPs
in memory specificity.
Intracellular recordings demonstrated that
the LRIPs powerfully suppressed the activity
of a subclass of cholecystokinin-
expressing interneurons (CCK+ INs).
These interneurons were normally
strongly excited by the CA3 inputs,
whichresultsinpronounced feedfor-
ward inhibition (FFI) of CA1 pyram-
idal neuron dendrites. By transiently
and maximally suppressing the INs
in a 15- to 20-ms temporal window,
the LRIPs enhanced CA3 inputs on-
to CA1 pyramidal neurons that ar-
rived within that timing interval.
This disinhibition enabled tempo-
rally precise, paired activation of
EC–Schaffer collateral (EC-SC) in-
puts (15 to 20 ms apart) to trigger
dendritic spikes in the distal den-
drites of CA1 pyramidal neurons and
to induce ITDP.
CONCLUSION: LRIPs from EC act
as a powerful, temporally precise
disinhibitory gate of intrahippocam-
pal information flow and enable
the induction of plasticity when cor-
tical and hippocampal inputs ar-
rive onto CA1 pyramidal neurons
at a precise 20-ms interval. We pro-
pose that the LRIPs increase the
specificity
of
hippocampal-based
long-term memory by assessing the
salience of mnemonic information
relayed by CA3 to the immediate
sensory context conveyed by direct
excitatory EC inputs.▪
RESEARCH
138
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Long-range inhibitory projections gate cortico-hippocampal infor-
mation flow in the short and long term. (Top) The cortico-hippocampal
circuit. Inputs from EC arrive at CA1 directly through excitatory perforant
path (PP) and LRIPs and indirectly through SCs of the trisynaptic path
[dentate gyrus (DG)→CA3→CA1]. (Bottom) Recordings from different
EC LRIP→CA1 circuit elements. (T
op left) A CA1 IN that normally inhibits
the pyramidal neuron (PN) dendrite is inhibited maximally by LRIP (blue,
LRIP intact) 20 ms after EC stimulation (dotted guide lines). (Bottom
left) This disinhibits the PN dendritic depolarization evoked by a SC input
arriving 20 ms after EC input. Multiple EC-SC pairings result in more
disinhibition (middle), which triggers dendritic Ca2+ spikes (10× pairings
for 10 s) and (right) induces somatic long-term plasticity (90× pairings
for 90 s) in the CA1 PN, where SC responses are potentiated for >1 hour.
LRIP silencing (red) decreases dendritic depolarization and spike prob-
ability and blocks somatic plasticity. [Background from a plate by C.Golgi
et al., 1886;text translatedandrepublished with plates inBrainRes. Bull. 54,
461–483 (2001)]
The list of author affiliations is available in the
full article online.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: jayeeta.basu@
nyumc.org (J.B.); sas8@columbia.edu (S.A.S.)
Cite this article as J. Basu et al., Science 351,
aaa5694 (2016). DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa5694
ON OUR WEB SITE
◥
Read the full article
at http:/
/dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aaa5694
..................................................
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
BRAIN CIRCUITS
Gating of hippocampal activity,
plasticity, and memory by entorhinal
cortex long-range inhibition
Jayeeta Basu,1†‡ Jeffrey D. Zaremba,1* Stephanie K. Cheung,1*† Frederick L. Hitti,1
Boris V. Zemelman,2 Attila Losonczy,1 Steven A. Siegelbaum1‡
The cortico-hippocampal circuit is critical for storage of associational memories. Most studies
have focused on the role in memory storage of the excitatory projections from entorhinal cortex to
hippocampus. However, entorhinal cortex also sends inhibitory projections, whose role in memory
storage and cortico-hippocampal activity remains largely unexplored.We found that these long-
range inhibitory projections enhance the specificity of contextual and object memory encoding.
At the circuit level, these g-aminobutyric acid (GABA)–releasing projections target hippocampal
inhibitory neurons and thus act as a disinhibitory gate that transiently promotes the excitation of
hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons by suppressing feedforward inhibition.This enhances the
ability of CA1 pyramidal neurons to fire synaptically evoked dendritic spikes and to generate a
temporally precise form of heterosynaptic plasticity. Long-range inhibition from entorhinal cortex
may thus increase the precision of hippocampal-based long-term memory associations by
assessing the salience of mnemonormation to the immediate sensory input.
T
he cortico-hippocampal circuit mediates
the encoding and storage of specific asso-
ciative memories, in part, through long-term
plastic changes at neural circuit synapses.
Most studies to date have focused on the im-
portance of excitatory projections from entorhinal
cortex (EC) to hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neu-
rons, which provide the principal output of hippo-
campus (1–3). However, EC also sends long-range
inhibitory projections (LRIPs) to the CA1 region
of the hippocampus (4). At present, little is known
about the role of these LRIPs in regulating hip-
pocampal circuit operations, synaptic plasticity,
or memory storage.
Excitatory glutamatergic input to the CA1 re-
gion arrives from EC through both a direct and
an indirect pathway (5). In the indirect, or tri-
synaptic, path, EC LII stellate cells excite dentate
gyrus granule cells, which excite CA3 pyramidal
neurons. The Schaffer collateral (SC) axons of
CA3 pyramidal neurons provide strong excitatory
drive onto CA1 pyramidal neurons by forming
synapses on CA1 apical dendrites in stratum ra-
diatum (SR), relatively close to the soma. EC LII (3)
and LIII (6) pyramidal neuron axons provide di-
rect, but weak, excitatory drive by forming synapses
on regions of the CA1 pyramidal neuron apical
dendrites locatedinstratum lacunosum moleculare
(SLM), very far from the soma. Both indirect and
direct inputs also recruit strong feedforward inhi-
bition (FFI) that normally limits CA1 excitation (7).
Previous studies have demonstrated that coor-
dinated activation of the direct and trisynaptic
inputs to CA1 pyramidal neurons enhances the
propagation of excitatory postsynaptic potentials
(EPSPs) along the pyramidal neuron apical den-
drites (8), enables the firing of dendritic spikes
and bursts of action potential output (9), induces
a robust and temporally precise form of hetero-
synaptic plasticity (termed inputtiming–dependent
plasticity or ITDP) (10, 11), and leads to de novo
place-cell firing (12). However, the contribution
of the LRIPs to cortico-hippocampal activity has
not been previously investigated. Here, we have
characterized the activity of the LRIPs in vivo,
analyzed their role in long-term memory storage,
and investigated their function in regulating the
effects of paired EC and CA3 input, in particular
CA1 pyramidal neuron synaptic activation, den-
dritic spike firing, and the induction of hetero-
synaptic plasticity.
Lateral EC provides direct GABAergic
inhibition to local CA1 interneurons
LRIPs from superficial layers of medial entorhinal
cortex (MEC), an area that encodes spatial in-
formation (13, 14), form synapses with inhibitory
neurons (INs) located near the SR-SLM border
of the CA1 region (4). However, the LRIPs from
MEC are sparse and generate relatively weak
inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) in the CA1
INs (4). To determine whether lateral entorhinal
cortex (LEC), which conveys multimodal non-
spatial sensory information to hippocampus (15),
sends a more potent inhibitory projection to
CA1 INs, we injected recombinant Cre-dependent
adeno-associated viral vectors (rAAVCre) into LEC
or MEC to label the LRIPs and to achieve opto-
genetic control of their activity. To restrict ex-
pression to INs, viral injections were performed
by using a pan g-aminobutyric acid (GABA)–
releasing or GABAergic Cre-driver mouse line
[GAD2-Cre mice (16)] (Fig. 1A and fig. S1).
Injections of two separate rAAVCre vectors were
used to express tdTomato in LEC and green fluo-
rescent protein (GFP) in MEC. In contrast to the
relatively weak and sparse inhibitory projections
from MEC (4), LEC sent dense projections to CA1
(Fig. 1, B to E, and fig. S1) that covered twice the
area in CA1 (82.05 ± 3.64%) as do the LRIPs from
MEC (37.79 ± 2.35%; P < 0.0001, two-tailed t test,
n = 5 mice) (fig. S2). Similar to their glutamatergic
counterparts, LRIPs from MEC differentially tar-
geted CA1 along its transverse, proximal-distal
axis, with denser projections to proximal re-
gions of CA1 (i.e., those closer to CA2) (fig. S2).
In contrast to the preferential targeting of LEC
excitatory inputs to distal CA1 (closer to subic-
ulum), LRIPs from LEC were distributed fairly
uniformly along the proximal-distal axis of CA1
with also a small, but significant, bias toward
the proximal side (figs. S2 and S6).
To examine the functional impact of these in-
puts, we injected an rAAVCre vector in LEC or MEC
of GAD2-Cre mice, which enabled us to express
light-sensitive cation channel channelrhodopsin-2
fused with enhanced yellow fluorescent protein
(ChR2-EYFP) (17) selectively in GABAergic neurons
in either region. Photostimulation of ChR2-EYFP+
GABAergic axons from LEC in the CA1 SLM re-
gion in hippocampal slices (Fig. 1C) evoked large
inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) in CA1
interneurons located in the SR/SLM border re-
gionvoltage-clamped to +10 mV (139 ± 24.8 pA, n =
17 responsive cells) (Fig. 1, F and G, and fig. S3).
In contrast, the amplitude of IPSCs evoked by
photostimulation of ChR2-EYFP+ MEC LRIPs was
only one-fourth as large (37.7 ± 4.5 pA, n = 11 re-
sponsive cells; P < 0.005, t test) (Fig. 1, F and G).
Moreover, a greater fraction of SR-SLM border
INs responded to photostimulation of LEC LRIPs
(53.4%) compared with MEC LRIPs (32.4%) (fig. S3B).
These synaptic currents were eliminated by
GABA, types A and B (GABAA and GABAB recep-
tor blockers 6-imino-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-1(6H)-
pyridazinebutanoic acid hydrobromide, SR 95531
(2 mM), and [S-(R*,R*)]-[3-[[1-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)
ethyl]amino]-2-hydroxypropyl](cyclohexylmethyl)
phosphinic acid, CGP 54626 (1 mM), respectively, but
wereunalteredbyblockadeofα-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)–type
glutamate receptors [2,3-dioxo-6-nitro-1,2,3,4-
tetrahydrobenzo[f]quinoxaline-7-sulfonamide,
NBQX (10 mM)], which indicated thatthe responses
represented direct IPSCs generated by GABA
release from the LRIPs (Fig. 1F and fig. S3C). We
failed to detect any EPSPs in CA1 SR-SLM INs
when we photostimulated ChR2-YFP+ LEC axons
under current clamp conditions with the INs
held at an initial membrane potential of –68 mV
(fig. S3D), which indicated that the rAAVCre vector
resulted in the selective expression of ChR2 in
LEC GABAergic neurons.
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-1
1Department of Neuroscience, Kavli Brain Institute, Columbia
University Medical Center, 1051 Riverside Drive, New York, NY
10032, USA. 2University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work. †Present address:
Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, NYU Neuroscience
Institute, New York University School of Medicine, 450 East 29th
Street, New York, NY 10016, USA. ‡Corresponding author. E-mail:
jayeeta.basu@nyumc.org (J.B.); sas8@columbia.edu (S.A.S.)
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 LRIPs regulate the precision of
memory storage
As LEC conveys nonspatial contextual informa-
tion, we reasoned that the LRIP inputs may be
important for nonspatial forms of learning, in-
cluding contextual fear conditioning (CFC) (18),
a hippocampus-dependent form of memory. We
therefore examined the effect of silencing the
LRIPs on CFC using the engineered ligand-gated
glycine receptor (GlyR), PSAM (pharmacogeneti-
cally selective actuator module), which powerfully
inhibits neural activity upon binding its cognate
synthetic ligand PSEM308 (pharmacogenetically
selective effector module) (11, 19). To selectively
silence the LEC LRIPs in CA1 without altering
inhibition in EC, we implanted bilateral cannulae
to locally infuse PSEM (15 mM, PSEM308) in dorsal
CA1 of Gad2-Cre mice expressing either GFP
(control) or PSAM (test) as a result of rAAVCre
injections in LEC (Fig. 2, A and B, and figs. S4
and S5). We verified that the local drug infusion
selectively targeted LRIPs in hippocampus and
spared EC by examining the distribution of the
dye miniRuby (5%), which was present in the PSEM
infusate (fig. S4, S5). PSEM308 infusion did not
alter locomotor activity or cause anxiety-like be-
havior, which indicated that the drug infusion
did not have significant adverse effects (fig. S7).
To test if the LRIPs were required for CFC, we
infused PSEM just before the training phase on
day 1 of the CFC task, in which the mice were
placed in a novel context A for 2.5 min, followed
by a brief, aversive foot shock (Fig. 2C) (see Ma-
terials and Methods below) (20). When placed
in the training environment (context A) 24 hours
after training (day 2, no PSEM present), the con-
trol (GFP-expressing) group demonstrated fear
learning, as assessed by increased freezing be-
havior (Fig. 2D). However, rather than inhibiting
CFC, silencing of the LEC LRIPs during training
on day 1 significantly increased freezing on day 2
in context A [37.7 ± 2.3%, GFP, n = 9; 53.23 ±
2.7%, PSAM, n = 7; P < 0.0001, two-way analysis of
variance(ANOVA);P<0.001,ttest,two-tailedpaired
by time) (Fig. 2D), which demonstrated that the
LRIPs were not necessary for contextual learning.
However, when we exposed the mice on day 3
of the task to a novel context B, designed to be
readily distinguishable from context A, the two
groups of mice showed a revealing difference.
Whereas the control mice did not freeze in the
novel context, reflecting the normal specificity of
CFC to the training context, the PSAM-expressing
test group (where the LRIPs were only silenced
during training in context A on day 1) exhibited a
significant level of inappropriate freezing to the
novel context (GFP: 5.1 ± 3.9%, n = 9; PSAM: 21.1 ±
7.9%, n = 7; P < 0.02, two-way ANOVA; P < 0.05,
two-tailed t test paired by time) (Fig. 2D). The
freezing to the novel context B in the test group
was also significantly greater than the amount
of freezing in context A before training (P <
0.0002), which suggested that the freezing
represented an inappropriately learned response
that caused an overgeneralization of fear mem-
ory. In contrast, the control group showed sim-
ilar, low levels of freezing to context A on day
1 and context B on day 3 (P > 0.5). Finally, the
difference in fear learning was specific for
hippocampus-dependent CFC and did not reflect
a general increase in fear or anxiety because the
two groups of mice displayed similar extents of
amygdala-dependent cued fear conditioning to
a tone paired with the foot shock (Fig. 2D).
We next tested the importance of the LRIPs in
a second nonspatial memory task, novel object
recognition, using a version of the task that is
aaa5694-2
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 1. LEC provides strong long-range GABAergic inputs to local CA1 inhibitory neurons. (A) LEC
and MEC viral injection sites (in green) and their hippocampal target (HC, in gray). (B) T
dT
omato-labeled
(magenta) and GFP-labeled (green) axons in SLM of CA1 from LEC and MEC Gad2-Cre+ LRIPs, respec-
tively.4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) stain in blue.The strata of hippocampal CA1 and dentate gyrus
(DG): SP
, stratum pyramidalis signifies pyramidal neuron (PN) cell body layer; SR, stratum radiatum where
SC inputs arrive; SLM, stratum lacunosum moleculare where EC inputs arrive; and in DG, ML, molecular
layer, and GCL, granule cell layer. (C) Scheme of experiment to functionally map impact of LRIPs from LEC
or MEC on CA1 INs at SR-SLM border.ChR2-EYFP was virallyexpressed in GABAergic neurons in the LEC or
MEC by using rAAVCre injections in Gad2-Cre mice. Patch-clamp recordings obtained from a CA1 IN (red) at
the border of SR-SLM that targets the CA1 PN dendrite (light blue). A 470-nm laser light focused on SLM
photostimulated ChR2+ LRIPs (green). (D) A 20× confocal image of ChR2-EYFP+ LRIP axons from LEC
(green) in hippocampus from Gad2-Cre mouse. DAPI staining in blue. (E) These 63× confocal images show
ChR2-EYFP+ LRIP axons from LEC (green) in CA1 SLM region impinging upon tdT
omato+ IN soma
(magenta). (F) Light-evoked IPSCs recorded from CA1 SR-SLM INs in normal extracellular solution (control,
blue) and in the presence of AMPA-type glutamate receptor blocker (10 mM NBQX, green trace) or GABA
receptor antagonists (2 mM SR95531 and 1 mM CGP 55845, red trace); see fig. S1 for statistics. (G) Bar
(mean ± SEM) and scatter (individual cells) plot of the light-evoked IPSCs (pA, Vm = +10 mV) from
responsive CA1 SR-SLM INs with ChR2 expressed in LEC (magenta, 139 ± 24.8 pA, n = 17) or MEC (green,
37.7 ± 4.5 pA, n = 11; P < 0.005, t test, LEC LRIP versus MEC LRIP).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 hippocampus-dependent (21–25) (Fig. 2E). Mice
were exposed to two objects during two 10-min
training trials. After a 10-min delay, one of the
now-familiar objects was substituted with a
novel object, and the time spent exploring the
novel versus familiar object was determined. The
control group explored the old object for 25.6 ±
4.3 s and the new object for 66.3 ± 13.5 s (n = 6;
P < 0.05, paired t test), which indicated object
recognition memory. Similar to CFC, the LRIPs
were not required for object memory storage as
mice treated with PSEM during the training
trials explored the novel object for a significantly
longer time (86.4 ± 7.5 s) than they explored the
familiar object (49.4 ± 3.6 s; n = 6; P < 0.05,
paired t test) (Fig. 2F). However, the LRIPs were
required for optimal memory storage, as the de-
gree of memory performance, measured by the
discrimination index for the two objects (Fig. 2G,
see legend), was significantly greater for control
(0.52 ± 0.06; n = 6) than for PSEM-treated mice
(0.29 ± 0.06; n = 6; P < 0.05, paired t test). PSEM
treatment also decreased the habituation that
mice normally show to the objects during the
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-3
Fig. 2. Silencing LEC LRIPs in CA1 alters both
context and object recognition memory. (A) Dia-
gram of the experimental design. Gad2-Cre mice
were injected with AAVCre to express GFP or PSAM
in LEC. PSEM and the dye mini Ruby (mRuby) were
delivered bilaterally to the CA1 region just before
the training phase of memory tasks. (B) Confocal
image (5×) of coronal section from a Gad2-Cre
mouse injected in LEC with an AAVCre-expressing
PSAM-2A-GFP
, showing expression of GFP (green)
in LEC (DAPI in blue). (C) Scheme of CFC (see
Materials and Methods). On day 1, mice were ex-
posed to context A, then given a tone followed by
footshock. On day 2, mice were reexposed to
context A. On day 3, mice were exposed to novel
context B, followed by a tone. PSEM was delivered
just before training in mice expressing GFP (con-
trol) or PSAM in LRIPs. (D) Bar plot (mean ± SEM)
of time spent freezing (GFP
, green; PSAM, purple):
day 1, in context A before (Ctx A) and after (CS+US)
footshock; day 2, during recall testing in context A;
day 3, in novel context B before (Ctx B) and after
cued tone (day 3 CS).Two-way repeated-measures
ANOVA revealed no significant difference between
groups in freezing on day 1 in context A (treat-
ment × time F6,105 = 0.8055, P = 0.5679; treatment
F1,105 = 3.655, P = 0.0586; time F6, 105 = 8.583, P <
0.0001). There was significantly greater freezing
in PSAM versus GFP groups in context A on day 2
(treatment × time F4,48 = 0.8918, P = 0.4761;
treatment F12,48 = 5.069, P < 0.0001; time F4,48 =
11.75, P < 0.0001) and in context B (no tone) on
day 3 (treatment × time F3,45 = 1.230, P = 0.3069;
treatment F15,45 = 2.246, P < 0.02; time F3,45 =
53.01, P < 0.0001). The PSAM group also showed
significantly greater freezing on day 3 in context B
versus context A on day 1 before footshock (treat-
ment F12,24 = 5.332; time F2,24 = 19.76; P < 0.0002).
The GFP control group showed no significant dif-
ference in freezing in context A on day 1 versus
context B on day 3 [treatment F18,18 = 0.4932;
time F2,18 = 12.84; P = 0.928, not significant (n.s.)].
(E) Schematic of experiment to test effect of
silencing LEC LRIPs on NOR. Mice were exposed
to two objects in training trials 1 and 2, followed by
a test trial in which one (now familiar or “old”)
object was replaced by a novel (“new”) object.
Before training, mice were infused with 0.5 ml of
either 15 mM PSEM308 plus miniRuby (silenced group,
+ PSEM) or miniRuby alone (control). Both groups
expressed PSAM in LEC. (F) Bar plots of time
spent with familiar (old) versus novel (new) object
in test trial. The PSEM-treated group explored the
old object for 49.4 ± 3.6 s (P < 0.005 versus
control) and the new object for 86.4 ± 7.5 s (n = 6;
P < 0.05, new versus old object, paired t test).
(G) The discrimination index, calculated as [(time spent exploring the new object) – (time spent exploring old object)]/(total exploration time), was significantly
greater in control versus PSEM-treated mice (P < 0.05, paired t test).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 aaa5694-4
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 3. Functional imaging of sensory coding in LEC LRIPs present in
SLM of CA1. (A) Diagram of in vivo imaging experiment.GCaMP6f was expressed
in dorsal LEC, by injecting Cre-dependent rAAV in Gad2-Cre/Ai 14 mice that also
expressed tdT
omato in all GABAergic neurons. A 40× water immersion objective
was used for two-photon imaging through a cranial window over CA1 in head-fixed
awake mice during multimodal sensory and behavioral stimuli presentation.
(B) Four examples of time-averaged images of GCaMP6f fluorescence in LEC
LRIP axons in SLM (green) with tdT
omato labeling CA1 interneurons (magenta).
(C) Experimental design of single-stimulus protocol. Imaging was performed in
blocks of four trials, each 40 s in duration. After a 10 ± 3 s baseline, one of four
types of stimuli—aversive air puff (A), water drop (W), tone (T), or light (L)—was
presented in random order for 200 ms, except the water drop was limited to
50 ms to prevent satiation. Each block was repeated to obtain at least five trials
per stimulus. The animal's behavioral response (running and licking) was
monitored. DF/F traces showing increased Ca2+ signal in a single bouton on an
LRIP axon in response to air puff. (D) Mean (± SEM) DF/F Ca2+ signal (PSTH)
from responsive ROIs to indicated stimuli. (E) Percentage of responsive boutons
to the stimuli (air = 22.92%,water = 11.96%, tone = 13.64%, and light = 5.65%).
(F) Scatter and mean (± SEM) plots of DF/F signals from individual responsive
boutons (air = 0.55 ± 0.05, n = 68; water = 0.58 ± 0.07
, n = 35; tone = 0.37 ±
0.03, n = 37; light = 0.23 ± 0.02, n = 18). (G) Experimental protocol: Imaging was
performed as described above, but in response to pairs of stimuli, presented in
blocks of 10 trials, each 40 s long. Stimuli were randomized and paired stimuli
were interleaved with single stimulus presentations. (H) Mean (± SEM) DF/FCa2+
signal (PSTH) from responsive ROIs to paired stimuli. (I) Percentage of responsive
boutons for paired stimuli (A+T = 32.8%; A+L = 45.3%; A+W = 25.4%; W+T =
13.3%; W+L = 15.6%; T+L = 14.1%). (J) Scatter and mean (± SEM) plots of DF/F
signals to paired stimuli from individual responsive boutons (A+T = 0.76 ± 0.07
,
n = 44; A+L = 0.74 ± 0.05, n = 58; A+W = 0.34 ± 0.03, n = 31; W+T = 0.48 ±
0.09, n = 17; W+L = 0.49 ± 0.04; T+L = 0.41 ± 0.045, n = 18).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 second of the two training trials (fig. S7) (P < 0.005).
Thus, although the LRIPs were not necessary for
memory storage in two separate hippocampus-
dependent nonspatial memory tasks, these inputs
were important for enhancing the specificity of
memory associations in performance of the two
tasks.
LEC GABAergic inputs to CA1 are
activated by sensory, motivational, and
aversive stimuli in vivo
To explore how the LRIPs encode signals that
might contribute to performance of nonspatial
memory tasks, we used Ca2+ imaging to examine
the responses of these inputs to a variety of sen-
sory cues. We injected rAAVCre in LEC of GAD2-
Cre mice to express the genetically encoded Ca2+
indicator GCaMP6f (26) in GABAergic neurons.
In vivo two-photon microscopy was then used to
image Ca2+ signals in LRIP axons and axon ter-
minals in the CA1 SLM region in response to a
light stimulus, tone, aversive air puff, or water
reward (Fig. 3, A to C) as described (27, 28).
The sensory and behaviorally relevant stimuli
elicited transient Ca2+ signals in LRIP axons and
presynaptic boutons (Fig. 3, D to F), with the
aversive air puff eliciting the largest increase in
fluorescence intensity relative to the resting flu-
orescence intensity (DF/F = 0.55 ± 0.05) and
greatest percentage of responsive boutons (22.9%).
This result is of interest, as the aversive air puff is
capable of serving as the unconditioned stimulus
in a head-fixed CFC protocol (28). Water reward
elicited a comparable Ca2+ signal in responsive
boutons (DF/F = 0.58 ± 0.07) (movie S1), but only
half as many boutons responded (11.9%) as com-
pared with the response to the air puff.
As environmental contexts are composed of
multisensory modalities, we also examined LRIP
responses to pairs of stimuli (Fig. 3G). Paired
stimuli tended to evoke larger Ca2+ responses
in a greater fraction of boutons than did single
stimuli. Pairing tone or light with air puff led to a
1.4-, 2.0-, and 3.2-fold greater Ca2+ response than
when air puff, tone, or light were presented alone,
respectively, with a 2- to 8-fold increase in the
fraction of active boutons (Fig. 3, H to J). Where-
as individual boutons usually responded to at
most one or two of the four individual stimuli,
collectively the LRIPs were able to represent
thefoursensory modalities examined (fig. S8D).
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-5
Fig. 4. CCK IN excitation and spike firing is
suppressed 15 to 20 ms after LRIP activation.
(A) Confocal projection image (left) showing CCK+
(GFP
, green), PV+ (immunostained, magenta), and
SOM+ (immunostained, blue) IN soma in a hippo-
campal section from a CCK-Cre/DLX-Flpe/RCE
dual-reporter mouse. Note abundant GFP+ CCK IN
soma at the SR-SLM border (arrowhead). (B) Z-axis
projection image (right) ofa GFP+ CCK IN at SR-SLM
border filled with neurobiotin-Alexa 555 (white).
(C) Zoomed in image of IN in (B), showing GFP (top)
and Alexa 555-neurobiotin (middle) colabeling (bot-
tom, yellow). Scale bar, 10 mm. (D to F) Whole-cell
voltage recordings from IN in (B) and (C). (D) Spike
firing and voltage sag in response to 700-ms, 200 pA
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current steps,
respectively. (E) Depolarizing PSP evoked by SC
stimulation. (F) Mixed depolarizing and hyper-
polarizing PSP evoked by EC stimulation (black).
Bath application of NBQX (10 mM) and D-APV
(100 mM) blocked the depolarization but not the
hyperpolarization (green trace). (G) A 63× projec-
tion image of PSAM (a-bungarotoxin Alexa 647,
blue) and ChR2-EGFP (green) showing coexpres-
sion in ~75% of EC INs in horizontal brain section
from a Gad2-Cre mouse injected in LEC and MEC
with rAAVCre. (H) Experimental scheme showing
whole-cell recording from a CA1 SR-SLM IN with
photostimulation of LRIPs or electrical activation of
EC inputs. (I) Voltage-clamped IPSCs (at +10 mV)
from CCK+ IN (verified by post hoc staining) evoked
by photostimulation of LRIPs in the absence (blue
trace) or presence (red trace) of PSEM (3 mM).
(J) Voltage responses in CA1 IN evoked by elec-
trical stimulation of EC (top) or SC (bottom) inputs
in the absence (control, blue trace) or presence (red
trace) of PSEM. (K) Voltage responses of CA1
SR-SLM IN to paired electrical stimulation of EC
and SC inputs (20-ms delay) in the absence (blue
trace) or presence (red trace) of PSEM. (L) Mean
probability of SR-SLM IN spike firing (percent of
stimuli eliciting a spike ±SEM) in response to paired
EC-SC stimulation as a function of pairing interval
in the absence and presence of PSEM (spike proba-
bility with –20-ms EC-SC pairing: control = 18 ± 4%;
PSEM = 70 ± 10%; P < 0.005, n = 7).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Moreover, the probability that a single bouton
responded to three distinct pairs of stimuli was
higher thanpredicted froma random, independent
distribution of boutons based on the measured
response to individual pairs of stimuli. Thus, a
subpopulation of LRIPs may be specifically tuned
to encode multimodal sensory cues, similar to
what constitutes a behavioral context.
Spontaneous motor behaviors, such as spon-
taneous running and licking, also elicited Ca2+
responses in the LRIPs (fig. S8E). Although the
aversive air puff typically elicited a running re-
sponse, the air puff recruited a greater fraction of
boutons and evoked a larger Ca2+ signal com-
pared with that seen with spontaneous running.
This indicates a specific sensory contribution to
the air-puff response. Furthermore, LRIP boutons
that made apparent contacts on dendrites had
larger Ca2+ responses than did boutons that
targeted SR-SLM interneuron somata (fig. S8, F
and G).
We wondered why different boutons showed
such diverse responses to different stimuli. One
clue came from the finding that boutons along a
single axon responded more uniformly to a set of
sensory cues than did neighboring boutons from
different axonal fibers (fig. S8, H and I). This
indicated that the variability in bouton response
was likely not caused by random trial-to-trial
variability but rather resulted from the specific
tuning of individual LRIP axons to distinct com-
binations of sensory and behavioral cues. This
finding is consistent with the idea that these in-
puts are important for regulating nonspatial con-
textual and object memory.
LRIPs from LEC transiently inhibit spike
output of local CA1 dendrite-targeting
feedforward inhibitory neurons
How do the long-range GABAergic projections
influence information flow through the cortico-
hippocampal circuit to regulate memory storage?
We began to investigate this question by perform-
ing whole-cell recordings from cholecystokinin-
positive (CCK+) SR-SLM interneurons, which
represent a large fraction of the SR-SLM border
INs targeted by the LRIPs (fig. S9). Moreover, the
CCK+ INs receive strong excitatory drive from
the SCs and send strong inhibitory output to CA1
pyramidal neuron dendrites (11, 29, 30).
To determine how the CCK+ INs integrate
their cortical and hippocampal inputs, we elec-
trically stimulated the SC axons (using an elec-
trode in SR) or a mixed population of excitatory
and inhibitory EC axons (using an electrode in
SLM). We then recorded the synaptic responses
in genetically defined CCK+ SR-SLM INs tagged
with GFP (11, 16) (Fig. 4, A to C). These neurons
displayed a large voltage sag in response to
hyperpolarization and an intermediate firing
pattern, characteristic of CCK+ INs (29, 31–33)
(Fig. 4D).
SC stimulation elicited a strongly depolarizing
PSP in the CCK+ INs, with a peak amplitude of
9.83 ± 0.17 mV at 50% maximal stimulation
strength (Fig. 4E). In contrast, EC stimulation
evoked a mixed EPSP-IPSP (inhibitory post-
synaptic potential peak depolarization of 0.79 ±
0.34 mV) that was dominated by a large hyper-
polarization, which reached its peak negative
value (–5.59 ± 0.17 mV, n = 7) ~20 ms after the
stimulus (Fig. 4F). As we show below, the time
course of the hyperpolarization imposes a pre-
cise timing dependence for disinhibition, which
regulates the timing of the induction of ITDP
and the generation of dendritic spikes in response
to paired stimulation of the EC and SC inputs.
The EC-evoked IPSP was unaffected by blockers
of glutamatergic transmission NBQX 10 mM and
2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV) 100 mM,
which demonstrated that it resulted from direct
activation of GABAergic axons rather than disyn-
aptic FFI (Fig. 4F).
To determine whether the electrically evoked
IPSP in CA1 INs was caused by GABA release from
the EC LRIPs, we silenced these projections using
the PSAM-PSEM approach (Fig. 4, G and H). Two
independent rAAVCre vectors expressing ChR2
and PSAM were injected into LEC and MEC of
Gad2-Cre mice (Fig. 4G). The light-evoked IPSC
recorded from SR-SLM INs was fully blocked by
local bath application of 3 to 5 mM PSEM308
(IPSC = 0.013 ± 0.04 pA, n = 11), which verified
aaa5694-6
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 5. LRIPs suppress SC-evoked FFI from CCK+ SR-SLM INs. (A) Con-
focal projection image of a CA1 PN filled with Alexa 594 (red) in a slice where
CCK+ INs expressed ChR2-EGFP (green). Blue circle represents the perim-
eter of 470-nm light stimulus. (B) Experimental scheme depicting somatic
recording from a CA1 PN (red); electrical stimulation of EC inputs in SLM was
paired at variable delays with photostimulation of CCK+ INs. (C) IPSCs evoked
by photostimulation of CCK+ INs (hv) recorded from soma of a voltage-clamped
CA1 PN (+10 mv) during paired electrical stimulation of EC inputs (arrow) at
0, 10-, 20-, 30-, and 40-ms delays. (D) IPSCs in CA1 PNs evoked by electrical
stimulation of EC inputs and photostimulation of CCK+ INs. Gray trace (ChR2
only), CA1 PN IPSC evoked by photostimulation of CCK+ IN. Black trace (EC),
CA1 PN IPSC evoked by electrical stimulation of EC input. Blue trace (EC+ChR2),
net IPSC evoked by pairing EC electrical stimulation with photostimulation
of CCK+ IN (20-ms delay). Red trace (difference), inferred CCK+ IN IPSC
evoked when EC electrical stimulation preceded photostimulation of CCK+
IN by 20 ms. Trace obtained by subtracting EC-evoked IPSC (black trace)
from IPSC evoked during paired stimulation (blue trace). (E) Effect of
pairing interval on EC-dependent suppression of IPSC evoked by photo-
stimulation of CCK+ INs or PV+ INs. Mean (±SEM) amplitude of photostimulation-
evoked IPSC during pairing with EC stimulation [measured as in (D)]
normalized by photostimulated IPSC amplitude in the absence of EC stim-
ulation, plotted versus pairing interval. ChR2-EGFP expressed in either
PV+ INs (magenta, 1.01 ± 0.03-fold change at –20-ms pairing interval, P =
0.3319, paired two-tailed t test, n = 5) or CCK+ INs (green, 0.76 ± 0.03-fold
decrease in IPSC at –20-ms pairing interval, P < 0.001 paired two-tailed t test, n
= 9).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the efficacy of this method (Fig. 4I). Silencing the
LRIPs nearly abolished the hyperpolarizing
component of the mixed PSP evoked by electrical
stimulation (peak negative value reduced to –0.29 ±
0.21 mV, n = 7), whereas it increased the peak de-
polarization during the PSP (to 4.79 ± 0.79 mV),
which demonstrated the importance of this pro-
jection. PSEM caused no change in the PSP evoked
by electrical stimulation of the SC axons in SR (Fig.
4J), which indicated the specificity of the approach.
Does LRIP activation affect action potential
output of the SR-SLM INs in response to paired
stimulation of their EC and SC inputs? Electri-
cal stimulation of the EC pathway alone failed
to trigger spike firing (Fig. 4K), consistent with
the weak depolarizing phase of the mixed EPSP-
IPSP response (Fig. 4F). In contrast, moderately
strong stimulation of the SC pathway alone (50 mA
stimulus current injection) elicited a large de-
polarizing PSP that triggered a spike in SR-SLM
INs with >50% probability (Fig. 4L). However,
when the SC stimulus was preceded by a stimu-
lus to the EC inputs that occurred 15 to 20 ms
before stimulation of the SC inputs, the ability of
the SC inputs to trigger action potentials in the
SR-SLM INs was suppressed (Fig. 4, K and L).
The timing dependence of spike suppression
(Fig. 4L) coincided with the maximal hyper-
polarization of the SR-SLM INs in response to EC
stimulation, which suggested that the suppres-
sion of spike firing was mediated by the activa-
tion of the LRIP inputs. Consistent with this idea,
silencing the LRIPs with PSAM-PSEM prevented
the suppression of spike firing upon electrical
stimulation of the EC inputs (Fig. 4, K and L).
LRIPs provide a temporally precise
gate of hippocampal input to CA1
pyramidal neurons
What are the consequences of the LRIP-mediated
suppression of SR-SLM IN firing for the activity
of CA1 pyramidal neurons? To examine this ques-
tion, we virally expressed ChR2 in CCK+ INs in
the CA1 SR/SLM region and measured the light-
evoked IPSC in CA1 pyramidal neurons voltage-
clamped at +10 mV (Fig. 5, A and B). Photo-
stimulation of the CCK+ INs with a light pulse
focused in SR produced a robust IPSC in the
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-7
Fig. 6. LRIPs enhance CA1 pyramidal neuron dendritic depolarization in
response to SC stimulation through disinhibition. (A) Experimental scheme
for assessing the synaptic response in CA1 PN dendrites to paired EC-SC
electrical stimulation. Horizontal lines show approximate locations of EC and
SC stimulation electrodes and dendritic recording pipette. (B) Dendritic voltage
responses to paired EC-SC electrical stimulation at indicated delays (SC after
EC), in the absence (left) or presence (right) of GABAR antagonists SR 95531
(2 mM) and CGP 55845 (1 mM). Gray dashed line, amplitude of PSP evoked by
SC stimulation alone. Red dashed line, predicted linear sum of PSPs evoked by
EC and SC paired stimulation. (C) Summary plot (mean ± SEM) of paired EC-
SC peak PSP normalized by PSP evoked by SC stimulation alone recorded in
CA1 PN proximal dendrites. PSPs measured in the absence (blue squares)
and presence (red circles) of GABAR blockers (EC-SC –20-ms pairing: with
inhibition intact, fold change = 1.35 ± 0.02; with inhibition blocked, fold change
= 1.08 ± 0.03; P = 0.001, two-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons
test, n = 5). (D) Experimental scheme to determine how silencing LRIPs
(denoted by X) affects PSP in CA1 PN distal dendrites during paired EC-SC
stimulation. PSAM expressed in LEC GABAergic neurons in GAD2-Cre mouse
with AAVCre. (E) CA1 PN distal dendrite PSPs evoked by paired stimulation of
EC-SC inputs at indicated intervals,first in the absence (left) and then the presence
(right) of PSEM. (F) Mean (± SEM) PSP amplitude recorded in CA1 PN distal
dendrites evoked by paired EC-SC stimulation normalized by PSPevoked bySC
stimulation alone, in the absence (blue squares) and presence (red circles) of
PSEM.PSEMsignificantlyreducedtheeffectofpairedEC-SCstimulationat–20-ms
delay to increase PSPsize (control, 1.45 ± 0.07-fold increase; PSEM, 1.04 ± 0.07-fold
increase; P < 0.001, two-way ANOVA with Sidak multiple comparisons test, n = 8).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 CA1 pyramidal neuron soma (~250 mm from the
light spot). Electrical stimulation of the EC in-
puts 20 ms before photostimulation significantly
suppressed the light-evoked IPSC (to 75.6 ± 2.7%
of the unpaired light-evoked IPSC, n = 9; P <
0.0001, two-way ANOVA) (Fig. 5, C to E), with
little change at other pairing intervals. Electrical
stimulationdidnot alterthelight-evokedIPSCwhen
ChR2-EYFP was expressed in PV+ INs, regardless
of pairing interval, which indicated the specificity
of the effect. As ChR2 photostimulation provides
anunusually strongexcitatory drive compared with
anactionpotential,theLRIPsarelikelytoproducean
evengreatersuppressionof the CCK+ IN–mediated
IPSP evoked by excitatory synaptic input.
Does the suppression of CCK+ IN firing by the
LRIPs influence the ability of the EC or SC inputs
to excite CA1 pyramidal neurons? As the SR-SLM
INs are known to target CA1 pyramidal neuron
apical dendrites, we addressed this question using
whole-cell recordings from CA1 pyramidal neuron
dendrites 150–300 mm from the soma in SR during
single or paired stimulation of the EC and SC
inputs (Fig. 6).
Stimulation of the SC input alone evoked a
large depolarizing PSP in the proximal dendrite
~150 mm from the soma (4.48 ± 0.57 mV, n = 5)
(fig. S10). Stimulation of the EC input alone
evoked only a very small dendritic depolarization
(1.00 ± 0.24 mV) (fig. S10). However, when we
stimulated the EC input 20 ms before the SC in-
put, we observed a supralinear boosting of dendritic
depolarization (Fig. 6, B and C), which resulted
in a net PSP that was 1.35 ± 0.02 times the PSP
evoked by stimulation of the SC pathway alone.
This boost was significantly greater than the pre-
dicted linear sum of 1.13 ± 0.024-fold for the SC
response alone (P < 0.05, t test; n = 5). Paired EC-SC
stimulation at the –20-ms interval was associ-
ated with an even greater 2.2-fold increase in the
postsynaptic Ca2+ transient evoked by SC stim-
ulation in CA1 pyramidal neuron dendritic spines
in SR, relative to the Ca2+ transient elicited by SC
input alone (fig. S10) (P < 0.001, t test, n = 5).
It was striking that the supralinear boosting
was sharply tuned to the –20-ms pairing in-
terval. Paired activation of EC and SC inputs at
other intervals resulted in linear or sublinear
summation (Fig. 6, B and C). Moreover, pairing
at the –10-ms interval produced a significantly
lower boosting in spine Ca2+ compared with the
–20-ms interval (1.3-fold, P < 0.0001, t test, n = 5).
The timing dependence of the supralinear boost-
ing of the CA1 pyramidal neuron PSP suggested
to us that it might result from a disinhibitory
action of the LRIPs to suppress SC-evoked FFI
through the SR-SLM INs (Fig. 6D). We therefore
compared the effect of paired EC-SC stimulation
before and after application of GABA receptor
channel antagonists (Fig. 6, B and C). Blockade
of inhibition greatly increased the peak depolari-
zation during the PSP evoked by stimulation of
the EC and/or SC inputs, reflecting the removal
of FFI (Fig. 6B and fig. S10, B and C). Of note,
paired EC-SC stimulation produced only a linear
or sublinear summation at all pairing intervals
in the presence of the antagonists, consistent with
the view that supralinear summation was caused
by disinhibition. For example, pairing at a –10-ms
interval resulted in a net PSP 1.19 ± 0.06 times
that of the SC PSP alone and not significantly
different from the linear sum of the EC+SC PSPs
when stimulated independently (P = 0.238). In ad-
dition, the peak of the paired response was shifted
to the –10-ms pairing interval, which corresponds
to the expected peak of temporal summation of
the individual EC and SC EPSPs.
Next, we tested directly whether the LRIPs
were responsible for the supralinear boosting by
recording PSPs in distal CA1 pyramidal neuron
dendrites (300 mm from the soma) in response to
paired EC-SC stimulation, before and after silenc-
ing the LRIPs (Fig. 6, D to F). We found that
application of PSEM308 (3 mM) to slices in which
the LRIPs expressed PSAM fully prevented the
supralinear boosting (Fig. 6, E and F). Thus, we
propose that the EC LRIPs potentiate the ability
of the SC inputs to excite CA1 pyramidal neuron
dendrites by suppressing SC-evoked feedforward
inhibition mediated by the SR-SLM interneurons.
Disinhibition through LEC LRIPs enables
input timing–dependent plasticity and
dendritic spike firing
Given the behavioral role of the LRIPs in mem-
ory storage, we asked whether these inputs may
also contribute to more robust, longer-lasting
forms of SC input gating than the transient boost-
ing of dendritic depolarization and spine Ca2+
levels seen above. Paired EC-SC stimulation at
1 Hz for 90 s induces a long-lasting form of
heterosynaptic plasticity, termed input timing–
dependent plasticity (ITDP) which strongly en-
hances SC-evoked excitation of the CA1 pyramidal
neuron through combined long-term potentia-
tion of the SC EPSP and long-term depression of
inhibition mediated by somatic-targeting CCK+
basket cells (which are distinct from the CCK+
SR/SLM INs) (10, 11). As the induction of ITDP is
finely tuned to the same –20-ms pairing interval
optimal for LRIP-mediated disinhibition, we hy-
pothesized that the LRIPs from EC may be re-
quired for this plasticity. In support of this view,
we foundthat silencingof PSAM-expressing LRIPs,
either from LEC alone or from both LEC and MEC,
with PSEM308 fully blocked the induction of ITDP
(Fig. 7, A and B).
The above results suggest that the induction of
ITDP is normally suppressed by FFI evoked by
SC stimulation and, thus, requires LRIP activa-
tion to suppress this inhibition. This model would
also explain how the induction of ITDP is finely
tuned to the –20-ms pairing interval. This sce-
nario predicts that robust ITDP may be induced
over a broader range of intervals when EC-SC
paired stimulation is given in the presence of
GABAR antagonists, which would eliminate FFI
at all pairing intervals. Consistent with this model,
we found that the presence of GABAR blockers
aaa5694-8
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 7. LEC LRIPs enable induction of ITDP in CA1 PNs. (A) Experimental scheme to assess role of
LRIPs in ITDP
. PSAM or GFP was expressed in GABAergic neurons in LEC alone or in both LEC and MEC.
ITDP was induced by pairing EC-SC stimulation at 1 Hz for 90 s with a –20-ms delay. (B) Pairing protocol
induces a 2.65 ± 0.23-fold increase in the SC-evoked depolarization in the CA1 PN soma (ITDP relative to
baseline PSP) when PSEM is applied to slices expressing GFP in LEC GABAergic neurons (green, n = 5, P <
0.0001, two-tailed t test, before versus after ITDP pairing). ITDP is absent when the pairing protocol is
applied with PSEM present in slices expressing PSAM in GABAergic neurons in LEC alone (purple triangles,
1.09 ± 0.12-fold potentiation, n =4, P = 0.114, two-tailed t test before versus after ITDP pairing; P < 0.0001,
two-tailed t test for ITDP with GFP versus PSAM in LEC). ITDP is also absent in the presence of PSEM when
PSAM was expressed in both LEC and MEC (orange squares, 1.10 ± 0.31-fold potentiation, n = 4, P = 0.189,
two-tailed t test pre versus post ITDP pairing; P < 0.0001, two-tailed t test for ITDP with GFP versus PSAM
in LEC+MEC). Peak PSP value normalized to value 5 min before ITDP induction. Mean fold potentiation
obtained by averaging normalized PSP values during the 25- to 30-min period after ITDP induction.
(C) ITDP tuning curve showing potentiation (mean ± SEM) as a function of EC-SC pairing interval. Blue
circles,with inhibition intact (–10-ms interval, 1.25 ± 0.26-fold change, n = 4; –20-ms interval, 2.74 ± 0.18-fold
change, n = 5; –30-ms interval, 1.03 ± 0.19-fold change, n = 4). Red squares, ITDP with GABAR antagonists
applied only during induction protocol (–10 ms, 2.41 ± 0.15-fold change, n = 5; –20 ms, 3.15 ± 0.55-fold
change, n = 7; –30 ms, 2.8 ± 0.67-fold change, n = 4). Inhibition blocked versus intact, no significant
difference, P = 0.105 two way ANOVA –20, –10, and –30 ms comparison.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 during the ITDP induction protocol alone enabled
the induction of robust ITDP over a broader range
of pairing intervals, from –10 to –30 ms (Fig. 7I).
This ITDP tuning curve now matched the ex-
pected time course of temporal summation of
the EC and SC EPSPs (10).
How could the relatively modest boosting by
the LRIPs of the EC-SC synaptic depolarization
lead to such a robust form of plasticity? Many
forms of long-term synaptic plasticity that do not
depend on somatic action potentials [such as
ITDP (10, 11)] require the firing of dendritic
spikes, which can enhance Ca2+ influx into the
postsynaptic cell (34, 35). Thus, we next exam-
ined whether more prolonged EC-SC pairing,
as used to induce ITDP, promoted dendritic
spiking, using whole-cell recordings from distal
CA1 pyramidal neuron dendrites (≥300 mm from
the soma) (Fig. 8A).
Although single paired–EC-SC stimulation failed
to elicit a dendritic spike, large regenerative
spikes began to appear when we delivered 10 or
more paired EC-SC stimuli at 1 Hz using a –20-ms
interval (Fig. 8B). Event amplitude frequency his-
tograms (Fig. 8C) showed three peaks, correspond-
ing to subthreshold PSPs (~20 mV amplitude);
small, brief action potentials (~40 mV) resembling
dendritic Na+ spikes (34, 36); and longer, larger
events (~60 mV) resembling dendritic Ca2+ spikes
(34, 36, 37). Both types of spikes were preferen-
tially generated at the –20-ms pairing interval
compared with a –10-ms pairing interval. Both
types of spikes also required LRIP input as spike
probability greatly decreased when the LEC
LRIPs were silenced with PSAM-PSEM (Fig. 8,
D to F).
Experiments using two-photon Ca2+ imaging
in CA1 pyramidal neurons supported the view that
the dendritic spikes may contribute to the induc-
tion of ITDP. Repetitive stimulation of EC-SC
inputs at 1 Hz using a –20-ms pairing interval led
to long-lasting Ca2+ signals in the apical dendrites
that propagated to the soma (fig. S10, F and G).
These dendritic signals provide a likely source
for the intracellular Ca2+ required for the induction
of ITDP (10, 11). Pairing-induced dendritic spikes
gated by the LRIPs may thus provide a powerful
nonlinear mechanism for the long-term enhance-
ment of SC-mediated excitation in response to tem-
porally precise, coordinated cortico-hippocampal
dendritic activity.
Discussion
The importance of excitatory projections from
LEC and MEC to hippocampus for memory stor-
age and spatial encoding is well established (38).
MEC also sends LRIPs to hippocampus that form
synapses on CA1 SR-SLM GABAergic interneurons
(4), although the in vivo function of these inputs
was not determined. Here, we report that LEC
sends LRIPs to CA1 that exert an even stronger
inhibitory drive on CA1 SR-SLM INs than the
LRIPs from MEC. We also found that LRIPs from
LEC convey multimodal sensory information that
helps fine-tune the specificity of hippocampus-
dependent contextual memory storage and en-
hances the ability to distinguish novel from familiar
objects. Finally, the LRIPs provide a temporally
precise disinhibitory gating mechanism for en-
hancing information flow within the hippocam-
pal circuit at both short and long time scales.
Within the context of the cortico-hippocampal
circuit, the LRIPs transiently suppress dendritic
FFI to enhance excitatory signals from the trisyn-
aptic path that arrive at CA1 pyramidal neurons
precisely 20 ms after LRIP activation. The effect
of this disinhibitory gating has ramifications across
widely differenttimescales. Activationof theLRIPs
with a single pairing of EC-SC stimulation at a
–20-ms interval causes a transient supralinear
boost in local dendritic depolarization and prox-
imal spine Ca2. Repetitive paired stimulation of
EC and SC inputs at the same interval leads to
further amplification of synaptic input by promot-
ing the firing of dendritic spikes (8, 9) and the
induction of ITDP, a robust Ca2+-dependent form
of long-term heterosynaptic plasticity (10, 11).
Given that dendritic spikes are normally suppressed
by strong FFI (9), the ability of the LRIPs to en-
hance dendritic spiking during a precise tempo-
ral window may contribute to the dendritic spike
firing in vivo observed during behaviorally rele-
vant cooperativeactivity(39). TheLRIP-dependent
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-9
Fig. 8. EC-SC pairing at –20-ms
interval induces dendritic spikes.
(A) Image showing CA1 PN filled with
Alexa 594 during a distal dendritic
recording. (B) Dendritic PSPs (blue),
brief spikes (magenta), and long
spikes (green) evoked by 10- to 30-s
repetitive pairing of EC-SC inputs at
1 Hz with –20- or –10-ms pairing
intervals. During the first 5 to
10 paired stimuli, only subthreshold
PSPs (blue) were observed. Sub-
threshold PSPs, brief spikes, and long
spikes were then observed inter-
spersed with subsequent paired
stimuli. (C) Histograms of the peak
dendritic voltage response evoked by
a train of 30 paired EC-SC stimuli at
1 Hz, by using a –20-ms (black open
bars) or –10-ms (gray filled bars)
pairing interval (P < 0.005, t test
within cell comparisons for –20 ms
vs –10 ms; n = 3). Responses were
classified on the basis of amplitude and
duration as subthreshold PSPs (blue)
or dendritic spikes (magenta, brief
spikes; green, long spikes. (D) Experi-
mental scheme to assess the role
of LRIPs in dendritic spike firing.
PSAM was virally expressed in LEC
of Gad2-Cre mice. (E and F) Distal
dendritic responses (E) and event
amplitude histograms (F) to paired
EC-SC stimulation at 1 Hz by using a
–20-ms delay interval in the absence (blue) and then presence (red) of PSEM (P < 0.0001, t test within cell comparisons, control vs. +PSEM; n = 3).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 dendritic spikes are likely to participate in the in-
duction of ITDP and the fine-tuning of learning
and memory; this likelihood is based on the role
ofsuchspikesinbothotherformsofCa2+-dependent
synaptic plasticity (34, 35, 40) and nonlinear gain
modulation during associative learning (35) and
sensory tuning (41).
Our findings, together with previous results
(28, 42–45), further demonstrate how distinct
populations of local interneurons play well-defined
roles in hippocampus-dependent behaviors and
circuit function. We found that CCK+ INs located
near the SR-SLM border exert strong FFI onto CA1
pyramidal neuron dendrites; LRIP-mediated tran-
sient suppression of these INs enables tempo-
rally precise supralinear dendritic excitation. The
GABAR kinetics, CA1 pyramidal neuron membrane
time constant (29, 46), and in vivo firing patterns
(47) of the CCK+ INs are all likely to participate in
ensuring that the kinetics of the LRIP-mediated
IPSP are appropriately tuned to implement the
20-ms gating of information flow from the SC
inputs to CA1 pyramidal neurons. Of note, mice
have been found to display an overgeneralized
contextual learning phenotype when signaling
in CA1 CCK+ INs is perturbed (48), similar to our
behavioral findings when the LRIPs that target
these INs are silenced.
The role of the CCK+ SR-SLM border INs in
implementing the ITDP timing rule contrasts with
the role in ITDP of a separate subclass of CCK+
INs, the perisomatic-targeting basket cells located
in and around the CA1 pyramidal neuron cell
body layer (11). Previously, we found that the ex-
pression of ITDP results from the combined ef-
fects of long-term potentiation of the SC excitatory
synapses on CA1 pyramidal neurons and the
long-term depression of FFI from a population
of perisomatic-targeting CCK+ basket cell INs
onto the same CA1 pyramidal cells (11). Thus,
anatomically distinct subpopulations of the same
genetically defined class of CCK+ INs are specifi-
cally involved in the induction versus the expres-
sion of ITDP. Yet another class of CA1 INs, the
somatostatin-positive (SOM+) dendrite targeting
INs, has been found to be required for CFC (28).
These INs serve to suppress EC input to CA1 py-
ramidal neuron dendrites during aversive stimuli,
thereby ensuring that the unconditioned stimulus
is not encoded as part of the contextual repre-
sentation. Thus, distinct populations of GABAergic
INs participate in distinct microcircuits to regulate
separate phases of memory encoding.
What is the significance of the precise 20-ms
temporal window for LRIP-dependent disinhib-
itory gating? One interesting possibility is sug-
gested by the fact that this interval is matched to
the dynamics of the delay-line architecture of the
cortico-hippocampal circuit, where signals prop-
agating through the trisynaptic path arrive at
CA1 pyramidal neurons about 15 to 20 ms after
the arrival of signals through the direct path (49).
Thus, the temporal dynamics of LRIP-mediated
disinhibition will enhance the propagation to a
given CA1 pyramidal neuron of those signals ar-
riving through the trisynaptic path that were ini-
tiated by activity in EC LII stellate cells (which
project to dentate gyrus) simultaneously with
activity in the subset of EC LII (3) and LIII py-
ramidal neurons (6) that directly project to the
same CA1 pyramidal neuron. This timing rule for
disinhibitory gating may therefore serve as a
filter to assess the salience of processed associa-
tions arriving from CA3 inputs on the basis of
their temporal relation to the direct multimodal
sensory inputs arriving from EC.
Because our studies of the effects of LRIP acti-
vation on CA1 pyramidal neuron function were
carried out in ex vivo hippocampal slices, a key
question is whether the 20-ms timing interval
between cortical and SC input that is required
for the boosting of SC excitation is implemented
by in vivo patterns of cortico-hippocampal activ-
ity. Studies of the temporal relation of oscillatory
activity in entorhinal cortex and hippocampus in
vivo suggest that the disinhibitory gating mech-
anism may indeed be engaged during spatial
behavior (50, 51) and associational learning (52).
For example, during running and memory tasks,
fast gamma oscillations (100 Hz) arising from EC
LIII are observed in SLM of CA1 and precede the
slow gamma oscillations (50 Hz) in SR of CA1, which
are thought to reflect CA3 pyramidal neuron input
(50). Notably, EC LIII–CA1gamma activity and CA3-
CA1 gamma activity display a 90° phase offset
during theta frequency oscillations (8 to 9 Hz) (50)
that is consistent with a ~20- to 25-ms time delay.
Learning is a critical adaptive behavior, and
the precision of memory storage normally en-
ables an animal to discriminate between harmful
(salient) versus safe (neutral) environments. Fail-
ure to do so can lead to overgeneralization of fear
memories, a characteristic feature of posttraumatic
stress and other anxiety disorders. How might the
effect of the LRIPs to enhance cortico-hippocampal
information flow contribute to their behavioral
role to enhance learning specificity? The increased
freezing in the conditioned and novel contexts
upon silencing the LRIPs indicates that the dis-
inhibitory circuit, and by implication ITDP, is
not required for generalized fear learning, which
may be implemented by other intrahippocampal
circuits (28, 53) or other forms of plasticity, such
as SC Hebbian LTP. Similarly, the LRIPs are
not needed for basic object recognition memory.
Rather, we suggest that the LRIPs may enhance
contextual and object memory storage and may
improve memory specificity by creating a sparse,
high-contrast ensemble of potentiated SC syn-
apses whose dynamics conform to the temporal
window of paired EC-SC associative inputs that
enables the induction of ITDP.
Materials and Methods
All experiments were conducted in accordance
with the National Institutes of Health guidelines
and with the approval of the Columbia University
and New York State Psychiatry Institute (NYSPI)
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Mice
Gad2-IRES-Cre (16), PV-IRES-Cre (54), and Ai14-
tdTomato (55) mouse lines were obtained from
the Jackson Laboratory (JAX); IRES refers to in-
ternal ribosomal entry site. The CCK IN-specific
enhancedgreenfluorescentprotein(EGFP)–labeled
line was generated as described in references
(11, 16). Briefly, CCK-IRES-Cre driver mice (gener-
ous gift of Z. J. Huang, Cold Spring Harbor Lab-
oratory) (11, 16) were crossed with the Dlx5/6-Flpe
driver mice [generous gift from G. Fishell, New York
University (56)] and a Cre- and Flp-dependent
EGFP reporter strain, R26NZG [JAX (57)].
Viruses
For anatomy and slice electrophysiology experi-
ments in Fig. 1, we used the following: (i) rAAV2/
1 EF1a-DIO-ChR2-EYFP (K. Deisseroth, Stanford
University), (ii) AAV2/9 CAG-Flex-EGFP, and (iii)
rAAV2/9 CAG-Flex-tdTomato [all prepared by Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania (UPenn) Vector Core]. Be-
havioral experiments in Fig. 2 utilized: (i) for the
PSAM-silencing group rAAV2/9 Syn-Flex-PSAM
(L141F)GlyR-IRES-GFP (plasmid generous gift from
S. Sternson, Janelia Farm; prepared by UPenn
Vector Core); and (ii) for the GFP control group
rAAV2/9 Syn-Flex-EGFP (B. Roth, University of
North Carolina; prepared by UNC Vector Core).
Imaging experiments in Fig. 4 used rAAV2/1 Syn-
Flex-GCaMP6f (L. Looger, Janelia Farm; prepared
by UPenn Vector Core). The following custom-
prepared viruses were used for the LRIP activa-
tion and silencing experiments in Fig. 5, G to L
and I to K, and Fig. 6, D to H: (i) rAAV2/7 Syn-
Flex-Chr2-sfGFP; and (ii) rAAV2/7 Syn-Flex-PSAM-
IRES-GFP [B. Zemelman, University of Texas at
Austin (UT Austin), both custom-prepared]. Ex-
periments in Fig. 6, A to E, involving (i) photo-
stimulation of GABAergic CCK-Cre+ INs used an
rAAV2/7 Gad65-(Chr2-sfGFP)Cre (B. Zemelman, UT
Austin, custom-prepared); (ii) photostimulation
of PV-Cre+ INs used rAAV2/5 EF1a-DIO-ChR2-
EYFP [K. Deisseroth, Stanford University, com-
mercially derived from UPenn (58)].
Surgery
Stereotaxic virus injection
The viral injection procedure is as previously
described (11, 59). Virus was injected into the
brains of mice under stereotactic control by
using thin glass pipettes pulled by using a mic-
ropipette puller and fire-polished with a micro-
forge to have a long taper ending with a 10-µm
tip diameter. Pipettes were first back-filled with
light mineral oil, then front-filled with the virus
by using a Nanoject II injector. Adult mice (5 to
10 weeks old) were injected with 50 µl buprenor-
phine (0.3 mg/ml), subsequently anesthetized
with 3.5% isofluorane for 3 min (1.5 ml/min flow
rate) in an induction chamber, head-fixed in a
stereotaxic frame, and maintained under anes-
thesia with 1.5 to 2.5% isofluorane (1 ml/min) with
a facemask. The hair on the head was clipped, the
scalp sterilized with ethanol and betadine, and a
5- to 7-mm incision made to expose the skull.
The skull was then cleaned with hydrogen
peroxide (0.1%), and the level adjusted to align
bregma and lambda in the z axis. Small crani-
otomies were made bilaterally to target the
dorsal hippocampal CA1 subfield [anteropos-
terior (A/P), –2.3 ± 0.2 from bregma; mediolateral
aaa5694-10
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (M/L), 1.5 ± 0.2 from bregma, dorsoventral (D/V),
–1.2 ± 0.2 mm from surface of the brain]; LEC
(A/P, –3.2 ± 0.2 from bregma; M/L, 4.5 ± 0.2
from bregma, D/V, –2.5 ± 0.2 mm); and MEC
(A/P 0.2 ± 0.2 from lamboid sinus at a 9° angle,
M/L 3.1 ± 0.2 from lambda, D/V 0.9 ± 0.1 from
surface of the brain). The pipette was lowered to
penetrate the dura and a total of ~92 to 115 nl
of virus was injected at each stereotactic coor-
dinate (23 nl at a time with a 30-s interval be-
tween injections) by using the Nanoject II auto
injector under slow mode. The pipette was re-
tracted from the brain after a 5-min waiting pe-
riod after the final injection per site. The scalp
was disinfected with betadine, treated with triple
antibiotic and the topical anesthetic Marcaine
(0.5%), and sutured. Mice were allowed to recover
for 2 to 4 weeks postinjection before the electro-
physiology experiments.
Hippocampal cannula guide implantation
To selectively silence the long-range inhibitory
projections from the entorhinal cortex to the hip-
pocampus, we used local infusion of the cognate
synthetic ligand PSEM in CA1 using a cannula.
The presurgical and craniotomy procedures were
identical to that of the stereotaxic viral injection.
The skull surface was dried completely and coated
with a thin layer of Vetbond and then lightly
scratched with a scalpel blade to form crevices
for the cement mix to seep in. A sterilized custom-
designed bilateral cannula guide with a dummy
cannula was inserted in the skull over dorsal
hippocampal CA1 (A/P, –2.2; M/L, 1.5, D/V, –1.7
from bregma) along with two stainless steel an-
choring screws inserted partially into the skull,
one over the prefrontal cortex and the other over
the cerebellum. The implant was secured to the
animal’s skull with dental cement (grip cement
or dental acrylic) and two bone screws. The ce-
ment was allowed to dry for 20 min, and the
wound was sutured around the implant. Marcaine
was applied locally to decrease postoperative pain.
Hippocampal cranial window implantation
The cranial window implantation method used
here is as described previously (27, 28). The pre-
surgical anesthesia and exposed skull prepara-
tion procedures were identical to that described
above. A 3-mm-diameter circle was drilled in the
skull over left dorsal CA1, to match the size of the
cannula window implant. The bone and dura
were gently removed, and the cortex covering the
hippocampus was slowly aspirated while con-
stant irrigation with chilled artificial cerebro-
spinal fluid (ACSF) was maintained until the
external capsule was exposed. A sterilized stain-
less steel cannula implant with a glass cover slip
window was inserted into the craniotomy. The
top of the cannula and a titanium head post were
secured to the skull with grip cement. The ce-
ment was allowed to dry for 20 min before mice
were returned to the home cage.
Postsurgical care
The animals recovered from anesthesia and were
mobile within 5 to 15 min postsurgery. Mice were
monitored every 12 hours for 3 days after surgery,
and buprenorphine was administered to mini-
mize any signs of discomfort.
Freely moving behavior
The contextual fear conditioning and open-
field behavioral tests were performed as de-
scribed previously (20). The novel object recog-
nition behavior task was a modified version of the
paradigm described in (25) to ensure hippocampal
dependence.
Subjects and habituation
Male mice (n = 4 or 5) were housed per cage with
ad libitum access to food and water, kept on a
12-hour (6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) light-dark cycle with
the ambient temperature maintained at 21°C.
Tests were conducted during the light cycle. Half
of the littermate mice in each cage were injected
with the control GFP virus bilaterally in LEC,
whereas the other half were injected with the
PSAM virus. For 5 days before the start of behav-
ioraltesting, the mice were habituatedtohandling,
transport from the postprocedural housing room
to the behavioral testing room, and momentary
head restraint for connecting the cannula guide
with dummy tubing. During these habituation
sessions, mice were allowed to move around with
the tubing attached to simulate the PSEM infusion
conditions. The experimenter was blind to the
group identities, which were revealed after testing
was completed.
Microinfusion of PSEM
An internal injection cannula was connected to a
10-µl Hamilton syringe via thin tubing. The
tubing was prefilled with sterifiltered PSEM
308 (15 µM) in oxygen-enriched ACSF, and the
syringe was mounted in a syringe pump. The
animal was gently restrained in its home cage by
hand, and the injection cannula was slowly
introduced into the previously implanted guide
cannula. The cannula was fixed to the head
implant via a screw-top connector, and the animal
was released in an empty cage. Next 0.5 µl of
PSEM was injected over the course of 5 min
with the syringe pump, followed by a 2-min rest
period with the tubing connected to the animal.
The animal was gently restrained once again by
hand, the connector detached, the internal cannula
removed, and the dummy internal cannula restored
to the guide cannula. The animal was then placed in
the open field, CFC chamber, or object recognition
arena for testing in the behavioral tasks.
During all microinfusion experiments, the dye
miniRuby (5% in water) was included in the
cannula solution to gauge post hoc the accuracy
of cannula targeting and spread of substances dur-
ingthemicroinfusion. Attheendof theexperiments,
the animals were infused with miniRuby again
10 min before perfusion with paraformaldehyde,
and the brains were examined for miniRuby fluo-
rescence. These experiments provide an overesti-
mate of the likely extent of PSEM diffusion during
its application, as the brains were analyzed 1 to
24 hours after the first miniRuby infusion and
subjected to more than one miniRuby infusion,
whereas PSEM is only active for 20 min after ap-
plication (19)
Open field
Mice were placed in an open field (45 cm L by
45 cm W by 30.5 cm) for 30 min. The testing cham-
bers were cleaned with 70% isopropanol wipes be-
tween animals to eliminate any odor-related cues.
Locomotor and rearing activity was monitored via
motion-sensitive infrared (IR) beam breaks and
recorded by the Med Associates Activity Monitor
software. The entire apparatus was enclosed in a
soundproof box.
Contextual and cued fear conditioning
Hippocampus-dependent contextual fear mem-
ory and amygdala-dependent auditory fear
memory were tested by using a 3-day-delay fear
conditioning protocol. A sound-attenuating cham-
ber equipped with a FireWire camera for tracking,
a light, and a speaker for delivering contextual
and conditioning cues was used. Mice were placed
in an enclosure (17 cm by 17 cm by 25 cm) housed
within the sound-attenuated chamber. The floor-
ing, wall patterns, dominant odors, and light con-
ditions of the enclosure could be changed to
provide different contexts. Context A on day 1 con-
sisted of an enclosure with a steel grid floor, three
Plexiglas walls and one opaque wall with black
and white stripes, 1% acetic acid as the dominant
odor, and the house fan turned on. The enclosure
was cleaned with 70% isopropanol between ani-
mals. Mice were moved from their home cage to a
transfer cage with no bedding for the PSEM mi-
croinfusion as detailed above. After 2-min post-
infusion of PSEM, the mice were placed in the
fear conditioning chamber (context A). The mice
explored the environment for 150 s, following
which a tone (30 s, 2.8 kHz, 85 dB) was presented
that coterminated with a shock (2 s, 0.7 mA). Mice
were removed from the chamber 30 s after the
shock. On day 2, the mice were placed back in con-
text A for 300 s and contextual fear memory was
assayed by scoring percent time spent freezing (de-
fined as the absence of all movement except for res-
piration). No shock or tone was presented on day 2.
On day 3, the mice were exposed to novel con-
textB: The testing room was dimly illuminated with
red light, and the enclosure was cleaned between
animals with Vimoba; the enclosure had an opaque
white-colored plastic floor, with three solid gray-
coloredwalls, one Plexiglas wallwith a circulardoor,
and a red, flat plastic roof and 0.25% benzaldehyde
as the dominant odor. Mice were first moved from
their home cage to a circular bucket and then a
cage with paper towel bedding during PSEM infu-
sion before moving them to the testing chamber.
Mice were exposed to context B for 180 s, and then
the tone from day 1 was played for 60 s to assess
cued fear conditioning by using percentage of time
spent freezing. Freezing during fear conditioning
was analyzed automated with ANY-maze and
parsed into the different behavioral task phases.
Novel object recognition
Twelve male mice were injected with AAV9-
Syn-FLEX-PSAM L141F:GlyR-IRES-GFP (Penn)
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-11
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and kept on a 12-hour reversed light-dark cycle
in a room maintained at 21°C. All trials of the
novel object recognition (NOR) task were con-
ducted during the dark cycle and in dim lighting.
White plastic transport boxes (55 by 40 by 15 cm3)
were used as testing arenas. Three different ob-
jects were used: (i) a blue ceramic shoe (diameter
9.5 cm, maximal height 6 cm), (ii) a black plastic
slide box (8 by 3 by 9.5 cm3), and (iii) a semiclear
plastic funnel (diameter 8.5 cm, maximal height
8.5 cm). Pilot experiments found that these ob-
jects elicited equal exploration time. Mice were
habituated to handling and transported from
the holding room to the behavioral room and
were given 1 hour in the behavioral room each day
to habituate before any tasks began. Mice were
habituated to the infusion set-up and empty test-
ing arena for 10 min each day for three conse-
cutive days. On the fourth day, mice were infused
over a duration of 5 min with either miniRuby +
ACSF + PSEM or a control solution of miniRuby +
ACSF. The solutions were kept in coded tubes to
ensure that the experimenter was blinded and to
randomize the treatment groups. In trial 1, mice
were exposed to object A and object B for 10 min.
After a 3-min intertrial interval, mice were again
exposed to the same pair of objects for trial 2.
The mice were then tested for object recognition
memory after a 10-min interval by replacing
either object A or object B with object C, the novel
object. Objects and arenas were cleaned with 30%
ethanol between all trials. Mice were recorded
with an overhead FireWire camera and their
movements tracked by using ANY-maze soft-
ware. Exploration time was determined by using
ANY-maze by measuring time spent with the
animal's head within a region-of-interest (ROI)
that extended 2 cm around each object.
In vivo imaging with head-fixed
behavioral cues
Imaging experiments in head-fixed, awake behav-
ing mice were performed as described previously
(27, 28). Briefly, Gad2-Cre: Ai14 tdTomato mice
were injected in the left LEC with Cre-dependent
rAAV to express the genetically encoded cal-
cium indicator GCaMP6f (26) selectively in Cre+
GABAergic neurons within the LEC. Two weeks
postinjection, a glass-bottomed stainless steel can-
nula was implanted directly over the left hippocam-
pus to allow for optical access to the long-range
GABAergic axons projecting from LEC to SLM.
After 1 week of recovery, water-deprived mice were
head-fixed on a treadmill belt under a two-photon
laser-scanning microscope within a custom-built
behavioral apparatus that allows for simultaneous
imaging and recording of behavior in response to
four sensory stimuli: an aversive air puff to the
snout, an appetitive water reward, a flash of light,
and pure tones. Each experiment contained three
to five blocks of stimuli presented either singu-
larly or in pairs. Locomotion was monitored while
imaging during each trial, which consisted of a
5- to 10-s pretrial interval, a randomly chosen
stimulus or pair of stimuli, and a 10- to 30-s post-
trial recording interval. Imaging was performed
with an ultra fast pulsed laser beam (920-nm wave-
length; 20 to 40 mW average power at the back
focal plane of the objective) through a 40× ob-
jective. Green (GCaMP) and red (tdTomato) fluo-
rescence was separated with an emission filter
cube set (green, HQ525/70m-2p; red, HQ607/
45m-2p; and 575dcxr) and was detected with
photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) (green: GaAsP
PMTs; red: multialkali PMTs) at either 256 × 128
pixels (75 × 75 mm; 0.295 µm/pixel in X; 0.588
µm/pixel in Y), 4× optical zoom, at 5.3 Hz or
128 × 128 pixels (105 × 105 mm), 2.8× optical
zoon, at 6.1 Hz.
Acute-slice electrophysiology
Solutions
Recordings were performed with ACSF (pH 7.3,
osmolarity 305 to 320 mOsm and saturated with
95% O2 and 5% CO2) for the extracellular solution.
The ACSF consisted of (in mM) NaCl (125),
NaHCO3 (25), KCl (2.5), NaH2PO4 (1.25), MgCl2 (1),
CaCl2 (2), glucose (22.5), Na-pyruvate (3), and
ascorbate (1). Hippocampal slices were prepared
and incubated in sucrose-enriched modified ACSF
containing (in mM) NaCl (10), NaH2PO4 (1.2),
KCl (2.5), NaHCO3 (25), glucose (25), CaCl2 (0.5),
MgCl2 (7), sucrose (190), and pyruvate (2). The
intracellular current-clamp recording solution con-
tained (in mM) KMeSO4 (135), KCl (5), NaCl (2),
EGTA (0.2), Hepes (10), phosphocreatine Na2 (10),
MgATP (5), Na2GTP (0.4), Alexa Fluor 594
cadaverine (0.1), and biocytin (0.2%). The intra-
cellular solution for voltage-clamp recordings con-
tained CsMeSO4 (135), KCl (5), NaCl (2), EGTA
(0.2), Hepes (10), phosphocreatineNa2(10), MgATP
(5), Na2GTP (0.4), Alexa Fluor 594 (0.1), and
biocytin (0.2%). In a subset of experiments, the
following drugs were applied via bath applica-
tion (in µM): SR95531 (2), CGP 55845 (1), NBQX
(10), D-APV (100), and PSEM308 (3 to 5). PSEM was
generously provided by S. Sternson, Janelia Farm.
Slice preparation
We prepared 400-µm-thick horizontal hippocam-
pal sections using a vibrating microtome from
brains of mice that were transcardially perfused
with ice-cold dissection ACSF. For the horizontal
sections, hemisected brains were blocked ven-
tromedially at an angle of 10° before sectioning.
For the transverse sections, the hippocampi were
dissected out, embedded in agar (4%), and then
sliced. Slices were allowed to recover for at least
20 min at 34°C and then stored at room temp-
erature in a 50% dissection: 50% standard ACSF
solution before transfer to the recording chamber.
Electrophysiology setup
For IR-guided patch recordings, slices were
visualized with a microscope equipped with
Dodt-gradient-contrast optics and a 2× to 4×
zoom module, IR filter, 60 × 1.0 nA water im-
mersion objective, and a camera using image
acquisition software. We performed fluorescence-
guided targeted patch-clamp recordings using an
epifluorescence illumination system equipped with
a metal-halide lamp, ET-GFP and mCherry filter
sets, Uniblitzshutter VCM-D1, andOrcaR2 charge-
coupled device camera controlled by µ-Manager
(60). Photostimulation of ChR2 was achieved with
an optical fiber coupled to a solid-state blue laser
(470 nm) to illuminate SLM. In some experiments,
the light was routed through a set of pinholes to
produce a 50-µm focal-beam spot over SR.
Two-photon imaging and
electrophysiology setup
Two-photon imaging of proximal dendritic spine
Ca2+ used a custom-designed system with dual
X-Y scanning galvanometers, coupled to a pulsed
Ti:Sapphire MaiTai DeepSee femtosecond laser.
Fluorescence was detected using high-sensitivity
GaAsP PMTs. The scanning system was mounted
on a microscope equipped with a 60 × 0.9 num-
erical aperture (NA) water immersion objec-
tive, and infrared Dodt-gradient-contrast optics
coupled to a multialkali detector. Recording and
stimulating electrodes were positioned using
three junior micromanipulators on a movable mo-
torized base plate connected to a MultiClamp
700B amplifier, Digidata 1440, and two constant-
current stimulators for patch-clamp electrophys-
iology during imaging.
Electrophysiology recordings
Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were per-
formed at 34°C in standard ACSF using boro-
silicate glass pipettes with tip resistances of 3.5 to
4.5 MW for somatic and 9 to 16 MW for dendritic
recordings. A MultiClamp 700B amplifier, pClamp
9 software, and a personal computer were used for
data acquisition. Pipette capacitance (Cp), series
resistance (Rs), and whole-cell capacitance (Cm)
were compensated under voltage clamp initially
with maximal allowable prediction and correction
(75 to 85%). The average series resistance for whole-
cell voltage-clamp recordings was kept between
9 and 15 MW. These values were used as a guide
to estimate the pipette capacitance compensation
and bridge balance under current clamp. The
average access resistances for the current-clamp
recordings ranged from 10 to 20 MW for soma
and 10 to 40 MW for dendrite recordings. The
membrane potential (Vm) of IN and pyramidal
neuron soma was held at +10 mV under voltage
clamp to measure IPSCs, whereas current clamp
recordings were performed from soma and den-
drites at the cell's resting membrane potential.
Synaptic responses were evoked by electrical
stimulation of the EC inputs or SCs, with focal
glass pipette stimulating electrodes coupled to
constant current stimulators placed in SLM or
SR, respectively. Stimulus strengths were adjusted
to evoke EC and SC PSPs <50% of their maximal
amplitude. Basal transmission was monitored
every 15 s with EC and SC electrical stimuli spaced
2 s apart. Laser pulses delivered during episodes
involving optical stimulation were also spaced 15 s
apart. Cells were intracellularly filled for 10 to
15 min with the Ca2+ indicator Fluo-5F (500 µM)
and the structural dye Alexa Fluor 594 (25 µM).
Random-access line scans (256 lines per frame,
5.6× optical zoom, 25.709 × 17.504 µm field of vi-
sion, 2.8-µs dwell time, 1.28-ms scan-line period)
and two-dimensional scan (512 × 512 pixels, 1×
optical zoom, 198.45 × 198.45 µm field of vision,
aaa5694-12
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 1.6-µs dwell time, 1.4-ms scan-line period) image
series were acquired using the PrairieView soft-
ware in both the green and red channel. The image
t-series acquisition on PrairieView was synchro-
nized and used transistor-transistor logic trig-
gered by the electrophysiology acquisition
software Axograph. Line scans were acquired
after each EC-SC stimulus pair simultaneously
with the SC stimulus trigger once every 15 s for
the single pairings at variable timing intervals (0
to 40 ms). For multiple pairings at 10- or 20-ms
intervals, images were acquired at a 1 Hz fre-
quency up to 90 times, identical to the ITDP in-
duction protocol.
Immunohistochemistry, confocal
imaging, and neuronal tracing
Immunohistochemistry
Adult animals were deeply anesthetized with
ketamine-xylazine and perfusedwith 1× phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) followed by 4% parfor-
maldehyde in PBS. The brains were removed
and postfixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde
at 4°C. The brains were sectioned in the coronal
plane for hippocampal sections or sagittal plane
for entorhinal sections at 50-µm thickness by
using a vibrating microtome. For experiments
involving the expression of GFP alone, GCaMP,
and TdTomato, the signal was bright enough
and did not require further immuno-enhancement.
For immunostaining, slices were permeabilized
in 1× PBS + 0.3% Triton, blocked in 3% normal
goat serum, and then incubated with primary
(overnight) and secondary (2 to 4 hours) anti-
bodies in blocking solution (1× PBS, 0.2% Triton
and 3% normal goat serum), unless otherwise
stated. ChR2-EYFP– and ChR2-GFP–labeled neu-
rons and their projections were stained by using
a rabbit polyclonal antibody against GFP primary
antibody (1:1000; Invitrogen) with a secondary
goat antibody against primary rabbit immuno-
globulin G (IgG) antibody conjugated with Alexa
Fluor 488 dye (1:1000; Invitrogen). For the GFP-
tagged CCK, PV, and SOM interneuron triple
staining, we used a similar procedure for wash-
ing, permeabilization, and blocking as described
above but substituted PBS with Tris-buffer so-
lution (TBS, TB 0.1 M; NaCl 0.9%; pH 7.4). The
primary antibodies we used were chicken poly-
clonal anti-GFP (1:1000, Abcam), rabbit polyclonal
anti-parvalbumin (1:500, Synaptic Systems—SYSY),
and rat monoclonal antibody against somatostatin
(1:200, Millipore, clone YC7). The secondary anti-
bodies for these stains included secondary goat
antibody against chicken IgG antibody con-
jugated with Alexa Fluor 488 dye (1:1000, Invitro-
gen), goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody conjugated
with Alexa Fluor 555 dye (1:1000, Invitrogen), and
minimal cross reactivity goat anti-rat IgG con-
jugated with Alexa Fluor 647 dye (1:1000, Jackson
Laboratories).
For experiments involving PSAM and CCK
after electrophysiology recordings, 400-µm slices
weredrop-fixedovernightin4%paraformaladhyde,
embedded in agar, and resectioned to 50 µm. For
the a-bungarotoxin staining of PSAM-GlyR, we
followed the procedure previously described (11).
Resliced sections were permeabilized with 0.5%
Triton by using a Tris-buffered saline (TBS) at a
pH of 7.4. The slices were blocked in 10% normal
goat serum in TBS with 0.5% Triton for 4 hours
atroomtemperatureandthenincubatedwithAlexa
Fluor 647 a-bungarotoxin (1:3000; Invitrogen) in
TBS + 0.1% Triton, first at room temperature for
1 hour, then at 4°C for 48 hours to stain for nic-
otinic a7 receptor–containing PSAM(L141F)-GlyR.
In sections that coexpressed ChR2-GFP or GFP
alone with the PSAM, primary antibody for GFP
(rabbit polyclonal anti-GFP primary antibody,
1:1000; Invitrogen) was added for the last 12 hours
of overnight incubation at 4°C. After TBS washes
(4 × 15 min), the slices were incubated at room tem-
perature for 4 hours with secondary antibody for
GFP (goat antirabbit Alexa Fluor 488, 1:1000;
Invitrogen) along with fresh Alexa Fluor 647
a-bungarotoxin (1:3000; Invitrogen) in TBS +
0.1% Triton to counterstain for GFP and PSAM.
For the CCK staining, we followed a previously
described procedure (61).
Briefly, slices were put through antigen re-
trieval by being placed in a citrate buffer at pH
8.6 for 70 min at 90°C. Then, slices were washed
three times for 5 min each time in PBS. Slices
were permeabilized with blocking solution (1%
BSA and 0.5% Triton in PBS) with 10% normal
goat serum for 4 hours at room temperature.
Slices were then incubated with primary anti-
bodies against cholecystokinin (mouse monoclo-
nal; 1:1000; generous gift of G. Ohning, CURE
center, UCLA) or GFP (rabbit polyclonal; 1:1000;
Invitrogen) in blocking solution for 48 hours at
4°C. Slices were then washed 4 × 15 min each
time with carrier solution (1% BSA, 0.1% Triton,
and 1% normal goat serum in PBS) at room tem-
perature. After this, slices were incubated with a
Biotin-SP–conjugated AffiniPure F(ab′)2 frag-
ment goat anti-mouse IgG (1:250; Jackson) and
goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 dye–conjugated
IgG antibody (1:1000; Invitrogen) in carrier solu-
tion for 4 hours at room temperature. After PBS
washes (4 × 15 min), the slices were incubated in
ABC complex for 1 hour. Then slices were washed
with PBS (4 × 15 min) and incubated with TSA-
tyramide-tetramethylrhodamine amplification kit
plus buffer solution for 3 to 10 min at room tem-
perature. PBS washed slices were next incubated
with Alexa Fluor 555 streptavidin(1:500; Invitrogen),
Alexa Fluor 488 dye–conjugated anti-rabbit IgG
secondary antibody (1:1000; Invitrogen), and Alexa
Fluor 555 dye–conjugated anti-mouse IgG sec-
ondary antibody (1:1000; Invitrogen) in carrier
solution for 4 hours at room temperature. Finally,
the slices were washed in PBS (4 × 15 min) and
mounted.
Stained slices were mounted with Prolong
Gold or Vectashield hard-set mounting medium
with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for
the GFP, CCK, PV, and somatostatin stains or
Aqua-Mount aqueous mounting medium for the
bungarotoxin staining.
Confocal imaging
An inverted laser-scanning confocal microscope
was used to acquire tile scan and Z-stack images
of multichannel fluorescent signals from fixed
tissue sections by using 5×, 10×, or 20× air ob-
jectives, as well as a high NA 63× oil immersion
objective. Maximum intensity projections were
created using Image J.
Neuronal reconstruction
During the electrophysiology recordings, all
cells were intracellularly filled with Alexa Fluor
594 for online visualization and 0.2% neuro-
biotin to allow for enhanced visualization and
post hoc reconstruction with a streptavidin-
bound fluorophore (Streptavidin Alexa Fluor
555). Immediately after recording, the acute brain
slice was drop-fixed overnight at 4°C in 4%
paraformaldehyde solution. The tissue was then
thoroughly rinsed with PBS-glycine (1 × 15 min)
and PBS (3 × 15 min) and processed for immu-
nohistochemistry. The 20× high-resolution (1024
× 1024, 16-bit depth) fluorescent confocal Z-stack
images of the fluorophore-labeled filled neu-
rons were used to trace the soma, axons, and
dendrites by using Neurolucida reconstruction
software.
Data analysis
Behavior data
For the behavioral experiments, we analyzed the
open-field data using Activity Monitor, and an
automated analysis was used for calculating
freezing during fear conditioning with ANY-maze.
The data were exported in tab-delimited format
into Prism for further statistical analysis. The red
fluorescent signal of miniRuby infused along
with PSEM during the behavioral tasks served
as an indicator of accurate cannula targeting and
drug spread. One animal from the control cohort
(total of 10 animals) and test cohort (total of 8
animals) each was removed from the data anal-
ysis because of mistargeting. Statistical signif-
icance was assessedbytwo-tailedunpairedStudent’s
t tests, two-way ANOVA, or two-way repeated-
measures ANOVA where appropriate. Significant
main effects or interactions were followed up with
multiple comparison testing by using Sidak’s cor-
rection. Results were considered significant when
P < 0.05. a was set equal to 0.05 for multiple
comparison tests. Sample sizes were chosen based
on previous studies.
In vivo imaging data
Sequential Image Analysis (SIMA) toolkit (62)
was used to correct motion artifacts in the raw
imaging data, to identify and tag regions of in-
terest (ROIs), and to extract fluorescence traces
from each ROI. Extracted signals were synchro-
nized to the recorded running signal and pre-
sented stimuli, and peristimulus time histograms
(PSTHs) were calculated. For each ROI-stimulus
pair, the response magnitude was calculated as
the mean of the PSTH in the 3 s preceding the
stimulus subtracted from the mean of the 3 s after
the stimulus. Significantly responding ROIs were
determined by randomly shuffling the stimulus
times across all trials 10,000 times, calculating
the response magnitude for each shuffle, and then
selecting any ROIs with a response magnitude
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-13
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 above the 95th percentile of the distribution of
shuffled values.
Electrophysiology data
Axograph X was used for electrophysiology
data analysis. A 7pA amplitude threshold was
set for sorting failures and successes for the light-
evoked IPSCs to map the LEC and MEC LRIP
connectivity. All IPSCs above this cutoff were
included in calculating the mean response amp-
litude and percentage of responsive INs for the
two groups. For calculating amplitude changes
in the EC-SC and EC-ChR2 single pairing, the
responses to SC electrical stimulation or ChR2
photostimulation alone were averaged for 3 min
before pairing, and the mean was used to nor-
malize the responses paired with EC stimulation.
For comparing the effect of application of NBQX,
APV, SR 95531, CGP 55845, or PSEM, the predrug
baseline synaptic-response amplitude for the
“control” condition was obtained by averaging
the responses recorded for the 5 min preceding
drug application. The postdrug synaptic-response
amplitudes were obtained by averaging responses
recorded for 5 min in the presence of the drug,
once a steady-state response was reached, typi-
cally 7 to 10 min after starting bath application of
the drug. For sorting and generating the his-
tograms of the dendritic PSPs and spikes, an
event-detection algorithm in Axograph was used.
Time-course plots for ITDP were generated by
using a boxcar average of every four responses
(1-min period), as previously described (11). All
statistical errors are standard errors of the pop-
ulation mean or boxcar mean (SEM); all P values
(significance level set at P < 0.05) for t tests are
two-tailed; and all ANOVAs were corrected for
multiple comparisons using post hoc tests as
indicated.
KaleidaGraph 4 and Prism 6 were used for
plotting all data and statistical analysis. Figures
were generated with Adobe Illustrator.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
V. H. Brun et al., Impaired spatial representation in CA1 after
lesion of direct input from entorhinal cortex. Neuron 57,
290–302 (2008). doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.11.034;
pmid: 18215625
2.
J. Suh, A. J. Rivest, T. Nakashiba, T. Tominaga, S. Tonegawa,
Entorhinal cortex layer III input to the hippocampus is crucial
for temporal association memory. Science 334, 1415–1420
(2011). doi: 10.1126/science.1210125; pmid: 22052975
3.
T. Kitamura et al., Island cells control temporal association
memory. Science 343, 896–901 (2014). doi: 10.1126/
science.1244634; pmid: 24457215
4.
S. Melzer et al., Long-range-projecting GABAergic neurons
modulate inhibition in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex.
Science 335, 1506–1510 (2012). doi: 10.1126/science.1217139;
pmid: 22442486
5.
D. G. Amaral, M. P. Witter, The three-dimensional organization
of the hippocampal formation: A review of anatomical data.
Neuroscience 31, 571–591 (1989). doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(89)
90424-7; pmid: 2687721
6.
M. P. Witter, D. G. Amaral, Entorhinal cortex of the monkey:
V. Projections to the dentate gyrus, hippocampus, and
subicular complex. J. Comp. Neurol. 307, 437–459 (1991).
doi: 10.1002/cne.903070308; pmid: 1713237
7.
G. Buzsáki, Feed-forward inhibition in the hippocampal
formation. Prog. Neurobiol. 22, 131–153 (1984). doi: 10.1016/
0301-0082(84)90023-6; pmid: 6433403
8.
T. Jarsky, A. Roxin, W. L. Kath, N. Spruston, Conditional
dendritic spike propagation following distal synaptic activation
of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
1667–1676 (2005). doi: 10.1038/nn1599; pmid: 16299501
9.
H. Takahashi, J. C. Magee, Pathway interactions and synaptic
plasticity in the dendritic tuft regions of CA1 pyramidal
neurons. Neuron 62, 102–111 (2009). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2009.03.007; pmid: 19376070
10. J. T. Dudman, D. Tsay, S. A. Siegelbaum, A role for synaptic
inputs at distal dendrites: Instructive signals for hippocampal
long-term plasticity. Neuron 56, 866–879 (2007). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2007.10.020; pmid: 18054862
11. J. Basu et al., A cortico-hippocampal learning rule shapes
inhibitory microcircuit activity to enhance hippocampal
information flow. Neuron 79, 1208–1221 (2013). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2013.07.001; pmid: 24050406
12. K. C. Bittner et al., Conjunctive input processing drives feature
selectivity in hippocampal CA1 neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
1133–1142 (2015). doi: 10.1038/nn.4062; pmid: 26167906
13. V. H. Brun et al., Place cells and place recognition maintained
by direct entorhinal-hippocampal circuitry. Science 296,
2243–2246 (2002). doi: 10.1126/science.1071089
pmid: 12077421
14. M. Fyhn, S. Molden, M. P. Witter, E. I. Moser, M. B. Moser,
Spatial representation in the entorhinal cortex. Science 305,
1258–1264 (2004). doi: 10.1126/science.1099901; pmid: 15333832
15. E. L. Hargreaves, G. Rao, I. Lee, J. J. Knierim, Major
dissociation between medial and lateral entorhinal input to
dorsal hippocampus. Science 308, 1792–1794 (2005).
doi: 10.1126/science.1110449; pmid: 15961670
16. H. Taniguchi et al., A resource of Cre driver lines for genetic
targeting of GABAergic neurons in cerebral cortex. Neuron 71,
995–1013 (2011). doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.07.026;
pmid: 21943598
17. E. S. Boyden, F. Zhang, E. Bamberg, G. Nagel, K. Deisseroth,
Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical control
of neural activity. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1263–1268 (2005).
doi: 10.1038/nn1525; pmid: 16116447
18. S. Maren, K. L. Phan, I. Liberzon, The contextual brain:
Implications for fear conditioning, extinction and
psychopathology. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 417–428 (2013).
doi: 10.1038/nrn3492; pmid: 23635870
19. C. J. Magnus et al., Chemical and genetic engineering of
selective ion channel-ligand interactions. Science 333, 1292–1296
(2011). doi: 10.1126/science.1206606; pmid: 21885782
20. F. L. Hitti, S. A. Siegelbaum, The hippocampal CA2 region
is essential for social memory. Nature 508, 88–92 (2014).
doi: 10.1038/nature13028; pmid: 24572357
21. S. J. Cohen, R. W. Stackman Jr., Assessing rodent hippocampal
involvement in the novel object recognition task. A review.
Behav. Brain Res. 285, 105–117 (2015). doi: 10.1016/
j.bbr.2014.08.002; pmid: 25169255
22. R. E. Clark, S. M. Zola, L. R. Squire, Impaired recognition
memory in rats after damage to the hippocampus. J. Neurosci.
20, 8853–8860 (2000). pmid: 11102494
23. J. A. Ainge et al., The role of the hippocampus in object
recognition in rats: Examination of the influence of task
parameters and lesion size. Behav. Brain Res. 167, 183–195
(2006). doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2005.09.005; pmid: 16214239
24. S. J. Cohen et al., The rodent hippocampus is essential for
nonspatial object memory. Curr. Biol. 23, 1685–1690 (2013).
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.07.002; pmid: 23954431
25. C. A. Denny, N. S. Burghardt, D. M. Schachter, R. Hen,
M. R. Drew, 4- to 6-week-old adult-born hippocampal neurons
influence novelty-evoked exploration and contextual fear
conditioning. Hippocampus 22, 1188–1201 (2012).
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20964; pmid: 21739523
26. T. W. Chen et al., Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for
imaging neuronal activity. Nature 499, 295–300 (2013).
doi: 10.1038/nature12354; pmid: 23868258
27. P. Kaifosh, M. Lovett-Barron, G. F. Turi, T. R. Reardon,
A. Losonczy, Septo-hippocampal GABAergic signaling across
multiple modalities in awake mice. Nat. Neurosci. 16,
1182–1184 (2013). doi: 10.1038/nn.3482; pmid: 23912949
28. M. Lovett-Barron et al., Dendritic inhibition in the hippocampus
supports fear learning. Science 343, 857–863 (2014).
doi: 10.1126/science.1247485; pmid: 24558155
29. D. W. Cope et al., Cholecystokinin-immunopositive basket and
Schaffer collateral-associated interneurones target different
domains of pyramidal cells in the CA1 area of the rat
hippocampus. Neuroscience 109, 63–80 (2002). doi: 10.1016/
S0306-4522(01)00440-7; pmid: 11784700
30. T. Klausberger, P. Somogyi, Neuronal diversity and temporal
dynamics: The unity of hippocampal circuit operations. Science
321, 53–57 (2008). doi: 10.1126/science.1149381; pmid: 18599766
31. H. Pawelzik, D. I. Hughes, A. M. Thomson, Physiological and
morphological diversity of immunocytochemically defined
parvalbumin- and cholecystokinin-positive interneurones in
CA1 of the adult rat hippocampus. J. Comp. Neurol. 443,
346–367 (2002). doi: 10.1002/cne.10118; pmid: 11807843
32. S. H. Lee, I. Soltesz, Requirement for CB1 but not GABAB
receptors in the cholecystokinin mediated inhibition of
GABA release from cholecystokinin expressing basket cells.
J. Physiol. 589, 891–902 (2011). doi: 10.1113/
jphysiol.2010.198499; pmid: 21173082
33. M. I. Daw, L. Tricoire, F. Erdelyi, G. Szabo, C. J. McBain,
Asynchronous transmitter release from cholecystokinin-
containing inhibitory interneurons is widespread and target-cell
independent. J. Neurosci. 29, 11112–11122 (2009).
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5760-08.2009; pmid: 19741117
34. N. L. Golding, N. P. Staff, N. Spruston, Dendritic spikes as a
mechanism for cooperative long-term potentiation. Nature 418,
326–331 (2002). doi: 10.1038/nature00854; pmid: 12124625
35. F. Gambino et al., Sensory-evoked LTP driven by dendritic
plateau potentials in vivo. Nature 515, 116–119 (2014).
doi: 10.1038/nature13664; pmid: 25174710
36. N. L. Golding, N. Spruston, Dendritic sodium spikes are
variable triggers of axonal action potentials in hippocampal
CA1 pyramidal neurons. Neuron 21, 1189–1200 (1998).
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80635-2; pmid: 9856473
37. M. E. Larkum, J. J. Zhu, B. Sakmann, A new cellular mechanism
for coupling inputs arriving at different cortical layers. Nature
398, 338–341 (1999). doi: 10.1038/18686; pmid: 10192334
38. G. Buzsáki, E. I. Moser, Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in
the hippocampal-entorhinal system. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 130–138
(2013). doi: 10.1038/nn.3304; pmid: 23354386
39. A. Kamondi, L. Acsády, G. Buzsáki, Dendritic spikes are
enhanced by cooperative network activity in the intact
hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 18, 3919–3928 (1998).
pmid: 9570819
40. A. Losonczy, J. K. Makara, J. C. Magee, Compartmentalized
dendritic plasticity and input feature storage in neurons.
Nature 452, 436–441 (2008). doi: 10.1038/nature06725;
pmid: 18368112
41. M. E. Sheffield, D. A. Dombeck, Calcium transient prevalence
across the dendritic arbour predicts place field properties.
Nature 517, 200–204 (2015). doi: 10.1038/nature13871;
pmid: 25363782
42. S. Royer et al., Control of timing, rate and bursts of hippocampal
place cells by dendritic and somatic inhibition. Nat. Neurosci. 15,
769–775 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nn.3077; pmid: 22446878
43. L. Roux, G. Buzsáki, Tasks for inhibitory interneurons in intact
brain circuits. Neuropharmacology 88, 10–23 (2015).
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.09.011; pmid: 25239808
44. A. J. Murray et al., Parvalbumin-positive CA1 interneurons are required
for spatial working but not for reference memory. Nat. Neurosci. 14,
297–299 (2011). doi: 10.1038/nn.2751; pmid: 21278730
45. F. Donato, S. B. Rompani, P. Caroni, Parvalbumin-expressing
basket-cell network plasticity induced by experience regulates
adult learning. Nature 504, 272–276 (2013). doi: 10.1038/
nature12866; pmid: 24336286
46. S. Hefft, P. Jonas, Asynchronous GABA release generates
long-lasting inhibition at a hippocampal interneuron-principal
neuron synapse. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1319–1328 (2005).
doi: 10.1038/nn1542; pmid: 16158066
47. T. Klausberger et al., Complementary roles of cholecystokinin-
and parvalbumin-expressing GABAergic neurons in
hippocampal network oscillations. J. Neurosci. 25, 9782–9793
(2005). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3269-05.2005
pmid: 16237182
48. W. Jacob, R. Marsch, G. Marsicano, B. Lutz, C. T. Wotjak,
Cannabinoid CB1 receptor deficiency increases contextual fear
memory under highly aversive conditions and long-term
potentiation in vivo. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 98, 47–55 (2012).
doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2012.04.008; pmid: 22579951
49. M. F. Yeckel, T. W. Berger, Feedforward excitation of the
hippocampus by afferents from the entorhinal cortex:
Redefinition of the role of the trisynaptic pathway. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87, 5832–5836 (1990). doi: 10.1073/
pnas.87.15.5832; pmid: 2377621
50. E. W. Schomburg et al., Theta phase segregation of
input-specific gamma patterns in entorhinal-hippocampal
networks. Neuron 84, 470–485 (2014). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2014.08.051; pmid: 25263753
51. J. J. Chrobak, A. Lörincz, G. Buzsáki, Physiological patterns in
the hippocampo-entorhinal cortex system. Hippocampus 10,
457–465 (2000). doi: 10.1002/1098-1063(2000)10:4<457::
AID-HIPO12>3.0.CO;2-Z; pmid: 10985285
aaa5694-14
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 52. K. M. Igarashi, L. Lu, L. L. Colgin, M. B. Moser, E. I. Moser,
Coordination of entorhinal-hippocampal ensemble activity
during associative learning. Nature 510, 143–147 (2014).
doi: 10.1038/nature13162; pmid: 24739966
53. T. Nakashiba, J. Z. Young, T. J. McHugh, D. L. Buhl,
S. Tonegawa, Transgenic inhibition of synaptic transmission
reveals role of CA3 output in hippocampal learning. Science
319, 1260–1264 (2008). doi: 10.1126/science.1151120;
pmid: 18218862
54. S. Hippenmeyer et al., A developmental switch in the response
of DRG neurons to ETS transcription factor signaling. PLOS
Biol. 3, e159 (2005). doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030159;
pmid: 15836427
55. L. Madisen et al., A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and
characterization system for the whole mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci.
13, 133–140 (2010). doi: 10.1038/nn.2467; pmid: 20023653
56. G. Miyoshi et al., Genetic fate mapping reveals that the caudal
ganglionic eminence produces a large and diverse
population of superficial cortical interneurons. J. Neurosci.
30, 1582–1594 (2010). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4515-09.2010;
pmid: 20130169
57. M. Yamamoto et al., A multifunctional reporter mouse line for
Cre- and FLP-dependent lineage analysis. Genesis 47, 107–114
(2009). doi: 10.1002/dvg.20474; pmid: 19165827
58. F. Zhang et al., Optogenetic interrogation of neural circuits:
Technology for probing mammalian brain structures. Nat. Protoc.
5, 439–456 (2010). doi: 10.1038/nprot.2009.226;
pmid: 20203662
59. J. V. Kupferman et al., Reelin signaling specifies the molecular
identity of the pyramidal neuron distal dendritic compartment.
Cell 158, 1335–1347 (2014). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.035;
pmid: 25201528
60. A. Edelstein, N. Amodaj, K. Hoover, R. Vale, N. Stuurman,
Computer control of microscopes using µManager. Curr.
Protoc. Mol. Biol. Chap.: Unit 14.20 (2010). pmid: 20890901
61. L. Tricoire et al., A blueprint for the spatiotemporal origins of
mouse hippocampal interneuron diversity. J. Neurosci. 31,
10948–10970 (2011). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0323-11.2011;
pmid: 21795545
62. P. Kaifosh, J. D. Zaremba, N. B. Danielson, A. Losonczy, SIMA:
Python software for analysis of dynamic fluorescence imaging
data. Front. Neuroinform. 8, 80 (2014). doi: 10.3389/
fninf.2014.00080
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank K. Deisseroth, S. Sternson, Z. J. Huang, and G. Fishell for
generously sharing reagents and transgenic mice. We thank
V. Jayaraman, R. A. Kerr, D. S. Kim, L. L. Looger, and K. Svoboda
from the GENIE Project, Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, for the use of the GCaMP6f-encoding
virus. We are grateful to G. Buzsaki, R. Tsien, R. Hen,
Al. Dranovsky, C. Kellendonk, S. Fusi, R. Bruno, and A. Das for
invaluable discussions on the study and C. Magnus, S. Sternson,
C. Denny, A. Katzman, and M. Russo for critical technical
advice. We are also indebted to J. Kupferman, Z. Rosen,
A. Masurkar, Q. Sun, and T. Bock for helpful comments on
previous versions of the manuscript. This work was supported
by a NARSAD Young Investigator grant to J.B.; a
Ruth L. Kirschstein F30 National Research Service Award from
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), NIH, to F.L.H.;
a Human Frontier Science Program grant and a grant
(1R01MH100510) from NIMH to B.V.Z.; a grant (1R01MH100631)
from NIMH and support from the Searle Scholars Program,
Human Frontier Science Program, and the McKnight Memory
and Cognitive Disorders Award to A.L.; and a grant (R01NS036658)
from National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
NIH, and support from the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute to S.A.S.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/351/6269/aaa5694/suppl/DC1
Figs. S1 to S10
References (63–67)
Movie S1
24 December 2014; accepted 17 November 2015
10.1126/science.aaa5694
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
8 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6269
aaa5694-15
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Corrected 21 January 2016; see full text.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 inhibition
Gating of hippocampal activity, plasticity, and memory by entorhinal cortex long-range
Siegelbaum
Jayeeta Basu, Jeffrey D. Zaremba, Stephanie K. Cheung, Frederick L. Hitti, Boris V. Zemelman, Attila Losonczy and Steven A.
DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa5694
 (6269), aaa5694.
351
Science 
, this issue p. 10.1126/science.aaa5694
Science
role in providing specificity of fear conditioning, and thus help prevent overgeneralization.
information transfer within the cortico-hippocampal circuit. In this way, long-range inhibitory projections play an important
memory. Multimodal sensory stimuli activate long-range inhibitory input in vivo. This input enables precisely timed 
 described this input in detail and characterized its role for learning and
et al.
projections to the hippocampus. Basu 
In addition to providing well-characterized excitatory inputs, the entorhinal cortex also sends long-range inhibitory
Fine-tuned information flow in the brain
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6269/aaa5694
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/01/06/351.6269.aaa5694.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/9/425/ra41.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/351/6272/aaf2878.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/3/104/104ra101.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/149/149ra118.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/217/217ra3.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/287/287ra69.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6269/aaa5694#BIBL
This article cites 67 articles, 19 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
