 Noninvasive Testing for Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis
and Hepatic Fibrosis in Patients With Psoriasis
Receiving Long-term Methotrexate Sodium Therapy
Bruce Bauer, MD; Po-Huang Chyou, PhD; Erik J. Stratman, MD; Clayton Green, MD, PhD
IMPORTANCE The long-term implications of hepatotoxic effects in patients with psoriasis
remains uncharacterized, and a method is needed for the noninvasive monitoring of the
development and progression of hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis receiving
long-term methotrexate therapy.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate if NASH FibroSure, a noninvasive test for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH) and hepatic fibrosis, can be used for patients with psoriasis to aid in determining
eligibility for methotrexate sodium (MTX) therapy, monitor for the development of
MTX-induced hepatotoxic effects, and monitor for worsening of hepatic fibrosis scores during
MTX therapy.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS A retrospective descriptive analysis was conducted
among a cohort of patients with psoriasis treated with MTX who underwent NASH FibroSure
testing between January 1, 2007, and December 31, 2013, at a dermatology referral center at
a single institution. Data analysis was performed from January 1 to December 31, 2014.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES NASH FibroSure risk scores suggesting the development
and progression of hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis receiving long-term MTX therapy.
RESULTS Included in the institutional experience portion of the study were 129 patients with
psoriasis undergoing treatment with MTX, while 107 patients (57 women and 50 men; mean
[SD] age, 83.3 [13.5] years) underwent NASH FibroSure testing during MTX therapy and were
eligible for correlation analysis. Of the 129 patients with psoriasis undergoing treatment with
MTX, 69 (53.5%) underwent NASH FibroSure testing prior to starting MTX; 19 of those
patients (27.5%) had elevated fibrosis scores, and 54 (78.3%) had elevated steatosis scores.
Among the 107 patients who underwent NASH FibroSure testing during MTX therapy, the
cumulative MTX dose corresponded to a statistically significant association of a higher NASH
FibroSure hepatic fibrosis score in women (Spearman ρ = 0.21; P = .02) but not in men
(Spearman ρ = 0.17; P = .11). All patients in the cohort except 1 were managed without a liver
biopsy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE The patients with psoriasis in this study had a high prevalence
of elevated hepatic steatosis scores. The NASH FibroSure test can be used to monitor
changes in fibrosis score in patients with psoriasis receiving MTX. In a single-institution
cohort, these results suggest that NASH FibroSure may be used, especially among female
patients, to help monitor for risk of worsening fibrosis during MTX therapy.
JAMA Dermatol. 2017;153(10):977-982. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.2083
Published online August 23, 2017.
Author Affiliations: Pariser
Dermatology Specialists, Norfolk,
Virginia (Bauer); Bioinformatics
Research Center, Marshfield Clinic
Research Foundation, Marshfield,
Wisconsin (Chyou); Department
of Dermatology, Marshfield Clinic,
Marshfield, Wisconsin
(Stratman, Green).
Corresponding Author: Clayton
Green, MD, PhD, Department of
Dermatology, Marshfield Clinic,
1000 N Oak Ave, Marshfield, WI
54449 (green.clayton
@marshfieldclinic.org).
Research
JAMA Dermatology | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
977
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/06/2019
 B
ecause of its relatively low cost, infrequent dosing, and
favorable side effect profile, methotrexate sodium
(MTX) is a widely used first-line agent among sys-
temic options for the long-term treatment of severe psoria-
sis. The most concerning potential long-term toxic effect of
MTX in patients with psoriasis is hepatic fibrosis.1 Even for pa-
tients who are carefully prescreened for alcohol use and sub-
clinical chronic viral hepatitis, the excess risk of hepatic fibro-
sis seems to already exist in the population.1
Several studies have demonstrated a high prevalence
(20%-60%) of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in pa-
tients with plaque psoriasis.2-5 Nonalcoholic fatty liver dis-
ease encompasses a spectrum of disease ranging from mild
to severe infiltration of fatty liver and ultimately hepatic scar-
ring. Methotrexate is a potential accelerator of hepatic fibro-
sis progression in a population that is already at risk for
hepatic fibrosis.
The current criterion standard for detecting and monitor-
ing hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis receiving long-
term MTX therapy is a liver biopsy (American Academy of Der-
matology consensus guidelines6). A recent systematic review
by Maybury et al7 of 8 observational studies that included 429
patients with psoriasis who had a liver biopsy while undergo-
ing MTX treatment demonstrated a pooled risk difference of
0.09 for developing significant fibrosis, as well as a pooled risk
difference of 0.22 for developing any fibrosis; a clear associa-
tion between progression of hepatic fibrosis and cumulative
MTX dose was not detected. A liver biopsy is an invasive pro-
cedure with associated risks of complications, including sam-
pling error (ie, missing the presence or maximum degree of
scarring owing to the patchy nature of hepatic fibrosis) and di-
agnostic discordance among pathologists on the interpreta-
tion of fibrosis.8 Although noninvasive tests for monitoring
MTX-induced hepatic fibrosis have been studied and shown
to be useful in reducing the number of liver biopsies, no single
test has emerged as a replacement for liver biopsy.9
Previousstudieshavedescribedtheuseofnoninvasivetests
for detecting hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis who are
receiving long-term MTX therapy. Transient elastography is an
ultrasonography-basedtestthatmeasuresliverstiffness.Ameta-
analysisindicatesthattransientelastographyhasahighdegree
of sensitivity (84.8%) and specificity (93.6%) for the detection
of fibrosis, but it performs less well in discriminating mild from
advanced fibrosis.10 However, the failure rate of hepatic ultra-
sonographyforpatientswithabodymassindex(BMI;calculated
as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) of
more than 30 is reported to be as high as 50%11; therefore, this
testappearstobeofquestionablediagnosticvalueformonitor-
ingofhepaticfibrosisinobeseindividuals.ProcollagenIIIamino
terminal peptide, a serologic marker of collagen turnover, has
been used with some success in monitoring the progression of
hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis who are taking MTX,
butactivepsoriaticarthritismayresultinartificiallyelevatedpro-
collagen III amino terminal peptide levels.12 A family of related
noninvasivetestsforhepaticfibrosisisavailable;thesetestscon-
sist of panels of serum biomarkers and patient biometrics that
areputintopatentedmathematicalmodelsthatgeneratescores
predictiveofhepaticfibrosis.ArecentarticlebyLynchetal13de-
scribedthecombineduseofprocollagenIIIaminoterminalpep-
tide levels, transient elastography, and FibroTest/FibroSure in
monitoring MTX-induced hepatotoxic effects. The FibroTest/
FibroSure test is a patented algorithm for generating a fibrosis
score from 5 serum biomarkers.14 In the study by Lynch et al,13
a positive correlation was reported between cumulative MTX
dose and FibroTest score, as well as between duration of MTX
therapyandFibroTestscore,suggestingthatthisnoninvasivetest
has a role to play in detecting MTX-induced hepatic fibrosis.
The nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) FibroSure test
(LabCorp) is similar to the FibroTest but was specifically devel-
opedforpatientswithNAFLD.Withacomputationalalgorithm
to provide a quantitative surrogate marker of liver fibrosis, ste-
atosis, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), the NASH
FibroSuretestuses10biochemicalmarkersincombinationwith
age,sex,height,andweight.TheNASHFibroSuretestisreported
tohaveasensitivityof83%andaspecificityof78%indetecting
riskofsignificantfibrosisandasensitivityof71%andaspecific-
ity of 72% in identifying risk of significant steatosis in patients
with NAFLD.15 Given the prevalence of NAFLD in patients with
psoriasis,weproposethatNASHFibroSurecanbeusedasastand-
alonetesttomonitortheprogressionofhepaticfibrosisinpatients
with psoriasis receiving long-term MTX therapy. We report our
experience using this test to guide medication management in
the absence of a liver biopsy.
Methods
This study was a single-institution retrospective analysis of pa-
tients with psoriasis treated with MTX who were identified
through the electronic medical record system. Patients were
excluded if they were younger than 18 years of age, had re-
ceived MTX therapy for another indication, had received less
than a 500-mg cumulative dose of MTX, or had been taking
MTX for fewer than 90 days. Age, sex, BMI, diagnosis of type
2diabetes(definedbyaplasmafastingglucoselevel>126mg/dL
[to convert to millimoles per liter, multiply by 0.0555], a he-
moglobin A1c level >6.5% [to convert to proportion of total he-
moglobin, multiply by 0.01], or a random fasting glucose con-
centrationof>200mg/dL),andthepresenceofstageIIIchronic
Key Points
Question Can a noninvasive test for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
be used as an alternative to liver biopsy and imaging for
monitoring hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis who are
taking methotrexate sodium?
Findings In this single-institution cohort study, 54 of 69 patients
(78.3%) had elevated steatosis scores. Women displayed a
significant correlation between worsening fibrosis score detected
by NASH FibroSure and an increasing cumulative methotrexate
dose; this correlation was not observed in men.
Meaning The NASH FibroSure test may be used for monitoring of
hepatic fibrosis scores in patients with psoriasis who are taking
methotrexate; worsening fibrosis scores can indicate the need to
switch to an alternative systemic agent without performing a liver
biopsy.
Research Original Investigation
Noninvasive Test for NASH and Hepatic Fibrosis in Patients With Psoriasis
978
JAMA Dermatology
October 2017
Volume 153, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/06/2019
 kidney disease (defined by 2 consecutive glomerular filtra-
tion rates <59 mL/min) were abstracted. Patient medical rec-
ords were manually reviewed to ensure that NASH FibroSure
had been performed as part of MTX therapy monitoring
for treatment of psoriasis. The study was approved by the
Marshfield Clinic institutional review board with a waiver of
informed consent.
The NASH FibroSure test is a semiquantitative test devel-
oped for use for patients with suspected NAFLD; it calculates
the degree of hepatic fibrosis using computational algo-
rithms to analyze serum levels of aminotransferases, α2-
macroglobulins, haptoglobin, apolipoprotein A1, cholesterol,
transpeptidase, glucose, and triglycerides, as well as age, sex,
height, and weight. Scores range from 0.0 to 1.0, with sub-
scores for fibrosis (reported as a METAVIR [Meta-analysis of
HistologicalDatainVirialHepatitis]scorefromstageF0[<0.21,
no fibrosis] to stage F4 [>0.74, cirrhosis]), hepatic steatosis
(METAVIR score from stage S0 [<0.30, no steatosis] to stage
S3 [>0.69, marked or severe steatosis]), and NASH (reported
as a METAVIR score from stage N0 [0.25, no NASH] to stage
N2 [0.75, clear diagnosis of NASH]). Cumulative MTX doses
were manually calculated from the medications record.
Race/ethnicity was included because the cohort was antici-
pated to be predominantly non-Hispanic white through self-
identification, which reflects the demographics of Central
Wisconsin and represents a potential limitation to study gen-
eralizability. Two patients of Asian ancestry and 2 of Native
American ancestry were identified in the abstractions. One Na-
tive American patient was found to have latent tuberculosis
on screening and stopped MTX. For the remaining 3 patients,
MTX therapy failed, and they were switched to other thera-
pies. None achieved the minimum 500-mg cumulative MTX
dose required to be included in the correlation analysis.
Theobservationalstudyincluded107patientswhoreceived
a diagnosis of psoriasis during the study period from January 1,
2007,toDecember31,2013.Spearman(includingpartial)corre-
lationcoefficientswerecalculatedtomeasurethestrengthofthe
linear association between cumulative MTX dose and fibrosis
score.Foreachcorrelation,aPvaluewasderivedfromthe2-tailed
ttest,andP < .05wasconsideredstatisticallysignificant.Tocon-
sider the potential confounding effect of age, BMI, glomerular
filtrationrate,ordiabetesontheassociationbetweenMTXdose
and fibrosis scores, the correlation analyses were repeated ac-
cordingtothestatusofage(<65vs≥65years),BMI(<30vs≥30),
glomerularfiltrationrate(normalorabnormal),anddiabetes(yes
orno).Inaddition,theFisherexacttestwasperformedtoassess
theassociationsbetweensexandeachofthefollowingvariables
of interest: age, BMI, and diabetes status.
Data analysis was performed from January 1 to December
31, 2014. With 107 patients planned to be included, the study
has 80% statistical power to detect an observed correlation co-
efficient of 0.27 or higher. The estimated statistical power was
derived using the following assumptions: a type I error rate of
5%anda2-tailedhypothesistestingisofinterest.Timetoevent
was not used to assess study outcomes, and patients who were
lost to follow-up during the study period were included in the
correlation analysis if they otherwise met study inclusion cri-
teria. All data analyses were carried out using SAS, version 9.3
(SAS Institute Inc), in English.
Results
The initial cohort consisted of 129 patients who had at least 1
NASH FibroSure determination during MTX therapy (Table 1):
69 patients had a baseline NASH FibroSure test performed be-
fore starting MTX; of these 69 patients, 54 (78.3%) had el-
evated steatosis scores and 18 (26.1%) had elevated fibrosis
scores. Table 2 displays the mean methotrexate dose at which
NASH FibroSure was checked in patients who underwent se-
rial testing. Of 107 patients who had a NASH FibroSure test per-
formed any time during therapy, a statistically significant cor-
relation between worsening fibrosis scores and cumulative
MTXdosewasobservedinwomen(Spearmanρ = 0.21;P = .02)
but not in men (Spearman ρ = 0.17; P = .11); the correlation for
women remained significant after correcting for patients who
had multiple NASH FibroSure tests (Table 3). Forwomen,there
was a statistically significant correlation between a BMI of 28
or more and worsening fibrosis scores (Spearman ρ = 0.2;
P = .03) (Table 4) and no significant correlation between the
combination of age older than 65 years and worsening of he-
patic fibrosis scores with cumulative MTX dose. There were no
Table 1. Patient Demographics
Characteristic
Value
Patients in cohort, No.
129
Patients eligible for correlation analysis, No.
107
Race/ethnicity, No. (%)
Non-Hispanic white
107 (100)
Sex
Male
50 (46.7)
Female
57 (53.3) [95% CI, 43-63]
Age, mean (SD), y [range]
83.3 (13.5) [19-85]
Body mass indexa
<28
3 (2.8)
28-30
17 (15.9)
>30
87 (81.3) [95% CI, 73-88]
Type 2 diabetes
17 (15.9) [95% CI, 10-24]
Stage III chronic kidney disease
4 (3.7) [95% CI, 1-9]
a Calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.
Table 2. Mean Methotrexate Dose at Interval of NASH FibroSure Testing
NASH FibroSure
Mean Methotrexate
Dose, g
Patients,
No.
Baseline
89
69
First
2.7
66
Second
3.4
45
Third
4.3
23
Fourth
4
14
Fifth
4.4
6
Sixth
4.7
2
Abbreviation: NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Noninvasive Test for NASH and Hepatic Fibrosis in Patients With Psoriasis
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
October 2017
Volume 153, Number 10
979
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/06/2019
 differences between men and women with regard to preva-
lence of a BMI of 28 or more, diabetes, age older than 65 years,
or chronic kidney disease (Table 5). These results suggest that
forwomen,obesityinfluencestheprogressionoffibrosisscores.
Several management patterns were observed in this study
ofourinstitutionalexperienceusingtheNASHFibroSuretestfor
managementofpatientswithpsoriasis.Elevatedsteatosisscores
werenevertreatedasacontraindicationtostartingMTXtherapy
withinthecohort,andwithonly1exception,MTXwasinstituted
for 18 patients who had baseline elevated fibrosis scores. Six of
the18werelosttofollow-upshortlyafterstartingMTXtherapy.
Owingtothedevelopmentoftransaminitiswithinthefirstyear
oftherapy,2patientswithelevatedbaselinefibrosisscoreswere
switched to different treatment regimens, specifically, etaner-
ceptandtopicalcorticosteroids.Methotrexatetherapyfailedin
2 other patients, who were started on anti–tumor necrosis fac-
tor agents: 1 patient received adalimumab and the second re-
ceivedetanercept.EightpatientsrespondedwelltoMTXandcon-
tinued this therapy; 1 had progressive worsening of fibrosis in
spite of reducing the weekly MTX dose and, ultimately, died of
unrelated causes. Of the remaining 7 patients with baseline fi-
brosis,4continuedMTXtherapywithstablefibrosisscores;1pa-
tientwasthesinglepatientinourstudytoundergoaliverbiopsy,
whichconfirmedsteatosisbutdidnotdetectfibrosis.Theremain-
ing 3 patients switched to biologic agents, specifically adali-
mumab, etanercept, and ustekinumab, owing to concern for fi-
brosisinspiteofstablefibrosisscores.Twentypatientswithout
baselinefibrosishadworseningfibrosisscores,mostoftenresult-
inginachangeintherapy.NoNASHFibroSuretestswereordered
forpatientsafterMTXwasdiscontinued,sothepotentialchanges
in hepatic fibrosis in the absence of MTX could not be assessed.
Thedermatologistsatourinstitutionshowedastrongpreference
forswitchingtobiologicswithoutfurthergastrointestinalworkup
inpatientswithpsoriasiswhodevelopedworseningfibrosiswhile
receivingMTX.Of4patientsreferredtoagastroenterologyspe-
cialist, only 1 received a liver biopsy and another underwent ul-
trasonography of the liver; neither patient showed evidence of
fibrosis and continued MTX therapy. Of the remaining patients
with worsening fibrosis scores, 15 were offered biologics (12 of
15receivedadalimumab,and3of15receivedustekinumab),1was
switched to cyclosporine, and another to acitretin.
Discussion
Severalnoninvasiveproprietarytestsbasedonpanelsofserum
biomarkers are available for monitoring the risk of progression
of hepatic fibrosis in patients with NAFLD, with the FibroTest
being the most widely adopted test evaluating MTX-induced
hepatotoxiceffects.9,13,16-18ThehighprevalenceofNAFLDamong
Table 3. Correlation Analysis Between Fibrosis Score and Cumulative Methotrexate Dose
Patients
Patients, No.
Spearman ρ
P Valuea
All
107
0.15
.02
Female
57
0.21
.02
Male
50
0.17
.11
Abbreviation: NASH, nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis.
a P value for females remained
significant when accounting for
multiple NASH FibroSure measures
using partial correlation.
Table 4. Correlation Analysis Among Fibrosis, Body Mass Index, and Type 2 Diabetes in Women
Characteristic
Patients, No.
Fibrosis or Methotrexate
Measures, Total No.
Spearman ρ
P Value
Body mass indexa
<28
15
22
−0.02
.93
≥28
42
109
0.2
.03
Type 2 diabetes
Yes
9
25
0.2
.33
No
48
106
0.23
.02
a Calculated as weight in kilograms
divided by height in meters
squared.
Table 5. Comparisons of Age, Body Mass Index, and Comorbidities Between Sexes
Characteristic
Women, No. (%) (n = 57)
Men, No. (%) (n = 50)
P Valuea
Age, y
≤65
45 (78.9)
42 (84.0)
.62
>65
12 (21.1)
8 (16.0)
Body mass indexb
<28
15 (26.3)
10 (20.0)
.50
≥28
42 (73.7)
40 (80.0)
Type 2 diabetes
Yes
9 (15.8)
6 (12.0)
.78
No
48 (84.2)
44 (88.0)
Stage III chronic kidney disease
Yes
0
2 (4.0)
.22
No
57 (100)
48 (96.0)
a Derived from Fisher exact tests.
bCalculated as weight in kilograms
divided by height in meters
squared.
Research Original Investigation
Noninvasive Test for NASH and Hepatic Fibrosis in Patients With Psoriasis
980
JAMA Dermatology
October 2017
Volume 153, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/06/2019
 patientswithpsoriasis,includinginourcohort,suggeststhattests
validated to assess the NAFLD spectrum may be useful for pa-
tientswithpsoriasisreceivinglong-termMTXtherapy,particu-
larly considering that fatty liver is considered to be a potential
precursorofhepaticfibrosis.TheNASHFibroSuretestisunique
among these tests in that it includes height and weight in the
model,therebyaccountingforthecontributionofBMItothepro-
gression of steatosis to fibrosis. To our knowledge, our study is
thefirsttoevaluatetheutilityofthistestinmonitoringthepro-
gressionoffibrosisscoresamongpatientswithpsoriasiswithel-
evated BMI, including obesity. Although our study design does
not allow us to examine the contribution of MTX to worsening
fibrosisscores,ourresultsprovidesupportfortheapplicationof
serologictestsfortheprogressionofNAFLDtopatientswithpso-
riasis. In addition to analyzing the use of NASH FibroSure as a
quantitative test to measure hepatic fibrosis scores among pa-
tients with psoriasis, we also analyzed the associations among
sexandthecomorbiditiesofobesityanddiabeteswithprogres-
sion of fibrosis scores during MTX therapy. Further analysis of
thesexdifferencesintheprogressionofhepaticfibrosisaccord-
ing to cumulative MTX dose will aid in the development of im-
provedtreatmentandmonitoringrecommendationsforfemale
and male patients with psoriasis.
Ourcohortdemonstratedahighprevalenceofbaselinefatty
liverchangeswhentheNASHFibroSuretestwasusedasascreen-
ingtool.TheNASHFibroSurescoressuggestedthatfibrosiswas
alsodetectedinsomepatientsbeforeMTXtherapy,althoughthe
drugwasgenerallyinitiatedinthesepatients.Thestudyalsosug-
gests that patients with psoriasis receiving long-term MTX
therapy can be managed without a liver biopsy or gastroenter-
ologyconsultation.Althoughcirrhosisandhepaticfailurewere
not detected in any of the patients in our cohort, the safe upper
levelofanelevatedfibrosisscoreamongpatientstakingMTXand
the rate of progression to cirrhosis among patients with psoria-
sis not treated with MTX are not known.
Multiple European studies have demonstrated that combi-
nationsofserumbiomarkersandimagingcanbeusedtoreduce
thenumberofliverbiopsiesperformed.9,13,16-18Giventhesignifi-
cant risks and limitations of a liver biopsy, we suggest that our
data support managing most patients with psoriasis receiving
long-termMTXwithouttheuseofaliverbiopsy.Femalepatients
withpsoriasisshowedasignificantcorrelationbetweenfibrosis
score progression and cumulative MTX dose (Table 5). A sex ef-
fect has also been reported by Amital et al,19 who observed that
womenwitheitherrheumatoidarthritisorpsoriasistreatedwith
MTX had a higher risk of an abnormal liver function test result
thanmen.Inourcohort,obesitywassignificantlycorrelatedwith
elevated fibrosis scores and cumulative MTX dose. The lack of
differences between cumulative MTX dose and prevalence of
obesity,diabetes,orelevatedsteatosisscoresinthemaleandfe-
malesubgroupswithinthecohortstrengthensthecaseforapo-
tential sex effect on MTX-induced progression of hepatic fibro-
sis.Nodifferencesbetweenthecohortswereobservedthatwould
explain the association of worsening fibrosis scores and cumu-
lative MTX dose among women but not men. The retrospective
nature of our study does not allow us to assess medication ad-
herence. However, given the implications of the progression of
hepaticfibrosis,westillrecommenddiscontinuingMTXformale
patients who demonstrate worsening fibrosis scores.
Limitations
There are several limitations to this study. The NASH FibroSure
test is a mathematical model that generates a risk score for he-
paticfibrosis,notanactualmeasureoffibrosis.Withtheexcep-
tionof2patients,liverbiopsiesandimagingwerenotusedtovali-
datethefibrosisscores.Inaddition,thecohortwasuncontrolled,
andthechangeinfibrosisscoresortheprogressionofNAFLDin
patients with psoriasis remains unknown. There was heteroge-
neity in the departmental use of NASH FibroSure as well, with
some patients already receiving long-term MTX therapy when
their first NASH FibroSure test was performed. Finally, the en-
tirecorrelationcohortself-identifiedasnon-Hispanicwhite,lim-
iting the ability to generalize the data to other races.
Conclusions
Our results do not suggest that a liver biopsy can be entirely
replaced by the NASH FibroSure test; they do, however, sup-
port the idea that the number of liver biopsies can be signifi-
cantlyreducedbytheuseofnoninvasivetestssuchastheNASH
FibroSure. To address the study limitations, a prospective, ran-
domized, multi-institutional analysis of NASH FibroSure and
liverbiopsiesforpatientswithpsoriasisreceivingMTXvsother
treatments, including a larger cohort of men and women with
different racial and ethnic backgrounds, would be necessary.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: May 5, 2017.
Published Online: August 23, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2017.2083
Author Contributions: Dr Green had full access to
all the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Bauer, Green.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Bauer, Chyou, Green.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Bauer, Stratman, Green.
Statistical analysis: Bauer, Chyou, Green.
Obtained funding: Bauer, Green.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Green.
Study supervision: Stratman, Green.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Green
reported receiving research funding from T2
Biosystems. No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: Funds for this study were
provided by the Marshfield Clinic Resident
Research Program.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding source
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Additional Contributions: Deb Hansen, BSN,
The Marshfield Clinic, provided administrative
assistance in preparing the initial grant submission.
She was not compensated for her contribution.
REFERENCES
1. Maybury CM, Samarasekera E, Douiri A, Barker
JN, Smith CH. Diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive
markers of liver fibrosis in patients with psoriasis
taking methotrexate: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol. 2014;170(6):1237-1247.
2. Gisondi P, Targher G, Zoppini G, Girolomoni G.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with
chronic plaque psoriasis. J Hepatol. 2009;51(4):
758-764.
Noninvasive Test for NASH and Hepatic Fibrosis in Patients With Psoriasis
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
October 2017
Volume 153, Number 10
981
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/06/2019
 3. Miele L, Vallone S, Cefalo C, et al. Prevalence,
characteristics and severity of non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease in patients with chronic plaque
psoriasis. J Hepatol. 2009;51(4):778-786.
4. Madanagobalane S, Anandan S. The increased
prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in
psoriatic patients: a study from South India.
Australas J Dermatol. 2012;53(3):190-197.
5. Roberts KK, Cochet AE, Lamb PB, et al.
The prevalence of NAFLD and NASH among
patients with psoriasis in a tertiary care
dermatology and rheumatology clinic. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther. 2015;41(3):293-300.
6. American Academy of Dermatology. Psoriasis:
treatment guide for methotrexate. https://www
.aad.org/file library/global navigation/education and
quality care/psoriasis-methotrexate-treatment
-guide.pdf. Accessed July 13, 2017.
7. Maybury CM, Jabbar-Lopez ZK, Wong T, Dhillon
AP, Barker JN, Smith CH. Methotrexate and liver
fibrosis in people with psoriasis: a systematic
review of observational studies. Br J Dermatol.
2014;171(1):17-29.
8. Aithal GP, Haugk B, Das S, Card T, Burt AD,
Record CO. Monitoring methotrexate-induced
hepatic fibrosis in patients with psoriasis: are serial
liver biopsies justified? Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2004;19(4):391-399.
9. Montaudié H, Sbidian E, Paul C, et al.
Methotrexate in psoriasis: a systematic review of
treatment modalities, incidence, risk factors and
monitoring of liver toxicity. J Eur Acad Dermatol
Venereol. 2011;25(suppl 2):12-18.
10. Hernaez R, Lazo M, Bonekamp S, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy and reliability of
ultrasonography for the detection of fatty liver:
a meta-analysis. Hepatology. 2011;54(3):1082-1090.
11. Bray AP, Barnova I, Przemioslo R, Kennedy CT.
Liver fibrosis screening for patients with psoriasis
taking methotrexate: a cross-sectional study
comparing transient elastography and liver biopsy.
Br J Dermatol. 2012;166(5):1125-1127.
12. Zachariae H, Aslam HM, Bjerring P, Søgaard H,
Zachariae E, Heickendorff L. Serum aminoterminal
propeptide of type III procollagen in psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis: relation to liver fibrosis and
arthritis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1991;25(1, pt 1):50-53.
13. Lynch M, Higgins E, McCormick PA, et al. The
use of transient elastography and FibroTest for
monitoring hepatotoxicity in patients receiving
methotrexate for psoriasis. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;
150(8):856-862.
14. BioPredictive.Liverdiagnostics.https://www
.biopredictive.com/products.AccessedJuly13,2017.
15. Ratziu V, Massard J, Charlotte F, et al; LIDO
Study Group; CYTOL Study Group. Diagnostic value
of biochemical markers (FibroTest-FibroSURE) for
the prediction of liver fibrosis in patients with
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. BMC Gastroenterol.
2006;6:6.
16. Berends MA, Snoek J, de Jong EM, et al.
Biochemical and biophysical assessment of
MTX-induced liver fibrosis in psoriasis patients:
FibroTest predicts the presence and FibroScan
predicts the absence of significant liver fibrosis.
Liver Int. 2007;27(5):639-645.
17. Laharie D, Seneschal J, Schaeverbeke T, et al.
Assessment of liver fibrosis with transient
elastography and FibroTest in patients treated with
methotrexate for chronic inflammatory diseases:
acase-controlstudy.JHepatol.2010;53(6):1035-1040.
18Chládek J, Simková M, Vanecková J, Hroch M,
Vávrová J, Hůlek P. Assessment of methotrexate
hepatotoxicity in psoriasis patients: a prospective
evaluation of four serum fibrosis markers. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013;27(8):1007-1014.
19. Amital H, Arnson Y, Chodick G, Shalev V.
Hepatotoxicity rates do not differ in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis treated with
methotrexate. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009;48
(9):1107-1110.
NOTABLE NOTES
Identified
Helena Jenkinson, MD
Afingerprintreferstothepatternformedbytheepidermalridgesofthe
skin. These distinctive markings, however, occur not only on the fin-
gers, but also on palms, soles, and toes. Human fingerprints are formed
during early fetal development through a mechanism that is not com-
pletelyunderstood,butonethatislikelyinfluencedbybothgeneticand
environmentalfactors.Theproductofthisprocessisuniquetoeveryin-
dividual, shared not even by identical twins.1 Because of this, finger-
printinghasbeenusedforcriminalidentificationformorethanacentury.2
Priortothepopularizationoffingerprinting,theBertillonsystemwas
amethodusedforidentificationofpeople.TheBertillonsystem,introduced
byAlphonseBertillonin1882,involvedaseriesofmeasurementsofvari-
ousbodyparts,includingcheek,foot,andears.Accordingtosomesources
(and dismissed as apocryphal by others), this system fell out of common
practiceaftertheappearanceofaman,WillWest,attheLeavenworthfed-
eralprisoninKansasin1903.Theadmissionsclerkwasconvincedthathe
recognized him, however, West stated he had never been incarcerated
there.Theclerkfoundacardfor“WilliamWest”intheprison'
srecords.Will
WestmatchedtherecordedBertillonmeasurementsofWilliamWestand
hisappearanceresembledthatofthemaninthephotoonthecard.How-
ever,WilliamWestwasatthattimealreadybeingincarceratedatLeaven-
worth,makingitimpossiblethatthesetwomencouldbeoneandthesame.
Their fingerprints were compared and found to be nonmatching.2
Whether or not West'
s misidentification was truly a factor, the Ber-
tillon system was indeed replaced by fingerprinting for criminal identi-
fication.Inrecentyears,DNAevidencehasalsobecomepopularforuse
during criminal investigations. However, DNA evidence has certain
disadvantages relative to fingerprinting, as evidenced by a 2008 case,
inwhichpolicearrestedDonaldSmithofGwinnett,Georgia,forcarjack-
ing and murder. His appearance matched witness descriptions and sur-
veillancevideos.DNAfoundatthesceneofthecrimewasconsistentwith
hisown.However,Donaldinsistedthathewasinnocentandstatedthat
thecrimeshadbeeninsteadcommittedbyhisidenticaltwinbrother,Ron-
ald.Infact,thefingerprintsatthesceneofthecrimedidnotmatchthose
of Donald, but rather those of Ronald. As a result of fingerprint evi-
dence, Donald was exonerated.3
Thesetwostoriesofmistakenidentity,acenturyapart,highlightthe
valueoffingerprinting.Eventoday,intheageofso-calledDNA,fingerprint-
ingthepatternsofepidermalridgesremainssignificantforcriminaliden-
tification purposes.
Author Affiliation: Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas at
Austin Dell Medical School, Austin.
Corresponding Author: Helena Jenkinson, MD, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, 601 E 15th Street,
Austin, TX, 78701 (helenajenx@gmail.com).
1. National Library of Medicine (US). Are fingerprints determined by genetics?
Genetics Home Reference website. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/traits
/fingerprints. June 13, 2017. Accessed June 18, 2017.
2. Morris E. What’s in a Name? (Part 2) New York Times. May 1, 2012.
https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/05/01/whats-in-a-name-part-2/.
Accessed May 29, 2017.
3. Ferran L. Rare twin murder case echoes bizarre fingerprint origins. ABC News
website.http://abcnews.go.com/TheLaw/atlanta-twin-murder-case-echoes-
fingerprint-origins/story?id=9909586.February22,2010.AccessedMay29,2017.
Research Original Investigation
Noninvasive Test for NASH and Hepatic Fibrosis in Patients With Psoriasis
982
JAMA Dermatology
October 2017
Volume 153, Number 10
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/06/2019
