 Protocol for PIT: a phase III trial of
prophylactic irradiation of tracts in
patients with malignant pleural
mesothelioma following invasive chest
wall intervention
N Bayman,1 D Ardron,2 L Ashcroft,3 D R Baldwin,4 R Booton,5 L Darlison,6,7
J G Edwards,8 L Lang-Lazdunski,9 J F Lester,10 M Peake,7,11 R C Rintoul,12
M Snee,13 P Taylor,14,15 C Lunt,3 C Faivre-Finn16,17
To cite: Bayman N, Ardron D,
Ashcroft L, et al. Protocol for
PIT: a phase III trial of
prophylactic irradiation of
tracts in patients with
malignant pleural
mesothelioma following
invasive chest wall
intervention. BMJ Open
2016;6:e010589.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-
010589
▸ Prepublication history and
additional material is
available. To view please visit
the journal (http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmjopen-2015-
010589).
Received 17 November 2015
Revised 2 December 2015
Accepted 7 December 2015
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr N Bayman;
Neil.Bayman@christie.nhs.uk
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Histological diagnosis of malignant
mesothelioma requires an invasive procedure such as
CT-guided needle biopsy, thoracoscopy, video-assisted
thorascopic surgery (VATs) or thoracotomy. These
invasive procedures encourage tumour cell seeding at
the intervention site and patients can develop tumour
nodules within the chest wall. In an effort to prevent
nodules developing, it has been widespread practice
across Europe to irradiate intervention sites
postprocedure—a practice known as prophylactic
irradiation of tracts (PIT). To date there has not been a
suitably powered randomised trial to determine
whether PIT is effective at reducing the risk of chest
wall nodule development.
Methods and analysis: In this multicentre phase III
randomised controlled superiority trial, 374 patients
who can receive radiotherapy within 42 days of a chest
wall intervention will be randomised to receive PIT or
no PIT. Patients will be randomised on a 1:1 basis.
Radiotherapy in the PIT arm will be 21 Gy in three
fractions. Subsequent chemotherapy is given at the
clinicians’ discretion. A reduction in the incidence of
chest wall nodules from 15% to 5% in favour of
radiotherapy 6 months after randomisation would be
clinically significant. All patients will be followed up for
up to 2 years with monthly telephone contact and at
least four outpatient visits in the first year.
Ethics and dissemination: PIT was approved by
NRES Committee North West—Greater Manchester
West (REC reference 12/NW/0249) and recruitment is
currently on-going, the last patient is expected to be
randomised by the end of 2015. The analysis of the
primary end point, incidence of chest wall nodules
6 months after randomisation, is expected to be
published in 2016 in a peer reviewed journal and
results will also be presented at scientific meetings and
summary results published online. A follow-up analysis
is expected to be published in 2018.
Trial registration number: ISRCTN04240319;
NCT01604005; Pre-results.
INTRODUCTION
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is
almost exclusively linked to asbestos exposure
with a latency period that is usually more
than 30 years and prognosis is poor.1–4 The
median survival in the UK is 8.8 months and
the 1-year survival 38.5%.5
Diagnosis of mesothelioma is usually made
by
pleural
biopsy
either
via
CT-guided
needle biopsy, thoracoscopy, video-assisted
thoracic
surgery
(VATs)
or
thoracotomy.
Patients often have associated pleural effu-
sions and require chest drains to relieve
symptoms such as chest pain and difficulty
breathing. These invasive procedures encour-
age tumour cell seeding at the site of the
intervention, which can result in formation
of a subcutaneous tumour. The rate of chest
wall metastases ranges from 2% to 50%, and
depends on the procedure performed.4 6–14
In an effort to minimise tumour seeding
and prevent nodule development, it has been
widespread practice for more than 20 years in
the
UK
to
irradiate
intervention
sites
Strengths and limitations of this study
▪ Largest, adequately powered randomised con-
trolled study of prophylactic radiotherapy in this
population.
▪ Radiotherapy fields reflect current practice for
thoracoscopy and drain insertion.
▪ Monthly telephone follow-up to supplement out-
patient follow-up clinical significance of chest
wall metastases measured with visual analogue
scale pain score.
▪ Will not determine role of prophylactic radiother-
apy at the site of an indwelling pleural catheter.
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
1
Open Access
Protocol
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 postprocedure—a practice known as prophylactic irradi-
ation of tracts (PIT).
Only three randomised controlled trials, the largest
with 61 patients, have assessed the role of PIT with con-
flicting results reported.14–19 One study reported a statis-
tically
significant
reduction
in
the
frequency
of
malignant seeding of tracts in the PIT arm compared to
the control arm14; the other two studies did not.15 16
Systematic reviews of the literature have concluded that
the randomised trials conducted to date were consid-
ered the best available evidence for PIT, but that there
was insufficient evidence to definitively recommend
PIT.17–20 Inconsistencies are also evident in current
national recommendations on the use of PIT. The
British Thoracic Society21 recommends the use of PIT to
prevent chest wall nodule formation following an inter-
ventional procedure.
In contrast, the
Cancer
Care
Ontario Programme22 stated that a recommendation for
PIT in MPM could not be made due to inconsistent evi-
dence, reflecting a lack of high-quality data. Similarly, in
2010 the European Respiratory Society stated “The value
of prophylactic radiotherapy is questionable”23 and the
European Society of Medical Oncology (ESMO) clinical
recommendations for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up
of MPM state that “it remains impossible to draw defini-
tive conclusions regarding its efficacy”.24
Currently in the UK the routine use of PIT in patients
with MPM depends on locality. A 2008 UK survey
showed that 75% of radiotherapy centres are routinely
using PIT.17 In addition, the small number of patients
recruited to each arm, the high death rates, and overesti-
mation of the rate of chest wall metastasis in the control
arms, question whether the three previous randomised
controlled trials were adequately powered. Furthermore,
recent evidence shows that portal tracts are not always
perpendicular to the skin25 and thus the small radiation
fields centred on the chest wall scar employed by the
previous negative studies may have been suboptimal.
There is now strong evidence to support the role of
palliative chemotherapy in patients with MPM26 which is
approved in the UK by the National Institute of Clinical
Excellence (NICE).27 Importantly, the previous studies
were conducted before palliative chemotherapy was
widely used in MPM. Therefore, the role of PIT in the
era
of
effective
palliative
chemotherapy
remains
undefined. In addition, no previous studies have used
validated pain scoring tools to assess pain from tract
metastases.
We believe a trial is essential for the following reasons:
first an adequately powered RCT employing radiotherapy
techniques ensuring adequate coverage of the entire
portal tract will establish whether PIT should be offered
routinely to patients with MPM after chest wall interven-
tion in the era of palliative chemotherapy; second to
establish whether chest wall metastases are symptomatic
and thus, whether PIT
, if effective, is clinically significant.
The hypothesis for this trial is that prophylactic irradi-
ation of tracts will reduce the incidence of chest wall
nodules from 15% to 5%. The primary objective of the
PIT study is to determine the efficacy, as assessed by the
incidence of chest wall metastasis, of prophylactic irradi-
ation of tracts following invasive chest wall intervention
in
malignant
pleural
mesothelioma
compared
to
no
prophylactic
radiotherapy.
Secondary
objectives
include: the description of the toxicity of PIT; time from
randomisation to chest wall tract metastasis in patients
undergoing PIT compared with the no prophylactic
radiotherapy; the assessment of pain from chest wall
metastasis.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Trial design
This is a two-arm, phase III multicentre (list of centres
can be found in online supplementary appendix 1
including a mix of academic centres and community
hospitals) randomised superiority trial comparing radio-
therapy versus no radiotherapy in patients with a histo-
logical
diagnosis
of
MPM
following
chest
wall
intervention (see figure 1). A total of 374 patients will
be
randomised
on
a
1:1
basis
to
receive
PIT
Figure 1
Trial schema/flow chart. MPM, malignant pleural
mesothelioma.
2
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 (experimental arm) or no PIT (control arm). Patients
can receive chemotherapy postradiotherapy/randomisa-
tion at the discretion of the treating physician.
The follow-up period for the study is up to 2 years
postrandomisation which includes regular telephone
follow-up and a minimum of four outpatient visits in the
first year.
Patient selection
Potential participants will be identified by the principal
investigator and his/her team at each centre, via the dis-
cussion of cases in a multidisciplinary team meeting
(MDT). If a patient is identified as a potential partici-
pant in the PIT trial they will be approached at their
next clinic visit, as part of discussions with the patient
about their options for treatment. Patients who are inter-
ested in receiving further information about the trial
will be given a copy of the patient information sheet
(see online supplementary appendix 2) and consent
form (see online supplementary appendix 3), and will
have the opportunity to discuss the trial in detail before
deciding whether to participate.
Inclusion criteria
▸ Either sex, age ≥18 years.
▸ Diagnosis of mesothelioma by MDT
▸ All histological subtypes. Where the histological diag-
nosis is unclear, a specialist thoracic pathologist
should be consulted.
▸ Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status 0–2.
▸ Inoperable disease or operable disease in patients
unsuitable for surgery as decided by a MDT.
▸ Chest wall intervention with video-assisted thoraco-
scopy (VATS), open surgical biopsy, local anaesthetic
thoracoscopy or chest drain.
▸ Able to start radiotherapy within 42 days (6 weeks)
from most recent chest wall intervention.
▸ Chest
wall
intervention
scar
visible
at
time
of
randomisation.
▸ No indwelling pleural catheters in situ at the inter-
vention site.
▸ Radiotherapy target volume acceptable by the local
radiotherapist.
▸ No previous open thoracotomy.
▸ No previous radiotherapy to the region of the chest
wall intervention site.
▸ Not
currently
receiving
chemotherapy
and
not
received
chemotherapy
for
mesothelioma
before
randomisation.
▸ No other previous or concomitant illness or treat-
ment which in the opinion of the clinician will inter-
fere with the trial treatments or comparisons.
▸ Patients enrolled on other clinical trials could be con-
sidered after discussion with the chief investigators.
▸ Female patients must satisfy the investigator that they
are not pregnant, or are not of childbearing poten-
tial, or are using adequate contraception.
▸ Patients must not be breastfeeding.
▸ Absence of any psychological, familial, sociological or
geographical condition potentially hampering com-
pliance with the trial protocol and follow-up sched-
ule; those conditions should be discussed with the
patient before randomisation in the trial
▸ Patients can only be randomised in this trial once.
Exclusion criteria
▸ Patients who underwent a thoracotomy (as large
thoracotomy scars may not be adequately covered by
this radiotherapy technique).
▸ Previous radiotherapy to the region of the chest wall
intervention site.
▸ Indwelling pleural catheter in situ at the intervention
site.
▸ Patients currently receiving chemotherapy.
Consent
All patients will be informed of the aims of the trial, the
procedures and possible adverse effects, and the mech-
anism of treatment allocation. Patients will be informed
as to the strict confidentiality of their patient data, but
that their medical records may be reviewed for trial pur-
poses by authorised individuals other than their treating
physician.
It will be emphasised that the participation is volun-
tary and that the patient is allowed to decline further
participation in the protocol whenever he/she wants.
This will not prejudice the patient’s subsequent care.
Documented informed consent will be obtained by local
principal investigators or a delegated member of staff for
all patients included in the trial before they are regis-
tered or randomised in the trial in accordance with the
national and local regulatory requirements.
Randomisation procedure
Patients will be randomised by phone or fax on a 1:1
basis to one of two treatment arms. A variant of an adap-
tive biased coin randomisation method will be used to
favour balance between treatment arms in the four
strata formed from the following two factors:
▸ Histology (epithelioid or not epithelioid)
▸ Intention to give chemotherapy
Randomisation
will
be
undertaken
centrally
by
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre Clinical
Trials Unit (MAHSC-CTU).
Radiotherapy
Patients are treated on a linear accelerator using a single
electron field. Treatment fields can be shaped using
individualised lead cut-outs of the appropriate thickness.
The total dose of radiotherapy in the PIT arm is 21 Gy
in three fractions, once daily over three consecutive
days. The patient can be treated supine, prone or in the
lateral position depending on the position of the chest
wall intervention site. To ensure >90% of the prescribed
dose
is
delivered
to
the
skin
surface,
0.5 cm
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
3
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 tissue-equivalent bolus can be applied to the whole treat-
ment
field.
The
field
position
for
radiotherapy
is
recorded so that if the patient develops chest wall
nodules it can be determined if the nodules are inside
or outside the treatment field.
The clinical target volume (CTV) comprises the
visible and palpable scar with a 1 cm margin of clinically
normal tissue in the lateral, medial and inferior direc-
tions at the skin surface. The planning target volume
(PTV) comprises the CTV with a 1 cm margin in all
directions at the skin surface. The CTV to PTV expan-
sion allows for set up errors, changes in the electron
beam profile at depth and patient motion. The treat-
ment field is defined by adding a further 1 cm margin
in all directions to account for the beam penumbra.
The superior margin will vary and should be the deter-
mined by counting three ribs superiorly. The upper
border of the third rib superior to the scar will be the
superior border of the treatment field. This will take into
account microscopic spread but also ensure that chest
wall intervention tracts (which will commonly run over
the rib superior to the scar) are covered at depth (see
figure 2).
No organs at risk need to be identified and if a
patient has two intervention sites, and therefore two
scars (eg, a VATS scar and adjacent chest drain scar)
these can be treated within a single treatment field or
two separate fields. A gap of >1 cm must separate two
treatment fields.
Chemotherapy
Patients can be treated with palliative chemotherapy at
the physician’s discretion after completion of radiother-
apy (experimental arm) or after randomisation (control
arm). The efficacy and/or safety of chemotherapy is not
being
investigated
as
part
of
the
study.
The
chemotherapy regimen used should be cisplatin or car-
boplatin plus pemetrexed, although alternative chemo-
therapy regimens (including clinical trial agents) may be
considered after discussion with the chief investigators.
The number of cycles given is left to the physician’s dis-
cretion. A gap of at least 1-week must separate the com-
pletion
of
radiotherapy and
the
start
of
palliative
chemotherapy. The chemotherapy regimen, start and
stop dates and total number of cycles administered
should be recorded. No further data needs to be col-
lected concerning the patients chemotherapy treatment.
Concomitant medication-not applicable for this trial.
Discontinuation or withdrawal of patients
In the case of disease progression, the patient will be
treated according to each centre’s policy. For patients
allocated to the treatment arm, radiotherapy can be
stopped at the participants request or if too unwell to
continue at the discretion of the treating clinician.
Outpatient visits
The patient is reviewed in clinic 6, 12, 26 and 52 weeks
following randomisation to assess for any signs of chest
wall metastasis and to record any treatment-related toxi-
cities. In addition, telephone follow-up at 4-weekly inter-
vals
following
randomisation
will
determine
if
the
patient has noted any chest wall nodules. If a patient is
suspicious that a nodule has appeared, they will be
invited to clinic for assessment.
If a chest wall metastases is confirmed, the position of
the metastases is recorded in relation to the recon-
structed radiotherapy treatment field.
Patients are asked to complete a visual analogue score
(VAS) for pain at baseline, and at each telephone and
clinic follow-up. Patients are specifically asked to only
consider
pain
at
the
original
site
of
chest
wall
Figure 2
Prophylactic irradiation of tracts radiotherapy field margins.
4
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 intervention. If the patient develops chest wall nodules
they will be asked to complete a VAS for pain at the site
of the chest wall intervention at for the three nodules
closest to the original intervention.
Outcome measures
The primary end point is the incidence of chest wall
tract metastasis 6 months from randomisation. If a
patient raises suspicion that a chest wall nodule had
developed at telephone follow-up, they will be invited to
attend an outpatient appointment with the investigator.
If there is clinical evidence of a chest wall metastases, a
chest wall metastasis cardio respiratory fitness (CRF) is
completed using the clinic date as date of chest wall
metastasis.
The secondary end points are:
▸ Time from randomisation to chest wall tract metasta-
sis (recorded on chest wall metastasis CRF)
▸ Position of chest wall tract metastasis recurrence in
relation to radiotherapy field in patients randomised
to experimental arm (in field/out-of-field, recorded
on chest wall metastasis CRF)
▸ Acute and late skin radiotherapy toxicity (recorded
by CTCAE v4.0 at baseline and at each outpatient
visit on CRF)
▸ Pain from chest wall tract metastasis (recorded by
VAS pain scores recorded on chest wall metastasis
CRF)
Sample size calculation
The crude rate of tract metastases following chest wall
intervention until death, based on historical data, is
expected to be 15%. It is estimated that the majority of
events will occur within 6 months of the intervention. A
reduction in the incidence of chest wall nodules from
15% to 5% in favour of radiotherapy would be clinically
significant. Based on a two-arm trial with a 5% signifi-
cance level, two-sided test and 80% power this would
require 280 patients. Furthermore it is anticipated that
25% of patients will not survive for 6 months therefore
an additional 94 patients will be required, making the
total number of patients to be enrolled 374.
Analysis
Incidence of chest wall tract metastasis
All
patients
randomised
will
be
analysed
on
an
intention-to-treat basis. A two-sided χ2 test of proportions
of chest wall tract metastasis at 6 months between the
control and experimental arms will be used with a 5%
significance
level.
Secondary
analysis
using
logistic
regression will be used to investigate treatment after
adjusting for significant baseline prognostic variables.
Time to chest wall tract metastasis
Kaplan-Meier curves will be drawn for each treatment
group. Time to chest wall tract metastasis will be com-
pared using a two-sided log rank test with a 5% level of
significance. Cox-proportional hazards models will be
used to investigate the effect of treatment after adjusting
for stratification factors and other significant baseline
variables.
Toxicity
Skin toxicity will be assessed according to NCI Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events V.4.0. The pro-
portions of patients experiencing a grade of 3 or above
acute toxicity, including acute radiation morbidity, or
late radiation morbidity will be compared between the
treatment groups using a two-sided χ2 test with a 5%
level of significance. Acute toxicity will be defined as
toxicities occurring from start of treatment to 3 months
after completion; late toxicity will be defined as toxicities
occurring between 3 months and 2 years after comple-
tion of treatment.
Position of chest wall tract metastases
Position of the central point of a chest wall tract metasta-
ses in relation to the reconstructed radiotherapy treat-
ment field will be recorded as in field/out-of field
recurrence. Where the central point falls on the edge of
the radiotherapy treatment field this will be recoded as
in-field recurrence
Pain scores
Patients
will
be
analysed
using
the
intent-to-treat
method. All tests will be two-sided and a p value of 0.05
or less will be considered statistically significant. In
patients who develop tract metastasis, the VAS pain score
from the assessment immediately before the occurrence
of the tract metastasis will be considered baseline.
Descriptive analysis will be performed to summarise
change in pain score from baseline to subsequent pain
score. Two-sample t tests will be used to explore differ-
ence between treatments. A 20% increase in VAS pain
score is considered significant. The proportion of signifi-
cant increases in pain in both arms will be analysed
using a two-sided χ2 test.
No formal interim analysis is planned.
Protocol adherence
No major problems are anticipated in terms of adher-
ence to intervention protocols as the experimental arm
only involves three fractions of standard radiotherapy
delivered over approximately 5 min on three consecutive
days.
Data handling and analysis
All forms will be entered in a trial defined database for
which some consistency checking will be programmed
in. Data managers will check for missing and invalid
data using SQL queries and statistical programs. Any
queries will be highlighted on trial-specific query forms
and returned to the centre for correction and/or clarifi-
cation. The data will be stored on a secure server access
to which is restricted to MAHSC-CTU staff. The data
management procedures can be found in the PIT Data
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
5
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 Management Manual, this is an internal document
created
for
use
by
the
Data
Manager
within
the
MAHSC-CTU and contains all procedures defined to
ensure the data management and validation procedures
are properly carried out.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
Protocol and protocol amendments
The trial details documented here are consistent with
PIT study protocol V.3.0 (dated: 19th April 2012, avail-
able on request from the trial manager, MAHSC-CTU).
There have been two substantial amendments for the
study.
1. 25 April 2012—addition of an inclusion criterion
‘Indwelling pleural catheter in situ at the interven-
tion site’ and several administrative updates to the
protocol and patient information sheets. The amend-
ment also included the home and outpatient VAS
questionnaires.
2. 17 April 2013—introduction of the VAS chest wall
nodule page which the patient is asked to complete if
they develop chest wall nodules.
Trial monitoring
The trial management group (TMG) is responsible for
reviewing the trial’s day-to-day activities, the overall
supervision of the trial and ensure that it is being con-
ducted in accordance with the principles of good clin-
ical practice and relevant regulations. The group should
agree any protocol amendments and provide advice to
the investigators on all aspects of the trial. The TMG
meets twice a year and includes patient/carer represen-
tatives, respiratory physicians, thoracic surgeons, clinical
oncologists, medical oncologists and clinical nurse spe-
cialists. Three additional members who are independent
of the trial have been appointed and will be available to
advise the TMG should any issues arise requiring an
independent viewpoint.
An Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC)
will not be appointed for this trial as PIT is currently
widely used in clinical practice, it is not a new treatment
and we not envisage that any safety issues will arise.
Trial sponsorship
The study is sponsored by The Christie NHS Foundation
Trust, Research & Development Department, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester, M20 4BX, UK
Trial management
The
Manchester
Academic
Health
Science
Centre
Clinical Trial Unit is co-ordinating the study. This
includes data collection, management, monitoring, ana-
lysis and interpretation of data. The PIT TMG will write
the report and will make the decision to submit the
report for publication.
Safety reporting
An adverse event (AE) is defined on this trial as any
untoward medical occurrence in a clinical trial subject
which does not necessarily have a causal relationship
with the trial-related procedures. An AE can therefore
be any unfavourable and unintended sign (including an
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom or disease.
A serious adverse event (SAE) for this trial is an
adverse event only if it meets the following criteria.
▸ Results in death (within 90 days of last dose of radio-
therapy
and
is
considered
related
to
trial
radiotherapy);
▸ Is life-threatening (and is considered related to the
trial radiotherapy);
▸ Requires hospitalisation, or prolongation of existing
hospitalisation (and is considered related to trial
radiotherapy);
▸ Results in persistent or significant disability or incap-
acity (and is considered related to trial radiotherapy);
▸ Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect;
▸ Other medically significant event. Medical judgement
should be exercised in deciding whether an AE is
serious in other situations. Important AEs that are
not immediately life-threatening or do not result in
death or hospitalisation, but may jeopardise the
subject or may require intervention to prevent one of
the other outcomes listed in the definition above,
should also be considered serious.
Disease progressions or events related to disease pro-
gressions are not considered to be SAEs. AEs relating to
other anticancer treatments that the patient may be
receiving are not considered to be SAEs.
All
SAEs
are
reported
by
site
teams
to
the
MAHSC-CTU within 24 h of the investigator being made
aware of the event.
End of the trial
The study will close 2 years after the 374th patient is ran-
domised. The Chief Investigator, TMG and/or the three
independent members have the right at any time to ter-
minate the study for clinical or administrative reasons.
The end of the study will be reported to the REC and
Regulatory Authority (where applicable) within the
required timeframes.
Investigators will inform participants of any premature
termination of the trial and ensure that the appropriate
follow-up is arranged for all involved.
Dissemination
Data from all centres will be analysed together and pub-
lished as soon as possible. Individual participants may not
publish data concerning their patients that are directly
relevant to questions posed by the trial until the TMG
has published its report. The TMG will have access to the
final data set, form the basis of the Writing Committee
and advise on the nature of publications. The trial will be
publicised at regional and national meetings, and to
patient groups with the support of Mesothelioma UK.
6
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 The final results will be presented at scientific meetings
and published in a peer-reviewed journal (authorship will
be according to the journal’s guidelines). A lay summary
will be disseminated via local and national mesothelioma
charities. Summary results will also be published online at
clinicaltrials.gov and cancerhelp.
Author affiliations
1Department of Clinical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK
2The National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI) Consumer Liaison Group,
London, UK
3Manchester Academic Health Science Centre Trials Co-ordination Unit
(MAHSC-CTU), The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK
4Respiratory Medicine Unit, David Evans Research Centre, Nottingham
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham City Hospital Campus,
Nottingham, UK
5Respiratory and Allergy Research Group, Institute of Inflammation & Repair,
The University of Manchester North West Lung Centre, University Hospital of
South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK
6Mesothelioma UK Charitable Trust, c/o Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, UK
7Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS
Trust, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, UK
8Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Chesterman Unit, Northern General
Hospital, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust UK, Sheffield,
UK
9Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Lister Hospital, London, UK
10Department of Clinical Oncology, Velindre NHS Trust UK, Cardiff, UK
11National Cancer Intelligence Network, (NCIN), Public Health England,
London, UK
12Department of Thoracic Oncology, Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Cambridge, UK,
13Department of Clinical Oncology, Leeds Teaching Hospital NHS Trust, St
James Hospital, Leeds, UK
14Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK
15Department Pulmonary Oncology, Wythenshawe Hospital Manchester,
Manchester, UK
16The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Institute of Cancer Sciences, Manchester Cancer Research Centre (MCRC),
Manchester, UK
17Radiotherapy Related Research, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank all the patients that have
agreed to participate in this trial, the principal investigators and the site teams
around the UK involved in set-up, recruitment and follow-up of the study.
This study was designed with patient involvement and patient representation
on the protocol development committee and trial management group. The
authors would also like to thank Alice Taylor for editorial assistance. Dr
Robert Rintoul is part funded by the Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre,
Cambridge Cancer Centre and the Clinical Research Network:Eastern.
Contributors CFF and NB conceived the study. CFF, NB, DA, LA, DRB, RB,
LD, JGE, LLL, JFL, MP, RCR, MS and PT initiated the study design and
helped with implementation. CFF is the grant holder. LA provided statistical
expertise in clinical trial. All authors contributed to refinement of the study
protocol and approved the final manuscript.
Funding This paper presents independent research commissioned by the
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) under its Research for Patient
Benefit (RfpB) Programme (Grant Reference Number PB-PG-1010-23232).
The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily the NHS,
the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Competing interests None declared.
Ethics approval The trial has been reviewed by NRES Committee North West
—Greater Manchester West which granted ethical approval for the study on 4
April 2012 (REC reference 12/NW/0249).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement The trial is being coordinated by the Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, Trials Coordination Unit (MAHSC-CTU).
Additional study information can be obtained from the PIT trial manager or
trial statistician. Contact details included in manuscript.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for
commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
Peto J, Hodgson JT, Matthews FE, et al. Continuing increase in
mesothelioma mortality in Britain. Lancet 1995;345:535–9.
2.
Stewart DJ, Edwards JG, Smythe WR, et al. Malignant pleural
mesothelioma—an update. Int J Occup Environ Health
2004;10:26–39.
3.
British Thoracic Society Standards of Care Committee. Statement on
malignant mesothelioma in the United Kingdom. Thorax
2001;56:250–65.
4.
Agarwal PP, Seely JM, Matzinger FR, et al. Pleural mesothelioma:
sensitivity and incidence of needle track seeding after
image-guided biopsy versus surgical biopsy. Radiology
2006;241:589–94.
5.
Centre NI. National Lung Cancer Audit 2010. volume 2015. The
NHS Information Centre, 2011.
6.
Attanoos RL, Gibbs AR. The pathology associated with therapeutic
procedures in malignant mesothelioma. Histopathology
2004;45:393–7.
7.
Adams VI, Unni KK. Diffuse malignant mesothelioma of pleura:
diagnostic criteria based on an autopsy study. Am J Clin Pathol
1984;82:15–23.
8.
Brenner J, Sordillo PP, Magill GB, et al. Malignant mesothelioma of
the pleura: review of 123 patients. Cancer 1982;49:2431–5.
9.
Law MR, Hodson ME, Turner-Warwick M. Malignant mesothelioma
of the pleura: clinical aspects and symptomatic treatment. Eur J
Respir Dis 1984;65:162–8.
10.
Ratzer ER, Pool JL, Melamed MR. Pleural mesotheliomas. Clinical
experiences with thirty-seven patients. Am J Roentgenol Radium
Ther Nucl Med 1967;99:863–80.
11.
Ruffie P, Feld R, Minkin S, et al. Diffuse malignant mesothelioma of
the pleura in Ontario and Quebec: a retrospective study of 332
patients. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1157–68.
12.
Stewart BN, Jay BA. Subcutaneous implantation of cancer following
thoracentesis. Chest 1974;66:456–7.
13.
Whitwell F, Rawcliffe RM. Diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma
and asbestos exposure. Thorax 1971;26:6–22.
14.
Boutin C, Rey F, Viallat JR. Prevention of malignant seeding after
invasive diagnostic procedures in patients with pleural
mesothelioma. A randomized trial of local radiotherapy. Chest
1995;108:754–8.
15.
Bydder S, Phillips M, Joseph DJ, et al. A randomised trial of
single-dose radiotherapy to prevent procedure tract metastasis by
malignant mesothelioma. Br J Cancer 2004;91:9–10.
16.
O’Rourke N, Garcia JC, Paul J, et al. A randomised controlled trial of
intervention site radiotherapy in malignant pleural mesothelioma.
Radiother Oncol 2007;84:18–22.
17.
Lee C, Bayman N, Swindell R, et al. Prophylactic radiotherapy to
intervention sites in mesothelioma: a systematic review and survey
of UK practice. Lung Cancer 2009;66:150–6.
18.
Ung YC, Yu E, Falkson C, et al. The role of radiation therapy in
malignant pleural mesothelioma: a systematic review. Radiother
Oncol 2006;80:13–8.
19.
Davies HE, Musk AW, Lee YC. Prophylactic radiotherapy for pleural
puncture sites in mesothelioma: the controversy continues. Curr
Opin Pulm Med 2008;14:326–30.
20.
McAleer MF, Tsao AS, Liao Z. Radiotherapy in malignant
pleural mesothelioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009;
75:326–37.
21.
(BTS) BTS. BTS statement on malignant mesothelioma in the UK,
2007. Thorax 2007;62(Suppl 2):ii1–19.
22.
Ung Y, Yu E, Falkson C, et al. The role of radiation therapy in
malignant pleural mesothelioma: a clinical practice guideline. Program
in Evidence-based Care 2006 2006; Series No.7: Section 1.
23.
Scherpereel A, Astoul P, Baas P, et al. [Guidelines of the European
Respiratory Society and the European Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
7
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
 for the management of malignant pleural mesothelioma]. Zhongguo
Fei Ai Za Zhi 2010;13:C23–45.
24.
Stahel RA, Weder W, Lievens Y, et al. Group EGW. Malignant pleural
mesothelioma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis,
treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2010;21(Suppl 5):v126–8.
25.
Hambleton KL, Faivre-Finn C, Baldwin DR. Lung cancer: what’s new
in diagnosis and therapies? Thorax 2009;64:A80–5.
26.
Vogelzang NJ, Rusthoven JJ, Symanowski J, et al. Phase III study
of pemetrexed in combination with cisplatin versus cisplatin alone in
patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol
2003;21:2636–44.
27.
(NICE) NIfHaCE. NICE technology appraisal guidance [TA135]:
Pemetrexed for the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma
volume 2015, 2008.
8
Bayman N, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010589. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010589 on 27 January 2016. Downloaded from 
