 iMedPub Journals
http://www.imedpub.com/
International Journal of Digestive Diseases 
ISSN 2472-1891
2016
Vol. 2 No. 2: 27
1
© Copyright iMedPub |                                                                          This article is available in: http://digestive-diseases.imedpub.com/
Short Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.4172/2472-1891.100027
Cash BD1, Epstein MS2 and 
Shah SM3
1 Division of Gastroenterology, University 
of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA
2 Digestive Disorders Associates, 
Annapolis, MD, USA
3 IM Health Science LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 
USA
Corresponding author: Cash BD
 cash@health.southalabama.edu
Gastroenterology Division, University of 
South Alabama, 6000 University Commons, 
75 University Blvd, Mobile, AL 36688, USA.
Tel: 251-660-5555 
Fax: 251-660-5559
Citation: Cash BD, Epstein MS, Shah 
SM. Peppermint Oil Delivery System in a 
Randomized Clinical Trial and in the General 
Population. Int J Dig Dis. 2016, 2:2.
Summary Box
What is already known?
• 
Peppermint oil can be an effective therapy for IBS.
• 
Some versions of peppermint oil are poorly tolerated due to 
GERD symptoms and dyspepsia.
What is new?
• 
Patients with IBS in a randomized clinical trial and in the 
general population reported consistently high overall 
satisfaction with relief in IBS symptoms and quality of life 
while taking a novel peppermint oil formulation. 
• 
Peppermint oil designed with site specific targeting may be 
Patient Satisfaction with IBS Symptom Relief 
Using a Novel Peppermint Oil Delivery System 
in a Randomized Clinical Trial and in the 
General Population
Received: March 25, 2016; Accepted: May 18, 2016; Published: May 25, 2016
Abstract
Background: A recent randomized clinical trial (RCT) of a novel peppermint oil 
preparation (PO-SST) demonstrated significant relief of irritable bowel syndrome 
(IBS) symptoms versus placebo. In addition to efficacy, patient satisfaction and 
post-marketing utilization are also important to assess. 
Methods: The RCT included an end-of-study questionnaire for subjects in the 
active arm to evaluate overall satisfaction with IBS symptom relief. A separate 
post-marketing study was conducted in the general population to assess real 
world satisfaction and dosing frequency of open label PO-SST in patients with IBS. 
The dosing frequency in the RCT was fixed at 2 capsules three times daily (TID), 
while the post-marketing patient population was allowed flexible dosing. 
Results: Thirty-five subjects randomized to PO-SST in the RCT and 285 patients 
in the post-marketing study were included in this analysis. There was a high 
satisfaction rate (>80%) with PO-SST in both studies. Most patients in the post-
marketing population (60.8%) used 1 to 2 capsules per day, and 75.6% reported 
IBS symptom reduction within 1-2 hours of ingestion. Patients in the RCT reported 
significant reduction in IBS symptoms 24 hours after the first dose of PO-SST. 
Discussion: PO-SST showed a high rate of satisfaction among patients participating 
in an RCT and the general patient population. Symptom improvement was rapid 
and remarkably similar in both groups, despite the lower daily capsule intake by 
patients in the general population.
Keywords: IBS; Peppermint oil; Patient satisfaction; Outcome; Quality of life
Abbreviations: BM: Bowel Movement; IBS: Irritable Bowel Syndrome; IBSACT: 
IBS Adherence and Compliance Trial; IBS-C: Constipation-predominant IBS; IBS-D: 
Diarrhoea-predominant IBS; IBS-M: Mixed IBS; IBSREST: Irritable Bowel Syndrome 
Reduction Evaluation and Safety Trial; PO: Peppermint Oil; PO-SST: Peppermint Oil 
with Site Specific Technology; RCT: Randomized Controlled Trial; TID: Three Times 
Daily
 2
ARCHIVOS DE MEDICINA
ISSN 1698-9465
2016
Vol. 2 No. 2: 25
© Copyright iMedPub |                                                                          This article is available in: http://digestive-diseases.imedpub.com/
International Journal of Digestive Diseases 
ISSN 2472-1891
a valued option for patients who desire rapid relief of IBS 
symptoms.
How might these findings impact clinical 
practice?
• 
Increase the willingness to use peppermint oil as an on-
demand therapy for IBS related symptoms.
• 
Facilitate additional evaluation of the mechanism of action of 
peppermint oil in IBS patients.
Introduction 
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a chronic functional bowel 
disorder with periodic exacerbations of multiple symptoms, 
including abdominal pain or discomfort, constipation, diarrhea, 
abdominal bloating, a sensation of incomplete evacuation, 
urgency of bowel movement (BM), pain at evacuation, and 
passage of gas or mucus [1, 2]. According to the Rome III criteria, 
IBS can be subtyped  based on predominant bowel habit patterns 
into mixed IBS (IBS-M), diarrhea-predominant IBS (IBS-D), and 
constipation-predominant IBS (IBS-C) [3].
Patients with IBS often have symptoms that are severe enough 
to impair quality of life, result in significant utilization of health-
care resources, cause high rates of absenteeism from work and 
school, [4] and endorse a high rate of dissatisfaction with the 
treatments they receive for their symptoms [5]. Furthermore, 
limited options are available for patients with IBS to obtain 
rapid relief during symptomatic flares. L-menthol, the primary 
active component of peppermint oil (PO), has been shown to 
possess anti-spasmodic, anti-serotonergic, anti-inflammatory, 
anti-bacterial, kappa opioid agonist, and carminative properties, 
making PO an attractive therapy for IBS [6-11]. However, 
unreliable delivery with single-unit, enteric-coated, liquid-filled 
PO capsules has limited their benefit—especially with heartburn 
and dyspepsia side effects [12].
The Irritable Bowel Syndrome Reduction Evaluation and Safety 
Trial (IBSREST), a 4-week, placebo controlled, randomized clinical 
trial (RCT), evaluated the efficacy of a novel PO formulation 
utilizing site specific technology (PO-SST) involving solid state, 
triple-coated microspheres of highly purified PO designed to 
provide rapid, reliable, and sustained release of PO in the small 
intestine [13]. Patients receiving PO-SST experienced significant 
relief of multiple individual IBS symptoms as well as improvement 
in symptoms rated as severe or unbearable compared with 
placebo, without significant adverse events observed with 
previous PO preparations [13]. In addition to individual symptom 
improvement, patient satisfaction with therapy was an important 
endpoint in IBSREST that has not been previously reported. The 
trial was conducted at 4 geographically diverse study sites in 
the United States, in accordance with good clinical practice and 
applicable regulatory requirements and ethical principles. The 
protocol was approved by the Chesapeake Institutional Review 
Board and the Palm Beach Clinical Research Organization (West 
Palm Beach, FL, USA) was responsible for conduct of the study.
A separate post-marketing evaluation of open label PO-SST, 
the IBS Adherence and Compliance Trial (IBSACT), was also 
conducted in order to determine real-world daily PO-SST capsule 
usage frequency and patient satisfaction in a general population 
of patients with IBS.  Herein, we report the overall satisfaction 
with relief of IBS symptoms for patients in both studies as well 
as the real-world daily PO-SST capsule intake observed in the 
IBSACT.
Methods
Study subjects
The details of the IBSREST have been previously published.(13) 
Briefly, patients met Rome III criteria for IBS-M or IBS-D, had 
average daily IBS-related abdominal pain of ≥ 4 (0-10 scale), a 
Total IBS Symptom Score of ≥ 2 (0-4 scale), and were 18-60 years 
of age. Subjects had to confirm that they were not planning to 
change their usual diet and lifestyle during the study. Patients 
with a diagnosis of IBS-C or IBS-unubtyped as defined by the Rome 
III criteria or a history of inflammatory or immune-mediated 
gastrointestinal disorders were excluded from the IBSREST. The 
protocol did not allow concomitant or rescue medications during 
the trial. The IBSACT included patients who were using open-
label PO-SST (marketed as IBgard®) in the general population 
of patients with IBS. There were no restrictions on concomitant 
medications for patients participating in the IBSACT. The PO-
SST formulations were identical in each study and PO-SST was 
indistinguishable from placebo in the IBSREST trial.
Experimental design
Patients in the IBSREST were randomized to receive either 
PO-SST (2 capsules, each containing 90 mg of PO) or identical 
placebo three times daily (TID) for 4 weeks. A 7 question end-
of-study questionnaire (Table 1) was utilized to evaluate overall 
satisfaction with the relief of IBS symptoms for all subjects in the 
IBSREST. Patients completed the written questionnaire during 
Question
Response Choices
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your IBS symptoms during 
the treatment period?
No Improvement
Moderate Improvement
Major Improvement
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your quality of life during 
the treatment period?
No Improvement
Moderate Improvement
Major Improvement
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your abdominal pain/
discomfort during the treatment period?
No Improvement
Moderate Improvement
Major Improvement
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your bowel regularity?
No Improvement
Moderate Improvement
Major Improvement
How likely are you to recommend the study 
product to family or friends who have 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)?
Not Likely
Likely
Very Likely
If given the option, how likely is it that you 
would continue taking the study product?
Not Likely
Likely
Very Likely
Would you be willing to be contacted in the 
future about the study product?
Yes
No
Table 1: IBSREST post-dose patient satisfaction questionnaire.
 3
© Under License of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License
ARCHIVOS DE MEDICINA
ISSN 1698-9465
2016
Vol. 2 No. 2: 25
International Journal of Digestive Diseases 
ISSN 2472-1891
their last study visit, prior to unblinding. Counts and percentages 
of subjects with each response were tabulated only for subjects 
randomized to the PO-SST treatment group. 
Patients in the IBSACT were allowed flexible dosing of PO-SST. 
 
A 10 question survey (Table 2) was conducted with patients 
who were using PO-SST in the general IBS patient population 
to assess patient satisfaction and dosing frequency in the real-
world setting. The study questionnaire was included in PO-SST 
physician samples, giving all patients receiving PO-SST samples 
from their physician the opportunity to fill out the questionnaire. 
Patients submitted survey responses online or via fax. 
Patient perception of change in quality of life after receiving 
PO-SST was assessed in both the IBSREST and IBSACT by asking 
the question, “Overall, how would you rate the improvement in 
your quality of life during the treatment period?” Patients were 
given three response options to choose from: no improvement, 
moderate improvement, or major improvement.
Results
Patients
Thirty-five subjects with moderate to severe IBS randomized to 
PO-SST in IBSREST completed the end-of-study questionnaire to 
evaluate overall satisfaction with IBS symptom relief. Sixteen of 
these patients had IBS-M and 19 patients had IBS-D. Demographics 
for this population have been reported previously [13].
From the general population, 285 patients with IBS, who had 
received PO-SST samples from their physicians, completed the 
IBSACT survey. Demographic information was not collected with 
the IBSACT survey. The majority of patients in IBSACT reported 
suffering from IBS symptoms daily (62.9%) or twice a week or 
more (23%).
Dosage frequency
In the IBSREST, the dosage of PO-SST was fixed per protocol at 
2 capsules TID. The dosage frequency reported by the general 
population of patients with IBS surveyed in the IBSACT was 
considerably lower with 60.8% of patients using only 1 to 2 capsules 
per day (Table 3). More than half (55.2%) of patients in the IBSACT 
took PO-SST before meals and 24.9% took PO-SST after meals.
Timing of symptom relief
Patients in the active arm of the IBSREST had a statistically 
significant reduction versus placebo in total IBS symptom score 
(Figure 1) and abdominal pain (Figure 2) at the first follow-up 
assessment, 24 hours after their first dose [13]. IBS symptom 
reduction occurred within 1-2 hours in 75.6% of patients surveyed 
in the IBSACT (Table 4).
Patient satisfaction
Responses for the surveys in the IBSREST and IBSACT are shown 
in Tables 3 and 4. When asked to rate their overall improvement 
in IBS symptoms while taking PO-SST, 98.1% of patients in the 
IBSACT reported moderate or major improvement, while 88.3% 
of patients randomized to PO-SST in the IBSREST noted moderate 
or major improvement. The majority of patients also reported 
moderate or major improvement in response to the question, 
“Overall, how would you rate the improvement in your quality of 
life during the treatment period?” while taking PO-SST (88.3% in 
IBSREST, 92.7% in IBSACT). 
For individual IBS symptoms, 85.3% of patients taking PO-SST 
in the IBSREST and 95.8% in the IBSACT indicated moderate or 
major overall improvement in abdominal pain and cramping 
(Table 5). In addition, 82.3% of patients in the IBSREST and 84.6% 
of patients in the IBSACT reported a moderate or major overall 
improvement in bowel regularity while taking PO-SST.
Question 
Response Choices
How often do you suffer from Irritable 
Bowel Syndrome (IBS)?
Daily 
Once a week 
Twice a week or more 
Once a month 
On average, how many capsules of 
IBgard® are you taking daily?
1-2 
3-4 
5-8 
I don't take it daily 
Other (please specify) 
When do you typically take IBgard®?
Before meals 
After meals 
Only when I have symptoms
Other (please specify) 
How long does it take for you to feel 
relief from your abdominal pain, 
discomfort and/or bloating after you 
have taken IBgard®?
Less than 1 hour 
1-2 hours 
3-8 hours 
8-24 hours 
Longer 
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your IBS symptoms 
while taking IBgard®?
Major improvement 
Moderate improvement 
No improvement 
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your quality of life 
while taking IBgard®?
Major improvement 
Moderate improvement 
No improvement 
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your abdominal pain 
and cramping while taking IBgard®?
Major improvement 
Moderate improvement 
No improvement
Overall, how would you rate the 
improvement in your bowel regularity 
while taking IBgard®?
Major improvement 
Moderate improvement 
No improvement
How likely are you to recommend 
IBgard® to family or friends who have 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)?
Very likely 
Likely 
Not likely 
How likely is it that you will continue 
taking IBgard® for your IBS?
Very likely 
Likely 
Not likely
Table 2: IBSACT post-marketing patient satisfaction survey.
Average number of PO SST 
capsules taken daily
IBSREST (n=35)
IBSACT (n=285)
5-8
100%  (6 per day)
4.6%
3-4
N/A
26.5%
1-2
N/A
60.8%
Not taken Daily
N/A
4.6%
Other
N/A
3.5%
Table 3: Dosing of PO-SST capsules.
 4
ARCHIVOS DE MEDICINA
ISSN 1698-9465
2016
Vol. 2 No. 2: 25
© Copyright iMedPub |                                                                          This article is available in: http://digestive-diseases.imedpub.com/
International Journal of Digestive Diseases 
ISSN 2472-1891
When asked how likely they would be to recommend PO-SST to 
family or friends who have IBS symptoms, 94.1% of patients in 
the IBSREST and 97.0% of patients in the IBSACT indicated that 
they were likely or very likely to recommend PO-SST (Table 6). 
The majority of patients also reported that they were likely or 
very likely to continue taking PO-SST for their IBS symptoms 
(88.3% in IBSREST, 99.3% in IBSACT). In the case of patients from 
the IBSREST, these recommendations occurred prior to drug 
unblinding.
Discussion 
This analysis found that patients reported a consistently high 
level of satisfaction with the novel PO-SST delivery system used 
in the IBSREST and in the IBSACT real-world study of patients with 
IBS. In addition, real-world usage data from the IBSACT revealed 
that 60.8% of the patients using open label PO-SST only needed 
1 to 2 capsules per day to achieve adequate relief from IBS 
symptoms, which is considerably less than the 6 daily capsules 
patients received in IBSREST. In the IBSACT, overall satisfaction 
with PO-SST was 85% or higher, even with lower usage of PO-SST 
capsules compared to the per protocol dose used in IBSREST. In 
addition, the responses for all questions from patients in each 
study were remarkably similar despite the lower capsule intake 
by patients in the IBSACT population (Table 1).
Patients with severe IBS are historically not satisfied with 
treatment even in the presence of improvement of individual 
IBS symptoms [5]. Patients recruited for the IBSREST exhibited 
moderate to severe IBS symptoms defined by average daily IBS-
related abdominal pain scores of 4 or higher on a scale of 0 to 10 
and Total IBS Symptom scores of 2 or higher on a scale of 0 to 4 
[13]. Thus, an overall satisfaction rate of greater than 80% for PO-
SST for all survey questions is promising.
Figure 1: Total IBS Symptom Score (TISS) at baseline and after 24 h of treatment with PO-SST 
or placebo. TISS = mean intensity and frequency for each of 8 IBS symptoms (abdominal pain 
or discomfort, bloating or distension, pain at evacuation, constipation, diarrhea, urgency of 
BM, mucus or gas, and sense of incomplete evacuation) summed and divided by 8. Percent 
reduction from baseline is shown above brackets (*P = 0.0092). P values are from general-
ized linear models with baseline score as a covariate.
Figure 1
Total IBS Symptom Score (TISS) at baseline and after 
24 h of treatment with PO-SST or placebo. TISS = mean 
intensity and frequency for each of 8 IBS symptoms 
(abdominal pain or discomfort, bloating or distension, 
pain at evacuation, constipation, diarrhea, urgency of 
BM, mucus or gas, and sense of incomplete evacuation) 
summed and divided by 8. Percent reduction from 
baseline is shown above brackets (*P = 0.0092). P values 
are from generalized linear models with baseline score 
as a covariate.
Figure 2
Percent reduction from baseline in abdominal pain or 
discomfort (average of frequency and intensity) after 24 
hours of treatment with PO-SST or placebo (*P < 0.05). P 
values are from generalized linear models with baseline 
score as a covariate.
IBSACT (n=285)
Number of hours before 
experiencing relief
Percentage of patients
< 1 hour
33.7
1-2 hours
41.9
3-8 hours
14.4
8-24 hours
5.2
> 24 hours
4.8
Table 4: Timing of symptom relief in the general IBS population (IBSACT) 
with open-label PO-SST.
Major
Improvement
Moderate
Improvement
No
Improvement
IBSREST IBSACT IBSREST IBSACT IBSREST IBSACT
Overall 
improvement 
in IBS 
symptoms 
while taking 
PO SST
41.2%
40.5%
47.1%
57.6%
11.8%
1.9%
Overall 
improvement 
in quality 
of life while 
taking PO SST
32.4%
36.5%
55.9%
56.2%
11.8%
7.3%
Overall 
improvement 
in abdominal 
pain and 
cramping 
while taking 
PO SST
35.3%
47.5%
50.0%
48.3%
14.7%
4.2%
Overall 
improvement 
in bowel 
regularity 
while taking 
PO SST
38.2%
29.8%
44.1%
54.8%
17.6%
15.4%
Table 5: Improvement in symptoms and perceived quality of life with 
PO-SST.
 5
© Under License of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License
ARCHIVOS DE MEDICINA
ISSN 1698-9465
2016
Vol. 2 No. 2: 25
International Journal of Digestive Diseases 
ISSN 2472-1891
The current analysis is subject to some other limitations; 
including the subjective nature of the data collection and 
reliance on patient recall for both the IBSREST end-of-
study questionnaire and the IBSACT survey. The surveys 
relied on the patients’ perception of improvement rather 
than physician measurement of improvement. In addition, 
although the IBSACT survey collected data on the frequency 
of IBS symptoms as reported by the patient, the severity of 
symptoms was not assessed and the demographics of patients 
was not collected. Adverse event data was not collected in 
the IBSACT survey. However, PO-SST was well tolerated 
and the adverse event rate was low in the IBSREST study in 
patients that received 6 capsules of PO-SST daily [13]. Finally, 
since the design of the IBSACT was as a post-marketing study, 
there is the possibility that patients who did not experience a 
clinical improvement with PO-SST may have been less likely 
to respond to the surveys included with the PO-SST provided 
to them, possibly leading to inflated estimates of patient 
satisfaction. It is striking, however, that patients with IBS in a 
RCT as well as in an open-label post-marketing IBS population 
reported a similar degree and onset of symptomatic relief 
and overall improvement in IBS symptoms and patient-
perceptions in changes in their quality of life while taking PO-
SST. The majority of patients taking PO-SST reported overall 
improvement, especially in abdominal pain, cramping, and 
bowel regularity, making PO-SST an option for patients who 
desire rapid relief of IBS symptoms.
Competing Interests
Brooks D. Cash, MD, is a consultant for IM HealthScience, LLC. 
Michael S. Epstein, MD, is the Chief Medical Advisor for IM 
HealthScience, LLC. Syed M. Shah, PhD. is the Chief Innovation 
Officer at IM HealthScience, LLC. 
This study was funded by IM HealthScience, LLC.
Author Contributions
BC is the guarantor of the article and contributed to data 
acquisition, data analysis, drafting of manuscript, and critical 
revision of manuscript. I was involved in study design, 
implementation, data acquisition, data analysis, drafting of 
manuscript, and critical revision of manuscript. SS contributed 
to study design, implementation, data acquisition, data analysis, 
drafting of manuscript, and critical revision of manuscript.
Acknowledgements, Funding, and 
Disclosures
The authors thank the principal investigators on the trials: 
Dennis S Riff, MD, FACG, CPI; Steven C Bowman, MD; Gigi Claire 
Lefebvre, MD; and Richard Krause, MD; Palm Beach CRO, LLC for 
help conducting the trial; SDC Biostatistics and Data Management 
for providing power and statistical analyses; Hubbell Consulting, 
LLC for preparing the clinical study report; and Whitney Smalley-
Freed, PhD, for editorial support. Medical writing support was 
provided my Precise Medical Writing, LLC. 
Very Likely
Likely
Not Likely
IBSREST
IBSACT
IBSREST
IBSACT
IBSREST
IBSACT
How likely are you to recommend PO SST to family or friends who have IBS?
76.5%
60.5%
17.6%
36.5%
5.9%
3.0%
How likely is it that you will continue taking PO SST for your IBS?
61.8%
66.3%
26.5%
33.0%
11.8%
0.7%
Table 6: Recommendation and continuation of PO-SST*.
*IBSREST (blinded); IBSACT (open-label)
 6
ARCHIVOS DE MEDICINA
ISSN 1698-9465
2016
Vol. 2 No. 2: 25
© Copyright iMedPub |                                                                          This article is available in: http://digestive-diseases.imedpub.com/
International Journal of Digestive Diseases 
ISSN 2472-1891
References 
1 
Cappello G, Spezzaferro M, Grossi L, Manzoli L, Marzio L (2007) 
Peppermint oil (Mintoil) in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: 
a prospective double blind placebo-controlled randomized trial. Dig 
Liver Dis 39: 530-536.
2 
(2014) Guideline on the evaluation of medicinal products for the 
treatment of irritable bowel syndrome European Medicines Agency.
3 
Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, Houghton LA, Mearin F, 
 
et al. (2006) Functional bowel disorders. Gastroenterology 130: 
1480-1491.
4 
Canavan C, West J, Card T (2014) Review article: the economic 
impact of the irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 40: 
1023-1034.
5 
Whitehead WE, Palsson OS, Levy RL, Feld AD, VonKorff M, et al. 
(2006) Reports of "satisfactory relief" by IBS patients receiving usual 
medical care are confounded by baseline symptom severity and do 
not accurately reflect symptom improvement. Am J Gastroenterol 
101: 1057-1065.
6 
Hawthorn M, Ferrante J, Luchowski E, Rutledge A, Wei XY, et al. 
(1988) The actions of peppermint oil and menthol on calcium 
channel dependent processes in intestinal, neuronal and cardiac 
preparations. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2: 101-118.
7 
Walstab J, Wohlfarth C, Hovius R, Schmitteckert S, Roth R, et al. 
(2014) Natural compounds boldine and menthol are antagonists of 
human 5-HT3 receptors: implications for treating gastrointestinal 
disorders. Neurogastroenterol Motil 26: 810-820.
8 
Juergens UR, Stober M, Vetter H (1998) The anti-inflammatory 
activity of L-menthol compared to mint oil in human monocytes in 
vitro: a novel perspective for its therapeutic use in inflammatory 
diseases. Eur J Med Res 3: 539-545.
9 
Hawrelak JA, Cattley T, Myers SP (2009) Essential oils in the treatment 
of intestinal dysbiosis: A preliminary in vitro study. Altern Med Rev 
14: 380-384.
10 Galeotti N, Di Cesare ML, Mazzanti G, Bartolini A, Ghelardini C (2002) 
Menthol: a natural analgesic compound. Neurosci Lett 322: 145-148.
11 Harries N, James KC, Pugh WK (1977) Antifoaming and carminative 
actions of volatile oils. Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics 
2: 171-177.
12 Grigoleit HG, Grigoleit P (2005) Gastrointestinal clinical pharmacology 
of peppermint oil. Phytomedicine 12: 607-611.
13 Cash BD, Epstein MS, Shah SM (2015) A Novel Delivery System of 
Peppermint Oil Is an Effective Therapy for Irritable Bowel Syndrome 
Symptoms Dig Dis Sci.
