 INFECTION CONTROL AND HOSPITAL EPIDEMIOLOGY 
FEBRUARY 2 0 1 4 , VOL. 35, NO. 2 
S H E A E X P E R T 
G U I D A N C E 
Healthcare Personnel Attire in Non-Operating-Room Settings 
Gonzalo Bearman, MD, MPH;1 Kristina Bryant, MD;2 Surbhi Leekha, MBBS, MPH;3 Jeanmarie Mayer, MD;4 
L. Silvia Munoz-Price, MD;5 Rekha Murthy, MD;6 Tara Palmore, MD;7 
Mark E. Rupp, MD;8 Joshua White, MD9 
Healthcare personnel (HCP) attire is an aspect of the medical profession steeped in culture and tradition. The role of attire in cross-
transmission remains poorly established, and until more definitive information exists priority should be placed on evidence-based measures 
to prevent healthcare-associated infections (HAIs). This article aims to provide general guidance to the medical community regarding HCP 
attire outside the operating room. In addition to the initial guidance statement, the article has 3 major components: (1) a review and 
interpretation of the medical literature regarding (a) perceptions of HCP attire (from both HCP and patients) and (b) evidence for 
contamination of attire and its potential contribution to cross-transmission; (2) a review of hospital policies related to HCP attire, as 
submitted by members of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) Guidelines Committee; and (3) a survey of SHEA 
and SHEA Research Network members that assessed both institutional HCP attire policies and perceptions of HCP attire in the cross-
transmission of pathogens. Recommendations for HCP attire should attempt to balance professional appearance, comfort, and practicality 
with the potential role of apparel in the cross-transmission of pathogens. Although the optimal choice of HCP attire for inpatient care 
remains undefined, we provide recommendations on the use of white coats, neckties, footwear, the bare-below-the-elbows strategy, and 
laundering. Institutions considering these optional measures should introduce them with a well-organized communication and education 
effort directed at both HCP and patients. Appropriately designed studies are needed to better define the relationship between HCP attire 
and HAIs. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014;35(2):107-121 
Healthcare personnel (HCP) attire is an aspect of the medical 
profession steeped in culture and tradition. From Hippoc-
rates's admonition that physicians' dress is essential to their 
dignity, to the advent of nurses' uniforms under the lead-
ership of Florence Nightingale, to the white coat ceremonies 
that continue to this day in medical schools, HCP apparel 
and appearance is associated with significant symbolism and 
professionalism. Recent years, however, have seen a rising 
awareness of the potential role of fomites in the hospital 
environment in the transmission of healthcare-associated mi-
croorganisms. Although studies have demonstrated contam-
ination of HCP apparel with potential pathogens, the role of 
clothing in transmission of these microorganisms to patients 
has not been established. The paucity of evidence has stymied 
efforts to produce generalizable, evidence-based recommen-
dations, resulting in widely disparate practices and require-
ments that vary by country, region, culture, facility, and dis-
cipline. This document is an effort to analyze the available 
data, issue reasonable recommendations, and describe the 
needs for future studies to close the gaps in knowledge on 
HCP attire. 
I N T E N D E D USE 
This document is intended to help acute care hospitals de-
velop or modify policies related to HCP attire. It does not 
address attire in the operating room (OR), perioperative ar-
eas, or other procedural areas and is not intended to guide 
HCP attire in those settings or in healthcare facilities other 
than acute care hospitals. 
SOCIETY FOR HEALTHCARE 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
OF AMERICA (SHEA) WRITING GROUP 
The writing group consists of volunteers among members of 
the SHEA Guidelines Committee, including those with re-
search expertise on this topic. 
Affiliations: 1. Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia; 2. University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky; 3. Department of 
Epidemiology 
and Public Health, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland; 4. Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah; 5. Departments of Medicine and Public Health Sciences, University of Miami, Miami, Florida; 6. Department 
of Hospital Epidemiology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California; 7. National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland; 
8. University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; 9. Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. 
Received November 21, 2013; accepted November 25, 2013; electronically published January 16, 2014. 
© 2014 by The Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. All rights reserved. 0899-823X/2014/3502-0001$15.00. DOI: 10.1086/675066 
 108 
INFECTION CONTROL AND HOSPITAL EPIDEMIOLOGY 
FEBRUARY 2014, VOL. 35, NO. 2 
KEY AREAS ADDRESSED 
We evaluated and summarized the literature around 2 aspects 
of HCP attire (details are provided in "Methods"): 
I. Perception of both patients and HCP regarding HCP attire 
in relation to professionalism and potential risk for trans-
mission of microorganisms. 
II. Evidence for contamination of HCP attire and the po-
tential for HCP attire to contribute to the transmission 
of pathogenic microorganisms in hospitals. 
In addition, we performed a survey of the SHEA mem-
bership and SHEA Research Network to learn more about 
the policies related to HCP attire that are currently in place 
in members' institutions. 
GUIDANCE AND RECOMMENDATION 
FORMAT 
Because this topic lacks the level of evidence required for a 
more formal guideline using the GRADE system, no grading 
of the evidence level is provided for individual recommen-
dations. Each guidance statement is based on synthesis of 
limited evidence, theoretical rationale, practical consider-
ations, a survey of SHEA membership and the SHEA Research 
Network, author opinion, and consideration of potential 
harm where applicable. An accompanying rationale is listed 
alongside each recommendation. 
GUIDANCE 
STATEMENT 
There is a paucity of data on the optimal approach to HCP 
attire in clinical, nonsurgical areas. Attire choices should at-
tempt to balance professional appearance, comfort, and prac-
ticality with the potential role of apparel in the cross-trans-
mission of pathogens resulting in healthcare-associated 
infections (HAIs). 
As the SHEA workgroup on HCP attire, we recommend 
the following: 
I. Appropriately designed studies should be funded and 
performed to better define the relationship between HCP 
attire and HAIs. 
II. Until such studies are reported, priority should be placed 
on evidence-based measures to prevent HAIs (eg, hand 
hygiene, appropriate device insertion and care, isolation 
of patients with communicable diseases, environmental 
disinfection). 
III. The following specific approaches to practice related to 
HCP attire may be considered by individual facilities; 
however, in institutions that wish to pursue these prac-
tices, measures should be voluntary and accompanied by 
a well-organized communication and education effort 
directed at both HCP and patients. 
A. "Bare below the elbows" (BBE): This article defines 
BBE as HCP's wearing of short sleeves, no wristwatch, 
no jewelry, and no ties during clinical practice. Facilities 
may consider adoption of a BBE approach to inpatient 
care as an infection prevention adjunct, although the 
optimal choice of alternate attire, such as scrub uni-
forms or other short-sleeved personal attire, remains 
undefined. 
1. Rationale: While the incremental infection preven-
tion impact of a BBE approach to inpatient care is 
unknown, this practice is supported by biological 
plausibility and studies in laboratory and clinical set-
tings and is unlikely to cause harm. 
B. White coats: Facilities that mandate or strongly rec-
ommend use of a white coat for professional appearance 
should institute one or more of the following measures: 
1. HCP engaged in direct patient care (including house 
staff and students) should possess 2 or more white 
coats and have access to a convenient and economical 
means to launder white coats (eg, institution-pro-
vided on-site laundering at no cost or low cost). 
i. Rationale: These practical considerations may help 
achieve the desired professional appearance yet al-
low for HCP to maintain a higher frequency of 
laundering of white coats. 
2. Institutions should provide coat hooks that would 
allow HCP to remove their white coat (or other long-
sleeved outerwear) prior to contact with patients or 
the patient's immediate environment. 
i. Rationale: This practical consideration may help 
achieve the desired professional appearance yet 
limit patients' direct contact with potentially con-
taminated attire and avoid potential contamination 
of white coats that may otherwise be hung on in-
appropriate objects in the hospital environment. 
C. Other HCP apparel: On the basis of the current evi-
dence, we cannot recommend limiting the use of other 
specific items of HCP apparel (such as neckties). 
1. Rationale: The role played by neckties and other spe-
cific items of HCP apparel in the horizontal trans-
mission of pathogens remains undetermined. If neck-
ties are worn, they should be secured by a white coat 
or other means to prevent them from coming into 
direct contact with the patient or near-patient 
environment. 
D. Laundering: 
1. Frequency: Optimally, any apparel worn at the bed-
side that comes into contact with the patient or pa-
tient environment should be laundered after daily 
use. In our opinion, white coats worn during patient 
care should be laundered no less frequently than once 
a week and when visibly soiled, 
i. Rationale: White coats worn by HCP who care for 
very few patients or by HCP who are infrequently 
involved in direct patient care activities may need 
to be laundered less frequently than white coats 
 SHEA EXPERT GUIDANCE! HEALTHCARE PERSONNEL ATTIRE 
109 
worn by HCP involved with more frequent patient 
care. At least weekly laundering may help achieve 
a balance between microbial burden, visible clean-
liness, professional 
appearance, and resource 
utilization. 
2. Home laundering: Whether HCP attire for non-
surgical settings should be laundered at home or pro-
fessionally remains unclear. If laundered at home, a 
hot-water wash cycle (ideally with bleach) followed 
by a cycle in the dryer is preferable, 
i. Rationale: A combination of washing at higher tem-
peratures and tumble drying or ironing has been 
associated with elimination of both pathogenic 
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. 
E. HCP footwear: All footwear should have closed toes, 
low heels, and nonskid soles. 
1. Rationale: The choice of HCP footwear should be 
driven by a concern for HCP safety and should de-
crease the risk of exposure to blood or other poten-
tially infectious material, sharps injuries, and slipping. 
F. Identification: Name tags or identification badges 
should be clearly visible on all HCP attire for identifi-
cation purposes. 
1. Rationale: Name tags have consistently been identi-
fied as a preferred component of HCP attire by pa-
tients in several studies, are associated with profes-
sional appearance, and are an important component 
of a hospital's security system. 
IV. Shared equipment, including stethoscopes, should be 
cleaned between patients. 
V. No guidance can be offered in general regarding prohib-
iting items like lanyards, identification tags and sleeves, 
cell phones, pagers, and jewelry, but those items that 
come into direct contact with the patient or environment 
should be disinfected, replaced, or eliminated. 
METHODS 
Using PubMed/Medline, between the months of January and 
May 2013 we searched the English literature for articles per-
taining to HCP attire in clinical settings focusing on areas 
. outside the OR. We included all studies dealing with bacterial 
contamination and laundering of HCP attire, patients' and 
providers' perceptions based on the type of attire, and/or HCP 
footwear. 
Additionally, we reviewed and compared hospital policies 
related to HCP attire from 7 large teaching hospitals, as sub-
mitted by members of the SHEA Guidelines Committee. Fi-
nally, between February and May 2013 we sent out a survey 
to all SHEA members to assess their institutional HCP attire 
policies (if any) and to determine their perceptions of HCP 
attire as a vehicle for potential transmission of pathogens. 
RESULTS 
I. Patients' Perceptions of HCP Attire 
We identified 26 studies (published from 1990 onward) that 
examined patients' perceptions of HCP attire1 26 (Table 1). 
Most (23/26) studies surveyed patient preference for different 
types of HCP attire1"6,8"18'20"25 using either pictures of models 
in various dress styles3'4'7'9,1518,20,22"24 or descriptions of at-
tire_i.5,n,i4,2i,25 F o u r studies6'10'12,13 asked patients to assess the 
attire of their actual physicians. Attire descriptions and ter-
minology varied among studies (eg, "formal," "business," 
"smart," "suit and tie," and "dress") and will be referred to 
hereafter as "formal attire." We use "casual attire" to refer to 
anything other than formal attire. 
A. Formal attire and white coats: Most of the studies using 
pictures and models of HCP attire indicated patient pref-
erence for formal attire, which was favored over both 
scrubs1,3,7,9,18'22 and casual attire.7,9,15,16,19,22 However, several 
other studies revealed that physician attire was unlikely 
to influence patients' levels of comfort,4,20 satisfaction, 
trust, or confidence in physicians' abilities,2,4,9,19,2"'25 even 
if patients previously had expressed a preference for one 
type of attire.4'9,20'25 
Fifteen studies addressed white coats.1'4'7"9,11"17'20"22 In 10 
of these studies, patients preferred that physicians wear 
white coats,1,7"10,12,15"17 and in 1 study patients reported 
feeling more confident in those physicians.8 Similarly, 2 
studies showed a significant association between the pres-
ence of a white coat, especially on a female physician, and 
patients' trust and willingness to share sensitive infor-
mation.22 Patients also indicated less comfort in dealing 
with an informally dressed physician,16 describing a shirt 
and a tie as the most professional and desirable attire for 
physicians23"25 in addition to an overall well-groomed ap-
pearance.5,15 Moreover, the following items were deemed 
as inappropriate or undesirable: jeans,5'14 shorts,15 
clogs,1415 and open-toed sandals.15 In the remaining 5 
studies, patients showed no clear predilection for one dress 
style over another or did not consider a white coat either 
necessary or expected.4,11,13,20,21 
Five studies assessed patient satisfaction, confidence, or 
trust on the basis of their treating physicians' dress,2,6'10'12,13 
showing little response variations regardless of apparel. A 
survey of patients seen by obstetricians/gynecologists who 
were randomly assigned formal attire, casual attire, or 
scrubs found high satisfaction with physicians regardless 
of the group allocation.6 Similarly, in a before-and-after 
trial, emergency department (ED) physicians were asked 
to wear formal attire with a white coat one week followed 
by scrubs the subsequent week. Using a visual analog scale, 
patients rated their physician's appearance, professional-
ism, and satisfaction equally regardless of the week of 
observation.13 Another ED study found no difference in 
 TABLE i. 
Studies of Patient and Healthcare Worker Perception of Healthcare Worker Attire (1990-2012) 
Lead author, year (country) 
Methodology 
Findings 
Ardolino, 2009 (UK)1 
Baevsky, 1998 (US)2 
Bond, 2010 (UK)3 
Cha, 2004 (US)4 
Ditchburne, 2006 (UK)5 
Fischer, 2007 (US)6 
Gallagher, 2008 (Ireland)7 
Gherardi, 2009 (UK)8 
Gonzalez del Rey, 1995 (US)9 
Survey (n = 100): Pts 
Re: Preference for MD attire before/after awareness of BBE 
policy 
Survey (n = 596): Urgent care Pts seen by MD in WC and 
on alternating days, scrubs vs formal attire 
Re: Satisfaction for courtesy, concern, skill, and likelihood Pt 
would return/recommend ED 
Survey (n = 160): ENT InPts, OutPts 
Re: Attitudes toward MD attire with photos of male MD in 
scrubs, formal, and BBE 
Survey (n = 184): OutPts in predominandy resident-run OB/ 
GYN clinic 
Re: Preference for MD attire and confidence and comfort with 
photos of MD in various attire 
Survey (n = 100): Public in hospital concourse 
Re: Attitudes to MD not wearing ties 
Survey (n = 1,136): Pts and OB/GYN MD before/after ran-
domization of MD attire type 
Re: Pt satisfaction with MD attire; MDs asked for their 
preference 
Survey (n = 124): OutPts 
Re: Preference and ranking of MD attire with photos (formal, 
casual, WC, scrubs) 
Survey (n = 511): InPts 
Re: Rated photos of MD in various attire to inspire confidence 
Survey (n = 360): Parents of pediatric ED Pts shown pictures 
of MD dressed in various types of attire 
Re: Which doctor would they prefer for their child, does attire 
matter, do clothes affect trust in MD? 
Before BBE policy: prefer suit more than WC but WC preferred for junior MD, 
scrubs not preferred as unprofessional and difficult to distinguish MDs 
After BBE policy: prefer short-sleeve shirt without tie (older Pts); prefer scrubs 
(younger Pts) 
No difference in satisfaction elements for scrubs vs formal attire 
WC ranked higher when MD broke protocol and did not wear, although when 
stratified by scrubs vs formal, higher mean ranks for WC noted only when 
MDs wore scrubs 
Attitude, mannerism, and professionalism likely more important than attire 
Most professional: formal 72%, scrubs 23%, BBE 5% 
Most hygienic: formal 10%, scrubs 87%, BBE 3% 
Ease to identify as MD: formal 59%, scrubs 35%, BBE 6% 
Overall preference: formal 48%, scrubs 41%, BBE 11% 
Attire preference: no preference 60%, WC 38% 
Pt comfort level: attire does not affect 63% vs does affect 28% 
Confidence level in MD: attire does not affect 62% vs does affect 24% 
Mean scores for comfort and confidence levels decreased as attire moved from 
clinical/formal (scrubs/WC) to casual 
93% did not object to tieless MD, but for staff more likely considered as profes-
sionalism factor 
Most important: wearing shirt and dress trousers (vs denim), being clean, tidy, 
formal, wearing clear identifications 
Pt satisfaction overall was high and did not change with different MD attire 
No difference for perceived MD competency and professionalism 
MD preference: 8 casual, 7 business, 5 scrubs 
Prefer WC, formal, and semiformal vs scrubs and casual 
WC most preferred; scrubs and casual least preferred 
WC ranked highest and most confidence inspiring 
All dress styles rated above neutral except casual (rated lower) 
Older Pts found scrubs less appealing 
Most preferred attire: formal 44% (P< .001) selected for all shifts but less likely 
selected for Pt seen by night shift 
Least preferred attire: casual without WC 64% (P < .001) 
Overall, 69% of "most-liked" pictures had WC, and 89% of "least-liked" pictures 
did not have WC 
Pictures witii scrubs favored by parents with children seen for surgical emergencies 
Majority did not consider most formally attired as most capable, did not matter 
how MD dressed and did not influence trust 
 Hennessy, 1993 (UK)1' 
Survey (n = 110): 2 groups of pre-op Pts, seen by same anes-
thetist, dressed formal vs casual 
Re: Select adjectives to describe anesthetist/visit, graded 15 
dress items as desirable, neutral, or undesirable 
Hueston, 2011 (US)11 
Ikusaka, 1999 (Japan)12 
Li, 2005 (US)13 
Major, 2005 (US)14 
Survey (n = 423): OutPts 
Re: Preference for MD attire before/after being informed of 
possible microbial contamination 
Survey: OutPts seen by groups of MD in WC or private 
clothes 
Re: Pt tension/satisfaction, preference for MD attire 
Before/after trial (n = 111) of Pt opinion in ED 
Re: ED MDs wore WC/formal vs scrubs 
Survey (« = 410): InPts, surgeons, and public 
Re: Surgeons' attire 
Matsui, 1998 (Canada)15 
McKinstry, 1991 (UK)16 
Mistry, 2009 (UK)17 
Monkhouse, 2008 (UK)18 
Nair, 2002 (Australia)1' 
Survey (n = 220): OutPt pediatric children/parents 
Re: Asked who they would like as their MD from photos of 
MD with and without WC; parents also rated attire 
appropriateness 
Survey (n = 475): OutPts in 5 practices 
Re: Pt acceptability for different styles of attire (photos of male 
and female MDs) for different attire and whether attire in-
fluenced their respect for MD 
Survey (n = 200): Pediatric dental parents/children 
Re: Attitudes on MD attire using photos 
Survey (n = 50): Surgical Pts random survey (ER and elective 
admits) 
Re: Attitudes toward dress (formal vs scrubs) before/after edu-
cational intervention on transmission of microorganisms on 
ties 
Survey (n = 1,680): InPts after discharge with crossover trial 
of MDs in varying attire 
Re: Pt confidence/trust in MD in informal vs "respectable" 
attire 
No difference between adjective choices (professionalism, approachability) of anes-
thetist in formal vs casual dress 
Desirability: name tag (90%), WC (66%), polished shoes (62%), short hair (57%), 
suit (36%) (suit and tie selected more likely desirable if viewed) 
Undesirability: clogs (84%), jeans (70%), trainers (67%), earrings (64%), long hair 
(62%), open-necked shirt (36%) 
Before education: no clear attire preference but did not favor scrubs (6%), poor 
agreement with Pt preference and what their MD wears 
After education: decrease preference for WC/tie/formal attire 
Conclusion: attire preferences may change with awareness for contamination 
Tension: WC group 42%, private clothes group 33% 
Satisfaction: no significant difference between attire groups 
WC preference: WC group (older Pts more likely to prefer WC) 71%, private 
clothes group 39% (P < .001) 
No significant difference in scores between 2 dress styles in appearance, satisfac-
tion, or professionalism 
WC necessary: surgeons 72%, InPts 69%, public 42% 
Scrubs appropriate: surgeons 73%, InPts 41%, public 33% (P < .05) 
Clogs appropriate: surgeons 63%, InPts 27%, public 18% (P < .05) 
Denim appropriate: surgeons 10%, InPts 22%, public 31% 
Selected MD in WC: children 69%, parents 66% 
Most appropriate and favored: name tag, WC, well groomed 
Neutral: scrubs, formal dress 
Not favored: open-toed sandals, clogs, shorts 
Formal dress favored (suit/tie or WC) 
28% would be unhappy seeing one of MDs shown, more likely those dressed 
informally 
64% thought how their MD dressed was important 
Practice to which a Pt belonged was an independent factor in Pt choice of dress 
WC and mask most popular overall but children favor casual attire 
Formal WC preferred over pediatric coat by parents and children 
Mask preferred over visor (eye contact potentially important) 
Before education: prefer formal for professionalism and approachability; prefer 
scrubs for hygiene, equal for identifiability; prefer formal dress overall 
After education: prefer scrubs (24% before to 62% after); formal preference de-
creased (52% before to 22% after) 
Authors' conclusions: if rationale behind modes of surgical dress are explained, Pts 
are more likely to prefer scrubs to formal clothes 
Pt confidence highest with "respectable" dress 
Loss of WC or tie did not deteriorate confidence significantiy 
Informal dress protocol "affront to sensitivities" and presence of nose ring most 
deleterious 
 TABLE i (Continued) 
Lead author, year (country) 
Methodology 
Findings 
Niederhauser, 2009 (US)2' 
Palazzo, 2010 (UK)2 
Rehman, 2005 (US)22 
Shelton, 2010 (UK)23 
Baxter, 2010 (UK)24 
Toquero, 2011 (UK)2! 
Garvin, 2012 (US)26 
Survey (n = 328): Pts at naval OB/GYN clinic 
Re: Preference for MD attire and effect on comfort or confi-
dence using pictures 
Survey (« = 75): InPts 
Re: Attitudes of MD attire 
Randomly chosen medical/surgical InPts rated 6 statements 
(modal responses provided) and provided reasons for im-
portance of MD dress code; opinions solicited after educa-
tion of new dress code policy 
Survey (« = 400): Pts/visitors in OutPt clinic 
Re: Preference, trust, willing to discuss sensitive issues with 
photos of MDs in various attire 
Survey (n = 100): InPts 
Re: Rate MD attire with photos of male and female MDs be-
fore/after being informed of microbial contamination 
Survey (n = 480): InPts 
Re: Attitudes toward MD attire using photos of male MDs in 
long sleeves/tie, scrubs, short sleeves 
Survey (n = NA): orthopedic InPts 
Re: Awareness/preference for recent BBE policy 
Survey (n = 1,494): InPts, MDs, RNs 
Re: Attitudes toward MD attire 
86% neutral whether MD wore a WC 
88% said attire did not impact confidence in MD ability 
Active-duty women were more likely than dependent wives to say MD attire influ-
enced their comfort discussing general/sexual/psychological/personal topics 
Authors conclude active-duty women may withhold pertinent medical information 
(eg, personal, sexual history) due to intimidation from military uniform of offi-
cer MD 
Aspect of military uniform unique to this study 
"MD dress important"—strongly agree (reason: dress code instills confidence) 
"Your MD this admission dressed professionally"—strongly agree 
"Scrubs are acceptable form of dress"—strongly agree (reason: appears clean) 
"MD should wear WC"—strongly disagree (reason: sleeves might encourage infec-
tion spread, might induce fear and anxiety in Pts) 
"MD should wear ties"—strongly disagree (reason: unnecessary, uncomfortable) 
"Is it easy to distinguish between different grades of doctor based on their 
dress?"—strongly disagree (hard to differentiate MD vs the public) 
No Pts noticed dress code change prior to being informed of the change 
All Pts favored dress code change when the suggested impact on infection was 
explained 
Conclusions: MD attire important but necktie and WC not expected 
Preferences: professional attire with WC 76%, scrubs 10%, business dress 9%, 
casual 5% 
Trust and willing to share sensitive information significantly associated with pro-
fessional attire (P < .001) 
Female MD dress significantly more important than male MD 
Before information: no significant difference between most attire except casual 
dress and short sleeves (considered less appropriate) 
After information: scrubs and short sleeves considered most appropriate, scrubs 
preferred for females 
Most professional: long sleeves/tie 77%, scrubs 22%, BBE 1% 
Greatest transmission risk: long sleeves/tie 30%, scrubs 33%, BBE 37% 
Preference for MD attire: long sleeves/tie 63%, scrubs 33%, BBE 4% 
Unaware of policy: 86% 
Attire preference: shirt/tie 63%, suits 22%, short sleeve shirt 6%, Pt trust high 
despite change to less preferred attire 
MD appearance important for Pt care: MDs/RNs 93%, InPts 83% (P< .001) 
Concerned with appearance of other provider but did not engage them: MDs 
39%, RNs 43%, Pts 16% (P < .001) 
Concerned with appearance of other provider but did not engage them: MDs 
39%, RNs 43%, Pts 16% {P < .001) 
NOTE. 
BBE, bare below elbows; ED, emergency department; ENT, ear, nose, and throat; InPt, inpatient; MD, physician; NA, not provided; OB/GYN, obstetrics/gynecology, OutPt, 
outpatient; Pt, patient; RN, nurse; WC, white coat. 
 SHEA EXPERT GUIDANCE: HEALTHCARE PERSONNEL ATTIRE 
113 
patients' satisfaction with the care provided when their 
physicians wore white coats combined with either scrubs 
or formal attire.2 Similarly, 2 groups of patients who re-
ceived preoperative care by the same anesthesiologist 
wearing either formal attire for one group of patients or 
casual attire for the other found no differences in patient 
satisfaction between the groups.10 In contrast, one cross-
over trial involving physicians dressed in "respectable" or 
formal versus "retro" or casual attire found that patient 
confidence and trust were higher with the respectable-
dress protocol.19 Another study evaluating the attire of 
patients' treating physicians indicated preference for pol-
ished shoes and short hair for men, with jeans, clogs, 
trainers, and earrings on men being rated as undesirable.10 
A survey among Japanese outpatients indicated a pref-
erence for white coats but no significant difference in 
satisfaction levels based on attire when presented with 
physicians wearing white coats or "noninstitutional 
clothes."12 
B. BBE: Preference for BBE was assessed in 6 studies origi-
nating in the United Kingdom following implementation 
of the nationwide BBE policy13'23'25 and in 1 US study." 
In these 7 reports, patients did not prefer short sleeves. 
After informing patients of the BBE policy, older patients 
were more likely to prefer short-sleeved shirts without ties, 
while younger patients favored scrubs.1 After providing 
information about the potential for cross-contamination 
from shirt sleeve cuffs and neckties, responses changed 
from a preference for formal or long-sleeved attire to a 
preference for short sleeves or scrubs.1118'23 In addition, 
Shelton et al23 also found an association between physician 
gender and BBE attire: after a statement informing the 
participants of the potential cross-transmission of micro-
organisms by attire, patients preferred scrubs for female 
physicians but did not differentiate between scrubs and 
short-sleeved shirts for male physicians. 
C. Ties: Neckties were specifically addressed in several studies 
from the United Kingdom.5,21,24 In one study, patients re-
ported that attire was important but that neckties were 
not expected.21 Similarly, in a survey among individuals 
in the public concourse of a hospital, 93% had no ob-
jection to male physicians not wearing ties.5 None of these 
studies evaluated neckties in the context of patients' per-
ceptions of infection prevention. 
D. Laundering of clothes: In one study, patients identified 
"daily laundered clothing" as the single most important 
aspect of physicians' appearance.8 
E. Other factors: Several additional variables may influence 
patient preference for physician attire, including age of 
either the patient or the managing physician, gender of 
the practitioner, time of day, setting, and the attire patients 
are accustomed to seeing. In Japan, older patients were 
more likely to prefer white coats.12 Similarly, older patients 
in England found scrubs less appealing than did younger 
patients.8 Pediatric dental patients were more likely than 
their parents to favor casual attire.17 Patients preferred 
formal attire for senior consultants but thought that junior 
physicians should be less formal.1 Patients identified fe-
male physicians' attire as more important than the attire 
worn by male physicians.22 Formal attire was less desirable 
by patients seen during the night shift.9 Parents of children 
being seen in the ED favored surgical scrubs. Additionally, 
2 trials evaluated attire preference on the basis of what 
patients often see their HCP wearing. In one trial, patients 
accustomed to seeing their anesthesiologist in a suit were 
more likely to find suits and ties desirable.10 Similarly, the 
practice to which a patient belonged was found to be an 
independent factor in the patient's choice of preferred 
attire;16 however, another study found poor agreement be-
tween patient preferences and their physicians' typical 
attire.11 
In summary, patients express preferences for certain types 
of attire, with most studies indicating a predilection for formal 
attire, including a white coat, but these partialities had a 
limited overall impact on patient satisfaction and confidence 
in practitioners. This is particularly true in trials that eval-
uated the effect of attire on patient satisfaction in real-world 
settings. Patients generally do not perceive white coats, formal 
attire, or neckties as posing infection risks; however, when 
informed of potential risks associated with certain types of 
attire, patients appear willing to change their preferences for 
physician attire.1118 
II. HCP Perceptions regarding Attire 
Few studies evaluated HCP preferences with regard to at-
tire.5'6''4,26 While most studies addressed specific elements of 
HCP attire, one looked at the overall importance of attire 
and found that 93% of physicians and nurses versus 83% of 
patients thought that physician appearance was important for 
patient care (P < .001).26 
A. White coats: In a survey exploring perceptions of sur-
geons' apparel performed among surgeons themselves, in-
patients, and the nonhospitalized public, all 3 groups were 
equally likely to consider a white coat necessary and blue 
jeans inappropriate. Surgeons were more prone to con-
sider scrubs and clogs appropriate.14 In another survey of 
15 obstetricians/gynecologists, 8 preferred casual attire, 
while 7 preferred formal attire.6 Three studies assessed 
HCP alongside patient perception of infection risk or lack 
of hygiene associated with white coats, formal attire, or 
neckties,3,24'26 with one finding that HCP were more likely 
than patients to consider white coats unhygienic.26 
B. Ties: In a survey performed in a public concourse of a 
UK hospital, HCP were more likely than non-HCP to 
prefer physicians' wearing of neckties for reasons of 
professionalism.5 
C. Laundering of clothes: A recent survey showed that non-
surgical providers preferentially (and without prompting) 
 114 
INFECTION CONTROL AND HOSPITAL EPIDEMIOLOGY 
FEBRUARY 2 0 1 4 , VOL. 35, NO. 2 
laundered their scrubs every 1.7 ± 0.1 days (mean ± 
standard error) compared with white coats, which were 
laundered every 12.4 ± 1.1 days (P< .001); however, the 
reasons for this divergent behavior remain unclear.27 
III. Studies of Microbial Contamination of Apparel in 
Clinical and Laboratory Settings 
No clinical studies have demonstrated cross-transmission of 
healthcare-associated pathogens from a HCP to a patient via 
apparel; however, a number of small prospective trials have 
demonstrated the contamination of HCP apparel with a va-
riety of pathogens (Table 2).5'28"37 
A. White coats/uniforms: The 5 studies we evaluated indi-
cate that physician white coats and nursing uniforms may 
serve as potential sources of colonization and cross-trans-
mission. Several studies described contamination of ap-
parel with Staphylococcus aureus in the range of 5% to 
29%.30'33"35,38 Although gram-negative bacilli have also been 
identified, these were for the most part of low pathoge-
nicity;30'35 however, actual pathogens, such as Acinetobacter 
species, Enterobacteriaceae, and Pseudomonas species, 
have been reported.38 
A number of factors were found to influence the mag-
nitude of contamination of white coats and uniforms. 
First, the degree of contamination was correlated with 
more frequent usage of the coat,35 recent work in the 
inpatient setting,34 and sampling certain parts of the uni-
form. Higher bacterial loads were found on areas of cloth-
ing that were more likely to come into contact with the 
patient, such as the sleeve.35 Additionally, the burden of 
resistant pathogens on apparel was inversely correlated 
with the frequency of lab coat change.38 Apparel contam-
ination with pathogenic microorganisms increased over 
the course of a single patient care shift. Burden et al28 
demonstrated that clean uniforms become contaminated 
within only a few hours of donning them. Similarly, a 
study testing nurses' uniforms at both the beginning and 
the end of their shifts described an increase in the number 
of uniforms contaminated with one or more microor-
ganisms from 39% to 54%, respectively. The proportion 
of uniforms contaminated with vancomycin-resistant en-
terococci (VRE), methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), 
and Clostridium difficile was also noted to increase with 
shift work.33 
In the first report of a positive correlation between 
contamination of hands and contamination of white coats, 
Munoz-Price et al39 cultured the hands, scrubs, and white 
coats of intensive care unit staff. The majority of bacteria 
isolated from hands were skin commensals, but HCP were 
also found to have contamination of hands, scrubs, and 
white coats with potentially pathogenic bacteria, including 
S. aureus, Enterococcus species, and Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. Among dominant hands, 17% of 119 hands were 
contaminated with one of these species, and staff members 
with contaminated hands were more likely to wear a white 
coat contaminated with the same pathogen. This associ-
ation was not observed with scrubs. 
B. BBE: Two observational trials evaluated the bacterial con-
tamination of HCP's hands on the basis of BBE attire 
versus controls, finding no difference in total bacterial 
counts or in the number of clinically significant patho-
gens.40'41 In contrast, Farrington et al,42 using a fluorescent 
method, examined the efficacy of an alcohol hand wash 
among BBE providers versus controls. The authors found 
decreased efficacy of hand hygiene at the wrist level in the 
non-BBE group, suggesting that the BBE approach may 
improve wrist disinfection during hand washing. 
The United Kingdom has adopted a BBE approach, on 
the basis of the theory that it will limit patient contact 
with contaminated HCP apparel and to promote better 
hand and wrist hygiene. However, a randomized trial com-
paring bacterial contamination of white coats against BBE 
found no difference in total bacterial or MRSA counts (on 
either the apparel itself or from the volar surface of the 
wrist) at the end of an 8-hour workday.28 
C. Scrubs: The use of antimicrobial-impregnated scrubs has 
been evaluated as a possible solution to uniform contam-
ination. In a prospective, randomized crossover trial of 
30 HCP in the intensive care unit setting,36 when com-
pared with standard scrubs, antimicrobial-impregnated 
scrubs were associated with a 4-7 mean log reduction in 
surface MRSA burden, although there was no difference 
in MRSA load on HCP hands or in the number of VRE 
or gram-negative bacilli cultured from the scrubs. The 
study did not assess the HAI impact of the antimicrobial 
scrubs. 
D. Ties: Several studies indicated that neckties may be col-
onized with pathogenic bacteria, including S. aureus. Lo-
pez et al31 reported a significantly higher bacterial burden 
on neckties than on the front shirt pocket of the same 
subject. In 3 studies, up to 32% of physician neckties grew 
S. aureus.5,11'37 Steinlechner et al37 identified additional po-
tential pathogens and commensals from necktie cultures, 
including Bacillus species and gram-negative bacilli. Two 
reports found that up to 70% of physicians admitted hav-
ing never cleaned their ties.5,31 
E. Laundering of clothes: Numerous articles published dur-
ing the past 25 years describe the efficacy of laundering 
hospital linens and HCP clothing,44 but most investiga-
tions of the laundering of HCP attire have employed in 
vitro experimental designs that may or may not reflect 
real-life conditions. A 2006 study45 demonstrated that 
while clothes lost their burden of S. aureus, they concom-
itantly acquired oxidase-positive gram-negative bacilli in 
the home washing machine. These bacteria were nearly 
eliminated by tumble drying or ironing. Similarly, inves-
tigators found that recently laundered clothing material 
acquired gram-negative bacteria from the washing ma-
 SHEA EXPERT GUIDANCE: HEALTHCARE PERSONNEL ATTIRE 
115 
chine, which were subsequently eliminated by ironing. An-
other in vitro study in the United Kingdom compared the 
reduction of microorganisms on artificially inoculated 
nurses' uniform material after washing at various tem-
peratures as well as with and without detergents. Washing 
uniforms contaminated with MRSA and Acinetobacter spe-
cies at a temperature of 60°C, with or without detergent, 
achieved at least a 7-log reduction in the bacterial burden 
of both microorganisms.46 There is no robust evidence 
that centralized industrial laundering decontaminates 
clothing more effectively than home laundering.43 
F. Footwear: Although restrictions on HCP footwear are in-
fluenced by a desire to meet patients' preferences for ap-
propriate attire,101415 most are driven by concerns for HCP 
safety.47"50 Studies have found that wearing of shoes with 
closed toes, low heels, and nonskid soles can decrease the 
risk of exposure to blood or other potentially infectious 
material,47,48,50'51 sharps injuries,48,50,52 slipping,50 and mus-
culoskeletal disorders.49 
Casual, open footwear, such as sandals, clogs, and foam 
clogs, potentially expose feet to injury from dropped con-
taminated sharps and exposure to chemicals in healthcare 
facilities. A comparison of needlestick injury surveillance 
data from the standardized Exposure Prevention Infor-
mation Network program revealed a higher proportion of 
hollow-bore needle injuries to the feet of Japanese HCP, 
with 1.5% of 16,154 total injuries compared with 0.6% of 
9,457 total injuries for US HCP (2.5 times higher; P < 
.001 ).48 Although multiple factors were linked to these in-
juries, one included the common practice in Japan to re-
move outdoor shoes and replace them with open-toed 
slippers on hospital entry. 
Footwear is an area of increased concern in the OR. 
The Association of perioperative Registered Nurses 
(AORN) recommends that OR footwear have closed toes 
as well as backs, low heels, and nonskid soles to prevent 
slipping.50 The US Occupational Safety and Health Ad-
ministration (OSHA) requires the use of protective shoes 
in areas where there is a danger of foot injuries from falling 
objects or objects piercing the soles.47 One study that mea-
sured the resistance of shoes to penetration by scalpels 
showed that of the 15 pairs of shoes studied, only 6 were 
made of material that was sharp resistant, including 
sneaker suede, suede with inner mesh lining, leather with 
inner canvas lining, nonpliable leather, rubber with inner 
leather lining, and thicker rubber.52 The OSHA bloodborne 
pathogens standard mandates that employers determine 
the workplace settings in which gross contamination with 
blood or body fluids is expected, such as the OR, and to 
provide protective shoe coverings in those settings.47,48,50,51 
Shoe covers are not meant to prevent transmission of bac-
teria from the OR floor; in fact, preliminary data show 
that the OR floor may play a dynamic role in the horizontal 
transmission of bacteria due to frequent floor contact of 
objects that then directly touch the patient's body (eg, 
intravenous tubing, electrocardiogram leads).53 
When HCP safety concerns or patient preference con-
flict with a HCP's desire for fashion, a facility's dress code 
can be the arbiter of footwear. OSHA allows employers to 
make such dress code determinations without regard to a 
worker's potential exposure to blood, other potentially in-
fectious materials, or other recognized hazards. 
IV. Outbreaks Linked to HCP Apparel 
Wright et al54 reported an outbreak of Gordonia potentially 
linked to HCP apparel. In this report, postoperative sternal 
wound infections with Gordonia bronchialis in 3 patients were 
linked to a nurse anesthetist. Gordonia was isolated from the 
HCP's scrubs, axillae, hands, and purse and from multiple 
sites on the HCP's roommate. 
V. Studies from Developing Countries 
In Nigeria, factors identified increasing the likelihood of bac-
terial contamination of white coats included daily laundering 
and use limited to patient care rather than nonclinical du-
ties.55 In India,56 medical students' white coats were assessed 
for bacterial contamination, paired with surveys about laun-
dering habits and attitudes toward white coats. Coats were 
contaminated most frequendy with S. aureus, followed by 
Pseudomonas species and coagulase-negative staphylococci. A 
similar trial of white coats used by staff in a rural dental clinic 
also revealed predominandy gram-positive contamination.57 
VI. Hospital Policies Addressing HCP Attire 
We reviewed and compared policies related to HCP attire 
from 7 large teaching hospitals or health systems. In general, 
policies could be categorized into 2 groups: 
A. General appearance and dress of all employees 
B. Standards for HCP working in sterile or procedure-based 
environments (OR, central processing, procedure areas, etc) 
Policies were evaluated for the following elements: 
A. Recommended clothing (eg, requirement for white coats, 
designated uniforms) or other options (eg, BBE) 
B. Guidance regarding scrubs 
C. Use of name tags 
D. Wearing of ties 
E. Requirements for laundering or change of clothing 
F. Footwear and nonapparel items worn or carried by HCP 
G. Personal protective equipment 
All institutions' human resources policies outlined general 
appearance or dress code requirements for professional stan-
dards of business attire; however, institutions varied in job-
specific policies and for the most part did not address more 
specific attire requirements except for OR-related activities. 
Few institutional policies included enforcement provisions. 
The institutions that required accountability varied from de-
 TABLE 2. Apparel and Microbial Burden: Review of Studies in Laboratory and Clinical Settings 
Lead author, year 
Methodology 
Findings 
Bearman, 20123' 
Burden, 20112: 
Burger, 2011* 
Ditchburne, 20065 
Farrington, 20094: 
Gaspard, 20082! 
Prospective crossover trial of HCWs in ICU (n = 30) 
Randomized to antimicrobial vs control scrubs 
Samples obtained from scrub abdominal area, pocket, and hands 
weekly 
Randomized trial comparing contamination on regular (dirty) 
WC vs short-sleeved UK-style MD uniform laundered daily 
Prospective observational study (n = 66) 
MDs from multiple specialties (38 BBE, 28 were not) volunteered 
without notice during normal work day 
Agar imprints of fingers, palms, wrists, and forearms, repeated af-
ter hand hygiene; imprints of cuffs of those not BBE 
MD ties cultured (n = 40) 
BBE vs non-BBE randomized trial of MD (n = 58) and medical 
students (n = 61) at a 900-bed teaching hospital 
Participants cleaned hands using alcohol, with areas fluorescing by 
UV light considered "missed" and recorded on a standard hand 
diagram 
Descriptive study of staff clothing in 3 LTCFs 
Uniforms (n = 256) from 90 RNs, 166 care partners sampled 
from waist zone pocket and between pockets 
HCW scrubs colonized during course of Pt care with MRSA 
Antimicrobial scrubs associated with a 4-7 mean log reduction in MRSA but not 
VRE or GNR 
No differences in bacterial hand burden or in HCWs with unique positive scrub 
cultures 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
No significant difference in bacterial burden between dirty WCs and recendy washed 
uniforms; clean uniforms contaminated within few hours of donning 
No information on frequency WCs were washed or hand hygiene rates 
Suggests no microbiological advantage of BBE 
No significant difference in bacterial counts (many skin commensals, no MRSA) be-
tween groups 
Some MDs had higher counts after HH 
Large variation in number of colonies cultured 
Authors conclude "no difference in density or type of baseline flora on hands and 
forearms irrespective of dress code" 
HH reduced colony counts from fingertips, palms, and wrists in all groups 
MD ties capable of carrying bacteria, including MRSA: 40% of ties grew MSSA (1 
with MRSA) 
70% had never laundered tie 
93% had no objection to not wearing ties 
Authors suggest substitute other attire for ties to preserve professional image 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
No significant difference found between 2 groups in percentage area of hands missed 
The non-BBE group missed more wrist vs BBE group (P < .002) 
Mean percent area missed on wrists significantly higher than hands in both groups 
(P<.001) 
Strengths: high participation rate without dropouts, single investigator created hand 
diagrams 
Weaknesses: Hawthorne effect 
Author conclusions: BBE did not affect quality of HH, and although BBE improved 
wrist washing, the clinical significance is uncertain 
HCW apparel frequently contaminated with MRSA 
27%-80% MRSA recovery from "waist zone"; 18%-60% MRSA recovery from 
"pocket zone" 
Authors stressed HH to limit cross-transmission from apparel to Pts via HCW hands 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
 Jacob, 20074: 
Loh, 2000* 
Lopez, 200931 
Morgan, 20123: 
Perry, 2001* 
Scott, 199058 
Steinlechner, 20023' 
Department of Health Working Group on Uniforms and Laun-
dry: evidence-based document on wearing and laundering uni-
forms from 2 literature reviews (Thames Valley University and 
University College London Hospital NHS Trust) 
Examined role of uniforms in infection transfer, efficacy of laun-
dry practices in removing contamination, how uniforms affect 
image of individual and organizations 
Random sample (n = 100) 
Cultured medical students' WCs 
Sampled shirts/ties from internists/surgeons (n = 25/25) for 
paired bacterial counts 
Cohort study of sequential HCW interaction with Pts with culture 
of gowns/hands linked to environmental cultures 
Cross-sectional sample (n = 57) 
Bacterial contamination across 5 services 
Sampled belt area-hem at start vs end of shift 
In vitro experiment: bacterial transfer from laminate surfaces and 
cloths to hands 
Cohort of orthopedic surgeons (n = 26) 
Sampled ties for bacterial growth 
No conclusive evidence that uniforms pose a significant hazard to spread infection 
Public does not like seeing hospital staff in uniform outside workplace 
All components of properly designed and operated laundering help to remove/kill mi-
croorganisms on fabric 
Ten-minute wash at 60°C sufficient to remove most microorganisms 
Detergents can remove many microorganisms from fabrics at lower temperature (eg, 
MRSA removed at 30°C) 
No conclusive evidence for difference between commercial or domestic laundering to 
remove microorganisms 
Authors provide list of good (and poor) practice examples with reasons: 
•
 Good practice example: "Dress in a manner which is likely to inspire public 
confidence" 
•
 Poor practice example: "Wear false nails for Pt care" 
MSSA recovered from back, pocket, and sleeves 
Students report occasional or infrequent WC laundering 
Authors suggest hospitals provide laundered WCs for students 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
16 participants had never cleaned their tie; 20 participants could not remember when 
tie last cleaned 
Bacterial counts from ties significantly higher than those paired from shirts 
Significant fraction of physicians (16) had Staphylococcus aureus isolated from clothes 
Apparel infrequently laundered (ties) associated with higher bacterial burden 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
Study with PFGE linking environmental isolates, gowns/gloves, and Pts in >80% of 
cases (Acinetobacter, MDR Pseudomonas, MRSA) 
Contamination of gowns/gloves during care of MDRO Pts most frequent with A. 
baumannii 
Environmental contamination major determinant of transmission to HCW gloves/ 
gowns 
Environmental cultures related to gowns/gloves more than clothing 
MRSA, VRE, and Clostridium difficile recovered 
Bacterial contamination of hospital-supplied apparel present at start of shift and in-
creased by end of shift: 
•
 Start shift: 39% of uniforms positive with >1 microorganism 
•
 End shift: 54% of uniforms positive with >1 microorganism 
All uniforms laundered at home 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
Contaminated inanimate surfaces (eg, laminates, textiles) associated with bacterial 
transfer to fingers: Escherichia coli, Salmonella species, MSSA 
Ties of orthopedic surgeons heavily colonized with pathogens 
295 bacterial isolates: 45% were Bacillus cereus, CNS, GNRs, S. aureus 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
 TABLE 2 (Continued) 
Lead author, year 
Methodology 
Findings 
Treakle, 200934 
Wiener-Well, 201138 
Willis-Owen, 201041 
Wilson, 20075S 
Wong, 199135 
Wright, 201254 
Cross-sectional study 
Attendees (n = 149) of medical and surgical grand rounds at a 
large teaching hospital 
Sampled WCs for growth 
Cross-sectional convenience sample of MDs/RNs (« = 135) with 
survey and cultures of uniforms/WC 
Prospective, cross-sectional, observational study (n = 92) 
Agar imprints of MD hands from multiple specialties during nor-
mal work day (49 BBE, 43 not) 
No. of CFU graded light (<10), moderate (10-20), or heavy (>20) 
with presence of pathogens recorded 
Systematic review of published literature 
Cross-sectional survey 
Bacterial contamination of WCs in a British hospital 
Outbreak report 
Cluster of 3 Pts with deep sternal wound infections due to Gor-
donia species 
34 (23%) WCs grew S. aureus; 6 (18%) were MRSA 
No VRE recovered 
Large fraction of HCP WCs contaminated with S. aureus, including MRSA 
WCs may be vectors of S. aureus transmission 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
Nearly all HCW clothing heavily contaminated with skin flora, 63% with potential 
pathogens (Acinetobacter species, S. aureus, Enterobacteriaceae) 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
No significant difference in either CFU or pathogens in BBE vs no BBE 
No MDRO cultured from MD hands 
Participants not given an opportunity for hand hygiene prior to enrollment 
Study does not identify group for the 50% of MDs who wore uniforms with antibac-
terial properties 
Authors concluded that BBE per se does not have impact on degree of contamination 
on MD hands and BBE initiative should not divert from other important mea-
sures, such as hand hygiene, appropriate Pt: RN ratios 
HCW uniforms and WCs can become progressively contaminated with bacteria of 
low pathogenicity (from HCWs) and mixed pathogenicity (from environment) 
Data do not support role of apparel as vehicles for cross-transmission 
25% MSSA contamination of WCs for both physicians and surgeons (cuffs, pockets) 
Degree of contamination associated with increased frequency of WC usage 
No data reported on cross-transmission to Pts 
Same species in RN anesthetist, her clothing, her roommate, and her roommate's 
clothing; home laundering of scrubs implicated (but not confirmed) as origin of 
staff clothing colonization 
Reminder that home laundering scrubs can be problematic 
NOTE. BBE, bare below elbows; CNS, coagulase-negative staphylococci; GNR, gram-negative rod; HAI, healthcare-associated infection; HCP, healthcare personnel; HCW, healthcare 
worker; HH, hand hygiene; ICU, intensive care unit; InPt, inpatient; LTCF, long-term care facility, MD, physician; MDR, multidrug resistant; MDRO, multidrug-resistant organism; 
MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA, methicillin-susceptible S. aureus; NHS, National Health Service; OutPt, outpatient; PFGE, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis; 
Pt, patient; RN, nurse; VRE, vancomycin-resistant enterococci; WC, white coat. 
 SHEA EXPERT GUIDANCE: HEALTHCARE PERSONNEL ATTIRE 
119 
tailing the supervisor's administrative responsibilities to more 
specific consequences for employee noncompliance. 
Three institutions recommended clothing (such as color-
coded attire) for specific types of caregivers (eg, nurses, 
nurses' assistants, etc). Policies specific to clinical personnel 
were most frequently related to surgical attire, including 
scrubs, use of masks, head covers, and footwear in restricted 
and semirestricted areas and surgical suites, and to central 
processing, as consistent with AORN standards. Scrubs were 
universally provided by the hospital in these settings. Laun-
dering policies clearly indicated that laundering of hospital-
provided scrubs was to be performed by the hospital or at a 
hospital-accredited facility. Use of masks, head covers, foot-
wear, and jewelry were generally consistent with AORN 
standards. 
Excluding surgical attire, only one institution provided 
guidance specific to physicians, outlining a recommendation 
for BBE attire during patient care. This policy specified not 
to use white coats, neckties, long sleeves, wristwatches, or 
bracelets. Institutional policies also varied in recommenda-
tions for laundering and change of clothing other than for 
surgical attire. No specific guidance was issued for other uni-
forms, other than cleanliness and absence of visible soiling; 
however, one institution referred to infection control speci-
fications for maintenance of clothing. Guidance regarding 
frequency of clothing change was variable for scrubs, from 
nonspecific requirements (eg, wearing freshly laundered sur-
gical attire on entry to restricted/semirestricted areas) to spe-
cific requirements (clean scrubs once per shift to once daily 
and if visibly soiled). In addition, most policies included in-
structions for HCP to remove scrubs and change into street 
clothes either at the end of the shift or when leaving the 
hospital or connected buildings. 
VII. Survey Results 
A total of 337 SHEA members and members of the SHEA 
Research Network (21.7% response of 1,550 members) re-
sponded to the survey regarding their institutions' policies 
for HCP attire. The majority of respondents worked at hos-
pitals (91%); additional facilities included freestanding chil-
dren's hospitals (4%), freestanding clinics (1%), and other 
facility types (5%), such as long-term acute care hospitals, 
multihospital systems, short-term nursing facilities, and re-
habilitation hospitals (rounding of numbers accounts for the 
sum of percentages being greater than 100). The majority of 
responses were from either university/teaching hospitals 
(39%) or university/teaching-affiliated hospitals (28%). We 
received additional responses from nonteaching hospitals 
(24%), Veterans Affairs hospitals (3%), specialty hospitals 
(2%), and miscellaneous facilities (4%). 
Enforcement of HCP attire policies was low at 11%. A 
majority of respondents (65%) felt that the role of HCP attire 
in the transmission of pathogens within the healthcare setting 
was very important or somewhat important. 
Only 12% of facilities encouraged short sleeves, and 7% 
enforced or monitored this policy. Pertaining to white coats, 
only 5% discouraged their use and, of those that did, 13% 
enforced or monitored this policy. For watches and jewelry, 
20% of facilities had a policy encouraging their removal. A 
majority of respondents (61%) stated that their facility did 
not have policies regarding scrubs, scrub-like uniforms, or 
white coats in nonclinical areas. Thirty-one percent re-
sponded that their hospital policy stated that scrubs must be 
removed before leaving the hospital, while 13% stated that 
scrubs should not be worn in nonclinical areas. Neckties were 
discouraged in 8% of facilities, but none monitored or en-
forced this policy. 
Although 43% of respondents stated that their hospitals 
issued scrubs or uniforms, only 36% of facilities actually laun-
dered scrubs or uniforms. A small number of hospitals pro-
vided any type of guidance on home laundering: 13% pro-
vided specific policies regarding home laundering, while 38% 
did not. 
In contrast to other items of HCP attire, half of facilities 
required specific types of footwear, and 63% enforced and/ 
or monitored this policy. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, patients express preferences for certain types of attire, 
with most surveys indicating a preference for formal attire, 
including a preference for a white coat. However, patient 
comfort, satisfaction, trust, and confidence in their physicians 
is unlikely to be affected by the practitioner's attire choice. 
The ability to identify a HCP was consistently reported as 
one of the most important attributes of HCP attire in studies. 
This was particularly true in studies that evaluated the effect 
of attire of actual physicians on patient satisfaction in a real-
world setting rather than those assessing the influence of 
physician attire on patient satisfaction in the abstract. Patients 
generally did not perceive white coats, formal attire, or ties 
as posing infection risks; however, when informed of potential 
risks associated with certain types of attire, patients were 
willing to change their preferences for physician attire.1118 
Data from convenience-sample surveys and prospective 
studies confirm that contamination occurs for all types of 
HCP apparel, including scrubs, neckties, and white coats, with 
pathogens such as S. aureus, MRSA, VRE, and gram-negative 
bacilli. HCP apparel can hypothetically serve as a vector for 
pathogen cross-transmission in healthcare settings; however, 
no clinical data yet exist to define the impact of HCP apparel 
on transmission. The benefit of institutional laundering of 
HCP scrubs versus home laundering for non-OR use remains 
unproven. A BBE approach is in effect in the United Kingdom 
for inpatient care; this strategy may enhance hand hygiene 
to the level of the wrist, but its impact on HAI rates remains 
unknown. 
Hospital policies regarding HCP attire were generally con-
sistent in their approach to surgical attire; however, general 
 120 
INFECTION CONTROL AND HOSPITAL EPIDEMIOLOGY 
FEBRUARY 2 0 1 4 , VOL. 35, NO. 2 
dress code policies varied from guidance regarding formal 
attire to use of job-specific uniforms. Laundering and change 
of clothing was also not consistently addressed other than for 
surgical attire. Finally, accountability for compliance with the 
attire policies by HCP and supervisors was not routinely in-
cluded in the policies. 
AREAS FOR FUTURE 
RESEARCH 
I. Determine the role played by HCP attire in the horizontal 
transmission of nosocomial pathogens and its impact on 
the burden of HAIs. 
II. Evaluate the impact of antimicrobial fabrics on the bac-
terial burden of HCP attire, horizontal transmission of 
pathogens, and HAIs. Concomitantly, a cost-benefit anal-
ysis should be conducted to determine the financial merit 
of this approach. 
III. Establish the effect of a BBE policy on both the horizontal 
transmission of nosocomial pathogens and the incidence 
of HAIs. 
IV. Explore the behavioral determinants of laundering prac-
tices among HCP regarding different apparel and examine 
potential interventions to decrease barriers and improve 
compliance with laundering. 
V. Examine the impact of not wearing white coats on pa-
tients' and colleagues' perceptions of professionalism on 
the basis of HCP variables (eg, gender, age). 
VI. Evaluate the impact of compliance with hand hygiene 
and standard precautions on contamination of HCP 
apparel. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Financial support. This study was supported in part by the SHEA Research 
Network. 
Potential conflicts of interest. G.B. reports receiving grants from Pfizer, 
Cardinal Health, BioVigil, and Vestagen Technical Textiles. M.E.R. reports 
receiving research grants/contracts from 3M and having an advisory/con-
sultant role with 3M, Ariste, Care Fusion, and Molnlycke. All other authors 
report no conflicts of interest relevant to this article. 
Address correspondence to Gonzalo Bearman MD, MPH, Virginia Com-
monwealth University, Internal Medicine, Richmond, V
A 23298 (gbearman 
@mcvh-vcu.edu). 
REFERENCES 
1. Ardolino A, Williams LA, Crook TB, Taylor HP. Bare below the 
elbows: what do patients think? / Hosp Infect 2009;71:291-293. 
2. Baevsky RH, Fisher AL, Smithline HA, Salzberg MR. The influ-
ence of physician attire on patient satisfaction. Acad Emerg Med 
1998;5:82-84. 
3. Bond L, Clamp PJ, Gray K, Van DV. Patients' perceptions of 
doctors' clothing: should we really be "bare below the elbow"? 
/ Laryngol Otol 2010;124:963-966. 
4. Cha A, Hecht BR, Nelson K, Hopkins MP. Resident physician 
attire: does it make a difference to our patients? Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2004;190:1484-1488. 
5. Ditchburne I. Should doctors wear ties? / Hosp Infect 2006;63: 
227-228. 
6. Fischer RL, Hansen CE, Hunter RL, Veloski JJ. Does physician 
attire influence patient satisfaction in an outpatient obstetrics 
and gynecology setting? Am } Obstet Gynecol 2007;196:186e.l-
186e.5. 
7. Gallagher J, Waldron LF, Stack J, Barragry J. Dress and address: 
patient preferences regarding doctor's style of dress and patient 
interaction. Ir Med } 2008;101:211-213. 
8. Gherardi G, Cameron J, West A, Crossley M. Are we dressed to 
impress? a descriptive survey assessing patients' preference of 
doctors' attire in the hospital setting. Clin Med 2009;9:519-524. 
9. Gonzalez del Rey JA, Paul RL Preferences of parents for pediatric 
emergency physicians' attire. Pediatr Emerg Care 1995;11:361-
364. 
10. Hennessy N, Harrison DA, Aitkenhead AR. The effect of the 
anaesthetist's attire on patient attitudes: the influence of dress 
on patient perception of the anaesthetist's prestige. Anaesthesia 
1993;48:219-222. 
11. Hueston WJ, Carek SM. Patients' preference for physician attire: 
a survey of patients in family medicine training practices. Earn 
Med 2011;43:643-647. 
12. Ikusaka M, Kamegai M, Sunaga T, et al. Patients' attitude toward 
consultations by a physician without a white coat in Japan. Intern 
Med 1999;38:533-536. 
13. Li SF, Haber M. Patient attitudes toward emergency physician 
attire. / Emerg Med 2005;29:1-3. 
14. Major K, Hayase Y, Balderrama D, Lefor AT. Attitudes regarding 
surgeons' attire. Am J Surg 2005;190:103-106. 
15. Matsui D, Cho M, Rieder MJ. Physicians' attire as perceived by 
young children and their parents: the myth of the white coat 
syndrome. Pediatr Emerg Care 1998;14:198-201. 
16. McKinstry B, Wang JX. Putting on the style: what patients think 
of the way their doctor dresses. Br } Gen Pract 1991;41:270, 275-
278. 
17. Mistry D, Tahmassebi JF. Children's and parents' attitudes to-
wards dentists' attire. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent 2009;10:237-240. 
18. Monkhouse SJ, Collis SA, Dunn JJ, Bunni J. Patients' attitudes 
to surgical dress: a descriptive study in a district general hospital. 
/ Hosp Infect 2008;69:408-409. 
19. Nair BR, Attia JR, Mears SR, Hitchcock KI. Evidence-based 
physicians' dressing: a crossover trial. Med JAust 2002; 177:681-
682. 
20. Niederhauser A, Turner MD, Chauhan SP, Magann EF, Morrison 
JC. Physician attire in the military setting: does it make a dif-
ference to our patients? Mil Med 2009;174:817-820. 
21. Palazzo S, Hocken DB. Patients' perspectives on how doctors 
dress. / Hosp Infect 2010;74:30-34. 
22. Rehman SU, Nietert PJ, Cope DW, Kilpatrick AO. What to wear 
today? effect of doctor's attire on the trust and confidence of 
patients. Am J Med 2005;118:1279-1286. 
23. Shelton CL, Raistrick C, Warburton K, Siddiqui KH. Can 
changes in clinical attire reduce likelihood of cross-infection 
without jeopardising the doctor-patient relationship? / Hosp In-
fect 2010;74:22-29. 
24. Baxter JA, Dale O, Morritt A, Pollock JC. Bare below the elbows: 
professionalism vs infection risk. Bull R Coll Surg Engl 2010;92: 
248-251. 
 SHEA EXPERT GUIDANCE: HEALTHCARE PERSONNEL ATTIRE 
121 
25. Toquero L, Abournarzouk O, Owers C, Chiang R, Thiagarajah 
S, Amin S. Bare below the elbows—the patient's perspective. 
WebmedCentral Qual Patient Sa/2011;2:WMC001401. 
26. Garvin K, Ali F, Neradelik M, Pottinger P. Attitudes regarding 
the safety of healthcare provider attire. Presented at IDWeek, 
October 8-12, 2012, Philadelphia, PA. Poster 455. 
27. Munoz-Price LS, Arheart KL, Lubarsky DA, Birnbach DJ. Dif-
ferential laundering practices of white coats and scrubs among 
health care professionals. Am J Infect Control 2013;41:565-567. 
28. Burden M, Cervantes L, Weed D, Keniston A, Price CS, Albert 
RK. Newly cleaned physician uniforms and infrequently washed 
white coats have similar rates of bacterial contamination after 
an 8-hour workday: a randomized controlled trial. / Hosp Med 
2011;6:177-182. 
29. Gaspard P, Eschbach E, Gunther D, Gayet S, Bertrand X, Talon 
D. Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus contamination of 
healthcare workers' uniforms in long-term care facilities. / Hosp 
Infect 2009;71:170-175. 
30. Loh W, Ng W, Holton J. Bacterial flora on the white coats of 
medical students. / Hosp Infect 2000;45:65-68. 
31. Lopez PJ, Ron O, Parthasarathy P, Soothill J, Spitz L. Bacterial 
counts from hospital doctors' ties are higher than those from 
shirts. Am J Infect Control 2009;37:79-80. 
32. Morgan DJ, Rogawski E, Thom KA, et al. Transfer of multidrug-
resistant bacteria to healthcare workers' gloves and gowns after 
patient contact increases with environmental contamination. 
Crit Care Med 2012;40:1045-1051. 
33. Perry C, Marshall R, Jones E. Bacterial contamination of uni-
forms. / Hosp Infect 2001;48:238-241. 
34. Treakle AM, Thom KA, Furuno JP, Strauss SM, Harris AD, 
Perencevich EN. Bacterial contamination of health care workers' 
white coats. Am J Infect Control 2009;37:101-105. 
35. Wong D, Nye K, Hollis P. Microbial flora on doctors' white 
coats. BM/ 1991;303:1602-1604. 
36. Bearman GM, Rosato A, Elam K, et al. A crossover trial of 
antimicrobial scrubs to reduce methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus burden on healthcare worker apparel. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:268-275. 
37. Steinlechner C, Wilding G, Cumberland N. Microbes on ties: 
do they correlate with wound infection? Bull R Coll Surg Engl 
2002:84:307-309. 
38. Wiener-Well Y, Galuty M, Rudensky B, Schlesinger Y, Attias D, 
Yinnon AM. Nursing and physician attire as possible source of 
nosocomial infections. Am J Infect Control 2011;39:555-559. 
39. Munoz-Price LS, Arheart KL, Mills JP, et al. Associations be-
tween bacterial contamination of health care workers' hands 
and contamination of white coats and scrubs. Am J Infect Control 
2012;40:e245-e248. 
40. Burger A, Wijewardena C, Clayson S, Greatorex RA. Bare below 
elbows: does this policy affect handwashing efficacy and reduce 
bacterial colonisation? Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2011;93:13-16. 
41. Willis-Owen CA, Subramanian P, Kumari P, Houlihan-Burne 
D. Effects of "bare below the elbows" policy on hand contam-
ination of 92 hospital doctors in a district general hospital. / 
Hosp Infect 2010;75:116-119. 
42. Farrington RM, Rabindran J, Crocker G, Ali R, Pollard N, Dal-
ton HR. "Bare below the elbows" and quality of hand washing: 
a randomised comparison study. / Hosp Infect 2010;74:86-88. 
43. Jacob G. Uniforms and Workwear: An Evidence Base for Devel-
oping Local Policy. National Health Service Department of 
Health Policy, 2007. 
44. Blaser MJ, Smith PF, Cody HJ, Wang WL, LaForce FM. Killing 
of fabric-associated bacteria in hospital laundry by low-tem-
perature washing. / Infect Dis 1984;149:48-57. 
45. Patel SN, Murray-Leonard J, Wilson AP. Laundering of hospital 
staff uniforms at home. / Hosp Infect 2006;62:89-93. 
46. Lakdawala N, Pham J, Shah M, Holton J. Effectiveness of low-
temperature domestic laundry on the decontamination of 
healthcare workers' uniforms. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2011;32:1103-1108. 
47. Occupational Safety and Health Administration Bloodborne 
Pathogens Standard, 29 CFR 1910.1030 (2013). 
48. Yoshikawa T, Kidouchi K, Kimura S, Okubo T, Perry J, Jagger 
J. Needlestick injuries to the feet of Japanese healthcare workers: 
a culture-specific exposure risk. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2007;28:215-218. 
49. Chiu MC, Wang MJ. Professional footwear evaluation for clin-
ical nurses. Appl Ergon 2007;38:133-141. 
50. Blanchard J. Wearing shoe covers and appropriate footwear in 
the OR. AORNJ 2010;92:228-229. 
51. Barr J, Siegel D. Dangers of dermatologic surgery: protect your 
feet. Dermatol Surg 2004;30:1495-1497. 
52. Watt AM, Parkin M, Sinnott MJ, Black RJ, Maddern GJ. Scalpel 
safety in the operative setting: a systematic review. Surgery 2010; 
147:98-106. 
53. Munoz-Price LS, Birnbach DJ, Lubarsky DA, et al. Decreasing 
operating 
room 
environmental 
pathogen 
contamination 
through improved cleaning practice. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol 2012;33:897-904. 
54. Wright SN, Gerry JS, Busowski MT, et al. Gordonia hronchialis 
sternal wound infection in 3 patients following open heart sur-
gery: intraoperative transmission from a healthcare worker. In-
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:1238-1241. 
55. Uneke CJ, Ijeoma PA. The potential for nosocomial infection 
transmission by white coats used by physicians in Nigeria: im-
plications for improved patient-safety initiatives. World Health 
Popul 2010;11:44-54. 
56. Banu A, Anand M, Nagi N. White coats as a vehicle for bacterial 
dissemination. / Clin Diagn Res 2012;6:1381-1384. 
57. Priya H, Acharya S, Bhat M, Ballal M. Microbial contamination 
of the white coats of dental staff in the clinical setting. / Dent 
Res Dent Clin Dent Prospects 2009;3:136-140. 
58. Scott E, Bloomfield SF. The survival and transfer of microbial 
contamination via cloths, hands and utensils. / Appl Bacterial 
1990;68:271-278. 
59. Wilson JA, Loveday HP, Hoffman PN, Pratt RJ. Uniform: an 
evidence review of the microbiological significance of uniforms 
and uniform policy in the prevention and control of healthcare-
associated infections. Report to the Department of Health (En-
gland). / Hosp Infect 2007;66:301-307. 
