 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 7 1973–1989
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170495
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
1973
IntroductIon
Listeria monocytogenes is a Gram-positive, facultative in-
tracellular bacterium that can contaminate food which, 
upon ingestion, can result in infection of a wide range of 
animals, including livestock and humans (Vázquez-Boland 
et al., 2001). The severity and extent of L. monocytogenes 
infection is determined by the virulence of the bacterial 
strain and the host’s immune status. Ingestion of L. mono-
cytogenes–contaminated food by immune-competent indi-
viduals is often limited to gastroenteritis that resolves in a 
few days, with clearance of the pathogen from the intestine 
(Dalton et al., 1997; Aureli et al., 2000). Pregnant women, 
infants, older adults, and immunocompromised individuals, 
particularly cancer patients, are at risk for systemic L. mono-
cytogenes infections (Vázquez-Boland et al., 2001; Swamina-
than and Gerner-Smidt, 2007). The remarkable capacity of 
 
L. monocytogenes to infect the placenta (Lecuit, 2005; Ges-
sain et al., 2015) can result in septic abortion and neonatal in-
fection, whereas in immunocompromised adults, bacteremia 
and meningo-encephalitis are the major syndromes associated 
with L. monocytogenes infection (Goulet et al., 2012). Pa-
tients with cancer have some of the highest incidences of sys-
temic L. monocytogenes infection (Mook et al., 2011; Goulet 
et al., 2012), and, whereas cell-mediated immune function 
may be compromised in these patients (Pamer, 2004), pre-
disposing factors in humans to L. monocytogenes infection 
remain incompletely defined.
L. monocytogenes outbreaks are associated with food 
contamination (CEN 
TERS FOR DIS 
EASE CON 
TROL 
AND PRE 
VEN 
TION (CDC), 2016); however, most liste-
riosis cases that occur in immunocompromised hosts are 
sporadic and likely result from ingestion of low numbers of 
bacteria that are known to contaminate many foods meant to 
be cooked before ingestion (Pinner et al., 1992; Schuchat et 
al., 1992). In the general population, exposure to L. mono-
cytogenes and asymptomatic clearance are believed to occur 
several times per year (Grif et al., 2003).
Mice are considered relatively resistant to oral infec-
tion with L. monocytogenes, but can develop disseminated 
infection upon oral inoculation with very high doses of 
 
L. monocytogenes (Bou Ghanem et al., 2012; Hoelzer et al., 
2012). Dissemination from the gut requires L. monocyto-
genes to traverse the intestinal epithelium, either by transcy-
tosis of M cells into Peyer’s patches (MacDonald and Carter, 
1980; Marco et al., 1997; Pron et al., 1998; Corr et al., 2006; 
Chiba et al., 2011; Bou Ghanem et al., 2012), or by binding 
of the bacterial invasion protein internalin A (InlA) with its 
ligand, E-cadherin (E-cad; Lecuit et al., 1999). The relative 
resistance of mice, compared with humans, to oral infection 
with L. monocytogenes results, in part, from reduced affin-
ity of InlA for murine, as opposed to human E-cad. Indeed, 
Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen that causes septicemia, meningitis and chorioamnionitis and is associated 
with high mortality. Immunocompetent humans and animals, however, can tolerate high doses of L. monocytogenes without 
developing systemic disease. the intestinal microbiota provides colonization resistance against many orally acquired pathogens, 
and antibiotic-mediated depletion of the microbiota reduces host resistance to infection. Here we show that a diverse micro-
biota markedly reduces Listeria monocytogenes colonization of the gut lumen and prevents systemic dissemination. Antibiotic 
administration to mice before low dose oral inoculation increases L. monocytogenes growth in the intestine. In immunodefi-
cient or chemotherapy-treated mice, the intestinal microbiota provides nonredundant defense against lethal, disseminated 
infection. We have assembled a consortium of commensal bacteria belonging to the clostridiales order, which exerts in vitro 
antilisterial activity and confers in vivo resistance upon transfer into germ free mice. thus, we demonstrate a defensive role of 
the gut microbiota against Listeria monocytogenes infection and identify intestinal commensal species that, by enhancing 
resistance against this pathogen, represent potential probiotics.
Commensal microbes provide first line defense against 
Listeria monocytogenes infection
Simone Becattini,1 Eric R. Littmann,2 Rebecca A. Carter,1 Sohn G. Kim,1 Sejal M. Morjaria,3 
Lilan Ling,2 
Yangtsho Gyaltshen,2 Emily Fontana,2 
Ying Taur,2,3 Ingrid M. Leiner,1 and Eric G. Pamer1,2,3
1Immunology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, 2Lucille Castori Center for Microbes Inflammation and Cancer, Molecular Microbiology Core Facility, and 
3Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
© 2017 Becattini et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Simone Becattini: becattis@mskcc.org;Eric G. Pamer: pamere@
mskcc.org
Abbreviations used: FMT, fecal microbiota transplantation; MNVC, metronida-
zole-neomycin-vancomycin-clindamycin; Strepto, Streptomycin.
on June 3, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20170495
Published Online: 6 June, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1974
the efficiency of murine L. monocytogenes infection can be 
increased by transgenic expression of human E-cad in mice 
(Lecuit et al., 2001) or mutagenesis of InlA to increase its 
affinity for murine E-cad (Wollert et al., 2007). Nevertheless, 
even with optimized InlA/E-cad affinities, murine infection 
requires high doses of orally administered L. monocytogenes, 
suggesting that other mechanisms limit in vivo L. monocy-
togenes virulence (Lecuit et al., 2001; Wollert et al., 2007; 
Bou Ghanem et al., 2012).
The intestinal microbiota provides resistance against 
orally acquired bacterial pathogens (Buffie and Pamer, 2013). 
Commensal microbes that constitute the microbiota di-
rectly inhibit potential pathogens by producing bacteriocins 
and by nutrient depletion and also indirectly by induction 
of host defense pathways, such as expression of defensins 
and bactericidal C-type lectins. We hypothesized that resis-
tance of mice and humans to L. monocytogenes infection 
might depend on the intestinal microbiota and that antibi-
otic-mediated damage to the microbiota, in particular in im-
munocompromised hosts, would increase susceptibility to L. 
monocytogenes infection. Herein, we show that an intact, di-
verse microbiota inhibits L. monocytogenes growth and that 
antibiotic administration to mice before L. monocytogenes 
inoculation decreases the inoculum required for systemic in-
fection to as few as 100 CFUs. Antibiotic-mediated damage 
to the microbiota enables L. monocytogenes to expand in 
the host intestine and to traverse the epithelial barrier. This 
has particularly dramatic consequences for immunocompro-
mised or chemotherapy-treated mice, promoting lethal in-
fection even with small inocula. We have identified a subset 
of commensal bacteria that confer protection against oral L. 
monocytogenes infection, suggesting that the microbiota of 
vulnerable hosts can be augmented to enhance resistance 
against this important pathogen.
resuLts
Antibiotic treatment results in increased susceptibility  
to L. monocytogenes infection
To determine the extent to which the intestinal microbiota 
provides resistance against oral infection with L. monocyto-
genes, we treated C57BL/6 mice from The Jackson Labora-
tory with one dose of clindamycin, followed by oral gavage 
24 h later with a sublethal dose of L. monocytogenes. Clinda-
mycin treatment markedly increased the duration and mag-
nitude of L. monocytogenes carriage in the intestinal lumen 
and tissue (Fig. 1 A). The density of L. monocytogenes CFUs 
in the intestinal lumen directly correlated with pathogen 
burden in the intestinal wall (Fig. 1 B). Colonies recovered 
on selective growth plates were further screened by PCR 
for the L. monocytogenes p60 gene (Fig. S1). The kinetics of 
luminal clearance of L. monocytogenes were similar in WT 
and Rag1−/− mice, indicating that B and T lymphocytes of 
the adaptive immune system do not contribute to pathogen 
elimination between days 1 and 6 (Fig. 1, C and D). Some 
Rag1−/− mice continued to excrete L. monocytogenes in 
their feces 10 d after inoculation, possibly as a result of de-
fective CD8+ T cell-mediated clearance of systemic infection 
(Andersson et al., 1998; Bregenholt et al., 2001).
A single dose of streptomycin, which markedly enhances 
murine susceptibility to Salmonella infection (Bohnhoff and 
Miller, 1962), or a cocktail of four antibiotics (metronidazole, 
neomycin, vancomycin, and clindamycin [MNVC]), also re-
sulted in robust expansion of L. monocytogenes (Fig. 1 E) 
and increased morbidity (Fig. 1 F
,G). At day 3 after infection, 
edema, inflammatory cell infiltration, and epithelial cell shed-
ding were detected in the intestinal tissue of infected anti-
biotic-treated, but not PBS-treated, mice (Fig. 1 F). Weight 
loss, the combined pathology score (Abt et al., 2015), and 
mortality were consistently increased in antibiotic-treated 
mice (Fig. 1 G). Treatment of mice with streptomycin in-
duced the highest level of susceptibility, potentially because 
L. monocytogenes 10403s, the strain used in these studies, is 
highly resistant to this antibiotic, whereas residual neomycin, 
vancomycin, and clindamycin might inhibit L. monocyto-
genes (Fig. S2). We detected high bacterial loads in spleen 
and liver of antibiotic-treated mice (unpublished data), in-
dicating that antibiotic-mediated compromise of the micro-
biota predisposes to severe, disseminated L. monocytogenes 
infection by enabling pathogen expansion in the intestinal 
lumen and increasing penetration into the intestinal tissue 
and the systemic circulation.
small inocula or gut-resident L. monocytogenes can 
promote infection upon dysbiosis
Inoculation of mice with as few as 102 CFUs (∼10−7 * LD50) 
after streptomycin treatment resulted in high-density coloni-
zation of the intestinal lumen with weight loss, signs of dis-
tress, and diarrhea and fecal shedding persisting for over 10 
d (Fig. 2 A,B and not depicted). Despite the low inoculum 
size, L. monocytogenes penetrated the epithelium, infiltrated 
mesenteric lymph nodes, and spread to spleen and liver in 
antibiotic-treated, but not PBS-treated, mice (Fig. 2 C). 
These 
results indicate that microbiota-mediated colonization resis-
tance against L. monocytogenes is a major contributor to the 
high level of murine resistance to oral infection.
Roughly 0.5–5% of the human population transiently 
and asymptomatically carries low levels L. monocytogenes in 
the gastrointestinal tract (Bojsen-Moller, 1964; Kampelmacher 
and van Noorle Jansen, 1969; MacGowan et al., 1994; Cobb 
et al., 1996; Grif et al., 2003). T
o determine whether antibi-
otic-mediated microbiota depletion in mice with low-level 
L. monocytogenes colonization of the gut could lead to 
blooming of L. monocytogenes, we orally infected mice and 
fecal pellets were cultured daily until L. monocytogenes was 
undetectable (detection limit = 100 CFU/g feces). Once 
 
L. monocytogenes became undetectable in feces, it could not 
be cultured from intestinal and abdominal organs, including 
the gallbladder, which was previously suggested to be a reser-
voir for L. monocytogenes in infected BALB/c mice (Hardy 
et al., 2004; Bou Ghanem et al., 2012; Fig. 2 D), but appears 
 1975
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
less permissive to the growth of the pathogen in C57BL/6 
mice, at least at relatively low doses of infection (Bou Ghanem 
et al., 2012). Upon virtual clearance, mice were treated with 
streptomycin, which resulted in a marked bloom of L. mono-
cytogenes (Fig. 2 E). Administration of streptomycin at differ-
ent times after infection demonstrated that a high proportion 
of mice harbor L. monocytogenes 11 d (∼80%), 16 d (∼40%), 
and 21 d (∼20%) after infection (Fig. 2 F), longer than pre-
Figure 1. Antibiotic treatment predisposes to severe L. monocytogenes infection. (A) L. monocytogenes (Lm) burden in antibiotic-treated mice. WT 
mice were treated with a single i.p. injection of clindamycin or PBS and infected orally 24 h later with 107 Lm 10403s CFUs. At each time point, animals 
were euthanized and the total number of Lm CFUs was determined by plating homogenized organs or intestinal content (n = 4 per time point, from two 
independent experiments). (B) Spearman correlation between Lm CFUs recovered from the intestinal content and wall of mice shown in A, for small and 
large intestine. (C and D) WT and Rag1−/− (Rag) mice were cohoused for 3 wk, then injected i.p. with a single dose of clindamycin and infected 24 h later 
with 107 Lm CFUs. Survival (C) and fecal shedding (D) of Lm were monitored over time (geometric means + geometric SD are shown; n = 10 per group; from 
two independent experiments). (E) Lm burden in feces 1 d after infection with 108 Lm CFUs of mice treated with either streptomycin or a combination of 
metronidazole, neomycin, vancomycin, and clindamycin (MNVC). Antibiotic treatment was terminated 1 d before infection in both cases (n = 9–13; Krus-
kal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison correction). (F) Representative H&E staining of colonic tissue from mice treated as in E, 3 d after infection 
(arrows indicate edema and stars indicate cellular infiltration; Bar, 200 µm). (G) Weight loss, pathology score (see Materials and methods) and survival of 
mice treated as in E (n = 13–17 per group; means + SD; Two way ANO 
VA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test and Log-Rank (Mantel-Cox) for survival). 
 
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.005; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1976
viously appreciated (Huleatt et al., 2001). Thus, despite neg-
ative fecal cultures, residual L. monocytogenes bacteria can 
undergo expansion when microbiota-mediated colonization 
resistance is impaired by antibiotic administration.
the gut microbiota provides nonredundant protection 
against L. monocytogenes in immunocompromised hosts
To investigate the contribution of the microbiota to resis-
tance against oral L. monocytogenes infection in immuno-
compromised hosts, we infected Rag2−/−Il2rg−/− (Raggc) 
mice, which lack T and B cells, as well as NK cells and innate 
lymphoid cells (ILCs), and are known the be highly suscep-
tible to oral L. monocytogenes infection (Bregenholt et al., 
2001). We confirmed that Raggc mice orally inoculated with 
L. monocytogenes doses that are sublethal for WT mice rap-
idly lose weight and succumb to infection (Fig. 2 A and not 
depicted). Interestingly, although it was originally proposed 
that lack of T cells accounted for marked susceptibility, we 
only detected increased susceptibility to oral L. monocyto-
genes infection in Rag1−/−Ifng−/− double KO mice, but not 
Rag1−/− or Rag1−/−Il17−/− mice, suggesting that type 1 ILCs 
or NK cells, rather than T cells, protect against L. monocyto-
Figure 2. small L. monocytogenes oral inocula spread systemically in antibiotic-treated mice. (A) WT mice were treated with one dose of oral 
streptomycin or PBS and infected 24 h later with 104 or 102 (only streptomycin group) CFUs of L. monocytogenes (Lm). Lm fecal shedding is shown over time 
(mean + SD; n = 8 per group; from two independent experiments). (B) Weight loss for animals shown in A (n = 7–8; n = 3 for streptomycin-only group; from 
two independent experiments; two Way ANO 
VA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons; a comma separates significance values for STR 
EPTO × 104 vs. PBS × 104 
groups and STR 
EPTO × 102 vs. PBS × 104 groups, respectively). (C) Lm burden in the depicted compartments at 3 d after infection, same conditions as in A 
(n = 6; from two independent experiments; Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons). (D) Mice infected with 108 Lm particles were euthanized 
1 d after negative fecal cultures for Lm, and whole organs/intestinal contents were homogenized and plated for Lm detection (n = 6; shown are only mice 
for which colonies where detected). (E) Kinetics of Lm fecal shedding in mice infected with 108 Lm CFUs. Lm presence in the feces was monitored over time, 
and mice were administered 1 dose of streptomycin (salmon arrow) on the first day after fecal cultures became negative for Lm (n = 4; one representative 
of three experiments shown). (F) Percentages of mice bearing Lm at the depicted time points after infection, as assessed using the approach described in 
E, except that in this experiment, mice were maintained in wire floor cages to prevent coprophagy (n = 10 per group; from three different experiments). 
 
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.005; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 1977
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
genes in these settings(Fig. 2 B). This result is consistent with 
previous demonstrations of the importance of early innate 
sources of IFN-γ for effective immune responses in systemic 
L. monocytogenes infection (Dunn and North, 1991 Ladel et 
al., 1996; Thäle and Kiderlen, 2005), although NKs have also 
been shown to reduce resistance during early phases of Listeria 
infection after intravenous inoculation of WT mice (T
eixeira 
and Kaufmann, 1994; Viegas et al., 2013; Clark et al., 2016). 
T
o determine the role of the microbiota in immunocompro-
mised, highly susceptible hosts, we treated Raggc mice with 
PBS or antibiotics (streptomycin, MNVC) and infected them 
orally with a sublethal L. monocytogenes inoculum (Fig. 3, 
C–F). Strikingly, all antibiotic-treated Raggc mice succumbed 
to infection, whereas all PBS-treated Raggc mice survived 
(Fig. 3, D and F). This indicates that the intestinal microbiota 
in immunocompromised hosts provides nonredundant, first 
line defense against L. monocytogenes infection.
Anticancer chemotherapy and antibiotics synergize  
in predisposing the host to listeriosis
Cancer patients have the highest incidence of severe 
 
L. monocytogenes infection (Gillespie et al., 2009; Mook 
et al., 2011; Fernández Guerrero et al., 2012; Goulet et al., 
2012), with some types of cancer resulting in infection rates 
increased by 1,000-fold (Goulet et al., 2012). Although the 
immune-suppressive effects of cancer chemotherapy and ra-
diation therapy might contribute to enhanced susceptibility, 
experimental evidence for their impact on L. monocytogenes 
infection is lacking. Furthermore, a recent study demon-
strated that cancer chemotherapy alters the gut microbiota 
(Viaud et al., 2013), which may increase susceptibility to in-
fections. Review of patients admitted to MSK 
CC with a di-
agnosis of L. monocytogenes infection in the past 20 yr (Fig. 
S3) demonstrated that the majority had been treated with 
multiple chemotherapeutic agents, corticosteroids, or anti-
biotics. T
o determine whether chemotherapy can predispose 
to L. monocytogenes dissemination after oral infection, we 
treated C57BL/6 mice with doxorubicin and cyclophos-
phamide, a commonly used chemotherapy combination for 
a variety of tumors (Alyamkina et al., 2010; Mainetti et al., 
2013), and subsequently infected with L. monocytogenes. 
Chemotherapy reduced the total number of circulating cells 
approximately fourfold, with decreased circulating B cells, 
CD8+ and CD8− T cells, ILCs/NKs, and monocytes (Fig. 4, 
A–C). Severity of L. monocytogenes infection was markedly 
augmented by chemotherapy administration, with increased 
morbidity over a range of inoculum doses (not depicted), 
and 100% mortality (Fig. 4 D). Chemotherapy administra-
Figure 3. Antibiotic treatment predisposes hosts 
with congenic immunodeficiency to lethal listeriosis. 
(A) Rag2−/−Il2rg−/− (Raggc) and WT mice were cohoused 
for 3 wk and infected orally with 108 L. monocytogenes 
(Lm) CFUs. Survival was monitored overtime (n = 3; sim-
ilar results were obtained with a lower infectious dose). 
(B) Mice of the depicted strain were cohoused for 3 wk, 
and then challenged orally with 108 Lm CFUs. Survival 
was monitored overtime (n = 9–15; from three indepen-
dent experiments). (C–F) Raggc mice were administered 
the depicted antibiotics or PBS and infected 24 h later 
with 104 Lm CFUs. (C and F) Show Lm CFUs in feces 1 
d after infection (mean + SD), (D and F) show survival 
rates (n = 6–7 for [A and B]; n = 4 for [C and D], from 
three and two independent experiments, respectively; 
Mann-Withney test for CFU comparison and Log-Rank 
[Mantel-Cox] test for survival.) *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, 
P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1978
tion resulted in higher L. monocytogenes CFUs in the large 
intestine lumen 24 h after infection (Fig. 4 E), suggesting 
that drug-induced dysbiosis or inflammation facilitates L. 
monocytogenes growth, contributing to greater dissemina-
tion. Of note, cyclophosphamide treatment has been shown 
to reduce the abundance of bacterial strains belonging to the 
order Clostridiales in a mouse model (Viaud et al., 2013). 
T
o determine whether antibiotic-induced microbiota pertur-
bation increases susceptibility of chemotherapy-treated mice 
to oral L. monocytogenes infection, chemotherapy recipients 
were treated with streptomycin or PBS before infection with 
a low L. monocytogenes inoculum. In concordance with re-
sults obtained in Raggc mice, streptomycin treatment accen-
tuated chemotherapy-induced susceptibility and resulted in 
increased mortality rates (Fig. 4 F).
commensal microbes efficiently antagonize 
L. monocytogenes ex vivo
Antibiotic-mediated depletion of commensals can reduce 
mucosal and systemic immune defenses (Caballero and 
Pamer, 2015; Becattini et al., 2016) and commensal-driven, 
MyD88-mediated stimuli induce RegIIIγ production by the 
intestinal epithelium and reduce L. monocytogenes growth 
in the small intestine (Brandl et al., 2007, 2008). Alternatively, 
Figure 4. Anticancer chemotherapy and antibiotics synergistically enhance susceptibility to L. monocytogenes infection. (A) Mice were adminis-
tered combined chemotherapy (CHE 
MO) composed of cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin, or PBS, injected twice i.p. (on day 0 and 7). On day 8 mice were 
bled and the white blood cell (WBC) count was determined (n = 14; from three independent experiments). (B) Representative FACS plots of cells obtained as 
in A and stained for markers of interest. (C) Cell numbers for circulating leukocytes identified as in B from mice shown in A (n = 14; lines represent means). 
(D) Survival of PBS- vs. CHE 
MO-treated mice infected 1 d after second treatment (d8) with 106 L. monocytogenes CFUs (n = 5). (E) Lm burden in the colonic 
content of mice treated and infected as in D with 108 Lm CFUs, 1 d after infection. Shown is one representative of two experiments (n = 4). (F) Mice were 
treated as in A, administered either PBS or streptomycin on day 7 (concomitant with the second CHE 
MO administration) and infected 24 h later with 104 
Lm CFUs (n = 12–13; Mann-Whitney test in A, C, and E; Log-Rank test in D and F. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.005; ****, P < 0.0001).
 1979
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
intestinal commensal bacteria can also directly inhibit patho-
gens by competing for nutrients or producing bacteriocins. 
T
o begin to determine how the intestinal microbiota inhib-
its in vivo L. monocytogenes expansion, we performed ex 
vivo experiments to assess if commensals, in the absence of 
host-derived factors, mediate L. monocytogenes clearance. 
Content from small or large intestine was harvested from 
WT mice, resuspended in reduced PBS, and inoculated with 
increasing doses of L. monocytogenes in either anaerobic 
or aerobic conditions. Intestinal contents killed L. monocy-
togenes within 24 h, with small intestinal content demon-
strating greater activity at reducing L. monocytogenes CFUs 
(Fig. 5 A). Large intestinal contents had more variable inhib-
itory activity, but in all cases reduced viable CFUs over 24 h. 
L. monocytogenes grew exponentially in intestinal content 
that had been filtered and cleared of bacteria, indicating that 
neither lack of nutrients in the initial suspension nor presence 
of antimicrobial molecules of host origin account for the bac-
tericidal effect of intestinal contents (Fig. 5 B). Exposure of 
ex vivo cultures to oxygen delayed L. monocytogenes clear-
ance from small intestine content, and abolished clearance 
from large intestine content (Fig. 5 A). These results suggest 
that obligate anaerobic bacteria inhibit and possibly kill L. 
monocytogenes. Intestinal content from mice that had been 
previously treated with antibiotics lost the capacity to elimi-
nate L. monocytogenes, enabling survival (small intestine) or 
expansion (large intestine) of the pathogen (Fig. 5 C). Expo-
sure to oxygen synergized with the effect of antibiotic treat-
ment decreasing the capacity of commensals to antagonize L. 
monocytogenes (Fig. 5 C). This corroborated our hypothesis 
that the enhanced infection and delayed L. monocytogenes 
clearance in antibiotic-treated mice depended on direct ef-
fects on microbiota composition, rather than on indirect con-
sequences on the immune system.
T
o investigate the inhibitory mechanisms operating in 
the aforementioned assays, contents from small or large in-
testine were co-cultured with L. monocytogenes for 24 h, a 
time sufficient to allow inhibitory mechanisms to take place, 
and the resulting culture supernatants were sterile filtered 
(24 h-sup). The supernatants were then inoculated with L. 
monocytogenes or a laboratory strain of E. coli (DH-5α) for 
an additional 24 h (Fig. 5 D). Although 24 h-sups from large 
intestinal contents promoted growth of both L. monocyto-
genes and E. coli, L. monocytogenes was completely elimi-
nated from 8 out of 10 small intestinal 24 h-sups. In contrast, 
E. coli grew exponentially in filtered supernatants, suggesting 
that different mechanisms interfere with Listeria expansion in 
the small and large intestine, some of which are selective and 
discriminate among bacteria.
Overall, our results suggest that bacteria inhabiting 
different intestinal regions efficiently eliminate L. monocy-
togenes by multiple mechanisms; these might include pro-
duction of antibacterial molecules (Zhu et al., 2000; Corr 
et al., 2007; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2013; Vijayakumar and 
Muriana, 2015; Egan et al., 2016; Saraoui et al., 2016), as 
well as nutrient competition (Maltby et al., 2013) or con-
tact-dependent inhibition (Ruhe et al., 2013).
Identification of intestinal commensal bacteria associated 
with protection from L. monocytogenes infection in vivo
T
o identify intestinal commensal species that provide coloni-
zation resistance against L. monocytogenes, we administered 
streptomycin or MNVC to C57BL/6 mice and challenged 
them with an oral inoculum of L. monocytogenes 1, 5, 16, 21, 
or 27 d after completion of antibiotic treatment. Mice were 
euthanized 24 h after infection and L. monocytogenes was 
quantified by culture of intestinal contents, liver, and spleen. 
Small intestine, cecum, or colon contents were also subjected 
to 16S rRNA gene sequencing to determine microbiota 
composition at each time point. High susceptibility to infec-
tion persisted for only 1 d after streptomycin treatment and 
mice fully recovered resistance (i.e., infection levels undistin-
guishable from PBS-treated animals) within 5 d of strepto-
mycin termination. In contrast, MNVC treatment resulted in 
susceptibility to L. monocytogenes intestinal colonization for 
up to 27 d after antibiotic cessation, suggesting that some bac-
terial species crucial for protection were irreversibly ablated 
(Fig. 6 A). L. monocytogenes density in cecum and colon 
content correlated with that in cecum and colon wall and 
the liver (Fig. 6 B). PCoA analysis of 16S sequences demon-
strated that the microbiota of streptomycin-treated mice 
returned to pretreatment composition within 5 d, whereas 
MNVC-treated animals maintained a distinct microbiota 
composition (Fig. 6 C).
Spearman rank correlation analysis between L. mono-
cytogenes susceptibility and bacterial taxa identified by 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing, as previously described (Ubeda et al., 
2013; Buffie et al., 2015), identified several bacterial species 
significantly associated with protection (Fig. 6 D and Table 
S1). The majority of taxa belonged to the order Clostridia-
les (Fig. 6 D and Fig. S4). Although bacteriocin-producing 
bacteria such as Lactobacilli are known to inhibit L. mono-
cytogenes (Zhu et al., 2000; Corr et al., 2007; Delgado et al., 
2007; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2013; Donia et al., 2014), our 
analysis demonstrated a strong negative correlation between 
multiple Clostridiales strains and L. monocytogenes. Clostrid-
iales, however, contribute to protection in various pathologi-
cal contexts, ranging from infection to allergy (Atarashi et al., 
2013; Narushima et al., 2014; Buffie et al., 2015).
commensal clostridiales protect from L. monocytogenes 
infection upon in vivo transfer
To identify specific bacterial strains that can inhibit L. 
monocytogenes growth, we screened a panel of Clos-
tridia strains, including human isolates (Atarashi et al., 
2013), commercially available strains, and isolates from 
mouse stool. A commercially available Lactobacillus gas-
seri strain was included as a positive control, as L. gasseri 
produces at least three toxins that target Gram+ bacteria, 
including L. monocytogenes (Zhu et al., 2000; Delgado 
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1980
et al., 2007; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2013; Donia et al., 
2014). Co-culture with L. monocytogenes under anaero-
bic conditions demonstrated that several bacterial strains 
inhibited L. monocytogenes growth by over three orders 
of magnitude (Fig. 7 A). 
The bacterial strains also inhibited 
L. monocytogenes growth when added to autoclaved cecal 
content (Fig. 7 B and not depicted). We identified four 
strains (C. saccharogumia, C. ramosum, C. hathewayi, and 
B. producta) that consistently reduced L. monocytogenes 
growth under varied culture conditions and that provided 
enhanced antilisterial properties as a consortium (4-Clost 
mix). We next compared L. monocytogenes growth in 
fecal pellets obtained from GF mice reconstituted with ei-
ther the 4-Clost mix or microbiota from antibiotic (MN-
VC)-treated mice (FMT-ABX). Mice reconstituted with 
FMT-ABX or 4-Clost had similar bacterial densities and 
overall microbiota diversity (Fig. 7 C and Fig. S5, A and 
C). Interestingly, only three of the four Clostridiales used 
for reconstitution appeared to engraft, with C. saccha-
rogumia being lost in several animals by day 10 (Fig. S5 
C). Culture of L. monocytogenes in fecal pellets from the 
two groups demonstrated reduced growth in fecal cultures 
derived from 4-Clost mice (Fig. S5B). In vivo challenge 
studies demonstrated that mice reconstituted with 4-Clost 
had markedly lower levels of luminal L. monocytogenes as 
compared with ABX-FMT mice (Fig. 7, D and E). Fur-
thermore, whereas dissemination of L. monocytogenes 
to MLNs, spleen, and liver was not detected or moderate 
in 4-Clost mice, we detected high-level dissemination in 
FMT-ABX mice (Fig. 7 F). Thus, by reducing L. monocy-
togenes burden in the intestinal lumen, the 4-Clost con-
sortium prevented systemic spread of the pathogen.
Figure 5. Intestinal microbes efficiently 
eliminate L. monocytogenes ex vivo, 
through diverse mechanisms. (A) Content 
from small and large intestine was collected 
from WT mice and resuspended in reduced PBS. 
L. monocytogenes (Lm) was inoculated at the 
depicted doses in 100 µl of intestinal suspen-
sion and cultured in anaerobic (top) or aerobic 
(bottom) conditions. Lm CFUs were enumer-
ated over time by plating (n = 3 mice per time 
point; one representative of two experiments 
shown, circles represent individual values, 
lines represent medians). (B) 103 Lm CFUs were 
inoculated in intestinal contents prepared as 
in A or in sterile filtered aliquots of the same 
intestinal contents and grown anaerobically or 
aerobically, respectively, for the depicted times 
(n = 3 mice per time point; one representa-
tive of two experiments shown, lines represent 
medians). (C) Same experimental setup as in A, 
except that intestinal content was collected 
from PBS, streptomycin or MNVC-treated 
mice 1 d after termination of treatment (n = 
3 mice per time point; one representative of 
two experiments shown, circles represent in-
dividual values, lines represent medians). (D) 
Content from small or large intestine was cul-
tured for 24 h in the presence of 103 Lm CFUs, 
then sterile filtered (24 h-sup). 103 CFUs of ei-
ther L. monocytogenes or E. coli DH5-α were 
inoculated in sterile-filtered supernatants 
(24 h-sup) and grown aerobically for 24 h (n = 
10 from different mice and three independent 
experiments, lines represents medians; statis-
tics: Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple 
comparisons). ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 1981
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
dIscussIon
L. monocytogenes has been studied extensively over the past 
century and has become one of the most widely used model 
pathogens in experimental immunology. L. monocytogenes 
studies have generally involved intravenous inoculation, a con-
venient and reproducible model to dissect systemic infection, 
and immune response mechanisms. Intravenous delivery, how-
ever, bypasses the intestinal phase of L. monocytogenes infection, 
which precedes systemic spread and has an important role in 
the overall pathogenesis of infection (Gahan and Hill, 2005). As 
a consequence, many aspects of the intestinal phase of L. mono-
cytogenes infection remain obscure. Even though ingestion of L. 
monocytogenes from contaminated food is the main cause of in-
fection in humans, there is little clinical information on the early 
intestinal stages of L. monocytogenes infection that might en-
hance resistance, and preventive interventions target the contam-
inated food itself (Saraoui et al., 2016). Our results suggest that 
the microbiota, here shown to be an essential player in defense 
against L. monocytogenes, especially in immunocompromised 
hosts, might provide a target for intervention in this window.
Figure 6. correlation of intestinal com-
mensal bacteria with protection from L. 
monocytogenes infection. (A) WT mice were 
treated with streptomycin or MNVC. Three 
mice per group were single-housed and in-
fected with 108 Lm CFUs at each of the de-
picted time points (after antibiotic treatment). 
24 h after infection, mice were sacrificed and 
L. monocytogenes CFUs enumerated in their 
intestinal content and organs. (B) Spearman 
correlation between Lm CFUs (Log10) in in-
testinal content, intestinal wall and liver for 
animals depicted in A (n = 30). Spearman 
coefficient and significance values are indi-
cated for each correlation. (C) PCoA analysis 
of microbiota 16S sequences from fecal pel-
lets collected from animals depicted in A on 
the day of infection. The plotted colored areas 
indicate: gray = pretreatment; green = d1 
after antibiotics (any antibiotics); salmon = 
d5-27 streptomycin; blue = d5-27 MNVC. (D) 
Spearman correlation between identified OTUs 
and Lm CFUs enumerated by plating 1 d after 
infection, shown separately for small intestine, 
cecum, and colon contents. Shown are only 
significant hits, BH corrected. P < 0.05.
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1982
Previous studies have suggested, although never conclu-
sively proven, that gut commensals can protect the host from 
L. monocytogenes infection. In the 70s, Zachar and Savage 
(1979) reported that GF mice, in contrast to SPF mice, were 
highly susceptible to L. monocytogenes infection, and their 
colon would become rapidly colonized by L. monocytogenes 
after low intra-gastric inocula. The authors hypothesized that 
the rich microbiota carried by SPF mice might account for 
their resistance to infection, but were unable to prevent in-
testinal growth of L. monocytogenes by gavage of selected 
Figure 7. A rationally designed consortium of four clostridiales antagonizes L. monocytogenes and confers host protection in vivo. (A and B) 
Depicted commensal bacteria were grown anaerobically and inoculated in medium (A) or in autoclaved intestinal content (B) at OD = 0.1. 103 L. monocy-
togenes (Lm) CFUs were added, and Lm expansion was evaluated after 24 h of anaerobic co-culture (n = 3 replicates; shown one representative of two to 
four experiments per condition). (C–E) GF mice were reconstituted with 4-Clost consortium or fecal pellet from MNVC-treated mice via oral gavage. After 
10 d mice were challenged orally with 107 Lm CFUs. (C) Diversity index of the microbiota 10 d after reconstitution (=day of L. monocytogenes infection) in 
feces of ex-GF mice of the indicated group, based on OTU composition as assessed by sequencing of 16S rRNA genes. (D) Listeria burden in the feces of 
ex-GF animals was evaluated 24 h after infection. (E and F) Mice described in C and D were euthanized at day 3 after infection and L. monocytogenes CFUs 
quantified in intestinal content and depicted organs. For C–E, circles represent individual mice, bars represent median values (n = 9 except in C; n = 5, from 
three independent experiments; Mann-Whitney test). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 1983
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
bacterial species, even though this treatment reduced pene-
tration of L. monocytogenes into intestinal tissue, as assessed 
by microscopy (Zachar and Savage, 1979). Czuprynski and 
Balish (1981) similarly observed that GF rats, in contrast to 
conventional rats, were highly permissive for L. monocyto-
genes expansion in the intestine, and proved that intestinal 
clearance of L. monocytogenes could be achieved in these 
animals by transplantation of a microbiota. Our finding that 
mice that were stably colonized with L. monocytogenes 
during repeated streptomycin treatments experienced dra-
matic decreases in intestinal L. monocytogenes burden after 
fecal microbiota transplantation (unpublished data) are con-
sistent with this earlier work. Susceptibility to L. monocy-
togenes infection in mice after antibiotic administration is 
exacerbated by concurrent corticosteroid administration 
(Okamoto et al., 1994), suggesting that the immune system 
and the gut microbiota make distinct contributions to the 
control of L. monocytogenes infection. Consistent with this 
hypothesis, a recent study demonstrated that cross-transfer of 
microbiota from C57BL/6 mice and BALB/c mice did not 
increase the susceptibility to Listeria infection in the former 
strain or reduce it in the latter (Bou Ghanem et al., 2012). As 
both strains supposedly harbor microbiota with similar com-
plexity and protective activity, genetic and immune factors are 
likely responsible for the outcome of infection when coloni-
zation resistance is intact (Myers-Morales et al., 2013).
The ability of the microbiota to cure patients with 
recurrent Clostridium difficile infections has recently been 
demonstrated in a randomized, controlled trial of fecal micro-
biota transplantation (FMT), and FMT is increasingly being 
tested in clinical trials as a therapeutic approach for a wide 
range of diseases (van Nood et al., 2013). Our results suggest 
that Listeria monocytogenes should be added to a growing 
list of intestinal pathogens that might be effectively antago-
nized by commensal bacteria that colonize the GI tract. Our 
finding that a diverse, antibiotic-naive microbiota can inhibit 
L. monocytogenes, possibly by multiple, parallel mechanisms, 
provides at least a partial explanation for why high L. mono-
cytogenes inocula are required for laboratory animals and 
healthy humans to become infected via the oral route, and 
why luminal clearance occurs rapidly (Dalton et al., 1997). 
Our study suggests that intestinal survival and expansion of 
L. monocytogenes is an event that precedes severe disease in 
subjects at risk of infection, and that a compromised micro-
biota is an important predisposing factor. It was recently pro-
posed that during early phases of intestinal infection, Listeria 
is shed from the tips of infected villi into the lumen, and then 
penetrate the epithelium at different locations, thus extending 
tissue invasion (Melton-Witt et al., 2012). In this scenario, 
the loss of microbiota-mediated colonization resistance might 
further amplify L. monocytogenes expansion.
Consistent with a previous study (Bou Ghanem et al., 
2012), but somewhat conflicting with a more established view 
in the field, our data suggest that large intestine, rather than 
small intestine, is a major replication site for Listeria. Prefer-
ential tissue invasion at the level of the small intestine seems at 
odds with the low local concentration of goblet cells, which 
have been postulated to be a major portal for InlA-mediated 
entry in the host tissue, and are instead numerous in cecum 
and colon (Nikitas et al., 2011). Importantly, our results sug-
gest that carriage of residual amounts of L. monocytogenes in 
the intestinal lumen is relatively long lasting, up to 3 wk or 
more in a sizable portion of C57BL/6 mice infected orally, in 
spite of the remarkable antilisterial activity exerted by com-
mensals. Here, we showed that such a residual population 
can expand upon impairment of the microbiota’s protective 
functions, an observation that is of relevance to immunocom-
promised patients, in whom systemic spread might be caused 
by intestinal resident rather than de novo ingested bacteria. 
In fact, by ablating or perturbing the microbiota, antibiotic 
treatment makes immunocompromised hosts susceptible 
to low doses of L. monocytogenes, which confirms previ-
ous observations on the synergistic effects of antibiotics and 
corticosteroids in listeriosis (Okamoto et al., 1994). Of note, 
another important protective contribution of the microbi-
ota was underlined in a recent study demonstrating that long 
lasting antibiotic treatment reduces hematopoiesis, and en-
hances susceptibility to listeriosis in a model of retro-orbital 
Listeria infection (Khosravi et al., 2014). However in our sys-
tem, where antibiotics were administered only once, no major 
consequence of the treatment on circulating lymphocytes was 
observed (unpublished data). Instead, using the oral challenge 
approach, we could clearly demonstrate the consequences on 
Listeria expansion resulting from microbiota perturbation.
We demonstrated the relevance of an intact gut micro-
biota in two different models of immune-deficiency: con-
genital deficiency of lymphoid cells (Rag2−/−Il2rg−/− mice) 
and generalized immune deficiency promoted by cancer 
chemotherapy in otherwise healthy animals. In our model, 
chemotherapy likely enhanced susceptibility to Listeriosis by 
reducing immune cells in the circulation, particularly inflam-
matory monocytes as well as IFN-γ–producing ILCs/NKs, 
whose defensive role in Listeria infection remains a subject 
of debate, with discrepancies across studies possibly arising 
from differences in mouse genetic backgrounds or routes of 
infection (Dunn and North, 1991; T
eixeira and Kaufmann, 
1994; Ladel et al., 1996; Thäle and Kiderlen, 2005; Viegas et 
al., 2013; Clark et al., 2016). In the absence of such cell types, 
we find that the microbiota provides a parallel line of defense, 
which directly acts on the pathogen, reducing its growth. 
Antibiotic treatment destroys this defense mechanism, thus 
exposing the host to infection even with extremely low L. 
monocytogenes doses. Interestingly, chemotherapy adminis-
tration alone resulted in a significantly higher L. monocyto-
genes burden in the large intestinal lumen 1 d after infection, 
suggesting that microbiota perturbation or inflammatory 
conditions induced by anticancer drugs might also contribute 
to the enhanced susceptibility of cancer patients. Thus, aug-
menting colonization resistance functions in immunocom-
promised patients by introducing or supporting protective 
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1984
bacterial species might represent a novel clinical approach to 
prevent L. monocytogenes infection.
Our results also raise the possibility that in other at-risk 
categories for listeriosis, such as infants or pregnant women, 
intestinal dysbiosis might be a contributing factor to suscep-
tibility. Anecdotally, L. monocytogenes was found to grow 
in meconium (Lembet et al., 2003), and pregnant women in 
their third trimester, the phase of pregnancy in which sus-
ceptibility to Listeria is known to be highest (Allerberger and 
Wagner, 2010), present altered microbial profiles, with marked 
reduction in Clostridiales members (Koren et al., 2012) and 
increases in Proteobacteria.
Our ex vivo data provide evidence that intestinal mi-
crobes have a remarkable ability to rapidly eliminate or out-
compete L. monocytogenes in culture. Interestingly, multiple 
mechanisms seems to account for such inhibition, possibly 
reflecting the different commensal communities repre-
sented along the GI tract.
Based on our results, competition for nutrients might 
be a crucial factor, promoting growth restriction of L. mono-
cytogenes in the small intestine (Fig. 5). Furthermore, com-
mensals such as Lactobacilli, which mainly reside in the small 
intestine, are known to produce antilisterial bacteriocins, and 
elegant in vivo experiments provided evidence that daily ga-
vage with L. salivarius increases resistance to Listeria in mice 
with an intact microbiota (Corr et al., 2007). Commensals 
such as L. gasseri, which is known to produce L. monocyto-
genes–killing bacteriocins, are recurrently identified in our 
mouse microbiota analyses.
To our knowledge, anaerobes from the large in-
testine have never been associated before with protec-
tion from L. monocytogenes. These commensals might 
be operating through mechanisms that do not involve 
secretion of toxins or competition for nutrients, as su-
pernatants from cultured large intestine contents still 
support Listeria growth, which is instead prevented when 
anaerobes are maintained in the culture (Fig. 5). Such 
alternative mechanisms of inhibition might include con-
tact-dependent inhibition (Aoki et al., 2005, 2010), hy-
potheses that require further investigation.
Our in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo assays indicate that 
colon resident Clostridiales are important and might even be 
sufficient to protect the host from Listeria invasion. Indeed, 
GF mice reconstituted with a consortium of four Clostridia-
les before infection, of which 3 consistently engrafted across 
experiments, showed virtually no intestinal L. monocytogenes 
burden or translocation to the mesenteric lymph nodes, and 
markedly reduced penetration into intestinal wall and visceral 
organs (Fig. 7, B and C; and Fig. S5). In contrast, mice recon-
stituted with a dysbiotic microbiota were highly susceptible 
to L. monocytogenes infection, demonstrating the impor-
tance of selected commensal species in exerting colonization 
resistance. Identifying protective bacteria and the underlying 
mechanisms might provide new diagnostic, preventive, and 
possibly curative approaches for listeriosis.
MAterIALs And MetHods
Mice
C57BL/6 and Rag1−/−, Ifng−/−, Il17−/− mice were purchased 
from the Jackson Laboratory. Rag2−/−Il2rg−/− (Raggc) mice 
were purchased from Taconic Farms, and then bred in-house. 
Rag1−/−Ifng−/− and Rag1−/−Il17−/− mice were derived on a 
C57BL/6 background, initially generated by breeding Rag1−/− 
mice with Ifng−/− or Il17a−/− mice, respectively, and then bred 
in house. All mice were bred and maintained under specific 
pathogen–free conditions at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Research Animal Resource Center. Sex- and age-matched 
controls were used in all experiments according to institu-
tional guidelines for animal care. Unless otherwise specified, 
6–12-wk-old female mice were used for all experiments. For 
the experiment shown in Fig. 2 F
, mice were maintained in 
wire floor cages to prevent coprophagy. All animal procedures 
were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Antibiotic and chemotherapy treatment
Three different antibiotic treatments were used over the 
course of this study: (1) a single i.p. injection of clindamycin 
(200 µg/mouse in PBS); (2) a single dose of streptomycin 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific; 20 mg/mouse in PBS) adminis-
tered by oral gavage; (3) a single dose of metronidazole (Sig-
ma-Aldrich), neomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and vancomycin 
(NOV 
APL 
US; 3.5 mg each/mouse in PBS) administered by 
oral gavage, followed by a single injection of clindamycin 3 d 
later. For the experiment shown in Fig. 6, 2 mg streptomy-
cin/mouse was administered to facilitate microbiota recovery.
Chemotherapy was composed of cyclophosphamide 
(Sigma-Aldrich; 1.8 mg/mouse; ∼100 mg/kg) and doxoru-
bicin (Pfizer; 0.27 mg/mouse; ∼15 mg/kg) and administered 
together via i.p injection in 200 µl total volume. Chemother-
apy was administered twice, 1 wk apart; bleeding or infections 
were performed 1 d after the second administration. For the 
experiments shown in Fig. 4 F
, mice were administered strep-
tomycin via oral gavage on the same day of second chemo-
therapy treatment, and infected 24 h later.
L. monocytogenes infection, cFu 
enumeration, and Pcr confirmation
L. monocytogenes strain 10403s was used throughout this 
study. Frozen aliquots of bacteria were freshly inoculated into 
BHI and grown to OD 0.1–0.4 (OD = 0.1 corresponds to 2 × 
108 CFUs/ml), washed once in PBS, and resuspended in PBS 
for inoculation. Used doses varied depending on the exper-
iment, and are reported in figure legends; L. monocytogenes 
was administered by oral gavage in all in vivo experiments.
T
o enumerate L. monocytogenes growth in mouse tis-
sue, collected organs were resuspended in PBS Triton X-100 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) 0.05%, homogenized for 30 s to 
1 min with a Power Gen 125 homogenizer (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific; power level: 5). Metal probes were washed in be-
tween samples through two immersions in ethanol and one 
 1985
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
in PBS for 10–15 s each. Serial dilutions of the homoge-
nates were prepared in PBS Triton and plated on BHI 
plates supplemented with streptomycin (100 µg/ml) and 
nalidixic acid (50 µg/ml). Colonies were enumerated after 
24–36 h of incubation at 37°C.
For CFU enumeration in intestinal wall, small and large 
intestine were separated after excision, cleared of content by 
squeezing with forceps, cut longitudinally, and washed vig-
orously four to six times (10-s vortex or manual shaking) in 
ice-cold PBS. The washed tissues were then processed as in 
the previous paragraph.
For CFU enumeration in intestinal content and fecal 
pellets, starting material was weighed (unless total CFU 
amount was calculated) and resuspended in PBS to a con-
centration of 100 mg/ml. Serial dilutions of the original 
suspension were plated.
Roughly 10% of plates from small and large intestine 
content and tissue displayed a second type of bacterial col-
ony, clearly distinguishable from L. monocytogenes colonies 
based on size and color. In particular, contaminating colonies 
were much smaller than L. monocytogenes colonies and of 
a brighter white color. T
o confirm the identity of L. mono-
cytogenes colonies, several colonies of each type from every 
contaminated plate were picked and subjected to PCR for 
the L. monocytogenes p60 gene. A clear band of ∼1300 bp 
was always detected following PCR of L. monocytogenes 
colonies, but not of contaminating colonies (see Fig. S1), thus 
confirming L. monocytogenes identity as determined by col-
ony size, color, and morphology. Contaminant colonies were 
not included into CFU counts. Sequence of the p60 PCR 
primers are: 5′ STA 
RT: 5′-GCG 
GTA 
ACA 
GCA 
TTT 
GCT 
GCT 
CCA 
ACA 
ATC-3′; 3′ END: 5′-GCC 
ATT 
GTC 
TTG 
CGC 
GTT 
AAT 
CAT 
TTG 
AC-3′. Amplification conditions 
were as follows: 30 cycles (95°C for 1 min; 50°C for 1 min; 
65°C for 2.5 min), 72°C for 5 min, hold 4°C.
Pathology score
The pathology score used in this study has been previ-
ously published (Abt et al., 2015). After infection, mice 
were monitored and scored for disease severity by four pa-
rameters: weight loss (>95% of initial weight = 0, 95–90% 
initial weight = 1, 90–80% initial weight = 2, and <80% 
initial weight = 3), surface body temperature (>32°C = 0, 
32°C–30°C = 1, 30°C–28°C = 2, <28°C = 3), diarrhea se-
verity (formed pellets = 0, loose pellets = 1, liquid discharge 
= 2, no pellets/caked to fur = 3), morbidity (score of 1 for 
each symptoms with max score of 3; ruffled fur, hunched 
back, lethargy, ocular discharge).
Blood cell collection and flow cytometry
Blood was obtained by tail bleeding. Red blood cell lysis 
was performed by three consecutive incubations in RBC 
lysis buffer (0.15 M NH4Cl = 1 mM NaHCO3 in dH2O) 
for 5′. Lymphocytes were counted and subjected to viability 
staining (Fixable Aqua Dead Cell staining, Life T
echnologies, 
#L34957) and subsequently to receptor Fc blockade (BD). 
Staining was performed using the following antibodies: CD45 
(clone 30-F11; eBioscience), CD8b (clone YTS156.7.7; Bi-
oLegend), CD11b (clone RM2817; Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific), Ly6c (clone AL-21; BD), CD3ε (clone 145-2C11; 
BD), CD19 (clone 1D3; BD), CD90.2 (53–2.1; BD), CD127 
(clone A7R34; BD). Samples were fixed (IC Fixation Buf-
fer; eBioscience), washed, resuspended in FACS buffer, and 
acquired with a LSR 
II flow cytometer (BD) either immedi-
ately or on the next day.
dnA extraction and 16s sequencing
DNA extraction from fecal pellets and intestinal content were 
performed as previously described (Ubeda et al., 2012). In 
brief, a frozen aliquot (∼100 mg) of each sample was sus-
pended, while frozen, in a solution containing 500 µl of ex-
traction buffer (200 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, and 
20 mM EDTA), 200 µl of 20% SDS, 500 µl of phenol/chloro-
form/isoamyl alcohol (24:24:1), and 500 µl of 0.1-mm-diam 
zirconia/silica beads (BioSpec Products). Microbial cells were 
lysed by mechanical disruption with a bead beater (BioSpec 
Products) for 2 min, after which two rounds of phenol/chlo-
roform/isoamyl alcohol extraction were performed. DNA 
was precipitated with ethanol and resuspended in 50 µl of 
TE buffer with 100 µg ml−1 RNase. The isolated DNA was 
subjected to additional purification with QIAamp Mini Spin 
Columns (QIA 
GEN). For each sample, duplicate 50 µl PCR 
reactions were performed, each containing 50 ng of purified 
DNA, 0.2 mM dNTPs, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 U Platinum Taq 
DNA polymerase, 2.5 µl of 10X PCR buffer, and 0.5 µM of 
each primer designed to amplify the 
V4-V5: 563F (5′-nnnn-
nnnn-NNN 
NNN 
NNN 
NNN-AYT 
GGG 
YDT 
AAA 
GNG-
3′) and 926R (5′-nnnnnnnn-NNN 
NNN 
NNN 
NNN-CCG 
TCA 
ATT 
YHT 
TTR 
AGT
-3′). A unique 12-base Golay bar-
codes (Ns) precede the primers for sample identification 
(Caporaso et al., 2012), and 1–8 additional nucleotides were 
placed in front of the barcode to offset the sequencing of the 
primers. Cycling conditions were 94°C for 3 min, followed 
by 27 cycles of 94°C for 50 s, 51°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 
1 min. 72°C for 5 min is used for the final elongation step. 
Replicate PCRs were pooled, and amplicons were purified 
using the Qiaquick PCR Purification kit (QIA 
GEN). PCR 
products were quantified and pooled at equimolar amounts 
before Illumina barcodes and adaptors were ligated on using 
the Illumina TruSeq Sample Preparation protocol. The com-
pleted library was sequenced on an Illumina Miseq platform 
following the Illumina recommended procedures with a 
paired end 250 × 250 bp kit.
The 16S (V4-V5) paired-end reads were merged and 
demultiplexed. 
The UPA 
RSE pipeline (Edgar, 2013) was used 
to: (1) perform error filtering, using maximum expected error 
(Emax = 1; Edgar and Flyvbjerg, 2015); (2) group sequences 
into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) of 97% dis-
tance-based similarity; and (3) identify and remove potential 
chimeric sequences, using both de novo and reference-based 
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1986
methods. Sequencing data were analyzed and processed using 
the MOT 
HUR pipeline (Schloss et al., 2009), and operational 
taxonomical units (OTU) were classified using a modified 
version of the Greengenes database (DeSantis et al., 2006).
Anaerobic culturing and ex vivo competition experiments
Commensal anaerobes and intestinal content (unless oth-
erwise stated in the text) were cultured using an anaerobic 
incubator (Coylabs) at 37°C, using reagents that had been 
reduced for at least 12 h. For assessment of L. monocytogenes 
survival in vitro, intestinal content or fecal pellets were resus-
pended at 100 mg/ml in reduced PBS, and inoculated with L. 
monocytogenes (inoculum size indicated in figure legends) in 
100 µl total using 96-well plates with U bottom. Listeria sur-
vival was assessed after 24, 48, or 72-h. In some experiment, 
the intestinal suspension was sterile filtered (0.22 µm) either 
directly or after a 24-h culture at 37°C.
Bacterial isolates assessed for antilisterial activity in-
cluded: L. gasseri JV-V03, C. aldenense WAL-1872 and R. 
gnavus CC55_001C (BEI resources); C. innocuum and B. 
producta (I) isolated in house from mouse intestinal content; 
C. ramosum, C. saccharogumia, Clostridiales 1_7_47FAA, C. 
hathewayi, C. bolteae, C. aldenense, C. asparagiforme, Ru-
minococcus sp.ID8, R. gnavus, C. scindens, Lachnospiraceae 
3_1_57FAA_CT1, Lachnospiraceae 7_1_58_FAA, C. indo-
lis, Clostridium sp. 7_3_54FAA, E. contortum, B. producta 
(II) isolated from human stool (Atarashi et al., 2013). All 
bacteria were grown overnight in BHI supplemented with 
yeast extract 5 g/liter and l-cysteine 1 g/liter (BD), with 
the exception of L. gasseri, which was grown in MRS broth 
(Difco). Bacterial species present in the original panel of At-
arashi et al. (2013) that were not included in the analysis grew 
poorly in modified BHI.
Autoclaved cecal content used as a medium in Fig. 7 B 
was prepared by resuspending large intestinal content into 
PBS at 100 mg/ml and autoclaving the suspension for 21 
min; the suspension was then incubated in the anaerobic 
chamber for at least 24 h before use.
To 
assess 
antilisterial 
activity, 
commensals 
of 
choice were inoculated at OD = 0.1 into either me-
dium or autoclaved cecal content together with 1,000 
L. monocytogenes CFUs, and residual Listeria CFUs 
were enumerated 24 h later.
reconstitution of GF mice
GF mice were maintained in isolators until the day of re-
constitution. Upon transfer to the SPF facility, mice were 
reconstituted via oral gavage with comparable amounts of 
Clostridiales of interest (C. ramosum, C. saccharogumia, C. 
hathewayi, and B. producta [I]) of ∼1–3 × 106/bacterium/
mouse, resuspended in 200 µl of reduced PBS. Alternatively, 
GF mice were reconstituted with a suspension in reduced 
PBS of a fecal pellet from MNVC-treated mice (pellet col-
lected 1 d after clindamycin treatment, 1 pellet per ml, 200 µl/
mouse). Engraftment was confirmed by plating of fecal pellets 
onto Columbia Agar Plates with 5% Sheep Blood (BD) in 
anaerobic chamber, 2 d after reconstitution.
statistical and data analysis
Data are presented as means or medians ± SD. Analy-
ses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 7.0a or 
R-3.3.2.pkg. Statistical tests used included: Mann-Whitney 
test for two group comparisons, Kruskall-Wallis test with 
Dunn’s multiple comparisons for three or more group com-
parisons, two-way ANO 
VA for time courses, and Log-Rank 
test for survival. Significance values are indicated as follow: 
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001. 
Spearman correlation for the experiment shown in Fig. 6 was 
calculated using the function 'cor.test' in the R 'stats' pack-
age, method=”spearman”; significance values were corrected 
using Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure, FDR<0.05. 
PCoA was performed using the 'ordinate' function in the R 
package 'phyloseq', with method=”PCoA”, distance=”JSD”.
Human subjects
Patients at MSK 
CC who developed L. monocytogenes infec-
tion (bloodstream infection, meningitis, or both) were iden-
tified via institutional clinical database query of the last 20 yr. 
Medical charts of these patients were reviewed; clinical data 
including extent of infection and medications administered 
before infection were collected. This retrospective observa-
tional review was approved by the MSK 
CC IRB.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows examples of colony morphology and PCR results 
used to confirm the identity of L. monocytogenes from plated 
intestinal content and organs. Fig. S2 shows that L. monocyto-
genes strain 10403s (the strain used in this study) is resistant to 
streptomycin and metronidazole, but sensitive to vancomycin, 
neomycin and clindamycin. Fig. S3 shows that most oncologic 
patients diagnosed with L. monocytogenes infection at MSK 
CC over the past twenty years were treated with chemotherapy, 
antibiotics, or both before becoming infected. Fig. S4 shows that 
recovery of clostridia following antibiotic treatment inversely 
correlates with luminal L. monocytogenes expansion in mice 
infected at different times during microbiota recovery. Fig. S5 
shows that reconstitution levels and overall microbiota diver-
sity are similar in GF mice reconstituted with fecal pellets from 
ABX-treated mice or with the assembled 4-Clost consortium. 
Nonetheless, fecal pellets from 4-Clost group had significantly 
higher ex vivo antilisterial potential than FMT
-ABX.
AcknoWLedGMents
We thank all members of the Eric Pamer Lab, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Cen-
ter, for their valuable suggestions. Human-derived clostridia were kindly provided by 
 1987
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
Kenya Honda (Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Japan). The following re-
agents were obtained through BEI Resources, NIA 
ID, National Institutes of Health as 
part of the Human Microbiome Project: Clostridium aldenense, strain WAL-1872, 
HM-307; Ruminococcus gnavus, strain CC55_001C, HM-1056; Lactobacillus gasseri, 
strain JV-V03, HM-104. Lactobacillus gasseri, strain JV-V03 was initially kindly pro-
vided by Michael Fischbach (UCSF), while L. monocytogenes strain 10403s was a gift 
of Dan Portnoy (UC Berkeley). We thank Mesruh Turkekul and Ning Fan at the Memo-
rial Sloan-Kettering Molecular Cytology Facility for support with histology slide 
preparation. We thank the Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation and 
Cancer for assistance with high-throughput sequencing and analysis.
This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant K23 
AI095398-01 to Y.T., RO1 AI42135 to E.G.P. and Y.T., U01 AI124275-01 to E.G.P. and 
Y.T., P30 CA008748), the Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation, and Can-
cer, and the Tow Foundation grant to EGP. SB was supported by a Swiss National 
Science Foundation Early Postdoc Mobility Fellowship and is currently a Cancer Re-
search Institute Irvington Fellow supported by the Cancer Research Institute.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions SB designed the study, conducted all experiments, ac-
quired and analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. SB, EL, LL and YT analyzed se-
quencing data. SM collected patient data. LL, YG and EF prepared 16s amplicon 
libraries for MySeq analysis. RC, SK and IL assisted with in vitro and in vivo experi-
ments. EGP designed the study, provided overall guidance and wrote the manuscript.
Submitted: 16 March 2017
Revised: 6 April 2017
Accepted: 19 April 2017
reFerences
Abt, M.C., B.B. Lewis, S. Caballero, H. Xiong, R.A. Carter, B. Sušac, L. Ling, 
I. Leiner, and E.G. Pamer. 2015. Innate Immune Defenses Mediated by 
Two ILC Subsets Are Critical for Protection against Acute Clostridium 
difficile Infection. Cell Host Microbe. 18:27–37. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.chom 
.2015 
.06 
.011
Allerberger, F
., and M. Wagner. 2010. Listeriosis: a resurgent foodborne 
infection. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 16:16–23. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1469 
-0691 
.2009 
.03109 
.x
Alyamkina, E.A., V
.P
. Nikolin, N.A. Popova, E.V
. Dolgova, A.S. Proskurina, 
K.E. Orishchenko, Y
.R. Efremov, E.R. Chernykh, A.A. Ostanin, 
S.V
. Sidorov, et al. 2010. A strategy of tumor treatment in mice with 
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide combination based on dendritic cell 
activation by human double-stranded DNA preparation. Genet. Vaccines 
Ther. 8:7. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1479 
-0556 
-8 
-7
Andersson, A., W
.J. Dai, J.P
. Di Santo, and F
. Brombacher. 1998. Early IFN-
gamma production and innate immunity during Listeria monocytogenes 
infection in the absence of NK cells. J. Immunol. 161:5600–5606.
Aoki, S.K., R. Pamma, A.D. Hernday, J.E. Bickham, B.A. Braaten, and D.A. 
Low. 2005. Contact-dependent inhibition of growth in Escherichia coli. 
Science. 309:1245–1248. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1115109
Aoki, S.K., E.J. Diner, C.T. de Roodenbeke, B.R. Burgess, S.J. Poole, B.A. 
Braaten, A.M. Jones, J.S. Webb, C.S. Hayes, P
.A. Cotter, and D.A. Low. 
2010. A widespread family of polymorphic contact-dependent toxin 
delivery systems in bacteria. Nature. 468:439–442. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature09490
Atarashi, K., T. Tanoue, K. Oshima, W
. Suda, Y
. Nagano, H. Nishikawa, S. 
Fukuda, T. Saito, S. Narushima, K. Hase, et al. 2013. Treg induction 
by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the human 
microbiota. 
Nature. 
500:232–236. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nature12331
Aureli, P
., G.C. Fiorucci, D. Caroli, G. Marchiaro, O. Novara, L. Leone, and S. 
Salmaso. 2000. An outbreak of febrile gastroenteritis associated with corn 
contaminated by Listeria monocytogenes. N. Engl. J. Med. 342:1236–
1241. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJM200004273421702
Becattini, S., Y
. Taur, and E.G. Pamer. 2016. Antibiotic-Induced Changes in 
the Intestinal Microbiota and Disease. Trends Mol. Med. 22:458–478. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molmed 
.2016 
.04 
.003
Bohnhoff, M., and C.P
. Miller. 1962. Enhanced susceptibility to Salmonella 
infection in streptomycin-treated mice. J. Infect. Dis. 111:117–127. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/infdis 
/111 
.2 
.117
Bojsen-Moller, J.1964. Occurrence of Listeria monocytogenes in feces from 
healthy and sick persons. Proc. of the XIV Scandinavian Congr. of 
Pathol., and Microbiol., Oslo-Norwegian Universities Press.
Bou Ghanem, E.N., G.S. Jones, T. Myers-Morales, P
.D. Patil, A.N. 
Hidayatullah, and S.E. D’Orazio. 2012. InlA promotes dissemination of 
Listeria monocytogenes to the mesenteric lymph nodes during food 
borne infection of mice. PLoS Pathog. 8:e1003015. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1003015
Brandl, K., G. Plitas, B. Schnabl, R.P
. DeMatteo, and E.G. Pamer. 2007. 
MyD88-mediated signals induce the bactericidal lectin RegIII gamma 
and protect mice against intestinal Listeria monocytogenes infection. J. 
Exp. Med. 204:1891–1900. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20070563
Brandl, K., G. Plitas, C.N. Mihu, C. Ubeda, T. Jia, M. Fleisher, B. Schnabl, 
R.P
. DeMatteo, and E.G. Pamer. 2008. 
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci 
exploit antibiotic-induced innate immune deficits. Nature. 455:804–807. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature07250
Bregenholt, S., P
. Berche, F
. Brombacher, and J.P
. Di Santo. 2001. Conventional 
alpha beta T cells are sufficient for innate and adaptive immunity against 
enteric Listeria monocytogenes. J. Immunol. 166:1871–1876. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.166 
.3 
.1871
Buffie, C.G., and E.G. Pamer. 2013. Microbiota-mediated colonization 
resistance against intestinal pathogens. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:790–801. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3535
Buffie, C.G., V
. Bucci, R.R. Stein, P
.T. McKenney, L. Ling, A. Gobourne, D. 
No, H. Liu, M. Kinnebrew, A. Viale, et al. 2015. Precision microbiome 
reconstitution restores bile acid mediated resistance to Clostridium 
difficile. Nature. 517:205–208. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature13828
Caballero, S., and E.G. Pamer. 2015. Microbiota-mediated inflammation and 
antimicrobial defense in the intestine. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 33:227–256. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
-immunol 
-032713 
-120238
Caporaso, J.G., C.L. Lauber, W
.A. Walters, D. Berg-Lyons, J. Huntley, N. 
Fierer, S.M. Owens, J. Betley, L. Fraser, M. Bauer, et al. 2012. Ultra-high-
throughput microbial community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq and 
MiSeq platforms. ISME J. 6:1621–1624. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
ismej 
.2012 
.8
CEN 
TERS FOR DIS 
EASE CON 
TROL AND PRE 
VEN 
TION (CDC). 
2016. Listeria Outbreaks [Online]. Available: http 
://www 
.cdc 
.gov 
/
listeria 
/outbreaks 
/index 
.html.
Chiba, S., T. Nagai, T. Hayashi, 
Y
. Baba, S. Nagai, and S. Koyasu. 2011. Listerial 
invasion protein internalin B promotes entry into ileal Peyer’s patches in 
vivo. Microbiol. Immunol. 55:123–129. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1348 
-0421 
.2010 
.00292 
.x
Clark, S.E., H.C. Filak, B.S. Guthrie, R.L. Schmidt, A. Jamieson, P
. Merkel, 
V
. Knight, C.M. Cole, D.H. Raulet, and L.L. Lenz. 2016. Bacterial 
Manipulation of NK Cell Regulatory Activity Increases Susceptibility 
to Listeria monocytogenes Infection. PLoS Pathog. 12:e1005708. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1005708
Cobb, C.A., G.D. Curtis, D.S. Bansi, E. Slade, W
. Mehal, R.G. Mitchell, and 
R.W
. Chapman. 1996. Increased prevalence of Listeria monocytogenes 
in the faeces of patients receiving long-term H2-antagonists. Eur. 
J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 8:1071–1074. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1097 
/00042737 
-199611000 
-00008
Corr, S., C. Hill, and C.G. Gahan. 2006. An in vitro cell-culture model 
demonstrates internalin- and hemolysin-independent translocation of 
Listeria monocytogenes across M cells. Microb. Pathog. 41:241–250. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.micpath 
.2006 
.08 
.003
 Gut microbiota protects against L. monocytogenes | Becattini et al.
1988
Corr, S.C., Y
. Li, C.U. Riedel, P
.W
. O’Toole, C. Hill, and C.G. Gahan. 2007. 
Bacteriocin production as a mechanism for the antiinfective activity of 
Lactobacillus salivarius UCC118. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 104:7617–
7621. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0700440104
Czuprynski, C.J., and E. Balish. 1981. Pathogenesis of Listeria monocyto-
genes for gnotobiotic rats. Infect. Immun. 32:323–331.
Dalton, C.B., C.C. Austin, J. Sobel, P
.S. Hayes, W
.F
. Bibb, L.M. Graves, B. 
Swaminathan, M.E. Proctor, and P
.M. Griffin. 1997. An outbreak 
of gastroenteritis and fever due to Listeria monocytogenes in 
milk. N. Engl. J. Med. 336:100–105. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/
NEJM199701093360204
Delgado, S., E. O’Sullivan, G. Fitzgerald, and B. Mayo. 2007. Subtractive 
screening for probiotic properties of lactobacillus species from the 
human gastrointestinal tract in the search for new probiotics. J. Food Sci. 
72:M310–M315. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1750 
-3841 
.2007 
.00479 
.x
DeSantis, T.Z., P
. Hugenholtz, N. Larsen, M. Rojas, E.L. Brodie, K. Keller, 
T. Huber, D. Dalevi, P
. Hu, and G.L. Andersen. 2006. Greengenes, a 
chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database and workbench compatible 
with ARB. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72:5069–5072. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/AEM 
.03006 
-05
Donia, M.S., P
. Cimermancic, C.J. Schulze, L.C. 
Wieland Brown, J. Martin, M. 
Mitreva, J. Clardy, R.G. Linington, and M.A. Fischbach. 2014. 
A systematic 
analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters in the human microbiome reveals 
a common family of antibiotics. Cell. 158:1402–1414. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2014 
.08 
.032
Dunn, P
.L., and R.J. North. 1991. Early gamma interferon production by 
natural killer cells is important in defense against murine listeriosis. Infect. 
Immun. 59:2892–2900.
Edgar, R.C. 2013. UPA 
RSE: highly accurate OTU sequences from microbial 
amplicon reads. Nat. Methods. 10:996–998. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nmeth 
.2604
Edgar, R.C., and H. Flyvbjerg. 2015. Error filtering, pair assembly and 
error correction for next-generation sequencing reads. Bioinformatics. 
31:3476–3482. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/bioinformatics 
/btv401
Egan, K., D. Field, M.C. Rea, R.P
. Ross, C. Hill, and P
.D. Cotter. 2016. 
Bacteriocins: Novel Solutions to Age Old Spore-Related Problems? 
Front. Microbiol. 7:461. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3389 
/fmicb 
.2016 
.00461
Fernández Guerrero, M.L., R. Torres, B. Mancebo, J.J. González-López, M. 
Górgolas, J.J. Jusdado, and R.F
. Roblas. 2012. Antimicrobial treatment of 
invasive non-perinatal human listeriosis and the impact of the underlying 
disease on prognosis. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18:690–695. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1469 
-0691 
.2011 
.03616 
.x
Gahan, C.G., and C. Hill. 2005. Gastrointestinal phase of Listeria 
monocytogenes infection. J. Appl. Microbiol. 98:1345–1353. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1365 
-2672 
.2005 
.02559 
.x
Gessain, G., 
Y
.H. Tsai, L. Travier, M. Bonazzi, S. Grayo, P
. Cossart, C. Charlier, 
O. Disson, and M. Lecuit. 2015. PI3-kinase activation is critical for host 
barrier permissiveness to Listeria monocytogenes. J. Exp. Med. 212:165–
183. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20141406
Gillespie, I.A., J. McLauchlin, C.L. Little, C. Penman, P
. Mook, K. Grant, and 
S.J. O’Brien. 2009. Disease presentation in relation to infection foci for 
non-pregnancy-associated human listeriosis in England and Wales, 2001 
to 2007. J. Clin. Microbiol. 47:3301–3307. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/
JCM 
.00969 
-09
Goulet, 
V
., M. Hebert, C. Hedberg, E. Laurent, 
V
. 
Vaillant, H. De 
Valk, and J.C. 
Desenclos. 2012. Incidence of listeriosis and related mortality among 
groups at risk of acquiring listeriosis. Clin. Infect. Dis. 54:652–660. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/cid 
/cir902
Grif, K., G. Patscheider, M.P
. Dierich, and F
. Allerberger. 2003. Incidence 
of fecal carriage of Listeria monocytogenes in three healthy volunteers: 
a one-year prospective stool survey. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 
22:16–20.
Hardy, J., K.P
. Francis, M. DeBoer, P
. Chu, K. Gibbs, and C.H. Contag. 2004. 
Extracellular replication of Listeria monocytogenes in the murine 
gall bladder. Science. 303:851–853. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1092712
Hoelzer, K., R. Pouillot, and S. Dennis. 2012. Animal models of listeriosis: a 
comparative review of the current state of the art and lessons learned. 
Vet. Res. (Faisalabad). 43:18. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1297 
-9716 
-43 
-18
Huleatt, J.W
., I. Pilip, K. Kerksiek, and E.G. Pamer. 2001. Intestinal and splenic 
T cell responses to enteric Listeria monocytogenes infection: distinct 
repertoires of responding CD8 T lymphocytes. J. Immunol. 166:4065–
4073. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.166 
.6 
.4065
Kampelmacher, E.H., and L.M. van Noorle Jansen. 1969. Isolation of Listeria 
monocytogenes from faeces of clinically healthy humans and animals. 
Zentralbl. Bakteriol. [Orig]. 211:353–359.
Khosravi, A., A. Yáñez, J.G. Price, A. Chow, M. Merad, H.S. Goodridge, and 
S.K. Mazmanian. 2014. Gut microbiota promote hematopoiesis to 
control bacterial infection. Cell Host Microbe. 15:374–381. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.chom 
.2014 
.02 
.006
Koren, O., J.K. Goodrich, 
T.C. Cullender, A. Spor, K. Laitinen, H.K. Bäckhed, 
A. Gonzalez, J.J. Werner, L.T. Angenent, R. Knight, et al. 2012. Host 
remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during 
pregnancy. Cell. 150:470–480. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2012 
.07 
.008
Ladel, C.H., C. Blum, and S.H. Kaufmann. 1996. Control of natural killer 
cell-mediated innate resistance against the intracellular pathogen 
Listeria monocytogenes by gamma/delta T lymphocytes. Infect. Immun. 
64:1744–1749.
Lakshminarayanan, B., C.M. Guinane, P
.M. O’Connor, M. Coakley, C. 
Hill, C. Stanton, P
.W
. O’Toole, and R.P
. Ross. 2013. Isolation and 
characterization of bacteriocin-producing bacteria from the intestinal 
microbiota of elderly Irish subjects. J. Appl. Microbiol. 114:886–898. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/jam 
.12085
Lecuit, M. 2005. Understanding how Listeria monocytogenes targets and 
crosses host barriers. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 11:430–436. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1469 
-0691 
.2005 
.01146 
.x
Lecuit, M., S. Dramsi, C. Gottardi, M. Fedor-Chaiken, B. Gumbiner, and P
. 
Cossart. 1999. A single amino acid in E-cadherin responsible for host 
specificity towards the human pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. EMBO 
J. 18:3956–3963. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/emboj 
/18 
.14 
.3956
Lecuit, M., S. 
Vandormael-Pournin, J. Lefort, M. Huerre, P
. Gounon, C. Dupuy, 
C. Babinet, and P
. Cossart. 2001. A transgenic model for listeriosis: role of 
internalin in crossing the intestinal barrier. Science. 292:1722–1725. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1059852
Lembet, A., S. Gaddipati, I.R. Holzman, R.L. Berkowitz, and E.J. Bottone. 
2003. Meconium enhances the growth of perinatal bacterial pathogens. 
Mt. Sinai J. Med. 70:126–129.
MacDonald, T.T., and P
.B. Carter. 1980. Cell-mediated immunity to intesti-
nal infection. Infect. Immun. 28:516–523.
MacGowan, A.P
., K. Bowker, J. McLauchlin, P
.M. Bennett, and D.S. Reeves. 
1994. The occurrence and seasonal changes in the isolation of Listeria 
spp. in shop bought food stuffs, human faeces, sewage and soil from 
urban sources. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 21:325–334. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0168 
-1605(94)90062 
-0
Mainetti, L.E., M.J. Rico, M.V
. Fernández-Zenobi, H.A. Perroud, E.A. 
Roggero, 
V
.R. Rozados, and O.G. Scharovsky. 2013. Therapeutic efficacy 
of metronomic chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin 
on murine mammary adenocarcinomas. Ann. Oncol. 24:2310–2316. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/annonc 
/mdt164
 1989
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
Maltby, R., M.P
. Leatham-Jensen, T. Gibson, P
.S. Cohen, and T. Conway. 
2013. Nutritional basis for colonization resistance by human commensal 
Escherichia coli strains HS and Nissle 1917 against E. coli O157:H7 in 
the mouse intestine. PLoS One. 8:e53957. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/
journal 
.pone 
.0053957
Marco, A.J., J. Altimira, N. Prats, S. López, L. Dominguez, M. Domingo, and 
V
. 
Briones. 1997. Penetration of Listeria monocytogenes in mice infected 
by the oral route. Microb. Pathog. 23:255–263. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/mpat 
.1997 
.0144
Melton-Witt, J.A., S.M. Rafelski, D.A. Portnoy, and A.I. Bakardjiev. 2012. 
Oral infection with signature-tagged Listeria monocytogenes reveals 
organ-specific growth and dissemination routes in guinea pigs. Infect. 
Immun. 80:720–732. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/IAI 
.05958 
-11
Mook, P
., S.J. O’Brien, and I.A. Gillespie. 2011. Concurrent conditions and 
human listeriosis, England, 1999-2009. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 17:38–43. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3201 
/eid1701 
.101174
Myers-Morales, T., K.M. Bussell, and S.E. D’Orazio. 2013. Fecal transplan-
tation does not transfer either susceptibility or resistance to food borne 
listeriosis in C57BL/6 and BALB/c/By mice. F1000 Res. 2:177.
Narushima, S., Y
. Sugiura, K. Oshima, K. Atarashi, M. Hattori, M. Suematsu, 
and K. Honda. 2014. Characterization of the 17 strains of regulatory T 
cell-inducing human-derived Clostridia. Gut Microbes. 5:333–339. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4161 
/gmic 
.28572
Nikitas, G., C. Deschamps, O. Disson, T. Niault, P
. Cossart, and M. Lecuit. 
2011. 
Transcytosis of Listeria monocytogenes across the intestinal barrier 
upon specific targeting of goblet cell accessible E-cadherin. J. Exp. Med. 
208:2263–2277. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20110560
Okamoto, M., A. Nakane, and 
T. Minagawa. 1994. Host resistance to an intra-
gastric infection with Listeria monocytogenes in mice depends on cellu-
lar immunity and intestinal bacterial flora. Infect. Immun. 62:3080–3085.
Pamer, E.G. 2004. Immune responses to Listeria monocytogenes. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 4:812–823. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri1461
Pinner, R.W
., A. Schuchat, B. Swaminathan, P
.S. Hayes, K.A. Deaver, R.E. 
Weaver, B.D. Plikaytis, M. Reeves, C.V
. Broome, and J.D. Wenger. The 
Listeria Study Group. 1992. Role of foods in sporadic listeriosis. II. 
Microbiologic and epidemiologic investigation. JAMA. 267:2046–2050. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1001 
/jama 
.1992 
.03480150052036
Pron, B., C. Boumaila, F
. Jaubert, S. Sarnacki, J.P
. Monnet, P
. Berche, and J.L. 
Gaillard. 1998. Comprehensive study of the intestinal stage of listeriosis 
in a rat ligated ileal loop system. Infect. Immun. 66:747–755.
Ruhe, Z.C., D.A. Low, and C.S. Hayes. 2013. Bacterial contact-dependent 
growth inhibition. Trends Microbiol. 21:230–237. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.tim 
.2013 
.02 
.003
Saraoui, T., P
.A. Fall, F
. Leroi, J.P
. Antignac, S. Chéreau, and M.F
. Pilet. 2016. 
Inhibition mechanism of Listeria monocytogenes by a bioprotective 
bacteria Lactococcus piscium CNCM I-4031. Food Microbiol. 53(Pt 
A):70–78. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.fm 
.2015 
.01 
.002
Schloss, P
.D., S.L. Westcott, T. Ryabin, J.R. Hall, M. Hartmann, E.B. 
Hollister, R.A. Lesniewski, B.B. Oakley, D.H. Parks, C.J. Robinson, et 
al. 2009. Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, 
community-supported software for describing and comparing microbial 
communities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75:7537–7541. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/AEM 
.01541 
-09
Schuchat, A., K.A. Deaver, J.D. Wenger, B.D. Plikaytis, L. Mascola, R.W
. 
Pinner, A.L. Reingold, and C.V
. Broome. The Listeria Study Group. 
1992. Role of foods in sporadic listeriosis. I. Case-control study of 
dietary risk factors. JAMA. 267:2041–2045. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1001 
/
jama 
.1992 
.03480150047035
Swaminathan, B., and P
. Gerner-Smidt. 2007. The epidemiology of human 
listeriosis. Microbes Infect. 9:1236–1243. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.micinf 
.2007 
.05 
.011
Teixeira, H.C., and S.H. Kaufmann. 1994. Role of NK1.1+ cells in ex-
perimental listeriosis. NK1+ cells are early IFN-gamma producers 
but impair resistance to Listeria monocytogenes infection. J. Immunol. 
152:1873–1882.
Thäle, C., and A.F
. Kiderlen. 2005. Sources of interferon-gamma (IFN-
gamma) in early immune response to Listeria monocytogenes. 
Immunobiology. 210:673–683. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.imbio 
.2005 
.07 
.003
Ubeda, C., L. Lipuma, A. Gobourne, A. Viale, I. Leiner, M. Equinda, R. 
Khanin, and E.G. Pamer. 2012. Familial transmission rather than 
defective innate immunity shapes the distinct intestinal microbiota of 
TLR-deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. 209:1445–1456. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20120504
Ubeda, C., 
V
. Bucci, S. Caballero, A. Djukovic, N.C. Toussaint, M. Equinda, L. 
Lipuma, L. Ling, A. Gobourne, D. No, et al. 2013. Intestinal microbiota 
containing Barnesiella species cures vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus 
faecium colonization. Infect. Immun. 81:965–973. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/IAI 
.01197 
-12
van Nood, E., A. Vrieze, M. Nieuwdorp, S. Fuentes, E.G. Zoetendal, W
.M. 
de Vos, C.E. Visser, E.J. Kuijper, J.F
. Bartelsman, J.G. Tijssen, et al. 2013. 
Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 368:407–415. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMoa1205037
Vázquez-Boland, J.A., M. Kuhn, P
. Berche, T. Chakraborty, G. Domínguez-
Bernal, W
. Goebel, B. González-Zorn, J. Wehland, and J. Kreft. 2001. 
Listeria pathogenesis and molecular virulence determinants. Clin. 
Microbiol. Rev. 14:584–640. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/CMR 
.14 
.3 
.584 
-640 
.2001
Viaud, S., F
. Saccheri, G. Mignot, T. Yamazaki, R. Daillère, D. Hannani, 
D.P
. Enot, C. Pfirschke, C. Engblom, M.J. Pittet, et al. 2013. The 
intestinal microbiota modulates the anticancer immune effects of 
cyclophosphamide. Science. 342:971–976. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/
science 
.1240537
Viegas, N., L. Andzinski, C.F
. Wu, R.M. Komoll, N. Gekara, K.E. Dittmar, 
S. Weiss, and J. Jablonska. 2013. IFN-γ production by CD27+ NK cells 
exacerbates Listeria monocytogenes infection in mice by inhibiting 
granulocyte mobilization. Eur. J. Immunol. 43:2626–2637. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/eji 
.201242937
Vijayakumar, P
.P
., and P
.M. Muriana. 2015. A Microplate Growth Inhibition 
Assay for Screening Bacteriocins against Listeria monocytogenes to 
Differentiate Their Mode-of-Action. Biomolecules. 5:1178–1194. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3390 
/biom5021178
Wollert, T., B. Pasche, M. Rochon, S. Deppenmeier, J. van den Heuvel, A.D. 
Gruber, D.W
. Heinz, A. Lengeling, and W
.D. Schubert. 2007. Extending 
the host range of Listeria monocytogenes by rational protein design. 
Cell. 129:891–902. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2007 
.03 
.049
Zachar, Z., and D.C. Savage. 1979. Microbial interference and colonization 
of the murine gastrointestinal tract by Listeria monocytogenes. Infect. 
Immun. 23:168–174.
Zhu, W
.M., W
. Liu, and D.Q. Wu. 2000. Isolation and characterization of 
a new bacteriocin from Lactobacillus gasseri KT7. J. Appl. Microbiol. 
88:877–886. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1046 
/j 
.1365 
-2672 
.2000 
.01027 
.x
