 Antibiotic-Induced Changes in the Intestinal Microbiota and 
Disease
Simone Becattini1, Ying Taur2,3, and Eric G. Pamer1,2,3,*
1Immunology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.
2Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.
3Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Abstract
The gut microbiota is a key player in many physiological and pathological processes occurring in 
humans. Recent investigations suggest that the efficacy of some clinical approaches depends on 
the action of commensal bacteria. Antibiotics are invaluable weapons to fight infectious diseases. 
However, by altering the composition and functions of the microbiota, they can also produce long-
lasting deleterious effects for the host. The emergence of multidrug-resistant pathogens raises 
concerns about the common, and at times inappropriate, use of antimicrobial agents. Here we 
review the most recently discovered connections between host pathophysiology, microbiota, and 
antibiotics highlighting technological platforms, mechanistic insights, and clinical strategies to 
enhance resistance to diseases by preserving the beneficial functions of the microbiota.
Keywords
Antibiotics; Gut Microbiota; Immunity; Disease; Antibiotic Resistance
In the past two decades, the gut microbiota has been recognized as a fundamental player 
orchestrating host physiology and pathology (Box 1). Trillions of bacteria inhabit the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract of complex metazoans including humans, greatly expanding the 
host genetic repertoire [1]. This translates into the possibility for the host to perform 
functions that are not encoded by its own genome: commensals protect from pathogen 
invasion, extract additional energy from food, synthesize key molecules for tissue 
development, in a way that is highly specialized with respect to their location along the GI 
tract [2-4].
*Correspondence: ; Email: pamere@mskcc.org 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Trends Mol Med. 2016 June ; 22(6): 458–478. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2016.04.003.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Although the physiology of virtually all organs is influenced by the microbiota [5, 6], the 
intestinal mucosa and its immune components, are most affected by this symbiosis [7]. Here 
we first review recent findings elucidating the impact of the microbiota on the immune 
system. Second we discuss the involvement of gut commensals in the pathogenesis of 
disease. Third, we examine the role of antibiotics in perturbing or driving these processes. 
And finally, we discuss the mechanisms of antibiotic resistance development and spread, as 
well as the proposed approaches to overcome the drawbacks of antibiotic therapy.
Beneficial Roles of the Microbiota
The gut microbiota exerts many beneficial functions for the host, to a level that it can be 
considered an additional organ [8]. For example, commensal bacteria convert primary bile 
acids into secondary bile acids, thus allowing lipid adsorption. They also produce vitamins 
of the B and K groups and ferment otherwise indigestible plant-derived fibers producing 
short chain fatty acids (SCFAs, see Glossary) that feed enterocytes and modulate immune 
functions [2, 3]. Furthermore, the microbiota drives intestinal development by promoting 
vascularization, villus thickening, mucosal surface widening, mucus production, cellular 
proliferation and maintenance of epithelial junctions [9-11]. Notably, the influence of the 
microbiota is not limited to the intestine, and affects the physiology of most host organs, 
even the brain [9, 12-15].
One of the most prominent roles of the gut microbiota is to promote the development and 
education of the immune system, both locally and systemically, as described below.
Education of the Immune System
The close proximity of dense microbial populations to host tissues poses risks of invasion 
and the immune system must thoroughly monitor bacteria present in the gut lumen (Box 2). 
Nonetheless, the microbiota is allowed to prosper on the surface of the intestinal mucosa, 
orchestrating the overall physiology of the tissue lying underneath. This concept was 
established with the observation that antibiotic-treatment worsens the severity of DSS-
induced colitis in mice, by depleting microbial ligands that normally signal through Toll-
like receptors (TLRs) and function to ensure expression of tissue homeostasis and repair 
mediators [16] (Figure 1, Figure 2).
All branches of the immune system rely on this tonic signaling to properly function (Figure 
1). Microbiota-derived LPS maintains basal level expression of RegIII-γ (a bactericidal C-
type lectin) in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and Paneth cells. RegIII-γ is not detected in 
germ-free (GF) mice [17], and even short-term antibiotic treatment impairs its expression, 
rendering mice susceptible to vancomycin-resistant enterococcus (VRE) infection, a defect 
that can be reverted by oral administration of LPS [18]. Similarly, commensal flagellin 
sensing by TLR5 on CD103+CD11b+ lamina propria (LP) dendritic cells (DCs) 
contributes to maintenance of RegIII-γ expression. Upon TLR5 signaling, DCs produce 
IL-23, promoting IL-22 release by innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) and therefore, RegIII-γ 
expression in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) [19, 20].
Becattini et al.
Page 2
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Granulocytes also receive commensal cues, which they sense while residing in the bone 
marrow (BM). NOD1-mediated sensing of meso-diaminopimelic acid (DAP) promotes 
neutrophil-mediated killing of pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus 
pneumoniae [21, 22]. In GF mice reconstituted with Escherichia coli, DAP was detected in 
the blood and BM over the course of three days, showing that bacterial ligands from the 
intestinal lumen can have systemic distribution and therefore, a systemic effect [22]. 
Moreover, perinatal antibiotic exposure alters neutrophil number and functions by impairing 
G-CSF and IL-17 production, predisposing neonates to increased risk of E. coli or Klebsiella 
pneumonia-induced sepsis [23]. Similarly, antibiotic-treatment perturbs the basophil 
compartment in the blood and BM of mice by acting through a Th2-IL-4-IgE pathway, 
which leads to exacerbated allergic syndromes [24].
Professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) also rely on the microbiota to orchestrate the 
immune response. For instance, DC migration and IL-1β/IL-18 production have been shown 
to be impaired in antibiotic-treated mice infected with influenza virus in an inflammasome-
dependent manner [25]. Immunoglobulin levels, T cell numbers and IFN-γ production were 
consequently affected, resulting in increased viral titers. However, rectal stimulation with 
TLR agonists restored lung immunity in this study, indicating that microbial signals from the 
intestine can modulate and re-establish systemic immunity.
Antibiotics have been shown to impair immunity against lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus 
(LCMV) in mice, by lowering the expression of antiviral genes such as Ifnb and Irf7 in lung 
macrophages, resulting in defects in CD8+ T cell expansion, as well as in IFN-γ/TNF-α and 
IgG production [26]. Another study reported that splenic macrophages from GF and 
antibiotic-treated mice also failed to prime NK cells because of reduced chromatin 
accessibility in the promoter region of genes encoding for cytokines such as type I IFNs (α, 
β), IL6 and TNF-α [27]. As a result, antibiotic-treated mice failed to control infection with 
mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV) [27].
With regard to adaptive immune cells, the activity of T lymphocytes is severely impaired by 
disruption of the dialogue between the immune system and the microbiota, as in the case of 
antibiotic exposure.
GF mice exhibit aberrant spleen architecture, decreased numbers of CD4+ T lymphocytes in 
lymphoid organs, and an increased Th2/Th1 ratio [28]. Reconstitution of mice with 
Bacteroides fragilis, an abundant commensal, reverts these defects via immunogenic 
presentation of the zwitterionic polysaccharide PSA and priming of splenic Th1 cells [28]. 
The biology of Th17 cells is particularly interconnected with the activity of luminal bacteria. 
Indeed, Th17 differentiation in the small intestine (SI) LP depends on the microbiota; GF 
mice have a reduced Th17 compartment that is restored by introduction of fecal material 
from conventional mice [29]. Of note, ATP, likely of commensal origin, contributes to the 
conversion of naïve T cells into Th17 in the intestinal LP [30]. Prominent inducers of Th17 
differentiation are segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB), spore-forming anaerobic Gram+ 
bacilli residing in the terminal ileum of some mouse strains [31, 32]. Accordingly, treatment 
with Gram+-targeting antibiotics impairs Th17 development in mice [29]. Mice 
reconstituted with SFB-lacking microbiota develop a reduced intestinal Th17 compartment 
Becattini et al.
Page 3
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and are therefore more susceptible to Clostridium rodentium challenge, a model for human 
enterohemorrhagic infections [29].
Commensal bacteria are detected by T cells, and most mouse LP Th17 T cells recognize 
SFB-derived antigens [21]. Physical interactions between SFB and enterocytes, to which the 
bacteria are tightly anchored, are required for the induction of Th17-polarizing molecules 
(SAA, IL-1β) [33, 34].
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) have a fundamental protective role against autoimmune and 
chronic inflammatory diseases, such as IBD. Commensal sensing by LP-resident phagocytes 
promotes release of retinoic acid (RA) and IL-10 in mice, leading to the generation and 
expansion of Tregs, a mechanism that is important in establishing tolerance to food antigens 
[35].
Commensal Clostridia belonging to clusters IV and XIVa have been shown to promote 
accumulation of Tregs in the colon by increasing TGF-β production in IECs, thus protecting 
mice from DSS-induced colitis and strengthening oral tolerance [36]. A follow up study 
described a protective consortium of 17 clostridia strains isolated from a human fecal 
sample, a community with therapeutic potential for allergic or inflammatory diseases such as 
colitis [37]. Recently, three different laboratories have identified microbiota-derived SCFAs 
(particularly propionate and butyrate), to be responsible for Treg differentiation/
accumulation [38-40]. Indeed, SCFAs were present at reduced concentrations in the fecal 
pellets of GF or antibiotic-treated mice, and oral administration of SCFAs protected mice 
from T cell-induced colitis by inducing immunosuppressive Tregs [38-40]. SCFAs were 
found to act directly on T cells via the receptor GPCR43, thus enhancing FoxP3 expression 
through DNA acetylation, and on DCs, conferring a higher capacity to drive naïve T cell 
differentiation into Tregs [38-40]. Notably, microbiota-produced SCFAs can also promote 
tolerance in non-intestinal tissue. SCFAs were reported to drive cathelicidin-related 
antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP) production in pancreatic β cells in mice, promoting a 
regulatory fate in macrophages, which enhanced the priming of Tregs [41]. In this study, 
CRAMP treatment of NOD mice ameliorated diabetes, while antibiotic treatment favored 
priming of diabetogenic T cells, thus promoting disease progression. Female NOD mice 
displayed lower SCFA production than in male NOD mice, and their CRAMP levels could 
be restored by conventionalization with feces from males, resulting in protection from 
diabetes. This falls in line with findings from a previous report, showing that microbiota 
from males could partially protect NOD females from diabetes by inducing high levels of 
circulating testosterone, glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids [42]. Androgens are in fact 
known to limit diabetes [43], possibly by reducing T cell proliferation and polarization 
towards a Th1 cell fate [44, 45].
Finally, SCFAs can also promote T cell tolerance in allergic diseases models. Mice fed a 
high fiber diet have shown increased levels of circulating SCFAs in a model of intranasal 
challenge with house dust mite (HDM) extract; the SCFAsprevented lung allergic 
inflammation by acting on the propionate receptor GPR41, and promoting the development 
of phagocytes with reduced Th2-polarizing capacity [46]. Collectively, these murine studies 
Becattini et al.
Page 4
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 show that commensal bacteria contribute to the maintenance of immune tolerance in the 
host, principally through induction of regulatory T cells.
B cell-mediated immunity is also affected by perturbation of the microbiota. In fact, 
immunoglobulin titers are decreased in mice treated with antibiotics prior to viral infection 
[25, 26]. Furthermore, sensing of commensal-derived LPS has been shown to be necessary 
for the development of B1 cells in mouse spleen and for the maintenance of basal levels of 
circulating IgM, which exert a protective role in the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-
induced sepsis model [47].
Surprisingly, gut microbes are capable of modulating vaccination outcomes. In a recent 
study, TIV (influenza trivalent inactivated) and other unadjuvanted vaccines were reported 
to induce IgG and IgM production in a TLR5-dependent manner through the microbiota in 
mice and, possibly, humans, as suggested by the correlation between leukocyte TLR5 
expression levels and anti-influenza antibody titers in cohorts of vaccinees [48]. TIV-
challenged antibiotic-treated (and TLR5-deficient, TLR5−/−) mice exhibited defective 
antibody production, but administration of the TLR5-agonist flagellin, restored the humoral 
response. TLR5 signaling had an effect on short-lived plasma cells, enhancing survival/
differentiation and antibody production, as well as on lymph node (LN) medullary cord 
macrophages, leading to the production of plasma cell-sustaining factors such as TNF-α, 
IL-6, and APRIL.
The described studies provide substantial demonstration of a strong influence of the gut 
microbiota on the immune response. This connection is currently being investigated in the 
context of different pathological conditions and therapeutic approaches. In this regard, it is 
of particular interest that the gut microbiota has been recently proposed to modulate the 
efficacy of anti-cancer therapies (Box 3), rapidly becoming an area of active research.
Colonization Resistance
The microbiota can confer protection against pathogens, a phenomenon referred to as 
colonization resistance, which can be severely impaired by antibiotic treatment [4]. 
Colonization resistance takes place through direct (not requiring host involvement) or 
indirect mechanisms (ultimately mediated by the host response, as mentioned above for the 
modulation of AMPs) [18, 19]. Mucus production is another mediator of indirect 
colonization resistance. Treatment with metronidazole, which selectively depletes anaerobes, 
but not streptomycin, reduced the thickness of the inner mucus layer in the large intestine 
(LI) – a process that depends on NLRP6 – and increased susceptibility to oral C. rodentium 
infection in mice [49, 50].
Another example of colonization resistance is that mediated by commensal anaerobes such 
as Blautia producta and B. thetaiothaomicron, that confer transkingdom resistance to C. 
albicans in a mouse model of oral infection by inducing expression of the hypoxic factor 
HIF1-α and production of the antimicrobial peptide CRAMP (LL37) [51].
Bifidobacterium longum has been shown to protect mice from enterohemorrhagic E. coli 
O157 infection through the production of SCFAs, that prevent IEC apoptosis and 
Becattini et al.
Page 5
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inflammation, thus preserving gut epithelium integrity, and reducing the spread of Stx2 toxin 
into the bloodstream, ultimately improving host survival [52].
In humans, recurrent infection with C. difficile occurs in hospitalized patients, in particular 
those undergoing antibiotic treatment, causing diseases ranging from mild diarrhea to deadly 
toxic megacolon. Colonization resistance against C. difficile presents itself in healthy 
individuals, and transfer of healthy microbiota is currently being performed to treat patients 
with recurrent infections [53]. Of note, the commensal bacterium C. scindens can inhibit 
growth of C. difficile through the generation of secondary bile acids deoxycholic acid 
(DCA) and lithocholic acid (LCA) [54]. Reconstitution with C. scindens alone or within a 
bacterial consortium, protected antibiotic-treated mice from C. difficile intestinal 
colonization. in this study, C. scindens was also associated to protection from C. difficile 
colonization in patients receiving allogeneic haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation [54].
By combining the study of microbiota recovery in human samples from infected patients, 
and GF mouse reconstitution, Ruminococcus obeum was found to provide direct 
colonization resistance against Vibrium cholerae (responsible for cholera disease). Through 
the LuxS-based AI-2 quorum sensing signaling system, whose expression is enhanced in the 
presence of V. cholerae, R. obeum induces down-regulation of virulence and colonization 
factors in the pathogen, promoting its clearance [55]. Moreover, enterococci carrying a 
plasmid encoding for bacteriocin bac-21 were shown to outcompete established VRE 
colonization upon continuous administration of the pathogen in drinking water to mice 
harboring an intact microbiota [56].
Thus, taken from these examples, it is clear that commensals can directly or indirectly 
protect from pathogens, and antibiotic use severely impairs this function, which in turn 
increases the risk of host infection.
Gut Microbiota and Pathogenesis
The microbiota can contribute to a variety of diseases through different mechanisms, 
including production of noxious catabolites, a capacity to overgrow, to sustain inflammation, 
or to provide support for pathogens. Many factors, such as diet, underlying inflammation 
and dysbiosis, can modulate such pathogenic potential. In the next section, we discuss 
recent literature on the role of gut commensal bacteria in disease pathogenesis .
The Microbiota in Diet-Promoted Disease
Diet profoundly influences gut microbiota composition and functions [57], an effect that can 
promote disease. Consumption of artificial sweeteners in mice and humans has been shown 
to lead to deregulation of the intestinal microbiota, with altered glycan degradation capacity 
promoting decreased glucose tolerance, a pre-diabetic condition [58]. An important role for 
the microbiome in modulating glycemic responses has been recently demonstrated, with the 
development of an effective machine-learning algorithm to predicti postprandial glucose 
levels in humans based on several personal as well biochemical parameters, including the 
composition of the microbiota in healthy individuals[59]. In this study, personalized dietary 
interventions adopted on the basis of algorithm predictions, significantly altered microbiota 
Becattini et al.
Page 6
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 composition while improving glycemic control, suggesting that modulation of microbiome 
configuration through diet could be used to prevent diabetes-predisposing conditions.
A correlation between certain bacterial taxa and type 2 diabetes has been proposed, based on 
analyses of human gut metagenomes [60, 61]. However, a recent study suggested that patient 
treatment with the drug metformin, a variable that subjects had not been stratified for 
previously, constituted the main determinant of microbial signatures in diabetic cohorts [62]. 
This finding demonstrates that multiple variables can influence gut microbiota composition 
in disease [63].
Gut microbiota plays a key role in the pathogenesis of obesity. Indeed, experiments have 
shown that the condition can be transferred from obese mice or humans to healthy mice via 
conventionalization (i.e. microbiota transfer by feeding fecal material) [64, 65]. These 
studies strongly suggest that diet is responsible for the selection of commensal strains with 
enhanced energy-harvesting capacity.
Obese mice harbor an altered microbiota enriched in Clostridia that produces high quantities 
of DCA, contributing to liver inflammation, and predisposing the host to an increased risk of 
developing hepatic cancer [66]. Low fat diet, antibiotic treatment or pharmacological 
inhibition of microbial conversion of primary to secondary bile acids has had a protective 
effect in this model. Along similar lines, in a mouse model of colorectal cancer, microbiota-
derived butyrate enhanced intestinal epithelial cell proliferation, as well as the occurrence of 
intestinal polyps and tumor development [67]. In this report, low carbohydrate diet or 
treatment with selected antibiotics could prevent polyp formation.
Furthermore, a series of recent studies [68-70] revealed a link between microbiota and 
atherogenesis. Dietary phosphatydilcholine (PC), a lipid broadly present in foods, and L-
carnitine (LC), a molecule abundant in red meat, are transformed by the microbiota into pro-
atherogenic trimethylamine (TMA). LC- or PC- supplemented diets were found to induce 
higher atheroma formation and wider aortic lesions in ApoE- mice, and disease was 
ameliorated by antibiotic treatment [68, 69]. Also in humans, PC or LC administration 
augmented TMA plasma levels, and increased the risk for cardiovascular disease; notably, 
antibiotic treatment dramatically reduced TMA levels in these subjects [68, 70]. Vegan or 
vegetarian subjects exhibited a reduced or non-existent capacity to produce TMA upon LC 
supplementation, and it was proposed that bacteria, presumably selected through the host’s 
diet, were incapable of performing this biochemical conversion [68]. Overall these studies 
convincingly demonstrate a prominent role for the gut microbiota in diet-driven 
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Interestingly, a follow-up study showed that feeding mice an 
analogue of choline, which inhibits TMA production by blocking microbial TMA lyases, 
could prevent atherosclerosis in mice [71]. Thus, the microbiota represent a promising target 
for pharmacological therapeutic intervention in atherosclerosis.
Commensal bacteria can also impair drug activity. Eggerthella lenta, a human commensal, 
reduces digoxin, a drug used to prevent heart failure and arrhythmia, thus destroying its 
biological activity. This activity is enhanced in the presence of other commensals, but is 
repressed by arginine, which can be supplemented through a high-protein diet [72].
Becattini et al.
Page 7
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The Microbiota in Infection, Inflammation and Aberrant Immunity
A strong link between the microbiota and intestinal inflammation has been established. For 
instance, it has been shown that NLRP6-deficient mice harbor a microbiota that is more 
prone to induce colitis upon DSS treatment, a phenotype that could be transferred to healthy 
WT mice upon conventionalization [73].
Upon dysbiosis or inflammation, pathobionts lodged among healthy commensal species can 
promote disease. For instance, like other enterobacteriaceae, E. coli can utilize nitrate as an 
electron acceptor for respiration, which confers a selective growth advantage following 
iNOS gene activation upon DSS-induced inflammation in mice [74]. This has been proposed 
to be a leading cause of inflammation-related dysbiosis [74]. As another example, DSS-
induced intestinal damage has been demonstrated to allow the human and mouse commensal 
Proteus mirabilis to engage the NLRP3 inflammasome on mouse CCR2+Ly6Chi monocytes 
via release of the Hemolysin A toxin [75]. Consequently, NLRP3 activation leads to 
production of IL1β, fostering inflammation and inducing colitis which can be ameliorated by 
antibiotic treatment. By contrast, antibiotic treatment has itself been reported to promote 
sepsis in mice in at least one model of DSS-induced colitis, by inducing overgrowth of the 
antibiotic resistant commensal strain of E. coli O21:H+, which carries a virulence gene 
cluster [76]. Upon expansion and DSS-induced epithelial damage, this pathobiont could 
enter the circulation and induce IL1-β production by macrophages, thus promoting sepsis 
[76].
The microbiota can favor or amplify the activity of pathogens, and antibiotics play an 
important role in this process. Enterohemorrhagic E. coli carries a fucose-sensing system 
(FusKR) that regulates virulence gene expression and therefore competition with 
commensals [77]. In vitro, B. thetaiotaomicron can cleave off fucose from mucin and 
enhance virulence of E. coli. In vivo, E. coli lacking FusKR is outcompeted by a wild type 
strain [77]. These data suggest that in vivo, B. thetaiotaomicron liberates fucose, thus fueling 
pathogenic E. coli growth. In addition, B. thetaiotaomicron also carries sialidases that can 
cleave sialic acid from mucus, although the bacterium lacks the enzymatic machinery 
necessary to catabolize such sugar [78]. In mono-associated gnotobiotic mice, B. 
thetaiothaomicron-liberated sialic acid can support the expansion of pathogens such as C. 
difficile or S. enterica upon oral infection. Accordingly, pathogen burden is reduced upon 
infection of mice monocolonized with a sialidase-deficient B. thetaiothaomicron strain [78]. 
In conventional mice, antibiotics reduce the amount of commensals competing for sugars 
liberated prior to treatment, increasing nutrient availability and favoring pathogen expansion 
througha limited time-window (peaking at day 1 and ending at day 3 post-antibiotic 
treatment for this study) [78].
Commensal bacteria have also been implicated in long-term sequelae from resolved Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis infections in conventional mice, such as those resulting in leakage of 
gut-draining lymphatic vessels and deviated trafficking of CD11b+CD103+ DCs to adipose 
tissues rather than to mesenteric LNs (MLNs) [79].. This “immunological scar” has been 
found to impair mucosal immune responses as well as oral tolerance to food antigens. DC 
Becattini et al.
Page 8
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 migration was not impaired in GF mice, and was restored in conventional mice upon 
antibiotic treatment, implicating a role for the microbiota in promoting scar formation [79].
Finally, the gut microbiota has also been associated with the induction of autoimmunity. For 
instance, R161H mice bear transgenic T cells that recognize the retinal photoreceptor RBP3 
and spontaneously develop autoimmune uveitis over time. However, as RBP3 is confined to 
the eye, which is an immune-privileged site, it has been unclear how auto-reactive T cells 
could encounter the cognate antigen and be activated prior to migrating to the eye and 
promoting inflammation. Recent data have emerged to suggest that cross-reactivity to 
unidentified commensal antigens triggers an autoimmune response in this model [80]. 
Indeed, effector auto-reactive T cells could be detected in R161H mice lacking RBP3 as 
well, especially in the intestinal LP, suggesting a nonendogenous source for cognate peptide. 
Autoreactive T cells responded to stimulation with cecal content. Importantly, the onset of 
uveitis in R161H mice could be delayed upon antibiotic treatment [80].
Collectively, the discussed data demonstrate that the gut microbiota, especially with 
dysbiosis, can promote a variety of pathological conditions. In some of these cases, targeted 
treatments to selectively deplete the involved pathogenic species may be considered as a 
promising therapeutic approach.
Antibiotic Treatment Induces Long-Lasting Changes in the Microbiota 
Correlating with Disease
Numerous studies have confirmed that antibiotics have a tremendous impact on the 
composition and functionality of the human microbiota.
One study documented that healthy volunteers treated for 1 week or less with antibiotics, 
reported effects on their bacterial flora that persisted six months to two years after treatment, 
including a dramatic loss in diversity as well as in representation of specific taxa, insurgence 
of antibiotic resistant strains, and up-regulation of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) [81]. 
Antibiotic treatment in mice recapitulates the impact and long-term shifts in human gut 
communities. For example, a single dose of Clindamycin has been shown to induce 
profound changes in mouse microbiota composition and, consequently, to confer long-
lasting susceptibility to C. difficile infection [82].
One potential explanation for the magnitude and duration of antibiotic effects in vivo, is the 
remarkable interdependence of different bacterial taxa. For instance, Gram− commensals 
can be depleted by vancomycin, which is a Gram+-targeting drug [83]. As a consequence of 
its profound effect on gut autochthonous (native) communities, vancomycin has been shown 
to cause long-lasting susceptibility to a variety of secondary infections in both humans and 
mice [84].
Microbiota development during early life stages of humans and mice is critical, and its 
perturbation predisposes to disease in later infancy or adulthood, particularly in the case of 
allergic and metabolic syndromes.
Becattini et al.
Page 9
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For instance, while vaginally delivered neonates acquire bacteria through the birth canal, the 
microbiota of C-section delivered infants resembles that populating the skin of adults, with 
Streptococci being a dominant species [85]. It has been posited that this could represent a 
factor predisposing individuals to subsequent infections [85]. Notably, swabbing C-section-
delivered newborns with gauze incubated in the vagina has been shown to partially restore a 
normal microbiota, albeit with effects that remain to be ascertained [86].
Surveys on thousands of children have highlighted a link between the use of antibiotics 
during the first year of life and development of asthma by the sixth-seventh year [87, 88]. 
Early use of macrolides in Finnish children was found to generate a distinct microbial profile 
characterized by a loss of Actinobacteriaceae and an increase in Bacteroidetes and 
Proteobacteria, an induction of ARGs, and a decrease in bile salt hydrolases. Such profile 
positively correlated with either a later development of asthma, or an increase in body mass 
index [89]. Concordant with these findings, studies in mice have shown that neonatal (from 
pre-birth) but not adult exposure to antibiotics, resulted in exacerbated asthma following 
intranasal challenge with ovalbumin [90]. Along similar lines, low dose penicillin (LDP) 
administration was shown to induce stronger physiological alterations if administered from 
the beginning of gestation, rather than at weaning, confirming a critical role for vertical 
acquisition of microbiota [91]. In particular, following early LDP administration, body mass 
and fat content were increased in adulthood, while the expression of intestinal immune genes 
coding for proteins such asRegIIIγ, β-defensins, and IL-17 was decreased.
Therefore, antibiotic exposure, even for short periods of time and especially during infancy, 
has long-lasting effects on the microbiota, which can predispose the host to a variety of 
diseases, some of which remain to be potentially identified. This evidently represents a 
matter of critical importance for public health.
Generation of Antibiotic Resistance: the Driving Forces
Antibiotic-resistant pathogens are a major public health burden. However, ARGs are highly 
represented not only in such pathogens, but also among human commensal bacteria. An 
early survey suggested that a sizable fraction of the anaerobe compartment within the 
microbiota of healthy subjects is resistant to one or multiple antibiotics, with the proportion 
of such bacteria increasing following antibiotic treatment [92]. A more recent metagenomic 
analysis of the gut microbiota obtained from two healthy subjects estimated that multidrug-
resistant species accounted for 20% of total bacteria [93]. As discussed below, exogenous 
antibiotics can contribute considerably to such accumulation of ARGs. However, 
antimicrobial molecules and resistance mechanisms are abundant in any bacterial 
community, and play an important evolutionary and regulatory role. Accordingly, ARGs 
were identified in microbiota from an 11th century AD mummy [94], in 30000 year-old 
permafrost sediment [95], as well as in a cave in New Mexico that had been isolated for 
millions of years [96]; none of these environments could have been influenced by the 
presence of modern day drugs. Surprisingly, both the DNA sequences and the structural 
organization within AR operons identified in these ancient bacteria were found to exhibit 
high similarity to those carried by currently circulating microbes [95]. Furthermore, 
Becattini et al.
Page 10
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 antibiotic resistance to multiple classes (up to 14) of antibiotics, even to semi-synthetic 
molecules, was also identified in these prehistoric samples [96].
It is recognized that at least 3 major forces drive the development and spread of antibiotic 
resistance in the host or in the environment: i) immune recognition and response; ii) 
bacterial competition within communities; iii) exogenous antibiotic pressure [97] (Figure 3).
Antibiotic resistance can arise in bacteria that inhabit animal body sites as a means to escape 
host defense strategies. For instance, erythromycin resistance gained by mutation of the 23s 
rRNA sequence was found to concurrently confer resistance to recognition by TLR13, which 
also happens to bind the same molecular target, and is likely to exert selective pressure in 
vivo [98]. The commensal B. thethaiotaomicron is highly resistant to the cationic peptide 
polymyxin B, which is considered a model for mammalian AMPs. Transposon mutation 
libraries in B. thethaiotaomicron have led to the identification of the bacterial gene lpxF, 
which encodes a phosphatase acting on LPS to diminish its negative charge and 
consequently, impair polymyxin B ligation to the bacterium [99]. Notably, upon DSS- or C. 
rodentium-induced inflammation, lpxF-deficient bacteria were outcompeted by WT strains 
in mouse intestines, suggesting that bacterial resistance can be both induced and maintained 
by the immune response [99].
The development of antibiotic resistance in natural environments, due to competition among 
different bacterial taxa, is a well-documented event [95, 96]. Intra-species competition, 
however, is sufficient to drive acquisition of resistance [100]. Growth of methycillin-resistant 
S. aureus (MRSA) in a high Mg2+ concentration medium which favors biofilm formation, 
has been shown to induce rapid generation of a mutated strain (W) that attempts to 
outcompete the WT strain (O) through secretion of surfactant molecules and the bacteriocin 
Bsa [100]. Increased Bsa concentrations drive in turn, the selection and expansion of a 
resistant S. aureus strain (Y), and as Bsa and vancomycin bind to a common target within 
the cell wall, the Y strain acquires resistance to the antibiotic, resulting in greater virulence 
in infected mice [100].
Finally, and most importantly, exogenous administration of antibiotics to a host can induce 
rapid expansion of ARGs (Box 4). In one study, pigs were fed a diet supplemented with a 
growth-enhancing antibiotic cocktail for two weeks. Subsequently, their microbiota showed 
increased expression of ARGs, conferring tolerance even to drugs that were not administered 
during the study [101]. That type of occurrence is of particular concern since drug-resistance 
genes can be horizontally transferred from soil bacteria, to pathogens [102]. Shotgun 
sequence analysis through an ARG-dedicated platform (PARFuMS) has in fact led to the 
identification of DNA cassettes conferring resistance to 7 different classes of antibiotics in 
soil bacteria, exhibiting perfect identity in coding and non-coding regions to genes encoded 
by common human pathogens, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Salmonella enterica. 
Some cassettes were flanked by transposable elements, strongly suggesting horizontal gene 
transfer between soil-resident and pathogenic bacteria [102].
Interestingly, a correlation was suggested between the increased use of tetracycline in 
Danish livestock and the prevalence of tetracycline-resistance genes in Danish human 
Becattini et al.
Page 11
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subject microbiomes, despite β-lactams being the most widely prescribed antibiotic to 
patients in the same period and region [103].
A detailed analysis of dozens of metagenomic datasets obtained from hosts (humans, 
animals) or environments (water, soil, etc) has identified housekeeping alleles of genes such 
as rpsL, rpoB, gyrA conferring resistance to three classes of broad spectrum antibiotics, 
segregating at high frequency [104]. Of note, nearly 40% of host-associated bacteria carried 
quinolone-resistance genes, even in subjects that had never been exposed clinically. The 
“resistome” is defined as the pool of all ARGs present in a given microbiome, and appears 
early in life, detectable in infants as early as two months after birth [105]. Interestingly, 
twins display remarkably greater resistome similarity to each other than to unrelated infants 
or their mothers, suggesting that vertical transmission does not play a crucial role in its 
establishment. Moreover, the resistome expands over time, as the number of ARGs within 
the human microbiome positively correlate with age [106].
Altogether, these data provide evidence that antibiotic-resistance is naturally present in 
bacterial communities, including the gut microbiota, where it can be induced by several 
driving forces. However, exposure to exogenous antibiotics via medical or industrial 
practices has a marked capacity to enhance the insurgence and spread of ARGs.
Antibiotic Resistance Generation: De Novo Mutations
As previously discussed, antibiotics exert a selective pressure that drives rapid development 
of resistant strains. This process generally requires multiple DNA mutations. To understand 
how such mutations are acquired, in one study, E. coli cultures were challenged with 
increasing doses of 3 different antibiotics for 20 days in vitro[107]. Antibiotic resistance was 
found to arise following similar or identical mutational patterns in replicate experiments;. 
mutations affecting the same, or functionally-analogous genes, consistently emerged in 
bacterial cultures treated with a given drug [107]. Mutations also occurred in multidrug 
resistance genes. Furthermore antibiotics with a common molecular target also induced 
resistance to one another. Thus, it appears that there is an evolutionary trajectory in the 
acquisition of mutations conferring antibiotic resistance [107].
Importantly, within a clonal bacterial population under antibiotic pressure, not all cells 
acquire resistance. “Bacterial charity work” has been described as a mechanism to enhance 
resistance of the whole community with respect to a single resistant clone in an initially 
homogeneous population [108]. This study documented that within an E. coli culture 
exposed to norfloxacin or gentamicin, only a few cells rapidly acquired resistance-conferring 
mutations. Surprisingly, the antibiotic-resistant cells did not outcompete the antibiotic-
sensitive members of the community, but rather, kept them alive. In fact, cells acquiring 
resistance to the drug also gained the ability (normally inhibited by antibiotics) to secrete 
indole, which acted on neighboring cells by activating defense mechanisms such as drug 
efflux pumps and oxidative-stress responses, ultimately allowing the survival of drug-
sensitive bacteria. This mechanism resulted in higher growth rates of the entire population 
when compared to those of isolated resistant clones, which displayed lower proliferative 
capacity due to the metabolic cost of acquired mutations [108]. This study highlighted how 
Becattini et al.
Page 12
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 acquisition of antibiotic resistance modifies ecological interactions within a homogeneous 
bacterial community, contributing to its own well-being. In well-mixed environments were 
different microbial taxa coexist in close proximity, distinct strains generally have the 
capacity to produce and to inactivate specific sets of anti-bacterial molecules. In this 
scenario, it has been proposed that leaky protection conferred by an antibiotic-degrading 
species to other surrounding bacteria is of public benefit [109]. In fact, ecological modeling 
has shown that in a bacterial consortium where every bacterial strain protects only itself 
from the action of a given antibiotic produced by a competing species (“rock, paper, 
scissors” model), fluctuations in the composition of the consortium increase, giving rise to a 
very unstable community that is ultimately dominated by one strain. On the contrary, if 
protection against a bactericidal molecule is provided in a leaky manner to surrounding 
species, -- by secretion of antibiotic-degrading enzymes in outer spaces, for instance-- the 
overall community composition is stabilized over time, becoming less subject to fluctuations 
[109]. Thus, antibiotic resistance plays a strong role in regulating microbial interactions and 
shaping microbial communities, possibly representing a prominent factor in the ecological 
regulation of the gut microbiota.
Antibiotic Resistance Genes are Spread via Horizontal Gene Transfer (HGT)
Bacteria can exchange ARGs via horizontal gene transfer (HGT). Specifically, HGT 
includes: i) transformation, the acquisition of DNA fragments from the environment; ii) 
conjugation, the delivery of genetic material from one cell to another through a pilus; iii) 
transduction, an exchange mediated by phages [97, 110]. All three mechanisms have been 
implicated in transfer of antibiotic resistance genes (Figure 3) [97, 110].
Generally speaking, HGT can take place among commensals, environmental bacteria or, 
importantly, between the two. For instance, a porphyranase necessary to process specific 
seaweed carbohydrates originally carried by a marine Bacteroidetes, Zobellia 
galactanivorans, was also found in commensal bacteria from Japanese, but not North 
American subjects [111]. As Japanese diets are highly enriched in seaweed containing 
porphyran, this work strongly implicated horizontal gene transfer between environmental 
and gut commensal bacterial species.
HGT of antibiotic resistance genes occurs at high rates among intestinal bacteria. In fact, 
clindamycin resistance transfer factor gene (BtgA) has been identified as carrying the 
highest number of SNPs within 200 human gut metagenomes, and other conjugal transfer 
factors have followed in this ranking [112].
Interestingly, all three mechanisms of HGT seem to be upregulated in bacteria upon 
antibiotic treatment (Figure 3).
Conjugation
Ciprofloxacin induces DNA damage-related SOS stress responses in E. coli, leading to a 
100-fold enhancement in conjugative transfer of SXT, a genetic element conferring 
resistance to several antibiotics. Notably, in recent decades, the SXT element has emerged, 
Becattini et al.
Page 13
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 presenting itself quite commonly in V. cholerae isolates from patients, potentially a result of 
antibiotic-induced resistance transfer [113].
Transduction
The phage metagenome (or “phageome”) recovered from the intestinal content of mice 
treated with ciprofloxacin or ampicillin is highly enriched in ARGs [114]. Furthermore, 
bacteriophages recovered from antibiotic-treated mice have been shown to be significantly 
more capable of transferring resistance to cultured microbiota ex vivo [114]. Phage genes 
conferring bacterial survival advantages under stress conditions (e.g. DNA repair enzymes), 
or an increase in fitness (e.g. carbohydrate degradation) were also enriched upon antibiotic 
treatment, suggesting that the ‘phageome’ can represent a reservoir for bacterial adaptation 
genes to be spread in times of need.
Transformation
Antibiotics and drugs interfering with DNA replication induce competence in bacteria, 
allowing acquisition of ARGs and other genetic material from the environment [115]. 
Treatment of S. pneumoniae with ciprofloxacin or HPUra (an inhibitor of DNA replication) 
has been shown to stall the progression of the DNA replication fork without inhibiting 
initiation of DNA replication [115]. This has been reported to result in increased copy 
numbers and, consequently, enhanced transcription of genes neighboring the origin of 
replication. Genes encoding for competence functions are located in this region, and 
consequently, they are upregulated in the presence of these drugs, promoting a state of 
competence.
Thus, ARGs spread among bacteria through conjugation, transduction and transformation, 
and this process is promoted by antibiotic exposure. As the human intestine is densely 
colonized with an amazing variety of microbes, antibiotic therapies are likely to promote 
diffusion of resistance genes within the microbiota, an aspect of antibiotic therapy that 
should not be neglected.
Moving Beyond Antibiotics
Considering the important roles of the microbiota in regulating host physiology and the 
multiple drawbacks of antibiotic use discussed above, finding alternative or complementary 
strategies to fight infections is imperative. Different promising approaches have been 
proposed to tackle this problem (Figure 4).
First and foremost, reforming or establishing a set of complementary public health measures 
can greatly diminish the need for antibiotic use. As pointed out by Laxminarayan [116], 
improving sanitation, expanding the use of vaccines, and strengthening hospital infection 
control have proven extremely effective tools in reducing the needs for antibiotic therapies. 
Moreover, reducing the unnecessary use of these molecules in farming practices must also 
be considered (Box 4).
Colonization resistance through microbiota transfer can substitute for antibiotics by 
restoring commensal communities (Figure 4). Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has 
Becattini et al.
Page 14
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 been shown to be more effective than conventional antibiotic therapy in the treatment of 
patients with recurrent C. difficile infection [53, 117]. Bacterial strains [54, 118, 119] and 
metabolites [54] associated with protection from C. difficile have now been identified, 
paving the way for eventual replacement of fecal material with selected probiotic strains or 
effector molecules. VRE colonizes the intestine following antibiotic treatment, prior to 
spreading to the bloodstream, and thus, represents a major threat for hospitalized patients 
[83]. In one study, transplantation of fecal microbiota containing Barnesiella species 
effectively cleared intestinal VRE from colonized mice, a promising finding that requires 
further investigation [120]. Enterococci carrying the conjugative plasmid pPD1, encoding 
for bacteriocin bac-21, were shown to outcompete VRE from mice colonized with the 
pathogen [56]. However, in this model, transfer of the plasmid to commensal bacteria was 
also observed, raising the possibility of pPD1 conjugation to VRE itself, and therefore, 
suggesting that caution should be taken with the clinical application of this approach.
Bacterial ligand administration following microbiota depletion can protect mice from 
infection . Systemic administration of TLR-5 agonist flagellin, or oral administration of 
TLR-4 agonist LPS, were shown to reinstate resistance to VRE or C. difficile in mice 
previously treated with antibiotics, through restoration of RegIII-γ production [18-20]. 
Moreover, R848, a synthetic agonist of TLR-7/8, orally delivered to mice, was reported to 
protect from VRE colonization [121]. Notably, R848 is already used in the clinics to treat 
papillomavirus infections, although it is topically administered. Thus, controlled 
administration of microbial ligands represents an important means by which to restore basal 
innate immune status and protection in hospitalized subjects undergoing antibiotic treatment.
Computational platforms and high-throughput screenings are currently being exploited in 
the quest for novel antimicrobial molecules. Screening of 2000 bacterial genomes from the 
human microbiome project have identified biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) encoding 
thiopeptides, abundantly present at multiple anatomical locations [122]. Lactocillin, a 
thiopeptide encoded by one such cluster (i.e. bgc66 from L. gasseri), has been produced and 
characterized, showing strong inhibitory activity against common pathogens such as S. 
aureus and G. vaginalis, but not against commensals [122]. Moreover, a high throughput 
screening of small molecules recently identified an inhibitor of riboflavin synthesis, called 
“ribocil”, that targets a regulatory non-coding region (i.e. riboswitch) in the mRNA of a 
synthase involved in the pathway, ribB [123]. Ribocil binding inhibits translation of ribB 
transcript in E. coli, inducing cell death by riboflavin starvation. Accordingly, ribocil 
administration, although only at high concentrations, significantly reduced bacterial burden 
in a mouse model of systemic infection with E. coli, suggesting that novel molecular targets 
may have a promising potential for drug development [123].
Recognition of the marked effect of antibiotics on microbiota composition has led to the 
search for a set of more narrow-spectrum bactericidal compounds. For instance, Thuricin-
CD, a bacteriocin produced by Bacillus thuringiensis, has been shown to be as effective as 
vancomycin or metronidazole against C. difficile without impacting microbiota composition 
in a fecal-culture system that models human colon [124]. Along the same lines, the 
bacteriocin Avidocin-CDs, engineered to selectively target the clinically relevant C. difficile 
strain BI/NAP1/027, has been reported to promote pathogen clearance in mice upon oral 
Becattini et al.
Page 15
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 administration. Furthermore, Avidocin-CDs, unlike antibiotics, was not found to interfere 
with the ability of the microbiota to provide colonization resistance [125].
Exploiting the principle of selective targeting, a recent study cleverly conjugated an 
analogue of rifampicin (i.e. rifalogue) and an S. aureus-specific antibody in order to target 
intracellular MRSA [126]. Indeed, intracellular MRSA represent an important pathogen 
reservoir that is shielded from antibiotic action. Mice challenged with infected cells rather 
than bacterial particles, were shown to present higher bacterial burdens despite vancomycin 
treatment [126]. In this study, rifalogue was conjugated to an S. aureus-specific antibody via 
a cleavable bridge so that opsonized MRSA, once phagocytosed, could be effectively killed 
by the protease-liberated antibiotic. Importantly, the Ab-rifalogue complex was more 
effective than uncoupled antibiotics in combating infection in an in vivo mouse model. This 
approach may be in principle, suitable for many intracellular pathogens.
Finally, a strategy to eliminate selected bacterial targets exploiting the CRISPRCAS9 system 
was recently proposed [127, 128]. CRISPR-CAS9 is a bacterial immune system that can be 
easily engineered to cleave DNA sequences of interest. Phagemids (i.e. plasmids carrying 
the information to package phage particles) bearing CRISPR-CAS9 components were 
generated to cleave antibiotic resistance genes on chromosomes or plasmids of specific 
pathogens, such as E. coli and S. aureus [127, 128]. Phage-mediated delivery of this genetic 
material resulted in efficient killing of the bacteria in both cases. Importantly, no resistance 
developed against the phagemids, and the sensitivity of the system allowed discrimination of 
single polymorphic nucleotides. Accordingly, within a consortium of 2-3 bacterial isolates of 
the same strain, the CRISPR-CAS9 phagemids killed only bacteria carrying the target gene, 
sparing surrounding microbes in in vivo models, i.e. upon infection of moth larvae with E. 
coli and of mouse skin with S. aureus [127, 128]. Thus, this system has allowed selective 
killing of pathogens, even antibiotic-resistant ones, without affecting the surrounding 
microbiota.
Concluding Remarks
Recent evidence demonstrates the fundamental role of the gut microbiota in directing host 
physiology. In particular, development of a fully functional immune system requires key 
induction and maintenance signals from the commensal community, many of which are still 
likely to be discovered (see Outstanding Questions). Antibiotics, to which we are 
increasingly exposed, disrupt the equilibrium among commensal populations, and lead to a 
decreased or altered communication between the human intestinal flora and the underlying 
mucosa. The effects of such perturbations are long-lasting and can have multiple 
consequences, including increased susceptibility to infections, the potential to develop 
allergies, a predisposition to develop metabolic syndrome, the decreased efficacy outcomes 
of pharmacologic therapies (Box 3), as well as the induction and spread of antibiotic 
resistance (Box 4, Box 5). Unnecessary antibiotic use should therefore be avoided to prevent 
any potential adverse consequence on the host, in addition to eliminating the spread of 
antibiotic resistance. Indeed, new strategies are needed to substitute or complement the use 
of antibiotic treatments.
Becattini et al.
Page 16
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here, we have highlighted strategic approaches that currently lie at various states of clinical 
development, namely, the exploitation of colonization resistance through the use of FMT or 
probiotics, the restoration of appropriate immune responses through delivery of bacterial 
ligands, as well as the design of narrow-spectrum or highly specific antimicrobial 
compounds. A rational use of highly specific antibacterial molecules would be intended to 
selectively deplete detrimental bacterial strains within the microbiota, particularly those 
associated with inflammation, atherogenesis, carcinogenesis, and drug inactivation. Indeed, 
it will be exciting to follow how the future application of such strategies unfolds in the 
clinic.
Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Pamer laboratory, particularly Sejal Morjaria and Sohn G. Kim, for critical reading of the 
manuscript and valuable suggestions. SB is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation Early Postdoc 
Mobility Fellowship. YT is supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant 1K23 AI095398-01 to Y.T.), the 
Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation, and Cancer, and the Tow Foundation. EGP has received funding 
from NIH Grants RO1 AI095706, AI042135, UO1 AI124275 and PO1 CA023766 and from the Leonard Tow 
Foundation.
Glossary
Anti-Microbial Peptides 
(AMP)
small peptides with bactericidal activity, mainly positively 
charged, produced by microorganisms and host myeloid and 
epithelial cells
Bacteriocins
toxins, largely proteins, secreted by bacteria to kill other 
bacteria
β-lactams
antibiotics containing a β-lactam ring in their molecular 
structure; this class includes penicillins, cephalosporins and 
carbapenems
B1 cells
subset of B cells activated by innate sensor triggeringthat 
produce the vast majority of natural IgM against common 
microbial structures(secreted independently of antigenic 
exposure)
Cathelicidins
heterogeneous family of antimicrobial peptides, including 
LL-37 in humans and CRAMP in mice, produced mainly by 
myeloid and epithelial cells
Colonization resistance
protection against pathogens exerted by commensal bacteria
Conventionalization
transfer of microbiota into a mouse; often performed by co-
housing or gavage (intra-gastric inoculation) of fecal 
material, to equalize microbial populations in the gut of 
different mice
Dendritic Cells (DCs)
myeloid cells specialized in sampling the outer environment 
through endocytosis, and which initiate immune responses 
upon antigen presentation to other immune cells
Becattini et al.
Page 17
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dysbiosis
imbalance (alteration in composition) within a microbiota
DSS-induced colitis
mouse model of colitis promoted by administration in 
drinking water of dextran sulfate sodium (DSS), which 
damages the intestinal epithelium and promotes 
inflammation
Enterocytes
epithelial cells constituting the intestinal epithelium, 
characterized by the presence of apical microvilli that 
enhance their adsorbing functions.
Germ-free (GF) mice
mice born and raised in isolators in the absence of any 
detectable microorganism inside or outside their body
Gnotobiotic mice
born aseptically, bred in laboratories and bearing known 
strains of microorganisms
Inflammasome
oligomeric protein complex that drives caspase1-mediated 
maturation of IL-1β and IL-18 upon sensing of danger-
associated signals, thus promoting inflammation
Innate Lymphoid Cells
cells of lymphoid lineage that lack antigen-specific receptors 
and rapidly respond to infection or inflammation by 
producing cytokines. The gut is enriched in a subset defined 
ILC3, that produces mainly IL-22 and IL-17
Lamina propria
the connective tissue layer underlying the epithelium in the 
intestine, highly vascularized and rich in immune cells
Mesenteric Lymph 
Nodes (MLNs)
lymph nodes draining the majority of the gastro-intestinal 
tract
Microbiome
the collection of genomes within a microbiota, i.e. the pool 
of genes represented in a bacterial community
Microbiota
a collection of microbes that inhabit a given environment. In 
this review, the term is used to specifically indicate bacterial 
communities residing in the intestine
NLRPs (including 
NLRP6)
Nod-like receptor (NLR) protein family that has a role in 
sensing stress- or pathogen-associated signals and participate 
in the formation of the inflammasome
NOD (Non-obese 
diabetic) mice
mouse model for type I diabetes. NOD mice spontaneously 
develop insulin-dependent diabetes as a consequence of 
leukocyte-mediated invasion and destruction of pancreatic β-
islets
Paneth cells
epithelial cells of the small intestine located at the bottom of 
the crypts of Lieberkühn and specialized in the production of 
anti-microbial molecules
Becattini et al.
Page 18
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Regulatory T cells (Treg)
FoxP3-dependent IL10-producing CD4+ T cells, responsible 
for dampening the immune response and maintaining 
tolerance
Short Chain Fatty Acids 
(SCFAs)
molecules such as acetate, propionate and butyrate, produced 
by bacteria through fermentation of fibers in the large 
intestine, influencing many host physiological processes
Shotgun sequencing
sequencing approach based on the generation of a library of 
short sequences from a complex sample (often total DNA or 
RNA extracted from bacterial communities). the obtained 
reads can be computationally assembled to reconstruct the 
entire sequences of the original nucleic acids
T helper 1 (Th1)
T-bet+ IFNγ-producing CD4+ T cells, involved in the 
clearance of intracellular pathogens
T helper 17 (Th17)
RORγt+ IL17-producing CD4+ T cells, specialized in 
responses to extracellular bacteria and fungi
T helper 2 (Th2)
GATA3+ IL4/5/13-producing CD4+ T cells, involved in the 
response against helminths and key players in allergic 
reactions
Toll-Like Receptors 
(TLRs)
dimeric receptors mainly expressed in cells of the innate 
immune system, recognizing conserved microbial structures 
and activating immune responses
Unadjuvanted vaccines
vaccines devoid of adjuvants, i.e. molecules that enhance 
vaccine immunogenicity by promoting inflammation or 
slower release of the antigen
Vertical acquisition
acquisition of maternal microbes in newborns through 
processes such as delivery (birth canal microbes) and 
breastfeeding (milk microbes)
References
1. Qin J, et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature. 
2010; 464:59–65. [PubMed: 20203603] 
2. Walter J, Ley R. The human gut microbiome: ecology and recent evolutionary changes. Annual 
review of microbiology. 2011; 65:411–429.
3. Brestoff JR, Artis D. Commensal bacteria at the interface of host metabolism and the immune 
system. Nature immunology. 2013; 14:676–684. [PubMed: 23778795] 
4. Buffie CG, Pamer EG. Microbiota-mediated colonization resistance against intestinal pathogens. 
Nature reviews. Immunology. 2013; 13:790–801.
5. Goyal MS, et al. Feeding the brain and nurturing the mind: Linking nutrition and the gut microbiota 
to brain development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 2015; 112:14105–14112. [PubMed: 26578751] 
6. Marsland BJ, Salami O. Microbiome influences on allergy in mice and humans. Current opinion in 
immunology. 2015; 36:94–100. [PubMed: 26218803] 
Becattini et al.
Page 19
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Caballero S, Pamer EG. Microbiota-Mediated Inflammation and Antimicrobial Defense in the 
Intestine. Annual review of immunology. 2015
8. O'Hara AM, Shanahan F. The gut flora as a forgotten organ. EMBO reports. 2006; 7:688–693. 
[PubMed: 16819463] 
9. Sommer F, Backhed F. The gut microbiota--masters of host development and physiology. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2013; 11:227–238. [PubMed: 23435359] 
10. Kelly CJ, et al. Crosstalk between Microbiota-Derived Short-Chain Fatty Acids and Intestinal 
Epithelial HIF Augments Tissue Barrier Function. Cell host & microbe. 2015; 17:662–671. 
[PubMed: 25865369] 
11. Reinhardt C, et al. Tissue factor and PAR1 promote microbiota-induced intestinal vascular 
remodelling. Nature. 2012; 483:627–631. [PubMed: 22407318] 
12. Luna RA, Foster JA. Gut brain axis: diet microbiota interactions and implications for modulation 
of anxiety and depression. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2015; 32:35–41. [PubMed: 25448230] 
13. Mayer EA, et al. Gut/brain axis and the microbiota. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2015; 
125:926–938. [PubMed: 25689247] 
14. Mu C, et al. Gut Microbiota: The Brain Peacekeeper. Frontiers in microbiology. 2016; 7:345. 
[PubMed: 27014255] 
15. Collins SM, et al. The interplay between the intestinal microbiota and the brain. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2012; 10:735–742. [PubMed: 23000955] 
16. Rakoff-Nahoum S, et al. Recognition of commensal microflora by toll-like receptors is required for 
intestinal homeostasis. Cell. 2004; 118:229–241. [PubMed: 15260992] 
17. Cash HL, et al. Symbiotic bacteria direct expression of an intestinal bactericidal lectin. Science. 
2006; 313:1126–1130. [PubMed: 16931762] 
18. Brandl K, et al. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci exploit antibiotic-induced innate immune 
deficits. Nature. 2008; 455:804–807. [PubMed: 18724361] 
19. Kinnebrew MA, et al. Bacterial flagellin stimulates Toll-like receptor 5-dependent defense against 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus infection. The Journal of infectious diseases. 2010; 201:534–
543. [PubMed: 20064069] 
20. Kinnebrew MA, et al. Interleukin 23 production by intestinal CD103(+)CD11b(+) dendritic cells in 
response to bacterial flagellin enhances mucosal innate immune defense. Immunity. 2012; 36:276–
287. [PubMed: 22306017] 
21. Yang Y, et al. Focused specificity of intestinal TH17 cells towards commensal bacterial antigens. 
Nature. 2014; 510:152–156. [PubMed: 24739972] 
22. Clarke TB, et al. Recognition of peptidoglycan from the microbiota by Nod1 enhances systemic 
innate immunity. Nature medicine. 2010; 16:228–231.
23. Deshmukh HS, et al. The microbiota regulates neutrophil homeostasis and host resistance to 
Escherichia coli K1 sepsis in neonatal mice. Nature medicine. 2014; 20:524–530.
24. Hill DA, et al. Commensal bacteria-derived signals regulate basophil hematopoiesis and allergic 
inflammation. Nature medicine. 2012; 18:538–546.
25. Ichinohe T, et al. Microbiota regulates immune defense against respiratory tract influenza A virus 
infection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2011; 108:5354–5359. [PubMed: 21402903] 
26. Abt MC, et al. Commensal bacteria calibrate the activation threshold of innate antiviral immunity. 
Immunity. 2012; 37:158–170. [PubMed: 22705104] 
27. Ganal SC, et al. Priming of natural killer cells by nonmucosal mononuclear phagocytes requires 
instructive signals from commensal microbiota. Immunity. 2012; 37:171–186. [PubMed: 
22749822] 
28. Mazmanian SK, et al. An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of 
the host immune system. Cell. 2005; 122:107–118. [PubMed: 16009137] 
29. Ivanov II, et al. Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in 
the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell host & microbe. 2008; 4:337–349. [PubMed: 18854238] 
30. Atarashi K, et al. ATP drives lamina propria T(H)17 cell differentiation. Nature. 2008; 455:808–
812. [PubMed: 18716618] 
Becattini et al.
Page 20
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 31. Ivanov II, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell. 2009; 
139:485–498. [PubMed: 19836068] 
32. Gaboriau-Routhiau V, et al. The key role of segmented filamentous bacteria in the coordinated 
maturation of gut helper T cell responses. Immunity. 2009; 31:677–689. [PubMed: 19833089] 
33. Sano T, et al. An IL-23R/IL-22 Circuit Regulates Epithelial Serum Amyloid A to Promote Local 
Effector Th17 Responses. Cell. 2015; 163:381–393. [PubMed: 26411290] 
34. Atarashi K, et al. Th17 Cell Induction by Adhesion of Microbes to Intestinal Epithelial Cells. Cell. 
2015; 163:367–380. [PubMed: 26411289] 
35. Mortha A, et al. Microbiota-dependent crosstalk between macrophages and ILC3 promotes 
intestinal homeostasis. Science. 2014; 343:1249288. [PubMed: 24625929] 
36. Atarashi K, et al. Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous Clostridium species. 
Science. 2011; 331:337–341. [PubMed: 21205640] 
37. Atarashi K, et al. Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the 
human microbiota. Nature. 2013; 500:232–236. [PubMed: 23842501] 
38. Arpaia N, et al. Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell 
generation. Nature. 2013; 504:451–455. [PubMed: 24226773] 
39. Furusawa Y, et al. Commensal microbe-derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic 
regulatory T cells. Nature. 2013; 504:446–450. [PubMed: 24226770] 
40. Smith PM, et al. The microbial metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell 
homeostasis. Science. 2013; 341:569–573. [PubMed: 23828891] 
41. Sun J, et al. Pancreatic beta-Cells Limit Autoimmune Diabetes via an Immunoregulatory 
Antimicrobial Peptide Expressed under the Influence of the Gut Microbiota. Immunity. 2015; 
43:304–317. [PubMed: 26253786] 
42. Markle JG, et al. Sex differences in the gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of 
autoimmunity. Science. 2013; 339:1084–1088. [PubMed: 23328391] 
43. Fox HS. Androgen treatment prevents diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice. The Journal of 
experimental medicine. 1992; 175:1409–1412. [PubMed: 1569406] 
44. Roden AC, et al. Augmentation of T Cell Levels and Responses Induced by Androgen Deprivation. 
The Journal of Immunology. 2004; 173:6098–6108. [PubMed: 15528346] 
45. Kissick HT, et al. Androgens alter T-cell immunity by inhibiting T-helper 1 differentiation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2014; 
111:9887–9892. [PubMed: 24958858] 
46. Trompette A, et al. Gut microbiota metabolism of dietary fiber influences allergic airway disease 
and hematopoiesis. Nature medicine. 2014; 20:159–166.
47. Proietti M, et al. ATP-gated ionotropic P2X7 receptor controls follicular T helper cell numbers in 
Peyer's patches to promote host-microbiota mutualism. Immunity. 2014; 41:789–801. [PubMed: 
25464855] 
48. Oh JZ, et al. TLR5-mediated sensing of gut microbiota is necessary for antibody responses to 
seasonal influenza vaccination. Immunity. 2014; 41:478–492. [PubMed: 25220212] 
49. Wlodarska M, et al. Antibiotic treatment alters the colonic mucus layer and predisposes the host to 
exacerbated Citrobacter rodentium-induced colitis. Infection and immunity. 2011; 79:1536–1545. 
[PubMed: 21321077] 
50. Wlodarska M, et al. NLRP6 inflammasome orchestrates the colonic host-microbial interface by 
regulating goblet cell mucus secretion. Cell. 2014; 156:1045–1059. [PubMed: 24581500] 
51. Fan D, et al. Activation of HIF-1alpha and LL-37 by commensal bacteria inhibits Candida albicans 
colonization. Nature medicine. 2015; 21:808–814.
52. Fukuda S, et al. Bifidobacteria can protect from enteropathogenic infection through production of 
acetate. Nature. 2011; 469:543–547. [PubMed: 21270894] 
53. van Nood E, et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile. The New 
England journal of medicine. 2013; 368:407–415. [PubMed: 23323867] 
54. Buffie CG, et al. Precision microbiome reconstitution restores bile acid mediated resistance to 
Clostridium difficile. Nature. 2015; 517:205–208. [PubMed: 25337874] 
Becattini et al.
Page 21
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 55. Hsiao A, et al. Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae 
infection. Nature. 2014; 515:423–426. [PubMed: 25231861] 
56. Kommineni S, et al. Bacteriocin production augments niche competition by enterococci in the 
mammalian gastrointestinal tract. Nature. 2015; 526:719–722. [PubMed: 26479034] 
57. David LA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014; 
505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
58. Suez J, et al. Artificial sweeteners induce glucose intolerance by altering the gut microbiota. 
Nature. 2014; 514:181–186. [PubMed: 25231862] 
59. Zeevi D, et al. Personalized Nutrition by Prediction of Glycemic Responses. Cell. 2015; 163:1079–
1094. [PubMed: 26590418] 
60. Karlsson FH, et al. Gut metagenome in European women with normal, impaired and diabetic 
glucose control. Nature. 2013; 498:99–103. [PubMed: 23719380] 
61. Qin J, et al. A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature. 
2012; 490:55–60. [PubMed: 23023125] 
62. Forslund K, et al. Disentangling type 2 diabetes and metformin treatment signatures in the human 
gut microbiota. Nature. 2015; 528:262–266. [PubMed: 26633628] 
63. Lewis JD, et al. Inflammation, Antibiotics, and Diet as Environmental Stressors of the Gut 
Microbiome in Pediatric Crohn's Disease. Cell host & microbe. 2015; 18:489–500. [PubMed: 
26468751] 
64. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy 
harvest. Nature. 2006; 444:1027–1031. [PubMed: 17183312] 
65. Ridaura VK, et al. Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in mice. 
Science. 2013; 341:1241214. [PubMed: 24009397] 
66. Yoshimoto S, et al. Obesity-induced gut microbial metabolite promotes liver cancer through 
senescence secretome. Nature. 2013; 499:97–101. [PubMed: 23803760] 
67. Belcheva A, et al. Gut microbial metabolism drives transformation of MSH2-deficient colon 
epithelial cells. Cell. 2014; 158:288–299. [PubMed: 25036629] 
68. Koeth RA, et al. Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes 
atherosclerosis. Nature medicine. 2013; 19:576–585.
69. Wang Z, et al. Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. 
Nature. 2011; 472:57–63. [PubMed: 21475195] 
70. Tang WH, et al. Intestinal microbial metabolism of phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2013; 368:1575–1584. [PubMed: 23614584] 
71. Wang Z, et al. Non-lethal Inhibition of Gut Microbial Trimethylamine Production for the 
Treatment of Atherosclerosis. Cell. 2015; 163:1585–1595. [PubMed: 26687352] 
72. Haiser HJ, et al. Predicting and manipulating cardiac drug inactivation by the human gut bacterium 
Eggerthella lenta. Science. 2013; 341:295–298. [PubMed: 23869020] 
73. Elinav E, et al. NLRP6 inflammasome regulates colonic microbial ecology and risk for colitis. 
Cell. 2011; 145:745–757. [PubMed: 21565393] 
74. Winter SE, et al. Host-derived nitrate boosts growth of E. coli in the inflamed gut. Science. 2013; 
339:708–711. [PubMed: 23393266] 
75. Seo SU, et al. Distinct Commensals Induce Interleukin-1beta via NLRP3 Inflammasome in 
Inflammatory Monocytes to Promote Intestinal Inflammation in Response to Injury. Immunity. 
2015; 42:744–755. [PubMed: 25862092] 
76. Ayres JS, et al. Lethal inflammasome activation by a multidrug-resistant pathobiont upon antibiotic 
disruption of the microbiota. Nature medicine. 2012; 18:799–806.
77. Pacheco AR, et al. Fucose sensing regulates bacterial intestinal colonization. Nature. 2012; 
492:113–117. [PubMed: 23160491] 
78. Ng KM, et al. Microbiota-liberated host sugars facilitate post-antibiotic expansion of enteric 
pathogens. Nature. 2013; 502:96–99. [PubMed: 23995682] 
79. Fonseca DM, et al. Microbiota-Dependent Sequelae of Acute Infection Compromise Tissue-
Specific Immunity. Cell. 2015; 163:354–366. [PubMed: 26451485] 
Becattini et al.
Page 22
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 80. Horai R, et al. Microbiota-Dependent Activation of an Autoreactive T Cell Receptor Provokes 
Autoimmunity in an Immunologically Privileged Site. Immunity. 2015; 43:343–353. [PubMed: 
26287682] 
81. Jernberg C, et al. Long-term ecological impacts of antibiotic administration on the human intestinal 
microbiota. The ISME journal. 2007; 1:56–66. [PubMed: 18043614] 
82. Buffie CG, et al. Profound alterations of intestinal microbiota following a single dose of 
clindamycin results in sustained susceptibility to Clostridium difficile-induced colitis. Infection 
and immunity. 2012; 80:62–73. [PubMed: 22006564] 
83. Ubeda C, et al. Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus domination of intestinal microbiota is enabled 
by antibiotic treatment in mice and precedes bloodstream invasion in humans. The Journal of 
clinical investigation. 2010; 120:4332–4341. [PubMed: 21099116] 
84. Lewis BB, et al. Loss of Microbiota-Mediated Colonization Resistance to Clostridium difficile 
Infection With Oral Vancomycin Compared With Metronidazole. The Journal of infectious 
diseases. 2015; 212:1656–1665. [PubMed: 25920320] 
85. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial 
microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:11971–11975. [PubMed: 20566857] 
86. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Partial restoration of the microbiota of cesarean-born infants via 
vaginal microbial transfer. Nature medicine. 2016; 22:250–253.
87. Kozyrskyj AL, et al. Increased risk of childhood asthma from antibiotic use in early life. Chest. 
2007; 131:1753–1759. [PubMed: 17413050] 
88. Risnes KR, et al. Antibiotic exposure by 6 months and asthma and allergy at 6 years: Findings in a 
cohort of 1,401 US children. American journal of epidemiology. 2011; 173:310–318. [PubMed: 
21190986] 
89. Korpela K, et al. Intestinal microbiome is related to lifetime antibiotic use in Finnish pre-school 
children. Nature communications. 2016; 7:10410.
90. Russell SL, et al. Early life antibiotic-driven changes in microbiota enhance susceptibility to 
allergic asthma. EMBO reports. 2012; 13:440–447. [PubMed: 22422004] 
91. Cox LM, et al. Altering the intestinal microbiota during a critical developmental window has 
lasting metabolic consequences. Cell. 2014; 158:705–721. [PubMed: 25126780] 
92. Levy SB, et al. High frequency of antimicrobial resistance in human fecal flora. Antimicrobial 
agents and chemotherapy. 1988; 32:1801–1806. [PubMed: 3266729] 
93. Sommer MO, et al. Functional characterization of the antibiotic resistance reservoir in the human 
microflora. Science. 2009; 325:1128–1131. [PubMed: 19713526] 
94. Santiago-Rodriguez TM, et al. Gut Microbiome of an 11th Century A.D. Pre-Columbian Andean 
Mummy. PloS one. 2015; 10:e0138135. [PubMed: 26422376] 
95. D'Costa VM, et al. Antibiotic resistance is ancient. Nature. 2011; 477:457–461. [PubMed: 
21881561] 
96. Bhullar K, et al. Antibiotic resistance is prevalent in an isolated cave microbiome. PloS one. 2012; 
7:e34953. [PubMed: 22509370] 
97. Modi SR, et al. Antibiotics and the gut microbiota. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2014; 
124:4212–4218. [PubMed: 25271726] 
98. Oldenburg M, et al. TLR13 recognizes bacterial 23S rRNA devoid of erythromycin resistance-
forming modification. Science. 2012; 337:1111–1115. [PubMed: 22821982] 
99. Cullen TW, et al. Gut microbiota. Antimicrobial peptide resistance mediates resilience of 
prominent gut commensals during inflammation. Science. 2015; 347:170–175. [PubMed: 
25574022] 
100. Koch G, et al. Evolution of resistance to a last-resort antibiotic in Staphylococcus aureus via 
bacterial competition. Cell. 2014; 158:1060–1071. [PubMed: 25171407] 
101. Looft T, et al. In-feed antibiotic effects on the swine intestinal microbiome. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2012; 109:1691–1696. [PubMed: 
22307632] 
Becattini et al.
Page 23
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 102. Forsberg KJ, et al. The shared antibiotic resistome of soil bacteria and human pathogens. Science. 
2012; 337:1107–1111. [PubMed: 22936781] 
103. Hu Y, et al. The abundance of antibiotic resistance genes in human guts has correlation to the 
consumption of antibiotics in animal. Gut microbes. 2014; 5:245–249. [PubMed: 24637798] 
104. Field W, Hershberg R. Alarmingly High Segregation Frequencies of Quinolone Resistance Alleles 
within Human and Animal Microbiomes Are Not Explained by Direct Clinical Antibiotic 
Exposure. Genome Biol Evol. 2015; 7:1743–1757. [PubMed: 26019163] 
105. Moore AM, et al. Gut resistome development in healthy twin pairs in the first year of life. 
Microbiome. 2015; 3:27. [PubMed: 26113976] 
106. Lu N, et al. DNA microarray analysis reveals that antibiotic resistance-gene diversity in human 
gut microbiota is age related. Scientific reports. 2014; 4:4302. [PubMed: 24618772] 
107. Toprak E, et al. Evolutionary paths to antibiotic resistance under dynamically sustained drug 
selection. Nature genetics. 2012; 44:101–105. [PubMed: 22179135] 
108. Lee HH, et al. Bacterial charity work leads to population-wide resistance. Nature. 2010; 467:82–
85. [PubMed: 20811456] 
109. Kelsic ED, et al. Counteraction of antibiotic production and degradation stabilizes microbial 
communities. Nature. 2015; 521:516–519. [PubMed: 25992546] 
110. Costello EK, et al. The application of ecological theory toward an understanding of the human 
microbiome. Science. 2012; 336:1255–1262. [PubMed: 22674335] 
111. Hehemann JH, et al. Transfer of carbohydrate-active enzymes from marine bacteria to Japanese 
gut microbiota. Nature. 2010; 464:908–912. [PubMed: 20376150] 
112. Schloissnig S, et al. Genomic variation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2013; 
493:45–50. [PubMed: 23222524] 
113. Beaber JW, et al. SOS response promotes horizontal dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes. 
Nature. 2004; 427:72–74. [PubMed: 14688795] 
114. Modi SR, et al. Antibiotic treatment expands the resistance reservoir and ecological network of 
the phage metagenome. Nature. 2013; 499:219–222. [PubMed: 23748443] 
115. Slager J, et al. Antibiotic-induced replication stress triggers bacterial competence by increasing 
gene dosage near the origin. Cell. 2014; 157:395–406. [PubMed: 24725406] 
116. Laxminarayan R. Antibiotic effectiveness: balancing conservation against innovation. Science. 
2014; 345:1299–1301. [PubMed: 25214620] 
117. Kelly CR, et al. Fecal microbiota transplant for treatment of Clostridium difficile infection in 
immunocompromised patients. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014; 109:1065–1071. [PubMed: 24890442] 
118. Lawley TD, et al. Targeted restoration of the intestinal microbiota with a simple, defined 
bacteriotherapy resolves relapsing Clostridium difficile disease in mice. PLoS pathogens. 2012; 
8:e1002995. [PubMed: 23133377] 
119. Reeves AE, et al. Suppression of Clostridium difficile in the gastrointestinal tracts of germfree 
mice inoculated with a murine isolate from the family Lachnospiraceae. Infection and immunity. 
2012; 80:3786–3794. [PubMed: 22890996] 
120. Ubeda C, et al. Intestinal microbiota containing Barnesiella species cures vancomycin-resistant 
Enterococcus faecium colonization. Infection and immunity. 2013; 81:965–973. [PubMed: 
23319552] 
121. Abt MC, et al. TLR-7 activation enhances IL-22-mediated colonization resistance against 
vancomycin-resistant enterococcus. Science translational medicine. 2016; 8:327ra325.
122. Donia MS, et al. A systematic analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters in the human microbiome 
reveals a common family of antibiotics. Cell. 2014; 158:1402–1414. [PubMed: 25215495] 
123. Howe JA, et al. Selective small-molecule inhibition of an RNA structural element. Nature. 2015; 
526:672–677. [PubMed: 26416753] 
124. Rea MC, et al. Effect of broad- and narrow-spectrum antimicrobials on Clostridium difficile and 
microbial diversity in a model of the distal colon. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2011; 108(Suppl 1):4639–4644. [PubMed: 20616009] 
125. Gebhart D, et al. A modified R-type bacteriocin specifically targeting Clostridium difficile 
prevents colonization of mice without affecting gut microbiota diversity. mBio. 2015; 6
Becattini et al.
Page 24
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 126. Lehar SM, et al. Novel antibody-antibiotic conjugate eliminates intracellular S. aureus. Nature. 
2015
127. Bikard D, et al. Exploiting CRISPR-Cas nucleases to produce sequence-specific antimicrobials. 
Nature biotechnology. 2014; 32:1146–1150.
128. Citorik RJ, et al. Sequence-specific antimicrobials using efficiently delivered RNA-guided 
nucleases. Nature biotechnology. 2014; 32:1141–1145.
129. Rajilic-Stojanovic M, de Vos WM. The first 1000 cultured species of the human gastrointestinal 
microbiota. FEMS microbiology reviews. 2014; 38:996–1047. [PubMed: 24861948] 
130. Ley RE, et al. Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2005; 102:11070–11075. [PubMed: 16033867] 
131. Nguyen TL, et al. How informative is the mouse for human gut microbiota research? Disease 
models & mechanisms. 2015; 8:1–16. [PubMed: 25561744] 
132. Xiao L, et al. A catalog of the mouse gut metagenome. Nature biotechnology. 2015; 33:1103–
1108.
133. Seedorf H, et al. Bacteria from diverse habitats colonize and compete in the mouse gut. Cell. 
2014; 159:253–266. [PubMed: 25284151] 
134. Blanton LV, et al. Gut bacteria that prevent growth impairments transmitted by microbiota from 
malnourished children. Science. 2016; 351
135. Kau AL, et al. Functional characterization of IgA-targeted bacterial taxa from undernourished 
Malawian children that produce diet-dependent enteropathy. Science translational medicine. 
2015; 7:276ra224.
136. Schluter J, Foster KR. The evolution of mutualism in gut microbiota via host epithelial selection. 
PLoS biology. 2012; 10:e1001424. [PubMed: 23185130] 
137. Pickard JM, et al. Rapid fucosylation of intestinal epithelium sustains host-commensal symbiosis 
in sickness. Nature. 2014; 514:638–641. [PubMed: 25274297] 
138. Hand TW, et al. Acute gastrointestinal infection induces long-lived microbiota-specific T cell 
responses. Science. 2012; 337:1553–1556. [PubMed: 22923434] 
139. Johansson ME, et al. Normalization of Host Intestinal Mucus Layers Requires Long-Term 
Microbial Colonization. Cell host & microbe. 2015; 18:582–592. [PubMed: 26526499] 
140. Diehl GE, et al. Microbiota restricts trafficking of bacteria to mesenteric lymph nodes by 
CX(3)CR1(hi) cells. Nature. 2013; 494:116–120. [PubMed: 23334413] 
141. Hepworth MR, et al. Innate lymphoid cells regulate CD4+ T-cell responses to intestinal 
commensal bacteria. Nature. 2013; 498:113–117. [PubMed: 23698371] 
142. Hepworth MR, et al. Immune tolerance. Group 3 innate lymphoid cells mediate intestinal 
selection of commensal bacteria-specific CD4(+) T cells. Science. 2015; 348:1031–1035. 
[PubMed: 25908663] 
143. Fanning S, et al. Bifidobacterial surface-exopolysaccharide facilitates commensal-host interaction 
through immune modulation and pathogen protection. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2012; 109:2108–2113. [PubMed: 22308390] 
144. Iida N, et al. Commensal bacteria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the tumor 
microenvironment. Science. 2013; 342:967–970. [PubMed: 24264989] 
145. Viaud S, et al. The intestinal microbiota modulates the anticancer immune effects of 
cyclophosphamide. Science. 2013; 342:971–976. [PubMed: 24264990] 
146. Sivan A, et al. Commensal Bifidobacterium promotes antitumor immunity and facilitates anti-PD-
L1 efficacy. Science. 2015; 350:1084–1089. [PubMed: 26541606] 
147. Vetizou M, et al. Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota. 
Science. 2015; 350:1079–1084. [PubMed: 26541610] 
148. Dubin K, et al. Intestinal microbiome analyses identify melanoma patients at risk for checkpoint-
blockade-induced colitis. Nature communications. 2016; 7:10391.
149. Chang Q, et al. Antibiotics in agriculture and the risk to human health: how worried should we 
be? Evolutionary applications. 2015; 8:240–247. [PubMed: 25861382] 
150. Meek RW, et al. Nonmedical Uses of Antibiotics: Time to Restrict Their Use? PLoS biology. 
2015; 13:e1002266. [PubMed: 26444324] 
Becattini et al.
Page 25
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 151. Kennedy D. Time to deal with antibiotics. Science. 2013; 342:777. [PubMed: 24233692] 
Becattini et al.
Page 26
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1
The Gut Microbiota: a Structural Overview
The human gut microbiota consists of an estimated 100 trillion bacteria, belonging to 
several hundreds of different species [129]. These fall into 4 major phyla covering more 
than 90% of the total bacterial population, namely Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, 
Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and many additional minor phyla, including 
Verrucomicrobia and Fusobacteria. The representation of these groups changes along the 
gastrointestinal tract, influenced by distinct microenvironments and nutrient availability 
[2]. The Firmicutes phylum is composed mainly by Gram+, aerobic and anaerobic 
bacteria. Prominent members are Clostridia strains, whose activities range from 
beneficial and protective (e.g. C. scindens, cluster IV-XIVa) to pathogenic (e.g. C. 
difficile, C. perfrigens). Potentially pathogenic streptococci, enterococci and 
staphylococci are also Firmicutes. Bacteroidetes are Gram− bacteria that are extremely 
well adapted to the intestinal environment. Here, they ferment otherwise indigestible 
carbohydrates producing SCFAs, molecules that have been implicated in a plethora of 
important processes. Actinobacteria are Gram+ bacteria generally considered beneficial, 
such as the Bifidobacterium genus, which are included in many probiotic preparations. 
The Proteobacteria phylum contains Gram-bacteria, most notably the family 
Enterobacteriaceae, including E. coli and K. pneumoniae. These are not very abundant 
under normal conditions, but tend to expand upon dysbiosis.
Notably, the majority of the studies of the microbiota have been performed in mice, even 
though human and mouse microbiota differ in genus representation [130]. Some genuses 
such as Prevotella, Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcus are abundant in humans, while 
others, namely Lactobacillus, Alistipes and Turicibacter are highly prevalent in mice 
[131]. However, a core of common taxa can be identified, and mouse and human 
intestinal metagenomes appear to be remarkably similar if analyzed from a functional 
perspective (i.e. representation of KEGG pathways, which depict the overall metabolic 
potential of a community) [132]. Most importantly, GF animals can be efficiently 
reconstituted with microbial communities isolated from other species, including humans, 
reproducing the effects that were observed in a donor, on a recipient host [133]. 
Reconstitution of GF mice with stool samples from obese or malnourished subjects is 
sufficient to phenocopy patient defects in energy harvest or growth [55, 65, 134, 135], 
demonstrating that despite inter-species divergences, the mouse model is a valuable tool 
to study the human microbiota.
Becattini et al.
Page 27
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 2
Microbiota and the Immune System: Strategies to Ensure a Tricky 
Coexistence
As a first challenge, the host must maintain in the gut lumen beneficial strains without 
allowing overproliferation of non-beneficial rapid growers. The epithelium has been 
proposed to act as a selectivity amplifier, causing major rearrangements in the 
composition of the microbial community through secretion of nutrients and reduced 
quantities of AMPs, and acting mainly on microbes that are closer to the mucosa [136]. 
Provision of nutrients is maintained at all costs. For instance, upon starvation-- a natural 
reaction of animals following infection --, a pathway signaling through DCs, ILCs and 
IECs induces massive fucosylation of the intestinal epithelium in mice, thus providing 
nutrients to commensal bacteria and maintaining colonization resistance to C. rodentium 
infection [137].
As a second challenge, immune recognition of commensal antigens and cues must be 
blunted. The luminal bacterial load, a few micrometers in distance, is as high as 1012 
CFU/ml, and the host immune system is well-suited to react. Indeed, breakdown of the 
intestinal barrier upon infection or DSS treatment of mice has been shown to result in a 
complete effector and memory immune response against commensal flagellin [138 [80].
Under normal physiological conditions, mucus creates a physical barrier that keeps most 
bacteria a safe distance from the epithelium, mainly through diffusion of AMPs and IgA 
in the small intestine and formation of a tight, impenetrable structure in the large intestine 
[139]. At steady state, commensal microbes provide signals that dampen the activity of 
CX3CR1+CD11c+ mononuclear phagocytes in the intestine, thus reducing transport of 
bacterial antigens to the MLNs and preventing triggering of adaptive immune responses 
against luminal antigens, a tolerogenic mechanism that can be broken by antibiotic 
treatment [140]. Moreover, type 3 ILCs in the intestine blunt the immune response 
against the microbiota by inducing apoptosis in commensal-specific T cells, through an 
MHCII-dependent antigen presentation process that resembles thymic negative selection 
[141, 142]. Deletion of the MHCII gene on ILCs has been shown to result in a T cell-
dependent inflammatory disease modeling IBD colitis, which could be ameliorated by 
antibiotic treatment [141, 142]. Of note, human ILC3s have also been found to express 
MHCII. ILC3s from pediatric patients with Crohn’s disease (IBD) were found to present 
reduced HLA-DR expression, and HLA-DR levels negatively correlated with the number 
of Th17 cells in colon biopsies from these patients [142].
Finally, commensals can also adopt strategies to “hide”. Some abundant strains of 
Bifidobacteria alternatively produce two variants of cell surface-associated 
exopolysaccharide, decreasing their chances of being recognized by the immune system 
[143]. B. thetaiotaomicron reduces the negative charge of LPS through phosphatase 
activity, thus acquiring resistance to positively-charged AMPs [99].
Becattini et al.
Page 28
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 3
The Gut Microbiota can Modulate the Efficacy of Anticancer Therapeutics
Recent publications have suggested an unexpected role for commensal bacteria in 
modulating the effectiveness of anticancer drug-based and antibody-based therapies. For 
instance, antibiotic treatment has been shown to impair responses to intratumoral CpG-
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) injection or Oxaliplatin administration in mice, by 
reducing induction of necrosis (via TNF-α), the magnitude of CD8+ T cell responses, as 
well as the production of ROS by myeloid cells [144]. Commensal taxa have been 
positively (e.g. Alistipes and Ruminocuccus) or negatively (e.g. Lactobacillus) associated 
with anticancer responses in this model.
Along the same lines, the antitumor alkylating agent Cyclophosphamide (CTX) has been 
shown to cause intestinal damage and augmented epithelial permeability in mice, thus 
promoting translocation of commensals to MLNs and spleen (particularly L. johnsonii 
and E. hirae) [145]. In this study, IFN-γ producing Th17 cells (pTh17) responsive to these 
bacteria were generated in CTX-treated (but not control) mice. Transfer of these cells 
rescued immune responses in vancomycin-treated CTX-treated mice that were otherwise 
unable to arrest tumor growth, suggesting that commensal-specific pTh17 generated as a 
consequence of CTX treatment were largely responsible for the anti-cancer effect of this 
drug.
In another study, checkpoint blockade anti-PDL1 therapeutic efficacy was improved by 
the presence or transfer of Bifidobacterium (but not Lactobacillus) in a mouse model of 
melanoma [146]. In this model, bacterial translocation was not observed, but the 
commensal bacteria improved the functionality of DCs, upregulating the expression of 
cytokines as well as T cell activation-related genes (e.g. antigen presentation, cross-
presentation and co-stimulatory molecules), thus inducing a more potent anti-tumor 
CD8+ T cell response.
Similar to PDL1, the efficacy of CTLA4 blockade (ipilimumab), was strongly impaired 
in GF or antibiotic-treated mice, with reduced T cell proliferation and IFN-γ/TNF-α 
production in several cancer models (melanoma, sarcoma, colon carcinoma) [147]. Anti-
CTLA4 treatment induced T cell-mediated intestinal damage and altered the microbiota 
by increasing B. thataiotaomicron, B. uniformis and Burkholderiaceae representation 
[147]. GF mice reconstituted with these but not other species (E. coli, L. plantarum, B. 
diastonis., E. hirae) recovered full responses to anti-CTLA4 administration, owing to the 
generation of bacterium-specific IFN-γ-producing T cells. Notably, T cells with the same 
bacterial specificity could be recovered from patients, and melanoma tumor-ridden mice 
reconstituted with human stool enriched in protective species exhibited a high incidence 
of tumor regression.
Of note, development of colitis upon ipilimumab administration, a common adverse 
effect observed in cancer patients undergoing treatment, was reduced in tumor-bearing 
mice reconstituted with B. fragilis and B. crepacia [147]. Accordingly, a recent analysis 
of a cohort of patients undergoing ipilimumab treatment identified members of the 
Bacteroidetes phylum as being significantly increased in subjects who did not develop 
Becattini et al.
Page 29
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 colitis [148]. Polyamine transport and B vitamin biosynthesis modules were also enriched 
in these subjects, and were successfully used as high-sensitivity and -specificity 
molecular markers to predict a patient’s risk for developing colitis. This analysis thus 
provided a potentially useful microbiota-based diagnostic tool [148].
Overall, these works demonstrate that the microbiota contributes to the efficacy of 
anticancer treatment and the development of adverse reactions. However, whether 
antibiotic use in the context of cancer treatment affects outcome, remains as of yet, an 
important albeit unanswered, question.
Becattini et al.
Page 30
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 4
Broad Use and Misuse of Antibiotics
Since the beginning of their commercial distribution in the 40’s, antibiotics have proven 
an invaluable weapon against infectious agents, saving millions of lives. However, their 
use has broadened to a level that raises many concerns. In fact, it is estimated that a 
sizable proportion of the human population (1-3%) makes use of antibiotics everyday 
[110]. The overall administration of medical antibiotics has increased by more than 30% 
in the decade 2001-2011, and last-resort antibiotic use is alarmingly frequent. This has 
ignited a vicious circle in which the augmented use of antibiotics and development of 
antibiotic resistance fuel one another, leading to the return of previously well-controlled 
threats such as gonorrhea and Enterobacteriaceae infection [116].
Antibiotics are broadly employed in farming practices at low doses with the main aim of 
enhancing animal growth [149-151]. Livestock account for the vast majority of antibiotic 
production and use in the US (80% in 2013), resulting in the selection of resistant 
bacteria that can either infect humans or horizontally transfer resistance to pathogens. 
The use of antibiotics for livestock has been widely criticized and the FDA has responded 
by introducing Guidance#213 in 2013, which recommends avoidance of unnecessary 
antibiotics. This remains, however, a voluntary policy. Of note, it has been calculated that 
the ban of this procedure would not significantly increase costs for producers or 
consumers [150].
Becattini et al.
Page 31
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 5
Clinician’s Corner
The normal gut microbiota benefits its host in a number of important ways; it helps with 
breakdown and absorption of nutrients, prevents infections directly by resisting expansion 
of potential pathogens, and enhances both innate and adaptive immune system function.
Disrupted gut microbiota states are associated with a variety of diseases, including 
infections (both inside and outside the gut), autoimmune diseases such as inflammatory 
bowel disease and diabetes, allergic disease, obesity, and atherosclerosis.
Many antibiotics that are currently used adversely affect beneficial members of the gut 
microbiota, which puts patients at risk for various disease states. These include infections 
arising due to increasingly prevalent colonization with antibiotic-resistant pathogens such 
as VRE, MRSA, and multidrug resistant gram negative Enterobacteriaceae. Healthcare 
providers could treat their patients more optimally by understanding and recognizing the 
full impact of these drugs on a healthy gut microbiota.
Potential strategies to prevent the untoward effects of antibiotics on the microbiota 
include: avoidance of unnecessary use through antibiotic stewardship, development and 
use of more targeted, narrow-spectrum antibiotics, and replacement of depleted microbes 
with fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT).
In the future, it may be possible to manipulate the gut microbiome for specific purposes 
such as prevention of atherosclerosis or optimization of responses to cancer treatment. 
This could be accomplished in the clinical setting through interventions such as 
specialized diets, administration of specific bacteria consortia, and tailored antibiotic 
therapy.
Becattini et al.
Page 32
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Outstanding Questions
What other physiological processes are influenced by the gut microbiota?
Research is showing that virtually no cell type in the body is oblivious to the presence of 
commensals. Even the physiology of organs such as the brain or the lungs is impacted by 
the composition of the gut microbiota, and can be altered upon dysbiosis. Unraveling the 
interaction network between host and intestinal commensals in different organs could 
provide novel targets for therapeutic intervention in many disease scenarios.
Can we cure disease by reshaping our commensal communities?
Selected taxa within the microbiota are being associated with different diseases such as 
atherosclerosis and cancer, and the mechanisms are starting to be elucidated. This paves 
the way for a true revolution in medicine, where precise antimicrobial therapy against 
specific intestinal microbes could prevent or treat disease.
What other infectious diseases can we treat by exploiting colonization resistance?
C. difficile infection is now being treated with fecal microbiota transplantation. The 
procedure has been successfully applied also in the context of VRE infection in animal 
models, both as preventive and therapeutic strategies. However, transfer of fecal material 
or selected bacterial communities could treat many other intestinal infections in principle. 
We predict that in the next few years, novel candidate consortia will be proposed to 
handle a plethora of infectious threats.
What are the factors that promote or restrict the introduction of health-promoting 
symbiotic bacteria into the community structure of a host’s microbiota?
The metabolic and structural requirements of specific commensal bacterial species are as 
yet, largely unknown. Understanding what microbial networks (i.e. other bacterial 
species) or molecular environments promote or inhibit the beneficial function of selected 
commensal strains would facilitate the design of more effective therapies based on the 
administration of such probiotics.
Becattini et al.
Page 33
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Trends Box
The gut microbiota contains trillions of bacteria belonging to hundreds, possibly 
thousands, of species and is critical for optimal maintenance of host physiological 
processes.
The microbiota protects against infections and other pathologies by directly inhibiting 
invading microbes or by orchestrating appropriate immune responses; conversely, 
metabolites produced by some gut commensals can promote a variety of diseases such as 
atherosclerosis or cancer.
Antibiotics alter the microbiota composition, resulting in an increased risk of disease, 
secondary infections, allergy, and obesity. In addition, they promote the spread of drug-
resistant pathogens, making the search for alternative clinical approaches imperative.
Novel strategies are being developed to substitute or complement antibiotic therapies, 
attempting to either selectively target pathogens without perturbing the microbiota, 
and/or, to re-establish commensal communities along with the protective and beneficial 
effects they confer to the host.
Becattini et al.
Page 34
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Roles of the Microbiota in the Development and Maintenance of the Intestinal Immune 
System
The gut microbiota is separated from the intestinal epithelium by a thin layer of mucus, 
secreted by Goblet cells in a microbiota- and NLRP6-dependent manner. The mucus layer 
has a different structure in small and large intestine (not depicted in the figure). Microbial-
associated molecular patterns (MAMPS) can be sensed by IECs as well as by myeloid cells 
in the lamina propria and induce a variety of effects, including tissue repair, and production 
of antimicrobial peptides such as RegIIIγ in intestinal epithelial and Paneth cells through a 
DC-ILC axis. Luminal ATP and SAA/IL1β produced by IECs and DCs in response to 
adhesion of segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) promote Th17 development. Antigens 
presented during this process are largely derived from SFB. Treg induction is also regulated 
by bacterial cues. Clostridia of the IV and XIVa groups induce Tregs in a TGFβ-dependent 
manner. Short chain fatty acids (SCFA) promote Treg differentiation by acting directly on T 
cells and indirectly on DCs. Macrophages in the lamina propria are involved in a pathway 
that includes also ILCs (not shown) resulting in production of IL-10 and Retinoic Acid 
(RA), and also sustaining expansion of Tregs. All pathways illustrated in the figure were 
shown to be affected by the use of antibiotics, leading to a lack of homeostasis, an increased 
sensitivity to infection and an increase in the severity of various conditions, as in the case of 
allergy.
Becattini et al.
Page 35
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Antibiotic-Mediated Microbiota Depletion Causes Disease in Multiple Organs
Antibiotics act on the gut microbiota by decreasing its density and modifying its 
composition in a long-lasting fashion. This causes reduced signaling to the intestinal mucosa 
and peripheral organs, which results in impaired functioning of the immune system. 
Depicted are examples of diseases that were shown to arise or be worsened as a consequence 
of antibiotic treatment in mouse models (see main text).
Becattini et al.
Page 36
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Generation and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance
Left panel: antibiotic resistance is generated by mutations that can be induced by several 
driving forces. From the top: competition of bacteria (inter- or intra- species, here depicted 
as intersections between circles representing population niches) mainly mediated by 
bacteriocins, induces a selective pressure that favors development of resistance. Some TLRs 
or host-derived antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) target bacterial molecules that can undergo 
mutations and provide resistance to clinically-relevant antibiotics. Exogenous antibiotic 
pressure through medical or industrial practices (e.g.. antibiotic use in livestock) promotes 
the generation and selection of resistant strains that can rapidly diffuse. Right panel: 
antibiotic resistance genes can be exchanged among bacteria also of different species (not 
shown) through horizontal gene transfer, i.e. conjugation, transduction or transformation. 
Notably, these three mechanisms are all enhanced upon antibiotic exposure, resulting in a 
faster and more efficient spread of ARGs in the gut as well as in the environment.
Becattini et al.
Page 37
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Novel Approaches to Substitute or Complement Antibiotic Therapies
Antibiotic treatment depletes commensal communities in the gut, decreases mucus layer 
thickness and expression of AMPs, and predisposes to infection (upper panel). Transfer of 
microbiota by fecal transplantation can restore a healthy microbiota, mucus production, 
antimicrobial peptide secretion, and provide colonization resistance against pathogens, that 
can no longer expand or are cleared. Transfer of selected bacterial communities, as shown in 
mouse models, can achieve the same effect. Similarly, administration of microbial ligands, 
here depicted as fragments of bacteria, can restore basal production of mucus and 
antimicrobial peptides following antibiotic treatment. Lower panel: strategies to selectively 
deplete pathogens without perturbing the microbiota. All the approaches illustrated have 
proven to be successful in mouse models, providing high levels of protection and leaving the 
composition of the surrounding communities, unaltered. Consequently, colonization 
resistance mechanisms can be potentially preserved.
Becattini et al.
Page 38
Trends Mol Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
