 Transgenic Expression of Human APOL1 Risk Variants in 
Podocytes Induces Kidney Disease in Mice
Pazit Beckerman1,*, Jing Bi-Karchin1,*, Ae Seo Deok Park1, Chengxiang Qiu1, Patrick D. 
Dummer2, Irfana Soomro3, Carine M. Boustany-Kari4, Steven S. Pullen4, Jeffrey H. Miner5, 
Chien-An A. Hu6, Tibor Rohacs7, Kazunori Inoue8, Shuta Ishibe8, Moin A. Saleem9, 
Matthew B. Palmer10, Ana Maria Cuervo11, Jeffrey B. Kopp2, and Katalin Susztak1,12,**
1Renal Electrolyte and Hypertension Division, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
2Kidney Disease Section, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD
3Division of Nephrology, New York University, New York, NY
4Department of Cardiometabolic Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, 
Ridgefield, CT
5Division of Nephrology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
6Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine and Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM
7Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Neuroscience, Rutgers - New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, NJ
8Division of Nephrology, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
9University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, BS2 8BJ Bristol, United Kingdom
10Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
11Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY
**Correspondence to: Katalin Susztak MD, PhD, ksusztak@mail.med.upenn.edu.
*P.B. and J.B.-K. contributed equally to the paper.
Data Availability Statement
RNA sequencing data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in ArrayExpress with the accession code E-
MTAB-5390.
Author Contribution
P.B. and J.B.-K. designed and performed the experiments, wrote and revised the manuscript. A.S.D.P. performed initial animal 
characterization and in vitro studies (EM and IF). C.Q. analyzed RNAsequencing data. P.D.D. and J.B.K. helped with the discussion 
and generated mCherry-APOL1-G0/G1/G2 stable cell lines (not used in the paper). I.S. generated TRE-GFP/APOL1-G1 stable 
HEK293 cell line. C.M.B.-K. and S.S.P. contributed to the human data presented in the paper. J.H.M. provided the NPHS1 transgenic 
mice. C.-A.A.H. provided the original APOL1 constructs. T.R. made the bicistronic plasmids containing TRE-GFP/APOL1-
G0/G1/G2. K.I. and S.I. provided help with spinning disk confocal microscopy M.A.S. provided human podocytes. M.B.P. performed 
the pathological characterization. A.M.C. helped with autophagy studies. K.S. designed and supervised the study, wrote and revised 
the manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests
No competing financial interest
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 April ; 23(4): 429–438. doi:10.1038/nm.4287.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 12Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA
Abstract
African-Americans have an increased risk of developing chronic and end-stage kidney disease, 
with much of it attributed to two common genetic variants in the APOL1 gene, termed G1 and G2. 
Direct evidence demonstrating that these APOL1 risk alleles are pathogenic is still lacking as the 
APOL1 gene is only present in some primates and humans; thus experimental proof of causality of 
these risk alleles for renal disease has been challenging. Here, we generated mice with podocyte-
specific inducible expression of the APOL1 reference allele (termed G0) or each of the risk alleles 
(G1 or G2). We show that mice with podocyte-specific expression of either APOL1 risk allele, but 
not the G0 allele, develop functional (albuminuria, azotemia), structural (foot process effacement 
and glomerulosclerosis) and molecular (gene expression) changes that closely resemble the human 
kidney disease. Disease development was cell-type specific, and likely reversible, and the severity 
correlated with the level of expression of the risk allele. We further found that expression of the 
APOL1 risk alleles interferes with endosomal trafficking and blocks autophagic flux, leading 
ultimately to inflammatory-mediated podocyte death and glomerular scarring. In summary, this is 
the first in vivo demonstration that expression of APOL1 risk alleles are causal for altered 
podocyte function and glomerular disease.
Keywords
APOL1; podocytes; albuminuria; glomerulosclerosis; pyroptosis
Introduction
African-Americans have a 3–5-fold increased risk of developing chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD)1,2. Recent studies indicate that coding region 
variants (G1 and G2) in the apolipoproteinL1 (APOL1) gene explain much of this excess 
risk3,4. APOL1 variants contribute to about 70% of non-diabetic ESRD (up to 40% of all 
ESRD) in African-Americans, and are associated with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
(FSGS), hypertension-attributed ESRD and HIV associated nephropathy (HIVAN) with odds 
ratios of 17, 7.3 and 29, respectively5. Unlike most disease-associated high penetrant 
variants the G1 and G2 alleles are present in the general population with a relatively high 
allele frequency6–8. It appears that these variants emerged as a result of a positive selection, 
as they protect against African sleeping sickness, caused by the parasite Trypanosoma brucei 
rhodesiense8. APOL1 functions as a component of the trypanolytic factor. It is taken up by 
the parasite, incorporates into endosomal membranes and transits to the lysosome. The low 
lysosomal pH induces a conformational change in the protein and it forms a pore-forming 
channel. The resulting ion transport causes osmotic lysosomal swelling and parasite death. 
The reference (G0) APOL1variant has lost its trypanolytic function in T.b.rhodesiense due to 
the emergence of a trypanosomal protein (serum resistance associated; SRA) that binds to 
and neutralizes the activity of APOL1 protein9. APOL1 risk variants (G1 and G2) have 
decreased affinity to SRA, and are able to lyse T.b.rhodesiense subspecies4.
Beckerman et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surprisingly, even six years after the discovery of this genetic association, very little is 
known about the functional role of APOL1 variants in kidney disease development. Proof of 
concept experiments, using animal models demonstrating that APOL1 G1 (double missense 
mutations) and G2 (an indel) polymorphisms are causal mutations for kidney disease are 
lacking, and indeed some recent studies failed to recapitulate kidney disease in animals 
expressing one of risk alleles10. Some of the key barriers have been that mice and other 
model organisms lack the APOL1 gene. In humans, APOL1 expression does not show tissue 
specificity, making it difficult to identify the cell type critical for renal disease 
development11. Furthermore, the variant is seemingly associated with diverse clinical 
phenotypes, including hypertensive nephrosclerosis, FSGS, HIVAN and lupus nephritis12. 
Recent pathological studies indicate increased incidence of solidified-type global sclerosis in 
subjects with high-risk APOL1 genotypes compared to people with kidney disease who 
carry the reference allele13–15. Observational cohort studies show that high-risk genotype 
subjects have higher albuminuria and faster GFR decline16–18.
The goal of this study was to answer the question whether kidney-specific expression of 
APOL1-G1 and G2 variants causes kidney disease. To address this issue we generated a new 
mouse model with conditional and inducible expression of APOL1 reference (G0) and risk 
alleles (G1, G2). We found that podocyte-specific expression of APOL1 risk alleles, but not 
the G0 allele, causes severe albuminuria and glomerulosclerosis. We show that this model 
recapitulates features of the human phenotype at functional, structural and molecular levels, 
indicating that the G1 and G2 variants are disease- causing alleles. On the mechanistic level 
we show that APOL1 mostly resides in the late endosomal compartment and risk variants 
show altered vesicular trafficking, decreased autophagic flux and shifting of cells to an 
inflammatory death pathway.
Results
Podocyte-specific expression of G1 or G2 in mice leads to kidney disease
We used the doxycycline inducible (rtTA) system (Fig. 1a) to generate mice with podocyte-
specific conditionally inducible APOL1 expression under doxycycline control. Using this 
transgenic system we expressed GFP and either the APOL1 reference allele (G0) or one of 
the two risk alleles (G1 or G2) (Supplementary Fig. 1) from a bicistronic promoter (TRE-
GFP/APOL1). We used the nephrin (NPHS1) rtTA promoter to drive podocyte-specific 
expression. Successful transgene expression following doxycycline administration was 
confirmed by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 1a). We identified at least three founders from 
each transgenic line that produced offspring expressing APOL1 and GFP transcripts and 
proteins. Male littermates of these founders were used for all further analysis. Double 
transgenic mice (NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1) are called transgenic mice and single 
transgenic mice (TRE-APOL1) are controls.
Littermates of double and single transgenic mice were placed on doxycycline diet at 3.5 
weeks of age. Risk allele transgenic mice developed significant proteinuria as early as three 
weeks after doxycycline diet induction (data not shown). Both risk allele transgenic mice 
(NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G1 and NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G2) had significantly higher 
mean urinary albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR) compared to reference allele transgenic 
Beckerman et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice (NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0) (Fig. 1b). Kidney functional analysis, including 
measurements of serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine, showed that mice 
expressing the G2 risk allele had significant azotemia compared to control (wild type) mice 
(Fig. 1c). The significant azotemia likely contributed to the greater mortality observed in G2 
risk allele expressing mice compared to mice expressing reference (G0) allele 
(Supplementary Fig. 2a).
Structural examination performed by light microscopy analysis of PAS-stained kidney 
sections indicated increased global and segmental glomerulosclerosis in mice expressing 
either APOL1 risk allele (Fig. 1d). By three weeks after doxycycline induction G1 and G2 
transgenic mice developed severe global (solidified-type) and segmental sclerosis compared 
to G0 control mice (Fig. 1e). Ultrastructural analysis using transmission electron microscopy 
(EM) showed increased foot process effacement, which is an important ultrastructural 
characteristic of proteinuric glomerulopathies in patients, in mice expressing a risk allele 
compared to those expressing the reference allele (Fig. 1f).
Next we performed molecular analysis of the NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1 mouse model by 
performing RNA-seq of whole kidneys from control, reference and risk allele mice 
(Supplementary Fig. 2b). This unbiased analysis identified many differentially expressed 
genes (Supplementary Table 1). We used gene set enrichment analysis to identify key 
pathways driving these transcriptional changes (Fig. 1g). The top differentially expressed 
pathways include JAK-STAT signaling, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and 
phagosome related genes indicated a potential connection between APOL1-associated 
kidney disease and immunity19 (Fig. 1g, Supplementary Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 
2). We have also examined the expression of five genes reported to be differentially 
expressed when patients with nephrotic syndrome with low- and high-risk APOL1 allele 
status were compared20. Except for one human-specific gene (SNORA14), all four genes 
that are present in mice showed increased expression in the mouse model (Fig. 1h) and 
statistical correlation with glomerulosclerosis (Supplementary Table 3).
G1 and G2 phenotypes are cell type-and dose-dependent
To show that the renal phenotype development after induced expression of G1 or G2 is not 
due to non-specific toxicity, we generated mice with tubule-specific expression of APOL1 
by crossing the TRE-APOL1 transgenic mice with Pax8-rtTA mice. We confirmed transgene 
expression in the Pax8-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 and Pax8-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G1 mice by 
immunostaining (Supplementary Fig. 3a) and Western blotting (Supplementary Fig. 3b). 
Further, we performed structural analysis by PAS staining of mouse kidney sections and 
found no observable alterations in mice expressing risk allele APOL1 (Supplementary Fig. 
3a). Serum creatinine, BUN, and urinary ACR measurements indicated no functional 
alterations in tubule-specific transgenic mice (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Furthermore 
transcript level analysis for kidney injury markers Kim1 and Col4a (by qRT-PCR) showed 
no significant differences among control mice and those expressing the G0, G1 or G2 alleles 
(Supplementary Fig. 3d).
To further show that disease development in podocytes specifically depends on the presence 
of the risk variants, we identified mice with equal expression of G0, G1 and G2 APOL1 in 
Beckerman et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 podocytes and examined their phenotype (Fig. 2a,b). In mice with equal expression of G0, 
G1 or G2, those with G1 and G2 variants had significantly higher albuminuria, indicated by 
the higher ACR level, compared to those with the G0 reference allele (P = 0.0029 and 
0.0061, respectively) (Fig. 2b). Similarly, in vitro studies show that G1 and G2 APOL1 
variants expressed in transfected HEK293 cells at the same level as G0 variant were 
associated with increased cytotoxicity compared to G0-APOL1 transfected cells (Fig. 2c). 
These findings are recapitulated in human samples (Supplementary Table 4). When 
glomerular expression of APOL1 was matched in low- and high-genetic risk samples, high-
risk samples had significantly lower eGFR (P = 0.032) (Fig. 2d). In summary, the phenotype 
in mice and human subjects as well as the cytotoxicity in vitro is closely linked to the risk 
variants supporting the notion that disease development is not a result of broad cytotoxicity.
As APOL1 genetic variants represent a complex trait, not all human subjects and not all 
mice develop severe kidney disease. To understand the variation in disease severity, first we 
correlated APOL1 transcript levels with kidney functional changes. We found a strong linear 
correlation between APOL1 transcript levels and albuminuria in mice with G1 and G2 
podocyte-specific expression, whereas no matter the expression level of the G0 allele we did 
not observe albuminuria (Fig. 2e). Similarly to albuminuria, histological damage was more 
severe in mice expressing higher levels of risk allele APOL1 compared to mice expressing 
the same risk allele at a lower level (Fig. 2f). Further, we inducibly expressed either a control 
vector, or one expressing either G0, G1 or G2 in transfected HEK293 cells using the 
doxycycline expression system we used in vivo. We found under escalating doses of 
doxycycline only expression of G1 or G2 at the highest doses resulted in greater cytotoxicity 
compared to cells expressing the G0 reference allele or a control vector, suggesting that G1 
and G2 toxicity is dose dependent (Fig. 2g).
To understand whether the renal disease phenotype in patients also depends on APOL1 
levels, we compared APOL1 transcript levels in glomeruli isolated from 286 human kidney 
samples. Patient characteristics are shown in Supplementary Table 4. We found that APOL1 
transcript level (regardless of genotype) is significantly higher in glomeruli isolated from 
CKD kidneys (GFR < 60) compared to controls (GFR>60) (P = 0.000283) (Fig. 2h). This 
was true even when diabetic samples were excluded (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Furthermore 
we have also examined the correlation between glomerular APOL1 levels and GFR in low- 
and high-risk samples. APOL1 levels are higher in lower GFR samples both in low- and 
high-risk samples (Supplementary Fig. 4b). This relationship is much stronger in high-risk 
samples (Fig. 2d) when compared to low risk samples, just as we observed in our mouse 
model (Fig. 2e).
Our studies also indicated that interferon is a strong regulator of APOL1 levels both in low-
and high-risk human podocytes (Supplementary Fig. 4c). We detected a strong statistically 
significant correlation between STAT1 and APOL1 transcript levels in human glomeruli (P < 
2.2e-16) (Supplementary Fig. 4d) and found that STAT1 binds to APOL1 enhancers 
(Supplementary Fig. 4e).
Given the strong correlation between APOL1 levels and phenotype development we also 
examined whether turning APOL1 expression off in our mouse model would lessen disease 
Beckerman et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 severity. We placed mice on doxycycline-containing food for 14 days and either kept the 
mice on doxycycline or took them off the diet for 7 (at day 21) or 17 (at day 31) days. The 
decrease we observed in albuminuria by Coomassie-stained gels of urine samples when 
doxycycline treatment was halted indicates that albuminuria development strongly correlates 
with the expression of risk allele APOL1 in podocytes (Fig 2i).
A role of APOL1 in autophagic flux
Next, we examined the molecular mechanism of APOL1 variant-induced kidney disease. 
Immunogold electron micrographs of human kidney tissue samples showed that APOL1 
localized to the plasma membrane and associated intracellular vesicles in podocytes (Fig. 
3a). We used intracellular compartment-specific markers to determine APOL1 localization 
in cultured human podocytes. We found co-localization of APOL1 with early endosomal 
marker EEA1 and late endosomal marker Rab7 (Fig. 3b,c). There was minimal 
colocalization with the recycling endosomal marker Rab11, the autophagic vacuole marker 
LC3, the lysosomal marker LAMP2 (Fig. 3b,c), the Golgi marker GM130, the ER marker 
calnexin or the lipid droplet marker perilipin2 (Supplementary Fig. 5). Examination of GFP-
APOL1 and RFP-Rab7 localization in transfected HEK293 cells further confirmed that 
APOL1 resides in the late endosomal compartment (Fig. 3d and Supplementary Video 1).
We noted that expression of APOL1 in HEK293 cells using the TRE-APOL1 constructs 
(Supplementary Fig. 1) resulted in excessive accumulation of intracellular vesicles, which 
was more evident in the G1 and G2 variant cells compared to G0 controls (Supplementary 
Fig. 6a). Immunofluorescence studies in human podocytes from low risk (G0/G0) and high-
risk allele subjects (G1/G2) indicated an increase in Rab7 (late endosome) (Fig. 3e) and 
LC3II (autophagosomes) (Fig. 3f) -positive intracellular organelles in the high-risk allele 
podocytes compared to low-risk allele podocytes. Similarly, there was an increase in total 
Rab7, Rab11 and steady state LC3II protein levels in APOL1 risk allele transfected HEK293 
cells compared to reference allele transfected cells (Supplementary Fig. 6b,c). Transmission 
EM of APOL1 risk allele transfected cells indicated accumulation of different types of 
vesicles, including multivesicular bodies (MVB; also called late endosomes) and autophagic 
compartments compared to reference allele transfected cells (Fig. 3g–i). Analysis of the 
morphometric characteristics of the autophagic vacuoles revealed a significantly higher 
abundance of autophagosomes (APG or AP; double membrane vesicles with content of 
similar characteristics to the surrounding cytosol) and a decrease in autolysosome fraction 
(AUT or AL; single membrane vacuoles with cargo in an advanced stage of degradation) in 
high risk allele-transfected cells compared to that in G0 or control cells (Fig. 3h,i). In 
addition, we noticed an expansion of vesicular compartments compatible with amphisomes 
(AMP; resulting from the fusion of autophagosomes and MVB; and containing cytosolic 
material as well as multiple small vesicles); the size and frequency of this was even more 
abundant in cells transfected with APOL1 risk alleles compared to reference allele 
transfected cells (Fig. 3i). Immunofluorescence and confocal spinning disk microscopy 
showed increased colocalization of APOL1 risk variants with late (Rab7 positive) and 
recycling (Rab11 positive) endocytic compartments in transfected HEK293 cells (Fig. 3j, 
Supplementary Fig. 6d,e and Supplementary Video 2a,b).
Beckerman et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To further characterize the APOL1-induced intracellular vesicle defect, we next examined 
autophagy, as there is a very dynamic interplay between autophagic and endocytic 
compartments under physiologic conditions. Furthermore, previous studies have proposed 
that APOL1 plays a role in autophagy21. First, we quantified the extent of autophagic 
vacuoles in reference and risk allele transfected HEK293 cells estimated by conjugated LC3 
(LC3II) (Fig. 4a). In agreement with the immunofluorescence and EM data, we found that at 
baseline there was a greater amount of LC3II in cells expressing a risk allele compared to 
cells expressing reference allele (Fig. 4a).
Increased LC3II can result from either increased autophagosome biogenesis or a blockage of 
autophagosome clearance. In order to distinguish between these possibilities, we examined 
autophagic vacuole content (amount of autophagic vesicles, represented by LC3II level in 
baseline conditions) and autophagic flux (lysosomal fusion and degradation of autophagic 
cargo, represented by the degree of increase in LC3II after pharmacological blockage of 
lysosomal degradation) (Fig. 4b). We speculated that the greater LC3II content associated 
with risk allele (G1 or G2) expression was likely a consequence of lower autophagic flux 
(and degradation of LC3II). We calculated the autophagic flux by blocking the lysosomal 
degradation of LC3 and demonstrated a lower degree of autophagic flux in risk allele-
transfected HEK293 cells (compared to G0 allele expressing cells) (Fig. 4b). Analysis of 
transmission EM studies further confirmed that risk allele-transfected cells contained a 
greater amount of autophagic vacuoles (AP) but fewer autolysosomes (AL) compared to 
reference allele transfected cells indicating a blockage in autophagic flux (Fig. 3g and Fig. 
4c).
To examine the relevance of these findings to the human condition we analyzed low-risk 
(G0/G0) and high-risk (G1/G2) human podocytes. These cells presented with a similar 
defect in autophagy; G1/G2 cells showed greater numbers of autophagic vacuoles at 
baseline, but defects in autophagic flux compared to G0/G0 cells (Fig. 4d,e).
APOL1 regulates the acidification of endocytic vesicles
Next we further analyzed the nature of the autophagic flux defect. A lysosomal defect would 
manifest as a defect in autolysosome formation (or reduced autophagic flux) therefore we 
first analyzed lysosomes in control- and risk allele-expressing cells. LysoTracker analysis of 
reference and risk allele-transfected HEK293 cells did not show significant differences in 
lysosomal content or acidification (Supplementary Fig. 7a). Identical results were seen in 
human podocytes harboring low- or high-risk alleles (Supplementary Fig. 7b), ruling out a 
gross defect in lysosomal function.
The most likely explanation to synthesize these results is that APOL1 risk alleles interfere 
with lysosomal fusion with autophagosomes. We examined the colocalization of the 
lysosomal SNARE protein VAMP822 with two autophagosome markers Stx17 
(Supplementary Fig. 7c,d) and LC3II (Supplementary Fig. 7e,f). We found a decrease in 
colocalization between VAMP8 and both Stx17 and LC3II in APOL1-G1 and G2 risk allele 
transfected HeLa cells. These studies further support a defect in autophagosome maturation.
Beckerman et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Many cells respond to reduced fusion of autophagosomes with the lysosome by increasing 
the fusion of autophagosomes directly with the endosome (resulting in amphisomes). To 
further characterize the endocytic compartment in APOL1 transfected cells, we analyzed the 
uptake of fluorescently labeled 10 kDa dextran in transfected HEK293 cells. In agreement 
with the EM data, cells expressing APOL1 risk alleles displayed a significant increase in the 
amount of endocytic vesicles compared to cells expressing the G0 reference allele 
(Supplementary Fig. 7g,h). We also examined endosomal pH using a 10 kDa dextran labeled 
with a pH sensitive dye (pHrodo). This dye reaches acidic compartments by endocytosis, in 
contrast to LysoTracker, that freely permeates membranes to reach cellular acid 
compartments (Supplementary Fig. 7g). We found that the acidification of the endosomes 
was defective in risk allele transfected HeLa cells (Supplementary Fig. 7i), as the ratio of 
fluorescence between pHrodo and labeled dextran was lower in APOL1 risk allele cells 
compared to G0 transfected HeLa cells. These studies indicate that in the presence of 
APOL1 risk alleles there is a defect in autophagosome maturation, likely resulting from 
diminished lysosomal fusion and impaired acidification of the late endocytic compartment, 
thus most likely resulting in a defect in autophagy flux. This defect in autophagy raises the 
possibility that APOL1 risk variant was not degraded and therefore accumulates in cells. 
However, our experiments indicated that this was not the case as APOL1 expression was 
generally slightly lower in risk allele cells when compared to reference allele transfected 
HEK293 cells (Supplementary Fig. 7j).
APOL1 variants result in inflammatory cell death (pyroptosis)
Podocyte loss due to cell death plays a critical role in the development of FSGS23,24; a 
common histological manifestation of APOL1-associated kidney disease. Upon examining 
the mechanism of APOL1-induced cytotoxicity, we failed to observe any increase in 
apoptosis in APOL1 risk allele-transfected cells (Fig. 5a). We therefore turned our attention 
to inflammatory cell death mechanisms as it has been shown that defect in non-
inflammatory cell death can shift towards inflammatory cell death pathways including 
pyroptosis25,26. We found that cleaved caspase1, the key player in pyroptosis, was increased 
in APOL1 transfected cells. This was particularly pronounced in cells expressing the 
APOL1 risk alleles (Fig. 5b). In pyroptosis active caspase1 cleaves interleukin 1β (IL1β) 
into a mature and active protein that eventually leaks out of the cell. We found that the level 
of mature IL1β was increased in the medium of cells expressing APOL1 risk allele 
compared to reference allele transfected cells (Fig. 5b).
To prove that pyroptosis contributes to APOL1 risk allele-induced toxicity we treated cells 
with caspase1-specific inhibitors Ac-YVAD-CHO and VX765 and found that APOL1 risk 
allele-induced cytotoxicity was significantly reduced (Fig. 5c). NLRP3 is a component of 
the inflammasome that activates caspase1 during pyroptosis. CRID3 and Parthenolide, as 
NLRP3 inhibitors, also reduced APOL1 risk allele-induced cytotoxicity (Fig. 5d). In line 
with our hypothesis that defective autophagy is the critical inducer of pyroptosis, we found 
that autophagy inducers rapamycin (an mTOR inhibitor)27 and STF66247 decreased the 
APOL1-induced cytotoxicity (Fig. 5d).
Beckerman et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Risk alleles increase inflammatory cell death in mice
As our in vitro data suggested an inflammatory cell death in risk allele-expressing cells, we 
examined whether such a mechanism contributes to podocyte pathology in risk allele-
expressing transgenic mice. We found a marked reduction in podocyte number in risk allele 
transgenic mice (Fig. 6a,b) and severe podocyte dedifferentiation indicated by decreased 
staining of nephrin in risk allele mice (Fig. 6a). DNA fragmentation, evident by TUNEL 
staining was increased in APOL1 risk allele mice (Fig. 6a, b), indicating severe podocyte 
injury and death.
Next we examined whether an autophagy defect similar to the one we observed in vitro, can 
be detected in vivo in mice expressing either the APOL1 reference or one of the risk alleles. 
Transmission EM indicated a greater number of multivesicular bodies/amphisomes and 
autophagosomes in risk allele mice compared to G0 mice (Fig. 6c). The autophagosome 
(AP) to autolysosome (AL) ratio was greater in mice expressing APOL1 risk allele in 
podocytes compared to G0 mice (Fig. 6d). Similarly to our in vitro finding, LC3II staining 
was greater in APOL1 risk allele mice compared to G0 mice (Fig. 6e).
To further analyze the cell death mechanism in vivo, we focused on pyroptosis. We detected 
signs of greater inflammatory death in mice with podocyte-specific deletion of Atg7 
(NPHS2creAtg7flox/flox), the gatekeeper of autophagy as IL1β and NLRP3 expression was 
greater in Atg7-deleted mice podocytes compared to single transgenic controls 
(Supplementary Fig. 8), pointing towards a link between decreased autophagy and increased 
pyroptosis in vivo. In mice with podocyte-specific expression of APOL1, immunostaining 
for IL1β, NLRP3 and caspase1 showed greater protein expression in kidney sections of risk 
allele transgenic mice compared to those expressing the reference allele (Fig. 6f–h), while 
we did not detect active caspase3 activity in risk allele mice (Fig. 6i). RNA-seq-based 
unbiased analysis indicated that caspase1, IL1β and NLRP3 were greater in expression when 
risk allele mice were compared to reference allele and control mice (Fig. 6i).
Discussion
G1 and G2 APOL1 variants have been strongly and reproducibly associated with kidney 
disease in patients. With the advent of whole genome and whole exome sequencing 
hundreds of disease-associated variants have been identified, but animal model experiments 
represent the mainstay of distinguishing causality from association in human genetics. Here 
we generated a mouse model with podocyte-specific inducible expression of APOL1 
reference and risk variants. We show that risk variants recapitulate critical features of the 
human condition indicating that these variants are not only disease associated but indeed 
disease causing. Functional changes, such as albuminuria and azotemia present in the risk 
allele-expressing transgenic mice are consistently observed in patients. Structural changes in 
the mouse model include foot process effacement and mostly solidified-type global sclerosis 
with some segmental sclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. While further human studies 
are needed, recent observations indicated that increased solidified-type global sclerosis and 
more severe tubulointerstitial fibrosis distinguishes subjects with high-risk APOL1 variants 
from subjects with low-risk genotypes13,14. Our mouse model studies here indicate that this 
lesion could represent an APOL1-specific phenotype that is superimposed on other CKD 
Beckerman et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 etiologies, such as hypertension, HIV or lupus (thus contributing to the seemingly variable 
phenotype of APOL1 kidney disease in humans). Moreover, APOL1 risk variant could act as 
a disease accelerating mechanism by inducing global glomerulosclerosis. The phenotype 
development in the mouse model not only closely resembled the human condition, but we 
found it was cell type and genotype restricted, indicating specific rather than non-specific 
toxicity.
Our results also strongly indicate that phenotype development not only depends on the 
presence of G1 and G2 risk variants, but also on risk variant expression levels. The 
correlation between APOL1 G1 or G2 levels and disease severity was also observed in 
human glomerular samples obtained from a large and diverse patient population. It is also in 
line with publications indicating that interferon (IFN) injection can lead to disease 
development in high-risk subjects28. Interferon seems to be a strong regulator of APOL1 
expression and in human subjects STAT1 shows a remarkable correlation with APOL1 
levels. We found that interferon increases cytotoxicity in high risk cells but its effect is not 
additive to the transgenic overexpression of APOL1. We therefore suggest that the level of 
APOL1-G1 and G2 represents a “second hit”; once risk variant APOL1 level rises above a 
critical threshold, disease develops (Supplementary Fig. 9). Besides the regular gene 
expression cues, environmental triggers, such as interferon treatment or infection, increase 
APOL1 risk allele expression in kidney podocytes, which subsequently blocks autophagy 
and activates caspase1-mediated inflammatory cell death (pyroptosis), resulting in disease 
progression. The recessive mode of inheritance is also in line with the “threshold” 
hypothesis, as heterozygous subjects have an average of 50% risk variant levels that is less 
likely to reach a critical threshold in geographical areas where the “environmental trigger” is 
less strong. A recent publication indicates that in Sub-Saharan Africa, where both APOL1 
risk variants and HIV incidence is much higher, even heterozygous individuals have a 
statistically significant increased disease risk29.
Recently a mouse model with podocyte-specific non-inducible expression of either G0 or 
G2-APOL1 was published10. The authors have described pre-eclampsia but no 
glomerulosclerosis in this model, which seems to be different from the human phenotype. In 
this model APOL1 expression was significantly lower in risk allele mice. Given our results 
in this study that the kidney phenotype is strongly associated with APOL1 levels, this lower 
expression level might have played a role in the lack of observed renal disease. APOL1 
expression in this model is constitutive, potentially causing a selective pressure and 
decreasing toxicity. Speaking to this issue in the pre-eclampsia model, the authors have 
obtained significantly fewer founders for the risk allele than for the reference allele mice. 
The conditional inducible expression system we used here likely circumvented such 
problems.
On the mechanistic level, APOL1 interferes with intracellular vesicle trafficking by 
disrupting autophagosome maturation, leading instead to expansion of mixed endocytic/
autophagic compartments. The molecular mechanism whereby APOL1 affects autophagy 
and vesicular trafficking is not fully understood. We have found that acidification of 
endocytic vesicles was altered in cells expressing one of the risk alleles. Although 
dissipation of acidic endosomal pH could be secondary to rerouting of autophagosomes 
Beckerman et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 towards fusion with endosomes instead of lysosomes, the most likely explanation for this 
defect is that APOL1 acts as an ion channel in vesicles. Acidification of vesicles occurs by 
the action of a vacuolar ATPase, an electrogenic process; therefore an ion channel is needed 
to compensate the electric changes. APOL1 has been shown to function as an ion channel in 
lipid bilayers30, and therefore it is possible that it also functions as such in podocytes. Other 
possible mechanisms include a potential interaction of APOL1 with a GTPase or a SNARE 
protein, which would interfere with autophagosome maturation and lysosomal fusion. Future 
studies are needed to distinguish between these or other possibilities.
We show that the effect of APOL1 on endocytic/autophagic maturation results in lower 
autophagic flux in cells expressing one of the APOL1 risk alleles. It has been suggested that 
autophagy is induced by APOL1, as it has a BH3 domain, and BH3-only proteins and BH3 
mimetics induce autophagy through beclin-1 and the class III phosphorinositide3-kinase 
complex21,31. Also, both reference and risk alleles of APOL1 increase LC3II levels, yet 
autophagic flux was not specifically investigated in these studies32–34. Although induction of 
autophagosome formation could be in part responsible for the higher number of 
autophagosomes observed in cells expressing a APOL1 risk allele, our studies support the 
conclusion that most of the increase in steady state levels of autophagosomes is due to 
reduced autophagic flux (lysosomal fusion and degradation of autophagic cargo). Podocytes, 
like other terminally differentiated cells, such as neurons, have high basal autophagy rates 
and autophagy is known to play an important role in podocyte homeostasis35. Indeed, 
defects in autophagy in podocytes have been shown to induce podocyte loss, focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis and proteinuria36–39.
Our results indicate that this defect in autophagy and endocytic trafficking is associated with 
inflammatory cell death. Caspase1 and IL1β play a key role in APOL1-induced cytotoxicity. 
These results offer new therapeutic possibilities for APOL1-associated kidney disease with 
already approved IL-1 inhibitors or other inflammatory cell death inhibitors40,41. Given that 
caspase1 knockout animals develop normally42, this pathway is potentially targetable.
Importantly, it seems that a positive feedback regulatory loop exists between APOL1 and 
inflammatory pathways. While APOL1 is part of the innate immune system and is strongly 
regulated by inflammatory cytokines; its expression results in inflammatory cell death21. 
Cytokines released following cell death can up-regulate APOL1 levels leading to further 
death. This regulatory loop likely explains the toxicity associated with APOL1 expression in 
vitro and in vivo. It may also explain the additive effect of HIV and APOL1 risk allele on 
glomerulosclerosis development, in light of the cytokine inducing effect of HIV and the 
potential additive activation of pyroptosis by the virus43,44.
In summary we show that expression of either APOL1 risk allele in podocytes causes lesions 
that recapitulate the human APOL1-associated kidney disease at the functional, structural 
and molecular levels, thus proving that these variants are disease-causing mutations. 
Targeting these variants may reduce the increased kidney disease risk among millions of 
people of African descent.
Beckerman et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Online Methods
Antibodies and reagents
The following primary antibodies were used: GFP (immunohistochemistry (IHC), Clontech 
#632380, 1:500; western blot (WB), 1:3000), WT1 (IHC, Santa Cruz #M3561, 1:40), EEA1 
(immunofluorescence (IF), BD transduction #610456, 1:100), Vamp8 (IF, Sigma 
#SAB1409943, 1:100), Rab7 (IF, Sigma #R8779, 1:100), Rab11 (IF, BD transduction 
#610656 1:100), LAMP2 (IF, BD transduction #555803, 1:100), LC3II (WB, Sigma 
#L7543, 1:1000; IF, cell signaling #27755, 1:100), STX17 (IF, Sigma #HPA001204, 1:100), 
APOL1 (WB, Sigma #HPA018885, 1:1000; IF, Sigma, 1:100), GM130 (IF, BD transduction 
#610822, 1:100), calnexin (IF, BD transduction #610523, 1:200), perilipin2 (IF, Sigma 
#611042, 1:500), Nephrin (IF, Fitzgerald Industries Intl Inc #20R-NP002, 1:100), cleaved-
Caspase-3 (WB and IHC, cell signaling #9664, 1:1000), Caspase-1 (WB, Santa Cruz 
#SC515, 1:1000; IHC, Thermo Fisher #PA5-38099, 1:100), IL1β (WB, R&D #AF-201-NA, 
1:1000; IHC, cell signaling #12242S, 1:100), NLRP3 (IHC, Novus #NBP2-12446, 1:100), 
α-tubulin (WB, Sigma #T6199, 1:3000). The following experimental materials were used: 
RPMI 1640 (Cellgro), MEM eagle (Sigma), DMEM 1× (Cellgro), FBS (Atlanta 
Biologicals), Tet system approved FBS (Clontech), Penicillin-Streptomycin (Cellgro), 
insulin transferrin selenium (ITS) (Cellgro), L-glutamine (Cellgro), Doxycycline (Clontech), 
Digitonin (CalBioChem). The following inhibitors were used: Ac-YVAD728 CHO (Cayman 
Chemicals, 50μM), VX765 (Toronto Research Chemicals, 10μM), CRID3 (Tocris 
bioscience, 50μM), Parthenolide (ENZO, 100μM), rapamycin (LC laboratories, 1ng/ml), 
STF62247 (Cayman Chemicals, 1.25μM).
Transgenic mice
TRE-APOL1 mice were generated by cloning APOL1 (G0/G1/G2) cDNA into the pBI734 
EGFP vector containing tetracycline response element (TRE). The transgenic construct was 
injected into FVB/N oocytes. Transgenic mice were identified by genomic PCR analysis 
using transgene (APOL1 and GFP) specific primers. We detected transgene integration in 
more than 10 founder lines for each allele. We then characterized 6 founders for G0, 8 for 
G1 and 4 for G2 by mating them with nephrin and Pax8 rtTA animals. Transgene expression 
was induced by doxycycline containing food (200mg/kg, BioServ). No blinding or 
randomization was used during animal handling. NPHS1rtTA transgenic mice were 
generated by Jeffrey Miner45. The Pax8rtTA mice were purchased from Jackson 
Laboratories (007176). Animal studies were approved by the Animal Care Committee of the 
University of Pennsylvania.
Phenotype analysis
Urine albumin and creatinine were determined using mouse albumin specific ELISA 
(Albuwell M kit, Exocell and Bethyl Laboratories) and creatinine reagent (Sciteck 
Diagnostics), per manufacturer’s protocol.
For NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1G2/WT mice, the serum creatinine and BUN were measured 
by i-STAT CHEM8+ Cartridge according to manufacturer’s instructions (Abbott).
Beckerman et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For Pax8-rtTA/TRE-APOL1 transgenic mice, serum creatinine and BUN were determined 
by Mouse Creatinine Kit (Crystal Chem) and TRACE DMA Urea kit (Thermo Electron 
Corporation), respectively, according to manufacturers’ instructions.
Histological analysis was performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded kidney sections 
stained by PAS (periodic acid Schiff).
Electron microscopy
Tissues for electron microscopic examination were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2.0% 
paraformaldehyde in 0.1M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH7.4, overnight at 4oC. Samples 
were post759 fixed in 2.0% osmium tetroxide. The tissue was infiltrated and embedded in 
EMbed-812 (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Fort Washington, PA). Thin sections were 
stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a JEOL 1010 electron 
microscope fitted with a Hamamatsu digital camera and AMT Advantage image capture 
software. Morphometric analysis of micrographs was performed using conventional 
criteria46. Scoring of vesicular compartments was performed blinded. For each group 32–54 
sections and 100–117 compartments were examined. Type of compartment was determined 
by the following criteria: autophagosomes were identified as ribosome-free double or 
partially double membrane vesicles with identified cargo or content of s comparable density 
to the surrounding cytosol; autolysosomes were identified as single membrane vesicles with 
content of lower density than the surrounding cytosol and cargo suggestive of breakdown; 
late endosome/multivesicular bodies were identified as single membrane vesicles containing 
homogenous single membrane vesicles in their low density lumen; amphisomes were 
defined using the same criteria of late endosome/multivesicular bodies, only containing 
cytosolic material of different density in their lumen. The membrane of amphisomes often 
presented invaginating vesicles representing multivesicular body formation. Immunogold 
studies were performed on human samples using APOL1 (Sigma #HPA018885) antibody.
Western blotting
Whole kidney was removed from NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1 or Pax8-rtTA/TRE-APOL1 
transgenic mice and subject to western blot analysis. Briefly, kidney lysates were 
homogenized in 1% SDS lysis buffer (1% SDS, 1% Triton x-100, 50mM Tris pH7.4, 
150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Mini, Roche). 
Equal amount of total protein (35ug) were resolved on a 10% gels, transferred to a 
polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, blocked with 5% non fat milk in TBS-tween and 
probed with primary antibodies as described above at 4oC overnight, and proper secondary 
antibodies: anti-rabbit (Cell Signaling, 1:3000) and anti-mouse (Cell Signaling, 1:3000) IgG 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and donkey anti785 goat IgG HRP (Santa Cruz, 1:3000). 
Blots were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Western Lightning-ECL, Thermo 
Scientific) or Pierce ECL (BioRad).
HeLa Tet-On 3G cells (Clontech), transfected HEK293 cells or GFP-TRE-G1APOL1 
HEK293, urinary podocytes were cultured at 37°C in appropriate medium as described 
above in the presence of 5% CO2. Cell lysates were prepared with 1% SDS lysis buffer as 
above. Proteins were resolved on a 10–15% gradient gels, and then follow the subsequent 
Beckerman et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 western blot procedure as above. in the presence of 5% CO2. Cell lysates were prepared 
with 1% SDS lysis buffer as above. Proteins were resolved on a 10–15% gradient gels, and 
then follow the subsequent western blot procedure as above.
Podocyte, HEK293 and HeLa cell culture and transfection
Transformed human podocytes were generated as previously described47. Subjects gave 
informed consent for genetic studies and for podocyte culture under protocols approved by 
the NIDDK Institutional Review Board. Human urinary podocytes were cultured in RPMI 
1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium and 1% 
penicillin-streptomycin at 33oC. Differentiation was induced when cells were approximately 
60–70% confluent by thermoshifting to 37°C for 14d.
HEK293 Tet-On 3G cells (Clontech) were cultured in Eagle MEM with 10% Tet system 
approved fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10% L-glutamine and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells 
were transfected with the TRE-GFP/APOL1 construct using Xfect kit (Clontech) per 
manufacturer’s protocol. On the following day, transfected cells were treated with 
doxycycline to induce APOL1 expression.
HeLa Tet-On 3G cells (Clontech) were cultured at 37°C in complete DMEM 1× with 10% 
tet system approved FBS and penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were transfected using Xfect 
according to manufacturer’s protocol. APOL1 expression was induced by doxycycline. Cells 
were incubated at 37°C for 24–48h after doxycycline addition before subjected to further 
analysis.
Stably transfected (GFP-TRE-G1APOL1) HEK293 cells were generated by puromycin 
selection followed by FACS sorting (GFP) and cylinder cloning. We have confirmed 
doxycycline inducible APOL1 expression on Western blots.
Cytotoxicity assays
HEK293 3G cells or G1APOL1 were plated in 96-well plate. Transfection of HEK293 cells 
with APOL1 plasmid was carried out as described above and doxycycline was added for 
12hr. The plate was read using SpectraMax for 485ex-535em for GFP signal. Then the 
medium was carefully removed and cells were incubated with HBSS (with Ca2+ and Mg2+) 
and 5μM propidium iodide (PI) at 37°C for 30 min. The plate then was read using 
SpectraMax for 530ex – 620em for dead cells. Without removing HBSS+PI, cells were 
incubated with equal volume of CellTiter Glo 2.0 reagent (Promega) at room temp for 10 
min. Finally, the plate was read using SpectraMax for luminescence, which indicated live 
cell count. The ratio between dead cell reading, live cell and GFP (APOL1 expression) 
reading was calculated, unless otherwise indicated.
LDH release test was preformed using CytoTox 96® Non-Radioactive Cytotoxicity Assay 
(Promega). Transfected Hela cells or GFP-TRE-G1APOL1 HEK293 cells were plated 
asdescribed above and treated with or without doxycycline and with or without inhibitors for 
8–24 h. Medium was collected in triplicates, spun down and incubated in a 96 well plate 
with the CytoTox reagent for 20–30 min. After addition of stop solution, the absorbance 
signal was measured at 490nm in a plate reader.
Beckerman et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RNAseq; Mouse kidneys
Total RNA of transgenic and control mice kidneys was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit 
(Qiagen). RNA quality was assessed with the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 and RIN scores 
above 7 were used. Libraries were prepared using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Preparation Kit. 
Samples were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq for single-end 100bp. Trimmed reads were 
aligned to the Gencode mouse genome (GRCm38) with STAR-2.4.1d. The readcount of 
each sample was obtained using HTSeq-0.6.1 (htseq-count) and then tested with DESeq2 for 
differential gene expression. Top differentially regulated pathways were determined using 
GSEA and KEGG pathway analysis software.
RNAseq; Human kidneys
Kidney samples were obtained from routine surgical nephrectomies. Samples were 
deidentified and clinical information was collected via an honest broker. Pathology 
examination was performed by local nephropathologist. The study was approved by the 
institutional review board (IRBs) of the University of Pennsylvania. The kidney tissue was 
immediately placed and stored in RNAlater (Ambion) according to manufacturer’s 
instruction. The tissue was manually microdissected under a microscope in RNAlater for 
glomerular and tubular compartments. Dissected glomerular tissue was homogenized, and 
RNA prepared using RNAeasy mini columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to 
manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality and quantity were determined as described above. 
RNA library preparation, sequencing and analysis were performed as described above. 
Reads were mapped to the reference genomes (Gencode human genome (GRCh37)) using 
Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference (STAR).
Reversibility study
NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G2 mice were placed on doxycycline diet at 3–9 weeks of age 
for 14 days. Then the mice were separated into two groups. One was continuing on 
doxycycline diet and the other one was fed normal chow diet. The urine samples from each 
mouse were collected twice a week. Urinary albumin levels on day 7 (day 21 total) and day 
17 (day 31 total) after separating were monitored by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie stain.
Immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and TUNEL
For Immunohistochemistry, sections were deparaffinized, hydrated in ethyl alcohol and 
washed in tap water. Antigen retrieval was carried out in 0.4% pepsin (WT1) or TRIS-
EDTA, pH 9.0 (LC3II, EGFP) in 37°C incubator for 10 min; or by boiling in sodium citrate 
pH6 for 10 min (caspase1, IL1β, NLRP3, c-casp3). Endogenous peroxidase activity was 
blocked in 3% H2O2 for 10 min. Endogenous biotin was blocked with avidin/biotin 
blocking kit (Vector Labs). Sections were blocked in 3% BSA (WT1), MOM kit blocking 
reagent (Vector Labs) (EGFP, IL1β) or Vectastain rabbit kit (Vector Labs) (caspase1, 
NLRP3, LC3II) for 1 hour at room temperature and incubated overnight at 40C with primary 
antibody and at room temperature for 30 min with secondary antibody. Staining was 
visualized using peroxidase-conjugated antibodies using either Vectastain Elite kit or MOM 
kit, and 3,3-diaminobenzidine (DAB), as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Vector Labs). For 
tissue immunofluorescence, 4μm thick, O.C.T. Compound (Sakura) embedded cryosections 
Beckerman et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were fixed in formalin, and then blocked and probed as described above. For cell 
immunofluorescence, cells were cultured on cover slips, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, 
permeabilized with 0.003% digitonin and blocked with 3%BSA. Cells were incubated with 
primary antibody for 1 hour and with secondary conjugated antibody (Alexa Fluor 555 
donkey anti rabbit or Alexa Fluor 665 goat anti mouse IgG antibodies, Life Technologies, 
1:500) for 30 min in room temperature. For TUNEL stain, sections were processed as 
described above for IHC and labeled with TdT using the ApopTag peroxidase in situ 
apoptosis detection kit (Millipore #S7100). Staining was visualized using DAB.
Endocytosis
Doxycycline-treated transfected HEK293 cells were incubated with 75 μM Alexa647 
dextran (an endocytosis marker) and with 75 μM pHRodo Red Dextran (a pH sensitive 
endosomal marker) (Life technologies) for 16 h and then medium was changed to dextran-
free medium with doxycycline for an 8h chase period. Hoechst dye was added and cells 
were imaged using Leica confocal microscopy. Dextran loading and imaging was done after 
changing medium to Live Cell Imaging Solution (Life Technologies). Images were 
quantified over whole cells using imageJ and normalized to background. A minimum of 20 
cells were analyzed for each group in each experiment.
LysoTracker labeling
Doxycycline-treated transfected HEK293 cells or human urinary podocytes were incubated 
with 50 nM LysoTracker Red DND-99 reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 h and then 
medium was changed and cells were visualized using a Leica confocal microscope. A 
minimum of 20 cells were analyzed for each group.
Spinning disc confocal microscopy
Live cell imaging were performed as described previously48. Briefly, GFP-APOL1, or GFP-
APOL1 D388, and mRFP-Rab7 (Addgene), or DsRed-Rab11 (Addgene) tagged proteins 
were coexpressed in Cos7 cells by electroporation (Gene Pulser II (Bio-Rad)). Transfected 
cells were seeded in glass-bottomed 35-mm dishes (no. 1.5 thickness; MatTek) and imaged 
18 h later. Before imaging, medium was replaced with an imaging buffer (containing 136 
mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1.3 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM HEPES [pH 7.4]). Cells 
were imaged using an Andor spinning confocal microscope with ×60 oil immersion 
objectives.
Statistical analyses
Differences between two groups were analyzed using Student’s 2-tailed t-test assuming 
unequal variance. Differences between more than two groups were analyzed using one-way 
ANOVA test. All data are presented as the means ± s.d., unless otherwise indicated. P < 0.05 
was considered to be significant. n.s., P > 0.05. We did not perform analyses to predetermine 
sample sizes. Rather, the sample sizes were chosen empirically based on our previous 
experiences in the calculation of experimental variability. The numbers of animals used are 
described in the corresponding figure legends. All experiments were done with at least three 
biological replicates. No animals or samples were excluded from the analysis.
Beckerman et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Work in the Susztak lab is supported by the National Institute of Health (NIH) DK105821, DK087635, DK076077 
and DP3 DK108220. The human kidney RNAsequencing project was performed in collaboration with Boehringer 
Ingelheim. J.Bi-Karchin was supported by T32-DK07785 (NIH). J.B.Kopp and P.D.Dummer were supported by the 
Intramural Research Program, NIDDK, NIH. J.H.Miner was supported by R01DK078314 and R01DK058366, 
T.Rohacs by GM093290 and NS055159, A.M.Cuervo by AG054108 (NIH). M.A.Saleem was supported by Kids 
Kidney Research, and the Bristol Nutrition NIHR-BRU. We would also like to thank the Electron Microscopy 
Resource Laboratory (EMRL) core facility in University of Pennsylvania for their technical support.
References
1. USRDS. US Renal Data System. 2015
2. Lipworth L, et al. Incidence and predictors of end stage renal disease among low456 income blacks 
and whites. PloS one. 2012; 7:e48407. [PubMed: 23110237] 
3. Tzur S, et al. Missense mutations in the APOL1 gene are highly associated with end stage kidney 
disease risk previously attributed to the MYH9 gene. Human genetics. 2010; 128:345–350. 
[PubMed: 20635188] 
4. Genovese G, et al. Association of trypanolytic ApoL1 variants with kidney disease in African 
Americans. Science. 2010; 329:841–845. [PubMed: 20647424] 
5. Freedman BI, et al. Differential Effects of MYH9 and APOL1 Risk Variants on FRMD3 Association 
with Diabetic ESRD in African Americans. PLoS Genet. 2011; 7:e1002150. [PubMed: 21698141] 
6. Foster MC, et al. APOL1 variants associate with increased risk of CKD among African Americans. 
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2013; 24:1484–1491. [PubMed: 23766536] 
7. Friedman DJ, Pollak MR. Genetics of kidney failure and the evolving story of APOL1. The Journal 
of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:3367–3374. [PubMed: 21881214] 
8. Thomson R, et al. Evolution of the primate trypanolytic factor APOL1. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2014; 111:E2130–2139. [PubMed: 
24808134] 
9. Lecordier L, et al. Adaptation of Trypanosoma rhodesiense to hypohaptoglobinaemic serum requires 
transcription of the APOL1 resistance gene in a RNA polymerase I locus. Molecular microbiology. 
2015; 97:397–407. [PubMed: 25899052] 
10. Bruggeman LA, et al. APOL1-G0 or APOL1-G2 Transgenic Models Develop Preeclampsia but 
Not Kidney Disease. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2016
11. Madhavan SM, et al. APOL1 localization in normal kidney and nondiabetic kidney disease. Journal 
of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2011; 22:2119–2128. [PubMed: 21997392] 
12. Yu H, et al. A role for genetic susceptibility in sporadic focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. The 
Journal of clinical investigation. 2016; 126:1067–1078. [PubMed: 26901816] 
13. Larsen CP, et al. Histopathologic findings associated with APOL1 risk variants in chronic kidney 
disease. Mod Pathol. 2015; 28:95–102. [PubMed: 25081748] 
14. Kopp JB, et al. Clinical Features and Histology of Apolipoprotein L1-Associated Nephropathy in 
the FSGS Clinical Trial. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2015; 26:1443–
1448. [PubMed: 25573908] 
15. Ng DK, et al. APOL1-associated glomerular disease among African-American children: a 
collaboration of the Chronic Kidney Disease in Children (CKiD) and Nephrotic Syndrome Study 
Network (NEPTUNE) cohorts. Nephrology, dialysis, transplantation: official publication of the 
European Dialysis and Transplant Association - European Renal Association. 2016
16. Jotwani V, et al. APOL1 Genotype and Glomerular and Tubular Kidney Injury in Women With 
HIV. American journal of kidney diseases: the official journal of the National Kidney Foundation. 
2015; 65:889–898. [PubMed: 25921719] 
Beckerman et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Parsa A, et al. APOL1 risk variants, race, and progression of chronic kidney disease. The New 
England journal of medicine. 2013; 369:2183–2196. [PubMed: 24206458] 
18. Tin A, et al. Patterns of Kidney Function Decline Associated with APOL1 Genotypes: Results 
from AASK. Clinical journal of the American Society of Nephrology: CJASN. 2016; 11:1353–
1359. [PubMed: 27230965] 
19. Ledo N, et al. Functional genomic annotation of genetic risk loci highlights inflammation and 
epithelial biology networks in CKD. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2015; 
26:692–714. [PubMed: 25231882] 
20. Sampson MG, et al. Integrative Genomics Identifies Novel Associations with APOL1 Risk 
Genotypes in Black NEPTUNE Subjects. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 
2016; 27:814–823. [PubMed: 26150607] 
21. Zhaorigetu S, Wan G, Kaini R, Jiang Z, Hu CA. ApoL1, a BH3-only lipid-binding protein, induces 
autophagic cell death. Autophagy. 2008; 4:1079–1082. [PubMed: 18927493] 
22. Furuta N, Amano A. SNARE mediates autophagosome–lysosome fusion. Journal of Oral 
Biosciences. 2012; 54:83–85.
23. Muller-Deile J, Schiffer M. Podocyte directed therapy of nephrotic syndrome-can we bring the 
inside out? Pediatric nephrology (Berlin, Germany). 2016; 31:393–405.
24. Tao J, Polumbo C, Reidy K, Sweetwyne M, Susztak K. A multicolor podocyte reporter highlights 
heterogeneous podocyte changes in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Kidney international. 
2014; 85:972–980. [PubMed: 24284512] 
25. Byrne BG, Dubuisson JF, Joshi AD, Persson JJ, Swanson MS. Inflammasome components 
coordinate autophagy and pyroptosis as macrophage responses to infection. mBio. 2013; 
4:e00620–00612. [PubMed: 23404401] 
26. Shahzad K, et al. Caspase-1, but Not Caspase-3, Promotes Diabetic Nephropathy. Journal of the 
American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2016
27. Inoki K. mTOR signaling in autophagy regulation in the kidney. Seminars in nephrology. 2014; 
34:2–8. [PubMed: 24485024] 
28. Nichols B, et al. Innate immunity pathways regulate the nephropathy gene Apolipoprotein L1. 
Kidney international. 2015; 87:332–342. [PubMed: 25100047] 
29. Kasembeli AN, et al. APOL1 Risk Variants Are Strongly Associated with HIV-Associated 
Nephropathy in Black South Africans. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 
2015; 26:2882–2890. [PubMed: 25788523] 
30. Thomson R, Finkelstein A. Human trypanolytic factor APOL1 forms pH-gated cation527 selective 
channels in planar lipid bilayers: relevance to trypanosome lysis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2015; 112:2894–2899. [PubMed: 
25730870] 
31. Wan G, et al. Apolipoprotein L1, a novel Bcl-2 homology domain 3-only lipid-binding protein, 
induces autophagic cell death. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2008; 283:21540–21549. 
[PubMed: 18505729] 
32. Cheng D, et al. Biogenesis and cytotoxicity of APOL1 renal risk variant proteins in hepatocytes 
and hepatoma cells. Journal of lipid research. 2015; 56:1583–1593. [PubMed: 26089538] 
33. Galindo-Moreno J, et al. Apolipoprotein L2 contains a BH3-like domain but it does not behave as a 
BH3-only protein. Cell death & disease. 2014; 5:e1275. [PubMed: 24901046] 
34. Heneghan JF, et al. BH3 domain-independent apolipoprotein L1 toxicity rescued by BCL2 
prosurvival proteins. American journal of physiology Cell physiology. 2015; 309:C332–347. 
[PubMed: 26108665] 
35. Hartleben B, et al. Autophagy influences glomerular disease susceptibility and maintains podocyte 
homeostasis in aging mice. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2010; 120:1084–1096. [PubMed: 
20200449] 
36. Hartleben B, Wanner N, Huber TB. Autophagy in glomerular health and disease. Seminars in 
nephrology. 2014; 34:42–52. [PubMed: 24485029] 
37. Kawakami T, et al. Deficient Autophagy Results in Mitochondrial Dysfunction and FSGS. Journal 
of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2015; 26:1040–1052. [PubMed: 25406339] 
Beckerman et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 38. Tagawa A, et al. Impaired Podocyte Autophagy Exacerbates Proteinuria in Diabetic Nephropathy. 
Diabetes. 2016; 65:755–767. [PubMed: 26384385] 
39. Yamamoto-Nonaka K, et al. Cathepsin D in Podocytes Is Important in the Pathogenesis of 
Proteinuria and CKD. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2016
40. Gabay C, Lamacchia C, Palmer G. IL-1 pathways in inflammation and human diseases. Nature 
reviews Rheumatology. 2010; 6:232–241. [PubMed: 20177398] 
41. Turner CM, Arulkumaran N, Singer M, Unwin RJ, Tam FW. Is the inflammasome a potential 
therapeutic target in renal disease? BMC nephrology. 2014; 15:21. [PubMed: 24450291] 
42. Li P, et al. Mice deficient in IL-1 beta-converting enzyme are defective in production of mature 
IL-1 beta and resistant to endotoxic shock. Cell. 1995; 80:401–411. [PubMed: 7859282] 
43. Doitsh G, et al. Cell death by pyroptosis drives CD4 T-cell depletion in HIV-1 infection. Nature. 
2014; 505:509–514. [PubMed: 24356306] 
44. Haque S, et al. HIV Promotes NLRP3 Inflammasome Complex Activation in Murine HIV560 
Associated Nephropathy. The American journal of pathology. 2016; 186:347–358. [PubMed: 
26683666] 
45. Lin X, Suh JH, Go G, Miner JH. Feasibility of repairing glomerular basement membrane defects in 
Alport syndrome. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN. 2014; 25:687–692. 
[PubMed: 24262794] 
46. Klionsky DJ, et al.Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy. 
Autophagy (3rd). 2016; 12:1–222. [PubMed: 26799652] 
47. Sakairi T, et al. Conditionally immortalized human podocyte cell lines established from urine. 
American journal of physiology. Renal physiology. 2010; 298:F557–567. [PubMed: 19955187] 
48. Soda K, et al. Role of dynamin, synaptojanin, and endophilin in podocyte foot processes. The 
Journal of clinical investigation. 2012; 122:4401–4411. [PubMed: 23187129] 
Beckerman et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Generation of a mouse model with cell-type-specific inducible expression of APOL1 
variants
(a) Upper: schematic representation of mouse model generation. Lower: representative 
images of GFP immunostaining. (n = 15 per line) Scale bars, 10μm. (b) Urine albumin/
creatinine ratio (ACR) of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 (n = 11), NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-
APOL1-G1 (n = 11), NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G2 (n = 12) mice. Single transgenic 
littermates served as controls (ctl) (n = 8, 6, 6 for G0, G1 and G2, respectively). Statistics 
was calculated by Student’s t-test, P = 0.0154 (G0 vs. G1), P=0.0077 (G0 vs. G2). (c) Serum 
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels of control (CTL) (n = 6) and NPHS1-rtTA/
TRE-APOL1-G2 (n = 4) mice on doxycycline diet for 12–19 days. Student’s t-test, P = 
0.0042 (BUN), P = 0.0279 (creatinine). The data are presented as means ± s.d. (d) 
Representative PAS-stained kidney images of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0, NPHS1-rtTA/
TRE-APOL1-G1 and NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G2 mice. The bottom images are higher 
magnifications of the boxed regions in the top images. (n > 5 per line) Scale bars: upper 
panels: 20μm; lower panels: 10μm. (e) Quantification of the histological findings of NPHS1-
rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 (n = 12), NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G1 (n = 12), NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-
APOL1-G2 (n = 7) mice. Student’s t-test, P = 0.0087 (G0 vs. G1), P = 0.0048 (G0 vs. G2). 
(f) Representative transmission electron micrographs (TEM) of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-
G0/G1/G2 mice. (n = 26, 74, 54 for G0, G1, G2 mice, respectively) Scale bar: 500nm. (g) 
Differentially expressed pathways by RNAsequencing identified using gene set enrichment 
analysis. Y-axis log (p) of the false discovery rate (FWER: family-wise error rate). (h) 
Heatmap analysis of mouse orthologs of Ubd, Cxcl9, Cxcl1 and Muc13, previously reported 
to be differentially expressed in APOL1 high vs. low risk allele nephrotic syndrome 
subjects. Higher transcript levels are shown in red, while lower in green.
Beckerman et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. APOL1 risk variant-induced phenotype is cell type- and dose-dependent and likely 
reversible
(a) Western blot showing APOL1 and tubulin levels in kidneys of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-
APOL1 transgenic mice on doxycycline for 3 (G1 and G2) to 17 (G0) weeks. (b) Left panel: 
Mice were matched for APOL1 transcript levels in NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0/G1/G2 
transgenic mice Right panel: urine albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-
APOL1-G0/G1/G2 transgenic mice after doxycycline diet for 3–6 weeks. (n = 5 per group). 
Data are presented as means ± s.e.m. and Student’s t-test, P = 0.0029 (G0 vs. G1), P = 
0.00612 (G0 vs. G2). (c) Cell toxicity (measured by the ratio of dead to viable cells) assay in 
TRE-GFP/APOL1-G0, G1 or G2 transiently transfected HEK293 cells and normalized to 
GFP (APOL1) levels. Grey bars represent no doxycycline treated and black (in CTL or G0) 
or white bars (in G1 or G2) represent doxycycline treated cells. Student’s t-test, P = 0.0031 
(G0 vs. G1), P = 0.016 (G0 vs. G2). (d) Violin plots of eGFR (right graph) in a group of low 
risk (LR) and high-risk (HR) APOL1 genotype patients matched by APOL1 expression level 
(left graph) (FPKM: fragments per kilobase million) and age, gender and other sequencing 
parameters (1:3=HR (n = 11): LR (n = 33)). Significance was calculated by conditional 
logistic regression P = 0.032 (right graph). (e) Correlation between APOL1 transcript levels 
(by qRT-PCR) and albumin/creatinine ratio for NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0, G1 or G2 
mice. n = 15 per group. The red, white and black diamonds in the graph for the G2 allele 
represent 3 mice of varying expression of this risk allele and used for analysis in f. (f) 
Representative PAS-stained kidney images of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G2 with 
increasing levels of APOL1 transcript. The diamonds represent the same 3 mice shown in e 
for the G2 group. (n > 5 per line) (g) APOL1 cell toxicity in TRE-GFP/APOL1-G0, G1 or 
G2 transiently transfected HEK293 cells treated with different concentrations of doxycycline 
(increasing APOL1 expression), cell toxicity was normalized to GFP (APOL1) expression. 
(h) Violin plots of glomerular APOL1 transcript level measured by RNA sequencing on 
microdissected glomeruli from 286 human kidney samples in control (GFR> 60mL/min/
1.73m2) and CKD (GFR<60ml/min/1.73m2) patients. Student’s t-test, P = 0.000283. (i) 
Coomassie gels of urine samples from mice that were placed on doxycycline food for 14 
days and then either kept on doxycycline food (on group) or taken doxycycline diet off (off 
Beckerman et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 group). Urine samples were taken from day 0, 14, 21 and 31 following initiation of 
doxycycline food. Quantifications of albumin gel images are shown at the bottom. Intensity 
of the albumin of Day 21 and 31 were both normalized to that of day 14 (the time of 
splitting up the groups). All data are presented as means ± s.d. (unless otherwise indicated).
Beckerman et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. APOL1 risk allele cells show increased accumulation of intracellular vesicles, mainly 
late endosomes/autophagosomes
(a) Immunogold electron microscopy (EM) of APOL1 in human kidney podocytes. APOL1 
localizes to plasma membrane (red circles) and intracellular vesicles (blue arrows). Scale 
bar, 200nm. (b) Double immunofluorescence micrographs of cultured human podocytes 
with APOL1 (red) and intracellular organelle markers (green) (EEA1-early endosome, 
Rab7-late endosome, Rab11-recycle endosome, LC3-autophagic vacuoles, LAMP2-
lysosomes). Scar bar, 11μm. (c) Quantification of colocalization correlation using Pearson r 
correlation through ImageJ coloc2 function. n = 5 separate experiments, 3–10 cells for each 
genotype were analyzed. Data are presented as means ± s.e.m. (d) Representative frame 
from the supplementary video 1 of spinning disk confocal microscopy analysis of GFP-
APOL1 (green) and RFP-Rab7 (late endosome) (red) in transfected HEK293 cells. 
Arrowheads, overlapping puncta of GFP-APOL1 and RFP-Rab7. Scale bar, 5μm. (e–f) 
Representative fluorescence images of confocal microscopy analysis of endogenous. (e) 
Rab7 and (f) LC3 immunofluorescence stain in cultured low risk genotype (G0/G0) and high 
risk genotype (G1/G2) human podocytes and quantification showing increased stain in 
G1/G2 cells. n = 5 separate experiments, 3–10 cells for each genotype were analyzed. Scale 
bars, 11μm. (g) Representative transmission electron micrographs from control, TRE-
APOL1-G0, TRE-APOL1-G1 and TRE-APOL1-G2 transfected HEK293 cells. Examples of 
autophagy-related compartments include: **(two black asterisks): Late endosomes/MVB 
(MVB), *(one black asterisk): autophagosomes (APG), ** (two white asterisks): 
autolysosomes (AUT), * (one white asterisk): amphisomes (AMP). Scale bars, 0.5μm. (h) 
Quantification showing the number of each type of vesicle per section. n = 7 analyzed 
sections. Data are presented as means ± s.e.m. and Student’s t-test, P = 0.032, 0.0057, 0.011 
for G0, G1, G2 comparing to control (AUT); while P = 0.024,0.00027, 0.00903 for G0, G1, 
G2 comparing control (AMP). (i) Quantification showing the relative percentage of each 
compartment. n = 7 analyzed sections. Data are presented as means ± s.e.m. and Student’s t-
test, P = 0.0064 (G2 vs. CTL, APG), 0.0068 and 0.0.01005 (G0 and G2, respectively, vs. 
CTL, AUT), 0.034 and 0.00044 (G0 and G2, respectively, vs. CTL, AMP). (j) 
Representative frames from the supplementary videos 1 and 2 of spinning disk confocal 
Beckerman et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 microscopy analysis of GFP-APOL1-G0 or GFP-APOL1-G2 (green) and RFP-Rab7 or 
RFP-Rab11 (red) in transfected HEK293 cells. Scale bar, 5 μm. All data are presented as 
means ± s.d. (unless otherwise indicated).
Beckerman et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Risk variants of APOL1 obstruct autophagy flux
(a) Representative Western blot analysis and (b) quantification of LC3 and GFP in TRE-
APOL1 transfected HEK293 cells under fed (F), starved (S) and starved+chloroquine 
treatment (SCQ) conditions. Top panel shows LC3I and LC3II bands on the same gel. Due 
to high LC3I content in the cells, different exposure times of the individual rows of LCI and 
LCII (see solid and dashed arrowed lines, respectively, pointing to the lower panels) were 
utilized for clear and quantifiable visibility of the bands. Data are presented as means ± 
s.e.m. and Student’s t-test compared to TRE-APOL1-G0 transfected cells. (c) Quantification 
of autophagosomes (AP) and autophagolysosomes (AL) by transmission EM and their ratio 
in transfected HEK293 cells. n = 35, 32, 54 and 42 cells for control, G0, G1 and G2 
transfected cells were analyzed, respectively. All data are presented as means ± s.e.m. and 
Student’s t-test, P = 0.0013 (left panel), 0.025 (right panel) compare to non-transfected 
(CTL) + TRE-APOL1-G0 transfected cells. (d,e) LC3 staining of low risk (G0/G0) and 
high-risk (compound heterozygous G1/G2) genotype human podocytes under fed (F), 
starved (S) and starved plus chloroquine (SCQ) conditions (d) and quantification of this data 
(e). Scale bars, 11μm. n = 3, 9–20 cells were analyzed per condition. Data are presented as 
means ± s.e.m. and Student’s t-test, P = 0.0462 (left panel), 0.0104 (right panel) compared to 
low risk genotype (G0/G0) podocytes.
Beckerman et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. APOL1 risk variants induce inflammatory cell death (pyroptosis) in cells
(a) Representative Western blot analysis of caspase3 (Casp3) and cleaved caspase3 (cCasp3) 
following transient transfection with TRE-APOL1-G0/G1/G2. UV exposure served as 
apoptosis positive control. n = 5. (b) Representative Western blot analysis of caspase1 
(Casp1) and cleaved caspase1 (cCasp1) following transient transfection of TRE-APOL1-
G0/G1/G2. GFP served as an APOL1 expression reference, α-tubulin as loading control and 
LPS as pyroptosis positive control. Western blot analysis of mature IL1β in medium from 
the same transfected HeLa cells. (c) Cell toxicity (measured by propidium iodide staining) in 
stably transfected TRE-GFP/APOL1-G1 HEK293 cells, with (APOL1) or without (CTL) 
doxycycline and in the presence of the indicated caspase1 inhibitors (concentration see 
Methods). Experiments were done in triplicates. Data are presented as means ± s.e.m, and 
Student’s t-test, P = 0.0015 (Ac-YVAD-CHO), 0.00018 (VX765) compared to APOL1. (d) 
Cell toxicity (measured by LDH release to the medium) in stably transfected TRE-GFP/
APOL1-G1 HEK293 cells with (APOL1) or without (CTL) doxycycline and with indicated 
inhibitors (concentration see Methods). A representative experiment out of three is 
presented; each experiment was done in triplicates. All data are presented as means ± s.e.m, 
and Student’s t-test, P < 0.05.
Beckerman et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Mice with podocyte specific APOL1 risk allele expression show increased podocyte loss, 
autophagy block and increased inflammatory cell death
(a) Representative immunohistochemistry images of WT1 (upper), nephrin (middle) and 
TUNEL staining (lower) in NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0/G1/G2 mouse kidney sections. (n 
> 5 per line) Scale bars, 10μm. (b) Left panel: Quantification of stained cells per glomerulus 
of WT1 (a podocyte marker), in transgenic mice. n = 11 analyzed images per condition. 
Student’s t-test, P =0.0036 compared to NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 mice and single 
transgenic control mice. Right panel: Quantification of stained cells per glomerulus of 
TUNEL stain from transgenic mice. n = 12 analyzed images per condition. Student’s t-test, 
P = 0.0011 compared to NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 mice and single transgenic control. 
(c) Representative transmission EM images of podocytes from transgenic mice showing 
increased numbers of MVB and autophagosomes. Inserts show multivesicular bodies (*) and 
amphisome-like structures (**). Scale bars, 500nm. (d) Quantification of autophagosomes 
(AP) and autolysosomes (AL) in transgenic mice. Note increased ratio of AP to AL in G1 
and G2 mice compared to G0 mice. n > 50 analyzed organelles per each condition. Data are 
presented as means ± s.e.m. and Student’s t-test, P = 8.1816e-07 (left panel), 0.037 (right 
panel) compared to NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 mice. (e) Representative 
immunohistochemistry images of LC3II from transgenic mice. Note the increased podocyte 
stain in G1 and G2 mice compared to G0 mice, suggesting increase in autophagic vacuole 
content. (n > 5 per line) Scale bars, 10μm. (f–h) Representative immunohistochemistry 
images of IL1β, NLRP3 and caspase1, showing increased stain of pyroptosis proteins in 
podocytes of G1 and G2 mice, compared to G0 mice. (n > 5 per line) Scale bars, 10 μm. (j) 
Representative immunohistochemistry images of cleaved caspase3 from transgenic mice. 
Note lack of detectable stain, indicating apoptosis is not significantly induced in transgenic 
mice. (n > 5 per line) Scale bars, 10 μm. (i) Differential expression of a set of genes by 
RNA-seq analysis in kidneys of NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0/G1/G2 mice. Single 
transgenic littermates and NPHS1-rtTA/TRE-APOL1-G0 are controls.
Beckerman et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
