  Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2730727 
Forced Marriage and Birth Outcomes 
 
 
Charles 
M. Becker 
Bakhrom 
Mirkasimov 
Susan 
Steiner 
Duke 
University  
University of 
Tashkent 
Leibniz 
Universität 
Hannover/ 
IZA 
 
April 6, 2016 
 
ERID Working Paper Number 204 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge from the Social 
Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2730727  
  Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2730727 
 
FORCED MARRIAGE AND BIRTH OUTCOMES 
 
Charles M. Becker†, Bakhrom Mirkasimov†† and Susan Steiner‡ 
 
April 2016 
 
Abstract: 
We study the impact of bride kidnapping, a form of marriage practiced in Central Asia and 
elsewhere, on infant birth weight. Considerable debate exists as to whether kidnapping is merely 
ritualized elopement, or whether it involves bride coercion. To the extent that it is non-consensual, 
we expect adverse consequences from such marriages, working through poor spousal matching 
quality and subsequent psychosocial stress. Remarkable survey data from rural Kyrgyzstan enable us 
to explore differential outcomes for kidnapped women. We apply several estimation models, 
including an IV estimation in which we instrument kidnapping among young women with the 
district-level prevalence of kidnapping among older women and an OLS regression with district 
fixed effects. Our findings indicate that children born to kidnapped mothers are of a substantially 
lower birth weight than children born to mothers who are not kidnapped. We further find less 
positively assorted mating among spouses in kidnapped marriages than in other types and higher 
divorce rates among kidnapped women. These findings have important implications for children’s 
long-term development; they also discredit the ritualized-kidnapping-as-elopement view.  
 
 
Keywords: Forced Marriage, Bride Kidnapping, Birth weight, Stress, Kyrgyzstan 
JEL classification: I12, J12 
 
 
Acknowledgements: We thank Giovanna d’Adda, Victor Agadjanian, Kathryn Anderson, Bezawit 
Beyene Chichaibelu, Christopher Edling, Damir Esenaliev, Bernd Fitzenberger, Urakorn Fuderich, 
Adrian Garcia-Mosqueira, Robert Garlick, Priscilla Hermida, Aliya Ibragimova, Joshua Jacobs, Olga 
Kozlova, Bohdan Krawchenko, Natalia Kyui, Sabine Liebenehm, Nathan Light, Mieke Meurs, 
Luciano Mauro, Huon Morton, Akylai Muktarbek kyzy, Dan Oldman, Kani Omurzakova, Sultan 
Omurzakov, Klara Sabirianova Peter, Daniel Rees, Daniel Schnitzlein, Cathy Starkweather, Artem 
Streltsov, Sebastian Vollmer and Marlene Waske for helpful comments. We also received crucial 
feedback from participants of workshops, seminars and conferences at the American University of 
Central Asia, El Colegio de Mexico, Humboldt University of Berlin, Leibniz Universität Hannover, 
University of Hamburg, and the University of Göttingen. We are grateful to the National Statistical 
Committee of the Kyrgyz Republic and the German Research Centre for Geosciences in Potsdam 
for providing us with different types of data. All errors, omissions, and faulty interpretations remain 
our own. 
 
 
† Duke University 
†† Humboldt University of Berlin, University of Central Asia (UCA) and Westminster International 
University in Tashkent (WIUT) 
‡ Leibniz Universität Hannover and IZA 
  Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2730727 
2 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Economists have addressed many questions about love marriages in which both spouses of a 
couple select one another after a period of courtship and arranged marriages in which other parties 
are primarily responsible for the spousal search (Fafchamps and Quisumbing, 2008; Weiss, 1997). In 
contrast, forced marriages have not received much attention. We argue in this paper that forced 
marriages are substantially different in nature than love and arranged marriages in terms of spousal 
search, spousal matching, and the resulting quality of the marriage. We hypothesize that the stress 
level of women who were forced into marriage is higher than that of women who had a choice over 
their spouse. Given that stress was repeatedly shown to be an important determinant of birth 
outcomes (Bozzoli and Quintana-Domeque, 2014; Camacho, 2008; Foureaux Koppensteiner and 
Manacorda, 2016; Mansour and Rees, 2012; Torche, 2011), we expect the birth outcomes of women 
in forced marriages to be worse than those of women in other types of marriage. 
 
We investigate the impact of forced marriage on birth weight. This impact is of high policy 
relevance. If we find a negative impact, forced marriage does not only have adverse consequences 
for the women involved but also for their children: Birth weight is a primary marker of infant health 
and affects long-run outcomes such as adult height, completed education, and earnings (Behrman 
and Rosenzweig, 2004; Black et al., 2007).  
 
The forced marriages that we study are marriages resulting from bride kidnapping. We focus on 
Kyrgyzstan – a small country with a population of 5.8 million located in Central Asia – but this is 
not the only country where bride kidnapping is practiced. According to ethnographic reports, 
various forms of kidnapping (also referred to as abduction or capture) existed in societies across 
Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia and the Americas in the past (Ayres, 1974; Barnes, 1999; Bates, 1974; 
McLaren, 2001; Stross, 1974). In many places, kidnapping no longer seems to be a common 
phenomenon, but evidence shows that it is still practiced in such countries as Armenia, Ethiopia, 
Kazakhstan, and South Africa (Dito, 2015; Edling, 2012; Nkosi and Buthelezi, 2013; Rice, 2014; 
Werner, 2009). 
 
Kyrgyzstan has a reputation for being reformist, pluralistic, and placing fewer constraints on 
women than some of its former Soviet neighbors and countries further south such as Afghanistan, 
Iran, or Pakistan. Women hold high positions in society and politics; recently, a woman, Roza 
Otunbayeva, served as President. At the same time, this apparent outpost of liberal values is also a 
society in which a significant percentage of women – an estimated 16-24 percent (Nedoluzhko and 
Agadjanian, 2015; Za Reformy i Rezul’tat, 2015) – are married following kidnapping.  
 
The extent of force involved in the kidnapping appears to vary widely (Amsler and Kleinbach, 
1999; Kleinbach et al., 2005). One extreme is fully non-consensual abduction in which the bride is 
kidnapped by the groom through physical force. Another extreme is elopement or staged abduction, 
where the groom and the bride agree on the kidnapping beforehand – for example, when their 
parents do not approve of a marriage. The stress level for the women in the resulting marriage is 
expected to differ accordingly, with higher stress after non-consensual abduction and lower stress 
after elopement. The Life in Kyrgyzstan survey (Brück et al., 2014) data used in our empirical 
analysis do not distinguish between different degrees of force involved in kidnapping. Our 
estimation results may therefore underestimate the effect of forced marriage on birth weight. 
However, our primary interest is to determine whether there is any negative impact of kidnapped 
marriages on birth weight; we place less importance on the exact magnitude of this impact. 
 3 
 
 
We focus on rural Kyrgyzstan and compare the birth weight for the children of women who 
were kidnapped to those of women who had arranged marriages. We exclude women in love 
marriages in our empirical analysis. Love marriages seem to be systematically different from arranged 
and kidnapped marriages and to be imprecisely measured in our survey data. We employ two 
estimation approaches. The first is a simple OLS regression with district fixed effects in which we 
compare the birth weight in kidnapped and arranged marriages within the same district to each 
other. The second is an instrumental variable estimation to avoid any potential omitted variable bias. 
Our instrument is the percentage of marriages within a district that resulted from kidnapping. We 
calculate this district-level share from women aged 44 and above and use it as an instrument for 
women aged 43 and below. We take great care to ensure that this district-level share is exogenous 
and does not capture geographic variation in other variables, such as poverty rates or the availability 
of health care, which might also affect infant’s birth weight.  
 
We find that birth outcomes are worse among children born to kidnapped mothers compared 
with children born to mothers in arranged marriages. The loss in birth weight is consistently negative 
across different estimation models and robustness tests. Children of kidnapped mothers are about 
100-200 grams (3 to 6 percent) lighter than other children; this weight difference is sizable and 
comparable to losses generated by other traumatic events. We interpret this result as a sign that 
kidnapped marriage is a form of marriage that, on average, lacks the consent of the women and is 
based on some degree of force, possibly including physical force. This force, in turn, leads to 
psycho-social stress among the women who then give birth to smaller children. We acknowledge 
that lower birth weight may also be triggered by more strenuous physical work, poorer nutrition, less 
prenatal care, or shorter birth intervals among kidnapped women compared with women in arranged 
marriages. We cannot fully dismiss these channels but we provide descriptive evidence that none of 
these other channels is as plausible as the stress channel.  
 
 
2. BACKGROUND: KIDNAPPING OF BRIDES IN KYRGYZSTAN 
 
Bride kidnapping, called ala kachuu in Kyrgyz (literally: “to take and run away”), is the act of 
abducting a woman to marry her. In Kyrgyzstan, kidnapping is illegal, with a maximum prison 
sentence of three to seven years, or up to ten years if the kidnapped bride is below the minimum 
legal age for marriage of 17 years. 1  However, few people report cases of kidnapping to the 
authorities; prosecutions are very rare. No numbers may be more telling than the commentary 
Kyrgyzstan: courts tackle sheep theft, ignore bride kidnapping on October 2, 2012 on the English-language 
news channel Eurasianet (http://www.eurasianet.org/node/65989): 666 cases of livestock theft 
brought criminal charges during the period January-August 2012, as against only 10 cases of bride 
kidnapping. In general, law enforcement and legal protection for women are rather weak (Human 
Rights Watch, 2006).  
  
In Kyrgyzstan, the practice of kidnapping is essentially limited to ethnic Kyrgyz, who account 
for 71 percent of the population (NSC, 2009). Other ethnic groups do not engage in kidnapping, 
with very few exceptions, but marry either through love or arranged marriages (Handrahan, 2004). 
                                        
                     
1 These penalties are determined in a new bride kidnapping bill that came into law in January 2013. Bride 
kidnapping had been illegal before, and in fact, since the 1920s when the Soviet Union established laws for 
banning it (Werner, 2009). 
 4 
 
That Kyrgyz (and Kazakhs in southern Kazakhstan) tolerate kidnapping while more conservative 
Uzbeks and Tajiks do not is one of the puzzles that remain to be explained. Religion does not serve 
as an explanation, since the vast majority of Kyrgyzstan, including Kyrgyz, Uzbeks, and Tajiks, are 
Muslims. Werner (2009: 321) states: “bride abduction is not an Islamic practice […] people in 
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan do not link bride abduction and religious custom.”2  
 
Ala kachuu usually involves a potential groom and his male friends taking a young woman into a 
car, and then transporting her to his home. The woman might be kidnapped from her house or 
another location, such as a school or her workplace. In the groom’s home, she is pressured by the 
groom’s female relatives to write a letter of “consent” to her family and put on a marriage scarf. 
Once she puts the marriage scarf over her hair, she accepts the marriage (Borbieva, 2012). This 
process could last from a few hours to several days. Eventually, the groom’s family goes to visit the 
bride’s parents to “apologize”, to hand over their daughter’s letter, and, traditionally, to offer sheep 
and other gifts. Such offers are considered the bride price (kalym). It is in principle possible for the 
woman to resist the kidnapping. Amsler and Kleinbach (1999) estimate that 17 percent of 
kidnappings do not result in marriage, either because the woman herself or her family resist. 
Kleinbach et al. (2005) provide an estimate of only 8 percent.  
 
 
A few scholars attempted to explain why most kidnapped women stay with their kidnapper and 
why the women’s parents agree to this practice. Werner (2009) argued that the act of kidnapping 
damages the reputation of the women, and the acceptance of marriage helps to restore that 
reputation. This is because, after abduction, the women were assumed to no longer be virgins. In 
addition, they might be perceived as stubborn and belligerent if they resisted the kidnapping. Taken 
together, kidnapped women were unattractive to other potential suitors. A related explanation was 
provided by Borbieva (2012) who emphasized the role of marriage as a social institution. She noted 
that women and men in Kyrgyzstan were expected to marry young and without long courtships for a 
number of reasons: the lack of social acceptance of premarital sexual activity, the expectation for 
women to have many children, but most importantly, the function of marriage as transition to full 
adult status. Families of women with relatively poor perspectives on the marriage market might thus 
be particularly inclined to give in to kidnapping. Finally, Handrahan (2004) made the point that 
kidnapping is often used as an act of ethnic definition. A “woman who rejects kidnapping is seen to 
be rejecting not only a Kyrgyz tradition but also Kyrgyz ethnicity” (Handrahan, 2004: 222). 
Rejection in turn might create conflict within the community since it implied denunciation of a 
common practice, especially where kidnapping is very prevalent. 
 
Data on the prevalence of kidnapping and marriages resulting from kidnapping are rare. 
Nedoluzhko and Agadjanian (2015) conducted a nationally representative survey in 2011/12 among 
slightly more than 2,000 households. The authors reported that one third of marriages among 
Kyrgyz were the result of kidnappings; half of these marriages were of a non-consensual nature. The 
authors pointed out that the risk of kidnapping declined since the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
particularly within the most recent marriage cohort. According to another survey among all 
households in one village in 2004, 80 percent of Kyrgyz marriages were the result of kidnapping 
(Kleinbach et al., 2005). Only 34 percent of the kidnappings took place with the woman’s consent, 
46 percent of the women were kidnapped through deception and 18 percent were taken by physical 
                                        
                     
2 The widespread presence of kidnapping in Armenia (Edling, 2012), Ethiopia (Dito, 2015) and parts of South 
Africa (Nkosi and Buthelezi, 2013; Rice, 2014) and its apparent similarity to the practice in Kyrgyzstan also 
make it clear that kidnapping is not confined to a particular religion. 
 5 
 
force. One fifth of the kidnapped women reported that they had not known their kidnappers. A 
slightly lower prevalence is reported in a study of roughly 1,600 women for the International Crime 
Victims Unit Survey conducted by the local NGO Za Reformy i Rezul’tat (2015). This survey, which 
covers all Kyrgyzstani women without ethnic distinction, finds that 16 percent of married women 
were abducted for the purpose of marriage. Of these, 34 percent did not agree in advance to their 
abduction.  
 
There is limited information on the characteristics of the kidnappers and the kidnapped women. 
Handrahan (2004) conducted a survey among men across Kyrgyzstan. Her most striking result was 
that there was no relationship between a man’s education as well as profession and his likelihood to 
kidnap. Kleinbach et al. (2005) interviewed the women of one predominantly Kyrgyz village and 
found that both kidnappers and kidnapped women had reasonable levels of education. Only 10 
percent of the men and 12 percent of the women had less than secondary schooling. In contrast, 14 
percent of the men and 21 percent of the women had a university degree. Nedoluzhko and 
Agadjanian (2015) studied the relative risks of marriage resulting from kidnapping among a 
representative sample of men and women. They showed that being employed did not make 
kidnapped marriage any more likely than not being employed. People with only basic secondary 
education were far less likely to be in a kidnapped marriage than people with higher education. 
People enrolled in education were less likely to be married through kidnapping than people with 
completed education. Father’s occupation, as a proxy of family background, only mattered in the 
case of forced kidnapping: If the own father worked in agriculture, men and women were more 
likely to have a kidnapped marriage than if the father had a different occupation.  
 
 
3. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
 
3.1 
THE ECONOMICS OF MARRIAGE FORMATION  
 
Marriage markets are characterized by uncertainty of outcomes and search costs because of 
scarce information about potential mates (Browning et al., 2014). In most societies, heterosexual, 
monogamous marriage can be the outcome of (1) an own search process in which a couple identifies 
one another following search activity; the groom usually proposes to the bride, and the bride 
accepts; or (2) a delegated search with negotiated activity by third parties on behalf of the bride and 
groom, who cede some of their selection power. They may do this voluntarily, in recognition of the 
superior selection ability of the third party, or less enthusiastically in recognition of local custom. In 
the Kyrgyz setting, kidnapping which is a limited, one-sided search involving unilateral, possibly 
coercive action by the groom is a third option. 
 
From the groom’s perspective, search and courtship costs for a love marriage are high in terms 
of time and money, and the marital outcome is not certain. The potential bride can choose to select 
his offer or refuse to marry but continue the search. Both partners compare each other’s 
characteristics and evaluate their potential gains from formation of this union. If the gains to both 
partners from marriage are greater than their expected gains from continued search for a potential 
mate, then they marry (Becker, 1973, 1974, 1991). This outcome is the fundamental logic behind the 
economic analysis of marriage formation. Individual consent is central to love marriages because 
with individual consent comes individual bargaining power (Edlund and Lagerlöf, 2006).  
 
 6 
 
The search for a potential spouse in an arranged marriage is not undertaken by the groom 
directly but by his parents, relatives, or a contracted external party. The process may be longer or 
shorter than the own-search depending on market conditions, relative bargaining skills of the various 
parties, and attractiveness of the groom. In arranged marriages, there is substantial variation in the 
extent of external involvement. Similar to love marriages, both mates generally have a choice, can 
evaluate their gains from marriage and request continuation of the spousal search if they wish so 
(Batabyal, 2001, 1999, 1998). A formal model that incorporates preferences for “marrying up” is 
presented in Banerjee et al. (2013). 
 
The search for a suitable mate in a kidnapped marriage is initiated by the groom, but there is 
typically non-coerced consent only by the male.3 The groom collects limited information about the 
woman he targets and evaluates his potential gain from marriage to her. The potential bride lacks 
choice over her potential groom after she is kidnapped. She cannot select from her prospective mate 
options and signal interest to the one mate who gives her the highest expected gains from marriage. 
Relative to love and arranged marriages, her expected gains are thus lower in kidnapped marriages.4  
 
 
3.2 THE MEASURABLE CONSEQUENCES OF BEING KIDNAPPED 
 
The women in kidnapped marriages have to live with a spouse whom they did not select and with 
whom they do not necessarily share common interests and attitudes on such important things as 
female labor force participation or children’s upbringing. It is not difficult to imagine that this 
implies emotional and psychological, possibly even physical, costs to the women.5 We hypothesize 
that their stress levels are higher than those of women in other types of marriage, on average.  
 
Psycho-social stress has been related with poor birth outcomes (Almond and Currie, 2011; 
Hobel et al., 2008). The medical explanation is that psycho-social stress activates the neuroendocrine 
stress response, which results in maternal endocrine changes, accelerated fetal maturation and, 
consequently, pre-term birth and low birth weight. Several authors have estimated the effect of 
stress on birth weight. Camacho (2008) links random landmine explosions to a woman’s birth 
outcomes based on a census of births in Colombia. She finds a nearly 9-gram decline in birth weight 
for infants born to women living in a municipality that experienced landmine explosions. The effect 
is still greater when the explosions occurred during the first trimester of pregnancy.  
 
Torche (2011) examines the effect of the 2005 Tarapaca earthquake in Chile and finds a large 
impact of exposure: birth weight is reduced by 51 grams on average and the probability of low birth 
weight, i.e., below 2,500 grams, increases. These effects appear to be driven by an increase in 
prematurity. Mansour and Rees (2012) assess the effects of armed conflict during the al-Aqsa 
Intifada on the incidence of low birth weight, using as their stress measure the number of 
                                        
                     
3 Kidnapping for show – staged elopement – with the prior agreement of both parties is a form of own search 
marriage. The empirical question is whether virtually all kidnappings are mutually pre-arranged, making them 
in fact a subset of own search marriages. 
4 In principle, there is also a fourth option facing prospective grooms and brides: abstention from marriage. 
This option is empirically unimportant in Kyrgyzstan and is an easily dominated option for all but a tiny 
number of people (Borbieva, 2012). 
5 Even though it is extremely difficult to obtain reliable numbers, a certain proportion of kidnappings seem to 
involve rape (Za Reformy i Rezul’tat, 2015).  
 7 
 
Palestinians killed by the Israeli Defense Force in the mother’s district during her first trimester of 
pregnancy. As they use a small sample, from the Palestinian Demographic and Health Survey, the 
authors face many of the inferential difficulties that also emerge in our empirical analysis; 
nonetheless, a clear link between fighting and low birth weight emerges. 
 
Foureaux Koppensteiner and Manacorda (2016) examine the role of neighborhood violence in a 
set of small municipalities as well as the large and violent city of Fortaleza in Brazil on birth 
outcomes. They find that increased violence leads to increased prematurity and low birth weight. An 
additional homicide in the small municipalities results in a 0.6 percentage point (or about 8 percent) 
higher probability of low birth weight. They conclude that homicides are responsible for about one 
percent of low birth weight and 3.5 percent of very low birth weight, i.e., below 1,500 grams, in 
urban Brazil; put differently, an additional 10 homicides result in about 10 low birth weight and 3 
very low birth weight births. Finally, Bozzoli and Quintana-Domeque (2014) consider the role of 
Argentina’s economic crisis in the early 2000s on birth weight across mothers with different levels of 
education. They find that birth weight declined by roughly 30 grams as a result of the crisis; the 
fluctuation from nadir to normalcy is more on the order of 70 grams. As the Colombian and Chilean 
datasets, the Argentinean data cover administrative records on millions of births. 
Taken together, these studies on the effect of stress on birth weight have several common 
features, despite using a range of data sources, from small sample surveys to vast administrative vital 
statistics records. They are all reduced form, so that the precise causal mechanism remains unknown. 
As reduced form studies, they all rely on natural experiments or exogenous fluctuations in 
underlying conditions. It is striking that none of them explores other stress impacts, such as on life 
satisfaction or physical health conditions of women, usually due to the absence of such information 
in the datasets used. One of our contributions is to demonstrate that the stress experienced by 
women in kidnapped marriages affects other factors as well, thereby making the stress mechanism 
more convincing.  
We acknowledge that marriage resulting from kidnapping may affect birth weight through other 
channels than through stress. We investigate the plausibility of these channels in the context of 
Kyrgyzstan below. In principle, kidnapped women might be obliged to do more strenuous 
household work during pregnancy. Physical exertion has been associated with low birth weight 
(Bonzini et al., 2007). Second, kidnapped women might receive poorer nutrition compared with 
other women. Dramatic reduction in maternal nutrition, such as during famines, induces lower birth 
weight (Stein and Lumey, 2000); lower birth weight is also the outcome of mild prenatal nutritional 
deprivation (Almond and Currie, 2011; Almond and Mazumder, 2011). Third, kidnapped women 
might enjoy less prenatal care. Grossman and Joyce (1990) and Wehby et al. (2009) show that less 
frequent prenatal visits decrease birth weight significantly. Fourth, kidnapped women might have 
shorter birth intervals which may lead to lower birth weight due to nutritional depletion (Kramer, 
1987). They also may have births at younger ages, but we can and do control for this. 
 
 
4. DATA  
 
Our data are from the Life in Kyrgyzstan (LIK) survey (Brück et al., 2014), which was collected 
annually between 2010 and 2013. Two of the authors were involved in designing and implementing 
the survey. The sampling technique was stratified, two-stage random sampling based on the 2009 
Population Census with probabilities proportional to population size. The strata were formed by 
 8 
 
Bishkek (capital city), Osh city (the major city in southern Kyrgyzstan), and the rural and urban areas 
of the seven provinces (oblasts). The data are representative at the national, urban/rural and 
North/South levels.  
 
We use data from the 2011 LIK wave, which is the wave that provides the most information on 
marriage and fertility of the respondents. The 2011 wave contains information on 8,066 adults (aged 
18 and above) in 2,863 households in 120 urban and rural communities. Female respondents were 
asked whether they have ever been married. If yes, they were then asked about the evolution of this 
marriage. The exact wording for this question was: How did this marriage come about? The answer 
options were: a) love marriage, b) arranged marriage, and c) bride kidnapping.6 We are unable to distinguish 
between different degrees of force involved in the kidnapping.  
 
In the below analysis, we exclude women living in the two major cities of Kyrgyzstan – Bishkek 
and Osh – for two reasons. First, kidnapping should be much less attractive in settings in which 
there is a steady arrival of prospective marriage partners, and this appears to be the case empirically 
(Handrahan, 2000). Second, living conditions differ dramatically: the cities are far wealthier. They are 
also culturally closer to Europe than to rural Central Asia, and Russian remains the dominant 
language, especially in Bishkek.7 
 
Among Kyrgyz rural women who are or were married, 23.8 percent report that they got married 
through the process of kidnapping, 53.4 percent report love marriage, and 22.8 percent report 
arranged marriage. 8 , 9  Figure 1 shows the incidence of the different marriage types by year of 
marriage. We only include the marriage period 1965-2010 in this figure because we have too few 
(less than ten) observations for the years before 1965 and for the year 2011 in our dataset. The share 
of love marriages clearly increased over this period, and the share of both kidnapped and arranged 
                                        
                     
6 It may seem awkward to ask such a question in a survey since it refers to seemingly sensitive information. 
When drafting the questionnaire, we were concerned about this and almost dropped the idea of including the 
question. However, after consulting with an anthropologist who worked on the marriage market in 
Kyrgyzstan (Nathan Light), he assured us that Kyrgyz people do not regard this information to be sensitive, 
and they talk a lot about kidnappings. He encouraged us to ask the question as bluntly as we did. We know 
from conversations with Victor Agadjanian that questions about kidnapping were not problematic in their 
study (Nedoluzhko and Agadjanian, 2015). We also spoke with many Kyrgyz friends, colleagues, and 
professionals and affirmed that kidnapping is regarded as a fact of life that one can talk about openly. We 
collected many stories of kidnappings. 
7 We believe that to some degree kidnapping is an affront to the bride’s family. No one can kidnap the local 
akim’s (mayor, or most senior government official) daughter; no one should kidnap a woman from a 
markedly higher social stratum. In such cases, retaliation – legal or extra-legal from the woman’s family – 
would be severe. These constraints make it less attractive to kidnap a woman whose background is uncertain 
to the prospective groom, which reduces the incentives to kidnap in populous settings where many people do 
not know one another. 
8 Among the older generation of women (as defined below), the respective shares are 25.8 percent, 45.7 
percent and 28.5 percent; among the younger generation, the shares are 21.8 percent, 61.2 percent and 17.0 
percent, respectively. 
9 We only consider information about the first marriage. The women in our sample are not necessarily 
married to their first husbands at the time of data collection. A small share, namely 2.6 percent of the women, 
got married a second time; 6 percent are divorced, and 2 percent are widowed. We ignore the type of second 
marriage as well as children born during second marriages.  
 9 
 
marriages decreased, especially in the most recent years. These trends are in line with Nedoluzhko 
and Agadjanian (2015). 
 
 
Figure 1: Incidence of marriage types by year of marriage 
 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
Female respondents were also asked about their own and their husband’s ages at marriage, 
whether their parents received a bride price, whether they ever gave birth, and detailed information 
on their children. Children’s birth weight was recorded based on the mother’s recall. During the 
Soviet Union and also in today’s Kyrgyzstan, birth weight is recorded on a so-called health card for 
each child. This health card is used to document all medical information during a child’s 
development. Health cards used to be kept at hospitals or health centers but increasingly are stored 
at home. We expect that younger women more accurately recall their children’s birth weight. For 
this reason, we split our sample of women at median age (43 years) and conduct the analysis only for 
children born to women aged 18-43 years. We also expect women with few – say, up to two – 
children to better recall their children’s birth weight. We therefore rerun our analysis for the subset 
of women with a maximum of two children in the robustness section.  
 
The empirical analysis uses the sample of Kyrgyz women who live outside of Bishkek and Osh 
city, were ever married, are of the age group 18-43 years at the time of the survey, and gave birth to 
at least one child. We exclude women residing above 2500 metres of altitude. The medical literature 
has found that birth weight is reduced at high altitudes, presumably due to the lower levels of 
oxygen (Giussani et al., 2001; Jensen and Moore, 1997; Unger et al., 1988). It appears to be 
unresolved, though, at which levels of altitude this phenomenon sets in. We thus define a different 
threshold in the robustness section.  
 
 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
year of marriage
love
arranged
kidnapping
 10 
 
5. EMPIRICAL METHODOLOGY 
 
We focus on estimation of the effect of marriage resulting from bride kidnapping on birth 
outcomes, and specifically on the birth weight of children. The birth weight (measured in grams) of 
child i born to mother j in district k is a linear function of whether the marriage of that child’s 
parents was a kidnapped marriage or not (Kjk), a set of child (Xijk) and mother (Mjk) characteristics at 
the time of birth, and birth date dummies (𝛾"). The empirical model is given in equation (1):  
 
 𝐵𝑖𝑟𝑡ℎ 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡",- =  𝛼 + 𝛽2𝐾
,- + 𝛽4𝑋",- + 𝛽6𝑀
,- + 𝛾" + 𝜀",-      1  
 
Child characteristics (Xijk) capture the gender and the birth order of child i. They additionally 
capture whether child i is a twin (no other multiple births were observed).10 Mother characteristics 
(Mjk) include her age at child i’s birth and her educational attainment. A squared term for her age at 
birth is also included to control for a non-linear relationship between mother’s age at birth and birth 
weight. We control for whether or not a mother speaks both Kyrgyz and Russian and the mother’s 
height, the latter of which has been found to be an important determinant of birth weight (Kramer, 
1987).11  
 
In the robustness section, we additionally include two control variables, which are available only 
for a subset of the sample. These variables are the educational attainment of the child’s father and 
the mother’s employment status in the year before she gave birth. The LIK survey contains labor 
market information going back to the year 1989. For women who gave birth after 1989, we can 
distinguish between women who worked in agriculture, worked in non-agriculture, were enrolled in 
an education program, and were not in the labor force (housewife or on maternity leave) in the year 
before giving birth.12  
 
𝛾" is a set of fixed effects for child i’s birth month and birth year, to control for seasonal 
variations in birth weight and time trends over the years. 𝜀",-  is the error term assumed to be 
orthogonal to birth weight. We cluster the standard errors of this estimation at the mother level. We 
are interested in the coefficient 𝛽2. If 𝛽2 is negative, mothers married through kidnapping give birth 
to lighter children. We interpret such a result as reflecting worsened circumstances for these mothers 
during pregnancy. We examine the specific mechanisms through which kidnapping affects birth 
weight below.  
 
Kidnapping is not likely a random event. Therefore, equation (1) potentially suffers from 
endogeneity due to omitted variable bias. Estimates of 𝛽2 would be biased if women ended up in 
kidnapped marriages based on certain characteristics that we do not control for and that also affect 
birth weight. For example, if women who appear particularly healthy and who are therefore 
presumably more fertile were most likely to be kidnapped, our OLS estimates would be biased 
                                        
                     
10 We would like to control for gestation duration, but, as in Mansour and Rees (2012), we do not have this 
information. 
11 Another important determinant is smoking during pregnancy. Very few women smoke in Kyrgyzstan; only 
2.5 percent of all adult women in the LIK sample smoke. We therefore do not control for smoking although 
we know whether women smoked at the time of the survey, but not at the time of pregnancy. 
12 The younger generation in our sample was born between 1968 and 1992. The oldest child of a mother in 
this younger generation was born in 1986.  
 11 
 
towards zero. In order to address the omitted variable bias, we run a two-stage least-squares (2SLS) 
estimation, using an instrument for kidnapping status.  
 
The anthropological literature explains that the family of the groom plays a crucial role in his 
decision to kidnap. The groom’s parents and siblings usually actively help plan the kidnapping 
(Amsler and Kleinbach, 1999; Borbieva, 2012). When the groom’s family is not informed in advance 
of the kidnapping, it is engaged when the kidnapped woman enters the groom’s house. The female 
relatives of the groom are expected to persuade the prospective bride to place the marriage scarf on 
her head. We argue that in areas with a high prevalence of past kidnappings, individual families are 
more likely to support this practice and may pressure prospective grooms to kidnap. An unmarried 
woman living in such an area is more likely to be kidnapped and acquiesce to the marriage than a 
woman in an area with a low prevalence of past kidnappings. We calculate the share of kidnapped 
marriages among all marriages per district, but only for the generation of women who are older than 
the median age of 43 years. This older generation of women forms the set of potential mothers-in-
law. We use this information as an instrument for women in the younger generation.13  
 
We assume that the district-level share of kidnapping among women in the older generation 
provides an exogenous source of variation for the marriage selection of younger women in the 
district (raion). 14 The older generation does not choose to live in a particular location because of the 
marriage market that their children face. Whether or not a woman in the young generation still lives 
in the same province where she was born is not significantly related with the district-level share of 
kidnapping (regression results unreported). Rural Kyrgyz people are not very mobile, and marriage 
markets (at least for kidnappings and arranged marriages) are local. In our total sample of adult 
women (including the younger and older generation) living in rural areas, 89 percent were born in 
the same province where they lived at the time of the survey. The geographical circumstances that a 
Kyrgyz woman is born into are thus highly likely to pre-determine her individual probability of 
having a kidnapped marriage.   
 
The district-level proportions of marriages due to kidnapping range between zero and 0.9 
(Appendix Figure A1). In some districts, there is a low number of observations among the older 
generation of women, which makes the calculation of district-level shares for kidnapped marriages 
among all marriages unreliable. We therefore exclude districts with less than nine women in the 
older generation. We lose information on five out of 46 districts. While all observed districts in 
Naryn province indicate a high prevalence of kidnapped marriages, there are almost no kidnapped 
marriages reported in Batken province. All other provinces have a wider distribution of district-level 
shares. In our sample of the younger generation, the mean of this district-level share is 0.29 (with a 
standard deviation of 0.22), and the median is 0.30.  
 
Our identifying assumption is that the district-level share affects the likelihood of kidnapped 
marriage of any single woman but does not have an independent influence on her children’s birth 
weight once we control for kidnapping. This may seem questionable if the prevalence of kidnapped 
marriage is correlated with other district-level characteristics, such as the level of poverty, which also 
affect children’s birth weight. We can eliminate this concern in the following way. Since the Kyrgyz 
are essentially the only ethnic group in Kyrgyzstan that practices kidnapping, we can test for a 
                                        
                     
13 We are grateful to Priscilla Hermida of Universidad Pontifica Catolica del Ecuador for this suggestion. 
14 According to the 2009 Census (NSC, 2009), the minimum and maximum population sizes in a district are 
21,154 and 321,915 people, respectively. The mean is 96,202.  
 12 
 
relationship between the district-level share of kidnapping and birth weight using data from other 
ethnic groups. If the district-level share captured other information than simply the prevalence of 
kidnapped marriages, a correlation between the district-level share and children’s birth weight should 
then show up for the non-Kyrgyz ethnic groups. Appendix Figure A2 illustrates the frequency with 
which children born to non-Kyrgyz mothers of the age group 18-43 live in districts with varying 
prevalence of kidnapped marriages. Even though the non-Kyrgyz in our sample do not reside in the 
districts with the highest kidnapping prevalence, we observe some variation in the district-level share 
for this group.15 We regress the birth weight of non-Kyrgyz children on the district-level share of 
kidnapping. Table 1 illustrates that there is no association between the district-level share and 
children’s birth weight for the non-Kyrgyz, whether or not we control for child and mother 
characteristics.16   
 
The identifying assumption could still be violated if the district-level prevalence of kidnapped 
marriage affected a number of pre-marriage characteristics of Kyrgyz women that are also related 
with children’s birth weight. Health, education, and family background are such potential 
characteristics. We know the women’s height, whether or not they suffer from high blood pressure, 
their proficiency of Kyrgyz and Russian, and whether or not their fathers worked in agriculture. We 
also know the highest education degree obtained by the women. However, schooling is not 
necessarily finished by the time of marriage, which is why we prefer the language variable as an 
alternative indicator of education. We consider maternal height, blood pressure, language proficiency 
and father’s agricultural employment to be determined before marriage age and to potentially 
influence children’s birth weight (Huxley et al., 2002; Kramer, 1987). We estimate the relationship 
between these variables and the district-level share of kidnapping for the sample of the younger 
generation women and report the results in Table 2. There is no association between the four 
variables and the prevalence of kidnapped marriage in a district. 
 
Last but not least, the validity of the instrument would be questionable if the kidnapping 
husbands were in any way different from the husbands involved in non-kidnapped marriages. If, for 
example, the least educated or the unemployed were more likely to kidnap than to engage in 
arranged or love marriages, this could have consequences on children’s birth weight through the 
level of health care or the quality of nutrition that the pregnant women enjoy. As indicated above, 
earlier studies have not found any relationship between the level of education or the economic 
activity of the husband and his likelihood to kidnap (Handrahan, 2004; Nedoluzhko and Agadjanian, 
2015).17 In Table A1 in the Appendix, we show a cross-tabulation of the educational attainment of 
the husbands of our younger generation sample (as well as of the wives themselves) and the type of 
                                        
                     
15 The non-Kyrgyz in this analysis live in 26 out of 41 different districts for which we calculated the district-
level share of kidnapping.  
16 We combine all non-Kyrgyz ethnic groups. The same result emerges when we restrict consideration to 
Uzbeks, the largest minority group.   
17 The results by Nedoluzhko and Agadjanian (2015) may seem confusing in this regard. The authors conduct 
event-history analysis to estimate the risks of entry into marriage. They report that men with a higher 
educational level face a higher risk of kidnapping, especially forced kidnapping, than men with a lower 
educational level. Yet, better educated people are generally more likely to be married, either through 
kidnapping, arranged marriage or otherwise. There is no indication that education matters for the choice of 
marriage type.  
 13 
 
marriage.18 Whereas educational attainment is similar for husbands in kidnapped marriages and 
arranged marriages, it differs for husbands in love marriages. There is a substantially higher share of 
husbands with a university degree in love marriages than in the other types of marriage. This 
difference might have consequences on children’s birth weight, for example through the quality of 
health care or nutrition provided to the wives. Therefore (and for other reasons elaborated on 
below), we drop love marriages and only compare children born to mothers in kidnapped marriages 
with children born to mothers in arranged marriages. 
 
In addition to the IV estimation, we run the OLS estimation of equation (1) and include district 
fixed effects. By doing so, we compare women in kidnapped and arranged marriages within the same 
district to each other. We thereby control for heterogeneity between districts, such as different 
poverty rates or the availability of medical facilities. This estimation is an alternative approach to 
measuring the effect of kidnapped marriage on birth weight and it represents an additional test for 
whether or not the district-level share of kidnapping captures unobserved district characteristics. If it 
did, the results of the OLS estimation including district fixed effects would be substantially different 
from the OLS estimation without these fixed effects and instead close to the IV estimates. The 
estimation is given by equation (2):  
 
𝐵𝑖𝑟𝑡ℎ 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡",- =  𝛼 + 𝛽2𝐾
,- + 𝛽4𝑋",- + 𝛽6𝑀
,- + 𝛾" + 𝜏- + 𝜀",-      2  
 
where (𝜏-) are the district fixed effects.  
 
 
6. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS 
 
In our empirical analyses, we ignore women who report love marriages and focus on outcomes 
for women in kidnapped marriages and women who had arranged marriages. We consider arranged 
marriages to be the adequate reference group for kidnapped marriages for several reasons. First, 
there is a greater share of husbands and wives with a university degree in love marriages than in the 
other types of marriage (Table 2). A similar picture emerges with regard to language proficiency. 
Husbands and wives are more likely to speak both Kyrgyz and Russian in love marriages than in 
other marriages. This difference in education is worrying because, on the one hand, it suggests a 
selection of more educated individuals into love marriage and, on the other hand, it might have 
consequences for birth outcomes – for example, through the nutrition and health care that pregnant 
women receive.  
 
Second, there seems to be selection in terms of marriage age as well. The age gap between 
spouses is smaller in love marriages (3.4 years) than in arranged marriages (4.8 years) and kidnapped 
marriages (4.9 years). The spousal age gap has often been used as a proxy for women’s bargaining 
power within the household (Browning et al., 1994; Vermeulen, 2005). In line with this argument, 
bargaining power is systematically differently distributed in love marriages compared with kidnapped 
and arranged marriages.  
 
                                        
                     
18 We have information on educational attainment for only 612 husbands out of the sample of 703 women in 
the younger generation sample.  
 14 
 
Third, compared to the numbers in Nedoluzhko and Agadjanian (2015), the prevalence of 
kidnapped marriages observed in our data seems too low. These authors report that one third of all 
marriages of Kyrgyz women in an age group comparable to our younger generation sample were the 
result of kidnappings. We measure slightly less than one quarter. It seems unlikely to us that 
unreported kidnapped marriages are categorized as arranged marriages in the LIK data because 
arranged marriages are a particular, well-defined type of marriage. We expect unreported kidnapped 
marriages to be categorized as love marriages, which is especially probable the more kidnappings are 
consensual. This means that while reported kidnapped marriages are likely to be true kidnapped 
marriages (with varying degrees of force involved in the kidnapping process) and reported arranged 
marriages are likely to be true arranged marriages, reported love marriages are likely to contain some 
marriages resulting from non-consensual and consensual kidnappings.19 
 
Table 3 provides summary statistics on the variables included in equation (1), distinguished by 
marriage type.20 These statistics are for the total sample in columns (1) and (2) as well as for the 
younger generation in columns (3) and (4). In the upper panel of the table, we report summary 
statistics for the children born to the mothers in our sample; in the lower panel for the mothers 
themselves. Among kidnapped and arranged marriages, some children (21 children among mothers 
in kidnapped marriages and 15 children among mothers in arranged marriages) seem to be born out 
of wedlock; the year of birth is reportedly before the year of marriage. We include these children in 
our analysis. In the robustness section, we exclude them because pregnancy may be differently 
experienced by unmarried women than by married women.  
 
The total sample comprises 670 women who gave birth to 2,568 children. Among the younger 
generation, 282 women gave birth to 828 children. For both the total sample and the younger 
generation, mean birth weight is significantly lower by 114 grams and 92 grams, respectively, for 
children in kidnapped marriages than for children in arranged marriages. Figure 2 displays the full 
distribution of birth weight for children born to the mothers in the younger generation. Mean birth 
weight is slightly higher for children in arranged marriages, as is clear from Table 2, but the standard 
deviation is also higher.21 There are differences neither in the share of male and female children 
across the marriage types nor in the share of children who are the firstborn. This indicates that the 
average number of children is comparable across the marriage types – 2.9 for kidnapped marriages 
and 3.0 for arranged marriages among the younger generation of mothers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        
                     
19 We expected a relationship between the prevalence of kidnapped marriages and the prevalence of arranged 
marriages within districts. We thus calculated district-level shares of kidnapped and arranged marriages for the 
young generation. The correlation is -0.22, but not statistically significant (p=0.17). Among the older 
generation, the correlation is much higher at -0.42 (p=0.01).  
20 Father’s educational attainment is not included in this table but can be inferred from Table A1 in the 
Appendix.  
21 Only 2.4 percent of children born in kidnapped marriages were born with low birth weight, defined as 
weight below 2,500 grams, and 6.6 percent of children born in arranged marriages. These shares relate to the 
younger generation. The respective shares are 4.4 percent and 4.0 percent in the older generation.   
 15 
 
Figure 2: Birth weight distribution 
 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 
Kidnapped mothers differ from mothers in arranged marriages on several counts. Kidnapped 
mothers are slightly younger at the time of birth. This is true for both the average age at birth (for all 
children) as well as for age at birth of the first child. Lower age at birth among kidnapped mothers 
may reflect the fact that they are also younger at the time of marriage than women in arranged 
marriages. Regardless of the marriage type, however, the first child is born 1.6 years after marriage 
among the younger generation sample.22 There is a larger share among kidnapped mothers than 
among arranged marriage mothers with only basic education (among the younger generation), and 
there is a smaller share among kidnapped mothers than among arranged marriage mothers with a 
secondary school degree. It is important to note that kidnapped and arranged marriages are rare at 
very young ages; most marriages occur between 17 and 25 years of age. Hence, both types of 
marriage do not target very young girls but rather young women who have finished most if not all of 
their education.23 Kidnapped mothers seem to be significantly less likely to work in agriculture and 
more likely to be students before giving birth. 
 
We face the risk to capture unobserved differences between mothers in kidnapped and arranged 
marriages in terms of health endowments, which could have an impact on children’s birth weight. In 
order to address this risk, we implement a number of placebo tests. We regress maternal height and, 
alternatively, a number of chronic health conditions on the type of marriage, the woman’s age at 
                                        
                     
22 The time between marriage and giving birth is not exact, as we do not have information about the month in 
which people married.  
23 We have been told (by Aliya Ibragimova and Christopher Edling) that secondary school and university 
graduation ceremonies are a popular time for kidnapping. Families of the groom often promise to pay for the 
bride’s education, so marrying after graduation reduces the costs for the groom’s family. The results 
presented in Nedoluzhko and Agadjanian (2015) are consistent with this claim: being in school more than 
halves one’s risk of incurring either a forced or staged kidnapping. 
0
.0005
.001
.0015
kernel density of birth weight
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
gram
child born in kidnapped marriage
child born in arranged marriage
 16 
 
marriage, her educational attainment, her language proficiency and district fixed effects. The 
assumption is that maternal height and (most) chronic illnesses are determined before marriage age 
and should therefore be unaffected by own marriage type. Results can be found in Table 4. 
Kidnapping does not appear to be related with height or chronic illness (except for kidney disease). 
 
 
7. ESTIMATION RESULTS 
 
Table 5 provides OLS (column (1)) and IV (column (2)) results for estimating equation (1) as 
well as OLS (column (3)) results for equation (2). The number of observations is slightly lower in 
column (2) than in columns (1) and (3) because we cannot produce reliable numbers for the district-
level share of kidnapping for all districts (when the number of women in the older generation is too 
low within the district to compute the instrument).24   
 
Results for the control variables provide a plausible picture of the determinants of birth weight 
in Kyrgyzstan. Male children are born with significantly higher weight (64-91 grams) than female 
children, and twins have significantly lower weight (806-865 grams) than singletons. Firstborns tend 
to be born with lower weight compared with children of higher birth order, but this finding is not 
statistically significant.25 Mother’s age does not matter, or only at a marginal level of significance in 
column (3). We believe this is due to the fact that women give birth at an average age of 24-25 years 
or 21-22 years for the first child. Age at birth is not very high and therefore does not imply age-
related risks of short gestation duration and low birth weight. Maternal age at first birth is also not 
very variable relative to many other countries; the standard deviation is 3 years. Furthermore, we 
find that while formal schooling degrees are unrelated to birth weight, speaking two languages, 
which we regard as an alternative indicator of education, increases birth weight by 103 grams in 
column (3). Mother’s body height is positively but insignificantly related with birth weight.   
 
Ceteris paribus, mothers in kidnapped marriages give birth to significantly lower birth weight 
children compared with mothers in arranged marriages. The birth weight loss is 121 grams in 
column (1), 228 grams in column (2), and 95 grams in column (3). The difference between the OLS 
estimate in column (1) and the IV estimate in column (2) suggests that there is some unobserved 
variable, for example physical attractiveness or healthy appearance of the woman, which is positively 
related with both kidnapping and birth weight. Such a variable will be included in the error term in 
the OLS estimation, resulting in biased estimates. There clearly appears to be such an unobserved 
variable, not at the level of the district but at the level of the individual woman, or possibly at the 
level of the household. If the bias were due to district-level variation, the results in columns (1) and 
(3) should be substantially different, but they are, in fact, relatively close to each other.    
 
Table A2 in the Appendix reports the first-stage results related to the IV estimation. The district-
level share of old generation kidnappings is a strong predictor of a woman’s likelihood of being in a 
kidnapped marriage. A 10 percentage point increase in the district-level share increases the 
likelihood of marriage through kidnapping of an individual woman by 14 percentage points. Tests 
                                        
                     
24 The reduced sample size does not modify the results by much: running the OLS estimation for the sample 
of column (2) leads to a kidnapping coefficient of -139.2, significant at the 1 percent level. 
25 It is a standard finding that firstborn children are lighter than other children (Kramer, 1987). We also 
differentiated between children of higher birth order, but this comparison did not increase the explanatory 
power of the estimation.  
 17 
 
for the relevance of the instrument reveal that the instrument is not weak. The F-statistic of the test 
for the significance of the excluded instrument (the district-level share of kidnapping) is 127 at a p-
value of 0.00. The partial R2 is 0.276 compared to an adjusted R2 of 0.338.  
 
We run a number of robustness tests in which we follow the same approach as in Table 5; we 
report the OLS and IV estimates of equation (1) and the OLS estimates of equation (2) in Table 6. 
First, we exclude the 36 children born out of wedlock (columns (1)-(3)). Excluding these children 
matters for the magnitude of the coefficients, but the change in the magnitude is rather small. 
Second, we exclude all observations residing above an altitude of 2,000 meters (columns (4)-(6)). 
This exclusion is because we cannot be sure that the threshold, above which birth weight decreases 
with altitude is 2,500 meters as assumed so far. The results are essentially unchanged, compared with 
those in Table 5.  
 
Third, we control for the employment status of the child’s mother in the year before giving birth 
(column (7)-(9)), distinguishing between work in agriculture, work in non-agriculture, enrollment in 
an education program, and not being in the labor force (housewife or on maternity leave). This 
additional control changes the magnitude of our results only marginally. Fourth, we control for the 
educational attainment of the child’s father (column (10)-(12)), again seeing no major deviations 
from the earlier results. 
 
Fifth, we only consider children born to women who had a maximum of two births (columns 
(13)-(15)).  We believe that women with fewer children are better able to recall the birth weight of 
their children correctly. This change reduces the sample size considerably, but it also explains more 
of the variation in the birth weight variable than any previous estimation model. The interesting 
finding is that the kidnapping coefficients for the OLS estimations in columns (1) and (3) are now 
much larger: Kidnapping seems to result in a loss in birth weight of close to 200 grams.  
 
Sixth, we define the cutoff between the young and the old generation differently (columns (16)-
(18)). In the previous estimation, we used the median age in our total sample of women as the 
cutoff; we now draw the limit at marriage in 1992 – the first year of Kyrgyzstan’s independence 
from the Soviet Union. We make this change to account for the fact that marriage formation may 
have changed from 1992 onwards. We could imagine that greater socialization in the Soviet Union 
meant a far lower incidence of non-consensual kidnapping. Schooling was nearly universal in Soviet 
times, as was participation in youth organizations like the Young Pioneers (Kuehnast, 1998). Almost 
all young men and women were exposed to many people of the opposite sex and in an environment 
that did not discourage romantic entanglements. With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, such 
institutionalized interaction among the youth disappeared. The extent of force involved in 
kidnappings likely increased after 1992. For the IV analysis, we calculate the district-level share of 
kidnapping on the basis of information from women who were married in 1991 or earlier and run 
the estimation with the sample of women who were married in 1992 or later. The estimates in 
columns (16) and (17) are negative and significant as before and in the area of a birth weight loss of 
around 100 to 200 grams. The estimate in column (18) is no longer statistically significant (t-value = 
-1.46). In essence, these results provide no evidence that substantially more kidnappings were non-
consensual after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.  
 
Overall, our findings indicate a strongly negative impact of kidnapped marriages on the birth 
weight of children. The magnitude of the impact appears to be between 100 and 200 grams, which is 
sizable. The impact is in line with the very limited empirical evidence that exists on violence against 
 18 
 
women and newborn health. Most critically, Aizer (2011) finds that admission to a hospital for 
assault during pregnancy reduces birth weight by 163 grams among Californian women. Our 
findings are difficult to compare to the other studies on stress and birth weight that we reviewed 
above. These studies investigate sources of stress, such as land mine explosions or a macroeconomic 
crisis, all of which can undoubtedly lead to serious worries and high stress levels among the affected 
women. Yet, the stress affects the whole household, not just the women, and spouses might, in fact, 
support and comfort each other.  
 
 
8. IDENTIFYING THE CHANNELS 
 
Does the measured birth weight loss resulting from kidnapped marriage work through psycho-
social stress as we hypothesize? We identified strenuous physical work, poor nutrition, insufficient 
prenatal care, and short birth intervals as possible alternative channels and now provide evidence, to 
the extent possible, for each of them.  
 
Given that the LIK dataset contains information about time use, we can compare how women 
in kidnapped and arranged marriages spend their days. This gives insight into whether women in 
kidnapped marriages are doing more strenuous physical work, get less sleep, and less leisure. This 
information refers to the time of the survey, not the time of pregnancy. It therefore does not allow 
for any causal explanations between time use and birth weight. The time use data can nevertheless 
give an indication about how different women spend their days on average. Appendix Table A3 
reports average hours spent per day on different activities, separately for women in kidnapped and 
arranged marriages. There is no evidence that women in kidnapped marriages are disadvantaged in 
terms of time use. They spend slightly more time for personal care and less time for elderly care. 
Fewer women live with their mother-in-law in kidnapped than in arranged marriages, partly due to 
the higher divorce rate among women in kidnapped marriages (see below). But even if we compare 
time use of only women in kidnapped and arranged marriages who live with their mother-in-law in 
the same household (unreported), there are no significant differences in time use. We conclude that 
strenuous physical work does not seem to be the main channel between kidnapped marriage and 
birth weight.26  
 
The LIK survey lacks information on prenatal care during pregnancy. However, we know from 
the Demographic and Health Survey in Kyrgyzstan that 97 percent of women received prenatal care 
from a skilled provider and 98-99 percent of births were delivered by a skilled provider in 1997 and 
2012 (NSC, 2013). Such high coverage makes it unlikely that the lower birth weight among children 
in kidnapped marriages is due to insufficient prenatal care.  
 
We know the birth months and years of the children born to our sample women and can also 
compare birth intervals. We do not know the day of birth and assume it is the first of each month.  
We calculate the number of days between the first and the second child, the second and the third 
child, and so on.  The number of women decreases as we increase the birth order and we only show 
the average number of days between births up to the fourth child. The results are shown in Table 
                                        
                     
26 Of course, this information only refers to the amount of time spent in a specific activity and tells nothing 
about the intensity of doing it. For example, five hours of housework alone may be more strenuous than 
doing five hours of housework jointly with another person. Still, the overall picture that we get from the time 
use information does not lead us to believe that kidnapped women suffer from more strenuous work.  
 19 
 
A4. There is no difference in birth intervals between children born to mothers in kidnapped versus 
arranged marriages, making us confident that kidnapped marriage does not affect birth weight 
through differences in birth spacing.27  
 
This leaves us with poor nutrition during pregnancy as the final alternative channel. 
Unfortunately, the LIK does not include any information on nutrition that helps to shed light on the 
plausibility of this channel. We think it is unlikely that husbands provide poor nutrition to their 
kidnapped wives when they are pregnant because being married and having children is socially so 
important. We do not have any hard facts to prove this.  
 
 
9. SUPPORTING EVIDENCE 
 
Our confidence in the hypothesis that bride kidnapping is involuntary and that it affects women 
and their infants via a stress mechanism is strengthened by two additional pieces of evidence. These 
are presented mainly as corroborating descriptive support, since in one case (divorce) the sample 
size is small given the relative infrequency of the event, and in the other case (assortative mating) we 
do not develop hypotheses as to which features are most important, and which should be positively 
or negatively assorted. 
 
Overall, the divorce rate is 12.2 percent among kidnapped women and 4.8 percent among 
women in arranged marriages in our younger generation sample. This is a huge difference; when in 
an OLS regression (Table 7) we control for other characteristics, none of which turns out to be 
significant as a predictor of divorce, the coefficient on being kidnapped becomes even larger (10.8 
percentage points). It is possible that the sort of people who elope impetuously also would be more 
likely to divorce, so that unobserved heterogeneity cannot be excluded. However, the huge 
coefficient size when we condition on observables makes this a less obvious explanation than, 
alternatively, that many kidnapped women were desperately unhappy. 
 
Divorce is a considerably more precipitous and traumatic move for rural Kyrgyz and other 
Central Asian women than it is for their Western counterparts, or even their urban counterparts in 
Kyrgyzstan. The strong, negative effect on satisfaction with family life appears in Table 7 as well, 
and once again none of the controls has a significant effect. Nor, for that matter, does being 
kidnapped. However, an interaction term between being kidnapped and being divorced is large and 
negative as well, and doubles the divorce effect. This pattern is consistent with an event that is 
consensual for some (that is, an elopement) and not for others (that is, an involuntary kidnapping). 
 
In addition, the LIK asked individuals to self-assess their personality: It includes a 21-item 
questionnaire on the Big-5 personality traits. Individuals were asked to indicate on a 5-point scale to 
what extent they agreed with statements such as: I see myself as someone who keeps distance. We have 
answers from 235 couples (115 in arranged marriage, 120 in kidnapped marriage) on these questions 
and use them to see whether spouses in kidnapped marriage are more different from one another 
than spouses in arranged marriage. We assume that larger differences imply poorer spousal match 
                                        
                     
27 We need to make one important qualification to this conclusion. We only know the birth dates of live-born 
children, as the LIK did not collect information about stillborn children. Hence, the conclusion only holds 
under the assumption that kidnapped women do not have more stillborn children than arranged marriage 
women on average. We do not have any evidence that this would be the case.  
 20 
 
and, hence, more stress involved in the marriage. Our point of departure lies in standard marriage 
models (and, specifically, Becker, 1973), which imply that in mutually voluntary marriage, there 
should be positive assortative mating (PAM) on complementary characteristics such as outlook on 
life, value placed on children’s human capital, and willingness to accept risks. If kidnapping is merely 
a form of ceremonial elopement, then patterns of assortative mating should not differ for those 
kidnapped and those whose marriages were arranged or the outcome of romances.  
 
We compute dummy variables taking the value 1 if the self-assessment of husbands and wives 
on a certain question differs by a maximum of one point on the 5-point scale, and the value 0 if it 
differs by more than one point. Table 8 illustrates the share of couples whose self-assessment is 
identical or differs by a maximum of one point. For nearly all (19 out 21) questions, there is lower 
similarity between husbands and wives in kidnapped than in arranged marriage. Note that if poorer 
outcomes (lower birth weights, higher divorce risk, lower life satisfaction) were actually due to 
elopement by impetuous, immature, hyperbolic discounters rather than to involuntary kidnapping, 
then we should see an unusually high level of positive assortativeness. In particular, note that there is 
much less concordance between spouses in kidnapped marriage than other types in response to the 
statement I see myself as someone who makes plans and follows through on them – and elopement would 
obviously qualify as a major life plan. 
 
 
10. CONCLUSION 
 
We consider the effects of marriage resulting from bride kidnapping, a common practice in 
Kyrgyzstan and several other countries, on birth outcomes. We show that infants born to women in 
kidnapped marriages have significantly lower birth weight than infants born to women in arranged 
marriages. The magnitude of the birth weight loss is in the range of 100 to 200 grams. We interpret 
this result as evidence that kidnapping involves some degree of force, on average, leading to poorer 
quality of the resulting marriage and higher psycho-social stress for the women involved.  
 
Kidnapping may be fully consensual between the groom and the bride. However, if this was 
true for all kidnappings, we would not obtain the results shown here. This is important news for 
Kyrgyzstan, and potentially for the other countries where some marriages result from kidnapping. 
Many human rights organizations in Kyrgyzstan have tried to raise awareness about the practice of 
kidnapping and to encourage Kyrgyz women and their families to report kidnappings to the 
authorities. Social condemnation of the practice is on the rise, at least in urban areas, and the 
country recently became more serious about law enforcement in this context. In contrast, there is 
virtually no law enforcement in South Africa (Nkosi and Buthelezi, 2013; Rice, 2014), no capacity to 
investigate kidnappings in Ethiopia (Dito, 2015), and complete official denial in Armenia (Edling, 
2012). Most incredibly, the Russian Duma (which has authority over Chechnya, Dagestan, and 
Ingushetia where kidnapping is also practiced) declined in 2006 to authorize investigative 
responsibility by the state into cases of bride kidnapping because the law excluded cases in which 
men were kidnapped for similar purposes (Sirazhudinova, 2013).28 
                                        
                     
28 These societies are also characterized by various levels of denial of the extent of coercive abduction, or 
refusal by the state to seriously investigate kidnappings. Remarkably, the exception to this statement comes 
from Chechnya, where President Ramzan Kadyrov has taken the offensive against bride kidnapping, 
imposing a 1-million ruble fine on kidnappers and also de-registering Islamic religious authorities who seek to 
reconcile kidnapped women to accept their married fate (Serdyukova, 2011; Sirazhudinova, 2013).  
 21 
 
 
Our findings make clear that the women in kidnapped marriages and their children are 
adversely affected by this practice. An important question for further research is to investigate the 
long-term consequences of kidnapped marriage for children born to kidnapped mothers. The good 
news is that the incidence of low birth weight (below 2500 or 1500 grams) is not higher in 
kidnapped marriages compared with arranged marriages, implying that the losses are occurring 
among infants who are not already at elevated risk of health and development problems. However, it 
is important to recognize that birth weight losses, even if from an average level of birth weight, can 
have long-term effects, including higher neonatal and infant mortality, lower school completion, and 
lower wages in adult life (Black et al., 2007; Camacho, 2008).  
 
In further research, it would be interesting to also investigate when and why some kidnappings 
do not end in marriage. The topic also is one that invites exploration of its social efficiency 
characteristics from a global (or, more aptly, village) perspective. We have argued heuristically that it 
seems rational for individual young men to consider coercively kidnapping brides. It also may be 
rational for potential brides to expose themselves to the risk of being kidnapped while they search 
for better husbands. But kidnapping has external effects, both on marriage choices of other 
individuals, and on the health of offspring and wives that does not get fully captured in individual 
agents’ calculations. The fact that kidnapping persists in a small but non-negligible collection of 
diverse settings means either that the externalities are not unacceptably large, or that there are 
positive features of a mating system that includes a kidnapping option.  
 
Most obviously, marriage markets that include a kidnapping option are likely to clear more 
rapidly than other systems, especially those restricted to uncertain lovers. Societies that have limited 
opportunities for young women and men to meet and develop both experience and preferences over 
partners therefore may value arranged or kidnapped marriages. If arrangements often fail, perhaps 
because of a combination of high value placed on brides – and hence high bride prices – and 
significant social stratification, then kidnapping may not automatically be socially condemned. This 
is particularly likely to be true if the myth of non-calamitous outcomes is maintained. 
 
 
 
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                    
 
 22 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Aizer, A., 2011. Poverty, Violence, and Health: The Impact of Domestic Violence during Pregnancy on 
Newborn Health. Journal of Human Resources 46, 518–538. 
Almond, D., Currie, J., 2011. Killing me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 25, 153–172. 
Almond, D., Mazumder, B., 2011. Health capital and the prenatal environment: the effect of Ramadan 
observance during pregnancy. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, 56–85. 
Amsler, S., Kleinbach, R., 1999. Bride Kidnapping in the Kyrgyz Republic. International Journal of Central 
Asian Studies 4, 185–216. 
Ayres, B., 1974. Bride Theft and Raiding for Wives in Cross-Cultural Perspective. Anthropological 
Quarterly 47, 238–252. 
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Ghatak, M., Lafortune, J., 2013. Marry for What? Caste and Mate Selection in 
Modern India. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5, 33–72. 
Barnes, R.H., 1999. Marriage by Capture. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 5, 57–73. 
Batabyal, A.A., 2001. On the Likelihood of Finding the Right Partner in an Arranged Marriage. The 
Journal of Socio-Economics 30, 273–280. 
Batabyal, A.A., 1999. A Dynamic and Stochastic Analysis of Decision Making in Arranged Marriages. 
Applied Economics Letters 6, 439–442. 
Batabyal, A.A., 1998. Aspects of Arranged Marriages and the Theory of Markov Decision Processes. 
Theory and Decision 45, 241–253. 
Bates, D.G., 1974. Normative and Alternative Systems of Marriage among the Yörük of Southeastern 
Turkey. Anthropological Quarterly 47, 270–287. 
Becker, G.S., 1991. A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press. 
Becker, G.S., 1974. A Theory of Marriage: Part II. Journal of Political Economy 82, 11–26. 
Becker, G.S., 1973. A Theory of Marriage: Part I. Journal of Political Economy 81, 813–846. 
Behrman, J.R., Rosenzweig, M.R., 2004. Returns to Birthweight. The Review of Economics and Statistics 
86, 586–601. 
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Salvanes, K.G., 2007. From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth 
Weight on Adult Outcomes. The Quarterley Journal of Economics 122, 409–439. 
Bonzini, M., Coggon, D., Palmer, K.T., 2007. Risk of prematurity, low birthweight and pre-eclampsia in 
relation to working hours and physical activities: a systematic review. Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine 64, 228–243. 
Borbieva, N.O., 2012. Kidnapping Women: Discourses of Emotion and Social Change in the Kyrgyz 
Republic. Anthropological Quarterly 85, 141–169. 
Bozzoli, C., Quintana-Domeque, C., 2014. The Weight of the Crisis: Evidence from Newborns in 
Argentina. Review of Economics and Statistics 96, 550–562. 
Browning, M., Bourguignon, F., Chiappori, P.-A., Lechene, V., 1994. Income and outcomes: A structural 
model of intrahousehold allocation. Journal of political Economy 1067–1096. 
Browning, M., Chiappori, P.-A., Weiss, Y., 2014. Economics of the Family. Cambridge University Press. 
Brück, T., Esenaliev, D., Kroeger, A., Kudebayeva, A., Mirkasimov, B., Steiner, S., 2014. Household Survey 
Data for Research on Well-Being and Behavior in Central Asia. Journal of Comparative 
Economics 42, 819–835. 
Camacho, A., 2008. Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks. American Economic 
Review 98, 511–515. 
Dito, B.B., 2015. Women’s Intrahousehold Decision-Making Power and Their Health Status: Evidence 
from Rural Ethiopia. Feminist Economics 21, 168–190. 
 23 
 
Edling, C., 2012. Bride Kidnapping, Courtship, and Marriage in Armenia. Goris Women’s Development 
Resource Center, Yerevan. 
Edlund, L., Lagerlöf, N.P., 2006. Individual versus Parental Consent in Marriage: Implications for Intra-
Household Resource Allocation and Growth. The American Economic Review 96, 304–307. 
Fafchamps, M., Quisumbing, A., 2008. Household Formation and Marriage Markets in Rural Areas, in: 
Schultz, T.P., Strauss, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 4. Elsevier, 
Amsterdam. 
Foureaux Koppensteiner, M., Manacorda, M., 2016. Violence and birth outcomes: Evidence from 
homicides in Brazil. Journal of Development Economics 119, 16–33. 
Giussani, D.A., Phillips, P.S., Anstee, S., Parker, D.J.P., 2001. Effects of Altitude versus Economic Status on 
Birth Weight and Body Shape at Birth. Pediatric Research 49, 490–494. 
Grossman, M., Joyce, T.J., 1990. Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and Birth Weight Production 
Functions in New York City. Journal of Political Economy 98, 983–1007. 
Handrahan, L., 2004. Hunting for Women. International Feminist Journal of Politics 6, 207–233. 
Handrahan, L., 2000. Implications of International Human Rights Law and Bride Kidnapping in 
Kyrgyzstan. The Fletcher Journal of Development Studies 16, 1–13. 
Hobel, C., Goldstein, A., Barrett, E.S., 2008. Psychosocial stress and pregnancy outcome. Clinical 
obstetrics and gynecology 51, 333–348. 
Human Rights Watch, 2006. Reconciled to Violence. State Failure to Stop Domestic Abuse and Abduction 
of Women in Kyrgyzstan. 
Huxley, R., Neil, A., Collins, R., 2002. Unravelling the fetal origins hypothesis: is there really an inverse 
association between birthweight and subsequent blood pressure? The Lancet 360, 659–665. 
Jensen, G.M., Moore, L.G., 1997. The Effect of Altitude and other Risk Factors on Birth Weight: 
Independent or Interactive Effects? American Journal of Public Health 87, 1003–1007. 
Kleinbach, R., Ablezova, M., Aitieva, M., 2005. Kidnapping for Marriage (ala kachuu) in a Kyrgyz Village. 
Central Asian Survey 24, 191–202. 
Kramer, M.S., 1987. Determinants of Low Birth Weight: Methodological Assessment and Meta-Analysis. 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization 65, 663–737. 
Kuehnast, K., 1998. From pioneers to entrepreneurs: young women, consumerism, and the “world 
picture”in Kyrgyzstan. Central Asian Survey 17, 639–654. 
Mansour, H., Rees, D.I., 2012. Armed Conflict and Birth Weight: Evidence from the Al-Aqsa Intifada. 
Journal of Development Economics 99, 190–199. 
McLaren, A.E., 2001. Marriage by Abduction in Twentieth Century China. Modern Asian Studies 35, 953–
984. 
Nedoluzhko, L., Agadjanian, V., 2015. Between Tradition and Modernity: Marriage Dynamics in 
Kyrgyzstan. Demography 52, 861–882. 
Nkosi, M., Buthelezi, M.T., 2013. The nature and causes of bride abduction cases in KwaZulu-Natal, 
South Africa. Studies on Tribes and Tribals 11, 161–178. 
NSC, 2013. Kyrgyz Republic. Demographic and Health Survey 2012. National Statistal Committee of the 
Kyrgyz Republic, Bishkek. 
NSC, 2009. Population and Housing Census of the Kyrgyz Republic of 2009. National Statistical 
Committee of the Kyrgyz Republic, Bishkek. 
Rice, K., 2014. Ukuthwala in Rural South Africa: Abduction Marriage as a Site of Negotiation about 
Gender, Rights and Generational Authority Among the Xhosa. Journal of Southern African 
Studies 40, 381–399. 
Sirazhudinova, S.V., 2013. Gendernaya Politika v Respublikakh Severnogo Kavkaza: Sovremennye 
Tendentsii (Gender policy in the republics of the Northern Caucasus: Contemporary trends). 
Zhenshchina v Rossiiskom Obshchestve (Woman in Russian Society) 1, 14–19. 
 24 
 
Stein, A., Lumey, L., 2000. The Relationship between Maternal and Offspring Birth Weights after 
Maternal Prenatal Famine Exposure: The Dutch Famine Birth Cohort Study. Human Biology 72, 
641–654. 
Stross, B., 1974. Tzeltal Marriage by Capture. Anthropological Quarterly 47, 328–346. 
Torche, F., 2011. The Effect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a Natural Experiment. 
Demography 48, 1473–1491. 
Unger, C., Weiser, J.K., McCullough, R.E., Keefer, S., Moore, L.G., 1988. Altitude, Birth Weight, and Infant 
Mortality in Colorado. Journal of the American Medical Association 259, 3427–3432. 
Vermeulen, F., 2005. And the winner is... An empirical evaluation of unitary and collective labour supply 
models. Empirical Economics 30, 711–734. 
Wehby, G.L., Murray, J.C., Castilla, E.E., López-Camelo, J.S., Ohsfeldt, R.L., 2009. Quantile Effects of 
Prenatal Care Utilization on Birth Weight in Argentina. Health Economics 18, 1307–1321. 
Weiss, Y., 1997. The Formation and Dissolution of Families: Why Marry? Who Marries whom? And what 
Happens upon Divorce, in: Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
pp. 81–123. 
Werner, C.A., 2009. Bride Abduction in Post-Soviet Central Asia: Marking a Shift Towards Patriarchy 
through Local Discourses of Shame and Tradition. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 
15, 314–331. 
Za Reformy i Rezul’tat, 2015. Mezhdunarodnyi issledovanie obshchestvennoi bezopasnosti v Kyrgyzstane 
- 2015. Za Reformy i Rezul’tat, Bishkek. 
 
 
 
 
 25 
 
Table 1: Determinants of birth weight for non-Kyrgyz children   
  
Dependent variable: birth weight 
District-level share 
78.09 
31.34 
14.20 
 
(138.2) 
(139.9) 
(139.9) 
Child male 
. 
27.08 
33.81 
 
 
(29.81) 
(29.68) 
Child firstborn 
. 
94.96** 
-52.81 
 
 
(38.80) 
(41.92) 
Twin 
. 
. 
. 
 
 
 
 
Age at birth 
. 
. 
30.61 
 
 
 
(35.84) 
Age at birth squared 
. 
. 
-0.314 
 
 
 
(0.662) 
Basic education 
. 
. 
-178.6 
 
 
 
(112.9) 
Secondary education 
. 
. 
-131.3 
 
 
 
(110.8) 
Technical education 
. 
. 
-212.9* 
 
 
 
(126.3) 
Kyrgyz and Russian 
. 
. 
-21.61 
 
 
 
(74.30) 
Mother’s height 
. 
. 
1.699 
 
 
 
(4.159) 
Constant 
3,208*** 
3,328*** 
2,644*** 
 
(29.70) 
(119.0) 
(850.5) 
 
 
 
 
Birth month & year FE 
NO 
YES 
YES 
Observations 
630 
630 
630 
R-squared 
0.001 
0.072 
0.109 
Note: The sample consists of non-Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age group 
18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. Clustered standard errors in brackets. 
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 Table 2: OLS estimates - Association between district-level prevalence of kidnapping and mother’s 
characteristics 
 
(1) 
Maternal height  
(2) 
High blood  
pressure 
(3) 
Kyrgyz and Russian 
proficiency 
(4) 
Father worked in 
agriculture 
District-level share 
-1.593 
-0.003 
-0.261 
-0.016 
 
(1.944) 
(0.014) 
(0.234) 
(0.121) 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
703 
703 
703 
653 
R-squared 
0.003 
0.000 
0.012 
0.001 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude.  
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 Table 3: Descriptive statistics, by marriage type  
 
 
 
Total sample 
Young generation only 
 
(1) 
Kidnapped 
(2) 
Arranged 
(3) 
Kidnapped 
(4) 
Arranged 
 
CHILD CHARACTERISTICS 
Birth weight 
3148 
3262* 
3171 
3263* 
 
(410) 
(436) 
(369) 
(490) 
Child male 
0.519 
0.528 
0.510 
0.525 
 
(0.500) 
(0.499) 
(0.501) 
(0.500) 
Child firstborn 
0.229 
0.217 
0.239 
0.215 
 
(0.420) 
(0.413) 
(0.427) 
(0.411) 
Twin 
0.012 
0.020 
0.004 
0.032* 
 
(0.107) 
(0.138) 
(0.067) 
(0.176) 
Mother’s age at birth 
26.5 
27.7* 
24.0 
25.5* 
 
(6.13) 
(6.34) 
(4.57) 
(4.97) 
Number of observations 
1290 
1278 
451 
377 
 
 
 
 
 
MOTHER CHARACTERISTICS 
Age at first birth 
22.3 
22.8 
21.0 
22.3* 
 
(4.22) 
(4.85) 
(2.72) 
(3.57) 
Age at marriage 
19.7 
20.7* 
19.4 
20.7* 
 
(4.36) 
(5.08) 
(2.64) 
(3.44) 
Basic education 
0.142 
0.147 
0.090 
0.024* 
 
(0.350) 
(0.354) 
(0.267) 
(0.152) 
Secondary education 
0.584 
0.688* 
0.628 
0.803* 
 
(0.493) 
(0.464) 
(0.485) 
(0.399) 
Technical education 
0.183 
0.086* 
0.192 
0.110 
 
(0.387) 
(0.280) 
(0.395) 
(0.314) 
University education 
0.073 
0.067 
0.090 
0.063 
 
(0.260) 
(0.251) 
(0.287) 
(0.244) 
Kyrgyz and Russian 
0.471 
0.419 
0.538 
0.559 
 
(0.500) 
(0.494) 
(0.500) 
(0.498) 
Mother’s height 
1.62 
1.63 
1.62 
1.63 
 
(0.061) 
(0.068) 
(0.056) 
(0.70) 
Agriculture before birtha) 
0.044 
0.153* 
0.028 
0.129* 
 
(0.206) 
(0.361) 
(0.166) 
(0.337) 
Non-agriculture before birtha) 
0.152 
0.092 
0.113 
0.069 
 
(0.360) 
(0.290) 
(0.317) 
(0.254) 
Education before birtha) 
0.171 
0.092* 
0.190 
0.103 
 
(0.378) 
(0.290) 
(0.394) 
(0.306) 
Inactive before birtha) 
0.608 
0.656 
0.648 
0.698 
 
(0.490) 
(0.477) 
(0.479) 
(0.461) 
Number of observations 
344 
326 
156 
126 
 28 
 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. Cell entries are means; standard deviation 
in brackets.  
* indicates that the mean in the arranged marriage group is statistically different at the 5% level from the mean of 
the kidnapping group. a) The number of observations is smaller for these variables than noted in the table. This is 
because the LIK dataset only collected information on activity status since 1989.  
Source: Authors' illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4: Placebo test - OLS estimates: association between kidnapping and maternal height and 
chronic illness 
 
(1) 
Maternal height  
(2) 
Heart disease 
(3) 
Lung disease  
(4) 
Liver disease 
(5) 
Gastrointestinal 
disease  
Kidnapped 
0.156 
0.005 
0.003 
-0.013 
-0.006 
 
(0.871) 
(0.006) 
(0.020) 
(0.028) 
(0.006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
282 
282 
282 
282 
282 
R-squared 
0.328 
0.164  
0.125 
0.215 
0.339 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
Kidney disease 
(7) 
High blood 
pressure 
(8) 
Low blood 
pressure 
(9) 
Spinal 
problems 
(10) 
Diabetes 
Kidnapped 
0.047** 
0.017 
0.006 
-0.008 
0.015 
 
(0.022) 
(0.021) 
(0.004) 
(0.028) 
(0.017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations 
282 
282 
282 
282 
282 
R-squared 
0.162 
0.157 
0.135 
0.269 
0186 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. All estimations control for the woman’s 
age at marriage, her educational attainment, her language proficiency, and district fixed effects. Clustered standard 
errors in brackets.  
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 Table 5: Estimates of birth weight for Kyrgyz children  
  
(1) 
OLS 
(2) 
IV 
(3) 
OLS, with district 
fixed effects 
Kidnap  
-121.5*** 
-228.5*** 
-95.39** 
 
(46.76) 
(82.80) 
(44.71) 
Child male 
67.20** 
64.42** 
91.18*** 
 
(27.83) 
(27.44) 
(24.08) 
Child firstborn 
-43.94 
-48.56 
-10.63 
 
(40.03) 
(40.10) 
(36.25) 
Twin 
-838.1*** 
-865.1*** 
-805.6*** 
 
(255.9) 
(252.4) 
(221.7) 
Age at birth 
40.52 
28.92 
52.25* 
 
(31.51) 
(32.12) 
(30.05) 
Age at birth squared 
-0.850 
-0.658 
-0.936* 
 
(0.586) 
(0.599) 
(0.550) 
Basic education 
34.41 
40.69 
-33.44 
 
(108.1) 
(114.2) 
(77.00) 
Secondary education 
49.81 
22.91 
1.391 
 
(75.68) 
(79.59) 
(58.14) 
Technical education 
74.69 
93.28 
57.06 
 
(88.03) 
(89.00) 
(70.87) 
Kyrgyz and Russian 
-15.39 
-0.0680 
103.2** 
 
(45.10) 
(45.48) 
(43.48) 
Mother’s height 
4.003 
2.904 
4.250 
 
(4.296) 
(4.513) 
(2.963) 
Constant 
2,679*** 
2,475*** 
2,445*** 
 
(835.0) 
(888.6) 
(607.9) 
 
 
 
 
Birth month & year FE 
YES 
YES 
YES 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Observations 
828 
794 
828 
R-squared 
0.131 
0.127 
0.405 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. Clustered standard errors in brackets.  
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 Table 6: Robustness tests 
Exclude children born out of wedlock 
 
(1) OLS 
(2) IV 
(3) OLS, with district FE 
Kidnapped 
-135.0*** 
-234.6*** 
-112.7** 
 
(47.65) 
(85.92) 
(44.63) 
 
 
 
 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Observations 
792 
759 
792 
R-squared 
0.129 
0.125 
0.410 
F-statistic (first stage)  
. 
123.6 
. 
Observations below 2000m of altitude 
 
(4) OLS 
(5) IV 
(6) OLS, with district FE 
Kidnapped 
-111.8** 
-252.6*** 
-94.74** 
 
(49.41) 
(94.44) 
(45.97) 
 
 
 
 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Observations 
748 
714 
748 
R-squared 
0.129 
0.116 
0.423 
F-statistic (first stage) 
. 
107.0 
. 
Controlling for mother’s employment in the year before birth 
 
(7) OLS 
(8) IV 
(9) OLS, with district FE 
Kidnapped 
-122.4** 
-224.1*** 
-98.02** 
 
(47.68) 
(94.05) 
(45.43) 
 
 
 
 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Observations 
791 
757 
791 
R-squared 
0.129 
0.124 
0.415 
F-statistic (first stage) 
. 
123.3 
. 
Controlling for father’s educational attainment 
 
(10) OLS 
(11) IV 
(12) OLS, with district FE 
Kidnapped 
-116.8** 
-211.8** 
-99.41** 
 
(49.26) 
(87.10) 
(48.75) 
 
 
 
 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Observations 
749 
721 
749 
R-squared 
0.136 
0.135 
0.423 
F-statistic (first stage) 
. 
113.0 
. 
Only women with maximum two children 
 
(13) OLS 
(14) IV 
(15) OLS, with district FE 
Kidnapped 
-182.3** 
-255.8** 
-190.6** 
 
(80.05) 
(114.6) 
(104.1) 
 
 
 
 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
 31 
 
Observations 
196 
181 
196 
R-squared 
0.286 
0.317 
0.539 
F-statistic (first stage) 
. 
57.8 
. 
New definition for old generation (cutoff: marriage before 1992) 
 
(16) OLS 
(17) IV 
(18) OLS, with district FE 
Kidnapped 
-110.7** 
-224.1** 
-69.23 
 
(48.27) 
(94.05) 
(47.57) 
 
 
 
 
District FE 
NO 
NO 
YES 
Observations 
669 
650 
669 
R-squared 
0.130 
0.115 
0.387 
F-statistic (first stage) 
. 
109.0 
. 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43 (except in columns (7)-(9)), do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude (except in 
columns (4)-(6)). All estimations include the control variables as well as birth and month fixed effects as defined in 
equation (1). Clustered standard errors in brackets.  
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 
Table 7: OLS estimates of alternative stress outcomes  
  
(1) 
Dependent variable: 
Divorce 
(2) 
Dependent variable: 
Satisfaction with family life 
Kidnap  
0.108* 
0.205 
 
(0.0586) 
(0.280) 
Divorced 
 
-2.508*** 
 
 
(0.875) 
Kidnap*Divorced 
 
-2.558** 
 
 
(1.161) 
Age at marriage 
0.048 
0.009 
 
(0.057) 
(0.257) 
Age at marriage squared 
-0.001 
-0.001 
 
(0.001) 
(0.005) 
Basic education 
0.101 
0.619 
 
(0.108) 
(1.144) 
Secondary education 
-0.099 
-0.008 
 
(0.108) 
(0.633) 
Technical education 
-0.117 
0.656 
 
(0.096) 
(0.652) 
Kyrgyz and Russian 
0.044 
0.202 
 
(0.045) 
(0.301) 
Height 
0.002 
0.013 
 
(0.002) 
(0.025) 
Constant 
-0.674 
3.040 
 
(0.857) 
(5.297) 
 
 
 
District FE 
YES 
YES 
Observations 
282 
273 
R-squared 
0.237 
0.573 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women in arranged or kidnapped marriages, who have given 
birth to at least one child, are of the age group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. 
Clustered standard errors in brackets.  
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 
 
 33 
 
 
Table 8: Percentage of husbands and wives giving similar responses to 
personality questions, across marriage type  
I see myself as someone who ... 
 
Love 
marriage 
(N=405) 
(1) 
Arranged 
marriage 
(N=115) 
(2) 
Kidnapped 
marriage 
(N=120) 
keeps distance 
74.32 
80.00 
75.00 
tends to find fault with others 
81.98 
80.00 
70.83 
does a thorough job 
83.46 
86.96 
80.00 
is depressed 
81.98 
86.96 
71.67 
is curious about many different things 
80.99 
82.61 
74.17 
generates a lot of enthusiasm 
78.52 
87.83 
71.67 
generally trusts other people 
84.44 
84.35 
75.00 
tends to be lazy 
80.74 
81.74 
72.50 
is relaxed, handles stress well 
80.49 
75.65 
70.83 
is ingenious, a deep thinker 
81.98 
84.35 
75.00 
tends to be quiet 
71.60 
75.65 
75.83 
can be cold and aloof 
76.05 
74.78 
70.83 
is inventive 
78.27 
82.61 
69.17 
worries a lot 
75.06 
73.04 
71.67 
has an active imagination 
79.51 
79.13 
68.33 
is outgoing, sociable 
66.42 
66.09 
67.50 
is sometimes rude to others 
74.57 
69.57 
67.50 
makes plans and follows through with them 
80.99 
80.87 
73.33 
gets nervous easily 
76.05 
80.87 
70.00 
values art and esthetic events 
77.28 
83.48 
73.33 
has few artistic interests 
73.58 
74.78 
73.33 
Source: Authors' illustration based on 2012 LIK data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
 
 
 35 
 
Figure A1: Histogram of district-level share of kidnappings 
 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 
Figure A2: Non-Kyrgyz children in districts with different kidnapping prevalence
 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
0
5
10
15
Percent
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
District-level share of kidnapping
0
50
100
150
Frequency
0
.2
.4
.6
District-level share of kidnapping
 Table A1: Educational attainment of husbands and wives across marriage type 
 
(1) 
Love marriage 
(2) 
Arranged 
marriage 
(3) 
Kidnapped 
marriage 
 
Husbands 
 
(N=392) 
(N=104) 
(N=116) 
Basic education 
5.36 
4.81 
9.48 
Secondary education 
54.85 
75.96 
68.97 
Technical education 
22.60 
13.46 
16.38 
University education 
22.19 
5.77 
5.17 
 
 
 
 
Proficiency of Kyrgyz and 
Russian 
68.9 
61.7 
51.7 
 
Wives 
 
(N=446) 
(N=126) 
(N=156) 
Basic education 
4.26 
2.38 
8.97 
Secondary education 
55.38 
80.16 
62.82 
Technical education 
15.92 
11.11 
19.23 
University education 
24.44 
6.35 
8.97 
 
 
 
 
Proficiency of Kyrgyz and 
Russian 
66.7 
55.6 
52.5 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data.
 Table A2: First-stage estimate 
  
Dependent variable: 
Kidnapping 
District-level share of  
1.142*** 
kidnappings 
(0.104) 
Child male 
0.008 
 
(0.031) 
Child firstborn 
-0.078 
 
(0.040) 
Twin 
-0.268* 
 
(0.140) 
Age at birth 
-0.033 
 
(0.033) 
Age at birth squared 
0.000 
 
(0.001) 
Basic education 
-0.058 
 
(0.149) 
Secondary education 
-0.233** 
 
(0.105) 
Technical education 
-0.106 
 
(0.124) 
Kyrgyz and Russian 
0.064 
 
(0.058) 
Mother’s height 
-0.004 
 
(0.005) 
Constant 
1.396 
 
(0.930) 
 
 
Birth month & year FE 
YES 
Observations 
794 
R-squared 
0.378 
Adjusted R-squared 
0.338 
Partial R-squared 
0.276 
F-stat of instrument 
127.5 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. Clustered standard errors in brackets.  
*** significant at 1%, ** at 5%, * at 10%. 
Source: Authors’ illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 38 
 
Table A3: Time use (number of hours per day), by type of marriage 
 
Kidnapped 
marriage 
Arranged 
marriage 
 
Sleep 
7.87 
7.79 
 
(1.49) 
(1.15) 
Personal care and eating 
3.51 
3.29* 
 
(0.88) 
(0.83) 
Child care 
1.53 
1.78 
 
(1.72) 
(1.60) 
Elderly care 
0.03 
0.16* 
 
(0.16) 
(0.51) 
Housework 
5.82 
5.77 
 
(2.80) 
(2.35) 
Leisure 
3.25 
3.51 
 
(2.57) 
(2.35) 
Travel 
0.26 
0.16 
 
(0.88) 
(0.44) 
Education 
0.09 
0.01 
 
(0.82) 
(0.09) 
Work 
1.62 
1.53 
 
(3.25) 
(2.82) 
 
 
 
Number of observations 
156 
126 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. Cell entries are mean number of hours per 
day per activity; standard deviation in brackets.  
* indicates that the mean of arranged marriage is statistically different at the 5% level from the mean of kidnapping. 
Source: Authors' illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
 
 
Table A4: Birth intervals (number of days), by type of marriage 
 
Kidnapped 
marriage 
Arranged 
marriage 
 
Child 2 – Child 1 
898 
956 
(Obs. = 230 women) 
(698) 
(678) 
Child 3 – Child 2 
1,451 
1,382 
(Obs. = 154 women) 
(904) 
(991) 
Child 4 – Child 3 
1,084 
1,288 
(Obs. = 91 women) 
(1,382) 
(1,228) 
Note: The sample consists of ever-married Kyrgyz women, who have given birth to at least one child, are of the age 
group 18-43, do not live in cities, and live below 2500 meters of altitude. Cell entries are mean number of days 
between births; standard deviation in brackets.  
* indicates that the mean of arranged marriage is statistically different at the 5% level from the mean of kidnapping. 
Source: Authors' illustration based on 2011 LIK data. 
 
