 Effects of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Patient 
Prescription Requests and Physician Prescribing: A Systematic 
Review of Psychiatry-Relevant Studies
Sara J. Becker, Ph.D.1,2 and Miriam M. Midoun, ScM1
1Department of Behavioral and Social Sciences, Brown School of Public Health, Providence, RI, 
02912, U.S.A.
2Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University Medical School, Providence, 
RI, 02912, U.S.A.
Abstract
Objective—To systematically analyze the effects of direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) on 
patient requests for medication and physician prescribing across psychiatry-relevant studies.
Data Sources—MEDLINE, PsychINFO, ISI Thompson's Web of Knowledge, and Google 
Scholar were searched from 1999 through 2014 using variations of the terms direct-to-consumer 
advertising and psychiatric. Reference lists and an online repository of DTCA manuscripts were 
also scrutinized.
Study Selection—English-language studies collecting data at the point of service, focusing on 
or including psychiatric medication, and assessing DTCA's effects on patient and/or physician 
behavior were included. Of 989 articles identified, 69 received full-text review. Four studies across 
five manuscripts met inclusion criteria.
Data Extraction—Data were extracted on participants, study design, methodological quality, 
and results. Methodological quality of individual studies was assessed using adapted criteria from 
the Effective Public Health Practice Project. Confidence in conclusions across studies was 
determined using principles from the well-established GRADE system.
Findings—Due to lack of replication across strong randomized controlled trials (RCTs), no 
conclusions merited high confidence. With moderate confidence, we concluded that DTCA 
requests: 1) are granted most of the time [1 RCT, 3 observational]; 2) prompt higher prescribing 
volume [1 RCT, 1 observational]; 3) promote greater adherence to minimally acceptable treatment 
guidelines for patients with depression [1 RCT], and 4) stimulate overprescribing among patients 
with an adjustment disorder [1 RCT].
Corresponding Author: Sara J. Becker, Ph.D., Assistant Professor (Research), Department of Behavioral and Social Sciences, Brown 
School of Public Health, 121 South Main Street | 5th Floor, Providence, RI 02903, Phone: 401-863-6604, Fax: 401-863-6697, 
sara_becker@brown.edu. 
Conflict of Interest / Disclosure Statement:
The authors report no financial or other relationship relevant to the subject of this article.
Dr. Spirito does not have any conflicts of interest to disclose.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Clin Psychiatry. 2016 October ; 77(10): e1293–e1300. doi:10.4088/JCP.15r10325.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Conclusions—Findings suggest that DTCA requests are typically accommodated, promote 
higher prescribing volume, and have competing effects on treatment quality. More 
methodologically strong studies are needed to increase confidence in conclusions.
Keywords
direct-to-consumer; advertising; psychiatric; medication; systematic review
Direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) of prescription medications has been extremely 
lucrative for the pharmaceutical industry in the United States. After the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) relaxed its guidelines for marketing pharmaceuticals in 1997, DTCA 
expenditures skyrocketed.1, 2 Spending on DTCA grew from under $800 million in 1996 to 
$2.5 billion in 2000, eventually peaking at $4.9 billion in 2007.2, 3 From 2007 through 2014, 
DTCA of pharmaceuticals remained a multi-billion dollar enterprise with annual 
expenditures between $3.5 and $4.5 billion.3, 4 Analyses of DTCA spending suggest that 
every $1 investment translates to $2.20–$4.20 of increased pharmaceutical sales.5, 6
Psychiatric medications are among the most heavily advertised prescriptions in the United 
States. Shortly after the revised FDA guidelines, psychiatric drugs comprised three of the 
five most advertised classes of medication and were among the first drugs to attain 
“blockbuster” status.7,8 For instance, Prozac sales rose 9% in 1997 to reach $2.56 billion by 
year end.9, 10 More recent data from 2014–2015 indicate that psychiatric medications 
comprise 20% of the 10 most advertised drugs and 10% of the 100 top-selling drugs.11 
Several features of psychiatric medications make them attractive for DTCA from the 
pharmaceutical firm's perspective: the medications are relatively safe and target conditions 
that are highly prevalent, chronic, associated with significant impairment, and substantially 
under-treated.12, 13
The prominence of DTCA in the United States has led both researchers and policy makers to 
scrutinize advertising practices and analyze their effect on public health. Consequently, 
DTCA of pharmaceutical products has been the subject of numerous excellent review 
articles.6, 14–16 and special journal issues in BMJ, JAMA, Health Affairs, Journal of Health 
Communication, and Research in Social and Administrative Policy. Across this work, 
several common arguments about DTCA's advantages and disadvantages have emerged. 
DTCA proponents have asserted that it enhances patient awareness and education by 
providing legitimate information about conditions and treatment options.17–19 It has been 
further argued that DTCA promotes the diagnosis and treatment of under-treated conditions, 
by encouraging patients to more actively request prescriptions.20 Meanwhile, DTCA 
opponents have asserted that it provides inaccurate and biased information fundamentally 
favoring pharmaceutical companies,21 thereby promoting unnecessary prescribing.22–24
The ability of prior DTCA reviews to inform psychiatry practice has been limited by several 
factors. First, previous work has focused on DTCA in general without considering the 
unique benefits and challenges related to prescribing psychiatric medication.14–16, 25 
Psychiatric conditions remain some of the most prevalent, stigmatized, and under-treated 
illnesses,26 making patients' treatment-seeking behaviors in response to DTCA especially 
important. Second, extant reviews have given equal attention to chart reviews, retrospective 
Becker and Midoun
Page 2
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 surveys, qualitative studies, and randomized trials,15, 25 despite significant differences in the 
scope and rigor of these approaches. Consideration of methodological quality is imperative 
to accurately determine the strength of evidentiary support for various arguments. Finally, 
the vast majority of prior reviews have not attempted to synthesize the effects of DTCA on 
patient and physician behavior in a systematic way.
To date, there has been one systematic review of the benefits and harms of a DTCA 
approach, conducted by Gilbody and colleagues.27 The investigators found evidence that 
DTCA was associated with increased physician prescribing. However, this review's 
relevance to psychiatric medication was questionable: of the 2853 citations identified, only 
four studies were included in the analysis and three were specifically focused on 
medications for non-psychiatric conditions (i.e., antihistamines, antihypertensives, acid-
peptic disorder medications, benign prostatic hypertrophy medications, antilipemics, 
migraine medication, and toe-nail fungus medication). Furthermore, findings were published 
over a decade ago, which limits applicability to current practice. The paucity of psychiatry-
relevant data highlights the need for a current and focused synthesis of the literature.
The current review aimed to systematically evaluate the effects of DTCA on patient and 
physician behavior in the United States. To ensure relevance to psychiatry, we restricted the 
review to studies focused specifically on psychiatric medication or encompassing a range of 
medications including psychiatric. Our review was guided by two key questions: 1) How 
does DTCA affect patient requests for advertised medication? 2) How does DTCA affect 
physician prescribing in response to patient requests? Across these questions, our objective 
was to synthesize the results of publicly available studies measuring behavior at the point-of-
service in order to determine the strength of conclusions that can be made. Addressing these 
questions represents an important step toward understanding the effects of DTCA on patient 
requests for psychiatric medication and physician prescribing, which can inform policy 
around this controversial issue.
Methods
Study Selection
We conducted our systematic review and report our results in accordance with the latest 
PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses: http://
www.prisma-statement.org) guidelines.28 Studies of the effects of DTCA on patients and 
physicians in the United States were selected according to these criteria: (a) presented 
quantitative data on patient prescription requests in response to DTCA and/or physician 
prescribing in response to patient requests; (b) gathered data directly from patients or 
physicians at the point-of-service (i.e., excluded aggregate-level data obtained from national 
databases or retrospective survey data); (c) measured the effects of DTCA for psychiatric 
medication specifically or for a range of medications including psychiatric (i.e., allowed 
studies based in generalist practices as long as physicians could prescribe psychiatric 
medication, but excluded studies focused on non-psychiatric medications or in non-
psychiatric specialty settings).; (d) published in or after 1999 to reflect the finalization of the 
FDA's guidance on DTCA; (e) collected data in the United States; and (f) published in a 
peer-reviewed journal in English.
Becker and Midoun
Page 3
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We restricted our search to studies that directly measured individuals' behavior either 
prospectively or in real-time at the point-of-service. We excluded studies using retrospective 
recall in order to minimize bias.29 The limitations of retrospective reports have been well-
established30, 31 and researchers have recommended avoiding the use of retrospective data to 
test hypotheses that demand precision in estimating event occurrence.32. Because we were 
interested in patients' and physicians' actual behavior, studies of DTCA's effects on 
knowledge, awareness, impressions, behavioral tendencies, or expected behaviors were 
excluded. Multiple manuscripts from the same dataset were treated as one study and data 
were extracted accordingly.
Search Strategy
Studies meeting inclusion criteria were identified via a targeted search a search of Medline, 
PsychInfo, the aggregated Social Sciences database on ISI Thompson's Web of Knowledge, 
and Google Scholar from 1999 to February 2015. Search terms included combinations of the 
following keywords: “direct-to-consumer”, “DTC”, “DTC marketing', “DTC advertising”, 
and “psychotropic” or “mental health” or “psychiatric.” During our search, we identified an 
online repository of 449 DTCA studies published between 1983 and 2013 compiled by a 
non-profit, nonpartisan website called Prescription Drug Ads: Pros and Cons (see http://
prescriptiondrugs.procon.org/), which we hand searched to identify additional articles. We 
also manually searched reference lists and conducted a Google Scholar search for articles 
citing identified work.
All identified articles were subject to two rounds of review. In the first round, two 
researchers (study co-authors) examined the abstracts and titles of potentially relevant 
studies and excluded those that were clearly not original studies, not focused on psychiatric 
medication, and not based in the United States. In the second round, full-length copies of the 
remaining studies were scrutinized to determine eligibility.
Data Extraction
Two researchers independently extracted data from studies meeting inclusion criteria. First, 
each article was examined to determine if it measured patient requests for prescriptions 
and/or physician prescribing behavior. Additional data extraction pertained to sample 
selection, data measurement and analysis, methodological quality, and study findings. A 
primary goal of this study was to determine the strength of conclusions that could be made 
from publically available evidence; hence, coders did not search for grey literature or contact 
study authors for unpublished data. Any disparities that emerged during coding were 
resolved through review by a third independent coder.
Assessment of Quality
Methodological quality of each study was assessed using adapted criteria from the Effective 
Public Health Practice Project (EPHPP)33 instrument. The EPHPP was developed to be 
suitable for evaluating a range of study designs including randomized clinical trials (RCTs) 
and observational studies. The instrument has been used in multiple systematic 
reviewssee 34–37 relevant to mental health treatment and has demonstrated content and 
construct validity.38, 39 This is the first systematic review to adapt the EPHPP to evaluate 
Becker and Midoun
Page 4
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 studies of DTCA. Consideration of study quality included four of the six EPHPP criteria: [1] 
selection bias – the extent to which the sample was representative of the target population; 
[2] study design – the degree to which the design isolated the effects of DTCA on patient 
and/or physician behavior; [3] blinding – whether patients and physicians (or session raters, 
if applicable) were aware of the study objectives; and [4] data collection – whether study 
measures were valid and reliable. Given our focus on DTCA, we added a fifth criterion to 
rate the specificity and replicability with which DTCA was operationalized. Using our 
adapted EPHPP grading scheme (see Table 1), we rated criteria as Strong, Moderate, or 
Weak. Studies with at least three criteria rated “Strong” and no criteria rated “Weak,” were 
designated Strong. Those studies with no more than one “Weak” rating were deemed 
Moderate and remaining studies were rated “Weak.”
Individual study ratings were used to determine the confidence with which specific 
conclusions could be made across investigations. Using principles from the well-established 
GRADE system,40, 41 we rated the quality of evidence in support of specific conclusions as 
high, moderate, low, or very low/insufficient. The GRADE system is one of the most widely 
used strength of evidence assessment tools and was specifically designed to convey 
reviewers' confidence in the strength of a detected effect.41 Consistent with the GRADE 
handbook,42 we used the terms quality of evidence, strength of evidence, and confidence in 
evidence interchangeably in our synthesis of the literature; for simplicity, we consistently 
used the word conclusion when referencing a significant finding, outcome, or estimated 
effect. Because our goal was to determine confidence in conclusions and not to devise 
recommendations, we used the standard four-level quality of evidence rating scheme and not 
the binary classification of Strong or Weak used by guideline panels.see 41 Table 2 presents 
the rating criteria and definitions we used to evaluate confidence in conclusions across 
studies.
Results
Search of the databases and online repository identified 989 articles potentially meeting 
inclusion criteria (Figure 1). After removing 503 duplicates, 486 articles remained. The first 
screening round excluded 419 articles, leaving 69 articles for full-text review. Of these, four 
studies (across five manuscripts) represented original, psychiatry-relevant research 
measuring the effect of DTCA on patient and/or physician behavior at the point-of-service. 
The most common reasons for exclusion were not including abehavioral outcome (e.g., 
measuring patient impressions, awareness, attitudes, or behavioral intentions), or not 
collecting data at the point-of-service (e.g., relying on retrospective reports).
Due to the small number and heterogeneity of studies, we deemed a narrative synthesis of 
study characteristics and findings more appropriate than a meta-analysis.43 The following 
sections present the study designs, participants, methodological quality, and findings of the 
four studies (see Table 3 for an overview).
Study Overview and Designs
Studies meeting inclusion criteria were all published between 2002 and 2009. While the two 
questions guiding this review were intentionally broad in scope, the identified studies 
Becker and Midoun
Page 5
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 focused on two specific aspects of patient and physician behavior: rates of patients 
requesting DTCA prescriptions and rates of physicians granting DTCA requests. Of the four 
studies, only one by Kravitz and colleagues44 was an RCT focused specifically on 
psychiatric medication. This study used standardized patient (SP) actors to manipulate both 
the types of requests made for antidepressants and the patient's level of severity. Six 
assignments were made by crossing two conditions (major depression or adjustment 
disorder) with three different types of DTCA drug requests (brand-specific, general, or 
none). The other three studies measured patient requests for any medication including but 
not restricted to psychiatric.
The study by Mintzes and colleagues45 (also described in a second manuscript46) was a two-
group observational point-of-service study comparing the behaviors of patients and 
physicians in a United States setting where DTCA is allowed to a Canadian setting where 
DTCA is prohibited. Consistent with our inclusion criteria, only the data from the United 
States site were extracted, though the overall design was considered when evaluating 
methodological quality. Data collection occurred on pre-determined days and a variety of 
potential confounders were controlled when comparing the two groups. The remaining two 
studies (Allison-Ottey et al.47 and Parnes et al.48) were observational point-of-service 
studies in which physicians recorded patient and physician behaviors on encounter forms 
after patient visits.
Sample Selection
All of the studies but Kravitz et al.44 used actual patients and all four used actual physicians. 
Focusing only on participants recruited in the United States, sample sizes ranged from 683 
to 1,647 patients (total n = 3,395) and 11 to 162 physicians (total n = 369). All four studies 
were based in general practice settings, with physicians identifying their focuses as family 
practice, internal medicine, geriatrics, and/or women's health. Two projects recruited 
physicians from physician collectives or networks (n = 320 physicians)44, 48, one recruited 
from a medical directory of general practitioners (n = 38 physicians)45, and one recruited 
from eight medical sites (n = 11 physicians).47
Strategies used to select patients were heterogeneous. Two investigative teams recruited and 
consented patients in physician waiting rooms,45, 47 while the others solely recruited 
physicians.44, 48 Participation rates were reported in three of the four studies. Mintzes et 
al.45 reported participation rates of both physicians (n = 38, 60%) and patients (n = 683, 
69%). Kravitz et al.44 enrolled 190 individual physicians with participation rates of 53–61% 
across settings (raw data not provided for analysis). Parnes et al.48 reported that 22 physician 
practices enrolled, which represented 28% of 78 invited practices.
The types of sample characteristics reported also varied. The three observational point-of-
service studies all provided some descriptive information about both patients and physicians, 
while the Kravitz et al. study44 (which used SPs) only gave information about physicians. 
Across the three observational reports45, 47, 48, 65% of the 3,395 patients were female. Only 
two of the three studies provided information about patient race/ethnicity47, 48 and 
cumulatively 70% of the 2,712 patients were minority group members. Very little data were 
provided about physicians beyond descriptions of their medical specialties. Only Allison et 
Becker and Midoun
Page 6
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 al.47 reported on physician race/ethnicity (n = 11 physicians, 100% African-American) and 
only Mintzes et al.45 reported on physician gender (n = 48 physicians, 79% male).
Outcomes
Across studies, the primary outcomes of interest were patient requests for DTCA medication 
and physician prescribing. Measurement of patient requests for DTCA medication occurred 
in the three observational point-of-service studies45, 47, 48 and varied depending on how 
“DTCA drugs” were operationalized. Two of three studies45, 48 measured patient requests 
for any prescription and then had the investigative team classify which medications were 
DTCA; Mintzes and colleagues45 classified a drug as DTCA if it was among the 50 products 
with the highest DTCA budgets during data collection, whereas Parnes and colleagues48 had 
two authors classify drugs as DTCA if they had been advertised in the last few years. 
Allison-Ottey et al.47 simply asked physicians a yes/no question, “Did the patient ask you 
about a specific medication that they saw advertised during this visit?”
Measurement of physician prescribing was more homogeneous and was the proportion of 
patients requesting DTCA medication(s) who were granted the medication. The only 
exception was Parnes et al.,48 which reported the prescribing rate for any requested 
medication, and did not disaggregate DTCA prescribing. Kravitz et al.44 also measured 
physician adherence to minimally acceptable care guidelines for major depression treatment, 
defined as offering any combination of antidepressant, mental health referral, or follow-up 
within two weeks.
Quality Assessment
Quality ratings of the four studies are provided in Table 4. Kravitz et al.44 was deemed 
strong due to its RCT design, blinding of both physicians and independent evaluators, and 
use of collateral data to verify physician prescribing. Mintzes et al.45 was rated moderate 
due to its use of a comparative two-group design, modest participation rates, blinding of 
patients, and strong DTCA operationalization. Remaining studies were rated weak.
Specific areas of concern across studies included selection bias (driven by low or non-
reported participation) and study design (driven by observational methods with limited 
ability to isolate DTCA effects). Most studies received strong or moderate quality ratings for 
blinding, since at least patients (and physicians in Kravitz et al.44) were not aware that their 
behavior was recorded. Some investigators provided sufficient detail to confirm construct or 
content validity of measures (thereby garnering data collection ratings of moderate), but 
reliability was rarely reported. DTCA operationalization also varied in quality; two studies 
provided definitions that could be replicated,44, 45 one studied relied on physician 
impressions of whether the patient requested a DTCA drug,47 and one studied relied on 
coders' impressions of whether the drug had been advertised (without clarifying how these 
impressions were determined).48
Study Results
In the three observational point-of-service studies,45, 47, 48 the proportion of patients 
requesting DTCA medication ranged from 2.6% to 9%. The Mintzes et al.45 study of 
Becker and Midoun
Page 7
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 moderate quality found that 7.2% of patients at the United States site requested DTCA 
medications versus 3.3% of patients at the Canada site (significant difference). The Allison-
Ottey et al.47 and Parnes et al.48 studies of weak quality found that 9% and 2.6% of patients 
requested DTCA medication, respectively. Two of these studies45, 48 tested factors 
predicting DTCA requests and identified six significant predictors: patient seen in private 
practice (versus community health center), patient on three or more chronic medications, 
patient self-reported exposure to advertising, patient self-reported reliance on advertising, 
patient had condition(s) potentially treatable by medication, and physician was female.
All four studies measured physician prescribing in response to DTCA requests. The Kravitz 
et al.44 study of strong quality found that for SPs with depression, prescribing rates were 
53%, 76%, and 31%, for brand-specific, general, and no requests, respectively. Rates of 
physicians meeting minimally acceptable depression guidelines across these conditions were 
90%, 98%, and 56%. For SPs with adjustment disorder, prescribing rates were 55%, 39%, 
and 10% respectively. Comparisons across conditions indicated that prescribing rates were 
significantly higher in the brand-specific and general request conditions than the no request 
condition. Of clinical importance, minimally acceptable depression treatment guidelines 
were met significantly more often in the brand-specific and general request conditions. 
There was also a significant interaction between type of request and condition, such that 
brand-specific requests had a more pronounced effect on prescribing for adjustment disorder 
than depression. Based on these data, the investigators concluded that DTCA requests (both 
brand-specific and general) had the following effects: 1) higher rates of physician 
prescribing, 2) higher rates of physicians meeting minimally acceptable treatment guidelines 
among patients with depression, and 3) overprescribing among patients with adjustment 
disorder.
The Mintzes et al.45 study of moderate quality found similar prescribing rates to Kravitz et 
al.,44 with physicians granting DTCA requests in 78% of encounters in the United States and 
72% in Canada (non-significant difference). This study also found that patients requesting 
one or more DTCA drugs had significantly higher odds of receiving a new prescription than 
patients not requesting DTCA drugs.
The two studies of weak quality by Allison-Ottey et al.47 and Parnes et al.48 found more 
modest prescribing rates of 33% and 54%, respectively. As noted previously, the prescribing 
rate reported by Parnes et al.48 was cumulative and did not specifically isolate requests for 
DTCA medications.
Confidence in Findings
Based on principles from the GRADE system, we determined that no conclusions could be 
made with high confidence due to lack of replication across methodologically strong 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Four conclusions were made with moderate confidence 
based on data from one methodologically strong RCT (and in some cases replication in 
observational studies). Specifically, we concluded that DTCA requests: 1) are granted in the 
majority (i.e.>50%) of encounters [1 RCT, 3 observational]; 2) prompt higher prescribing 
volume [1 RCT, 1 observational study]; 3) promote greater adherence to minimally 
acceptable treatment guidelines for patients with depression [1 RCT]; and 4) stimulate 
Becker and Midoun
Page 8
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 overprescribing among patients with an adjustment disorder [1 RCT]. Based on data from 
three methodologically weaker studies, we made two additional conclusions with weak 
confidence: 1) DTCA medications are requested in a minority (i.e.<10%) of clinical 
encounters [3 observational studies]; and 2) patient, physician, and practice setting attributes 
are associated with higher rates of requests for DTCA medication. There was very low/
insufficient evidence from this review to make conclusions about specific variables that 
predicted higher rates of requests for DTCA medication, as tests of specific variables were 
not replicated across studies.
Discussion
This was the first psychiatry-relevant systematic review to analyze patient and physician 
behavior in response to DTCA for medication. Our comprehensive search of almost 1000 
articles identified only four studies that measured patient and physician behavior in real-time 
as opposed to relying on registry data, reports of past behavior, or reports of intended 
behavior. Of these four studies, only one focused specifically on psychiatric medication 
(antidepressants), while the others focused on patient requests for medication (both 
psychiatric and non-psychiatric) in general practice settings. An analysis of methodological 
quality revealed several areas of improvement for future DTCA evaluations, most notably in 
the areas of study design and selection bias.
Despite the lack of methodologically strong trials in this review, our synthesis indicates that 
patient requests for DTCA medication are granted in the majority (i.e., more than 50%) of 
encounters and result in higher physician prescribing rates. These conclusions are consistent 
with those of Gilbody et al.27 that DTCA results in increased prescribing volume. However, 
our review does not provide definitive evidence as to whether these prescribing rates are 
beneficial for patients. With moderate confidence, we can conclude that DTCA requests 
result in both better adherence to minimally acceptable care guidelines for patients with 
depression and overprescribing among patients with an adjustment disorder, suggesting that 
DTCA has competing effects on quality.
One conclusion (albeit supported by weak evidence) that is unique to this review is that 
DTCA requests consistently occurred in less than 10% of clinical encounters, a modest 
proportion compared to the rates that have been reported in retrospective patient and 
physician surveys (i.e. rates from 22–72%49–51). The discrepancy between the conservative 
rates found here and those in other published surveys may reflect our reliance on the 
measurement of patient behavior in real-time as opposed to retrospective self-report, which 
may produce biased estimates of actual behavior.29 Because the evidence in support of this 
conclusion is weak, more methodologically strong studies are needed to replicate the 
conservative rates of DTCA requests found in this review.
The conclusions of our review are limited not only by the small number of methodologically 
strong studies, but also by our search criteria and the characteristics of the included studies. 
Our focus on studies that collected data at the point-of-service was intended to reduce bias, 
but significantly reduced the number of articles available for analysis. The final pool of 
studies also focused on primary care settings in which a range of medications (including 
Becker and Midoun
Page 9
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 psychiatric) could be requested, suggesting that the results may not pertain to specialty 
psychiatry settings. Finally, the studies collected data across multiple regions and/or states, 
but none of the studies collected data nationally, suggesting that the findings might not be 
representative of patient and physician behaviors in all regions of the United States.
For researchers and physicians interested in the effects of DTCA of psychiatric medication 
on patient and physician behavior, there are significant opportunities for further research. 
Although some researchers have referred to DTCA as a “huge, uncontrolled public health 
experiment,” Kravitz and colleagues showed that controlled evaluations of DTCA can be 
done. Additional designs such as case-control, cohort, and interrupted time-series also hold 
great promise for rigorous tests of DTCA. At a minimum, our review suggests that more 
studies conducted at the point-of-service focused on the effects of DTCA for psychiatric 
medication would be of significant value, given the limited data from methodologically 
strong studies available in this area. Future research evaluating the effects of DTCA in 
specialty psychiatry settings would also be beneficial due to the predominant focus on 
primary care settings in extant investigations.
Acknowledgment of Assistance
The authors would like to thank Anthony Spirito, Ph.D., Professor (Research), Department of Psychiatry and 
Human Behavior, Brown University Medical School, for his critical review of the first draft of this manuscript.
Sources of Financial Support:
This work was supported by the National Institute on Drug Abuse under award K23DA031743 to Dr. Sara Becker. 
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse
References
1. Cole CL. Viagra Gets Out of the Game. J Sport & Social Issues. 2007; 31:101–2.
2. Rosenthal MB, Berndt ER, Donohue JM, Frank RG, Epstein AM. Promotion of prescription drugs 
to consumers. N Engl J Med. 2002; 346:498–505. [PubMed: 11844852] 
3. IMS. Total US Promotional Spend by Type. IMS Health website; 2010. http://www.imshealth.com/
deployedfiles/imshealth/Global/Content/StaticFile/Top_Line_Data/2010_Promotional_Data.pdf 
[Accessed June 17, 2015]
4. Staton, T. Pharma's ad spending vaults to $4.5B, with big spender Pfizer leading the way. Fierce 
Pharma Marketing website; http://www.fiercepharmamarketing.com/story/pharmas-ad-spend-
vaults-45b-big-spender-pfizer-leading-way/2015-03-25. Updated March 25, 2015 [Accessed June 
17, 2015]
5. Anonymous. Impact of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Prescription Drug Spending. The Henry 
J. Kaiser Family Foundation; 2003. 
6. Ventola CL. Direct-to-Consumer Pharmaceutical Advertising: Therapeutic or Toxic? Pharma 
Therapeut. 2011; 36:669–84.
7. National Institute for Health Care Management. Prescription drugs and mass media advertising, 
2000. National Institute for Health Care Management Research and Educational Foundation; 
Washington, DC: 2001. 
8. Bhanji NH, Baron DA, Lacy BW, et al. Direct-to-consumer marketing: An attitude survey of 
psychiatric physicians. Prim Psychiatry. 2008; 15:67–71.
9. Prozac Print Campaign. [Accessed March 12, 2015] Marketing Campaign Case Studies website. 
http://marketing-casestudies.blogspot.com/2008/10/prozac-print-campaign.html. Updated October 
25, 2008
Becker and Midoun
Page 10
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Eli Lilly and Company. Lilly Announces Fourth-Quarter Financial Results and 1997 Financial 
Results. PR Newswire; http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/lilly-announces-fourth-quarter-
financial-results-and-1997-financial-results-76476212.html. Updated January 29, 1998 [Accessed 
October 12, 2015]
11. Brooks, M. [Accessed October 10, 2015] 100 Best-selling, Most Prescribed Branded Drugs 
Through June. Medscape. http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/849457. Updated August 13, 
2015
12. McDevitt, C. [Accessed April 1, 2015] The Big Money: Depression and the Recession. The 
Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/08/28/
AR2009082804069.html. Updated August 30, 2009
13. Donohue JM, Berndt ER. Effects of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Medication Choice: The 
Case of Antidepressants. J Public Policy Mark. 2004; 23:115–27.
14. Gellad ZF, Lyles KW. Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Pharmaceuticals. Am J Med. 2007; 
120:475–80. [PubMed: 17524744] 
15. Frosch DL, Grande D, Tarn DM, Kravitz RL. A Decade of Controversy: Balancing Policy with 
Evidence in the Regulation of Prescription Drug Advertising. Am J Public Health. 2010; 100:24–
32. [PubMed: 19910354] 
16. Porter DM. Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) Pharmaceutical Marketing: Impacts and Policy 
Implications. SPNHA Review. 2011; 7:5.
17. Holmer AF. Direct to consumer prescription drug advertising builds bridges between patients and 
physicians. J Am Med Assoc. 1999; 281:380–2.
18. Berndt ER. To Inform or Persuade? Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Prescription Drugs. N Engl 
J Med. 2005; 352:325–8. [PubMed: 15673797] 
19. Holmer AF. Direct-to-consumer advertising--strengthening our health care system. N Engl J Med. 
2002; 346:526–8. [PubMed: 11844858] 
20. Liu Q, Gupta S. The impact of direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription drugs on physician 
visits and drug requests: Empirical findings and public policy implications. Int J Res Mark. 2011; 
28:205–17.
21. Davis JJ. Riskier than we think? The relationship between risk statement completeness and 
perceptions of direct to consumer advertised prescription drugs. J Health Commun. 2000; 5:349–
69. [PubMed: 11191018] 
22. Frosch DL, Krueger PM, Hornik RC, Cronholm PF, Barg F, K. Creating Demand for Prescription 
Drugs: A Content Analysis of Television Direct-to-Consumer Advertising. Ann Fam Med. 2007; 
5:6–13. [PubMed: 17261859] 
23. Hollon MF. Direct-to-consumer marketing of prescription drugs: Creating consumer demand. J Am 
Med Assoc. 1999; 281:382–4.
24. Mintzes B. Direct to Consumer Advertising of Prescription Drugs. BMJ. 2008; 337:526–7.
25. Mukherjee A, Limbu Y, Wanasika I. A review of research on direct-to-consumer advertising of 
prescription drugs. IJPHM. 2013; 7:226–43.
26. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2013 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings. Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration; Rockville, MD: 2014. NSDUH Series H-48HHS Publication No 
(SMA) 14-4863
27. Gilbody S, Wilson P, Watt I. Benefits and harms of direct to consumer advertising: a systematic 
review. Qual Saf Health Care. 2005; 14:246–50. [PubMed: 16076787] 
28. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. BMJ. 2009; 339
29. Hassan E. Recall Bias can be a Threat to Retrospective and Prospective Research Designs. Internet 
J Epi. 2005; 3:1–7.
30. Coughlin SS. Recall bias in epidemiologic studies. J Clinic Epi. 1990; 43:87–91.
31. Hess DR. Retrospective Studies and Chart Reviews. Respir Care. 2004; 49:1171–4. [PubMed: 
15447798] 
Becker and Midoun
Page 11
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Henry B, Moffitt TE, Caspi A, Langley J, Silva PA. On the “remembrance of things past”: A 
longitudinal evaluation of the retrospective method. Psychol Assess. 1994; 6:92–101.
33. Thomas BH, Ciliska D, Dobbins M, Micucci S. A process for systematically reviewing the 
literature: providing the research evidence for public health nursing interventions. Worldviews 
Evid Based Nurs. 2004; 1:176–84. [PubMed: 17163895] 
34. Pandor A, Kaltenthaler E, Higgins A, et al. Sexual health risk reduction interventions for people 
with severe mental illness: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. 2015; 15:138. [PubMed: 
25886371] 
35. Leamy M, Bird V, Le Boutillier C, Williams J, Slade M. Conceptual framework for personal 
recovery in mental health: systematic review and narrative synthesis. Brit J Psychiat. 2011; 
199:445–52.
36. Chong C, Tsunaka M, Tsang HWH, Chan EP, Cheung WM. Effects of Yoga on Stress 
Management in Healthy Adults: A Systematic Review. Altern Ther Health Med. 2011; 17:32–8.
37. Jones L, Hughes K, Atkinson AM, Bellis MA. Reducing harm in drinking environments: A 
systematic review of effective approaches. Health Place. 2011; 17:508–18. [PubMed: 21257334] 
38. Deeks JJ, Dinnes J, D'Amico R, et al. Evaluating non-randomised intervention studies. Health 
Technol Assess. 2003; 7:iii–x. 1–173.
39. Jackson N, Waters E. Criteria for the systematic review of health promotion and public health 
interventions. Health Promot Intl. 2005; 20:367–74.
40. Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. 
BMJ. 2004; 328:1490. [PubMed: 15205295] 
41. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of 
evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2008; 336:924–6. [PubMed: 18436948] 
42. Schünemann, H.Brożek, J.Guyatt, G., Oxman, A., editors. GRADE Handbook for Quality of 
Evidence and Strength of Recommendations. The GRADE Working Group; 2013. Updated 
October 2013Available from www.guidelinedevelopment.org/handbook
43. Higgins, JPT., Green, S., editors. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews Interventions. 
Version 5.1.0. The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011. Updated March 2011Available from 
www.cochrane-handbook.org
44. Kravitz RL, Epstein RM, Feldman MD, et al. Influence of patients' requests for direct-to-consumer 
advertised antidepressants: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc. 2005; 293:1995–2002.
45. Mintzes B, Barer ML, Kravitz RL, et al. How does direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) affect 
prescribing? A survey in primary care environments with and without legal DTCA. Can Med 
Assoc J. 2003; 169:405–12. [PubMed: 12952801] 
46. Mintzes B, Barer ML, Kravitz RL, et al. Influence of direct to consumer pharmaceutical 
advertising and patients' requests on prescribing decisions: two site cross sectional survey. BMJ. 
2002; 324:278–9. [PubMed: 11823361] 
47. Allison-Ottey S, Ruffin K, Allison K, Ottey CC. Assessing the impact of direct-to-consumer 
advertisements on the AA patient: a multisite survey of patients during the office visit. J Natl Med 
Assoc. 2003; 95:120–31. [PubMed: 12760607] 
48. Parnes B, Smith PC, Gilroy C, et al. Lack of Impact of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on the 
Physician-Patient Encounter in Primary Care: A SNOCAP Report. Ann Fam Med. 2009; 7:41–6. 
[PubMed: 19139448] 
49. Allison-Ottey S, Ruffin K, Allison KB. “To do no harm” survey of NMA physicians regarding 
perceptions on DTC advertisements. National Medical Association. J Natl Med Associ. 2002; 
94:194–202.
50. Ball JG, Manika D, Stout P. Consumers young and old: segmenting the target markets for direct-to-
consumer prescription drug advertising. Health Mark Q. 2011; 28:337–53. [PubMed: 22054029] 
51. Datti B, Carter MW. The effect of direct-to-consumer advertising on prescription drug use by older 
adults. Drugs Aging. 2006; 23:71–81. [PubMed: 16492071] 
Becker and Midoun
Page 12
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clinical Points
•
Medications for psychiatric conditions are heavily advertised, but the effects 
of direct-to- consumer advertising (DTCA) on patient prescription requests 
and physician prescribing are not well understood.
•
A systematic search identified only four studies relevant to psychiatry that 
measured the effects of DTCA on patient and/or physician behavior at the 
point-of-service.
•
DTCA requests appear to be accommodated in the majority of encounters, 
promote higher prescribing volume, and have competing effects on treatment 
quality, though more methodologically strong studies are needed to increase 
confidence in conclusions.
Becker and Midoun
Page 13
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Flowchart of Study Selection
Becker and Midoun
Page 14
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Becker and Midoun
Page 15
Table 1
Quality Assessment Component Definitions and Ratings Adapted from the EPHPP Instrument
Component
Strong
Moderate
Weak
Selection Bias
Very likely to be representative of target population, 
participation > 80%
Somewhat likely to be representative of target population, 
participation > 60%
Unlikely to be representative of target population, 
participation < 60% or not described
Study design
Randomized controlled trial or controlled clinical trial
Comparative group design, cohort, case control, 
interrupted time series
Other designs or not reported
Blinding
Blinding of physicians and patients (and outcome assessors if 
applicable) to research question
Blinding of either physicians or patients
No blinding or not reported
Data collection
Tools have evidence of validity (content, construct, or 
discriminant) and reliability
Tools have evidence of validity, but reliability not 
described
No data on validity or reliability
DTCA definition
Definition clearly defined and replicable
Definition clearly defined but not easily replicable
No definition provided
aThe criteria in this table are based upon the original EPHPP criteria published in Thomas et al., 2004.
bAbbreviations: EPHPP = Effective Public Health Practice Project; DTCA = direct-to-consumer advertising
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Becker and Midoun
Page 16
Table 2
Confidence Rating Descriptions and Criteria Adapted from the GRADE System
Rating
Description
Criteria
High
Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of the effect
•
Several strong randomized controlled trials with consistently 
replicated results
•
In special cases, one large, strong quality multi-center trial
Moderate
Further research is likely to have an important effect on our confidence in the estimate of the effect and may change 
the estimate
•
One un-replicated methodologically strong study
•
Several studies with consistent results, each of which has 
methodological limitations
Low
Further research is very likely to have an important effect on our confidence in the estimate of the effect and will 
likely change the estimate
•
Several methodologically weak studies with consistently 
replicated results
Very low
Any estimate of the effect is very uncertain and our confidence is very low
•
Expert opinion, consensus guidelines, usual care, or case reports
•
No direct research evidence
•
One un-replicated methodologically weak study
aThe criteria in this table are based on the definitions of ratings in Guyatt et al., 2008 and the description of evidence ratings in the GRADE handbook.
bAbbreviations: GRADE = Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Becker and Midoun
Page 17
Table 3
Summary of Study Characteristics
Author, Year
Setting/Focus
Design
Participants
DTCA Definition
Outcomes
Results
Allison-Ottey et 
al., 2003
General practice clinics 
(n=8) across 5 states;
Psychiatry specific?: 
No
Observational point of 
service (POS);
Doctors recorded patient 
behaviors after patient 
visits;
Blinding: None
N = 11
physicians, 1065 
patients;
Participation rate: not 
reported
Doctors asked: Did the patient 
ask you about a specific 
medication that they saw 
advertised?
1)
Patient requests for DTCA
DTCA requests: 9% of 
patients
Kravitz et al., 
2005
Primary care clinics in 
3 cities across 2 states;
Psychiatry specific?: 
Yes, antidepressants
RCT;
Standardized patients 
(SPs) portray 2 conditions 
(depression/MDD, 
adjustment/ADJ) and 
make 3 requests (brand-
specific/B, general/G, 
none/N);
Blinding: Doctors and 
session raters
N = 152 physicians, 
298 visits;
Participation rate: 53–
61% across practices
SPs used scripts to request a 
DTCA drug by name (B 
condition) or by class (G 
condition; antidepressant seen 
on TV)
1)
Physician prescribing rates 
for MDD and ADJ
Reported consecutively 
for B, G, and N groups.
MDD prescribing rates: 
53%, 76%, 31%.
Adjustment prescribing: 
55%, 39%, 10%.
Minimally acceptable 
care for MDD rates: 
90%, 98%, 56%.
2)
Physician meeting minimally 
acceptable guidelines for 
MDD
Mintzes et al., 
2003
Primary care clinics 
across 2 cities in U.S. 
and Canada;
Psychiatry-specific?: 
No
Two-group observational 
POS;
Doctors recorded patient 
behaviors after 
consecutive patient visits 
in 2 settings;
Blinding: Patients
N (U.S. only) = 38 
physicians, 683 
patients
Participation rate: 
61% physicians, 69% 
patients
Doctors recorded if patient 
requested any prescription.
Two raters coded drug as 
DTCA if it was among 50 most 
heavily advertised in past year.
1)
Patient requests for DTCA
DTCA requests: 7.2% of 
patients
Prescribing rates: 78% of 
DTCA requests given 
prescription
2)
Physician prescribing rates
Parnes et al., 
2005
Primary care clinics 
(n=22) across one state;
Psychiatry specific?: 
No
Observational POS;
Doctors recorded patient 
behaviors after 
consecutive patient visits;
Blinding: Patients
N = 168 doctors, 
1647 patients;
Participation rate: 
22% of physician 
practices
Doctors recorded if patient 
requested any prescription.
Two coders rated if drug had 
been advertised recently.
1)
Patient requests for DTCA
DTCA requests: 2.6% of 
patients (3.5% made any 
request)
Prescribing rates: 72% of 
all requests given 
prescription
2)
Physician prescribing rates
aAbbreviations: DTCA = direct-to-consumer advertising
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Becker and Midoun
Page 18
Table 4
Methodological Quality Ratings of Studies Meeting Inclusion Criteria
Author, Year
Selection Bias
Study Design
Blinding
Data Collection
DTC Definition
Overall
Allison-Ottey et al., 2003
Weak
Weak
Weak
Moderate
Moderate
Weak
Kravitz et al., 2005
Moderate
Strong
Strong
Strong
Strong
Strong
Mintzes et al., 2003
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Weak
Strong
Moderate
Parnes et al., 2009
Weak
Weak
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Weak
J Clin Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
