 WHITE PAPER
Reimagining the Health Assessment
Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness Solutions, Inc.
Rich Bedrosian, Ph.D. 
Amy Bucher, Ph.D.
Tyler Steben
Scott Rigby, Ph.D.
Bobbi Coluni
Steve Bennett, M.S.
 CONTACT
CALL US: 855-206-3815
EMAIL US: JJHWS@ITS.JNJ.COM
VISIT US ONLINE AT:
JJHWS.COM/INSIGHTS/WHITE-PAPERS
©2015 Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness Solutions, Inc. 
 3
WHITE PAPER
Reimagining the Health Assessment
Rich Bedrosian, Ph.D.
Amy Bucher, Ph.D.
Tyler Steben
Scott Rigby, Ph.D.
Bobbi Coluni
Steve Bennett, M.S.
 4
Challenge
The traditional HA experience has a reputation 
for being onerous. Question sets are long and 
require users to access medical information 
that may not be close at hand. For web-based 
or mobile HAs, consumers increasingly have 
low tolerance for poor digital experiences. 
Additionally, HAs do not always provide users 
with actionable feedback to help change health-
related behaviors in a proven, science-based way.
Opportunity
There is an opportunity to better engage users 
in effective behavior-change interventions while 
preserving the integrity of data captured through 
the HA.
What We Did
Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness 
Solutions identified issues with the existing HA 
model – focusing on the need to improve user 
engagement while delivering a meaningful data set 
to economic buyers. We also recognized a need 
to think beyond traditional health risks to consider 
other variables influencing health and wellness – 
essentially transforming the tool from a “health risk 
assessment” or “HRA” to a health assessment or “HA”. 
We conducted a series of consumer studies to 
identify the most critical areas of improvement for 
increasing user engagement with an HA. Next, we 
conducted a rigorous statistical validation study to 
create a streamlined questionnaire designed to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction Health assessments (HAs) are established tools 
in the world of population health management. Used to gather 
data on a variety of health risks and behaviors through patient 
questionnaires, HAs have the potential to provide employers, 
health plans and researchers with rich data about the prevalence 
of particular health risks in a population. Over time, repeated 
administrations of HAs can provide valuable insight into the 
effects of health interventions and longitudinal trends in 
population health.
Data from HAs are particularly critical in light of findings that ten 
modifiable behaviors drive the vast majority of health care costs 
in the United States (Goetzel et al., 2012). Population-level data 
can help guide interventions, and personal data may help drive 
individual behavior change. People who participate in HAs may also 
make better use of health care services (Sieck & Dembe, 2014). 
 5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY (CONTINUED)
predict health risks. We also incorporated topics 
like mindfulness and vitality – topics not typically 
included in an HA but with important implications 
for health and wellness.
Results/Outcomes
After two rounds of user research, the statistical 
validation study, and an iterative design process, 
the result was My Health Discovery,
TM a fully 
reimagined health assessment with key features 
organized around three areas:
• Optimized question set. We dramatically  
reduced the number of questions asked while 
still providing a meaningful data set to economic 
buyers. The data set retains crucial constructs for 
maintaining fidelity to the National Committee 
for Quality Assurance (NCQA) certification 
requirements and calculating Health Enhancement 
Research Organization (HERO) risk scores, both 
frequent concerns for health plans and employers.
• Improved user experience. With a mobile-first 
design, users can easily engage with the assessment 
on any device.
• Enhanced application of behavioral science 
for engagement. We leveraged behavior science 
for engagement and applied motivational design 
principles, including game mechanics, to offer 
users elements of choice as they complete the 
assessment. Discovery-based feedback helps 
users gain new insights about their health and 
behaviors and provides positive feedback and 
encouragement alongside suggestions for 
mitigating health risks. Tailored and concrete 
action steps are offered throughout the HA 
experience and are designed as a natural pathway 
to additional coaching.
My Health DiscoveryTM was built for mobile and 
for use across multiple platforms. It provides an 
engaging, action-oriented HA experience for 
users and meaningful population health data for 
economic buyers.
Conclusion
Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness Solutions 
developed My Health DiscoveryTM as a fully 
reimagined health assessment. With more health 
plans and employers offering HAs to members, and 
consumers increasing their expectations around 
digital experiences, the limitations of traditional 
HRAs were becoming more evident.  
We saw an opportunity to better engage users and 
promote participation in effective behavior-change 
interventions while maintaining or improving the 
integrity of data captured through the HA for the 
organization providing it.  
We believe My Health DiscoveryTM represents  
a disruptive change in how the market thinks  
about health risk assessments. My Health 
DiscoveryTM moves beyond a focus on broad data 
sets to examine the strategic value of specific, 
targeted data. This new HA fundamentally 
improves the user experience and recognizes that, 
to be effective, an HA must go beyond evaluation 
to become an engaging, science-based tool that 
functions as a gateway to improved  
health behaviors.
 6
In this paper, we will cover the foundational 
framework upon which My Health DiscoveryTM is 
built, including perspectives on technology and 
design that determined product specifications. 
Then, we will review the research that Johnson & 
Johnson Health and Wellness Solutions conducted 
with end users to develop the new HA format. 
We will also provide an overview of the statistical 
validation research that was conducted to arrive at 
a questionnaire that minimizes user burden while 
providing employers and healthcare organizations 
rich, meaningful data about their populations. 
Finally, we will review some of the features and 
benefits of My Health DiscoveryTM that result from 
this research.
THIS WHITE PAPER
 7
INTRODUCTION
Health assessments (HAs) have a firm hold in 
the world of population health management. 
Used to gather data on a variety of health risks 
and behaviors through patient questionnaires, 
HAs have the potential to provide employers, 
health plans, and researchers with rich data about 
the prevalence of particular health risks in a 
population. Over time, repeated administrations of 
an HA can provide valuable insight into the effects 
of health interventions and longitudinal trends in 
population health.
Data from HAs are particularly critical in light of 
findings that ten modifiable behaviors drive the 
vast majority of health care costs in the United 
States (Goetzel et al., 2012). Population-level data 
can help guide interventions, and personal data 
may help drive individual behavior change. People 
who participate in HAs may make better use of 
health care services (Sieck & Dembe, 2014).
However, HAs also have a reputation for being 
onerous to users. The question sets may be long 
and require users to look up medical information 
that is not close at hand. In one study, nearly 
40% of people who declined to take an HA cited 
time concerns as their main reason (Colkesen 
et al., 2011). Additionally, unlike digital coaching 
programs, HAs typically do not provide much 
actionable feedback to end users. End users 
therefore do not derive useful information to help 
change health-related behaviors as a result of the 
HA experience.
Many of these issues arise from the needs of the 
HA’s economic buyer, whether that is a health plan 
or an employer. Economic buyers typically want a 
broad data set on their population, which drives 
the length of HA question sets. Unfortunately, 
if end users fail to complete the HA due to the 
burden of questionnaire length, economic buyers 
do not receive the data. An HA that users do not 
complete also misses an opportunity to engage 
uses in appropriate risk-reducing interventions.
Therefore, it is in the best interest of economic 
buyers to be judicious about what data are truly 
necessary to monitor their population and to help 
inform programs and tools that will help mitigate 
health risks and add the most value.
At the same time, one effect of U.S. health care 
reform has been an increasing consumerization of 
health care. Health plans now have an economic 
incentive to offer HAs and other wellness 
programs to their members (Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act, 2010), which means a 
proliferation of options for end users. As a result, 
consumers may have lower tolerance for barriers 
to digital health experiences. For example, users 
are not likely to be tolerant of digital programs that 
require a lot of effort to enroll or have non-intuitive 
navigation. Market forces are requiring companies 
that administer experiences like HAs to consider 
the benefits to users and not just data collection.
 8
My Health DiscoveryTM was built for mobile-first and 
for use across multiple platforms, recognizing that 
users increasingly reach for their smart phones as 
a primary device. Most HAs have historically been 
hard copy instruments adapted to a web format, 
rather than created to take advantage of web 
capabilities. It has only been in the last few years 
that some HAs have been developed specifically 
with an eye to web administration (e.g., Mills et al., 2011).
Now the smart phone and tablet era has arrived. 
By 2014 the majority of Americans owned smart 
phones (Pew Research Center, 2014). Over half 
of Americans surveyed said that their primary 
device for accessing the web was either a phone 
or a tablet, not a computer (Chaffey, 2014). 
There is also a growing segment of people who 
only access the web through mobile technology 
(McGrane, 2013). Finally, data show that about 
90% of web users transition between multiple 
devices to complete tasks (Google, 2012). These 
trends suggest a need to go beyond designing 
for just the web to designing specifically for the 
mobile web. Considering My Health DiscoveryTM 
from a mobile-first mindset allowed the Johnson 
& Johnson Health and Wellness Solutions team to 
think creatively about how to format and design 
HA questions. At the same time, designing for 
mobile resulted in a more visually interesting web 
experience for laptop and desktop users as well, 
helping to better engage users.
Engaging users in the HA is important for multiple 
reasons. Not only do economic buyers want users 
to complete the assessment, but also to provide 
complete, truthful responses in order to create 
a high-quality data set. From a public health 
perspective, the HA also has a higher likelihood 
of evoking behavior change if it engages users in 
the actual experience. An HA that helps motivate 
change, increase user receptivity to feedback, 
and inform action to mitigate risk is more likely to 
influence public health than one that does not.  
The design of the HA is critical in gaining that type 
of user engagement.
Design is not just the appearance of a product.  
It is also the underlying psychological framework 
around which a product’s elements are arranged in 
order to create the user’s experience. As a behavior 
 
science-based company, Johnson & Johnson Health 
and Wellness Solutions draws on motivational 
design to create products that engage users by 
supporting fundamental psychological needs.  
In fact, research suggests that digital experiences 
that support these needs do have a stronger 
“hook” for users (Przybylski, Rigby, & Ryan, 2010); 
that is why the motivational design approach is 
heavily used to create games and gamified programs.
Those fundamental psychological needs, as 
described by Self-Determination Theory (SDT; 
Ryan & Deci, 2000) are:
Autonomy. Autonomy refers to the human need for 
meaningful choice. The idea of meaningful choice is 
BUILT FOR HOW PEOPLE USE TECHNOLOGY
A BEHAVIOR CHANGE PERSPECTIVE ON DESIGN
 9
A BEHAVIOR CHANGE PERSPECTIVE ON DESIGN (CONTINUED)
particularly important; technology applications 
can offer users hundreds of choices from 
customizing color schemes to reorganizing 
elements on a dashboard, but these superfi
 cial 
decisions only minimally support people’s sense 
of autonomy. Autonomy is better fulfi
 lled when 
users engage with technology in fulfi
 llment of a 
highly personal goal. This is particularly critical in 
health behavior change, where many of the specifi
 c 
activities required to achieve outcomes may not 
be desirable (e.g., eating less of favorite foods, 
engaging in exercise rather than relaxing after 
work, or experiencing some medical treatments).
Competence. Competence is the need to learn 
and grow over time. Humans seek feedback 
from other people and their environments to 
benchmark their performance (Bandura, 1971); 
they become more engaged when that feedback 
either indicates successful growth or provides 
useful information for improvement (Senko & 
Harackiewicz, 2005; Vallerand, 1997). Competence 
can also be supported when the tasks presented 
to someone refl
 ect an optimal challenge level, one 
that stretches abilities without being so easy as to 
be boring. 
Relatedness. Human beings are highly social 
animals and crave connections with others. 
These connections may come in the form of 
actual person-to-person relationships, or they 
may be more conceptual, as in feeling understood, 
belonging to the same spiritual community, or 
perceiving important commonalities between 
yourself and others. Technology products can 
promote a sense of relatedness by enabling 
person-to-person connections or becoming a 
participant in a relationship with the user. Warm 
content tone, personalization, and responsiveness 
to the user’s input all help support relatedness 
(Alison, Alison, Noone, Elntib, & Christiansen, 2013; 
Sheldon & Filak, 2008; Visser, 2010).
The philosophy behind motivational design shares 
much in common with gamifi
 cation. Games hook 
people by pushing motivational levers – by 
providing people with a sense of meaningful choice 
(autonomy), helping them see progress and growth 
(competence), and connecting them with other, 
like-minded people (relatedness). In addition to 
providing support for these needs, a gamifi
 ed 
product specifi
 cally includes game mechanics, 
which include points, badges, and leaderboards 
(Werbach & Hunter, 2012). My Health DiscoveryTM 
selectively incorporates some game mechanics, 
including icons, animation, sounds, and levels that 
support a sense of progress. These mechanics are 
used only when they naturally support the user 
activities within the HA, as our design focus is more 
on fulfi
 lling the underlying psychological needs 
rather than including such mechanics for their own sake.
At each step in the development process, 
decisions about content, functionality, and design 
were compared against the best practices of 
motivational design. The principles of support for 
autonomy, competence, and relatedness were thus 
infused throughout My Health DiscoveryTM to help 
create an engaging and motivating user experience.
Figure 1: Feedback throughout the data collection process supports 
relatedness by creating a relationship with users, and autonomy by 
offering frequent choice points.
 10
Recognizing that different stakeholder groups 
and research methods yield different insights into 
the HA (e.g., Vosbergen et al., 2014), we conducted 
multiple rounds of research as part of the My 
Health DiscoveryTM development process.
Design Input: Stakeholder and End User 
Interviews. As a fi
 rst step in understanding the 
key issues to be addressed when reimagining the 
HA, a third-party team conducted two rounds of 
investigatory interviews. The fi
 rst included key 
internal Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness 
Solutions stakeholders representing different 
functional areas including behavior science, 
business development, product management, 
and customer support, as well as existing 
customers and other external health plan leaders. 
The intention of these interviews was to understand 
the business requirements necessary to satisfy 
economic buyers, as well as the historical 
challenges with the design and implementation 
of HAs. The second included end users who were 
exposed to the existing SUCCEEDTM HA for the fi
 rst 
time as part of the interview process. These users 
were queried about their expectations of the HA 
experience, their thoughts on the design and 
usability of the existing program, and ideas 
for improvements.
This initial interview research yielded four design 
principles to guide the development of the 
reimagined health assessment. The principles 
were derived from end-user feedback and 
aligned with business stakeholder concerns 
around gathering high-quality data, engaging 
end users, and improving end users’ health over 
time. The principles are also in alignment with 
the motivational design principles underlying the 
product design, especially around supporting 
relatedness in the way the user and product interact. 
These principles were:
• Show me I can trust you. HAs require end users 
to volunteer highly personal information, from 
biometric results to health-related behaviors to 
barriers to change. End users shared a concern 
about offering such data without understanding 
who would see it and how it would be used. In 
particular, end users do not want their health 
care providers or employers seeing non-de-
identifi
 ed health data. They also expressed a 
need to understand the origin of any health 
recommendations made to them, in order to 
judge their credibility and reliability.
• Accurately represent me. Users reported feeling 
like the assessment did not accurately differentiate 
between their health history and their more recent 
health behaviors. For example, one user felt that 
his health behaviors, which included a nutritious 
diet and regular exercise, were de-emphasized in 
feedback relative to his high cholesterol, which he 
attributed to family history. He felt de-motivated by 
the focus on factors he felt were out of his control. 
Another user had recently lost a great deal of 
weight but remained outside of a recommended 
weight range; he wanted a way to enter his 
historical data so that the assessment could 
recognize his weight loss accomplishments or 
understand the progress he had made.
STARTING WITH THE END IN MIND: END-USER RESEARCH
Figure 2: Question design takes advantage of the mobile format 
for visual interest and interactivity.
 11
STARTING WITH THE END IN MIND: END-USER RESEARCH (CONTINUED)
• Engage with me. Users wanted an HA  
experience that was interesting and interactive, 
beyond a typical multiple-choice questionnaire.  
Engagement encompassed multiple factors. 
One consideration was making the most of the 
technology available; users wanted the capabilities 
and conveniences of mobile devices reflected 
in the assessment design. Another factor was 
stating questions in a way that was relevant and 
comprehensible to the user. One user, for example, 
disliked a question about waist circumference 
because finding the answer required him to seek 
out a tape measure and use it. A second common 
challenge was estimating food serving sizes, 
since people rarely think about their meals in 
the same terms used in most HA question sets. 
Such activities may be a barrier to assessment 
completion, so alternative ways of gaining 
information would be helpful.
• Encourage me to act. Users wanted to leave 
the assessment experience with an accurate 
understanding of their health risks and ideas of 
steps they could take to mitigate them. They were 
dissatisfied with feedback that overemphasized 
factors they felt outside of their control (as with 
the user with the family history of high cholesterol), 
and preferred feedback that provided a clear 
avenue for action. 
These four principles were then used to guide the 
development of initial HA concepts and wireframes, 
which were then tested with additional end users.
Wireframe and Concept Testing. Once prototypes 
of My Health DiscoveryTM were developed, including 
new question formats that take advantage of 
the touch-screen capabilities of mobile devices, 
end-user testing was conducted with a group of 
participants demographically similar to the core 
user base seen in our health plan customers. The 
participants each completed a 45-minute, one-on-
one in-depth interview (IDI) with a moderator,
during which they interacted with a prototype 
version of the new HA as well as the existing 
SUCCEED SNAPSHOTTM HA (a condensed version 
of the full-length SUCCEEDTM instrument), which 
served as a comparison.
The order in which participants were exposed to 
the assessments was counterbalanced, with half 
seeing the new mobile HA first and the other half 
seeing the classic SUCCEED SNAPSHOTTM HA first. 
Regardless of which instrument they saw first, most 
users agreed that the new mobile design was more 
flexible and accessible and said they preferred it.
One key finding from this user testing was that 
users appreciate a balance between modern 
and traditional design. Including the typical HA 
questions orients the user to the experience and 
set expectations, while enhanced functionality 
on other questions provides a “wow” factor and 
increases engagement. Users also expressed 
a need for a design compatible with mobile 
browsing, as the smart phone is often the first 
technology they use to interact with a website.  
At the same time, they asked that functionality be 
simple and clean, so they did not need to spend 
time puzzling out how to use the program but could 
focus instead on the content of the assessment.
Another finding was that even though users found 
the new mobile HA engaging, they were not willing 
to download a native app devoted specifically to 
an HA. Native apps draw on phone battery life and 
storage, and users guard this real estate for apps 
they use frequently, as opposed to an HA they 
may access only a few times per year. This was 
one of many considerations that led to My Health 
DiscoveryTM being developed with responsive 
design for access through a web browser. Users 
are not required to download anything to access 
the tool, and are able to seamlessly move between 
devices to continue accessing My Health
 12
DiscoveryTM and the associated suite of digital 
health coaching programs. We believe this design 
choice mitigates possible barriers to assessment 
use associated with native apps.
Participants responded favorably to the 
positive language and encouraging tone in both 
assessments. Similar to the users from the first 
round of testing, these participants wanted to hear 
positive feedback for their accomplishments and 
encouragement in areas for development. Users 
specifically called out a sense of not being alone  
in their health improvement goals as a feature  
they liked.
Finally, participants provided numerous 
suggestions about optimizing the navigational 
experience within the HA, as well as design 
improvements. These ideas were carried forward 
into the final visual and architectural design.
As part of reimagining the HA, we conducted 
rigorous statistical testing to streamline and 
validate the question set used. Our goal for this 
work was to minimize user burden by asking only 
the most relevant and meaningful questions for 
each key health risk domain, ensuring relevant  
and high-quality data for economic buyers  
while improving the end-user experience.  
Statistical validation provides confidence that the 
questions included both measure the intended 
constructs and adequately predict related 
outcomes. In essence, the statistical validation 
allowed our team to select the minimum question 
sets that would accurately measure the health risks 
of interest to economic buyers and end users.
Generate candidate constructs and items. To that 
end, we first created an inventory of the critical 
health risk domains that My Health DiscoveryTM 
should include given the concerns of economic 
buyers and the need to identify risk and motivate 
behavior change for end users. For each domain 
area identified, we assembled a set of questions 
that could measure it, including items from the 
STARTING WITH THE END IN MIND: END-USER RESEARCH (CONTINUED)
INTELLIGENT STREAMLINED QUESTION SET: STATISTICAL VALIDATION RESEARCH
63
1
4
8
2
1
3
3
3
4
3
2
2
3
8
4
3
5
4
Final 
Question 
Set
Domain
Basic demographics 
Screenings & immunizations 
Biometrics 
Self-perceived health 
Personal health history 
Eating behaviors 
Alcohol consumption 
Smoking & tobacco use 
Physical activity 
Movement 
Pain 
Sleep 
Productivity 
Subjective vitality 
Stress coping 
Depression 
Mindfulness 
Values 
TOTAL ITEMS 
 13
INTELLIGENT STREAMLINED QUESTION SET: STATISTICAL VALIDATION RESEARCH (CONTINUED)
existing SUCCEEDTM HA, validated items from 
published scales, and face-valid equivalents 
designed by the Johnson & Johnson Health and 
Wellness Solutions team to take advantage of 
mobile capabilities. We included several new 
and innovative areas (or “domains”) to reflect 
our philosophy toward behavior change and 
motivation. Specifically, we added items around 
vitality, mindfulness, motivational quality, and 
values that we believe are necessary to understand 
in order to coach people through long-lasting 
behavior change. This comprehensive list of 
domains and corresponding items became the 
central instrument for the validation study.
Select a representative study sample. For the  
statistical validation study, we recruited a 
sample of approximately 1,700 people who were 
representative of the overall U.S. population in 
terms of demographic composition. They ranged 
in age from 18 to 80 years old, were 50% male, 
and came from all 50 U.S. states. Choosing a 
sample that is similar to the overall U.S. population 
maximizes the generalizability of the research 
results to our book-of-business customers.
Validate selected constructs. Once the participant 
sample completed the candidate construct 
instrument, we analyzed the results using principal 
components analysis (PCA), confirmatory factor 
analysis (FA), and related methods. These analyses 
are designed to assess whether a given item 
is accurately assessing the right construct. For 
example, if there are ten questions all intended to 
measure physical activity, these analytical tools 
can help determine which ones actually measure 
someone’s exercise habits and which ones are 
actually assessing related ideas (e.g., motivation  
to exercise or access to a gym).
The results of these analyses allowed us to select 
the candidate items for each domain that were 
measuring the constructs as intended. We retained 
the subset of questions for each domain that 
were most strongly correlated with the construct 
in the data set and were most consistent in their 
measurement of the desired construct.
Maximize predictive value. In reducing the 
candidate item list to select the final instrument, 
we also paid attention to how well each item 
predicted variation in outcome variables. One of 
the ultimate goals of any HA tool is to accurately 
predict health risks and outcomes, as well as guide 
economic buyer decisions about population-level 
interventions to offer. Accordingly, we prioritized 
questionnaire items with a higher predictive validity 
for meaningful outcomes related to key business 
metrics such as health care utilization and productivity.
 14
After the two rounds of user research, the 
statistical validation study, and an iterative design 
process, the result was a reimagined HA with 
several key features. These features are organized 
around three areas:
• Optimized question set
• Improved user experience 
•  
Enhanced application of behavioral science 
for engagement
Optimized question set. First, My Health 
DiscoveryTM boasts a dramatically reduced 
question set. The classic HealthMedia® 
SUCCEEDTM HA, the most robust instrument 
Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness Solutions 
offers, includes a maximum question set of nearly 
270 items. My Health DiscoveryTM has a maximum 
of 63 questions; most users will see a subset 
of those depending on the skip logic triggered 
by their responses (e.g., smoking status, 
pregnancy, etc). The reduced question set improves 
the user experience by reducing the amount of 
time needed to complete the instrument.
At the same time, we are able to provide a 
meaningful data set to economic buyers as a result 
of the statistical validation research, even with an 
overall reduced number of items. The fact that the 
questions that were retained were shown to be 
valid measurements of the intended constructs 
and signifi
 cant predictors of outcomes of interest 
means that we were able to maintain the data 
rigor desired by customers even while improving 
the end-user experience. The data set also retains 
crucial constructs for maintaining fi
 delity to NCQA 
certifi
 cation requirements and calculating HERO 
risk scores, both frequent concerns for health plans 
and employers.
Another important feature of My Health DiscoveryTM 
is the inclusion of items and domains that go 
beyond the typical HA. In addition to standard 
constructs related to health risks, we also assess 
vitality, mindfulness, and values. These topics 
have increasingly become the focus of behavioral 
science research on how mental or psychological 
wellness can infl
 uence physical health and well-
being (e.g., Boyle, Barnes, Buchman, & Bennett, 
2009; Consedine & Butler, 2014; Niemiec, Ryan, 
Patrick, Deci, & Williams, 2010), so including 
them in the assessment also recognizes and 
incorporates recent advances in understanding 
health. In general, our behavior-change philosophy 
emphasizes shifting motivational quality toward 
more intrinsic forms of motivation driven by values 
and purpose. We include questions to assess 
users’ motivational state and core goals. This 
information then supports our ability to create 
a user experience that supports fundamental 
psychological needs like autonomy, competence, 
and relatedness.
Improved user experience. With the focus on 
mobile-fi
 rst design, we were able to create an 
assessment experience that allows users to 
easily engage with the program on any device. 
Responsive design means that the visual elements 
on the screen re-organize and re-size automatically 
to display correctly on a smart phone, tablet, or 
computer. At the same time, the design takes 
advantage of the touch screen capabilities of 
THE REIMAGINED HEALTH ASSESSMENT
Figure 3: My Health Discovery categorizes questions as belonging 
to one of four areas, and allows users to choose the order and 
depth in which they explore each.
 15
THE REIMAGINED HEALTH ASSESSMENT (CONTINUED)
mobile devices (these questions adjust to be 
mouse-appropriate for computer users).
The overall design is clean and simple. Feedback 
from users who interacted with the prototype 
was used to improve the original navigational 
fl
 ow. The design is colorful and uses animated 
graphics to pique visual interest and guide the 
user’s interaction with the screen. Visuals also 
help reinforce message content, consistent with 
research demonstrating that images can enhance 
intention to take action on health risk information 
(Hollands & Marteau, 2013).
All content, including the questions, was also 
written to optimize the mobile experience. 
Questions and feedback are short and 
easy to understand. This style of content also 
accommodates users who have lower reading 
levels or simply dislike reading long blocks of text.
Finally, an important fi
 nding from the prototype 
testing was that users valued the positive, 
encouraging tone in HA feedback. Accordingly, 
My Health DiscoveryTM maintains a supportive tone 
rather than an emphasis on negative feedback. 
While the feedback alerts users to specifi
 c health 
risks they may have, it does so in a solution-
focused manner that emphasizes the user’s 
strengths and ability to make changes.
Enhanced application of behavioral science 
for engagement. User engagement in the HA is 
important for at least two reasons. It provides more 
and better-quality data to the economic buyer, 
and it increases the chances that the user will 
receive the information or feedback needed to help 
mitigate health risks. For the My Health DiscoveryTM 
experience, we implemented a number of features 
to improve user engagement with an eye both to 
completing the instrument and going on to engage 
in further interventions.
First, users are provided with elements of choice 
as to how they want to complete the assessment. 
The question set was divided among four 
categories: Bio (demographics and biometrics), 
Body (health history and medical treatments), 
Lifestyle (exercise, alcohol, and tobacco use), and 
Mind (mental health, stress management, and 
mindfulness). Users can choose to dive into the 
categories in any order they wish. Offering users 
choice about how to tackle the HA questions 
supports their sense of autonomy, one of the three 
basic levers of motivation (Ryan & Deci, 2000). 
Supporting autonomy has been shown to enhance
Figure 4: Feedback at the end of each level provides a sense 
of progression and accomplishment, reinforces positive health 
areas, and indicates opportunities for action.
Figure 5: Users are provided with concrete action steps to take 
to help improve their health risks in each area. This supports 
competence, builds self-effi
 cacy, and provides a natural bridge 
to future health coaching interventions.
 16
THE REIMAGINED HEALTH ASSESSMENT (CONTINUED)
engagement with digital experiences (Ryan, Rigby, 
& Przybylski, 2006). Importantly, because the HA 
includes calls to action, the choice offered within 
the design is not merely about sequencing the 
experience, but about a more fundamental decision 
on prioritizing health behaviors.
Then, within each category, there are two levels 
of questions. Level 1 is the most basic questions 
representing the minimal information needed to 
provide feedback, with Level 2 being deeper-dive 
items that can be used for more nuanced and 
tailored feedback.  The level design was chosen 
in order to provide opportunities for feedback 
throughout My Health DiscoveryTM, rather than in a 
single block at the end of the questionnaire. Some 
users may stop the questionnaire midway and 
never see feedback that may be useful, while also 
depriving the economic buyer of having that data 
in their population report. This new design ensures 
that users receive feedback steadily throughout 
the questionnaire experience and their data are 
stored at the end of each level, not when the full 
questionnaire is submitted. This ongoing feedback 
supports users’ sense of competence by signaling 
progress through the HA experience as well as 
reflecting back their “performance” in managing 
health risks.
The type of feedback offered at the conclusion 
of each level is discovery-based. That means it 
is designed to help users gain new insight about 
their own health and behaviors. The user testing 
revealed that people feel discouraged when they 
receive overwhelmingly negative feedback about 
their health, especially if it is related to factors 
they cannot control (family history) or morally-
tinged behaviors (e.g., overeating). In fact, digital 
engagement is enhanced when the experience 
allows users to close the gap between their 
actual and ideal selves (Przybylski et al., 2011); 
positive feedback that also indicates avenues for 
improvement can help accomplish that. 
Accordingly, the discovery-based feedback was 
designed to always provide some positive feedback 
and encouragement alongside suggestions for 
mitigating health risks. Moreover, the feedback 
is designed to highlight relationships between 
different health variables for users to help deepen 
their understanding of their health. For example, 
the body-mind connection is reinforced for users 
when they learn that their mindfulness can benefit 
attempts to change health behaviors, or how 
visualization techniques can reduce pain.
Some game mechanics, as appropriate, were also 
included in My Health DiscoveryTM to help support 
user engagement. One example is presenting the 
discovery-based feedback at the conclusion of 
each level of questions. This design incorporates 
the game mechanics of achievements, levels, 
and progression. Colors, images, and sounds are 
used to reinforce the sense of progress through 
levels and achievement at completion. My Health 
DiscoveryTM also enables economic customers to 
implement some of their own game mechanics, 
particularly related to rewards and bonuses via 
their incentives structure.
Historically, HAs are not considered interventions 
because their role is to collect data on health risks, 
not prescribe changes to mitigate them. Those HAs 
that do provide feedback to users typically offer a 
descriptive portrait of the user’s overall health, with 
an emphasis on rank-ordered risk areas. HAs that 
do not provide feedback also miss an opportunity 
to influence users’ behavior in a meaningful way.  
As part of a motivating and discovery-based 
process, we wanted to empower users to take 
action on their health risks, not just learn about 
them. Helping people to take action is also a way 
to support a sense of competence and build  
self-efficacy. Therefore, My Health DiscoveryTM 
offers concrete action steps throughout the 
experience that the user can try to improve their 
health risks and adopt healthy new behaviors.
 17
THE REIMAGINED HEALTH ASSESSMENT (CONTINUED)
The action steps were designed to align with  
what Fogg and Hreha (2010) call “dot” activities; 
that is, they are discrete, one-time activities that 
would be appropriate on a to-do list and can  
be checked off as complete in a relatively short 
time frame. For example, a user with a chronic 
condition requiring medication might be given an 
action step to transfer all of her prescriptions to a 
single pharmacy to streamline the refill process and 
gain visibility to potential interactions. Dot action 
steps can also be strung together by the user into 
a repeating pattern Fogg and Hreha (2010) call a 
“path” or a “span”; for example, someone learning 
to be more physically active may take a post-dinner 
walk every day for a defined period of time.
Finally, My Health DiscoveryTM was designed as a 
natural pathway to further interventions to improve 
health-related behaviors. Recognizing that many 
customers will implement the HA alongside other 
digital health coaching products, we wanted 
to create a seamless flow between the initial 
assessment experience and ongoing coaching.  
The incremental feedback and action steps 
included in My Health DiscoveryTM transition the 
user to our skills-based coaching model, which 
also uses action steps on a to-do list to organize 
behavior change. Based on findings that many 
HA users already take some action on their risks 
following feedback (e.g., Sieck & Dembe, 2014), we 
felt it critical to formalize an opportunity to help 
improve health risks as a result of the risk appraisal.
THE HEALTH ASSESSMENT OF THE FUTURE
We believe My Health DiscoveryTM represents a 
disruptive change in how the market thinks about 
assessing health risks. We are moving beyond a 
focus on the broad data set to the strategic value 
of the specific, targeted data collected. At the same 
time, we are focusing heavily on user experience  
in recognition that an effective HA must go beyond 
being just an evaluation instrument to being an 
engagement tool and gateway into improved  
health behavior. 
We also recognize that technology and health  
care will continue to evolve in the United States 
and worldwide. Therefore we do not see My Health 
DiscoveryTM as an end state, but rather a milestone 
in a continuous product evolution. Our post-launch 
plans include ongoing outcomes and user experience 
research to continue to refine the question set, 
design, and functionality of the solution so that  
it best bridges the needs of economic buyers and  
end users. 
 18
REFERENCES
Alison, L. J., Alison, E., Noone, G., Elntib, S., & 
Christiansen, P. (2013). Why tough tactics fail and 
rapport gets results: Observing rapport-based 
interpersonal techniques (ORBIT) to generate 
useful information from terrorists. Psychology, 
Public Policy, and Law, 19(4), 411-431. 
Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. New York: 
General Learning Press.
Boyle, P. A., Barnes, L. L., Buchman, A. S., & 
Bennett, D. A. (2009). Purpose in life is associated 
with mortality among community-dwelling older 
persons. Psychosomatic Medicine, 71(5), 574.
Chaffey, D. (2014, August 11). How important 
are digital communications in 2014? Retrieved 
from http:/
/www.smartinsights.com/
marketplace-analysis/customer-analysis/digital-
communications-use -statistics-2014/ 
Colkesen, E. B., Kraaijenhagen, R. A., Frings-Dresen, 
M. H. W., Sluiter, J. K., van Kalken, C. K., Tijssen, J. G., 
& Peters, R. J. (2011). Participation in a workplace 
web-based health risk assessment program. 
Occupational Medicine, 61(8), 586-589.
Consedine, N. S., & Butler, H. F. (2014). Mindfulness, 
health symptoms and healthcare utilization: 
Active facets and possible affective mediators. 
Psychology, Health & Medicine, 19(4), 392-401.
Fogg, B. J., & Hreha, J. (2010). Behavior wizard: 
a method for matching target behaviors with 
solutions. In Persuasive Technology (pp. 117-131). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Goetzel, R. Z., Pei, X., Tabrizi, M. J., Henke, R. M., 
Kowlessar, N., Nelson, C. F., & Metz, R. D. (2012).  
Ten modifiable health risk factors are linked to 
more than one-fifth of employer-employee health 
care spending. Health Affairs, 31(11), 2474-2484.
Google (2012, August). The new multi-screen 
world: Understanding cross-platform user behavior. 
Retrieved from https:/
/ssl.gstatic.com/think/docs/
the-new-multi-screen-world-study_research-
studies.pdf 
Hollands, G. J., & Marteau, T. M. (2013). The 
impact of using visual images of the body 
within a personalized health risk assessment: 
An experimental study. British Journal of Health 
Psychology, 18(2), 263-278.
McGrane, K. (2013, May 28). The rise of the mobile-
only user. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from 
https:/
/hbr.org/2013/05/the-rise-of-the-mobile-
only-us/ 
Mills, P. R., Masloski, W. S., Bashaw, C. M., Butler, 
J. R., Hillstrom, M. E., & Zimmerman, E. M. (2011). 
Design, development and validation of the 
Redbrick Health Assessment: a questionnaire-
based study. JRSM Short Reports, 2(9), 71.
Niemiec, C. P., Ryan, R. M., Patrick, H., Deci, E. L., & 
Williams, G. C. (2010). The energization of health-
behavior change: Examining the associations 
among autonomous self-regulation, subjective 
vitality, depressive symptoms, and tobacco 
abstinence. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 5, 
122-138.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 42 
U.S.C. § 18001 et seq. (2010).
Pew Research Center (2014). The web at 25 in 
the U.S. Available at: http:/
/www.pewinternet.
org/2014/02/25/the-web-at-25-in-the-u-s 
Przybylski, A. K., Rigby, C. S., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). 
A motivational model of video game engagement. 
Review of General Psychology, 14(2), 154.
 19
REFERENCES
Przybylski, A. K., Weinstein, N., Murayama, K., 
Lynch, M. F., & Ryan, R. M. (2011). The Ideal Self at 
Play: The Appeal of Video Games That Let You Be 
All You Can Be. Psychological Science, 23(1), 69–76.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination 
theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, 
social development, and well-being. American 
Psychologist, 55(1), 68.
Ryan, R. M., Rigby, C. S., & Przybylski, A. (2006). 
The motivational pull of video games: A self-
determination theory approach. Motivation and 
Emotion, 30(4), 344-360.
Senko, C., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2005). Regulation 
of Achievement Goals: The Role of Competence 
Feedback. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
97(3), 320.
Sheldon, K. M., & Filak, V. (2008). Manipulating 
autonomy, competence, and relatedness support 
in a game learning context: New evidence that 
all three needs matter. British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 47(2), 267-283.
Sieck, C. J., & Dembe, A. E. (2014). A 3-Year 
Assessment of the Effects of a Self-Administered 
Health Risk Assessment on Health Care Utilization, 
Costs, and Health Risks. Journal of Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine, 56(12), 1284-1290.
Vallerand, R. J. (1997). Toward a hierarchical model 
of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology, 29, 271-360. http:/
/
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60019-2
Visser, C. (2010). Self-determination theory meets 
solution-focused change: Autonomy, competence 
and relatedness support in action. InterAction-The 
Journal of Solution Focus in Organisations, 2(1), 7-26.
Vosbergen, S., Mahieu, G. R., Laan, E. K., 
Kraaijenhagen, R. A., Jaspers, M. W., & Peek, N. 
(2014). Evaluating 
a web-based health risk assessment with tailored 
feedback: what does an expert focus group yield 
compared to a web-based end-user survey? 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 16(1).
Werbach, K., & Hunter, D. (2012). For the win: How 
game thinking can revolutionize your business. 
Wharton Digital Press.
Links to other parties’ websites are provided solely for convenience. Johnson & Johnson Health and Wellness, Inc. is not responsible for the content of such websites, and 
users are solely responsible for compliance with any terms of use thereon. In addition, such links to third-party sites does not imply an endorsement of any third party or any 
website or the products or services provided by any third party.
*
 