 Behavioral Counseling to Promote a Healthful Diet
and Physical Activity for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention
in Adults Without Cardiovascular Risk Factors
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
IMPORTANCE Adults who adhere to national guidelines for a healthful diet and physical
activity have lower rates of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality than those who do not.
All persons, regardless of their risk status for cardiovascular disease (CVD), can gain health
benefits from healthy eating behaviors and appropriate physical activity.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2012 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation
on behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity for cardiovascular
disease prevention among adults without obesity who do not have cardiovascular risk factors
(hypertension, dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, or diabetes).
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on whether primary care–relevant
counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet, physical activity, or both improve health
outcomes, intermediate outcomes associated with CVD, or dietary or physical activity
behaviors in adults; interventions to reduce sedentary behaviors; and the harms of behavioral
counseling interventions.
FINDINGS Counseling interventions result in improvements in healthful behaviors and small
but potentially important improvements in intermediate outcomes, including reductions in
blood pressure and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and improvements in measures
of adiposity. The overall magnitude of benefit related to these interventions is positive but
small. The potential harms are at most small, leading the USPSTF to conclude that these
interventions have a small net benefit for adults without obesity who do not have
CVD risk factors.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends that primary care
professionals individualize the decision to offer or refer adults without obesity who do not
have hypertension, dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, or diabetes to behavioral
counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity. Existing evidence indicates
a positive but small benefit of behavioral counseling for the prevention of CVD in this
population. Persons who are interested and ready to make behavioral changes may be
most likely to benefit from behavioral counseling. (C recommendation)
JAMA. 2017;318(2):167-174. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.7171
Editorial page 130
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 175 and
JAMA Patient Page page 210
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
and CME Questions page 196
Related articles at
jamainternalmedicine.com
jamacardiology.com
Author/Group Information: The US
Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: David C.
Grossman, MD, MPH
(chair@uspstf.net)
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
(Reprinted)
167
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendations about the effectiveness of specific clinical
preventive services for patients without obvious related
signs or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
TheUSPSTFrecommendsthatprimarycareprofessionalsindividu-
alizethedecisiontoofferorreferadultswithoutobesitywhodonot
havehypertension,dyslipidemia,abnormalbloodglucoselevels,or
diabetes to behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and
physicalactivity.Existingevidenceindicatesapositivebutsmallben-
efitofbehavioralcounselingforthepreventionofcardiovasculardis-
ease(CVD)inthispopulation.Personswhoareinterestedandready
to make behavioral changes may be most likely to benefit from be-
havioral counseling (C recommendation) (Figure 1).
Seethe“UsefulResources”sectionformoreinformationonhow
this recommendation fits into the USPSTF’
s suite of recommenda-
tions on CVD prevention.
Rationale
Importance
Cardiovascular disease, which includes myocardial infarction and
stroke,istheleadingcauseofdeathintheUnitedStates.1Adultswho
adhere to national guidelines for a healthful diet and physical activ-
ity have lower rates of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality than
those who do not. All persons, regardless of their CVD risk status,
can gain health benefits from healthy eating behaviors and appro-
priate physical activity.2
Benefits of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that behavioral counseling
interventions provide at least a small benefit for reduction of CVD
risk in adults without obesity who do not have the common risk
factors for CVD (hypertension, dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glu-
cose levels, or diabetes). Behavioral counseling interventions have
been found to improve healthful behaviors, including beneficial
effects on fruit and vegetable consumption, total daily caloric
intake, salt intake, and physical activity levels. Behavioral counsel-
ing interventions led to improvements in systolic and diastolic
blood pressure levels, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C)
levels, body mass index (BMI), and waist circumference that per-
sisted over 6 to 12 months. The USPSTF found inadequate direct
evidence that behavioral counseling interventions lead to a reduc-
tion in mortality or CVD rates.
Harms of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
The USPSTF found adequate evidence that the harms of behav-
ioral counseling interventions are small to none. Among 14 trials of
behavioralinterventionsthatreportedonadverseevents,nonere-
ported any serious adverse events.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that behavioral
counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet and physical
activity have a small net benefit in adults without obesity who do
not have specific common risk factors for CVD (hypertension, dys-
lipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, and diabetes).
Although the correlation among healthful diet, physical activ-
ity,andCVDincidenceisstrong,existingevidenceindicatesthatthe
health benefit of behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet
andphysicalactivityamongadultswithoutobesitywhodonothave
these specific CVD risk factors is small.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
This recommendation applies to adults 18 years or older who are of
normalweightoroverweight,withaBMIbetween18.5and30(cal-
culatedasweightinkilogramsdividedbythesquareofheightinme-
ters) (Figure 2). It does not apply to persons who have known CVD
riskfactors(hypertension,dyslipidemia,abnormalbloodglucoselev-
els, or diabetes) or persons with obesity or who are underweight.
Behavioral Counseling Interventions
The USPSTF reviewed 88 trials with more than 120 distinct inter-
ventionsfocusedonpromotingahealthfuldiet,physicalactivity,or
both. Dietary messages documented in the interventions typically
focused on general heart-healthy eating patterns (increased con-
sumption of fruits, vegetables, fiber, and whole grains; decreased
consumptionofsalt,fat,andredandprocessedmeats).3,4Thisguid-
ance is generally consistent with major dietary recommendations,
including the US Department of Health and Human Services’2015-
2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.5 Similarly, national guide-
lines suggest that US adults should perform at least 150 minutes of
moderate-intensityoratleast75minutesofvigorous-intensityphysi-
calactivityperweek,oranequivalentcombinationofmoderate-and
vigorous-intensity physical activity, and also should perform
strengthening activities at least twice per week.6 Physical activity
messages used in the reviewed interventions emphasized gradu-
allyincreasingaerobicactivitiestorecommendedlevels,withmany
studies emphasizing walking.3
Interventions categorized as low intensity included print- or
web-based materials with tailored feedback and tools for behavior
change, ranging from 1-time mailings to monthly mailings over 3
years. Medium- and high-intensity interventions commonly
included face-to-face individual or group counseling or both, with
telephone, email, and text message follow-up. These more inten-
sive interventions ranged in duration from 4 weeks to 6 years, with
the active intervention period often lasting for 6 months. Interven-
tions were delivered by primary care clinicians, health educators,
behavioral health specialists, nutritionists or dieticians, exercise
specialists, and lay coaches. Behavioral change techniques included
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
168
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 goal setting and planning, monitoring and feedback, motivational
interviewing, addressing barriers to change, increasing social sup-
port, and general education and advice. Adherence to all interven-
tions was relatively high; adherence to high-intensity interventions
was generally lower than for less-intensive interventions. Overall,
there appeared to be a dose-response effect, with higher-intensity
interventions demonstrating greater and statistically significant
benefits. However, this dose-response effect was not seen for
interventions targeting physical activity only, among which some
low-intensity interventions demonstrated benefit.3
Additional Approaches to Prevention
The USPSTF recognizes the important contributions of public
health approaches to improving diet, increasing physical activity
levels, and preventing CVD. The Community Preventive Services
Task Force recommends several community-based interventions
to promote physical activity, including community-wide cam-
paigns, social support interventions, school-based physical educa-
tion, and environmental and policy approaches. It also recom-
mends programs promoting healthful diet and physical activity for
persons at increased risk for type 2 diabetes on the basis of strong
evidence of the effectiveness of these programs in reducing the
incidence of new-onset diabetes.7
Useful Resources
The USPSTF has evaluated the evidence on several aspects of CVD
prevention in adults with and without common risk factors, includ-
ingbehavioralcounselinginterventionstopromoteahealthfuldiet
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
169
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 and physical activity for CVD prevention in adults with cardiovas-
cular risk factors,8 screening for and management of obesity in
adults,9 and screening for abnormal blood glucose levels and type
2 diabetes mellitus.10
Inotherrecommendationstatements,theUSPSTFhadrecom-
mended screening for high blood pressure,11 use of statin medica-
tions in persons at risk for CVD,12 screening and counseling for
tobacco smoking cessation,13 and aspirin use in certain persons
for CVD primary prevention.14
In addition, the US Department of Health and Human Services
has published national dietary and physical activity guidelines for
Americans.5,6
Other Considerations
Although the evidence review that supports this recommendation
did not exclude studies that enrolled persons who were over-
weight or had obesity, the USPSTF had previously commissioned a
separate evidence review focused on screening for and manage-
ment of obesity in adults.15 Based on that review, the USPSTF rec-
ommendedofferingorreferringadultswithobesitytointensive,mul-
ticomponent behavioral interventions (B recommendation).9
Tohighlightthisbenefit,theUSPSTFdecidedtoexcludepersonswith
obesity from the current recommendation.
In a separate recommendation statement, the USPSTF recom-
mended offering or referring adults to intensive behavioral coun-
seling interventions to promote a healthful diet and physical activ-
ity if they are overweight and have hypertension, dyslipidemia, or
other CVD risk factors.8 The USPSTF recognizes that persons with
hypertensionordyslipidemiawhoarenotoverweightordonothave
obesity are likely to receive at least as great a benefit from behav-
ioral counseling as adults without these risk factors. The USPSTF
therefore suggests that health care professionals also consider of-
feringorreferringadultswhoarenotoverweightordonothaveobe-
sity but who have hypertension, dyslipidemia, or both to behav-
ioral counseling on an individual basis.
Research Needs and Gaps
The USPSTF found very limited evidence on the effect of be-
havioral interventions to reduce sedentary behaviors. Given the
link between sedentary behaviors and cardiovascular risk,
this is an important area for future research. Continued research
on individually tailored, computer-based interventions that
can be delivered via the internet, social media, and text messag-
ing is needed. Novel research methods should be applied to
Figure 2. Clinical Summary: Behavioral Counseling to Promote a Healthful Diet and Physical Activity for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Adults
Without Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Population
Adults without obesity who do not have known CVD risk factors
Recommendation 
Individualize the decision to offer or refer adults to behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and physical activity. 
Grade: C
Risk Assessment 
Interventions
Balance of Benefits
and Harms 
Other Relevant
USPSTF
Recommendations 
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.
Adults who adhere to national guidelines for a healthful diet and physical activity have lower rates of cardiovascular morbidity
and mortality than those who do not. All persons, regardless of their CVD risk status, can gain health benefits from healthy eating
behaviors and appropriate physical activity.
Dietary counseling interventions typically focused on general heart-healthy eating patterns (increased consumption of fruits,
vegetables, fiber, and whole grains; decreased consumption of salt, fat, and red and processed meats). Physical activity interventions
emphasized gradually increasing aerobic activities to recommended levels, with many studies emphasizing walking.
Interventions categorized as low intensity included print- or web-based materials with tailored feedback and tools for behavior
change, ranging from 1-time mailings to monthly mailings over 3 years. Medium- and high-intensity interventions commonly
included face-to-face individual or group counseling or both, with telephone, email, and text message follow-up.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet and physical
activity have a small net benefit in adults without obesity who do not have specific common risk factors for CVD (hypertension,
dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, and diabetes).
The USPSTF has recommendations on several aspects of CVD prevention in adults with and without common risk factors, including
behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthful diet and physical activity for CVD prevention in adults with cardiovascular
risk factors, screening for and management of obesity in adults, screening for abnormal blood glucose levels and type 2 diabetes
mellitus, screening for high blood pressure, use of statin medications in persons at risk for CVD, screening and counseling for tobacco
smoking cessation, and aspirin use for CVD primary prevention. These recommendations are available on the USPSTF website
(https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org).
CVD indicates cardiovascular disease; USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
170
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 understand longer-term health effects of behavioral interventions
and to improve understanding of the association between
changes in behaviors, changes in intermediate risk factors, and
improvements in health outcomes.
Discussion
Burden of Disease
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death for men and
womenintheUnitedStates.1Despiteoverallreductionsindeathfrom
heart disease and stroke over the past few decades, approximately
2200 persons in the United States die of CVD each day.16 Among
adults 50 years and older in 2012, fewer than 40% were perform-
ingtherecommendedamountofphysicalactivity(150minutesper
week of moderate activity or at least 75 minutes of vigorous activ-
ity), and fewer than 2% met criteria for an ideal diet. While nearly
50% of adults aged 20 to 49 years were meeting physical activity
guidelines, even fewer (1.3% vs 1.8%) were meeting dietary
guidelines.16 By not eating a healthful diet and being physically ac-
tive,USadultswithoutobesitywhodonothaveCVDriskfactors(hy-
pertension, dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, or diabe-
tes) increase their risk for developing these risk factors and for
developing CVD.
Scope of Review
The evidence review for this recommendation addressed whether
primarycare–relevantcounselinginterventionstopromoteahealth-
ful diet, physical activity, or both improve health outcomes, inter-
mediate outcomes associated with CVD, or dietary or physical ac-
tivitybehaviorsinadults.Becausethefocusofthisrecommendation
is adults without known CVD risk factors, the evidence review ex-
cluded studies that targeted persons with known CVD, hyperten-
sion, dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, or diabetes. In-
cluded intervention studies could enroll persons who were
overweightorhadobesity,butstudiesfocusingsolelyonweightloss
(and not healthful eating, being physically active, or both) were ex-
cluded. These types of interventions have been included in evi-
dencereviewssupportingotherUSPSTFrecommendations(seethe
“Useful Resources” section and the Table). All of the included stud-
ies reported at least 1 health outcome (ie, morbidity or mortality),
intermediateCVDoutcome(ie,systolicbloodpressureorlipidlevel),
or behavioral outcome (ie, amount of physical activity per week or
fruitandvegetableconsumption).3Allincludedinterventionswere
judged to be either feasible for delivery in a primary care setting or
referable from a primary care setting to community resources. In-
terventionsthatfocusedonsupervisedexerciseorcontrolleddiets
were not included.
The evidence review also examined interventions to reduce
sedentary behavior, as well as the harms of behavioral counseling
interventions.
Effectiveness of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
The evidence review included 88 trials (involving 121 190 individu-
als and 121 distinct intervention groups).3 Interventions that tar-
geted both a healthful diet and physical activity were evaluated in
23 trials, healthful diet only was evaluated in 24 trials, and physical
activity only was evaluated in 44 trials. Of the 121 trial intervention
groups, 40 were categorized as low intensity (solely print materi-
alsor�30minutesofcontacttime),55asmediumintensity(31min-
utes to 6 hours of contact time), and 26 as high intensity (>6 hours
of contact time).
Patient Health Outcomes
The USPSTF considered 4 trials (involving 51 356 individuals) that
reported on mortality,17-20 all of which focused exclusively on pro-
moting a healthful diet. Healthful diets were associated with re-
duced saturated fat, sodium, and total caloric energy intake and in-
creasedintakeoffruits,vegetables,andfiber.Fewdeathsoccurred
inthesetrials,andnosignificanteffectwasseeninall-causeorCVD-
related mortality. Three of these trials also reported on cardiovas-
cular events.18-20 One large trial found no significant difference in
major coronary heart disease events,20 while the other 2 trials
showedasignificantdecreaseinmyocardialinfarctions,strokes,and
revascularizationover10to15yearsoffollow-up(hazardratio,0.70
[95%CI,0.53to0.94]).Theresults,however,werenotstatistically
significantwhenrevascularizationwasremovedfromtheoutcome
measure.18,19
Tenstudiesexaminedtheeffectofbehavioralinterventionson
health-related quality of life. Seven of these studies exclusively tar-
geted increasing physical activity levels. Overall, these behavioral
interventionsappearedtoimproveself-reportedmeasuresofhealth-
related quality of life, although the effect was not consistent across
the 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey subscales.3
Table. Summary of Related USPSTF Recommendations
Risk Factors
Normal Weight (BMI 18.5 to <25)a
Overweight (BMI 25 to <30)a
Obese (BMI ≥30)a
No hypertension, dyslipidemia,
or abnormal blood glucose levels
Individualize the decision to provide
or refer to behavioral counselingb
Individualize the decision to provide
or refer to behavioral counselingb
Provide or refer to intensive
behavioral counseling9
Hypertension, dyslipidemia, or both
Individualize the decision to provide
or refer to behavioral counselingc
Provide or refer to intensive
behavioral counseling8
Provide or refer to intensive
behavioral counseling8,9
Abnormal blood glucose levels
or diabetes
Provide or refer to intensive
behavioral counselingd
Provide or refer to intensive
behavioral counseling8,10
Provide or refer to intensive
behavioral counseling8-10
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; USPSTF, US Preventive Services
Task Force.
a BMI calculated as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height
in meters.
bFrom this recommendation statement.
c From the “Other Considerations” section of this recommendation statement.
dThe USPSTF recommends screening for abnormal blood glucose levels as part
of cardiovascular risk assessment in adults aged 40 to 70 years who
are overweight or have obesity. Patients with certain risk factors (family
history of diabetes, personal history of gestational diabetes or polycystic
ovarian syndrome, or being a member of certain racial/ethnic groups
[African Americans, American Indians or Alaskan Natives, Asian Americans,
Hispanics or Latinos, or Native Hawaiians or Pacific Islanders]) may also be at
increased risk of diabetes at a younger age or at a lower BMI and should be
considered for screening.10
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
171
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 Intermediate Health Outcomes
The USPSTF considered 34 trials, involving more than 75 000 per-
sons, that reported on intermediate outcomes such as blood
pressure level, LDL-C level, and BMI.3 Most of the interventions in
these trials were categorized as medium or high intensity. When all
good- and fair-quality intervention trials were pooled, they
demonstrated statistically significant improvements in systolic
blood pressure level (−1.26 mm Hg [95% CI, −1.77 to −0.75]), dia-
stolicbloodpressurelevel(−0.49mmHg[95%CI,−0.82to−0.16]),
LDL-C level (−2.58 mg/dL [95% CI, −4.30 to −0.85]), total choles-
terol level (−2.85 mg/dL [95% CI, −4.95 to −0.75]), and adiposity
measures such as BMI (−0.41 [95% CI, −0.62 to −0.19]), weight
(−1.04kg[95%CI,−1.56to−0.51]),andwaistcircumference(1.19cm
[95% CI, −1.79 to −0.59]).3 There was no evidence of an associa-
tion between behavioral counseling interventions and improve-
ments in levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycer-
ides,orfastingglucosewhentheinterventionswerepooled.Among
the intermediate outcomes showing a positive association, dose-
response effects were seen, with increasing intervention intensity
associated with greater improvement in intermediate outcomes.
There was limited evidence for effects lasting beyond 12 months.
Health Behavior Outcomes
The USPSTF reviewed 86 trials, involving more than 115 000 per-
sons, that reported on behavioral outcomes such as fruit and veg-
etable consumption, salt intake, and minutes per week of physical
activity.3 Almost all trials used self-reported measures for behav-
ioral outcomes. Although substantial statistical heterogeneity pre-
ventedpooledanalysis,ingeneral,healthfuldietinterventionswere
associatedwithreducedsaturatedfat,sodium,andtotalcaloricen-
ergyintakeandincreasedfruitandvegetableandfiberintake.Physi-
cal activity interventions resulted in an increase of approximately
35 minutes of physical activity per week and 32% higher odds of
meetingrecommendedphysicalactivityguidelines.3Studiesthatlim-
itedenrollmenttopersonswhodidnotmeetphysicalactivityguide-
linesatbaselinehadgreaterincreasesinphysicalactivitylevelscom-
pared with studies that included persons who were already active
at baseline.3
Among the 32 trials reporting both intermediate and behavioral
outcomes,concordantchangesweregenerallyseeninbehavioralout-
comeswhenpositivefindingswereseeninintermediateoutcomes.3
Forexample,trialsthatfoundsignificantimprovementsinbloodpres-
sure levels generally also found significant reductions in measures
of sodium intake. Studies that found reductions in waist circumfer-
ence also reported increased physical activity levels. Several stud-
iesdemonstratedimprovementsinbehavioraloutcomesbutdidnot
find concordant improvements in intermediate outcomes.
The USPSTF found 4 trials that reported on measures of sed-
entary behavior.3 Although there were some small but significant
effects, the results were not consistent.
Potential Harms of Behavioral Counseling Interventions
Ofthe88trialsreviewedbytheUSPSTF,14specificallyreportedon
adverse events.3 No trials reported any serious adverse events re-
latedtothecounselingintervention.Eighttrialsreportedonthein-
cidenceofimportantpatientevents,includingfalls,injuries,andcar-
diovascular events. Seven trials found no difference between
intervention and control groups. One trial in women aged 40 to 74
years reported more injuries among intervention participants over
24 months of follow-up (19% vs 14%; P = .03). This trial also re-
portedmorefallsintheinterventiongroup(37%vs29%;P < .001).21
Fourothertrialsreportingfalls,2inolderadultsand2ingeneralpri-
mary care populations, found no difference between intervention
and control groups over 12 months of follow-up.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
The USPSTF assessed the overall effectiveness of behavioral coun-
seling interventions to promote a healthful diet and physical activ-
ity to be positive but small. Counseling interventions result in im-
provements in healthful behaviors and small but potentially
important improvements in intermediate outcomes, including re-
ductions in blood pressure and LDL-C levels and improvements in
measures of adiposity. Noting the concordance between behav-
ioral and intermediate outcomes and the apparent dose-response
effect of behavioral interventions on intermediate and behavioral
outcomes, the USPSTF concluded that the evidence is adequate to
establish the benefits of behavioral counseling interventions. The
USPSTF concluded that the overall magnitude of benefit related to
these interventions for persons without obesity who do not have
hypertension, dyslipidemia, abnormal blood glucose levels, or dia-
betes is positive but small. The potential harms are at most small,
leadingtheUSPSTFtoconcludethattheseinterventionshaveasmall
net benefit for this population.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from November 29, 2016,
toJanuary2,2017.Asmallnumberofcommentswerereceived,and
allwerereviewedbytheUSPSTF.Afewrespondentsencouragedthe
USPSTFtoissueseparaterecommendationsforbehavioralcounsel-
inginterventionstopromoteahealthfuldietandinterventionstopro-
motephysicalactivity.Otherrespondentsfeltthattheevidencebase
was different for the 2 types of behavioral counseling interventions
andsuggestedthattheUSPSTFassignseparateanddifferentgrades.
The USPSTF carefully reviewed the evidence on interventions that
promoted a healthful diet only, those that promoted physical activ-
ityonly,andthosethatpromotedboth.TheUSPSTFrecognizesthat
the evidence base for these interventions varies, and although the
evidence for behavior change was greater for interventions focus-
ing on physical activity, there were no meaningful differences in
intermediate or overall health outcomes. After reviewing the evi-
dence, the USPSTF reaffirmed its conclusion that there is a positive
but small benefit of behavioral counseling interventions to pro-
moteahealthfuldiet,physicalactivity,orbothinpersonswhodonot
haveCVDriskfactors.Patientsandhealthcareprofessionalscande-
cide together, based on patient interest and the availability of local
resources, whether a focus on a healthful diet, physical activity, or
both is most appropriate. Several comments agreed with the
USPSTF’
s inclusion of language reinforcing the established benefits
of healthful lifestyle behaviors and encouraged better definition of
the nature of behavioral counseling interventions. The USPSTF re-
tained its emphasis that all patients can gain health benefits from a
healthful diet and appropriate physical activity and added language
definingboth.TheUSPSTFalsoclarifiedthattherecommendedbe-
havioral counseling interventions are more intensive than just gen-
eral promotion of a healthful diet and physical activity.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
172
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This is an update of the 2012 USPSTF recommendation.22 In 2012,
the USPSTF recommended that primary care professionals selec-
tively provide or refer patients who do not have hypertension,
dyslipidemia, diabetes, or CVD to behavioral counseling to pro-
mote a healthful diet and physical activity rather than incorporat-
ing counseling into the routine care of all adults. The current rec-
ommendation is based on a new systematic evidence review that
included 50 trials from the previous review and an additional 38
new trials. The current recommendation is similar to the previous
recommendation. Given the recent publication of recommenda-
tions focused on behavioral counseling in adults at higher risk for
CVD,8 adults with obesity,9 and adults with abnormal blood glu-
cose levels or diabetes,10 the current recommendation focuses on
persons without these risk factors.
Recommendations of Others
In 2010, the American Heart Association23 recommended that cli-
niciansusecounselinginterventionstopromoteahealthfuldietand
physical activity that include a combination of 2 or more of the fol-
lowing strategies: setting specific, proximal goals; providing feed-
back on progress; providing strategies for self-monitoring; estab-
lishing a plan for frequency and duration of follow-up; using
motivationalinterviews;andbuildingself-efficacy.Therecommen-
dations suggest that intervention support should be offered to all
patients. Previous statements by the American Academy of Family
Physicians24aboutbehavioralcounselingtopromoteahealthfuldiet
andphysicalactivityhavebeenconsistentwiththoseoftheUSPSTF.
The American College of Physicians does not currently have a clini-
calrecommendationonbehavioralcounselingtopromoteahealth-
ful diet or physical activity in adults.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: May 18, 2017.
The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
Members: David C. Grossman, MD, MPH; Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS; Susan J. Curry,
PhD; Michael J. Barry, MD; Karina W. Davidson,
PhD, MASc; Chyke A. Doubeni, MD, MPH; John W.
Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS;
Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN,
MSN, MPH; C. Seth Landefeld, MD; Carol M.
Mangione, MD, MSPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD,
MPH; Michael Silverstein, MD, MPH; Melissa A.
Simon, MD, MPH; Chien-Wen Tseng, MD, MPH,
MSEE.
Affiliations of The US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) Members: Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle
(Grossman); University of California, San Francisco
(Bibbins-Domingo); University of Iowa, Iowa City
(Curry); Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts (Barry); Columbia University,
New York, New York (Davidson); University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (Doubeni); Virginia Tech
Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke (Epling); Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island (Phipps); Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts (Silverstein);
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois (Simon);
University of Hawaii, Honolulu (Tseng); Pacific
Health Research and Education Institute, Honolulu,
Hawaii (Tseng).
Author Contributions: Dr Grossman had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Authors
followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest
described at https://www
.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name
/conflict-of-interest-disclosures. All members of the
USPSTF receive travel reimbursement and an
honorarium for participating in USPSTF meetings.
No other disclosures are reported.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates that
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) support the operations of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff assisted
in the following: development and review of the
research plan, commission of the systematic
evidence review from an Evidence-based Practice
Center, coordination of expert review and public
comment of the draft evidence report and draft
recommendation statement, and the writing and
preparation of the final recommendation statement
and its submission for publication. AHRQ staff had
no role in the approval of the final recommendation
statement or the decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Justin A.
Mills, MD, MPH, and David Meyers, MD (AHRQ),
who contributed to the writing of the manuscript,
and Lisa Nicolella, MA (AHRQ), who assisted with
coordination and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for Health Statistics. Leading
causes of death, 2015. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs
/fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm. Accessed
May 1, 2017.
2. Ford ES, Bergmann MM, Boeing H, Li C, Capewell
S. Healthy lifestyle behaviors and all-cause
mortality among adults in the United States. Prev
Med. 2012;55(1):23-27.
3. Patnode CD, Evans CV, Senger CA, Redmond N,
Lin JS. Behavioral Counseling to Promote a Healthful
Diet and Physical Activity for Cardiovascular Disease
Prevention in Adults Without Known Cardiovascular
Disease Risk Factors: An Updated Systematic Review
for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Evidence
Synthesis No. 152. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2017. AHRQ
publication 15-05222-EF-1.
4. Patnode CD, Evans CV, Senger CA, Redmond N,
Lin JS. Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful
diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults without known cardiovascular
disease risk factors: updated evidence report and
systematic review for the US Preventive Services
Task Force. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.3303
5. US Department of Health and Human Services
and US Department of Agriculture. 2015–2020
dietary guidelines for Americans, eighth edition.
https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015
/guidelines/. 2015. Accessed May 1, 2017.
6. US Department of Health and Human Services.
2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans.
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and
Human Services; 2008. ODPHP publication U0036.
7. Community Preventive Services Task Force.
Diabetes: combined diet and physical activity
promotion programs to prevent type 2 diabetes
among people at increased risk. https://www
.thecommunityguide.org/findings/diabetes
-combined-diet-and-physical-activity-promotion
-programs-prevent-type-2-diabetes. 2014.
Accessed May 1, 2017.
8. LeFevre ML; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet
and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk
factors: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med.
2014;161(8):587-593.
9. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for and management of obesity in adults:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;
157(5):373-378.
10. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for abnormal blood glucose and type 2
diabetes mellitus: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163(11):861-868.
11. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for high blood pressure in adults: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(10):778-786.
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
173
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
 12. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al; US Preventive Services Task Force. Statin use
for the primary prevention of cardiovascular
disease in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA. 2016;316(19):
1997-2007.
13. Siu AL; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for
tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including
pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163(8):622-634.
14. Bibbins-Domingo K; U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Aspirin use for the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164(12):836-845.
15. LeBlanc E, O’
Connor E, Whitlock EP, Patnode C,
Kapka T. Screening for and Management of Obesity
and Overweight in Adults. Evidence Synthesis No. 89.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality; 2011. AHRQ publication 11-05159-EF-1.
16. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al;
Writing Group Members; American Heart
Association Statistics Committee; Stroke Statistics
Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke
statistics—2016 update: a report from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;133(4):e38-e360.
17. Hypertension Prevention Trial Research Group.
The Hypertension Prevention Trial: three-year
effects of dietary changes on blood pressure. Arch
Intern Med. 1990;150(1):153-162.
18. Whelton PK, Appel L, Charleston J, et al. The
effects of nonpharmacologic interventions on
blood pressure of persons with high normal levels:
results of the Trials of Hypertension Prevention,
phase I. JAMA. 1992;267(9):1213-1220.
19. Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative
Research Group. Effects of weight loss and sodium
reduction intervention on blood pressure and
hypertension incidence in overweight people with
high-normal blood pressure: the Trials of
Hypertension Prevention, phase II. Arch Intern Med.
1997;157(6):657-667.
20. Tinker LF, Bonds DE, Margolis KL, et al;
Women’
s Health Initiative. Low-fat dietary pattern
and risk of treated diabetes mellitus in
postmenopausal women: the Women’
s Health
Initiative randomized controlled dietary
modification trial. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(14):
1500-1511.
21. Lawton BA, Rose SB, Elley CR, Dowell AC,
Fenton A, Moyes SA. Exercise on prescription for
women aged 40-74 recruited through primary care:
two year randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2008;
337:a2509.
22. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Behavioral counseling interventions to promote a
healthful diet and physical activity for
cardiovascular disease prevention in adults: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(5):367-371.
23. Artinian NT, Fletcher GF, Mozaffarian D, et al;
American Heart Association Prevention Committee
of the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing.
Interventions to promote physical activity and
dietary lifestyle changes for cardiovascular risk
factor reduction in adults: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2010;122(4):406-441.
24. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical preventive service recommendation:
healthful diet and physical activity to prevent
cardiovascular disease (CVD). http://www.aafp.org
/patient-care/clinical-recommendations/all/diet-cvd
.html. 2012. Accessed May 1, 2017.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Behavioral Counseling for CVD Prevention
174
JAMA
July 11, 2017
Volume 318, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jama.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ on 07/11/2017
