 Supplement
4 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
In response to the emergence, rapid spread, and sustained 
transmission of Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in West Africa 
during 2014–2016, CDC worked closely with other U.S. 
government agencies, ministries of health (MoHs), the World 
Health Organization (WHO), and other international partners 
as part of an intensive effort to end the epidemic (Figure 1). 
Multiple factors led to the unprecedented scale of this epidemic, 
including the wide geographic spread of cases, slow response 
by the international community, population intermixing and 
mobility, disease transmission in densely populated urban 
areas, poor public health and societal infrastructure, local 
unfamiliarity with the disease, and distrust of government 
authorities and health care workers (HCWs). As of March 31, 
2016, WHO had reported 28,652 suspected, probable, and 
confirmed Ebola cases, including 11,325 deaths, far exceeding 
the combined total number of cases reported in approximately 
20 previous outbreaks since the 1970s (Table). This report 
presents an overview of previous Ebola outbreaks and the 
2014–2016 epidemic and observations about the epidemic’s 
implications for future public health responses.
Background
Ebola Outbreaks and Control Strategies, 
1976–2014
Ebola is a rare and often fatal illness caused by viruses 
of the family Filoviridae, genus Ebolavirus, which has five 
viruses: Ebola virus (EBOV), Sudan virus, Bundibugyo virus, 
Overview, Control Strategies, and Lessons Learned in the CDC 
Response to the 2014–2016 Ebola Epidemic
Beth P
. Bell, MD1
Inger K. Damon, MD, PhD2
Daniel B. Jernigan, MD3
Thomas A. Kenyon, MD4
Stuart T. Nichol, PhD2
John P
. O’Connor, MS1
Jordan W. Tappero, MD5
1Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
2Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
3Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
4Office of the Director, Center for Global Health, CDC
5Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
Corresponding author: Beth P
. Bell, Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-3967; 
E-mail: BBell@cdc.gov.
Summary
During 2014–2016, CDC, working with U.S. and international partners, mounted a concerted response to end the unprecedented epidemic 
of Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in West Africa. CDC’s response, which was the largest in the agency’s history, was directed simultaneously at 
controlling the epidemic in West Africa and strengthening preparedness for Ebola in the United States. Although experience in responding to 
approximately 20 Ebola outbreaks since 1976 had provided CDC and other international responders an understanding of the disease and 
how to stop its spread, the epidemic in West Africa presented new and formidable challenges. The initial response was slow and complicated 
for several reasons, including wide geographic spread of cases, poor public health and societal infrastructure, sociodemographic factors, local 
unfamiliarity with Ebola, and distrust of government and health care workers. In the United States, widespread public alarm erupted 
after Ebola cases were diagnosed in Dallas, Texas, and New York City, New York. CDC, in collaboration with its U.S. and international 
counterparts, applied proven public health strategies as well as innovative new approaches to help control the Ebola epidemic in West Africa 
and strengthen public health readiness in the United States. Lessons learned include the recognition that West African and other countries 
need effective systems to detect and stop infectious disease threats, the need for stronger international surge capacity for times when countries 
are overwhelmed by an outbreak, and the importance of improving infection prevention and control in health care settings. 
 The activities summarized in this report would not have been possible without collaboration with many U.S. and international partners 
(http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/partners.html).
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Taï Forest virus, and Reston virus. All viruses cause disease in 
humans except Reston virus, which has caused asymptomatic 
infections in humans but disease in nonhuman primates only. 
The natural wildlife host of EBOV has not been definitively 
identified; however, evidence suggests fruit bats of the family 
Pteropodidae might be a reservoir. Ebola was first recognized 
in 1976 during two near-simultaneous outbreaks: one caused 
by EBOV in Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo 
[DRC]) that comprised 318 cases and 280 deaths (case-fatality 
rate [CFR] = 88%), and the other caused by Sudan virus in 
Sudan that comprised 284 cases and 151 deaths (CFR = 53%). 
These and subsequent sporadic outbreaks of Ebola in Eastern 
and Central African nations (DRC, seven; Uganda, five; 
Gabon, four; and Republic of the Congo and Sudan [now 
South Sudan], three each) had CFRs of approximately 
25%–90%; occurred in resource-poor settings where health 
care, transportation, and other services are limited; and lasted 
from several weeks to approximately 3 months (1) (Table).
EBOV is thought to be introduced into humans when a 
person has direct contact with blood, body fluids, or organs 
of infected animals (e.g., fruit bats, chimpanzees, or gorillas) 
or prepares meat from infected animals. Infection in human 
communities is sustained through person-to-person contact, 
often from symptomatic persons to caregivers in homes and 
health care settings, where infection-control practices are 
inadequate and personal protective equipment is unavailable 
FIGURE 1. CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic, from the first reported cases through the first year after CDC’s EOC was activated, and 
approximate number of reported new cases of Ebola per week — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, March 2014–July 2015
Abbreviations: Ebola = Ebola virus disease; EOC = Emergency Operations Center. 
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Mar
2014
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
2015
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Guinea
Sierra Leone
Liberia
Reported no. of new cases of Ebola per week
Pre-EOC activation
First quarter EOC
Second quarter EOC
Third quarter EOC
Fourth quarter EOC
 
Spread to Liberia and Sierra Leone
Spread to Nigeria and Senegal; 
CDC teams help stop the outbreak
Traveler with Ebola comes to United States (Dallas); two nurses infected
CDC expands 
Ebola testing 
among U.S. 
laboratories
CDC organizes health care worker safety course in Anniston, Alabama, for West Africa volunteers
Rapid Isolation and Treatment of Ebola (RITE) teams 
help rapidly control new outbreaks in Liberia
Spread to Mali; CDC teams help 
stop the outbreak
CDC deploys 1,000th 
staf member
Liberia outbreak declared 
over for the frst time
Early reports of Ebola 
from Guinea; CDC feld 
team deployed
CDC EOC 
activated; CDC 
deployments 
surge
CDC issues Level 3 
travel warnings for 
West Africa (i.e., avoid 
all nonessential travel 
to West Africa)
CDC laboratory 
established in 
Sierra Leone
CDC Director 
Dr. Thomas 
Frieden travels 
to Guinea, 
Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone
Microplanning 
workshops with 
county leaders 
held in Liberia
CDC implements enhanced 
screening at airports; new 
tracking program for people 
coming from countries with 
Ebola outbreaks
CDC works with 
states to improve 
hospital readiness
CDC recommends reduced 
screening for passengers 
from Liberia
New cases 
reported 
in Liberia
CDC marks frst year since 
EOC was activated 
 Supplement
6 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
or in short supply. In some previous outbreaks (e.g., Kikwit, 
Zaire, in 1995), the infection cycle was amplified by explosive 
spread of disease in overcrowded local hospitals, underscoring 
the role of nosocomial transmission. Because corpses have high 
viral loads, funerals and burials accompanied by ceremonial 
washing and touching of deceased persons often are responsible 
for multiple chains of transmission.
During the first reported Ebola outbreak in Zaire in 1976, an 
international response team developed an early strategy to stop 
the outbreak, focusing on the identification, isolation, and care 
of persons with Ebola symptoms; meticulous contact tracing; 
engagement with community leaders; culturally sensitive and 
safe burials; effective infection control; and reliable laboratory 
testing (2). This strategy, further refined with accumulated 
experience, has been used to successfully control approximately 
20 Ebola outbreaks, including DRC’s seventh outbreak in 
November 2014 (3).
Ebola Symptoms, Tests, Treatment,  
and Transmission
Ebola patients typically experience fever, fatigue, muscle 
pain, and headache, followed by variable signs and symptoms 
that include vomiting, diarrhea, rash, and hemorrhagic 
diathesis resulting in external bleeding, internal bleeding, or 
both. In severe cases, multiorgan dysfunction (e.g., hepatic 
damage, renal failure, and central nervous system involvement) 
can develop, leading to shock and death (4). The incubation 
period is 2–21 days; symptoms usually appear within 8–10 days 
after exposure to EBOV. In the initial clinical phase, Ebola 
can be difficult to distinguish from other infectious diseases, 
including malaria, typhoid fever, and Lassa fever.
EBOV infection most commonly is confirmed by testing 
blood by using a real-time reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. Genetic sequencing is 
increasingly useful for describing the molecular epidemiologic 
characteristics and other features of Ebola outbreaks. No 
proven vaccine or specific treatment for Ebola exists; however, 
human trials of potential vaccines and therapies are under 
way. Early supportive care with rehydration (e.g., providing 
intravenous fluids and balancing electrolytes) and treatment 
of specific symptoms improve chances for survival.
Human-to-human transmission of EBOV occurs through 
direct contact with the blood or body fluids (e.g., urine, saliva, 
sweat, feces, vomit, breast milk, or semen) of symptomatic or 
deceased persons or with objects (e.g., needles and syringes) 
contaminated with body fluids from an infected person. An 
infected person becomes contagious once symptoms appear, 
and the level of infectivity increases dramatically as the disease 
progresses and the infected person’s viral load increases. The 
TABLE. Number of cases and deaths during Ebola outbreaks, excluding the 2014–2016 epidemic — worldwide, 1976–2014
Country
Year
Town
No. of cases
No. of deaths
Species
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2014
Multiple
66
49
Zaire ebolavirus
Uganda
2012
Luwero District
6*
3*
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2012
Isiro Health Zone
36*
13*
Bundibugyo ebolavirus
Uganda
2012
Kibaale District
11*
4*
Sudan ebolavirus
Uganda
2011
Luwero District
1
1
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2008
Luebo
32
15
Zaire ebolavirus
Uganda
2007
Bundibugyo
149
37
Bundibugyo ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo
2007
Luebo
264
187
Zaire ebolavirus
South Sudan†
2004
Yambio
17
7
Zaire ebolavirus
Republic of the Congo
2003
Mbomo
35
29
Zaire ebolavirus
Republic of the Congo
2002
Mbomo
143
128
Zaire ebolavirus
Republic of the Congo
2001
Not specified
57
43
Zaire ebolavirus
Gabon
2001
Libreville
65
53
Zaire ebolavirus
Uganda
2000
Gulu
425
224
Sudan ebolavirus
South Africa
1996
Johannesburg
2
1
Zaire ebolavirus
Gabon
1996
Booue
60
45
Zaire ebolavirus
Gabon
1996
Mayibout
37
21
Zaire ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo§
1995
Kikwit
315
250
Zaire ebolavirus
Côte d’Ivoire
1994
Tai Forest
1
0
Taï Forest ebolavirus
Gabon
1994
Mekouka
52
31
Zaire ebolavirus
South Sudan†
1979
Nzara
34
22
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo§
1977
Tandala
1
1
Zaire ebolavirus
South Sudan†
1976
Nzara
284
151
Sudan ebolavirus
Democratic Republic of the Congo§
1976
Yambuku
318
280
Zaire ebolavirus
Source: CDC. Outbreaks chronology: Ebola virus disease. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/history/chronology.html 
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* Numbers reflect laboratory-confirmed cases only.
† Formerly part of Sudan.
§ Formerly Zaire.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
fluids, skin, and other tissues of persons who die of Ebola are 
extremely infectious and pose a hazard to anyone who has 
unprotected contact with the body, including caregivers and 
people preparing the body for burial. EBOV can be found in 
the semen of some men who have recovered from the disease, 
and CDC has recommended that contact with semen from 
male survivors be avoided until more is known about infectivity 
of body fluids. If male survivors have sex, they are advised to 
use a condom correctly and consistently (5).
Emergence in West Africa: A Regional 
and Global Threat
The first Ebola cases in West Africa were reported by WHO 
on March 23, 2014, in the forested rural region of southeastern 
Guinea bordering Liberia and Sierra Leone, where multiple 
unrecognized chains of transmission had festered for months 
(6). The lack of surveillance systems and other public health 
infrastructure impeded the ability of affected countries to 
effectively detect and respond to the rapidly evolving outbreak. 
As the outbreak spread to urban areas and expanded into 
an epidemic, the number of cases quickly overwhelmed 
the limited isolation and treatment capacity in the three 
countries affected, exacerbated by strained laboratory testing 
capacity. Poor infection control resulted in transmission in 
health care facilities, including a large number of infections 
and deaths among HCWs, and collapse of the health care 
system. Inadequate disease surveillance and reporting further 
hampered control efforts, resulting in incomplete information 
about the extent of the outbreak, particularly in difficult-
to-reach areas. Sociodemographic factors that contributed 
to virus spread included high mobility and intermixing of 
populations (e.g., ease of travel across land and river borders) 
and general unfamiliarity with Ebola and how to respond to 
Ebola outbreaks. By late July, Ebola had reached the urban 
and densely populated capitals of all three countries, the 
first time the disease had caused widespread transmission in 
crowded metropolitan areas. On August 8, 2014, with case 
counts steadily increasing, WHO declared the escalating 
Ebola situation a Public Health Emergency of International 
Concern (7). By March 2016, WHO had reported cumulative 
cases throughout Liberia and Sierra Leone and most of the 
prefectures in Guinea (Figure 2).
CDC’s Role and Accomplishments
CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic was the largest 
emergency response in the agency’s history (8). During CDC’s 
activation of its Emergency Operations Center (EOC) during 
July 9, 2014–March 31, 2016, approximately 4,000 CDC 
staff members directly participated in the response, and of 
these, 1,897 deployed to Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and 
other African countries affected by the epidemic (e.g., Nigeria 
and Mali). CDC’s deployed teams included specialists in 
epidemiology, infection control, laboratory analysis, medical 
care, emergency management, information technology, health 
communication, behavioral science, anthropology, logistics, 
planning, and other disciplines.
Response in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone
Before the Ebola epidemic, CDC’s presence in Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone was limited to technical support for a 
small number of disease-specific disease control programs (e.g., 
malaria and polio) and vaccination campaigns (e.g., measles and 
yellow fever). In Liberia, CDC also supported the collection of 
reproductive health data to improve family planning, maternal 
health, and gender-based violence, as well as programs to help 
United Nations peacekeepers avoid human immunodeficiency 
virus infection. In Sierra Leone, CDC evaluated the impact of 
community case management of childhood diseases programs. 
Though these programs provided some support for public health 
systems, they did not include efforts to strengthen infectious 
disease surveillance with laboratory diagnostic testing. Therefore, 
CDC’s response in these three countries required that CDC 
experts mobilize from other international and U.S. CDC 
locations. CDC teams deploying to West Africa early in the 
response established working relationships with each country’s 
MoH, WHO, and other international partners. In addition to 
CDC country teams, CDC staff members in West Africa were 
part of the Disaster Assistance Response Teams (DARTs) of the 
U.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Foreign 
Disaster Assistance, with CDC leading the public health and 
medical care teams within the DARTs.
A priority was to make response activities faster and 
more effective. To strengthen coordination among various 
government and partner organizations in Guinea, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone, CDC helped set up national EOCs by using an 
incident management system (IMS) (9). Teams specializing 
in areas such as surveillance, case management, infection 
control, and social mobilization* met daily to report the 
status of assigned tasks and provide updates on the epidemic 
to an incident manager, who in turn updated country leaders. 
Support for EOC buildings, staffing, and operations was 
provided in large part by the CDC Foundation and by the 
DARTs and WHO.
* Social mobilization is a process that uses dialogue to encourage communities 
and help them work together to overcome a disease or achieve a social objective.
 Supplement
8 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Drawing on experience from previous Ebola responses, 
CDC worked with governments and partners to detect and 
break chains of transmission and end the epidemic. Because 
lack of reliable epidemiologic data was a major challenge from 
the outset, the teams quickly began to improve surveillance, 
laboratory, and information management systems to collect, 
analyze, and report data needed to guide response actions (10). 
CDC field teams regularly traveled to districts and villages 
to work with community teams on patient identification 
and isolation, contact tracing, infection control, social 
mobilization, and safe burials. However, as the epidemic in 
West Africa evolved, the large numbers of new cases and 
contacts each day overwhelmed response efforts. Effective 
isolation of patients became increasingly difficult as hospitals, 
clinics, and temporary Ebola treatment units (ETUs) were 
filled beyond capacity; persons with new suspected cases, as 
FIGURE 2. Number of cumulative confirmed Ebola cases during the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic, by county (Liberia), district (Sierra Leone), and 
prefecture (Guinea) — Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, as of March 27, 2016*
Source: World Health Organization. Ebola situation reports. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. http://apps.who.int/ebola/ebola-situation-reports
Abbreviation: Ebola = Ebola virus disease.
* After March 27, 2016, an additional three confirmed cases were reported in Liberia, and three probable cases were reported in Guinea.
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
well as symptomatic contacts, frequently were turned away 
from ETUs, thereby fostering new chains of transmission. 
Suspicion of ETUs as a possible source for infection was 
common, making some persons reluctant to seek care even 
when beds were available. In addition, many HCWs became 
infected and died, contributing to the collapse of an already 
limited and compromised health care system. The growing 
numbers of contacts inundated response teams’ capacity to 
identify and monitor contacts. Chains of Ebola transmission 
evolved rapidly, and responders often were unable to identify 
how cases were epidemiologically linked.
In September 2014, CDC published results of a modeling 
analysis that estimated that approximately 555,000 Ebola 
cases (1.4 million cases when corrected for underreporting) 
could occur in Liberia and Sierra Leone by January 20, 2015, 
if approximately 70% of all persons with new cases were not 
effectively isolated (11). The model also showed that the speed 
with which this 70% target was reached would profoundly affect 
the total number of cases attributable to the epidemic. As the 
situation worsened in the three countries that were most heavily 
affected, these estimates contributed to the decision to massively 
scale up U.S. resources, including deployment of approximately 
3,000 U.S. Department of Defense personnel to Liberia to build 
ETUs and support other response activities. Other countries and 
organizations increased their response efforts as well; for example, 
the African Union mobilized nearly 1,000 African health care 
staff members to support the response.
CDC teams were integral to each country’s EOC in several 
ways (12). First, they responded rapidly to reports of new 
cases, helped place symptomatic persons into ETUs, and 
identified and monitored contacts by creating teams dedicated 
to targeted and rapid response (e.g., as part of the Rapid 
Isolation and Treatment of Ebola [RITE] strategy developed 
in Liberia) (13) and assigning field staff to districts. Second, 
previous Ebola responses, as well as evidence of widespread 
transmission in health care settings in the three countries most 
affected, emphasized the importance of infection control in 
breaking the chains of EBOV transmission. CDC provided 
infection-control training to approximately 24,600 HCWs 
and others; helped establish a system of infection control 
points of contact in health care facilities in Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone; and conducted 3-day hands-on training in 
Anniston, Alabama, for approximately 650 U.S. HCWs and 
other staff scheduled for deployment to West Africa. Third, 
CDC laboratory experts worked closely with IMS and other 
response teams to expand and coordinate the availability of 
laboratory testing of clinical specimens and collaborated to 
develop faster diagnostic assays. Fourth, social mobilization 
was used to promote awareness of the epidemic and marshal 
community religious and political leaders, and CDC health 
communication experts worked with response teams to help 
educate local populations about Ebola. Finally, CDC helped 
each country’s MoH develop border and airport exit-screening 
programs. Teams at national airports screened all passengers 
before the passengers boarded commercial flights and retained 
and evaluated travelers with febrile illness to minimize the risk 
for exportation of Ebola to other countries.
Response in Other African Countries
In July 2014, a traveler with Ebola flew from Monrovia, 
Liberia, to Lagos, Nigeria, where multiple responders had 
unprotected contact with him and were infected, raising the 
specter of an Ebola epidemic in Africa’s most populous city 
(21 million). The Nigerian government promptly launched an 
emergency response supported by an existing EOC and IMS 
structure for polio eradication, Nigerian trainees and graduates 
of a CDC Field Epidemiology Training Program, and CDC 
response officials. The IMS response established an ETU within 
2 weeks, trained approximately 2,000 Ebola caregivers, identified 
approximately 890 contacts, and completed 19,000 contact 
tracing home visits (14). The rapid response helped contain the 
outbreak to just 19 cases in two cities and averted a public health 
catastrophe, not only for Nigeria (population approximately 
180 million) but also for the entire African continent. WHO 
declared Nigeria Ebola-free on October 20, 2014.
CDC provided support to Senegal and Mali after separate 
importations of Ebola into those countries by travelers. 
Vigorous responses, including meticulous contact tracing, were 
implemented rapidly, and only a small number of cases occurred 
(one confirmed in Senegal and eight reported [seven confirmed] 
in Mali). CDC also worked with WHO and national MoHs to 
improve Ebola preparedness for all at-risk West African countries 
by helping to plan for EOCs, isolation capacity for patients with 
suspected Ebola, disease surveillance, laboratory testing, public 
awareness, and other related activities.
Response in the United States
As its response in West Africa evolved during the summer of 
2014, CDC worked closely with U.S. federal, state, and local 
public health and clinical partners to prepare for the possible 
introduction of Ebola into the United States. CDC issued 
guidance (15) and alerted health care workers to consider a 
diagnosis of Ebola if patients had compatible symptoms and 
had visited an affected country within the previous 3 weeks. 
To facilitate rapid testing, CDC provided staff, training, and 
support to qualify 56 state and local public health laboratories 
to perform Ebola reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) testing for Ebola.
 Supplement
10 
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The introduction of Ebola into the United States triggered 
intense national media attention and widespread public 
alarm. In September 2014, a man flew from Liberia to Dallas, 
Texas and became ill with Ebola after his arrival; he died in 
a Dallas hospital. Two nurses who cared for him became 
infected with Ebola, were hospitalized, and recovered. A 
fourth U.S. case was confirmed in an HCW who returned 
from West Africa to New York City in October 2014, was 
hospitalized there, and recovered; no secondary infections 
were reported. In addition to these four U.S. patients, seven 
persons with Ebola symptoms, including six HCWs, were 
transported by charter aircraft from West Africa to U.S. 
hospitals; six of these patients recovered.
After the laboratory confirmation of Ebola in the Dallas 
patient, CDC developed expert teams (i.e., CDC Ebola 
Response Teams) to deploy where needed anywhere in the 
United States to assist with the response. To strengthen the 
preparedness of hospitals nationwide, CDC defined three tiers 
of hospital readiness, consisting of frontline health care facilities,† 
Ebola assessment hospitals, and Ebola treatment centers (16). 
CDC teams with expertise in infection control, occupational 
health, and laboratory diagnosis visited 81 facilities in 21 states 
and the District of Columbia (DC) to evaluate their readiness to 
care for patients with Ebola. By July 2015, a total of 55 hospitals 
in 17 states and DC were designated by state health departments 
as Ebola treatment centers.
To improve protection against importation of Ebola 
into the United States, CDC worked closely with the U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security, and state and local public health 
departments to establish a system to screen and follow up 
all travelers returning from Ebola-affected countries in West 
Africa. Travelers arriving from these countries were routed 
to one of five U.S. airports, triaged by CBP agents, screened 
for febrile illness, provided with CARE (Check and Report 
Ebola) kits (consisting of a thermometer, prepaid cell phone, 
and educational materials), and given an opportunity to have 
any questions answered by CDC. These returning travelers 
were then tracked by state and local health departments 
for any symptoms consistent with Ebola during the 21-day 
incubation period. During October 2014–December 2015, 
approximately 29,000 persons were monitored. Health 
departments also implemented plans to facilitate safe 
transport of travelers to a hospital ready to assess them for 
Ebola if fever or other compatible symptoms developed.
Conclusion
The Ebola epidemic of 2014–2016 took a profound toll 
on the lives of men, women, and children of Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone who were affected by a disease that had never 
been seen in their part of the world. Although an earlier and 
more robust response most likely would have controlled the 
epidemic sooner, the affected West African nations and the 
international community that responded were not prepared 
for an epidemic of this magnitude. This epidemic in the 
three countries and its introduction to seven other countries 
illustrates how all countries are connected and that a threat in 
one country is a threat everywhere. Readiness to detect and 
respond to outbreaks of infectious disease such as Ebola is the 
goal of the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) (17), an 
initiative supported by countries, government agencies, and 
international organizations to assist countries with attaining 
compliance with the International Health Regulations (18) and 
accelerate progress toward detecting and mitigating infectious 
disease threats quickly and effectively (19,20). The U.S. 
government has committed to working in at least 30 countries 
to implement GHSA, including Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone, where CDC has established new country offices to 
provide direct technical assistance with implementation. One 
of the most important lessons of the epidemic is that building 
these foundational capacities beyond Ebola in the three 
countries that were most heavily affected and more broadly is 
pivotal to preventing a similar disaster in the future.
CDC’s technical expertise and in-country presence and close 
collaboration with MoHs and international partners were vital 
to controlling the epidemic. By using information gleaned from 
participation in approximately 20 previous Ebola outbreaks, 
CDC’s Ebola experts and laboratory scientists, emergency 
management and response specialists, epidemiologists, 
database developers and managers, health communicators, 
experts in infection prevention and control and border 
issues, and numerous dedicated field workers all contributed 
unique and essential skills. Through rigorous field work to 
identify and follow up with ill persons and their contacts and 
innovative and focused epidemiologic analyses, response teams 
helped demonstrate that the epidemic was more widespread 
than initially thought and that more extensive and targeted 
control measures were needed. CDC laboratory scientists 
staffed field laboratories and helped to boost testing capacity 
in the three countries that were most heavily affected. CDC 
worked to strengthen critical control strategies, including case 
management, meticulous contact tracing, early treatment with 
supportive care, and social mobilization, and helped to develop 
† Facilities able to identify and triage persons under investigation and isolate 
them, notify the appropriate authorities, and transfer patients to an assessment 
hospital or treatment center.  
 Supplement
MMWR / July 8, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
creative new strategies relevant to this epidemic (e.g., the RITE 
strategy in Liberia, which enhanced the capacity of county 
health teams to investigate and lead coordinated responses 
to outbreaks in remote areas) (13). In-country scientists and 
public health experts were integral to these activities. CDC’s 
Public Health Ethics Unit staffed the Ethics Desk within the 
EOC and facilitated consultation on ethical issues.
The epidemic highlighted how much more still needs to 
be learned about Ebola and the importance of partnerships, 
including with in-country scientists, in addressing research 
questions. Some areas of research include less common modes 
of virus transmission, virus persistence, virus reservoirs, 
clinical sequelae and disease spectrum, development of faster 
reliable laboratory tests and genetic analysis methods for virus 
characterization, improved information technology systems 
for use in the field, and effectiveness and safety of Ebola 
therapeutic drugs and vaccines, such as the Sierra Leone Trial 
to Introduce a Vaccine against Ebola (21).
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone will move beyond the 
epidemic and rebuild with resources they lacked before 
this epidemic, including EOCs, stronger laboratories and 
surveillance systems, improved infection control in hospitals 
and health care centers, and better public awareness of the 
threats posed by infectious diseases. CDC in-country offices 
have been established and will continue to work with MoHs 
and other partners to further strengthen public health systems 
through GHSA.
CDC’s response to the Ebola epidemic in West Africa was 
made possible by the tireless work, unbridled dedication, and 
extraordinary resilience of thousands of agency staff members 
overseas and in the United States. To sustain CDC’s readiness 
to respond to future epidemics, emphasis must continue to be 
on building capacity and having a strong in-country presence; 
meticulous field work, technical rigor, and expertise; partnerships 
with MoHs, WHO, and other international organizations; and 
a commitment to effective evidence-based strategies.
Acknowledgment
CDC Ebola response staff in Atlanta and in affected countries.
References
1. CDC. Ebola (Ebola virus disease). Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.
gov/vhf/ebola/index.html
2. Breman JG, Johnson KM. Ebola then and now. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:1663–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1410540
 3. World Health Organization. Democratic Republic of Congo: the country 
that knows how to beat Ebola. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2014. http://www.who.int/features/2014/drc-beats-ebola/en
 4. WHO Ebola Response Team. Ebola virus disease in West Africa—the 
first 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:1481–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1411100
 5. CDC. Ebola virus disease transmission. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.
cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/transmission
 6. Dixon MG, Schafer IJ; CDC. Ebola viral disease outbreak—West Africa, 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:548–51.
 7. World Health Organization. Statement of the 1st meeting of the IHR 
emergency committee on the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2014. http://www.
who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2014/ebola-20140808/en
 8. CDC. The road to zero: CDC’s response to the West African Ebola 
epidemic, 2014–2015. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/
about/ebola/index.html
 9. Brooks JC, Pinto M, Gill A. Incident management systems and building 
emergency management capacity during the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic—
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. In: CDC response to the 2014–2016 
Ebola epidemic-—West Africa and United States. MMWR Suppl 
2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
10. Arwady MA, Bawo L, Hunter JC, et al. Evolution of Ebola virus disease 
from exotic infection to global health priority, Liberia, mid-2014. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2015;21:578–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2104.141940
 
11. Meltzer MI, Atkins CY, Santibanez S, et al. Estimating the future number 
of cases in the Ebola epidemic—Liberia and Sierra Leone, 2014–2015. 
MMWR Suppl 2014;63(No. Suppl 3).
 
12. Frieden TR, Damon IK. Ebola in West Africa—CDC’s role in epidemic 
detection, control, and prevention. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1897–905. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2111.150949
 
13. Kateh F, Nagbe T, Kieta A, et al. Rapid response to Ebola outbreaks in 
remote areas—Liberia, July–November 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2015;64:188–92.
 
14. Shuaib F, Gunnala R, Musa EO, et al. Ebola virus disease outbreak—
Nigeria, July–September 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:867–72.
 
15. CDC. Guidelines for evaluation of U.S. patients suspected of having 
Ebola virus disease. CDC Health Advisory. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2014. 
http://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00364.asp
 
16. Van Beneden CA, Pietz H, Kirkcaldy RD, et al. Early identification and 
prevention of the spread of Ebola—United States. In: CDC response to 
the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—West Africa and United States. 
MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3).
 
17. CDC. The global health security agenda. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://
www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/oga
 
18. World Health Organization. International health regulations. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/topics/
international_health_regulations/en
 
19. Heymann DL, Chen L, Takemi K, et al. Global health security: the wider 
lessons from the West African Ebola virus disease epidemic. Lancet 
2015;385:1884–901. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60858-3
 
20. Frieden TR, Tappero JW, Dowell SF, Hien NT, Guillaume FD, Aceng 
JR. Safer countries through global health security. Lancet 2014;383:764–
6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60189-6
 
21. Widdowson MA, Schrag SJ, Carter RJ, et al. Implementing an Ebola vaccine 
study—Sierra Leone. In: CDC response to the 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic—
West Africa and United States. MMWR Suppl 2016;65(No. Suppl 3). 
