 Oral, ultra–long-lasting drug delivery: Application toward 
malaria elimination goals
Andrew M. Bellinger1,2,3,*, Mousa Jafari1,*, Tyler M. Grant1,3,*, Shiyi Zhang1,*,†, Hannah C. 
Slater4, Edward A. Wenger5, Stacy Mo1, Young-Ah Lucy Lee1, Hormoz Mazdiyasni1, 
Lawrence Kogan1, Ross Barman1, Cody Cleveland1,6, Lucas Booth1, Taylor Bensel1, Daniel 
Minahan1, Haley M. Hurowitz1, Tammy Tai1, Johanna Daily7, Boris Nikolic8, Lowell Wood5, 
Philip A. Eckhoff5, Robert Langer1,9,10,‡, and Giovanni Traverso1,6,11,‡
1Department of Chemical Engineering and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
2Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
3Lyndra Inc., Watertown, MA 02472, USA.
4Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, MRC (Medical Research Council) Centre for 
Outbreak Analysis and Modelling, Imperial College London, London, U.K.
5Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA 98005, USA.
6Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.
7Division of Infectious Diseases, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
8Biomatics Capital, 1107 1st Avenue, Apartment 1305, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
‡Corresponding author. rlanger@mit.edu (R.L.); ctraverso@partners.org (G.T).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Present address: School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/365/365ra157/DC1
Fig. S1. Optimization of elastomer geometry using FEA.
Fig. S2. Administration of stellate dosage forms of varying diameters and assessment of the duration of gastric residence.
Fig. S3. Mechanical in vitro characterization of gastric residence dosage forms.
Fig. S4. Permanent deformation of central elastomer.
Fig. S5. Polymeric matrix erosion and diffusion contribute to drug release.
Fig. S6. Impact of correlation between treatment rounds for a MDA intervention consisting of DP + 14-day ivermectin at 80% 
coverage.
Author contributions
A.M.B., M.J., T.M.G., S.Z., H.C.S., E.A.W., J.D., B.N., L.W., P.A.E., R.L., and G.T. conceived and designed the research. T.M.G., 
D.M., and T.B. performed the mechanical characterization and FEA. A.M.B., R.B., L.B., C.C., and G.T. performed the in vivo pig 
experiments. A.M.B., T.M.G., and S.M. performed the geometric design and CAD. A.M.B., M.J., H.M., L.K., Y.-A.L.L., H.M.H., and 
T.T. performed formulation synthesis and characterization. A.M.B., S.Z., H.M.H., T.M.G., T.B., and D.M. performed linker and 
elastomer synthesis and characterization. H.C.S., E.A.W., and P.A.E. performed malaria mathematical simulation. A.M.B. and G.T. 
performed the statistical analysis. A.M.B., T.M.G., R.L., and G.T. analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
A.M.B. and T.M.G. are employees of Lyndra Inc., a biotechnology company focused on the development of oral drug delivery systems 
for ultralong drug release. R.L., G.T., A.M.B., and T.M.G. have financial interest in Lyndra Inc. A.M.B., M.J., T.M.G., S.Z., S.M., 
L.W., P.A.E., R.L., and G.T. are co-inventors on multiple patent applications describing the gastric-resident drug delivery systems.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Transl Med. 2016 November 16; 8(365): 365ra157. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aag2374.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
10Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
11Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA.
Abstract
Efforts at elimination of scourges, such as malaria, are limited by the logistic challenges of 
reaching large rural populations and ensuring patient adherence to adequate pharmacologic 
treatment. We have developed an oral, ultra–long-acting capsule that dissolves in the stomach and 
deploys a star-shaped dosage form that releases drug while assuming a geometry that prevents 
passage through the pylorus yet allows passage of food, enabling prolonged gastric residence. This 
gastric-resident, drug delivery dosage form releases small-molecule drugs for days to weeks and 
potentially longer. Upon dissolution of the macrostructure, the components can safely pass 
through the gastrointestinal tract. Clinical, radiographic, and endoscopic evaluation of a swine 
large-animal model that received these dosage forms showed no evidence of gastrointestinal 
obstruction or mucosal injury. We generated long-acting formulations for controlled release of 
ivermectin, a drug that targets malaria-transmitting mosquitoes, in the gastric environment and 
incorporated these into our dosage form, which then delivered a sustained therapeutic dose of 
ivermectin for up to 14 days in our swine model. Further, by using mathematical models of 
malaria transmission that incorporate the lethal effect of ivermectin against malaria-transmitting 
mosquitoes, we demonstrated that this system will boost the efficacy of mass drug administration 
toward malaria elimination goals. Encapsulated, gastric-resident dosage forms for ultra–long-
acting drug delivery have the potential to revolutionize treatment options for malaria and other 
diseases that affect large populations around the globe for which treatment adherence is essential 
for efficacy.
INTRODUCTION
Development of oral, long-acting therapies is fundamentally limited by the rapid 
gastrointestinal (GI) transit time. To counter this, attempts have been made to prolong the GI 
transit time by delaying gastric emptying of the drug through flotation or swelling in the 
gastric cavity (1–3) or by sedimentation in gastric folds or adhesion to mucosal surfaces (1–
4). In addition, oral dosage forms that adopt a different conformation in the gastric cavity to 
prolong gastric residence time have been described over the last 30 years. These attempts 
have been limited, however, by lack of safety mechanisms incorporated into the dosage 
forms that ensure ultimate safe passage through the GI tract (5–7) or limited (hours) duration 
of the gastric residence (8), or both. Recently, we developed new materials that can 
potentially improve safety and have the ability to fit into ingestible forms (9).
Despite major advances in the 20th century, malaria remains a scourge in large portions of 
the world, especially sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia. The Global Malaria 
Eradication Program in the 1950s, as well as the Roll Back Malaria Partnership campaign of 
the 2000s, has succeeded in reducing the toll of malaria. Nevertheless, globally, there were 
Bellinger et al.
Page 2
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 an estimated 214 million cases in 2015, and 438,000 lives were lost (10, 11). More than 90% 
of the mortality from malaria is caused by the protozoan parasite Plasmodium falciparum 
despite the availability of multiple effective therapies. Factors contributing to the disease’s 
resiliency include endemic region poverty, emergence of antimalarial resistance, and poor 
health care infrastructure that limits access to care.
Indoor residual spraying with insecticidal agents, insecticide-treated bed nets, and treating 
individuals with symptomatic disease have been the cornerstone of malaria control and have 
led to an estimated 40% reduction in clinical disease since 2000 (12). However, it is 
becoming apparent that additional interventions will be required to eliminate this disease. 
One such strategy is mass drug administration (MDA) to human populations with parasite 
clearing and prophylactic drugs (13), such as Coartem (artemether-lumefantrine) or 
Eurartesim [dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DP)], to treat or prevent malaria (13). 
Prolonged delivery of malaria preventative chemotherapies could have a significant impact 
on malaria transmission (14) because humans are the only known reservoir for this infection. 
The effectiveness of MDA depends on obtaining sufficient and prolonged drug blood levels 
in the vast majority of the population, which can be difficult in resource-constrained or 
remote locations, and increases the cost of the MDA approach (13, 15). Nonadherence, a 
well-recognized barrier to effective care in the developed world, has also been shown to 
contribute to MDA failure in the developing world during repeat dosing regimens (16–18).
Ivermectin is a well-known and safe drug that has been administered more than a billion 
times around the world since its approval in 1987 for the treatment of onchocerciasis 
(African river blindness). Upon approval, Merck committed to providing ivermectin free of 
charge to the World Health Organization (WHO) to help eradicate onchocerciasis (river 
blindness) (19). Ivermectin is also active against lymphatic filariasis, which infects 68 
million people worldwide (20), and is effective for the control of scabies during MDA 
campaigns (21). In addition, ivermectin kills the Anopheles mosquito that transmits malaria 
(22–24). Oral ivermectin, with a half-life of 18 hours in humans (25), achieves serum 
concentrations that kill the mosquito after a blood meal and prevents malaria transmission to 
another person (26, 27). Serum levels of 8 ng/ml [well below the maximum serum 
concentration (Cmax) of commercial ivermectin] are sufficient to achieve this effect. 
Modeling studies and field evidence suggest that coadministration of ivermectin may 
augment the efficacy of MDA regimens that administer artemisinin combination therapies 
(22, 28, 29) through a mosquitocidal effect and malaria transmission blockade (30–32). This 
strategy has the potential to effectively interrupt vector transmission of malaria and could 
reduce prevalence within endemic regions. We have therefore developed a single-encounter 
oral, ultra– long-acting form of ivermectin that can achieve sustained therapeutic serum drug 
concentrations for at least a week or more.
RESULTS
Design of an oral capsule capable of prolonged gastric residence
An oral sustained delivery dosage form that has prolonged gastric residence should (i) have a 
shape and size that can be ingested by a subject (such as a capsule), (ii) have the ability to 
adopt an alternative conformation in the gastric cavity that delays or prevents passage 
Bellinger et al.
Page 3
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 through the pylorus, (iii) be able to carry large loads of the therapeutic agent, (iv) provide 
controlled release of the agent for long time periods (weeks or months) with little or no 
potential for burst release, (v) maintain stability of the therapeutic agent in a low-pH gastric 
environment for an extended duration, (vi) degrade/dissolve or dissociate into forms in a 
predictable manner that can exit the stomach and pass through the GI lumen with no 
potential for obstruction or perforation, and (vii) have safety mechanisms that enable 
dissociation of the macrostructure in the event of inadvertent passage through the pylorus to 
avoid downstream intestinal obstruction (particularly at the ileocecal valve) (Fig. 1A).
Previous work with gastric balloons of various sizes has determined that the size necessary 
to preclude passage through the pylorus in large mammals, such as human and dog, is about 
2 cm (33). Later attempts in beagles to identify geometries that were retained in the stomach 
identified 2 cm as a critical size and a tetrahedron as the optimal geometry. However, these 
designs were not successful in humans (5–7), in part, a result of the size difference between 
fully grown beagles (about 10 to 15 kg) and humans. Thus, the development and 
optimization of an animal model that approximated the relevant anatomic dimensions of a 
human adult was a critical first step in developing a successful long-acting drug delivery 
platform. We therefore chose 35-to 50-kg Yorkshire pigs for our in vivo work because their 
gastric anatomy is similar to that of humans and they are often used for evaluation of GI-
related devices (34, 35).
Modular designs
Iterative studies identified a modular design that best fulfilled the above design criteria. The 
modular approach was driven by the observation that requiring a material to perform 
multiple functions (for example, controlled release of drug and tunable degradation) 
imposed unacceptable trade-offs in function. Two geometric families of rigid and flexible 
combinations were designed and characterized (Fig. 1B): a “polygon” family of alternating 
rigid and flexible elements and a second “stellate” family in which rigid elements project 
from a central flexible component. A combination of flexible recoil element(s) that enable 
the dosage form to be deformed addresses the first two design constraints, whereas rigid 
polymeric elements serve as a drug delivery matrix and address the third through fifth 
constraints. Degradable and/or dissolvable elements within the formulation that selectively 
dissolve in near neutral pH but remain stable in the acidic gastric environment can be used to 
control the duration of gastric residence and improve safety by reducing the size of the 
fragments during passage, addressing the final two constraints. Poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) 
was selected for the rigid drug release matrix because of its biocompatibility, low-
temperature melt processing, and established use in controlled drug delivery.
We constructed finite element analysis (FEA) models to compare the ability of formulations 
based on various geometries to be encapsulated and to subsequently resist gastric 
housekeeping contractions. Figure S1 shows stress maps of several geometries during 
folding of the dosage form for placement in a capsule. Figure 1C illustrates an optimized 
geometry that has minimal stress concentrations in the encapsulated form while providing 
sufficient folding force to resist gastric contractions and expulsion from the stomach. 
Bellinger et al.
Page 4
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Further, this stellate geometry has a high capsule fill ratio >85% compared with less than 
60% for the comparable hexagonal polygon geometry.
Designs were generated with computer-aided design (CAD) software, printed with three-
dimensional (3D) additive technology, and used as positive models for polydimethylsiloxane 
(PDMS) negative molds. Oral dosage forms were then formed by melt-molding the 
thermoplastic polymers into the desired geometry (Fig. 1D).
Optimization for gastric residence
The ability to resist gastric exit through the pylorus is a complex function of geometric, 
mechanical, and material properties. A size greater than a 2-cm cross-sectional dimension 
alone did not predict the duration of gastric residence in preliminary large-animal trials (fig. 
S2).
We developed a simplified in vitro assay, a “funnel” test (shown schematically in fig. S3), to 
assess the folding forces that dosage forms could resist. This approach allowed us to model 
the ability of dosage forms to resist the migrating motor complex peristaltic waves of the 
stomach. We evaluated various formulations to identify the geometry and material properties 
that resulted in “folding forces” greater than 1.5 N to compress the formulation into a shape 
with a cross-sectional dimension of less than 2 cm. We selected the 1.5-N cutoff to provide 
an excess over published estimates of the maximum developed force in the gastric antrum 
and pylorus in humans (36); the 2-cm geometric cutoff was based on previous anatomical 
estimates (33).
Selection of a PCL thermoset as the elastic recoil element
We considered various elastomeric materials for use as the central elastic element of the 
dosage form. The key properties assessed were the ability to (i) undergo a high degree of 
strain without tearing, (ii) recoil rapidly within 5 to 30 min after removal from a capsule, and 
(iii) remain in the deformed state for a prolonged period of time without undergoing plastic 
deformation. A thermoset polyurethane (PU) material composed of low–molecular weight 
(MW) PCL polyols cross-linked with isocyanate was selected. This thermoset material has 
minimal creep properties compared to several other common elastomeric materials (fig. 
S4A). We assessed the ability of the flexible element to recoil in vitro by placing 
formulations in gelatin capsules in storage for 1 month at 22° and 4°C. The folding force 
was evaluated in vitro and found to decrease by 20% at 22°C and 15% at 4°C (fig. S4). 
Although the folding force decreased after storage, it was still well above the estimated 
threshold required for achieving gastric residence (36).
Tunable linkers for control of gastric exit and intestinal dissolution
The design elements that control safety and exit from the gastric cavity (as well as reducing 
the potential for obstruction once in the intestine) are the break points shown schematically 
in Fig. 1B. Separating the control of dissolution of the star-shaped dosage form from the 
control of drug release was important to reduce the risk of unanticipated drug release, or 
“dumping,” and to facilitate incorporation of a variety of drugs. On the other hand, 
Bellinger et al.
Page 5
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 incorporating dissolution into the elastic recoil element could compromise the mechanical 
properties and stability necessary for durable storage and rapid recoil in the gastric cavity.
We formed linkers from films of pH-dependent copolymers via solvent welding. Films 
consisting of blends of Eudragit L100-55 plasticized with Eudragit Plastoid B were 
interfaced with PCL by using a solvent weld. The strength and adhesion of the linker were 
evaluated by characterizing the flexural strength through four-point bending and the 
adhesion through a pull-apart test (fig. S3). Linker dissolution was evaluated by incubation 
in vitro in simulated gastric fluid (SGF) and simulated intestinal fluid (SIF) for 1 week 
followed by strength and adhesion tests. We designed enteric linkers that retained strength 
and adhesion in SGF and rapidly degraded in SIF (fig. S3, A and B). After incubation in SIF 
for 24 hours, the linkers fractured under minimal mechanical loading.
In vivo evaluation of gastric residence and drug delivery systems
We characterized our dosage forms in vivo in pigs for their efficiency to (i) deploy rapidly 
after reaching the gastric cavity, (ii) remain safely resident in the gastric cavity for prolonged 
periods of time without causing obstruction or mucosal injury, and (iii) fragment and pass 
through the intestinal tract safely. Representative serial abdominal x-rays after 
administration revealed the stellate-shaped dosage forms exiting the gelatin capsule in the 
gastric cavity and adopting a residence form (Fig. 2A). Of more than 107 capsules 
administered on 35 occasions (to 15 different pigs), all 107 capsules deployed properly 
within 5 min, as confirmed by radiographic transition from an encapsulated to an 
unencapsulated appearance (Fig. 2A).
Gastric residence was evaluated by serial x-rays obtained on subsequent days and by 
endoscopic evaluation (Fig. 2). Figure 2C shows representative endoscopic images from 
gastric residence experiments at various time points. Notably, even after prolonged periods 
of gastric residence, gastric mucosal surfaces did not show injury, erosions, or the presence 
of any ulceration, as determined through endoscopic evaluation by a trained 
gastroenterologist over the course of the study. Further, on serial x-ray evaluations, the 
gastric-resident dosage forms can be detected in the fundus and antrum and are found to 
move around freely within the gastric cavity between sessions. No evidence of 
mucoadhesion or attachment/lodging on a gastric surface was noted. Gastric-resident dosage 
forms are seen in some endoscopic evaluations to be overlying the pylorus; however, no 
evidence of obstruction or limitation in passage of food or liquid was seen. The pigs were 
fed a normal diet except on days before endoscopic evaluation when they received a liquid 
diet to facilitate visualization and maximize safety during sedation. Endoscopic evaluation 
revealed a clear stomach irrespective of the previous animal diet, which included fibrous 
foods such as banana peels and uncooked yams, supporting the lack of a functional gastric 
outlet obstruction from our dosage forms.
We quantified the duration of gastric residence by recording the presence of the various 
forms of the stellate structure in the gastric cavity on serial x-ray evaluation. Survival of the 
stellate configuration was defined as the last day on which it was visualized as fully intact in 
the gastric cavity. For the individual “arm” fragments and elastic elements, survival was 
defined as the last day on which each piece was visualized in the gastric cavity during serial 
Bellinger et al.
Page 6
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 evaluation. Stellate configurations designed for encapsulation in 00el gelatin capsules 
consistently remained in the gastric cavity for up to 10 days, which was significantly longer 
than seen with the individual arm fragments and elastic elements (Fig. 2B, P = 0.006 by 
Mantel-Cox log-rank test). Gastric emptying and intestinal transit times in the pig are 
delayed compared to other species (37), and in some cases, our gastric residence 
formulations remained in place for up to 42 days in the absence of the degradable linkers. 
Inclusion of linkers could provide more consistent gastric residence times. In summary, we 
demonstrate the potential of the star-shaped dosage form to reside in the gastric cavity for 
multiple weeks without affecting the passage of food.
Ivermectin controlled release and stabilization
Ivermectin in the powdered form can be suspended into PCL by melting PCL and 
mechanically blending the powder into the molten polymer. PCL is melted at 70° to 90°C to 
allow blending, and ivermectin remains stable at this temperature. The rate of release of 
ivermectin from the PCL matrix can be tuned by varying the amount of drug and including 
hydrophilic U.S. Food and Drug Administration–recognized excipient polymers such as 
poloxamers and methyl methacrylate copolymers (Fig. 3, A to C). Drug release occurs 
through polymeric matrix erosion that opens channels, allowing drug to diffuse out of the 
polymer (fig. S5). To further study the drug release dynamics, we selected formulations with 
near-linear rates of release in vitro. To minimize the variability of the rate of release in 
different gastric and intestinal environments, we also evaluated formulations for the 
consistency of the rate of release in two different Biorelevant fluids, SGF and SIF. 
Formulations with relatively consistent rates of release between SGF and SIF were selected 
for further optimization (Fig. 3C).
Ivermectin is relatively large and lipophilic, as compared to other small-molecule therapeutic 
agents, and is prone to oxidative and radical degradation. Hence, a gastric residence 
technology intended to deliver ivermectin for multiple days must stabilize the ivermectin for 
prolonged periods of time in the harsh gastric environment (37°C, pH 1.5, 100% humidity). 
Ivermectin in SGF degrades substantially within 3 days (Fig. 3, D and E). Formulations of 
ivermectin suspended in PCL, a relatively hydrophobic polymer that minimally swells in 
water, and incubated in SGF (pH 1.5, at 37°C, fully submersed and agitated at 150 rpm) 
were stable for up to 14 days (Fig. 3, D and E).
To achieve prolonged gastric residence, formulations must retain sufficient mechanical 
strength to withstand gastric contractions. This is a particular challenge for the polymer-drug 
matrix after most of the drug is released. Strength after casting, as well as strength after 
releasing ivermectin in SGF for 7 days, was assessed for multiple formulations and found to 
be near or greater than 10 MPa for ultimate flexural strength even after 7 days in SGF across 
all the formulations (Fig. 3F).
In vivo sustained oral delivery of ivermectin for 10 days
Having identified favorable ivermectin formulations in vitro, dosage forms varying in their 
excipient profile and drug loading were prepared for administration in the swine large-
animal model for identification of optimal ultralong pharmacokinetic profiles. Capsule-
Bellinger et al.
Page 7
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 enclosed dosage forms were endoscopically administered to swine under moderate sedation. 
After administration at time 0, serum samples were collected at 0, 1, 2, 6, 24, 48, 72, 96 
hours, etc. and analyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) 
for serum ivermectin concentration. One to three dosage forms per pig containing ivermectin 
formulations with 15 to 20% (w/w) drug load to total polymer composition were 
administered. We observed sustained serum levels within a target therapeutic range (8 to 40 
ng/ml) for malaria transmission reduction for more than 10 days (Fig. 4). We compared 
these levels with the sustained therapeutic ivermectin levels of the commercially available 
ivermectin (Stromectol) immediate-release formulation dosage form, with a known serum 
high bioavailability of >90% and half-life of about 18 hours in humans (ivermectin has a 
half-life of about 12 hours in swine) (25, 38). Dosage forms without enteric linker elements 
were used for the in vivo studies to isolate and identify drug release properties and thereby 
identify optimal pharmacokinetic parameters from the various formulations. Such dosage 
forms would be expected to carry a higher risk of complication; the animals were monitored 
clinically and radiographically, and no complications were observed.
Three dosage forms were endoscopically retrieved from the gastric cavity at day 14 after 
deployment, and ivermectin integrity was evaluated by HPLC. Residual ivermectin drug load 
was solvent-extracted and analyzed by a stability-indicating HPLC assay. After 14 days in 
vivo, the residual ivermectin was found to be >96% intact without evidence of substantial 
degradation. Certain formulations, especially those containing the Eudragit E PO (IVM-03) 
excipient, released ivermectin more efficiently in vivo, resulting in less residual ivermectin 
present after 14 days (Fig. 4).
Sustained ivermectin could potentiate efficacy of artemisinin combination therapy–based 
MDA for malaria
Two well-established mathematical malaria models (28, 39, 40) were used to estimate the 
impact of long-lasting ivermectin on transmission dynamics and prevalence. Two scenarios 
were chosen in which ivermectin was a component of multiple rounds of MDA in 
conjunction with DP: a seasonal southern Zambian setting with three annual dry-season 
rounds and a nonseasonal African setting, such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
showing three rounds of mass treatment (Fig. 5). The mosquitocidal impact of ivermectin 
was estimated on the basis of data from 12 studies in which mosquitoes were fed on blood 
containing a range of ivermectin concentrations (28). This derived relationship then 
informed the increased hazard of mosquito mortality used in these simulations based on the 
pharma-cokinetic concentration achieved by our gastric-resident dosage form (Fig. 4). Long-
lasting ivermectin complements MDA with DP by reducing the proportion of mosquitoes 
living long enough to become infectious, meaning that, as the prophylactic period of DP 
starts to wane, there are few infectious mosquitoes in the population to reseed transmission, 
thus maintaining the gains achieved by the mass parasite clearance. Figure 5A shows 
multiple stochastic realizations of MDA campaigns with initial prevalence of 50% and 
uncorrelated per-campaign coverage of 60%. Within these simulated transmission 
parameters and drug campaign coverage assumptions, Fig. 5A (inset) illustrates the 
substantially increased probability of local malaria elimination for the 14-day compared to 
the 3-day ivermectin dose duration. Figure 5B shows the tradeoff between the ivermectin-
Bellinger et al.
Page 8
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 effect duration and the campaign coverage that achieve about the same population-wide 
effect in a nonseasonal setting. Although malaria prevalence can be greatly reduced by MDA 
with artemisinin combination therapy alone if coverage is very high (~90%), we predict that 
incorporating long-lasting ivermectin can achieve similar results at more modest and 
historically and operationally achievable levels of population-wide MDA coverage (13, 15–
18). With the inclusion of long-acting ivermectin, we have the added benefit that 
transmission from nontreated individuals is reduced because there are fewer mosquitoes to 
become infected, and any mosquitoes picking up infectious parasites from these untreated 
individuals are likely to take one or more blood meals from ivermectin-treated individuals, 
and thus die, before becoming infectious themselves. Figure 5C shows the prevalence of 
infection after 2 years of interventions (during the follow-up interval from Fig. 5A) for a 
wide range of different initial prevalence and campaign coverage values. Each marker 
indicates a single stochastic simulation, and the shaded areas represent the interpolated mean 
values. The shaded white areas indicate that local elimination is possible with ivermectin 
combined with a long-lasting artemisinin combination therapy. As indicated by the shift 
from darker to lighter colors, the higher postintervention prevalence values are significantly 
reduced in the 14-day compared to the 3-day ivermectin scenario, and local elimination is 
likely over a broader range of initial prevalence and campaign coverage values. We further 
evaluated the potential capacity of the long-acting ivermectin dosage form to reduce parasite 
burden in scenarios where a random cross section of subjects is treated in each round of 
MDA administration and in correlated scenarios (where the same subjects received the 
ivermectin and artemisinin combination therapy in every round) (fig. S6). Our calculations 
predicted that inclusion of a long-lasting ivermectin delivery dosage form increased and 
sustained the effect of an MDA with both correlated and random coverage assumptions. It 
has been posited that individuals that are repeatedly not covered in an MDA (correlated 
coverage) can jeopardize the campaign’s success (41). Including a long-lasting ivermectin 
delivery dosage form can reduce this negative effect.
DISCUSSION
Here, we report an oral, ultra–long-acting delivery of a small-molecule therapy for malaria 
control for more than a week in a dosage form compatible with human administration. With 
these gastric-resident dosage forms, a single administration of a capsule-carried dosage form 
can deliver up to 10 to 14 days of sustained, mosquitocidal ivermectin that results in serum 
concentrations in a range effective for vector control. These gastric-resident dosage forms 
showed no clinical, radiographic, or endoscopic evidence of GI obstruction or mucosal 
injury. The dosage form can be administered as a capsule, rapidly and consistently deployed 
in the gastric cavity, and achieves prolonged gastric residence. Because they contain 
removable linkers, these systems can disassociate into small pieces for safe passage through 
the intestine as indigestible material. Ivermectin release in the gastric cavity was optimized 
for linearity and drug stability. Finally, mathematical modeling of malaria transmission 
predicted that sustained ivermectin at mosquitocidal levels would increase the effect of 
malaria interventions and the probability of achieving elimination.
Ivermectin’s efficacy during MDA in malaria transmission reduction and vector control is 
related to the duration of serum exposure of ivermectin (22, 31). A major limitation to MDA 
Bellinger et al.
Page 9
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 approaches for malaria has been the logistic challenges of repeated dosing in resource-
constrained locations, and this is a particular challenge with the less than 24-hour half-life of 
ivermectin. Injectable and implantable solutions have been described to prolong effective 
drug levels (42). However, cost, sterility requirements, procedural complications, and patient 
preference suggest that oral therapies will be preferable. Single-administration dosage forms 
with sustained efficacy, such as that described here, may reduce the cost and increase the 
success of elimination campaigns in sub-Saharan Africa.
Because of the characteristics of the current polymeric matrices necessary to maintain 
gastric residence, the total amount of the therapeutic entity that can be incorporated is 
restricted, and thus, drugs with daily doses of less than 20 to 50 mg are ideal for delivery 
with this system. One potential limitation of our animal model is that pigs have slower GI 
transit, both gastric emptying and intestinal transit time, than humans (43). To account for 
this difference, we tested intact star-shaped delivery systems against multiple control 
configurations of the same materials in the pigs, including standard oral dosage forms. 
Further preclinical testing in other large-animal models including dogs and nonhuman 
primates with faster transit times and strong gastric compressive forces (36) will help inform 
further engineering of the optimal dosage forms for humans. Ultimately, efficacy of our 
described gastric residence dosage form will need to be confirmed in humans. In addition, 
safety of these dosage forms will have to be evaluated in relevant animal models, human 
volunteers, and populations with GI pathology. Of particular concern with ivermectin is dose 
dumping, although this risk is largely mitigated by the polymer composition of the 
formulation (PCL), which degrades slowly. Further, the mass of ivermectin in the studies is 
below the median lethal dose (LD50) previously observed for dog, nonhuman primates, and 
humans (44). Improvements in the efficiency of release of poorly soluble ivermectin should 
allow reduction in the total dose incorporated in the dosage form. Although our data support 
the capacity of the stellate dosage form to maintain the chemical stability of ivermectin in 
the gastric environment for prolonged periods, future studies, including mosquito sensitivity 
to ivermectin derived from dosage forms residing in the gastric cavity, will have to be 
performed.
Modeling suggests that adding long-acting ivermectin formulations to MDA along with an 
antimalarial can affect sustained reductions in malaria prevalence. Moreover, we predict that 
this intervention could increase the probability of local malaria elimination in certain 
transmission settings. However, further data are needed to validate these predictions, in 
particular, data on the pharmacokinetics and mosquitocidal impact of the formulation in 
humans and MDA trial data to inform realistic levels of coverage and correlation between 
treatment rounds.
We believe that ultra–long-acting gastric-resident dosage forms could transform the standard 
of care across a broad range of clinical conditions (34). Essential to broad implementation is 
the modular design of the oral, ultra–long-acting dosage form, which allows, in principle, for 
adaptation of the platform to other therapeutic applications, including incorporation of a 
range of chemical therapeutics. These could feature a variety of active materials with 
distinctive mass fractions and time-release characteristics. Further, new-generation linkers 
could be tuned for gastric residence times ranging from days to months and potentially even 
Bellinger et al.
Page 10
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 years. We anticipate broad applicability of the ultra–long-acting ivermectin form in the 
control of a variety of vectors and also of the orally delivered, ultra–long-acting platform for 
optimal disease management where adherence is essential for efficacy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In vivo evaluation
To assess formulations for the ability to achieve gastric retention, we administered them to a 
large-animal model (35- to 50-kg Yorkshire pigs). This model was chosen because its gastric 
anatomy is similar to that of humans and is widely used in evaluating devices in the GI space 
(35, 45). All animal experiments were performed in accordance with protocols approved by 
the Committee on Animal Care at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Pigs were 
sedated with Telazol (tiletamine/zolazepam) (5 mg/kg), xylazine (2 mg/kg), and atropine 
(0.05 mg/kg) and/or isoflurane (1 to 3% inhaled), and an endoscopic overtube was placed in 
the esophagus under endoscopic visual guidance during esophageal intubation. Capsules 
were administered via the overtube into the esophagus and/or stomach, and the overtube was 
then removed. In vivo drug release experiments were performed with dosage forms that did 
not contain enteric linkers for safety evaluation. No adverse events were observed during the 
studies associated with these dosage forms. Serial x-rays were obtained immediately 
afterward to document the process of deployment from the gelatin capsule. Blood samples, 
if necessary, were obtained via cannulation of an external mammary vein on the ventral 
surface of the pig at the indicated time points, most often times, 0 min (before administration 
of the capsule), 5 min, 15 min, 30 min, 2 hours, 6 hours, daily for a minimum of 5 days, and 
then three times per week. Chest and abdominal radiographs were obtained three times per 
week from a minimum of five views, including anterior-posterior, left lateral, and right 
lateral views of the chest, upper abdomen, and lower abdomen. Between three and five 
stainless steel fiducials (diameter of 1 mm) were embedded via melt casting into each arm of 
the formulation to allow radiographic tracking. Radiographs were also assessed for evidence 
of complications including pneumoperitoneum or intestinal obstruction. Animals were 
evaluated twice daily for clinical signs of GI obstruction.
Prototype design and manufacture
Designs that had the potential to be efficiently encapsulated into 000 and 00el gelatin 
capsules were generated in Inventor CAD software (Autodesk). Prototypes were generated 
with a Stratasys Objet30 Pro 3D printer and used to make PDMS-negative molds.
Finite element analysis
The finite element method was used to analyze the stress and strain profiles of different 
geometries of gastric-resident dosage forms in Abaqus FEA software (SIMULIA). We 
defined the material properties of the PCL PU elastomer with the Mooney-Rivlin 
hyperelastic model from tension and compression tests performed on standardized shapes of 
the elastomer (fig. S1, A and B). The linear PCL– ivermectin arms were assumed to be 
linear elastic, and the modulus was derived from flexural tests. The model was meshed using 
C3D4 elements, and the PCL elastomer and linear PCL were numerically bonded at the 
interface. Force was perpendicularly applied to the top of each arm to simulate folding of the 
Bellinger et al.
Page 11
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dosage form into a capsule. The von Mises stress was extracted from the simulation and 
analyzed.
Polymer-drug hot melt
Formulations containing ivermectin, excipient polymers such as pluronic P407, and linear 
PCL polymer (MW, 45,000 Da; Sigma-Aldrich) were weighed and combined in the desired 
amounts as powder and pellets. The mixture was melted briefly at 90°C and mixed 
vigorously. The molten mixture was transferred into a mold of the star-shaped design dosage 
form. The mold was heated to 90°C for 2 hours and then air-cooled. Arm portions were cut 
and placed back into the stellate mold, leaving the region of the central element as a void.
Thermoset elastomer synthesis
The PCL-based PU thermoset elastomer was cured to the desired geometry. The PU used is 
based on previous descriptions (46) and consists of a 6:1.3:0.027:9.5 molar ratio of PCL diol 
(MW, 530), PCL triol (MW, 900), linear PCL (MW, 45,000), and hexamethylene di-
isocyanate (HMDI). The first three ingredients were mixed at 70°C until well mixed, and 
then, HMDI was added and mixed for 30 min while maintaining the temperature between 
70° and 75°C. The prepolymer solution was sonicated to remove entrapped air bubbles and 
then gently pipetted into PDMS molds of the desired shape (or into a void space within a 
mold containing solid polymeric elements) and cured at 70° to 75°C for 48 hours to fully 
consume the cross-linking agent.
Linker design and manufacture
Enteric linkers were formed by solvent-casting a 90:10 ratio mixture of Eudragit L100-55 
(Evonik), an enteric copolymer with a pH-dependent dissolution profile, and Plastoid B 
(Evonik), an adhesive plasticizer, in acetone. The solvent was allowed to evaporate over 12 
hours, and the resulting film was cut into 3-mm × 3-mm square linkers and had a thickness 
of about 500 µm. Acetone was applied to the inner surface of linkers to create an adhesive 
surface, and linkers were applied to drug-loaded arms around cut break points. Linkers 
reached full strength 24 hours after solvent welding.
Mechanical evaluation
The PCL elastomer was mechanically characterized in tension, compression, and creep 
loading. Mechanical characterization was conducted according to the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards D638 (tension), D575 (compression), and D2990 
(creep). The PCL elastomer was cured into a 2-mm-thick polymer sheet. The sheet was 
allowed to cool, and specimens were cut from the sheet using a standard dumbbell die 
(ASTM D-638). Specimens were loaded into the grips of an Instron testing machine with a 
500-N load cell, and the gauge length was measured using a digital micrometer. 
Displacement was applied to the specimen at a rate of 15 mm/min until samples ruptured. 
Force was converted into normal stress (F/A), and displacement was converted into strain 
(ΔL/L).
The PCL elastomer was cured into a 13-mm-thick slab. The slab was allowed to cool, and a 
circular punch was used to cut a 28-mm-diameter specimen from the slab. Specimens were 
Bellinger et al.
Page 12
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 placed into a constrained loading compression jig and subjected to displacement at 12 mm/
min. Specimens were tested until reaching 30% compression strain. Force was converted 
into pressure (F/A), and displacement was converted into a volume ratio (ΔV/V).
PCL elastomer, PDMS (Dow Corning Sylgard 184 RTV silicone), and polyethylene vinyl 
acetate were cured into 2-mm-thick polymer sheets, and ASTM D-638 specimens were cut 
as described above and loaded onto an Instron testing machine. A constant stress was 
applied to the specimens for 60 min. The force and displacement were calculated throughout 
the test and converted into normal stress (F/A) and strain (ΔL/L).
Funnel testing
A custom experimental setup was developed to better understand the transit of gastric 
residence dosage forms through a simulated pylorus. A 10-cm (upper diameter) × 2-cm 
(lower diameter) polypropylene funnel simulated the pyloric sphincter. Devices were placed 
into the funnel, and a custom-designed plunger pushed the device through the 2-cm spout. 
The plunger was attached to the tension crosshead of an Instron testing machine, and the 
funnel was attached to a clamp. The dosage form was pushed through the funnel at a rate of 
1 mm/s, and the force and displacement were recorded.
Formulation evaluation by four-point bending
Linear PCL was mechanically characterized in flexion according to ASTM D-790. Sheets of 
linear PCL, PCL blended with excipient, and PCL blended with excipient and ivermectin 
were molded into 2-mm-thick sheets. The sheets were allowed to cool, and then, 80-mm × 8-
mm rectangles were cut out of the sheet to produce samples. A digital micrometer was used 
to measure the width and thickness of specimens before testing. An Instron testing machine 
fitted with a four-point bending fixture was used to test specimens. The test was conducted 
at a rate of 0.85 mm/min, and a span of 32 mm was used for all specimens. The test was 
stopped when the specimens failed or when they reached a flexural strain of 20%. Force was 
converted into flexural stress, and displacement was converted into flexural strain.
Linker evaluation by four-point bending and pull-apart test
Linker strength and adhesion were evaluated with four-point bending and pull-apart tests, 
respectively. PCL triangular arms were molded and cut perpendicularly at the midpoint of 
the arm using a scalpel. Linkers were solvent-welded around the joint by applying acetone to 
the surface and pressing linkers around the “butt” joint. The specimens were stored at room 
temperature overnight to ensure complete evaporation of the solvent from the linker. 
Individual arms were incubated in air at day 0 and FaSSGF or fasted-state SIF (FaSSIF) for 
days 1, 2, and 7 at 37°C and 150 rpm. The arms were removed from the medium and 
immediately mechanically tested on an Instron testing machine. The arms were tested in 
flexion using a standard four-point bending fixture, ensuring that the arms had an overhang 
of 10% and the upper head did not press directly on the linker. The linkers were loaded until 
they reached a flexural displacement of 0.88 mm by applying displacement to the arm at a 
rate of 6 mm/min. The 0.88-mm maximum displacement was used to ensure that the results 
were indicative of the linker strength and not of compression of PCL. Linker adhesion was 
evaluated by clamping the arms with standard tensile grips. Displacement was applied to the 
Bellinger et al.
Page 13
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 arm at a rate of 6 mm/min until failure occurred at the linker. A total of 75 specimens were 
tested. Initially, five samples were used for initial establishment of gripping apparatus 
settings. At time 0, five pull-apart and five four-point bending samples were each tested. On 
days 1, 2, and 7, five pull-apart and five four-point bending samples were each tested in 
FaSSGF, and five pull-apart and five four-point bending samples were each tested in FaSSIF 
for a total of 20 per day.
Ivermectin in vitro release
Formulations of ivermectin in PCL polymer matrices were formed by blending crystalline 
powdered ivermectin into molten PCL at 90°C (except in formulations containing Eudragit 
E PO where 150°C was used). The polymer matrix was molded and cooled until solid in the 
desired shapes. Individual 200-mg arms of the star configuration were used for long-term 
release studies. Simulated GI media (SGF adjusted to pH 1.5 using NaCl and HCl) FaSSGF 
and FaSSIF were made by following the manufacturer’s instructions (Biorelevant) (47) and 
used to evaluate the rate of release. Because of the hydrophobicity and low water solubility 
of ivermectin, for purposes of evaluating differences between formulations, a polymeric 
surfactant (3% Kolliphor RH 40) was added into all in vitro release media. Polymeric 
formulations were incubated in shaking incubators (150 rpm, 37°C) in 10 ml of simulated 
GI fluids for up to 14 days, with daily solution exchanges to quantify rates of release.
Ivermectin stability tests
Acidic stability of ivermectin in a simulated gastric environment was evaluated using HPLC 
and LC-MS/MS analyses. Ivermectin was dissolved in IAW (70% isopropanol, 20% 
acetonitrile, and 10% water), and pH was adjusted to 1.5 using 1 M HCl and to 6 using 1 M 
NaOH. After vortexing for 1 min and sonicating for 10 min, tubes were placed in a shaking 
incubator (150 rpm, 37°C). Samples were collected at defined time points for up to 2 weeks 
and analyzed by HPLC and LC-MS/MS to quantify the stability of ivermectin.
Stability of ivermectin in fully formed gastric residence dosage forms was also studied. 
Ivermectin-loaded polymer samples were submerged in acidic conditions (pH 1, 37°C) for 
up to 2 weeks, and residual ivermectin within the formulation was extracted and analyzed by 
HPLC and/or LC-MS/MS. To extract ivermectin, we sonicated dosage forms in isopropanol 
for 10 min. Fresh drug in isopropanol was prepared immediately before analysis as a 
control.
Scanning electron microscopy
Surface morphology of the materials was observed using the JEOL 5600LV scanning 
electron microscope (SEM). For visualization under SEM, samples were fixed to aluminum 
stubs with double-sided adhesive carbon conductive tape and subsequently sputter-coated 
with carbon using a Hummer 6.2 Sputter System.
High-performance liquid chromatography
Drug concentration was analyzed using an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system equipped 
with a quaternary pump, autosampler, thermostat, control module, and diode array detector. 
The output signal was monitored and processed using the ChemStation software. 
Bellinger et al.
Page 14
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Chromatographic separation was carried out on a 50-mm × 4.6-mm EC-C18 Agilent 
Poroshell 120 analytical column with 2.7-µm spherical particles and was maintained at 
40°C. The optimized mobile phase consisted of acetonitrile, methanol, and buffer (pH 3.5 
adjusted with 0.1% formic acid) [72:20:8 (v/v)] at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min over a 10-min 
run time. The injection volume was 4 µl, and the ultraviolet detection wavelength of 254 nm 
was selected.
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectroscopy
Ultra-performance LC (UPLC) separation was carried out on a Waters UPLC aligned with a 
Waters Xevo TQ-SMS mass spectrometer (Waters Ltd.). MassLynx 4.1 software was used 
for data acquisition and analysis. LC separation was performed on an Acquity UPLC 
Charged Surface Hybrid C18 (50 mm × 2.1 mm; particle size, 1.7 µm) at 50°C. The mobile 
phase consisted of acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 10 mM ammonium formate solution and 
was flowed at a rate of 0.6 ml/min using a time and solvent gradient composition. The initial 
gradient (95%) was followed by a linear gradient (20%) over 0.5 min. The gradient was then 
brought to 0% over 1.75 min, held for 1.0 min, and finally shifted to the initial gradient of 
95% and held constant until the end of the run for column equilibration. The total run time 
was 4.25 min, and sample injection volume was 2.5 µl. The mass spectrometer was operated 
in the multiple reaction monitoring mode. Sample introduction and ionization was electron 
spray ionization (ESI) in the positive-ion mode.
Stock solutions of ivermectin and an internal standard doramectin were prepared in 
methanol at a concentration of 500 µg/ml. A 10-point calibration curve ranging from 0.5 to 
2500 ng/ml was prepared. Quality control samples were prepared in a similar procedure 
using an independent stock solution at three concentrations (2.5, 25, and 250 ng/ml). Two-
hundred microliters of internal standard was added to 100 µl of sample solution to cause 
precipitation. Samples were vortexed and sonicated for 10 min and then placed in a 
centrifuge for 10 min. Two-hundred microliters of solution was pipetted into a 96-well plate 
containing 200 ml of water. Finally, 2.5 µl of sample was injected into the UPLC-ESI-MS 
system for analysis.
Malaria mathematical models
Two well-established mathematical malaria models (28, 39, 40) were used to estimate the 
impact of long-lasting ivermectin on transmission dynamics and prevalence. Three drug 
durations (3, 14, and 30 days) were considered, with the assumption that mosquitoes blood-
feeding during the effective window would experience a considerably higher mortality rate. 
The amplified mortality rate was informed by pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics 
modeling (28) and resulted in a negligible fraction of mosquitoes surviving for 10 to 12 
days, the time it takes for a mosquito to become infectious after taking an infected blood 
meal. Two scenarios were chosen that add ivermectin as a component of MDA in multiple 
rounds in conjunction with DP: a seasonal southern Zambian setting with three annual dry-
season rounds 2 months apart (39, 40) and a nonseasonal African setting showing three 
rounds of mass treatment 1 month apart (28). Long-duration ivermectin dosing was 
restricted to individuals older than 10 years. The timing of interventions is based on 
recommendations from WHO and recent MDA intervention trials in Africa (13). A medium 
Bellinger et al.
Page 15
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and high transmission setting was chosen to model different starting prevalences and 
demonstrate the potential impact of long-lasting ivermectin in different settings. The 
populations covered in each round of treatment are assumed to be uncorrelated; that is, a 
random cross section of the population receives the drugs each round. This means that even 
with low coverage, almost all individuals will receive one or more treatments. This is an 
optimistic assumption with respect to the impact of artemisinin combination therapy but will 
have little effect on the predicted additional impact of the long-lasting ivermectin (because 
the primary driver of ivermectin in suppressing transmission is the reduction in the total 
vector density, this additional impact is not affected by whether the bitten individual is 
infectious or not).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank S. Kern, D. Hartman, S. Hershenson, and W. H. Gates from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for 
helpful discussions around the application and development approach of the extended release gastric-resident 
dosage form. We thank Pentax for providing the endoscopic equipment used for this research and, in particular, M. 
Fina for facilitating access to the equipment. We thank J. Haupt and M. Jamiel for help with the in vivo porcine 
work and J. Wardrobe for assistance with endoscopy consumables. We are grateful to all members of the Langer 
Laboratory, especially D. Glettig and A. Diciccio, for helpful discussions around gastric-resident dosage forms and 
material selection.
Funding
This work was funded, in part, by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (grant nos. OPP1096734 and 
OPP1139921), by NIH (grant no. EB-000244), and by the Alexander von Humboldt-Stiftung Foundation (Max 
Planck Research Award, Award Ltr Dtd. 2/11/08) (to R.L.). A.M.B. was supported in part by the NIH (T32 
5T32HL007604-29), and M.J. was supported in part by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada postdoctoral fellowship. H.C.S. was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (grant no. 
OPP1068440). E.A.W. and P.A.E. were supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates through the Global Good Fund. 
G.T. was supported in part by the Divisions of Gastroenterology at the Massachusetts General Hospital and 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Singh BN, Kim KH. Floating drug delivery systems: An approach to oral controlled drug delivery 
via gastric retention. J. Controlled Release. 2000; 63:235–259.
2. Berner B, Cowles VE. Case studies in swelling polymeric gastric retentive tablets. Expert Opin. 
Drug Delivery. 2006; 3:541–548.
3. El-said IA, Aboelwafa AA, Khalil RM, ElGazayerly ON. Baclofen novel gastroretentive extended 
release gellan gum superporous hydrogel hybrid system: In vitro and in vivo evaluation. Drug 
Delivery. 2016; 23:101–112. [PubMed: 24786486] 
4. das Neves J, Bahia MF, Amiji MM, Sarmento B. Mucoadhesive nanomedicines: Characterization 
and modulation of mucoadhesion at the nanoscale. Expert Opin. Drug Delivery. 2011; 8:1085–1104.
5. Cargill R, Caldwell LJ, Engle K, Fix JA, Porter PA, Gardner CR. Controlled gastric emptying. 1. 
Effects of physical properties on gastric residence times of nondisintegrating geometric shapes in 
beagle dogs. Pharm. Res. 1988; 5:533–536. [PubMed: 3244664] 
6. Cargill R, Engle K, Gardner CR, Porter P, Sparer RV, Fix JA. Controlled gastric emptying. II. In 
vitro erosion and gastric residence times of an erodible device in beagle dogs. Pharm. Res. 1989; 
6:506–509. [PubMed: 2762227] 
Bellinger et al.
Page 16
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Fix JA, Cargill R, Engle K. Controlled gastric emptying. III. Gastric residence time of a 
nondisintegrating geometric shape in human volunteers. Pharm. Res. 1993; 10:1087–1089. 
[PubMed: 8378252] 
8. Jensen MP, Irving G, Rauck R, Wallace M, Sweeney M, Vanhove GF. Long-term safety of 
gastroretentive gabapentin in postherpetic neuralgia patients. Clin. J. Pain. 2013; 29:770–774. 
[PubMed: 23370075] 
9. Zhang S, Bellinger AM, Glettig DL, Barman R, Lee Y-AL, Zhu J, Cleveland C, Montgomery VA, 
Gu L, Nash LD, Maitland DJ, Langer R, Traverso G. A pH-responsive supramolecular polymer gel 
as an enteric elastomer for use in gastric devices. Nat. Mater. 2015; 14:1065–1071. [PubMed: 
26213897] 
10. Noor AM, Kinyoki DK, Mundia CW, Kabaria CW, Mutua JW, Alegana VA, Fall IS, Snow RW. 
The changing risk of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection in Africa: 2000–10: A spatial and 
temporal analysis of transmission intensity. Lancet. 2014; 383:1739–1747. [PubMed: 24559537] 
11. World Health Organization (WHO). World Malaria Report 2015 (WHO/HTM/GMP/2016.2, 
WHO,). 2015. www.who.int/malaria/publications/world-malaria-report-2015/report/en/
12. Bhatt S, Weiss DJ, Cameron E, Bisanzio D, Mappin B, Dalrymple U, Battle KE, Moyes CL, Henry 
A, Eckhoff PA, Wenger EA, Briët O, Penny MA, Smith TA, Bennett A, Yukich J, Eisele TP, 
Griffin JT, Fergus CA, Lynch M, Lindgren F, Cohen JM, Murray CLJ, Smith DL, Hay SI, 
Cibulskis RE, Gething PW. The effect of malaria control on Plasmodium falciparum in Africa 
between 2000 and 2015. Nature. 2015; 526:207–211. [PubMed: 26375008] 
13. Newby G, Hwang J, Koita K, Chen I, Greenwood B, von Seidlein L, Shanks GD, Slutsker L, 
Kachur SP, Wegbreit J, Ippolito MM, Poirot E, Gosling R. Review of mass drug administration for 
malaria and its operational challenges. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2015; 93:125–134. [PubMed: 
26013371] 
14. The malERA Consultative Group on Drugs. A research agenda for malaria eradication: Drugs. 
PLOS Med. 2011; 8:e1000402. [PubMed: 21311580] 
15. Alexander NDE. Are we nearly there yet? Coverage and compliance of mass drug administration 
for lymphatic filariasis elimination. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2015; 109:173–174. [PubMed: 
25575555] 
16. Whitman TJ, Coyne PE, Magill AJ, Blazes DL, Green MD, Milhous WK, Burgess TH, Freilich D, 
Tasker SA, Azar RG, Endy TP, Clagett CD, Deye GA, Shanks GD, Martin GJ. An outbreak of 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in U.S. Marines deployed to Liberia. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 
2010; 83:258–265. [PubMed: 20682864] 
17. Rini EA, Weintrob AC, Tribble DR, Lloyd BA, Warkentien TE, Shaikh F, Li P, Aggarwal D, 
Carson ML, Murray CK. Infectious Disease Clinical Research Program Trauma Infectious Disease 
Outcomes Study Group, Compliance with antimalarial chemoprophylaxis recommendations for 
wounded United States military personnel admitted to a military treatment facility. Am. J. Trop. 
Med. Hyg. 2014; 90:1113–1116. [PubMed: 24732457] 
18. Nduka FO, Nwosu E, Oguariri RM. Evaluation of the effectiveness and compliance of intermittent 
preventive treatment (IPT) in the control of malaria in pregnant women in south eastern Nigeria. 
Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 2011; 105:599–605. [PubMed: 22325819] 
19. Lindley D. Merck’s new drug free to WHO for river blindness programme. Nature. 1987; 329:752.
20. Ramaiah KD, Ottesen EA. Progress and impact of 13 years of the global programme to eliminate 
lymphatic filariasis on reducing the burden of filarial disease. PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 2014; 
8:e3319. [PubMed: 25412180] 
21. Romani L, Whitfeld MJ, Koroivueta J, Kama M, Wand H, Tikoduadua L, Tuicakau M, Koroi A, 
Andrews R, Kaldor JM, Steer AC. Mass drug administration for scabies control in a population 
with endemic disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 2015; 373:2305–2313. [PubMed: 26650152] 
22. Ouédraogo AL, Bastiaens GJH, Tiono AB, Guelbéogo WM, Kobylinski KC, Ouédraogo A, Barry 
A, Bougouma EC, Nebie I, Ouattara MS, Lanke KHW, Fleckenstein L, Sauerwein RW, Slater HC, 
Churcher TS, Sirima SB, Drakeley C, Bousema T. Efficacy and safety of the mosquitocidal drug 
ivermectin to prevent malaria transmission after treatment: A double-blind, randomized, clinical 
trial. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2015; 60:357–365. [PubMed: 25414262] 
Bellinger et al.
Page 17
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 23. Sylla M, Kobylinski KC, Gray M, Chapman PL, Sarr MD, Rasgon JL, Foy BD. Mass drug 
administration of ivermectin in south-eastern Senegal reduces the survivorship of wild-caught, 
blood fed malaria vectors. Malar. J. 2010; 9:365. [PubMed: 21171970] 
24. Butters MP, Kobylinski KC, Deus KM, da Silva IM, Gray M, Sylla M, Foy BD. Comparative 
evaluation of systemic drugs for their effects against Anopheles gambiae . Acta Trop. 2012; 
121:34–43. [PubMed: 22019935] 
25. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), Stromectol FDA label (CDER, 2007). p. 
1-6.www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2009/050742s024s025lbl.pdf Accessed on 
November 6, 2016, previously accessed on July 14, 2016
26. Chaccour CJ, Kobylinski KC, Bassat Q, Bousema T, Drakeley C, Alonso P, Foy BD. Ivermectin to 
reduce malaria transmission: A research agenda for a promising new tool for elimination. Malar. J. 
2013; 12:153. [PubMed: 23647969] 
27. Seaman JA, Alout H, Meyers JI, Stenglein MD, Dabiré RK, Lozano-Fuentes S, Burton TA, 
Kuklinski WS, Black IV WC, Foy BD. Age and prior blood feeding of Anopheles gambiae 
influences their susceptibility and gene expression patterns to ivermectin-containing blood meals. 
BMC Genomics. 2015; 16:797. [PubMed: 26471037] 
28. Slater HC, Walker PGT, Bousema T, Okell LC, Ghani AC. The potential impact of adding 
ivermectin to a mass treatment intervention to reduce malaria transmission: A modelling study. J. 
Infect. Dis. 2014; 210:1972–1980. [PubMed: 24951826] 
29. Chaccour CJ, Rabinovich NR, Slater H, Canavati SE, Bousema T, Lacerda M, ter Kuile F, 
Drakeley C, Bassat Q, Foy BD, Kobylinski K. Establishment of the ivermectin research for malaria 
elimination network: Updating the research agenda. Malar. J. 2015; 14:243. [PubMed: 26068560] 
30. Chaccour C, Lines J, Whitty CJM. Effect of ivermectin on Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes fed on 
humans: The potential of oral insecticides in malaria control. J. Infect. Dis. 2010; 202:113–116. 
[PubMed: 20482251] 
31. Steketee RW, ter Kuile FO. Ivermectin as a complementary strategy to kill mosquitoes and stop 
malaria transmission? Clin. Infect. Dis. 2015; 60:366–368. [PubMed: 25414261] 
32. Kobylinski KC, Foy BD, Richardson JH. Ivermectin inhibits the sporogony of Plasmodium 
falciparum in Anopheles gambiae . Malar. J. 2012; 11:381. [PubMed: 23171202] 
33. Salessiotis N. Measurement of the diameter of the pylorus in man: Part I. Experimental project for 
clinical application. Am. J. Surg. 1972; 124:331–333. [PubMed: 5056893] 
34. Traverso G, Langer R. Perspective: Special delivery for the gut. Nature. 2015; 519:S19. [PubMed: 
25806494] 
35. Tarnoff M, Shikora S, Lembo A. Acute technical feasibility of an endoscopic duodenal-jejunal 
bypass sleeve in a porcine model: A potentially novel treatment for obesity and type 2 diabetes. 
Surg. Endosc. 2008; 22:772–776. [PubMed: 18270770] 
36. Laulicht B, Tripathi A, Schlageter V, Kucera P, Mathiowitz E. Understanding gastric forces 
calculated from high-resolution pill tracking. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2010; 107:8201–8206. 
[PubMed: 20404209] 
37. Aoyagi N, Ogata H, Kaniwa N, Uchiyama M, Yasuda Y, Tanioka Y. Gastric emptying of tablets 
and granules in humans, dogs, pigs, and stomach-emptying-controlled rabbits. J. Pharm. Sci. 1992; 
81:1170–1174. [PubMed: 1491333] 
38. Plumb, DC. Plumb’s Veterinary Drug Handbook. Blackwell Publishing; 2008. p. 6
39. Eckhoff P. Mathematical models of within-host and transmission dynamics to determine effects of 
malaria interventions in a variety of transmission settings. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2013; 88:817–
827. [PubMed: 23589530] 
40. Gerardin J, Eckhoff P, Wenger EA. Mass campaigns with antimalarial drugs: A modelling 
comparison of artemether-lumefantrine and DHA-piperaquine with and without primaquine as 
tools for malaria control and elimination. BMC Infect. Dis. 2015; 15:144. [PubMed: 25887935] 
41. WHO, Consensus modelling evidence to support the design of mass drug administration 
programmes (WHO 2015). www.who.int/malaria/mpac/mpac-sept2015-consensus-modelling-
mda.pdf
Bellinger et al.
Page 18
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 42. Chaccour C, Barrio ÁI, Royo AGG, Urbistondo DM, Slater H, Hammann F, Del Pozo JL. 
Screening for an ivermectin slow-release formulation suitable for malaria vector control. Malar. J. 
2015; 14:102. [PubMed: 25872986] 
43. Snoeck V, Huyghebaert N, Cox E, Vermeire A, Saunders J, Remon JP, Verschooten F, Goddeeris 
BM. Gastrointestinal transit time of nondisintegrating radio-opaque pellets in suckling and 
recently weaned piglets. J. Controlled Release. 2004; 94:143–153.
44. Merial. Ivermectin (IVOMEC) Material Safety Data Sheet (ISO/DIS 11014/29 CFR 1910.1200/
ANSI Z400.1, Merial. 2010
45. Mintz Y, Horgan S, Savu MK, Cullen J, Chock A, Ramamoorthy S, Easter DW, Talamini MA. 
Hybrid natural orifice translumenal surgery (NOTES) sleeve gastrectomy: A feasibility study using 
an animal model. Surg. Endosc. 2008; 22:1798–1802. [PubMed: 18437477] 
46. Guise GB, Smith GC. Properties of some cast polyurethane rubbers prepared from poly-ε-
caprolactone polyols and diisocyanates. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1980; 25:149–161.
47. Dressman JB, Reppas C. In vitro-in vivo correlations for lipophilic, poorly water-soluble drugs. 
Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2000; 11(Suppl. 2):S73–S80. [PubMed: 11033429] 
48. Griffin JT, Ferguson NM, Ghani AC. Estimates of the changing age-burden of Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria disease in sub-Saharan Africa. Nat. Commun. 2014; 5:3136. [PubMed: 
24518518] 
Bellinger et al.
Page 19
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Design of a modular gastric residence vehicle
(A) Schematic of deployment of gastric residence drug delivery dosage form via ingestible 
capsule. (B) Two families of geometric arrangements of flexible and rigid elements able to 
fit into a capsule and method of dissolution via fracture at designed failure points in 
presence of intestinal pH. Schematic enteric linkers, such as those evaluated in vitro (see fig. 
S3), are represented by black lines. (C) Stress distribution of the flexible element when it is 
folded into the capsule, generated with the finite element method. (D) Representative dosage 
form after assembly and loading into a 00el gelatin capsule. Linkers, such as those evaluated 
in vitro in fig. S3, are yellow and black.
Bellinger et al.
Page 20
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. In vivo evaluation of gastric residence dosage forms
(A) Representative lateral abdominal radiographs obtained immediately after administration 
to a pig of gelatin capsules containing the star-shaped dosage forms demonstrating rapid 
deployment. Arrowheads, location of dosage forms. (B) Survival analysis of 00el capsule 
containing the stellate dosage forms, individual arm pieces, and elastomer centers in the 
gastric cavity after administration on separate occasions to pigs [n = 6 pigs for stellate 
dosage forms, n = 4 for elastomer centers of the dosage forms, and n = 4 pigs for fragmented 
arms of the dosage forms (48 arms)]. P = 0.006 by Mantel-Cox log-rank test for significance 
of difference among survival curves. (C) Representative endoscopic images from days 0, 4, 
10, and 14 after dosage form administration to the swine large-animal model. Intact dosage 
forms reside in various locations in the gastric cavity, are mobile, and do not show 
mucoadhesion or obstruction of passage of solid food or liquids.
Bellinger et al.
Page 21
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. In vitro release and stability of ivermectin
(A) In vitro release of ivermectin (IVM) from drug-loaded stellate dosage forms with 
different formulations in SGF. (B) Summary of formulations used for in vitro release and 
mechanical testing, as in (A) and (F), respectively. (C) In vitro release of ivermectin in SGF, 
SIF, and fasted-state SGF (FaSSGF). (D) Representative high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) curves of ivermectin degradation after 3 days in SGF and of 
ivermectin stabilized in PCL and incubated in SGF for 0 and 14 days. (E) Ivermectin 
stability when homogenously dispersed in a PCL matrix versus in a solution after incubation 
in SGF (an acidic environment) over 14 days. (F) Flexural strength of drug-polymer blends 
after incubation in SGF for days 0, 1, and 7. Error bars represent SD for n = 3 samples in 
each group.
Bellinger et al.
Page 22
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. In vivo release of ivermectin
(A) Ivermectin serum concentration over 14 days after administration of various 
formulations in swine. (B) Composition of the formulations used for in vivo analysis. EUD 
EPO, Eudragit EPO. (C) Duration of therapeutic effect of long-acting ivermectin 
formulations compared to stromectol. Error bars represent SD for n = 3 samples in each 
group. AUC, area under the curve.
Bellinger et al.
Page 23
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. Mathematical malaria transmission model
(A) P. falciparum parasite rate (PfPR) as measured using rapid diagnostic test (RDT) for 
multiple stochastic realizations of MDA scenarios using the EMOD (epidemiological 
modeling) model (39, 40) in a high-transmission southern Zambian setting. Arrows indicate 
the timing of 60% coverage campaigns with DP (all ages) and ivermectin (people over 10 
years of age), and color indicates the duration of ivermectin efficacy: gray (no ivermectin), 
brown (3 days), pink (14 days), and green (30 days). Aligned on the same time axis, the 
inset shows the fraction of simulations with no remaining infections for each scenario. (B) 
Bellinger et al.
Page 24
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fraction of population positive by slide microscopy for MDA scenarios with DP and 
ivermectin using the model of Griffin et al. (48) in a nonseasonal African setting. 
Successively lower campaign coverage is traded off against higher ivermectin durations: 
90% coverage (blue), 80% coverage with 3-day ivermectin (yellow), 60% coverage with 14-
day ivermectin (pink), 50% coverage with 30-day ivermectin (green). (C) Sensitivity 
analysis showing the prevalence of infection across a range of initial prevalence and 
campaign coverage for the EMOD model after 2 years of intervention. Each marker 
represents a single stochastic simulation, and shaded areas represent interpolated mean 
values estimated by kernel regression. The baseline and follow-up prevalence values (PfPR) 
are taken from the intervals indicated in (A).
Bellinger et al.
Page 25
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
