 A U T O I M M U N I T Y
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
PD-L1 genetic overexpression or pharmacological
restoration in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
reverses autoimmune diabetes
Moufida Ben Nasr,1,2 Sara Tezza,1 Francesca D’Addio,1,2 Chiara Mameli,3 Vera Usuelli,1,2
Anna Maestroni,2 Domenico Corradi,4 Silvana Belletti,4 Luca Albarello,5 Gabriella Becchi,4
Gian Paolo Fadini,6 Christian Schuetz,7 James Markmann,7 Clive Wasserfall,8 Leonard Zon,9
Gian Vincenzo Zuccotti,2,3 Paolo Fiorina1,2,10*
Immunologically based clinical trials performed thus far have failed to cure type 1 diabetes (T1D), in part because
these approaches were nonspecific. Because the disease is driven by autoreactive CD4 T cells, which destroy b
cells, transplantation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) has been recently offered as a therapy for
T1D. Our transcriptomic profiling of HSPCs revealed that these cells are deficient in programmed death ligand
1 (PD-L1), an important immune checkpoint, in the T1D nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse model. Notably, the
immunoregulatory molecule PD-L1 plays a determinant role in controlling/inhibiting activated T cells and thus
maintains immune tolerance. Furthermore, our genome-wide and bioinformatic analysis revealed the existence of
a network of microRNAs (miRNAs) controlling PD-L1 expression, and silencing one of key altered miRNAs restored
PD-L1 expression in HSPCs. We therefore sought to determine whether restoration of this defect would cure T1D as
an alternative to immunosuppression. Genetically engineered or pharmacologically modulated HSPCs overexpress-
ing PD-L1 inhibited the autoimmune response in vitro, reverted diabetes in newly hyperglycemic NOD mice in vivo,
and homed to the pancreas of hyperglycemic NOD mice. The PD-L1 expression defect was confirmed in human
HSPCs in T1D patients as well, and pharmacologically modulated human HSPCs also inhibited the autoimmune
response in vitro. Targeting a specific immune checkpoint defect in HSPCs thus may contribute to establishing
a cure for T1D.
INTRODUCTION
Since the search for feasible and safe immunological approaches to
reestablish tolerance toward islet autoantigens and preserve b cell func-
tion in type 1 diabetes (T1D) began, little progress has been made clini-
cally (1–4). However, most immunotherapies tested thus far are simply
broadly immunosuppressive and are not linked to any immunological
abnormalities detected in T1D (5). Couri et al. (6) evaluated the safe-
ty and efficacy of autologous hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell
(HSPC) transplantation in combination with thymoglobulin plus cy-
clophosphamide as induction in newly diagnosed T1D patients. The
latest multicenter analysis on 65 newly diagnosed T1D patients treated
with autologous HSPC transplantation achieved insulin independence
in nearly 60% of treated patients (7), suggesting that HSPCs may be a
therapeutic option for selected T1D patients. HSPCs are endowed with
immunoregulatory properties, which have been shown to be linked to
the expression of the immune checkpoint PD-L1 (also known as
CD274) (8). PD-L1 is the ligand for the inhibitory programmed death
1 (PD-1) receptor, expressed primarily on activated T cells (9). Cross-
linking of PD-L1 and PD-1 inhibits T cell activation and favors their
exhaustion/apoptosis (10); mice deficient in PD-L1/PD-1 develop ac-
celerated diabetes (9). On the basis of these data, we hypothesized that
a defect in expression of the immune checkpoint PD-L1 in HSPCs
plays a role in T1D and that genetic or pharmacological restoration
of this defect would cure T1D. PD-L1+ HSPCs may play an important
endogenous immunoregulatory role, capable of eliminating auto-
reactive T cells but eventually becoming defective in T1D. This de-
ficiency may serve as a novel mechanism of disease for T1D and allow
for establishment of a therapeutic approach based on the restoration
of the PD-L1 defect in HSPCs.
RESULTS
A defect in PD-L1 is evident in HSPCs from nonobese
diabetic mice
To identify any defects in immunoregulatory molecules in HSPCs
derivedfromnonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, we performedbroadtran-
scriptomic profiling of immune-related molecules in murine HSPCs.
Sca-1+Lineage−c-kit+ (KLS) cells (or a subset of murine HSPCs) ob-
tained from 10-week-old normoglycemic NOD mice had decreased
PD-L1 transcripts as compared to HSPCs obtained from C57BL/6 mice
(Fig. 1, A and B, and table S1). Measurement of PD-L1 mRNA ex-
pression by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
confirmed reduction in NOD HSPCs as well (Fig. 1C). We next used a
range of techniques to demonstrate the defect in PD-L1 expression in
a variety of bone marrow HSPCs, including KLS cells, Lineage−c-kit+
(KL) cells, and long-term repopulating HSPCs (CD41−CD48−CD150+
and CD244−CD48−CD150+ cells), and compared it to the expression
observed in NOR (NOD-related diabetes-resistant) and C57BL/6 mice
(Fig. 1, D to G). The overall PD-L1 defect is primarily confined to NOD
mice (Fig. 1, D to G). We sought then to explore any association of the
1Nephrology Division, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. 2International Center for T1D, Pediatric Clinical Research Center Romeo ed
Enrica Invernizzi, “L. Sacco” Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University
of Milan, Milan 20157, Italy. 3Department of Pediatrics, Buzzi Children’s Hospital, Milan
20154, Italy. 4Pathology Unit, University of Parma, Parma 43126, Italy. 5Pathology Unit,
Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan 20132, Italy. 6Department of Medicine, University of Padua,
Padua 35100, Italy. 7Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA. 8Department of Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.
9Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. 10Department of Endocrinology, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco,
Milan 20121, Italy.
*Corresponding author. Email: paolo.fiorina@childrens.harvard.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
1 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 PD-L1 defect in HSPCs with age or disease status. We noticed a slight
decline in the number of KL–PD-L1+ cells in both strains with pro-
gressive age but again with a clear defect inNOD mice(Fig. 1H). Other
costimulatory molecules were evaluated as well, and no major signif-
icant differences were observed inHSPCs (fig. S1, A to D), suggesting a
uniqueness of the PD-L1 defect. The PD-L1 defect was primarily con-
fined to HSPCs in NOD mice, although other bone marrow–derived
myeloid immune cells were slightly deficient in PD-L1 expression
Fig. 1. PD-L1 is down-
regulated in HSPCs from
NOD mice. (A and B) Tran-
scriptomicprofilingofKLScells
obtained from bone marrow
of NODand C57BL/6 mice; n=
3 samples per group were
evaluated. Statistical analysis
was performed also by using
the software available (RT2
profiler PCR Array Data Anal-
ysis, Qiagen). TNF-a, tumor
necrosis factor–a. (C) Bar
graph representing mRNA ex-
pression of PD-L1 as mea-
sured by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) in KL cells, collected
from bone marrow of C57BL/6
and NOD mice. All samples
were run in triplicate and nor-
malized to expression of the
housekeeping gene GAPDH.
GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase.
(D to G) Representative flow
cytometric analysis and quan-
titative bar graphs assessing
PD-L1 expression in four pop-
ulations of HSPCs in C57BL/6
andNOD mice.(H)Represent-
ative flow cytometry and quan-
titative bar graphs of PD-L1
expression in KL cells obtained
fromthebonemarrowofC57BL/
6 and NOD mice at different
ages; n = 3 mice per group
were evaluated and for statis-
ticalanalysis,one-wayanalysis
of variance (ANOVA) followed
by Bonferroni multiple com-
parison test for group compar-
isons between C57BL/6 and
NOD mice. Lin, Lineage; Ab,
antibody; Hglc, hyperglycemic.
(I) Representative flow cyto-
metricanalysisandquantitative
bar graphs of PD-L1 expres-
sion in KL cells and in other
nonprogenitor cells from
bone marrow or spleen re-
spectively obtained from
C57BL/6 and NOD mice; n =
3 mice per group were evalu-
ated. (J and K) Confocal imag-
ing and quantification of
bone marrow sections of C57BL/6 and NOD mice for c-kit (shown in red) and PD-L1 (shown in green) staining (n = 5 sections per strain); the quantification of the orange-stained
bone marrow element was performed by ImageJ, and statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. Histology magnification, ×63.
Scale bar, 40mm.(L)Westernblottingandquantitativebargraphsconfirming reducedPD-L1proteinexpressioninKLcellsobtainedfrombonemarrowofC57BL/6andNODmice(n=
3 samples per group), with GAPDH used as an internal control. Data are expressed as means ± SEM. Data are representative of at least n = 3 mice. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
2 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (that is, F4/80+ and CD11b+ cells; Fig. 1I and fig. S1, E to M). A subset
of CD11c+ cells in NOD mice were PD-L1 high, whereas all CD11c+
cells in C57BL/6 mice expressed a low level of PD-L1; this could be a
compensatory effect in myeloid cells (Fig. 1I). To understand the ex-
tent of the PD-L1 defect within the HSPC niche, we analyzed bone
marrow tissues using confocal imaging. Fewer c-kit+PD-L1+ cells
were observed in samples obtained from NOD as compared to
C57BL/6 control mice (Fig. 1, J and K). Western blotting confirmed
reduced PD-L1 protein expression on KL cells obtained from NOD
bone marrow compared to C57BL/6 bone marrow (Fig. 1L). Our data
confirmed the existence of a defect in PD-L1 expression in HSPCs in
NOD mice.
The PD-L1 defect is associated with an altered network of
PD-L1–related microRNAs
To better understand the mechanism behind the PD-L1 defect in
HSPCs of NOD mice, we performed a series of in vitro experiments.
We first tested the effect of high glucose on PD-L1 expression and
then evaluated the existence of any HSPC survival defect that could
explain the deficiency in PD-L1. Isolated KL cells from NOD and
C57BL/6 mice were cultured for 3 days in high glucose, and there
was no evidence of a high glucose–associated effect on PD-L1 ex-
pression (Fig. 2A), although we cannot exclude the fact that the ob-
served PD-L1 defect may be caused by a metabolic derivative of high
glucose. No differences in the proliferation rate, and a slight difference
in the percentage of apoptotic cells, were detected among KL cells from
NOD or C57BL/6 mice (Fig. 2, B and C).
When extending our investigation into analysis of gene expres-
sion profiles, Affymetrix microarray analysis revealed 48 microRNAs
(miRNAs) differentially expressed in KLS cells of NOD and C57BL/6
mice (Fig. 2, D to F, and table S2). Data related to up-regulated and
down-regulated miRNAs observed in the genome-wide analysis
study (GWAS) performed on KLS cells obtained from NOD and
C57BL/6 mice are described in table S2, shown as an MA plot in
Fig. 2D and listed in Fig. 2 (E and F). Multiple databases and bio-
informatics tools [Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI), DIANA-
microT-CDS (http://microrna.gr/microT-CDS), and MouseMine
(www.mousemine.org)] enabled us to identify ~330 miRNAs pre-
dicted to target the PD-L1 gene and revealed a comprehensive miRNA
network associated with PD-L1 (Fig. 2G). Fourteen miRNAs appeared
as both key players in controlling PD-L1 expression and altered in
KLS cells obtained from NOD mice (Fig. 2, E to G). Next, to test
the proof of concept that an altered miRNA network may have in-
fluenced PD-L1 expression on HSPCs, we silenced miR-1905, one of
the miRNAs found altered in NOD HSPCs, in isolated KL cells
extracted from bone marrow of NOD mice (Fig. 2, H and I). Although
silencing one miRNA may influence other target genes, we chose to
target miR-1905 because of the fact that it was the only mature miRNA
among the six identified as relevant to PD-L1. Furthermore, miR-
1905 was confirmed as having the higher miRNA target gene score
or prediction score by the online software “DIANA-microT-CDS
(www.microrna.gr/microT),” thus indicating a higher probability of
affecting PD-L1 expression as compared to other miRNAs on the list.
miR-1905 antagomir increased the expression of PD-L1 transcripts
and protein in HSPCs (Fig. 2, I and J). An altered network of miRNAs
may be responsible for PD-L1 reduced expression in HSPCs. Finally,
we demonstrated the absence of a methylation of the PD-L1 promoter
in KLS cells from NOD mice, which could have accounted for the
PD-L1 defect (Fig. 2K).
Genetically engineered NOD HSPCs abrogate the
autoimmune response in vitro and in vivo and
revert hyperglycemia
We next tested the effect of a genetic engineering approach to over-
come the PD-L1 defect in NOD HSPCs. We genetically engineered
murine KL cells ex vivo to generate PD-L1.Tg (transgenic) KL cells
(Fig. 3A) from normoglycemic NOD mice by using third-generation
self-inactivating lentiviral vectors (Lvs), a technique that has potential
use in vivo because of its high efficiency and low risk of genotoxicity
(fig. S2A) (11). Immunofluorescence and GWAS of these PD-L1.Tg
KL cells confirmed the increase in PD-L1 expression compared to
mock–Lv-transduced KL cells (Fig. 3, B to D, and table S3). We then
explored the immunoregulatory properties of PD-L1.Tg KL cells in
an autoimmune setting in vitro. PD-L1.Tg KL cells generated from
normoglycemic NOD mice were cocultured at different ratios with
T cells (1:1, 1:5, and 1:10) with CD11c+ dendritic cells (DCs) and
BDC2.5 Tg CD4+CD25− T cells in the presence of the CD4-restricted
islet mimotope peptide BDC2.5. A significant decrease (P < 0.05) in
the percentage of interferon g–positive (IFN-g+)CD4+ T cells, as quan-
tified by flow cytometry, was evident when naïve T cells were co-
cultured with PD-L1.Tg KL cells as compared to those cultured alone
or cocultured with untransduced KL cells (Fig. 3, E and F). The gating
strategy was determined using nonreactive isotype-matched control
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) in each culture condition, in which
99% of nonreactive cells were excluded. When PD-L1.Tg KL cells were
precultured at a ratio of 1:1 to T cells with an anti–PD-L1–blocking
mAb, the aforementioned immunoregulatory effect was severely
hampered (Fig. 3, E and F). The robust and PD-L1–dependent
immunoregulatory properties of PD-L1.Tg KL cells were confirmed
using a CD8-restricted islet peptide–based assay [islet-specific glucose-
6-phosphatase catalytic subunit–related protein (IGRP)] (Fig. 3, G and
H) and an assay not specific to the autoimmune setting [anti-CD3/
anti-CD28 stimulation (Fig. 3, I and J)], thus confirming that PD-L1.
Tg HSPCs abrogate the autoimmune response in vitro. BDC2.5
Tg CD4+CD25− T cells appear to be more susceptible to the effect
of PD-L1 up-regulation as compared to IGRP Tg CD8+ T cells.
To understand the mechanism by which PD-L1.Tg KL cells exert
their immunosuppressive effects on autoreactive T cells, we per-
formed an apoptosis assay in vitro during a diabetogenic auto-
immune response by coculturing IGRP Tg CD8+ T cells from NOD
8.3 (stimulated with the islet peptide IGRP) or CD4+CD25− T cells
from NOD BDC2.5 (stimulated with the islet peptide BDC2.5) in
the presence of PD-L1.Tg KL or WT KL cells. PD-L1.Tg KL cells
induced late cell death of autoreactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
whereas only a minor effect was observed, primarily on autoreac-
tive CD8+ T cells, when WT KL cells were added (Fig. 3, K and L).
We explored whether a possible conversion into myeloid-suppressive
cells may partially explain the immunoregulatory effects of PD-L1.
Tg KL cells. Whereas after transduction the presence of T/B cell
markers was very scant, myeloid markers were strongly expressed
(Fig. 3M and fig. S2B).
To evaluate the immunoregulatory properties of PD-L1.Tg KL
cells in vivo, we adoptively transferred newly hyperglycemic NOD
mice intravenously with 3 × 106 PD-L1.Tg KL cells (Fig. 3N), and they
received doxycycline in the water (2 mg/ml) to induce PD-L1 expres-
sion, until the completion of the study, or with 3 × 106 untransduced
KL cells (Fig. 3N), respectively. PD-L1.Tg KL cells successfully re-
verted hyperglycemia in 100% of treated hyperglycemic NOD mice
with nearly 30% of treated mice remaining normoglycemic in the
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
3 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 2. Mechanism of PD-L1
down-regulationinNODHSPCs.
(A) Bar graphs depicting per-
centage of PD-L1+ cells within
KL cells isolated from bone mar-
row of C57BL/6 and NOD mice
and cultured for 3 days in normal
glucose, in 20 mM, or in 35 mM
high glucose. Experiments were
run in triplicate. NG, normal glu-
cose; HG-20, 20 mM high glu-
cose; HG-35, 35 mM high glucose.
(B) Proliferation rates of carboxy-
fluorescein succinimidyl ester
(CFSE)–labeled KL cells obtained
from C57BL/6 and NOD bone
marrow at baseline and after
1 and 3 days of culture. (C) Fre-
quency of apoptosis of KL cells
obtained from bone marrow of
C57BL/6 and NOD mice at base-
line and after 1 and 3 days of
culture. For statistical analysis
in (A) to (C), one-way ANOVA
followed by Bonferroni multiple
comparison test for group com-
parisons between C57BL/6 and
NOD mice; in (A): P = not signifi-
cant (ns); in (B): #P < 0.0001 ver-
sus all except NOD–day 0 (D0)
(P = ns); in (C): §P < 0.0001 versus
all except NOD-D0 (P = ns) and
NOD-D1 (P < 0.001); #P < 0.0001
versusallexceptNOD-D1(P=ns).
7-AAD, 7-aminoactinomycin D.
(D) MA plot for GWAS performed
in KLS cells obtained from bone
marrow of C57BL/6 compared to
NOD mice; MA-plot, log2 normal-
ized expression levels of expres-
sion for KLS cells from C57BL/6
(y axis) in comparison with KLS
cells from NOD (x axis). Avg, aver-
age. (E and F) List of miRNAs sig-
nificantly up-regulated (E) and
down-regulated (F) in KLS cells
obtained from the bone marrow
of NOD as compared to C57BL/6
mice. (G) miRNA network con-
trolling PD-L1 gene expression
generated with MGI. (H and I) KL
cells obtained from bone marrow
of NOD mice were cultured in the
presence of miR-1905 inhibitor,
and wild-type (WT) (untreated
KL) were used as controls. qRT-
PCR of miR-1905 (H) and qRT-PCR
ofPD-L1(I)areshown.Experimentswererunintriplicate,andstatisticalsignificancewasdeterminedusingtwo-tailedunpairedStudent’sttest.(J)Westernblottingandquantitativebargraphs
of PD-L1 protein expression in KL cells obtained from bone marrow of NOD mice cultured in the presence of miR-1905 inhibitor, and WT (untreated KL) were used as controls, with GAPDH
usedasaninternalcontrol.Experimentswere run in triplicate,andstatisticalsignificance wasdeterminedusingtwo-tailedunpairedStudent’sttest (P= 0.0005). (K)Methylationstatusofthe
PD-L1 locus in KLS cells obtained from the bone marrow of C57BL/6 and NOD mice. Experiments were run in triplicate, and statistical significance comparing methylated CpG% of C57BL/6
to NOD was determined using two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test. Data are expressed as means ± SEM. Data are representative of at least n = 3 mice. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.0001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
4 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 3. Genetically engineered PD-
L1.Tg KL cells abrogate the auto-
immune response in vitro and revert
diabetes in hyperglycemic NOD mice
in vivo. (A) Freshly isolated murine KL
cells were transduced with PD-L1 len-
tiviral particles, and 24 hours after
transduction, cells were collected for
fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) analysis; representative flow cy-
tometric analysis and quantitative bar
graph of KL cells obtained from bone
marrow of NOD mice before and after
transduction with PD-L1 lentivirus. Ex-
periments were run in triplicate, and
statistical significance comparing WT
to Tg postlentiviral PD-L1 transduction
was determined by using two-tailed
unpaired t test. (B) Confocal imaging
of KL cells obtained from bone marrow
of NOD mice pre- and postlentiviral
PD-L1 transduction confirmed PD-L1
up-regulation. Histology magnifica-
tion, ×63. Scale bar, 50 mm. DAPI, 4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole. (C and D)
MAplotandPD-L1foldchangeforgene
expression level in KL cells obtained
from bone marrow of NOD mice tran-
sduced with PD-L1 lentivirus as com-
pared to mock-transduced KL cells,
demonstrating PD-L1 up-regulation.
Experiments were run in triplicate,
and statistical analysis was performed
using pairwise ANOVA test. (E and F)
Representative flow cytometric anal-
ysis and quantitative bar graph of
IFN-g+CD4+ T cells isolated from NOD-
BDC2.5 T cell receptor (TCR) Tg mice
stimulated with BDC2.5 peptide in
the presence of DCs (control) or upon
coculture with untransduced KL cells
(WT), with PD-L1.Tg KL cells (at differ-
ent ratios), or with PD-L1.Tg KL cells
pretreated with anti–PD-L1–blocking
mAb, with the isotype control also
shown. aPD-L1, anti–PD-L1–blocking
mAb. (G and H) Representative flow
cytometric analysis and quantitative
bar graph of IFN-g+CD8+ T cells iso-
lated from NOD-8.3 TCR Tg mice stim-
ulated with IGRP peptide in the
presence of DCs (control), or upon co-
culture with WT KL cells, with PD-L1.Tg KL cells (at different ratios), or with PD-L1.Tg KL cells pretreated with PD-L1–blocking mAb. Experiments were run in triplicate, and statistical
significance was determined by using two-tailed unpaired t test; #P < 0.05 versus all except Tg 1:10 and anti–PD-L1–blocking mAb (P = ns); §P < 0.05 versus all. (I and J) Representative
flow cytometric analysis and quantitative bar graph of IFN-g+CD4+ T cells isolated from normoglycemic NOD mice stimulated with soluble anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (control), or upon
coculture with WT KL cells, with PD-L1.Tg KL cells (at different ratios), or with PD-L1.Tg KL cells pretreated with PD-L1–blocking mAb. PD-L1.Tg KL cells strongly abrogate the CD4- and
CD8-restricted autoimmune response and anti–CD3/CD28-dependent T cell stimulation in vitro. All experiments were run at least in triplicate, and statistical significance was
determined using two-tailed unpaired t test; #P < 0.05 versus all except WT (P = ns); §P < 0.05 versus all. (K and L) Naïve CD4+CD25− T cells isolated from BDC2.5 TCR Tg NOD mice
or CD8+ T cells from 8.3 TCR Tg NOD mice and stimulated with BDC2.5 or IGRP islet peptides and CD11c+ DCs were cocultured with KL cells (WT) or PD-L1.Tg KL cells, and the rate of
apoptosis of CD4 or CD8 T cells was assessed by flow cytometry. PD-L1.Tg KL cells’ effect on cell death in autoreactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells as compared to WT KL cells. Experiments
were run in triplicate, and statisticalsignificance was determined by using two-tailed unpairedt test. (M) Quantitative bar graphs for lymphoid and myeloid markers of isolated KL cells
before and after lentiviral transduction. GFP+, green fluorescent protein. (N) Newly hyperglycemic NOD mice were treated with WT KL cells, with PD-L1.Tg KL cells, and with dox-
ycycline or were left untreated. (O) Representative immunohistochemical hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) analysis and CD3/insulin staining in serial pancreatic islet tissue sections from
PD-L1.Tg KL cell–treated or untreated newly hyperglycemic NOD mice. Histology magnification, ×20. Scale bars, 200 mm. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.0001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
5 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 long term (Fig. 3N and fig. S2J), whereas none of the untreated
hyperglycemic NOD mice (Fig. 3N) or those treated with doxycycline
(Fig. 3N) reverted to normoglycemia. When untransduced KL cells
were used, one hyperglycemic NOD mouse reverted to normogly-
cemia, and another showed a mild transient improvement of glycemic
levels (Fig. 3N). Pathology of the pancreas of PD-L1.Tg KL cell–
treated hyperglycemic NOD mice revealed reduced islet infiltration,
with fewer CD3+ cells, preserved insulin staining, and improved
insulitis score as compared to hyperglycemic untreated NOD mice
(Figs. 3O and 4A). We then evaluated whether immunocompetence
was preserved in NOD mice during treatment with PD-L1.Tg KL cells.
PD-L1.Tg KL cell–treated NOD mice, untransduced KL cell–treated
NOD mice, and untreated NOD mice were immunized at day 14
after the onset of hyperglycemia with ovalbumin (OVA), and after
3 days, splenocytes were harvested and rechallenged in vitro with
OVA. In a 24-hour enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISpot) assay,
the T cell response against the OVA peptide was measured as number
of IFN-g–producing cells. Treated NOD mice were capable of moun-
ting a regular immune response to OVA similar to other groups
tested and were thus immunocompetent (Fig. 4B). Immunopheno-
typing of PD-L1.Tg KL cell–treated hyperglycemic NOD mice
showed at day 14 after treatment a twofold increase in the percent-
age of FoxP3+ regulatory CD4+ T cells as compared to untreated
mice (Fig. 4C). Furthermore, a reduction in IFN-g–producing
cells was evident in PD-L1.Tg KL cell–treated as compared to un-
treated hyperglycemic NOD mice in an ex vivo assay, when spleno-
cytes were challenged with islet peptides at day 40 after treatment
(Fig. 4D).
Genetically engineered HSPCs traffic to the pancreas in
hyperglycemic NOD mice
To explore the fate of infused PD-L1.Tg KL cells in NOD mice, we
performed a set of tracking experiments in the pancreas, spleen,
pancreatic draining lymph nodes (PLNs), and bone marrow using
the tracer ZsGreen, present on the vector used to transduce PD-L1.
Tg KL cells. PD-L1.Tg KL cells were adoptively transferred into nor-
moglycemic and hyperglycemic NOD mice, and tissues were har-
vested at days 1, 7, and 14 after infusion. ZsGreen+ cells and ZsGreen
mRNA expression were quantified in all tissues by flow cytometry
and qRT-PCR, respectively. PD-L1.Tg KL cells preferentially trafficked
to the pancreas once infused into hyperglycemic NOD (Fig. 4, E and
F), although they homed to a lesser extent to the PLN, bone marrow,
and spleen (Fig. 4, I, J, M, and N, and fig. S2C). Conversely, in nor-
moglycemic NOD mice, PD-L1.Tg KL cells rarely trafficked to the
pancreas, to the spleen, or to the PLN (Fig. 4, G, H, O, and P, and
fig. S2D) but instead preferentially homed to the bone marrow (Fig. 4,
K and L). Confocal imaging confirmed that ZsGreen+ cells were
absent in the pancreas of normoglycemic NOD mice (Fig. 4Q),
whereas they were detectable in the pancreata of hyperglycemic NOD
mice, particularly at day 1 after PD-L1.Tg KL cell infusion (Fig. 4R).
Although preferential homing of PD-L1.Tg KL cells to the bone mar-
row and to the spleen in hyperglycemic NOD mice was observed
based on ZsGreen transcript quantification by qRT-PCR, flow cy-
tometry and confocal imaging consistently showed trafficking of
PD-L1.Tg KL cells to the pancreas. We also performed a tracking
experiment using GFP+ KL cells (WT, untransduced KL cells) infused
into hyperglycemic NOD mice and examined these mice by flow cy-
tometry at days 1, 7, and 14; results showed no migration into the pan-
creas (fig. S2E). Moreover, we explored the chemokine receptor profile
of PD-L1.Tg KL cells to determine which chemokine receptors are
more likely involved in the homing of Tg HSPCs. Results showed that
CXCR4 is expressed by the largest proportion of cells and thus highly
involved in PD-L1.Tg KL cell trafficking (table S4). Bioluminescence
imaging of NOD mice adoptively transferred with luciferase+PD-
L1.Tg KL cells showed a rapid disappearance of luciferase+PD-L1.Tg
KL cells from the peripheral blood (Fig. 4, S and T). We also examined
whether PD-L1.Tg KL cells differentiated after their infusion into NOD
mice. Tracking studies revealed a predominant transformation into
myeloid cells (for example, CD11b) into the PLN of treated mice
(fig. S2, F to I). These PD-L1–expressing myeloid cells may interact
with autoreactive CD4 and CD8 T cells and may be contributing to
their demise.
Pharmacologically modulated HSPCs abrogate the
autoimmune response in vitro
To offer an alternative approach to gene therapy, we explored the
feasibility of pharmacological modulation of PD-L1. We first tested
the ability of single agents potentially capable of up-regulating PD-L1
in human CD34+ cells (Fig. 5, A to C) and then established a cocktail
of three agents {IFN-b, IFN-g, and polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid
[poly(I:C)]}, which robustly up-regulates PD-L1 (Fig. 5, D and E).
We then confirmed the ability of the cocktail to up-regulate PD-L1
in murine KL cells isolated from normoglycemic NOD mice, thus
generating pharmacologically modulated KL (pKL) cells (Fig. 5, F
to I, and tables S5 and S6). We then analyzed the expression of co-
stimulatory molecules and proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory
cytokines by flow cytometry, which demonstrated up-regulation
of interleukin-4 (IL-4), PD-1, CD80, CD86, and ICOSL in pKL cells
as compared to unmodulated-KL (Vehicle-KL) cells, with CD40
comparatively down-regulated in pKL cells (fig. S3, A and B). We ex-
plored the immunoregulatory properties of pKL cells in an auto-
immune setting in vitro. pKL cells generated from normoglycemic
NOD mice were cocultured at ratios of 1:1, 1:5, and 1:10 to T cells
with CD11c+ DCs and BDC2.5 Tg CD4+CD25− T cells in the presence
of BDC2.5 peptide. Quantification by flow cytometry revealed a
pronounced and significant decrease (P < 0.01) in the percentage of
IFN-g+CD4+ T cells when pKL cells were added to the assay as com-
pared to when unmodulated KL cells were used (Fig. 5, J and K). Im-
munoregulation was determined to be PD-L1–dependent by
preculturing pKL cells at a ratio of 1:1 to T cells with an anti–PD-
L1–blocking mAb, which resulted in a marked reduction in the
immunoregulatory effect (Fig. 5, J and K). These effects and PD-L1
dependency were confirmed in CD8-dependent (Fig. 5, M and N)
and in non–autoimmune-specific anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (Fig. 5, P and
Q) assays. Finally, we compared the immunosuppressive effects of
PD-L1.Tg KL cells, pKL cells, and unmodulated KL cells (WT) with
that of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells similarly obtained from
normoglycemic NOD mice. In the three aforementioned CD4- and
CD8-restricted autoimmune and anti-CD3/anti-CD28 assays, PD-
L1.Tg KL and pKL cells exerted robust immunoregulatory proper-
ties almost comparable or higher to those obtained with freshly
isolated CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells from normoglycemic NOD
(10 weeks old); this was particularly evident for PD-L1.Tg KL cells
(Fig. 5, L, O, and R, and fig. S4, A to C). A less pronounced effect
(but still significantly suppressive; P < 0.05) was observed when un-
modulated KL cells (WT) were added to the assays. Pharmacologically
modulated HSPCs are thus endowed with immunoregulatory proper-
ties and abrogate the autoimmune response in vitro.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
6 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 4. Genetically engineered
PD-L1.Tg KL cells traffic to the
pancreas in hyperglycemic NOD
mice. (A) Insulitis score: n = 9 sec-
tions per group were analyzed. Unt,
untreated. (B) OVA rechallenge test.
Data are representative of one exper-
iment performed in three mice per
group, and statistical significance
was determined by using two-tailed
unpaired t test. Unimm Unt, unimmu-
nized untreated; Imm Unt, immunized
untreated; Imm WT, immunized treated
with KL; Imm Tg, immunized treated
with PD-L1.Tg KL cells. (C) Immuno-
phenotypic analysis of lymphocytes
isolated from spleens by flow cyto-
metry of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs)
in PD-L1.Tg KL cell–treated NOD mice
as compared to untreated NOD mice.
Data are representative of one exper-
iment performed in three mice per
group, and statistical significance was
determined by using two-tailed un-
paired t test. (D) Quantification of
IFN-g–producing cells (with number
of spots normalized for background)
in an ex vivo assay, in which spleno-
cytes were challenged with islet pep-
tides [BDC2.5, IGRP, glutamic acid
decarboxylase 65 (GAD-65), and in-
sulin] 40 days after treatment in
newly hyperglycemic PD-L1.Tg KL
cell–treated NOD mice or in untreated
hyperglycemic NOD mice. Data are
expressed as means ± SEM, and sta-
tistical significance was determined
by using two-tailed unpaired t test.
Data are representative of at least
n = 3 mice. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P <
0.001. #P < 0.05 versus all; §P < 0.05
versus all. (E and G) Representative
flow cytometric analysis and quanti-
tative bar graphs of ZsGreen+PD-L1.
Tg KL cells in the pancreas of hyper-
glycemic (Hyper) and normoglycemic
(Normo) NOD mice at 1, 7, and 14 days
after treatment with PD-L1.Tg KL cells.
Experiments were run in triplicate [in
(F): in duplicate], and statistical sig-
nificance was determined by using
two-tailed unpaired t test. (F and
H) Quantification of ZsGreen mRNA
in the pancreas of hyperglycemic
and normoglycemic NOD mice by
qRT-PCR after treatment with PD-L1.Tg KL cells. (I and K) Bar graphs depicting flow cytometric quantification of ZsGreen+PD-L1.Tg KL cells and (J and L) quantification
of ZsGreen mRNA by qRT-PCR in the bone marrow of hyperglycemic and normoglycemic NOD mice, after treatment with PD-L1.Tg KL cells. Experiments were run in
triplicate [in (M): in duplicate], and statistical significance was determined by using two-tailed unpaired t test. (M and O) Bar graphs for flow cytometric quantification of
ZsGreen+PD-L1.Tg KL cells and (N and P) quantification of ZsGreen mRNA by qRT-PCR in the spleen of hyperglycemic and normoglycemic NOD mice. (Q and R) Confocal
imaging of pancreatic sections obtained from normoglycemic or hyperglycemic NOD mice after 1, 7, and 14 days after treatment with ZsGreen+PD-L1.Tg KL cells. Histology
magnification, ×63 in all confocal images. Scale bars, 5 mm. (S and T) Luminescent images of NOD mice adoptively transferred with luciferase+PD-L1.Tg KL cells after 1 and
7 days of treatment. Data are expressed as means ± SEM. Data are representative of at least n = 2 mice. Statistical significance was determined using two-tailed unpaired t test.
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. CTRL, control.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
7 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 5. pKL cells abrogate the autoimmune
response in vitro. (A to C) Results of screen-
ing of small molecules tested for their abil-
ity to up-regulate PD-L1 [mean fluorescence
intensity (MFI)] on mobilized CD34+ cells ob-
tained from healthy controls, the three-color
coding shown in (C) represents lowest PD-
L1 MFI values (orange), median PD-L1 MFI
values (yellow), and highest PD-L1 MFI
values (green). TLR, toll-like receptor; wp, well
plate. (D and E) PD-L1 expression (mRNAand
MFI) fold change was quantified for each
component of the small-molecule cocktail
tested singularly or in combination. Tx, treat-
ment. (F) Representative flow cytometric anal-
ysis and quantitative bar graph of PD-L1
expression on KL cells from NOD mice pre-
and postpharmacological modulation with a
cocktail of small molecules (n = 3 from two
independent experiments), and statistical
significance was performed by using two-
tailed unpaired t test. (G) Confocal imaging
of KL cells pre- and postmodulation with
cocktail of small molecules, showing DAPI (in
blue) and PD-L1 (in red) staining. Histology
magnification, ×63. Scale bar, 50 mm. (H and I)
MA plot and fold change for gene expression
in KL cells obtained from bone marrow of
NOD mice and pKL as compared to un-
modulated KL cells (Vehicle-KL cells, WT) n =
3 samples per condition, and statistical signif-
icance was performed using pairwise ANOVA
test. (J and K) Representative flow cytomet-
ric analysis and quantitative bar graph for
IFN-g+CD4+ T cells isolated from NOD-BDC2.5
TCRTgmiceandstimulatedwithBDC2.5peptide
in the presence of DCs (Controls) or upon co-
culture with unmodulated KL (WT), with pKL
cells (at different ratios), or with pKL cells pre-
treated with anti–PD-L1–blocking mAb with
the isotype control also shown; n = 3 samples
per condition, and statistical significance was
performed using two-tailed unpaired t test.
#P < 0.05 versus all; §P < 0.05 versus all except
Tg. 1:10. (L) Bar graph for flow cytometric
quantification of IFN-g+CD4+ T cells after co-
culture of CD4+ T cells isolated from NOD-
BDC2.5 TCR Tg mice stimulated with BDC2.5
peptide in the presence of DCs (control) or
upon coculture with unmodulated KL cells
(WT), with pKL cells, with PD-L1.Tg KL cells, or with CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells; n = 4 samples per condition were used, and statistical significance was performed using two-tailed
unpaired t test; #P < 0.05 versus all. (M and N) Representative flow cytometric analysis and quantitative bar graph for IFN-g+CD8+ T cells isolated from NOD-8.3 TCR Tg mice and
stimulatedwith IGRPpeptidein the presence ofDCs(control)oruponcoculture with unmodulatedKLcells(WT), withpKLcells(atdifferentratios),orwithpKLcellspretreatedwith anti–
PD-L1–blockingmAb.Experimentswere runintriplicate (n=3forcontrols,alltherestn≥5),andstatisticalanalysiswasperformedusingtwo-tailedunpairedttest. (O)Bargraphforflow
cytometric quantification of IFN-g+CD8+ T cells after coculture of CD8+ T cells isolated from NOD-8.35 TCR Tg mice stimulated by IGRP peptide in the presence of DCs (control) or upon
coculture with unmodulated KL cells (WT), with pKL cells, with PD-L1.Tg KL cells, or with CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells. Experiments were run in triplicate (n = 4 for controls and WT,
all the rest n = 3), and statistical analysis was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test (P and Q) Representative flow cytometric analysis and quantitative bar graph for IFN-g+CD4+
TcellsisolatedfromNODmice andstimulatedwith soluble anti-CD3/anti-CD28(control)orupon coculture with unmodulatedKL cells (WT), with pKL cells (atdifferentratios), orwith
pKL cells pretreated with PD-L1–blocking/–neutralizing mAb. Experiments were run in triplicate [n = 3 for all conditions except for anti–PD-L1 (n = 4)], and statistical analysis was
performed using two-tailed unpaired t test; in (R): #P < 0.05 versus all except anti–PD-L1–blocking mAb and pKL 1:10 (P = ns); §P < 0.05 versus all. (R) Bar graph depicting flow
cytometric quantification of IFN-g+CD4+ T cells within CD4+CD25− T cells isolated from NODmice and stimulated with soluble anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (control) or upon coculture with
WT, with pKL, with PD-L1.Tg KL cells, or with CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells. Experiments were run in triplicate [n = 3 for all conditions, except for WT (n = 4)], and statistical
analysis was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. Data are expressed as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.0001. #P < 0.05 versus all; §P < 0.05 versus all.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
8 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pharmacologically modulated HSPCs revert hyperglycemia
in vivo
To evaluate the effect of pKL cells in vivo, newly hyperglycemic NOD
mice were adoptively transferred with 3 × 106 pKL cells (Fig. 6A). pKL
cells successfully reverted diabetes in 40% of treated newly hyper-
glycemic NOD mice, with 30% remaining normoglycemic until the
completion of the study at day 40. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed a
greater effect of PD-L1.Tg KL cells in reverting hyperglycemia in
NOD mice, as compared to pKL cells (Fig. 6B). Quantification of
IFN-g–producing cells in an ex vivo assay where splenocytes were
challenged with islet peptides at day 40 (BDC2.5, IGRP, GAD-65,
and insulin) revealed a reduction in IFN-g–producing cells in pKL
Fig. 6. pKLcellsreverthyperglycemiain NOD mice in vivo. (A and B) Newly hyperglycemic NODmice were treated with WT cells, pKL cells, or Tg cells. Data are representative
of 10 untreated mice, 10 mice treated with WT cells, 10 mice treated with pKL cells, and 15 mice treated with Tg cells. Incidence of diabetes in all groups of NOD mice (untreated,
WT-treated, pKL-treated, and Tg-treated mice) was compared using the log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test; #P < 0.0001 versus all, P < 0.0001 for Tg versus WT, and P < 0.05 for pKL versus
WT. (C) Quantification of IFN-g–producing cells in an in vitro assay, in which splenocytes isolated from newly hyperglycemic pKL-treated NOD mice or in untreated hyperglycemic
NOD mice 40 days after treatment were challenged with islet peptides after treatment with pKL, normalized for background. Experiments were run in triplicate, and statistical
analysis was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. (D) Immunophenotype of lymphocytes isolated from spleen of pKL-treated newly hyperglycemic NOD mice showed an
increase in the percentage of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells. Experiments were run in triplicate (n = 3 pKL-treated and n = 5 untreated), and statistical analysis was performed using two-
tailed unpaired t test. (E to G) Bar graph showing the levels of pro- (IL-2/IL-6) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4) cytokines as measured by Luminex in the serum of untreated or pKL-
treated newly hyperglycemic NOD mice at baseline and at 7 days after treatment. Experiments were run in triplicate per group, and condition (D0 and D7) and statistical analysis
were performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. (H) OVA rechallenge. Experiments were run in triplicate per group, and statistical analysis were performed using two-tailed
unpaired t test, #P < 0.05 versus all. (I) Insulitis score in untreated and pKL-treated newly hyperglycemic NOD mice. (J and K) Representative immunohistochemical H&E analysis
and CD3/insulin staining in serial pancreatic islet tissue sections from pKL-treated or untreated NOD mice; n = 9 sections per group were analyzed. Histology magnification, ×20.
Scale bars, 200 mm. Data are expressed as means ± SEM. Data are representative of at least n = 3 mice. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.0001; #P < 0.05 versus all.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
9 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cell–treated hyperglycemic NOD mice (Fig. 6C). Immunopheno-
typing of treated NOD mice at day 40 after treatment showed a
marked increase in FoxP3+ regulatory CD4+ T cells (Fig. 6D). A reduc-
tion in the peripheral levels of proinflammatory (IL-2/IL-6; Fig. 6, E
and F) and an increase in anti-inflammatory (IL-4; Fig. 6G) cytokines
were evident in pKL cell–treated NOD mice. We then evaluated whether
immunocompetence was maintained during treatment of NOD mice
with pKL cells, as we did when using PD-L1.Tg KL cells. pKL cell–
treated NOD mice were capable of mounting a regular immune re-
sponse to OVA once immunized and rechallenged in vitro with OVA
similar to untreated NOD mice and were thus immunocompetent (Fig.
6H). Pathology of the pancreas of pKL cell–treated NOD mice revealed
mild infiltration of the islets, with preserved insulin staining and re-
duced insulitis score as compared to untreated hyperglycemic NOD mice
(Fig. 6, I to K). Finally, we tested the effects of a PD-1 signaling mAb
capable of mimicking PD-L1/PD-1 cross-linking. PD-1 mAb treat-
ment did not delay diabetes onset in prediabetic NOD mice nor did
it revert diabetes in newly hyperglycemic NOD mice (fig. S4, D and
E). It is possible that the mAb used was unable to reach the in-
flamed islets within the pancreas, which conversely could be ac-
cessed by modified HSPCs because of their CXCR4 expression,
which allows the trafficking of HSPCs into inflamed areas that re-
lease high levels of CXCL12.
The PD-L1 defect is evident in human HSPCs from T1D patients
and is associated with an altered miRNA network, and
pharmacologically modulated HSPCs reinstate PD-L1
expression and immunoregulatory properties
To assess whether patients with T1D displayed defects in HSPCs
similar to those observed in our preclinical models, PD-L1 expression
was analyzed on CD34+ cells isolated from peripheral blood (table S7).
In line with our findings in NOD mice, fewer PD-L1+CD34+ cells were
detectable in T1D patients as compared to healthy controls (Fig. 7A).
The defect was evident in newly diagnosed T1D patients as well, when
it is unlikely there is any effect of high glucose (fig. S5A). Western blot
and PCR analysis confirmed reduced PD-L1 protein and mRNA ex-
pression in CD34+ cells obtained from T1D patients as compared to
those obtained from healthy controls (Fig. 7, B and C). Other relevant
immune cells were not deficient in PD-L1 (fig. S5, B to D), thus
confirming that the PD-L1 defect is mainly restrained to HSPCs in
T1D patients. PD-L2 was expressed on CD34+ cells from T1D patients
at higher levels as compared to controls; however, PD-L2 has been
described to be less relevant for T1D onset as shown by the lack of
effect when knocking down PD-L2 in NOD mice (fig. S5, E to G) (9).
PD-1 expression was significantly slightly reduced (P < 0.05) by MFI
in T1D patients compared to healthy controls (fig. S5, H to J). Finally,
we confirmed by confocal imaging a reduced number of PD-L1+CD34+
cells in the bone marrow of T1D patients as compared to healthy
controls (Fig. 7, D and E). Our data confirmed the existence of a
defect in PD-L1 expression in HSPCs of T1D patients. We analyzed
the effect of plerixafor-mediated mobilization, used in clinic (8, 12),
on PD-L1 expression in CD34+ cells obtained from five T1D pa-
tients and eight healthy controls (table S8). Whereas the percentage
and absolute number of CD34+ cells significantly increased (P <
0.05), the percentage of PD-L1+CD34+ cells remained stable in
T1D patients but decreased after mobilization in healthy controls,
highlighting that CD34+ cell mobilization may have failed in pre-
vious clinical trials because of PD-L1 down-regulation (fig. S8, A
to C).
To understand the immunological basis of the PD-L1 defect in
human HSPCs, we performed in vitro experiments similar to those
we performed in mice. We did not find any potential high glucose–
associated effect on PD-L1 expression on CD34+ cells or only small
differences, if any, in the proliferation and apoptosis rate in CD34+ cells
obtained from T1D patients and controls (Fig. 7, F to H). Bioinformatic
analysis of miRNAs showed a number of miRNA species involved in
controlling PD-L1 expression (Fig. 7I). qRT-PCR analysis of several
relevant miRNAs confirmed that a number of miRNA species were dif-
ferentially expressed in human CD34+ cells obtained from T1D patients
as compared to controls (Fig. 7J), with no differences observed in the
methylation status of the promoter of the PD-L1 gene (Fig. 7K). In line
with preclinical findings, an altered miRNA network is evident in
HSPCs of T1D patients.
We tested the effect of overcoming PD-L1 deficiency in human
HSPCs by using the same cocktail of small molecules tested in
NOD mice. As shown by flow cytometric analysis, confocal imaging,
and qRT-PCR, modulation of CD34+ cells with a cocktail of three
agents [IFN-b, IFN-g, and poly(I:C)], up-regulated PD-L1 expression
in human CD34+ cells obtained from T1D patients [pharmacologically
modulated CD34+ (pCD34+)] as compared to unmodulated CD34+
cells (Fig. 7, L to N). Immunophenotyping and transcriptome pro-
filing of pCD34+ cells (figs. S6, A and B, and S7, A and B, and table
S9) confirmed specific PD-L1 up-regulation in pCD34+ cells as com-
pared to unmodulated CD34+ cells. To study the ex vivo immuno-
regulatory functions of pCD34+, CD34-depleted peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were cocultured with unmodulated
CD34+ or pCD34+ cells in the presence of insulin-associated auto-
antigen 2 (I-A2), and the number of IFN-g–producing cells was quan-
tified in an ELISPot assay. The addition of unmodulated CD34+ or
pCD34+ resulted in a significant decrease (P < 0.05) in the number
of IFN-g–producing cells as compared to those obtained when
PBMCs were cultured without unmodulated CD34+/pCD34+ cells
in the presence of the islet peptide IA-2 (Fig. 7, O and P). The sup-
pression was more pronounced when pCD34+ cells were added,
suggesting that pCD34+ cells are endowed with greater immuno-
regulatory activity than unmodulated CD34+ cells (Fig. 7, O and P).
To further confirm that the immunosuppressive effect exerted by
pCD34+ cells was primarily due to PD-L1 expression, we precultured
pCD34+ cells in the presence of an anti–PD-L1–blocking mAb and
then tested them in the autoimmune assay. Ab-mediated PD-L1
blockade hampered the immunoregulatory effect exerted by pCD34+
cells (Fig. 7, Q and R). Surprisingly, the effects of pCD34+ were not
confirmed in a non–autoimmune-specific anti-CD3/anti-CD28 assay
(Fig. 7S). Overall, our data confirmed that pCD34+ cells are endowed
with PD-L1–dependent immunoregulatory properties.
DISCUSSION
T1D is regarded as one of the most aggressive autoimmune diseases
and requires lifelong exogenous insulin administration. Efforts to halt
b cell decline or stall chronic complications are ongoing (13–15); how-
ever, the immunotherapies tested thus far have failed, mostly because
of their lack of specificity as well as the fact that they are usually sim-
ply adopted from other settings (for example, kidney transplantation)
(16–18). The need for more T1D-tailored therapies led us to explore
the existence of immune checkpoint abnormalities that may be re-
levant to the disease. Various pieces of evidence led us to hypothesize
that an HSPC-specific PD-L1 defect may be involved in the onset of
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
10 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 7. The PD-L1 defect is evident in
HSPCs from T1D patients. (A) Repre-
sentative flow cytometric and quantita-
tive bar graph of PD-L1+CD34+ cells from
patients with T1D as compared to healthy
controls (n = 10 from each group), and
statistical significance was performed
by using two-tailed unpaired t test.
(B) Western blot analysis and (C) qRT-
PCR confirmed the PD-L1 defect in CD34+
cells from T1D patients (n = 3 in each
group), and statistical significance was
performed by using two-tailed unpaired
t test. (D and E) Confocal imaging and
quantitative bar graph of bone marrow
sections obtained from T1D patients and
healthy controls showing PD-L1 (green)
and CD34 (red) staining; the quantifica-
tion of the orange-stained bone marrow
element was performed by ImageJ. Data
are representative of n = 5 sections per
group, and statistical significance was
performed using two-tailed unpaired
t test with Welch’s correction. Histology
magnification, ×63. Scale bar, 40 mm.
(F) Bar graph depicting the percentage
of PD-L1 on CD34+ cells obtained from
peripheralbloodofT1Dpatientsorhealthy
controls at baseline or cultured for 3 days
in normal glucose, in 20 mM, or in 35 mM
high glucose (n = 3 samples from each
group), and statistical significance was
performed using two-tailed unpaired t
test; #P < 0.05 versus all except T1D
HG-35 and CTRL HG-20; §P < 0.05 versus
all except T1D HG-35 (ns) and T1D HG-20
(ns). (G) CFSE-based proliferation assay
of peripheral CD34+ cells obtained from
T1D and healthy control patients at base-
line and after 1 and 3 days of culture (n =
3 samples from each group), and statis-
tical significance was performed using
two-tailed unpaired t test; #P < 0.0001
versus all except T1D-D0; §P < 0.0001 ver-
sus all except CTRL-D0 (ns). (H) Frequency
of apoptosis of CD34+ cells obtained from
T1D and healthy control patients at base-
line and after 1 and 3 days of culture. Ex-
periments were run in triplicate, and
statistical significance was performed
using two-tailed unpaired t test. (I) Table
of human miRNAs, discovered by bioinformatic approach, involved in the regulation of PD-L1 expression. (J) qRT-PCR showed differentially expressed miRNA in human CD34+
cells obtained from T1D patients as compared to controls (at least n = 5 samples from each group), and statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test with
Welch’s correction. (K) DNA methylation status of the PD-L1 gene promoter in peripheral CD34+ cells obtained from T1D patients as compared to healthy controls (n = 2 samples
from each group). Statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. (L) Representative flow cytometric and quantitative bar graph of
PD-L1 expression on peripheral CD34+ cells from T1D patients pre- and postpharmacological modulation with a cocktail of small molecules. Experiments were run in triplicate, and
statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. (M) Confocal imaging of PD-L1 expression on CD34+ cells from T1D patients pre- and postpharmacological
modulation. Histology magnification, ×63. Scale bar, 50 mm. (N) PD-L1 expression fold change in pCD34+ after 24 hours and in vehicle-treated CD34+ cells as assessed by RT-PCR.
Experiments were run in duplicate, and statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. (O to R) Quantification of IFN-g–producing cells where human
PBMCs from T1D were challenged with IA-2 in the presence of unmodulated CD34+ or pCD34+ cells with or without an anti–PD-L1–blocking mAb. Experiments were run in
triplicate, andstatisticalsignificance wasperformedusingtwo-tailedunpaired ttest. Experimentswere performedatleastin triplicate;in(R):Datarelatedtoanti–PD-L1treatmentwere
performed in duplicate, and statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. (S) Quantification of IFN-g–producing cells where human PBMCs from T1D already
stimulated with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 were cocultured in the presence of unmodulated CD34+ or pCD34+ cells with or without an anti–PD-L1–blocking mAb. Experiments were run in
duplicate, and statistical significance was performed using two-tailed unpaired t test. Data are expressed as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. #P < 0.05 versus all.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
11 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 T1D and that the resolution of this defect may provide a cure for the
disease. First of all, the expansion and reinfusion of autologous HSPCs
were the most potent therapy in reverting hyperglycemia in T1D pa-
tients (7); second, there is a strong link between the PD-L1 defect and
T1D (9, 19); and finally, PD-L1 is a key player in HSPC immunobiology,
such that the lack of PD-L1 reduces the ability of HSPCs to abrogate the
immune response (8). Whereas immunosuppressant treatment alone
[that is, antithymocyte globulin (ATG)] failed to preserve b cell function
in recent onset T1D, HSPCs plus immunosuppressant were successful in
the Voltarelli trial (20). This result suggests either that there is a syner-
gistic effect between HSPCs and immunosuppression or that a defect
prevents HSPCs from being fully effective in their suppression. Tran-
scriptomic profiling, flow cytometric analysis, RT-PCR, and direct anal-
ysis of bone marrow showed a reduction in PD-L1 expression in HSPCs
in both NOD mice and T1D patients. Whereas high glucose, altered
HSPC survival, or epigenetic abnormalities cannot account for the im-
paired PD-L1 expression, gene expression profiling unveiled abnorm-
alities in the HSPC miRNA network in T1D that may be responsible
for the PD-L1 defect. Therefore, we developed a genetic approach to
overcome the PD-L1 defect and generated PD-L1.Tg HSPCs, which suc-
cessfully abrogated the autoimmune response in vitro in a PD-L1–
dependent manner. Notably, our PD-L1.Tg HSPCs successfully converted
all treated hyperglycemic NOD mice to normoglycemia, with suppression
of the autoimmune response. Tracking studies suggested that PD-L1.Tg
HSPCs preferentially homed to the inflamed pancreas, most likely be-
cause of substantial CXCR4 expression, which is in line with the
CXCL12 shown to be released by inflamed pancreatic islets (21). The
persistence of a regular immune response against OVA, but not against
islet peptides, suggests both the maintenance of immunocompetence
and the idea that autoreactive T cells only are strictly dependent from
the PD-L1/PD-1 pathway for tolerance/anergy induction.
Once in the pancreas, PD-L1.Tg HSPCs may induce cell death
of autoreactive T cells or may just render them unresponsive. The
recent progress in the field of gene therapy (22) provides a basis for
the potential use of the aforementioned genetic approach in T1D as
well. Clinically relevant, our pharmacologically modulated HSPCs
also exhibited immunoregulatory effects because they markedly ab-
rogated CD4- and CD8-restricted autoimmune responses in vitro
and reverted diabetes in nearly 40% of newly hyperglycemic NOD
mice. The human data parallel the preclinical findings, confirming the
presence of the PD-L1 defect in human CD34+ cells. Our results have
two major implications. First, we may have identified a path involved
in the onset of T1D, and the PD-L1 defect in HSPCs may have a per-
missive role on the generation of autoreactive T cells (23). We can
now propose a working hypothesis, in which an altered network of
miRNAs is responsible for the PD-L1 defect in HSPCs in T1D. The ge-
netic and pharmacological restoration of this PD-L1 defect in HSPCs in
T1D generates a new pool of PD-L1+ HSPCs, which, once adoptively
transferred, traffic to the pancreas, and they may be able to either delete
or to render unresponsive autoreactive T cells via a PD-L1/PD-1–
dependent mechanism, thus reverting hyperglycemia (fig. S8D). How-
ever, it is also possible that other HSPC-derived cells may abrogate the
autoimmune response in the pancreas.
Our study thus provides key insight into the potential role of
miRNAs in the regulation of PD-L1 expression of HSPCs and poten-
tially of T1D pathogenesis. Second, expression of PD-L1 in HSPCs
may be used as a tool for targeted immunotherapy in T1D, which
appears more efficacious than mAbs in animal models and also
appears to be safe (24, 25).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The objective of our study was to demonstrate the existence of a defect
in PD-L1 expression on HSPCs in NOD mice and T1D individuals.
We then sought to use genetic engineering/pharmacological mod-
ulation to restore/up-regulate PD-L1 defect in HSPC and study their
effect on autoimmune diabetes. NOD mice were treated and followed
until day 40 or earlier to avoid the wasting syndrome. Between 10 and
15 NOD mice were allocated in the different treatment groups randomly
with our NOD colony exhibiting a consistent diabetes penetrance
(that is, 80% at 25 weeks) (2, 3). Sample analysis and pathology were
blinded. Primary data were reported in table S10.
Human studies
T1D patients and healthy patients matched for age and gender were
enrolled (table S7). This study was conducted in accordance with Insti-
tutional Review Board approval (BCH 3851).
In vitro human studies
Isolated human CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells were stimulated for
24 hours with human IFN-b (hIFN-b), hIFN-g, and poly(I:C). PD-L1
expression was evaluated before and after culture by different techni-
ques (qRT-PCR, FACS, and confocal imaging) (26). PBMCs isolated
from T1D patients were cultured for 2 days in the presence of I-A2 pep-
tide. Cells were plated with or without CD34+ or pCD34+ cells. hIFN-g
spots were counted using an ELISpot reader.
Animal studies
Animalstudies were conducted in NOD and C57BL/6 mice; all the mice
were usedaccording to institutionalguidelines,andanimalprotocolwas
approved by the Boston Children’s Hospital Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee. A complete description of the different murine
strains used is provided in the Supplementary Materials.
In vitro murine studies
Murine bone marrow KL cells were transduced with PD-L1 lentivirus,
and 24 hours after transduction PD-L1 expression was evaluated by
multiple techniques (qRT-PCR, FACS, and confocal imaging). In vitro
assays were performed by coculturing KL–PD-L1.Tg KL cells, un-
modulated KL cells, or pKL with CD4+CD25−/CD8+ T cells extracted
from splenocytes of NOD-BDC2.5 TCR Tg mice or 8.3 TCR Tg NOD
mice in the presence of islet mimotope peptides.
In vivo interventional murine studies
Newly diabetic NOD mice were treated with PD-L1.Tg KL cells, un-
modulated KL cells, or pKL, and glycemia was monitored daily (27).
Mechanistic studies were conducted on different groups of treated
NOD mice and compared to untreated NOD mice (ELISPot, flow cy-
tometry, Luminex).
Statistical analysis
Unless otherwise indicated, all data, including human data, were shown
as means ± SEM. Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired Stu-
dent’s t test. A two-sided value of P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. Kaplan-Meier curve analysis with Wilcoxon test was used to
analyze the development of diabetes in mice. For multiple comparisons,
one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni posttest between the group of
interests and all other groups was used. For GWAS, data were presented
as Robust Multi-array Average normalized intensities, and statistical
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
12 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 analysis was performed using pairwise ANOVA test. Two-tailed un-
paired t test or two-tailed unpaired t test with Welch’s correction (if ap-
plicable) was used for comparison between C57BL/6 and NOD mice.
One-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni multiple comparison test
was used for group comparison between C57BL/6 mice (used as con-
trol) and NOD or NOR mice or DBA/1J or BALB/C and for compar-
ison between healthy control, long-standing T1D, and new-onset T1D.
For transcriptomic analysis, statistical analysis was performed using the
software available (RT2 profiler PCR Array Data Analysis, Qiagen). For
GWAS, statistical analysis was performed using pairwise ANOVA test.
Diabetes incidence among different groups of NOD mice (untreated,
WT-treated, pKL-treated, and Tg-treated mice) was analyzed with
the log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. All mechanistic and in vitro studies
were performed in triplicate (unless otherwise indicated), and the sta-
tistical analyses used are reported in the figure legends. All graphs and
statistical tests were generated using GraphPad Prism software version
5.0b (GraphPad Software Inc.) and were performed at the 5% signifi-
cance level. More detailed Materials and Methods are available in the
Supplementary Materials.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/416/eaam7543/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. PD-L1 expression in non-HSPCs.
Fig. S2. Generation of PD-L1.Tg KL cells and their tracking.
Fig. S3. Immunophenotype of pKL cells.
Fig. S4. Anti–PD-1 studies.
Fig. S5. CD34+ cells characterization in T1D patients and in healthy controls.
Fig. S6. Immunophenotype of pCD34+.
Fig. S7. Transcriptome of pCD34+.
Fig. S8. CD34+ cell mobilization with plerixafor and working hypothesis.
Table S1. Transcriptomic profiling of murine KLS cells (provided as an Excel file).
Table S2. Genome-wide expression analysis of murine KLS cells (provided as an Excel file).
Table S3. Genome-wide expression analysis of Tg KL cells.
Table S4. Chemokine receptors expression in different groups of KL cells.
Table S5. Genome-wide expression analysis of pKL cells: up-regulated genes (provided as an
Excel file).
Table S6. Genome-wide expression analysis of pKL cells: down-regulated genes (provided as
an Excel file).
Table S7. Characteristics of patients enrolled in the study.
Table S8. Characteristics of patients enrolled in the plerixafor mobilization study.
Table S9. Transcriptome of pCD34+ cells (provided as an Excel file).
Table S10. Primary data (provided as an Excel file).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. J. A. Bluestone, K. Herold, G. Eisenbarth, Genetics, pathogenesis and clinical interventions
in type 1 diabetes. Nature 464, 1293–1300 (2010).
2. P. Fiorina, M. Jurewicz, A. Augello, A. Vergani, S. Dada, S. La Rosa, M. Selig, J. Godwin, K. Law,
C. Placidi, R. N. Smith, C. Capella, S. Rodig, C. N. Adra, M. Atkinson, M. H. Sayegh, R. Abdi,
Immunomodulatory function of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells in
experimental autoimmune type 1 diabetes. J. Immunol. 183, 993–1004 (2009).
3. P. Fiorina, A. Vergani, S. Dada, M. Jurewicz, M. Wong, K. Law, E. Wu, Z. Tian,
R. Abdi, I. Guleria, S. Rodig, K. Dunussi-Joannopoulos, J. Bluestone, M. H. Sayegh,
Targeting CD22 reprograms B-cells and reverses autoimmune diabetes. Diabetes
57, 3013–3024 (2008).
4. A. Vergani, F. D’Addio, M. Jurewicz, A. Petrelli, T. Watanabe, K. Liu, K. Law, C. Schuetz,
M. Carvello, E. Orsenigo, S. Deng, S. J. Rodig, J. M. Ansari, C. Staudacher, R. Abdi,
J. Williams, J. Markmann, M. Atkinson, M. H. Sayegh, P. Fiorina, A novel clinically relevant
strategy to abrogate autoimmunity and regulate alloimmunity in NOD mice. Diabetes 59,
2253–2264 (2010).
5. M. Ben Nasr, F. D’Addio, V. Usuelli, S. Tezza, R. Abdi, P. Fiorina, The rise, fall, and
resurgence of immunotherapy in type 1 diabetes. Pharmacol. Res. 98, 31–38 (2015).
6. C. E. Couri, M. C. B. Oliveira, A. B. P. L. Stracieri, D. A. Moraes, F. Pieroni, G. M. N. Barros,
M. I. A. Madeira, K. C. R. Malmegrim, M. C. Foss-Freitas, B. P. Simoes, E. Z. Martinez,
M. C. Foss, R. K. Burt, J. C. Voltarelli, C-peptide levels and insulin independence following
autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in newly
diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus. JAMA 301, 1573–1579 (2009).
7. F. D’Addio, A. Valderrama Vasquez, M. Ben Nasr, E. Franek, D. Zhu, L. Li, G. Ning, E. Snarski,
P. Fiorina, Autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
new-onset type 1 diabetes: A multicenter analysis. Diabetes 63, 3041–3046 (2014).
8. P. Fiorina, M. Jurewicz, A. Vergani, A. Petrelli, M. Carvello, F. D’Addio, J. G. Godwin, K. Law,
E. Wu, Z. Tian, G. Thoma, J. Kovarik, S. La Rosa, C. Capella, S. Rodig, H. -. Zerwes,
M. H. Sayegh, R. Abdi, Targeting the CXCR4-CXCL12 axis mobilizes autologous
hematopoietic stem cells and prolongs islet allograft survival via programmed death
ligand 1. J. Immunol. 186, 121–131 (2011).
9. M. J. Ansari, A. D. Salama, T. Chitnis, R. N. Smith, H. Yagita, H. Akiba, T. Yamazaki,
M. Azuma, H. Iwai, S. J. Khoury, H. Auchincloss Jr., M. H. Sayegh, The programmed
death-1 (PD-1) pathway regulates autoimmune diabetes in nonobese diabetic (NOD)
mice. J. Exp. Med. 198, 63–69 (2003).
10. T. Yokosuka, M. Takamatsu, W. Kobayashi-Imanishi, A. Hashimoto-Tane, M. Azuma,
T. Saito, Programmed cell death 1 forms negative costimulatory microclusters that
directly inhibit T cell receptor signaling by recruiting phosphatase SHP2. J. Exp. Med. 209,
1201–1217 (2012).
11. K. D. Bunting, C.-K. Qu, The hematopoietic stem cell landscape. Methods Mol. Biol. 1185,
3–6 (2014).
12. J. D. Scandling, S. Busque, J. A. Shizuru, R. Lowsky, R. Hoppe, S. Dejbakhsh-Jones,
K. Jensen, A. Shori, J. A. Strober, P. Lavori, B. B. Turnbull, E. G. Engleman, S. Strober,
Chimerism, graft survival, and withdrawal of immunosuppressive drugs in HLA matched
and mismatched patients after living donor kidney and hematopoietic cell
transplantation. Am. J. Transplant. 15, 695–704 (2015).
13. M. G. von Herrath, O. Korsgren, M. A. Atkinson, Factors impeding the discovery of an
intervention-based treatment for type 1 diabetes. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 183, 1–7 (2016).
14. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications Research Group, J. M. Lachin, S. Genuth, P. Cleary, M. D. Davis,
D. M. Nathan, Retinopathy and nephropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes four years
after a trial of intensive therapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 342, 381–389 (2000).
15. M. A. Atkinson, M. von Herrath, A. C. Powers, M. Clare-Salzler, Current concepts on the
pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes—Considerations for attempts to prevent and reverse
the disease. Diabetes Care 38, 979–988 (2015).
16. S. E. Gitelman, P. A. Gottlieb, M. R. Rigby, E. I. Felner, S. M. Willi, L. K. Fisher, A. Moran,
M. Gottschalk, W. V. Moore, A. Pinckney, L. Keyes-Elstein, S. Aggarwal, D. Phippard,
P. H. Sayre, L. Ding, J. A. Bluestone, M. R. Ehlers; START Study Team, Antithymocyte
globulin treatment for patients with recent-onset type 1 diabetes: 12-month results of a
randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 1, 306–316
(2013).
17. K. C. Herold, S. E. Gitelman, M. R. Ehlers, P. A. Gottlieb, C. J. Greenbaum, W. Hagopian,
K. D. Boyle, L. Keyes-Elstein, S. Aggarwal, D. Phippard, P. H. Sayre, J. McNamara,
J. A. Bluestone; AbATE Study Team, Teplizumab (anti-CD3 mAb) treatment preserves
C-peptide responses in patients with new-onset type 1 diabetes in a randomized
controlled trial: Metabolic and immunologic features at baseline identify a subgroup of
responders. Diabetes 62, 3766–3774 (2013).
18. M. D. Pescovitz, C. J. Greenbaum, H. Krause-Steinrauf, D. J. Becker, S. E. Gitelman,
R. Goland, P. A. Gottlieb, J. B. Marks, P. F. McGee, A. M. Moran, P. Raskin, H. Rodriguez,
D. A. Schatz, D. Wherrett, D. M. Wilson, J. M. Lachin, J. S. Skyler; Type 1 Diabetes
TrialNet Anti-CD20 Study Group, Rituximab, B-lymphocyte depletion, and preservation of
beta-cell function. N. Engl. J. Med. 361, 2143–2152 (2009).
19. I. Guleria, M. Gubbels Bupp, S. Dada, B. Fife, Q. Tang, M. J. Ansari, S. Trikudanathan,
N. Vadivel, P. Fiorina, H. Yagita, M. Azuma, M. Atkinson, J. A. Bluestone, M. H. Sayegh,
Mechanisms of PDL1-mediated regulation of autoimmune diabetes. Clin. Immunol. 125,
16–25 (2007).
20. J. C. Voltarelli, C. E. B. Couri, A. B. P. L. Stracieri, M. C. Oliveira, D. A. Moraes,
F. Pieroni, M. Coutinho, K. C. R. Malmegrim, M. C. Foss-Freitas, B. P. Simões, M. C. Foss,
E. Squiers, R. K. Burt, Autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation in newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus. JAMA 297,
1568–1576 (2007).
21. M. J. Cowley, A. Weinberg, N. W. Zammit, S. N. Walters, W. J. Hawthorne, T. Loudovaris,
H. Thomas, T. Kay, J. E. Gunton, S. I. Alexander, W. Kaplan, J. Chapman, P. J. O’Connell,
S. T. Grey, Human islets express a marked proinflammatory molecular signature prior to
transplantation. Cell Transplant. 21, 2063–2078 (2012).
22. M. Sessa, L. Lorioli, F. Fumagalli, S. Acquati, D. Redaelli, C. Baldoli, S. Canale,
I. D. Lopez, F. Morena, A. Calabria, R. Fiori, P. Silvani, P. M. V. Rancoita, M. Gabaldo,
F. Benedicenti, G. Antonioli, A. Assanelli, M. P. Cicalese, U. Del Carro, M. G. Sora, S. Martino,
A. Quattrini, E. Montini, C. Di Serio, F. Ciceri, M. G. Roncarolo, A. Aiuti, L. Naldini,
A. Biffi, Lentiviral haemopoietic stem-cell gene therapy in early-onset metachromatic
leukodystrophy: An ad-hoc analysis of a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1/2 trial.
Lancet 388, 476–487 (2016).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
13 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 23. J. Yang, L. V. Riella, S. Chock, T. Liu, X. Zhao, X. Yuan, A. M. Paterson, T. Watanabe, V. Vanguri,
H. Yagita, M. Azuma, B. R. Blazar, G. J. Freeman, S. J. Rodig, A. H. Sharpe, A. Chandraker,
M. H. Sayegh, The novel costimulatory programmed death ligand 1/B7.1 pathway is functional
in inhibiting alloimmune responses in vivo. J. Immunol. 187, 1113–1119 (2011).
24. M. J. Haller, C. H. Wasserfall, K. M. McGrail, M. Cintron, T. M. Brusko, J. R. Wingard, S. S. Kelly,
J. J. Shuster, M. A. Atkinson, D. A. Schatz, Autologous umbilical cord blood transfusion
in very young children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 32, 2041–2046 (2009).
25. P. Fiorina, J. Voltarelli, N. Zavazava, Immunological applications of stem cells in type
1 diabetes. Endocr. Rev. 32, 725–754 (2011).
26. F. D’Addio, S. La Rosa, A. Maestroni, P. Jung, E. Orsenigo, M. Ben Nasr, S. Tezza, R. Bassi,
G. Finzi, A. Marando, A. Vergani, R. Frego, L. Albarello, A. Andolfo, R. Manuguerra, E. Viale,
C. Staudacher, D. Corradi, E. Batlle, D. Breault, A. Secchi, F. Folli, P. Fiorina, Circulating IGF-I and
IGFBP3 levels control human colonic stem cell function and are disrupted in diabetic
enteropathy. Cell Stem Cell 17, 486–498 (2015).
27. R. G. Gill, P. P. Pagni, T. Kupfer, C. H. Wasserfall, S. Deng, A. Posgai, Y. Manenkova,
A. Bel Hani, L. Straub, P. Bernstein, M. A. Atkinson, K. C. Herold, M. von Herrath, T. Staeva,
M. R. Ehlers, G. T. Nepom, A preclinical consortium approach for assessing the efficacy
of combined anti-CD3 plus IL-1 Blockade in reversing new-onset autoimmune diabetes in
NOD mice. Diabetes 65, 1310–1316 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank M. Jurewicz for editing. We thank the Fondazione Romeo ed Enrica
Invernizzi for its support. Funding: P.F. is supported by European Foundation for the Study of
Diabetes/Sanofi European Research Programme, an American Heart Association Grant-in-Aid, and
Fate Therapeutic research grant. Author contributions: M.B.N. performed the experiments,
analyzed the data, and wrote the paper. S.T., F.D., C.M., V.U., A.M., D.C., S.B., L.A., G.B., G.P.F., C.S.,
and C.W. performed the experiments and helped with the sample collection. J.M., L.Z., and G.V.Z.
coordinated the research. P.F. designed the study and wrote and edited the paper. Competing
interests: P.F. is the inventor on patent application (PCT/US2016/043053) submitted by
Boston Children’s Hospital that covers the immunoregulatory properties of HSPCs. All other
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability:
The data for this study have been deposited in the database dbGaP (database of Genotypes
and Phenotypes).
Submitted 3 February 2017
Resubmitted 1 June 2017
Accepted 14 August 2017
Published 15 November 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aam7543
Citation: M. Ben Nasr, S. Tezza, F. D’Addio, C. Mameli, V. Usuelli, A. Maestroni, D. Corradi,
S. Belletti, L. Albarello, G. Becchi, G. P. Fadini, C. Schuetz, J. Markmann, C. Wasserfall, L. Zon,
G. V. Zuccotti, P. Fiorina, PD-L1 genetic overexpression or pharmacological restoration in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells reverses autoimmune diabetes. Sci. Transl. Med. 9,
eaam7543 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Ben Nasr et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam7543 (2017)
15 November 2017
14 of 14
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 progenitor cells reverses autoimmune diabetes
PD-L1 genetic overexpression or pharmacological restoration in hematopoietic stem and
Wasserfall, Leonard Zon, Gian Vincenzo Zuccotti and Paolo Fiorina
Silvana Belletti, Luca Albarello, Gabriella Becchi, Gian Paolo Fadini, Christian Schuetz, James Markmann, Clive 
Moufida Ben Nasr, Sara Tezza, Francesca D'Addio, Chiara Mameli, Vera Usuelli, Anna Maestroni, Domenico Corradi,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aam7543
, eaam7543.
9
Sci Transl Med 
interrupt the autoimmune response and help people with diabetes.
pharmacological modulation of PD-L1 on stem cells could be brought into the clinic, providing a new way to 
reversed diabetes in NOD mice and inhibited human autoimmune responses in vitro. Either gene therapy or
patients express less PD-L1, which is a T cell inhibitory molecule. Induction of PD-L1 expression on stem cells 
 demonstrate that hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from NOD mice and diabetic
et al.
patients. Ben Nasr 
Many approaches have been taken to inhibit this process, but few have translated into real benefit for diabetic 
 cells, disrupting insulin production.
β
In type 1 diabetes, autoreactive CD4 T cells attack and kill pancreatic 
Stemming attacks on the pancreas
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/416/eaam7543
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/11/13/9.416.eaam7543.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/359/6372/eaan4672.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/422/eaag1782.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/358/6365/852.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/372/eaag2809.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/378/eaaf8848.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/402/eaaf7779.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/416/eaam7543#BIBL
This article cites 27 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
