 Patient-derived xenografts undergo murine-specific tumor 
evolution
Uri Ben-David1, Gavin Ha1,2, Yuen-Yi Tseng1, Noah F. Greenwald1,3,4, Coyin Oh1, Juliann 
Shih1,2, James M. McFarland1, Bang Wong1, Jesse S. Boehm1, Rameen 
Beroukhim1,2,3,5,6,10, and Todd R. Golub1,7,8,9,10
1Cancer Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
2Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
3Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
4Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
5Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
6Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
7Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
8Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
9Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA
Abstract
Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) have become a prominent cancer model system, as they are 
presumed to faithfully represent the genomic features of primary tumors. Here we monitored the 
dynamics of copy number alterations (CNAs) in 1,110 PDX samples across 24 cancer types. We 
observed rapid accumulation of CNAs during PDX passaging, often due to selection of pre-
existing minor clones. CNA acquisition in PDXs was correlated with the tissue-specific levels of 
aneuploidy and genetic heterogeneity observed in primary tumors. However, the particular CNAs 
acquired during PDX passaging differed from those acquired during tumor evolution in patients. 
Several CNAs recurrently observed in primary tumors gradually disappeared in PDXs, indicating 
that events undergoing positive selection in humans can become dispensable during propagation in 
mice. Importantly, the genomic stability of PDXs was associated with their response to 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to R.B. (rameen_beroukhim@dfci.harvard.edu) or T.R.G. (golub@broadinstitute.org).
10These authors jointly supervised this work.
Contributions
U.B.-D. conceived the project, collected the data and carried out the analyses; G.H., N.F.G. and J.M.M. assisted with computational 
analyses; Y.-Y.T. and J.S.B. provided cell line data. C.O. assisted with the copy number analysis of cell lines. B.W. assisted with figure 
design and preparation. J.S.B. assisted with the copy number analysis of TCGA samples. R.B. and T.R.G. directed the project. U.B.-
D., R.B. and T.R.G. wrote the manuscript.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2017 November ; 49(11): 1567–1575. doi:10.1038/ng.3967.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chemotherapy and targeted drugs. These findings have important implications for PDX-based 
modeling of human cancer.
Cancer research relies on interrogating model systems that mirror the biology of human 
tumors. Cell lines cultured from human tumors have been the workhorse of cancer research, 
but the marked differences between the in vitro cell culture environment and the in vivo 
tumor environment raise concerns that they may not be fully representative of human 
tumors. Recently, there have been increasing efforts to utilize patient-derived xenografts 
(PDXs) as models to study drug response1–4. These in vivo models are assumed to capture 
the cellular and molecular characteristics of human cancer better than simpler cell line-based 
models 1,2.
As the value of PDX models depends on their faithful representation of primary tumors, it is 
important to assess whether PDXs retain their genomic and phenotypic characteristics 
throughout propagation. To date, the genomic stability of PDX models has primarily been 
evaluated indirectly, leading to the notion that PDXs are highly stable3,5,6. Consistent with 
this perception, PDX-based studies often involve the analysis of tumors from multiple 
passages3. However, hints that PDXs may be more genomically unstable than assumed have 
recently begun to emerge7,8, emphasizing the need for a comprehensive analysis of PDX 
genomic evolution (Supplementary Note).
Here, we systematically analyzed landscapes of aneuploidy and large CNAs in PDX models 
across multiple human cancers. We generated a comprehensive CNA catalogue of 1,110 
PDX samples from 24 cancer types, and used these data to characterize CNA dynamics 
during PDX derivation and propagation, to study the origin of passaging-acquired CNAs, 
and to compare PDX genomic stability across cancer types. We also compared the CNA 
dynamics observed in PDXs to those of newly-derived tumor cell lines and cell line-derived 
xenografts (CLDXs). Finally, we compared the CNA landscapes of PDXs to those of human 
primary and advanced tumors. We found that despite an overall similarity, the CNA 
landscapes of PDXs diverge substantially from their parental tumors during passaging. We 
discuss the potential implications of this divergence, including its effect on therapeutic 
response.
Results
Generating a catalogue of aneuploidy and CNAs in PDXs
To enable a comprehensive analysis of aneuploidy and CNAs in PDXs, we created an 
integrated CNA dataset representing 1,110 PDXs. We first assembled data from DNA-based 
copy number measurements across multiple PDX passages, using published SNP arrays, 
CGH arrays and DNA sequencing data. Unfortunately, such DNA copy number data were 
only available for 177 PDX samples from 5 studies – too few to support a comprehensive 
analysis of CNA stability (Supplementary Table 1)6,7,9–11. In contrast, gene expression 
profiles were available for 933 PDX samples collected from 511 PDX models across 17 
studies (Supplementary Table 1)3,5,6,10–23. To reconstruct chromosomal aneuploidy and 
large (>5 Mb) CNAs from these expression profiles, we used previously described 
Ben-David et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 computational inference algorithms that accurately identify CNAs based on induced 
coordinated gene expression changes24–26. We validated the accuracy of this approach by 
analyzing PDXs from which both gene expression and SNP array data were available 
(Supplementary Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Note). Our final dataset 
comprised CNA data of 1,110 PDX samples from 543 unique PDX models across 24 cancer 
types (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Data 1 and 2). For 342 of these PDX models, data were 
available from both the primary tumor and its derived PDX model(s), or from multiple PDX 
passages, thus enabling an analysis of tumor evolution (Fig.1a and Supplementary Table 1).
We found the CNA landscapes of PDXs to be highly similar to those of their respective 
tumor types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (mean Pearson’s r=0.79; Fig. 1b and 
Supplementary Fig. 2), consistent with prior reports6,8,10,11. This confirms that, at the cohort 
level, PDX models are generally genomically representative of primary human tumors.
Tracking CNA dynamics during PDX derivation and propagation
We set out to follow CNA dynamics in individual PDX models, in order to assess their 
stability as well as their similarity to the tumors from which they were derived. For each 
model, the earliest passage (in most cases, P0 or P1) was compared to later passages (range, 
P1–P16; median: P3) in order to determine the changes that occurred throughout passaging. 
A representative example of PDX model evolution is shown in Fig. 1c.
We found that large (>5Mb) CNAs arose in PDXs rapidly: 60% of the PDX models acquired 
at least one large chromosomal aberration within a single in vivo passage, and 88% acquired 
at least one large aberration within four passages (Supplementary Fig. 3a). The CNA 
landscape of PDX models thus gradually shifted away from that of the original primary 
tumors, with a median of 12.3% of the genome (range, 0% to 58.8%) affected by model-
acquired CNAs within four passages (Fig. 1d). Of note, similar results were obtained using 
three different definitions of CNA prevalence: the proportion of the genome affected by 
CNAs (CNA fraction), the number of discrete events, or the proportion of altered genes (Fig. 
1d and Supplementary Fig. 3b–c), thereby highlighting the robustness of this finding.
There was no significant change in the overall number of CNAs throughout passaging 
(Supplementary Fig. 3d), indicating equal rates of emergence of new events and 
disappearance of existing ones. A median of 35.6% of the genome was affected by CNAs, 
consistent with prior estimates in primary tumors27 (Fig. 1e and Supplementary Fig. 3c). 
The disappearance of CNAs during passaging was not due to changes in tumor sample 
purity (for instance, contamination with mouse tissue might dilute the CNA signal), as other 
primary events were readily detected at similar signal strength. Importantly, approximately 
one out of six large CNAs identified in PDX models at P4 was not observed in the respective 
primary tumor. A similar proportion of primary clonal CNAs could no longer be detected in 
PDXs by P4. This observed tumor evolution was not limited to large CNAs, but also affected 
mutations in cancer-related genes (Supplementary Fig. 4 and Supplementary Note). We 
conclude that individual PDX models can quickly genomically diverge from their parental 
primary tumors.
Ben-David et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Selection of pre-existing subclones underlies CNA dynamics
Our observation that CNAs were often gained or lost during PDX passage might be 
explained by expansion of pre-existing subclones, the acquisition and expansion of de novo 
events, or a combination of both. Several lines of evidence suggest that clonal selection of 
pre-existing subclones plays a major role in shaping the CNA landscape of PDXs. First, 
CNAs accumulated with each passage, but their acquisition rate decreased over time (Fig. 
2a). Second, apoptosis expression signatures gradually decreased, while signatures of 
proliferation increased, with PDX passage number, in line with clonal selection of fitter 
clones (Fig. 2b). Third, the rates of model-acquired CNAs were similar in PDXs from 
primary tumors and from metastases (Fig. 2c), despite metastasis-derived PDXs being more 
aneuploid and exhibiting higher expression of genes associated with chromosomal instability 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a–b)28; this suggests that model-acquired CNAs predominantly result 
from clonal dynamics, rather than from genomic instability.
If our hypothesis that acquired CNAs were the result of positive biological selection of 
existing minor subclones is correct, one would expect that the same minor clones would be 
enriched in multiple independent grafts of the same tumor (i.e., transplanted into “sibling” 
P0 mice). Five such PDX pairs (representing breast, lung, pancreas and skin cancer PDXs) 
were available for analysis (Fig. 2d). The similarity in model-acquired CNAs between 
“sibling” PDXs was indeed significantly higher than the similarity between lineage-
controlled “non-sibling” PDXs (p<1E-5; Fig. 2e). This finding suggests that clonal evolution 
occurs through directional selection of pre-existing subclones, consistent with observations 
in breast and hematopoietic cancers7,29.
To further test this, we analyzed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) events. Because LOH is an 
irreversible event at the cellular level, an LOH “reversion” at the population level can only 
be explained by expansion of cells that did not undergo LOH in the first place. We queried 
previously published whole-genome sequencing data from 15 breast cancer pairs of primary 
tumors and PDXs7, and identified five cases of LOH “reversion” (Fig. 2f and Supplementary 
Fig. 6). These analyses thus confirm that rare pre-existing subclones not readily detected in 
the primary tumor, can expand and become the dominant clone in PDXs.
We conclude that CNA dynamics are strongest during engraftment and the first few in vivo 
passages, continue at a reduced rate throughout model propagation, and result primarily 
from selection of pre-existing subclones.
The degree of genomic instability in PDXs mirrors that of primary tumors
As human cancer types differ considerably in their CNA prevalence and acquisition rate 
(also referred to as degree of genomic instability, or DGI), we next compared CNA 
dynamics in PDXs across cancer types. We found that the rate of model-acquired CNAs 
varies significantly (p=0.001, comparing the most stable to the most unstable tumor types), 
with brain tumor PDXs being the most stable and gastric tumors being the most unstable (a 
median of 0% and 4.2% of the genome affected by CNAs per passage, respectively) (Fig. 
3a).
Ben-David et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We therefore asked whether this spectrum of PDX aneuploidy reflected the aneuploidy 
levels of human cancer types. We measured aneuploidy in TCGA data according to two 
metrics. First, we used the percentage of samples with whole-genome duplication (WGD)27. 
Across seven tissues for which data were available from both TCGA and PDX datasets, the 
CNA acquisition rate in PDXs correlated strongly with WGD prevalence in TCGA samples 
(Spearman’s rho=093, p=0.003; Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 7a). Second, we found that 
the median number of PDX-acquired arm-level CNAs and the median number of arm-level 
events acquired during tumor development in TCGA samples were correlated across 10 
different cancer types (Spearman’s rho=0.76, p=0.010; Fig. 3c). We thus conclude that DGI 
variation among PDX tumors types parallels that of primary tumors.
As we found that expansion of pre-existing subclones played a major role in shaping the 
CNA landscape of PDXs, we next examined whether the tissue-specific rate of CNA 
dynamics correlates with the degree of heterogeneity that characterizes each cancer type. 
Indeed, the CNA acquisition rate in PDXs correlated well with the median number of clones 
of the respective primary tumor type30, across six cancer types that could be matched 
(Spearman’s rho=0.82, p=0.044; Supplementary Fig. 7b). Interestingly, melanoma had the 
highest degree of intra-tumor heterogeneity, but only a moderate level of DGI in PDXs, and 
was therefore the only cancer type that significantly deviated from the observed correlation; 
the correlation became even stronger when melanoma was removed from the analysis 
(Spearman’s rho=1, p<2.2E-16; Fig. 3d and Supplementary Note).
The combined results of these analyses suggest that PDX models have characteristic tissue-
specific levels of CNA dynamics that correspond both to the DGI and to the degree of 
heterogeneity of the respective primary tumor type. As genetic heterogeneity is closely 
associated with aneuploidy levels and DGI in primary tumors30–32, either of these factors – 
or both of them together – may explain the observed correlations.
CNA recurrence analysis reveals distinct selection pressures in PDXs vs. primary tumors
A key question is whether the clonal dynamics observed in PDXs mimic that observed in 
human patients. To address this, we asked whether recurrent arm-level genetic events that 
are observed in human tumors remain under selection pressure when transplanted into mice; 
loss of these signature events would signal significant differences in selection pressures 
between human and mouse hosts.
We identified 61 recurrent arm-level CNAs across TCGA tumor types, and followed them in 
PDXs. Surprisingly, events that were recurrent in the TCGA dataset (reflecting positive 
selection in humans) tended to disappear throughout PDX passaging. Specifically, among 
lineage-matched PDXs, we observed 116 model-acquired events that were in the opposite 
direction to the recurrent TCGA CNAs, and only 79 model-acquired events in the same 
direction (p=0.01; Fig. 4a). We identified twelve recurrent events in TCGA samples that 
were preferentially lost throughout PDX passaging, across five cancer types (GBM, breast, 
lung, colon and pancreatic cancer; Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 8). Events that tend to 
disappear throughout PDX propagation should be less prevalent at high passage compared to 
low passage PDXs. Indeed, nine of the twelve events that PDXs tend to lose, including the 
hallmark gains of chr1q and 8q in breast cancer and chr7 in GBM, and the hallmark losses 
Ben-David et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of chr10 in GBM and chr4q in non-small cell lung cancers, were less common at high 
passage PDXs (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig. 9).
Together, these data demonstrate that PDXs can lose recurrent chromosomal aberrations that 
are believed to play causal roles in the development of human tumors. This suggests that 
selection pressures that led to the acquisition and retention of these hallmark CNAs in 
patients may no longer exist in the murine model environment.
Distinct CNA dynamics during tumor progression in PDXs and in human patients
In order to further assess whether the clonal dynamics observed in PDXs are indeed 
fundamentally different from those occurring during tumor evolution in patients, we next 
analyzed CNA dynamics during the progression of primary tumors into advanced disease 
(metastases and recurrences). We predicted that if recurrent CNAs tended to disappear in 
PDXs due to murine-specific selection pressures, this trend should not be found during 
tumor evolution in humans.
To address this, we compiled CNA data from 306 tumor samples of matched primary tumors 
(n=132) and their derived metastases or recurrences (n=174), across five cancer types 
represented in our PDX dataset (colon, lung, endometrial, brain and head and neck)33–40 
(Supplementary Table 3). By comparing each metastasis/recurrence to its matched primary 
tumor, we found that tumor progression in patients is associated with a dramatic shift in 
CNA landscapes, with a median of 18.2% of the genome (range, 0% to 95.4%) affected by 
progression-acquired CNAs (Fig. 4d). This change is greater, on average, than the change 
observed in PDXs (p<1E-5; Fig. 1d), likely reflecting the much longer time periods (often 
years) between paired resections and the strong treatment-associated selection pressures.
However, in contrast to the disappearance of recurrent CNAs during PDX passaging, the 
opposite was observed during tumor evolution in patients: recurrent CNAs more often 
emerged than disappeared during tumor progression. We observed 158 progression-acquired 
events that were in the same direction to the recurrent TCGA CNAs, and only 101 model-
acquired events in the opposite direction (p=0.0005; Fig. 4e). The relative proportion of 
recurrent CNAs that emerged, compared to those that disappeared, during tumor evolution 
was significantly different between PDXs and advanced human disease (p=0.0001; Fig. 4a 
and Fig. 4e). Therefore, these data further demonstrate that distinct selection pressures shape 
the CNA landscapes of tumors during their evolution in human and in murine hosts.
Genomic instability of PDXs is comparable to that of cell lines and CLDXs
PDXs are generally considered to reflect primary human tumors more faithfully than cell 
lines, due to the artificial cell culture environment1,41. However, the immunodeficient, 
subcutaneous murine microenvironment also differs considerably from the natural human 
host. To address the assumption that PDXs better preserve the fidelity of human tumors, we 
compared CNA dynamics of PDXs in vivo to those of cell lines in vitro.
We found that the prevalence of model-acquired CNAs in newly-derived cell lines is similar 
to that in PDXs. We analyzed the CNA landscapes of 38 samples of nine new cell lines 
derived in our lab from five cancer types (colon, GBM, pancreas, esophagus and thyroid; 
Ben-David et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Table 4). Similar to our observations with PDXs, newly-derived cell lines 
acquired CNAs with passaging, and their CNA landscape gradually shifted away from that 
of the earliest passage (Supplementary Fig. 10a). As seen in PDXs, changes occurred mostly 
during the first few passages, and the rate of model-acquired CNAs decreased throughout 
culture propagation (Fig. 5a). Notably, while CNA rates (defined as the fraction of the 
genome affected by model-acquired CNAs per passage) varied considerably among cell 
lines, they fell well within the range seen in PDXs, in a lineage-matched comparison 
(p=0.55; Fig. 5b). These results were recapitulated with newly-derived cell lines from three 
independent studies of GBM42,43, kidney44 and head and neck cancer22 (n=31; 
Supplementary Fig. 10b and Supplementary Table 4), suggesting that clonal selection is not 
unique to a particular cell line propagation method.
Next, we compared CNA dynamics between PDXs and cell line-derived xenografts 
(CLDXs). To assess CNA dynamics during the in vivo propagation of established cancer cell 
lines, we turned to the NCI MicroXeno project, which profiled gene expression of 49 human 
cancer cell lines across multiple in vivo passages45. We used the same computational 
algorithms24–26 that we applied to the PDX models to infer aneuploidy and CNAs from 
these gene expression profiles, resulting in 823 copy number profiles (Supplementary Data 3 
and 4). We found that CNAs accumulate with in vivo passaging of CLDXs (Fig. 5c), and 
that the DGI of CLDXs correlates with the karyotypic complexity of their parental cell lines 
(Fig. 5d and Supplementary Fig. 10c), in line with what we observed in PDXs. However, the 
rate of CNA acquisition was lower in CLDXs: within four passages, the median model-
acquired CNA fraction was 2.2% in CLDXs, compared to 12.3% in PDXs (p=1.6E-6), likely 
reflecting the reduced heterogeneity of established cell lines compared to primary tumors at 
the time of xenograft initiation46.
Taken together, our data from three types of cancer models (PDXs, cell lines, and CLDXs) 
demonstrate that switching the environment in which a model is propagated results in CNA 
dynamics that gradually alter its CNA landscape. All cancer models are subject to such 
clonal selection. PDXs do not appear to be spared.
CNA dynamics in PDXs and cell lines may affect drug response
It is conceivable that while PDXs undergo selection in the mouse, such selection is 
unimportant with respect to modeling therapeutic response. To address this, we turned to a 
dataset of PDXs with accompanying responses to both genotoxic chemotherapies and 
targeted therapeutics3.
Both very low and very high levels of aneuploidy have been associated with response to 
genotoxic drugs and improved patient survival28,30,47,48. Importantly, CNA acquisition rate 
(DGI), rather than absolute levels of aneuploidy, determines sensitivity to further 
perturbation of chromosome segregation49. We therefore determined the DGI of PDX 
models, and asked whether it similarly predicts response to chemotherapies. For three of five 
chemotherapies tested, extreme (either very low or very high) levels of DGI – but not overall 
aneuploidy levels – were associated with favorable therapeutic response (Fig. 6a): 
dacarbazine in skin PDXs, paclitaxel in lung PDXs, and abraxane/gemcitabine in pancreas 
PDXs (p=0.04, 0.014 and 0.006, respectively). The biological activity and clinical efficacy 
Ben-David et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of these drugs were previously linked to chromosomal instability50–54. PDXs thus 
recapitulate the correlation observed in patients between genomic instability and response to 
cytotoxic chemotherapies.
We next asked whether particular model-acquired CNAs might affect PDX responses to 
targeted therapies, given that specific recurrent arm-level or whole-chromosome aberrations 
have been reported to alter the cellular response to certain drugs55–57. We evaluated the 
association between PDX response to targeted therapies and the presence or absence of 
individual arm-level CNAs, focusing on the twelve driver CNAs found to be selected against 
during PDX passaging. We identified three statistically significant drug response-CNA 
associations (Fig. 6b): chr4 loss was associated with increased response of colon PDXs to 
the TNKS inhibitor LCJ049 (p=0.005, q=0.04 for 4p loss, and p=0.00002, q=0.0003, for 4q 
loss); chr20q gain was associated with increased response of pancreatic PDXs to the 
combination of the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 and the SMO inhibitor LDE225 (p=0.024, 
q=0.19); and chr1q gain was associated with increased response of breast PDXs to the 
ERBB3 inhibitor LJM716 (p=0.013, q=0.23). These results indicate that it is not unusual for 
CNAs (and presumably for other genomic events) that undergo negative selection in the 
murine host to be associated with changes in sensitivity to specific targeted agents. Such 
associations may affect the stability of PDX drug response.
To further assess the potential functional relevance of model-acquired chromosomal changes 
we turned to the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) project and its associated datasets 
of genomic features, genetic dependencies and drug response58–60. For the twelve recurrent 
CNAs, we compared cell lines with and without the aberration with regard to their gene 
expression profiles, genetic dependencies and drug sensitivity(controlling for cell lineage). 
In line with the PDX drug response data, colon cancer cell lines with chr4q loss were more 
sensitive to knockdown of TNKS (p=0.077), breast cancer cell lines with chr1q gain were 
more sensitive to knockdown of ERBB3 (p=0.048), and pancreatic cancer cell lines with 
chr20q gain were more sensitive to knockdown of multiple PI3K genes (p=0.020, p=0.076, 
p=0.005 and p=0.014 for PIK3C2A, PIK3CD, PIK3CG and PIK3R2, respectively; Fig. 6c 
and Supplementary Fig. 11a). The analysis of cell lines also revealed that arm-level CNAs 
were commonly associated with a significant up- or down-regulation of genes that reside 
within the aberrant arm, and that these changes were significantly associated with cell line 
genetic and pharmacologic dependencies (Supplementary Figures 11 and 12, Supplementary 
Tables 5 and 6, and Supplementary Note). We conclude that recurrent arm-level CNAs are 
associated with drug response, and their gradual disappearance throughout PDX propagation 
may therefore be functionally important.
Discussion
The ability to directly transfer human tumors into mice, and propagate them for multiple 
passages in vivo, offers unique opportunities for cancer research and drug discovery, making 
PDXs a valuable cancer model. Like any other model system, however, understanding its 
limitations – and the ways in which it differs from human tumors in their natural 
environment – is required for optimal application. Our findings suggest that the genomic 
instability of PDXs has been underappreciated: the CNA landscapes of PDXs change 
Ben-David et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 continuously, and so their propagation distances them from the primary tumors from which 
they were derived (Supplementary note). Indeed, the comparison of PDXs to newly-derived 
cell lines revealed that PDXs do not necessarily capture the genomic landscape of primary 
tumors better than cell lines, in contrast to common belief1 (Supplementary Note). The 
similar CNA rate suggests that multiple cell line models from a single primary tumor may 
capture more of the original genomic landscape – and its heterogeneity – than a single PDX 
model. Moreover, the acquisition of genetic alterations throughout model propagation is 
unlikely to be restricted to CNAs (Supplementary Fig. 13 and Supplementary Note).
As our analysis was based on bulk-population measurements, the cellular origin of each 
model-acquired event could not be definitively determined. Our study strongly suggests that 
pre-existing alterations play a major role in model-acquired CNAs, especially at the early 
stages of PDX derivation and propagation, but that de novo events also contribute to 
genomic instability (Supplementary Fig. 14 and Supplementary Note). Regardless of their 
origin, we found that CNAs often became fixed in the population quickly; a single in vivo 
passage sometimes rendered an undetected chromosomal aberration readily detectable at the 
population level. Such strong clonal dynamics suggest that distinct selection pressures 
between patients and animal models result in divergent tumor evolution trajectories 
(Supplementary Note).
Recent genomic analyses revealed that metastases evolve independently from primary 
tumors, often representing common ancestral subclones that are not detected in individual 
biopsies of the primary tumor. In contrast to the considerable heterogeneity between primary 
tumors and metastases, distinct metastatic sites tend to be relatively homogeneous33,61,62. 
Our findings from PDXs echo those from metastasis. The dominant clones in PDXs often 
come from minor subclones of the primary tumor, and PDXs that originate from the same 
primary tumor (the equivalence of multiple metastatic sites) tend to evolve in similar 
trajectories. It has been suggested that caution is required when inferring the genetic 
composition of metastatic disease from a primary tumor biopsy, and vice versa33,61,62; 
similarly, we propose that the genetic composition of a PDX tumor may differ from its 
matched primary tumor, potentially in therapeutically meaningful ways (Supplementary 
Note). This should be considered when using PDXs as avatar models for personalized 
medicine, or to identify biomarkers of drug sensitivity.
Online Methods
PDX data assembly and processing
CGH array, SNP array and gene expression microarray data were obtained from the GEO 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) and EMBL-EBI (http://www.ebi.ac.uk) repositories. 
RNA sequencing data were obtained from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/). Accession numbers are provided in Supplementary Table 1. 
Normalized matrix files were downloaded, and samples were curated manually to identify 
the cancer tissue type and the PDX passage number. Arrays were analyzed for quality 
control and outliers were removed. The final database consisted of 1,110 PDX tumor 
samples, from 543 unique PDX models across 24 cancer types. The analysis was performed 
in batches, and normal tissue samples included in each study served as internal controls, 
Ben-David et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 whenever available. Data were processed using the R statistical software (http://www.r-
project.org/). For all platform types, probe sets were organized by their chromosomal 
location, and log2-transformed values were used. Probe sets without annotated chromosomal 
location were removed. For gene expression data, all the probe sets of each gene were 
averaged (as well as their chromosomal location), in order to obtain one intensity value per 
gene. A threshold expression value was set, and genes with lower expression values were 
collectively raised to that level: flooring values were 6–7 for the Affymetrix and Illumina 
platforms, and −0.5 for the Agilent platforms. Probe sets not expressed in >20% of the 
samples within a batch were removed. The 10% of the probe sets with the most variable 
expression levels were also excluded, to reduce expression noise.
Generation of CNA profiles
CNA profiles from SNP arrays were generated using the Copy Number Workflow of the 
Partek Genomics Suite software (http://www.partek.com/pgs), as reported by the original 
studies. CNA profiles from CGH arrays were generated using the CGH-Explorer software 
(http://heim.ifi.uio.no/bioinf/Projects/CGHExplorer/), using the program’s piecewise 
constant fit (PCF) algorithm, with the following set of parameters: Least allowed deviation = 
0.3; Least allowed aberration size = 30; Winsorize at quantile = 0.001; Penalty = 12; 
Threshold = 0.01. CNA profiles from gene expression data were generated using the 
protocols developed by Ben-David et al 24 and by Fehrman et al26. For all gene expression 
platforms, the e-karyotyping method was applied24: whenever normal tissue samples were 
available, the median expression value of each gene across the normal samples was 
subtracted from the expression value of that gene in the tumor samples, in order to obtain 
comparative values. These relative gene expression data were then subjected to a CGH-PCF 
analysis, with the following set of parameters: Least allowed deviation = 0.25; Least allowed 
aberration size = 30; Winsorize at quantile = 0.001; Penalty = 12; Threshold = 0.01. For 
Affymetrix gene expression platforms, Human Genome U133A and U133Plus2.0, the 
functional genomic mRNA profiling (FGMP) method 26 was also applied: gene expression 
data were corrected for the first 25 previously-identified transcriptional components, and the 
corrected data were subjected to the same processing steps and CGH-PCF analysis described 
above, with the following set of parameters: Least allowed deviation = 0.15; Least allowed 
aberration size = 30; Winsorize at quantile = 0.001; Penalty = 12; Threshold = 0.01. CNA 
profiles from DNA sequencing were obtained in a processed table form from the publication 
by Eirew et al.7. CNA profiles from SNP arrays were obtained in a processed form from the 
publication by Gao et al. 3 and compared to CNA profiles from RNA sequencing of the same 
PDX models. For visualization purposes, moving average plots were generated using the 
CGH-Explorer moving average fit tool.
Identification of model-acquired CNAs
To identify CNAs emerging during the generation and propagation of PDXs, 342 PDX 
models in which data were available from multiple time points were analyzed. These PDX 
models were compared either to the primary tumors from which they were derived, or to 
their earliest available passage. For gene expression data, model-acquired CNAs were 
identified by e-karyotyping. For each probe set, a relative value was obtained by subtracting 
the early time point value from the late time point value. CGH-PCF analysis was then 
Ben-David et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed, with the same parameters described above. For visualization purposes, moving 
average plots were generated using the CGH-Explorer moving average fit tool.
CNA recurrence analysis
For each tissue type, the arm-level CNA recurrence was computed and compared between 
the PDX dataset and the human patient TCGA dataset (http://cancergenome.nih.gov). 
Chromosome arm-level events in TCGA samples were called using a novel approach to be 
described in Taylor, Shih, Ha et al. (manuscript in preparation). Briefly, segments of CNAs 
identified by ABSOLUTE63 were determined as loss, neutral, and gain relative to each 
sample’s predicted tumor ploidy. Consecutive segments were iteratively joined such that the 
combined segment is no less than 80% altered in a given direction (i.e. gain or loss, not 
both). For every combination of arm/chromosome and direction of alteration within each 
TCGA tumor type, the start coordinates, end coordinates, and proportion of chromosome 
arm altered (based on the longest joined segment) were clustered across samples using a 3-
dimensional Gaussian Mixture Model. The optimal clustering solution was chosen based on 
the Bayesian Information Criterion. Clusters whose mean fraction altered in either specific 
direction was >=80% were considered “aneuploid”, those whose mean fraction altered (in 
both directions) was <=20% were considered “non-aneuploid”. Chromosome arm-level 
events in PDX samples were determined using the CNA status of the largest overlapping 
segment from the e-karyotyping analysis. The comparisons of absolute CNA landscapes 
were performed using the FGMP-derived CNA profiles, and the comparisons of model-
acquired CNAs were performed using the e-karyotyping-derived CNA profiles. The 
comparisons between early and late passage PDXs were performed using FGMP-derived 
CNA profiles: samples from p<=1 were defined as early passage, and samples from p>=3 
were defined as late passage. Heatmaps were generated using the ‘pheatmap’ R package, 
and clustering was performed using euclidean distance and complete linkage.
DGI comparison across passages and tissue types
The degree of genomic instability (DGI) of each sample was determined in three ways: 1) 
the fraction of the genome affected by model-acquired CNAs per passage, 2) the number of 
discrete events per passage, and 3) the fraction of altered genes per passage. For each cancer 
type, the median number of model-acquired arm-level CNAs across all PDX samples was 
determined, and compared to several TCGA statistics: the percentage of samples with 
whole-genome duplication taken from the publication by Zack et al27, the median number of 
arm-level CNAs per sample, and the median number of clones per sample taken from the 
publication by Andor et al30.
Similarity analysis
PDX samples derived from the same primary tumors, but propagated in different animals 
starting from their initial transplantation (i.e., transplanted into different P0 mice) were 
defined as “siblings”. PDX samples derived from the same primary tumors, and propagated 
in the same animal at some point during PDX propagation were excluded from the analysis. 
PDX samples from distinct primary tumors were defined as “non-siblings”. Similarity scores 
were calculated for each pair of samples, based on the arm-level events that occurred during 
their in vivo passaging (i.e., model-acquired CNAs), using a modified Jaccard similarity 
Ben-David et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 coefficient. This similarity coefficient was inversely weighted to account for the observed 
prevalence of each CNA in each PDX tissue type. Therefore, the similarity score was 
calculated using the following equation: 
, where 
, and freq(k) is the frequency of event k in that tumor type.
Loss of heterozygosity analysis
Allelic copy number data were obtained from the publication by Eirew et al7. Using 10Mb 
windows along the genome, we identified the following scenarios: (1) the minor allele was 0 
(LOH) in a primary tumor but > 0 (presence of both alleles) in the tumor-derived PDX 
model, and (2) the minor allele was 0 (LOH) in an early passage PDX but > 0 in a later 
passage of the same PDX model. These instances of apparent “reversion” of LOH were 
visualized using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV; https://www.broadinstitute.org/igv/) 
and re-plotted in Figure 2f.
Gene expression signature scores
The apoptosis and proliferation gene sets were derived from the Molecular Signature 
Databse (http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb), using the “Hallmark_Apoptosis”64 
and the “Benporath_Proliferation”65 gene sets, respectively. The CIN70 gene set was 
derived from the publication by Carter et al13. Signature scores were generated for all PDXE 
models3. For each gene set, genes not expressed at all in the PDX dataset were removed, and 
the remaining gene expression values were log2-transformed and scaled by subtracting the 
gene expression means. The signature score was defined as the sum of these scale-
normalized gene expression values.
Advanced disease data assembly, processing and CNA profiling
CGH array and SNP array data were obtained from the GEO (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
geo) and EMBL-EBI (http://www.ebi.ac.uk) repositories. CNA profiles from DNA 
sequencing were obtained in a processed table form from the authors of the respective 
publications. Accession numbers are provided in Supplementary Table 4. The final database 
consisted of 306 tumor samples across five cancer types. Chromosome arm-level events in 
advanced disease samples were determined as described above. Progression-acquired CNAs 
were determined as events that were identified in the primary tumor but not in its advanced 
disease (metastasis, recurrence or progressed sample), or vice versa.
CLDX data assembly, processing and CNA profiling
Gene expression microarray data from the National Cancer Institute MicroXeno project 
were downloaded from the GEO repository (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo), under 
accession number GSE48433 (ref 45). Data were processed as described above. CNA 
profiles were generated using the FGMP method, and model-acquired CNAs were identified 
by e-karyotyping, as described above. The in vitro cultured (P0) cell line gene expression 
values were used as reference in the e-karyotyping analysis. The numerical karyotypic 
complexity categorization of the cell lines was obtained from the publication by Roschke et 
al66.
Ben-David et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cell line data assembly, processing and CNA profiling
Whole-exome sequencing data from 9 newly-derived cell lines were obtained from Tseng et 
al. (manuscript in preparation). CNA profiles were generated from these data using the 
ReCapSeg program (http://gatkforums.broadinstitute.org/gatk/categories/recapseg-
documentation), from the ratio of tumor read depth to the expected read depth (as 
determined from a panel of normal samples). Gene expression microarray data were 
obtained from the GEO repository (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo). Accession numbers 
are provided in Supplementary Table 3. Data were processed as described above. CNA 
profiles were generated using the FGMP method, and model-acquired CNAs were identified 
by e-karyotyping, as described above. Renal cancer CNA data were obtained directly from 
the publication by Cifola et al44, and model-acquired CNAs were identified as described 
above. For the comparison of model-acquired CNA rates across passages, samples were 
compared to the earliest available passage (p=0 or p=1). Samples from p<=7 were defined as 
early passage, samples from p=10 were defined as medium passage, and samples from 
p>=19 were defined as late passage.
PDX drug response association analyses
PDX drug response data were obtained from the publication by Gao et al3. For the analysis 
of the association between chemotherapy response and absolute levels of aneuploidy, the 
CNA fraction was determined according to the FGMP-derived CNA profiles of the latest 
passage sample available from each model. Low CNA levels were determined as CNA 
fraction<0.3; intermediate CNA levels were determined as 0.3<CNA fraction<0.7; high 
CNA levels were determined as CNA fraction>0.7. For the analysis of the association 
between chemotherapy response and the degree of genomic instability (DGI), the DGI level 
of each model was determined as the number of discrete model-acquired CNAs per passage, 
using the latest passage sample available from each model: low DGI=0, 0<intermediate 
DGI<4, high DGI>4. The BestAvgResponse values were used to make response calls. 
Association tests were conducted in each available tissue type independently, yielding a total 
of six drug-tissue association tests (representing five chemotherapies in five tissue types). 
For the analysis of the association between targeted therapy response and the existence of 
specific arm-level events, the arm-level copy number status of each model was set according 
to the FGMP-derived CNA profiles of the latest passage sample available from that model. 
The BestAvgResponse values were used to make response calls. For each of the 12 recurrent 
TCGA events that tend to disappear throughout PDX passaging, its association with PDX 
drug response was evaluated in the relevant cancer type. All targeted drugs that were used as 
single agents, and that showed at least partial response in at least one animal, were 
evaluated. Drug combinations were also evaluated, if one (or both) of the drugs in the 
combination was not tested as a single agent. A total of X association tests were performed 
(representing 15 single agent drugs and five drug combinations in three tissue types).
Cell line gene expression, genetic dependency and drug response association analyses
Chromosome arm-level events in cell line samples were called using the same approach used 
to call arm-level events in TCGA samples (described above). Gene expression was measured 
for CCLE cell lines using RNAseq (n = 936 cell lines with arm-level CNV calls), and was 
Ben-David et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 normalized to RPKM values for each gene60. Gene essentiality profiles for each cell line 
were derived from genome-wide RNAi screens across 503 cell lines (n = 446 with arm-level 
CNA calls), using the DEMETER algorithm to isolate gene knockdown effects from off-
target effects60. Drug sensitivity measurements were taken from the Cancer Therapeutics 
Response Portal (CTRP v2) dataset (downloaded from https://ctd2.nci.nih.gov/dataPortal/). 
These data represented dose-response curve AUC measures for 887 cell lines (n = 804 with 
arm-level CNV calls) across 545 compounds. Comparisons of gene expression, RNAi-based 
gene essentiality, and compound sensitivity, for cell lines with and without particular arm-
level CNAs were made using standard linear modeling tools developed for differential 
expression analysis: the R package limma was used to derive p-values from empirical Bayes 
moderated t-statistics67. In all cases we tested the effect of arm-level CNVs while 
controlling for inter-lineage differences by including lineage as a covariate in the model67. 
Gene set testing was performed using a parametric approximation to permutation-based 
testing, implemented in the R package npGSEA68. Inter-lineage differences were controlled 
for by regressing lineage out of both the arm-level CNA calls and the variable of interest68.
Mutation allelic fraction analysis
The allelic fraction (AF) and predicted effects of point mutations were obtained from the 
publication by Eirew et al7. AF shifts were determined as |AF[Primary]−AF[PDX]|>0.2. 
Missense and nonsense coding mutations were considered separately from the rest of the 
mutations, and their AF shifts were plotted in Supplementary Fig. X.
Comparison of CNA-based and mutation-based phylogenetic trees
Copy number and mutation data were obtained from the publications by Gibson et al33 and 
Bi et al69. To construct SNV-based trees, SNVs present at low allelic fractions, and SNVs 
from regions of low sequencing coverage, were first excluded. To construct arm-level CNA-
based trees, copy number data from the tumors were converted to arm-level calls. 
Phylogenetic trees were then generated separately. In each case, branch points in the tree 
were assigned based on the overall similarity in shared events, and branch lengths were set 
to be proportional to the number of shared events. Patients for which trees could not be 
generated due to insufficient information (e.g., no branch points identified) were excluded 
from the analysis. CNA-based trees were then compared to SNV-based trees to determine 
their sensitivity (the proportion of SNV-based branch points identified in CNA-based trees) 
and specificity (the proportion of CNA-based branch points identified in SNV-based trees).
Statistical analyses
The significance of the differences in prevalence and rate of absolute CNAs and of model-
acquired CNAs between PDX passages, between primary and metastatic PDXs, between 
P53-WT and P53-mutated/deleted PDXs, between PDXs from the most stable (upper 
quartile) and least stable (lower quartile) tissue types, between cell line passages, between 
CLDX passages, and between CLDXs from cell lines of distinct numerical karyotypic 
complexities, was determined using the two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test. The significance 
of the difference in similarity scores between “sibling” and “non-sibling”, the significance of 
the difference in CNA rates between PDXs and cell lines, and the significance of the 
differences between PDX-acquired and progression-acquired CNA fractions, were 
Ben-David et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 determined using a stratified bootstrap test, permuting the data 100,00 times within each 
tissue type. The significance of the gene expression signature trends observed throughout 
PDX passaging was determined by the Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum test. The significance of 
correlations between PDX and TCGA data was determined using a Spearman’s correlation 
test. To evaluate the tendency to acquire or to lose recurrent TCGA CNAs during PDX 
propagation and during disease progression in patients, recurrent CNAs were defined for 
each tissue type as those that recur in over 40% of the samples, and the number of events 
that involve these CNAs were computed in the lineage-matched PDX cohorts; the 
significance of the difference between the emergence frequency and the loss frequency in 
PDXs and in advanced disease was determined using the McNemar’s test, and the 
significance of the difference between the two groups was determined using a Chi-squared 
test for equality of proportions (using the proportion observed in humans as the expected 
proportion). The significance of the difference in CNA prevalence between early and late 
passage PDX samples was evaluated using the one-tailed Fisher’s exact test. The 
significance of the association between chromosome arms and drug response was 
determined using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, with FDR multiple test correction performed 
for each tissue type independently. Box plots show the median, 25th and 75th percentiles, 
lower whiskers show data within 25th percentile −1.5 times the IQR, upper whiskers show 
data within 75th percentile +1.5 times the IQR, and circles show the actual data points. 
Violin plots show the combination of a box plot and a kernel density plot, in which the width 
is proportional to the relative frequency of the measurements. All of the statistical tests were 
performed, using the R statistical software (http://www.r-project.org/), and the box plots and 
violin plots were generated using the ‘boxplot’ and ‘vioplot’ R packages, respectively.
Code availability
The codes used to generate and/or analyze the data during the current study are publically 
available, or available from the authors upon request.
Data availability
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available within 
the article, its supplementary information files, or available from the authors upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Lude Franke for assistance with functional genomic mRNA profiling; Adam Bass, Keith Ligon, 
Andrew J. Aguirre and Jochen Lorch for providing the clinical samples for cell line derivation; Andrew Tubelli for 
assistance with figure preparation; Matthew Meyerson, Andrew J. Cherniack, Alison Taylor, Alexander Pearson and 
Zuzana Tothova for helpful discussions; William J. Gibson for copy number data. U.B.-D. is supported by a Human 
Frontiers Science Program postdoctoral fellowship, R.B received support from the NIH (R01 CA188228) and the 
Gray Matters Brain Cancer Foundation, and T.R.G. received support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
Ben-David et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Tentler JJ, et al. Patient-derived tumour xenografts as models for oncology drug development. 
Nature reviews. Clinical Oncol. 2012; 9:338–350. DOI: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.61
2. Siolas D, Hannon GJ. Patient-derived tumor xenografts: transforming clinical samples into mouse 
models. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:5315–5319. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1069 [PubMed: 
23733750] 
3. Gao H, et al. High-throughput screening using patient-derived tumor xenografts to predict clinical 
trial drug response. Nat Med. 2015; 21:1318–1325. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3954 [PubMed: 26479923] 
4. Hidalgo M, et al. Patient-derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational cancer 
research. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:998–1013. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0001 [PubMed: 
25185190] 
5. Zhang X, et al. A renewable tissue resource of phenotypically stable, biologically and ethnically 
diverse, patient-derived human breast cancer xenograft models. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:4885–4897. 
DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4081 [PubMed: 23737486] 
6. Hodgson JG, et al. Comparative analyses of gene copy number and mRNA expression in 
glioblastoma multiforme tumors and xenografts. Neuro Oncol. 2009; 11:477–487. DOI: 
10.1215/15228517-2008-113 [PubMed: 19139420] 
7. Eirew P, et al. Dynamics of genomic clones in breast cancer patient xenografts at single-cell 
resolution. Nature. 2015; 518:422–426. DOI: 10.1038/nature13952 [PubMed: 25470049] 
8. Bruna A, et al. A Biobank of Breast Cancer Explants with Preserved Intra-tumor Heterogeneity to 
Screen Anticancer Compounds. Cell. 2016
9. Kresse SH, Meza-Zepeda LA, Machado I, Llombart-Bosch A, Myklebost O. Preclinical xenograft 
models of human sarcoma show nonrandom loss of aberrations. Cancer. 2012; 118:558–570. DOI: 
10.1002/cncr.26276 [PubMed: 21713766] 
10. DeRose YS, et al. Tumor grafts derived from women with breast cancer authentically reflect tumor 
pathology, growth, metastasis and disease outcomes. Nat Med. 2011; 17:1514–1520. DOI: 
10.1038/nm.2454 [PubMed: 22019887] 
11. Lin D, et al. High fidelity patient-derived xenografts for accelerating prostate cancer discovery and 
drug development. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:1272–1283. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2921-T 
[PubMed: 24356420] 
12. Huynh H, et al. Bevacizumab and rapamycin induce growth suppression in mouse models of 
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol. 2008; 49:52–60. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.02.022 [PubMed: 
18490075] 
13. Zhang X, et al. SRRM4 Expression and the Loss of REST Activity May Promote the Emergence of 
the Neuroendocrine Phenotype in Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2015; 
21:4698–4708. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-0157 [PubMed: 26071481] 
14. Oakes SR, et al. Sensitization of BCL-2-expressing breast tumors to chemotherapy by the BH3 
mimetic ABT-737. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:2766–2771. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1104778108 [PubMed: 21768359] 
15. Jager W, et al. Patient-derived bladder cancer xenografts in the preclinical development of novel 
targeted therapies. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:21522–21532. DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3974 [PubMed: 
26041878] 
16. Monsma DJ, et al. Using a rhabdomyosarcoma patient-derived xenograft to examine precision 
medicine approaches and model acquired resistance. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014; 61:1570–1577. 
DOI: 10.1002/pbc.25039 [PubMed: 24687871] 
17. Wong NC, et al. Stability of gene expression and epigenetic profiles highlights the utility of 
patient-derived paediatric acute lymphoblastic leukaemia xenografts for investigating molecular 
mechanisms of drug resistance. BMC Genomics. 2014; 15:416. [PubMed: 24885906] 
18. Gu Q, et al. Genomic characterization of a large panel of patient-derived hepatocellular carcinoma 
xenograft tumor models for preclinical development. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:20160–20176. DOI: 
10.18632/oncotarget.3969 [PubMed: 26062443] 
Ben-David et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Smith KB, et al. Novel dedifferentiated liposarcoma xenograft models reveal PTEN down-
regulation as a malignant signature and response to PI3K pathway inhibition. Am J Pathol. 2013; 
182:1400–1411. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.01.002 [PubMed: 23416162] 
20. Ma CX, et al. Targeting Chk1 in p53-deficient triple-negative breast cancer is therapeutically 
beneficial in human-in-mouse tumor models. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:1541–1552. DOI: 10.1172/
JCI58765 [PubMed: 22446188] 
21. Morisot S, et al. High frequencies of leukemia stem cells in poor-outcome childhood precursor-B 
acute lymphoblastic leukemias. Leukemia. 2010; 24:1859–1866. DOI: 10.1038/leu.2010.184 
[PubMed: 20739953] 
22. Peng S, et al. Tumor grafts derived from patients with head and neck squamous carcinoma 
authentically maintain the molecular and histologic characteristics of human cancers. J Transl 
Med. 2013; 11:198. [PubMed: 23981300] 
23. Chou J, et al. Phenotypic and transcriptional fidelity of patient-derived colon cancer xenografts in 
immune-deficient mice. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e79874. [PubMed: 24278200] 
24. Ben-David U, Mayshar Y, Benvenisty N. Virtual karyotyping of pluripotent stem cells on the basis 
of their global gene expression profiles. Nat Protoc. 2013; 8:989–997. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.
2013.051 [PubMed: 23619890] 
25. Ben-David U, et al. The landscape of chromosomal aberrations in breast cancer mouse models 
reveals driver-specific routes to tumorigenesis. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:12160. [PubMed: 
27374210] 
26. Fehrmann RS, et al. Gene expression analysis identifies global gene dosage sensitivity in cancer. 
Nat Genet. 2015; 47:115–125. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3173 [PubMed: 25581432] 
27. Zack TI, et al. Pan-cancer patterns of somatic copy number alteration. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1134–
1140. DOI: 10.1038/ng.2760 [PubMed: 24071852] 
28. Carter SL, Eklund AC, Kohane IS, Harris LN, Szallasi Z. A signature of chromosomal instability 
inferred from gene expression profiles predicts clinical outcome in multiple human cancers. Nat 
Genet. 2006; 38:1043–1048. DOI: 10.1038/ng1861 [PubMed: 16921376] 
29. Clappier E, et al. Clonal selection in xenografted human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
recapitulates gain of malignancy at relapse. J Exp Med. 2011; 208:653–661. DOI: 10.1084/jem.
20110105 [PubMed: 21464223] 
30. Andor N, et al. Pan-cancer analysis of the extent and consequences of intratumor heterogeneity. 
Nat Med. 2016; 22:105–113. DOI: 10.1038/nm.3984 [PubMed: 26618723] 
31. Bakker B, et al. Single-cell sequencing reveals karyotype heterogeneity in murine and human 
malignancies. Genome Biol. 2016; 17:115. [PubMed: 27246460] 
32. Mroz EA, Tward AD, Hammon RJ, Ren Y, Rocco JW. Intra-tumor genetic heterogeneity and 
mortality in head and neck cancer: analysis of data from the Cancer Genome Atlas. PLoS Med. 
2015; 12:e1001786. [PubMed: 25668320] 
33. Gibson WJ, et al. The genomic landscape and evolution of endometrial carcinoma progression and 
abdominopelvic metastasis. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:848–855. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3602 [PubMed: 
27348297] 
34. Kim TM, et al. Subclonal Genomic Architectures of Primary and Metastatic Colorectal Cancer 
Based on Intratumoral Genetic Heterogeneity. Clin Cancer Resh. 2015; 21:4461–4472. DOI: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2413
35. Bai H, et al. Integrated genomic characterization of IDH1-mutant glioma malignant progression. 
Nat Genet. 2016; 48:59–66. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3457 [PubMed: 26618343] 
36. Hedberg ML, et al. Genetic landscape of metastatic and recurrent head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma. J Clin Invest. 2016; 126:1606.
37. Um SW, et al. Molecular Evolution Patterns in Metastatic Lymph Nodes Reflect the Differential 
Treatment Response of Advanced Primary Lung Cancer. Cancer Res. 2016; 76:6568–6576. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0873 [PubMed: 27634761] 
38. Sveen A, et al. Intra-patient Inter-metastatic Genetic Heterogeneity in Colorectal Cancer as a Key 
Determinant of Survival after Curative Liver Resection. PLoS Genet. 2016; 12:e1006225. 
[PubMed: 27472274] 
Ben-David et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Lee SY, et al. Comparative genomic analysis of primary and synchronous metastatic colorectal 
cancers. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e90459. [PubMed: 24599305] 
40. Lim B, et al. Genome-wide mutation profiles of colorectal tumors and associated liver metastases 
at the exome and transcriptome levels. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:22179–22190. DOI: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4246 [PubMed: 26109429] 
41. Daniel VC, et al. A primary xenograft model of small-cell lung cancer reveals irreversible changes 
in gene expression imposed by culture in vitro. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:3364–3373. DOI: 
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4210 [PubMed: 19351829] 
42. Gunther HS, et al. Glioblastoma-derived stem cell-enriched cultures form distinct subgroups 
according to molecular and phenotypic criteria. Oncogene. 2008; 27:2897–2909. DOI: 10.1038/
sj.onc.1210949 [PubMed: 18037961] 
43. Schulte A, et al. A distinct subset of glioma cell lines with stem cell-like properties reflects the 
transcriptional phenotype of glioblastomas and overexpresses CXCR4 as therapeutic target. Glia. 
2011; 59:590–602. DOI: 10.1002/glia.21127 [PubMed: 21294158] 
44. Cifola I, et al. Renal cell carcinoma primary cultures maintain genomic and phenotypic profile of 
parental tumor tissues. BMC Cancer. 2011; 11:244. [PubMed: 21668985] 
45. Hollingshead MG, et al. Gene expression profiling of 49 human tumor xenografts from in vitro 
culture through multiple in vivo passages--strategies for data mining in support of therapeutic 
studies. BMC Genomics. 2014; 15:393. [PubMed: 24885658] 
46. Gillet JP, Varma S, Gottesman MM. The clinical relevance of cancer cell lines. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2013; 105:452–458. DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djt007 [PubMed: 23434901] 
47. Birkbak NJ, et al. Paradoxical relationship between chromosomal instability and survival outcome 
in cancer. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:3447–3452. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3667 [PubMed: 
21270108] 
48. Zhang W, et al. Centromere and kinetochore gene misexpression predicts cancer patient survival 
and response to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:12619. [PubMed: 
27577169] 
49. Silk AD, et al. Chromosome missegregation rate predicts whether aneuploidy will promote or 
suppress tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:E4134–4141. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1317042110 [PubMed: 24133140] 
50. Zasadil LM, et al. Cytotoxicity of paclitaxel in breast cancer is due to chromosome missegregation 
on multipolar spindles. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6:229ra243.
51. Janssen A, Kops GJ, Medema RH. Elevating the frequency of chromosome mis-segregation as a 
strategy to kill tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:19108–19113. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.0904343106 [PubMed: 19855003] 
52. Burrell RA, et al. Targeting chromosomal instability and tumour heterogeneity in HER2-positive 
breast cancer. J Cell Biochem. 2010; 111:782–790. DOI: 10.1002/jcb.22781 [PubMed: 20665662] 
53. Tempest HG, et al. Sperm aneuploidy frequencies analysed before and after chemotherapy in 
testicular cancer and Hodgkin’s lymphoma patients. Hum Reprod. 2008; 23:251–258. DOI: 
10.1093/humrep/dem389 [PubMed: 18083744] 
54. Khan F, Sherwani AF, Afzal M. Analysis of genotoxic damage induced by dacarbazine: an in vitro 
study. Toxin Rev. 2010; 29:130–136. DOI: 10.3109/15569543.2010.516463
55. Ben-David U, et al. Aneuploidy induces profound changes in gene expression, proliferation and 
tumorigenicity of human pluripotent stem cells. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:4825. [PubMed: 25198699] 
56. Cai Y, et al. Loss of Chromosome 8p Governs Tumor Progression and Drug Response by Altering 
Lipid Metabolism. Cancer Cell. 2016; 29:751–766. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.04.003 [PubMed: 
27165746] 
57. Chen G, et al. Targeting the adaptability of heterogeneous aneuploids. Cell. 2015; 160:771–784. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.026 [PubMed: 25679766] 
58. Barretina J, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer 
drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607. DOI: 10.1038/nature11003 [PubMed: 22460905] 
59. Rees MG, et al. Correlating chemical sensitivity and basal gene expression reveals mechanism of 
action. Nat Chem Biol. 2016; 12:109–116. DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.1986 [PubMed: 26656090] 
Ben-David et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 60. Tsherniak A, et al. Defining a Cancer Dependency Map. Cell. 2017; 170:564–576 e516. DOI: 
10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.010 [PubMed: 28753430] 
61. Brastianos PK, et al. Genomic Characterization of Brain Metastases Reveals Branched Evolution 
and Potential Therapeutic Targets. Cancer Discov. 2015; 5:1164–1177. DOI: 
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0369 [PubMed: 26410082] 
62. Liu W, et al. Copy number analysis indicates monoclonal origin of lethal metastatic prostate 
cancer. Nat Med. 2009; 15:559–565. DOI: 10.1038/nm.1944 [PubMed: 19363497] 
63. Carter SL, et al. Absolute quantification of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2012; 30:413–421. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.2203 [PubMed: 22544022] 
64. Liberzon A, et al. The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collection. Cell 
Syst. 2015; 1:417–425. DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2015.12.004 [PubMed: 26771021] 
65. Ben-Porath I, et al. An embryonic stem cell-like gene expression signature in poorly differentiated 
aggressive human tumors. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:499–507. DOI: 10.1038/ng.127 [PubMed: 
18443585] 
66. Roschke AV, et al. Karyotypic complexity of the NCI-60 drug-screening panel. Cancer Res. 2003; 
63:8634–8647. [PubMed: 14695175] 
67. Ritchie ME, et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and 
microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:e47. [PubMed: 25605792] 
68. Larson JL, Owen AB. Moment based gene set tests. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015; 16:132. [PubMed: 
25928861] 
69. Bi WL, et al. Genomic landscape of high-grade meningiomas. npj Genom Med. 2017; 2
Ben-David et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. The landscape of aneuploidy and copy number alterations in PDXs
(a) Distribution of cancer types in our PDX dataset (n=543 unique models). In the inner 
circle models are divided by their lineage: each cancer type is denoted by a color and a 
number. In the middle circle models are divided by the number of time points analyzed: 
multiple time points are denoted by a darker color, and enable to follow PDX evolution 
throughout in vivo propagation. In the outer circle models are divided by the biological 
material from which CNAs were inferred: DNA (stripes), RNA (dots) or both (stripes and 
dots). (b) A heatmap comparing the landscapes of lineage-matched arm-level CNAs of 
PDXs and of primary TCGA tumors, showing an overall high degree of concordance (mean 
Pearson’s r = 0.79). The color of each chromosome arm represents the fraction difference 
between gains and losses of that arm. (c) A representative example of PDX model evolution. 
Shown are gene expression moving average plots of normal brain tissue (gray), GBM PDX 
model at p1 (pink) and GBM model at p3 (red), revealing the disappearance of trisomy 7, 
the retention of monosomy 10, and the emergence of monosomy 11, within two in vivo 
passages. (d) Gradual evolution of CNA landscapes throughout PDX passaging. Box plots 
present model-acquired CNA fraction as a function of the number of passages between 
measurements. Bar, median; box, 25th and 75th percentiles; whiskers, data within 1.5*IQR 
of lower or upper quartile; circles: all data points. P-values indicate significance from a 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test. (e) Violin plots present the proportion of genes affected by CNAs 
Ben-David et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in TCGA and in PDX tumor samples (all tissue types combined), showing an overall 
similarity between both datasets. Bar, median; colored rectangle, 25th and 75th percentiles; 
width of the violin indicates frequency at that CNA fraction level.
Ben-David et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Selection of pre-existing subclones underlies CNA dynamics
(a). The rate of model-acquired CNAs decreases with PDX passaging. Violin plots present 
the fraction of CNAs acquired within two in vivo passages as a function of passage number. 
P-value indicates significance from a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. 1°, primary tumor. (b) 
Apoptosis decreases and proliferation increases with PDX passaging. Box plots present the 
apoptosis (left panel) and proliferation (right panel) gene expression signature scores as a 
function of passage number. P-values indicate significance from a Kruskal-Wallis test. (c) 
Similar CNA acquisition rates in PDXs from primary tumors and from metastases. Box plots 
present the rate of model-acquired CNAs as a function of tumor source (P=primary, 
M=metastasis), across three available tissue types. n.s., non-significant (Wilcoxon rank-sum 
test). (d) Schematics showing the calculation of pair-wise similarity scores for PDX models 
coming from the same primary tumor but propagated independently in the mouse (“sibling” 
PDXs; n=5) and for PDX models coming from distinct primary tumors (“non-sibling” 
Ben-David et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PDXs; n=268). (e) “Sibling” PDXs tend to acquire more similar aberrations than lineage-
matched “non-sibling” PDXs. Violin plots present the similarity scores of “sibling” and 
“non-sibling” PDXs. P-value indicates significance from a lineage-controlled permutation 
test. (f) Alleles that seem to have been lost in primary tumors can “re-appear” in PDXs, 
demonstrating expansion of rare pre-existing subclones throughout PDX propagation. Plots 
present the copy number of both of chromosome 5 alleles in a primary tumor and its derived 
PDX. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is identified in the primary tumor along most of 
chromosome 5, but both alleles are detected in a 1:1 ratio in the PDX derived from that 
primary tumor.
Ben-David et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Genomic instability of PDXs mirrors that of primary tumors
(a) The degree of genomic instability (DGI) of PDXs is cancer type-specific. Violin plots 
present the rate of CNA acquisition throughout PDX propagation of 13 cancer types, for 
which data were available from at least three PDX models. P-value indicates significance 
from a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. (b) The DGI of PDXs and that of primary tumors correlate 
extremely well. In PDXs, tissue DGI was defined as the median number of CNAs per 
passage. In TCGA tumors, tissue DGI was defined as the fraction of samples with whole-
genome duplication (WGD). (c) This correlation holds when the tissue DGI is defined, both 
for PDXs and for TCGA tumors, by the median number of arm-level CNAs. (d) The DGI of 
PDXs also correlates extremely well with intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) of primary 
tumors (excluding the skin tissue). The DGI of PDXs was defined as the median number of 
arm-level CNAs per passage. The heterogeneity of primary tumors was defined as the 
median number of clones per tumor. Spearman’s rho values and p-values indicate the 
strength and significance of the correlations, respectively.
Ben-David et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Tumor evolution of PDXs diverges from that of primary tumors
(a) Recurrent arm-level TCGA CNAs tend to disappear throughout PDX passaging. Pie 
chart presents the number of model-acquired events that were in the opposite direction to the 
recurrent TCGA CNAs vs. the number of events in the same direction. (b) Opposite 
propensities to gains and losses in human tumors and PDX models. Bar plots present the 
fraction difference between gains and losses of 12 recurrent TCGA arm-level CNAs. The 
PDX fractions represent the model-acquired CNAs, rather than the absolute prevalence of 
these events. (c) Recurrent TCGA arm-level CNAs are more common in early passage PDXs 
than in late passage PDXs. Bar plots present the absolute prevalence of each event in the 
Ben-David et al.
Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relevant cancer type. P-values indicate significance from a Fisher’s exact test. (d) Evolution 
of CNA landscapes during tumor progression to advanced disease. Box plots present 
progression-acquired CNA fraction in the five tumor types analyzed. Bar, median; box, 25th 
and 75th percentiles; whiskers, data within 1.5*IQR of lower or upper quartile; circles: all 
data points. (e) Recurrent arm-level TCGA CNAs tend to emerge throughout tumor 
progression in patients. Pie chart presents the number of progression-acquired events that 
were in the opposite direction to the recurrent TCGA CNAs vs. the number of events in the 
same direction. P-value indicates significance from a Chi-squared test.
Ben-David et al.
Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Genomic instability of PDXs is comparable to that of cell lines and CLDXs
(a) The rate of CNA acquisition decreases with cell line passaging. Box plots present the 
rate of CNA acquisition as a function of in vitro passage number. P-values indicate 
significance from a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. (b) Similar rates of CNA acquisition in PDXs 
and in newly-derived cell lines. Dot plots present the distribution of model-acquired CNA 
rates across four available cancer types. P-value indicates lack of significance from a 
lineage-controlled permutation test. (c) Gradual evolution of CNA landscapes throughout 
CLDX passaging. Box plots present model-acquired CNA fraction as a function of the 
number of passages between measurements. P-values indicate significance from a Wilcoxon 
rank-sum test. (d) The CNA acquisition rate of CLDXs is associated with the numerical 
karyotypic complexity of the parental cell lines. Violin plots present the fraction of CNAs 
acquired by passage 4 as a function of numerical karyotypic complexity. P-values indicate 
significance from a Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
Ben-David et al.
Page 27
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. CNA dynamics affect PDX drug response
(a) Extreme levels of genomic instability are associated with better therapeutic response to 
chemotherapies. Waterfall plots present the response to dacarbazine (n=14), paclitaxel 
(n=19), and the combination of abraxane and gemcitabine (n=22) in skin, lung and pancreas 
PDXs, respectively. DGI, degree of genomic instability. P-values indicate significance from 
a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. (b) The status of recurrent arm-level CNAs is associated with 
response to targeted therapies. Waterfall plots present the response to the TNKS inhibitor 
LCJ049 (n=40), the ERBB3 inhibitor LJM716 (n=38), and the combination of the PI3K 
inhibitor BKM120 and the SMO inhibitor LDE225 (n=31). P-values indicate significance 
from a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. (c). The status of recurrent arm-level CNAs is associated 
with the genetic depletion of the genes targeted by the identified drugs. Box plots present the 
dependency scores to RNAi-mediated knockdown of the indicated genes. Colon cancer cell 
lines with chromosome 4q loss are more sensitive to knockdown of TNKS, breast cancer cell 
lines with chromosome 1q gain are more sensitive to knockdown of ERBB3, and pancreatic 
cancer cell lines with chromosome 20q are more sensitive to knockdown of multiple PI3K 
genes, including PIK3C2A. P-values indicate significance from a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. -
Ben-David et al.
Page 28
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
