 TOOLS
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2931
J. Cell Biol. 2018 Vol. 217 No. 8 2931–2950
Rockefeller University Press
Understanding the mechanisms of cellular differentiation is challenging because differentiation is initiated by signaling 
pathways that drive temporally dynamic processes, which are difficult to analyze in vivo. We establish a new tool, Timer of 
cell kinetics and activity (Tocky; or toki [time in Japanese]). Tocky uses the fluorescent Timer protein, which spontaneously 
shifts its emission spectrum from blue to red, in combination with computer algorithms to reveal the dynamics of 
differentiation in vivo. Using a transcriptional target of T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, we establish Nr4a3-Tocky to follow 
downstream effects of TCR signaling. Nr4a3-Tocky reveals the temporal sequence of events during regulatory T cell (Treg) 
differentiation and shows that persistent TCR signals occur during Treg generation. Remarkably, antigen-specific T cells 
at the site of autoimmune inflammation also show persistent TCR signaling. In addition, by generating Foxp3-Tocky, we 
reveal the in vivo dynamics of demethylation of the Foxp3 gene. Thus, Tocky is a tool for cell biologists to address previously 
inaccessible questions by directly revealing dynamic processes in vivo.
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in 
transcription during differentiation in vivo
David Bending1, Paz Prieto Martín1, Alina Paduraru1, Catherine Ducker1, Erik Marzaganov1, Marie Laviron1, Satsuki Kitano2, Hitoshi Miyachi2, 
Tessa Crompton3, and Masahiro Ono1
Rockefeller University Press
Introduction
It is a central question in cell biology how cellular differentiation 
progressively occurs through the activities of temporally coor-
dinated molecular mechanisms (Kohwi and Doe, 2013; Kurd and 
Robey, 2016). It is, however, challenging to investigate in vivo 
mechanisms at the single-cell level because individual cells are 
not synchronized and are heterogeneous, receiving key signaling 
at different times and frequencies in the body. No existing tech-
nologies can systematically analyze the temporal dynamics of 
differentiation and activities of individual cells in vivo. Intravital 
microscopy is useful for analyzing cells in microenvironments 
(Koechlein et al., 2016) but is not suitable for systematically ana-
lyzing cells that rapidly migrate through tissues such as T cells. 
Single-cell sequencing can provide “pseudotime,” but this is not 
the measurement of time as the name implies; rather, it is a mea-
surement of the transcriptional similarities between samples at 
chosen analysis time points (Trapnell et al., 2014). Flow cytometry 
is suitable for determining the differentiation stage of individual 
cells, but current methods cannot be applied to investigate how 
individual cells sequentially differentiate into more mature stages 
as data from individual cells do not currently encode time infor-
mation (Hoppe et al., 2014). There is thus a great need for a new 
technology to experimentally analyze the passage of time after a 
key differentiation event, or the time domain, of individual cells 
in vivo. Such a new technology would benefit all areas of cellular 
biology, but it would be particularly useful for the study of T cells 
under physiological conditions in vivo, where both the time and 
frequency of signaling are critical to their differentiation.
T cells migrate through the body (Krummel et al., 2016), and 
their activation and differentiation statuses are almost exclu-
sively determined by flow cytometric analysis (Fujii et al., 2016). 
In T cells, T cell receptor (TCR) signaling triggers their activation 
and differentiation (Cantrell, 2015) and is the central determi-
nant of thymic T cell selection (Kurd and Robey, 2016), includ-
ing negative selection (Stepanek et al., 2014) and regulatory T 
(Treg) cell selection (Picca et al., 2006) and antigen recognition 
in the periphery (Cantrell, 2015). Although the temporal dynam-
ics of proximal TCR signaling, which are in the timescale of sec-
onds, have been comprehensively and quantitatively analyzed 
(Roncagalli et al., 2014; Stepanek et al., 2014), it is still unclear 
how transcriptional mechanisms for activation and differentia-
tion respond to TCR signals over time in vivo. Such a transcrip-
tional mechanism may be used for a new reporter system to ana-
lyze the dynamics of T cell activation and differentiation upon 
antigen recognition.
TCR signaling activates NFAT, AP-1, and NF-κB, which initiate 
the transcription of immediate early genes within a few hours 
© 2018 Bending et al. This article is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution 4.0 International, as described at https:// 
creativecommons 
.org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4 
.0/ 
).
1Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Imperial College London, London, England, UK; 2Institute for Viral Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan; 3University College London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, England, UK.
Correspondence to Masahiro Ono: m.ono@ 
imperial 
.ac 
.uk; D. Bending’s present address is Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, College of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, England, UK. 
on June 3, 2019
jcb.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
Published Online: 25 June, 2018 | Supp Info: 
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2932
(Oh and Ghosh, 2013), but their effects on T cell differentiation 
over the timescale of hours and days are obscure. To analyze TCR 
signal strength, currently, Nur77 (Nr4a1)-EGFP reporter mouse 
is commonly used (Moran et al., 2011), but the long half-life of 
the reporter gene EGFP (∼56 h; Sacchetti et al., 2001) prevents 
its application for the analysis of the temporal dynamics of the 
events downstream of TCR signaling in vivo.
In this study, we have established a new fluorescent Timer 
technology, Timer of cell kinetics and activity (Tocky; toki means 
time in Japanese), which uniquely reveals the time and frequency 
domains of cellular differentiation and function in vivo. Fluores-
cent Timer proteins have been used to analyze in vivo protein 
dynamics and receptor turnover (Khmelinskii et al., 2012; Donà 
et al., 2013) as well as identify progenitor cells (i.e., those cells 
expressing only immature fluorescence during embryogenesis 
and pancreatic β cell development; Terskikh et al., 2000; Subach 
et al., 2009; Miyatsuka et al., 2011, 2014). However, those studies 
were qualitative and did not recognize the quantitative power of 
fluorescent Timer. In this study, we develop a new fluorescent 
Timer approach to quantitatively analyze the time and frequency 
domains of gene transcription within individual cells in vivo. By 
identifying a downstream gene of TCR signaling (Nr4a3) and 
developing fluorescent Timer reporter mice for the gene, we 
experimentally establish and validate the Tocky system for TCR 
signaling. Furthermore, we apply the Tocky approach to the 
Foxp3 gene, which is the lineage-specific transcription factor of 
Treg cells, revealing in vivo dynamics of Treg cell differentiation. 
Thus, Tocky technology reveals time-dependent mechanisms of 
in vivo cellular differentiation and developmental states after key 
signaling pathway or lineage commitment, which cannot be ana-
lyzed by existing technologies.
Results
Design of the Tocky system for analyzing the time and 
frequency domains of signal-triggered activation and 
differentiation events
Given the long half-life of stable fluorescent proteins (FPs) like 
GFP (56 h; Sacchetti et al., 2001), the dynamics of gene trans- 
cription cannot be effectively captured using conventional FP 
expression as a reporter. We therefore chose to use fluorescent 
Timer protein (Timer), which forms a short-lived chromophore 
that emits blue fluorescence (blue), before producing the mature 
chromophore that emits red fluorescence (red). The maturation 
half-life (i.e., the production of red-form proteins) is estimated 
to be 7 h, whereas red proteins are stable and have a decay rate 
>20 h (Fig. 1 A; Subach et al., 2009).
We investigated in silico how two different transcriptional 
activities would influence the production of blue and red fluores-
cent form of the protein through time, and how the light emitted 
would be detected by flow cytometry. We compared the report-
ing of transient, pulse-like transcription with that of persistent 
transcription, both of which are relevant to TCR-mediated tran-
scription (Fig. 1 B; Yosef and Regev, 2011). A linear kinetics model 
showed that blue was a better readout for the real-time level of 
transcription than red and GFP, which rather reported the cumu-
lative activity of transcription. Next, we analyzed the dynamics 
of Timer-expressing cells in the blue–red plane, which is relevant 
for flow cytometric analysis. Assuming that cells received a tran-
sient signal in a synchronized manner, cells showed a fan-like 
movement from blue+red− to blue−red+, and cells stayed until the 
red-form proteins decayed. However, when cells receive per-
sistent TCR signals, cells gradually approached the diagonal line 
between blue and red axes, which is the steady state (Fig. 1 C). 
Thus, there are three key loci in the blue–red plane (Fig. 1 D). 
First, when new transcription occurs in Timer-negative cells, 
Timer-positive cells acquire pure blue and are identified in the 
New locus. Second, if transcriptional activity is persistent and/
or sufficiently frequent, then cells accumulate in and around the 
steady-state diagonal line (Persistent locus). Lastly, when tran-
scription is diminished, cells lose blue and stay in the Arrested 
locus until the red protein decays (Fig. 1 D). Importantly, Timer 
maturation is unidirectional and irreversible as the chromophore 
matures from blue to red. In the case of individual Timer-positive 
cells, movement from New to Persistent loci is also unidirectional 
and irreversible because the half-life of red protein is longer than 
the half-life of the blue form, whether the signal is transient or 
continuous (Fig. 1 C). Therefore transition from the New to the 
Persistent loci captures the time domain of cellular differentia-
tion. In contrast, cells in the Arrested locus may reinitiate tran-
scription to express new blue protein and move anticlockwise 
back into the Persistent locus (Fig. 1 D). This leads to the hypothe-
sis that the movement between Persistent and Arrested loci more 
specifically captures how frequently transcriptional activities 
occur in mature cells.
These three loci can be identified and quantified more effec-
tively by analysis of the angle of individual cells from the blue 
axis. The 2D blue versus red Timer fluorescence data can be 
transformed by trigonometric data transformation and converted 
into the polar coordinate to provide new variables: the angle from 
the blue axis is defined as Timer Angle, which is a measure of 
the trajectory and change in transcriptional history. The Euclid 
distance from the origin is defined as Timer Intensity (Fig. 1 E) 
and is a measure of the signal strength given Timer Angle value.
In fact, trigonometric data transformation quantitatively 
showed that transient signals had a faster progression of Timer 
Angle than continuous signals (Fig. 1 F). Next, using Timer Angle, 
we analyzed transcriptional activities with different frequencies. 
As implicated by the analysis of transient and continuous sig-
nals (Fig. 1, B and C), when the frequency of transcription was 
low, cells accumulate in higher Timer Angle. In contrast, if cells 
receive high-frequency signals, they approach the steady state of 
continuous transcription (Fig. 1 G).
We therefore coined the system Tocky. Timer Angle pro-
vides time-related composite information: the first phase (New 
→ Persistent) is for analyzing how differentiation mechanisms 
are regulated over time (i.e., time domain analysis); and the 
latter half (Persistent – Arrested) is for analyzing the relative 
frequency of transcriptional activation (i.e., frequency domain 
analysis). Thus, we designate this composite time axis as Tocky 
time (Fig. 1 H). In Time domain analysis in physics and related 
subjects, data obtained over time are transformed into frequency 
data (and vice versa) using a function such as the Fourier trans-
form. In contrast, the Tocky time can be the measurement of 
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2933
Figure 1. Design of Tocky system for analyzing the time and frequency domains of signal-triggered activation and differentiation events. (A) Produc-
tion and decay of GFP and fluorescent Timer protein. (B) In silico analysis of GFP and Timer fluorescence by different transcriptional dynamics. Time-course 
analysis of GFP or blue and red forms of Timer protein, simulated flow cytometric data, and Timer Angle, given the constant influx of cells with the indicated 
transcriptional dynamics. Data from spike-like (transient) and constant transcriptional dynamics are shown. (C) In silico modeling of flow cytometric data depict-
ing transient (top) or persistent Timer transcription (bottom). (D) Timer locus approach to translate flow cytometric Timer fluorescence data into transcriptional 
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2934
either time or frequency, depending on the Timer maturation 
phase. Notably, these two domains merge in the Tocky time when 
transcriptional activities are persistent.
The development of Nr4a3-Tocky for the analysis of TCR signal 
downstream events
T cell differentiation is triggered by TCR signals. To track the in 
vivo dynamics of transcription downstream of TCR signal trans-
duction, we first identified genes immediately downstream of 
TCR signaling using a data-oriented multidimensional analysis, 
canonical correspondence analysis (CCA; Ono et al., 2014; Fig. 
S1 A). Nr4a3 (Nor1) was identified as the gene with the highest 
correlation with anti-CD3–mediated T cell activation (which 
mimics TCR activation) and in vivo TCR signals in the thymus, 
whereas Nr4a1 (Nur77) and Rel also scored highly (Fig. S1, B and 
C). In agreement, upon anti-CD3 stimulation, Nr4a3/Nor1 was 
rapidly induced in T cells and peaked within 2 h of stimulation 
(Fig. S1 D). Having established in silico that Tocky can temporally 
report transcription, we generated a bacterial artificial chromo-
some (BAC) transgenic reporter Nr4a3-Tocky mice (Fig. 2 A), in 
which the transcriptional activity of the Nr4a3 gene is reported 
by Timer proteins and used as an indicator of new transcription 
mediated by TCR signal transduction.
Antigen–receptor ligation induces Timer proteins in B and T 
cell subsets from Nr4a3-Tocky mice
Using Nr4a3-Tocky, antigen–receptor ligation induced Timer 
protein expression not only in CD4+ T cells but also in CD8+ T 
cells and B cells, with the most prominent induction in CD4+ T 
cells (Fig. 2 B). This provided us an opportunity to experimen-
tally determine the half-life of the blue fluorescent form of Timer 
protein in each cell subtype and thereby ask whether the kinetics 
of blue-expressing cells are similar between different cell sub-
types. B and T cells were stimulated by antigen–receptor ligation 
and immediately after the induction of Timer proteins, protein 
translation was blocked by cycloheximide and the decay of blue 
fluorescence was measured by flow cytometry (Fig. 2 C). Linear 
regression analysis showed that the half-life of blue-expressing 
cells was ∼4 h in all of the cell subtypes, whereas the percentage 
of red-expressing cells was barely changed or slightly increased 
after the conversion of blue proteins into red proteins (Fig. 2 D). 
These data support that Timer maturation is not affected 
by cell subtypes.
Nr4a3-Tocky reveals the temporal dynamics and frequency of 
TCR signal-triggered activation events
To analyze the T cell response upon antigen recognition, we 
generated OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky mice, which express ovalbumin 
(Ova)-specific transgenic TCR. Ova stimulation of CD4+ T cells 
from OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky mice resulted in the up-regulation 
of blue within 4 h, with some cells acquiring red at 8 h after 
stimulation (Fig. 3 A). Nr4a3-Tocky T cells further increased 
both blue and red throughout the 48-h culture, whereas removal 
of TCR stimulation by anti–major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) II treatment from 24 h onwards resulted in the rapid loss 
of blue (Fig. 3 A), which captured the reduction in frequency of 
TCR signaling.
To analyze effectively the continuous progression of Timer 
fluorescence in Fig. 3 A, Timer fluorescence data were trans-
formed into Angle and Intensity data (Fig. 3 B). This transforma-
tion of the data normalizes for blue and red fluorescence by using 
the mean and SD of the negative cloud of cells (i.e., cells with 
autofluorescence only). To generate robust angle values, thresh-
olding of the data are required to restrain angles between 0° and 
90°. This thresholding sets the blue and red levels for positivity 
and thus collapses pure blue and pure red cells into angles of 0° 
and 90°, respectively (see Materials and methods).
Importantly, the progression of Timer Angle becomes 
slower and cells accumulate as cells approach ∼45° by density 
plots, which visualize the distribution of angle values, reflect-
ing sustained or high-frequency TCR signaling (Fig. 3 C). To 
quantify the maturation of the Timer chromophore since first 
onset of its translation, we grouped cells into five populations 
(i.e., data categorization) according to their Angle values: from 
the “New” population (Angle = 0°) representing cells within 
the first 4 h of initiation of TCR-mediated transcription to the 
“Arrested” population (Angle = 90°), which represents cells in 
which all Timer protein has matured to red and transcriptional 
activity has decreased below cytometer detection thresholds 
(Fig. 3 D). The area between 30° and 60° was defined as the 
Persistent locus. The areas between New and Persistent (NP-t) 
or between the Persistent and Arrested (PA-t) contained cells 
from the surrounding loci that are in the process of changing 
their frequency of Nr4a3 transcription (Fig. 3 E). The analysis 
of the percentage of cells in these loci (designated as Timer 
locus analysis) neatly captured the change in TCR-mediated 
transcription through time as cells shifted from New to Per-
sistent, which represent the time domain. Furthermore, it 
showed that removal of TCR signals lead to a complete loss 
of New, NP-t, and Persistent signaling within 8 h, and cells 
migrated to Arrested transcriptional dynamics, which rep-
resents sparse or no signaling activity (Fig. 3 E). Thus, Nr4a3-
Tocky recaptured the predicted kinetics of Timer-expressing 
cells, validating the Tocky model (Fig. 1 H).
We hypothesized that Timer Intensity reflects both the sig-
nal strength and the duration/frequency of TCR signaling as 
Timer proteins accumulate in individual cells in response to 
strong and/or repeated TCR signals. Timer Intensity in anti-
gen-stimulated Nr4a3-Tocky T cells increased over time and fell 
after removal of the TCR signal (Fig. 3 F). Furthermore, Timer 
Intensity was increased in a dose-dependent manner by cognate 
antigen (Fig. 3 G). Interestingly, Timer Intensity showed a high 
dynamics. (E) Schematic representation of trigonometric data transformation of flow cytometric Timer data. Flow cytometric blue and red Timer fluorescence 
data were preprocessed and normalized and subsequently transformed by a trigonometric function. (F) Effect of persistent or transient transcription on Timer 
Angle progression. (G) In silico modeling of the effect of transcriptional frequency on the distribution of Timer Angle values. (H) Model for analyzing the time 
domain and frequency domain using Tocky time analysis.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2935
correlation to cell surface CD25 expression, which is a marker of 
activated T cells (R2 = 0.93; Fig. 3 H). Thus, using Nr4a3-Tocky, 
Timer Intensity reflects the cumulative transcriptional outcome 
of signals in a given cell as the reporter protein accumulates in 
response to sustained or highly frequent signals.
Next, we addressed whether Nr4a3-Tocky identifies T cells 
that receive TCR signals in vivo. We adoptively transferred OT-II 
TCR transgenic Nr4a3-Tocky T cells into congenic recipients, 
which were then fed their cognate antigen, Ova, in the water 
(or water alone; Fig. 3 I). This model allows analysis of T cell 
responses in mesenteric lymph nodes to orally administered 
antigens. Timer expression occurred in OT-II TCR transgenic T 
cells from Nr4a3-Tocky mice only in the presence of their cog-
nate antigen, indicating that Timer expression is induced upon 
antigen recognition in vivo.
To validate the frequency domain of the Tocky system, we 
used the Nr4a3-Tocky OTII system to perform periodic stimula-
tion of T cells with cognate peptide. T cells underwent one, two, 
or three rounds of 4-h peptide stimulation over a 48-h period (the 
groups I, II, and III), and the Timer blue versus red expression 
was analyzed by flow cytometry and compared with constant 
stimulation (Constant; Fig. 4 A). As predicted, low frequency 
stimulation resulted in predominantly pure red expression 
(Fig. 4 B). With increased frequency of signaling, blue fluores-
cence increased, which was highest in cells undergoing constant 
stimulation. Analysis of Timer Angle distribution captured the 
shift in frequency as Angles moved from the Arrested locus 
(i.e., 90°) toward the Persistent locus with increasing frequency 
of stimulus (Fig. 4, C and D). As expected, Timer Intensity also 
showed a frequency dependent relationship as more Timer pro-
teins accumulated in response to more frequent TCR stimula-
tion (Fig. 4 E).
Next, we have further analyzed the same stimulated T cells 
using confocal microscopy analysis (Fig. 4, F–I; and Fig. S2, A 
and B). Visual inspections of microscopic images suggested 
that Timer–blue fluorescence was increased as the frequency 
Figure 2. Antigen–receptor ligation induces Timer proteins in B and T cell subsets from Nr4a3-Tocky mice. (A) Construct for generating Nr4a3-Tocky 
BAC transgenic mice. (B) Splenocytes from Nr4a3-Tocky mice were activated for 20 h with either 10 µg/ml of soluble goat anti–mouse IgM (for CD19+ B cells) 
or 2 µg/ml plate bound anti-CD3 (for CD4+ and CD8+ T cells). Cells were then incubated with 100 μg/ml cycloheximide to inhibit new protein translation and 
the decay of blue fluorescence measured over time by flow cytometry. Shown is Timer–blue versus Timer–red fluorescence in CD19+ B cells (top), CD4+ T cells 
(middle), or CD8+ T cells (bottom) at the indicated time points. (C and D) Summary data of the percentage of cells blue+ (C) or red+ (D) cells in the cultures. 
Linear regression by Pearson’s correlation; n = 3 culture triplicates. Data are representative of two independent experiments.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2936
of stimulation increased (Figs. 4 F and S2 A). Quantitative 
measurement of fluorescent intensities in individual cells 
confirmed this (Fig. 4, G–I; and Fig. S2 B). Both Timer–blue 
and Timer–red fluorescence increased as the stimulation was 
more frequently applied, and the increase was more remark-
able in Timer–blue fluorescence (Fig. 4, G and H). 2D plot of 
Timer–blue and Timer–red fluorescence by confocal micros-
copy (Fig. 4 I) recaptured the flow cytometric result (Fig. 4 B). 
Thus, this single-cell microscopy experiment further validated 
the Tocky system.
Cell division, costimulation, and IL-2 signaling do not affect 
Timer Angle progression
Next, we examined whether processes related to T cell activa-
tion affect Timer Angle. TCR signaling leads to T cell activation 
and proliferation. Because each cell division halves both existing 
blue- and red-form proteins, it was predicted that cell division 
would not change Timer Angle. In fact, by analyzing the dilu-
tion of a proliferation dye as cells divide, activated T cells did 
not change their Timer Angle after cell division (Fig. 5, A and B). 
Activated T cells produce IL-2, which promotes the survival and 
Figure 3. Nr4a3-Tocky reveals the time 
domain of TCR signal–triggered activation 
and differentiation events. (A) Flow cytomet-
ric analysis of blue and red Timer raw fluores-
cence in antigen-stimulated OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky 
T cells. T cells were stimulated for the indicated 
time points with 1 µM Ova peptide. In some 
cultures, anti–MHC II antibodies were added at 
24 h to terminate TCR signaling. (B) Trigonomet-
ric-transformed data from A. Individual cells are 
plotted against Timer Angle and Timer Intensity. 
(C) Density plot of Timer Angle from the trans-
formed data. (D) The designation of the five 
Timer loci by Timer Angle θ as follows: New (θ 
= 0°), NP-t (0° < θ < 30°), Persistent (30° ≤ θ < 
60°), PA-t (60° ≤ θ < 90°), and Arrested (θ = 90°). 
 
(E) Timer Locus analysis to show the frequency 
of cells within the five Timer loci defined in C. 
 
(F) Summary of Timer Intensity in the cultures 
from A over time. (G) Dose–response curve of 
Timer Intensity on stimulation with titrated doses 
of Ova peptide (antigen). OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky T 
cells were stimulated for 22 h in the presence of 
1, 10, 100, or 1,000 nM Ova peptide and APCs. 
Data were fitted to a dose–response curve with 
a statistical significance by a lack-of-fit test (P = 
0.014). (H) Scatter plot of Timer Intensity versus 
cell surface CD25 expression. Linear regression 
analysis showed a strong correlation (R2 = 0.93). 
See legend for sample identities. (I) CD4+ T cells 
from OT-II TCR transgenic Nr4a3-Tocky mice 
were adoptively transferred in to CD45.1 con-
genic mice, which were fed Ova or control for 3 d. 
CD45.2+CD45.1+CD4+ OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky T cells 
within mesenteric lymph nodes were analyzed 
for Timer expression. Error bars represent mean 
± SD; n = 3 culture triplicates. Data are represen-
tative of at least two independent experiments.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2937
proliferation of these T cells (Hoyer et al., 2008). Exogenous IL-2 
had no effect on Timer Angle (Fig. 5, C and D). CD28 signaling 
enhances the activities of TCR signal downstream, inhibiting 
apoptosis and sustaining the activation processes (Boomer and 
Green, 2010; Walker and Sansom, 2011). Importantly, anti–CD28 
antibody alone did not induce Timer expression, and it also did 
not change the progression of Timer Angle by TCR signals (Fig. 5, 
E and F). Collectively, the data above indicate that the progres-
sion of Timer Angle is not affected by cell division or activation 
status but is defined by the time and signal dynamics and that 
Figure 4. Nr4a3-Tocky captures the frequency domain of TCR signaling. (A–I) T cells from OTII Nr4a3-Tocky mice were cultured with T cell–depleted 
splenocytes. (A) T cells were stimulated with 1 µM Ova as follows: 4-h stimulation, then rested for 48 h (I); 4-h stimulation, 20-h rest, 4-h stimulation, and 
24-h rest (II); 4-h stimulation, 20-h rest, 4-h stimulation, 20-h rest, and 4-h stimulation (III); or 2-d constant (Con) stimulation. During resting stages, cells 
were incubated with 100 U/ml recombinant IL-2 and 20 µg/ml anti–MHC II and washed before and after stimulations. (B) Cells were then harvested and CD4+ 
OTII T cells analyzed for Timer–blue versus Timer–red fluorescence expression by flow cytometry. (C) Displayed are the Timer Angle distributions for the four 
culture conditions. (D and E) Shown are the mean Timer Angle (D) or Timer Intensity (E) within the four different cultures. Error bars represent mean ± SD; 
n = 3 culture triplicates. (F) Confocal microscopy analysis of OTII Nr4a3-Tocky stimulated with various frequencies. The same cell samples used in A–D were 
analyzed by confocal microscopy. Bars, 10 µm. (G and H) Histogram showing the mean fluorescence intensity of Timer–blue (G) or Timer–red fluorescence 
(H) in single cells by microscopic image analysis. (I) 2D plots of the mean fluorescence intensities of Timer–blue and Timer–red fluorescence in single cells by 
microscopic image analysis. Cells were identified as regions of interest, and mean fluorescence intensities were measured and logged. See Fig. S2 and Materials 
and methods for details.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2938
Nr4a3-Tocky reports the temporal dynamics of TCR signal down-
stream activities.
The time-domain analysis of Nr4a3-Tocky mice delineates the 
temporal sequences of thymic Treg cell differentiation in vivo
Having validated the Nr4a3-Tocky system, we decided to investi-
gate thymic Treg cell differentiation. TCR signaling is the major 
determinant of Treg cell differentiation in the thymus. T cells 
that have recognized their cognate antigens and received strong 
TCR signals preferentially express CD25 and Foxp3 and differen-
tiate into Treg cells (Hsieh et al., 2012; Weissler and Caton, 2014).
To demonstrate the quantitative power of the Tocky technol-
ogy, we investigated the temporal sequence of thymic CD4 T cell 
differentiation after TCR signals by analyzing the time domain 
of ex vivo T cells from Nr4a3-Tocky thymus. Timer expression 
occurred in the CD4+CD8+ double-positive, CD4 single-positive 
(SP), and CD8SP populations, with CD4SP displaying the highest 
frequency (8.9 ± 3.7%; Fig. 6 A). The cell-surface expression of 
CD69, which is highly expressed on immature CD4SP, was high 
in CD4SP cells in the New locus and progressively declined as the 
Timer protein matures. In contrast, the majority of CD4SP cells 
in the Persistent locus expressed Foxp3 and CD25 (Fig. 6 B). With 
the assumption that in neonatal mice, nearly all cells in the Per-
sistent locus would be derived from the New locus, these results 
led to the hypothesis that Treg cell differentiation requires per-
sistent TCR stimulation.
The sequence of thymic Treg cell development is controver-
sial. Some studies suggest that CD25+Foxp3− Treg cells are the 
major Treg cell precursors (Burchill et al., 2007; Lio and Hsieh, 
2008), whereas other research argues that CD25−Foxp3+ cells 
are Treg cell precursors (Fig. 6 C; Tai et al., 2013). These studies 
used in vitro culture experiments and intrathymic injection of 
precursor populations, which may not reflect the differentiation 
dynamics in vivo. We therefore revisited this issue to reveal the 
temporal sequences of thymic Treg cell differentiation in oth-
erwise unmanipulated animals by analyzing the time domain 
of Nr4a3-Tocky.
The majority of Treg cells (CD25+Foxp3+) were Timer+ (∼90%), 
and both of the proposed Treg cell precursor populations (CD25+-
Foxp3− and CD25−Foxp3+) also had high proportions of Timer+ 
cells (∼63% and ∼58%, respectively; Fig. 6 D), indicating that these 
three populations have all received either strong or frequent TCR 
signals. To place the three populations in time after TCR signal 
transduction, we analyzed thymi from Nr4a3-Tocky neonates 
Figure 5. Cell division, costimulation, and IL-2 signaling do not affect Timer Angle progression. (A–F) CD4+ T cells from Nr4a3-Tocky mice were labeled 
with a proliferation dye and activated for 72 h with anti-CD3. Cells were then analyzed based on dilution of proliferation dye and classified into number of 
cellular divisions. (A) Timer–blue versus Timer–red fluorescence in CD4+ T cells gated on dilution of proliferation dye. (B) Mean Timer Angle values in the 
cultures from A. (C and D) Splenocytes from Nr4a3-Tocky mice were stimulated on anti-CD3–coated plates in the presence or absence of 100 U/ml rhIL-2 for 
20 h. Timer–blue versus Timer–red fluorescence in CD4+ T cells from cultures (C). Mean Timer-Angle in cultures (D). (E and F) Splenocytes from Nr4a3-Tocky 
mice were stimulated on plates coated with anti-CD28 alone, anti-CD3 alone, or anti-CD3 + anti-CD28 for 20 h. Timer–blue versus Timer–red fluorescence 
in CD4+ T cells from cultures (E). Mean Timer-Angle in cultures (F). n = 3 culture triplicates; error bars represent mean ± SEM. Data are representative of two 
independent experiments.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2939
and measured Foxp3 and CD25 expression in addition to Timer 
fluorescence. Timer expressing CD25+Foxp3− cells were mostly 
blue+red−, whereas those of CD25+Foxp3+ Treg and CD25−Foxp3+ 
cells were mostly blue+red+ (Fig. 6 E). Most of CD25+Foxp3− cells 
had the Angle value 0, whereas CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells showed a 
clear peak ∼30°–50° and CD25−Foxp3+ cells had a higher peak at 
90° (Fig. 6 F). The mean of Angle was not significantly different 
between CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells and CD25−Foxp3+ cells (Fig. 6 G). 
These indicate that the CD25+Foxp3− population is in the earliest 
time after receiving TCR signals. Next, to define the temporal 
relationships between the three Treg cells and precursor popu-
lations, we quantified the proportion of Timer+ cells in each mat-
uration stage of Timer fluorescence (Fig. 6 H). This showed that 
most of the CD4SP cells in the New locus were CD25+Foxp3− cells, 
whereas most of CD4SP cells in the Persistent were CD25+Foxp3+ 
Treg cells. The relative contribution of CD25−Foxp3+ was great-
est in the Arrested locus, suggesting that these cells are enriched 
with those with aborted TCR signaling (Fig. 6 H). In addition, 
Timer intensity analysis showed that the CD25−Foxp3+ subset had 
received the weakest and/or least frequent TCR signals among 
these subsets (Fig. 6 I).
Collectively, these analyses demonstrate that the major path-
way for Treg cell differentiation is from CD25+Foxp3− Treg cell 
precursors in which persistent TCR signals induce Foxp3 expres-
sion. The CD25−Foxp3+ subset is enriched with Foxp3+ cells that 
have received relatively weaker and/or less sustained TCR sig-
nals. After TCR signaling, cell surface CD69 expression peaks 
within 4–8 h. CD25 expression is induced in this early phase in 
Figure 6. Nr4a3-Tocky mice identify thymic Treg cell precursors. (A) Percentages of Timer-positive cells in the indicated thymic T cell populations from 
Nr4a3-Tocky mice. DP, double positive. (B) Mean percentages of CD4SP cells expressing CD69 (green), CD25 (blue), or Foxp3 (red) from the five Timer loci. 
(C) Current working model for thymic Treg cell differentiation. (D) Percentages of Timer+ cells in the indicated CD4SP subpopulations (A, CD25+Foxp3−; 
B, CD25−Foxp3+; and C, CD25+Foxp3+). (E) Timer blue and red fluorescence from CD4SP Thymic Treg cell subsets from 7-d-old neonates. (F) Density plot of 
Timer Angle from the transformed data. (G) The mean Timer Angle of thymic Treg cell subsets. (H) Frequency within the CD4SP thymic population of each Timer 
locus in the three Treg cell subsets. (I) The mean Timer Intensity of thymic Treg cell subsets. Thymi from 7-, 9-, and 13-d-old neonates were analyzed in three 
independent experiments, and data were combined unless otherwise indicated. Error bars represent mean ± SD. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2940
the Timer-blue (New) population and steadily accumulates as T 
cells receive TCR signals. Foxp3 expression is the most delayed 
and occurs most efficiently after T cells have persistently inter-
acted with antigen (Fig. 7). Importantly, the Tocky system has 
for the first time directly shown the temporal sequences of Treg 
cells differentiation processes, revealing that temporally per-
sistent TCR signals induce CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cell differentiation. 
Thus, our investigations show that Nr4a3-Tocky and Timer locus 
analysis effectively unravel the temporal dynamics of T cell dif-
ferentiation after TCR signals.
Spontaneous and infrequent TCR signals occur in a minority of 
peripheral self-reactive T cells from Nr4a3-Tocky mice
Considering that Treg cell differentiation occurs through the rec-
ognition of cognate antigens in the thymus (Picca et al., 2006) 
and that these cells receive persistent TCR signals (Fig. 6), we 
hypothesized that Nr4a3-Tocky allows to identify by the per-
sistent dynamics of TCR signals antigen-reactive T cells that 
recognize their cognate antigen during inflammation. First, we 
analyzed Nr4a3-Tocky mice with WT polyclonal T cell repertoire 
and found that Timer expression spontaneously occurred in a 
minority of the T cells from Nr4a3-Tocky mice and was mainly 
blue–red+ (Fig. S3 A). Remarkably, Timer was expressed by a 
majority of Treg cell and memory-phenotype T cells (66.1 ± 5.1% 
and 30.8 ± 6.1%, respectively), whereas it was expressed by only 
a small proportion of naive T cells (5.7 ± 2.5%; Fig. S3 B). Because 
both Treg cells and memory-phenotype T cells are self-reactive 
T cells (Ono and Tanaka, 2016), we hypothesized that all these 
Timer-positive cells are in fact self-reactive T cells that sponta-
neously recognize self-antigens and receive TCR signals in the 
periphery. Interestingly, the Timer Angle of most of Timer- 
positive cells was 90° (the Arrested locus) irrespective of which 
T cell fraction they are from (Fig. S3, C and D). This indicates that 
all these Timer-positive populations received infrequent TCR sig-
nals with short durations in a similar manner. To further con-
firm this, Nr4a3-Tocky T cells were adoptively transferred into 
congenic MHC class II knockout mice to assess the contribution 
of spontaneous interactions between TCR and self-antigen/MHC 
class II to Timer expression (Fig. S3 E). As expected, 9 d after 
transfer, most of Timer expression was lost within MHC class II 
knockout mice. Collectively, these indicate that the spontaneous 
Timer expression in CD4+ T cells is induced through the infre-
quent and not-immunogenic interaction of self-reactive TCRs 
and self-antigen/MHC, which is currently called “tonic TCR sig-
nals” (Klein et al., 2014; Ono and Tanaka, 2016).
The frequency-domain analysis of Nr4a3-Tocky mice identify 
tissue-infiltrating antigen-reactive T cells as cells receiving 
persistent TCR signals
Next, we asked whether immunogenic T cell responses have 
distinct dynamics of TCR signals compared with the infrequent 
TCR signals in self-reactive T cells. We used a murine model of 
multiple sclerosis, experimental autoimmune encephalomyeli-
tis, which produces autoimmune T cell responses to myelin basic 
proteins in the central nervous system (CNS; O’Neill et al., 2006). 
Upon immunization of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
(MOG), mice developed paralysis within 2 wk, when T cells in the 
draining lymph nodes (dLNs) of the immunized site and the spi-
nal cord (CNS) were isolated and analyzed (Fig. 8 A). MHC class II 
tetramer for MOG-specific T cells (designated as MOG-tetramer) 
stained >10% of CNS-infiltrating T cells, whereas it stained only 
0.5% of T cells in dLN (Fig. 8, B and C). This indicates that most 
of cells in dLN cells are not reactive to MOG, whereas CNS- 
infiltrating T cells are markedly enriched with MOG-specific T 
cells, which mediate pathological inflammation (Stromnes and 
Goverman, 2006). Strikingly, almost 100% of CNS-infiltrating 
MOG-tetramer+ cells expressed Timer, whereas 40% of MOG- 
tetramer+ cells were Timer+ in dLN (Fig. 8 D). These findings 
show that a significantly greater proportion of CNS-infiltrating 
MOG-specific T cells are actively engaged in TCR signals com-
pared with the dLN. Next, we analyzed the Timer expression in 
these cells. T cells in dLNs, whether MOG-tetramer positive or 
negative, showed prominent peaks at the New and Arrested loci 
(Fig. 8, E and F). This suggests that a significant proportion of 
T cells receive TCR signals at each moment (therefore produc-
ing a peak at the New locus), whereas TCR signals in individual 
T cells are infrequent (hence producing a peak at the Arrested 
locus; Fig. 1 E). In contrast, CNS-infiltrating MOG-specific T cells 
were almost exclusively blue+red+ and had a single peak between 
30° and 60°, whereas CNS-infiltrating tetramer T cells had peaks 
in the New and Arrested loci (Fig. 8, E and F), showing a sim-
ilar pattern to those of dLN cells (Fig. 8 F). Most of the MOG- 
specific T cells in the CNS were found in the Persistent and 
NP-t loci (Fig. 8 G), further confirming that CNS-infiltrating 
MOG-specific T cells frequently receive TCR signals.
Collectively, the results above indicate that MOG-specific T 
cells are engaged with their cognate antigens in the CNS, receiv-
ing frequent TCR signals. The accumulation of blue+red+ cells does 
not occur in lymph nodes, presumably because both MOG-specific 
T cells and MOG-presenting antigen-presenting cells (APCs) are 
rare in lymph nodes. Thus, Nr4a3-Tocky identifies antigen-re-
active T cells by their transcriptional response in the nucleus. 
The signal dynamics of these antigen-reactive T cells are distinct 
from those of bystander or nonreactive T cells and are intrigu-
ingly similar to those of thymic CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells (Fig. 6 E vs. 
Fig. 8 E), which are engaged with self–antigen-presenting thymic 
APCs (namely, under agonistic selection; Klein et al., 2014).
Figure 7. Model for the influence of TCR signaling dynamics on thymic 
Treg cell differentiation.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2941
Foxp3-Tocky successfully identifies newly generated Treg cells
Next, to address whether the Tocky system can be applied to 
another gene and to further validate the system, we developed 
Foxp3-Tocky mice using the same approach used for Nr4a3-
Tocky (Fig. 9, A and B). By investigating Foxp3 protein staining 
(Fig. 9 C) and Foxp3IRES-GFP Foxp3-Tocky double-transgenic mice 
(Fig. 9 D), Timer expression showed high correlation with GFP 
and with Foxp3 protein. As expected, when naive CD4+ T cells 
were stimulated in the presence of IL-2 and TGF-β (i.e., induced 
Treg [iTreg] cell conditions), new Foxp3 expression (blue+red−) 
Figure 8. Tocky mice identify antigen-reactive T cells as cells receiving frequent TCR signals. (A) Development of clinical symptoms by MOG immuni-
zation. (B) At day 14, CD4+ T cells within the CNS or dLNs were analyzed for MOG-tetramer labeling. Flow cytometry plots depict CD44 versus MOG-tetramer 
gated on CD4+ T cells. (C) Percentages of MOG-tetramer–positive cells in dLNs of immunization site and the CNS from MOG-immunized mice or dLNs from 
control mice with adjuvant only. (D) Percentages of Timer-positive cells in MOG-tetramer–positive and –negative cells in either dLNs or CNS from MOG-im-
munized mice. (E–G) MOG-tetramer–positive and –negative cells in either dLNs or CNS from MOG-immunized mice were analyzed for blue and red Timer raw 
fluorescence by flow cytometry (E) or Timer Angle by density plot (F). (G) Timer locus analysis of data from E. n = 3 mice; error bars represent mean ± SD. Data 
are representative of two independent experiments.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2942
was induced at 22 h, which gained red proteins by 50 h as the 
Timer chromophore matured (Fig. 9 E). Trigonometric Timer 
data analysis showed ex vivo splenic Foxp3+ T cells from adult 
mice had high Timer Angle values throughout the culture. In 
contrast, iTreg cells showed very low Angle values at 22 h, which 
slowly increased overtime (Fig. 9, F and G). These data indicate 
that Foxp3-Tocky mice can identify the newly differentiating 
Treg cells that have recently initiated Foxp3 transcription in vivo, 
which cannot be achieved through use of existing methods such 
as GFP reporter mice.
Foxp3-Tocky reveals that the demethylation of the Foxp3 
gene actively occurs when Foxp3 transcription is highly 
sustained in vivo
Next, taking advantage of the Tocky system, we investigated the 
transcription and methylation of the Foxp3 gene during Treg cell 
Figure 9. Foxp3-Tocky identifies newly generated Treg cells. (A) Use of Foxp3-Tocky mice to investigate in vivo dynamics of Foxp3 transcription. (B) Con-
struct for the generation of Foxp3-Tocky BAC transgenic mice. (C) Splenic T cells were sored into blue−red+, blue+red+, and blue−red− and analyzed for intracel-
lular Foxp3 proteins. (D) Foxp3-Tocky mice were crossed with Foxp3-IRES-GFP, and analyzed for the coexpression of GFP and Timer. (E) Timer-negative naive T 
cells and splenic Timer-positive Treg cells from Foxp3-Tocky mice were isolated and stimulated by anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 for 0, 22, or 50 h in the presence of 
IL-2 (and TGF-β for iTreg cells). Flow cytometry plots display raw blue versus red expression during the cultures. (F and G) Timer Angle versus Timer Intensity 
(F) or Timer Angle versus time in the data from E (F).
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2943
generation. Although it is known that demethylation can occur 
within a few hours in cultured cells (Métivier et al., 2008), there 
is no available method to investigate the in vivo dynamics of 
demethylation in the mouse body. Immature Treg cells, as iden-
tified by high CD24 expression (Marodon and Rocha, 1994), dis-
play methylation of the Treg cell–specific demethylated region 
(TSDR) of the Foxp3 gene, and loss of CD24 expression is associ-
ated with its demethylation (Toker et al., 2013). However, because 
the in vivo dynamics of CD24 expression is not fully known, it 
is still unclear how the demethylation of the TSDR dynamically 
occurs in vivo. Thus, by analyzing the time domain of Foxp3 
transcription using Foxp3-Tocky, we investigated the tempo-
ral dynamics of the demethylation of the TSDR during thymic 
Treg cell development. We isolated differentiating thymic T cells 
by flow-sorting bluehigh T cells into Timer Angle low, medium, 
and high (Fig. 10 A). Analysis showed that the isolated popula-
tions exhibited distinct Timer Angles from a mean of 10° to 80° 
(Fig. 10, B and C). DNA was isolated from each population, and 
their TSDR demethylation was analyzed (Fig. 10 D). Importantly, 
the newest Foxp3+ cells (low) were still mostly methylated and not 
significantly different from Timer− cells in the degree of TSDR 
demethylation, whereas rapid demethylation occurred as cells 
moved to the Persistent locus (Fig. 10 D). Timer Angles showed a 
strong correlation with TSDR demethylation rates (Spearman’s 
correlation coefficient ρ = −0.81; Fig. 10 E), indicating that the 
Foxp3-Tocky reporter successfully captures the demethylation 
dynamics of the Foxp3 gene. Thus, Foxp3 expression precedes the 
demethylation of the TSDR region, and the most active demethyl-
ation process occurs when Foxp3 transcription is sustained. Col-
lectively, the Foxp3-Tocky reporter successfully identified newly 
generated Treg cells in vitro and in vivo and also ordered cells 
from new to relatively aged ones (by the time domain analysis), 
demonstrating the general applicability of the Tocky system to 
studies of cellular biology and immunology.
Discussion
In this study, we have established two uses of the Tocky system. 
First, the time domain analysis of Tocky allows investigators to 
determine the relative temporal order of the molecular events 
after the activation of key signaling pathways and thereby pro-
vides a new way to identify immediate precursors and relatively 
mature cells. Previous studies using fluorescent Timer pro-
teins identified newly generated cells as they expressed solely 
Figure 10. Foxp3-Tockyreveals in vivo 
dynamics of demethylation of the Foxp3 
gene. (A–E) Thymic cells or splenic Treg cells 
were sorted according to increasing Tocky time 
(i.e., Timer Angle) in blue+ cells. (A–C) Flow 
cytometry plots of blue versus red fluorescence 
(A), Timer Angle density plots (B), or mean 
Timer Angle in the sorted T cell populations 
(C); n = 3. DNA was extracted for methylation 
analysis, and thymic samples were compared 
with Timer (−) and splenic Treg cell samples. 
(D) Heatmap showing mean TSDR methyl-
ation rates of flow-sorted T cell subsets. (E) 
Mean TSDR methylation rates plotted against 
mean Timer Angle in sorted T cell subsets (n = 
3 mice for each subset). Spearman’s correlation 
coefficient is shown. Data were combined from 
two experiments.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2944
immature fluorescence without mature fluorescence (Terskikh 
et al., 2000; Miyatsuka et al., 2011, 2014). In this study, in addi-
tion to the rigorous determination of New cells (blue+red−), we 
established a quantitative method to measure the relative age of 
cells that are maturing in vivo. Thus, we determined the tempo-
ral sequences of molecular events during thymic Treg cell dif-
ferentiation after receiving TCR signals using Nr4a3-Tocky and 
identified the major precursor of these cells as the earliest cells 
among the presumptive precursor populations. In addition, the 
time domain analysis has allowed us to simultaneously investi-
gate the temporal dynamics of the demethylation process and the 
transcriptional activities in vivo, identifying and characterizing 
the earliest stages of Foxp3+ Treg cell differentiation. Instead of 
using a surface marker as an indicator of developmental stage 
(Toker et al., 2013), we directly investigated the time domain of 
Foxp3 transcription and thereby revealed the in vivo dynamics 
of the demethylation of the Foxp3 enhancer region: the demeth-
ylation process is initiated after Foxp3 transcription started and 
it becomes the most active when the transcriptional activity is 
highly sustained. This means that the Tocky system provides an 
unprecedented means to investigate the in vivo regulation of 
molecular mechanisms.
Second, the frequency domain analysis of the Tocky system 
can identify cells that are undergoing repeated signaling pro-
cesses. Using Nr4a3-Tocky, we showed that thymic T cells that 
have received sustained TCR signals differentiate into Treg cells. 
Consistent with these findings, thymic Foxp3+ cells show slower 
and more confined migration by two-photon microscopy com-
pared with other thymic T cells (Le Borgne et al., 2009). These 
differentiating Foxp3+ cells may integrate TCR and other signals 
from thymic epithelial cells and other APCs. In addition, using 
Nr4a3-Tocky, tissue-infiltrating antigen-specific T cells also 
accumulate in the Persistent locus, indicating that they frequently 
interact with cells presenting their cognate antigens. This is also 
compatible with the findings by intravital microscopic analysis 
of TCR transgenic T cells that showed that antigen-specific T cells 
decrease velocity when interacting with antigens (Bousso, 2008). 
Because the affinity of TCR–ligand interactions determines the 
dynamics of proximal TCR signaling molecules (Stepanek et al., 
2014), future studies should investigate whether and how dif-
ferent TCR affinities are translated into different dynamics of 
transcription of downstream transcription factors, including 
Nr4a3. In addition, further studies are required to investigate the 
temporal dynamics of antigen-specific T cell responses in differ-
ent contexts such as other autoimmune diseases, allergy, infec-
tions, and vaccination. Nevertheless, Nr4a3-Tocky enables the 
investigation of the antigen-specific response of T cells within 
polyclonal repertoires, revealing in vivo T cell responses at the 
single-cell level, which may be effective in evaluating the effects 
of immunotherapy on T cell responses.
In addition, using Nr4a3-Tocky, self-reactive T cells are iden-
tified as cells that receive infrequent TCR signals in the periph-
ery. The spontaneous TCR signals in self-reactive T cells are 
historically defined as tonic TCR signals (Stefanová et al., 2002), 
although their temporal dynamics were unknown. Using Nr4a3-
Tocky, most of self-reactive T cells are mainly at the Arrested 
locus, and therefore, the interval of signals is considered to 
be several times longer than the half-life of blue fluorescence 
(∼4 h). Further study is required to elucidate the mechanism of 
the infrequent TCR signals in self-reactive T cells and whether 
and how TCR and other signals differentiate self-reactive T cells 
into pathogenic T cells in autoimmune conditions. It is of interest 
how different frequencies of TCR signals result in the activation 
of different transcriptional mechanisms.
In general, persistent signals may have distinct biological 
roles compared with transient signals (Yosef and Regev, 2011), 
and the Tocky system is an effective tool to investigate these 
dynamics. For example, sustained TLR4 signaling induces Il6 
transcription effectively, in contrast with transient activities 
(Litvak et al., 2009); sustained DNA damage, but not transient 
damage, activates p53 and induces p21 expression and cell cycle 
arrest (Loewer et al., 2010). To date, such studies used in vitro 
time-course analyses and/or mathematical modeling to analyze 
the sustained dynamics of transcription. The Tocky system will 
benefit studies in cell signaling by providing a means to directly 
identify and isolate cells receiving persistent signals.
Thus, the Tocky system can be used to dissect the temporal 
dynamics of cellular differentiation and activation of individ-
ual cells by analyzing their time-and frequency domains, pro-
viding a measurement of “Tocky time” (Fig. S4), which is in a 
nonlinear relationship with “real” time, and represents a relative 
chronological readout for events occurring after a cellular differ-
entiation cue. It is of note that the time and frequency domains 
of the Tocky time are merged at the Persistent locus, and fur-
ther mathematical approaches to understand the relationship 
between these two domains are anticipated. The advantages of 
the Tocky system over other gene reporters are summarized in 
Table S1. In the future, Tocky mice for key transcription factors 
and genes will be promising tools to reveal the in vivo dynamics 
of gene transcription and cellular differentiation (e.g., Bcl6 for 
T-follicular helper cells, Rag2 for TCR recombination, and Oct4 
for stem cell–ness), which cannot be investigated otherwise. In 
summary, we have established the Tocky system as a pioneer-
ing tool to investigate cellular activation and differentiation and 
gene dynamics in vivo, which will facilitate studies in cell biology 
disciplines, including immunology, developmental biology, and 
stem cell biology.
Materials and methods
Transgenesis and mice
The BAC clones RP23-122N18 and RP23-330D17 were obtained 
from the BAC 
PAC Resources Center at Children’s Hospital Oak-
land Research Institute and were for generating Nr4a3-Tocky 
and Foxp3-Tocky, respectively. BAC DNA was modified by the 
BAC recombineering approach using the SW106 strain bacte-
ria (Warming et al., 2005). Two independent lines were estab-
lished for both of the Nr4a3-Tocky and Foxp3-Tocky transgenic 
reporter strains. Both lines exhibited highly similar phenotypes 
and frequencies of Timer-positive cells.
We used a Timer knock-in knockout approach for BAC trans-
genic reporter constructs. Precisely, for Nr4a3-Tocky, the first 
coding exon of the Nr4a3 gene in RP23-122N18 was targeted 
and replaced with the transgene cassette containing the Timer 
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2945
(Fast-FT) gene (Subach et al., 2009), a poly(A) tail, and a floxed 
neomycin resistance gene (neo). For Foxp3-Tocky, the first coding 
exon of the Foxp3 gene in RP23-330D17 was targeted and replaced 
by the same transgene cassette. Subsequently, neo was excluded 
by arabinose-inducible Cre expression in SW106 (Warming et 
al., 2005). BAC DNA was purified by the NucleoBond Xtra Midi 
kit (Macherey-Nagel) and microinjected into the pronucleus of 
one-cell embryos from C57BL/6 mice under the approval of the 
Gene Recombination Experiments Safety Committee of Kyoto 
University. Founders were screened by genomic PCR, and trans-
gene-positive founders were mated with WT C57BL/6 mice. F1 
mice were screened by flow cytometry for Timer expression and 
subsequently bred to homozygosity with Foxp3IRES-GFP mice (B6.
Cg-Foxp3tm1Mal/J, 018628; Jackson Laboratory) to generate Nr4a3 
-Tocky: 
Foxp3IRES 
-GFP double-transgenic mice. OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky: 
Foxp3IRES-GFP mice were similarly generated by crossing Nr4a3-
Tocky, B6.Cg-Tg(TcraTcrb)425Cbn/J, and B6.Cg-Foxp3tm1Mal/J. 
MHC class IIko/ko (B6.129S2-H2dlAb1-Ea/J, 003584; The Jackson Lab-
oratory) and congenic CD45.1 (B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ, 002014; 
The Jackson Laboratory) were also used. All animal experiments 
were performed in accordance with local Animal Welfare and 
Ethical Review Body at Imperial College London and Univer-
sity College London, and all gene recombination experiments 
were performed under the risk assessment that was approved 
by the review board at Imperial College London and University 
College London.
In vitro Treg cell polarization and mature Treg cell culture
CD4+CD44loFoxp3− naive T cells from Foxp3-Tocky mice were iso-
lated by cell sorting, and 105 cells were cultured on anti-CD3 (clone 
1452C11; 2 µg/ml; eBioscience) and anti-CD28 (clone 37.51; 10 µg/
ml; eBioscience)–coated 96-well plates (Corning) in the presence 
of 100 U/ml rhIL-2 (Roche) and 2 ng/ml rhTGFβ (R&D) for 0–48 h 
in a final volume of 200 µl RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 
10% FCS and penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Mature Foxp3+ Treg cells from Foxp3-Tocky mice were iso-
lated by cell sorting, and 105 cells were cultured on anti-CD3 
(clone 145.2C11; 2 µg/ml) and anti-CD28 (clone 37.51; 10 µg/ml) 
–coated 96-well plates in the presence of 100 U/ml rhIL-2 for 
0–48 h in a final volume of 200 µl RPMI 1640 containing 10% 
FCS and penicillin/streptomycin.
Activation of T and B cells in vitro and the analysis of the half-
life of blue-fluorescence
Splenocytes (4 × 105 per well) were cultured on 96-well U-bottom 
plates coated with 2 µg/ml anti-CD3 and/or 10 µg/ml anti-CD28 
for 20 h. Cells were then harvested and replated in the presence 
of 100 µg/ml cycloheximide (Sigma-Aldrich). At various time 
points, cells were stained with CD4 and CD8 antibodies, and 
Timer–blue and Timer–red fluorescence was measured by flow 
cytometry. In some cultures, 100 U/ml rhIL-2 was added. For 
polyclonal activation of B cells, 10 µg/ml F(ab′)2 goat anti–mouse 
IgM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to cultures of spleno-
cytes for 20 h. Cells were then harvested and replated in the pres-
ence of 100 µg/ml cycloheximide. At various time points, cells 
were stained for CD19 and CD3 and CD3−CD19+ B cells analyzed 
for Timer–blue and Timer–red fluorescence.
In vitro T cell activation of OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky T cells
CD4+ T cells from OT-II Nr4a3 
-Tocky: 
Foxp3GFP 
KI mice were 
isolated by immunomagnetic cell separation, (StemCell Tech-
nologies), and 2 × 105 cells were cultured with 3 × 105 (2:3) 
CD90.2-depleted splenocytes in the presence of 1, 10, 100, or 
1,000 nM Ova(323–339) peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) on 96-well plates 
(Corning) in a final volume of 200 µl RPMI 1640 containing 10% 
FCS and penicillin/streptomycin and 55 µM β-mercaptoetha-
nol (Gibco) for the stated time periods. At 24 h, some cells were 
washed three times and recultured on a fresh plate in the pres-
ence of 40 µg/ml anti–MHC class II (clone M5/114; BioXcell) for 
a further 8–24 h before analysis. The stimulation was terminated 
in the same manner for periodic stimulation of OT-II Nr4a3.
Confocal microscopy
Confocal microscopy analysis of stimulated OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky T 
cells was performed using Cytospin as previously described (Ono 
et al., 2007). In brief, Cytospin slides were prepared with stimu-
lated T cells and fixed by 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room 
temperature. After washing with PBS, fluorescence images were 
obtained by the confocal system LSM510 invert (ZEI 
SS) using a 
Plan Apochromat 20×/0.8 objective. The laser-scanning micros-
copy image files were converted into TIFF format and further ana-
lyzed by FIJI (ImageJ; National Institutes of Health; Schindelin et 
al., 2012). For quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensities in 
single cells, individual cells were manually identified as region of 
interest using light-field differential interference contrast images. 
It is of note that because GFP+Foxp3+ cells were very rare in stim-
ulated OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky cells, we used GFP images as a dump, 
excluding cells with high autofluorescence (Fig. S2, arrowheads). 
Measurement of mean fluorescence intensities were obtained 
by redirecting them to thresholded grayscale images for Timer–
blue and Timer–red fluorescence. The same threshold value was 
applied to all the images from the same channel. Mean fluores-
cence intensities were logged to produce histograms and 2D plots. 
Color images were enhanced for brightness by applying the same 
linear adjustment to all images from the same channel.
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis was induced by 
subcutaneous injection of 200 µg MOG35–55 (Sigma-Aldrich) 
emulsified in Freund’s adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 
4 mg/ml heat-killed mycobacteria (Invivogen). Control mice 
received complete Freund’s adjuvant alone, emulsified with ster-
ile water. On days 0 and 2, mice received 200 ng pertussis toxin 
i.p. (EMD Millipore). Mice were monitored for the development 
of clinical symptoms (0, no clinical symptoms; 0.5, tip of the tail 
is limp; 1, limp tail; 1.5, limp tail and hindleg inhibition; 2, limp 
tail and weakness in hindlegs; 2.5, limp tail and dragging of hind 
legs; 3, limp tail and paralysis of hindlegs). The severity limit of 
the protocol was 3.
For isolating cells from the spinal cord, mice were culled and 
the left ventricle perfused with ice-cold PBS. Spinal cords were 
removed and forced through a 70-µm cell strainer. CNS lympho-
cytes were separated from myelin using a 30%/70% Percoll gra-
dient (Sigma-Aldrich). Mononuclear cells were removed from the 
interphase and washed and resuspended in 10% RPMI for labeling.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2946
Tetramer staining
dLN or CNS mononuclear cells isolated by Percoll gradient were 
incubated at 37°C for 15 min in the presence of 50 nM dasatinib 
(Lissina et al., 2009). 1 in 100 dilution of APC-labeled mouse I-Ab 
MOG peptide 38–49 (GWY 
RSP 
FSR 
VVH, I-Ab MOG38–49; National 
Institutes of Health Tetramer Core) was added to the cells and 
further incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Cells were then washed and 
stained for viability dye and surface markers on ice.
Flow cytometric analysis and cell sorting
After spleen or thymus removal, organs were forced through a 
70-µm cell strainer to generate a single-cell suspension. For sple-
nocyte preparations, an RBC-lysis stage was used. Staining was 
performed on a V-bottom 96-well plate or in 15-ml falcon tubes 
for cell sorting. Analysis was performed on a BD Fortessa III 
instrument. The blue form of the Timer protein was detected in 
the blue (450/40 nm) channel excited off the 405-nm laser. The 
red form of Timer protein was detected in the mCherry (610/20) 
channel excited off the 561-nm laser. For all experiments, a fix-
able eFluor 780 fluorescent viability dye was used (eBioscience). 
The following directly conjugated antibodies were used in these 
experiments: CD3 PerCPcy5.5 (clone 145.2C11; TON 
BO) CD4 
APC (clone RM4-5; eBioscience), CD4 Alexa Fluor 700 and CD4 
BUV395 (clone GK1.5; BD; clone RM4-5; BioLegend), CD8 PE-Cy7 
or APC (clone 53–6.7; BioLegend), CD8 BUV737 (clone 53–6.7; 
BD) TCRβ FITC and Alexa Fluor 700 (clone H57-597; BioLegend), 
TCRβ BUV737 (clone H57-597; BD), CD19 APC (clone 6D5; BioLeg-
end), CD25 PerCPcy5.5 (PC61.5; eBioscience) or PE-Cy7 (PC61.5; 
Tombo Bioscience), CD44 APC (clone IM7; eBioscience) or Alexa 
Fluor 700 (clone IM7; BioLegend), CD69 APC (H1.2F3; eBiosci-
ence) and Foxp3 APC (clone FJK-16s; eBioscience), CD45.1 PE-Cy7 
(clone A20; BioLegend), CD45.2 APC (clone 104; BioLegend), and 
CD45RB PE-Cy7 (clone C363-16A). For Foxp3-Tocky validation, 
RBC-lysed splenocytes were stained with eFluor 780 viability 
dye before staining for APC-conjugated CD4 and FITC-conju-
gated TCRβ. Live CD4+TCRβ+ cells were gated and then sorted 
into four fractions: Timer(blue+red−), Timer (blue+red+), Tim-
er(blue−red+), and Timer(blue−red−). Cells were then fixed and 
labeled with APC-conjugated Foxp3 using the eBioscience Foxp3 
fixation and permeabilization kit according to the manufactur-
er’s instructions. In some experiments, cells were labeled with an 
eFluor 670 proliferation dye (eBioscience) at a concentration of 
5 µM for 5 min at room temperature.
Adoptive transfer experiments
CD4+CD25−CD44loFoxp3−T cells from OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky mice 
were isolated by cell sorting on FACS Aria III, and between 1 and 
5 M cells were adoptively transferred i.p. to congenic CD45.1 
recipients, which were fed Ova (Sigma-Aldrich) at a concen-
tration of 1% in water. For MHC class II knockout experiments, 
CD4+ T cells were isolated by immunomagnetic selection (Stem 
Cell Technologies) and 3–5 M cells injected i.p. into congenic 
(CD45.1) MHC class IIko/ko mice. MHC class IIko/wt mice were 
used as controls. Adoptively transferred T cells were defined as 
CD45.1−CD45.2+CD4+TCRβ+ cells.
DNA methylation analysis
DNA was extracted from sorted samples using QIA 
GEN DNeasy 
kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 100 ng DNA 
was bisulfite treated using the Epitect Bilsulfite kit (QIA 
GEN) 
and used as a template for amplification of the TSDR. TSDR was 
amplified using the primers Foxp3 TSDR forward, 5′-ATT 
TGA 
ATT 
GGA 
TAT 
GGT 
TTGT-3′; and reverse, 5′-AAC 
CTT 
AAA 
CCC 
CTC 
TAA 
CATC-3′ (Floess et al., 2007) and the following cycling condi-
tions: 94°C for 1 min followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 54°C 
for 30 s, and 68°C 30 s and a final extension phase of 68°C for 15 
min. PCR amplicons were purified and then underwent Sanger 
sequencing using the reverse primer by Source BioScience. 
Sequence traces and CpG methylation rates were analyzed and 
determined by ESME software (Epigenomics; Lewin et al., 2004).
CCA
The gene signature and sample scores in Fig. S1 were calcu-
lated by cross-dataset analysis using CCA (Ono et al., 2014). In 
brief, the expression data of GSE15907 (Painter et al., 2011) was 
regressed onto the log2 fold change of activated CD4+ T cells (2 h 
after activation) and naive T cells from GSE48210 (Li et al., 2013) 
as the explanatory variable, correspondence analysis was per-
formed for the regressed data, and correlation analysis was done 
between the new axis and the explanatory variable. CCA was 
performed by the CRAN package vegan as previously described 
(Ono et al., 2014). The analysis was undertaken using only tran-
scription factor genes, which were selected by the Gene Ontology 
database by including the genes that are tagged with GO: 0003677 
(DNA binding) and GO: 0005634 (nucleus) and not with GO: 
0016020 (membrane) using the Bioconductor package GO.db.
Timer data analysis
Overview of Timer data analysis
Timer data analysis is composed of the following three steps: 
 
(1) data preprocessing and scaling/normalization of blue and red 
fluorescence data; (2) trigonometric data transformation of blue 
and red fluorescence, which transform data into Timer Angle and 
Timer Intensity using the polar coordinate; and (3) data export, 
statistical analysis and visualization. Timer data analysis will be 
performed by importing those csv files into R (R Core Team 2016). 
A series of data preprocessing, normalization and transformation 
results in Timer normalized data, which are further analyzed for 
statistics, visualization, and quality control processes. Finally, the 
code exports these quality control and statistical results, the cell 
number data of total cells and Timer-positive cells in each file, and 
a matrix containing Timer Angle and Timer Intensity data and all 
the fluorescence data for individual cells in each file (Fig. S5 A).
Data import
Flow cytometric data are gated for T cell populations (e.g., CD4+ 
T cells) by an external program such as FlowJo or the Bioconduc-
tor package flowCore and batch exported as csv files, including a 
negative control file and a forward scatter (FSC) control file (see 
below). The R codes import all files and produce and work on the 
dataset as an R object.
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2947
Data preprocessing
Data preprocessing for Timer data analysis is composed of the 
following three steps: (1) FSC correction, (2) data thresholding, 
and (3) data normalization.
FSC correction. Our investigations showed that blue autofluo-
rescence increases as FSC increases, which indicates that larger 
cells have higher blue signals (Fig. S5 B). This effect was more 
remarkable in blue than red, which can result in underestima-
tion of Timer Angle (e.g., in activated T cells, which have larger 
cell sizes). Accordingly, the code incorporates the function to per-
form FSC correction by applying a linear regression to FSC (x) 
and either blue (b) or red (r):
 
b =    
α 
 
B +    
β 
 
B 
 
 x 
or
 
r =  
α 
 
R +    
β 
 
R 
 
 x. 
Thus, FSC-corrected blue (bc) and FSC-corrected red (rc) 
are obtained by
 
 
b 
 
c 
 
 = b −  
β 
 
B 
 
 x 
and
 
 
r 
 
c 
 
 = r −  
β 
 
R 
 
 x. 
Data thresholding. The instrument setting of flow cytometry 
is determined by manually adjusting the amplification param-
eters so that the autofluorescence signals of negative cells have 
positive values and the threshold value for positive signals can 
be visually determined. In the standard practice of flow cyto-
metric analysis, the threshold value for each fluorescence is 
determined using a negative control cell sample, so that a certain 
small proportion of cells are identified as positive (e.g., 0.5% of 
the parent population; Fujii et al., 2016). These negative signals 
are problematic for trigonometric data transformation because 
bluelowred− and blue−redlow cells can have various Timer Angle 
values, which is biologically meaningless (Fig. S5 C). Accordingly, 
the negative signals of FSC-corrected blue (bc) and FSC-corrected 
red data (rc) will be collapsed using the threshold value nB and 
nR, respectively:
 
 
b 
 
t 
 
 =  
 
{ 
 
 
 
b 
 
c 
 
 −  
n 
 
B 
,   if   
b 
 
c 
 
 >  
n 
 
B 
 
  
 
0,   if   
b 
 
c 
 
 ≤  
n 
 
B 
 
  
 
 
and
 
 
r 
 
t 
 
 =  
 
{ 
 
 
 
r 
 
c 
 
 −  
n 
 
R 
,   if   
r 
 
c 
 
 >  
n 
 
R 
 
  
 
0,   if   
r 
 
c 
 
 ≤  
n 
 
R 
 
  
 
. 
In Fig. S5 C, Timer Angle calculation with or without data thresh-
olding is compared on uniformly distributed cell data. In this 
figure, it is assumed that each cell has a discrete integer value 
between 0 and 100 for blue and another value for red (i.e., there 
are 10,201 cells in the blue–red plane) and that the barycenter 
of negative control cells is (10, 10). When data are processed by 
blue–red normalization without applying data thresholding, cells 
can have various Timer Angle values around the barycenter of 
negative control cells, and thus, cells in the negative quadrant 
gate (the lower left quadrant of pink lines) can have all the dif-
ferent Timer Angle values (Fig. S5 C, top left) and have all the 
Timer loci (Fig. S5 C, top right). These variations in blue− red− 
cells are biologically meaningless. In Fig. S5 C, bottom left, data 
were first thresholded (at blue = 18 and red = 18 in this exam-
ple), and thereafter blue and red data were normalized. The 
thresholding removes all the blue− red− cells. All the blue− red+ 
cells have Timer Angle value 90, whereas all the blue+ red− have 
Timer Angle value 0.
Log transformation. After thresholding negative signals, Timer 
fluorescence data are log transformed by the function log(x + 1).
Blue–red normalization. The autofluorescence data of blue 
and red fluorescence in negative control sample are used to 
estimate the deviation of blue and red signals in each dataset. 
Assuming that the SD of blue and red fluorescence in negative 
control is σB and σR, normalized blue and red data bn and rn are 
obtained as follows:
 
 
b 
 
n 
 
 =  
  
b 
 
t 
 
 
__ 
 
σ 
 
B 
 
 
 
 
or
 
 
r 
 
n 
 
 =  
  
r 
 
t 
 
 
___ 
 
σ 
 
R 
 
 
 
. 
Trigonometric data transformation
Lastly, using a trigonometric function, normalized blue and red 
data will be transformed into Timer Angle and Timer Intensity 
data. Timer Angle θ is defined as the angle from the normalized 
blue axis and has the value between 0° and 90°, or [0,  
π 
__ 
2  
 
 ]. Timer 
Intensity δ is the distance from the origin of normalized blue 
and normalized red axes (Fig. S5 D). By definition, cells in the 
origin (0, 0) are negative for Timer protein and removed from 
further analysis. Thus, the R code automatically identifies Tim-
er-positive cells:
 
δ =    
√ 
_________ 
 
b 
 
n 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
 +  
r 
 
n 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
  
 
and
 
θ =  
cos 
 
 
−1 
( 
 
 
b 
 
n 
 
 
__ 
δ  
 ) . 
Timer locus analysis
Timer locus analysis allows the translation of Timer data into 
transcriptional dynamics and the biological interpretation of 
individual cells (Fig. S5 E). The five Timer loci are designated 
as follows: New = 0°, NP-t = (0°, 30°), Persistent [30°, 60°], PA-t 
[60°, 90°], and Arrested = 90° (Fig. S5 F). Nonparametric tests 
for Timer locus were performed by the CRAN package. A Kruskal 
test was applied to data with more than two experimental groups, 
and subsequently, post hoc Dunn’s test was applied.
Computer simulation of Timer fluorescence
Computer simulation of GFP and Timer expression was per-
formed by time course analysis of a series of first-order equa-
tions involving the function for transcript (mRNA) X and trans-
lated Timer proteins including the colorless-form C, the blue 
form B, the intermediate form I (which does not emit fluores-
cence), and the red form R, or translated GFP protein G and the 
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2948
decayed protein D. Thus, a liner kinetic model for Timer protein 
was constructed as previously reported (Subach et al., 2009):
 
X  
  
k 
 
C 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 C  
  
k 
 
B 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 B  
  
k 
 
I 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 I  
  
k 
 
R 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 R  
  
k 
 
D 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 D, 
and for GFP:
 
X  
  
k 
 
G 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 G  
  
k 
 
D 
 
 
  
⟶ 
 
 D. 
The amounts of blue- and red-form proteins are
 
 
 
dB 
___ 
dt  =    
k 
 
B 
 
 C −    
k 
 
I 
 
 B 
and
 
 
 
dR 
___ 
dt  =    
k 
 
R 
 
 I −    
k 
 
D 
 
 R. 
Similarly, the amounts of other intermediate form proteins were 
modeled in a similar manner, and time-course analysis was per-
formed by the CRAN package deSolve. Analytically, the amounts 
of blue- and red-form proteins are as follows:
 
B 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 =  
e 
 
 
− 
k 
 
I 
 
t  
∫ 
 
  
e 
 
 
 
k 
 
I 
 
s  
  
k 
 
B 
 
 C 
 
( 
 
s 
) 
 
 
ds +  
k 
 
B 
 
  
e 
 
 
− 
k 
 
I 
 
t  
 
and
 
R 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 =  
e 
 
 
− 
k 
 
D 
 
t  
∫ 
 
  
e 
 
 
 
k 
 
D 
 
s  
  
k 
 
R 
 
 I 
 
( 
 
s 
) 
 
 
ds +  
k 
 
R 
 
  
e 
 
 
− 
k 
 
D 
 
t 
. 
Thus, blue- and red-form proteins are dependent on the supply 
from their precursor proteins, and when transcription is termi-
nated and no precursor protein is supplied, they are expected to 
exponentially decay at the rate kB and kR. For Fig. 1 C, the param-
eters from the preceding study (Subach et al., 2009) were used 
to perform time-course analysis. For GFP, the translation rate 
was set to be the same with Timer, kG = 3.0 × 10−1/h, whereas the 
decay rate was set to be kE = 1.3 × 10−2/h as previously reported 
(Sacchetti et al., 2001). Density plots for the distribution of 
Timer Angle (Fig. 1 G) were generated by testing different fre-
quencies and intermittent expressions, assuming that signals 
are conveyed to cells for 7 d by the temporal dynamics shown 
in each figure and that each cells is at a random time point 
in this duration.
Statistical analysis and data visualization
Statistical analysis was performed on R or Prism 6 (GraphPad 
Software). Percentage data for Timer-positive and Timer locus 
analysis was analyzed by Mann-Whitney U test or Kruskal-Wal-
lis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons using the CRAN pack-
age PMC 
MR. Samples with <18 Timer-positive cells were not 
included in the analysis. Student’s t test was used for compar-
ison of two means. For comparison of more than two means, a 
one-way ANO 
VA with Tukey’s post hoc test was applied using the 
CRAN package Stats. Scatterplots were produced by the CRAN 
packages ggplot2 and graphics. Dose–response data in Fig. 3 G 
were fitted to a dose–response curve using the three-parame-
ter log-logistic function of the CRAN package drc as previously 
described (Yoshioka et al., 2012). All computations were per-
formed on a Mac (version 10.11.6). Adobe Illustrator (CS5) was 
used for compiling figures and designing schematic figures. Vari-
ance is reported as SD or SEM unless otherwise stated.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows that CCA identifies Nr4a3 as a downstream target 
of TCR signaling. Fig. S2 shows that confocal microscopy analysis 
of OT-II Nr4a3-Tocky T cells stimulated at various frequencies. 
Fig. S3 shows that steady-state TCR signaling is restricted to 
memory-like T cells in vivo and dependent on MHC class II. Fig. 
S4 shows a summary of Tocky technology. Fig. S5 shows Timer 
data analysis methods. Table S1 lists differences between Tocky, 
fate-mapper, and GFP/FP reporters.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Ayad Eddaoudi and Stephanie Canning (Univer-
sity College London, London, England, UK), Jane Srivastava, 
Catherine Simpson, and Jess Rowley (Imperial College London, 
London, England, UK) for their kind support at the flow cytom-
etry facility. We thank Dr. Andreas Bruckbauer for his technical 
support at the Facility for Imaging by Light Microscopy (Impe-
rial College London). We thank Professor Anne Cooke (Univer-
sity of Cambridge, Cambridge, England, UK), Professor Charles 
R.M. Bangham (Imperial College London), Professor Fiona Rawle 
(University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada), Professor Taku Oka-
zaki (Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan), Professor Gloria 
Rudenko (Imperial College London), and Dr. Alastair Copland (St. 
George’s University London, London, England, UK) for their feed-
back on the manuscript.
M. Ono is a David Phillips Fellow from the Biotechnology and 
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBS 
RC; BB/J013951/2). 
T. Crompton is supported by the Medical Research Council 
(MRC) and Great Ormond Street Hospital Children’s Charity. 
A. Padararu holds a BBS 
RC studentship, and C. Ducker holds 
an MRC studentship.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: M. Ono conceived the Tocky technol-
ogy. M. Ono designed and generated transgenic constructs. S. 
Kitano, H. Miyachi, and M. Ono established the transgenic found-
ers. S. Kitano, H. Miyachi, P.P. Martín, and D. Bending screened 
mouse lines. D. Bending, T. Crompton, and M. Ono conceived and 
designed immunological experiments. D. Bending, P.P. Martín, 
A. Paduraru, and C. Ducker performed animal experiments. D. 
Bending, P.P. Martín, A. Paduraru, E. Marzaganov, and M. Lavi-
ron performed in vitro experiments. M. Ono conceived Timer 
data analysis, wrote computational codes, and performed bioin-
formatics analysis and data visualization. D. Bending, T. Cromp-
ton, and M. Ono wrote the manuscript.
Submitted: 8 November 2017
Revised: 6 February 2018
Accepted: 14 May 2018
References
Boomer, J.S., and J.M. Green. 2010. An enigmatic tail of CD28 signaling. 
Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2:a002436. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1101/ 
cshperspect 
.a002436
Bousso, P. 2008. T-cell activation by dendritic cells in the lymph node: lessons 
from the movies. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8:675–684. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nri2379
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2949
Burchill, M.A., J. Yang, C. Vogtenhuber, B.R. Blazar, and M.A. Farrar. 2007. IL-2 
receptor beta-dependent STAT5 activation is required for the develop-
ment of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. J. Immunol. 178:280–290. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.178 
.1 
.280
Cantrell, D. 2015. Signaling in lymphocyte activation. Cold Spring Harb. Per-
spect. Biol. 7:7. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1101/ 
cshperspect 
.a018788
Donà, E., J.D. Barry, G. Valentin, C. Quirin, A. Khmelinskii, A. Kunze, S. Durdu, 
L.R. Newton, A. Fernandez-Minan, W. Huber, et al. 2013. Directional 
tissue migration through a self-generated chemokine gradient. Nature. 
503:285–289. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature12635
Floess, S., J. Freyer, C. Siewert, U. Baron, S. Olek, J. Polansky, K. Schlawe, H.D. 
Chang, T. Bopp, E. Schmitt, et al. 2007. Epigenetic control of the foxp3 
locus in regulatory T cells. PLoS Biol. 5:e38. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.pbio 
.0050038
Fujii, H., J. Josse, M. Tanioka, Y. Miyachi, F. Husson, and M. Ono. 2016. Regu-
latory T Cells in Melanoma Revisited by a Computational Clustering of 
FOXP3+ T Cell Subpopulations. J. Immunol. 196:2885–2892. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.1402695
Hoppe, P.S., D.L. Coutu, and T. Schroeder. 2014. Single-cell technologies 
sharpen up mammalian stem cell research. Nat. Cell Biol. 16:919–927. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ncb3042
Hoyer, K.K., H. Dooms, L. Barron, and A.K. Abbas. 2008. Interleukin-2 in the 
development and control of inflammatory disease. Immunol. Rev. 226:19–
28. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
j 
.1600 
-065X 
.2008 
.00697 
.x
Hsieh, C.S., H.M. Lee, and C.W. Lio. 2012. Selection of regulatory T cells in the 
thymus. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12:157–167. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nri3155
Khmelinskii, A., P.J. Keller, A. Bartosik, M. Meurer, J.D. Barry, B.R. Mardin, A. 
Kaufmann, S. Trautmann, M. Wachsmuth, G. Pereira, et al. 2012. Tan-
dem fluorescent protein timers for in vivo analysis of protein dynamics. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 30:708–714. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nbt 
.2281
Klein, L., B. Kyewski, P.M. Allen, and K.A. Hogquist. 2014. Positive and neg-
ative selection of the T cell repertoire: what thymocytes see (and don’t 
see). Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14:377–391. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nri3667
Koechlein, C.S., J.R. Harris, T.K. Lee, J. Weeks, R.G. Fox, B. Zimdahl, T. Ito, A. 
Blevins, S.H. Jung, J.P. Chute, et al. 2016. High-resolution imaging and 
computational analysis of haematopoietic cell dynamics in vivo. Nat. 
Commun. 7:12169. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ncomms12169
Kohwi, M., and C.Q. Doe. 2013. Temporal fate specification and neural pro-
genitor competence during development. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14:823–838. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nrn3618
Krummel, M.F., F. Bartumeus, and A. Gérard. 2016. T cell migration, search 
strategies and mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16:193–201. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nri 
.2015 
.16
Kurd, N., and E.A. Robey. 2016. T-cell selection in the thymus: a spatial and 
temporal perspective. Immunol. Rev. 271:114–126. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
imr 
.12398
Le Borgne, M., E. Ladi, I. Dzhagalov, P. Herzmark, Y.F. Liao, A.K. Chakraborty, 
and E.A. Robey. 2009. The impact of negative selection on thymocyte 
migration in the medulla. Nat. Immunol. 10:823–830. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ni 
.1761
Lewin, J., A.O. Schmitt, P. Adorján, T. Hildmann, and C. Piepenbrock. 2004. 
Quantitative DNA methylation analysis based on four-dye trace data 
from direct sequencing of PCR amplificates. Bioinformatics. 20:3005–
3012. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
bioinformatics/ 
bth346
Li, L., J. Nishio, A. van Maurik, D. Mathis, and C. Benoist. 2013. Differential 
response of regulatory and conventional CD4+ lymphocytes to CD3 
engagement: clues to a possible mechanism of anti-CD3 action? J. Immu-
nol. 191:3694–3704. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.1300408
Lio, C.-W.J., and C.-S. Hsieh. 2008. A two-step process for thymic regulatory 
T cell development. Immunity. 28:100–111. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2007 
.11 
.021
Lissina, A., K. Ladell, A. Skowera, M. Clement, E. Edwards, R. Seggewiss, 
H.A. van den Berg, E. Gostick, K. Gallagher, E. Jones, et al. 2009. Protein 
kinase inhibitors substantially improve the physical detection of T-cells 
with peptide-MHC tetramers. J. Immunol. Methods. 340:11–24. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.jim 
.2008 
.09 
.014
Litvak, V., S.A. Ramsey, A.G. Rust, D.E. Zak, K.A. Kennedy, A.E. Lampano, M. 
Nykter, I. Shmulevich, and A. Aderem. 2009. Function of C/EBPdelta 
in a regulatory circuit that discriminates between transient and per-
sistent TLR4-induced signals. Nat. Immunol. 10:437–443. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ni 
.1721
Loewer, A., E. Batchelor, G. Gaglia, and G. Lahav. 2010. Basal dynamics of p53 
reveal transcriptionally attenuated pulses in cycling cells. Cell. 142:89–
100. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2010 
.05 
.031
Marodon, G., and B. Rocha. 1994. Generation of mature T cell populations in 
the thymus: CD4 or CD8 down-regulation occurs at different stages of 
thymocyte differentiation. Eur. J. Immunol. 24:196–204. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
eji 
.1830240131
Métivier, R., R. Gallais, C. Tiffoche, C. Le Péron, R.Z. Jurkowska, R.P. Car-
mouche, D. Ibberson, P. Barath, F. Demay, G. Reid, et al. 2008. Cyclical 
DNA methylation of a transcriptionally active promoter. Nature. 452:45–
50. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature06544
Miyatsuka, T., Y. Kosaka, H. Kim, and M.S. German. 2011. Neurogenin3 inhib-
its proliferation in endocrine progenitors by inducing Cdkn1a. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA. 108:185–190. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1073/ 
pnas 
.1004842108
Miyatsuka, T., T.A. Matsuoka, S. Sasaki, F. Kubo, I. Shimomura, H. Watada, 
M.S. German, and M. Hara. 2014. Chronological analysis with fluores-
cent timer reveals unique features of newly generated β-cells. Diabetes. 
63:3388–3393. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.2337/ 
db13 
-1312
Moran, A.E., K.L. Holzapfel, Y. Xing, N.R. Cunningham, J.S. Maltzman, J. Punt, 
and K.A. Hogquist. 2011. T cell receptor signal strength in Treg and iNKT 
cell development demonstrated by a novel fluorescent reporter mouse. J. 
Exp. Med. 208:1279–1289. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1084/ 
jem 
.20110308
O’Neill, E.J., M.J. Day, and D.C. Wraith. 2006. IL-10 is essential for disease 
protection following intranasal peptide administration in the C57BL/6 
model of EAE. J. Neuroimmunol. 178:1–8. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.jneuroim 
.2006 
.05 
.030
Oh, H., and S. Ghosh. 2013. NF-κB: roles and regulation in different CD4(+) 
T-cell subsets. Immunol. Rev. 252:41–51. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
imr 
.12033
Ono, M., and R.J. Tanaka. 2016. Controversies concerning thymus-derived reg-
ulatory T cells: fundamental issues and a new perspective. Immunol. Cell 
Biol. 94:3–10. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
icb 
.2015 
.65
Ono, M., H. Yaguchi, N. Ohkura, I. Kitabayashi, Y. Nagamura, T. Nomura, Y. 
Miyachi, T. Tsukada, and S. Sakaguchi. 2007. Foxp3 controls regulatory 
T-cell function by interacting with AML1/Runx1. Nature. 446:685–689. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature05673
Ono, M., R.J. Tanaka, and M. Kano. 2014. Visualisation of the T cell differ-
entiation programme by Canonical Correspondence Analysis of tran-
scriptomes. BMC Genomics. 15:1028. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1186/ 
1471 
-2164 
-15 
-1028
Painter, M.W., S. Davis, R.R. Hardy, D. Mathis, and C. Benoist. Immunologi-
cal Genome Project Consortium. 2011. Transcriptomes of the B and T 
lineages compared by multiplatform microarray profiling. J. Immunol. 
186:3047–3057. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.1002695
Picca, C.C., J. Larkin III, A. Boesteanu, M.A. Lerman, A.L. Rankin, and A.J. 
Caton. 2006. Role of TCR specificity in CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T-cell 
selection. Immunol. Rev. 212:74–85. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
j 
.0105 
-2896 
.2006 
.00416 
.x
Roncagalli, R., S. Hauri, F. Fiore, Y. Liang, Z. Chen, A. Sansoni, K. Kanduri, 
R. Joly, A. Malzac, H. Lähdesmäki, et al. 2014. Quantitative proteomics 
analysis of signalosome dynamics in primary T cells identifies the sur-
face receptor CD6 as a Lat adaptor-independent TCR signaling hub. Nat. 
Immunol. 15:384–392. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ni 
.2843
Sacchetti, A., T. El Sewedy, A.F. Nasr, and S. Alberti. 2001. Efficient GFP muta-
tions profoundly affect mRNA transcription and translation rates. FEBS 
Lett. 492:151–155. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S0014 
-5793(01)02246 
-3
Schindelin, J., I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, 
S. Preibisch, C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, et al. 2012. Fiji: an open-
source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods. 9:676–682. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nmeth 
.2019
Stefanová, I., J.R. Dorfman, and R.N. Germain. 2002. Self-recognition pro-
motes the foreign antigen sensitivity of naive T lymphocytes. Nature. 
420:429–434. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature01146
Stepanek, O., A.S. Prabhakar, C. Osswald, C.G. King, A. Bulek, D. Naeher, M. 
Beaufils-Hugot, M.L. Abanto, V. Galati, B. Hausmann, et al. 2014. Core-
ceptor scanning by the T cell receptor provides a mechanism for T cell 
tolerance. Cell. 159:333–345. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2014 
.08 
.042
Stromnes, I.M., and J.M. Goverman. 2006. Passive induction of experimental 
allergic encephalomyelitis. Nat. Protoc. 1:1952–1960. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nprot 
.2006 
.284
Subach, F.V., O.M. Subach, I.S. Gundorov, K.S. Morozova, K.D. Piatkevich, A.M. 
Cuervo, and V.V. Verkhusha. 2009. Monomeric fluorescent timers that 
change color from blue to red report on cellular trafficking. Nat. Chem. 
Biol. 5:118–126. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nchembio 
.138
Tai, X., B. Erman, A. Alag, J. Mu, M. Kimura, G. Katz, T. Guinter, T. McCaughtry, 
R. Etzensperger, L. Feigenbaum, et al. 2013. Foxp3 transcription fac-
tor is proapoptotic and lethal to developing regulatory T cells unless 
 Bending et al. 
A timer for analyzing temporally dynamic changes in transcription during differentiation in vivo
Journal of Cell Biology
https:/
/doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201711048
2950
counterbalanced by cytokine survival signals. Immunity. 38:1116–1128. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.immuni 
.2013 
.02 
.022
Terskikh, A., A. Fradkov, G. Ermakova, A. Zaraisky, P. Tan, A.V. Kajava, X. Zhao, 
S. Lukyanov, M. Matz, S. Kim, et al. 2000. “Fluorescent timer”: protein 
that changes color with time. Science. 290:1585–1588. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.290 
.5496 
.1585
Toker, A., D. Engelbert, G. Garg, J.K. Polansky, S. Floess, T. Miyao, U. Baron, S. 
Düber, R. Geffers, P. Giehr, et al. 2013. Active demethylation of the Foxp3 
locus leads to the generation of stable regulatory T cells within the thy-
mus. J. Immunol. 190:3180–3188. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4049/ 
jimmunol 
.1203473
Trapnell, C., D. Cacchiarelli, J. Grimsby, P. Pokharel, S. Li, M. Morse, N.J. Len-
non, K.J. Livak, T.S. Mikkelsen, and J.L. Rinn. 2014. The dynamics and 
regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal order-
ing of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32:381–386. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nbt 
.2859
Walker, L.S.K., and D.M. Sansom. 2011. The emerging role of CTLA4 as a 
cell-extrinsic regulator of T cell responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11:852–
863. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nri3108
Warming, S., N. Costantino, D.L. Court, N.A. Jenkins, and N.G. Copeland. 2005. 
Simple and highly efficient BAC recombineering using galK selection. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 33:e36. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1093/ 
nar/ 
gni035
Weissler, K.A., and A.J. Caton. 2014. The role of T-cell receptor recognition of 
peptide: 
MHC complexes in the formation and activity of Foxp3+ regu-
latory T cells. Immunol. Rev. 259:11–22. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
imr 
.12177
Yosef, N., and A. Regev. 2011. Impulse control: temporal dynamics in gene tran-
scription. Cell. 144:886–896. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2011 
.02 
.015
Yoshioka, Y., M. Ono, M. Osaki, I. Konishi, and S. Sakaguchi. 2012. Differential 
effects of inhibition of bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signalling on 
T-cell activation and differentiation. Eur. J. Immunol. 42:749–759. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
eji 
.201141702
