 Laboratory Investigation (2018) 98:1300–1310
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41374-018-0038-3
ARTICLE
A single high-fat meal provokes pathological erythrocyte
remodeling and increases myeloperoxidase levels: implications for
acute coronary syndrome
Tyler W Benson1
● Neal L Weintraub1
● Ha Won Kim1
● Nichole Seigler2
● Sanjiv Kumar1
● Jonathan Pye1
●
Tetsuo Horimatsu
1
● Rod Pellenberg1
● David W Stepp1
● Rudolf Lucas1,3
● Vladimir Y Bogdanov4
●
Sheldon E Litwin5
● Julia E Brittain1
● Ryan A Harris2
Received: 2 November 2017 / Revised: 19 January 2018 / Accepted: 31 January 2018 / Published online: 23 March 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is published with open access
Abstract
High-fat meal (HFM) consumption can produce acute lipemia and trigger myocardial infarction in patients with
atherosclerosis, but the mechanisms are poorly understood. Erythrocytes (red blood cells, RBCs) intimately interact with
inflammatory cells and blood vessels and play a complex role in regulating vascular function. Chronic high-fat feeding in
mice induces pathological RBC remodeling, suggesting a novel link between HFM, RBCs, and vascular dysfunction.
However, whether acute HFM can induce RBC remodeling in humans is unknown. Ten healthy individuals were subjected
to biochemical testing and assessment of endothelial-dependent flow-mediated dilation (FMD) before and after a single
HFM or iso-caloric meal (ICM). Following the HFM, triglyceride, cholesterol, and free fatty acid levels were all significantly
increased, in conjunction with impaired post-prandial FMD. Additionally, peripheral blood smears demonstrated microcytes,
remodeled RBCs, and fatty monocytes. Increased intracellular ROS and nitration of protein band 3 was detected in RBCs
following the HFM. The HFM elevated plasma and RBC-bound myeloperoxidase (MPO), which was associated with
impaired FMD and oxidation of HDL. Monocytic cells exposed to lipid in vitro released MPO, while porcine coronary
arteries exposed to fatty acids ex vivo took up MPO. We demonstrate in humans that a single HFM induces pathological
RBC remodeling and concurrently elevates MPO, which can potentially enter the blood vessel wall to trigger oxidative stress
and destabilize vulnerable plaques. These novel findings may have implications for the short-term risk of HFM consumption
and alimentary lipemia in patients with atherosclerosis.
Introduction
Chronic consumption of meals rich in calories and saturated
fats promotes obesity and adversely impacts cardiovascular
health by initiating a cascade of inflammation, insulin
resistance, oxidative stress, dyslipidemia, endothelial dys-
function, and atherosclerosis [1]. In humans, a single high-
fat meal (HFM) has been shown to increase circulating
lipids, inflammatory mediators, and free radical production
These authors contributed equally: Tyler W Benson, Neal L
Weintraub, Julia E Brittain, Ryan A Harris.
* Neal L Weintraub
nweintraub@augusta.edu
* Julia E Brittain
jbrittain@augusta.edu
1
Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta
University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA
2
Georgia Prevention Institute, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta
University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA
3
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of
Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA
4
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
5
Cardiology Division, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC, USA
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41374-018-0038-3) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
1234567890();,:
 while activating inflammatory cells and provoking endo-
thelial dysfunction [2]. Indeed, consuming an HFM suffi-
cient to promote lipemia has been reported to trigger acute
coronary syndromes in patients with established athero-
sclerosis, likely in part through activation of inflammatory
cells such as monocytes and macrophages [3].
Studies examining the impact of an HFM have focused
heavily on inflammatory cells. The erythrocyte (red blood
cell, RBC), however, is the most abundant cell in the cir-
culation; on average, there are 700 RBCs for every circu-
lating leukocyte. Although RBCs are widely recognized for
their vital role in transporting and delivering oxygen to the
tissues, they play a much broader role in cardiovascular
pathophysiology. For example, RBCs regulate vascular
function via releasing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
modulating nitric oxide (NO)-dependent vasorelaxation [4].
In addition, RBCs regulate the levels of key circulating
chemokines, such as monocyte chemoattractant protein
(MCP)-1, through binding to the Duffy antigen receptor for
chemokines (DARC), a non-signaling receptor that is
thought to function primarily as a chemokine reservoir [5].
Moreover, the RBC membrane is host to myeloperoxidase
(MPO) whose binding induces vascular remodeling and
stiffness, and likely contributes to endothelial dysfunction
[6, 7]. Notably, MPO is a potent inducer of oxidative stress
via production of hypochlorous acid, and plasma levels of
MPO have been positively linked to risk of acute coronary
syndromes in humans [8]. However, the mechanisms that
regulate circulating and RBC-bound MPO are poorly
understood.
Structurally, RBCs are composed of biconcave mem-
branes that contain large amounts of cholesterol and avidly
bind to lipoproteins, resulting in lipid transfer and mem-
brane remodeling [9]. Moreover, RBC cholesterol levels are
strongly and independently predictive of acute coronary
syndromes in patients with angina [10]. We reported that
chronic high-fat feeding in mice induced structural, bio-
chemical, and functional alterations in RBCs, suggesting a
role for pathologically “remodeled” RBC that may accent-
uate inflammation and vascular dysfunction [11]. In the
current study, we sought to examine the effects of a single
HFM, in comparison to a low-fat iso-caloric meal (ICM), on
RBCs in a cohort of young healthy adults.
Materials and methods
Participant recruitment
Ten apparently healthy, physically active male participants
with no past medical history and taking no prescription
medications were recruited for the study, which was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Augusta
University. After obtaining informed consent, a compre-
hensive assessment of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk
factors, vital signs, and body composition was conducted
and a cardiopulmonary exercise test was performed. The
protocol consisted of two testing visits separated by a
minimum of 7 days. For each visit, all participants were
instructed to report to the Laboratory of Integrative Vas-
cular and Exercise Physiology at Augusta University fol-
lowing an overnight fast having abstained from caffeine or
strenuous physical activity for 24 h and vitamin supple-
mentation for 72 h prior to investigation.
Experimental design
After arrival to the test center, pre-meal metabolic para-
meters and blood samples were collected, and flow-
mediated dilation (FMD) testing was performed. After
baseline assessments were performed and blood samples
were collected, all participants consumed either an HFM in
the form of a milkshake (1 g/kg fat, 0.5 g/kg carbohydrate,
and 0.15 g/kg protein for a total of 11.6 Kcals/kg of body
weight) or a low-fat ICM (0.04 g/kg fat, 2.54 g/kg carbo-
hydrate, and 0.28 g/kg protein for a total of 11.6 Kcals/kg of
body weight). Four hours post-meal consumption, meta-
bolic parameters, blood samples, and FMD data were col-
lected again.
Flow-mediated dilation
Endothelial function was assessed using the brachial artery
FMD test and performed according to the most recent
methodological guidelines [12]. In brief, subjects rested in a
supine position for ~20 min prior to baseline FMD mea-
surements. A 12 MHz linear transducer connected to a
LOGIQ 7 ultrasound imagining device (GE Healthcare,
UK) was used to asses FMD. To verify that measurements
were taken during the end-diastolic portion of the cardiac
cycle, ECG gating (Accusync 72, USA; GE Medical Sys-
tems, China) was employed. The occlusion cuff was rapidly
inflated to 250 mm Hg for a duration of 5 min. Post-
occlusion measurements were initiated 30 s prior to cuff
deflation and recorded for at least 2.5 min. Images were
acquired using Vascular Imager software (version 6.0.3,
Medical Imaging Application, USA) and arterial diameter
was
measured
using
offline
edge
detection
software
(Brachial Analyzer for Research Version 5.7.0, Medical
Imaging Applications, USA). Pre-meal FMD measurements
were initiated upon the subject’s arrival to the laboratory,
and post-meal
measurements were initiated 4 h after
consumption of either the HFM or the ICM. After
normalization
to
VO2
max
and
shear
rate
(AUC),
ΔFMD was calculated by subtracting pre-meal FMD from
meal FMD.
A single high fat meal provokes pathological erythrocyte remodeling and increases myeloperox…
1301
 Blood sampling
Venus blood samples were collected from all participants
before (pre) and following (post) consumption of the HFM
and ICM as previously described [13]. Briefly, blood was
drawn into sodium citrate, lithium heparin, and EDTA tubes
for individual biomarker testing. EDTA-collected blood
was assayed for chemokines (described below) or separated
by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 10 min; plasma was
removed, aliquoted, and stored at −80 °C for future analysis
of lipids, glucose levels, and free fatty acids. The washed
and packed RBCs were aliquoted and stored for future
protein
analysis.
Lithium-heparin-collected
blood
was
assayed for intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) via
flow cytometry. For preparation of blood smears, blood was
collected into sodium citrate tubes, and 3 µl of whole blood
was then smeared onto a slide for analysis. Mean corpus-
cular volume (MCV) was estimated from hematocrit and
concentration of RBCs. Estimated results were verified via
blood smear.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Blood drawn into a sodium citrate tube was separated by
centrifugation at 600 RCF for 10 min. ESR was then mea-
sured following a standard protocol using an EZ-Rate pip-
ette kit (Globe Scientific Inc.). ESR (mm/h) was measured
in RBC from both the HFM and ICM pre-meal and post-
meal blood draws, and ΔESR was calculated by subtracting
the pre-meal value from the post-meal value.
Blood smear analyses
To examine the effects of an HFM on RBC morphology,
whole blood smears were prepared for each participant at
both pre and post HFM and ICM. Whole blood was
smeared onto glass cover slips using an automated device to
ensure even and consistent coverage for counting mor-
phology across samples and conditions. The smear was then
stained using modified Wright–Giemsa staining. RBC
morphology
was
scored
by
the
blinded
investigator
according to Bessis et al., and is presented as raw score
without weighted group average [14].
Milliplex bead array
Blood collected in EDTA tubes was split into two equal
volume aliquots; one was treated with 50 U/ml of heparin to
liberate chemokines from the RBCs [7] while the other
aliquot was left untreated to measure chemokines circulat-
ing in plasma. After heparin treatment, blood was separated
and plasma was aliquoted and snap frozen using liquid
nitrogen. Using a Milliplex MAP Human Chemokine
Magnetic Bead Panel (EMD Millipore), plasma was
assayed for MCP-1, IL-8, and IP-10 levels at both pre and
post HFM and ICM.
Flow cytometry
Measurement of intracellular ROS was measured as pre-
viously described [11]. Briefly, packed RBCs were washed
HNE
MDA
Cl
HFM pre
HNE
MDA
Cl
HFM post
HNE
MDA
Cl
ICM pre
HNE
MDA
Cl
ICM post
D
C
A
B
Fig. 1 Quantification of oxidized
HDL modifications before and
after the HFM and ICM. HDL
was interrogated in EDTA
anticoagulated plasma using
ELISA with IgG raised against
MPO-oxidized HDL (Cl-HDL).
Other modified sites (HNE and
MDA) were also detected by
ELISA (Generon). a High-fat
pre, b High-fat post, c ICM pre,
d ICM post. *Significant from
HFM pre and ICM (n = 10
HFM, n = 6 ICM)
1302
T. W. Benson et al.
 and
treated
with
5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlor-
odihydrofluorescein
diacetate,
acetyl
ester
(CM-
H2DCFDA, Invitrogen), then passed through an Acuri C6
flow cytometer. Quantification and comparison was per-
formed using the mean fluorescent value. Treatment with
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was used as a positive control.
RBC lysis and western blot for nitrotyrosine
Protein lysates for quantification of nitrotyrosine levels in
the RBC membrane were prepared as described previously
[13]. In brief, packed and washed RBCs were thawed and
lysed for 20 min in ice-cold lysis buffer containing 1%
Triton X-100, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 137 mM NaF, and
1× protease inhibitor cocktail set III (Calbiochem-Nova-
bichem Corp.). After an overnight incubation at 4 °C of the
Triton X-100 soluble fraction with nitrotyrosine antibody at
2 µg/ml final concentration, samples where incubated with
protein G sepharose beads. After washing immunoprecipi-
tated proteins in lysis buffer three times, concentrated
samples were loaded onto a 4−20% SDS-PAGE gel,
transferred onto a PVDF membrane (Millipore) and blotted
with anti-Band-3 antibody (Abcam).
Plasma MPO activity
MPO activity was assayed using a colorimetric assay kit
(ABCAM) as per the manufacturer’s specifications. To
reduce lipemic interference in the post-HFM samples, and/
or any interference of heparin (Fig. 1b), all samples were
diluted 1000-fold in the kit provided buffer and assayed in
triplicate. One unit of MPO activity was defined as is the
amount of MPO to consume 1.0 μmol of substrate per
minute at 25 °C and was normalized to plasma protein
levels.
Determination of Cl-HDL
MPO-induced modification of HDL was quantified using
ELISA in which plasma HDL was captured using mouse
anti-human HDL IgG (ProGen), and chlorotyrosine content
was labeled using rabbit anti-chlorotyrosine (HyCult), and
quantified with donkey anti-rabbit conjugated to horse-
radish peroxidase (Abcam).
Monocytic cell studies
THP-1 monocytic cells (5 × 105/ml) were incubated for 4 h
with 0.5% (volume/volume) triolein in complete media. The
supernatant was collected, allowed to separate into aqueous
and lipid phases, and the aqueous phase collected and
assayed for TNF-α and IL-8 via ELISA (R&D) and MPO
activity (Abcam). For fatty acid studies, the same number of
cells were incubated for 4 h with 50 or 500 µM of oleic acid
conjugated to albumin. Albumin was used as the control
and MPO activity was determined as described above.
Neutrophilic cell studies
HL60 cells (5 × 105/ml) were incubated for 4 h with either
50 or 500 µM oleic acid conjugated to albumin. Albumin
was used as the control and MPO activity was determined
as described above. NB4 cells were induced to differentiate
into mature granulocytes by exposure to 1 µM all trans
retinoic
acid
(ATRA)
for
72 h.
Differentiation
was
verified via flow cytometry to detect expression of CD 11c
with an anti-CD11c antibody conjugated directly to phy-
coerythrin. At 72 h, 83% of the cells were positive for
antigen. The cells were washed and re-suspended in com-
plete media at a concentration of 5 × 105/ml and exposed to
oleic acid as described for the HL60 cell line. Both cell lines
were treated with 10 nM A23187 for 15 min as a positive
control.
MPO uptake by porcine coronary arteries in vitro
To model the impact of an acute HFM on MPO uptake into
coronary arteries, porcine hearts were obtained from a local
abattoir and immediately placed in PBS for dissection. The
epicardial coronary arteries were carefully isolated and
adventitial fat was removed. Vessels were cut into ~5 mm
rings and pre-incubated in 200 μl of DMEM (0.1% FBS,
without phenol red) in 96-well plates at 37 °C for 30 min.
The rings were then exposed to bovine serum albumin-
conjugated sodium palmitate or oleic acid (0–500 μM,
Sigma-Aldrich) for 0–4 h, and then incubated with vehicle
or purified human MPO (100 nM) for 2 h. Vessels were
washed, homogenized, and MPO activity was measured by
MPO detection kit (Fluoro MPO, Cell Technology) and
normalized by mg of protein.
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean ± SD unless otherwise noted.
Significance was set at p < 0.05. The Shapiro–Wilk test was
used to analyze the normality of the measurement dis-
tribution. Those satisfying normalcy are presented as mean
± SE. Those which fail are presented as median with
interquartile range. Repeated-measures ANCOVA analyses
were used to evaluate the effects of the meal (HFM vs ICM)
over time (pre vs post). When a significant interaction was
identified, simple main effects were performed to identify
where the differences exist. The change in each outcome is
expressed as delta (Δ) and calculated as the post to pre
difference for each meal. Paired samples t-tests were used to
compare Δ’s between meal. Multiple hypothesis testing
A single high fat meal provokes pathological erythrocyte remodeling and increases myeloperox…
1303
 significance was treated as nominal. Regression analyses
were conducted using Spearman’s method.
Results
Participant characteristics and biochemistry
Participant characteristics are listed in Table 1. All partici-
pants were apparently healthy, non-smoking, non-obese,
physically fit young adult men who completed both the
HFM and ICM protocols. Biochemical parameters before
and after the meals are presented in Table 2. Consistent with
prior publications [15], lipemia was present 4 h following
ingestion of the HFM, but not the ICM (not shown), and
total cholesterol (p = 0.01), triglycerides (p = 0.01), and
plasma free fatty acids (p = 0.003) were all significantly
increased post HFM. In contrast, the ICM had no effect on
these parameters. Additionally, high-density lipoprotein
(HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and glucose levels
were similar after both the HFM and ICM.
Vascular endothelial function
Supplemental Figure S1 illustrates a significant meal by
time interaction (p = 0.046) for flow-mediated dilation
(FMD) when controlling for BMI. Specifically, a significant
(p = 0.005) decrease in FMD was observed following the
HFM, whereas no change (p = 0.837) was observed fol-
lowing the ICM. Additional parameters of the FMD test for
pre and post meal are presented in Table 3. No differences
(all p > 0.05) in baseline diameter, peak diameter, or abso-
lute change in diameter were observed within or between
meals. Shear rate was also similar (p = 0.790) pre and post
within and between each meal. Consistent with the FMD
findings, a significant (p = 0.016) meal by time interaction
was observed for FMD normalized for shear rate when
controlling for BMI. In addition, the pre to post change in
concentrations of sVCAM, an inflammatory marker that
correlates with the extent of atherosclerosis [16], was
unaffected by consumption of either the HFM (Δ 3.12 ±
0.99) or the ICM (Δ −6.96 ± 2.2).
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and RBC
morphology
The change in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was
measured as a general marker of inflammation pre and post
the HFM and ICM. Figure 2a illustrates a significant
increase in ESR following the HFM, whereas no change
was observed in ESR following the ICM. Compared to post
ICM (Fig. 2b), RBC morphology was noticeably altered
following the HFM. Specifically, microcytosis (Fig. 2c) was
observed in the post-HFM samples. Furthermore, there was
a significant increase in the number of acanthocytes
(Fig. 2d) and echinocytes (Fig. 2e) post HFM. The blinded
investigator scored change in RBC morphology is presented
in Table 4. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV), estimated as
hematocrit divided by RBC concentration (MCVe), was
significantly (p = 0.015) reduced post HFM compared to
the ICM (Table 4). In addition to the changes in RBC
morphology, we detected foamy monocytes (Fig. 2f) and
lipid-laden monocytes (Fig. 2f) in the circulation post HFM.
HFMs have been demonstrated to transiently increase
circulating chemokine levels in humans [17]. Moreover,
chronic high-fat feeding in mice promoted an increase in
chemokine binding to RBC DARC [11]. To investigate
whether a single HFM could increase chemokines in the
Table 1 Participant characteristics
Variable
N
10
Age (years)
26 ± 3
Height (cm)
184 ± 7
Weight (kg)
83.8 ±
14.6
BMI (kg/m2)
24.7 ±
3.9
SBP (mm Hg)
117 ± 12
DBP (mm Hg)
65 ± 4
Body fat (%)
22.5 ±
4.2
Framingham risk
score
−5.9 ±
2.7
VO2 peak (ml/kg/
min)
56.7 ±
9.4
Values are mean ± SD
BMI body mass index, SBP systolic blood pressure, DBP diastolic
blood pressure
Table 2 Blood testing following the high fat and iso-caloric meals
Variable
Pre HFM
Post
HFM
Pre
ICM
Post
ICM
Total cholesterol (mg/
dl)
162 ± 12
173 ± 14a
148 ± 9
146 ± 10
HDL (mg/dl)
48 ± 5
49 ± 5
47 ± 5
46 ± 5
LDL (mg/dl)
100 ± 9
86 ± 12
92 ± 7
85 ± 4
Triglycerides (mg/dl)
87 ± 12
211 ± 42a
83 ± 6
98 ± 5
Free fatty acids (μm/l)
135 ± 15
203 ± 12a
109 ±
17
40 ± 11
Glucose (mg/dl)
90 ± 3
86 ± 2
90 ± 2
85 ± 6
Values are mean ± SEM
HDL high density lipoprotein, LDL low density lipoprotein
aSignificant from pre HFM
1304
T. W. Benson et al.
 circulation and/or bound to RBC in our subjects, we mea-
sured MCP-1, interleukin (IL)-8, and interferon gamma-
inducible protein (IP)-10 using a multiplex bead array after
treating blood with or without heparin to liberate chemo-
kines bound to RBC DARC [11]. None of the levels of
these cytokines were increased by either the HFM or the
ICM. Although treatment with heparin increased MCP-1,
indicative of liberation from DARC, the amount released
was unaffected by consumption of either the HFM or ICM
(Supplemental Figure S2). Heparin treatment was not
effective at liberating either IL-8 or IP-10 from RBC in our
study.
Intracellular RBC reactive oxygen species
The effects of the HFM on intracellular RBC reactive
oxygen species (ROS) were determined using a fluorescent
probe, CM-H2DCFDA. Representative histograms pro-
duced from RBC pre and post HFM demonstrate a positive
post-prandial shift in fluorescence following HFM, indica-
tive of increased intracellular ROS in the RBCs (Fig. 3a,
left). In contrast, no significant increase in ROS was
detected following ICM (Fig. 3a, right). Figure 3b illustrates
the significantly greater (p < 0.05) fold change in ROS
following the HFM compared to the ICM. To determine
whether the increase in ROS induced by the HFM was
sufficient to induce oxidative damage to the RBCs, proteins
were harvested from the RBC membranes pre and post
HFM or ICM and assayed by western blotting. Notably,
significant increases in tyrosine nitration (3-NT) of band 3
(anion exchanger 1) were detected following the HFM
(p = 0.008), whereas no change was observed following the
ICM (Fig. 3c, d).
Plasma and RBC-bound MPO
We next examined the activity of MPO in the plasma of
participants pre and post HFM or ICM. Figure 4a illustrates
the significantly (p = 0.002) greater elevation in MPO fol-
lowing the consumption of the HFM compared to the ICM.
To determine whether RBC-bound MPO was also increased
following the HFM, we assayed plasma for MPO activity
using heparin to liberate MPO from RBCs. While there was
an increase in MPO activity in the EDTA-collected samples
post HFM, collection of these samples into heparin
resulted in a further increase in MPO activity, indicative of
liberation from RBCs (Fig. 4b). In contrast, very little MPO
activity was detected in EDTA- or heparin-collected sam-
ples post ICM (Fig. 4b). Interestingly, MPO released from
the RBCs upon heparin collection correlated significantly
with the impairment in FMD (r = 0.63, p = 0.023), whereas
the baseline collection into EDTA did not (r = 0.21,
p = 0.68), consistent with a potential role for RBC-bound
MPO in promoting endothelial dysfunction post-HFM
consumption.
To investigate potential mechanisms that might promote
an increase in circulating MPO following the HFM,
monocytic THP-1 cells were either untreated or exposed to
a neutral fat, triolein, for 4 h, after which MPO in the
medium was assayed. Exposure to triolein resulted in sig-
nificant (p < 0.05) MPO release when compared to the
untreated cells (Fig. 4c). In addition, a significant release of
the inflammatory factors tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and
IL-8 was detected from THP-1 monocytic cells upon
exposure to triolein (Fig. 4c). To determine whether oleic
acid, the primary fatty acid present in the HFM, could
induce a similar response, THP-1 cells were exposed to
albumin-conjugated oleic acid for 4 h and MPO activity was
measured. Oleic acid treatment dose dependently induced
the release of active MPO as compared to albumin treatment
alone (Supplemental Figure S3).
The primary MPO releasing cells in the blood are the
granulocytes, with neutrophils being the most prevalent;
thus, we also examined whether free fatty acids can induce
MPO release from neutrophilic cells. Albumin-conjugated
oleic acid (50 or 500 µM for 4 h) failed to induce MPO
release from either HL60 cells or ATRA-differentiated NB4
cells, whereas both cell lines mounted a brisk degranulation
response to 10 nM of the calcium ionophore A23187 within
15 min of treatment (Supplemental Figure S4). These data
Table 3 Parameters of flow-mediated dilation testing
Variable
Pre HFM
Post HFM
Pre ICM
Post ICM
Baseline diameter (mm)
0.382 ± 0.009
0.0388 ± 0.010
0.374 ± 0.014
0.037 ± 0.014
Peak diameter (mm)
0.409 ± 0.010
0.410 ± 0.010
0.040 ± 0.014
0.398 ± 0.013
Absolute change (mm)
0.026 ± 0.004
0.022 ± 0.004
0.024 ± 0.003
0.025 ± 0.004
Shear rate (s-1, AUC)
35216 ± 2248
34962 ± 3454
33608 ± 3246
34473 ± 2420
FMD/shear (%/S−1, AUC)
0.194 ± 0.029
0.163 ± 0.027a
0.0196 ± 0.021
0.210 ± 0.034
Time to peak dilation (s)
38 ± 3
44 ± 4
41 ± 4
45 ± 3
Values are mean ± SEM
aSignificant from pre HFM
A single high fat meal provokes pathological erythrocyte remodeling and increases myeloperox…
1305
 suggest that free fatty acids exhibit specificity with regard to
eliciting MPO release from the monocytic cells in blood.
Given the pro-atherosclerotic potential of MPO, we
investigated whether the HFM-induced increase in MPO
was sufficient to promote pro-atherogenic oxidative mod-
ification of HDL. We observed that consumption of the
HFM (Fig. 1b), but not the ICM (Fig. 1d), increased the
levels of chlorotyrosine (Cl), a specific marker for MPO-
mediated oxidative modification of HDL. In contrast,
modifications of HDL linked to other oxidant mediators
(hydroxynonenal; HNE, malondialdehyde; MDA) were not
detected in any of the assayed samples. Finally, because the
HFM was associated with concurrent increases in circulat-
ing free fatty acids and MPO, we investigated whether
incubation of coronary arteries with fatty acids could pro-
mote vascular MPO uptake. Porcine coronary arteries were
exposed to sodium palmitate, oleic acid, or vehicle and
incubated with MPO. Afterward, the arteries were homo-
genized and MPO activity was assayed. Notably, incubation
with either palmitic or oleic acid, the two most abundant
fatty acids contained in bovine milk fat [18] induced a
significant (p < 0.05) increase in MPO uptake into porcine
coronary arteries in a dose- (Fig. 5a) and time-dependent
manner (Fig. 5b).
Discussion
RBCs intimately interact with blood vessels and are increas-
ingly recognized for their complex role in regulating vascular
function
and
cardiovascular-related
disease.
Here,
we
demonstrate for the first time in humans that a single HFM
sufficient to induce lipemia promotes RBC remodeling,
induces intracellular ROS and oxidative damage to RBC
membranes, and increases circulating and RBC-bound MPO
that is sufficient to promote oxidative modification of HDL.
Additionally, in vitro, monocytic cells exposed to lipid release
MPO, which in turn is taken up by coronary arteries in the
presence of free fatty acids. These findings may have impli-
cations with regard to the mechanisms, whereby consumption
of meals rich in fat have been temporally linked to the
development of acute coronary syndromes in humans [3, 19].
Erythrocyte morphology
Examination of whole blood smears (Fig. 2b–e) demon-
strated a post-prandial increase in microcytes induced by the
HFM. This change in morphology was likely caused by
lipemia-induced osmotic forces imposed on the RBC.
Interestingly, microcytes have been reported to exhibit less
deformability and a tendency to clump in the micro-
circulation, suggesting potentially important functional
consequences with regard to blood rheology, increased
RBC density, and increased peripheral resistance [20]. In
addition, acanthocytes and echinocytes were also detected
following consumption of the HFM in most individuals.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
*
**
**
**
**
**
*Post 
ICM, 
**Post 
HFM
Fig. 2 Changes in erythrocyte morphology and blood monocytes fol-
lowing HFM. a Effects of HFM and ICM on changes in erythrocyte
sedimentation rate. Effects of ICM (b) and HFM (c–e) on RBC
morphology. Note the appearance of microcytosis (c), acanthocytosis
(d), and echinocytosis (e) following HFM. Foamy monocytes (f) and
lipid-laden monocytes (g) post HFM. b–e ×400 magnification, f–g
×1000
Table 4 Erythrocyte morphology change score following the HFM
and ICM
Erythrocyte scoring summary
Acanthocytes
Echinocytes
MCVe
Change following
HFM
2+
3
74 [63.0,
80.7]
Change following ICM
ND
ND
97 [86.0, 103]
Values are presented as mean of observer scores with “+” indicating
averaged value fell between 2 and 3. MCVe values are shown as
median with [interquartile range]
ND none detected
1306
T. W. Benson et al.
 Structural alterations in protein band 3 have been associated
with increased presence of acanthocytes [21], and MPO
binding has been suggested to lead to the formation of
echinocytes. Thus, the increased tyrosine nitration of band 3
post HFM, combined with the increase in RBC MPO,
suggest multiple hits to the RBC each of which compromise
its vaso-regulatory function. Indeed, even non-specific RBC
clumping or aggregation in addition to impaired deform-
ability has been suggested to mediate increased micro-
vascular flow resistance and subendocardial ischemia in
patients with angina [22]. Whether the alterations in RBC
morphology identified in this study might have contributed
to the impaired FMD is unknown and beyond the scope of
this investigation. Future studies are certainly warranted to
identify if changes in erythrocyte morphology contribute to
changes in vascular health.
Monocytes patrol the circulation in search of diseased or
senescent RBC; for example, those infected by blood-borne
pathogens such as malaria [23]. This function of monocytes
is crucial for proper immune surveillance and infection
control. In fact, our study detected foamy monocytes after a
single HFM (Fig. 2g). We also demonstrated that ingestion
of the neutral fat triolein was sufficient to induce the release
of MPO, and other inflammatory factors, from monocytic
cells. Furthermore, increased MPO release was detected in
monocytic cells, but not in neutrophilic cells, when exposed
to oleic acid, the primary fatty acid present in HFM, sug-
gesting that monocytic cells are a major cell source for
MPO release by HFM. Conceivably, RBCs that are suffi-
ciently “remodeled” by the HFM might be mistakenly
recognized
by
circulating
monocytes
as
infected
or
damaged. Indeed, we recently reported that remodeled
RBCs from mice fed a chronically high-fat diet were avidly
taken
up
by
macrophages
in
vitro,
triggering
pro-
inflammatory gene expression and cytokine production
[11]. Moreover, when injected in vivo, the remodeled RBCs
were avidly taken up by the spleen, and when incubated
in vitro, they provoked increased monocytic cell binding to
the vascular endothelium. The presence of acanthocytes
following the HFM is consistent with the homing and
escape of damaged RBCs to and from the spleen. Collec-
tively, these findings suggest that the immune system may
be capable of recognizing and responding to RBCs that are
remodeled by consumption of the HFM, analogous to the
“molecular mimicry” induced by oxidized lipid epitopes in
atherosclerosis [24].
Post
Pre
Relative changes 
(3-NT/Band3)
A
HFM
CM-H2DCFDA
Cell number
ICM
CM-H2DCFDA
C
D
Relative changes 
(3-NT/Band3)
Post
Pre
Fold change
in ROS
ICM
HFM
B
*
Fig. 3 Effects of HFM and ICM on levels of ROS and oxidative stress
in RBCs. a Intracellular ROS were detected in washed RBCs loaded
with the probe CM-H2DCFDA and subjected to flow cytometry.
Representative histograms show a positive shift in fluorescence 4 h
post HFM (left), while there was no significant shift following ICM
(right). b Quantification of the fold change in fluorescence post meal.
Each dot represents an individual subject value, and the horizontal
lines denote the mean values (n = 10 HFM, n = 8 ICM). Tyrosine
nitration of band 3 isolated from RBC membranes was increased in
HFM group (c), while no change was observed in ICM group (d).
*Significant from ICM. †Significant from Pre-meal (n = 6)
A single high fat meal provokes pathological erythrocyte remodeling and increases myeloperox…
1307
 Role of MPO and clinical relevance
Plasma MPO levels have been linked to risk of acute cor-
onary syndrome in several studies [8, 25, 26]. A transient
increase in MPO, consequent to a single HFM, is not likely
to be harmful to an otherwise healthy individual free of
underlying atherosclerosis. However, uptake of MPO into a
diseased coronary artery could potentially contribute to
destabilization of vulnerable plaques [8]. Our ex vivo data
show that MPO uptake in porcine coronary artery was
augmented by treatment with free fatty acids, which
have been shown to promote endothelial dysfunction [17].
MPO is known to bind to endothelial cells and accrues in
the vascular matrix via endothelial transcytosis [27], but
whether this process may be perturbed by fatty acids is
unknown.
Further
in-depth
studies
are
required
to
determine whether fatty acids augment vascular MPO
uptake through the endothelium and/or by transcellular or
paracellular
pathways.
Nevertheless,
it
is
clear
that
the
single
HFM
significantly
increased
plasma
and
RBC-bound MPO (Fig. 4) and promoted MPO-mediated
oxidative modification of HDL (Fig. 1). These data
suggest that HFM can transiently increase circulating
MPO levels and potentially promote MPO uptake into
the vascular wall, which in turn could contribute to oxida-
tive stress, plaque destabilization, and acute coronary
syndrome.
Inflammatory consequence of the HFM
HFMs have been demonstrated to transiently increase cir-
culating chemokine levels in humans [28]. Moreover,
chronic high-fat feeding in mice promotes an increase in
chemokine binding to RBC DARC [11]. In the present
study, and in contrast to prior reports [10], a single HFM
was insufficient to induce changes in pro-inflammatory
chemokines or sVCAM levels in this young, non-obese
cohort. The reason for this discrepancy is unclear. However,
given that we only tested a single post-prandial time point
(4 h) following consumption of the HFM, it is possible that
a transient increase in chemokines was not detected. Indeed,
monocytic cells exposed in vitro to lipid produced mea-
surable levels of TNF-α and IL-8, consistent with inflam-
matory activation (Fig. 4c). However, the 4 h time point
employed in the in vivo study was specifically chosen based
on data from prior published studies, which demonstrated
elevated chemokine levels. More likely, the single HFM did
not evoke a measurable chemokine response in this cohort
because all participants were young, non-obese, and
exceptionally fit as evidenced by the high peak VO2 values
(Table 1). Predictably, these subjects were highly insulin
sensitive and exhibited a very low level of basal adipose
tissue and systemic inflammation, so that the HFM chal-
lenge was well tolerated. In fact, published data from our
team indicate an equivocal vascular response to an HFM
Fig. 4 Changes in MPO activity following the HFM and ICM and
monocitic exposure to neutral fat. a Individual plasma MPO activity
levels before (pre) and after (post) the HFM and ICM. b Pre and post
plasma MPO activity following the HFM (top) and ICM (bottom) in
EDTA or heparin anticoagulated samples. c Relative changes in MPO
activity and inflammatory marker expression (ELISA) in response to
THP-1 monocyte exposure to neutral fat for 4 h. *Significant from pre.
**Significant from untreated. †Significant from EDTA post (n = 6)
1308
T. W. Benson et al.
 between active and sedentary men [2]. Nonetheless, ESR, a
general marker of inflammation, was increased following
the HFM (Fig. 2a). The elevated ESR might have been due
to increased plasma viscosity resulting from the HFM,
which may in turn have been related to changes in the RBC
membrane. Both inflammation and viscosity are believed to
be mechanistically linked to destabilization of coronary
atheromatous plaques leading to myocardial infarction [29].
Erythrocyte-induced ROS
Impaired FMD induced by the HFM is thought to be
mediated by post-prandial lipemia and elevated ROS, both
of which can diminish NO bioavailability [30]. In the pre-
sent study, we detected a significant increase in intracellular
RBC ROS following the consumption of a single HFM.
Although the source of the ROS and the specie(s) of free
radicals remains to be determined, RBCs are particularly
susceptible to oxidative stress due to their high content of
unsaturated lipids and O2 [31]. Importantly, we also showed
that the increased ROS post HFM was sufficient to induce
oxidative RBC damage as measured by tyrosine nitration of
band 3 (Fig. 4). Oxidative damage to the RBC has been
implicated in the disruption of the cytoskeletal network,
resulting in complexes between spectrin, oxidized hemo-
globin, and band 329. Disruption of the cytoskeleton has in
turn been shown to impair membrane deformability and
impede RBC passage through microcirculation, which may
produce detrimental effects on blood flow. Increases in non-
fasting circulating cholesterol/triglycerides and endothelial
dysfunction have been identified as risk factors for athero-
sclerosis, which raises the possibility that RBC-induced
ROS provoked by the HFM could also be a contributory
factor [15].
Consumption of a single HFM, but not an ICM, resulted
in a significant increase in circulating concentrations of total
cholesterol, triglycerides, and free fatty acids (Table 2),
findings that are in line with what has previously been
reported [15]. In addition, the HFM resulted in a reduction
in brachial artery FMD, which has been associated with
increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease [32].
Taken together, our findings may provide insight into the
risk of acute coronary syndromes occurring following
consumption of copious, fat-enriched meals. This may be
particularly important to emphasize given the controversy
surrounding the association between chronic fat consump-
tion and cardiovascular disease, which has led some pro-
fessionals to recommend relaxing restrictions on dietary fat
intake [33, 34]. Unfortunately, patients might interpret such
recommendations to mean that consuming fatty foods, no
matter what the amount, is not harmful. Based on the pre-
sent findings, the potential risk of “binge” HFM may be
greater than previously recognized for patients with cor-
onary artery disease, akin to the risk of other binge habits
such as alcohol consumption.
In conclusion, we demonstrate for the first time in
humans that a single HFM can induce pathological RBC
remodeling and oxidative stress, in conjunction with ele-
vations in plasma and RBC-bound MPO. Remarkably, the
single HFM was sufficient to promote MPO-mediated
HDL oxidation. Together, these findings shed novel
insight into the mechanisms whereby consumption of heavy
meals enriched in fat may promote destabilization of vul-
nerable plaques leading to acute myocardial infarction.
Acknowledgements This
work
was
supported
by
HL112640,
HL126949, HL134354, and AR070029 to NLW, and DK093734 and
HL102635 to JEB.
A
B
*
*
*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
None
Sodium palmitate
Oleic acid
vehicle
0
1
2
3
4
MPO
(hr)
MPO ac�vity
(units/mg)
Fig. 5 Effects of free fatty acids on MPO uptake by porcine coronary
artery. Porcine coronary arterial rings were exposed to varying con-
centrations of a bovine serum albumin-conjugated sodium palmitate or
oleic acid for 4 h, or to b 300 µM sodium palmitate or oleic acid for
variable durations, followed by incubation with purified human MPO
(100 nM) for 2 h. MPO activity in the arterial rings was then quanti-
fied. *Significant from vehicle treatment (n = 3)
A single high fat meal provokes pathological erythrocyte remodeling and increases myeloperox…
1309
 Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Bornfeldt KE, Tabas I. Insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and
atherosclerosis. Cell Metab. 2011;14:575–85.
2. Johnson BD, Padilla J, Harris RA, et al. Vascular consequences of
a high-fat meal in physically active and inactive adults. Appl
Physiol Nutr Metab. 2011;36:368–75.
3. Kalsch T, Elmas E, Nguyen XD, et al. Alimentary lipemia
enhances procoagulatory effects of inflammation in patients with a
history of acute myocardial infarction complicated by ventricular
fibrillation. Int J Cardiol. 2008;123:131–7.
4. Ellsworth ML, Ellis CG, Goldman D, et al. Erythrocytes: oxygen
sensors and modulators of vascular tone. Physiology. 2009;24:107–16.
5. Horuk R. The duffy antigen receptor for chemokines darc/ackr1.
Front Immunol. 2015;6:279.
6. Adam M, Gajdova S, Kolarova H, et al. Red blood cells serve as
intravascular carriers of myeloperoxidase. J Mol Cell Cardiol.
2014;74:353–63.
7. Gorudko IV, Sokolov AV, Shamova EV, et al. Binding of human
myeloperoxidase to red blood cells: Molecular targets and bio-
physical consequences at the plasma membrane level. Arch Bio-
chem Biophys. 2016;591:87–97.
8. Roman RM, Camargo PV, Borges FK, et al. Prognostic value of
myeloperoxidase in coronary artery disease: Comparison of unstable
and stable angina patients. Coron Artery Dis. 2010;21:129–36.
9. Hui DY, Harmony JA. Interaction of plasma lipoproteins with
erythrocytes. I. Alteration of erythrocyte morphology. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 1979;550:407–24.
10. Tziakas DN, Chalikias GK, Stakos D, et al. Independent and
additive predictive value of total cholesterol content of erythrocyte
membranes with regard to coronary artery disease clinical pre-
sentation. Int J Cardiol. 2011;150:22–27.
11. Unruh D, Srinivasan R, Benson T, et al. Red blood cell dys-
function induced by high-fat diet: Potential implications for
obesity-related atherosclerosis. Circulation. 2015;132:1898–908.
12. Harris RA, Nishiyama SK, Wray DW, et al. Ultrasound assess-
ment of flow-mediated dilation. Hypertension. 2010;55:1075–85.
13. Brittain JE, Mlinar KJ, Anderson CS, et al. Activation of sickle
red blood cell adhesion via integrin-associated protein/cd47-
induced signal transduction. J Clin Invest. 2001;107:1555–62.
14. Bessis M, Weed RI. The structure of normal and pathologic
erythrocytes. Adv Biol Med Phys. 1973;14:35–91.
15. Gower RM, Wu H, Foster GA, et al. Cd11c/cd18 expression is
upregulated on blood monocytes during hypertriglyceridemia and
enhances adhesion to vascular cell adhesion molecule-1. Arter-
ioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:160–6.
16. Peter K, Weirich U, Nordt TK, et al. Soluble vascular cell adhe-
sion molecule-1 (vcam-1) as potential marker of atherosclerosis.
Thromb Haemost. 1999;82:38–43.
17. Kim F, Tysseling KA, Rice J, et al. Free fatty acid impairment of
nitric oxide production in endothelial cells is mediated by IKK-
beta. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005;25:989–94.
18. Mansson HL. Fatty acids in bovine milk fat. Food Nutr Res.
2008;52.
19. Lipovetzky N, Hod H, Roth A, et al. Heavy meals as a trigger for
a first event of the acute coronary syndrome: A case-crossover
study. Isr Med Assoc J. 2004;6:728–31.
20. Kubota K, Tamura J, Shirakura T, et al. The behaviour of red cells
in narrow tubes in vitro as a model of the microcirculation. Br J
Haematol. 1996;94:266–72.
21. Kay MM, Bosman GJ, Lawrence C. Functional topography of band
3: Specific structural alteration linked to functional aberrations in
human erythrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1988;85:492–6.
22. Lee BK, Durairaj A, Mehra A, et al. Microcirculatory dysfunction
in cardiac syndrome x: Role of abnormal blood rheology.
Microcirculation. 2008;15:451–9.
23. Tilley L, Dixon MW, Kirk K. The plasmodium falciparum-
infected red blood cell. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011;43:839–42.
24. Miller YI, Choi SH, Wiesner P, et al. Oxidation-specific epitopes are
danger-associated molecular patterns recognized by pattern recogni-
tion receptors of innate immunity. Circ Res. 2011;108:235–48.
25. Brennan ML, Penn MS, Van Lente F, et al. Prognostic value of
myeloperoxidase in patients with chest pain. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:1595–604.
26. Nicholls SJ, Tang WH, Brennan D, et al. Risk prediction with
serial myeloperoxidase monitoring in patients with acute chest
pain. Clin Chem. 2011;57:1762–70.
27. Baldus S, Eiserich JP, Mani A, Castro L, et al. Endothelial
transcytosis of myeloperoxidase confers specificity to vascular
ECM proteins as targets of tyrosine nitration. J Clin Invest.
2001;108:1759–70.
28. Margioris AN. Fatty acids and postprandial inflammation. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2009;12:129–37.
29. Mittleman MA, Mostofsky E. Physical, psychological and che-
mical triggers of acute cardiovascular events: Preventive strate-
gies. Circulation. 2011;124:346–54.
30. Berry SE, Tucker S, Banerji R, et al. Impaired postprandial
endothelial function depends on the type of fat consumed by
healthy men. J Nutr. 2008;138:1910–4.
31. Hale JP, Winlove CP, Petrov PG. Effect of hydroperoxides on red
blood
cell
membrane
mechanical
properties.
Biophys
J.
2011;101:1921–9.
32. Green DJ, Jones H, Thijssen D, et al. Flow-mediated dilation and
cardiovascular
event
prediction:
Does
nitric
oxide
matter?
Hypertension. 2011;57:363–9.
33. de Souza RJ, Mente A, Maroleanu A, et al. Intake of saturated and
trans unsaturated fatty acids and risk of all cause mortality, car-
diovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes: systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ. 2015;351:h3978.
34. Zong G, Li Y, Wanders AJ, Alssema M, et al. Intake of individual
saturated fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease in us men
and women: two prospective longitudinal cohort studies. BMJ.
2016;355:i5796.
1310
T. W. Benson et al.
