 https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691617690878
Perspectives on Psychological Science
2017, Vol. 12(5) 703 
–714
© The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1745691617690878
www.psychologicalscience.org/PPS
As it predisposes to many diseases, and decreases life 
expectancy, the increasing incidence of obesity is among 
the greatest problems facing the human race. By 2025, 
18% of the world’s male population and 21% of women 
will be obese (NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, 2016): In 
the United States 68% are already classified as overweight 
or obese (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, 2010). Attempts to reduce obesity have 
focused on reducing calorie intake, but has too much time 
been spent looking the wrong way down the telescope? Is 
reducing calorie intake likely to fail as it ignores the mech-
anisms that the body uses to maintain its existing weight?
Psychological interventions have in common that they 
attempt to reduce calorie intake, for example trying to 
regulate appetite, increase satiety, or reduce portion size. 
It has been claimed that “portion size is a modifiable 
determinant of energy intake that should be addressed in 
connection with the prevention and treatment of obesity” 
(Rolls, Morris, & Roe, 2002). It has been said that “foods 
that target within-meal satiation and postmeal satiety pro-
vide a plausible approach to weight management” 
(Halford & Harrold, 2012). Alternatively effort has been 
directed to understanding appetite, although a systematic 
review failed to find an association between appetite and 
energy intake (G. M. Holt et al., 2017).
Trying to reduce calorie intake is also the fundamental 
principle that directs much of public health policy. The 
U.S. government dietary guidelines suggest that we 
should “Avoid oversized portions.” In addition the num-
ber of calories is printed on food labels and lower calorie 
options are widely available in supermarkets. The U.K. 
policy on healthy eating suggests “putting calorie infor-
mation on menus” and “helping people to eat fewer calo-
ries (for example by changing the portion size or the 
recipe of a product).”
However, obesity demands a more sophisticated 
approach than counting calories: It needs to be treated as 
an interdisciplinary topic. Those giving psychological 
advice need to be cognizant of aspects of both physiol-
ogy and nutrition: Their recommendations must be com-
patible with bodily predispositions.
Biologists have tended to examine physiological 
mechanisms that influence energy balance. For example 
the lipostatic hypothesis suggests that a center in the 
hypothalamus monitors metabolites in the blood and, 
690878 PPSXXX10.1177/1745691617690878Benton, YoungReducing Calorie Intake
research-article2017
Corresponding Author:
David Benton, Department of Psychology, University of Swansea, 
Swansea SA2 8PP, UK 
E-mail: d.benton@swansea.ac.uk
Reducing Calorie Intake May Not Help  
You Lose Body Weight
David Benton and Hayley A. Young
Swansea University
Abstract
As the widespread availability of highly calorific food has resulted in a high incidence of obesity, attempts to decrease 
body weight have concentrated on trying to reduce energy intake. It is suggested that this is not the best approach. 
Although consuming more calories than expended is part of the initial problem, it does not follow that reducing intake, 
unless consciously counting calories, is the best solution. Mechanisms smooth out the large day-to-day differences in 
energy consumption, decreasing the importance of the size of a meal. In the short term a reduction in energy intake 
is counteracted by mechanisms that reduce metabolic rate and increase calorie intake, ensuring the regaining of lost 
weight. For example, even a year after dieting, hormonal mechanisms that stimulate appetite are raised. Over a million 
calories are consumed a year yet weight changes to only a small extent; there must be mechanisms that balance 
energy intake and expenditure. As obesity reflects only a small malfunctioning of these mechanisms, there is a need to 
understand the control of energy balance and how to prevent the regaining of weight after it has been lost. By itself, 
decreasing calorie intake will have a limited short-term influence.
Keywords
body mass index, body weight, calorie deduction, obesity, weight gain
 704 
Benton, Young
using feedback mechanisms, attempts to balance energy 
intake and expenditure (Kennedy, 1953). The approach 
gained a boost with the discovery of leptin, a hormone 
released from adipose tissue that reduces hunger. In con-
trast, psychologists typically expect the level of body fat 
to reflect aspects of the environment, food intake, or life-
style. The present argument is that the interdisciplinary 
nature of obesity demands both approaches: There are 
interactions between physiology, the environment, and 
psychology. More specifically it is argued that having a 
reduction in calorie intake as the central plank of an anti-
obesity strategy fails to acknowledge the existence of 
physiological mechanisms that predispose to its failure.
Psychologists interested in reducing obesity should 
consider altering their approach. Why is a reduction in 
calorie intake recommended when a lower energy intake 
leads to hormonal changes that stimulate appetite (Lean 
& Malkova, 2016), reduces metabolic rate (Dulloo & 
Jacquet, 1998), and stimulates the consumption of more 
calorific foods (Benton, 2005)? Although it may appear to 
be common sense to suggest that eating less will reduce 
the risk of putting on weight, this may not be the optimal 
approach.
As the approach taken by psychology is to reduce 
caloric intake, various questions are considered. How 
does the body respond to a small change in the caloric 
content of meals? How does obesity develop? What nutri-
tional approach should be taken rather than simply con-
centrating on calorie intake? Finally, in the context of the 
resulting conclusions, how should psychologists study 
obesity?
How Does the Body Respond to a 
Small Change in the Calorie Content of 
Meals?
Advocating a reduction in the calorie intake reflects the 
implicit assumption that physiological mechanisms do 
not, to any great extent, balance energy intake and 
expenditure. However, from meal to meal and day to day, 
food intake is characterized by very large differences in 
the number of calories consumed. Before concluding that 
reducing the energy intake of meals will be influential, 
such changes need to be placed in the context of a wide 
range of social and psychological factors. In addition if 
meals vary greatly in size for a wide variety of reasons, 
and adaptations exist to smooth out these variations, 
changing the energy content of a meal is going to have a 
limited impact.
De Castro (1996) recorded food intake for a week or 
longer. He found that many psychological, social, cul-
tural, and environmental factors affected the size of 
meals, influences that were powerful although short-
lived. The size of a meal was described for the most part 
as “unregulated,” “elastic,” and varying “spontaneously 
within a relatively wide range.” Social facilitation has a 
particularly powerful influence. He found that eating in 
the presence of one additional person increased the calo-
rie intake by 44%, while eating with six others raised it by 
74% (de Castro, 1996). In addition palatability, hunger, 
thirst, elation, and anxiety all influenced consumption. 
Dietary restraint has been found to be associated with 
consuming 301 fewer calories a day in females (1.26 MJ; 
16%) and 279 kcal a day in males (1.17 MJ; 12%; de 
Castro & Elmore, 1988).
Faced with these wide variations in calorie intake, the 
important question is, how does the body respond? A 
simplistic suggestion is that a calorie is a calorie and 
therefore any raised intake of calories will inevitably 
result in an increase in body weight. However, even if 
this was the case, the impact of reducing the energy 
intake of some food items is going to be limited by the 
large influence of many social and psychological vari-
ables. The impact will be even less if, over time, there are 
mechanisms that smooth out the day-to-day variations in 
calorie consumption.
Reducing the size of meals
Implicit in the proposition that reducing the energy pro-
vided will help to control weight is the view that the 
energy consumed in one meal has a limited if any impact 
on subsequent consumption. However, over many years 
reviews have come to the same conclusion: Following a 
reduction in body weight, the lost energy is replaced by 
alterations in physiology and changes in the nature of the 
food consumed (Drenowatz, 2015; Poppitt & Prentice, 
1996).
Energy compensation is more likely when you reduce 
rather than increase energy consumption. For example a 
study that lasted 14 days, carried out blind in a metabolic 
laboratory, found that subjects “completely compensated 
for the loss of calories.” They increased the number of 
food items consumed that contained normal levels of 
calories. In contrast they “failed to compensate for an 
increase in caloric intake” (Foltin, Fischman, Emurian, & 
Rachlinski, 1988). Similarly Drenowatz (2015) acknowl-
edged that humans are better equipped to replace lost 
weight than avoid weight gain, although the phenome-
non is characterized by individual variability.
It is relevant that Poppitt and Prentice (1996) consid-
ered a time frame that excluded any preload study of less 
than 24-hr duration. This time scale is important as many 
psychological studies give a meal or a snack and then, 
after 120 or 150 min, measure food consumption. This 
time scale is not enough to allow full energy compensa-
tion although it has sometimes been wrongly quoted as 
evidence that compensation is of little importance. In fact 
 Reducing Calorie Intake 
705
the time scale is critical as “energy balance in the lean is 
a long-term phenomenon, conditioned by large day-to-
day fluctuations in energy intake” (Naismith & Rhodes, 
1995).
Relevant experimental evidence is offered by studies 
where, unknown to the subjects, calories were removed 
from the diet. Any lost weight tends to be regained rap-
idly (Benton, 2005). It is essential, if you wish to demon-
strate a response to changing the caloric content of food, 
that studies are carried out blind: Knowingly taking part 
in a study produces general changes in behavior (Benton 
& Young, 2016). It proved difficult to find studies that had 
covertly reduced energy consumption and monitored 
subsequent calorie intake as the majority of studies either 
had added calories or were not blind (Table 1).
Over a period up to 24 days, following covert energy 
reduction, all studies reported a degree of energy com-
pensation that was variously 100% (Foltin et al., 1988; 
Lavin, French, & Read, 1997; Louis-Sylvestre, Tornier, 
Verger, Chabert, & Delorme, 1989; Reid & Hammersley, 
1998), 70% to 80% (Foltin, Fischman, Moran, Rolls, & 
Kelly, 1990; Porikos, Hesser, & van Itallie, 1982), or 40% 
to 50% (Naismith & Rhodes, 1995; Porikos, Booth, & van 
Itallie, 1977), although it was only 16% in one instance 
(Foltin et al., 1992). The most common response in these 
nine studies was 100% energy compensation. That is, 
reducing the calorie content of particular foods resulted 
in no overall reduction in energy consumption. Yet at the 
other extreme there was a report of only 16% energy 
compensation. Understanding these differential responses 
may be the key to learning to benefit from a reduced 
calorie intake.
In addition energy compensation may be aided by 
changes in metabolic rate. For one day young women 
either fasted, consumed 1,200 kcal (5,040 KJ), or ate nor-
mally; then for 4 days they ate freely chosen meals 
(Levitsky & DeRosimo, 2010). Body weight decreased 
significantly after fasting or restricting the diet, although 
when allowed to eat normally the lost body weight was 
regained within 4 days. There had, however, been no 
increase in the amount of food eaten, and it appeared 
that reducing food intake had decreased the metabolic 
rate and thus ensured the recovery of body weight. This 
study suggested that the failure to maintain a reduced 
body weight does not necessarily reflect an increased 
appetite or a raised food intake; rather physiological 
mechanisms have important roles.
In the context of attempting to reduce body weight, 
this is the worst possible scenario. For example, when a 
larger portion supplies more calories, if it is part of a 
general and prolonged increase in energy intake it will 
tend to be stored as fat. The body does not try to reduce 
subsequent food intake to return to the preexisting body 
weight but rather anticipates starvation by storing energy. 
In contrast, if calorie intake is reduced, the body com-
pensates by decreasing its metabolic rate or stimulating 
food intake.
The short-term regulation of  
energy consumption
Rather than assuming that decreasing calorie intake will 
inevitably influence body weight, a more sophisticated 
conception is that there are regulatory mechanisms that 
influence future food intake. When food intake was mea-
sured over days, de Castro (1996) found evidence of 
feedback mechanisms. These mechanisms were said to 
act “subtly but persistently,” although they were not 
apparent for at least a day, and usually a longer period 
was required.
A study of military trainees during basic training found 
that on a day-to-day basis there was no relationship 
between energy intake and expenditure. However, after 
2 days in some, and a longer period in others, adjust-
ments were made (Edholm, Fletcher, Widdowson, & 
McCance, 1955). Again when cyclists taking part in the 
Tour de France were monitored, the association between 
energy expenditure and subsequent intake was closer 
after 3 to 5, rather than 1 to 2 days (Saris, 1997). Both of 
these studies examined those who were physically active; 
however, a similar finding has been reported in those 
displaying more normal levels of activity. When food 
intake was recorded for 2 weeks, if there were devia-
tions from the average energy intake, after 3 to 4 days 
there were compensations in intake that were not 
observed after 1 or 2 days (Bray, Flatt, Volaufova, DeLany, 
& Champagne, 2008).
The findings are consistent. Food consumption is 
influenced by previous energy intake, often after as much 
as 4 days. Thus short-term studies, of the type that typi-
fies much of the psychological work in this area, will be 
unable to examine the mechanisms that regulate food-
intake. The existence of mechanisms that smooth out the 
day-to-day energy intake suggests that the minor changes 
in caloric intake associated with the modification of food 
items are unlikely to have a significant impact.
The Longer-Term Regulation of  
Energy Consumption
Dieting
What happens when, over a longer period, energy intake 
is reduced? Although a diet may produce a short-term 
gain, it is at a long-term cost.
Even one year after dieting, the levels of leptin, pep-
tide YY, cholecystokinin, insulin, ghrelin, gastric inhibi-
tory polypeptide, and pancreatic polypeptide have been 
 706 
Table 1. Energy Compensation Following Covert Reductions in the Energy Content of the Diet
Study
Sample
Treatment
Energy Substituted
Duration
Food Available
Outcome
Porikos, Booth, 
and van Itallie 
(1977)
8 obese adults
Metabolic ward with 
sugar or aspartame 
foods
850 and 897 kcal 
during two 
periods
9 days sucrose 
and 6 days 
aspartame
Prescribed by 
stage of study
50% energy compensation
Porikos, Hesser, 
and van Itallie 
(1982)
6 normal-weight 
males
Metabolic ward with 
sugar or aspartame 
foods; Days 7–18 the 
caloric content reduced 
by 25%
900 kcal
24 days
Prescribed by 
stage of study
40% energy compensation 
after 4–6 days on low-
calorie diet then 85% 
energy for rest low-calorie 
period
Foltin, Fischman, 
Emurian, and 
Rachlinski (1988)
6 normal-weight 
males
Metabolic ward with 
third of food low 
calorie on Days 6–11
500 kcal
14 days
Apart from 
periods of low-
calorie foods a 
free choice
Days 6–11 100% energy 
compensation; Days 
12–14 with regular 
foods available failed to 
compensate for increased 
caloric intake
Louis-Sylvestre, 
Tornier, Verger, 
Chabert, and 
Delorme (1989)
17 normal-weight 
males 15–17 
years
Normal or low-energy 
snack (artificial 
sweeteners + fat) 
consumed for 5 days
200 kcal
6 days
Dinner provided 1 
hour after snack 
on Days 1 and 6
Day 1 snack was not 
compensated at dinner; 
Day 6 there was precise 
energy compensation
Foltin, Fischman, 
Moran, Rolls, 
and Kelly (1990)
6 normal-weight 
males
Four lunches differing in 
fat and carbohydrate
Lunch offered 431 
or 844 kcal
4 × 3 days
Apart from lunch 
freely chosen
76% energy compensation
Foltin et al. (1992)
6 normal-weight 
males
Metabolic ward with 
meals varying in fat 
and sugar/aspartame
Energy varied 700 
to 1,700 kcal
4 × 3 days
Foods varied in 
energy content 
in 4 stages of 
study
16% energy compensation
Naismith and 
Rhodes (1995)
10 normal-weight 
males
Lunch sweetened with 
sucrose and then 
sweeteners
500 kcal
10 days
Freely chosen but 
foods varied in 
composition
42% energy compensation 
but varied from 0% to 90%
Lavin, French, and 
Read (1997)
14 female 
restrained eaters 
of normal weight
4 × 330 ml sweetened 
sugar/aspartame: half 
informed of nature of 
drink although did not 
influence energy intake
330 kcal
2 days
High-carbohydrate 
and high-fat 
snacks available 
with drink; Day 
2 freely chosen
Over 2 days more energy 
consumed after aspartame 
drinks 111% compensation
Reid and 
Hammersley 
(1998)
14 normal-weight 
males and 13 
females
Existing soft drinks 
replaced with those 
containing sucrose or 
aspartame
200–400 kcal
7 days
Freely chosen diet
Day 1 less carbohydrate 
consumed when aspartame 
consumed; by Day 2, 
there were no differences 
in intake, that is, energy 
compensation had taken 
place
 Reducing Calorie Intake 
707
found to differ from baseline values (Sumithran et al., 
2011). A review concluded that “diet-induced weight loss 
results in long-term changes in appetite gut hormones, 
postulated to favour increased appetite and weight 
regain” (Lean & Malkova, 2016, p. 622). There are other 
physiological changes. When food intake was restricted, 
the resulting loss of body fat was associated with a 
decrease in the production of body heat and a reduction 
in metabolic rate (Dulloo & Jacquet, 1998), changes that 
will facilitate a return to the initial weight. More gener-
ally, the perceived reward of food increased following 
weight loss (Cameron, Goldfield, Cyr, & Doucet, 2008).
Given these responses to dieting, it is not surprising 
that it has been proposed that in the long term it does not 
work; any lost weight tends not to be maintained. In fact 
an examination of the long-term consequences of low-
calorie diets found that between one third and two thirds 
of dieters regained more weight than they lost initially 
(Mann et al., 2007). Weight cycling, or more colloquially 
yo-yo dieting, refers to a cycle of weight loss followed by 
regaining the lost weight, followed by again dieting, and 
so on. The Summermatter Cycle describes how, initially 
during dieting, the energy expenditure of muscle reduces. 
Thus when more food becomes available, the more 
thrifty body favors the depositing of fat (Summermatter & 
Handschin, 2012). Such a mechanism illustrates that 
directing attention to the reduction of food intake, with-
out realizing that it is the maintenance of weight loss that 
is important, is unlikely to be successful.
Weight fluctuation
Thus the body has as short-term goals the smoothing out 
of energy intake and maintaining the existing body 
weight. However, in the long term other mechanisms 
come into play that discourage large fluctuations in 
weight. Although over a period of months large amounts 
of energy are consumed, over time there are often rela-
tively small variations in body weight.
The mechanisms are not perfect, but over long periods 
the ability of the body to balance energy intake and expen-
diture is staggering. It has been estimated that the average 
45-year-old male in Western Europe consumes 1.24 mil-
lion kcal (5,188 MJ) a year (Speakman & Westerterp, 2010). 
Similarly the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation calculated that the average American consumes 
3,790 calories (15.86 MJ) a day, a total of 1.38 million 
(5,774 MJ) a year. Based on food consumption data, the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture found that over a year the 
average American consumes nearly one ton of food.
However, although a large energy intake might be 
expected to be associated with putting on large amounts 
of weight, the figures do not add up. This level of energy 
intake needs to be placed in the context of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture’s Dietary Guidelines. The 
organization calculates that a sedentary adult male 
requires 2,200 calories (9.20 MJ) a day, that is 803,000 
(3,360 MJ) a year. The comparable figure is 2,800 (11.72 
MJ) a day in those who are physically active, adding up 
to an annual intake of 1.02 million calories (4,268 MJ). 
Without the intervention of compensatory mechanisms, 
this great excess of energy intake over expenditure would 
result in a massive annual increase of weight.
Although these ballpark figures cannot be expected to 
produce anything other than crude estimates, it is obvi-
ous that the weight of the average American is not 
increasing by anything in the range suggested by the dif-
ference between the actual and recommended levels of 
energy intake. Without compensatory mechanisms every 
year, this difference would result in an increase in weight 
approaching 100 pounds.
The body weight of those in the Framingham Study 
increased by a total of 10% over 20 years (Belanger, 
Cupples, & D’Agostino, 1988). Therefore, someone who 
was initially 150 pounds (68 kg) would 20 years later be 
165 pounds (75 kg); that is, the person would have put 
on 0.75 pounds (0.33 kg) a year. When 15,624 Swedish 
women were monitored over 10 years, the annual weight 
gain was 0.75 pounds (0.33 kg; Norberg et al., 2011). In 
a Scottish population, over 9 years the average annual 
weight increase, in those initially aged 39 years, was 1.34 
pounds (0.61 kg). Females aged initially 59 years, 
increased by 0.42 pounds (0.10 kg) a year and males by 
0.20 pounds (0.13 kg; Ebrahimi-Mameghani, Scott, Der, 
Lean, & Burns, 2007). Similarly over 10 years a German 
study found an annual weight gain of 0.55 pounds (0.25 
kg) in males and 0.53 pounds (0.24 kg) in females 
(Haftenberger et al., 2016).
In the context of the observed annual weight increase, 
it has been calculated that over a year 3,296 kcals (13.8 
MJ) more energy would need to be consumed than had 
been expended (Speakman et al., 2011). These figures 
translate to a daily excess of energy intake over expendi-
ture of only 9 kcal (38 kJ), a figure put in context by a 
teaspoon of sugar providing 16 kcal (67 kJ). Given the 
large number of calories often consumed, it is clear that 
factors other than calorie intake need to be considered.
There is, however, evidence that the analysis of weight 
change over long periods may be misleading. Weight 
may not increase gradually, but rather stay stable for long 
periods (Speakman et al., 2011), with weight gain occur-
ring at times of excessive intake such as Thanksgiving or 
Christmas (Yanovski et al., 2000). This observation of 
periods of weight stability again suggests an ability to 
balance energy intake and expenditure. If for much of 
the time the body is able to generate energy balance, this 
would again argue against the expectation that reducing 
the caloric content of food will decrease body weight.
 708 
Benton, Young
Average changes in weight, however, hide individual 
differences. The Scottish sample, for example, reported 
that the weight of 20% of the sample changed little over 
9 years (Ebrahimi-Mameghani et al., 2007). Trying to 
understand why some manage to maintain their existing 
weight while others gain weight may be profitable.
A consistent picture has emerged. Even though exces-
sive amounts of energy are consumed, over a year it is, 
on average, associated with only small increases in body 
weight. Clearly to understand the development of obesity 
we need to look beyond the number of calories that pass 
our lips. The impression gained is of finely tuned control 
mechanisms that monitor and respond to energy intake 
and expenditure. Examining these control mechanisms 
may well be more productive than reducing the caloric 
content of particular food items that are responsible for a 
small percentage of a million calories.
How Is Body Weight Determined?
A soundly based approach to dealing with body weight 
needs to reflect the mechanisms by which body weight is 
determined and maintained. Two main approaches have 
been suggested: There is a “set” or a “settling” point.
The set point theory suggests that the level of body fat 
is monitored and compared with a target value (Kennedy, 
1953). As necessary, intake or expenditure is then modi-
fied to maintain the desired level of body fat. One prob-
lem with this approach is that it does not explain why the 
incidence of obesity has increased so markedly. A second 
issue is that it does not account for people with different 
lifestyles having a different risk of becoming obese.
In contrast, the settling point theory suggests that over 
time body weight is related to the pattern of food intake 
and physical activity into which people 
“settle” (Speakman 
et al., 2011; Wirtshafter & Davis, 1977). The biological 
mechanisms that control energy balance are programed 
by environmental factors, such that the point at which 
body weight is defended may change over time. The set-
tled point is defended by metabolic and behavioral adap-
tations. Rosenbaum and Leibel (2010, p. S52) commented, 
“The multiplicity of systems regulating energy stores and 
opposing the maintenance of a reduced body weight 
illustrates that body energy stores in general and obesity 
in particular are actively defended.” The model acknowl-
edges that nutrition and physiology, as well as social, 
psychological, and economic considerations, all influ-
ence obesity. In addition, de Castro and Plunkett (2002) 
suggested that the defended point reflects both the inter-
nal and external milieu.
With the settling point approach there is a need to 
distinguish the initial development of obesity from subse-
quent attempts to reduce it. There can be no doubt that 
changes in the availability of food, and its increased 
caloric content, have played a major role in the obesity 
epidemic. It follows that public health advice has been to 
reduce food intake, although there has been limited suc-
cess. Unfortunately, although the high level of calorie 
intake was a large part of the initial problem, it does not 
follow that its reduction will be a major part of the solu-
tion. When a reduction in calorie intake has decreased 
body weight, there are powerful physiological adapta-
tions that favor regaining that weight (Greenway, 2015). 
When the initial attention associated with attempting to 
lose weight dissipates, body weight increases and returns 
to, or even exceeds, the starting level (Mann et al., 2007).
Obesity
The present argument that there are mechanisms that 
over time defend the existing body weight raises a ques-
tion: If this is the case, why is there an obesity epidemic? 
There are various contributory factors.
First, obesity often reflects putting on one or two 
pounds (0.5 to 1 kg) a year for decades: That is, there is 
a very good, albeit not perfect, control of energy balance. 
Second, the nature of the entire diet is important. To pre-
vent energy compensation, low-energy dense foods 
should be consumed (see below). However, many West-
ern diets have a high energy density that rapidly com-
pensates for any reduction in energy intake. Third, in 
many Western societies a major predictor of obesity is 
poverty (Drewnowski & Spector, 2004). Poverty is associ-
ated with a low expenditure on food, a low intake of 
fruits and vegetables, and a high intake of fat. The cheap-
est foods tend to have a high energy density.
Another part of the answer is that to control weight it 
must be possible to both lose weight and maintain that 
loss. It may be that it is not the amount consumed at a 
meal that is important but rather the lack of opportunity 
to prevent subsequent compensatory adjustments. Hav-
ing eaten a large meal, is there an opportunity to subse-
quently reduce calorie intake? Often we do not eat 
because we are hungry but because it is meal time; we 
do not choose what to eat but rather eat what has been 
prepared by others; we consume a portion determined 
by those serving the meal, the food manufacturer, or the 
food outlet. As such, the opportunity to balance energy 
consumption and expenditure may be limited.
It is clear that obesity reflects many factors other than 
calorie intake and any coherent policy should address 
more than the caloric content of a meal.
If Not Calorie Reduction, What 
Approach Should We Take?
Although being aware of calorie intake is an approach 
often taken by those in control of their weight, the 
 Reducing Calorie Intake 
709
present question is the extent to which reducing calorie 
intake can help more generally to decrease obesity. More 
specifically, is covertly decreasing calorie levels, for 
example by decreasing a portion size, going to be influ-
ential in those not consciously engaged in reducing 
intake?
The weight conscious are actively engaged with trying 
to not put on weight. As often these people are close to 
energy balance, counting calories is potentially a success-
ful approach. There remain the two thirds of the U.S. 
population who are overweight if not already obese: In 
this circumstance, is reducing the calorie content of par-
ticular meals helpful?
Whereas those who are weight conscious are working 
at the margin of energy balance, and may even consume 
less energy than they expend, the obese tend to have an 
intake in excess of expenditure. In fact, as their intake is 
often greatly in excess of expenditure, over months a 
new and higher “settled point” is created. Why then 
should a small difference in calorie consumption greatly 
influence body weight? The settled point is defended, 
such that any decrease in energy intake will stimulate 
compensatory mechanisms. In those who are obese, cal-
orie intake will reduce weight only if an energy deficit 
can be achieved.
Although both the obese and those who successfully 
control their weight are faced with powerful pressures to 
regain any lost calories, there are critical differences. 
Those maintaining a low weight often use cognitive strat-
egies to prevent compensatory increases in calorie con-
sumption. Those who put on weight may be unaware of 
psychological strategies or may choose not to use them. 
Unless the obese consciously engage with calorie con-
trol, requiring food manufacturers and food outlets to 
reduce portion size would be expected to be ineffective. 
If there is no conscious control of calorie intake, the 
body will simply replace the lost energy.
In addition, it is unlikely that minor changes in diet 
will reduce the incidence of obesity, as controlling body 
weight will often require a complete dietary makeover. It 
does, however, seem likely that concentrating on the 
nature of the food consumed, rather than simply reduc-
ing calories, offers advantages. An approach that consid-
ers macro-nutrients, energy density, and glycemic load 
may help to prevent energy compensation.
Diets that aid weight loss
There are reports that appetite, the control of body 
weight, and energy compensation are influenced by the 
macronutrient composition of meals (amount of fat, car-
bohydrate, and protein).
When in the short term the energy content of the diet 
is reduced, if some of the available foods are energy 
dense, that is they provide more calories per gram of 
food, then the lost energy tends to be replaced. In fact, 
after reducing calorie intake, only when the diet was uni-
formly of a low-energy density was energy compensation 
not observed (Poppitt & Prentice, 1996). A meta-analysis 
of observational studies found that a diet with a higher 
energy density was associated with a higher body mass 
index (Rouhani, Haghighatdoost, Surkan, & Azadbakht, 
2016). As we tend to eat a similar volume of food, the 
same volume of low density foods provides fewer calo-
ries. Thus a low-energy diet has two advantages: It 
decreases energy intake but also helps to maintain any 
weight loss. Low-energy dense foods tend to have a high 
level of water and a low fat content; fruit and vegetables 
are good examples.
A satiety index has been developed that found eating 
foods that contained more protein, fiber, and water 
resulted in feeling fuller after a meal, whereas the fat 
content had the opposite impact (S. H. Holt, Miller, 
Petocz, & Farmakalidis, 1995). These findings were con-
firmed more recently when 100 foods were rated for their 
perceived ability to induce satiety. Foods with a lower 
energy density, lower fat, and higher protein accounted 
for most of the differences in the perceived ability to 
induce satiety (Buckland, Stubbs, & Finlayson, 2015).
A review of the effects of high protein diets concluded 
that there was “convincing evidence that a higher protein 
intake increases thermogenesis and satiety” and that 
“high protein meals lead to a reduced subsequent energy 
intake” (Halton & Hu, 2004, p. 373). Eating protein stimu-
lates energy expenditure associated with its absorption, 
digestion, and metabolism (thermogenesis): This is esti-
mated to be 23% of the energy consumed as protein, 
compared with 6% for carbohydrate and 1% for fat (Flatt, 
1978).
After dieting, in a randomized trial for 6 months, either 
a high-protein or control diet was consumed. Satiety was 
higher and less weight was regained when high-protein 
meals had been consumed (Lejeune, Kovacs, & Westerterp-
Plantenga, 2005). Similarly, a Cochrane review concluded 
that the overweight and obese lost more weight when on 
a low-glycemic-load diet; that is, they consumed a diet 
that produced smaller increases in the level of blood glu-
cose. It was, however, noted that there was a need for 
longer term follow-up studies to establish a long-term 
benefit (Thomas, Elliott, & Baur, 2007).
In another study overweight adults lost 10% to 15% of 
their weight when they followed a low-carbohydrate, 
low-fat, or low-glycemic-index diet (Ebbeling et al., 
2012). The fall in resting energy expenditure was, how-
ever, largest after the low-fat diet: an important observa-
tion as this would encourage energy compensation and 
the regaining of lost weight. In another study, subjects 
were monitored for 7 days while consuming covertly 
 710 
Benton, Young
manipulated diets (Stubbs, Harbon, Murgatroyd, & 
Prentice, 1995). After a delay of 3 to 4 days a greater 
intake of carbohydrate or protein, but not fat, was part of 
a negative feedback loop that reduced subsequent energy 
intake.
Hence, there is the potential to develop a diet based 
on the nature of the food items, rather than calorie con-
tent, that will help to maintain a lower weight. However, 
rather than concentrating specifically on the properties of 
individual foods, it should be remembered that it is the 
habitual pattern of eating that predisposes to obesity. 
Thus the opportunity exists for psychology to encourage 
the consumption of diets that are less likely to be associ-
ated with the gaining or regaining of weight. This will, 
however, involve considerations other than simply reduc-
ing calorie intake.
Discussion
In summary, a short-term priority of the body is to bal-
ance the extremes of energy intake that occur from meal 
to meal. As such, minor changes in caloric intake are 
unlikely to have a long-term impact. A second objective, 
following a loss of weight, is to ensure a return to the 
preexisting body weight. These mechanisms have impli-
cations for those recommending that we should try to 
reduce obesity by decreasing calorie intake: They suggest 
that the strategy, unless part of a wider intervention, will 
tend to fail.
In the longer term, the development of obesity reflects 
the assessment by the body that, over a period, excess 
energy had been consumed and thus a new higher “set-
tled body weight” is established. Historically, it would be 
predicted that the marked societal changes that resulted 
in a positive energy balance would result in a higher 
“settled” body weight; for example, larger portion sizes, 
eating more often outside the home, decreasing physical 
activity, and the ready availability of cheap highly calo-
rific foods. If history could be rewritten and these societal 
changes reversed, the chance that a younger individual 
will become obese would decline. Unfortunately, for 
those who are already obese, it does not follow that, by 
itself, reducing calorie intake will lead to a lower body 
weight. The existing body weight will be defended.
Although the physiological mechanisms that favor 
retaining body weight are powerful, this must not become 
a council of despair. Rather it should direct psychology to 
the examination of aspects of the environment and 
changes in behavior that can modify their impact.
A paradox
It may appear paradoxical to suggest that, when consid-
ering obesity, attention should not be directed primarily 
to the intake of calories. We are, however, fighting many 
aspects 
of 
modern 
Western 
society 
and 
bodily 
mechanisms 
that have developed over millions of years (Drenowatz, 
2015; Greenway, 2015; Poppitt & Prentice, 1996; 
Rosenbaum & Leibel, 2010).
In theory the best strategy is to prevent obesity in the 
first place by ensuring that no more energy is consumed 
than is expended. In most cases, given the multitude of 
factors that influence the chances of achieving energy 
balance, such an objective will be achieved only after 
widespread societal changes. Thus in increasing sections 
of Western societies the body develops a “settled point” 
that reflects the levels of energy input and expenditure 
associated with obesity. How then should the problem of 
obesity be approached?
Historically, many of the attempts to develop public 
health policy can be summarized with the aphorism of 
the American journalist H. L. Mencken (1917): “For every 
complex question there is an answer that is clear, simple 
and wrong.” It is unclear why, as all serious researchers 
acknowledge that the origins of obesity are wide-ranging 
and complex, public health initiatives have tended to 
emphasize a single or a few major influences. A good 
example was in the 1980s identifying fat as the villain, 
with the result that supermarkets are now filled with 
low-fat and “lite” options, yet obesity continued on the 
same upward trajectory. In a similar manner more 
recently attention has been paid by different groups to 
sugar, carbonated drinks, or portion size. Why is it 
believed that the origins of obesity are so simple that it 
is going to respond, even to a small extent, to isolated 
interventions?
The government of the United Kingdom commis-
sioned a group to outline the variables that lead to obe-
sity (Foresight, 2007). There resulted a list of 110 factors 
that were grouped into eight categories: food production, 
food consumption, physiology, physical activity, energy 
balance, the physical activity environment, social psy-
chology, individual psychology. Each of these 110 factors 
was of considerable complexity and characterized by a 
maze of feedback loops. Fully acknowledging the com-
plex origins of obesity emphasizes that it is fundamen-
tally unlikely that the manipulation of a few isolated 
variables is going to make a significant difference. That is 
not to say that decreasing fat consumption or reducing 
portion size could not play a role, but only in the context 
of making changes to the entire diet. In fact dietary 
approaches can be expected to be successful only 
when part of a multifaceted, multidisciplinary inspired 
intervention.
Psychologists need to spend more time out of the lab-
oratory as this location does not reflect most of the fac-
tors that determine weight gain. The most robust of 
laboratory phenomena may not survive interacting with 
 Reducing Calorie Intake 
711
the wide range of factors that influence the tendency to 
put on weight. At the most laboratory studies are hypoth-
esis generating and before an approach is recommended 
it needs to be tested under real-world conditions.
Maintaining a loss of weight
Although successfully controlling body weight is likely to 
involve a range of initiatives, many of which are unre-
lated to food, the nature of the diet inevitably plays a 
major role. The present analysis suggests that particular 
attention should be given to attempts to prevent the 
regaining of lost weight.
It is easy to propose that you should maintain a new 
lower weight but it is difficult to achieve. Losing weight, 
compared to maintaining weight loss, is relatively straight-
forward. There are hundreds of different diets, most of 
which will be to some extent successful, at least for a 
short period. However, of those who lose 10% of their 
weight, only 20% will maintain this loss for at least a year 
(Wing & Phelan, 2005). Thus in the short term it is pos-
sible to maintain weight loss, although very few will 
maintain that loss for 5 years. The aim should be to 
increase this percentage and to understand the factors 
that prevent the regaining of weight. What sort of behav-
ior needs to be encouraged?
Behavioral changes
If reducing calorie intake is not to be the central driving 
principle, what is the alternative? Above, several 
approaches were outlined that could be used to develop 
a dietary style that will encourage the control of body 
weight. It would then need to be demonstrated experi-
mentally that it worked. Finally, the problem for psychol-
ogy will be to ensure its widespread implementation.
Strategic approaches
The major task is to develop strategies that encourage a 
consortium of behavioral changes that realize the bene-
fits of an appropriate lifestyle. Dietary changes will be a 
part, but an appropriate lifestyle and helpful personality 
traits also need to be encouraged (Wing, Tate, Gorin, 
Raynor, & Fava, 2006). A first task will be to identify rel-
evant aspects of behavior. Maintaining weight loss has 
been associated with high levels of physical activity, eat-
ing a low-calorie low-fat diet, eating breakfast regularly, 
self-monitoring weight, maintaining a consistent eating 
pattern across weekdays and weekends (Wing & Phelan, 
2005).
For any strategy to work it needs to take account of 
the general environment. When studies of health-related 
behaviors were subject to meta-analysis various themes 
emerged (Kelly et al., 2016). Health-related behavior was 
limited by pressure of time due to family and work com-
mitments, the financial cost, access to necessary resources, 
low socioeconomic status, lack of knowledge, and 
entrenched attitudes and behavior. However, it was help-
ful to focus on enjoyment, have social support, integrate 
new behavior into one’s lifestyle, and have a clear mes-
sage to follow. It is clear that any dietary intervention 
needs to be placed in a social and cultural context and 
the factors that facilitate or inhibit the process need to be 
acknowledged and reflected in a strategy.
Psychological engagement
Given the relentless physiological pressures to regain lost 
weight, the key factor in countering these tendencies is to 
consciously engage with the control of body weight. As 
such psychology has a particular role in identifying and 
facilitating advantageous cognitive styles and strategies. 
Maintaining a lower weight has been associated with 
increased dietary restraint, perceiving benefits as out-
weighing costs, having lower/stable levels of depression, 
and having a more positive body image. Similarly dichot-
omous thinking, that is, seeing things as extremes, com-
fort eating to regulate mood, and disinhibited eating were 
unhelpful (Ohsiek & Williams, 2011).
As an ability to monitor the intake of food is a charac-
teristic of those who successfully maintain their weight 
over a long period, it has been suggested that people 
might be trained to self-regulate, perhaps using con-
trolled exposure techniques (Johnson, Pratt, & Wardle, 
2012). A review of the most successful means of self-
regulation found that “higher autonomous motivation, 
self-efficacy, and self-regulation skills emerged as the 
best predictors” of a beneficial weight outcome. These 
were therefore suggested as possible targets when 
designing interventions (Teixeira et al., 2010). Another 
summary of the area concluded that interventions that 
incorporated self-monitoring (tracking one’s own food-
related behaviour), provided feedback on performance, 
prompted a review of behavioral goals, provided contin-
gent rewards (rewarding diet success), and planned for 
social support were more successful (Prestwich et al., 
2014). There was also evidence that attempts to manage 
stress improved the success of these approaches.
In a weight management program a high level of self-
efficacy, the extent to which you believe you have the 
ability to accomplish a task, was associated with the loss 
of more weight (Bas & Donmez, 2009). An evaluation of 
attempts to increase self-efficacy concluded that “action 
planning,” “providing instruction,” and “reinforcing effort 
towards behavior” were associated with greater self-
efficacy, suggesting approaches that could be taken 
(Williams & French, 2011).
 712 
Benton, Young
Restrained eaters are individuals who watch their 
weight; they are continuously concerned about what they 
eat and try to limit intake. Typically their dietary restric-
tions may not be enough to lose weight, but they prevent 
weight gain. A review of prospective studies found that 
restrained eating did not predict future weight gain, 
although the weight of those who were dieting was more 
likely to increase (Lowe, Doshi, Katterman, & Feig, 2013). 
One explanation is that dieters and restrained eaters have 
a similar tendency toward weight gain, although restrained 
eating more effectively prevented it from happening. It is 
natural to suggest that the success of restrained eating will 
be enhanced by the judicial choice of foods that combine 
a low level of calories with the enhancement of satiation, 
the feeling that the meal is over, satiety, and how long it 
is before you again wish to eat.
Conclusion
In summary, any successful approach to controlling weight 
needs to take a wider and longer-term approach than 
studying the intake of calories. There is evidence of physi-
ological mechanisms that monitor intake, although Western 
society often ensures that they are overwhelmed and obe-
sity develops. However, although these control mecha-
nisms are powerful, understanding how they function may 
be helpful. Rather than simply reducing calories, under-
standing the influence of the food consumed on satiety, 
satiation, and energy compensation may be advantageous.
It is, however, overly optimistic to expect a simple 
solution to such a complex and multifaceted problem. 
Given that the body actively attempts to maintain its 
existing body weight, we need to learn how to outflank 
such mechanisms. A first step will be to get beyond sim-
ply trying to reduce caloric intake.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with 
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
References
Bas, M., & Donmez, S. (2009). Self-efficacy and restrained eat-
ing in relation to weight loss among overweight men and 
women in Turkey. Appetite, 52, 209–216.
Belanger, A. J., Cupples, L. A., & D’Agostino, R. B. (1988). Means 
at each examination and inter-examination consistency of 
specified characteristics: Framingham Heart Study, 30-year 
follow up. In W. B. Kannel, P. A. Wolf, & R. J. A’Agostino 
(Eds.), The Framingham Study: An epidemiological inves-
tigation of cardiovascular disease (NIH Publication No. 
88-2970). Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Benton, D. (2005). Can artificial sweeteners help control body 
weight and prevent obesity? Nutrition Research Reviews, 
18, 63–76.
Benton, D., & Young, H. A. (2016). A meta-analysis of the rela-
tionship between brain dopamine receptors and obesity: A 
matter of changes in behavior rather than food addiction? 
International Journal of Obesity, 40, S12–S21.
Bray, G. A., Flatt, J. P., Volaufova, J., DeLany, J. P., & Champagne, 
C. M. (2008). Corrective responses in human food intake 
identified from an analysis of 7-d food-intake records. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 88, 1504–1510.
Buckland, N. J., Stubbs, R. J., & Finlayson, G. (2015). Towards 
a satiety map of common foods: Associations between 
perceived satiety value of 100 foods and their objective 
and subjective attributes. Physiology & Behavior, 152, 
340–346.
Cameron, J. D., Goldfield, G. S., Cyr, M. J., & Doucet, E. 
(2008). The effects of prolonged caloric restriction lead-
ing to weight-loss on food hedonics and reinforcement. 
Physiology & Behavior, 94, 474–480.
de Castro, J. M. (1996). How can eating behavior be regu-
lated in the complex environments of free-living humans? 
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 20, 119–131.
de Castro, J. M., & Elmore, D. K. (1988). Subjective hunger 
relationships with meal patterns in the spontaneous feed-
ing behavior of humans: Evidence for a causal connection. 
Physiology & Behavior, 43, 159–165.
de Castro, J. M., & Plunkett, S. (2002). A general model of 
intake regulation. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 
26, 581–595.
Drenowatz, C. (2015). Reciprocal compensation to changes in 
dietary intake and energy expenditure within the concept 
of energy balance. Advances in Nutrition, 6, 592–599.
Drewnowski, A., & Spector, S. E. (2004). Poverty and obesity: 
The role of energy density and energy costs. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 79, 6–16.
Dulloo, A. G., & Jacquet, J. (1998). Adaptive reduction in basal 
metabolic rate in response to food deprivation in humans: 
A role for feedback signals from fat stores. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 68, 599–606.
Ebbeling, C. B., Swain, J. F., Feldman, H. A., Wong, W. W., 
Hachey, D. L., Garcia-Lago, E., & Ludwig, D. S. (2012). 
Effects of dietary composition on energy expenditure dur-
ing weight-loss maintenance. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 307, 2627–2634.
Ebrahimi-Mameghani, M., Scott, J. A., Der, G., Lean, M. E. J., & 
Burns, C. M. (2007). Changes in weight and waist circum-
ference over 9 years in a Scottish population. European 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 62, 1208–1214.
Edholm, O. G., Fletcher, J. G., Widdowson, E. M., & McCance, 
R. A. (1955). The energy expenditure and food intake of 
individual men. British Journal of Nutrition, 9, 286–300.
Flatt, J. P. (1978). The biochemistry of energy expenditure. In 
G. A. Bray (Ed.), Recent advances in obesity research (Vol. 
2, pp. 211–228). London, England: Newman.
Foltin, R. W., Fischman, M. W., Emurian, C. S., & Rachlinski, 
J. J. (1988). Compensation for caloric dilution in humans 
given unrestricted access to food in a residential laboratory. 
Appetite, 10, 13–24.
Foltin, R. W., Fischman, M. W., Moran, T. H., Rolls, B. J., & Kelly, 
T. H. (1990). Caloric compensation for lunches varying in fat 
 Reducing Calorie Intake 
713
and carbohydrate content by humans in a residential labora-
tory. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52, 969–980.
Foltin, R. W., Rolls, B. J., Moran, T. H., Kelly, T. H., McNelis, 
A. L., & Fischman, M. W. (1992). Caloric, but not macronu-
trient, compensation by humans for required-eating occa-
sions with meals and snack varying in fat and carbohydrate. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 55, 331–342.
Foresight. (2007). Tackling obesities: Future choices—Obesity 
system atlas. London, England: Government Office for 
Science.
Greenway, F. L. (2015). Physiological adaptations to weight loss 
and factors favouring weight regain. International Journal 
of Obesity, 9, 1188–1196.
Haftenberger, M., Mensink, G. B. M., Herzog, B., Kluttig, A., 
Greiser, K. H., Merz, B., . . .  Schienkiewitz, A. (2016). 
Changes in body weight and obesity status in German 
adults: Results of seven population-based prospective stud-
ies. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 70, 300–305.
Halford, J. C. G., & Harrold, J. A. (2012). Satiety-enhancing 
products for appetite control: Science and regulation of 
functional foods for weight management. Proceedings of 
the Nutrition Society, 71, 350–362.
Halton, T. L., & Hu, F. B. (2004). The effects of high protein diets 
on thermogenesis, satiety and weight loss: A critical review. 
Journal of the American College of Nutrition, 23, 373–385.
Holt, G. M., Owen, L. J., Till, S., Cheng, Y., Grant, V. A., Harden, 
C. J., & Corfe, B. M. (2017). Systematic literature review 
shows that appetite rating does not predict energy intake. 
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. Advance 
online publication. doi:10.1080/10408398.2016.1246414
Holt, S. H., Miller, J. C., Petocz, P., & Farmakalidis, E. (1995). 
A satiety index of common foods. European Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 49, 675–690.
Johnson, F., Pratt, M., & Wardle, J. (2012). Dietary restraint and 
self-regulation in eating behavior. International Journal of 
Obesity, 36, 665–674.
Kelly, S., Martin, S., Kuhn, I., Cowan, A., Brayne, C., & Lafortune, 
L. (2016). Barriers and facilitators to the uptake and mainte-
nance of healthy behaviours by people at mid-life: A rapid 
systematic review. PLoS ONE, 27(11), e0145074.
Kennedy, G. C. (1953). The role of depot fat in the hypotha-
lamic control of food intake in the rat. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 140, 578–592.
Lavin, J. H., French, S. J., & Read, N. W. (1997). The effect of 
sucrose- and aspartame-sweetened drinks on energy intake, 
hunger and food choice of female moderately restrained 
eaters. International Journal of Obesity, 21, 37–42.
Lean, M. E., & Malkova, D. (2016). Altered gut and adipose tissue 
hormones in overweight and obese individuals: Cause or 
consequence? International Journal of Obesity, 40, 622–632.
Lejeune, M. P
., Kovacs, E. M., & Westerterp-Plantenga, M. S. (2005). 
Additional protein intake limits weight regain after weight 
loss in humans. British Journal of Nutrition, 93, 281–289.
Levitsky, D. A., & DeRosimo, L. (2010). One day of food restric-
tion does not result in an increase in subsequent daily food 
intake in humans. Physiology & Behavior, 99, 495–499.
Louis-Sylvestre, J., Tornier, A., Verger, P., Chabert, M., & 
Delorme, B. (1989). Learned caloric adjustment of human 
intake. Appetite, 12, 95–103.
Lowe, M. R., Doshi, S. D., Katterman, S. N., & Feig, E. H. (2013). 
Dieting and restrained eating as prospective predictors of 
weight gain. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 577.
Mann, T., Tomiyama, A. J., Westling, E., Lew, A. M., Samuels, 
B., & Chatman, J. (2007). Medicare’s search for effective 
obesity treatments: Diets are not the answer. American 
Psychologist, 62, 220–233.
Mencken, H. L. (1917, November 16) The divine afflatus. New 
York Evening Mail.
Naismith, D. J., & Rhodes, C. (1995). Adjustment in energy 
intake following the covert removal of sugar from the diet. 
Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 8, 167–175.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. 
(2010). Overweight and obesity statistics. Bethesda, MD: 
Weight-Control Information Network.
NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. (2016). Trends in adult body-
mass index in 200 countries from 1975 to 2014: A pooled 
analysis of 1698 population-based measurement studies 
with 19.2 million participants. Lancet, 387, 1377–1396.
Norberg, M., Lindvall, K., Jenkins, P. L., Emmelin, M., Lonnberg, 
G., & Nafziger, A. N. (2011). Self-rated health does not pre-
dict 10-year weight change among middle-aged adults in a 
longitudinal population study. BMC Public Health, 11, 748.
Ohsiek, S., & Williams, M. (2011). Psychological factors influ-
encing weight loss maintenance: An integrative litera-
ture review. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse 
Practitioners, 23, 592–601.
Poppitt, S. D., & Prentice, A. M. (1996). Energy density and its 
role in the control of food intake: Evidence from metabolic 
and community studies. Appetite, 26, 153–174.
Porikos, K. P., Booth, G., & van Itallie, T. B. (1977). Effect of 
covert nutritive dilution on the spontaneous food intake 
of obese individuals: A pilot study. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 30, 1638–1644.
Porikos, K. P., Hesser, M. F., & van Itallie, T. B. (1982). Caloric 
regulation in normal-weight men maintained on a palat-
able diet of conventional foods. Physiology & Behavior, 29, 
293–300.
Prestwich, A., Kellar, I., Parker, R., MacRae, S., Learmonth, M., 
Sykes, B., . . . Castle, H. (2014). How can self-efficacy be 
increased? Meta-analysis of dietary interventions. Health 
Psychology Review, 8, 270–285.
Reid, M., & Hammersley, R. (1998). The effect of blind sub-
stitution of aspartame-sweetened for sugar-sweetened soft 
drinks on appetite and mood. British Food Journal, 100, 
254–259.
Rolls, B. J., Morris, E. L., & Roe, L. S. (2002). Portion size of food 
affects energy intake in normal-weight and overweight 
men and women. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
76, 1207–1213.
Rosenbaum, M., & Leibel, R. L. (2010). Adaptive thermogenesis 
in humans. International Journal of Obesity, 34, S47–S55.
Rouhani, M. H., Haghighatdoost, F., Surkan, P. J., & Azadbakht, 
L. (2016). Associations between dietary energy density and 
obesity: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observa-
tional studies. Nutrition, 32, 1037–1047.
Saris, W. H. M. (1997). Limits of human endurance: Lessons from 
the Tour de France. In J. M. Kinney & H. N. Tucker (Eds.), 
Physiology, stress, and malnutrition: Functional correlates, 
 714 
Benton, Young
nutritional intervention (pp. 451–462). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott-Raven.
Speakman, J. R., Levitsky, D. A., Allison, D. B., Bray, M. S., de 
Castro, J. M., Clegg, D. J., . . . Westerterp-Plantenga, M. S.  
(2011). Set points, settling points and some alternative 
models: Theoretical options to understand how genes and 
environments combine to regulate body adiposity. Disease 
Model Mechanisms, 4, 733–745.
Speakman, J. R., & Westerterp, K. R. (2010). Associations 
between energy demands, physical activity and body com-
position in adult humans between 18 and 96 years of age. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 92, 826–834.
Stubbs, R. J., Harbon, C. G., Murgatroyd, P. R., & Prentice, A. 
M. (1995). Covert manipulation of dietary fat and energy 
density: Effect on substrate flux and food intake in men 
feeding ad libitum. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
62, 316–329.
Sumithran, P., Prendergast, L. A., Delbridge, E., Purcell, K., 
Shulkes, A., Kriketos, A. D., . . . Proietto, J. (2011). Long-
term persistence of hormonal adaptations to weight loss. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 365, 1597–1604.
Summermatter, S., & Handschin, C. (2012). PGC-1α and exer-
cise in the control of body weight. International Journal of 
Obesity, 36, 1428–1435.
Teixeira, P. J., Silva, M. N., Coutinho, S. R., Palmeira, A. L., 
Mata, J., Vieira, P. N., . . .  Sardinha, L. B. (2010). Mediators 
of weight loss and weight loss maintenance in middle-aged 
women. Obesity, 18, 725–735.
Thomas, D. E., Elliott, E. J., & Baur, L. (2007). Low glycaemic 
index or low glycaemic load diets for overweight and obe-
sity. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews, 3, CD005105.
Williams, S. L., & French, D. P. (2011). What are the most effec-
tive intervention techniques for changing physical activity 
self-efficacy and physical activity behaviour–and are they 
the same? Health Education Research, 26, 308–322.
Wing, R. R., & Phelan, S. (2005). Long-term weight loss main-
tenance. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 82, 222S–
225S.
Wing, R. R., Tate, D. F., Gorin, A. A., Raynor, H. A., & Fava, J. L. 
(2006). A self-regulation program for maintenance of weight 
loss. New England Journal of Medicine, 355, 1563–1571.
Wirtshafter, D., & Davis, J. D. (1977). Set points, settling points 
and the control of body weight. Physiology & Behavior, 19, 
75–78.
Yanovski, J. A., Yanovski, S. Z., Sovik, K. N., Nguyen, T. T., 
O’Neill, P. M., & Sebring, N. G. (2000). A prospective study 
of holiday weight gain. New England Journal of Medicine, 
342, 861–867.
