 nutrients
Review
The Potential Protective Effects of Polyphenols in
Asbestos-Mediated Inflammation and Carcinogenesis
of Mesothelium
Monica Benvenuto 1,†, Rosanna Mattera 1,†, Gloria Taffera 1, Maria Gabriella Giganti 1,
Paolo Lido 2, Laura Masuelli 3, Andrea Modesti 1 and Roberto Bei 1,*
1
Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome 00133,
Italy; monicab4@hotmail.it (M.B.); rosannamatter@gmail.com (R.M.); g.taffera@gmail.com (G.T.);
giganti@med.uniroma2.it (M.G.G.); modesti@med.uniroma2.it (A.M.)
2
Internal Medicine Residency Program, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome 00133, Italy;
paulshore@virgilio.it
3
Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome “Sapienza”, Rome 00164, Italy;
Laura.masuelli@uniroma1.it
*
Correspondence: bei@med.uniroma2.it; Tel.: +39-06-7259-6522
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received: 24 March 2016; Accepted: 4 May 2016; Published: 9 May 2016
Abstract: Malignant Mesothelioma (MM) is a tumor of the serous membranes linked to exposure to
asbestos. A chronic inflammatory response orchestrated by mesothelial cells contributes to the
development and progression of MM. The evidence that: (a) multiple signaling pathways are
aberrantly activated in MM cells; (b) asbestos mediated-chronic inflammation has a key role in
MM carcinogenesis; (c) the deregulation of the immune system might favor the development of
MM; and (d) a drug might have a better efficacy when injected into a serous cavity thus bypassing
biotransformation and reaching an effective dose has prompted investigations to evaluate the effects
of polyphenols for the therapy and prevention of MM. Dietary polyphenols are able to inhibit cancer
cell growth by targeting multiple signaling pathways, reducing inflammation, and modulating
immune response. The ability of polyphenols to modulate the production of pro-inflammatory
molecules by targeting signaling pathways or ROS might represent a key mechanism to prevent
and/or to contrast the development of MM. In this review, we will report the current knowledge
on the ability of polyphenols to modulate the immune system and production of mediators of
inflammation, thus revealing an important tool in preventing and/or counteracting the growth
of MM.
Keywords:
malignant
mesothelioma;
inflammation;
immune
system;
ROS
and
RNS;
polyphenols; asbestos
1. Introduction
Malignant Mesothelioma (MM) is a rare primary tumor arising from the mesothelial cell linings
of the serous membranes, most commonly involving the pleural and peritoneal spaces [1]. The
development of MM consists of a multi-step process driven by cellular DNA damage and tumor cell
promotion, in which genetically modified mesothelial cells are prone to grow, and tumor progression,
in which mesothelial cells develop a more aggressive phenotype and eventually acquire the ability to
metastasize and invade other tissues. The immune system’s involvement in the development of MM is
complex and multifaceted and is likely to involve both the innate and adaptive immune systems [2–4].
A chronic inflammatory response orchestrated by mesothelial cells contributes to the development
and progression of mesothelial cells into MM [2–4].
Nutrients 2016, 8, 275; doi:10.3390/nu8050275
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
2 of 23
Cisplatin and antifolate-based combination chemotherapy represent the standard first-line
treatment for advanced and unresectable MM patients [5]. However, taking into account the poor
outcome and toxicity of chemotherapy, novel approaches based on targeting abnormally activated
signaling pathways in MM cells were employed to improve survival in MM patients, as described in
the review by Remon et al. [5]. Clinical trials have employed antiangiogenic and vascular disrupting
agents, PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitors, heat shock protein S90 inhibitors and arginine depletory
molecule, and immunotherapy. However, although some of these clinical trials sustain further studies,
the absolute response rates (RRs) are limited compared to other tumors [5].
The knowledge of MM pathophysiology might influence novel approaches [6–9].
The evidence that: (a) multiple signaling pathways are aberrantly activated in MM cells [10];
(b) asbestos-mediated chronic inflammation through the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
nitrogen species (RNS) and cytokines has a key role in MM carcinogenesis [11]; (c) the deregulation of
the immune system might favor the onset of MM [9]; and (d) a drug might have a better efficacy when
injected into a serous cavity, thus bypassing biotransformation and reaching an effective dose [12],
have prompted investigations to evaluate the effects of polyphenols for the therapy and prevention of
MM. Dietary polyphenols possess pleiotropic properties capable of being able to (a) inhibit cancer cell
growth by targeting multiple signaling pathways; (b) reduce inflammation and (c) modulate immune
response [13–17].
The ability to reduce chronic inflammation might represent a key mechanism to contrast the
development and/or to prevent MM. Accordingly, the local or systemic administration of polyphenols
might reduce the production of pro-inflammatory molecules by targeting signal transduction pathways
or ROS and RNS. In addition, the pro-oxidant activity of polyphenols could be a strategy to kill cancer
cells and thus to limit tumor growth [14].
In this review we will report the current knowledge on the ability of polyphenols to modulate the
immune system and production of mediators of inflammation in MM, thus revealing an important
tool to prevent and/or to counteract the growth of MM.
2. Polyphenols
Polyphenols, a large group of phytochemicals ubiquitously found in plants, are secondary
metabolites that perform functions in the host’s defense against pathogens, ultraviolet radiation,
and signal transduction [18]. Polyphenols are present in food and beverages of plant origin, such as
fruits, vegetables, cereals, spices, legumes, nuts, olives, tea, coffee, and wine [19]. These compounds
exhibit anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, anticancer, and immunomodulatory activities, and thus are
beneficial for human health [20].
Polyphenols have a characteristic phenolic structure and are classified according to the number of
phenol rings that they contain and by the structural elements that bind these rings to one another. The
main classes of polyphenols are flavonoids, phenolic acids, stilbenes, and lignans [18,21].
Among flavonoids, the most important subclasses are flavonols, flavones, flavan-3-ols,
anthocyanins, flavanones, and isoflavones. The flavonoid subclasses dihydroflavonols, flavan-3,4-diols,
chalcones, dihydrochalcones, and aurones are minor components of our diet [22].
Quercetin, kaempferol, and myricetin, found mostly in fruits, edible plants, wine, and tea,
are the main flavonols [18]. The most abundant flavones in foods are apigenin (parsley, celery,
onion, garlic, pepper, chamomile tea) and luteolin (Thai chili, onion leaves, celery) [20].
The
flavan-3-ol subclass includes a wide range of compounds with different chemical structures that
can be divided in monomers, (+)-catechin, (´)-epicatechin, (+)-gallocatechin, (´)-epigallocatechin,
(´)-epicatechin-3-O-gallate, (´)-epigallocatechin-3-O-gallate, and polymers (proanthocyanidins) and
are found mainly in fruits, berries, cereals, nuts, chocolate, red wine, and tea [20].
The most
abundant anthocyanins (cyanidin, pelargonidin, delphinidin, peonidin, petunidin, and malvidin)
are found mainly in berries, cherries, red grapes, and currants [23]. Flavanones are present in
citrus fruit and the most important are hesperetin and naringenin and their correspondent glycated
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
3 of 23
forms (naringin (naringenin-7-O-neohesperidoside), neohesperidin (hesperetin-7-O-neohesperidoside),
narirutin (naringenin-7-O-rutinoside), and hesperidin (hesperetin-7-O-rutinoside)) [21,24]. Daidzein,
genistein, and glyciten are the most common members of isoflavones, found mainly in soybeans, soy
products, and leguminous plants [25].
Among phenolic acids, the hydroxybenzoic acids (protocatechuic acid and gallic acid) are found
in few edible plants, while hydroxycinnamic acids (caffeic acid, ferulic acid, p-coumaric acid, and
sinapic acid) are found in fruits, coffee, and cereal grains [18].
The main member of stilbenes is resveratrol (3,5,41-trihydroxystilbene) and is present in
grapes, berries, plums, peanuts, and pine nuts [21].
Lignans (ecoisolariciresinol, matairesinol,
medioresinol, pinoresinol, and lariciresinol) are found in high concentration in linseed and in
minor concentration in algae, leguminous plants, cereals, vegetables, and fruits [18]. Curcumin
(1,7-bis-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,6-heptadiene-3,5-dione), a member of the curcuminoid family,
is another polyphenol compound found in turmeric, a spice produced from the rhizome of
Curcuma longa [26].
Polyphenols have important anti-inflammatory effects by regulating innate and adaptive
immunity through the modulation of different cytokines and also by acting as an immune surveillance
mechanism against cancers through the regulation of apoptosis [14]. Polyphenols also possess
anti-oxidant and pro-oxydant activities [27–30] and are able to modulate multiple targets involved in
carcinogenesis through simultaneous direct interaction or modulation of gene expression [13]. It is
worth nothing that these compounds are able to inhibit the growth of cancer cells without having an
adverse effect on normal cells. In this way, polyphenols play selectively an antitumor role in cancer [14].
However, despite promising results obtained from in vitro studies, the use of polyphenols as anticancer
agents is yet limited in clinical practice due to their low bioavailability in the human body, which
affects the effective dose delivered to cancer cells. In fact, polyphenols have a poor absorption and
biodistribution and a fast metabolism and excretion in the human body. Only nano- or micromolar
concentrations of polyphenols and polyphenol metabolites are found in plasma (0–4 µM after an intake
of 50 mg of aglycone equivalents) [31]. Several mechanisms limit the bioavailability of polyphenols,
including their metabolism in the gastrointestinal tract and liver, their binding on the surfaces of
blood cells and microbial flora in the oral cavity and gut, and regulatory mechanisms that prevent
the toxic effects of high compound levels on mitochondria or other organelles [32]. In addition to
endogenous factors, dietary factors can affect the bioavailability of polyphenols, such as food matrix
and food preparation techniques [33]. Promising strategies for improving the in vivo anticancer effects
of polyphenols are the combination of polyphenols, or polyphenols and conventional cancer treatments,
and the intratumoral administration of polyphenols, in order to bypass biotransformation and reach
an effective dose directly available at the site of tumor [22]. Several pre-clinical and Phase I and Phase
II clinical trials are employing intratumoral administration to deliver different therapeutics such as
drugs, viral-based cancer vaccines, immune cell-based vaccines, cytokines, DNA, bacterial products,
nanoparticles, and natural compounds to the tumor site [34–39]. Thus, intratumoral delivery of cancer
therapeutics could be a more efficient route of administration for several agents in easily accessible
tumors, such as MM. An intratumoral route of administration is able to prevent the occurrence of
systemic side effects and makes the therapeutic agents directly available at the tumor site, allowing for
the highest concentration close to tumor cells [40].
3. Asbestos Fibers and MM
MM was broadly observed in the mid-to-late 1960s among workers whose asbestos exposure
began 30–40 years earlier [41]. Accordingly, the development of MM has been linked to exposure
to asbestos fibers [1]. Although the use of asbestos has by now been prohibited in 55 countries, the
occurrence of asbestos-related diseases cannot decrease due to: the long latency period of MM, the
continued use of asbestos in Third World Countries and the continued occupational exposure in
Western Countries, such as the US and Europe [5,42].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
4 of 23
Thermo-resistant magnesium and calcium silicate fibers were usually used as insulating materials
in buildings and are deposited in the alveoli upon inhalation. Asbestos fibers are genotoxic, causing
random chromosome breaks [43]. Asbestos is classified into two major categories (amphibole and
serpentine) [43]. There are five members of the amphibole category: crocidolite (blue asbestos), amosite
(brown asbestos), tremolite, anthophyllite, and actinolite. The serpentine class is made up of only one
member (chrysotile, white asbestos) [43]. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
classifies asbestos as a Group I carcinogen, because of the ability of chrysotile, crocidolite, and amosite
to induce lung cancer or MM [44]. Fiber translocation into the pleural cavity can occur across the
alveolar surface or via pulmonary lymph flow [45].
Although the link between MM and asbestos is well established, other carcinogenic or
co-carcinogenic events must be involved in MM development because only 10% of all MM cases
occur in asbestos-exposed subjects [46].
4. Chronic Inflammation Affects MM Development
4.1. Overproduction of ROS and RNS
A key immune-mediated involvement in asbestos-related carcinogenesis is superimposed on
the fibers’ damage to the mesothelium integrity. Mesothelial cells offer the first defense against
chemical and biological injuries by building a mechanical barrier and also by activating inflammation
through the release of ROS, RNS, and cytokines [47–51]. In fact, mesothelial cells express on their
luminal surface a sialomucins veil that electrostatically repels bacteria, viruses, and chemicals and
mechanically decreases their adherence to the mesothelial layer [47]. In addition, serous spaces
are surrounded by several defensive molecules including lysozyme, IgA immunoglobulins, and
complement factors [47]. Mesothelial cells damaged by asbestos fibers release inflammatory mediators
that maintain an inflammatory environment [48–50].
Asbestos induces free radical production by mesothelial cells through the iron content of the
asbestos fibers which increases the hydroxyl radical formation from hydrogen peroxide through
iron catalysed reactions and by inflammatory cells such as pulmonary alveolar macrophages and
neutrophils [52]. Kinnula et al. reported that inflammatory cells are the essential cells responsible
for the free radical-mediated mesothelial cell injury during asbestos exposure in vivo [53,54]. During
the respiratory burst, leukocytes produce multiple ROS, including hydroxyl radical, superoxide
anions, and hydrogen peroxide [55]. Hansen et al. reported that the geometry and/or chemical
composition of asbestos is important for the release of superoxide anions by leucocytes during
frustrated phagocytosis [56,57]. Indeed, crocidolite and amosite induced significant ROS generation
by neutrophils with a peak at 10 min, whereas that of chrysotile was ~25% of the crocidolite/amosite
response [58].
Leukocytes and mesothelial cells are also able to overexpress nitric oxide synthase (NOS) in
response to a variety of stimuli [52]. Inflammatory cytokines and oxidant stress can each augment iNOS
expression and activity in pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells [52]. The inhalation of either chrysotile or
crocidolite asbestos fibers was shown to induce the production of nitric oxide in bronchoalveolar lavage
cells and the formation of nitrotyrosine within the lungs and pleura [59]. The majority of MM was
found to express high levels of iNOS, while its expression was occasionally found in non-neoplastic
healthy mesothelium [60]. Thus, RNS might have an important role in asbestos-mediated mesothelioma
oncogenesis [52]. Peroxynitrite can be produced by the reaction of ROS with RNS. The overproduction
of ROS and RNS in the inflammatory microenvironment can cause DNA damage to mesothelial cells,
thus leading to the development of MM [61].
Macrophages are recruited and activated to clear away asbestos fibers [48]. Vitronectin captures
crocidolite asbestos and enhances fiber phagocytosis by mesothelial cells via integrins [62]. Yang et al.
provided the mechanistic rationale that associates asbestos-mediated mesothelial cell necrosis to the
chronic inflammatory reaction that is, in turn, linked with asbestos-mediated tumorigenesis [63].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
5 of 23
The authors reported that exposure of mesothelial cells to crocidolite asbestos induces them to
activate poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, to secrete hydrogen peroxide, to deplete ATP, and to secrete
high-mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1) into the extracellular space. This latter stimulates
macrophages to secrete tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and the inflammatory response associated
with asbestos-mediated carcinogenesis [2].
The asbestos-mediated chronic inflammation can increase the genotoxic damage due to the
secretion of free radicals [48].
In addition, several studies have shown that asbestos fibers induce the activation of EGFR
(Epidermal growth factor receptor) and thus MAPK (Mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathway and
AP-1 (Activator protein-1), leading to cell proliferation [43] (Figure 1).
Nutrients 2016, 8, 275 
5 of 22 
The asbestos‐mediated chronic inflammation can increase the genotoxic damage due to the 
secretion of free radicals [48].  
In addition, several studies have shown that asbestos fibers induce the activation of EGFR 
(Epidermal growth factor receptor) and thus MAPK (Mitogen‐activated protein kinase) pathway 
and AP‐1 (Activator protein‐1), leading to cell proliferation [43] (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. The asbestos‐mediated long‐lasting inflammation in mesothelial cells. Biological responses 
of mesothelial cells to asbestos fiber injury. Abbreviations: ROS, Reactive Oxygen Species; RNS, Reactive 
Nitrogen Species; HMGB1, High‐Mobility Group Box 1 Protein; PDGF, Platelet‐Derived Growth Factors; FGF, 
Fibroblast Growth Factor; IGF‐1, Insulin‐Like Growth Factor‐1; VEGF, Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor; TGF‐β, 
Transforming Growth Factor‐β; GM‐CSF, Granulocyte/Macrophage‐Colony Stimulating Factor; IL‐6, Interleukin‐6; 
ET‐1, Endothelin‐1; IL‐1 α/β, Interleukin‐1 α/β; TNF‐α, Tumor Necrosis Factor‐α; ENA‐78, Epithelial Neutrophil 
Activating Protein‐78; NF‐κB, Nuclear Factor‐kB; EGFR, Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor; AP‐1, Activator 
Protein‐1. 
4.2. Inflammasome Activation and Cytokines Secretion  
It was reported that exposure to asbestos induces mesothelial cell necrosis and the release of 
HMGB1 into the extracellular space [2]. HMGB1 is a key mediator of chronic inflammation in MM, 
leading to Nalp3 inflammasome activation, macrophages accumulation, interleukin (IL)‐1β and TNF‐α 
secretion, and thus to activation of the NF‐κB pathway, which increases cell survival and tumor 
growth after asbestos exposure [50]. A recent study reported that HMGB1 localization was regulated 
by its acetylation. In fact, HMGB1 is localized in the nucleus to stabilize nucleosomes when it is in 
the nonacetylated form. When HMGB1 is hyperacetylated, it is actively secreted into the 
extracellular space. The authors indicated that HMGB1 hyperacetylation could be a sensitive and 
specific biomarker to discriminate MM patients from asbestos‐exposed individuals and from healthy 
unexposed controls. They demonstrated that hyperacetylated HMGB1 was significantly higher in 
MM patients compared with asbestos‐exposed individuals and healthy controls, and did not vary 
with tumor stage [4]. 
Accordingly, asbestos fibers induce NLRP3 priming and activation, thus leading to increased 
transcription of pro‐inflammatory cytokines [63,64]. The inflammasome is a constituent of the 
inflammation machinery which includes NOD‐like receptors (NLRs) whose activation induces the 
activation of caspase‐1 and of the mature form pro‐inflammatory cytokines, such as IL‐1β and  
IL‐18 [65,66]. It was reported that the NLRP3 inflammasome is necessary for early inflammatory 
responses to asbestos, but it is not indispensable for asbestos‐induced MM [64]. Hillegass et al. linked 
NLRP3 activation to the release of several pro‐inflammatory cytokines (IL‐1β, IL‐6 and IL‐8) and the 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by fiber‐stimulated human mesothelial cells in vitro [63]. 
They showed that mesothelial cells secrete IL‐1β in response to asbestos/erionite and that through an 
Figure 1. The asbestos-mediated long-lasting inflammation in mesothelial cells. Biological responses of
mesothelial cells to asbestos fiber injury. Abbreviations: ROS, Reactive Oxygen Species; RNS, Reactive
Nitrogen Species; HMGB1, High-Mobility Group Box 1 Protein; PDGF, Platelet-Derived Growth Factors;
FGF, Fibroblast Growth Factor; IGF-1, Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1; VEGF, Vascular Endothelial
Growth Factor; TGF-β, Transforming Growth Factor-β; GM-CSF, Granulocyte/Macrophage-Colony
Stimulating Factor; IL-6, Interleukin-6; ET-1, Endothelin-1; IL-1 α/β, Interleukin-1 α/β; TNF-α, Tumor
Necrosis Factor-α; ENA-78, Epithelial Neutrophil Activating Protein-78; NF-κB, Nuclear Factor-kB;
EGFR, Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor; AP-1, Activator Protein-1.
4.2. Inflammasome Activation and Cytokines Secretion
It was reported that exposure to asbestos induces mesothelial cell necrosis and the release of
HMGB1 into the extracellular space [2]. HMGB1 is a key mediator of chronic inflammation in MM,
leading to Nalp3 inflammasome activation, macrophages accumulation, interleukin (IL)-1β and TNF-α
secretion, and thus to activation of the NF-κB pathway, which increases cell survival and tumor growth
after asbestos exposure [50]. A recent study reported that HMGB1 localization was regulated by its
acetylation. In fact, HMGB1 is localized in the nucleus to stabilize nucleosomes when it is in the
nonacetylated form. When HMGB1 is hyperacetylated, it is actively secreted into the extracellular
space. The authors indicated that HMGB1 hyperacetylation could be a sensitive and specific biomarker
to discriminate MM patients from asbestos-exposed individuals and from healthy unexposed controls.
They demonstrated that hyperacetylated HMGB1 was significantly higher in MM patients compared
with asbestos-exposed individuals and healthy controls, and did not vary with tumor stage [4].
Accordingly, asbestos fibers induce NLRP3 priming and activation, thus leading to increased
transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines [63,64].
The inflammasome is a constituent of the
inflammation machinery which includes NOD-like receptors (NLRs) whose activation induces the
activation of caspase-1 and of the mature form pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
6 of 23
IL-18 [65,66]. It was reported that the NLRP3 inflammasome is necessary for early inflammatory
responses to asbestos, but it is not indispensable for asbestos-induced MM [64]. Hillegass et al. linked
NLRP3 activation to the release of several pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8) and the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by fiber-stimulated human mesothelial cells in vitro [63].
They showed that mesothelial cells secrete IL-1β in response to asbestos/erionite and that through an
autocrine stimulation they undergo transformation [63]. In addition, the authors demonstrated that
treatment of MM tumor-bearing SCID mice with IL-1R (Interleukin-1 receptor) antagonist (Anakinra)
decreased the levels of IL-8 and VEGF in peritoneal lavage fluid, thus indicating that IL-1 has a key
role in regulating the production of other cytokines, thus affecting the tumorigenesis of mesothelial
cells [63]. A combination of IL-1β and TNF-α and erionite, or at least two cytokines together without
erionite, for at least four months, induced transformation of the immortalized, non-tumorigenic human
mesothelial cell line (MeT-5A) in vitro [67].
Accordingly, the release of cytokines driving inflammation represents a hallmark of exposure
to asbestos. Mesothelial inflammatory processes were reported to occur both in animal models and
in the lungs of patients exposed to asbestos. The production of different cytokines by mesothelial
cells indicates the particular transcriptional aptitude of mesothelial cells [68]. A cytokine network
is established in the serous membranes after mesothelial cell injury. Among the other cytokines,
chemokines produced by mesothelial cells can recruit leukocytes [68] (Figure 1). Driscoll et al. showed
that alveolar macrophages release TNF-α and IL-1 in rats exposed to crocidolite fibers [69]. In
addition, crocidolite enhanced the production of mitochondrial-derived hydrogen peroxide which in
turn contributes to crocidolite activation of NF-κB and increased MIP-2 (Macrophage Inflammatory
protein-2) gene expression in rat alveolar Type II cells [70]. Recently, Acencio et al. performed
an in vitro experiment to determine the acute inflammatory response of mesothelial cells damaged
by asbestos fibers. They showed that mesothelial cells exposed to either crocidolite or chrysotile
produced high levels of IL-6, IL-1β, MIP-2 and that these cytokines, when acting together with
asbestos, increased cell death of pleural mesothelial cells [49]. Indeed, they showed that anti-IL-1β
and anti-IL-6 antibodies significantly inhibited necrosis and apoptosis of mesothelial cells exposed
to crocidolite [49]. High levels of cytokines, including transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), IL-6,
IL-1 and TNF-α were produced during MM development in an in vivo mouse model by the MM
cells and/or tumor infiltrating leukocytes [71]. TNF-α, IL-6, TGF-β, and IL-10 have been shown to
participate in cancer initiation and progression [72]. TGF-β counteracts proliferation and differentiation
of different immune cells, thus inducing immunosuppression and favoring cancer cell growth [73].
IL-1β may confer a proliferative advantage to cancer cells through autocrine mechanisms [74]. The
pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and VEGF promote tumor angiogenesis [75].
Fox et al. investigated the expression of CC and CXC chemokine genes I response to cytokines in
MM and mesothelial cell cultures derived from two different mouse strains (BALB/c and CBA/CaH).
They found that monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)/JE, GRO-α/KC and RANTES were
expressed in mouse MM and mesothelial cells, whereas MIP-1α and MIP-2 were infrequently expressed
in these cell lines. MCP-1 was up-regulated in response to TNF-α and other cytokines [76]. MCP-1 and
RANTES have been shown to induce cell growth and to act as monocyte attractants [77]. GRO-α/KC
mRNA was overexpressed in cancer cells [76].
In vivo human studies were performed as well. The study of the RENAPE (French Network for
Rare Peritoneal Malignancies) aimed to evaluate the intraperitoneal levels of IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNF-α,
and sICAM (soluble intercellular adhesion molecule) in patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei and
peritoneal mesothelioma. They found that cancer patients had significantly higher intraperitoneal
cytokine levels than non-cancer patients. Cytokines peritoneal levels were significantly higher in
peritoneal fluids compared with matched sera, thus indicating the cytokines production from either
peritoneal cells or immune cells. In addition, they found a correlation between cytokine peritoneal
levels and aggressiveness of peritoneal surface malignancies [78].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
7 of 23
Comar et al., employing Luminex Multiplex Panel Technology, measured the serum levels
of a large panel of cytokines and growth factors from workers previously exposed to asbestos
(Asb-workers). They found that interferon (IFN)-α, EOTAXIN, and RANTES were highly expressed in
Asb-workers while IL-12(p40), IL-3, IL-1α, MCP-3, β-NGF (nerve growth factor), TNF-β, and RANTES
were highly produced in MM patients [79].
Xu et al. found that the amount of CCL3 in the serum of healthy subjects potentially exposed to
asbestos was significantly higher than for the control group. In addition, they observed that the pleural
plaque, benign hydrothorax asbestosis, and lung cancer patients had serum CCL3 levels similar to
that of healthy subjects potentially exposed to asbestos. They detected the CCL3 chemokine in the
serum of nine of the 10 patients diagnosed with MM and three patients with MM showed very high
CCL3 levels [80]. The elevated levels of CCL3 are very likely produced by macrophages chronically
interacting with asbestos fibers [80].
4.3. Innate Immunity and Cytokines in the Development of MM: MM-Driven Immunoediting
The activation of an adaptive immune response and/or cell proliferation by inflammasome
effectors is dependent on the cell type and tissue microenvironment [81]. The creation of a local
cytokine-based microenvironment is employed by MM to avoid the specific immune response. IL-1β
and IL-18 released by epithelial cells promote a Th2 response and recruitment of suppressive immune
cells in the absence of IL-12 rather than activating Th1 and Th17 cells. In addition, the release
of growth factors will favor angiogenesis and tumor invasiveness [81]. Indeed, IL-1β promotes
carcinogenesis and induces the invasive potential of malignant cells by favoring the expression
of matrix metalloproteinases, VEGF, chemokines, growth factors, and TGF-β in chronic inflamed
tissue [82]. However, inflammasome’s activation in dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages can
bias Th1, Th17 immune response ability to reduce tumor growth in the presence of an appropriate
microenvironment [81]. We recently demonstrated that macrophages and CD4+ T-cells were polarized
by MM to produce IL-17, and that this cytokine exerts multiple tumor-supporting effects on both cell
growth and invasiveness [83].
Many MM-derived factors can skew monocyte development through the recruitment of
tumor-supporting cells, as reported by the presence of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
in murine models of MM. Employing a mouse model of transplanted diffuse MM, it was reported
that MDSCs arise simultaneously with the recruitment of inflammatory cells in tumor foci. The
presence of MDSCs came before the accumulation of macrophages and regulatory T lymphocytes
which suppress T-cell function [84]. The cytokine profile three weeks after MM injection induced a
tumor microenvironment that suppressed immune surveillance and antitumor immunity. At that
stage, high expression levels of CXCL12, a chemotactic factor for MDSC, CCL9, and CXCL5, were
observed [84]. Veltman et al. demonstrated that BALB/c mice carrying MM have PMN-MDSCs that
induce immunosuppressive activity by releasing ROS via a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-dependent
mechanism, which then induces T-cell immunosuppression [85]. The same authors inoculated mice
with MM cells and treated them with celecoxib, a COX-2 inhibitor. They observed that treatment
of tumor-bearing mice with the celecoxib prevented the local and systemic expansion of all MDSC
subtypes [86]. However, a recent study by Yang et al. also reported that aspirin (a COX inhibitor)
exerted a protective effect against MM growth through a COX-2-independent mechanism. In fact,
the authors demonstrated that aspirin inhibited MM growth in a xenograft model by inhibiting the
activities of HMGB1. The authors concluded that aspirin could be administered to people who were
exposed to asbestos or erionite to prevent or delay MM development and progression [87].
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) represent a major link between inflammation and
cancer [88]. M1 macrophages have immunostimulatory Th1-activating properties while M2 cells
have poor antigen-presenting capacity and suppress Th1 adaptive immunity [88]. Prostaglandin E2
(PGE2), TGF-β, IL-6, and IL-10 promote M2 macrophage polarization. Inhibition of the antitumor
responses is achieved not only by the secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines but also by the
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
8 of 23
selective recruitment of naive T-cells, trough CCL18, and of Th2 and Treg, through CCL17 and
CCL22 [88]. The majority of TAMs in MM have the M2 phenotype. By retrospectively reviewing 667
tumor specimens of patients with MM it was found that, within the tumors, macrophages comprised
27% of the tumor area and had an immunosuppressive phenotype [89]. Hegmans et al. detected in
pleural effusion of MM patients several cytokines involved in immune suppression and angiogenesis,
including TGF-β. In addition, they demonstrated that human MM tissue contained a high number
of Foxp3+ CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T-cells and when the CD25+ regulatory T-cells were depleted
in an in vivo mouse model, mice survival increased [90]. The expression profile of cytokines and
chemokines in mice transplanted with MM cells was consistent with M2-polarized cells [91]. They
found elevated IL-10 and IL-10RA expression as well as expression of CXCL13, CCL22, CCL24, and
their respective receptors [91]. In a recent report by Napolitano et al., it was also observed that mice
with germline BAP1 (BRCA1-associated protein-1) mutations (BAP1+/´ mice) exposed to low-dose
asbestos fibers had alterations in the peritoneal inflammatory response. In fact, BAP1+/´ mice showed
higher levels of pro-tumorigenic M2 macrophages and lower levels of M1 macrophages, cytokines
(IL-6, leukemia inhibitory factor), and chemokines (MCP-1, keratinocyte-derived chemokine). Thus,
these mice showed higher MM incidence after exposure to very low doses of asbestos, doses that
rarely induced MM in wild-type mice. The authors suggested that patients with this mutation have an
increased risk of developing MM, even after a minimal exposure of asbestos, due to alterations of the
inflammatory response [92].
Asbestos induces partially functional decreases in T helper (Th) cells, natural killer (NK) cells,
and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in patients with MM [93]. To elucidate the antitumor immune
interference of asbestos caused to CD4+ T-cells, Maeda et al. established an in vitro T-cell model
of long-term and low-level exposure to chrysotile asbestos from a human adult T-cell leukemia
virus-1-immortalized human polyclonal CD4+ T-cell line (MT-2). They observed a decreased expression
of CXCR3, IFN-γ, and CXCL10/IP10 in the MT-2 cell line, thus suggesting that exposure to asbestos
may impair the antitumor immune responses [94]. They also found that chrysotile asbestos reduces the
chemokine receptor CXCR3 expression in human peripheral CD4+ T-cells, thus suggesting that immune
response might be impaired in patients with asbestos-related disease because the low expression of
CXCR3 might reduce chemotaxis [95]. In addition, in a recent report, the same authors showed that
an asbestos-induced apoptosis-resistant subline (MT-2Rst), which was established from a human
adult T-cell leukemia virus-immortalized T-cell line (MT-2Org) by continuous exposure to asbestos
chrysotile-B, produced high levels of TGF-β1 through phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, and acquire
resistance to inhibition of cell growth by TGF-β1 [96]. It was observed that asbestos can trigger a
cascade of biological events including the increase of IL-10 expression and Bcl-2 overexpression in
human T-cell leukemia virus-immortalized T-cell line and that CD4+ T lymphocytes from MM patients
had significant up-regulation of Bcl-2 expression thus affecting their survival. The Bcl-2 up-regulation
might affect the Treg population thus contributing to immunosuppression in cancer patients [97]
(Figure 2).
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
9 of 23
Nutrients 2016, 8, 275 
8 of 22 
found elevated IL‐10 and IL‐10RA expression as well as expression of CXCL13, CCL22, CCL24, and 
their respective receptors [91]. In a recent report by Napolitano et al., it was also observed that mice 
with germline BAP1 (BRCA1‐associated protein‐1) mutations (BAP1+/− mice) exposed to low‐dose 
asbestos fibers had alterations in the peritoneal inflammatory response. In fact, BAP1+/− mice showed 
higher levels of pro‐tumorigenic M2 macrophages and lower levels of M1 macrophages, cytokines 
(IL‐6, leukemia inhibitory factor), and chemokines (MCP‐1, keratinocyte‐derived chemokine). Thus, 
these mice showed higher MM incidence after exposure to very low doses of asbestos, doses that 
rarely induced MM in wild‐type mice. The authors suggested that patients with this mutation have 
an increased risk of developing MM, even after a minimal exposure of asbestos, due to alterations of 
the inflammatory response [92]. 
Asbestos induces partially functional decreases in T helper (Th) cells, natural killer (NK) cells, 
and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in patients with MM [93]. To elucidate the antitumor immune 
interference of asbestos caused to CD4+ T‐cells, Maeda et al. established an in vitro T‐cell model of 
long‐term and low‐level exposure to chrysotile asbestos from a human adult T‐cell leukemia 
virus‐1‐immortalized human polyclonal CD4+ T‐cell line (MT‐2). They observed a decreased 
expression of CXCR3, IFN‐γ, and CXCL10/IP10 in the MT‐2 cell line, thus suggesting that exposure 
to asbestos may impair the antitumor immune responses [94]. They also found that chrysotile 
asbestos reduces the chemokine receptor CXCR3 expression in human peripheral CD4+ T‐cells, thus 
suggesting that immune response might be impaired in patients with asbestos‐related disease 
because the low expression of CXCR3 might reduce chemotaxis [95]. In addition, in a recent report, 
the same authors showed that an asbestos‐induced apoptosis‐resistant subline (MT‐2Rst), which was 
established from a human adult T‐cell leukemia virus‐immortalized T‐cell line (MT‐2Org) by 
continuous exposure to asbestos chrysotile‐B, produced high levels of TGF‐β1 through 
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, and acquire resistance to inhibition of cell growth by TGF‐β1 [96]. It 
was observed that asbestos can trigger a cascade of biological events including the increase of IL‐10 
expression and Bcl‐2 overexpression in human T‐cell leukemia virus‐immortalized T‐cell line and 
that CD4+ T lymphocytes from MM patients had significant up‐regulation of Bcl‐2 expression thus 
affecting their survival. The Bcl‐2 up‐regulation might affect the Treg population thus contributing 
to immunosuppression in cancer patients [97] (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Role of the innate immunity in the development of MM. Tumor‐associated macrophages 
(TAMs) represent a major link between inflammation and cancer. The majority of TAMs in MM have 
the M2 phenotype. M2 TAMs have poor antigen‐presenting capacity, suppress T‐cells adaptive 
immunity, and support MM growth.  
5. Effects of Polyphenols in MM 
5.1. Effects of Polyphenols on ROS in MM 
Epidemiological studies indicate the existence of an inverse correlation between the 
consumption of polyphenols and the incidence of various chronic diseases and cancer. In fact, 
Figure 2. Role of the innate immunity in the development of MM. Tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) represent a major link between inflammation and cancer. The majority of TAMs in MM have the
M2 phenotype. M2 TAMs have poor antigen-presenting capacity, suppress T-cells adaptive immunity,
and support MM growth.
5. Effects of Polyphenols in MM
5.1. Effects of Polyphenols on ROS in MM
Epidemiological studies indicate the existence of an inverse correlation between the consumption
of polyphenols and the incidence of various chronic diseases and cancer.
In fact, polyphenols
possess anti-oxidant activities and thus are able to protect cells from oxidative stress, providing
an anti-inflammatory effect [98–100]. For instance, flavonoids are able to scavenge ROS generated
by neutrophils and macrophages and to impair ROS production by inhibiting NADPH oxidase,
xanthine oxidase, and myeloperoxidase [27,29,30]. In addition, polyphenols modulate the activity
of ROS-generating enzymes, such as COX and lipoxygenase (LOX) [30,101,102].
Furthermore,
polyphenols inhibit NO production from activated macrophages [103,104] and also inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS) protein and its mRNA expression [105].
However, polyphenols also possess a pro-oxidant activity, depending on their concentration and
chemical structure, cell type, or experimental conditions (pH, redox stress) [106,107]. The pro-oxidant
effect of polyphenols is important in cancer cells, since this effect leads to oxidative breaking of DNA,
inhibition of cell growth and apoptosis [14]. In fact, in the last few years the use of pro-oxidants against
cancer is an emerging topic of research, since it has been observed that ROS contribute to the cytotoxic
activity of some chemotherapeutics and that cancer cells are more susceptible to ROS than normal
cells [107].
As for MM, asbestos produces ROS and RNS, that act as second messengers to drive initiation and
progression of MM-carcinogenesis, through genetic alterations, activation of the survival pathways,
stimulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), and angiogenic signaling. Furthermore, ROS mediate
extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy, thus ROS production is also
used as a therapy for MM, to limit tumor growth [51]. In this way, polyphenols, which also possess
pro- and anti-oxidant properties, are a promising tool to treat MM.
Several studies have explored the ability of different polyphenols as pro-oxidant agents in MM.
It has been demonstrated that curcumin (40 µM) increased ROS production in HMESO cells in vitro,
leading to caspase-1 activation and pyroptotic cell death of MM cells [108].
Satoh et al. demonstrated that the flavan-3-ol epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) induced ROS
production and impaired the mitochondrial membrane potential and these effects were responsible for
the induction of apoptosis in MM cells in vitro. In fact, the treatment of MM cells with ROS scavengers,
such as tempol and catalase, inhibited the apoptosis induced by EGCG [109]. A similar effect was
reported by Ranzato et al. They demonstrated that EGCG induced both apoptotic and necrotic cell
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
10 of 23
death in MM cells. In particular, it has been shown that EGCG had a pro-oxidant effect and induced
cell death by the release of H2O2 outside of cells [110]. Similarly, a recent study showed that EGCG,
when added to culture medium, induced H2O2 formation and decreased proliferation both in MM
cells and MET5A cells (normal cells). Due to EGCG instability that causes H2O2 formation in culture
medium, ECGC was added to cells in presence of catalase (CAT) and exogenous superoxide dismutase
(SOD). In this way, EGCG decreased cell proliferation only in MM cells and induced mitochondrial
apoptosis [111].
The increased levels of ROS induce the nuclear translocation and activation of Nrf2 (nuclear factor
E2-related factor 2) in MM. Normally, Nrf2 is sequestered in cytosol by its inhibitor Keap-1 (Kelch-like
ECH-associated protein 1); when MM arises, the ROS levels increase and one or multiple cysteines
bind to Keap-1, which undergoes a conformational change releasing Nrf2. Next, Nrf2 translocates to
the nucleus and activates the transcription of downstream genes, as HO-1. The high levels of Nrf2
create an anti-oxidant environment which is resistant to MM-therapy. It has been demonstrated that
the combined treatment of clofarabine and resveratrol inhibited the Nrf2 pathway by reducing nuclear
localization of Nrf2 and by decreasing Nrf2 and HO-1 protein levels in vitro. Lee et al. hypothesized that
resveratrol with clofarabine decreased the chemoresistance of MM, modulating the levels of proteins
activated by ROS, as Nrf2 [112]. In addition, the same authors demonstrated that the combined
treatment of clofarabine and resveratrol increased the nuclear expression of phospho-p53. Hence,
p53 induced the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins, as Bax, Puma, and Noxa [113]. Faraonio et al.
indicated the possibility of crosstalk between p53 and Nrf2. p53 could prevent the generation of an
anti-oxidant environment counteracting the effect of Nrf2 and inducing apoptosis [114].
A recent study by Pietrofesa et al. reported the in vitro ability of LGM2605 (a synthetic lignan
secoisolariciresinol diglucoside) to reduce asbestos-induced cytotoxicity and ROS generation and to
induce phase II anti-oxidant enzymes stimulated by Nrf2 (HO-1 and Nqo1) in murine peritoneal
macrophages. LGM2605 acted as a direct free radical scavenger and anti-oxidant in a dose-dependent
manner. They hypothesized the possible use of this synthetic lignan as a chemopreventive agent in the
development of asbestos-induced MM [115].
Kostyuk et al. have conducted several studies on the efficacy of different polyphenols in preventing
asbestos-induced injury of peritoneal macrophages and red blood cells. They demonstrated that
quercetin and rutin were able to reduce peritoneal macrophages injury caused by asbestos and
to scavenge ROS. They suggested that quercetin and rutin could be promising drug candidates
for a prophylactic asbestos-induced disease [116]. Similarly, in another study they explored the
efficacy of the main polyphenolic constituents of green tea extract, (´)-epicatechin gallate (ECG)
and (´)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG). They observed that ECG and EGCG had a protective effect
against chrysotile and crocidolite-induced cell injuries in peritoneal macrophages, and this effect was
attributed to the scavenger properties towards the superoxide anion and the ability of polyphenols to
chelate iron ions [117]. They also concluded in a comparative study that the protective effect increased
in the following series: rutin < dihydroquercetin < quercetin < ECG < EGCG [118].
Effects of polyphenols on ROS in MM are summarized in Table 1.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
11 of 23
Table 1. Effects of polyphenols on ROS production and scavenging in MM.
Polyphenols
Cell Type
Effects on ROS
Ref.
Curcumin
H-MESO cells
Ò ROS
[108]
Ò Caspase-1
Ò Pyroptotic cell death
EGCG
ACC-meso 1, Y-meso 8A,
EHMES-10, EHMES-1,
MSTO-211H, REN,
MM98, BR95, E198 cells
Ò ROS
[109–111]
Ò H2O2 outside of cells
Ò Apoptosis and necrosis
Ó Cell proliferation
Resveratrol
(+Clofarabine)
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Nrf2 pathway
[112,113]
Ò p53 phosphorylation
Ò Pro-apoptotic proteins
LGM2605
(a synthetic lignan)
Murine peritoneal
macrophages
Ó ROS
[115]
Ó Cytotoxicity
Ò Phase II anti-oxidant
enzymes
Quercetin + Rutin
Peritoneal macrophages
of Wistar rats
Ó ROS
[116]
Ó Peritoneal
macrophages injury by
asbestos
EGCG + ECG
Peritoneal macrophages
of Wistar rats
Ó ROS
[117]
Ó Peritoneal
macrophages injury by
asbestos
Ó: decrease; Ò: increase.
5.2. Effects of Polyphenols on Mediators of Inflammation in MM
Inflammation plays a critical role in the process of carcinogenesis by regulating the different
stages of initiation, promotion, progression, and metastasis, and also the responses to therapies [119].
In this regard, it has been observed that the tumor microenvironment is infiltrated by innate and
adaptive immune cells, such as macrophages, neutrophils, mast cells, myeloid-derived suppressor
cells, dendritic cells, NKcells, and T and B lymphocytes that communicate to each other through the
production of cytokines [119].
Polyphenols possess the ability to directly modulate innate and also adaptive immune cells that
infiltrate the tumor. In fact, it has been demonstrated that different polyphenols, such as genistein,
EGCG, curcumin, and resveratrol, are able to modulate these immune cells to enhance an antitumor
response or to suppress the immune escape of tumors [14].
In addition, it has been demonstrated that polyphenols possess the ability to control the
inflammatory process by inhibiting the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6,
IFN-γ, TNF-α) and chemokines [20]. The inhibition of the production of these cytokines also led to
inhibition of ROS, since cytokines trigger ROS production [120]. Several studies have reported this
ability of polyphenols. For instance, curcumin and different flavonoids, such as flavones, EGCG, and
flavonols, are able to inhibit the secretion of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, IL-8, and IFN-γ from various cell
types [121–129].
By the activation of different transcription factors, such as NF-κB, AP-1, STAT-3, SMAD, and
caspases, cytokines can promote or inhibit tumor progression [119].
It has been demonstrated
that polyphenols, such as resveratrol, flavones, flavonols, EGCG, anthocyanins, isoflavones, and
curcumin, are able to modulate NF-κB [130–138]. Curcumin, resveratrol, and EGCG also inhibit STAT-3
activation [139–142].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
12 of 23
Inflammation, and thus the production of inflammasome, has an essential role in the development
of MM [143]. As previously described, the active inflammasome induces the activation of caspase-1
and mature form of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 and thus the inflammatory cell death
pyroptosis [144].
In this regard, the anti-inflammatory effect of polyphenols, by regulating innate and adaptive
immunity through the modulation of different cytokines, chemokines, and transcription factors could
be a promising strategy to contrast development of this type of cancer [14].
Miller et al. has observed that curcumin was able to kill MM cells via pyroptosis without the
classical inflammasome-related cytokines, IL-1β and IL-18. They observed that curcumin increased the
concentration of caspase-1 but did not increase IL-1β and IL-18 expression. Furthermore, they observed
a higher concentration of pro-IL-1β, indicating a block of the maturation of cytokine. Curcumin
treatment increased the expression of NLRP3, which alone induces a decreased NF-κB expression.
Curcumin reduced the inflammasome-related gene expression, NF-κB, TLR and IL-1 pathway. In
addition, curcumin down-regulated the expression of MYD88, NLRC4, and TXNIP and up-regulated
HSP90AA1 (heat shock protein 90 kDa alpha class A member 1), IL-12, IL-6. Hence, curcumin has an
anti-inflammatory effect on MM cells by blocking cytokine processing of IL-1β and genes involved in
the NF-κB pathway [108].
Wang et al. demonstrated that curcumin also suppressed MM cell growth in vitro and in vivo
(oral administration) and enhanced the efficacy of cisplatin. In particular, curcumin inhibited cell
growth through activation of p38 kinase, caspases 9 and 3, increased pro-apoptotic protein Bax levels,
stimulated PARP cleavage, and induced apoptosis. In addition, curcumin stimulated expression of
novel transducers of cell growth suppression, such as CARP-1, XAF1, and SULF1 proteins [145].
It has been shown that the activated NF-κB and high levels of the activated phosphorylated
STAT-3 are present in MM. Cioce et al. showed that butein (3,4,21,41-tetrahydroxychalcone), a natural
inhibitor of NF-κB and STAT-3, inhibits the migration of MM cells and strongly affects the clonogenicity
of MM cells in vitro by inhibiting the phosphorylation of STAT-3, the nuclear localization of NF-κB
and the interaction of NF-κB and phospho-STAT-3. Different genes involved in cancer progression of
pro-angiogenic cytokines (VEGF) and of IL-6 and IL-8 were also down-regulated. Furthermore, they
showed that butein was able to severely affect tumor engraftment and to potentiate the anticancer
effects of pemetrexed in mouse xenograft models in vivo. Intraperitoneal treatment with butein was
safe, since butein does not significantly affect the viability of human untransformed mesothelial cells
in vitro or the survival of tumor-free mice in vivo [146].
The activation of STAT-3 is associated to PIAS-3 expression levels in MM cell lines. PIAS-3
specifically interacts with phospho-STAT-3 and decreases the STAT-3 DNA-binding capacity and
transcriptional activity. The overexpression of PIAS-3 can inhibit STAT-3 transcriptional activity and
induces apoptosis in vitro [147]. Dabir et al. demonstrated that an inverse correlation between PIAS-3
and STAT-3 is present in MM cells. In fact, they showed that high levels of phospho-STAT-3 and low
levels of PIAS-3 are present. Furthermore, they observed that treatment with curcumin (1.0 µM) was
able to increase PIAS-3 levels and thereby decreased STAT-3 phosphorylation and cell viability in MM
cells [148].
Flaxseed lignans, enriched in secoisolariciresinol diglucoside (SDG), have been investigated for
the prevention of asbestos-induced peritoneal inflammation in a mouse model of accelerated MM
development that recapitulates many of the molecular, genetic, and cell-signaling features of human
MM after asbestos injection. Mice were supplemented with a diet containing lignans seven days before
an intraperitoneal injection of crocidolite asbestos and three days after asbestos exposure; they were
evaluated for abdominal inflammation, pro-inflammatory/pro-fibrogenic cytokine release, WBC gene
expression changes, and oxidative and nitrosative stress in peritoneal lavage fluid. The results showed
that dietary lignan administration diminished acute inflammation by decreasing the number of WBCs
and the release of IL-1β, IL-6, HMGB1, and TNF-α pro-inflammatory cytokines and pro-fibrogenic
active TGF-β1. Furthermore, lignan acted as an anti-oxidant by decreasing mRNA levels of inducible
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
13 of 23
nitric oxide synthase, and thus nitrosative and oxidative stress, and by increasing the expression of the
Nrf2-regulated anti-oxidant enzymes, HO-1, Nqo1 and Gstm1 [42].
In a preliminary study, Martinotti et al. demonstrated that the combined treatment with EGCG,
ascorbate, and gemcitabine (AND) synergistically affected the viability of MM cells [149]. Next, the
same authors showed that AND treatment increased DAPK2 (Death-Associated Protein Kinase 2), a
calcium- and calmodulin-dependent regulator of apoptosis and tumor suppressor, and TNSFR11B
expression. The TNSFR11B gene encodes a cytokine receptor belonging to the TNF receptor family,
called osteoprotegerin (OPG). OPG acts as receptor for RANK ligand, inhibiting RANK-dependent
activation of NF-κB. Furthermore, they observed a decreased expression of TNFAIP3 (tumor necrosis
factor-α-induced protein 3), an inhibitor of NF-κB activation and TNF-mediated apoptosis, typically
up-regulated in inflammation and in tumors. In this study, they found a down-regulated TNFAIP3
expression because AND treatment decreased p65 subunit of NF-κB. Hence, the combined treatment
induced a non-inflammatory apoptosis [150].
The transcription factor Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is highly expressed in different cancers and is
associated with poor prognosis. Sp1 modulates the expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressors,
as well as genes involved in proliferation, differentiation, the DNA damage response, apoptosis,
senescence, and angiogenesis and it is also implicated in inflammation and genomic instability [151].
Lee et al.
showed that resveratrol decreased the Sp1 expression and down-regulated
Sp1-dependent gene expression in MM. They observed a decreased tumor volume and an increased
number of caspase-3-positive cells after intraperitoneal treatment with resveratrol [152]. In another
study, it has been demonstrated that the combined treatment of clofarabine and resveratrol decreased
levels of Sp1, p-Akt, c-Met, cyclin D1, and p21 [153].
Similarly, Chae et al. found that 20–80 µM quercetin suppressed the Sp1 expression and modulated
the target genes, as cyclin D1, Mcl-1 (myeloid cell leukemia), and survivin in MM. Furthermore,
quercetin induced apoptosis through the Bid, caspase-3, and PARP cleavage, the up-regulation of Bax,
and down-regulation of Bcl-xL in MSTO-211H cells [154].
In another study, the same authors focused on the anticancer effects of honokiol (HNK), a
pharmacologically active component found in the traditional Chinese medicinal herb, Magnolia species.
It has been observed that HNK inhibited MM cell growth, down-regulated Sp1 expression and Sp1
target transcription factors, including cyclin D1, Mcl-1, and survivin, and induced the apoptosis by
increasing Bax, reducing Bid and Bcl-xL and activating caspase-3 and PARP [155].
Kim et al. found that licochalcone A (LCA), a natural product derived from the Glycyrrhiza inflata,
regulated the cell growth and down-regulated the Sp1 expression in MSTO-211H and H28 cell lines.
Furthermore, LCA down-regulated the expression of Sp1 downstream genes, as cyclin D1, Mcl1 and
survivin. Like quercetin and honokiol, LCA increased Bax and decreased Bcl-2 expression, inducing
the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway [156].
Lee et al. demonstrated that hesperidin, a flavanone presents in citrus fruits, inhibited the
cell growth and down-regulated the SP1 expression in MSTO-211H cells. Hesperidin significantly
suppressed mRNA and protein levels of Sp1 and regulated the expression of p27, p21, cyclin D1,
Mcl-1, and survivin. Furthermore, hesperidin induced the apoptosis pathway through cleavages of
Bid, caspase-3, and PARP, and up-regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-xL [157]. Similarly,
the same authors showed that cafestol and kahweol, two diterpenes present in the typical bean of
Coffea Arabica, induced apoptosis and suppressed the Sp1 protein levels in MSTO-211H cells. These
compounds modulated the expression of genes regulated by Sp1, including cyclin D1, Mcl-1, and
survivin. Furthermore, the cafestol treatment induced the cleavage of Bid, caspase-3, and PARP, and
the kahweol treatment up-regulated Bax and down-regulated Bcl-xL [158].
The effect of a novel mixture containing lysine, proline, ascorbic acid, and green tea extract has
been investigated by Roomi et al. in MM cell line MSTO-211H. They demonstrated that this mixture
was able to inhibit MMP secretion and invasion and thus is a promising candidate for therapeutic use
in the treatment of MM [159].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
14 of 23
Effects of polyphenols on mediators of inflammation in MM are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Effects of polyphenols on production of mediators of inflammation in MM.
Polyphenols
Cell Type or Animal
Model
Effects on Inflammation
Ref.
Curcumin
H-MESO, NCI-2052,
NCI-H2452, MSTO-211H,
and NCI-H28 cells
Ò Caspase-1
[108,148]
Ò pro-IL-1β and block of maturation
of IL-1 β
Ò NLRP3
Ó NF-κB, TRL, and IL-1 pathways
Ò PIAS-3
Ó p-STAT-3
Butein
MSTO-211H, NCI-H28,
NCI-H2052
Ó NF-κB, p-STAT-3
[146]
ÓVEGF
Ó IL-6, IL-8
Flaxseed Lignans
MM-prone Nf2+/mut
mice
Ó IL-1β, IL-6, HMGB1, TNF-α,
TGF-β1
[42]
Ò Nrf2-regulated anti-oxidant
enzymes
EGCG + Ascorbate +
Gemcitabine (AND)
REN cells
Ò DAPK2
[150]
Ò TNSFR11B
Ó TNFAIP3
Ó NF-κB pathway
Resveratrol
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Sp1, p21, p27, cyclin D1, Mcl-1
[152]
Ó survivin
Ò Apoptosis
Resveratrol +
Clofarabine
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Sp1, p-Akt
[153]
Ó c-Met, cyclin D1, p21
Quercetin
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Sp1, cyclin D1, Mcl-1, survivin
[154]
Ò Apoptosis
Honokiol
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Sp1
[155]
Ó cyclin D1, Mcl-1, survivin
Ò Apoptosis
Licochalcone A
MSTO-211H and H28
cells
Ó Sp1
[156]
Ó cyclin D1, Mcl-1, survivin
Ò Apoptosis
Hesperidin
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Sp1
[157]
Ó p27, p21, cyclin D1, Mcl-1,
survivin
Ò Apoptosis
Cafestol and kahweol
MSTO-211H cells
Ó Sp1, cyclin D1, Mcl-1, survivin
[158]
Ò Apoptosis
Ó: decrease; Ò: increase.
6. Conclusions
The immune system, and in particular inflammation, has an essential role in the development
of MM. A long-lasting inflammatory response orchestrated by mesothelial cells contributes to the
initiation, promotion, and progression of mesothelial cells into MM. Polyphenols possess important
anti-inflammatory properties by regulating innate and adaptive immunity through the modulation of
different mediators of inflammation and also by acting as an immune surveillance mechanism against
cancers through the regulation of apoptosis. Furthermore, polyphenols possess a pro-oxidant activity,
which could be used against cancer. In fact, in the last few years the use of ROS-generating agents
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
15 of 23
against cancer is an emerging strategy to kill cancer cells, since it has been observed that ROS contribute
to the cytotoxic activity of some chemotherapeutics and that cancer cells are more susceptible to ROS
than normal cells.
Accordingly, the local or systemic administration of polyphenols might reduce the production of
pro-inflammatory molecules by targeting signal transduction pathways or ROS and RNS in order to
prevent MM. On the other hand, the administration of polyphenols might also induce MM cell death
to limit tumor growth.
Furthermore, MM is a tumor arising from the mesothelial cell linings of the serous membranes,
thus the local administration of polyphenols in the serous cavity might be a better strategy to treat
MM, because in this way polyphenols could bypass biotransformation and could reach an effective
dose directly available at the site of tumor.
Thus the use of polyphenols might represent a promising strategy to contrast the development
and/or to prevent MM.
Acknowledgments: This study was supported by a grant from Ricerche Universitarie Sapienza (C26A14T57T).
We thank Evelyn Carpenter for help in English language editing. Rosanna Mattera is a recipient of the Sapienza
PhD program in Molecular Medicine.
Author Contributions: All authors of this paper have directly participated in the planning or drafting of this
manuscript and have read and approved the final version submitted.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Carbone, M.; Ly, B.H.; Dodson, R.F.; Pagano, I.; Morris, P.T.; Dogan, U.A.; Gazdar, A.F.; Pass, H.I.; Yang, H.
Malignant mesothelioma: Facts, myths, and hypotheses. J. Cell Physiol. 2012, 227, 44–58. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2.
Yang, H.; Rivera, Z.; Jube, S.; Nasu, M.; Bertino, P.; Goparaju, C.; Franzoso, G.; Lotze, M.T.; Krausz, T.;
Pass, H.I.; et al. Programmed necrosis induced by asbestos in human mesothelial cells causes high-mobility
group box 1 protein release and resultant inflammation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 12611–12616.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Jube, S.; Rivera, Z.S.; Bianchi, M.E.; Powers, A.; Wang, E.; Pagano, I.; Pass, H.I.; Gaudino, G.; Carbone, M.;
Yang, H. Cancer cell secretion of the DAMP protein HMGB1 supports progression in malignant mesothelioma.
Cancer Res. 2012, 72, 3290–3301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Napolitano, A.; Antoine, D.J.; Pellegrini, L.; Baumann, F.; Pagano, I.; Pastorino, S.; Goparaju, C.M.;
Prokrym, K.; Canino, C.; Pass, H.I.; et al. HMGB1 and its hyperacetylated isoform are sensitive and
specific serum biomarkers to detect asbestos exposure and to identify mesothelioma patients. Clin. Cancer
Res. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Remon, J.; Lianes, P.; Martinez, S.; Velasco, M.; Querol, R.; Zanui, M. Malignant mesothelioma: New insights
into a rare disease. Cancer Treat. Rev. 2013, 39, 584–591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Faig, J.; Howard, S.; Levine, E.A.; Casselman, G.; Hesdorffer, M.; Ohar, J.A. Changing Pattern in Malignant
Mesothelioma Survival. Transl. Oncol. 2015, 8, 35–39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Testa, J.R.; Cheung, M.; Pei, J.; Below, J.E.; Tan, Y.; Sementino, E.; Cox, N.J.; Dogan, A.U.; Pass, H.I.;
Trusa, S.; et al. Germline BAP1 mutations predispose to malignant mesothelioma. Nat. Genet. 2011, 43,
1022–1025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Astoul, P.; Roca, E.; Galateau-Salle, F.; Scherpereel, A. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: From the bench to
the bedside. Respiration 2012, 83, 481–493. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Izzi, V.; Masuelli, L.; Tresoldi, I.; Foti, C.; Modesti, A.; Bei, R. Immunity and malignant mesothelioma: From
mesothelial cell damage to tumor development and immune response-based therapies. Cancer Lett. 2012,
322, 18–34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Menges, C.W.; Chen, Y.; Mossman, B.T.; Chernoff, J.; Yeung, A.T.; Testa, J.R. A phosphotyrosine
proteomic screen identifies multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathways aberrantly activated in malignant
mesothelioma. Genes Cancer 2010, 1, 493–505. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
16 of 23
11.
Albonici, L.; Palumbo, C.; Manzari, V. Role of inflammation and angiogenic growth factors in malignant
mesothelioma. In Malignant Mesothelioma; Belli, C., Ed.; InTech: Rijeka, Croatia, 2012.
12.
Bajaj, G.; Yeo, Y. Drug delivery systems for intraperitoneal therapy. Pharm. Res. 2010, 27, 735–738. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
13.
Benvenuto, M.; Fantini, M.; Masuelli, L.; de Smaele, E.; Zazzeroni, F.; Tresoldi, I.; Calabrese, G.; Galvano, F.;
Modesti, A.; Bei, R. Inhibition of ErbB receptors, Hedgehog and NF-kappaB signaling by polyphenols in
cancer. Front. Biosci. 2013, 18, 1290–1310.
14.
Ghiringhelli, F.; Rebe, C.; Hichami, A.; Delmas, D. Immunomodulation and anti-inflammatory roles of
polyphenols as anticancer agents. Anticancer Agents Med. Chem. 2012, 12, 852–873. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Gonzáles, R.; Ballester, I.; López-Posadas, R.; Suárez, M.D.; Zarzuelo, A.; Martínez-Augustin, O.;
de Medina, F.S. Effects of flavonoids and other polyphenols on inflammation. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2011,
51, 331–362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Santangelo, C.; Vari, R.; Scazzocchio, B.; di Benedetto, R.; Filesi, C.; Masella, R. Polyphenols, intracellular
signalling and inflammation. Ann. Ist. Super. Sanità 2007, 43, 394–405. [PubMed]
17.
Cuevas, A.; Saavedra, N.; Salazar, L.A.; Abdalla, D.S. Modulation of immune function by polyphenols:
Possible contribution of epigenetic factors. Nutrients 2013, 5, 2314–2332. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Manach, C.; Scalbert, A.; Morand, C.; Rémésy, C.; Jiménez, L. Polyphenols: Food sources and bioavailability.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004, 79, 727–747. [PubMed]
19.
Scalbert, A.; Manach, C.; Morand, C.; Rémésy, C.; Jiménez, L. Dietary polyphenols and the prevention of
diseases. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2005, 45, 287–306. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Marzocchella, L.; Fantini, M.; Benvenuto, M.; Masuelli, L.; Tresoldi, I.; Modest, A.; Bei, R. Dietary flavonoids:
Molecular mechanisms of action as anti- inflammatory agents. Recent Patent Inflamm. Allergy Drug Disc. 2011,
5, 200–220. [CrossRef]
21.
Crozier, A.; Jaganath, I.B.; Clifford, M.N. Dietary phenolics: Chemistry, bioavailability and effects on health.
Nat. Prod. Rep. 2009, 26, 1001–1043. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Fantini, M.; Benvenuto, M.; Masuelli, L.; Frajese, G.V.; Tresoldi, I.; Modesti, A.; Bei, R. In vitro and in vivo
antitumoral effects of combinations of polyphenols, or polyphenols and anticancer drugs: Perspectives on
cancer treatment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 16, 9236–9282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Bei, R.; Masuelli, L.; Turriziani, M.; Li Volti, G.; Malaguarnera, M.; Galvano, F. Impaired expression and
function of signaling pathway enzymes by anthocyanins: Role on cancer prevention and progression. Curr.
Enzym. Inhib. 2009, 5, 184–197. [CrossRef]
24.
Tomás-Barberán, F.A.; Clifford, M.N. Flavanones, chalcones and dihydrochalcones-nature, occurrence and
dietary burden. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2000, 80, 1073–1080. [CrossRef]
25.
Cassidy, A.; Hanley, B.; Lamuela-Raventos, R.M. Isoflavones, lignans and stilbenes-origins, metabolism and
potential importance to human health. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2000, 80, 1044–1062. [CrossRef]
26.
Prasad, S.; Tyagi, A.K.; Aggarwal, B.B. Recent developments in delivery, bioavailability, absorption and
metabolism of curcumin: The golden pigment from golden spice. Cancer Res. Treat. 2014, 46, 2–18. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
27.
García-Lafuente, A.;
Guillamón, E.;
Villares, A.;
Rostagno, M.A.;
Martínez, J.A. Flavonoids as
anti-inflammatory agents: Implications in cancer and cardiovascular disease. Inflamm. Res. 2009, 58,
537–552. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Izzi, V.; Masuelli, L.; Tresoldi, I.; Sacchetti, P.; Modesti, A.; Galvano, F.; Bei, R. The effects of dietary flavonoids
on the regulation of redox inflammatory networks. Front. Biosci. 2012, 17, 2396–2418. [CrossRef]
29.
Edwards, S.W. The O-2 Generating NADPH Oxidase of Phagocytes: Structure and Methods of Detection.
Methods 1996, 9, 563–577. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Cotelle, N. Role of flavonoids in oxidative stress. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2001, 1, 569–590. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
31.
Manach, C.; Williamson, G.; Morand, C.; Scalbert, A.; Rémésy, C. Bioavailability and bioefficacy of
polyphenols in humans. I. Review of 97 bioavailability studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 81, 230S–242S.
[PubMed]
32.
Ginsburg, I.; Kohen, R.; Koren, E. Microbial and host cells acquire enhanced oxidant-scavenging abilities by
binding polyphenols. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2011, 506, 12–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
17 of 23
33.
Bohn, T. Dietary factors affecting polyphenol bioavailability. Nutr. Rev. 2014, 72, 429–452. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
34.
Masuelli, L.; Fantini, M.; Benvenuto, M.; Sacchetti, P.; Giganti, M.G.; Tresoldi, I.; Lido, P.; Lista, F.; Cavallo, F.;
Nanni, P.; et al. Intratumoral delivery of recombinant vaccinia virus encoding for ErbB2/Neu inhibits the
growth of salivary gland carcinoma cells. J. Transl. Med. 2014, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Masuelli, L.; Marzocchella, L.; Focaccetti, C.; Lista, F.; Nardi, A.; Scardino, A.; Mattei, M.; Turriziani, M.;
Modesti, M.; Forni, G.; et al. Local delivery of recombinant vaccinia virus encoding for neu counteracts
growth of mammary tumors more efficiently than systemic delivery in neu transgenic mice. Cancer Immunol.
Immunother. 2010, 59, 1247–1258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Galanis, E.; Russell, S. Cancer gene therapy clinical trials: Lessons for the future. Br. J. Cancer 2001, 85,
1432–1436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Forsyth, P.; Roldán, G.; George, D.; Wallace, C.; Palmer, C.A.; Morris, D.; Cairncross, G.; Matthews, M.V.;
Markert, J.; Gillespie, Y.; et al. A phase I trial of intratumoral administration of reovirus in patients with
histologically confirmed recurrent malignant gliomas. Mol. Ther. 2008, 16, 627–632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Roberts, N.J.; Zhang, L.; Janku, F.; Collins, A.; Bai, R.Y.; Staedtke, V.; Rusk, A.W.; Tung, D.; Miller, M.;
Roix, J.; et al. Intratumoral injection of Clostridium novyi-NT spores induces antitumor responses. Sci. Transl.
Med. 2014, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Fujiwara, S.; Wada, H.; Miyata, H.; Kawada, J.; Kawabata, R.; Nishikawa, H.; Gnjatic, S.; Sedrak, C.; Sato, E.;
Nakamura, Y.; et al. Clinical trial of the intratumoral administration of labeled DC combined with systemic
chemotherapy for esophageal cancer. J. Immunother. 2012, 35, 513–521. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Masuelli, L.; Pantanella, F.; la Regina, G.; Benvenuto, M.; Fantini, M.; Mattera, R.; Di Stefano, E.; Mattei, M.;
Silvestri, R.; Schippa, S.; et al. Violacein, an indole-derived purple-colored natural pigment produced by
Janthinobacterium lividum, inhibits the growth of head and neck carcinoma cell lines both in vitro and in vivo.
Tumour Biol. 2016, 37, 3705–3717. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Price, B.; Ware, A. Time trend of mesothelioma incidence in the United States and projection of future cases:
An update based on SEER data for 1973 through 2005. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 2009, 39, 576–588. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
42.
Pietrofesa, R.A.; Velalopoulou, A.; Arguiri, E.; Menges, C.W.; Testa, J.R.; Hwang, W.T.; Albelda, S.M.;
Christofidou-Solomidou, M. Flaxseed lignans enriched in secoisolariciresinol diglucoside prevent acute
asbestos-induced peritoneal inflammation in mice. Carcinogenesis 2016, 37, 177–187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Chew, S.H.; Toyokuni, S. Malignant mesothelioma as an oxidative stress-induced cancer: An update. Free
Radic. Biol. Med. 2015, 86, 166–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Otsuki, T.; Maeda, M.; Murakami, S.; Hayashi, H.; Miura, Y.; Kusaka, M.; Nakano, T.; Fukuoka, K.;
Kishimoto, T.; Hyodoh, F.; et al. Immunological effects of silica and asbestos. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 2007, 4,
261–268. [PubMed]
45.
Miserocchi, G.; Sancini, G.; Mantegazza, F.; Chiappino, G. Translocation pathways for inhaled asbestos fibers.
Environ. Health 2008, 7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Tunesi, S.; Ferrante, D.; Mirabelli, D.; Andorno, S.; Betti, M.; Fiorito, G.; Guarrera, S.; Casalone, E.; Neri, M.;
Ugolini, D.; et al. Gene-asbestos interaction in malignant pleural mesothelioma susceptibility. Carcinogenesis
2015, 36, 1129–1135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Jantz, M.A.; Antony, V.B. Pathophysiology of the pleura. Respiration 2008, 75, 121–133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Carbone, M.; Bedrossian, C.W. The pathogenesis of mesothelioma. Semin. Diagn. Pathol. 2006, 23, 56–60.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Acencio, M.M.; Soares, B.; Marchi, E.; Silva, C.S.; Teixeira, L.R.; Broaddus, V.C. Inflammatory cytokines
contribute to asbestos-induced injury of mesothelial cells. Lung 2015, 193, 831–837. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Carbone, M.; Yang, H. Molecular pathways: Targeting mechanisms of asbestos and erionite carcinogenesis
in mesothelioma. Clin. Cancer Res. 2012, 18, 598–604. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Benedetti, S.; Nuvoli, B.; Catalani, S.; Galati, R. Reactive oxygen species a double-edged sword for
mesothelioma. Oncotarget 2015, 6, 16848–16865. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Kamp, D.W.; Weitzman, S.A. The molecular basis of asbestos induced lung injury. Thorax 1999, 54, 638–652.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Kinnula, V.L.; Aalto, K.; Raivio, K.O.; Walles, S.; Linnainmaa, K. Cytotoxicity of oxidants and asbestos fibers
in cultured human mesothelial cells. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1994, 16, 169–176. [CrossRef]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
18 of 23
54.
Kinnula, V.L.; Raivio, K.O.; Linnainmaa, K.; Ekman, A.; Klockars, M. Neutrophil and asbestos fiber-induced
cytotoxicity in cultured human mesothelial and bronchial epithelial cells. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1995, 18,
391–399. [CrossRef]
55.
Moslen, M.T. Reactive oxygen species in normal physiology, cell injury and phagocytosis. Adv. Exp. Med.
Biol. 1994, 366, 17–27. [PubMed]
56.
Hansen, K.; Mossman, B.T. Generation of superoxide (O2-.)
from alveolar macrophages exposed to
asbestiform and nonfibrous particles. Cancer Res. 1987, 47, 1681–1686. [PubMed]
57.
Shukla, A.; Gulumian, M.; Hei, T.K.; Kamp, D.; Rahman, Q.; Mossman, B.T. Multiple roles of oxidants in the
pathogenesis of asbestos-induced diseases. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2003, 34, 1117–1129. [CrossRef]
58.
Funahashi, S.; Okazaki, Y.; Ito, D.; Asakawa, A.; Nagai, H.; Tajima, M.; Toyokuni, S. Asbestos and
multi-walled carbon nanotubes generate distinct oxidative responses in inflammatory cells. J. Clin. Biochem.
Nutr. 2015, 56, 111–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Tanaka, S.; Choe, N.; Hemenway, D.R.; Zhu, S.; Matalon, S.; Kagan, E. Asbestos inhalation induces reactive
nitrogen species and nitrotyrosine formation in the lungs and pleura of the rat. J. Clin. Investig. 1998, 102,
445–454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Soini, Y.; Kahlos, K.; Puhakka, A.; Lakari, E.; Säily, M.; Pääkkö, P.; Kinnula, V. Expression of inducible nitric
oxide synthase in healthy pleura and in malignant mesothelioma. Br. J. Cancer 2000, 83, 880–886. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
61.
Reuter, S.; Gupta, S.C.; Chaturvedi, M.M.; Aggarwal, B.B. Oxidative stress, inflammation, and cancer: How
are they linked? Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2010, 49, 1603–1616. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Wu, J.; Liu, W.; Koenig, K.; Idell, S.; Broaddus, V.C. Vitronectin adsorption to chrysotile asbestos increases
fiber phagocytosis and toxicity for mesothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 2000, 279,
L916–L923. [PubMed]
63.
Hillegass, J.M.; Miller, J.M.; MacPherson, M.B.; Westbom, C.M.; Sayan, M.; Thompson, J.K.; Macura, S.L.;
Perkins, T.N.; Beuschel, S.L.; Alexeeva, V.; et al. Asbestos and erionite prime and activate the NLRP3
inflammasome that stimulates autocrine cytokine release in human mesothelial cells. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 2013,
10, 39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Chow, M.T.; Tschopp, J.; Möller, A.; Smyth, M.J. NLRP3 promotes inflammation-induced skin cancer but is
dispensable for asbestos-induced mesothelioma. Immunol. Cell Biol. 2012, 90, 983–986. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Petrilli, V.; Dostert, C.; Muruve, D.A.; Tschopp, J. The inflammasome: A danger sensing complex triggering
innate immunity. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 2007, 19, 615–622. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Westbom, C.; Thompson, J.K.; Leggett, A.; MacPherson, M.; Beuschel, S.; Pass, H.; Vacek, P.; Shukla, A.
Inflammasome modulation by chemotherapeutics in malignant mesothelioma. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0145404.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Wang, Y.; Faux, S.P.; Hallden, G.; Kirn, D.H.; Houghton, C.E.; Lemoine, N.R.; Patrick, G. Interleukin-1beta
and tumour necrosis factor-alpha promote the transformation of human immortalised mesothelial cells by
erionite. Int. J. Oncol. 2004, 25, 173–178. [PubMed]
68.
Antony, V.B. Immunological mechanisms in pleural disease. Eur. Respir. J. 2003, 21, 539–544. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
69.
Driscoll, K.E.; Maurer, J.K.; Higgins, J.; Poynter, J. Alveolar macrophage cytokine and growth factor
production in a rat model of crocidolite-induced pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis. J. Toxicol. Environ.
Health 1995, 46, 155–169. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Driscoll, K.E.; Carter, J.M.; Howard, B.W.; Hassenbein, D.; Janssen, Y.M.; Mossman, B.T. Crocidolite activates
NF-kappa B and MIP-2 gene expression in rat alveolar epithelial cells. Role of mitochondrial-derived
oxidants. Environ. Health Perspect. 1998, 106, 1171–1174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.
Bielefeldt-Ohmann, H.; Fitzpatrick, D.R.; Marzo, A.L.; Jarnicki, A.G.; Himbeck, R.P.; Davis, M.R.;
Manning, L.S.; Robinson, B.W. Patho- and immunobiology of malignant mesothelioma: Characterisation of
tumour infiltrating leucocytes and cytokine production in a murine model. Cancer Immunol. Immunother.
1994, 39, 347–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Landskron, G.; de la Fuente, M.; Thuwajit, P.; Thuwajit, C.; Hermoso, M.A. Chronic inflammation and
cytokines in the tumor microenvironment. J. Immunol. Res. 2014, 2014. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Caja, F.; Vannucci, L. TGFβ: A player on multiple fronts in the tumor microenvironment. J. Immunotoxicol.
2015, 12, 300–307. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
19 of 23
74.
Zitvogel, L.; Kepp, O.; Galluzzi, L.; Kroemer, G. Inflammasomes in carcinogenesis and anticancer immune
responses. Nat. Immunol. 2012, 13, 343–351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Naldini, A.; Carraro, F. Role of inflammatory mediators in angiogenesis. Curr. Drug Targets Inflamm. Allergy
2005, 4, 3–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Fox, S.A.; Loh, S.S.; Mahendran, S.K.; Garlepp, M.J. Regulated chemokine gene expression in mouse
mesothelioma and mesothelial cells: TNF-α upregulates both CC and CXC chemokine genes. Oncol. Rep.
2012, 28, 707–713. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Rollins, B.J. Inflammatory chemokines in cancer growth and progression. Eur. J. Cancer 2006, 42, 760–767.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Vlaeminck-Guillem, V.; Bienvenu, J.; Isaac, S.; Grangier, B.; Golfier, F.; Passot, G.; Bakrin, N.;
RodriguezLafrasse, C.; Gilly, F.N.; Glehen, O. Intraperitoneal cytokine level in patients with peritoneal
surface malignancies. A study of the RENAPE (French Network for Rare Peritoneal Malignancies). Ann.
Surg. Oncol. 2013, 20, 2655–2662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Comar, M.; Zanotta, N.; Bonotti, A.; Tognon, M.; Negro, C.; Cristaudo, A.; Bovenzi, M. Increased levels of
C-C chemokine RANTES in asbestos exposed workers and in malignant mesothelioma patients from an
hyperendemic area. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e104848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Xu, J.; Alexander, D.B.; Iigo, M.; Hamano, H.; Takahashi, S.; Yokoyama, T.; Kato, M.; Usami, I.; Tokuyama, T.;
Tsutsumi, M. Chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 3 detection in the serum of persons exposed to asbestos: A
patient-based study. Cancer Sci. 2015, 106, 825–832. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Terlizzi, M.; Casolaro, V.; Pinto, A.; Sorrentino, R. Inflammasome: Cancer’s friend or foe? Pharmacol. Therap.
2014, 143, 24–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Dinarello, C.A. Why not treat human cancer with interleukin-1 blockade? Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2010, 29,
317–329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Izzi, V.; Chiurchiù, V.; Doldo, E.; Palumbo, C.; Tesoldi, I.; Bei, R.; Albonici, L.; Modesti, A. Interleukin-17
produced by malignant mesothelioma-polarized immune cells promotes tumor growth and invasiveness.
Eur. J. Inflamm. 2013, 11, 203–214.
84.
Miselis, N.R.; Lau, B.W.; Wu, Z.; Kane, A.B. Kinetics of host cell recruitment during dissemination of diffuse
malignant peritoneal mesothelioma. Cancer Microenviron. 2010, 4, 39–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Veltman, J.D.; Lambers, M.E.; van Nimwegen, M.; Hendriks, R.W.; Hoogsteden, H.C.; Hegmans, J.P.;
Aerts, J.G. Zoledronic acid impairs myeloid differentiation to tumour-associated macrophages in
mesothelioma. Br. J. Cancer 2010, 103, 629–641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Veltman, J.D.; Lambers, M.E.; van Nimwegen, M.; Hendriks, R.W.; Hoogsteden, H.C.; Aerts, J.G.;
Hegmans, J.P. COX-2 inhibition improves immunotherapy and is associated with decreased numbers
of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in mesothelioma. Celecoxib influences MDSC function. BMC Cancer
2010, 10, 464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Yang, H.; Pellegrini, L.; Napolitano, A.; Giorgi, C.; Jube, S.; Preti, A.; Jennings, C.J.; de Marchis, F.; Flores, E.G.;
Larson, D.; et al. Aspirin delays mesothelioma growth by inhibiting HMGB1-mediated tumor progression.
Cell Death Dis. 2015, 6, e1786. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Sica, A.; Allavena, P.; Mantovani, A. Cancer related inflammation: The macrophage connection. Cancer Lett.
2008, 267, 204–215. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Burt, B.M.; Rodig, S.J.; Tilleman, T.R.; Elbardissi, A.W.; Bueno, R.; Sugarbaker, D.J. Circulating and
tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells predict survival in human pleural mesothelioma. Cancer 2011, 117, 5234–5244.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Hegmans, J.P.; Hemmes, A.; Hammad, H.; Boon, L.; Hoogsteden, H.C.; Lambrecht, B.N. Mesothelioma
environment comprises cytokines and T-regulatory cells that suppress immune responses. Eur. Respir. J.
2006, 27, 1086–1095. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Miselis, N.R.; Wu, Z.J.; van Rooijen, N.; Kane, A.B. Targeting tumor-associated macrophages in an orthotopic
murine model of diffuse malignant mesothelioma. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2008, 7, 788–799. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Napolitano, A.; Pellegrini, L.; Dey, A.; Larson, D.; Tanji, M.; Flores, E.G.; Kendrick, B.; Lapid, D.; Powers, A.;
Kanodia, S.; et al. Minimal asbestos exposure in germline BAP1 heterozygous mice is associated with
deregulated inflammatory response and increased risk of mesothelioma. Oncogene 2016, 35, 1996–2002.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
20 of 23
93.
Nishimura, Y.; Kumagai-Takei, N.; Matsuzaki, H.; Lee, S.; Maeda, M.; Kishimoto, T.; Fukuoka, K.; Nakano, T.;
Otsuki, T. Functional alteration of natural killer cells and cytotoxic T limphocytes upon asbestos exposure
and in malignant mesothelioma patients. BioMed. Res. Int. 2015, 2015. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Maeda, M.; Nishimura, Y.; Hayashi, H.; Kumagai, N.; Chen, Y.; Murakami, S.; Miura, Y.; Hiratsuka, J.;
Kishimoto, T.; Otsuki, T. Reduction of CXC chemokine receptor 3 in an in vitro model of continuous exposure
to asbestos in a human T-cell line, MT-2. Am. J. Respira. Cell Mol. Biol. 2011, 45, 470–479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Maeda, M.; Nishimura, Y.; Hayashi, H.; Kumagai, N.; Chen, Y.; Murakami, S.; Miura, Y.; Hiratsuka, J.;
Kishimoto, T.; Otsuki, T. Decreased CXCR3 expression in CD4+ T cells exposed to asbestos or derived from
asbestos-exposed patients. Am. J. Respira. Cell Mol. Biol. 2011, 45, 795–803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Maeda, M.; Chen, Y.; Hayashi, H.; Kumagai-Takei, N.; Matsuzaki, H.; Lee, S.; Nishimura, Y.; Otsuki, T.
Chronic exposure to asbestos enhances TGF-β1 production in the human adult T cell leukemia
virus-immortalized T cell line MT-2. Int. J. Oncol. 2014, 45, 2522–2532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Miura, Y.; Nishimura, Y.; Katsuyama, H.; Maeda, M.; Hayashi, H.; Dong, M.; Hyodoh, F.; Tomita, M.;
Matsuo, Y.; Uesaka, A.; et al. Involvement of IL-10 and Bcl-2 in resistance against an asbestos-induced
apoptosis of T cells. Apoptosis 2006, 11, 1825–1835. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Feskanich, D.; Ziegler, R.G.; Michaud, D.S.; Giovannucci, E.L.; Speizer, F.E.; Willett, W.C.; Colditz, G.A.
Prospective study of fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of lung cancer among men and women.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2000, 92, 1812–1823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Bazzano, L.A.; He, J.; Ogden, L.G.; Loria, C.M.; Vupputuri, S.; Myers, L.; Whelton, P.K. Fruit and vegetable
intake and risk of cardiovascular disease in US adults: The first National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey Epidemiologic follow-up study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2002, 76, 93–99. [PubMed]
100. Mennen, L.I.; Sapinho, D.; de Bree, A.; Arnault, N.; Bertrais, S.; Galan, P.; Hercberg, S. Consumption of foods
rich in flavonoids is related to a decreased cardiovascular risk in apparently healthy French women. J. Nutr.
2004, 134, 923–926. [PubMed]
101. Chang, H.W.; Baek, S.H.; Chung, K.W.; Son, K.H.; Kim, H.P.; Kang, S.S. Inactivation of phospholipase A2
by naturally occurring biflavonoid, ochnaflavone. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1994, 205, 843–849.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Kang, H.K.; Ecklund, D.; Liu, M.; Datta, S.K. Apigenin, a non-mutagenic dietary flavonoid, suppresses lupus
by inhibiting autoantigen presentation for expansion of autoreactive Th1 and Th17 cells. Arthritis Res. Ther.
2009, 11, R59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Chi, Y.S.; Kim, H.P. Suppression of cyclooxigenase-2 expression of skin fibroblasts by wogonin, a plant
flavones from Scutellaria radix. Prostaglandins Leukot. Essent. Fat. Acids 2005, 72, 59–66. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Liang, Y.C.; Huang, Y.T.; Tsai, S.H.; Lin-Shiau, S.Y.; Chen, C.F.; Lin, J.K. Suppression of inducible
cyclooxygenase and inducible nitric oxide synthase by apigenin and related flavonoids in mouse
macrophages. Carcinogenesis 1999, 20, 1945–1952. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Hamalainen, M.; Nieminen, R.; Vuorela, P.; Heinonen, M.; Moilanen, E. Anti-inflammatory effects of
flavonoids: Genistein, kaempferol, quercetin, and daidzein inhibit STAT-1 and NF-kappaB activations,
whereas flavone, isorhamnetin, naringenin, and pelargonidin inhibit only NF-kappaB activation along with
their inhibitory effect on iNOS expression and NO production in activated macrophages. Mediat. Inflamm.
2007, 2007. [CrossRef]
106. Halliwell, B. Are polyphenols antioxidants or pro-oxidants? What do we learn from cell culture and in vivo
studies? Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2008, 476, 107–112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. León-Gonzáles, A.J.; Auger, C.; Schini-Kerth, V.B. Pro-oxidant activity of polyphenols and its implication on
cancer chemoprevention and chemotherapy. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2015, 98, 371–380. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Miller, J.M.; Thompson, J.K.; MacPherson, M.B.; Beuschel, S.L.; Westbom, C.M.; Sayan, M.; Shukla, A.
Curcumin: A double hit on malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Prev. Res. 2014, 7, 330–340. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
109. Satoh, M.; Takemura, Y.; Hamada, H.; Sekido, Y.; Kubota, S. EGCG indices human mesothelioma cell death
by inducing reactive oxygen species and autophagy. Cancer Cell Int. 2013, 13, 19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Ranzato, E.; Martinotti, S.; Magnelli, V.; Murer, B.; Biffo, S.; Mutti, L.; Burlando, B. Epigallocathechin-3-gallate
induces mesothelioma cell death via H2 O2-dependent T-type Ca2+ channel opening. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 2012,
16, 2667–2678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
21 of 23
111. Valenti, D.; de Bari, L.; Manente, G.A.; Rossi, L.; Mutti, L.; Moro, L.; Vacca, R.A. Negative modulation of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation by epigallocatechin-3 gallate leads to growth arrest and apoptosis
in human malignant pleural mesothelioma cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2013, 1382, 2085–2096. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
112. Lee, Y.J.; Im, J.H.; Lee, D.M.; Park, J.S.; Won, S.Y.; Cho, M.K.; Nam, H.S.; Lee, Y.J.; Lee, S.H. Synergistic
inhibition of mesothelioma cell growth by the combination of clofarabine and resveratrol involves Nrf2
downregulation. BMB Rep. 2012, 45, 647–652. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Lee, Y.J.; Park, I.S.; Lee, Y.J.; Shim, J.H.; Cho, M.K.; Nam, H.S.; Park, J.W.; Oh, M.H.; Lee, S.H. Resveratrol
contributes to chemosensivity of malignant mesothelioma cells with activation of p53. Food Chem. Toxicol.
2014, 63, 153–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Faraonio, R.; Vergara, P.; Di Marzo, D.; Pierantoni, M.G.; Napolitano, M.; Russo, T.; Cimino, F. p53 suppresses
the Nrf2-dependent transcription of antioxidant response genes. J. Biol. Chem. 2006, 281, 39776–39784.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Pietrofesa, R.A.; Velalopoulou, A.; Albelda, S.M.; Christofidou-Solomidou, M. Asbestos Induces Oxidative
Stress and Activation of Nrf2 Signaling in Murine Macrophages: Chemopreventive Role of the Synthetic
Lignan Secoisolariciresinol Diglucoside (LGM2605). Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016, 17, 322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Kostyuk, V.A.; Potapovich, A.I.; Speransky, S.D.; Maslova, G.T. Protective effect of natural flavonoids on rat
peritoneal macrophages injury caused by asbestos fibers. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1996, 21, 487–493. [CrossRef]
117. Kostyuk, V.A.; Potapovich, A.I.; Vladykovskaya, E.N.; Hiramatsu, M. Protective effects of green tea catechins
against asbestos-induced cell injury. Planta Med. 2000, 66, 762–764. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Potapovich, A.I.; Kostyuk, V.A. Comparative study of antioxidant properties and cytoprotective activity of
flavonoids. Biochemistry 2003, 68, 514–519. [PubMed]
119. Grivennikov, S.I.; Greten, F.R.; Karin, M. Immunity, inflammation, and cancer. Cell 2010, 140, 883–899.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Valko, M.; Leibfritz, D.; Moncol, J.; Cronin, M.T.; Mazur, M.; Telser, J. Free radicals and antioxidants in
normal physiological functions and human disease. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2007, 39, 44–84. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
121. Cohen, A.N.; Veena, M.S.; Srivatsan, E.S.; Wang, M.B. Suppression of interleukin 6 and 8 production in head
and neck cancer cells with curcumin via inhibition of Ikappa beta kinase. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg.
2009, 135, 190–197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Wang, Y.; Yu, C.; Pan, Y.; Yang, X.; Huang, Y.; Feng, Z.; Li, X.; Yang, S.; Liang, G. A novel synthetic
mono-carbonyl analogue of curcumin, A13, exhibits anti-inflammatory effect in vivo by inhibition of
inflammatory mediators. Inflammation 2011, 35, 594–604. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Serafini, M.; Peluso, I.; Raguzzini, A. Flavonoids as anti-inflammatory agents. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2010, 69,
273–278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Hirano, T.; Higa, S.; Arimitsu, J.; Naka, T.; Shima, Y.; Ohshima, S.; Fujimoto, M.; Yamadori, T.; Kawase, I.;
Tanaka, T. Flavonoids such as luteolin, fisetin and apigenin are inhibitors of interleukin-4 and interleukin-13
production by activated human basophils. Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol. 2004, 134, 135–140. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
125. Chen, P.C.; Wheeler, D.S.; Malhotra, V.; Odoms, K.; Denenberg, A.G.; Wong, H.R. A green tea-derived
polyphenol, epigallocatechin-3-gallate, inhibits IKappaB kinase activation and IL-8 gene expression in
respiratory epithelium. Inflammation 2002, 26, 233–241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Shin, H.Y.; Kim, S.H.; Jeong, H.J.; Kim, S.Y.; Shin, T.Y.; Um, J.Y.; Hong, S.H.; Kim, H.M. Epigallocatechin-3-
gallate inhibits secretion of TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IL-8 through the attenuation of ERK and NF-kappaB in
HMC- 1 cells. Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol. 2007, 142, 335–344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Ahmed, S.; Marotte, H.; Kwan, K.; Ruth, J.H.; Campbell, P.L.; Rabquer, B.J.; Pakozdi, A.; Koch, A.E.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits IL-6 synthesis and suppresses transsignaling by enhancing soluble gp130
production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008, 105, 14692–14697. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Rasheed, Z.; Anbazhagan, A.N.; Akhtar, N.; Ramamurthy, S.; Voss, F.R.; Haqqi, T.M. Green tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits advanced glycation end product-induced expression of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and matrix metalloproteinase-13 in human chondrocytes. Arthritis Res. Ther. 2009, 11, R71.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
22 of 23
129. Park, H.H.; Lee, S.; Son, H.Y.; Park, S.B.; Kim, M.S.; Choi, E.J.; Singh, T.S.; Ha, J.H.; Lee, M.G.; Kim, J.E.
Flavonoids inhibit histamine release and expression of proinflammatory cytokines in mast cells. Arch. Pharm.
Res. 2008, 31, 1303–1311. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
130. Sun, C.; Hu, Y.; Liu, X.; Wu, T.; Wang, Y.; He, W.; Wei, W. Resveratrol downregulates the constitutional
activation of nuclear factor-kappaB in multiple myeloma cells, leading to suppression of proliferation and
invasion, arrest of cell cycle, and induction of apoptosis. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 2006, 165, 9–19. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
131. Manna, S.K.; Mukhopadhyay, A.; Aggarwal, B.B. Resveratrol suppresses TNF-induced activation of nuclear
transcription factors NF-kappaB, activator protein-1, and apoptosis: Potential role of reactive oxygen
intermediates and lipid peroxidation. J. Immunol. 2000, 164, 6509–6519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Kim, G.Y.; Kim, K.H.; Lee, S.H.; Yoon, M.S.; Lee, H.J.; Moon, D.O.; Lee, C.M.; Ahn, S.C.; Park, Y.C.; Park, Y.M.
Curcumin inhibits immunostimulatory function of dendritic cells: MAPKs and translocation of NF-kappaB
as potential targets. J. Immunol. 2005, 174, 8116–8124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Garcia-Mediavilla, M.V.; Crespo, I.; Collado, P.S.; Esteller, A.; Sanchez-Campos, S.; Tunon, M.J.
Anti-inflammatory effect of the flavones quercetin and kaempferol in Chang Liver cells involves inhibition
of inducible nitric oxide synthase, cyclooxygenase-2 and reactive C-protein, and down-regulation of the
nuclear factor kappaB pathway. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2007, 557, 221–229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Nicholas, C.; Batra, S.; Vargo, M.A.; Voss, O.H.; Gavrilin, M.A.; Wewers, M.D.; Guttridge, D.C.; Grotewold, E.;
Doseff, A.I. Apigenin blocks lipopolysaccharide-induced lethality in vivo and proinflammatory cytokines
expression by inactivating NF-kappa B through the suppression of p65 phosphorylation. J. Immunol. 2007,
179, 7121–7127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Romier, B.; van de Walle, J.; During, A.; Larondelle, Y.; Schneider, Y.J. Modulation of signaling nuclear
factor-kappaB activation pathway by polyphenols in human intestinal Caco-2 cells. Br. J. Nutr. 2008, 100,
542–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Lin, R.W.; Chen, C.H.; Wang, Y.H.; Ho, M.L.; Hung, S.H.; Chen, I.S.; Wang, G.J. (´)-Epigallocatechin gallate
inhibition of osteoclastic differentiation via NF-kappaB Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2009, 379, 1033–1037.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Laua, F.C.; Josepha, J.A.; McDonald, J.E.; Kalt, A.W. Attenuation of iNOS and COX2 by blueberry polyphenols
is mediated through the suppression of NF-κB activation. J. Funct. Foods 2009, 1, 274–283. [CrossRef]
138. Kim, J.W.; Jin, Y.C.; Kim, Y.M.; Rhie, S.; Kim, H.J.; Seo, H.G.; Lee, J.H.; Ha, Y.L.; Chang, K.C. Daidzein
administration in vivo reduces myocardial injury in a rat ischemia/reperfusion model by inhibiting NF-κB
activation. Life Sci. 2009, 84, 227–234. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Bharti, A.C.; Donato, N.; Aggarwal, B.B. Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) inhibits constitutive and
IL-6-inducible STAT3 phosphorylation in human multiple myeloma cells. J. Immunol. 2003, 171, 3863–3871.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Chakravarti, N.; Myers, J.N.; Aggarwal, B.B. Targeting constitutive and interleukin-6-inducible signal
transducers and activators of transcription 3 pathway in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells by
curcumin (diferuloylmethane). Int. J. Cancer 2006, 119, 1268–1275. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Wung, B.S.; Hsu, M.C.; Wu, C.C.; Hsieh, C.W. Resveratrol suppresses IL-6- induced ICAM-1 gene expression
in endothelial cells: Effects on the inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation. Life Sci. 2005, 78, 389–397. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
142. Masuda, M.; Suzui, M.; Weinstein, I.B. Effects of epigallocatechin-3- gallate on growth, epidermal growth
factor receptor signaling pathways, gene expression, and chemosensitivity in human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. Clin. Cancer Res. 2001, 7, 4220–4229. [PubMed]
143. Kadariya,
Y.;
Menges,
C.W.;
Talarchek,
J.;
Cai,
K.Q.;
Klein-Szanto,
A.J.;
Pietrofesa,
R.A.;
Christofidou-Solomidou, M.; Cheung, M.; Mossman, B.T.; Shukla, A.; Testa, J.R. Inflammation-Related
IL-1β/IL-1R Signaling Promotes the Development of Asbestos-Induced Malignant Mesothelioma. Cancer
Prev. Res. 2016, 9, 406–411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Miao, E.A.; Rajan, J.V.; Aderem, A. Caspase-1-induced pyroptotic cell death. Immunol. Rev. 2011, 243,
206–214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Wang, Y.; Rishi, A.K.; Wu, W.; Polin, L.; Sharma, S.; Levi, E.; Albelda, S.; Pass, H.I.; Wali, A. Curcumin
suppresses growth of mesothelioma cells in vitro and in vivo, in part, by stimulating apoptosis. Mol. Cell.
Biochem. 2011, 357, 83–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 275
23 of 23
146. Cioce, M.; Canino, C.; Pulito, C.; Muti, P.; Strano, S.; Blandino, G. Butein impairs the protumorigenic activity
of malignant pleural mesothelioma cells. Cell Cycle 2012, 11, 132–140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Dabir, S.; Kluge, A.; Dowlati, A. The association and nuclear translocation of the PIAS3-STAT3 complex is
ligand and time dependent. Mol. Cancer Res. 2009, 7, 1854–1860. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Dabir, S.; Kluge, A.; Kresak, A.; Yang, M.; Fu, P.; Groner, B.; Wildey, G.; Dowlati, A. Low PIAS3 expression
in malignant mesothelioma is associated with increased STAT3 activation and poor patient survival. Clin.
Cancer Res. 2014, 20, 5124–5132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Martinotti, S.; Ranzato, E.; Burlando, B. In vitro screening of synergistic ascorbate-drug combinations for the
treatment of malignant mesothelioma. Toxicol. Vitro 2011, 25, 1568–1574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Martinotti, S.;
Ranzato, E.;
Parodi, M.;
Vitale, M.;
Burlando, B. Combination of ascorbate/
epigallocatechin-3-gallate/gemcitabine synergistically induces cell cycle deregulation and apoptosis in
mesothelioma cells. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2014, 274, 35–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Beishline, K.; Azizkhan-Clifford, J. Sp1 and the ‘hallmarks of cancer’. FEBS J. 2015, 282, 224–258. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
152. Lee, K.A.; Lee, Y.J.; Ban, J.O.; Lee, Y.J.; Lee, S.H.; Cho, M.K.; Nam, H.S.; Hong, J.T.; Shim, J.H. The flavonoid
resveratrol suppresses growth of human malignant pleural mesothelioma cells through direct inhibition of
specificity protein 1. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2012, 30, 21–27. [PubMed]
153. Lee, Y.J.; Lee, Y.J.; Im, J.H.; Won, S.Y.; Kim, Y.B.; Cho, M.K.; Nam, H.S.; Choi, Y.J.; Lee, S.H. Synergistic
anti-cancer effects of resveratrol and chemotherapeutic agent clofarabine against human malignant
mesothelioma MSTO-211H cells. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2013, 52, 61–68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Chae, J.I.; Cho, J.H.; Lee, K.A.; Choi, N.J.; Seo, K.S.; Kim, S.B.; Lee, S.H.; Shim, J.H. Role of transcriptor factor
Sp1 in the quercetin-mediated inhibitory effect on human malignant pleural mesothelioma. Int. J. Mol. Med.
2012, 30, 835–841. [PubMed]
155. Chae, J.I.; Jeon, Y.J.; Shim, J.H. Downregulation of Sp1 is involved in honokiol-induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in human malignant pleural mesothelioma cells. Oncol. Rep. 2013, 29, 2318–2324. [PubMed]
156. Kim, K.H.; Yoon, G.; Cho, J.J.; Cho, J.H.; Cho, Y.S.; Chae, J.I.; Shim, J.H. Licochalcone A induces
apoptosis in malignant pleural mesothelioma through downregulation of Sp1 and subsequent activation of
mitochondria-related apoptotic pathway. Int. J. Oncol. 2015, 46, 1385–1392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
157. Lee, K.A.; Lee, S.H.; Lee, Y.J.; Baeg, S.M.; Shim, J.H. Hesperidin induces apoptosis by inhibiting Sp1 and its
regulatory protein in MSTO-211H cells. Biomol. Ther. 2012, 20, 273–279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Lee, K.A.; Chae, J.I.; Shim, J.H. Natural diterpenes from coffee, cafestol and kahweol induce apoptosis
through regulation of specificity protein 1 expression in human malignant pleural mesothelioma. J. Biomed.
Sci. 2012, 19, 60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Roomi, M.W.; Ivanov, V.; Kalinovsky, T.; Niedzwiecki, A.; Rath, M. Inhibition of malignant mesothelioma
cell matrix metalloproteinase production and invasion by a novel nutrient mixture. Exp. Lung Res. 2006, 32,
69–79. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
