 Gut microbiota from multiple sclerosis patients enables
spontaneous autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice
Kerstin Berera,1, Lisa Ann Gerdesb,1, Egle Cekanaviciutec, Xiaoming Jiac, Liang Xiaod, Zhongkui Xiad, Chuan Liud,
Luisa Klotze, Uta Staufferf, Sergio E. Baranzinic,g, Tania Kümpfelb, Reinhard Hohlfeldb,h,
Gurumoorthy Krishnamoorthya,i,2, and Hartmut Wekerlea,h,2
aHertie Senior Professor Group, Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology, 82152 Martinsried, Germany; bInstitute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximillians University, 81377 Munich, Germany; cDepartment of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143; dBGI-Shenzhen,
Shenzhen, 518083, China; eDepartment of Neurology, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany; fMax Planck Institute of Immunobiology and
Epigenetics, 79108 Freiburg, Germany; gInstitute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143; hMunich Cluster for Systems
Neurology, Ludwig-Maximillians University, 81377 Munich, Germany; and iResearch Group for Neuroinflammation and Mucosal Immunology, Max Planck
Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Edited by Lawrence Steinman, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, and approved August 7, 2017 (received for review June 30, 2017)
There is emerging evidence that the commensal microbiota has
a role in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS), a putative
autoimmune disease of the CNS. Here, we compared the gut
microbial composition of 34 monozygotic twin pairs discordant for
MS. While there were no major differences in the overall micro-
bial profiles, we found a significant increase in some taxa such as
Akkermansia in untreated MS twins. Furthermore, most notably,
when transplanted to a transgenic mouse model of spontaneous
brain autoimmunity, MS twin-derived microbiota induced a signifi-
cantly higher incidence of autoimmunity than the healthy twin-
derived microbiota. The microbial profiles of the colonized mice
showed a high intraindividual and remarkable temporal stability with
several differences, including Sutterella, an organism shown to in-
duce a protective immunoregulatory profile in vitro. Immune cells
from mouse recipients of MS-twin samples produced less IL-10 than
immune cells from mice colonized with healthy-twin samples.
IL-10 may have a regulatory role in spontaneous CNS autoimmunity,
as neutralization of the cytokine in mice colonized with healthy-twin
fecal samples increased disease incidence. These findings provide ev-
idence that MS-derived microbiota contain factors that precipitate an
MS-like autoimmune disease in a transgenic mouse model. They
hence encourage the detailed search for protective and pathogenic
microbial components in human MS.
gut microbiome | multiple sclerosis | experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis | twin study | germ-free mice
T
he risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MS) is driven by
both genetic factors and environmental exposures (1). Risk
genes have been determined by large-scale genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), which identified more than 200 different DNA
variants associated with disease susceptibility (2). Environmental risk
factors include smoking, reduced exposure to sunlight, and infection
with Epstein–Barr virus (3). Very recently, the intestinal micro-
biota emerged as an additional potential triggering factor (4, 5).
The notion that commensal gut bacteria are causally related to
brain autoimmunity is supported by a transgenic mouse model
of spontaneous experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
In this model, nearly all animals raised in specific pathogen-free
(SPF) conditions develop a relapsing–remitting (RR) variant of the
disease within months of age (6). Importantly, when kept in a germ-
free environment, animals from the same strain remain disease-free.
However, spontaneous disease promptly follows exposure of germ-
free mice to SPF-derived fecal material (7). Taken together, these
observations indicate that the encephalitogenic immune response
observed in these mice is mediated by the intestinal microbiota.
Translation of these experimental observations into human
MS poses considerable practical challenges. Complicating factors
are, in particular, genetic diversity (8) and lifestyle, such as diet
(9), both of which profoundly impact the individual gut microbiota.
In addition, age, therapy, and neurological condition (10) might
also affect the gut microbial composition. In an attempt to
eliminate genetic variance and reduce environmental variance to
a minimum, we identified and recruited 34 monozygotic (MZ)
twin pairs, discordant for MS, for a microbiome study. All the
probands were of Caucasian origin and had grown up together
with their healthy twins to adulthood in Germany. We studied
their gut microbiota in two tiers: first, intestinal microbial pro-
files of MS twins and healthy twins were compared by 16S ri-
bosomal RNA (rRNA) amplicon and metagenomic shotgun
sequencing. Second, we transplanted fecal samples from selected
twin pairs to germ-free mice to assess functional differences in
the human intestinal microbiota of MS and healthy twins.
Results
MZ Twin Cohorts Discordant for MS. We assembled a cohort of
34 MZ twin pairs clinically discordant for MS. In each pair, one twin
has clinically definite MS according to the current diagnostic cri-
teria (11), whereas the co-twin is unaffected. Our MS twin cohort
resembles the general MS population with respect to female
Significance
Studies using experimental models have indicated that multiple
sclerosis (MS)-like disease can be triggered in the gut following
interactions of brain autoimmune T lymphocytes with local
microbiota. Here we studied the gut microbiota from mono-
zygotic human twin pairs discordant for multiple sclerosis. When
we transferred human-derived microbiota into transgenic mice
expressing a myelin autoantigen-specific T cell receptor, we
found that gut microbiota from multiple sclerosis-affected twins
induced CNS-specific autoimmunity at a higher incidence than
microbiota from healthy co-twins. Our results offer functional
evidence that human microbiome components contribute to
CNS-specific autoimmunity.
Author contributions: K.B., L.A.G., R.H., G.K., and H.W. designed research; K.B., L.A.G.,
L.K., U.S., T.K., and G.K. performed research; K.B., L.A.G., E.C., X.J., L.X., Z.X., C.L., L.K.,
S.E.B., and G.K. analyzed data; and K.B., R.H., G.K., and H.W. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: Normalized datasets related to this paper are available from the UCSF
Data Sharing Service (Dash) at https://doi.org/10.7272/Q6N58JH2 and raw data have been
deposited in the European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) database, https://www.ebi.
ac.uk (accession no. ERP101460).
See Commentary on page 10528.
1K.B. and L.A.G. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: guru@biochem.mpg.de or
hwekerle@neuro.mpg.de.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1711233114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711233114
PNAS
|
October 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 40
|
10719–10724
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
SEE COMMENTARY
 preponderance, age distribution, age at onset, and distribution of
clinical subtypes [RR MS, secondary progressive MS, primary
progressive MS, and clinically isolated syndrome (CIS)] (Table 1)
(12). The twin cohort is homogenous in terms of geographic en-
vironment and genetic background. Furthermore, immunophe-
notyping of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from all
twin pairs did not show relevant differences in the frequencies of
CD4+ T cells, Th1 cells, Th17 cells, and Treg cells (Fig. S1).
Microbial Profiling of MS-Discordant MZ Twins by 16S rRNA and
Metagenomic Shotgun Sequencing. To search for differences be-
tween microbiomes of MS-affected versus nonaffected twins, we
applied 16S rRNA sequencing and metagenomics shotgun se-
quencing. 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing revealed no major
differences in microbial community structures. Specifically, MS
twins and healthy twins exhibited comparable microbial com-
munity richness (alpha diversity) (Fig. 1A). A concomitant
principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) also did not point to
disease-dependent clustering of samples (Fig. 1B). Further,
analysis at the level of individual taxa [up to genera or the op-
erational taxonomic units (OTUs) level] did not indicate signif-
icant differences between MS and healthy twins. However, when
patients were stratified for the use of disease-modifying therapy,
several taxa (most notably Akkermansia muciniphila) were sig-
nificantly increased in untreated MS twin siblings (Fig. S2).
Comparing the microbiome composition of MS and healthy
twins is a first, purely descriptive step in exploring the role of the
microbiota in MS. Disease-related functional differences in the
microbiomes of healthy or MS twins might be revealed by shotgun
metagenomic sequencing. Using Human Microbiome Project
(HMP) Unified Metabolic Analysis Network (HUMAnN2) tool1,
we assessed the microbial community, performed functional pro-
filing on the bacterial DNA sequences, and identified 242 unique
bacterial species across 98 genera, 1.2 million gene families, and
558 bacterial metabolic pathways. Interestingly, analysis of gut
bacterial composition showed higher similarity between discordant
twin siblings than among unrelated twin pairs (Fig. S3), thus
confirming the influence of the host’s genetics in the composition
of the gut microbiome. To determine possible associations of spe-
cific bacterial species, gene families, or metabolic pathways with
MS, we performed logistic regression analysis. In harmony with
16S sequencing findings, after adjusting for twin pair, number of
genome equivalents sequenced, and multiple comparisons, no
specific bacterial species, gene families, or metabolic pathways
were significantly associated with the MS disease phenotype.
RR Mice Colonized with Human MS Twin-Derived Microbiota. To ex-
plore the functional role of human microbiota in CNS in-
flammation, we used our previously described spontaneous RR
mouse model (6, 7). Several qualities render these mice a partic-
ularly promising reporter system. RR mice express a transgenic
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-specific T cell re-
ceptor in more than 70% of their CD4+ T cells. Beginning at 2 mo
of age, more than 80% of the mice spontaneously develop an
inflammatory demyelinating disease that recapitulates features of
early human MS: The disease course is often relapsing–remitting,
affects varying parts of the brain and spinal cord with lesions
featuring round-cell infiltrates and large confluent areas of de-
myelination with axonal degeneration, and responds to B cell-
depleting therapy (6). Most importantly, spontaneous disease
critically depends on an intact commensal microbiome, as germ-
free RR mice remain healthy (7).
We reasoned that if the gut microbiota is a determinant factor
contributing to the severity and course of human MS, transplanta-
tion of human fecal microbial communities from MS twins should
result in a higher frequency of spontaneous EAE than the transfer of
fecal material from healthy twins. We selected a subgroup of five
twin pairs who were all discordant for RR MS and in which the
affected twins had different disease durations and were either
without therapy or were treated with IFN-β (for further details refer
to Table S1). Each donor fecal sample was diluted in prereduced
PBS and introduced into a group of 6-wk-old, germ-free RR mice by
oral gavage. Mouse fecal pellets were collected 2 and 6 wk after
transplantation to assess the stability as well as composition of the
intestinal microbiota by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing (Fig. 2A).
Unsurprisingly, we detected significantly reduced alpha di-
versity (∼10%) in colonized mice compared with the donor hu-
mans (Fig. 2B). PCoA confirmed the divergent gut microbial
community structures in human and mouse samples (Fig. 2C),
indicating that only a subset of microbial species from human
donors was able to colonize mouse recipients. The microbiota
transfer rate was consistent across samples and independent of
the disease state of the donor. Since the composition of the in-
testinal microbiota is profoundly imprinted by host genetics, diet,
Table 1.
Demographic and clinical characteristics of MZ twins
discordant for MS
Characteristic
MZ twins
No. of pairs
34
Gender, female/male
26/8
Age in years (range in years)
41.3 ± 10.8 (21–63)
Age in years at disease onset
(range in years)
28.0 ± 9.0 (14–47)
Time in years clinically discordant
for MS (range in years)
13.2 ± 9.6 (1–33)
Pairs clinically discordant for MS
longer than 10 y (%)
18 (53)
Pairs with a positive family
history of MS (%)
11 (32)
MS type, n (%)
CIS
3 (9)
RR-MS
22 (65)
SP-MS
7 (21)
PP-MS
2 (6)
Disease-modifying treatment, n (%)
Untreated
15 (44)
IFN-β
13 (38)
Natalizumab
4 (12)
Glatiramer acetate
1 (3)
Azathioprine
1 (3)
Continuous data are expressed as mean ± SD. Categorical data are
expressed as the number of observations (%). CIS, clinically isolated syn-
drome; PP-MS, primary progressive MS; RR-MS, relapsing–remitting MS; SP-
MS, secondary progressive MS.
Fig. 1.
No overt differences in alpha or beta diversity were detected by
comparing the fecal microbial profiles of healthy twins with those of MS
twins. (A) Phylogenetic (alpha) diversity of fecal microbiota in healthy twins
(HD, black; n = 34) and MS twins (MS, green; n = 34). (B) PCoA of weighted
UniFrac community distances for fecal microbiota of healthy twins (black;
n = 34) and MS twins (green; n = 34).
10720
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711233114
Berer et al.
 and other environmental factors (13), it was not surprising that
the composition of gnotobiotic mouse fecal samples reflected
incomplete colonization by the human donor microbiota. Similar
changes were noted in previous human-to-mouse transplant ex-
periments (14, 15). PCoA of mouse samples demonstrated
clustering by donor and twin pair but not by EAE disease state
(Fig. 2D). In addition, comparison of the percentage of microbial
genera that was transferred from the human donor to recipient
mice did not indicate any disease-based trends and highlighted a
comparatively high mean transfer rate of 90.3% (Table S2). Fi-
nally, the recipient mouse microbiome remained highly stable
between 2 and 6 wk after colonization, as indicated by repre-
sentative bar plots of mean relative abundance of bacterial
genera and corresponding analysis (Fig. 2E).
Increased Incidence of Spontaneous EAE in RR Mice Colonized with
Microbiota from MS-Affected Twins. Remarkably, RR mice trans-
planted with MS patient-derived microbiota developed sponta-
neous EAE at a higher frequency than animals colonized with
intestinal bacteria from healthy twins (Fig. 3A). The triggering of
EAE in germ-free RR mice by human microbial transfer per se is
notable, considering that so far this has been achieved only with
some mouse-associated bacteria (7). However, monocolonization
with experimental bacterial consortia (such as altered Schaedler
flora) and segmented filamentous bacteria did not induce spon-
taneous EAE (7).
We next set out to determine the differences that made MS-
derived microbiota more pathogenic than healthy-derived sam-
ples. Analysis of the mouse microbiome at the level of individual
taxa revealed significant differences between MS- and healthy
twin-colonized mice, both at the genus and OTU taxonomical
levels. While the genera Adlercreutzia and Tannerella were more
abundant in the feces of mice transplanted with the healthy twin
fecal material, fewer bacteria of the genera Ruminococcus were
present in these mice. The most significant difference, however,
was a reduced abundance of the genus Sutterella in mice colonized
with microbiota from the MS twins compared with recipients of
Fig. 2.
Human microbiota can be efficiently transferred to mouse recipients. (A) Design of humanized gnotobiotic mouse experiment: 6-wk-old, germ-free RR SJL/J
mice were gavaged with fecal samples from the healthy twin or the MS twin from a MZ twin pair. Fecal samples for 16S rRNA sequencing analysis were harvested at
2 and 6 wk after colonization. Humanized gnotobiotic RR mice were observed for the development of clinical signs of EAE for 12 wk. (B) Phylogenetic (alpha)
diversity of fecal microbiota in human twin pairs (purple; n = 8) and mouse recipients (gray; n = 47). ****P < 0.0001 (Mann–Whitney u test). (C) PCoA of weighted
UniFrac community distances comparing fecal microbiota of human donors (purple; n = 8) and mouse recipients (gray; n = 47). (D) PCoA of weighted UniFrac
community distances for fecal microbiota of mice transplanted with microbiota from healthy (n = 23) or MS (n = 24) twins. (E) Mean relative abundances of bacterial
genera in fecal samples of mice that received microbiota of healthy donors (HD; n = 20–26) or MS patients (MS; n = 22–26) at 2 and 6 wk after transplantation.
Berer et al.
PNAS
|
October 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 40
|
10721
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
SEE COMMENTARY
 fecal material from healthy twins (Fig. 3B). Consistent with our
results, Sutterella has previously been associated with better out-
comes in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (16) as well as
with resistance to EAE development in male TNFR2−/− mice (17).
The gut flora may also affect CNS autoimmune responses by
changing the metabolic environment of the gastrointestinal tract
to produce metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) ligands, which are known to affect
microglia and astrocytes (18–20). To identify potential metabolic
pathways that are altered in recipient mice, we performed
shotgun metagenomic sequencing on total stool DNA. In-
terestingly, shotgun metagenomic sequencing of mouse fecal
pellets uncovered several metabolic pathways that were associ-
ated with the MS disease status of the donor and thus were up-
regulated in the intestines of mouse recipients of MS microbiota.
Pathways associated with the disease phenotype included pyru-
vate fermentation, L-tyrosine biosynthesis, and chondroitin sul-
fate degradation (Fig. S4). While the functional significance of
these pathways to MS pathogenesis remains unclear, these re-
sults indicate that the gut microbiome influences MS disease risk
not only through specific bacterial composition, as suggested by
other studies, but also by potentially changing the metabolic
environment of the human gastrointestinal tract. Additional
studies are required to validate these findings as well as to
identify similar associations in a larger cohort of human subjects.
Reduced IL-10 Production in RR Mice Colonized with Microbiota from
MS-Affected Twins. A search for relevant immunological changes
possibly responsible for the differential EAE induction pointed
to IL-10 as a key factor. While the global composition of immune
tissues (dendritic cells, macrophages, and B cells, as well as T cell
subsets, including Foxp3+ regulatory T cells) remained un-
affected by fecal transfers (Fig. S5), there were functional dis-
similarities in the production of antibodies and cytokines. Serum
anti-MOG autoantibody titers of the IgG1 class were slightly
increased in MS-colonized RR mice, while IgG2a levels were
decreased (Fig. S6). In addition, we performed a comprehensive
qPCR-based screening for cytokines and barrier and tight junc-
tion proteins in the small intestine and colon of mouse recipi-
ents. We did not find significant differences in the expression
levels of IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-9, IL-11, IL-18, IL-21, GM-CSF,
IFN-γ, TNF-α, Claudin-1, Claudin-2, Claudin-4, Claudin-5,
Myo9b, Occludin, RegIIIγ, Tjp-1, Tjp-2, or Tjp-3 between mice
transplanted with control or MS twin fecal samples (Fig. S7).
The expression levels of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-22, and IL-27 were
below the detection limit.
Most informative was the pattern of cytokines released by ac-
tivated splenic T cells. There was a modest change in IL-17 re-
lease, with IFN-γ remaining unaltered (Fig. 3C). More strikingly,
spleen cells from recipients of control microbiota produced much
higher amounts of IL-10 upon stimulation with anti-CD3/anti-
CD28 monoclonal antibodies than cells from recipients of MS
Fig. 3.
Intestinal microbiota plays a pivotal role in CNS-specific autoimmunity. (A) Incidence of spontaneous EAE in humanized gnotobiotic RR SJL/J mice.
Germ-free RR SJL/J mice were gavaged with fecal material from healthy (HD; n = 18) or MS (MS; n = 20) twins using in total five MZ twin pairs. *P < 0.05
(Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test). (B) Relative abundance of Sutterella in fecal samples of mice that received the microbiota of healthy donor (HD; n = 23) or an
MS patient (MS; n = 24) using in total five MZ twin pairs. Each circle represents an individual stool sample, and the horizontal line and whiskers indicate
mean ± SEM. ***P < 0.001 (Mann–Whitney u test). (C) Cytokine production by splenocytes from humanized gnotobiotic SJL/J mice. Spleen cells were
stimulated for 72 h with 1 μg/mL anti-CD3 antibody or 1 μg/mL anti-CD3 and 0.5 μg/mL anti-CD28 antibody. Levels of IFN-γ, IL-17, and IL-10 in the supernatants
were measured by ELISA. Bars display mean ± SEM; n = 12–16 mice per group. Data were pooled from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05; **P = 0.0069
(Mann–Whitney u test). (D) IL-10 neutralization increases spontaneous EAE in humanized gnotobiotic RR SJL/J mice. Germ-free RR SJL/J mice were gavaged
with fecal material from healthy twins and were treated weekly with either isotype control antibodies (n = 10) or neutralizing anti–IL-10 antibodies (n = 11).
Data were pooled from two independent experiments.
10722
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711233114
Berer et al.
 microbiota (Fig. 3C). This difference was of functional relevance.
We colonized germ-free RR mice with healthy donor fecal ma-
terial and subsequently treated them with anti–IL-10 neutralizing
or isotype control antibodies. Blocking IL-10 increased disease
incidence compared with isotype control-treated mice (from 30 to
55%; P = 0.0006, Fisher’s exact test) (Fig. 3D).
The immunological profiles observed in the colonized RR
mice were consistent with the patterns observed in PBMCs from
a subgroup of eight twin pairs which included several donors
used for the mouse colonization experiments. There, anti-CD3/
anti-CD28 stimulation induced stronger production of anti-
inflammatory IL-10 in T cells from healthy than from MS do-
nors (Fig. 4A). In contrast, we found no differences in the fre-
quencies of CD4+ T cells, Th1 cells, Th17 cells, and Treg cells
(Fig. S1). Also, production of IFN-γ, IL-17, and IL-4 cytokines in
response to in vitro stimulation with phytohemagglutinin (PHA)
or anti-CD3/anti-CD28 was largely indistinguishable between T
cells from MS-affected and healthy twins (Fig. 4B).
Discussion
Chronic inflammatory diseases have been recently associated with
altered profiles of the intestinal bacterial flora (21). These changes
were revealed by studies making use of new sequencing technol-
ogies, which, however, cannot per se resolve whether the microbial
changes were primary or secondary to cognate diseases. Causal
relations were established in metabolic conditions such as obe-
sity by transplanting human-derived microbiota to rodents; these
recipients of disease-derived fecal samples developed an equiva-
lent metabolic condition (22). Applying similar strategies to
studies of chronic autoimmune or degenerative diseases (23–25)
has remained more challenging. This definitely applies to explor-
ing links between MS and changes of intestinal microbiota.
Here we took a two-tiered approach to address this question.
First, we compared the intestinal microbial profiles of MS twins
and healthy twins by microbial 16S rRNA amplicon and met-
agenomic shotgun sequencing. Second, we transplanted fecal
samples from MS-affected and healthy twins into germ-free
mice. We did not detect significant differences in MS-related
microbial profiles between MS-affected and healthy twins. In
this respect, our results differ from findings reported by others.
A recent study using pyrosequencing of 16S rRNA gene in 20
Japanese patients with RR MS detected associations with
Clostridium and Bacteroidetes species (26). These signatures
were not seen in our cohort, nor were they reported in another
independent screening (27). However, it should be noted that
these studies (including our own) are relatively limited in size.
Second, it is likely that microbial associations vary according to
geographical region, human genetic background, and many
other factors, including treatment. However, it is worth noting
that, after adjusting for treatment, we found Akkermansia
species were increased in untreated MS twins, which was also
found to be increased in another independent cohort of MS
patients [see ref. 27 and the companion paper by Cekanaviciute
et al. (28)]. Third, fecal material may be suboptimal for
studying processes possibly restricted to circumscribed intesti-
nal segments. Gut microbiota differ radically in their functional
potential, density, and composition along different segments
of the small and large intestine (29). Thus, in the feces, path-
ogenic organisms populating the small intestine at low density
could be eclipsed by high-density colonic communities. Obvi-
ously, more detailed studies of much larger cohorts are needed
to further explore the complexities of MS-related microbial
associations.
The second tier of our strategy, transfer of human microbiota
into germ-free RR mice, led to a particularly interesting obser-
vation. We found that not only could human microbiota trigger
classic RR EAE, but, even more significantly, transplants from
MS-affected donors triggered EAE at higher rates than did
transplants from their healthy control-derived counterparts. This
difference was not large in magnitude but was significant and
reproducible. A detailed analysis of 16S rRNA sequences
revealed significant differences between MS- and healthy twin-
colonized mice at the level of individual taxa (genera and
OTUs). The most prominent MS-dependent change was a re-
duction in the bacterial genus Sutterella.
The increased incidence of spontaneous EAE in MS sample-
recipient gnotobiotic RR mice could be due to either increased
activation of autoimmune effector T cells or a weakened regu-
latory mechanism. Our results seem to favor the latter. Indeed,
functional screening of peripheral blood lymphocytes from a
subgroup of monozygotic twins indicated decreased IL-10 pro-
duction in MS-derived samples. This is in accord with previous
work, which described decreases of Tr1-like, IL-10–producing
T cells (30–32). The differential IL-10 response noted in human
PBMCs was mirrored in gnotobiotic RR mice. In germfree RR
mice recolonized with MS-derived fecal samples, spleen T cells
produce less IL-10 than their equivalents from control sample
recipients. This recalls previous reports describing enhanced IL-
10 production in the intestinal immune system driven by bacte-
rial polysaccharide A (33) and protection from actively induced
CNS autoimmune disease (34). A relative lack of protective
factors rather than an increase in disease-promoting factors is
also supported by our observation that in vivo treatment with
anti–IL-10 antibody resulted in an increased incidence of spon-
taneous EAE in our RR model. Although there is currently no
Fig. 4.
Gut bacteria from healthy twins trigger an antiinflammatory T cell
response. (A) IL-10 production of CD4+ T cells isolated from PBMCs of se-
lected twin pairs. T cells were stimulated for 96 h with 1 μg/mL anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 antibodies. Levels of IL-10 (seven pairs, two singletons) in the
supernatants were measured by ELISA. *P < 0.05 (Wilcoxon test). (B) Cyto-
kine profiles of CD4+ T cells isolated from PBMCs of selected twin pairs
Depending on PBMC availability and quality, eight twin pairs were selected
for further in vitro stimulation assays, and data are depicted for each cyto-
kine where stimulation-dependent production above the individual de-
tection level could be documented. T cells were stimulated for 48 h with 5
μg/mL PHA. Levels of IFN-γ (five pairs, three singletons), IL-17 (eight pairs),
and IL-4 (seven pairs, one singleton) in the supernatants were measured by
the Luminex Bead-based Multiplex Assay.
Berer et al.
PNAS
|
October 3, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 40
|
10723
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
SEE COMMENTARY
 conclusive evidence of a genetic association of MS with the IL-
10 gene or IL-10–related pathways, this by no means excludes
the possibility that this crucially important pathway is modulated
by external factors (e.g., microbiota).
In conclusion, we here provide evidence that human MS-
derived microbiota contain factors that precipitate an MS-like
autoimmune disease in a humanized transgenic mouse model.
This observation provides possibilities for characterizing the
precise role and functional mechanisms by which the human
intestinal microbiota contributes to the pathogenesis of neuro-
inflammatory diseases. The findings may eventually have im-
portant implications not only for the pathogenesis but also for
the therapy and potentially even prevention of human MS.
Methods
Details of cohort recruitment, sample acquisition, and information collection
are provided in SI Methods. The study was approved by the local Ethics
Committee of the Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, and all partici-
pants gave written informed consent. All animal procedures were in accor-
dance with the guidelines of the Committee on Animals of the Max Planck
Institute of Neurobiology and the Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology
and Epigenetics with a license from the Regierung von Oberbayern as well as
the Regierungspräsidium Freiburg. Procedures for 16S and metagenomic
sequencing, data analysis, mouse colonization, flow cytometry, ELISA, cy-
tokine profiling, and real-time qPCR are described in detail in SI Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Prof. Thomas Boehm for supervising the
maintenance of our germ-free mouse colony; Birgit Kunkel for technical
assistance; Norbert Joswig, Melanie Pfunder, Manuela Schätzle, and Chris-
tian Schauerte for maintaining our germ-free colony and for technical sup-
port; Angelika Bamberger for support in patient care; Dr. Klaus Dornmair
and Dr. Naoto Kawakami for helpful suggestions and comments; and
Dr. Nicolaus König for support in the recruitment of the twin cohort. We also
thank the international multiple sclerosis microbiome consortium (iMSMS) for
helpful discussions and feedback. This work was funded by the Hertie Foun-
dation, a DFG Koselleck Award, DFG Grant TR-128, the German Competence
Network on Multiple Federal and Bavarian Divisions of the German MS
Society, Verein Therapieforschung für MS Kranke e.V., Cyliax Stiftung, and
the Max Planck Society. K.B. was supported by the James Heineman Re-
search Award of the Minerva Stiftung. G.K. is supported by European Re-
search Council Starting Grant GAMES 635617. S.E.B. is supported by grants
from the US Department of Defense and the US National MS Society. E.C.
is supported by a NIH/Institutional Research and Academic Career Devel-
opment Award.
1. Wekerle H (2015) Nature plus nurture: The triggering of multiple sclerosis. Swiss Med
Wkly 145:w14189.
2. Sawcer S, Franklin RJ, Ban M (2014) Multiple sclerosis genetics. Lancet Neurol 13:
700–709.
3. Simon KC, Munger KL, Ascherio A (2011) XVI European Charcot Foundation lecture:
Nutrition and environment: Can MS be prevented? J Neurol Sci 311:1–8.
4. Berer K, Krishnamoorthy G (2014) Microbial view of central nervous system autoim-
munity. FEBS Lett 588:4207–4213.
5. Wekerle H, Hohlfeld R (2016) Gut Microbiota in Multiple Sclerosis: A Bioreactor
Driving Brain Autoimmunity (Elsevier, Amsterdam), pp 113–123.
6. Pöllinger B, et al. (2009) Spontaneous relapsing-remitting EAE in the SJL/J mouse:
MOG-reactive transgenic T cells recruit endogenous MOG-specific B cells. J Exp Med
206:1303–1316.
7. Berer K, et al. (2011) Commensal microbiota and myelin autoantigen cooperate to
trigger autoimmune demyelination. Nature 479:538–541.
8. Goodrich JK, et al. (2014) Human genetics shape the gut microbiome. Cell 159:
789–799.
9. Goodrich JK, Davenport ER, Waters JL, Clark AG, Ley RE (2016) Cross-species com-
parisons of host genetic associations with the microbiome. Science 352:532–535.
10. Sampson TR, Mazmanian SK (2015) Control of brain development, function, and
behavior by the microbiome. Cell Host Microbe 17:565–576.
11. Polman CH, et al. (2011) Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the
McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol 69:292–302.
12. Lublin FD, et al. (2014) Defining the clinical course of multiple sclerosis: The 2013 re-
visions. Neurology 83:278–286.
13. Seedorf H, et al. (2014) Bacteria from diverse habitats colonize and compete in the
mouse gut. Cell 159:253–266.
14. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. (2009) The effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: A
metagenomic analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci Transl Med 1:6ra14.
15. Chung H, et al. (2012) Gut immune maturation depends on colonization with a host-
specific microbiota. Cell 149:1578–1593.
16. Morgan BP, Harris CL (2015) Complement, a target for therapy in inflammatory and
degenerative diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov 14:857–877.
17. Miller PG, Bonn MB, Franklin CL, Ericsson AC, McKarns SC (2015) TNFR2 deficiency acts
in concert with gut microbiota to precipitate spontaneous sex-biased central nervous
system demyelinating autoimmune disease. J Immunol 195:4668–4684.
18. Erny D, et al. (2015) Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of
microglia in the CNS. Nat Neurosci 18:965–977.
19. Sampson TR, et al. (2016) Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuro-
inflammation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell 167:1469–1480.e12.
20. Rothhammer V, et al. (2016) Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of trypto-
phan modulate astrocyte activity and central nervous system inflammation via the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Nat Med 22:586–597.
21. Kamada N, Seo SU, Chen GY, Núñez G (2013) Role of the gut microbiota in immunity
and inflammatory disease. Nat Rev Immunol 13:321–335.
22. Ridaura VK, et al. (2013) Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity modulate
metabolism in mice. Science 341:1241214.
23. Zhang X, et al. (2015) The oral and gut microbiomes are perturbed in rheumatoid
arthritis and partly normalized after treatment. Nat Med 21:895–905.
24. de Goffau MC, et al. (2013) Fecal microbiota composition differs between children
with β-cell autoimmunity and those without. Diabetes 62:1238–1244.
25. Scheperjans F, et al. (2015) Gut microbiota are related to Parkinson’s disease and
clinical phenotype. Mov Disord 30:350–358.
26. Miyake S, et al. (2015) Dysbiosis in the gut microbiota of patients with multiple
sclerosis, with a striking depletion of species belonging to Clostridia XIVa and IV
clusters. PLoS One 10:e0137429.
27. Jangi S, et al. (2016) Alterations of the human gut microbiome in multiple sclerosis.
Nat Commun 7:12015.
28. Cekanaviciute E, et al. (2017) Gut bacteria from multiple sclerosis patients modulate
human T cells and exacerbate symptoms in mouse models. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA,
10.1073/pnas1711235114.
29. Walter J, Ley R (2011) The human gut microbiome: Ecology and recent evolutionary
changes. Annu Rev Microbiol 65:411–429.
30. Astier AL, Meiffren G, Freeman S, Hafler DA (2006) Alterations in CD46-mediated
Tr1 regulatory T cells in patients with multiple sclerosis. J Clin Invest 116:3252–3257.
31. Martinez-Forero I, et al. (2008) IL-10 suppressor activity and ex vivo Tr1 cell function
are impaired in multiple sclerosis. Eur J Immunol 38:576–586.
32. Cao Y, et al. (2015) Functional inflammatory profiles distinguish myelin-reactive T cells
from patients with multiple sclerosis. Sci Transl Med 7:287ra74.
33. Round JL, Mazmanian SK (2010) Inducible Foxp3+ regulatory T-cell development by a
commensal bacterium of the intestinal microbiota. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:
12204–12209.
34. Wang Y, et al. (2014) An intestinal commensal symbiosis factor controls neuro-
inflammation via TLR2-mediated CD39 signalling. Nat Commun 5:4432.
35. Navas-Molina JA, et al. (2013) Advancing our understanding of the human micro-
biome using QIIME. Methods Enzymol 531:371–444.
36. Kopylova E, et al. (2016) Open-source sequence clustering methods improve the state
of the art. mSystems 1:e00003–e00015.
37. Faith DP, Baker AM (2007) Phylogenetic diversity (PD) and biodiversity conservation:
Some bioinformatics challenges. Evol Bioinform Online 2:121–128.
38. Lozupone C, Knight R (2005) UniFrac: A new phylogenetic method for comparing
microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:8228–8235.
39. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S (2014) Moderated estimation of fold change and dis-
persion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15:550.
10724
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711233114
Berer et al.
