 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Guideline
for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
Sandra I. Berríos-Torres, MD; Craig A. Umscheid, MD, MSCE; Dale W. Bratzler, DO, MPH; Brian Leas, MA, MS;
Erin C. Stone, MA; Rachel R. Kelz, MD, MSCE; Caroline E. Reinke, MD, MSHP; Sherry Morgan, RN, MLS, PhD;
Joseph S. Solomkin, MD; John E. Mazuski, MD, PhD; E. Patchen Dellinger, MD; Kamal M. F. Itani, MD;
Elie F. Berbari, MD; John Segreti, MD; Javad Parvizi, MD; Joan Blanchard, MSS, BSN, RN, CNOR, CIC;
George Allen, PhD, CIC, CNOR; Jan A. J. W. Kluytmans, MD; Rodney Donlan, PhD; William P. Schecter, MD;
for the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
IMPORTANCE The human and financial costs of treating surgical site infections (SSIs) are
increasing. The number of surgical procedures performed in the United States continues to
rise, and surgical patients are initially seen with increasingly complex comorbidities. It is
estimated that approximately half of SSIs are deemed preventable using evidence-based
strategies.
OBJECTIVE To provide new and updated evidence-based recommendations for the
prevention of SSI.
EVIDENCE REVIEW A targeted systematic review of the literature was conducted in MEDLINE,
EMBASE, CINAHL, and the Cochrane Library from 1998 through April 2014. A modified
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach
was used to assess the quality of evidence and the strength of the resulting recommendation
and to provide explicit links between them. Of 5759 titles and abstracts screened, 896
underwent full-text review by 2 independent reviewers. After exclusions, 170 studies were
extracted into evidence tables, appraised, and synthesized.
FINDINGS Before surgery, patients should shower or bathe (full body) with soap
(antimicrobial or nonantimicrobial) or an antiseptic agent on at least the night before the
operative day. Antimicrobial prophylaxis should be administered only when indicated based
on published clinical practice guidelines and timed such that a bactericidal concentration of
the agents is established in the serum and tissues when the incision is made. In cesarean
section procedures, antimicrobial prophylaxis should be administered before skin incision.
Skin preparation in the operating room should be performed using an alcohol-based agent
unless contraindicated. For clean and clean-contaminated procedures, additional
prophylactic antimicrobial agent doses should not be administered after the surgical incision
is closed in the operating room, even in the presence of a drain. Topical antimicrobial agents
should not be applied to the surgical incision. During surgery, glycemic control should be
implemented using blood glucose target levels less than 200 mg/dL, and normothermia
should be maintained in all patients. Increased fraction of inspired oxygen should be
administered during surgery and after extubation in the immediate postoperative period for
patients with normal pulmonary function undergoing general anesthesia with endotracheal
intubation. Transfusion of blood products should not be withheld from surgical patients as a
means to prevent SSI.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE This guideline is intended to provide new and updated
evidence-based recommendations for the prevention of SSI and should be incorporated into
comprehensive surgical quality improvement programs to improve patient safety.
JAMA Surg. 2017;152(8):784-791. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2017.0904
Published online May 3, 2017. Corrected on June 21, 2017.
Invited Commentary page 791
Supplemental content
CME Quiz at
jamanetwork.com/learning
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Group Information: The Healthcare
Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Erin C.
Stone, MA, Division of Healthcare
Quality Promotion, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention,
1660 Clifton Rd NE, Mail Stop A07
Atlanta, GA 30329
(ecstone@cdc.gov).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA Surgery | Special Communication
784
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 S
urgical site infections (SSIs) are infections of the incision or
organorspacethatoccuraftersurgery.1Surgicalpatientsini-
tiallyseenwithmorecomplexcomorbidities2andtheemer-
gence of antimicrobial-resistant pathogens increase the cost and
challengeoftreatingSSIs.3-5ThepreventionofSSIisincreasinglyim-
portant as the number of surgical procedures performed in the
United States continues to rise.6,7 Public reporting of process, out-
come,andotherqualityimprovementmeasuresisnowrequired,8,9
and reimbursements10 for treating SSIs are being reduced or de-
nied. It has been estimated that approximately half of SSIs are pre-
ventable by application of evidence-based strategies.11
Methods
This guideline focuses on select areas for the prevention of SSI
deemed important to undergo evidence assessment for the ad-
vancementofthefield.Theseareasoffocuswereinformedbyfeed-
back received from clinical experts and input from the Healthcare
Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC), a fed-
eraladvisorycommitteetotheCentersforDiseaseControlandPre-
vention (CDC). This guideline was a systematic review of the litera-
ture.Noinstitutionalreviewboardapprovalorparticipantinformed
consent was necessary.
This guideline’
s recommendations were developed based on a
targetedsystematicreviewofthebestavailableevidenceonSSIpre-
vention conducted in MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, and the Coch-
rane Library from 1998 through April 2014. To provide explicit links
between the evidence and recommendations, a modified Grading
of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation
(GRADE) approach was used for evaluating the quality of evidence
and determining the strength of recommendations.12-15 The meth-
ods and structure of this guideline were adopted in 2009 by CDC
and HICPAC.16,17 The present guideline does not reevaluate several
strong recommendations offered by CDC’
s 1999 Guideline for Pre-
ventionofSurgicalSiteInfection18thatarenowconsideredtobeac-
cepted practice for the prevention of SSI. These recommendations
arefoundineAppendix1oftheSupplement.Adetaileddescription
oftheGuidelineQuestions,ScopeandPurpose,andMethods,aswell
astheEvidenceSummariessupportingtheevidence-basedrecom-
mendations, can also be found in eAppendix 1 of the Supplement.
Thedetailedliteraturesearchstrategies,GRADETables,andEvi-
dence Tables supporting each section can be found in eAppendix 2
oftheSupplement.Resultsoftheentirestudyselectionprocessare
shownintheFigure.Of5759titlesandabstractsscreened,896un-
derwent full-text review by 2 independent reviewers. Full-text ar-
ticles were excluded if: 1) SSI was not reported as an outcome; 2) all
patients included had “
dirty”surgical procedures (except for Q2
Figure. Results of the Study Selection Process
719 Studies excluded
592 Not relevant to key questions
4 Not in English
117 Study design
6 Not available as full-text article
25 Studies excluded, not relevant
to key questions
17 Clinical practice guidelines excluded
4863 Studies excluded
5487 Potentially relevant studies
identified in literature searches
104 Studies suggested by content
experts
26 Clinical practice guidelines
19 Additional clinical practice guidelines
identified by writing group
170 Studies extracted into evidence
and GRADE tables
28 Clinical practice guidelines
cited in present guideline
44 RCTs identified from excluded SRs
5759 Titles and abstracts screened
896 Full-text review
168 Studies cited in 1999 CDC
SSI guideline
CDC indicates Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; RCTs, randomized
controlled trials; SRs, systematic reviews; and SSI, surgical site infection.
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
785
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 addressingtheuseofaqueousiodophorirrigation);3)thestudyonly
included oral or dental health procedures; 4) the surgical proce-
dures did not include primary closure of the incision in the operat-
ing room (eg, orthopedic pin sites, thoracotomies, or percutane-
ous endoscopic gastrostomy [PEG] procedures, or wounds healing
by secondary intention); or 5) the study evaluated wound protec-
tors used postincision. Evidence-based recommendations in this
guidelinewerecross-checkedwiththosefromotherguidelinesiden-
tified in a systematic search.
CDC completed a draft of the guideline and shared it with the
expert panel for in-depth review and then with HICPAC and mem-
bers of the public at committee meetings (June 2010 to July
2015). CDC posted notice in the Federal Register for the following
2 periods of public comment: from January 29 to February 28,
2014, and from April 8 to May 8, 2014. Comments were aggre-
gated and reviewed with the writing group and at another
HICPAC meeting. Based on the comments received, the literature
search was updated, and new data were incorporated into a
revised draft. Further input was provided by HICPAC during a
public teleconference in May 2015. Final HICPAC input was pro-
vided via a vote by majority rule in July 2015. After final HICPAC
input, CDC updated the draft document and obtained final CDC
clearance and coauthor approval.
Recommendation Categories
Recommendationswerecategorizedusingthefollowingstandardsys-
tem that reflects the level of supporting evidence or regulations:
•CategoryIA:Astrongrecommendationsupportedbyhightomod-
erate–quality evidence suggesting net clinical benefits or harms.
•Category IB: A strong recommendation supported by low-quality
evidence suggesting net clinical benefits or harms or an accepted
practice (eg, aseptic technique) supported by low to very
low–quality evidence.
•Category IC: A strong recommendation required by state or fed-
eral regulation.
•Category II: A weak recommendation supported by any quality
evidence suggesting a trade-off between clinical benefits and
harms.
•Norecommendation/unresolvedissue:Anissueforwhichthereis
low to very low–quality evidence with uncertain trade-offs be-
tween the benefits and harms or no published evidence on out-
comesdeemedcriticaltoweighingtherisksandbenefitsofagiven
intervention.
Recommendations
Core Section
In 2006, approximately 80 million surgical procedures were per-
formed in the United States at inpatient hospitals (46 million)7
and ambulatory hospital–affiliated or freestanding (32 million)
settings.6 Between 2006 and 2009, SSIs complicated approxi-
mately 1.9% of surgical procedures in the United States.19 How-
ever, the number of SSIs is likely to be underestimated given that
approximately 50% of SSIs become evident after discharge.20
Estimated mean attributable costs of SSIs range from $10 443 in
2005 US dollars to $25 546 in 2002 US dollars per infection.3-5,11
Costs can exceed $90 000 per infection when the SSI involves a
prosthetic joint implant21,22 or an antimicrobial-resistant
organism.23 The Core Section of this guideline (eAppendix 1 of the
Supplement) includes recommendations for the prevention of SSI
that are generalizable across surgical procedures, with some
exceptions as mentioned below.
Parenteral Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
1A.1. Administer preoperative antimicrobial agents only when indi-
catedbasedonpublishedclinicalpracticeguidelinesandtimedsuch
that a bactericidal concentration of the agents is established in the
serum and tissues when the incision is made. (Category IB–strong
recommendation; accepted practice.)
1A.2. No further refinement of timing can be made for preoperative
antimicrobialagentsbasedonclinicaloutcomes.(Norecommendation/
unresolved issue.)
1B. Administer the appropriate parenteral prophylactic antimicro-
bial agents before skin incision in all cesarean section procedures.
(Category IA–strong recommendation; high-quality evidence.)
1C.Theliteraturesearchdidnotidentifyrandomizedcontrolledtrials
that evaluated the benefits and harms of weight-adjusted paren-
teral antimicrobial prophylaxis dosing and its effect on the risk of
SSI. Other organizations have made recommendations based on
observational and pharmacokinetic data, and a summary of these
recommendations can be found in the Other Guidelines section of
thenarrativesummaryforthisquestion(eAppendix1oftheSupple-
ment). (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
1D.Thesearchdidnotidentifysufficientrandomizedcontrolledtrial
evidence to evaluate the benefits and harms of intraoperative re-
dosing of parenteral prophylactic antimicrobial agents for the pre-
vention of SSI. Other organizations have made recommendations
based on observational and pharmacokinetic data, and a summary
oftheserecommendationscanbefoundintheOtherGuidelinessec-
tion of the narrative summary for this question (eAppendix 1 of the
Supplement). (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
1E. In clean and clean-contaminated procedures, do not administer
additional prophylactic antimicrobial agent doses after the surgical
incision is closed in the operating room, even in the presence of
a drain. (Category IA–strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence.)
Nonparenteral Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
2A.1. Randomized controlled trial evidence suggested uncertain
trade-offs between the benefits and harms regarding intraopera-
tive antimicrobial irrigation (eg, intra-abdominal, deep, or subcuta-
neous tissues) for the prevention of SSI. Other organizations have
maderecommendationsbasedontheexistingevidence,andasum-
mary of these recommendations can be found in the Other Guide-
lines section of the narrative summary for this question (eAppen-
dix 1 of the Supplement). (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
2A.2. The search did not identify randomized controlled trials that
evaluated soaking prosthetic devices in antimicrobial solutions be-
fore implantation for the prevention of SSI. (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
786
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 2B.1. Do not apply antimicrobial agents (ie, ointments, solutions, or
powders) to the surgical incision for the prevention of SSI. (Cat-
egory IB–strong recommendation; low-quality evidence.)
2B.2. Application of autologous platelet-rich plasma is not neces-
sary for the prevention of SSI. (Category II–weak recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence suggesting a trade-off between clinical
benefits and harms.)
2C. Consider the use of triclosan-coated sutures for the prevention
of SSI. (Category II–weak recommendation; moderate-quality evi-
dence suggesting a trade-off between clinical benefits and harms.)
2D.Randomizedcontrolledtrialevidencesuggesteduncertaintrade-
offs between the benefits and harms regarding antimicrobial
dressings applied to surgical incisions after primary closure in the
operating room for the prevention of SSI. (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
Glycemic Control
3A.1. Implement perioperative glycemic control and use blood glu-
cose target levels less than 200 mg/dL in patients with and with-
out diabetes. (Category IA–strong recommendation; high to mod-
erate–quality evidence.)
3A.2. The search did not identify randomized controlled trials that
evaluatedlower(<200mg/dL)ornarrowerbloodglucosetargetlev-
els than recommended in this guideline nor the optimal timing, du-
ration,ordeliverymethodofperioperativeglycemiccontrolforthe
prevention of SSI. Other organizations have made recommenda-
tionsbasedonobservationalevidence,andasummaryoftheserec-
ommendations can be found in the Other Guidelines section of the
narrative summary for this question (eAppendix 1 of the Supple-
ment). (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
3B. The search did not identify randomized controlled trials that
evaluatedtheoptimalhemoglobinA1Ctargetlevelsforthepreven-
tion of SSI in patients with and without diabetes. (No recommen-
dation/unresolved issue.)
Normothermia
4. Maintain perioperative normothermia. (Category IA–strong
recommendation; high to moderate–quality evidence.)
5.Thesearchdidnotidentifyrandomizedcontrolledtrialsthatevalu-
ated strategies to achieve and maintain normothermia, the lower
limit of normothermia, or the optimal timing and duration of nor-
mothermia for the prevention of SSI. Other organizations have
made recommendations based on observational evidence, and a
summary of these recommendations can be found in the Other
Guidelines section of the narrative summary for this question
(eAppendix 1 of the Supplement). (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
Oxygenation
6A.Randomizedcontrolledtrialevidencesuggesteduncertaintrade-
offs between the benefits and harms regarding the administration
of increased fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2) via endotracheal in-
tubation during only the intraoperative period in patients with nor-
malpulmonaryfunctionundergoinggeneralanesthesiaforthepre-
vention of SSI. (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
6B. For patients with normal pulmonary function undergoing gen-
eralanesthesiawithendotrachealintubation,administerincreased
FIO2 during surgery and after extubation in the immediate postop-
erative period. To optimize tissue oxygen delivery, maintain peri-
operative normothermia and adequate volume replacement. (Cat-
egory IA–strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence.)
6C.Randomizedcontrolledtrialevidencesuggesteduncertaintrade-
offs between the benefits and harms regarding the administration
of increased FIO2 via face mask during the perioperative period in
patients with normal pulmonary function undergoing general an-
esthesiawithoutendotrachealintubationorneuraxialanesthesia(ie,
spinal,epidural,orlocalnerveblocks)forthepreventionofSSI.(No
recommendation/unresolved issue.)
6D. Randomized controlled trial evidence suggested uncertain
trade-offs between the benefits and harms regarding the admin-
istration of increased FIO2 via face mask or nasal cannula during
only the postoperative period in patients with normal pulmonary
function for the prevention of SSI. (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
7.Thesearchdidnotidentifyrandomizedcontrolledtrialsthatevalu-
atedtheoptimaltargetlevel,duration,anddeliverymethodofFIO2
for the prevention of SSI. Other organizations have made recom-
mendationsbasedonobservationalstudies,andasummaryofthese
recommendations can be found in the Other Guidelines section of
thenarrativesummaryforthisquestion(eAppendix1oftheSupple-
ment). (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
Antiseptic Prophylaxis
8A.1. Advise patients to shower or bathe (full body) with soap (an-
timicrobialornonantimicrobial)oranantisepticagentonatleastthe
night before the operative day. (Category IB–strong recommenda-
tion; accepted practice.)
8A.2. Randomized controlled trial evidence suggested uncertain
trade-offs between the benefits and harms regarding the optimal
timingofthepreoperativeshowerorbath,thetotalnumberofsoap
or antiseptic agent applications, or the use of chlorhexidine glu-
conatewashclothsforthepreventionofSSI.(Norecommendation/
unresolved issue.)
8B. Perform intraoperative skin preparation with an alcohol-based
antiseptic agent unless contraindicated. (Category IA–strong rec-
ommendation; high-quality evidence.)
8C.Applicationofamicrobialsealantimmediatelyafterintraopera-
tiveskinpreparationisnotnecessaryforthepreventionofSSI.(Cat-
egoryII–weakrecommendation;low-qualityevidencesuggestinga
trade-off between clinical benefits and harms.)
8D. The use of plastic adhesive drapes with or without antimicro-
bial properties is not necessary for the prevention of SSI. (Category
II–weak recommendation; high to moderate–quality evidence sug-
gesting a trade-off between clinical benefits and harms.)
9A. Consider intraoperative irrigation of deep or subcutaneous
tissueswithaqueousiodophorsolutionforthepreventionofSSI.In-
traperitoneal lavage with aqueous iodophor solution in contami-
nated or dirty abdominal procedures is not necessary. (Category
II–weakrecommendation;moderate-qualityevidencesuggestinga
trade-off between clinical benefits and harms.)
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
787
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 9B. The search did not identify randomized controlled trials that
evaluated soaking prosthetic devices in antiseptic solutions before
implantation for the prevention of SSI. (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
10. Randomized controlled trial evidence was insufficient to evalu-
ate the trade-offs between the benefits and harms of repeat appli-
cation of antiseptic agents to the patient’
s skin immediately before
closing the surgical incision for the prevention of SSI. (No recom-
mendation/unresolved issue.)
Prosthetic Joint Arthroplasty Section
Prevention efforts should target all surgical procedures but espe-
cially those in which the human and financial burden is greatest.
In 2011, primary total knee arthroplasty accounted for more than
half of the 1.2 million prosthetic joint arthroplasty procedures (pri-
mary and revision) performed in the United States, followed by
total hip arthroplasty and hip hemiarthroplasty.24 Primary shoul-
der, elbow, and ankle arthroplasties are much less common. By
2030, prosthetic joint arthroplasties are projected to increase to
3.8 million procedures per year.25-27
Infection is the most common indication for revision in total
knee arthroplasty28 and the third most common indication in
total hip arthroplasty.28 By 2030, the infection risk for hip
and knee arthroplasty is expected to increase from 2.18%22 to
6.5% and 6.8%, respectively.25 In addition, owing to increasing
risk and the number of individuals undergoing prosthetic joint
arthroplasty procedures, the total number of hip and knee pros-
thetic joint infections is projected to increase to 221 500 cases
per year by 2030, at a cost of more than $1.62 billion.22,25 The
Prosthetic Joint Arthroplasty section contains recommendations
that are applicable to these procedures (eAppendix 1 of the
Supplement).
Blood Transfusion
11A. Available evidence suggested uncertain trade-offs between
the benefits and harms of blood transfusions on the risk of
SSI in prosthetic joint arthroplasty. Other organizations
have made recommendations on this topic, and a reference
to these recommendations can be found in the Other Guide-
lines section of the narrative summary for this question (eAppen-
dix 1 of the Supplement). (No recommendation/unresolved
issue.)
11B. Do not withhold transfusion of necessary blood products from
surgicalpatientsasameanstopreventSSI.(CategoryIB–strongrec-
ommendation; accepted practice.)
Systemic Immunosuppressive Therapy
12 and 13. Available evidence suggested uncertain trade-offs
between the benefits and harms of systemic corticosteroid
or other immunosuppressive therapies on the risk of SSI in
prosthetic joint arthroplasty. Other organizations have made
recommendations based on the existing evidence, and a sum-
mary of these recommendations can be found in the Other
Guidelines section of the narrative summary for this question
(eAppendix 1 of the Supplement). (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
14. For prosthetic joint arthroplasty patients receiving systemic
corticosteroid or other immunosuppressive therapy, recommen-
dation 1E applies: in clean and clean-contaminated procedures,
do not administer additional antimicrobial prophylaxis doses after
thesurgical incision is closed in the operating room, even in the
presence of a drain. (Category IA–strong recommendation; high-
quality evidence.)
Intra-articular Corticosteroid Injection
15 and 16. Available evidence suggested uncertain trade-offs
between the benefits and harms of the use and timing of preop-
erative intra-articular corticosteroid injection on the incidence of
SSI in prosthetic joint arthroplasty. Other organizations have
made recommendations based on observational studies, and a
summary of these recommendations can be found in the Other
Guidelines section of the narrative summary for this question
(eAppendix 1 of the Supplement). (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
Anticoagulation
17. Available evidence suggested uncertain trade-offs between
the benefits and harms of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
on the incidence of SSI in prosthetic joint arthroplasty. Other
organizations have made recommendations based on the existing
evidence, and these references can be found in the Other Guide-
lines section of the narrative summary for this question (eAppen-
dix 1 of the Supplement). (No recommendation/unresolved
issue.)
Orthopedic Surgical Space Suit
18. Available evidence suggested uncertain trade-offs between the
benefitsandharmsoforthopedicspacesuitsorthehealthcareper-
sonnel who should wear them for the prevention of SSI in pros-
thetic joint arthroplasty. (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
Postoperative Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
Duration With Drain Use
19. In prosthetic joint arthroplasty, recommendation 1E applies: in
cleanandclean-contaminatedprocedures,donotadministeraddi-
tional antimicrobial prophylaxis doses after the surgical incision is
closed in the operating room, even in the presence of a drain. (Cat-
egory IA–strong recommendation; high-quality evidence.)
Biofilm
20A.Availableevidencesuggesteduncertaintrade-offsbetweenthe
benefits and harms regarding cement modifications and the pre-
vention of biofilm formation or SSI in prosthetic joint arthroplasty.
(No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
20B.Thesearchdidnotidentifystudiesevaluatingprosthesismodi-
fications for the prevention of biofilm formation or SSI in pros-
thetic joint arthroplasty. (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
20C.Thesearchdidnotidentifystudiesevaluatingvaccinesforthe
prevention of biofilm formation or SSI in prosthetic joint arthro-
plasty. (No recommendation/unresolved issue.)
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
788
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 20D. The search did not identify studies evaluating biofilm control
agents, such as biofilm dispersants, quorum sensing inhibitors, or
novel antimicrobial agents, for the prevention of biofilm formation
or SSI in prosthetic joint arthroplasty. (No recommendation/
unresolved issue.)
Conclusions
Surgical site infections are persistent and preventable health care–
associated infections. There is increasing demand for evidence-
basedinterventionsforthepreventionofSSI.Thelastversionofthe
CDC Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection18 was pub-
lishedin1999.Whiletheguidelinewasevidenceinformed,mostrec-
ommendationswerebasedonexpertopinion,intheerabeforeevi-
dence-based guideline methods. CDC updated that version of the
guideline using GRADE as the evidence-based method that pro-
videsthefoundationoftherecommendationsinthisguideline.These
new and updated recommendations are not only useful for health
care professionals but also can be used as a resource for profes-
sional societies or organizations to develop more detailed imple-
mentationguidanceortoidentifyfutureresearchpriorities.Thepau-
cityofrobustevidenceacrosstheentireguidelinecreatedchallenges
in formulating recommendations for the prevention of SSI. None-
theless, the thoroughness and transparency achieved using a sys-
tematic review and the GRADE approach to address clinical ques-
tionsofinteresttostakeholdersarecriticaltothevalidityoftheclinical
recommendations.
The number of unresolved issues in this guideline reveals sub-
stantial gaps that warrant future research. A select list of these un-
resolved issues may be prioritized to formulate a research agenda
toadvancethefield.Adequatelypowered,well-designedstudiesthat
assesstheeffectofspecificinterventionsontheincidenceofSSIare
neededtoaddresstheseevidencegaps.Subsequentrevisionstothis
guidelinewillbeguidedbynewresearchandtechnologicaladvance-
ments for preventing SSIs.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 1, 2017.
Correction: This article was corrected on June 21,
2017, to fix corrupted numbering and update
abstract and methods.
Published Online: May 3, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2017.0904
Author Affiliations: Division of Healthcare Quality
Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia (Berríos-Torres, Stone,
Donlan); Center for Evidence-Based Practice,
University of Pennsylvania Health System,
Philadelphia (Umscheid, Leas, Kelz, Morgan);
College of Public Health, The University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City
(Bratzler); Carolinas Healthcare System, Charlotte,
North Carolina (Reinke); Department of Surgery,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio (Solomkin); Section of Acute and
Critical Care Surgery, Washington University School
of Medicine in St Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri
(Mazuski); American College of Surgeons
Representative, University of Washington Medical
Center, Seattle (Dellinger); Surgical Infection
Society Representative, Veterans Affairs Boston
Healthcare System, Boston University and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts (Itani);
Musculoskeletal Infection Society Representative,
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota (Berbari); American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons Representative, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois
(Segreti); American Academy of Orthopaedic
Surgeons Representative, Rothman Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (Parvizi); Quality
Department, Littleton Adventist Hospital, Denver,
Colorado (Blanchard); Association of Perioperative
Registered Nurses Representative, New York
Methodist Hospital, Brooklyn (Allen); Laboratory
for Microbiology and Infection Control, Amphia
Hospital, Breda, the Netherlands (Kluytmans);
Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care,
University Medical Center, Utrecht, the Netherlands
(Kluytmans); Department of Surgery, San Francisco
General Hospital, University of California, San
Francisco (Schecter).
Author Contributions: Dr Umscheid and Ms Stone
had full access to all of the data in the study and
take responsibility for the integrity of the data and
the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Berríos-Torres,
Umscheid, Bratzler, Leas, Stone, Kelz, Morgan,
Mazuski, Dellinger, Itani, Berbari, Parvizi, Blanchard,
Kluytmans.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Berríos-Torres, Umscheid, Bratzler, Leas, Stone,
Kelz, Reinke, Morgan, Solomkin, Mazuski, Dellinger,
Segreti, Allen, Kluytmans, Donlan, Schecter.
Drafting of the manuscript: Berríos-Torres,
Umscheid, Leas, Stone, Kelz, Reinke, Morgan, Itani,
Berbari, Segreti, Blanchard.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Berríos-Torres, Umscheid,
Bratzler, Leas, Stone, Kelz, Reinke, Solomkin,
Mazuski, Dellinger, Itani, Berbari, Segreti, Parvizi,
Allen, Kluytmans, Donlan, Schecter.
Statistical analysis: Berríos-Torres, Umscheid, Leas.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Berríos-Torres, Bratzler, Leas, Stone, Morgan, Itani,
Parvizi.
Study supervision: Berríos-Torres, Umscheid,
Bratzler, Stone, Itani, Berbari, Parvizi.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Drs Umscheid,
Kelz, and Morgan and Mr Leas reported receiving
funding from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention to support the guideline development
process. Dr Bratzler reported being a consultant for
the Oklahoma Foundation for Medical Quality and
for Telligen (a nonprofit Medicaid external quality
review organization) and reported that his
institution received payment for his lectures,
including service on speakers’bureaus from
Premier and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. Dr Reinke
reported receiving lecture fees from Covidien and
reported being a paid consultant for Teleflex. Dr
Solomkin reported receiving grants for clinical
research from, receiving consulting fees regarding
clinical trial data, serving on an advisory board for,
or lecturing for honoraria from the following:
Merck, Actavis, AstraZeneca, PPD, Tetraphase,
Johnson & Johnson, and 3M. Dr Mazuski reported
being a paid consultant for Bayer, Cubist
Pharmaceuticals, Forest Laboratories, MedImmune,
Merck/Merck Sharp and Dohme, and Pfizer;
reported receiving lecture fees from Forest
Laboratories, Merck/Merck Sharp and Dohme, and
Pfizer; and reported that his institution received
funding for his consultancy to AstraZeneca and
grants from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Merck/MSD, and
Tetraphase. Dr Dellinger reported receiving grants
for clinical research from, serving on an advisory
board for, or lecturing for honoraria from the
following: Merck, Baxter, Ortho-McNeil, Targanta,
Schering-Plough, WebEx, Astellas, Care Fusion,
Durata, Pfizer, Applied Medical, Rib-X, Affinium,
and 3M. Dr Itani reported that his institution
received grants from Merck, Cubist, Dr Reddy’
s,
Sanofi Pasteur, and Trius for research trials;
reported clinical advisory board membership at
Forrest Pharmaceuticals; and reported payment for
development of educational presentations for Med
Direct and Avid Education. Dr Berbari reported that
his institution received a grant from Pfizer for a
research trial for which he serves as the principal
investigator. Dr Segreti reported receiving lecture
fees from Pfizer, Merck, and Forest Laboratories
and reported owning stocks in or having stock
options from Pfizer. Dr Parvizi reported being a paid
consultant for Zimmer, Smith and Nephew,
ConvaTec, TissueGene, CeramTech, and Medtronic;
reported receiving royalties from Elsevier, Wolters
Kluwer, Slack Incorporated, Data Trace Publishing,
and Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers; and
reported having stock options with Hip Innovation
Technologies, CD Diagnostics, and PRN. Dr Allen
reported receiving lecture fees from Ethicon and
royalties from Wolters Kluwer as an author for
Infection Control: A Practical Guide for Healthcare
Facilities. Dr Kluytmans reported being a paid
consultant for 3M, Johnson & Johnson, and Pfizer.
No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) supported the development
of the guideline. The activities of Drs Umscheid,
Kelz, and Morgan and Mr Leas were supported
through a short-term detail under contract at CDC
(10IPA1004117, 10IPA1004133, 11IPA1106551,
11IPA1106555, and 11IPA1106565).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention conducted the full guideline
development process, directing the design and
conduct of the systematic reviews; collection,
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
789
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 management, analysis, and interpretation of the
data; and preparation, review, and approval for
submission of the manuscript for publication.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention staff
members were responsible for the overall design
and conduct of the guideline and preparation,
review, and approval of the manuscript.
Group Information: The Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC)
members are as follows: Hilary M. Babcock, MD,
MPH, Washington University School of Medicine in
St Louis; Dale W. Bratzler, DO, MPH, The University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center; Patrick J.
Brennan, MD, University of Pennsylvania Health
System; Vickie M. Brown, RN, MPH, WakeMed
Health & Hospitals; Lillian A. Burns, MT, MPH,
Greenwich Hospital; Ruth M. Carrico, PhD, RN, CIC,
University of Louisville School of Medicine; Sheri
Chernetsky Tejedor, MD, Emory University School
of Medicine; Daniel J. Diekema, MD, University of
Iowa Carver College of Medicine; Alexis Elward, MD,
Washington University School of Medicine in St
Louis; Neil O. Fishman, MD, University of
Pennsylvania Health System; Ralph Gonzales, MD,
MSPH, University of California, San Francisco; Mary
K. Hayden, MD, Rush University Medical Center;
Susan Huang, MD, MPH, University of California
Irvine School of Medicine; W. Charles Huskins, MD,
MSc, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine; Lynn
Janssen, MS, CIC, CPHQ, California Department of
Public Health; Tammy Lundstrom, MD, JD,
Providence Hospital; Lisa Maragakis, MD, MPH, The
Johns Hopkins Hospital; Yvette S. McCarter, PhD,
University of Florida Health Science Center; Denise
M. Murphy, MPH, RN, CIC, Main Line Health
System; Russell N. Olmsted, MPH, St Joseph Mercy
Health System; Stephen Ostroff, MD, US Food and
Drug Administration; Jan Patterson, MD, University
of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio; David
A. Pegues, MD, David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA; Peter J. Pronovost, MD, PhD, The Johns
Hopkins University; Gina Pugliese, RN, MS, Premier
Healthcare Alliance; Selwyn O. Rogers Jr, MD, MPH,
The University of Texas Medical Branch; William P.
Schecter, MD, University of California, San
Francisco; Barbara M. Soule, RN, MPA, CIC, The
Joint Commission; Tom Talbot, MD, MPH,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Michael L.
Tapper, MD, Lenox Hill Hospital; and Deborah S.
Yokoe, MD, MPH, Brigham & Women’
s Hospital.
Ex Officio Members: William B. Baine, MD, Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; Elizabeth
Claverie-Williams, MS, US Food and Drug
Administration; David Henderson, MD, National
Institutes of Health; Jeannie Miller, RN, MPH,
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; Paul D.
Moore, PhD, Health Resources and Services
Administration; Sheila Murphey, MD, US Food and
Drug Administration; and Daniel Schwartz, MD,
MBA, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Liaisons: Joan Blanchard, RN, BSN, Association of
Perioperative Registered Nurses; William A. Brock,
MD, Society of Critical Care Medicine; Barbara
DeBaun, MSN, RN, CIC, Association of Professionals
of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc;
Kathleen Dunn, BScN, MN, RN, Public Health
Agency of Canada; Sandra Fitzler, RN, American
Health Care Association; Nancy Foster, American
Hospital Association; Janet Franck, RN, MBA, CIC,
DNV Healthcare, Inc; Diana Gaviria, MD, MPH,
National Association of County and City Health
Officials; Jennifer Gutowski, MPH, BSN, RN, CIC,
National Association of County and City Health
Officials; Holly Harmon, RN, MBA, American Health
Care Association; Patrick Horine, MHA, DNV
Healthcare, Inc; Michael D. Howell, MD, MPH,
Society of Critical Care Medicine; W. Charles
Huskins, MD, MSC, Infectious Diseases Society of
America; Marion Kainer, MD, MPH, Council of State
and Territorial Epidemiologists; Emily Lutterloh,
MD, MPH, Association of State and Territorial
Health Officials; Lisa Maragakis, MD, Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America; Michael
McElroy, MPH, CIC, America’
s Essential Hospitals;
Lisa McGiffert, Consumers Union; Silvia
Muñoz-Price, MD, America’
s Essential Hospitals;
Shirley Paton, RN, MN, Public Health Agency of
Canada; Michael Anne Preas, RN, CIC, Association
of Professionals of Infection Control and
Epidemiology, Inc; Mark E. Rupp, MD, Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America; Mark Russi,
MD, MPH, American College of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine; Sanjay Saint, MD, MPH,
Society of Hospital Medicine; Robert G. Sawyer,
MD, Surgical Infection Society; Roslyne Schulman,
MHA, MBA, American Hospital Association; Rachel
Stricof, MPH, Advisory Council for the Elimination
of Tuberculosis; Donna Tiberi, RN, MHA, Healthcare
Facilities Accreditation Program; Margaret
VanAmringe, MHS, The Joint Commission; Stephen
Weber, MD, Infectious Diseases Society of America;
Elizabeth Wick, MD, American College of Surgeons;
Robert Wise, MD, The Joint Commission; and
Amber Wood, MSN, RN, CNOR, CIC, CPN,
Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses.
Disclaimer: The opinions of the reviewers might
not be reflected in all of the recommendations
contained in this document.
Additional Information: Before July 2014, Dr
Berríos-Torres was employed at Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. She has no affiliation since
July 2014. Authors recused themselves from
discussions if they had competing interests related
to recommendations under discussion. For
product-specific recommendation discussions (eg,
triclosan-coated sutures), a new declaration of
conflicts specific to that topic was requested from
each author before his or her input was considered
in the formulation of the recommendation.
Additional Contributions: The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention thanks the many individuals
and organizations who provided valuable feedback
on the guideline during the development process,
especially the following experts for their input
throughout the process: Rajender Agarwal, MD,
MPH (Center for Evidence-Based Practice,
University of Pennsylvania Health System,
Philadelphia); J. William Costerton, PhD (Center for
Genomic Sciences, Allegheny-Singer Research
Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania); Jeffrey C.
Hageman, MHS (Division of Healthcare Quality
Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia); Thomas Hunt, MD
(Department of Surgery, University of California at
San Francisco); Bernard Morrey, MD (Department
of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota); Lena M. Napolitano, MD (Division of
Acute Care Surgery, University of Michigan Health
Systems, Ann Arbor); Douglas Osmon, MD
(Department of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota); Robin Patel, MD(CM),
FRCP(C), D(ABMM) (Infectious Diseases Research
Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota);
and Mark Shirtliff, PhD (Department of Microbial
Pathogenesis, University of Maryland, Baltimore).
None received compensation outside of their usual
salary.
REFERENCES
1. National Healthcare Safety Network, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Surgical site
infection (SSI) event. http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn
/pdfs/pscmanual/9pscssicurrent.pdf. Published
January 2017. Accessed January 25, 2017.
2. Fry DE. Fifty ways to cause surgical site
infections. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2011;12(6):497-500.
3. Anderson DJ, Kirkland KB, Kaye KS, et al.
Underresourced hospital infection control and
prevention programs: penny wise, pound foolish?
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2007;28(7):767-773.
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The
direct medical costs of healthcare-associated
infections in U.S. hospitals and the benefits of
prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hai/pdfs/hai/scott
_costpaper.pdf. Published 2009. Accessed January
25, 2017.
5. Stone PW, Braccia D, Larson E. Systematic
review of economic analyses of health
care–associated infections. Am J Infect Control.
2005;33(9):501-509.
6. Cullen KA, Hall MJ, Golosinskiy A. Ambulatory
surgery in the United States, 2006. National Health
Statistics Reports 11. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data
/nhsr/nhsr011.pdf. Revised September 4, 2009.
Accessed January 25, 2017.
7. DeFrances CJ, Podgornik MN. 2004 National
Hospital Discharge Survey. Adv Data. 2006;(371):1-
19.
8. US Department of Health and Human Services.
National action plan to prevent health
care–associated infections: road map to
elimination. https://health.gov/hcq/prevent
-hai-action-plan.asp. Published 2013. Accessed
January 25, 2017.
9. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), HHS. Medicare Program; hospital inpatient
prospective payment systems for acute care
hospitals and the long-term care hospital
prospective payment system changes and FY2011
rates; provider agreements and supplier approvals;
and hospital conditions of participation for
rehabilitation and respiratory care services;
Medicaid program: accreditation for providers of
inpatient psychiatric services. Final rules and
interim final rule with comment period. Fed Regist.
2010;75(157):50041-50681.
10. US Government Printing Office. The Deficit
Reduction Act of 2005. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys
/pkg/BILLS-109s1932enr/pdf/BILLS-109s1932enr
.pdf. Published 2006. Accessed January 25, 2017.
11. Umscheid CA, Mitchell MD, Doshi JA, Agarwal R,
Williams K, Brennan PJ. Estimating the proportion
of healthcare-associated infections that are
reasonably preventable and the related mortality
and costs. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2011;32
(2):101-114.
12. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE
Working Group. Going from evidence to
recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7652):1049-1051.
13. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE,
Falck-Ytter Y, Schünemann HJ; GRADE Working
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
790
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamasurgery.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Group. What is “
quality of evidence”and why is it
important to clinicians? BMJ. 2008;336(7651):995-
998.
14. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al; GRADE
Working Group. GRADE: an emerging consensus on
rating quality of evidence and strength of
recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7650):924-926.
15. Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, Brozek J, et al;
GRADE Working Group. Grading quality of evidence
and strength of recommendations for diagnostic
tests and strategies. BMJ. 2008;336(7653):1106-1110.
16. Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Brennan PJ;
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Updating the guideline methodology of
the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee (HICPAC). http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac
/pdf/guidelines/2009-10-29HICPAC
_GuidelineMethodsFINAL.pdf. Published 2010.
Accessed January 25, 2017.
17. Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Brennan PJ;
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee. Updating the guideline development
methodology of the Healthcare Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). Am J
Infect Control. 2010;38(4):264-273.
18. Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC,
Jarvis WR; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) Hospital Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
prevention of surgical site infection, 1999. Am J
Infect Control. 1999;27(2):97-132.
19. Mu Y, Edwards JR, Horan TC, Berríos-Torres SI,
Fridkin SK. Improving risk-adjusted measures of
surgical site infection for the National Healthcare
Safety Network. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol.
2011;32(10):970-986.
20. McKibben L, Horan T, Tokars JI, et al;
Heathcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee. Guidance on public reporting of
healthcare-associated infections:
recommendations of the Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Am J Infect
Control. 2005;33(4):217-226.
21. Bozic KJ, Ries MD. The impact of infection after
total hip arthroplasty on hospital and surgeon
resource utilization. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005;87
(8):1746-1751.
22. Kurtz SM, Lau E, Watson H, Schmier JK, Parvizi
J. Economic burden of periprosthetic joint infection
in the United States. J Arthroplasty. 2012;27(8)
(suppl):61-5.e1.
23. Engemann JJ, Carmeli Y, Cosgrove SE, et al.
Adverse clinical and economic outcomes
attributable to methicillin resistance among
patients with Staphylococcus aureus surgical site
infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;36(5):592-598.
24. HCUPnet. Healthcare Cost and Utilization
Project, Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality. 2011 Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS).
https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/nisoverview.jsp.
Published 2011. Accessed January 25, 2017.
25. Kurtz S, Ong K, Lau E, Mowat F, Halpern M.
Projections of primary and revision hip and knee
arthroplasty in the United States from 2005 to
2030. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2007;89(4):780-785.
26. Kurtz SM, Lau E, Schmier J, Ong KL, Zhao K,
Parvizi J. Infection burden for hip and knee
arthroplasty in the United States. J Arthroplasty.
2008;23(7):984-991.
27. Kurtz SM, Ong KL, Schmier J, Zhao K, Mowat F,
Lau E. Primary and revision arthroplasty surgery
caseloads in the United States from 1990 to 2004.
J Arthroplasty. 2009;24(2):195-203.
28. Bozic KJ, Kurtz SM, Lau E, et al. The
epidemiology of revision total knee arthroplasty in
the United States. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010;468
(1):45-51.
Invited Commentary
Surgical Site Infection Prevention—
What We Know and What We Do Not Know
Pamela A. Lipsett, MD, MHPE, MCCM
Surgical site infections remain among remain the most com-
mon preventable infections today. Recently, the World Health
Organization1,2 and the American College of Surgeons and Sur-
gical Infection Society3 published their guidelines for the
prevention of surgical site in-
fections. In this journal, the
long-awaited update to the
1999guidelinesfromtheCen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have now been
published.4,5 With the publication of guidelines from 3 repu-
table sources, where should the surgeon turn for guidance?
What are the major controversies? What is new and where do
we need to perform new research? The CDC guidelines use a
strict process for literature review, development of consen-
sus, public reporting, and refinement of their final recommen-
dations. The article from the CDC by Berríos-Torres et al5 in this
issue of JAMA Surgery is useful to every surgeon because it is
brief and summarizes the recommendations, with their level
of support. It tells us what we should do and what we do not
know. The supplementary material is inclusive and recom-
mended for anyone with a thirst for the evidence supporting
these recommendations. Unfortunately, in many cases the au-
thors make no recommendation with respect to support or
harm if the level of the evidence was low or very low or if they
were unable to judge trade-offs between harms and benefits
of the proposed intervention because of lack of outcomes. The
authors ultimately provide 42 statements, including 8 Cat-
egory 1A, 4 Category 1B, 5 Category II, and 25 areas for which
they made no recommendation or considered the area unre-
solved. The fact that most statements were unresolved, espe-
cially regarding prosthetic joint surgery, shows our investiga-
tors where we should be putting forth our efforts in clinical
trials. There is a lot of opportunity to learn how we can pro-
vide more effective care to our patients.
The 12 Category 1A and Category 1B recommendations are
based on moderate or high–quality evidence, and we should be
using these recommendations in our practice. These key areas
include(butarenotlimitedto)theuseofantimicrobialprophy-
laxis to achieve bactericidal concentrations in serum and
tissues,includingbeforecesareansection,andarelimitedtodur-
ing the operation. Furthermore, we should not be using anti-
biotics because the patient has a drain, whether or not a pros-
thetic joint is in place. These recommendations are likely to be
themostdifficulttooperationalizebecausesomesurgeonsand
practices have had difficulty confining antibiotic use to just 24
hours after a clean or clean-contaminated procedure, let alone
when a drain is in place. Glycemic control should be achieved
in all patients, with a glucose target less than 200 mg/dL.
Normothermia should be maintained, and a higher fraction
of inspired oxygen should be used in patients with normal
Related article page 784
CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamasurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Surgery
August 2017
Volume 152, Number 8
791
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
