 B O N E R E G E N E R A T I O N
2017 © The Authors,
some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science.
In situ bone tissue engineering via
ultrasound-mediated gene delivery to
endogenous progenitor cells in mini-pigs
Maxim Bez,1,2 Dmitriy Sheyn,2,3 Wafa Tawackoli,2,3,4,5 Pablo Avalos,3 Galina Shapiro,1
Joseph C. Giaconi,6 Xiaoyu Da,4 Shiran Ben David,2,3 Jayne Gavrity,7 Hani A. Awad,7 Hyun W. Bae,2
Eric J. Ley,2 Thomas J. Kremen,2,8 Zulma Gazit,1,2,3,8 Katherine W. Ferrara,9
Gadi Pelled,1,2,3,4,5* Dan Gazit1,2,3,4,5,8*†
More than 2 million bone-grafting procedures are performed each year using autografts or allografts. However,
both options carry disadvantages, and there remains a clear medical need for the development of new therapies for
massive bone loss and fracture nonunions. We hypothesized that localized ultrasound-mediated, microbubble-
enhanced therapeutic gene delivery to endogenous stem cells would induce efficient bone regeneration and
fracture repair. To test this hypothesis, we surgically created a critical-sized bone fracture in the tibiae of Yucatán
mini-pigs, a clinically relevant large animal model. A collagen scaffold was implanted in the fracture to facilitate
recruitment of endogenous mesenchymal stem/progenitor cells (MSCs) into the fracture site. Two weeks later,
transcutaneous ultrasound-mediated reporter gene delivery successfully transfected 40% of cells at the fracture
site, and flow cytometry showed that 80% of the transfected cells expressed MSC markers. Human bone
morphogenetic protein-6 (BMP-6) plasmid DNA was delivered using ultrasound in the same animal model, leading
to transient expression and secretion of BMP-6 localized to the fracture area. Micro–computed tomography
and biomechanical analyses showed that ultrasound-mediated BMP-6 gene delivery led to complete radiographic
and functional fracture healing in all animals 6 weeks after treatment, whereas nonunion was evident in control
animals. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that ultrasound-mediated gene delivery to endogenous mesenchy-
mal progenitor cells can effectively treat nonhealing bone fractures in large animals, thereby addressing a major
orthopedic unmet need and offering new possibilities for clinical translation.
INTRODUCTION
Fracture nonunion, when the normal process of fracture repair is
thwarted and the fracture fails to heal, constitutes a complex medical
condition with an estimated incidence of 100,000 new nonunion
cases every year in the Unites States alone (1). These injuries not only
cause patients to suffer but also lead to long-term hospitalization and
disability, repeated surgeries, loss of working days, and considerable
costs to the health system (2). Various factors affect the incidence of
nonunion formation, including fracture pattern, anatomical location,
degree of bone loss, and the quality of surgical treatment (3).
Currently, the gold-standard treatment for fracture nonunion is
autologous bone grafting (autografts). However, autografts are not
alwaysavailableandtheirharvestoftenleadstoprolongedpostoperative
pain and substantial donor site morbidity (4). Bone allografts are readily
available from tissue banks and, therefore, are an alternative to auto-
grafts. Unfortunately, allografts have very low osteogenic potential,
leading to poor graft-host integration that results in numerous failures
due to fractures and nonunion (5). In recent years, recombinant human
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have been introduced to the
clinic, among other indications, for long-bone fracture repair. Local
administration of BMP-2 (6) and BMP-7 (7) in patients with tibial
nonunions resulted in increased healing rates. However, BMPs are
costly and have been associated with a high incidence of side effects
including infection, heterotopic bone formation, and immunogenic
reactions, possibly due to their use in megadoses (8). Thus, fracture
nonunion remains a clear unmet clinical need.
An attractive alternative to BMP protein therapy is a local targeted
gene therapy (9). Such therapy could facilitate nonunion healing via
transient overexpression of an osteogenic BMP gene without requiring
the production of high-cost recombinant proteins or their administra-
tion in megadoses. Viral BMP gene delivery has been shown to induce
nonunion healing in rodents and large animals (10–12). Although viral
vectors are considered to be efficient gene delivery methods, they intro-
duce risks of malignancy and immunogenic reactions, which greatly
limits their translational potential (13). Nonviral vectors are considered
safer for human use, albeit much less efficient for gene expression (9).
Our group showed that in vivo electroporation of a BMP gene to endog-
enous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) within a nonunion fracture site
yielded efficient fracture healing in rodents (14). Although successful,
this approach requires the insertion of electrodes and conduction of
powerful electricalcurrents resulting in pain and tissue damage, limiting
its use in clinical applications.
An alternative physical method of gene transfection, sonoporation—
the use of ultrasound for gene delivery—is especially attractive (15).
Ultrasound is widely used in medicine and considered one of the safest
1Skeletal Biotech Laboratory, Hadassah Faculty of Dental Medicine, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Ein Kerem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. 2Department of Sur-
gery, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA
90048, USA. 3Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. 4Biomedical Imaging Research Insti-
tute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. 5Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
6Department of Imaging, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA. 7Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Center for Musculoskeletal
Research, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
8Department of Orthopedics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA. 9Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Davis, 451
Health Sciences Drive, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: dan.gazit@csmc.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
1 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 imaging modalities. In addition, ultra-
sound can be applied noninvasively to
many different regions of interest and
can reach deep-lying tissues with minimal
systemic side effects. Sonoporation uses
ultrasonic waves to increase cell mem-
brane permeability by forming transient
nanosized pores in the membrane, subse-
quently enhancing uptake of drugs and
nucleic acids (16–18). Most studies have
combined ultrasound with the adminis-
tration of formulated microbubble sus-
pensionsto enhance the deliveryofnucleic
acids to target cells (19–23). Such micro-
bubble suspensions contain micrometer-
sized bubbles filled with a low-diffusivity
gas core and stabilized by a shell. Orig-
inally designed and U.S. Food and Drug
Administration–approvedforuseasblood
pool contrast agents, exposure to ultra-
sound drives microbubbles to a forced
oscillation state in which the gas core is
repeatedly compressed and expanded.
Within a range of ultrasound parameters,
these microbubbles can deform the cell
membrane and form membrane pores,
thus enhancing the cellular uptake of
drugs and nucleic acids.
Recently, we showed that the combi-
nation of ultrasound and microbubbles
can be used to overexpress a reporter gene
in endogenous MSCs recruited to a frac-
ture site in a large animal model (24). Although ultrasound-mediated
BMP gene delivery was shown to induce ectopic bone formation in
vivo (25–27), previous attempts at fracture repair were not successful
(25). Here, we hypothesized that microbubble-enhanced, ultrasound-
mediated gene delivery of a BMP gene would lead to efficient bone re-
generation and fracture healing in a clinically relevant, large animal
model (porcine). Multiple structural, biomechanical, and safety para-
meters were monitored to demonstrate the feasibility of this therapeutic
approach for human use.
RESULTS
Sonoporation leads to reporter gene expression in
endogenous MSCs recruited to fracture site
Mini-pigs underwent surgery during which a 1-cm critical-sized tibial
bone fracture was created, a biodegradable collagen scaffold was im-
planted, and fractures were internally fixated with custom-made dy-
namic compression plates (fig. S1). The fracture sites were treated with
microbubble-enhanced, ultrasound-mediated gene delivery 14 days
after surgery, when maximal cell recruitment of mesenchymal lineage
was noted (fig. S2). Plasmid DNA encoding a reporter gene [green
fluorescent protein (GFP) or luciferase] mixed with microbubbles
was transcutaneously injected into the fracture site, and half of the
animals were randomly assigned to receive ultrasound treatment (fig.
S3). Ex vivo optical imaging of the fracture site revealed fluorescent
signal localized to the fracture site in GFP-treated animals (Fig. 1A).
Flow cytometry revealed that 40% of cells collected from within the
tibial fracture of animals treated with ultrasound (US) expressed GFP
six times greater than that observed in untreated animals (No US, P =
0.049; Fig. 1B). GFP-expressing cells from bone fractures in ultrasound-
treated animals were also three times more fluorescent (P = 0.0013;
Fig. 1C). In another experiment, cells isolated from bone fractures in
animals treated with luciferase and ultrasound demonstrated 80 times
more luciferase activity than cells from fracture sites in animals not
subjected to ultrasound (P = 0.0001; Fig. 1D). An examination of the
transfected cells showed significantly more cells expressing MSC
markers CD29 and CD90 in the ultrasound-treated group: 90% of
GFP-positive cells in the ultrasound-treated group were CD29-positive
and 80% of GFP-positive cells were CD90-positive, whereas only 30%
of GFP-positive cells in the untreated group were CD29-positive (P =
0.0001; Fig. 1E) and 40% were CD90-positive (P = 0.0057; Fig. 1F). No
significant differences were observed in CD44-positive cells, a cellmarker
of mesenchymal lineage (P = 0.0531; Fig. 1G). Overall, ultrasound-
treated fracture sites exhibited significantly higher progenitor transfec-
tion rates and stronger transgene expression.
Sonoporation induces transient BMP-6 expression at bone
fracture site
Eighteen pigs received tibial fractures as described above and were
treated with ultrasound after localinjection of BMP-6 and microbubbles
(BMP-6 + US) or injection of BMP-6 and microbubbles without ultra-
sound application (BMP-6 control). Local expression of BMP-6 gene
after sonoporation to tibial bone fractures was evaluated over time.
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of isolated
Fig. 1. Reporter gene expression in mini-pig tibial fractures after ultrasound-mediated gene delivery. (A) Ex vivo
fluorescenceimagingofanexposedGFP-treatedfracture5daysaftertreatment.Fracturemarginsarerepresentedbyadashed
rectangle. (B) Flow cytometry analysis of the percentage of GFP+ cells isolated from fracture sites 5 days after treatment with or
without ultrasound (*P = 0.049). (C) Mean fluorescence intensity per cell isolated from fractures 5 days after treatment with or
without ultrasound (**P = 0.0013). (D) Luciferase enzyme activity in cells isolated from fracture sites 5 days after treatment with
or without ultrasound (****P = 0.0001). Percentage of(E)CD29+ (****P = 0.0001), (F) CD90+ (**P =0.0057), and (G) CD44+ cells
(P = 0.0531) out of GFP+ cells isolated from fractures 5 days after treatment with or without ultrasound. Data are means ±
SEM; P values were determined by two-tailed Student’s t tests (No US, n = 3; US, n = 4; RLU, relative light units).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
2 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cells from the fracture site showed 850- and 400-fold higher BMP-6
expression in ultrasound-treated animals compared to control animals
on days 2 and 5 after treatment, respectively (Fig. 2A). On day 10,
BMP-6 gene expression was undetectable. Similarly, BMP-6 protein
secretion in the fracture site was 70- and 120-fold higher on days 2
and 5 after treatment, respectively, compared to animals that were
not treated with ultrasound (Fig. 2B). Negligible amount of BMP-6
protein was detected on day 10. In addition, no overexpression of
BMP-6 was found in off-target tissues (fig. S4).
BMP-6 sonoporation facilitates in vivo bone regeneration
Next, the therapeutic effect of local BMP-6 gene delivery was evaluated
in the same pig model of tibial nonhealing fracture. Tibial fracture
regeneration in BMP-6 + US–treated animals was compared to a
nontreated control group (Scaffold only), animals treated with plasmid
premixed with microbubbles without ultrasound (BMP-6 only) or an
empty plasmid premixed with microbubbles and ultrasound (US only),
andagold-standardcontrolgrouptreatedwithan autograft(Autograft).
Micro–computed tomography (mCT) analysis 8 weeks after surgery
revealed that fractures treated with BMP-6 + US regenerated 75%
of their volume with new-formed bone, which was equivalent to
autograft transplantation (P = 0.102) and doubled the bone volume
density seen in all other treatment groups (P = 0.0001; Fig. 3A). No
differences in healing were noted between male and female pigs with-
in the BMP-6 + US group (P = 0.3945; fig. S5). In addition, the new-
formed bone in the BMP-6 + US group was significantly more calcified
than in all other groups (P = 0.0029; Fig. 3B) except the Autograft group
(P = 0.068). Only fractures treated with BMP-6 + US or autograft
showed union, evident by the complete cortical continuity of the tibia
(Fig. 3C). Histological analysis showed that there was a complete re-
generation of the fracture with mature new-formed bone and the
presence of osteocytes in BMP-6 + US–treated pigs (Fig. 3D). All other
groups showed evidence of insufficient bone formation, abundant gran-
ulation tissue deposition, and fibrosis (Fig. 3D).
BMP-6 gene delivery induces functional healing of
treated bones
Torsional testing was performed blindly on tibiae excised from the
operated animals to examine the mechanical properties of the treated
bones 8 weeks after surgery. In accordance with the mCT and histolog-
ical analysis results, tibial bones from the BMP-6 + US group showed
at least twofold higher mechanical stiffness (P = 0.02), strength (P =
0.0048), and toughnesscompared withtibialfractures from the BMP-6–
only group (P = 0.0077; Fig. 4). No significant differences were observed
between the BMP-6 + US and the Autograft groups (P = 0.1552).
DISCUSSION
Here, we used ultrasound-mediated, microbubble-enhanced gene
delivery for in situ bone engineering in a mini-pig model of tibial
fracture repair. We showed that ultrasound-mediated BMP-6 delivery
to cells residing within the fracture site achieved transient local gene
expression, mainly targeting endogenous MSCs. Osteogenic gene de-
livery resulted in a spatial and temporal expression pattern that is
consistent with nonviral gene delivery systems. Furthermore, it resulted
in complete fracture union within 8 weeks with autograft-equivalent
biomechanical properties. No evidence of ectopic transgene expression
or inflammatory response was observed, suggesting a favorable safety
profile. Using a clinical ultrasound system within the range of para-
meters used in B-mode ultrasound imaging of microbubble contrast
agent in humans, we saw no clinical or histological signs of heating
or heat-associated damage.
Almost 20 yearsago, Bonadio et al. (28) showed forthe first time that
nonviral gene delivery can achieve complete fracture repair in a large
animal model (canine). Using gene-activated matrix implants
containing plasmid DNA encoding human parathyroid hormone,
complete critical-sized tibial fracture repair was achieved by 18 and
8 weeks for 1.6- and 1.0-cm-sized fractures, respectively. Since then,
other works involving large animals focused mainly on viral gene deliv-
ery. Egermann et al. (29) showed improved fracture repair after BMP-2
adenoviral gene delivery in a tibial fracture in osteoporotic sheep.
Dai et al. (30) showed improved fracture repair after implantation of
BMP-2 virally transduced bone marrow–derived MSCs into a goat tibial
fracture. Despite these promising results, viruses have many safety
concerns, limiting their use in humans. Xu et al. (31) showed that
adenoviral BMP-2 gene delivery to a fracture site resulted in temporary
cellular and persistent humoral immune responses against the viral
vector. In addition, clinical trials have shown that viral gene delivery
can evoke a systemic inflammatory response resulting in death (32)
and may cause carcinogenesis by random gene insertions into the
genome (33, 34). Thus, efficient nonviral gene delivery methods must
be developed for clinical use.
Ultrasound-mediated BMP gene delivery had not been successfully
applied for fracture repair previously. This is not to be mistaken with
low-intensity pulsed ultrasound, which uses different ultrasound
parameters, and is applied daily over a period of weeks to the fracture site
(35). Feichtinger et al. (25) used microbubble-enhanced, ultrasound-
mediated gene delivery of BMP-2 and BMP-7 in a femur nonunion
model in rats. Despite successfully inducing gene overexpression and
ectopic bone formation using repetitive treatments, they could not
induce significant orthotopic bone formation in a fracture site. These
differences can be attributed to diminished osteogenic potentials of
BMP-2 and BMP-7 within the fracture site microenvironment, as
reported in other animal and clinical studies (36–41). The biological re-
sponse to BMPs is dependent on the cell type and microenvironment
that is present at the site of BMP delivery (42–44). BMP-6 has a distinct
BMP receptor type 1A specificity, making it less affected by endogenous
BMP inhibitors while strongly promoting osteogenesis by osteoblasts
(45, 46). Previously, we showed that BMP-6 has better osteogenic
Fig. 2. BMP-6 expression after ultrasound-mediated gene delivery to tibia
fractures in mini-pigs. (A) Gene [relative quantification (RQ); *P = 0.0111, ****P =
0.0001] and (B) protein expression (**P = 0.0085, ****P = 0.0001) in tibial fracture
sites 2, 5, and 10 days after ultrasound-mediated BMP-6 gene delivery. Data are
means ± SEM; P values were determined by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with multiple comparisons (n = 3 per experimental group).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
3 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 potential and induced more efficient bone formation than BMP-2 in
vitro and in vivo when overexpressed in MSCs (47). Some studies
have suggested that BMP-6 signaling works through mechanisms of
both osteochondral and intramembranous ossifications, with the latter
being the primary pathway, thus resulting in more rapid calcification
within the fracture site (44). Therefore, BMP-6 could serve as a more
potent orthotopic bone inducer.
In contrast to the study conducted by Feichtinger et al., our study
used a two-step procedure that included recruitment of endogenous
progenitor cells to the fracture site. We showed that by implanting a
collagen scaffold into the fracture site, efficient endogenous progenitor
migration and retention in the scaffold could be achieved within 14 days.
Betz et al. (10)showedthatdelayedadministrationofaBMP-2–encoding
adenoviral vector improved bone forma-
tion in a critical-sized femoral fracture in
rats. It is likely that delayed treatment
allows for more progenitors to populate
the fracture site, making the vector more
efficient in targeting cells that respond to
BMP secretion and induce bone regen-
eration. Overall, it seems that the combi-
nation of a potent osteogenic protein
together with an effective delivery strategy
to a viable progenitor population is key to
efficient fracture repair.
A modification of the method de-
scribed here could include preloading of
microbubbles and plasmid into the scaf-
fold, which would eliminate the need to
inject these materials in a subsequent
procedure. A recent study applied ultra-
sound to intramuscularly implanted fibrin/
collagenhybridmatricescontainingmicro-
bubbles, BMP-2/7coexpression plasmids,
and C2C12 cells in mice (48). Although
that studycombinedexogenouscellswith-
in the scaffold, only a small amount of
new bone was generated in vivo. In our
two-step method, the recruitment of en-
dogenous progenitor cellsisan important
factor that occurs over the course of at
least 2 weeks, aswe have previously shown
in rodents (14, 24). Hence, implanting
scaffolds containing plasmids and micro-
bubbleswould require long-term protec-
tion of these components because naked
DNA is degraded by deoxyribonucleases,
and microbubbles have a short half-life of
about 10 min when injected locally. To
the best of our knowledge, there are tech-
nological barriers that still need to be over-
cometogeneratesuchacompositescaffold.
However, local injection, as applied here,
is attractive for near-term studies because
the properties can be well controlled and
injections can be repeated and monitored
as needed.
The clinical gold standard for non-
union treatment uses autografts (49).
As a living tissue, their osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties
make them far superior over other types of grafts (50). The most
common donor site for bone grafting is the patient’s own iliac crest.
Because the autografts used here were the native osteotomized tibiae,
they were far superior to autografts available in a clinical setting. This
autograft group represents a hypothetically perfect case scenario, in
which an exact autologous replica of the lost bone was implanted
within the fracture site. The autografts used in this study were structur-
ally identical to the fractured site in size, shape, and bone content. This
allowed efficient bone formation and complete bridging of the defect
in 8 weeks, as seen in our results. In addition, their harvest did not result
in donor-site morbidities, shortening the surgical time and improving
recovery. Moreover, these autografts were attached to a periosteal blood
Fig. 3. Ultrasound-mediated BMP-6 gene delivery to mini-pig tibial bone fractures. Quantitative analysis of
bone formation in the tibial fractures, including (A) bone volume density (****P = 0.0001) and (B) apparent density
(**P = 0.0029). Data are means ± SEM; P values were determined by one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons. (C) Rep-
resentative mCT slices of the fractures 8 weeks after surgery. Asterisks represent new bone formation within the fracture.
Arrows point to cortical discontinuity indicating nonunion within the fracture. Autograft margins are represented by a
dashed square. (D) Masson’s trichrome staining of tibial fractures 8 weeks after surgery at low magnification (upper
subfigures) and high magnification of the yellow square (lower subfigures). Arrows point to the border between native
bone and newly formed bone in the fracture. Scale bars, 1 mm. (Autograft, n = 7; BMP-6 + US, n = 8; BMP-6, n = 6; US only, n =
3; Scaffold only, n = 4; HA, hydroxyapatite.)
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
4 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 supply. These factors were shown to improve fracture healing (51, 52).
Runyan et al. (53) showed that this approach resulted in superior
fracture repair relative to other types of grafts. The similarities found
between the Autograft and the BMP-6 + US groups serve as a proof of
concept that our proposed therapy is as efficient as an “optimal” auto-
graft for the treatment of critical-sized fractures.
A final difference between our study and that of Feichtinger et al. is
the use of ultrasound imaging to monitor microbubble oscillation
during treatment. This is a key aspect of the protocol because, although
ultrasound therapy is highly promising, ultrasound wave propagation
is limited by tissue properties. Both bone and fixation plates are highly
reflective of ultrasound waves. These reflections can significantly alter
the ultrasound field in the fracture site to lower transfection efficacy.
This effect was observed in other works, requiring longer ultrasound
exposure time for effective gene delivery (54). For efficient gene deliv-
ery using our proposed therapy, imaging provides the opportunity to
ensure sufficient sonoporation despite the fixation plates that have the
potential to impede the ultrasonic waves. More robust ultrasound
systems can be implemented to bypass these hurdles in future human
therapies (55).
One of the parameters not tested in this study is the use of repeated
treatments. Because of the therapy’s relative ease and low invasiveness,
repeated treatments at various time points might further enhance the
effect of osteogenesis and promote faster and improved bone repair.
Thus, implementation of multiple treatments could be another ap-
proach in future ultrasound-mediated gene delivery studies. However,
note that prolonged ultrasound exposure could result in a variety of ad-
verse effects, including excessive tissue heating and dystrophic calcifica-
tions due to tissue damage (22). Using higher ultrasound intensities, the
combination of ultrasound and microbubbles can also result in cellular
lysis due to jetting during microbubble collapse within the tissue (56).
The current study evaluated the effect of ultrasound-based BMP
gene delivery for a short term. A long-term study is required to fully
assess the efficiency of the method in bone healing compared to controls.
Here, all animals received collagen scaffold implants that have been
previously shown to have some osteoconductive properties (14, 57).
However, even with the inclusion of the scaffold, and within a short
period of time, we were able to show significantly higher union rate,
bone formation, and biomechanical properties among BMP-6 and
ultrasound–treated animals. We can conclude that the combined therapy
of a collagen scaffold, BMP-6 plasmid, microbubbles, and ultrasound
is superior to the control groups and is similar to autograft-treated
animals.
These results show great promise for future ultrasound-mediated
gene therapies to tissues. Because ultrasound technology is safe
and widely used in the clinic, this approach can easily be translated
into clinical practice. The introduction of microbubbles allows local-
ization of the injected material and real-time monitoring of the sono-
poration procedure in the treatment site. This method has the potential
to be used for many different applications, promoting in situ tissue
engineering. In the context of bone fractures, this therapy can be applied
to a varietyof orthopedicindications. It is minimally invasive, does not
require ex vivo stem cell manipulation or the patient’s own bone har-
vest for implantation, and avoids use of costly growth factors. Because
no alternative efficient method of inducing bone regeneration in sites
with severe bone loss has yet been found, ultrasound-mediated gene
therapy is a promising tool that might offer a positive response to this
unmet clinical need.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The objective of our study was to develop a therapy for critical-sized
bone fracture repair consisting of ultrasound-mediated gene targeting
to endogenous MSCs. Our prespecified hypothesis was that ultrasound-
mediated, microbubble-enhanced gene delivery of BMP-6 would lead
to efficient bone regeneration and fracture healing in a clinically rele-
vant, large animal model. Male and female Yucatán mini-pigs (S&S
Farms) were used in this study. The mean weight ± SD of the animals
was 37.0 ± 3.6 kg, and their mean age ± SD was 7.8 ± 1.2 months. The
sample size used was estimated to achieve a power of 0.8 and a = 0.05
using one-way ANOVA.
Sonoporation was investigated for its capacity to regenerate a critical-
sized tibial bone fracture. Pigs underwent surgery consisting of the
creation of a 1-cm critical-sized bone fracture in the tibia bone. During
the same surgery, a collagen scaffold was implanted within the fracture
site to recruit endogenous MSCs. Fourteen days later, the pigs were
randomly assigned either to receive the treatment, which consisted
of an injection of BMP-6 plasmid premixed with microbubbles to the
fracture site followed by ultrasound application (BMP-6 + US), or to one
of the control groups. The following control groups were used: (i) No
treatment (Scaffold only); (ii) BMP-6 plasmid premixed with micro-
bubbles injection (BMP-6); or (iii) empty plasmid vector premixed
Fig. 4. Biomechanical properties of treated tibiae. Torsion testing was per-
formed on tibiae harvested from treated mini-pigs. (A) Photograph of a tibia
reaching its failure point during biomechanical testing. Analysis of load and rota-
tion was performed to determine the (B) maximum torque (strength; **P =
0.0048), (C) torsional rigidity (stiffness; *P = 0.02), and (D) energy to maximum
(toughness; **P = 0.0077) of treated bones. Data are means ± SEM; P values were
determined by one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons (N·m, Newton meter;
n = 5 per experimental group).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
5 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with microbubbles injection followed by ultrasound application (US
only). In addition, a control group treated with an autograft (Autograft)
was used to assess treatment efficacy compared to the gold-standard
treatment forlarge fractures. Sonoporation potency wasestimatedusing
reportergene expression and tissue analysisfor BMP-6 gene andprotein
expression. Bone formation was assessed using mCT, histology, and
biomechanical testing. Animals that developed acute procedural com-
plications, such as bone fixation failure or signs of distress during follow-
up that compromised animal welfare, were eliminated from the study.
Plasmid DNA production
Plasmids encoding luciferase under the control of the ubiquitin promoter
(pUb-Luc2) and enhanced GFP under the control of the cytomegalovi-
ruspromoter(pCMV-EGFP-N1)wereusedtostudytransgeneexpression.
A plasmid encoding BMP-6 under the control of the cytomegalovirus
promoter (pCMV-BMP6) was used to induce bone regeneration. Plas-
mid preparation was detailed elsewhere (58, 59). All plasmids were
expanded using standard laboratory procedures and purified using an
EndoFree Kit (Qiagen).
Critical-sized tibia fracture model: Surgical procedure
All animal procedures were approved by the Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center institutional review board for animal experiments (IACUC
#004740). A critical-sized circumferential bone defect of 1 cm in length
was created in the tibia bones of Yucatán mini-pigs per previously
described method (60). A critical-sized defect in humans was defined
as “involving 50% of the cortical diameter of the tibia and >1 cm in
length” (61). The average length of the tibia bone in the Yucatán
mini-pig is 10 cm, and in an adult human it is 43 cm. Hence, a 1-cm
defect in the mini-pig can be compared to a 4.3-cm defect in an average
person. After an 18-hour preoperative fast, each mini-pig was sedated
using intramuscular acepromazine (0.25 mg/kg), ketamine (20 mg/kg),
and atropine (0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg). The animal was then administered
propofol(2mg/kg) intravenously, andendotrachealintubation wasper-
formed. Anesthesia was maintained using 1 to 3.5% inhaled isoflurane
for the duration of the procedure. A 10-cm anteromedial skin incision
was made over the tibia. Soft tissue and periosteum were bluntly
dissected to expose the tibial diaphysis. An oscillating saw (CONMED)
was used to remove 1 cm of bone and create a segmental bone fracture.
The fracture was internally fixated using a custom-made six-hole
limited-contact dynamic compression plate (Veterinary Orthopedic
Implants; fig. S1), and a flat sheet of biodegradable collagen scaffold
(DuraGen Matrix, Integra LifeSciences) with a pore size of 100 mm
was shaped and implanted in the fracture site. For autograft-treated
animals, the resected bone segment was grafted into the fracture and
fixated using the fixation plate. Finally, the subcutaneous tissue
was closed with an absorbable subcutaneous suture, and the skin was
closed using a nonabsorbable suture, which was removed 2 weeks after
surgery. The animal received perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis
(ceftiofur, 0.05 ml/kg) and postoperative analgesia (buprenorphine,
0.2 mg/kg).
Flow cytometry characterization of cells recruited to
fracture site
Nine animals underwent surgery and were anesthetized and sacrificed
by injection of veterinary euthanasia solution (VetOne) on postoperative
days 7, 14, and 21 (three animals were euthanized per time point). Post-
mortem tissue was extracted from the fracture site, washed with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), digested using 0.1% collagenase (type
1A, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour, filtrated using a 70-mm cell strainer, and
centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 7 min. Freshly isolated cells were analyzed
for MSC surface markers, taking into consideration the limited avail-
ability of anti-pig antibodies. The cells were stained with mouse anti-
human (with cross-reactivity to pig) CD90, mouse anti-pig CD29
(BD Biosciences Pharmingen), and rat anti-pig CD44 (Fitzgerald
Industries International). Primary antibodies were detected by applying
fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies rat anti-mouse–PE
(phycoerythrin) (BD Biosciences Pharmingen) and donkey anti-rat–PE
(Imgenex Corp.) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
The cells were analyzed and plotted using an LSR II flow cytometer,
BD FACSDiva, and FCS Express software (BD). Nonspecific binding
of secondary antibodies was quantified, and the fluorescence signal
was subtracted from the detection values of the experimental group.
Ultrasound-mediated, microbubble-enhanced gene delivery
Fourteen days after fracture creation, scaffold implantation, and bone
stabilization, each animal was sedated in the manner described above.
First, a microbubble suspension (DEFINITY, Lantheus Medical Imaging)
composed of a gas core containing octafluoropropane and a lipid shell
was activated by 45 s of shaking using a VIALMIX shaker (Lantheus
Medical Imaging). Then, 107 microbubbles and 1-mg plasmid DNA
were mixed together to a final volume of 500 ml. To avoid microbubble
aggregation and adhesion to syringe walls, we manually rotated the
syringe containing the mixture periodically before injection. Next,
the fracture was located using a Fluoroscan mini C-arm (Hologic),
and an 18-gauge needle was inserted into the center of the fracture (fig.
S3A). The mixture was injected while being visualized using a Sonos
5500 (Philips Ultrasound) unit equipped with a focused S3 probe
set to B-mode with its focal point matching the location of the defect
(fig. S3, B and C). Then, a therapeutic ultrasonic pulse was applied
using cadence contrast agent imaging mode at a transmission fre-
quency of 1.3 MHz, a mechanical index of 0.6, and a depth of 4 cm
for about 2 min until microbubble oscillation could no longer be visual-
ized (fig. S3D). Repeated oscillation of the microbubbles eventually
results in dissolution as a result of either fragmentation or diffusion (62).
Transfection efficacy evaluation: GFP expression
Six animals underwent surgery. Fourteen days later, the mini-pigs were
injected with GFP plasmid premixed with microbubbles. The animals
were randomly assigned so only half were treated with ultrasound
immediately after the injection. Five days after transfection, the animals
were sacrificed. Ex vivo optical imaging of the fracture site was per-
formed using a fluorescence imaging system (IVIS; PerkinElmer) to
localize the signal within the treated limb. Then, cells from the fracture
sites were isolated as described above. The cells were examined using
flow cytometry to detect GFP expression. The percentage of GFP-
positive cells served as a measure of transfection rate.
Transfection efficacy evaluation: Luciferase expression
Six animals underwent surgery and 14 days later were injected with
luciferase plasmid premixed with microbubbles. The animals were
randomly assigned so only half were treated with ultrasound imme-
diately after the injection. Five days after transfection, cells from the
fracture sites were isolated as described above and incubated with
luciferase lysis buffer (Promega). The resulting homogenate was cen-
trifuged at 10,000g for 10 min, and 100 ml of luciferase reaction buffer
(Promega) was added to 20 ml of the clear supernatant. Light emission
was measured by a luminometer (TD-20/20; Turner BioSystems) in
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
6 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RLU. The values were normalized for protein content, which was
measured using bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce). Luciferase activity
was expressed as RLU per milligram of protein.
BMP-6 gene and protein expression analysis
Eighteen animals underwent surgery and 14 days postoperatively were
injected with BMP-6 plasmid premixed with microbubbles. The animals
were randomly assigned so only half were treated with ultrasound imme-
diately after the injection. Then, animals were randomly sacrificed 2,
5, or 10 days after ultrasound transfection. Tissues were collected
postmortem to characterize BMP-6 gene and protein expression.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCRs (RT-PCRs) were performed
to quantify BMP-6 gene expression in various organs after ultrasound
transfection. Tissues from the fracture site, brain, bone marrow, lung,
liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and spleen were harvested postmortem, and
RNA was isolated using an RNeasy extraction kit (Qiagen). The RNA
was then reverse-transcribed using random primers and reverse tran-
scriptase (Promega). Expression of BMP-6 gene was analyzed using the
ABI 7500 Prism system (Applied Biosystems) with Hs00233470_m1
primer (ABI). 18S was used as a housekeeping gene control.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to estimate
BMP-6 protein expression in fracture over time. Tissue from the frac-
ture site was homogenized using tissue homogenizer (VWR) and in-
cubated with proteinase inhibitors (Roche) at 4°C for 2 hours. The
resulting homogenate was centrifugedat 12,000 rpmfor 10 min, and the
supernatant was collected for a BMP-6 ELISA assay (R&D Systems).
Values were normalized for protein content, which was measured using
bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce).
Bone formation analysis using mCT
Twenty-eight mini-pigs underwent surgery and were randomly as-
signed to receive the following 14 days later: (i) No treatment (“Scaffold
only” group); (ii) BMP-6 plasmid premixed with microbubbles (“BMP-
6” group); (iii) empty plasmid vector premixed with microbubbles and
ultrasound (“US only” group); (iv) BMP-6 plasmid premixed with
microbubbles and ultrasound (“BMP-6 + US” group); or (v) autograft
implantation (“Autograft” group). Eight weeks postoperatively, the
animals were euthanized and their tibiae were harvested for ex vivo,
high-resolution mCT (vivaCT 40; SCANCO Medical AG), as previously
described (63). Microtomographic slices were acquired using an x-ray
tube with a 55-kVp (kilovolt peak) potential and reconstructed at a vox-
el size of 35 mm. The fracture was evaluated using histomorphometric
three-dimensional (3D) evaluation. A constrained 3D Gaussian filter
(s = 0.8, support = 1) was used to partly suppress noise in the volume
of interest. The bone tissue was segmented from marrow and soft
tissue using a global thresholding procedure. A quantitative assess-
ment of bone volume density and apparent density based on micro-
tomographic data sets was created using direct 3D morphometry.
Histological evaluation
One specimen from each treatment group was used for histological
evaluation. The specimens were cleaned and fixed in 4% formalin
for 3 days. Dehydration was accomplished using a graded series of ethyl
alcohols and three stages of xylene. Infiltration was performed using
a graded series of xylene and Osteo-Bed (Polysciences) resins, followed
by a catalyzed mixture of Osteo-Bed resin containing benzoyl peroxide
(1.40 g/100 ml). Embedding was performed using a final catalyzed
resin mixture of Osteo-Bed resin solution containing benzoyl peroxide
(2.5 g/100 ml). Tissue sections were cut at a section thickness of 5.0 mm
onaRM2155rotarymicrotome(Leica)byusingtungstencarbideD-profile
knives. The sectionswere stainedusing matrix-specific Masson’strichrome
staining. In brief, tissue sections were treated overnight in Bouin’s solution
at room temperature. Slides were rinsed for 10 min under running water
and stained with Weigert’s hematoxylin for 5 min. The slides were
then rinsed and stained with scarlet-acid fuchsin for 5 min and rinsed
again, after which the slides were again stained with phosphomolybdic-
phosphotungstic, aniline blue, and 2% acetic acid for 5 min each. Final-
ly, the slides were rinsed, dried, and mounted. The slides were imaged
using a four-channel Laser Scanning Microscope 780 (Zeiss) with ×20
magnification, z-stacking, and 5 × 5 tile scanning. For zoom-in images,
a single z-stacked image was generated. All samples were scanned using
the same gain and exposure settings.
Biomechanical analysis
Fifteen samples from the “Autograft,” “BMP-6 + US,” and “BMP-6
only” groups (n = 5 per group) were used for biomechanical analysis.
After harvest, the samples were wrapped in saline-soaked gauze, sealed,
and frozen until analysis. Before analysis, the samples were thawed
for about 1 hour and then allowed to rehydrate in PBS for 2 hours. A
custom-made alignment jig was used to fix the proximal and distal
ends of the tibia in two aluminum square pots by submerging 2.5 cm
of each end in Bosworth Fastray Cement (Midway Dental Supply).
The gauge length of the exposed tibia between the two fixed ends was
measured using calipers before testing. Torsion testing was performed
using a custom-designed jig on an Instron ElectroPuls E10000 (Instron).
The rotational actuator was rotated at a rate of 1 deg/s until failure. Load
and rotation data were continuously recorded during testing. The
collected data were analyzed using a custom MATLAB code (data
file S1) to determine the torsional rigidity, yield torque, ultimate torque,
rotation-to-yield torque, rotation-to-ultimate torque, work-to-yield
torque, and work-to-ultimate torque.
Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism 5.0f software (GraphPad Prism) was used to analyze
the data. Results are presented as means ± SEM. Data analysis was con-
ducted using Student’s t test, one-way ANOVA, or a two-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s multiple comparison post hoc test. To assess significance,
we considered P < 0.05 statistically significant. Individual-level data are
shown in table S1.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/390/eaal3128/DC1
Fig. S1. Critical-sized bone fracture model in Yucatán mini-pigs’ tibia.
Fig. S2. Endogenous mesenchymal progenitor cell recruitment to mini-pig tibial fracture site.
Fig. S3. Ultrasound treatment setup.
Fig. S4. Biodistribution of BMP-6 expression after ultrasound-mediated gene delivery.
Fig. S5. Comparison of bone formation between male and female mini-pigs.
Table S1. Primary data.
Data file S1. MATLAB code of biomechanical analysis.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. D. J. Hak, D. Fitzpatrick, J. A. Bishop, J. L. Marsh, S. Tilp, R. Schnettler, H. Simpson, V. Alt,
Delayed union and nonunions: Epidemiology, clinical issues, and financial aspects.
Injury 45 (Suppl. 2), S3–S7 (2014).
2. H. A. Awad, X. Zhang, D. G. Reynolds, R. E. Guldberg, R. J. O’Keefe, E. M. Schwarz,
Recent advances in gene delivery for structural bone allografts. Tissue Eng. 13,
1973–1985 (2007).
3. J. A. Bishop, A. A. Palanca, M. J. Bellino, D. W. Lowenberg, Assessment of compromised
fracture healing. J. Am. Acad. Orthop. Surg. 20, 273–282 (2012).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
7 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 4. C. Hierholzer, D. Sama, J. B. Toro, M. Peterson, D. L. Helfet, Plate fixation of ununited
humeral shaft fractures: Effect of type of bone graft on healing. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 88,
1442–1447 (2006).
5. B. E. Brigman, F. J. Hornicek, M. C. Gebhardt, H. J. Mankin, Allografts about the knee in
young patients with high-grade sarcoma. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 421, 232–239 (2004).
6. S. Govender, C. Csimma, H. K. Genant, A. Valentin-Opran, Y. Amit, R. Arbel, H. Aro, D. Atar,
M. Bishay, M. G. Borner, P. Chiron, P. Choong, J. Cinats, B. Courtenay, R. Feibel, B. Geulette,
C. Gravel, N. Haas, M. Raschke, E. Hammacher, D. van der Velde, P. Hardy, M. Holt,
C. Josten, R. L. Ketterl, B. Lindeque, G. Lob, H. Mathevon, G. McCoy, D. Marsh, R. Miller,
E. Munting, S. Oevre, L. Nordsletten, A. Patel, A. Pohl, W. Rennie, P. Reynders,
P. M. Rommens, J. Rondia, W. C. Rossouw, P. J. Daneel, S. Ruff, A. Ruter, S. Santavirta,
T. A. Schildhauer, C. Gekle, R. Schnettler, D. Segal, H. Seiler, R. B. Snowdowne, J. Stapert,
G. Taglang, R. Verdonk, L. Vogels, A. Weckbach, A. Wentzensen, T. Wisniewski; BMP-2
Evaluation in Surgery for Tibial Trauma (BESTT) Study Group, Recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein-2 for treatment of open tibial fractures: A prospective, controlled,
randomized study of four hundred and fifty patients. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 84,
2123–2134 (2002).
7. J. Ristiniemi, T. Flinkkilä, P. Hyvönen, M. Lakovaara, H. Pakarinen, P. Jalovaara, RhBMP-7
accelerates the healing in distal tibial fractures treated by external fixation. J. Bone Joint
Surg. Br. 89, 265–272 (2007).
8. E. J. Carragee, E. L. Hurwitz, B. K. Weiner, A critical review of recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein-2 trials in spinal surgery: Emerging safety concerns and lessons
learned. Spine J. 11, 471–491 (2011).
9. N. K. Bleich, I. Kallai, J. R. Lieberman, E. M. Schwarz, G. Pelled, D. Gazit, Gene therapy
approaches to regenerating bone. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 64, 1320–1330 (2012).
10. O. B. Betz, V. M. Betz, A. Nazarian, M. Egermann, L. C. Gerstenfeld, T. A. Einhorn,
M. S. Vrahas, M. L. Bouxsein, C. H. Evans, Delayed administration of adenoviral BMP-2 vector
improves the formation of bone in osseous defects. Gene Ther. 14, 1039–1044 (2007).
11. M. Egermann, C. A. Lill, K. Griesbeck, C. H. Evans, P. D. Robbins, E. Schneider, A. W. Baltzer,
Effect of BMP-2 gene transfer on bone healing in sheep. Gene Ther. 13, 1290–1299 (2006).
12. C. Yazici, M. Takahata, D. G. Reynolds, C. Xie, R. J. Samulski, J. Samulski, E. J. Beecham,
A. A. Gertzman, M. Spilker, X. Zhang, R. J. O’Keefe, H. A. Awad, E. M. Schwarz, Self-
complementary AAV2.5-BMP2-coated femoral allografts mediated superior bone healing
versus live autografts in mice with equivalent biomechanics to unfractured femur.
Mol. Ther. 19, 1416–1425 (2011).
13. D. Trono, Gene therapy: Too much splice can spoil the dish. J. Clin. Invest. 122, 1600–1602
(2012).
14. N. Kimelman-Bleich, G. Pelled, Y. Zilberman, I. Kallai, O. Mizrahi, W. Tawackoli, Z. Gazit,
D. Gazit, Targeted gene-and-host progenitor cell therapy for nonunion bone fracture
repair. Mol. Ther. 19, 53–59 (2011).
15. D. Sheyn, N. Kimelman-Bleich, G. Pelled, Y. Zilberman, D. Gazit, Z. Gazit, Ultrasound-based
nonviral gene delivery induces bone formation in vivo. Gene Ther. 15, 257–266 (2008).
16. G. Shapiro, A. W. Wong, M. Bez, F. Yang, S. Tam, L. Even, D. Sheyn, S. Ben-David,
W. Tawackoli, G. Pelled, K. W. Ferrara, D. Gazit, Multiparameter evaluation of in vivo gene
delivery using ultrasound-guided, microbubble-enhanced sonoporation. J. Control.
Release 223, 157–164 (2016).
17. M. Endoh, N. Koibuchi, M. Sato, R. Morishita, T. Kanzaki, Y. Murata, Y. Kaneda, Fetal gene
transfer by intrauterine injection with microbubble-enhanced ultrasound. Mol. Ther. 5,
501–508 (2002).
18. Y. Taniyama, K. Tachibana, K. Hiraoka, M. Aoki, S. Yamamoto, K. Matsumoto, T. Nakamura,
T. Ogihara, Y. Kaneda, R. Morishita, Development of safe and efficient novel nonviral gene
transfer using ultrasound: Enhancement of transfection efficiency of naked plasmid DNA
in skeletal muscle. Gene Ther. 9, 372–380 (2002).
19. P. G. Sanches, M. Mühlmeister, R. Seip, E. Kaijzel, C. Löwik, M. Bohmer, K. Tiemann, H. Grüll,
Ultrasound-mediated gene delivery of naked plasmid DNA in skeletal muscles: A case for
bolus injections. J. Control. Release 195, 130–137 (2014).
20. Y. Watanabe, S. Horie, Y. Funaki, Y. Kikuchi, H. Yamazaki, K. Ishii, S. Mori, G. Vassaux,
T. Kodama, Delivery of Na/I symporter gene into skeletal muscle using nanobubbles and
ultrasound: Visualization of gene expression by PET. J. Nucl. Med. 51, 951–958 (2010).
21. T. Li, K. Tachibana, M. Kuroki, M. Kuroki, Gene transfer with echo-enhanced contrast
agents: Comparison between Albunex, Optison, and Levovist in mice—Initial results.
Radiology 229, 423–428 (2003).
22. Q. L. Lu, H.-D. Liang, T. Partridge, M. J. Blomley, Microbubble ultrasound improves the
efficiency of gene transduction in skeletal muscle in vivo with reduced tissue damage.
Gene Ther. 10, 396–405 (2003).
23. X. Wang, H. D. Liang, B. Dong, Q. L. Lu, M. J. Blomley, Gene transfer with microbubble
ultrasound and plasmid DNA into skeletal muscle of mice: Comparison between
commercially available microbubble contrast agents. Radiology 237, 224–229 (2005).
24. G. Shapiro, I. Kallai, D. Sheyn, W. Tawackoli, Y. Do Koh, H. Bae, T. Trietel, R. Goldbart,
J. Kost, Z. Gazit, D. Gazit, G. Pelled, Ultrasound-mediated transgene expression in
endogenous stem cells recruited to bone injury sites. Polym. Adv. Technol. 25, 525–531
(2014).
25. G. A. Feichtinger, A. T. Hofmann, P. Slezak, S. Schuetzenberger, M. Kaipel, E. Schwartz,
A. Neef, N. Nomikou, T. Nau, M. van Griensven, A. P. McHale, H. Redl, Sonoporation
increases therapeutic efficacy of inducible and constitutive BMP2/7 in vivo gene delivery.
Hum. Gene Ther. Methods 25, 57–71 (2013).
26. K. Tai, G. Pelled, D. Sheyn, A. Bershteyn, L. Han, I. Kallai, Y. Zilberman, C. Ortiz, D. Gazit,
Nanobiomechanics of repair bone regenerated by genetically modified mesenchymal
stem cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 14, 1709–1720 (2008).
27. K. Osawa, Y. Okubo, K. Nakao, N. Koyama, K. Bessho, Osteoinduction by microbubble-
enhanced transcutaneous sonoporation of human bone morphogenetic protein-2.
J. Gene Med. 11, 633–641 (2009).
28. J. Bonadio, E. Smiley, P. Patil, S. Goldstein, Localized, direct plasmid gene delivery in vivo:
Prolonged therapy results in reproducible tissue regeneration. Nat. Med. 5, 753–759
(1999).
29. M. Egermann, A. W. Baltzer, S. Adamaszek, C. Evans, P. Robbins, E. Schneider, C. A. Lill,
Direct adenoviral transfer of bone morphogenetic protein-2 cDNA enhances fracture
healing in osteoporotic sheep. Hum. Gene Ther. 17, 507–517 (2006).
30. K. R. Dai, X. L. Xu, T. T. Tang, Z. A. Zhu, C. F. Yu, J. R. Lou, X. L. Zhang, Repairing of goat
tibial bone defects with BMP-2 gene–modified tissue-engineered bone. Calcif. Tissue Int.
77, 55–61 (2005).
31. X. L. Xu, T. Tang, K. Dai, Z. Zhu, X. E. Guo, C. Yu, J. Lou, Immune response and effect
of adenovirus-mediated human BMP-2 gene transfer on the repair of segmental tibial
bone defects in goats. Acta Orthop. 76, 637–646 (2005).
32. S. E. Raper, N. Chirmule, F. S. Lee, N. A. Wivel, A. Bagg, G.-p. Gao, J. M. Wilson,
M. L. Batshaw, Fatal systemic inflammatory response syndrome in a ornithine
transcarbamylase deficient patient following adenoviral gene transfer. Mol. Genet. Metab.
80, 148–158 (2003).
33. C. Baum, O. Kustikova, U. Modlich, Z. Li, B. Fehse, Mutagenesis and oncogenesis by
chromosomal insertion of gene transfer vectors. Hum. Gene Ther. 17, 253–263 (2006).
34. S. Hacein-Bey-Abina, C. von Kalle, M. Schmidt, F. Le Deist, N. Wulffraat, E. McIntyre,
I. Radford, J. L. Villeval, C. C. Fraser, M. Cavazzana-Calvo, A. Fischer, A serious adverse
event after successful gene therapy for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.
N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 255–256 (2003).
35. TRUST Investigators writing group; J. W. Busse, M. Bhandari, T. A. Einhorn, E. Schemitsch,
J. D. Heckman, P. Tornetta III, K. S. Leung, D. Heels-Ansdell, S. Makosso-Kallyth,
G. J. Della Rocca, C. B. Jones, G. H. Guyatt, Re-evaluation of low intensity pulsed
ultrasound in treatment of tibial fractures (TRUST): Randomized clinical trial. BMJ 355,
i5351 (2016).
36. G. K. Hiremath, M. P. Steinmetz, A. A. Krishnaney, Is it safe to use recombinant human
bone morphogenetic protein in posterior cervical fusion? Spine 34, 885–889 (2009).
37. J. D. Kang, Another complication associated with rhBMP-2? Spine J. 11, 517–519 (2011).
38. E. J. Carragee, K. A. Mitsunaga, E. L. Hurwitz, G. J. Scuderi, Retrograde ejaculation after
anterior lumbar interbody fusion using rhBMP-2: A cohort controlled study. Spine J. 11,
511–516 (2011).
39. H. Miyaji, T. Sugaya, K. Kato, N. Kawamura, H. Tsuji, M. Kawanami, Dentin resorption
and cementum-like tissue formation by bone morphogenetic protein application.
J. Periodontal Res. 41, 311–315 (2006).
40. C. M. Cowan, O. O. Aalami, Y.-Y. Shi, Y. F. Chou, C. Mari, R. Thomas, N. Quarto,
R. P. Nacamuli, C. H. Contag, B. Wu, M. T. Longaker, Bone morphogenetic protein 2 and
retinoic acid accelerate in vivo bone formation, osteoclast recruitment, and bone
turnover. Tissue Eng. 11, 645–658 (2005).
41. D. G. Little, M. McDonald, R. Bransford, C. B. Godfrey, N. Amanat, Manipulation of the
anabolic and catabolic responses with OP-1 and zoledronic acid in a rat critical defect
model. J. Bone Miner. Res. 20, 2044–2052 (2005).
42. K. Lavery, P. Swain, D. Falb, M. H. Alaoui-Ismaili, BMP-2/4 and BMP-6/7 differentially
utilize cell surface receptors to induce osteoblastic differentiation of human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 20948–20958 (2008).
43. J. Z. Li, H. Li, T. Sasaki, D. Holman, B. Beres, R. J. Dumont, D. D. Pittman, G. R. Hankins,
G. A. Helm, Osteogenic potential of five different recombinant human bone
morphogenetic protein adenoviral vectors in the rat. Gene Ther. 10, 1735–1743 (2003).
44. J. A. Jane Jr., B. A. Dunford, A. Kron, D. D. Pittman, T. Sasaki, J. Z. Li, H. Li, T. D. Alden,
H. Dayoub, G. R. Hankins, D. F. Kallmes, G. A. Helm, Ectopic osteogenesis using adenoviral
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 and BMP-6 gene transfer. Mol. Ther. 6, 464–470
(2002).
45. Y. Jung, J. Song, Y. Shiozawa, J. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Williams, A. Havens, A. Schneider, C. Ge,
R. T. Franceschi, L. K. McCauley, P. H. Krebsbach, R. S. Taichman, Hematopoietic stem cells
regulate mesenchymal stromal cell induction into osteoblasts thereby participating in
the formation of the stem cell niche. Stem Cells 26, 2042–2051 (2008).
46. S. Vukicevic, L. Grgurevic, BMP-6 and mesenchymal stem cell differentiation.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 20, 441–448 (2009).
47. O. Mizrahi, D. Sheyn, W. Tawackoli, I. Kallai, A. Oh, S. Su, X. Da, P. Zarrini, G. Cook-Wiens,
D. Gazit, Z. Gazit, BMP-6 is more efficient in bone formation than BMP-2 when
overexpressed in mesenchymal stem cells. Gene Ther. 20, 370–377 (2013).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
8 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 48. N. Nomikou, G. A. Feichtinger, S. Saha, S. Nuernberger, P. Heimel, H. Redl, A. P. McHale,
Ultrasound-responsive gene-activated matrices (GAMs) for osteogenic gene therapy
using matrix-assisted sonoporation (MAS). J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 10.1002/term.2406
(2017).
49. M. A. Flierl, W. R. Smith, C. Mauffrey, K. Irgit, A. E. Williams, E. Ross, G. Peacher, D. J. Hak,
P. F. Stahel, Outcomes and complication rates of different bone grafting modalities in
long bone fracture nonunions: A retrospective cohort study in 182 patients. J. Orthop.
Surg. Res. 8, 33 (2013).
50. G. E. Friedlaender, Bone grafts. The basic science rationale for clinical applications. J. Bone
Joint Surg. Am. 69, 786–790 (1987).
51. A. J. Weiland, T. W. Phillips, M. A. Randolph, Bone grafts: A radiologic, histologic, and
biomechanical model comparing autografts, allografts, and free vascularized bone grafts.
Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 74, 368–379 (1984).
52. M. J. Peltola, K. M. Aitasalo, J. T. Suonpaa, A. Yli-Urpo, P. J. Laippala, In vivo model for
frontal sinus and calvarial bone defect obliteration with bioactive glass S53P4 and
hydroxyapatite. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 58, 261–269 (2001).
53. C. M. Runyan, A. T. Vu, A. Rumburg, K. Bove, J. Racadio, D. A. Billmire, J. A. Taylor, Repair of
a critical porcine tibial defect by means of allograft revitalization. Plast. Reconstr. Surg.
136, 461e–473e (2015).
54. A. Delalande, M. F. Bureau, P. Midoux, A. Bouakaz, C. Pichon, Ultrasound-assisted
microbubbles gene transfer in tendons for gene therapy. Ultrasonics 50, 269–272 (2010).
55. D. N. Stephens, D. E. Kruse, S. Qin, K. W. Ferrara, Design aspects of focal beams from
high-intensity arrays. IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 58, 1590–1602 (2011).
56. S. Qin, C. F. Caskey, K. W. Ferrara, Ultrasound contrast microbubbles in imaging
and therapy: Physical principles and engineering. Phys. Med. Biol. 54, R27–R57 (2009).
57. D. Sheyn, S. Ben-David, G. Shapiro, S. De Mel, M. Bez, L. Ornelas, A. Sahabian, D. Sareen,
X. Da, G. Pelled, W. Tawackoli, Z. Liu, D. Gazit, Z. Gazit, Human induced pluripotent stem
cells differentiate into functional mesenchymal stem cells and repair bone defects.
Stem Cells Transl. Med. 5, 1447–1460 (2016).
58. O. Mizrahi, D. Sheyn, W. Tawackoli, I. Kallai, A. Oh, S. Su, X. Da, P. Zarrini, G. Cook-Wiens,
D. Gazit, Z. Gazit, BMP-6 is more efficient in bone formation than BMP-2 when
overexpressed in mesenchymal stem cells. Gene Ther. 20, 370–377 (2012).
59. D. Sheyn, I. Kallai, W. Tawackoli, D. C. Yakubovich, A. Oh, S. Su, X. Da, A. Lavi,
N. Kimelman-Bleich, Y. Zilberman, N. Li, H. Bae, Z. Gazit, G. Pelled, D. Gazit, Gene-modified
adult stem cells regenerate vertebral bone defect in a rat model. Mol. Pharm. 8,
1592–1601 (2011).
60. M. Raschke, S. Kolbeck, H. Bail, G. Schmidmaier, A. Flyvbjerg, T. Lindner, M. Dahne,
I. A. Roenne, N. D. H. de Haas, Homologous growth hormone accelerates healing of
segmental bone defects. Bone 29, 368–373 (2001).
61. C.-M. Court-Brown, R. W. Bucholz, J. D. Heckman, Fractures of the tibia and fibula, in
Rockwood and Green’s Fractures in Adults (Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, ed. 6, 2005),
pp. 2079–2146.
62. J. E. Chomas, P. Dayton, J. Allen, K. Morgan, K. W. Ferrara, Mechanisms of contrast agent
destruction. IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 48, 232–248 (2001).
63. D. Sheyn, G. Shapiro, W. Tawackoli, D. S. Jun, Y. Koh, K. B. Kang, S. Su, X. Da, S. Ben-David,
M. Bez, E. Yalon, B. Antebi, P. Avalos, T. Stern, E. Zelzer, E. M. Schwarz, Z. Gazit, G. Pelled,
H. M. Bae, D. Gazit, PTH induces systemically administered mesenchymal stem cells to
migrate to and regenerate spine injuries. Mol. Ther. 24, 318–330 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank S. De Mel for the dedicated laboratory work during this study.
Funding: We acknowledge funding from California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM)
grant TR4-06713, a grant from IDF Medical Corps, a grant from Milgrom Family (D.G.), NIH
R01CA112356 (K.W.F.), and NIH P30AR069655 (H.A.A.). Author contributions: G.P., Z.G.,
E.J.L., K.W.F., and D.G. contributed to the concept of the study and revised the manuscript. G.P.,
M.B., and D.G. designed the experiments. M.B., W.T., P.A., T.J.K., and H.W.B. performed large-
animal surgical procedures. M.B., D.S., W.T., and J.C.G. performed ultrasound-mediated gene
delivery experiments. M.B., D.S., and W.T. extracted bone and soft tissue samples. M.B., D.S.,
and S.B.D. performed flow cytometry data analysis. S.B.D. performed RT-PCR and ELISA assays.
J.G. and H.A.A. performed biomechanics testing. M.B. and G.S. performed the statistical
analyses. M.B., W.T., and X.D. performed mCT imaging and biomechanical data analysis.
M.B., G.S., and G.P. wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: T.J.K., G.P., and D.G. are
inventors on patent application (PCT/US2017/020033) submitted by Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center that “covers the use of ultrasound for endogenous stem cell activation.” G.P., Z.G.,
and D.G. are shareholders in GamlaStem Medical Inc., which did not provide funds for this
study. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials
availability: All materials are available from commercial sources or can be derived using
methods described in this study. All relevant data are reported in the article.
Submitted 3 November 2016
Resubmitted 8 February 2017
Accepted 14 April 2017
Published 17 May 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3128
Citation: M. Bez, D. Sheyn, W. Tawackoli, P. Avalos, G. Shapiro, J. C. Giaconi, X. Da, S. B. David,
J. Gavrity, H. A. Awad, H. W. Bae, E. J. Ley, T. J. Kremen, Z. Gazit, K. W. Ferrara, G. Pelled, D. Gazit,
In situ bone tissue engineering via ultrasound-mediated gene delivery to endogenous
progenitor cells in mini-pigs. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Bez et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal3128 (2017)
17 May 2017
9 of 9
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 progenitor cells in mini-pigs
In situ bone tissue engineering via ultrasound-mediated gene delivery to endogenous
Gadi Pelled and Dan Gazit
David, Jayne Gavrity, Hani A. Awad, Hyun W. Bae, Eric J. Ley, Thomas J. Kremen, Zulma Gazit, Katherine W. Ferrara, 
Maxim Bez, Dmitriy Sheyn, Wafa Tawackoli, Pablo Avalos, Galina Shapiro, Joseph C. Giaconi, Xiaoyu Da, Shiran Ben
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3128
, eaal3128.
9
Sci Transl Med 
critical-sized tibial nonunions in mini-pigs.
. This therapy led to transient BMP-6 secretion, bone regeneration, and fracture healing over 6 weeks in
BMP-6
and ultrasound was applied to oscillate the microbubbles, which helped the recruited progenitors take up the 
) plasmid DNA and microbubbles were injected into nonunions,
BMP-6
 (
bone morphogenetic protein-6
weeks later, 
stem/progenitor cells were recruited to the bone nonunion by implanting a collagen sponge in the defect site. Two 
. developed a two-step therapy. First, endogenous mesenchymal
et al
alternative to viral gene delivery, Bez 
Treatments for bone nonunions (fractures that fail to heal) include surgery and bone grafting. As an
Bubbles and BMP-6 for bone repair
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/390/eaal3128
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/05/15/9.390.eaal3128.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/423/eaam8828.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/356/6342/1020.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/3/100/100ra89.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/191/191ra83.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/310/310ra168.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/177/177ra36.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/390/eaal3128#BIBL
This article cites 61 articles, 6 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
