 180
EARLY LIFE EXPOSURE TO MATERNAL OBESITY
PERTURBS RENAL MORPHOLOGY IN MICE
1Adele Pinnock*, 1Heather Blackmore, 2Tom Ashmore, 1Susan Ozanne. 1University of
Cambridge; 2University of Cambridge Metabolic; *Presenting Author
10.1136/heartjnl-2016-309890.180
Introduction The incidence of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
has risen globally by 83% since 1990, concurrently with type
2
diabetes
and
metabolic
syndrome.
Studies
of
maternal
under-nutrition during pregnancy have highlighted that the
kidney can be adversely “programmed” resulting in fewer fil-
tration units, a factor linked to the pathogenesis of CKD,
hypertension and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Despite the
dramatic increase in obesity in recent years, the effect of
maternal over-nutrition/obesity during pregnancy on offspring
kidney structure and function remains largely unexplored. The
aim of the current study was to define the effects of maternal
over-nutrition on offspring kidney structure using a mouse
model of maternal diet-induced obesity.
Methods Female C57BL/6 mice were fed a high fat diet sup-
plemented with sweetened condensed milk for six weeks prior
to pregnancy and throughout gestation and lactation. This led
to a doubling in maternal body fat. Male offspring were
studied at 3 weeks of age. Kidneys were harvested, sectioned
and stained with Haematoxylin and Eosin. Nephrons were
counted in whole sections at even interspaces throughout the
kidney to estimate the number of nephrons within a given
area. Glomeruli diameters were also measured as an indicator
of glomerular area.
Results There was no difference in absolute kidney weight
between the 2 offspring groups (p = 0.95). Offspring exposed
to a maternal obesogenic diet had significantly larger com-
bined renal cortex and medulla areas than offspring exposed
to a maternal chow diet (17.4 mm2 vs 12.5 mm2 respectively
[p = 0.0136]). However, the number of nephrons/mm2 within
the cortex and medulla was significantly reduced in offspring
of obese pregnancies when compared to controls (2.2/mm2 vs.
3.5/mm2 respectively [p = 0.0047]). The mean glomerulus
diameter was also significantly larger within offspring of obese
pregnancies compared with offspring of control pregnancies
(53.7 um vs. 46.3 um respectively [p < 0.0001]).
Conclusions These results suggest that there is compensatory
individual glomerular hypertrophy due to a reduced glomeruli
density in offspring exposed to maternal obesity during preg-
nancy and lactation, and that these individuals may therefore
be more at risk of developing renal disease and associated
CVD in later life. These findings highlight the importance of
further studying the long-term consequences of these early
morphological changes.
181
ENRICHMENT OF THROMBIN ACTIVATABLE
FIBRINOLYSIS INHIBITOR (TAFI), A NOVEL PRO-
THROMBOTIC PROTEIN IN LIPOPROTEINS OF SOUTH
ASIAN PATIENTS WITH CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Sanjay Bhandari*, Donald Jones, Leong Ng. University of Leicester; *Presenting Author
10.1136/heartjnl-2016-309890.181
Introduction CAD is a leading cause of mortality in the UK
with South Asians at heightened risk, owing to their dispro-
portionately high prevalence of diabetes and metabolic syn-
drome. Simplistic notion of lipoprotein was transporters of
lipids has been challenged, with a growing appreciation of
their functionality, due to their carriage of low abundant pro-
teins which are concerned with redox, inflammation and coag-
ulation. In this study we sought to compare the lipoproteins
and their associated protein cargoes between South Asian and
Caucasian patients with CAD to further understand the differ-
ential risk that exists.
Methods South Asian males (n = 51, age mean ± SD 58 ±
8.6years) and Caucasian males (n = 49, age mean ± SD 64
±
8.7years)
with
angiographic
evidence
of
CAD
were
recruited, after fulfilling the inclusion criteria, into this single
centre prospective cohort study. Blood was withdrawn from
the consented patients. Lipoproteins and their associated pro-
teins were isolated using a novel lipoaffinity resin. A bottom-
up label-free unbiased lipoproteomic discovery workflow was
utilised. Samples were analysed on a Waters G2S high defini-
tion ion mobility enabled mass spectrometer. Data analysis
was executed using Progenesis Qi with a stringent FDR of
1%.
Results As expected South Asians were younger and had a
higher prevalence of diabetes. Renal function, lipid parameters,
burden of CAD and cardiovascular medication prescription
were equivalent between the two ethnicities. 272 proteins
were identified in both groups, of which 28 demonstrated sig-
nificant differential expression (P < 0.05). South Asians were
found to have enrichment of proteins concerned with acute
inflammation (alpha-1 acid glycoprotein), complement activa-
tion (ficolin-2), extracellular remodelling (thrombospondin-1),
endothelial dysfunction (profilin-1) and pro-thrombosis (throm-
bin
activatable
fibrinolysis
inhibitor
[TAFI]/carboxypeptidase
B2) relative to Caucasians. South Asians had depletion of tet-
ranectin, concerned with fibrinolysis, compared to their Cauca-
sian counterparts. Biomarker verification revealed that plasma
levels
of
TAFI
were
significantly
higher
in
South
Asian
patients compared to Caucasian patients with CAD, using a
single site in-house immunoassay (P = 0.045).
Conclusion CAD remodels the lipoproteins and their associ-
ated protein cargo with ethnic specific alterations, such that
South Asian patients have a predominance of pro-inflamma-
tory
and
pro-thrombotic
proteins
compared
to
Caucasian
patients. Higher plasma levels of TAFI in the South Asian
patients relative to the Caucasian patients, may contribute to a
pro-thrombotic state and to their excess CAD risk.
182
LOSS OF ENDOTHELIAL ENDOGLIN LEADS TO HEART
FAILURE
1Simon Tual-Chalot, 2Benjamin Davison, 1Rachael Redgrave, 1Helen Arthur*. 1Newcastle
University; 2Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust; *Presenting Author
10.1136/heartjnl-2016-309890.182
Introduction Endoglin is a co-receptor for members of the
transforming growth factor-beta superfamily of ligands, and
regulates angiogenesis. Patients carrying mutations in the endo-
glin
gene
develop
Hereditary
Haemorrhagic
Telangiectasia
(HHT), a disorder characterised by vascular malformations
and bleeding. Endoglin is mainly expressed in vascular endo-
thelial cells, is required for normal blood vessel development,
but its role in the adult vasculature is not yet understood.
Methods To investigate the role of endoglin in the adult vas-
culature, we used 12 week old Engfl/fl; Cdh5Cre-ERT2 mice to
generate endothelial-specific depletion of endoglin (Eng-iKOe).
Abstracts
Heart 2016;102(Suppl 6):A1–A147
A125
