 Specific Transcriptome Changes Associated
with Blood Pressure Reduction in Hypertensive
Patients After Relaxation Response Training
Manoj K. Bhasin, PhD,
1–3,{ John W. Denninger, MD, PhD,
1,4,{ Jeff C. Huffman, MD,
4
Marie G. Joseph, BA,
3 Halsey Niles, BA,
1 Emma Chad-Friedman, BA,
1,2 Roberta Goldman, BA,
1
Beverly Buczynski-Kelley, RN,
5 Barbara A. Mahoney, RN,
5 Gregory L. Fricchione, MD,
1,4
Jeffery A. Dusek, PhD,
1,6,* Herbert Benson, MD,
1,7,{
Randall M. Zusman, MD,
5,{ and Towia A. Libermann, PhD1–3,{
Abstract
Objective: Mind–body practices that elicit the relaxation response (RR) have been demonstrated to reduce
blood pressure (BP) in essential hypertension (HTN) and may be an adjunct to antihypertensive drug therapy.
However, the molecular mechanisms by which the RR reduces BP remain undefined.
Design: Genomic determinants associated with responsiveness to an 8-week RR-based mind–body inter-
vention for lowering HTN in 13 stage 1 hypertensive patients classified as BP responders and 11 as nonre-
sponders were identified.
Results: Transcriptome analysis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells identified 1771 genes regulated by the
RR in responders. Biological process- and pathway-based analysis of transcriptome data demonstrated en-
richment in the following gene categories: immune regulatory pathways and metabolism (among downregulated
genes); glucose metabolism, cardiovascular system development, and circadian rhythm (among upregulated
genes). Further in silico estimation of cell abundance from the microarray data showed enrichment of the anti-
inflammatory M2 subtype of macrophages in BP responders. Nuclear factor-kB, vascular endothelial growth
factor, and insulin were critical molecules emerging from interactive network analysis.
Conclusions: These findings provide the first insights into the molecular mechanisms that are associated with
the beneficial effects of the RR on HTN.
Keywords: relaxation response, hypertension, gene expression, microarray, blood pressure, mindfulness
1Benson-Henry Institute for Mind Body Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
2Division of Interdisciplinary Medicine and Biotechnology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
3BIDMC Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA.
Departments of 4Psychiatry and 7Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
5Department of Medicine, Corrigan-Minehan Heart Center, Cardiology Division, Section on Hypertension, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
6Integrative Health Research Center, Penny George Institute for Health and Healing, Allina Health, Minneapolis, MN.
*Present address: Kripalu Center for Yoga and Health, Stockbridge, MA.
{Contributed equally and should be considered first authors.
{Contributed equally and should be considered senior authors.
ª Manoj K. Bhasin et al., 2018; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons License (http:/
/creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
THE JOURNAL OF ALTERNATIVE AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE
JACM
Volume 24, Number 5, 2018, pp. 486–504
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/acm.2017.0053
486
 Introduction
H
ypertension (HTN) is a major risk factor for the de-
velopment of coronary, cerebrovascular, and peripheral
vascular disease, leading to myocardial infarction, stroke, and
vascular death.1,2 As many as 100 million Americans and up to
1 billion people worldwide are estimated to have HTN.1,2
Among older Americans, prevalence rises to >50%.1
HTN is of particular importance for public health as the
total annual cost attributed to HTN is projected to rise to
$274 billion by 2030.1 A recent article published in the
Journal of the American Medical Association reported that
elevated blood pressure (BP) is associated with increased
burden of death globally.1 Pharmacologic therapy is the
principal means of BP control; however, antihypertensive
drugs are associated with side effects, which can be bur-
densome and can cause noncompliance with the prescribed
antihypertensive regimen.3,4 Importantly, lifestyle modifi-
cation (weight loss, exercise, and sodium intake restriction)
and mind–body interventions (MBIs) may be at least as
effective as pharmacologic therapy5–7 and are generally free
of side effects. Recently, the American Heart Association
(AHA) issued a statement about the potential usefulness of
mediation, including the relaxation response (RR), for heart-
healthy lifestyle, and medical treatment.2 This statement
from the AHA specifically mentioned that meditation may
help lower BP and decrease the risk of heart attacks.
The stress response is a state of physiologic, behavioral,
and psychological hyperarousal in an organism in response
to an environmental challenge. The profound physiologic
alterations observable in the stress response—involving the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and the sympathetic
nervous system—may lead to onset, development, or pro-
gression of pathophysiologic disease processes,8 especially
when stress is chronic or overwhelming.9 This clear rela-
tionship between stress and HTN3–5 is further supported by
data showing that anxiety and depression are recognized risk
factors for HTN development. HTN can be envisioned in
part as a stress disorder, in which increased BP is the body’s
attempt to adapt to stress.6
Increasing evidence and meta-analysis of MBI trials
support their efficacy in treating chronic diseases.7–10 One of
these MBIs, the RR, is the physiologic and psychological
opposite of the fight-or-flight stress response11–13 and has
demonstrated efficacy in stress-linked disorders.7,8 The RR
is evoked by many techniques including meditation, pro-
gressive muscle relaxation, autogenic training, and yoga.12
The RR is characterized by a set of physiologic changes that
include decreased oxygen consumption,14 decreased carbon
dioxide elimination, decreased respiratory rate,10,15–17 in-
creased brain cortical thickness,18 increased low-frequency
heart rate oscillations,19,20 increased exhaled nitric oxide,14
and specific changes in gene expression.21,22
A growing body of evidence supports an association be-
tween MBI and BP reduction, in addition to decreasing
levels of anxiety and depression in patients with HTN.9,23–25
Meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials indicate that
MBI including relaxation and stress reduction therapies may
reduce systolic blood pressure (SBP) in essential HTN, al-
though no clear-cut conclusion could be drawn.26 In 2008,
the author’s group demonstrated the efficacy of the RR in
controlling HTN without metabolic, hemodynamic, or cen-
tral nervous system side effects,27 enabling the elimination
of at least one antihypertensive medication in 32% of sub-
jects receiving RR training.27
In the past, it has been assumed that regardless of how BP
is controlled, the protective response will be similar.28
However, recent comparative clinical trials have concluded
that the mechanism by which BP is controlled is an im-
portant variable in determining the clinical outcome of the
patient cohort and may vary from patient to patient.29 One
factor that may differentiate the clinical response in patients
treated with different therapeutic modalities is the effect on
inflammatory markers, whose expression levels are im-
pacted by altered gene expression and, the authors contend,
may be targeted by RR training.30 Transcriptional profiling
of qigong31 and t’ai chi32 practitioners and the authors’ two
studies of RR-practicing healthy subjects21,22 revealed a
distinct and consistent set of anti-inflammatory gene expres-
sion changes in mind–body practitioners.33 Altered immune
functions and leukocyte blood gene expression changes have
been linked to anxiety disorders and various other social
stresses.34,35
To identify biological pathways and mechanisms of action
underlying RR-mediated BP reduction, a study of RR training
in patients with stage 1 essential HTN was conducted. The
authors’ effort focused on comparing the transcriptome chan-
ges in patients who exhibited reduced BP after RR training (BP
responders) with nonresponders whose BP was not signifi-
cantly influenced by the RR training (BP nonresponders).
Materials and Methods
Study design
This prospective single-arm trial involved enrolling 58
patients diagnosed with stage 1 essential HTN who were
either not receiving antihypertensive drug therapy or who
were receiving antihypertensives but willing to be tapered
off. Patients were recruited from the Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH) Hypertension Clinics and from MGH pri-
mary care clinics. After enrollment and tapering (if neces-
sary) under medical supervision for a minimum of 4 weeks,
study eligibility was confirmed at three weekly run-in visits
performed by the MGH Hypertension Clinic. Eligible pa-
tients received an RR-based intervention. The study protocol
was approved by the Partners Human Research Committee,
the Institutional Review Board of the MGH, and Partners
HealthCare. Informed consent was obtained from all pa-
tients. The study was carried out in accordance with the
approved
guidelines
and
was
registered
on
Clinical-
Trials.gov (Identifier: NCT01263743).
Run-in visits
Advancement to the intervention phase required patients
to (1) meet criteria for stage 1 HTN, defined as SBP between
140 and 159 mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure (DBP)
between 90 and 104 mm Hg on average at the three weekly
run-in visits, (2) be off antihypertensive medications, and
(3)
have
no
prior
RR-elicitation
experience.
During
each run-in visit, after patients had been seated at rest for
5 min, three BP measurements were taken by a study nurse,
with at least 2 min between measurements. If either SBP
or DBP measurements varied by >8 mm Hg, additional
RELAXATION RESPONSE EFFECT ON HYPERTENSIVES
487
 measurements were taken until values were within this
range. The average values of SBP and DBP from the three
run-in visits were used as the baseline BP value. Patients
whose baseline values met the stage 1 HTN criteria already
listed were considered to have stable HTN and were ad-
vanced to the intervention phase.
Preintervention biopsych testing
After the successful completion of the run-in visits, patients
returned to the Clinical Research Center (CRC) at MGH for
baseline biopsych testing. Premenopausal female patients at-
tended baseline visits between days 1 and 11 or between days
22 and 28 of their menstrual cycle, and a urine pregnancy test
was performed to ensure minimal hormonal confounds. Pa-
tients who had been taking antihypertensive medication before
study enrollment had been completely off antihypertensive
medications for at least 5 weeks. Fasting blood was drawn by
nursing staff into RNA PAXgene tubes (Qiagen) for genomic
analysis. After the blood draw, patients completed the Per-
ceived Stress Scale (PSS), the Beck Depression Inventory-II
(BDI-II), and the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI).
RR training
The enrolled patients received training in techniques to
elicit the RR, which included eight weekly individual training
sessions from an experienced RR trainer. During the weekly
sessions, patients were guided through an RR elicitation
routine, including diaphragmatic breathing, body scan, man-
tra repetition, and mindfulness meditation, while passively
ignoring intrusive thoughts. A 20-min audio CD that guided
listeners through this same sequence was given to the patients
to be listened to at home once a day.21 As per Galvin et al.,36
daily at-home RR practice was logged by participants.
Postintervention biopsych testing and BP
determination
Immediately after the final RR training session, patients
returned to the CRC for endpoint biopsych testing, which
involved the same blood draw and questionnaires as the
baseline visit. At a separate visit to the MGH Hypertension
Clinic, final endpoint BP was recorded by a study nurse,
typically within 2 weeks after the final RR training. How-
ever, a few patients’ BP was measured between 2 and 4
weeks after the final RR training.
RNA sample collection, isolation, and profiling
Blood samples for transcriptome analysis were collected
into PAXgene tubes (Qiagen) for stabilizing RNA. Total
RNA was isolated from the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) as described previously.21
For transcriptional profiling, the Affymetrix human ge-
nome GeneChip HT HG-U133+ PM 24-Array Plate was
used. The peripheral blood transcriptome profile was as-
sessed on hypertensive patients with paired pre- and post-
intervention samples. Microarray analysis was conducted by
the BIDMC Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology Center at the Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center according to the standard Affymetrix pro-
tocol using the high-throughput Affymetrix GeneTitan sys-
tem. Overview of study design is shown in Supplementary
Figure S1 (Supplementary Data are available online at www
.liebertpub.com/acm).
Data analysis
An overview of the transcriptome data analysis plan is
shown in Supplementary Figure S1.
Definition of BP responders.
After completion of the 8-
week RR intervention, patients who demonstrated (1) a sig-
nificant reduction in both SBP (at least 10mm Hg decrease)
and DBP (at least 5 mm Hg decrease) and (2) BP below AHA
stage 1 HTN clinical limits (SBP <140 mm Hg and DBP
<90mm Hg) were classified as ‘‘responders’’ (n = 13). In-
dividuals who completed the study, but did not meet these
thresholds, were classified as ‘‘nonresponders’’ (n = 11).
Baseline characteristics and self-report outcomes. Des-
criptive statistics were used to describe baseline subject
characteristics. Regarding changes in outcome variables
(SBP/DBP readings; PSS, BAI, and BDI-II scores), paired
samples t-tests were used to compare pre-and postscores for
responders and nonresponders. If post data were missing for
a given scale, data were entered using last observation
carried forward. Effect size [mean difference/standard de-
viation (SD) of difference] was also calculated for self-report
measures. In all cases, statistical tests were two-tailed. De-
scriptive statistics were completed using Stata version 11.0
(Stata Corp, College Station, TX) and pre- to postanalyses
were completed using SPSS Statistics 17.0; p-values of
<0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Microarray quality control analysis.
The technical quality
of hybridized microarrays was assessed using Affymetrix
standard quality control measures including perfect match
(PM) mean, PM residual mean, 3¢–5¢ ratios for b-actin, and
GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) as
well as spike-in control transcripts. Reproducibility of the
samples was checked by using chip-to-chip correlation and
signal-to-noise ratio methods for replicate arrays using ar-
rayQualityMetrics, a Bioconductor package in R.37 Based
on these quality control analyses, microarrays for two pairs
of pre- and post-RR patients (one responder and one non-
responder) were excluded from further analysis. All the 22
high-quality arrays (12 responders and 10 nonresponders)
were included for unsupervised and supervised bioinfor-
matics analysis.
Normalization, unsupervised, and supervised analysis of
transcriptome data.
The high-quality arrays were normal-
ized using the robust multichip average (RMA) method in R
using Bioconductor. RMA performs background correction,
quantile normalization, and summarization on multiple oli-
gonucleotides per transcript using the median polish algo-
rithm.38 To identify outliers and batch effects, unsupervised
analysis using principal component analysis (PCA) and hi-
erarchical clustering analysis (HCA) was performed. The
PCA projects multivariate data objects onto a lower dimen-
sional space while retaining as much of the original variance
as possible.39,40 The HCA was performed using Pearson
correlation matrices with complete-linkage method. Batch
effects, due to multiple transcriptome runs, were removed
488
BHASIN ET AL.
 using ComBat, an empirical Bayes method.41 The differen-
tially expressed genes among pre- versus postintervention
samples were defined using a random-variance t-test. The
random-variance t-test is an improvement over the standard
separate t-test as it permits sharing information among genes
about within-class variation without assuming that all genes
have the same variance.42 Genes were considered statistically
significant if their p-value was <0.05. P-values for signifi-
cance were computed based on 1000 random permutations, at
a significance level of each univariate test of 0.05 using BRB-
ArrayTools.43
Identification of BP response-associated genes
To determine whether the drop in BP after the RR in-
tervention was linked to specific antihypertensive changes
in gene expression and pathophysiologic pathways, tran-
scriptome perturbations in BP responders and nonresponders
were compared, by comparing RNA isolated from PBMCs
at baseline (pre-RR) to RNA isolated after 8 weeks of RR
practice (post-RR) and identifying the differences between
responders and nonresponders. The transcriptome compari-
son was performed using both individual genes and gene
sets/pathways to identify genes and pathways altered by the
RR intervention.
Gene ontology analysis.
To identify over-represented
gene ontology (GO) categories in differentially expressed
genes, the Biological Processes and Molecular Functions
Enrichment Analysis available from the Database for An-
notation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID)
was used.44 DAVID is an online implementation of the
EASE software that produces a list of over-represented ca-
tegories. A p-value is calculated for each biological category
on the basis of enrichments using Fisher’s exact test. The
GO categories with p-values <0.05 and for at least three
genes were considered significant.
Pathway and interactive network analysis.
To more
precisely understand the complex interactions between the
differentially expressed genes and the key differences be-
tween responders and nonresponders, and to identify the
key focus hub genes (genes with the largest number of
connections and anticipated to be those that ensure the
stability and integrity of the network), interactive network
analysis of the relaxation response hypertension (RR HTN)
Responder Signature of 172 genes using the Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis software package (IPA 8.0; Qiagen) was
performed. This analysis generates an interaction network
based on known functional interactions such as protein–
protein interactions, protein activation, or gene regulation
interactions, and demonstrates the interconnectivity be-
tween genes. IPA was used to identify the pathways and
interaction networks significantly affected by genes that
are altered after RR practice in responders only. A detailed
description of IPA is available at the Ingenuity Systems’
web site. IPA calculates a p-value for each pathway ac-
cording to the fit of the user’s data to the IPA database using
a one-tailed Fisher exact test. The pathways with p-values
<0.05 were considered significantly affected.
Regulatory module analysis.
The regulatory module
analysis was used to identify the cascade of upstream tran-
scriptional regulators that can explain observed gene expres-
sion changes. The regulatory module analysis was performed
using the upstream regulator analysis module available in IPA
platform.45 Regulatory analysis helps in identifying signifi-
cantly activated or inhibited transcriptional regulators on the
basis of upregulation or downregulation of its target genes. The
significance of transcriptional regulators activation/inhibition
was determined using one-tailed Fisher’s exact test.
Gene set enrichment analysis.
In addition to individual
gene analysis, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was
implemented to determine whether a priori defined sets of
genes showed statistically significant, concordant differ-
ences between pre- and postintervention samples.46 GSEA
can be more powerful than single-gene methods for studying
the effects of interventions such as the RR in which many
genes each make subtle contributions. The gene sets with
nominal p-value <5% and a false discovery rate (FDR)
<25% after 500 random permutations were considered sig-
nificantly altered. GSEA was performed on the basis of 1007
canonical pathways obtained from the MSig2.0 database.
Furthermore, GSEA on the basis of 345 blood transcript
modules (BTMs) representing B and T cell, natural killer
(NK) cell, neutrophil, and macrophage populations to de-
termine their enrichment in RR HTN responders and non-
responders was performed.47
In addition to BTM analysis, CIBERSORT analysis on
gene expression data from RR HTN responders and nonre-
sponders was performed to estimate the abundance of dif-
ferent immune cells as components of overall PBMC gene
expression.48 The CIBERSORT algorithm characterizes the
cell-type composition of complex tissues/biological fluids
from their gene expression profiles. The gene signatures of
22 distinct immune cell types (LM22) for this analysis were
used.48 The signatures were developed from gene expres-
sion profiles of each immune cell type using Affymetrix and
Illumina platforms.
Leading edge analysis.
The significantly enriched gene
sets (or pathways) identified from GSEA already described
may have significant overlap in terms of core-enriched
genes that are potentially linked to enrichment of multiple
gene sets. Thus, the enriched gene sets were merged into
functional modules on the basis of overlap of signifi-
cantly enriched genes. The ‘‘leading edge’’ analysis con-
siders genes shared across the gene sets as most strongly
associated with the phenotype or key effects of interven-
tion. Therefore, leading edge analysis to cluster significant
gene sets and identify common genes that accounted for
the core enrichment signal was used. The core set of genes
identified from leading set analysis was considered for
further validation.
Correlation of genes with changes in BP.
To evaluate
whether the relative changes of SBP and DBP in the patients
before and after RR training correlate with gene expression
changes in responders, correlation analysis using linear re-
gression was conducted. The correlation analysis was per-
formed by comparing change in BP and gene expression
after 8 weeks of RR training and practice. For the purpose
RELAXATION RESPONSE EFFECT ON HYPERTENSIVES
489
 of this analysis, the pre- to postdifference in mean arterial
pressure (MAP; equivalent to DBP+1⁄3[SBP-BDP]) was
used. Correlation analysis was performed separately for BP
responders and nonresponders to select the genes that have
a significant correlation ( p < 0.05) in BP responders but not
in nonresponders. The correlation analysis was performed
for 1821 and 1280 differentially expressed transcripts for BP
responders and nonresponders, respectively, which were
identified from the individual gene-based analysis.
Results
Baseline characteristics
Figure 1 shows the flow of patients through the trial. A
total of 58 patients with stage 1 essential HTN who were
either off antihypertensive medications or willing to be ta-
pered were enrolled (i.e., signed informed consent); 2 of
these withdrew consent before medication taper and run-in
and 2 initiated tapering visits but withdrew (i.e., failed ta-
pering). Out of the 54 patients who completed run-in visits,
34 passed all screening procedures, 19 were ineligible be-
cause they no longer met criteria for stage 1 HTN after the
run-in period, and 1 was ineligible because of a psycho-
logical disorder. Ten enrolled patients dropped out during
the intervention, leaving 24 completers. Table 1 describes the
baseline characteristics of the 24 patients who completed the 8
weeks of RR training, demonstrating no significant differences
between responders and nonresponders on any of these vari-
ables. At baseline, average SBP was 143.8 mm Hg, ranging
from 141 to 150 mm Hg; the average DBP was 90.9 mm Hg,
ranging from 90 to 96 mm Hg (Fig. 2; Table 1).
Blood pressure
Figure 2 and Table 2 show the baseline pre-RR data for
the 24 patients who completed the RR training and the
changes in SBP and DBP for each patient from baseline to
the post-RR time point after 8 weeks of RR training.
Overall, 8 weeks of RR training decreased SBP by 15.4 mm
Hg ( p < 0.001) and DBP by 10.6 mm Hg ( p < 0.001). Al-
though these decreases in SBP and DBP were statistically
significant, not all patients achieved an improvement in BP
that was clinically significant. Using stringent predefined
parameters for BP reduction, patients were separated into
BP responders and nonresponders. This differentiation was
a key step for further downstream analysis of BP reduction
FIG. 1.
Flow of patients through
the trial. CONSORT diagram of
patient flow through the trial. A
total of 58 patients signed consent
and were enrolled, 34 passed all
screening procedures, and 24 pa-
tients completed the intervention.
490
BHASIN ET AL.
 Table 1. Baseline Characteristics of Blood Pressure Responders and Nonresponders
Total (n = 24)
Responders (n = 13)
Nonresponders (n = 11)
p
Demographics, mean (SD)
Age (years)
55.6 (10.2)
57.7 (9.8)
53.2 (10.7)
0.29
HTN duration (years)
5.4 (5.4)
4.8 (5.7)
6.1 (5.1)
0.55
Demographics, n (%)
Female sex
17 (71)
9 (69)
8 (73)
0.72
Married
12 (50)
5 (38)
7 (64)
0.23
Whitea
20 (83)
10 (77)
10 (91)
0.38
Hispanic
1 (4)
0 (0)
1 (9)
0.29
Employed
18 (75)
9 (69)
9 (82)
0.50
Completed college
15 (63)
7 (54)
8 (73)
0.36
Baseline measures, mean (SD)
SBP (mm Hg)
143.7 (2.5)
143.9 (2.8)
143.5 (2.2)
0.65
DBP (mm Hg)
90.9 (1.5)
90.7 (1.2)
91.2 (1.8)
0.43
PSS
14.8 (7.8)
12.9 (8.3)
16.9 (7.1)
0.23
BDI-II
5.6 (5.6)
4.1 (4.8)
7.4 (6.1)
0.15
BAI
5.3 (4.9)
4.8 (3.8)
5.9 (6.1)
0.62
All values in n (%), unless stated otherwise.
aFor race, the four nonwhite patients included three African American and one Asian patient.
BAI, Beck Anxiety Inventory; BDI-II, Beck Depression Inventory-II; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; HTN, hypertension; PSS, Perceived
Stress Scale; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SD, standard deviation.
FIG. 2.
Significant SBP and DBP
reduction in hypertensive patients is
associated with short-term RR training
(8 weeks). Specific pre- and post-RR
BP values (mm Hg) for SBP and DBP
for responders (upper graph) and
nonresponders (lower graph) are
shown for each patient. Box and
whisker plots on the right summarize
the median SBP and DBP levels in
responders and nonresponders. Pa-
tients excluded from genomic analysis
due to low data quality are marked
with a red asterisk. BP, blood pres-
sure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure;
RR, relaxation response; SBP, systolic
blood pressure.
491
 associated with the RR intervention and the link to changes
in the transcriptome, because it allowed a between-group
comparison. Based on the stringent criteria defined in the
Materials and Methods section, 13 out of 24 patients (54%)
were classified as BP responders and 11 patients (46%) as
BP nonresponders (Fig. 2; Table 2). Some of the BP non-
responders had SBP but not DBP reduction or vice versa but
did not match the authors’ stringent clinical relevance cri-
teria. These patients, within the BP nonresponder class, may
be considered ‘‘partial’’ responders. The authors’ rigorous
clinically meaningful definition of BP response a priori
maximizes the chance of finding genomic changes associ-
ated with true BP response. Figure 2 shows the individual
(left side) and group (right side) differences in BP changes
between BP responders and BP nonresponders.
Self-report outcomes
After completion of the 8-week RR intervention, BP re-
sponders and BP nonresponders, taken together, reported
improvements on all psychological self-report measures.
There were statistically significant improvements on BAI
scores (5.21 vs. 3.17; t = 2.39; p = 0.026) and PSS scores
(pre: 14.29 vs. post: 11.50; t = 2.43; p = 0.02); mean BDI-II
scores dropped from 5.58 to 4.13, but this difference was not
statistically significant (t = 1.90; p = 0.069). Overall effect
sizes of change on psychological measures as measured by
Cohen’s D were moderate (PSS: d = 0.50; BAI: d = 0.49;
BDI-II: d = 0.39).
When BP responders and BP nonresponders were ana-
lyzed separately, a slightly different picture emerged. On
the BAI, responders had statistically significant improve-
ments
(mean – SD;
pre:
4.83 – 3.79;
post:
2.83 – 2.52,
t = 2.23, p = 0.047) but nonresponders (pre: 5.9 – 6.08; post:
3.4 – 2.54, t = 1.401, p = 0.195) did not. On the BDI, re-
sponders showed marginally significant improvement (pre:
4.08 – 4.79; post: 2.62 – 3.78, t = 2.13, p = 0.054) compared
with
nonresponders
(pre:
7.36 – 6.1;
post:
5.91 – 5.82,
t = 0.967, p = 0.356), who did not have significant im-
provement. On the PSS, neither responders (pre: 12.9 –8.25;
post: 10.5 – 7.38, t = 1.75, p = 0.107) nor nonresponders (pre:
16.91 – 7.15; post: 13.45 – 7.13, t = 1.68, p = 0.124) had
significantly decreased scores when considered separately.
Transcriptional changes after 8 weeks of RR training
in HTN patients: RR HTN signature
To identify the transcripts modulated after 8 weeks of RR
training in HTN patients (i.e., the RR HTN gene expression
signature), the transcriptional profile of all patients from
baseline to 8 weeks of RR practice was compared. Only 22
of the 24 eligible patients were included in this and the fol-
lowing analyses: the microarrays for the remaining two pa-
tients (labeled in Fig. 2 with a red asterisk) did not pass the
authors’ quality control measures due to poor array quality
caused by low quality of the RNA samples. This analysis
identified 1387 transcripts as significantly differentially ex-
pressed ( p < 0.05) between baseline and 8 weeks of RR
practice (Fig. 3A; Supplementary Table S1). GO analysis (see
Materials and Methods section) showed significant upregu-
lation of genes linked to endoplasmic reticulum stress, DNA
repair, and kinase activity after RR practice (Fig. 3A) and
downregulation of genes linked to lipid metabolism, cellu-
lar differentiation, and neuromuscular processes (Fig. 3A).
To understand the biological meaning of RR-associated
changes, pathway enrichment analysis was also performed.
Pathway enrichment analysis showed a significant over-
representation of upregulated genes in pathways linked to
cell proliferation and survival (e.g., integrin signaling,
ErbB signaling, PTEN signaling, NGF signaling, FGF signal-
ing, RAC signaling, and TRK signaling), T and B lymphocyte
signaling, and energy production (e.g., AMPK signaling)
(Fig. 3B). Significant enrichment of downregulated genes
was linked to STAT3, FXR/RXR activation, ATM, and
Reelin signaling pathways (Fig. 3C).
Identification of BP response-associated genes
in HTN patients using individual gene-based analysis
In both BP responders and nonresponders, differentially
expressed genes were identified by comparing expression
profiles of pre versus post-RR patients using a permuted
paired univariate t-test. The differential expression analysis
(post-RR vs. pre-RR) identified 1821 and 1280 differentially
expressed transcripts for the 12 responders and 10 nonre-
sponders, respectively (permuted p < 0.05). Venn diagram
analysis identified 50 transcripts altered after RR training
that overlapped between responders and nonresponders
(Fig. 4A). Most importantly, 1771 transcripts were uniquely
impacted after RR training in BP responders, indicating that
these transcripts may be directly associated with the BP
lowering ability of RR (Fig. 4A). Hierarchical clustering
using the 388 top BP responder-specific genes based on more
stringent selection ( p < 0.05 and fold change >1.2; Supple-
mentary Table S2) shows striking segregation between pre-
and post-RR in BP responders but not in BP nonresponders,
validating the hypothesis that 8 weeks of RR practice is
associated with differential expression of a distinct set of
genes in PBMCs specific to BP responders (Fig. 4B).
To gain deeper insight into the molecular mechanisms of
RR-associated changes in BP responders only, GO enrich-
ment analysis on the 388 responder-specific differentially
expressed
genes
was
first
performed.
This
analysis
Table 2. Pre–Post Blood Pressure Values
of Responders and Nonresponders
Pre
Post
n
M
SD
n
M
SD
Responders
SBP
13
143.9
2.8
13
126.9
5.9
DBP
13
90.7
1.2
13
75.4
5.5
Nonresponders
SBP
11
143.5
2.2
11
136.6
9.4
DBP
11
91.2
1.8
11
85.8
7.5
Total sample
SBP
24
143.7
2.5
24
131.4
9.0
DBP
24
90.9
1.5
24
80.2
8.3
DBP, diastolic blood pressure; M, mean; SBP, systolic blood
pressure; SD, standard deviation.
492
BHASIN ET AL.
 FIG. 3.
Transcriptome changes and significantly affected pathways in hypertension patients after 8 weeks of RR intervention.
(A) A heatmap of significantly differentially expressed genes after 8 weeks of RR training. Relative gene expression differences
pre- to post-RR intervention for significantly differentially expressed genes are shown with a pseudocolor scale (-1 to 1), with red
denoting higher gene expression and green denoting lower expression after intervention. (B) Pathway enrichment analysis of
significantly upregulated genes, and (C) pathway enrichment analysis of significantly downregulated genes. Selected top path-
waysofdifferentiallyupregulated (B) and downregulated (C) genes are shown.They-axis representspathwaysand the x-axis the -
logtransformedp-value(e.g.,avalueof2representsap-valueof0.01).ER,endoplasmicreticulum;IL,interleukin;RR,relaxation
response.
493
 identified a significant effect of RR on multiple biological
processes, including ‘‘Phospholipase D activity,’’ ‘‘Beta-
catenin binding,’’ ‘‘MAP kinase phosphatase activity,’’
‘‘Cellular growth and proliferation,’’ and ‘‘Calmodulin-
dependent protein kinase activity’’ (Fig. 4C).
Identification of BP response-associated genes in HTN
patients highly correlated with BP change
Correlation analysis (see the Materials and Methods sec-
tion) identified 121 genes for which change in MAP and
change in gene expression were significantly correlated
( p < 0.05; Supplementary Table S3). Out of these 121 genes,
46 showed significant positive (decreasing gene expression
correlates with decreasing BP) and 75 showed negative
(increasing gene expression correlates with decreasing BP)
correlation between gene expression and MAP (Fig. 5A).
Insight into the biological functions of genes showing cor-
relation with BP reduction was obtained by functional en-
richment analysis. Functional categories with p < 0.05 were
considered significant. Cardiovascular system development
and function is the top affected functional category. Various
other functional categories linked to metabolism (e.g., lipid
and carbohydrate metabolism) and cell cycle (e.g., cellular
growth and proliferation, cell cycle, and cell morphology)
were also significantly enriched (Fig. 5B).
Scale-free interactive network analysis was performed on
these 121 BP correlated genes to analyze the functional
networks and to identify the key nodes that might be relaying
reduction in BP. The nodes of networks were colored on the
basis of correlation between gene expression and BP (i.e.,
positively correlated = red, negatively correlated = green).
This analysis identified BP-correlated genes that are enriched
in networks related to metabolism (lipid, nucleic acid, and
drug metabolism) and connective tissue disorder (Fig. 5C) as
well as cardiovascular disease (Fig. 5D).
FIG. 3.
(Continued).
494
BHASIN ET AL.
 GSEA reveals that RR is associated with significantly
upregulated glucose transport and suppressed
inflammation pathways in BP responders
GSEA (see the Materials and Methods section) identified 32
pathways (25 upregulated, 7 downregulated) that were sig-
nificantly ( p < 0.05, FDR <0.25) modulated in BP responders
compared with nonresponders (Fig. 6). Significantly upregu-
lated pathways include, among others, glucose metabolism
(glucose transport, regulation of glucokinase by glucokinase
regulatory protein), cardiovascular system development (e.g.,
N-cadherin, myogenesis, RAC1, and NECTIN), cell–cell in-
FIG. 4.
Transcriptome changes distinguishing BP responders from nonresponders after 8 weeks of RR intervention. (A)
Venn diagram depicting common genes between BP responders and nonresponders and transcripts selectively changing in
responders or nonresponders only. Fifty genes were commonly altered between BP responders and nonresponders. (B)
Heatmap of the top 388 genes that are significantly altered in BP responders (RES) but not in nonresponders (NRES). (C)
GO analysis of genes that are exclusively differentially expressed in BP responders. The y-axis represents GO categories
and the x-axis the -log transformed p-value (e.g., a value of 2 represents a p-value of 0.01). BP, blood pressure; GO, gene
ontology; MAP, mean arterial pressure; RR, relaxation response.
FIG. 5.
Identification of gene expression changes and pathways significantly correlating with BP changes after 8 weeks of
RR intervention. (A) Correlation analysis for differentially expressed transcripts in BP responders and nonresponders for
which changes in the pre-MAP to post-MAP (equivalent to DBP +1/3[SBP-DBP]) and changes in gene expression were
significantly correlated ( p < 0.05). Out of these 121 genes, 46 and 75 genes showed significant positive (right graph) and
negative (left graph) correlation, respectively, between gene expression change (x-axis) and MAP change (y-axis). (B)
Pathway analysis of genes depicting significant correlation with BP changes. The y-axis represents pathways and the x-axis
the -log transformed p-value (e.g., a value of 2 represents a p-value of 0.01). (C) Interactive network of BP change
correlated genes that is enriched with metabolism (lipid, nucleic acid, and drug metabolism) and connective tissue disorder-
related genes. (D) Interactive network of BP change correlated genes that is enriched with cardiovascular disease-related
genes. For both (C, D), network nodes are colored on the basis of correlation between gene expression and BP (i.e.,
positively correlated = red, negatively correlated = green, colorless nodes = no correlation). BP, blood pressure; DBP, dia-
stolic blood pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure; RR, relaxation response; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
‰
RELAXATION RESPONSE EFFECT ON HYPERTENSIVES
495
 496
 FIG. 6.
Gene set enrichment analysis identifies pathways specifically impacted in BP responders. (A) Pathways that are significantly upregulated in BP responders. (B)
Pathways that are significantly downregulated in BP responders. The significantly affected pathways were identified on the basis of normalized p-value (<0.05) and false
discovery rate (<0.25; values for each pathway in the NES shaded boxes). The upregulated and downregulated pathways are shown with red and green shaded boxes, respectively
(red = positive NES, green = negative NES). (C) Enrichment maps of selected significantly upregulated (glucose transport and PID regulation of CDC42 pathway) and
downregulated (biocarta inflammation pathway and biocarta cytokine pathway) pathways. (D) Leading edge analysis identification of potential key genes that are highly abundant
in significantly affected pathways. Bar graph depicts the number of gene sets in which each gene is altered after the RR practice. Red and blue bars represent genes that are
significantly upregulated and downregulated after the RR practice, respectively. BP, blood pressure; NES, normalized enrichment score; RR, relaxation response.
497
 teractions (cell–cell junction organization and adherens junc-
tions interactions), circadian rhythm (circadian repression of
expression by REV-ERBA, RORA activates circadian ex-
pression), and the MET pathway (Fig. 6A). The significantly
downregulated pathways include pathways related to immune
function (e.g., cytokine pathway and inflammation pathway)
and to metabolism (e.g., ascorbate and aldarate metabolism
and propanoate metabolism) (Fig. 6B). Enrichment maps of a
subset of these significantly upregulated and downregulated
pathways are depicted in Figure 6C.
To identify the individual genes that are key targets in BP
responders, leading edge analysis (Fig. 6D) was performed.
Leading edge analysis identifies the set of genes that is
consistently and significantly dysregulated in multiple
pathways. The top genes from leading edge analysis are
thought to govern the phenotype, and are thus the critical
genes for formulating a hypothesis about the genetic
mechanism underlying the potential impact of RR on BP.
This analysis identified multiple nuclear transport, cell cy-
cle, protein kinase cascade, and insulin receptor signaling
pathway-related genes (NUP43, NUP50, NUPL1, NUP188,
RANBP2, TPR, POM121, NUP153, CTNNB1, PIP5K1C,
PIK3R1, MAPK8, PIK3CB, PIK3CD, and JUN) as top genes
that may be critically involved in BP response after an RR
intervention in HTN patients (Fig. 6D).
GSEA based on BTMs depicted significant enrichment
( p < 0.05, FDR <0.25) of the ‘‘Inositol phosphate metabo-
lism’’ module in BP responders compared with nonre-
sponders
(Supplementary
Table
S4).
Further
repeated
analysis with relaxed significance cutoff ( p < 0.09) showed
that BP nonresponders have significant upregulation of
multiple immune and inflammation-related cellular modules
including ‘‘T cell surface signature,’’ ‘‘B cell signature,’’
‘‘dendritic cell signature through NFKB activation,’’ and
‘‘lymphocyte homing and migration’’ as compared with
responders (Supplementary Table S4). These results indicate
that the nonresponder group exhibits a pattern biased toward
activated inflammation and higher immune cell enrichment
as than responders.
To further decipher the contribution of different cell types
to the PBMC expression profile, an in silico analysis was
performed to determine the abundance of different cell types
from the PBMC gene expression data using the CIBERSORT
algorithm.48 After estimating the abundance of cell types in
each sample, comparative analysis showed that BP respond-
ers have significantly higher abundance of M2 macrophages
than nonresponders ( p = 0.02 and fold change >3.5). Other
immune cells do not show any statistically significant dif-
ference between responders and nonresponders. It is in-
teresting that BP responders appear to have a significantly
higher number of anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages,
suggesting an association between BP response and anti-
inflammation. Combining the results from the CIBERSORT
and BTM analysis, it was predicted that the BP response has
a significant association with inflammation levels.
Identification of RR HTN Responder Signature
by integrating results of GSEA and individual
gene-based analysis
To further focus on genes whose perturbation may lead to
BP reduction in HTN patients after RR training, a BP re-
sponder signature was generated. To accomplish this task,
the top differentially expressed genes that were significantly
correlated with BP change in BP responders (Fig. 5) were
combined with genes from pathways that are significantly
differentially regulated in BP responders compared with
nonresponders in multiple gene sets (Fig. 6). The final RR
HTN Responder Signature consists of 172 genes, out of
which 84 are downregulated and 88 are upregulated (Sup-
plementary Table S5).
Upstream regulators of genes differentially expressed
in HTN responders to RR therapy
To assess whether a specific set of upstream regulators
may explain how the RR is associated with the expression of
genes within the RR HTN Responder Signature in associa-
tion with BP reduction, upstream regulator enrichment
analysis using the Upstream Regulator Tool of IPA was
conducted. This tool enables the prediction of which up-
stream regulators are likely involved in altering expression
of a set of genes and predicts whether these regulators are
inhibited or activated. Analysis of the 84 downregulated
genes of the RR HTN Responder Signature predicted inhi-
bition of multiple immune system molecules [e.g., CD2,
several members of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family
(TLR4, TLR7, TLR8, TLR9), NFATC2, nuclear factor-kB
(NF-jB) (complex), IFNG, CD40LG, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), interleukin (IL)-15, IL-18, IL-2, IL-3] to be re-
sponsible for reduced expression of these downstream tar-
gets, suggesting that the RR blunts inflammatory and immune
processes through reduced activity of this set of regulators,
most interestingly NF-kB (Fig. 7A). Similarly, regulator anal-
ysis of the 88 upregulated genes from the RR HTN Responder
Signature revealed that activation of several cell growth and
immune system molecules (e.g., transforming growth factor-
b1, T cell receptor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and
oncostatin M) and inhibition of extracellular matrix-related
molecules (e.g., COL18A1 and Mir124-3p) (Fig. 7B) may be
involved in increased expression of these genes.
The regulator network indicates that the RR may affect
inflammation in a bimodal manner by upregulating anti-
inflammatory pathways [i.e., glucocorticoid (GC) receptor
signaling] and downregulating NF-kB and TNF pathways.
Interactive network analysis of RR-affected genes in re-
sponders identified NF-kB and related downstream targets as
top critical focus hubs. Most genes upstream and downstream
of NF-kB were decreased in responders providing the first
insight that NF-kB might be crucial in mediating RR effects
on HTN. NF-kB might be playing a major role in achieving
beneficial effects of RR. NF-kB was also identified as a key
focus molecule in previous studies49 focused on identifying
the genomic determinants of RR in healthy subjects as well as
in the study of the effects of RR on irritable bowel syndrome
and inflammatory bowel disease patients.49
Discussion
This trial of RR training for unmedicated patients with
stage 1 HTN demonstrates that BP is effectively lowered in
over half of all patients after an 8-week RR training and is
associated with improvements in psychological variables
and specific changes in gene expression. Although these
data are compelling and suggest a direct effect of the RR on
498
BHASIN ET AL.
 BP, in this uncontrolled study, it cannot be ruled out that
other factors may have caused the drop in BP. The 8-week
RR intervention used here was, however, associated with
substantial improvement of BP, with over half of patients
meeting stringent response criteria requiring improvement
in both SBP (>10 mm Hg) and DBP (>5 mm Hg), despite the
presence of only mild (stage 1) HTN. The stringency of the
response criteria makes it clinically relevant to patient care,
and ensures that responder status is unlikely to be affected
by regression to the mean.
Although guidelines for goals in BP reduction in the el-
derly remain controversial and the JNC7 goal for diabetics
and chronic kidney disease patients is reduction to <130/
80 mm Hg, most clinicians in the HTN community are using
the traditional target of <140/90mm Hg as the goal for pa-
tients with uncomplicated HTN, the patient population used in
FIG. 7.
Upstream regulator analysis
of genes significantly linked to BP
response in HTN patients. Upstream
regulator analysis of genes signifi-
cantly linked to BP response in HTN
patients. This analysis helps to iden-
tify upstream regulators that are pre-
dicted to be significantly activated or
inhibited upstream of the gene ex-
pression alterations after the RR
training. Top upstream regulators
identified from analysis of down-
regulated (A) and upregulated (B)
genes from the RR HTN Responder
Signature. The upstream regulators
that are predicted to be activated and
inhibited are orange and blue, re-
spectively. The downstream targets of
each regulators are shown with red
(genes upregulated by RR) and green
(genes downregulated by RR). BP,
blood pressure; HTN, hypertension;
RR, relaxation response.
RELAXATION RESPONSE EFFECT ON HYPERTENSIVES
499
 this study. The improvements in BP observed in this study are
consistent with changes seen with antihypertensive medica-
tions50–52 and are consistent with related work showing the
impact of MBIs on BP in a variety of populations.27,53–55 To
the authors’ knowledge, this is the first study to test such an
intervention for a population of unmedicated adults with
carefully documented persistent HTN, and the first study to
identify genomic determinants associated with the impact of
an MBI on HTN. Results from this study provide new insights
into how integrative medicine, especially mind–body ap-
proaches, influences BP control at the molecular level.
On psychological self-report measures, BP responders
and BP nonresponders, considered together, had significant
improvement in anxiety symptoms (as measured by the
BAI) and trended toward improvement in depression
symptoms (as measured by the BDI-II). Considered sepa-
rately, only BP responders had significant or near-significant
improvements in anxiety and depression, respectively. This
indicates that the positive effect on BP paralleled im-
provements in psychological symptoms, suggesting (but not
proving, in the absence of a control group) that BP response
was likely the result of RR training. Given that patients were
recruited on the basis of BP and not on the basis of stress
levels (with initial scores on the PSS below population
means), it is interesting that there were small but significant
improvements in perceived stress in the patients analyzed as
a group. When BP responders and BP nonresponders were
considered separately, however, the improvements were not
significant—an unsurprising result given the likely floor
effect and the small sample size.
Although HTN has been attributed primarily to regulation
through the renin–angiotensin system in the kidney and
perturbations of the vasculature and central nervous system,
increasing evidence demonstrates a significant contribution
of the immune system, especially the innate immune system—
inflammatory cells and cytokines such as TNF-a, IL-17,
and IL-6—in association with the sympathetic nervous
system.56,57 Indeed, the vasoactive peptide angiotensin II
has been known for some time to activate NF-kB, which
then provides intracellular signaling for angiotensin II-
induced target organ effects, including effects in vascular
smooth muscle cells that contribute to HTN.58 Focusing on
peripheral blood for studying the effect of the RR on HTN-
linked gene expression may not be ideal, but it is an easily
available biological source for determining the pathophysi-
ologic pathways of BP control; in addition, angiotensin II is
known to activate NF-kB not only in vascular smooth
muscle cells but also in human monocytes,59 which of
course contribute to gene expression in peripheral blood.
The results clearly define pathways directly or indirectly
impacted by the RR-associated drop in BP; still, whether
these gene expression changes are causal or surrogates for
BP regulation remains to be determined. As discussed in
more detail hereunder, however, key gene expression
changes and pathways identified in this study have previ-
ously been linked to HTN, which suggests that the findings
here bear further testing.
Those findings show that specific changes in PBMC gene
expression were significantly associated with BP changes
after RR practice. A robust systems-level transcriptome RR
HTN Responder Signature was generated using multiple
bioinformatics approaches (see Supplementary Figure S1 for
the overall scheme), including a traditional individual gene-
based approach, as well as advanced systems biology and
GSEA, resulting in the identification of a significant number
of BP responder-specific genes and signaling pathways that
have previously been linked to HTN, as well as those not
yet associated with BP control. A total of 121 differentially
expressed genes were identified that significantly corre-
late with BP changes. An Integrated RR HTN Responder
Signature of 172 genes was subsequently generated by
combining genes that are differentially expressed and sig-
nificantly correlated with BP improvement among RR-
responsive HTN patients (Fig. 5) with genes derived from
the leading edge analysis (Fig. 6). Systems biology analysis
of this Integrated RR HTN Responder Signature provided
new insights into the biological pathways, upstream regu-
lators, and key focus hub genes that are predicted to be the
bottlenecks for relaying the upstream RR-elicited signals to
downstream targets.
One of the most consistent pathways emerging from these
analyses was inflammation/immune response, including
downstream targets of NF-kB, selectively influenced in BP
responders after RR training. Several lines of evidence from
the data analysis support the apparent key function of NF-
kB in mediating at least part of the beneficial effect of the
RR on reduction of BP. First, leading edge analysis identi-
fied, among the most consistently responder-specific upre-
gulated genes, primarily those involved in nuclear transport
(NUP43,
NUP50,
NUPL1,
NUP188,
RANBP2,
TPR,
POM121, and NUP153). Altered nuclear transport plays a
key role in oxidative stress-mediated effects and impacts
nuclear transport and redistribution of NF-kB, a key regu-
latory mechanism in NF-kB activation.
Furthermore, upregulation of circadian rhythm pathways
(circadian repression of expression by REV-ERBA, RORA
activates circadian expression) in BP responders was identi-
fied by GSEA as significantly affected subsequent to the RR
practice. Since circadian regulation of BP is well established,
and dysregulation of circadian rhythm can cause HTN, one
model emerging from the authors’ studies is that the RR may
help regulate circadian rhythm, which may at least partially
contribute to BP control.60–62 This may be highly relevant
with regard to the potential role of NF-kB as a mediator of
RR effects, since REV-ERBA, a critical regulator of circa-
dian rhythm, induces NF-kB activation in vascular smooth
muscle cells, leading to expression of proinflammatory cy-
tokines.63 In contrast, REV-ERBA blocks RORA-mediated
repression of cytokine expression. The authors, thus, specu-
late that RR enhances repression of REV-ERBA expression,
resulting in enhanced RORA activation, decreased NF-kB
activity, and decreased cytokine production.
Cytokines have been demonstrated to play critical roles in
endothelial and smooth muscle cell responses, and GSEA in-
dicates significant downregulation of inflammatory and cyto-
kine pathways associated with the RR in BP responders.
Various studies support the notion that inflammation contrib-
utes to endothelial dysfunction and the development of HTN.64
Systemic low-grade inflammation, as reflected by increased C-
reactive protein (CRP) and cytokine levels, is thought to pre-
cede HTN.65 Immune cell function, particularly involving T
cells and macrophages, has been directly implicated in the
development of HTN in animal models, possibly by causing
endothelial dysfunction as a consequence of cytokine-mediated
500
BHASIN ET AL.
 alterations in the rates of synthesis and degradation of nitric
oxide and other vasoconstrictors or vasodilators.
The authors’ integrated model of RR-elicited HTN
responder-specific gene expression alterations provides
further insights into the mechanisms of RR-associated BP
reduction that are not obvious from the individual analyses
viewed in isolation. Importantly, this Integrated RR HTN
Responder Signature of 172 genes further supports the in-
volvement of NF-kB in mediating RR-associated improve-
ments in BP, as revealed by the most significant enrichment
of pathways among the downregulated genes being linked to
immune function and inflammation (e.g., NF-kB signaling,
crosstalk between dendritic cells and NK cells, T helper cell
differentiation, IL-12 signaling and production in macro-
phages, TREM1 signaling, cytokine communication be-
tween immune cells, antigen presentation pathway, TLR
signaling, and communication between innate and adaptive
immune cells). Counter-intuitively, when analyzing the
upregulated genes, several immune function pathways (IL-2
signaling and B cell receptor signaling) were identified as
enriched as well. This result suggests selective alteration of
immune functions in BP responders after RR training,
namely a potential switch in T helper cell differentiation
from proinflammatory TH1 (reduced IL-12 production) to
TH2 (enhanced IL-2 signaling), reduced innate immune
response (TLR signaling and communication between in-
nate and adaptive immune cells), reduced inflammation
(NF-kB signaling), and enhanced B cell function (B cell
receptor signaling).
The authors’ observed association of reduced innate im-
mune activity (TLR signaling) with reduced BP after the RR
intervention is further strengthened by the upstream regu-
lator analysis, which predicts reduced activity of TLRs
(TLR4, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9) based on the reduced ex-
pression of several downstream target genes (ICAM2,
SLC30A1,
ALDH2,
IFNA1,
IFNA13,
SLC12A7,
and
CD40). Activation of TLRs in vascular or renal damage
associated with HTN has been described in preeclampsia,
renal disease, spontaneously hypertensive rats, and angio-
tensin II-induced HTN. That TLRs may play an important
role in HTN is supported by the finding that inhibiting TLR
with neutralizing antibodies resulted in BP reduction and
downregulation of NF-kB, ICAM1, chemokines, and cyto-
kines.66,67 It was previously reported that eliciting the RR
through a variety of interventions downregulates NF-kB
activity, and in this study, this effect has been repeated.
In addition to the downregulation of NF-kB, the upregula-
tion of anti-inflammatory processes (e.g., GC receptor signal-
ing) is observed.21,22 It is of interest that cognitive behavioral
stress management has been reported to decrease the activity of
the NF-kB family of transcription factors and increase activity
of the GC receptor in early stage breast cancer patients.68
Furthermore, investigation of transcriptome changes in de-
mentia family caregivers, randomized to simple yogic medi-
tation or music listening, demonstrated that yoga, which elicits
the RR, reverses the pattern of increased NF-kB-dependent
transcription of proinflammatory cytokines and replicates the
finding of reduced NF-kB activity after randomization to an
RR-inducing meditation group.69,70 Transcriptome changes
associated with t’ai chi and cognitive behavior therapy in in-
somnia patients also showed significant downregulation of
inflammatory markers, including NF-kB and CRP.71 Chroni-
cally stressed family caregivers of brain cancer patients dem-
onstrate deactivation of GC response elements and increased
activation of NF-kB. Stress may lead to functional GC receptor
resistance to GCs in monocytes, which then leads to proin-
flammatory transcription control pathway activation.72 In
summary, different MBIs support the model that NF-kB-
mediated reduction of inflammation is a potential mechanism
associated with RR-mediated control of BP in HTN patients.
The following are some study limitations. These limita-
tions include small sample size, a short-term intervention
lasting only 8 weeks, absence of data on lifestyle behavior
during the trial changes (e.g., low-salt diet, weight loss, and
exercise), and an inability to control for the effects of so-
cioeconomic status. Moreover, this study had no comparison
group for the RR intervention. Since patients were not
randomized to a placebo or no-treatment control, it is dif-
ficult to distinguish between regression to the mean and a
bona fide BP clinical response to the RR intervention. Thus,
it cannot be definitively concluded that the effects on BP
and gene expression are specific to or caused by the RR.
Whether BP responders to the RR differ with regard to the
molecular mechanisms of BP reduction in responders to
medications, health education, or other interventions cannot
be determined in this study; however, what can be concluded
from this study is that BP responders have distinct tran-
scriptome alterations not seen in BP nonresponders that may
or may not be specific for RR intervention, but clearly cor-
relate with reduction in BP. Future studies are planned to
address whether the RR induces unique transcriptome chan-
ges or impacts similar pathways as antihypertensive drugs or
health education. The authors’ previous work suggests, in
fact, that different interventions may act by different mech-
anisms. For example, health education and the RR both ap-
pear to reduce BP in a significant percentage of patients, but
only the RR reduces BP medication requirements as well,
suggesting mechanistic differences between the RR and
health education interventions.27
The limitations are balanced by several notable strengths.
First, of particular note, is the rigorous definition of BP
response to therapy. The authors’ definition of BP response
is the most rigorous of possible definitions and adds to the
validity of this analysis. In addition, multiple complemen-
tary approaches for identification of genes and pathways that
are affected by the RR in HTN subjects have been used,
increasing the reliability of the conclusions. Finally, the
comprehensive systems biology analysis links RR-associated
BP reduction with genes known to be linked to BP regulation,
providing a sound biological rationale for these findings.
Conclusions
The treatment of HTN is based upon lifestyle modifica-
tion as the foundation of improved BP control and reduced
cardiovascular events. Traditionally, HTN patients are treated
with pharmacologic therapy, but not all patients respond to
drug therapy and many experience treatment-limiting adverse
experiences. In these patients, alternative strategies are in-
valuable. In this study, it is demonstrated that the RR can
successfully contribute to the reduction of the BP of untreated
HTN patients. Importantly, the transcriptome changes associ-
ated with this fall in BP are consistent with the changes in
hemodynamic parameters and inflammatory markers that one
RELAXATION RESPONSE EFFECT ON HYPERTENSIVES
501
 would anticipate, and hope to observe, in successfully treated
patients.
In summary, the results suggest that the RR reduces BP,
at least partially, by altering expression of genes in a select
set of biological pathways, most prominently involving NF-
kB as a key regulatory molecule. Supporting this finding are
important changes in the genomic signature of individuals
who, after the RR intervention, had clinically meaningful
changes in BP as compared with those who did not. The
study design was not able to prove a causal link between BP
reduction and changes in gene expression, but these data are
suggestive and provide new hypotheses that can be tested in
future studies. Importantly, this unified model of RR func-
tion provides support for a scenario wherein selective al-
teration of inflammatory processes and immune functions,
likely linked to oxidative stress and imbalance of circadian
rhythm, may contribute to BP reduction.
Acknowledgments
Veronique Lepoutre and Lauren Slipp are gratefully
thanked for their contributions to the study. The study was
funded by grant R01 DP000339 from the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention. The funders had no role in study
design, data collection, and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the article.
Authors’ Contributions
M.K.B., J.W.D., J.C.H., G.L.F., J.A.D., H.B., R.M.Z., and
T.A.L. wrote the main article text and were all involved in
the inception of the project, execution of the project, and
generating as well as analyzing all the data. M.K.B. pre-
pared most of the figures with the input of J.W.D., G.L.F.,
J.A.D., H.B., R.M.Z., and T.A.L. M.G.J. performed all the
microarray transcriptional profiling experiments. B.B.K. and
B.A.M. were involved in collecting patient clinical data and
samples. H.N., E.C.F., and R.G. assisted with analyses,
figure/table preparation, and article writing/editing. All au-
thors reviewed the article.
Author Disclosure Statement
The following authors hold or have held positions at the
Benson-Henry Institute for Mind Body Medicine at Mas-
sachusetts General Hospital, which is paid by patients and
their insurers for running the SMART-3RP and related RR/
mindfulness clinical programs, markets-related products such
as books, DVDs, CDs, and the like, and holds a patent pending
(PCT/US2012/049539 filed August 3, 2012) entitled ‘‘Quan-
titative Genomics of the Relaxation Response’’: J.W.D., H.N.,
E.C.F., R.G., G.L.F., J.A.D., and H.B. The following authors
hold or have held positions at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center that coholds the patent pending (PCT/US2012/049539
filed August 3, 2012) entitled ‘‘Quantitative Genomics of the
Relaxation Response’’: M.K.B. and T.A.L. J.W.D., M.K.B.,
and T.A.L. receive research support for investigator-initiated
studies from Onyx/Amgen and Basis/Intel.
References
1. Forouzanfar MH, Liu P, Roth GA, et al. Global burden of
hypertension and systolic blood pressure of at least 110 to
115 mm Hg, 1990–2015. JAMA 2017;317:165–182.
2. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/
AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation,
and management of high blood pressure in adults: Execu-
tive summary: A report of the American College of Cardi-
ology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017 [Epub ahead
of print]; doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000066.
3. Boone JL. Stress and hypertension. Prim Care 1991;18:
623–649.
4. Egan KJ, Kogan HN, Garber A, et al. The impact of psy-
chological distress on the control of hypertension. J Human
Stress 1983;9:4–10.
5. Gonzalez J, Valls N, Brito R, et al. Essential hypertension
and oxidative stress: New insights. World J Cardiol 2014;6:
353–366.
6. Player MS, Peterson LE. Anxiety disorders, hypertension,
and cardiovascular risk: A review. Int J Psychiatry Med 2011;
41:365–377.
7. Arias AJ, Steinberg K, Banga A, Trestman R. Systematic
review of the efficacy of meditation techniques as treat-
ments for medical illness. J Altern Complement Med 2006;
12:817–832.
8. Astin JA, Shapiro SL, Eisenberg DM. Mind-body medi-
cine: State of the science, implications for practice. J Am
Board Fam Pract 2003;16:131–147.
9. Hughes JW, Fresco DM, Myerscough R, et al. Randomized
controlled trial of mindfulness-based stress reduction for
prehypertension. Psychosom Med 2013;75:721–728.
10. Benson H, Beary JF, Carol MP. The relaxation response.
Psychiatry 1974;37:37–46.
11. Benson H. The Relaxation Response. HarperCollins, New
York, 1975.
12. Benson H, ProctorW. Relaxation Revolution. Simon &
Schuster, New York, 2011.
13. Dusek JA, Benson H. Mind-body medicine: A model of the
comparative clinical impact of the acute stress and relax-
ation responses. Minn Med 2009;92:47–50.
14. Dusek JA, Chang BH, Zaki J, et al. Association between ox-
ygen consumption and nitric oxide production during the
relaxation response. Med Sci Monit 2006;12:CR1–CR10.
15. Wallace RK, Benson H, Wilson AF. A wakeful hypome-
tabolic physiologic state. Am J Physiol 1971;221:795–799.
16. Peng CK, Henry IC, Mietus JE, et al. Heart rate dynamics
during three forms of meditation. Int J Cardiol 2004;95:19–27.
17. Hoffman DW, Salzman SK, Marchi M, et al. Nor-
epinephrine levels in peripheral nerve terminals during
development and aging. J Neurochem 1980;34:1785–1787.
18. Lazar SW, Kerr CE, Wasserman RH, et al. Meditation
experience is associated with increased cortical thickness.
Neuroreport 2005;16:1893–1897.
19. Jacobs GD, Benson H, Friedman R. Perceived benefits in a
behavioral-medicine insomnia program: A clinical report.
Am J Med 1996;100:212–216.
20. Lazar SW, Bush G, Gollub RL, et al. Functional brain
mapping of the relaxation response and meditation. Neuro-
report 2000;11:1581–1585.
21. Dusek JA, Otu HH, Wohlhueter AL, et al. Genomic
counter-stress changes induced by the relaxation response.
PLoS One 2008;3:e2576.
22. Bhasin MK, Dusek JA, Chang BH, et al. Relaxation re-
sponse induces temporal transcriptome changes in energy
metabolism, insulin secretion and inflammatory pathways.
PLoS One 2013;8:e62817.
502
BHASIN ET AL.
 23. Bali LR. Long-term effect of relaxation on blood pressure
and anxiety levels of essential hypertensive males: A con-
trolled study. Psychosom Med 1979;41:637–646.
24. Benson H, Rosner BA, Marzetta BR, et al. Decreased
blood-pressure in pharmacologically treated hypertensive
patients who regularly elicited the relaxation response.
Lancet 1974;1:289–291.
25. Blom K, Baker B, How M, et al. Hypertension analysis of
stress reduction using mindfulness meditation and yoga:
Results from the HARMONY randomized controlled trial.
Am J Hypertens 2014;27:122–129.
26. Blumenthal JA, Sherwood A, Gullette EC, et al. Biobeha-
vioral approaches to the treatment of essential hyperten-
sion. J Consult Clin Psychol 2002;70:569–589.
27. Dusek JA, Hibberd PL, Buczynski B, et al. Stress man-
agement versus lifestyle modification on systolic hyper-
tension and medication elimination: A randomized trial. J
Altern Complement Med 2008;14:129–138.
28. Ravera M, Re M, Deferrari L, et al. Importance of blood
pressure control in chronic kidney disease. J Am Soc Ne-
phrol 2006;17:S98–S103.
29. Protogerou A, Blacher J, Stergiou GS, et al. Blood pressure
response under chronic antihypertensive drug therapy: The
role of aortic stiffness in the REASON (Preterax in Re-
gression of Arterial Stiffness in a Controlled Double-Blind)
study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:445–451.
30. Androulakis E, Tousoulis D, Papageorgiou N, et al. In-
flammation
in
hypertension:
Current
therapeutic
ap-
proaches. Curr Pharm Des 2011;17:4121–4131.
31. Li QZ, Li P, Garcia GE, et al. Genomic profiling of neu-
trophil transcripts in Asian Qigong practitioners: A pilot
study in gene regulation by mind-body interaction. J Altern
Complement Med 2005;11:29–39.
32. Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Breen EC, et al. Tai Chi, cellular
inflammation, and transcriptome dynamics in breast cancer
survivors with insomnia: A randomized controlled trial. J
Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2014;2014:295–301.
33. Niles H, Mehta DH, Corrigan AA, et al. Functional geno-
mics in the study of mind-body therapies. Ochsner J 2014;
14:681–695.
34. Cole SW, Hawkley LC, Arevalo JM, et al. Transcript origin
analysis identifies antigen-presenting cells as primary tar-
gets of socially regulated gene expression in leukocytes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:3080–3085.
35. Wingo AP, Gibson G. Blood gene expression profiles
suggest altered immune function associated with symptoms
of generalized anxiety disorder. Brain Behav Immun 2015;
43:184–191.
36. Galvin JA, Benson H, Deckro GR, et al. The relaxation
response: Reducing stress and improving cognition in
healthy aging adults. Complement Ther Clin Pract 2006;12:
186–191.
37. Wilson CL, Miller CJ. Simpleaffy: A BioConductor pack-
age for Affymetrix Quality Control and data analysis.
Bioinformatics 2005;21:3683–3685.
38. Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, et al. Exploration, nor-
malization, and summaries of high density oligonucleotide
array probe level data. Biostatistics 2003;4:249–264.
39. Wang C, Rao N, Wang Y. [Principal component analysis
for exploring gene expression patterns]. Sheng Wu Yi Xue
Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi 2007;24:736–741.
40. Yeung KY, Ruzzo WL. Principal component analysis for
clustering gene expression data. Bioinformatics 2001;17:
763–774.
41. Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch effects in
microarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods.
Biostatistics 2007;8:118–127.
42. Wright GW, Simon RM. A random variance model for
detection of differential gene expression in small micro-
array experiments. Bioinformatics 2003;19:2448–2455.
43. Simon R, Lam A, Li MC, et al. Analysis of gene expres-
sion data using BRB-ArrayTools. Cancer Inform 2007;3:
11–17.
44. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Tan Q, et al. DAVID bioin-
formatics resources: Expanded annotation database and
novel algorithms to better extract biology from large gene
lists. Nucleic Acids Res 2007;35:W169–W175.
45. Kramer A, Green J, Pollard J Jr, et al. Causal analysis
approaches in ingenuity pathway analysis. Bioinformatics
2014;30:523–530.
46. Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, et al. Gene set
enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for in-
terpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2005;102:15545–15550.
47. Li S, Rouphael N, Duraisingham S, et al. Molecular sig-
natures of antibody responses derived from a systems bi-
ology study of five human vaccines. Nat Immunol 2014;15:
195–204.
48. Newman AM, Liu CL, Green MR, et al. Robust enumer-
ation of cell subsets from tissue expression profiles. Nat
Methods 2015;12:453–457.
49. Kuo B, Bhasin M, Jacquart J, et al. Genomic and clinical
effects associated with a relaxation response mind-body
intervention in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and
inflammatory bowel disease. PLoS One 2015;10:e0123861.
50. Musini VM, Rezapour P, Wright JM, et al. Blood pressure
lowering efficacy of loop diuretics for primary hyperten-
sion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;8:CD003825.
51. Heran BS, Wong MM, Heran IK, et al. Blood pressure
lowering efficacy of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors for primary hypertension. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2008;CD003823.
52. Bangalore S, Parkar S, Grossman E, et al. A meta-analysis
of 94,492 patients with hypertension treated with beta
blockers to determine the risk of new-onset diabetes mel-
litus. Am J Cardiol 2007;100:1254–1262.
53. Palta P, Page G, Piferi RL, et al. Evaluation of a
mindfulness-based intervention program to decrease blood
pressure in low-income African-American older adults. J
Urban Health 2012;89:308–316.
54. Nidich SI, Rainforth MV, Haaga DA, et al. A randomized
controlled trial on effects of the Transcendental Meditation
program on blood pressure, psychological distress, and cop-
ing in young adults. Am J Hypertens 2009;22:1326–1331.
55. Schein MH, Gavish B, Baevsky T, et al. Treating hyper-
tension in type II diabetic patients with device-guided
breathing: A randomized controlled trial. J Hum Hypertens
2009;23:325–331.
56. Rodriguez-Iturbe B, Pons H, Johnson RJ. Role of the immune
system in hypertension. Physiol Rev 2017;97:1127–1164.
57. Trott DW, Harrison DG. The immune system in hyper-
tension. Adv Physiol Educ 2014;38:20–24.
58. Ruiz-Ortega M, Lorenzo O, Ruperez M, et al. Angiotensin
II activates nuclear transcription factor kappaB through
AT(1) and AT(2) in vascular smooth muscle cells: Mole-
cular mechanisms. Circ Res 2000;86:1266–1272.
59. Kranzhofer R, Browatzki M, Schmidt J, et al. Angiotensin
II activates the proinflammatory transcription factor nuclear
RELAXATION RESPONSE EFFECT ON HYPERTENSIVES
503
 factor-kappaB in human monocytes. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1999;257:826–828.
60. Lecarpentier Y, Claes V, Duthoit G, et al. Circadian rhythms,
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and PPAR alpha/gamma profiles
in diseases with primary or secondary cardiac dysfunction.
Front Physiol 2014;5:429.
61. Miyazaki M, Schroder E, Edelmann SE, et al. Age-associated
disruption of molecular clock expression in skeletal muscle
of the spontaneously hypertensive rat. PLoS One 2011;6:
e27168.
62. Takeda N, Maemura K. Circadian clock and the onset of
cardiovascular events. Hypertens Res 2016;39:383–390.
63. Migita H, Morser J, Kawai K. Rev-erbalpha upregulates
NF-kappaB-responsive genes in vascular smooth muscle
cells. FEBS Lett 2004;561:69–74.
64. Bautista LE. Inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, and the
risk of high blood pressure: Epidemiologic and biological
evidence. J Hum Hypertens 2003;17:223–230.
65. Bautista LE, Vera LM, Arenas IA, et al. Independent asso-
ciation between inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein,
interleukin-6, and TNF-alpha) and essential hypertension.
J Hum Hypertens 2005;19:149–154.
66. McCarthy CG, Goulopoulou S, Wenceslau CF, et al. Toll-
like receptors and damage-associated molecular patterns:
Novel links between inflammation and hypertension. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2014;306:H184–H196.
67. Singh MV, Abboud FM. Toll-like receptors and hyperten-
sion. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2014;307:
R501–R504.
68. Antoni MH, Lutgendorf SK, Blomberg B, et al. Cognitive-
behavioral stress management reverses anxiety-related
leukocyte transcriptional dynamics. Biol Psychiatry 2012;
71:366–372.
69. Black DS, Cole SW, Irwin MR, et al. Yogic meditation re-
verses NF-kappaB and IRF-related transcriptome dynamics
in leukocytes of family dementia caregivers in a randomized
controlled trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2012;38:348–355.
70. Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, et al. Mindfulness-
based stress reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-
inflammatory gene expression in older adults: A small
randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun 2012;26:
1095–1101.
71. Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Breen EC, et al. Cognitive be-
havioral therapy and Tai Chi reverse cellular and genomic
markers of inflammation in late-life insomnia: A random-
ized controlled trial. Biol Psychiatry 2015;78:721–729.
72. Miller GE, Chen E, Sze J, et al. A functional genomic
fingerprint of chronic stress in humans: Blunted glucocor-
ticoid and increased NF-kappaB signaling. Biol Psychiatry
2008;64:266–272.
Address correspondence to:
Towia A. Libermann, PhD
BIDMC Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics
and Systems Biology Center
Department of Medicine
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
Research North Building, Room 380C
99 Brookline Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
E-mail: tliberma@bidmc.harvard.edu
504
BHASIN ET AL.
