 T I S S UE E N G I N EE R I N G
Tissue-engineered autologous grafts for facial
bone reconstruction
Sarindr Bhumiratana,1 Jonathan C. Bernhard,1 David M. Alfi,2 Keith Yeager,1 Ryan E. Eton,1
Jonathan Bova,3 Forum Shah,4 Jeffrey M. Gimble,4,5 Mandi J. Lopez,3
Sidney B. Eisig,2 Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic1*
Facial deformities require precise reconstruction of the appearance and function of the original tissue. The
current standard of care—the use of bone harvested from another region in the body—has major limitations,
including pain and comorbidities associated with surgery. We have engineered one of the most geometrically
complex facial bones by using autologous stromal/stem cells, native bovine bone matrix, and a perfusion bio-
reactor for the growth and transport of living grafts, without bone morphogenetic proteins. The ramus-condyle
unit, the most eminent load-bearing bone in the skull, was reconstructed using an image-guided personalized
approach in skeletally mature Yucatán minipigs (human-scale preclinical model). We used clinically approved
decellularized bovine trabecular bone as a scaffolding material and crafted it into an anatomically correct
shape using image-guided micromilling to fit the defect. Autologous adipose-derived stromal/stem cells were
seeded into the scaffold and cultured in perfusion for 3 weeks in a specialized bioreactor to form immature
bone tissue. Six months after implantation, the engineered grafts maintained their anatomical structure,
integrated with native tissues, and generated greater volume of new bone and greater vascular infiltration than
either nonseeded anatomical scaffolds or untreated defects. This translational study demonstrates feasibility of
facial bone reconstruction using autologous, anatomically shaped, living grafts formed in vitro, and presents a
platform for personalized bone tissue engineering.
INTRODUCTION
Bone defects in the head and face due to congenital abnormalities,
trauma, or cancer surgery are associated with major functional, soci-
ological, and psychological problems. Defects in the complex struc-
tures of the head and face are difficult to restore with aesthetic and
functional accuracy. Bone autografts are the gold standard for crani-
ofacial reconstruction, owing to their osteoinductive, osteoconductive,
and immunocompatible properties (1, 2). However, autografts are
limited in volume, associated with donor site morbidity, and are dif-
ficult to carve into precise anatomical shapes. Ideally, the craniofacial
bones should be reconstructed to the original anatomy and using the
patient’s own cells.
Stem cell and tissue engineering approaches have made major strides
toward growing biological substitutes that mimic the properties of na-
tive tissues. Clinically available bone grafts, either biological or synthet-
ic, fall short of providing the fidelity of bone autografts, necessitating
the development of new treatment modalities. Bone tissues grown
from culture-expanded stem/progenitor cells isolated from bone mar-
row or adipose tissue aspirates are now at the forefront of regenerative
medicine (3–5). Enhanced bone regeneration by transplantation of
various types of stem cells has been demonstrated in small-animal
models (6, 7). Other meritorious studies developed clinically sized an-
atomical scaffolds for bone reconstruction by growth factor delivery
(8). Early on, imaging data were used in a single patient to create a
titanium mesh that was filled with bone mineral, bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP), and the patient’s bone marrow; left for 7 months un-
der a dorsal muscle to vascularize; and used to fit a mandible defect
(9). Scaffolds with stem cells and growth factors were studied in large-
animal models, with growth factors alone or in combination with cells
generally giving better outcomes (10–13).
However, translational studies in large animals of autologous bone
engineered in vitro to precisely match the desired anatomy have not
been conducted. The complexities associated with growing clinically
sized, living bone grafts have been recognized (14, 15). We previously
developed an anatomically correct scaffold-bioreactor system for bone
tissue engineering using osteogenically differentiated mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) (16). Additive manufacturing of tissue constructs
has also been implemented in the repair of long bones (17). Our
method is distinctly different as it engineers in vitro geometrically
complex bones using autologous stem cells, anatomically shaped bone
scaffolds, and a geometrically matched bioreactor chamber.
Here, we move engineered bone tissues closer to humans by creat-
ing personalized scaffolds to heal critical-sized, load-bearing maxillo-
facial bone defects in skeletally mature large animals, the Yucatán
minipigs. The investigational approach was designed to provide clin-
ical adequacy for repairing the ramus-condyle unit (RCU). We used
decellularized bovine trabecular bone as a scaffolding material, because
it is clinically approved for bone grafting (Cancello-Pure and CopiOs
bone wedges), and crafted it into an anatomically correct shape to per-
fectly fit the defect by using image-guided micromilling. Autologous
adipose-derived stromal/stem cells (ASCs) were the cells of choice due
to their high availability and easy harvest when compared to bone
marrow–derived cells (MSCs), along with osteogenic capacity (5, 18).
The term “autologous” in this study refers to the use of cellular mate-
rial prepared from a fat aspirate of the recipient animal and seeded
into a cell-free bone matrix.
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, 500 West 120th Street,
New York, NY 10027, USA. 2Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Columbia Uni-
versity College of Dental Medicine, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.
3School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton
Rouge, LA 70803, USA. 4LaCell LLC, 1441 Canal Street, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
5Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Tulane University School
of Medicine, 1324 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: gv2131@columbia.edu
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
1
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 In addition to demonstrating feasibility and efficacy of bone repair,
we recapitulated the logistics of the envisioned clinical application,
where the patient and the manufacturing site are at remote locations,
requiring shipping of both adipose tissues for cell isolation and bone
grafts for implantation. The perfusion bioreactor was designed to al-
low the growth and transport of bone grafts in a single step while
maintaining sterility and viability. Thus, from start to finish, the study
demonstrated utility and translation of personalized tissue-engineered
bone grafts for facial reconstruction.
RESULTS
Bioreactor design for engineering anatomically shaped
living bone implants
Our overarching objective was to grow bone grafts with the precise
anatomical structure to repair a large defect in the jaw, without using
BMPs or other growth factors; instead, we used only native bone
matrix to induce osteogenic differentiation of ASCs through its
composition, architecture, and mechanical properties (7, 19, 20). We
reconstructed the most eminent weight-bearing facial bone, the RCU,
in Yucatán minipigs because of similarities in the jaw anatomy, me-
chanics, and bone remodeling to those in humans.
We obtained the bone matrix by removing all cellular material
from the native trabecular bone of bovine distal femur, and then fab-
ricated the bone matrix into an exact anatomic replica of the native
tissue structure (Fig. 1A). To this end, we used computer-aided micro-
milling fabrication methods that were guided by three-dimensional
(3D) reconstructions of computed tomography (CT) images of each
pig’s jaw. Autologous porcine ASCs (pASCs) were then cultured for
3 weeks in anatomically shaped scaffolds customized to each animal in
perfusion bioreactors (movie S1).
To maintain cell viability within these complex anatomical scaffolds,
we devised an advanced bioreactor system that provided environmental
Fig. 1. Fabrication of engineered bone grafts. (A) Personalized bone
tissue engineering process. Autologous MSCs (from fat aspirates) and CT
images were obtained for each animal subject. The anatomical scaffold
was fabricated from the bovine stifle bone that had been processed to
remove any cellular material while preserving the tissue matrix. The cells
were seeded into the scaffold and cultured in the specially designed
perfusion bioreactor. After 3 weeks, the engineered RCU was implanted
back into the pig for 6 months. (B) The bioreactor culture chamber con-
sisted of five components designed to provide tightly controlled perfu-
sion through the anatomical scaffold: anatomical inner chamber with
bone scaffold, two halves of the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (elasto-
mer) block with incorporated channels, two manifolds, and an outer
casing. The PDMS block was designed as an impression of the anatom-
ical RCU structure and contained flow channels at both sides for the
flow of culture medium in and out of the scaffold. The flow rate neces-
sary for providing nutrient supply and hydrodynamic shear was defined
by the design of parallel channels in the elastomer block (with the
channel diameters and distribution dictated by the geometry of the
graft) and the fluid-routing manifold. The channel diameters and
spacing were specifically designed by flow simulation software for each
pig to provide a desired interstitial flow velocity for a given shape and
size of the anatomical RCU. (C) Flow simulation of the medium flow
through the anatomically shaped scaffold reveals uniform flow velocity
throughout the volume of the graft.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
2
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 control and the exchange of nutrients,
oxygen, and metabolites. The anatomical
scaffold was placed into the matching
void between two elastomer blocks con-
taining arrays of channels designed on
the basis of the transport analysis. The
elastomer blocks and the fluid-routing
manifolds were aligned and tightened
by the polycarbonate case to create a
watertight seal (Fig. 1B). The perfusion
system distributed culture medium throughout the ~12-ml volume
construct by regulating the fluid flow path resistance. Fluid distribution
into the channels was directed by a fluid-routing manifold via a peristal-
tic pump, with one inlet and one outlet per bioreactor. Gas exchange
occurred within the medium reservoir to maintain oxygen and pH.
The medium flow velocity at any specific location within the cultured
graft was controlled by the size of the channels that directed the fluid
into and out of the anatomical chamber (Fig. 1C). For each animal, the
channel sizes (0.82 to 2.41 mm) and channel locations were determined
using computational flow simulation. The interstitial flow velocity of
culture medium was maintained within the cultured grafts between
400 and 1000 mm/s (Fig. 1C) on the basis of a previously determined
optimum flow rate that did not limit oxygen transport to the cells (21).
Osteogenic differentiation of adipose stem cells and
deposition of bone matrix
After 3 weeks of osteogenic differentiation in 2D culture, ASCs from
subcutaneous porcine adipose tissue exhibited bone cell properties, in-
cluding the deposition of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and mineralized
matrix (Fig. 2, A and B). After 3 weeks of osteogenic culture in the 3D
scaffolds, the cellularity of the grafts increased 7.5-fold relative to day 3
(Fig. 2C). Differentiated ASCs in the engineered bone grafts at week 3
Fig. 2. Properties of engineered bone
grafts. (A) DNA, ALP, and calcium (Ca) con-
tent over the course of 3 weeks of osteogen-
ic induction. Significant increases in ALP and
Ca deposition were observed. Data were
quantified for each animal as means ± SD
(n = 7 animals) using one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s comparison
posttest. (B) ALP and von Kossa stains con-
firmed deposition of ALP protein and miner-
al during osteogenic induction. (C) DNA
content quantifies the number of cells per
scaffold at 3 days and 3 weeks after osteo-
genic induction in the scaffold-bioreactor
system, as well as after transport (one addi-
tional day). Data are box plots (n = 7). P
values were determined by one-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s multiple comparison post hoc
test. (D) Gene expression after 3 weeks of os-
teogenic induction of cells in the scaffold.
Data are the fold difference (means ± SD)
of gene expression normalized to the
housekeeping gene (Gapdh) and then to
the corresponding day 3 data (n = 7). P
values were determined by t test with H0 =
1. (E) H&E staining and immunohisto-
chemistry (type I collagen and BSP) of engi-
neered bone grafts after seeding (3 days)
and before implantation (3 weeks). Cells
attached to the scaffold (black arrowheads),
proliferated, filled the pore spaces, and
deposited bone proteins (white arrow-
heads). The decellularized trabecular scaf-
fold (S) was maintained throughout the
cultivation period. Scale bars, 250 mm.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
3
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 expressed osteoblastic transcription factors, such as core-binding
factor a1 (Cbfa1, also known as Runx2) and Osterix; osteogenic matrix
proteins Alp, type I collagen (Col1a1), bone sialoprotein (Bsp), and
osteonectin (ON); and osteogenic-related growth factors such as
Bmp2 and transforming growth factor–b2 (Tgfb2), normalized to in-
ternal Gapdh control and compared with day 3 (Fig. 2D). The ASCs
attached to the bone scaffold surfaces, proliferated over 3 weeks of
cultivation, and filled the pore spaces (Fig. 2E). The cells and the
new osteogenic extracellular matrix (ECM) rich in type I collagen
and BSP were present throughout the graft interiors (Fig. 2E).
During graft transport to the site of implantation, the perfusion
was discontinued for up to 10 hours. Finite element analysis of O2
transport and consumption within 3D-engineered bone grafts demon-
stratedthattheminimalO2concentrationat10hourswas≥0.14mol/m3
(movie S2), a value well above the depletion rate for cell survival. To
test for the effects of reduced oxygen supply on cell viability, we con-
ducted experiments with native osteochondral explants of a compara-
ble thickness and showed that the cell viability did not change over a
longer period of time (96 hours). The average percentage of live cells
(±SD) determined by a live-dead assay was 85 ± 12 for the freshly
sectioned samples and 83 ± 6 after 96 hours of culture without medi-
um perfusion. Consistently, the graft cellularity posttransport was not
significantly different from the pretransportation values (Fig. 2C).
Pig RCU reconstruction model and bone regeneration
Fourteen skeletally mature Yucatán minipigs (>2 years old) were cho-
sen as study subjects. The left RCU was excised (3 cm wide along the
dorsal plane by 6 cm long along the transverse plane), with the right
RCU left intact. The defects were fitted with a tissue-engineered bone
graft or with a cell-free bone scaffold, or left untreated (condylectomy,
to control for spontaneous regeneration). The animals were not im-
mobilized to maintain native loading environment. There were no
complications throughout the 6-month study. Animals receiving acel-
lular scaffolds and tissue-engineered bone were sacrificed at 3 months
(n = 2 each) or 6 months (n = 4 each). Condylectomy subjects were
sacrificed at 6 months (n = 2). The left temporomandibular joint
(TMJ) capsule was excised with the base of the ramus and temporal
bone intact. Engineered grafts had the exact anatomical shape of the
native RCU extracted at the time of surgery (fig. S1).
Bone regeneration and condyle height. CT images of the por-
cine skulls were acquired immediately after surgery and at 6 weeks,
3 months, and 6 months after implantation (Fig. 3A and fig. S2). The
bone volume (Fig. 3B) and the bone volume fraction (Fig. 3C) in the
tissue-engineered bone groups were significantly higher than in the acel-
lular scaffold and condylectomy groups at all time points. The greater
amount of bone formed in the engineered grafts resulted in a more
complete regeneration of the original joint anatomy, as indicated by
the final heights of the new condyles (Fig. 3D). The extracted RCU
was about 60% of the original height in all groups. After condylectomy,
the condyle height reached about 80% of the structure height. Because
the geometry and anatomical features of bone grafts matched the native
RCU, the condyle height after implantation was equivalent to the
physiologic height. Although the condyle height in the acellular scaf-
fold group decreased over time, the condyle height in the engineered
bone graft was maintained throughout the study (Fig. 3D).
Ramus regeneration. Regeneration of the ramus bone was ini-
tiated from the native bone and progressed toward the grafting region
(Fig. 4A and fig. S2). Time lapse of CT images of the individual
subjects revealed infiltration from the native bone at the rostral end
and ossification at the caudal end of the ramus (Fig. 4A and fig.
S2). Condylectomy resulted in incomplete ramus regeneration, with
a large hollow area within the ramus observed by CT at 6 months after
surgery (fig. S2). Histological analysis of the condylectomy control
group revealed that the region lacking mineralized matrix was filled
with soft fibrous tissue (Fig. 4B and fig. S3). The native and new bone
could be distinguished by the presence of osteocytes that could only be
observed in the newly formed bone.
In contrast to large amounts of acellular scaffold resorption as early
as 3 months after implantation (fig. S4), tissue-engineered bone grafts
were gradually and orderly replaced by new bone, resulting in regen-
eration of the original tissues (fig. S5). Portions of both the implanted
acellular scaffold and engineered bone were still present at 6 months
after implantation (Fig. 4B and figs. S3 to S5 and S7 to S9), indicative
of ongoing remodeling, with remarkable differences in the compo-
sition, structure, and bone formation between the two groups.
Condyle regeneration. Regeneration of the condyle could be seen
in all groups at 6 months after surgery (Fig. 4C and fig. S6). Longitu-
dinal CT images of the individual subjects over 6 months revealed the
patterns of condyle formation and ramus regeneration (fig. S6). In the
condylectomy group, ossification occurred in the condyle region and
grew in size over time, forming a condyle structure supported by a
narrow ramus at the rostral and caudal ends (Fig. 4C). At 6 months,
the condylar cartilage had not yet regenerated, resulting in under-
developed condylar surfaces (Fig. 4D and fig. S7).
Acellular scaffold implantation resulted in new tissue at the artic-
ular surfaces of the graft material. By 3 months, the new bone formed
at the articular region with only minimal formation of the condylar
cartilage (Fig. 4, C and D, and figs. S6 and S8). By 6 months, the
ossification progressed and the articular cartilage formed at the con-
dylar surfaces (Fig. 4D and figs. S6 and S8). Only small amounts of the
original scaffold material were present within the newly formed con-
dyle. By contrast, reconstruction with tissue-engineered bone resulted
in the most complete condyle regeneration (Fig. 4, C and D, and figs.
S6 and S9). New bone regenerated at the rostral side and from the
caudal end into the tissue-engineered bone graft. Sites of endo-
chondral ossification could be observed at the condylar surfaces,
within the implanted tissue-engineered bone grafts (Fig. 4 and fig.
S10). After 6 months, the engineered bone graft was mostly replaced
by the newly regenerated condyle containing a continuous layer of
condylar cartilage (Fig. 4D and figs. S6 and S9). The presence of
portions of the implanted tissue-engineered bone indicated continued
regeneration and remodeling.
Graft-host integration
The structural integration of the implanted graft with native bone was
investigated using high-resolution mCT and histological analysis.
Paired histological (Movat’s pentachrome stain) and mCT image anal-
ysis distinguished the implanted scaffold material (both acellular and
cell-laden) from the native bone (Fig. 5A). Among the three experi-
mental groups, the tissue-engineered grafts most strongly enhanced
the graft-host bone integration. 3D reconstruction of engineered
graft-host interface displayed the progression of structural integration
between the new bone and the host bone at 3 months. Integration was
confirmed by histology showing new bone penetrating into the graft
(Fig. 5A). Higher-magnification histology revealed the proximity of
the new bone and the resorbing scaffold, as well as the presence of
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
4
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 osteoclastic processes involved in the remodeling and replacement of
the graft material with the new bone. By 6 months, a large portion of
the tissue-engineered bone graft was replaced by new bone (Figs. 4, B
and D, and 5A). In contrast, the implanted acellular scaffolds resulted
in disconnected mineral structures with soft fibrous tissue formed be-
tween the host and the graft.
The mechanical integrity of regenerated bone was analyzed by
three-point bending (fig. S11) to determine structural stability of re-
generating bone. The peak and equilibrium flexural moduli of the
whole ramus were significantly higher for the tissue-engineered bone
group than the acellular scaffold group at both 3- and 6-month time
points but were still twofold lower than the corresponding values in
native bone (Fig. 5, B and C). However, the peak force during bending
of the ramus after engineered bone implantation was similar to that of
the native bone, indicating that the whole ramus tissue can withstand
the same amount of flexural load as the native bone (Fig. 5C).
The mechanism of graft-host integration was investigated by
evaluating the amounts and distributions of type I collagen and
BSP. Preosteoblastic cells secreted rich ECM that underwent miner-
alization to form new bone containing osteocytes in the ramus
region (Fig. 6). The new bone matrix was rich in type I collagen
and BSP and ossified (Fig. 6). The cellularized region of this bone-like
matrix was present before implantation (Fig. 2C) and maintained
throughout the implantation study, suggesting that the osteogenically
induced ASCs facilitated new bone formation and enhanced graft-host
bone integration.
Scaffold structure, graft resorption, and vascular infiltration
Quantitative analysis of tissue microstructure was used to investigate
the effects of stem cell incorporation on graft structure, resorption,
and vascular infiltration. Large portions of the original graft material
were still present 3 months after implantation (Fig. 7A), with the
largest amount of the original scaffold material present in the tissue-
engineered bone graft, as determined by quantitative image analysis
(Fig. 7, A and B), presumably because of lower rate of resorption (Fig.
7C). In contrast, the acellular scaffold underwent massive resorption in
vivo with small dense macrophage-like cells infiltrating the grafts and
amorphous areas consistent with tissue necrosis (Fig. 7A).
Fig. 3. Progression of bone regeneration and reestablishment of
condyle height. (A) Lateral (left) and caudal (right) 3D views of the
mandible after surgery. Images were taken at timed intervals for condy-
lectomy controls (n = 1), animals implanted with acellular scaffolds (n =
2), and animals implanted with tissue-engineered bone (n = 2). Addi-
tional images are in fig. S2B. (B to D) Quantitative analysis of bone vol-
ume (B), bone volume fraction (C), and condyle height normalized to
the original height (D). Data are individual animals with means ± SD
(n = 6). ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05, two-way ANOVA and Bonfer-
roni post hoc tests.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
5
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Notably, the tissue-engineered grafts vascularized, and the newly
formed vasculature was continuous with the host circulation, as evi-
denced by the presence of blood cells inside lumen structures in
Movat’s pentachrome stains (Fig. 7A). Staining with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) showed the formation of new vasculature, and
the Prussian blue stain confirmed the presence of hemoglobin (iron)
in the cells found within the new blood vessels (Fig. 7D). The endo-
thelial lining of the new blood vessels was confirmed by CD31 staining.
Vasculature was also present in the acellular scaffold implantation, but
to a markedly lower extent than in the tissue-engineered bone grafts
(Fig. 7, A and E). The vascularization was detected throughout the
tissue-engineered bone grafts (Fig. 4, B and D, and fig. S9), indicating
that the formation of new bone and vascular perfusion occurred in
parallel.
DISCUSSION
We developed a translational approach for growing anatomically correct
bone grafts from ASCs and demonstrated its utility for reconstruction
Fig. 4. Morphology and structure of regenerated RCU. (A and B) Ramus
regeneration was assessed by mCT (A) and Movat’s pentachrome staining
for bone and soft tissues (B). Scale bars, 1 cm. (C and D) Condyle regenera-
tion was assessed using mCT 3D reconstruction (C) and Movat’s penta-
chrome staining (D) at low magnification (top; 1-cm scale) and high
magnification (bottom; 2-mm scale) of the condylectomy site. The dashed
circumferences indicate the remaining graft regions, with the red trabecular
structure representing the remaining scaffold material. Images are repre-
sentative of n = 2 (condylectomy control), n = 4 (acellular scaffold), and
n = 4 (tissue-engineered bone) animals.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
6
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of the entire facial bone in a skeletally mature large animal. Cells were
infused into an anatomically shaped decellularized bone scaffold and
cultured in a matching bioreactor chamber with interstitial flow of
culture medium to engineer customized bone grafts. For each animal,
the scaffold and the bioreactor were designed by image-guided fabri-
cation. Over 6 months after implantation, the engineered grafts rees-
tablished the original RCU, integrated with the host bone, and formed
bone-like tissue that was extensively vascularized, in contrast to both
groups of control animals. This study shows successful tissue-engineered
reconstruction of large, anatomically precise, load-bearing cranio-
facial defect.
Previously, the utility of osteogenic stem cells has been studied in
small-animal models for craniofacial bone reconstruction (7, 8) and in
sheep for regeneration of long bones by using MSCs seeded into scaf-
folds containing BMP-2 protein (10). We investigated regeneration of
flat bones in the skull that involves intramembranous ossification pre-
ceded by callus formation (22, 23). Our system did not require addi-
tion of BMP-2, as the scaffold alone had strong osteogenic properties.
For clinical impact, we created anatomically precise complex bone
grafts using decellularized bone scaffolds and autologous MSCs and
demonstrated their utility for reconstructing load-bearing maxillofacial
bone defects in a large-animal model.
RCU, the most eminent load-bearing joint of the skull, served as a
rigorous model for assessing tissue-engineered bone incorporation
in skeletally mature minipigs. To mimic the envisioned logistics of
the commercial process, the grafts were grown and implanted at
two locations that were more than 1200 miles apart. For each
animal, the CT images and adipose tissues were shipped to the pro-
cessing laboratory. Cell preparation and assurance of quality
followed good manufacturing guidelines (24–26) so that the process
can be readily adapted to the regulatory requirements. The bio-
reactor provided graft cultivation and transport to the implantation
site in a closed system and with the preservation of cell viability. Grafts
were implanted by an expert maxillofacial surgeon by following
standard clinical protocols and using standard plates and screws for
fixation.
Fig. 5. Graft-host bone integration. (A) mCT 3D reconstruction of the
graft-host interface and Movat’s pentachrome staining were used to assess
integration of the implanted graft with the host bone. For acellular grafts,
the mineralized host bone (hb) and the graft structures (g) were separated
by soft fibrous tissue (f). In contrast, host bone extended into the tissue-
engineered bone graft. In the proximity of the new bone, osteoclastic re-
sorption (white arrowheads) was detected on the implanted scaffold with
the lining of osteoblasts (black arrowheads), indicating active ossification.
Scale bars, 1 mm (4×) and 100 mm (40×). (B and C) Three-point bending
mechanical test for peak and equilibrium flexural moduli (B) and the peak
and equilibrium forces (C). Data are means ± SD (n = 4 from two animals
for condylectomy; n = 4 from two animals for 3-month data; n = 8 from
four animals for 6-month data). ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05, two-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni post hoc tests.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
7
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 The study had two controls: condy-
lectomy to account for any spontaneous
healing and biomaterial scaffold to ac-
count for the role of cells in inducing
tissue regeneration. As in previous studies
in large animals (27, 28), condylectomy
resulted in minimal bone regeneration.
The implanted acellular scaffolds re-
sulted in formation of fibrous tissue, ap-
parently due to insufficient capacity for
replacing the degrading scaffold by new
bone tissue. Only the tissue-engineered
bone grafts enhanced condyle regenera-
tion to the original height at both 3 and
6 months while maintaining mechanical
integrity of the ramus. The condylar car-
tilage formed at the articular surface and
the subchondral bone replaced the im-
planted bone graft, resulting in high fi-
delity of the regenerated condylar
surface. Unlike acellular scaffolds, the
scaffold material in tissue-engineered
bone grafts was degraded slowly and
replaced by new bone. Fast resorption of
acellular scaffolds caused inflammatory re-
sponses and soft tissue infiltration that
persisted through 6 months of implanta-
tion. These properties of acellular scaffolds
have led to granulation and fibrosis at
the graft-host interface, precluding graft
incorporation (29). In contrast, engineered
bone grafts enhanced bone ingrowth,
provided mechanical stability for mas-
tication, and accelerated graft turnover
and new bone formation. These proper-
ties are important for clinical translation as the success in clinical bone
grafting depends on graft resorption, bone incorporation, and me-
chanical stability. Clearly, graft resorption needs to be balanced with
the deposition and remodeling of the new bone for adequate cranio-
facial reconstruction (30). We believe that slower bulk resorption and
the presence of osteoclasts in tissue-engineered bone supported favor-
able remodeling into native-like bone.
Similar to previous studies that used perfusion bioreactors for
bone tissue engineering (16, 21, 31), the grafts contained large num-
bers of cells (≥6 × 108 cells) expressing osteogenic markers CBFA1
and Osterix (32, 33) with dense bone ECM filling the scaffold pores.
The differentiating ASCs expressed high levels of bone-related genes
and proteins, such as ALP, type I collagen, BSP, and osteonectin.
Notably, BMP-2 [commonly added to support bone culture and repair
(34)] and transforming growth factor–b2 (35, 36) were also highly
expressed in engineered grafts at 3 and 6 months after implantation. Con-
sistent with previously shown immunoprotective and anti-inflammatory
properties of MSCs, including ASCs (37–40), tissue-engineered bone
grafts did not express proinflammatory genes.
Vascularization of implanted tissues has been a major challenge, as
inadequate nutrient transport leads to necrosis (41). Culture-expanded
stromal/stem cells have been shown to promote endothelial migration
and induced angiogenesis both in vitro and in vivo (42–44). Here, vas-
cularization was associated with the formation of new bone in the re-
generating RCU and detected deep inside the graft, as in autologous
trabecular bone implants, where bone was vascularized rapidly
through the marrow spaces (2). These regenerative features were
not seen in acellular scaffolds, suggesting that the autologous ASCs
exhibited osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties as reported
for autologous trabecular bone implants (2). Nevertheless, the com-
parison between engineered bone grafts and tissue autografts needs
a more detailed evaluation of the integrative repair at the graft-host
interface and vascular perfusion.
We demonstrated that bone grafts engineered to the exact anatom-
ical shape using decellularized bone scaffolds and autologous ASCs
regenerated the entire RCU in a pig model. However, our study also
has limitations. We did not determine whether enhanced bone forma-
tion was a direct effect of implanted cells or a result of secondary factors,
such as immune modulation, proangiogenic signaling, and/or release of
chemotactic or homing signals. Cell lineage tracking will be required to
discern possible mechanisms. It will also be of interest to compare ASCs
to alternative sources of autogenous cell populations and to determine
effects of cell concentration and the duration of bioreactor culture on
integrative repair. Last, translation of tissue-engineered grafts into clin-
ical use will require characterization of ASCs from diverse donor popu-
lations to ensure quality control and safety.
Fig. 6. Deposition of type I collagen and BSP in the newly formed bone. The regenerating new
bone (nb) within the tissue-engineered bone graft is shown at low and high magnification. Localized
areas of type I collagen and BSP at the graft-host bone interface were precursors for bone formation.
New bone contained osteocytes (black arrowheads) within their lacunae. Negative immunohisto-
chemistry confirmed the specificity of the staining. Images are representative of n = 4 animals. Scale
bars, 400 mm (low) and 100 mm (high).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
8
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The objective of our study was to engineer anatomically correct living
craniofacial bones by using ASCs without BMPs, native bone matrix, a
perfusion bioreactor, and image-guided fabrication methods. Our pre-
specified hypothesis was that the immature bone formed in vitro will
serve as a template for bone development and remodeling and its
functional integration with adjacent host tissues. The research was
conducted using skeletally mature Yu-
catán minipigs [21 to 32 months old;
48 to 73 kg (60.0 ± 7.9 kg)]. Sample
size was determined using power
analysis (b = 0.1 and a = 0.05) with
mA and mB of 0.4 and 0.6, respectively,
and SD of 0.1 based on estimated
bone volume fraction. The resulting
sample size was 6.
Anatomically correct engineered
bone grafts were investigated for
their capacity to regenerate the en-
tire RCU during a 6-month period
of implantation in Yucatán mini-
pigs. Two control groups were stud-
ied: condylectomy to assess any
spontaneous regeneration of the
bone and acellular, anatomically
shaped scaffolds to assess the role
of exogenous cells in tissue regenera-
tion. Tissue outcomes were evaluated
by using CT and mCT imaging, gene
expression, protein contents, histolo-
gy, immunostains, and biomechanical
testing. Selection of animals for the
main experimental group and the
two control groups was randomized.
In the main experimental group, the
cells were autologous and therefore
derived from each animal. Also, the
scaffold and bioreactor chamber were
specifically made for each animal to fit
the defect geometry by image-guided
fabrication. The acellular scaffold
group also required the image-guided
preparation of a specific scaffold for
each animal. The implantations could
not be blinded because of the different
appearance of the engineered bone
(tissue-like) and acellular scaffold
(biomaterial-like). Nevertheless, all
analytical assessments were blinded to
the maximum practical extent, and most
of them were done by an independent
expert (such as mCT, CT, histology,
and mechanical testing) to eliminate
any bias.
Stromal/stem cell preparation
Subcutaneous fat (about 20 g) was harvested from the dorsal lumbar
region of each animal (n = 7) at the same time as the initial CT
procedure and the adipose-derivedstemcells were isolatedas previously
described (25). The flasks containing passage 0 (P0) ASCs were com-
pletely filled with culture medium and shipped on ice to Columbia Uni-
versity for processing. The pASCs were expanded in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS),
Fig. 7. Graft resorption and vascularization. (A) Movat’s pentachrome stain of the central region with-
in the scaffolds is shown 3 months after implantation. Scaffold resorption is indicated by white arrows.
Vasculature is indicated by black arrows. Scale bars, 1 mm and 250 mm. (B and C) Quantification of mi-
crostructure properties: percentage of scaffold area (B) and percentage of the resorbing area (C). (D) H&E
showed structural differences between the newly formed vasculature and the surrounding tissue. Immu-
nohistochemistry for CD31 confirmed the presence of endothelial cell lining in newly formed vessels in both
tissue-engineered bone and acellular scaffold group. Negative control confirmed the specificity of CD31
antibody. The CD31 immunohistochemistry was used to quantify vascular number per area. Scale bar, 50 mm.
(E) The number of blood vessels per area was quantified from CD31 immunohistochemical images. (B, C,
and E) Data are box plots for n = 56 images for the acellular scaffold group and n = 90 images for the
tissue-engineered bone group.
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
9
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and fibroblast growth factor (0.1 ng/ml),
and passaged by trypsinization up to P3.
Scaffold fabrication
The scaffolds were made from native bovine bone after removing all
cellular material to leave behind the ECM with largely preserved
composition, architecture, and mechanical properties. The decellular-
ization method has been demonstrated to remove all cellular material
from the bone (45). Large cancellous bone blocks were created from
the distal aspect of adult bovine femurs (>2 years old) after removing
the epiphysis, articular surface, and periosteum with an electrical band
saw. The blocks were lathed into cylinder blocks that are 4.5 cm in
diameter and 12 cm long. To fabricate an anatomical TMJ ramus-
condyle cancellous bone block, G-code was generated from the Initial
Graphics Exchange Specifications (.iges) files of the CT images for
each pig using the Mastercam software. Using a four-axis computer nu-
merical control milling machine (LittleMachineShop), the cylindrical
bone blocks were milled into the custom geometry of the RCU for
each pig. The anatomical scaffolds were decellularized by using a mod-
ification of a known protocol (16) and are described in Supplementary
Methods.
Perfusion bioreactor design and operation
The perfusion bioreactor used in this study was developed starting
from our previous bioreactor system that was used to generate ana-
tomical pieces of tissue-engineered bone with high cell density (16)
and is described in Supplementary Methods.
Cultivation of bone grafts
The anatomically shaped scaffolds were seeded and cultured using
perfusion bioreactors with anatomical chambers fabricated to exactly
match the geometry of each scaffold, as described above. For scaffold
seeding, the scaffold volumes were determined by the SolidWorks
software and were in the range of 11 to 15 cm3. A suspension of
P3 pASCs (12 ml; 107 cells/cm3 in expansion medium) was injected
into the culture chamber throughout the anatomical scaffold. After
allowing the cells to attach for 3 hours at 37°C in an incubator, oste-
ogenic media [low-glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1%
antibiotics, 10 mM sodium b-glycerophosphate, 100 nM dexametha-
sone, and ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (50 mg/ml)] were perfused
through the scaffold for 3 days at 10% of the calculated optimal flow
rate to promote spatially uniform cell attachment throughout the scaf-
fold volume.
For cultivation of bone grafts, the seeded scaffolds were perfused
with osteogenic medium for 3 weeks at the set optimal flow rate, with
medium changes twice per week. The 3-week cultivation period was
selected on the basis of the finding that ASCs highly express osteogenic
markers after 3 weeks of in vitro differentiation (fig. S2). Four engi-
neered constructs were generated for each animal: one for implantation
and three for evaluation, after 3 days and 3 weeks of cultivation and after
transport from New York, NY, to Baton Rouge, LA, where the grafts
were implanted. Transport of the bone grafts is described in Supple-
mentary Methods.
Animal implantation study
The animal implantation study was conducted at the Louisiana State
University under an approved Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee protocol. A total of 14 skeletally mature Yucatán minipigs
were divided into three groups: (i) condylectomy (n = 2), (ii) acellular
scaffold implantation (n = 6), and (iii) autologous engineered bone
implantation (n = 6). Two surgeries were performed per day over a
period of 2 months. Two pigs per group receiving acellular scaffold or
autologous tissue-engineered bone graft were sacrificed at 3 months
after implantation. The remaining animals were sacrificed at 6 months.
CT imaging was performed immediately and at 6 weeks, 3 months,
and 6 months after surgery. End point analyses included mechanical
testing and histological and immunohistological evaluation.
All pigs underwent clinical CT scan (GE LightSpeed 16; 120 kilovolt
peaks, 625-mm resolution) 2 to 3 months before surgery. For each
animal, the facial skull structures were reconstructed from CT images
using the Mimics software. From the reconstructed 3D images, we
selected the left TMJ RCU measuring 3 cm along the dorsal plane
by 6 cm along the transverse plane as the region for defect creation
and reconstruction. For all animals except the condylectomy con-
trols, the 3D structure data were sent to the laboratory at Columbia
University and the defect/grafting region was selected in Mimics
software.
The animal implantation process and the selection of fixative
method were chosen by an expert maxillofacial surgeon to closely
mimic the current clinical procedure. The implantation procedure
occurred after 12 hours of food withdrawal. The pigs were admin-
istered intramuscularly with ketamine (10 mg/kg; Vedco Inc.), midazolam
(0.2 mg/kg; Hospira Inc.), and dexmedetomidine (2 mg/kg; Pfizer
Animal Health). Anesthesia was induced 15 min later with 5% iso-
flurane in 100% oxygen at flow (1.5 liters/min) via facial mask. The
animals were intubated with a cuffed Murphy’s endotracheal tube (7 to
9 mm internal diameter), and anesthesia was maintained at a vaporizer
setting of 1.5% isoflurane in a circular breathing system.
The pigs were then prepped and draped in a standard sterile fash-
ion. We used a retromandibular approach with 15 blades to make a
5-cm skin incision. We then used electrocautery to dissect through the
subcutaneous and superficial cervical fascial layers. Blunt dissection
was carried to the angle and inferior border of the mandible, where
the periosteum was approached. The facial vessels were identified and
ligated. The periosteum was incised with electrocautery, and sub-
periosteal dissection exposed the medial and lateral mandible from
the antegonial notch to the head of the condyle. Preplanned cuts were
measured and marked, and condylectomies were performed with a
reciprocating saw under copious sterile saline irrigation. The RCU
was then removed and the pig was treated with either no replacement
(condylectomy) or replacement with an acellular scaffold or a tissue-
engineered bone graft. Two eight-hole miniplates with 1.7-mm bone
screws (Stryker) were used to provide rigid fixation of the implants.
The wounds were closed with 3-0 polyglactin 910 sutures for sub-
cutaneous tissues and 2-0 nylon sutures for skin.
CT and mCT imaging
The animals were anesthetized and placed in ventral recumbency on
the GE LightSpeed 16 Slice CT scanner (GE Medical Systems). The
scans (0.625-mm resolution; 120 kV) were conducted on all animals
at 2 months before surgery, immediately, and at 6 weeks, 3 months, and
6 months after surgery. mCT imaging (50-mm resolution; 100 kV) of
harvested RCUs was done using the GE Explore CT-120 (GE Medical
Systems) at an external facility (Cornell University Imaging Facility) in
a blinded fashion. Condyle height and bone volume were measured
using the Mimics software (Materialise). Quantitation of bone volume
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and bone volume fraction was conducted by determining the amount
of bone in the defect area on the basis of the difference between the
CT before and after surgery and the amount of bone removed.
mCT was performed by using a modified protocol (45), and the
samples were scanned at 21-mm isotropic resolution. The bone volume
was obtained from the application of a global thresholding technique
so that only the mineralized tissue was detected. There was no diffi-
culty in distinguishing the grafted material from the miniplates and
screws used for fixation, which appeared in mCT as compact and ge-
ometrically defined structures. Spatial resolution of the full voxel
model was sufficient for evaluating the microarchitecture of the bone
tissue.
Mechanical testing
A simple three-point bending mechanical test was used to assess struc-
tural rigidity of the ramus (fig. S11). Samples were cut along dorsal
plane into about 1 cm wide (ventral-dorsal) and 3 cm long (cranial-
caudal). Two 1-cm sections were cut and tested for each animal sacri-
ficed at 3 months and for condylectomy group, and one 1-cm section
was cut and tested for other animals. Soft tissue was removed to ex-
pose the hard tissue structure. The samples were placed on two
supports that were 25 mm apart. An actuator applied a load in the
exact middle of the two supports onto the samples. Preload of 25 g
was applied for 900 s before the test. The samples were subjected to a
300-mm displacement at a loading rate of 3 mm/s and then held in
place for 1800 s. Force was measured throughout the period of
loading. Peak force and equilibrium force were determined as the
maximum force and the force at the end point of the testing. The flex-
ural modulus (E) was calculated from the force measured and the ge-
ometry of the sample:
E ¼ Fl3
48yI
where F is force, l is the distance between two supports, y is the
displacement, and I is the overall second moment of area, which
was calculated using a solid rectangular beam model:
I ¼ wh3
12
where w and h are width and height of the samples, respectively.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism software
(GraphPad Software Inc.). Statistical analysis of graft cellularity was
carried out by one-way ANOVA nonparametric test and Tukey’s
comparison posttest to compare means. Statistical analysis of gene ex-
pression was carried out by the one-sample t test with hypothetical
value of 1. Statistical analyses of the bone volume, bone volume frac-
tion, condyle height, and mechanical properties were carried out by
two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni post hoc tests to compare the
means. Data were calculated as the means ± SD. Statistical analyses
of image quantitation were carried out by Student’s t test. P < 0.05
was considered significant. The box plots were constructed to represent
median, first quartile, and third quartile, with error bars indicating max-
imum and minimum values; if outliers are present, they are shown as
dots above or below. Histograms are means ± 1 SD. Dot plots are indi-
vidual animals with lines to represent the means ± 1 SD.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/343/343ra83/DC1
Methods
Fig. S1. Structural comparison of tissue-engineered graft and native explant.
Fig. S2. Regeneration of RCU.
Fig. S3. High-resolution Movat’s pentachrome stain of the ramus in the condylectomy group at 6
months.
Fig. S4. High-resolution Movat’s pentachrome stain of the ramus in the acellular scaffold group.
Fig. S5. High-resolution Movat’s pentachrome stain of the ramus in the tissue-engineered bone
group.
Fig. S6. Condyle regeneration (posterior view and histologies).
Fig. S7. High-resolution Movat’s pentachrome stain of the condyle in the condylectomy group
at 6 months.
Fig. S8. High-resolution Movat’s pentachrome stain of the ramus in the acellular scaffold group.
Fig. S9. High-resolution Movat’s pentachrome stain of the ramus in the tissue-engineered bone
group.
Fig. S10. Ossification patterns in the condyle after tissue-engineered bone regeneration.
Fig. S11. Experimental setup for the three-point bending mechanical testing.
Table S1. Porcine real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) primers.
Movie S1. Assembly of bioreactor.
Movie S2. Finite element modeling of oxygen concentration.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. P. V. Giannoudis, H. Dinopoulos, E. Tsiridis, Bone substitutes: An update. Injury 36, S20–S27
(2005).
2. M. J. Yaszemski, R. G. Payne, W. C. Hayes, R. Langer, A. G. Mikos, Evolution of bone trans-
plantation: Molecular, cellular and tissue strategies to engineer human bone. Biomaterials
17, 175–185 (1996).
3. A. I. Caplan, Review: Mesenchymal stem cells: Cell-based reconstructive therapy in ortho-
pedics. Tissue Eng. 11, 1198–1211 (2005).
4. J. M. Gimble, F. Guilak, Adipose-derived adult stem cells: Isolation, characterization, and
differentiation potential. Cytotherapy 5, 362–369 (2003).
5. M. F. Pittenger, A. M. Mackay, S. C. Beck, R. K. Jaiswal, R. Douglas, J. D. Mosca, M. A. Moorman,
D. W. Simonetti, S. Craig, D. R. Marshak, Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal
stem cells. Science 284, 143–147 (1999).
6. C. M. Cowan, Y.-Y. Shi, O. O. Aalami, Y.-F. Chou, C. Mari, R. Thomas, N. Quarto, C. H. Contag,
B. Wu, M. T. Longaker, Adipose-derived adult stromal cells heal critical-size mouse calvarial
defects. Nat. Biotechnol. 22, 560–567 (2004).
7. L. Meinel, R. Fajardo, S. Hofmann, R. Langer, J. Chen, B. Snyder, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, D. Kaplan,
Silk implants for the healing of critical size bone defects. Bone 37, 688–698 (2005).
8. S. J. Hollister, C. Y. Lin, E. Saito, C. Y. Lin, R. D. Schek, J. M. Taboas, J. M. Williams, B. Partee,
C. L. Flanagan, A. Diggs, E. N. Wilke, G. H. Van Lenthe, R. Müller, T. Wirtz, S. Das, S. E. Feinberg,
P. H. Krebsbach, Engineering craniofacial scaffolds. Orthod. Craniofac. Res. 8, 162–173 (2005).
9. P.H. Warnke, I. N. G. Springer, J. Wiltfang, Y. Acil, H. Eufinger, M. Wehmöller, P. A. J. Russo,
H. Bolte, E. Sherry, E. Behrens, H. Terheyden, Growth and transplantation of a custom
vascularised bone graft in a man. Lancet 364, 766–770 (2004).
10. J. C. Reichert, A. Cipitria, D. R. Epari, S. Saifzadeh, P. Krishnakanth, A. Berner, M. A. Woodruff,
H. Schell, M. Mehta, M. A. Schuetz, G. N. Duda, D. W. Hutmacher, A tissue engineering
solution for segmental defect regeneration in load-bearing long bones. Sci. Transl. Med.
4, 141ra93 (2012).
11. Y. Yamada, K. Ito, S. Nakamura, M. Ueda, T. Nagasaka, Promising cell-based therapy for
bone regeneration using stem cells from deciduous teeth, dental pulp, and bone marrow.
Cell Transplant. 20, 1003–1013 (2011).
12. A. Berner, J. Henkel, M. A. Woodruff, R. Steck, M. Nerlich, M. A. Schuetz, D. W. Hutmacher,
Delayed minimally invasive injection of allogenic bone marrow stromal cell sheets regenerates
large bone defects in an ovine preclinical animal model. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 4, 503–512 (2015).
13. J. R. Field, M. McGee, R. Stanley, G. Ruthenbeck, T. Papadimitrakis, A. Zannettino, S. Gronthos,
S. Itescu, The efficacy of allogeneic mesenchymal precursor cells for the repair of an ovine
tibial segmental defect. Vet. Comp. Orthopaed. 24, 113–121 (2011).
14. G. N. Bancroft, V. I. Sikavitsas, A. G. Mikos, Technical note: Design of a flow perfusion bio-
reactor system for bone tissue-engineering applications. Tissue Eng. 9, 549–554 (2003).
15. D. A. Gaspar, V. Gomide, F. J. Monteiro, The role of perfusion bioreactors in bone tissue
engineering. Biomatter 2, 167–175 (2012).
16. W. L. Grayson, M. Fröhlich, K. Yeager, S. Bhumiratana, M. E. Chan, C. Cannizzaro, L. Q. Wan,
X. S. Liu, X. E. Guo, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Engineering anatomically shaped human bone
grafts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 3299–3304 (2010).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
11
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 17. P. F. Costa, C. Vaquette, J. Baldwin, M. Chhaya, M. E. Gomes, R. L. Reis, C. Theodoropoulos,
D. W. Hutmacher, Biofabrication of customized bone grafts by combination of additive
manufacturing and bioreactor knowhow. Biofabrication 6, 035006 (2014).
18. A. Gupta, D. T. Leong, H. F. Bai, S. B. Singh, T.-C. Lim, D. W. Hutmacher, Osteo-maturation of
adipose-derived stem cells required the combined action of vitamin D3, b-glycerophosphate,
and ascorbic acid. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 362, 17–24 (2007).
19. G. M. de Peppo, I. Marcos-Campos, D. J. Kahler, D. Alsalman, L. Shang, G. Vunjak-Novakovic,
D. Marolt, Engineering bone tissue substitutes from human induced pluripotent stem cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 8680–8685 (2013).
20. D. Marolt, I. M. Campos, S. Bhumiratana, A. Koren, P. Petridis, G. Zhang, P. F. Spitalnik,
W. L. Grayson, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Engineering bone tissue from human embryonic stem
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 8705–8709 (2012).
21. W. L. Grayson, D. Marolt, S. Bhumiratana, M. Fröhlich, X. E. Guo, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Op-
timizing the medium perfusion rate in bone tissue engineering bioreactors. Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 108, 1159–1170 (2011).
22. N. S. Karp, J. G. McCarthy, J. S. Schreiber, H. A. Sissons, C. H. Thorne, Membranous bone
lengthening: A serial histological study. Ann. Plast. Surg. 29, 2–7 (1992).
23. Y.-Q. Yang, Y.-Y. Tan, R. Wong, A. Wenden, L.-K. Zhang, A. B. M. Rabie, The role of vascular
endothelial growth factor in ossification. Int. J. Oral Sci. 4, 64–68 (2012).
24. B. T. Estes, B. O. Diekman, J. M. Gimble, F. Guilak, Isolation of adipose-derived stem cells
and their induction to a chondrogenic phenotype. Nat. Protoc. 5, 1294–1311 (2010).
25. K. J. Williams, A. A. Picou, S. L. Kish, A. M. Giraldo, R. A. Godke, K. R. Bondioli, Isolation and
characterization of porcine adipose tissue-derived adult stem cells. Cells Tissues Organs
188, 251–258 (2008).
26. S. Riis, V. Zachara, S. Bouchera, M. C. Vemuria, C. P. Pennisia, T. Fink, Critical steps in the
isolation and expansion of adipose-derived stem cells for translational therapy. Expert Rev.
Mol. Med. 17, e11 (2015).
27. K. Miyamoto, R. Vickers, J.-I. Ishimaru, N. Ogi, K. Kurita, A. N. Goss, Effect of unilateral condylect-
omy on the sheep temporomandibular joint. Br. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 37, 401–404 (1999).
28. D. E. Poswillo, The late effects of mandibular condylectomy. Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral
Pathol. 33, 500–512 (1972).
29. T. W. Bauer, G. F. Muschler, Bone graft materials. An overview of the basic science. Clin.
Orthop. Relat. Res. 371, 10–27 (2000).
30. M. E. Elsalanty, D. G. Genecov, Bone grafts in craniofacial surgery. Craniomaxillofac. Trauma
Reconstr. 2, 125–134 (2009).
31. V. I. Sikavitsas, G. N. Bancroft, H. L. Holtorf, J. A. Jansen, A. G. Mikos, Mineralized matrix
deposition by marrow stromal osteoblasts in 3D perfusion culture increases with
increasing fluid shear forces. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 14683–14688 (2003).
32. Y. Cao, Z. Zhou, B. de Crombrugghe, K. Nakashima, H. Guan, X. Duan, S.-F. Jia, E. S. Kleinerman,
Osterix, a transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation, mediates antitumor activity in
murine osteosarcoma. Cancer Res. 65, 1124–1128 (2005).
33. P. Ducy, Cbfa1: A molecular switch in osteoblast biology. Dev. Dynam. 219, 461–471 (2000).
34. W. F. McKay, S. M. Peckham, J. M. Badura, A comprehensive clinical review of recombinant
human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (INFUSE® Bone Graft). Int. Orthop. 31, 729 (2007).
35. M. Centrella, M. C. Horowitz, J. M. Wozney, T. L. McCarthy, Transforming growth factor-b
gene family members and bone. Endocr. Rev. 15, 27–39 (1994).
36. D. Chen, M. Zhao, S. E. Harris, Z. Mi, Signal transduction and biological functions of bone
morphogenetic proteins. Front. Biosci. 9, 349–358 (2004).
37. K. Le Blanc, C. Tammik, K. Rosendahl, E. Zetterberg, O. Ringdén, HLA expression and im-
munologic properties of differentiated and undifferentiated mesenchymal stem cells. Exp.
Hematol. 31, 890–896 (2003).
38. K. McIntosh, S. Zvonic, S. Garrett, J. B. Mitchell, Z. E. Floyd, L. Hammill, A. Kloster, Y. Di Halvorsen,
J. P. Ting, R. W. Storms, B. Goh, G. Kilroy, X. Wu, J. M. Gimble, The immunogenicity of
human adipose-derived cells: Temporal changes in vitro. Stem Cells 24, 1246–1253
(2006).
39. D. J. Prockop, J. Y. Oh, Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs): Role as guardians of in-
flammation. Mol. Ther. 20, 14–20 (2012).
40. L. C. J. van den Berk, B. J. H. Jansen, K. G. C. Siebers-Vermeulen, H. Roelofs, C. G. Figdor,
G. J. Adema, R. Torensma, Mesenchymal stem cells respond to TNF but do not produce
TNF. J. Leukoc. Biol. 87, 283–289 (2010).
41. T. Kaully, K. Kaufman-Francis, A. Lesman, S. Levenberg, Vascularization—The conduit to
viable engineered tissues. Tissue Eng. Part B 15, 159–169 (2009).
42. D. O. Traktuev, S. Merfeld-Clauss, J. Li, M. Kolonin, W. Arap, R. Pasqualini, B. H. Johnstone,
K. L. March, A population of multipotent CD34-positive adipose stromal cells share pericyte
and mesenchymal surface markers, reside in a periendothelial location, and stabilize en-
dothelial networks. Circ. Res. 102, 77–85 (2007).
43. S. Trkov, G. Eng, R. Di Liddo, P. P. Parnigotto, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Micropatterned three-
dimensional hydrogel system to study human endothelial–mesenchymal stem cell inter-
actions. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 4, 205–215 (2010).
44. Y. Wu, L. Chen, P. G. Scott, E. E. Tredget, Mesenchymal stem cells enhance wound healing
through differentiation and angiogenesis. Stem Cells 25, 2648–2659 (2007).
45. W. L. Grayson, S. Bhumiratana, C. Cannizzaro, P.-H. G. Chao, D. P. Lennon, A. I. Caplan,
G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Effects of initial seeding density and fluid perfusion rate on formation
of tissue-engineered bone. Tissue Eng. Part A 14, 1809–1820 (2008).
Acknowledgments: We thank the staff at the Louisiana State University School of Veterinary
Study for veterinary assistance. Funding: We gratefully acknowledge funding support by NIH
(grants DE016525 and EB002520), the New York Partnership Bioaccelerate Program (CU11-
1915), and Mikati Foundation (gift funding for research). Author contributions: S.B., S.B.E.,
and G.V.-N. designed experiments and developed the animal model. S.B. and G.V.-N. wrote
the paper. S.B., K.Y., and R.E.E. were responsible for bioreactor design and fabrication. F.S.
and J.M.G. isolated and characterized ASCs. S.B., J.C.B., and R.E.E. were responsible for
tissue-engineered bone graft manufacturing, studies of the osteogenic differentiation,
mechanical testing, histology, immunohistochemistry, CT, and mCT analysis. J.C.B. performed
RT-PCR analysis and blinded image quantitation. R.E.E. performed DNA quantitation. D.M.A., M.J.L.,
and S.B.E. performed animal surgery. J.B. and M.J.L. harvested adipose tissue and oversaw animal
care. Competing interests: The perfusion bioreactor technology described in this paper is patent-
pending (WO 2014172575 A1) and is now being commercialized through a Columbia University
spinout, EpiBone, cofounded by S.B., S.B.E., and G.V.-N. J.M.G. is a co-owner, cofounder, and chief
scientific officer of LaCell LLC, a for-profit company focusing on stromal/stem cell technology and
clinical translation. Data and materials availability: All materials are available from commercial
sources or can be derived using methods described in this study. All relevant data are reported in
the article and the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 6 October 2015
Accepted 27 April 2016
Published 15 June 2016
10.1126/scitranslmed.aad5904
Citation: S. Bhumiratana, J. C. Bernhard, D. M. Alfi, K. Yeager, R. E. Eton, J. Bova, F. Shah,
J. M. Gimble, M. J. Lopez, S. B. Eisig, G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Tissue-engineered autologous
grafts for facial bone reconstruction. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 343ra83 (2016).
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org
15 June 2016
Vol 8 Issue 343 343ra83
12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Tissue-engineered autologous grafts for facial bone reconstruction
Jeffrey M. Gimble, Mandi J. Lopez, Sidney B. Eisig and Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic
Sarindr Bhumiratana, Jonathan C. Bernhard, David M. Alfi, Keith Yeager, Ryan E. Eton, Jonathan Bova, Forum Shah,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad5904
, 343ra83343ra83.
8
Sci Transl Med 
with craniofacial bone deformities.
anatomically correct, large-scale bone constructs could vastly improve regenerative medicine options for patients
tissue, formed new bone, and was vascularized extensively, but only if cells were present. Growing such 
surgery. Paired histological and image analysis showed that the implanted scaffold material integrated with host
reconstructing human facial bones, then authors shipped the bioreactor with the living bone inside the site of 
cultured on the bone for several weeks. To mimic the manufacturing and transport chain that could be involved in
minipigs, which have similar jaw anatomies and weight-bearing properties as humans. Then, stem cells were 
a custom-designed perfusion bioreactor. The bone was first shaped to the defect in the ramus-condyle unit of
designed a maxillofacial reconstructive strategy centered on a combination of stem cells, decellularized bone, and 
by providing personalized grafts for deformities of all shapes and sizes. Bhumiratana and colleagues therefore
currently uses bone grafts from the same patient. Cell- and biomaterial-based approaches could benefit this field 
reconstruction
saving face through restoration of actual bone structure. A delicate and precise process, facial bone 
Restoring your reputation after a social gaffe may be challenging, but perhaps welcomed in comparison to
Saving face
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/343/343ra83
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/06/13/8.343.343ra83.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/453/eaao6806.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/446/eaaq1802.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/191/191ra83.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/3/68/68ra9.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/141/141ra93.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/160/160rv12.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/343/343ra83#BIBL
This article cites 45 articles, 7 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
