 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Introduction
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a polygenic and organ-specific autoim-
mune disease, in which a certain subclass of T lymphocytes is 
involved in executing autoimmune attacks that lead to the destruc-
tion of pancreatic β cells (1, 2). Although the current prevailing 
treatment of T1D is lifelong daily injection of recombinant insulin, 
the exogenously delivered insulin does not carry C-peptide, which 
has been known to provide protective effects on the microvascula-
ture (3) and on neuronal (4) and renal (5) function. Even with prop-
er blood glucose control, T1D patients are prone to complications 
such as retinopathy, neuropathy, and cardiovascular disease (6, 7). 
Thus far, there is no effective method of reversing autoimmuni-
ty once a patient enters the course of T1D. Research in the past 
decade has been focused on islet allografting (8) and stem cell–
derived β cells (9), as well as immunotherapies using mAbs target-
ing CD3 (10), glutamic acid decarboxylase-65 Ig (GAD65-Ig) (11), 
and cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated antigen-4–Ig (CTLA-4–
Ig) (12). Although promising phase I and II trials were reported in 
patients with early onset of T1D, phase III trials of anti-CD3 and 
GAD65-Ig immunotherapy did not meet the primary endpoints 
(10, 11, 13). Similarly, CTLA4-Ig preserved C-peptide concentra-
tions for only 9 months, despite continuous i.v. administration 
for 2 years (12). The limitations of islet transplantation include a 
shortage of donors, fibrosis of transplanted islets, and various side 
effects of immunosuppressive agents, making it unlikely to be a 
primary therapeutic approach for T1D (8, 14). Indeed, either a sin-
gle immunosuppressive agent or islet allografting alone appears to 
be insufficient to completely control or reverse the autoimmune 
attack on β cells. A new paradigm that targets several pathogenic 
pathways is therefore sorely needed for a complete cure of T1D.
Both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors can 
trigger the onset of T1D. In particular, environmental factors such 
as viral infection and nutritional imbalance can cause dysregula-
tion of CD4+ T cells (15), leading to the infiltration of autoreactive 
CD8+ T cells into pancreatic islets and, ultimately, the killing of 
β cells. Eventually, a subsequent wave of β cell killing results in 
a severe reduction of β cell function and mass (1, 15). Numerous 
studies have shown that alterations of multiple immune cells play 
major roles in the etiology of T1D, chief among which Th1, Th2, 
and Th17 cells and Tregs have been extensively elucidated (16). 
Th1 cells evoke cell-mediated immunity and phagocyte-depen-
dent inflammation, whereas Th2 cells can cause strong antibody 
responses but inhibit phagocyte-independent inflammation (17, 
18). The Th1-dominated responses dictate the pathogenesis of 
organ-specific autoimmune disorders (19). Th1 and Th17 cells 
mainly secrete inflammatory factors such as IFN-γ and IL-17, 
which, by acting alone or synergistically, can aggravate the pro-
gression of T1D (20). In contrast, Th2 cells and Tregs can antag-
onize autoimmune responses through cytokines such as IL-4 and 
Despite the benefit of insulin, blockade of autoimmune attack and regeneration of pancreatic islets are ultimate goals for 
the complete cure of type 1 diabetes (T1D). Long-term consumption of ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) is known to 
suppress inflammatory processes, making these fatty acids candidates for the prevention and amelioration of autoimmune 
diseases. Here, we explored the preventative and therapeutic effects of ω-3 PUFAs on T1D. In NOD mice, dietary intervention 
with ω-3 PUFAs sharply reduced the incidence of T1D, modulated the differentiation of Th cells and Tregs, and decreased 
the levels of IFN-γ, IL-17, IL-6, and TNF-α. ω-3 PUFAs exerted similar effects on the differentiation of CD4+ T cells isolated 
from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The regulation of CD4+ T cell differentiation was mediated at least in part 
through ω-3 PUFA eicosanoid derivatives and by mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) inhibition. Importantly, therapeutic intervention 
in NOD mice through nutritional supplementation or lentivirus-mediated expression of an ω-3 fatty acid desaturase, mfat-1, 
normalized blood glucose and insulin levels for at least 182 days, blocked the development of autoimmunity, prevented 
lymphocyte infiltration into regenerated islets, and sharply elevated the expression of the β cell markers pancreatic and 
duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1) and paired box 4 (Pax4). The findings suggest that ω-3 PUFAs could potentially serve as a 
therapeutic modality for T1D.
ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids ameliorate type 1 
diabetes and autoimmunity
Xinyun Bi,1,2 Fanghong Li,1 Shanshan Liu,3 Yan Jin,4 Xin Zhang,3 Tao Yang,5 Yifan Dai,3 Xiaoxi Li,3 and Allan Zijian Zhao1
1Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. 2The Center of 
Immunological Genetics and HLA Typing, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. 3The Center of Metabolic Disease Research, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. 4Department of Pathology, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi, Jiangsu Province, China. 5Department of 
Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.
Authorship note: X. Li and A.Z. Zhao are co-senior authors.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: March 10, 2016; Accepted: February 2, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(5):1757–1771. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI87388.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
jects also resulted in a much-reduced 
incidence of childhood-onset T1D (23). 
Recently, a multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind trial of docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA) supplementation in infants 
at a high genetic risk of T1D, beginning 
either in the last trimester of pregnan-
cy or in the first 5 months after birth, 
revealed significantly reduced inflam-
mation as reflected in the lower levels 
of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein 
(24). Apart from this, our earlier studies 
showed that stable cellular production 
of ω-3 PUFAs could enhance insulin 
secretion and confer strong resistance 
to cytokine-induced β cell destruction 
(25). These studies indicated that an 
ω-3 PUFA–enriched-diet can have a 
strong influence on immune responses 
as well as on pancreatic islet function 
and prompted us to investigate the 
strategy of using ω-3 PUFAs as a preven-
tative, or even therapeutic, modality to 
deter T1D. Specifically, we improvised 
a nutritional as well as a gene therapy 
approach to elevate circulating eicos-
apentaenoic acid (EPA) and DHA levels, 
with the goals of correcting the dysregu-
lation of T cell differentiation, silencing 
the immune attack against pancreatic 
 β cells, and regenerating β cells.
Results
Intervention with dietary ω-3 PUFAs 
reduces the incidence of T1D. We designed 
a dietary intervention study, in which 
female NOD mice were fed a diet con-
taining enriched EPA/DHA for 35 weeks, 
starting at 5 weeks of age. In addition to 
a control group fed a regular diet, a sepa-
rate group of animals was fed a diet con-
taining equal levels of arachidonic acid 
(AA, an ω-6 PUFA). The dietary inter-
vention resulted in significant changes in 
fatty acid composition in serum and tis-
sue samples (Supplemental Tables 1–3; supplemental material avail-
able online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI87388DS1). 
The EPA/DHA-enriched diet resulted in a substantial increase in ω-3 
PUFAs that was accompanied by a significant decrease (P < 0.0001) 
in ω-6 PUFAs, leading to sharply reduced ratios of ω-6/ω-3 PUFAs 
relative to ratios in AA diet–fed mice. Nonfasting blood glucose con-
centrations were used to monitor the incidence of diabetes, which 
was diagnosed by the presence of glucose concentrations of greater 
than 11.11 mmol/l for 2 consecutive weeks. No spontaneous reversal 
to less than 11.11 mmol/l was observed in any of the control groups 
 
(n = 15 per group). Consistent with results reported by others (26, 
27), we found that 80% of female NOD mice on a regular diet devel-
IL-10 (21). The intervention of dysregulated Th cells is therefore 
critical to stopping autoimmune progression and the inflammato-
ry attack against β cells.
Mounting evidence suggests that dietary supplementation of 
fish oil starting from infancy has the beneficial effect of alleviating 
autoimmune progress and T1D. A longitudinal DAISY (Diabetes 
Autoimmunity Study in the Young) study showed that long-term 
dietary intake of ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) starting 
from 1 year of age is associated with a reduced risk of islet auto-
immunity in children with familial T1D (22). A Norwegian case- 
control study in which cod liver oil was given, starting from 1 year of 
age, to infants with a high risk of T1D and to population control sub-
Figure 1. ω-3 PUFAs ameliorate the development of T1D and normalize glucose metabolism in NOD 
mice. (A) Blood glucose concentrations in 3 groups of NOD mice on varied diets were monitored weekly 
until 40 weeks of age. Sustained hyperglycemia for 2 consecutive weeks (>11.11 mmol/l) marked the onset 
of disease, which was used to create a life table to determine the incidence of diabetes (n = 15/group). 
Statistical calculation was done using a Mantel-Cox log-rank test. (B) Sections (4-μm-thick) of pancreas 
from 20-week-old NOD mice were formaldehyde fixed, paraffin embedded, and stained with H&E (n =7/
group). Islets were sorted into the following 4 categories on the basis of the relative degree of immune 
infiltration: no insulitis (0), peri-insulitis (1), invasive insulitis (2), or severe insulitis (3). Representative 
pancreatic sections are shown in Supplemental Figure 1. The differences in severe insulitis between DHA 
plus EPA group and the control group (P < 0.0001) and between the DHA plus EPA group and the AA group 
(P = 0.0008) were significant. The finding of no insulitis in the DHA plus EPA group was increased compared 
with the control (P = 0.02) and AA (P < 0.0001) groups. Statistical calculation was done using Pearson’s χ2 
test. (C) Glucose tolerance tests (GTTs) in NOD mice fed a control, AA, or DHA plus EPA diet (n = 15/group) at 
20 weeks of age. (D) AUC for GTTs performed in 3 groups of NOD mice fed different diets. (E) Serum insulin 
concentrations during the GTT at the indicated time points (n = 10/group). (F) Insulin tolerance tests (n = 
10/group). (C–E) *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 versus the control group (Student’s t test). Data 
are representative of 2 independent experiments. All values represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 5 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
were no different among the 3 groups, suggesting that ω-3 PUFAs 
could not prevent the initiation of lymphocyte infiltration. Taken 
together, these results indicated that ω-3 PUFA supplementation 
in NOD mice sharply reduced the percentage of islets showing the 
most severe insulitis (Figure 1B).
Intervention with ω-3 PUFA can normalize glucose metabolism in 
NOD mice. To study the function of β cells and the homeostasis 
of blood glucose, we evaluated the impact of ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs 
on glucose homeostasis in NOD mice on different diets. Fasting 
blood glucose concentrations were indistinguishable among the 3 
groups. However, during the i.p. glucose tolerance test, the NOD 
mice maintained on an EPA/DHA-enriched diet showed signifi-
cantly lower blood glucose concentrations at all time points than 
did mice in the other 2 groups (Figure 1, C and D). The improved 
glucose tolerance in the EPA/DHA-fed mice was primarily 
attributed to the elevated glucose-induced insulin secretion (Fig-
ure 1E), as the insulin tolerance tests revealed no significant differ-
ence among the 3 groups of NOD mice (Figure 1F).
Modulation of CD4+ T cell differentiation by ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs. 
The interplay among CD4+ T cells, particularly Th1, Th2, Th17, 
oped diabetes by the age of 40 weeks. In contrast, only 33% of the 
mice fed an EPA/DHA-enriched diet were diabetic, which was sig-
nificantly different (P = 0.0076) according to a Mantel-Cox log-rank 
test. Interestingly, 93% of NOD mice on the diet containing compa-
rable levels of AA developed diabetes at the same age, although there 
was no significant difference between the AA intervention group and 
the control diet group (Figure 1A). Thus, long-term supplementation 
of dietary EPA/DHA reduced the incidence of T1D and delayed its 
onset in female NOD mice.
Intervention with ω-3 PUFAs blocks the progression of immune 
infiltration in NOD mice. The progression of peri-insulitis and insu-
litis occurs between the initiation and detection of hyperglycemia 
in NOD mice (28). We used H&E-stained pancreatic sections to 
evaluate the extent of lymphocyte infiltration into pancreatic islets 
isolated from 20-week-old NOD mice (16 weeks after different 
dietary intervention) (29) (Supplemental Figure 1). By the age of 
20 weeks, the islets from the EPA/DHA-fed mice had a signifi-
cantly reduced incidence of severe insulitis compared with those 
from mice maintained on an AA-enriched diet or a regular diet. 
The percentages of peri-insulitis and invasive insulitis incidence 
Figure 2. Modulation of Th cells by ω-3 and ω-6 
PUFAs in vivo and in vitro. (A–J) Percentage of 
IFN-γ+, IL-4+, IL-7+, and CD25+FoxP3+ Th cells in 
spleens and LNs of nondiabetic NOD mice fed 
a control, DHA plus EPA, or AA diet. NOD mice 
were sacrificed at 20 weeks of age, following 
dietary intervention, and their spleens and LNs 
were harvested. Each point represents an indi-
vidual mouse, and the data are representative of 
3 independent experiments (n =6–8/group). Rep-
resentative flow cytometric images are shown 
in Supplemental Figure 3. (K–O) Quantification 
of the percentage of intracellular staining of 
IFN-γ+, IL-4+, IL-7+, and CD25+FoxP3+ Th cells from 
10-week-old nondiabetic NOD mice. Cells were 
cultured for 24 hours under PMA and ionomycin 
stimulation in the presence of DHA, EPA, and AA 
(50 μM), added at the time of activation. Data 
are representative of 3 independent experiments 
(n = 3/group). Representative flow cytometric 
images are shown in Supplemental Figure 5.  
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 versus 
the control group (Student’s t test). Values 
represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
IL-4 secreted from CD8+ T cells were too low to be detected by 
FACS. Thus, CD8+ T cells were probably not the primary targets of 
autoimmune regulation by ω-3 PUFAs. Taken together, interven-
tion with ω-3 PUFAs normalized the ratio of Th1/Th2 cells and had 
an inhibitory effect on Th1 and Th17 cells, but a stimulatory effect 
on Tregs in NOD mice.
Dietary ω-3 PUFAs restore cytokine secretion profiles in NOD 
mice. Activated T cells produce a series of cytokines that exert many 
actions on T cell themselves and on other immune cells. Measure-
ment of pro- and antiinflammatory cytokines in the blood of NOD 
mice showed that an EPA/DHA-enriched diet had no significant 
impact on proinflammatory factors such as IL-17A and TNF-α and 
decreased the secretion of IFN-γ and IL-6, but increased the levels 
of IL-4 and IL-10, which are cytokines with known immunosup-
pressive characteristics. In contrast, the AA-enriched diet promot-
ed the secretion of IFN-γ, IL-17A, IL-6, and TNF-α, while it had no 
effect on IL-4 and IL-10 secretion (Supplemental Table 4), which 
was consistent with the proinflammatory nature of AA.
Direct effects of ω-3 PUFAs on CD4+ T cell differentiation in 
vitro. The results described above led us to examine the direct 
impact of ω-3 PUFAs on CD4+ T cell differentiation in vitro. CD4+ 
T cells were purified from the spleens and lymph nodes (LNs) of 
10-week-old female NOD mice and treated with DHA, EPA, or 
AA, separately. Treatment with EPA or DHA, both of which are 
ω-3 PUFAs, reduced the population of Th1 cells, increased Th2 
and Tregs, as well as their secreted cytokines (30, 31) plays crucial 
roles in priming an immune response against pancreatic β cells (19, 
32–35). The analysis of Th1 and Th2 cells in NOD mice revealed 
that Th1 cells significantly increased from 5.03% to 14.8%, while 
Th2 cells decreased from 5.65% to 2.24% after the onset of T1D in 
the mice fed a regular diet. Consequently, the Th1/Th2 ratio was 
significantly disturbed and polarized toward Th1 cells (Supplemen-
tal Figure 2, A and B). In contrast, intervention with an EPA/DHA- 
enriched diet reduced Th1 cell percentages and elevated the popu-
lation of Th2 cells, thus rebalancing the ratio of Th1/Th2 cells (Fig-
ure 2, A–F and Supplemental Figure 3). Consistent with its role as a 
proinflammatory fatty acid, dietary addition of AA further boosted 
the population of Th1 cells, resulting in a drastically exacerbated 
ratio of Th1/Th2 cells (Figure 2, A–F and Supplemental Figure 3).
Dietary EPA/DHA not only corrected the imbalance of effec-
tive Th1 and Th2 cells but also reduced the proportion of Th17 
cells and increased the population of Tregs. In contrast, an AA- 
enriched diet increased the numbers of Th17 cells and had no sig-
nificant effect on Treg numbers (Figure 2, G–J and Supplemental 
Figure 3). We also performed a parallel analysis of some cytokines 
secreted by CD8+ T cells following intervention with an ω-3 or ω-6 
PUFA–enriched diet. Although an ω-6 PUFA–enriched diet also 
markedly elevated the secretion of IFN-γ, an ω-3 PUFA–enriched 
diet did not induce significant changes in IFN-γ secretion from 
CD8+ T cells (Supplemental Figure 4). Furthermore, the levels of 
Figure 3. Diverse metabolic production of ω-3 PUFAs regulates Th cell differentiation. (A–F) Presence of different eicosanoids from ω-3 or ω-6 PUFAs in 
pancreas samples from NOD mice fed a control, DHA plus EPA, or AA diet (n = 6/group). (G–K) Quantification of the percentage of intracellular staining of 
IFN-γ+, IL-4+, IL-7+, and CD25+ FoxP3+ Th cells from 10-week-old nondiabetic NOD mice. Cells were cultured for 24 hours under PMA and ionomycin stimula-
tion in the presence of distinctive PUFA metabolites (0.1 μg/ml), added at the time of activation (n = 3/group). Representative flow cytometric images are 
shown in Supplemental Figure 7. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 versus the control group (Student’s t test). Data are representative of 3 indepen-
dent experiments. All values represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
promoting Th2 cell and Treg populations. In contrast, 15-HETE 
significantly elevated Th17 cell numbers (Figure 3, G–K and Sup-
plemental Figure 7). The results suggested that some of the EPA- 
and DHA-derived metabolites were at least partly responsible for 
balancing CD4+ T cell differentiation.
ω-3 PUFA–regulated CD4+ T cell differentiation via mTOR 
complex 1 activity. Our previous studies showed that ω-6 and ω-3 
PUFAs had opposite effects on mTOR kinase (38), a critical reg-
ulator of Th cell activation and fate decision (39, 40). To test the 
involvement of this pathway in the regulation of T cell differenti-
ation by PUFAs, we treated the isolated CD4+ T cells from spleens 
of NOD mice with AA (ω-6), DHA, or EPA (ω-3) for 24 hours. The 
phosphorylated form of S6 (Ser235/236) and dephosphorylated 
form of 4E-BP1 are indicative of the activation of mTOR complex 
1 (mTORC1) (41). The treatment with AA alone strongly elevated 
phosphorylated S6 (p-S6) levels. However, EPA or DHA alone (or 
in combination) only had a small or marginal effect on S6 phos-
phorylation (Figure 4A). To further investigate the cross-regula-
tion of mTORC1 activity by different PUFAs, we treated CD4+ T 
cells with different combinations of AA plus EPA or DHA for 24 
hours. Although AA elevated p-S6 levels, the addition of EPA or 
DHA to the AA-containing medium ameliorated the AA-induced 
increase in p-S6. Consistent with this observation, p–4E-BP1 lev-
els were higher in the medium containing AA plus EPA/DHA than 
the medium containing AA alone, indicative of mTORC1 inhibi-
tion (Figure 4B). The phosphorylation of PKC and AKT (Ser473), 
however, remained unchanged by incubation with ω-3 PUFAs 
(Figure 4B). Thus, ω-6 PUFAs could activate mTORC1, but not 
mTORC2, in CD4+ T cells, and such activation could be reversed 
by the addition of ω-3 PUFAs. As an additional confirmation of the 
importance of mTORC1 in PUFA-mediated CD4+ T cell differen-
tiation, coincubation with rapamycin completely blocked AA-pro-
moted differentiation into Th1 cells (Figure 4, C and D). Thus, 
the counterregulation of mTORC1 activity by ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs 
plays a critical role in the differentiation of CD4+ T cells.
and Treg numbers, and consequently balanced the Th1/Th2 ratio. 
However, addition of AA to the culture significantly increased Th1 
and Th17 cell populations, but did not affect Th2 cell or Treg pop-
ulations (Figure 2, K–O, and Supplemental Figure 5), suggesting 
that, although ω-6 PUFAs favored the activation of Th1 and Th17, 
ω-3 PUFAs could counteract the excessive production of Th1 by 
increasing the population of Th2 cells and Tregs. We observed 
similar results when we analyzed secreted cytokines in the culture 
media. Accordingly, EPA and DHA suppressed the production 
of IL-17A and significantly increased IL-4 and IL-10 secretion 
(Supplemental Table 5). DHA also decreased the secreted levels 
of IFN-γ. Incubation with AA generated the opposite effect by 
increasing secreted IL-17A, IFN-γ, and IL-6, while significant-
ly reducing the amount of IL-4. Thus, ω-3 PUFAs promoted the 
secretion of antiinflammatory cytokines and inhibited the produc-
tion of proinflammatory cytokines.
Regulation of CD4+ T cell differentiation by ω-3 PUFA metabolites. 
Several prominent ω-3 and ω-6 PUFA–derived eicosanoids such as 
prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs), 
and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) are synthesized via 
COX and lipoxygenase (LOX) activity and can have multiple bio-
logical effects on inflammation (36, 37). Metabolomic analysis of 
ω-3 and ω-6 PUFA metabolites in the pancreatic samples revealed 
that the levels of some DHA and EPA metabolites such as resol-
vin D1 (RvD1); 16,17-epoxy docosapentaenoicacid (16,17-EDP); 
prostaglandin D3 (PGD3); and 17,18-dihydroxy-5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z- 
eicosatetraenoic acid (17,18-DiHETE) were significantly higher 
(P < 0.05) than those in mice fed a regular diet or an AA-enriched 
diet. On the other hand, the levels of the AA-derived metabolites 
15-HETE, 20-HETE, and 15-oxo-5Z,8Z,11Z,13E-eicosatetraenoic 
acid (15-oxo-ETE) were higher in the samples from mice fed an 
AA-enriched diet (Figure 3, A–F and Supplemental Figure 6). Eval-
uation of the biological effects of these metabolites on CD4+ T cell 
differentiation indicated that DHA-derived RvD1 and EPA-derived 
PGD3 sharply inhibited the differentiation into Th1 cells, while 
Figure 4. ω-3 PUFAs regulate Th cell differ-
entiation through the inhibition of mTORC1. 
(A and B) Immunoblot analysis of mTOR 
activation in lysates of naive CD4+ T cells from 
nondiabetic NOD mice. Cell lysates were stimu-
lated for 24 hours with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 
Abs plus various doses of AA, DHA, and EPA 
(top lanes) in serum-containing medium. (C) 
Representative flow cytometric images, with 
the numbers in quadrants indicating the per-
centage of IFN-γ+ Th cells in splenocytes from 
10-week-old nondiabetic NOD mice. Spleno-
cytes were cultured under PMA and ionomycin 
stimulation in the presence of AA (50 μM) plus 
rapamycin (10 nM) or AA alone. (D) Quantifi-
cation of Th1 cell percentages (n = 3/group). 
**P < 0.01 versus the AA group (Student’s t 
test). Data are representative of 3 independent 
experiments, and flow cytometric samples were 
gated on CD4+ T cells (CD3+CD8–). All values 
represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Reversal of diabetes development by gene therapy or nutritional 
supplementation of ω-3 PUFAs. Intervention with an ω-3 PUFA–
enriched diet before hyperglycemia constituted only a preventive 
method against T1D development in NOD mice. We speculated 
that there would also be a therapeutic benefit of such a modality 
for diabetic NOD mice. To this end, we designed a lentiviral vec-
tor carrying a modified Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) cDNA, 
mfat-1 (referred to herein as lenti-mfat-1), that encodes an ω-3 fat-
ty acid desaturase (42). By adding a double bond at the ω-3 posi-
tion, the mFAT-1 enzyme can specifically convert ω-6 PUFAs into 
ω-3 PUFAs, thereby elevating endogenous levels of ω-3 PUFAs 
with a concomitant decrease in ω-6 PUFAs. In parallel, we also 
set up a group of female NOD mice that were fed an EPA/DHA- 
enriched diet after they became diabetic.
Delivery (i.v.) of lenti-mfat-1 (109 transducing units per kilo-
gram [TU/kg]) into NOD mice increased blood concentrations 
of ω-3 PUFAs, primarily EPA and DHA. Because of the activity of 
mFAT-1, the concentrations of ω-6 PUFAs, mainly AA, were sig-
nificantly reduced, and the ratio of ω-6/ω-3 was decreased from 
4.2 to 1.7 (Supplemental Table 6). Approximately 3 to 4 weeks after 
lenti-mfat-1 treatment, nonfasting blood glucose levels had grad-
ually dropped to 8 mmol/l or lower in 7 of 10 diabetic NOD mice. 
The euglycemic condition was sustained for at least 9 weeks after 
virus delivery. Similarly, in the dietary intervention group, 7 of 11 
diabetic mice regained normal glucose concentrations 3 weeks 
after starting an EPA/DHA-enriched diet (Figure 5A). The treat-
ed mice maintained a euglycemic condition and survived for at 
least 182 days. Concomitant with the normalization of blood glu-
cose levels, serum insulin levels in the lenti-mfat-1–treated group 
and the EPA/DHA-enriched diet group were completely restored, 
reaching 0.5 ng/ml and 0.4 ng/ml, respectively (Figure 5B). These 
insulin levels were similar to those observed in the prediabetic 
NOD mice and in sharp contrast to the almost undetectable insu-
lin levels in the control lentivirus–treated (lenti-con–treated) dia-
betic NOD mice (Figure 5B).
Interestingly, either treatment method could only rescue those 
diabetic NOD mice with nonfasting blood glucose levels below 
20 mmol/l. A ketone test of β-hydroxybutyrate (BHOB) revealed 
that mice bearing blood glucose levels above 20 mmol/l had very 
severe diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), with BHOB levels reaching 7.0 
mmol/l, which was at least 10-fold higher than the levels seen in 
NOD mice with blood glucose levels below 20 mmol/l (Figure 5C).
Therapeutic supplementation of ω-3 PUFAs promotes islet and 
 
β cell regeneration. At the end of 9 weeks of therapy with the len-
tiviral gene or the EPA/DHA-enriched diet, confocal imaging 
revealed newly formed insulin-staining islets with a diameter of 
at least 50 μm that were located adjacent to pancreatic ducts (Fig-
ure 6, A and B). Importantly, lymphocyte infiltration of neopan-
creatic islets in the lenti-mfat-1–treated or EPA/DHA-enriched 
dietary group was much lower compared with that observed in the 
lenti-con–treated groups (Figure 6, C and D), suggesting that both 
therapeutic approaches deterred the immune attack on the pancre-
as. Interestingly, we found that a high percentage of regenerated 
islets (~40%) had essentially all β cells, with very few α cells (Fig-
ure 7, A and B). Confocal imaging revealed multiple cells with both 
insulin and glucagon staining (indicated by yellow fluorescence) 
within the regenerated islets near pancreatic ducts after either 
interventional approach (Figure 8, A–E), which was indicative of 
transdifferentiation from α cells into β cells. Consistent with these 
observations, blood glucagon levels in the nonfasted ω-3 PUFA 
intervention group were much lower than those in the nontreated 
diabetic mice as well as in the lenti-con–treated NOD mice (Figure 
9A). Also, compared with the nontreated diabetic and lenti-con–
treated groups, the transcription levels of Pdx1, Pax4, and arista-
Figure 5. ω-3 PUFAs exert a therapeutic effect 
on hyperglycemia in diabetic NOD mice. (A) 
Nonfasting blood glucose levels in diabetic 
NOD mice (nonfasting blood glucose levels for 
2 consecutive weeks = 11.1–20 mmol/l) after 
i.v. tail-vein injection of lenti-con (black, n = 7) 
or lenti-mfat-1 (green, n = 7), or DHA plus EPA 
dietary intervention (purple, n = 7). ***P < 0.0001 
versus the lenti-con group (Student t test). (B and 
C) Concentrations of nonfasting serum insulin 
and BHOB, the ketone metabolite, in nondiabetic 
and diabetic NOD mice (nonfasting blood glucose 
levels <20 mmol/l for 2 consecutive weeks) before 
treatment; diabetic NOD mice (nonfasting blood 
glucose level for 2 consecutive weeks = 11.1–20 
mmol/l) after lentivirus injection; or in mice that 
received DHA plus EPA diet intervention for 9 
weeks. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 
versus the nondiabetic group (n = 5–10/group) 
(Student’s t test). Each point represents an 
individual mouse, and data are representative of 
2 independent experiments. All values represent 
the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
less-related homeobox (Arx) were drastically increased following 
treatment with either ω-3 PUFA interventional approach (Figure 9, 
B–D). Taken together, our data showed that the lenti-mfat-1 virus 
could regenerate pancreatic β cells, at least some of which came 
from transdifferentiated α cells.
Therapeutic supplementation of ω-3 PUFAs altered CD4+ T cell 
differentiation profiles in diabetic NOD mice. Implementation of 
either ω-3 PUFA dietary intervention had an inhibitory effect on 
the population of Th1 and Th17 cells but strongly promoted Th2 
and Treg differentiation and activation (Figure 9, E–N and Supple-
mental Figure 8). Interestingly, the stimulatory effect on Th2 cells 
achieved through the gene therapy method was even more effec-
tive than that of dietary intervention. Thus, either ω-3 PUFA sup-
plementation method could restore the differentiation profiles of 
CD4+ T cells and therefore stall the progression of autoimmunity.
Modulation of human CD4+ T cell differentiation by ω-3 PUFAs. 
The data presented above led us to further explore whether ω-3 
PUFAs have a similar impact on human CD4+ T cell differentia-
tion. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were 
isolated from 4 T1D patients and 5 nondiabetic donors (patients’ 
information, including A1C and autoantibodies, is provided in 
Supplemental Table 7) and treated with 100 μM DHA, EPA, and 
AA, separately, for 24 hours. CD4+ T cell differentiation was ana-
lyzed by flow cytometry. Consistent with the findings in NOD 
mice, we found that EPA and DHA essentially rebalanced the 
Th1/Th2 ratio from approximately 12 to approximately 1 by both 
increasing Th2 cell populations and decreasing Th1 cell popula-
tions in the samples from T1D patients (Figure 10, A–E and Sup-
plemental Figure 9). Meanwhile, we also observed a significant 
reduction of Th17 cells and an elevation of Tregs. In contrast, AA, 
Figure 6. ω-3 PUFAs have a therapeutic effect on immune infiltration in diabetic NOD mice. Confocal images (A) and quantification (B) of islets with a 
diameter of 50 μm that appeared adjacent to pancreatic ducts in diabetic NOD mice after lentivirus treatment and DHA plus EPA dietary intervention for 9 
weeks (n = 4/group). Scale bars: 50 μm. Original magnification: ×400. **P < 0.01 versus the lenti-con group (Student’s t test). Values represent the mean 
± SEM. (C) H&E-stained sections of islets from pancreatic tissue obtained from diabetic NOD mice after lentivirus treatment and DHA plus EPA dietary 
intervention for 9 weeks. Scale bars: 50 μm. Images are representative of 3 biological replicates. (D) Quantification of the incidence of insulitis in diabetic 
NOD mice after lentivirus injection or DHA plus EPA dietary intervention for 9 weeks (n = 4/group). Islets were sorted into 4 categories on the basis of the 
relative degree of immune infiltration: no insulitis (0), peri-insulitis (1), invasive insulitis (2), and severe insulitis (3). The differences in the incidence of no 
insulitis or severe insulitis between the lenti-con and lenti-mfat-1 groups (P < 0.0001) and between the DHA plus EPA and lenti-con groups (P < 0.0001) 
were significant. Statistical significance was determined by Pearson’s χ2 test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
ed by B cells change dynamically or even become undetectable 
in some patients (43). In addition, the strong association between 
T1D and the HLA class II locus can trigger the activation of CD4+ T 
cells (44). Thus, our studies have primarily focused on autoimmune 
responses driven by CD4+ T cells in NOD mice. Elevated popula-
tions of Th1 cells, the main effectors of diabetes in NOD mice, are a 
hallmark of T cell–mediated autoimmunity that in turn can further 
stimulate CD8+ T cells and macrophages to promote inflammatory 
and immune attacks on pancreatic β cells (45). CD4+ T cells prefer-
entially differentiate into Th1 cells, with a concomitant decrease in 
Th2 cells in NOD mice, as indicated by the elevated ratio of IFN-γ/
IL-4 (46, 47). In addition to dysregulated Th1/Th2 ratios, T1D 
patients have an elevated percentage of activated Th17 cells and 
decreased numbers of Tregs. Specific anti–IL-17 antibodies have 
been shown to significantly increase the proportion of Tregs (48). 
Mesenchymal stem cell–based cellular therapy has already shown 
promise in elevating Tregs, which then suppress immune attack 
in a T1D model (49). In our study, supplementation of ω-3 PUFAs, 
provided as either a preventative or therapeutic modality, signifi-
cantly suppressed Th1 and Th17 cells, reduced secreted IFN-γ 
and IL-17 levels, and increased Th2 cells and Tregs. Meanwhile, 
the regulatory effects of ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs on IFN-γ secretion 
by CD8+ T cells were consistent but somewhat minor when com-
pared with the effects on IFN-γ secretion by CD4+ T cells, and IL-4 
secretion by CD8+ T cells was undetectable. Thus, CD8+ T cells par-
ticipate in the pathogenesis of T1D mainly through their cytotoxic 
effects on islet cells, but not  through cytokine secretion (50, 51). In 
further extending this concept to application in humans, we found 
that DHA and EPA had the same effects on the differentiation of 
CD4+ T cells isolated from T1D donors as those observed in NOD 
mice. Thus, ω-3 PUFA–initiated global changes in CD4+ T cells are 
likely the primary cellular mechanisms underlying the blockade of 
autoimmune development.
Multiple mechanisms may have contributed to the effects of 
ω-3 PUFAs on CD4+ T cell differentiation. EPA/DHA-derived eico-
sanoids, synthesized through the activities of enzymes such as LOX 
and COX, tend to be antiinflammatory, whereas those derived from 
ω-6 PUFAs are proinflammatory (37). For example, AA-derived 
an ω-6 PUFA generally considered to be proinflammatory, exerted 
effects on CD4+ T cell differentiation that were completely oppo-
site to those induced by EPA or DHA. We also obtained similar 
results in the T cell samples from nondiabetic donors (Figure 10, 
F–J and Supplemental Figure 10). To further confirm the impact 
of ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs on human CD4+ T cells, we also used flow 
cytometry to follow the expression of transcription factors such 
as T-bet, GATA3, and RORγT in human PBMCs following treat-
ment with AA, DHA, or EPA. The results were clearly consistent 
with the staining panels of cytokines from the nondiabetic donors 
(Supplemental Figure 11).
Discussion
The deterrence of autoimmune attack and regeneration of pan-
creatic β cells remain daunting tasks in the pursuit of a complete 
cure for T1D. The study described here suggested the clinical 
potential of gene therapy or nutritional supplementation of ω-3 
PUFAs — EPA and DHA in particular — in preventing and revers-
ing the development of autoimmunity and T1D. Both approaches 
alleviated T cell–mediated autoimmunity by rebalancing the ratio 
of Th1 and Th2 cells, decreasing Th17 cells, and increasing Tregs, 
while reducing circulating levels of inflammatory cytokines. 
Importantly, we observed a full recovery of pancreatic islet func-
tion and a near-complete absence of any lymphocyte infiltration 
into regenerated islets in the diseased NOD mice following the 
nutritional or gene therapeutic intervention. To our knowledge, 
this represents the first report of a single treatment method that 
can both stall autoimmunity and, concomitantly, fully restore 
pancreatic β cell function. Three recent clinical trials in inde-
pendent cohorts have convincingly demonstrated that long-term 
dietary intake of ω-3 PUFAs, starting from infancy, could signifi-
cantly decrease the incidence of islet autoimmunity and T1D (22–
24). The results from our studies are entirely consistent with the 
findings revealed in these clinical studies.
A targeted autoimmune attack on islets involves dysregulation 
and dysfunction of both T cells and B cells (16). T cell–mediated 
immunity is primarily responsible for the direct damage of β cells 
and inflammatory injury (16). The titers of autoantibodies secret-
Figure 7. Islet and β cell regeneration in 
diabetic NOD mice treated with ω-3 PUFAs. 
Pancreases were harvested from 9-week-old 
mice that had received lentivirus treatment 
and DHA plus EPA dietary intervention. 
Confocal images (A) and quantification (B) 
of islets expressing only insulin, without α 
cells. These islets were discovered next to the 
ductal epithelium in NOD mice treated with 
lenti-mfat-1 and fed a DHA plus EPA diet  
(n = 4/group). β cells (insulin, green), α cells 
(glucagon, red), and nuclei (DAPI, blue) are 
shown. Scale bars: 50 μm. *P < 0.05 versus 
the lenti-con group (ANOVA). Images are 
representative of 3 biological replicates. All 
values represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
molecules such as CD28 (53, 54). T cell–specific mutation of mTOR 
suppresses differentiation of Th17 cells (54) and promotes naive 
CD4+ T cell differentiation into Tregs (54). In our studies, EPA/
DHA strongly inhibited the activation of mTORC1 by AA. Similar 
to the effect of EPA and DHA, rapamycin also blocked the Th1 dif-
ferentiation induced by AA. Such results are also reminiscent of the 
anti-diabetes and autoimmunity prevention effects of rapamycin 
in NOD mice that were reported by several groups (55–59).
Increased intake of ω-6 PUFAs has been found to amplify 
immune response and the inflammatory events in mice with aller-
gic diseases (60). Moreover, oleic acid and linoleic acid diets have 
been reported to elevate the development of autoimmunity and 
intestinal inflammation in mice (61, 62). Although the conclusions 
from these studies were generally consistent with our findings, one 
study also found the beneficial effect of an ω-6 PUFA–rich diet in 
alleviating inflammation in drug-induced mucosal damage (63). 
Thus, the effects of ω-6 PUFAs on inflammatory diseases should 
be carefully considered in different immune disease models.
eicosanoids play a role in the development of arthritis, lupus, and 
asthma (52). Some of the eicosanoids that showed drastic chang-
es in our metabolomics analysis of pancreatic samples played dis-
tinct roles in CD4+ T cell differentiation. For example, PGD3, an 
EPA-derived metabolite, had a strong inhibitory effect on Th1 and 
Th17 cell differentiation and elevated Th2 and Treg populations. 
On the other hand, 17,18-DiHETE, another EPA-derived metab-
olite, decreased only Th17 cell populations. RvD1, a DHA-derived 
metabolite, had a strong inhibitory effect on Th1 cell differentiation 
and strongly promoted Th2 and Treg differentiation. As one might 
expect, AA-derived proinflammatory eicosanoids, such as 15-HETE 
and 20-HETE, had effects on naive CD4+ T cell differentiation that 
were exactly opposite to those of EPA/DHA-derived metabolites, 
further confirming the specificity of the effects of these eicosanoids.
Regulation of mTOR activity plays a critical role in the differ-
entiation of CD4+ T cells (40). Application of rapamycin can inhibit 
the proliferation of T cells and the differentiation into Th1 and Th17 
cells, even in the presence of T cell receptor (TCR) costimulatory 
Figure 8. Islet and β cell regeneration and colocalization of α cells and β cells in diabetic NOD mice treated with ω-3 PUFAs. Mice were sacrificed and 
pancreases harvested at 9 weeks following lentivirus treatment and DHA plus EPA dietary intervention. (A–C) Confocal images of colocalization (yellow 
areas) of α cells and β cells detected in islets and cells near the pancreatic duct in lenti-mfat-1–treated and DHA plus EPA dietary intervention groups of 
diabetic NOD mice. β cells (insulin, green), α cells (glucagon, red), and nuclei (DAPI, blue) are shown. Scale bars: 50 μm. Original magnification: ×400.  
Images are representative of 3 biological replicates. (D) Quantification of islets detected by glucagon and insulin (Ins and Glu) colocalization (n = 20–26 
islets/group). (E) Quantification of islets expressing only glucagon (Glu) and no insulin (n = 4/group) and that appeared adjacent to pancreatic ducts.  
***P < 0.0001 versus the lenti-con group (ANOVA). All values represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
cyte infiltration into regenerated islets. Second, both interventions 
regenerated pancreatic islets and fully restored blood insulin lev-
els. In the absence of a meaningful number of preexisting β cells 
(as is the case in diabetic NOD mice), neogenesis can be achieved 
via either differentiation of progenitors within the ductal epitheli-
um (64) or transdifferentiation of acinar (65) or α cells (66) into β 
cells. Although the underlying mechanisms remain to be defined, 
neogenesis is probably the primary event, as we found expression 
levels of Pdx1 (67) and Pax4 (68) to be sharply elevated. We also 
Arguably, the most striking finding from this study is the 
reversal of autoimmune development and stable normalization 
of blood glucose levels following gene therapeutic or nutritional 
supplementation of ω-3 PUFAs in diabetic NOD mice. We believe 
these findings have strong clinical implications for the treatment 
of T1D. First, both intervention methods successfully readjusted 
the differentiation of CD4+ T cells, including the rebalancing of 
the Th1/Th2 ratio, the reduction of Th17 cells, and the elevation of 
Treg numbers, thus causing a nearly complete absence of lympho-
Figure 9. β Cell regeneration and modulation of Th cell subsets after lentivirus and dietary therapy with ω-3 PUFAs in diabetic NOD mice. Mice were 
sacrificed at 9 weeks of age following lentivirus treatment and DHA plus EPA dietary intervention, and pancreases were harvested. (A) Concentrations 
of nonfasting serum glucagon levels in nondiabetic mice; diabetic NOD mice (nonfasting blood glucose level for 2 consecutive weeks <20 mmol/l) before 
treatment; and diabetic NOD mice (nonfasting blood glucose level for 2 consecutive weeks >11.1 mmol/l) after ω-3 PUFA therapy (n = 5–7/group).  
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 versus the nondiabetic group (Student’s t test). Data are representative of 2 independent experiments. (B–D) 
mRNA expression of Pdx1, Pax4, and Arx measured by RT-PCR in pancreases from NOD mice that received ω-3 PUFA therapy. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and 
***P < 0.0001 compared with the lenti-con group (n = 3 per group) (Student’s t test). Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. (E–N) Quan-
tification (n = 4–10 per group) of the percentage of intracellular staining of IFN-γ+, IL-4+, IL-7+, and CD25+FoxP3+ Th cells in LNs and spleens of diabetic NOD 
mice that received ω-3 PUFA therapy. Representative flow cytometric images are shown in Supplemental Figure 8. Data are representative of 3 indepen-
dent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 compared with the lenti-con group (Student’s t test). All values represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
with T1D (69, 70). Part of this failure may reside in the complexi-
ty of the pathogenesis of T1D. On this note, we were encouraged 
to observe the same effects of EPA/DHA on human CD4+ T cells 
as those on murine T cells. In addition, the results from our stud-
ies are entirely consistent with the conclusions derived from the 
 
DAISY and Norwegian clinical studies (22, 23).
In this study, the daily intake of EPA/DHA applied to NOD mice 
was approximately 3.6 g/kg BW, which is high by clinical standards. 
Such a dose could very well be a saturating amount in these mice, and 
a dose well below this level may only be needed to achieve a thera-
peutic effect. We do not yet know whether the same dose for mice 
discovered the phenomenon of α cell transdifferentiation, as a sig-
nificant percentage of newly generated islets often had very few 
α cells and glucagon/insulin double staining following the thera-
peutic interventions. For reasons that are not clear, we were only 
able to rescue a subset of diabetic mice with our therapeutic inter-
ventions, particularly those mice without overt conditions (non-
fasting blood glucose ≤20 mmol/l and only mild ketoacidosis), 
suggesting an irreversible damage to the neogenesis mechanisms 
after prolonged exposure to the severe DKA condition.
Most of the preventative and therapeutic modalities devel-
oped in NOD mice have not been successfully realized in humans 
Figure 10. ω-3 and ω-6 PUFAs readjust CD4+ T cell differentiation in PBMCs from T1D patients and nondiabetic donors in vitro. Quantification of the 
percentage of intracellular staining of IFN-γ+, IL-4+, IL-7+, and CD25+FoxP3+ Th cells in PBMCs from 4 T1D patients (A–E) and 5 nondiabetic donors (F–J). 
Cells were cultured for 24 hours under PMA and ionomycin stimulation in the presence of DHA, EPA, and AA (100 μM) added at the time of activation. 
Representative flow cytometric images are shown in Supplemental Figures 9 and 10. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.0001 compared with the control 
group (Student’s t test). Each point represents an individual patient or donor, and the data are representative of 3 independent experiments. All values 
represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
glucometer (Accu-Chek; Roche). For insulin tolerance tests, mice 
were fasted for a 4-hour period during the light cycle before i.p. injec-
tion of regular human insulin (0.8 U/kg; Novo Nordisk) diluted in ster-
ile saline. Blood glucose levels were measured before insulin admin-
istration and then every 15 minutes afterwards, for 60 minutes (26).
Histological studies and insulitis scoring. After the mice were sac-
rificed, pancreases were harvested and fixed with 4% paraformal-
dehyde overnight at 4°C. The pancreases were paraffin embedded 
and sectioned (4 μm thickness). To assess insulitis, islets from H&E-
stained sections were scored using standard methods and placed into 
1 of 4 categories: 1) no insulitis; 2) peri-insulitis (leukocytes in the 
periphery of the islet); 3) invasive insulitis (25%–50% coverage of the 
islet); and 4) severe insulitis (>50% infiltration). Paraffin sections of 
mouse pancreases were collected at intervals of 100 μM. Mouse islets 
(20–50 per pancreata) were scored for the evaluation of insulitis. This 
procedure was used for 1 paraffin cross section of pancreatic tissue 
placed on individual slides from each of the 7 animals included in the 
histopathological study, and all slides were evaluated by a pathologist 
and scored for degree of perivascular and islet-associated monocyte 
infiltration. In addition, for each section included, a standard H&E-
stained slide was prepared and submitted for pathological review.
Confocal microscopy and immunofluorescence. For immunofluores-
cence staining, 5-μm-thick paraffin sections were assayed with DAPI 
as a counterstain. The primary antibodies used were: rabbit anti-mouse 
insulin (1:100; Cell Signaling Technology) and monoclonal anti-mouse 
glucagon (1:1,000; Sigma-Aldrich). The secondary antibodies (1:1,000; 
Molecular Probes, Thermo Fisher Scientific) used were: Alexa Fluor 
555 donkey anti-mouse and Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit. Sec-
tions were examined under a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope.
Serum analysis. Blood was collected when the NOD mice were 
sacrificed. Serum insulin levels were measured using an insulin 
 
ELISA Kit (EMD Millipore). Plasma glucagon and BHOB levels were 
measured using an ELISA Kit (Mercodia) and a Colorimetric Assay 
Kit (Cayman Chemical).
Human PBMC isolation and flow cytometry. Human blood samples 
were obtained from T1D donors. The resulting PBMCs were prepared by 
differential density gradient separation (Lymphoprep; AXIS-SHIELD). 
The following anti-human surface antibodies were purchased from BD 
Biosciences: CD3 (UCHT1) and CD8 (RPA-T8). The following anti-
mouse surface antibodies were purchased: CD3 (145-2C11; BD Biosci-
ences) and CD8 (53-6.7; eBioscience). For intracellular cytokine FACS, 
we stimulated cells with PMA (50 ng/ml; Sigma-Aldrich); ionomycin 
(500 ng/ml; Sigma-Aldrich); and brefeldin A (5 μg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) 
for 5 hours. For the detection of CD4+ T cells, CD3+ cells were gated as 
whole T lymphocytes with CD3-PerCP Cy5.5 mAb. In this gated CD3+ 
cell population, CD8 was labeled with CD8-FITC mAb. The CD8– cells 
were selected as the targeted CD4+ T cells (see Figure 4C and Supple-
mental Figures 2, 3, and 5 and 7–11). Cells were fixed and permeabi-
lized with Fixation/Permeabilization Diluent (eBioscience) and then 
stained for IFN-γ, IL-4, and IL-17 (Miltenyi Biotec for mouse samples; 
BD Biosciences for human samples). For Treg staining, we used human 
and mouse Treg-staining kits (catalogs 88-8999 and 88-8111; eBiosci-
ence) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells (105 per sample) 
were collected on an Accuri-C6 (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using 
FlowJo software (Tree Star). Each test was repeated 3 times. Analysis of 
mouse Th1, Th2, and Th17 cytokines in culture supernatants was per-
formed with a BD Cytometric Bead Array.
can simply be mathematically translated into a dose for humans to 
achieve the same results, given the very different metabolic profiles 
of mice and humans. However, the DAISY study showed that daily 
supplementation of a mere 150-mg dose of EPA/DHA in infants 
would have a strong preventative effect in children (22). For infants, 
starting at 1 year of age, the Norwegian study suggested that daily 
supplementation (1.0 g DHA/EPA) could reduce their risk of devel-
oping T1D (23). These EPA/DHA levels were far below those applied 
here in the NOD mice, further raising the hope of using such an 
approach to alleviate T1D in the clinic. Unlike the nutritional supple-
mentation approach, gene therapy led not only to an increase of ω-3 
PUFAs but also a significant decrease of ω-6 PUFAs, particularly the 
proinflammatory AA and its derivatives, which might have also con-
tributed to the suppression of autoimmunity and the restoration of 
blood glucose levels. The dose of EPA/DHA needed to reverse T1D 
in the clinic will require a very thorough trial.
Our observations may also offer clinical guidance, in that those 
patients who are either at the early-onset stage of T1D or have con-
sistently had good management of their blood glucose levels may 
benefit the most from these interventions. These treatment modal-
ities, if cleared in safety evaluations, may potentially be helpful in 
the treatment of other types of autoimmune diseases as well.
Methods
Mice and diets. The NOD (J001976) mouse colony, which was the same 
colony used in most of the other published studies (71–73), was pur-
chased from The Jackson Laboratory and maintained in a strict specif-
ic pathogen–free (SPF) barrier facility at the Model Animal Research 
Center of Nanjing University. Both male and female NOD mice were 
tested regularly (at least every 3 months) for microbiological screening 
when housed at the barrier facility. All microbial screening test results 
were negative. Mice had ad libitum access to water and food. The 3 
groups of mice in this study were fed a semi-purified control diet or the 
same control diet supplemented with either 10% AA or 10% EPA/DHA 
(by weight). The diets met National Research Council (NRC) nutrition 
requirements for mice and varied only in PUFA lipid content (74). The 
source of ω-3 PUFAs was fish oil (ShangHai HOPE Industry Co., Ltd.). 
Analysis of other fatty acids and vitamine D3 is shown in Supplemental 
Table 8. The SPF-level regular mouse diet and the PUFA-enriched diet 
were manufactured by XIETONG Bioengineering Co., Ltd. Details of 
the sources of protein, other fats, and other additives are provided in 
Supplemental Table 9. The distribution of fatty acid species in the fish 
oil and DHA/EPA diets was analyzed by gas chromatography–mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS) and is detailed in Supplemental Table 8. All 
PUFA-enriched diets were vacuum sealed and stored at –20°C before 
thawing. The PUFA-enriched diets were replenished for the mice every 
48 hours. The same lot of PUFA-enriched diets was used throughout 
this study. Diabetes was confirmed by the presence of blood glucose 
concentrations above 11.11 mmol/l for 2 consecutive weeks, with the 
first week of hyperglycemia considered the age of disease onset.
Glucose tolerance tests and insulin tolerance tests. All 3 groups of mice 
were subjected to i.p. glucose tolerance tests (GTTs). Briefly, after 16 
hours (from 5:00 pm to 9:00 am) of fasting, with free access to water, 
unanesthetized mice were i.p. injected with a 20% glucose solution 
 
(2 g/kg BW). Plasma glucose concentrations were measured at base-
line and 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes after glucose injection. Blood 
glucose levels were measured from tail-vein blood samples using a 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 6 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
olites were quantified using a 5500 QTRAP hybrid triple quadrupole 
linear ion trap mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with a turbo ion 
spray electrospray ionization (ESI) source.
Statistics. All data are presented as the mean ± SEM. P values 
were calculated using a 2-tailed Student’s t test or 1-way ANOVA with 
a Tukey’s post-hoc multiple comparisons test. A P value of less than 
0.05 was considered statistically significant. Survival plot analyses 
were used to evaluate the difference in the incidence of diabetes onset 
between the different groups of NOD mice, with the differences being 
determined using a Mantel-Cox log-rank test. All statistic analyses 
(Student’s t tests, ANOVA, and survival analyses) were performed 
using GraphPad Prism 5.0 software (GraphPad Software).
Study approval. All experimental protocols were approved by the 
Research Ethics Committee of Nanjing Medical University, and all 
experiments were conducted in compliance with guidelines for the 
care and use of laboratory animals and approved by the IACUC of 
Nanjing Medical University. PBMCs from T1D patients and nondia-
betic donors were provided with prior informed consent, and blood 
samples were collected with IRB approval of the First Affiliated Hospi-
tal of Nanjing Medical University.
Author contributions
XB, SL, XZ, YD, and XL designed and performed experiments, 
analyzed data, and contributed to the writing of the first draft of 
the manuscript. FL and YJ supervised the histopathological stud-
ies and revised the manuscript. XB and TY recruited patients 
and performed experiments with human PBMCs. AZZ designed 
experiments, supervised the work, and wrote and revised the 
manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank Yu Jiang (Department of Pharmacology and Chemical 
Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA) and Xiaochun Bai (Department of Cell Biolo-
gy, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical Universi-
ty, Guangzhou, China) for their helpful scientific discussions and 
technical assistance. This work was supported by grants from the 
National Program on Key Basic Research Project of China (973 
Program, 2013CB945202, to AZZ and FL); the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (81170780 and 81630021, 
to AZZ; 81372798, to FL; 81200570, to XL); the Natural Science 
Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (JSNFC) (BK20130059, 
to AZZ; 2011766, to XL); and the Key University Science Research 
Project of Jiangsu Province (12KJB310006, to XL).
Address correspondence to: Allan Zijian Zhao, No. 100 Waihuan 
Xi Road, Guangzhou Higher Education Mega Center, Panyu Dis-
trict, Guangzhou, Peoples Republic of China, 510006. Phone: 
86.18027330698; E-mail: azzhao@gdut.edu.cn. Or to: Xiaoxi 
Li, 101 Longmian Avenue, Jiangning District, Nanjing 211166, 
Peoples Republic of China. Phone: 86.17715230828; E-mail: 
lxx@njmu.edu.cn.
CD4+ T cell isolation, cell culture, and Western blot analysis. Naive 
CD4+ T cells from spleens were obtained by negative selection using the 
Miltenyi Biotec CD4+ Purification Kit II, according to the manufactur-
er’s recommendations. RPMI 1640 (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
supplemented with 10% FBS (HyClone; GE Healthcare), 50 mM β-mer-
captoethanol, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin, nonessen-
tial amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 10 mM HEPES was used 
as a complete culture medium. Magnetic-activated cell sorter–purified 
(MACS-purified) CD4+ T cells (purity >96%) were cultured in 12-well 
plates (2.0 × 106 cells per well) and stimulated with 2 μg/ml soluble anti-
CD3 Ab and 2 μg/ml soluble anti-CD28 Ab (both from BD Biosciences). 
For each analysis, 8 × 106 CD4+ T cells were lysed and the aliquots ana-
lyzed by Western blotting using phospho-specific Abs or total protein 
(Cell Signaling Technology), with β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich) as the control.
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, and real-time PCR. RNA from NOD 
mice pancreas was prepared using an RNeasy Micro Kit (QIAGEN). 
One microgram of RNA was used for the preparation of single-stranded 
cDNA using a QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (QIAGEN). Real-
time PCRs were performed using the QuantiNova SYBR Green PCR Kit 
(QIAGEN) on Applied Biosystems StepOne equipment (Applied Bio-
systems). Reactions were performed at least in triplicate, and specifici-
ty of the amplified products was determined by melting peak analysis. 
Quantification for each gene of interest was performed using the 2–ΔΔCt 
method. Quantified values were normalized against the housekeeping 
gene Actb. The primers used are listed in Supplemental Table 10.
Gas chromatographic analysis of fatty acids. Lipids were extracted from 
mouse food and whole-blood samples collected from mouse tail veins 
according to the method of Bligh and Dyer (75). Gas chromatography was 
performed on a Model 6890 N Network Gas Chromatograph (Agilent 
Technologies). Identification of components was done by comparison of 
retention times with those of authentic standards (Sigma-Aldrich).
Lentiviral vector design, production, and administration. In this 
study, the lentiviral transfer vector pLJM1-EGFP (Addgene) containing 
mfat-1 cDNA encoding a ω-3 fatty acid desaturase under the control 
of the CMV promoter was designed on the basis of a design that was 
previously detailed and proven successful for converting ω-6 PUFAs 
into the corresponding ω-3 forms in transgenic mice (25). Vesicular 
stomatitis virus glycoprotein–pseudotyped lentiviral supernatant was 
produced by transient transfection of HEK293FT cells (Life Technol-
ogies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the 3-plasmid system, including 
the lentiviral transfer vector pLJM1-EGFP, and the packaging plas-
mids psPAX2 and pMD2.G. The lentiviral vectors were produced in 
293FT cells and concentrated by ultracentrifugation to 108 TU/ml, 
as described previously (76). Transducing units per milliliter (TU/ml) 
were determined for each vector stock by assessing EGFP+ cells, using 
limiting dilution on 293FT cells. Both lenti-mfat-1 and lenti-con at 109 
TU/kg were injected into the tail vein of diabetic NOD mice.
Metabolomic analysis. Pancreatic tissues from female NOD 
mice fed different PUFA-enriched diets were subject to eicosanoid 
extraction according to a previously reported method (77). Chromato-
graphic separation involved an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column 
(Waters) consisting of ethylene-bridged hybrid particles. The metab-
 1. Wållberg M, Cooke A. Immune mecha-
nisms in type 1 diabetes. Trends Immunol. 
2013;34(12):583–591.
 2. Atkinson MA, et al. How does type 1 diabetes 
develop?: the notion of homicide or β-cell suicide 
revisited. Diabetes. 2011;60(5):1370–1379.
 3. Panero F, et al. Fasting plasma C-peptide and 
micro- and macrovascular complications in 
a large clinic-based cohort of type 1 diabetic 
patients. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(2):301–305.
 4. Sima AA, et al. C-peptide prevents and improves 
chronic Type I diabetic polyneuropathy in the 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
BB/Wor rat. Diabetologia. 2001;44(7):889–897.
 5. Johansson BL, Sjöberg S, Wahren J. The influence 
of human C-peptide on renal function and glu-
cose utilization in type 1 (insulin-dependent) dia-
betic patients. Diabetologia. 1992;35(2):121–128.
 6. Johansson BL, Linde B, Wahren J. Effects of 
C-peptide on blood flow, capillary diffusion 
capacity and glucose utilization in the exercising 
forearm of type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetic 
patients. Diabetologia. 1992;35(12):1151–1158.
 
7. Bhatt MP, Lim YC, Kim YM, Ha KS. C-peptide 
activates AMPKα and prevents ROS-mediated 
mitochondrial fission and endothelial apoptosis 
in diabetes. Diabetes. 2013;62(11):3851–3862.
 8. Shapiro AM, et al. Islet transplantation in seven 
patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus using a glu-
cocorticoid-free immunosuppressive regimen.  
N Engl J Med. 2000;343(4):230–238.
 9. Kroon E, et al. Pancreatic endoderm derived  
from human embryonic stem cells generates  
glucose-responsive insulin-secreting cells in vivo. 
Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(4):443–452.
 10. Bach JF. Anti-CD3 antibodies for type 1 
diabetes: beyond expectations. Lancet. 
2011;378(9790):459–460.
 11. Ludvigsson J, et al. GAD65 antigen therapy in 
recently diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus.  
N Engl J Med. 2012;366(5):433–442.
 12. Orban T, et al. Co-stimulation modulation with 
abatacept in patients with recent-onset type 1 
diabetes: a randomised, double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;378(9789):412–419.
 13. Wherrett DK, et al. Antigen-based therapy with 
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) vaccine 
in patients with recent-onset type 1 diabe-
tes: a randomised double-blind trial. Lancet. 
2011;378(9788):319–327.
 14. Shapiro AM, et al. International trial of the 
Edmonton protocol for islet transplantation.  
N Engl J Med. 2006;355(13):1318–1330.
 15. van Belle TL, Coppieters KT, von Herrath MG. 
Type 1 diabetes: etiology, immunology, and ther-
apeutic strategies. Physiol Rev. 2011;91(1):79–118.
 16. Lehuen A, Diana J, Zaccone P, Cooke A. Immune 
cell crosstalk in type 1 diabetes. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2010;10(7):501–513.
 17. Mosmann TR, Cherwinski H, Bond MW, Giedlin 
MA, Coffman RL. Two types of murine helper T 
cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles of 
lymphokine activities and secreted proteins.  
J Immunol. 1986;136(7):2348–2357.
 18. Abbas AK, Murphy KM, Sher A. Functional 
diversity of helper T lymphocytes. Nature. 
1996;383(6603):787–793.
 19. Stechova K, et al. High T-helper-1 cytokines but 
low T-helper-3 cytokines, inflammatory cyto-
kines and chemokines in children with high risk 
of developing type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res 
Rev. 2007;23(6):462–471.
 20. Luger D, et al. Either a Th17 or a Th1 effector 
response can drive autoimmunity: conditions of 
disease induction affect dominant effector cate-
gory. J Exp Med. 2008;205(4):799–810.
 21. Tang Q, et al. Visualizing regulatory T cell control 
of autoimmune responses in nonobese diabetic 
mice. Nat Immunol. 2006;7(1):83–92.
 22. Norris JM, et al. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty 
acid intake and islet autoimmunity in children 
at increased risk for type 1 diabetes. JAMA. 
2007;298(12):1420–1428.
 23. Stene LC, Joner G, Norwegian Childhood Diabe-
tes Study Group. Use of cod liver oil during the 
first year of life is associated with lower risk of 
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes: a large, popu-
lation-based, case-control study. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2003;78(6):1128–1134.
 24. Chase HP, et al. Effect of docosahexaenoic acid 
supplementation on inflammatory cytokine lev-
els in infants at high genetic risk for type 1 diabe-
tes. Pediatr Diabetes. 2015;16(4):271–279.
 25. Wei D, et al. Cellular production of n-3 PUFAs and 
reduction of n-6-to-n-3 ratios in the pancreatic 
beta-cells and islets enhance insulin secretion 
and confer protection against cytokine-induced 
cell death. Diabetes. 2010;59(2):471–478.
 26. Norquay LD, et al. Insulin receptor substrate-2 in 
beta-cells decreases diabetes in nonobese diabet-
ic mice. Endocrinology. 2009;150(10):4531–4540.
 27. Ferris ST, Carrero JA, Mohan JF, Calderon B, 
Murphy KM, Unanue ER. A minor subset of 
Batf3-dependent antigen-presenting cells in 
islets of Langerhans is essential for the devel-
opment of autoimmune diabetes. Immunity. 
2014;41(4):657–669.
 28. Anderson MS, Bluestone JA. The NOD mouse: 
a model of immune dysregulation. Annu Rev 
Immunol. 2005;23:447–485.
 29. Fox CJ, Danska JS. Independent genetic reg-
ulation of T-cell and antigen-presenting cell 
participation in autoimmune islet inflammation. 
Diabetes. 1998;47(3):331–338.
 30. Makhlouf L, et al. Depleting anti-CD4 monoclo-
nal antibody cures new-onset diabetes, prevents 
recurrent autoimmune diabetes, and delays 
allograft rejection in nonobese diabetic mice. 
Transplantation. 2004;77(7):990–997.
 31. Pfleger C, Meierhoff G, Kolb H, Schloot NC, 
p520/521 Study Group. Association of T-cell 
reactivity with beta-cell function in recent 
onset type 1 diabetes patients. J Autoimmun. 
2010;34(2):127–135.
 32. Feuerer M, Shen Y, Littman DR, Benoist C, 
Mathis D. How punctual ablation of regulatory T 
cells unleashes an autoimmune lesion within the 
pancreatic islets. Immunity. 2009;31(4):654–664.
 33. Lindley S, Dayan CM, Bishop A, Roep BO, Peak-
man M, Tree TI. Defective suppressor function in 
CD4(+)CD25(+) T-cells from patients with type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes. 2005;54(1):92–99.
 34. Park H, et al. A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells 
regulates tissue inflammation by producing inter-
leukin 17. Nat Immunol. 2005;6(11):1133–1141.
 35. Emamaullee JA, et al. Inhibition of Th17 cells 
regulates autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice. 
Diabetes. 2009;58(6):1302–1311.
 36. Weylandt KH, Chiu CY, Gomolka B, Waechter SF, 
Wiedenmann B. Omega-3 fatty acids and their 
lipid mediators: towards an understanding of 
resolvin and protectin formation. Prostaglandins 
Other Lipid Mediat. 2012;97(3–4):73–82.
 37. Schmitz G, Ecker J. The opposing effects 
of n-3 and n-6 fatty acids. Prog Lipid Res. 
2008;47(2):147–155.
 38. Chen Z, et al. mTORC1/2 targeted by n-3 poly-
unsaturated fatty acids in the prevention of 
mammary tumorigenesis and tumor progression. 
Oncogene. 2014;33(37):4548–4557.
 39. Yang K, et al. T cell exit from quiescence and 
differentiation into Th2 cells depend on Raptor- 
mTORC1-mediated metabolic reprogramming. 
Immunity. 2013;39(6):1043–1056.
 40. Delgoffe GM, et al. The kinase mTOR regulates 
the differentiation of helper T cells through the 
selective activation of signaling by mTORC1 and 
mTORC2. Nat Immunol. 2011;12(4):295–303.
 41. Chi H. Regulation and function of mTOR signal-
ling in T cell fate decisions. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2012;12(5):325–338.
 42. Spychalla JP, Kinney AJ, Browse J. Identification 
of an animal omega-3 fatty acid desaturase by 
heterologous expression in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94(4):1142–1147.
 43. Steck AK, et al. Predictors of Progression From 
the Appearance of Islet Autoantibodies to Early 
Childhood Diabetes: The Environmental Deter-
minants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY). 
Diabetes Care. 2015;38(5):808–813.
 44. Nepom GT. Class II antigens and disease suscep-
tibility. Annu Rev Med. 1995;46:17–25.
 45. Boitard C. T-lymphocyte recognition of beta cells 
in type 1 diabetes: clinical perspectives. Diabetes 
Metab. 2013;39(6):459–466.
 46. Charlton B, Lafferty KJ. The Th1/Th2 bal-
ance in autoimmunity. Curr Opin Immunol. 
1995;7(6):793–798.
 47. Delovitch TL, Singh B. The nonobese diabetic 
mouse as a model of autoimmune diabetes: 
immune dysregulation gets the NOD. Immunity. 
1997;7(6):727–738.
 48. Ferraro A, et al. Expansion of Th17 cells and func-
tional defects in T regulatory cells are key features 
of the pancreatic lymph nodes in patients with 
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 2011;60(11):2903–2913.
 49. Vija L, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells: Stem cell 
therapy perspectives for type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Metab. 2009;35(2):85–93.
 50. Skowera A, et al. β-cell-specific CD8 T cell phe-
notype in type 1 diabetes reflects chronic autoan-
tigen exposure. Diabetes. 2015;64(3):916–925.
 51. Jörns A, et al. Islet infiltration, cytokine expres-
sion and beta cell death in the NOD mouse, 
BB rat, Komeda rat, LEW.1AR1-iddm rat and 
humans with type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia. 
2014;57(3):512–521.
 52. Patterson E, Wall R, Fitzgerald GF, Ross RP, 
Stanton C. Health implications of high dietary 
omega-6 polyunsaturated Fatty acids. J Nutr 
Metab. 2012;2012:539426.
 53. Lee K, et al. Mammalian target of rapamycin 
protein complex 2 regulates differentiation of 
Th1 and Th2 cell subsets via distinct signaling 
pathways. Immunity. 2010;32(6):743–753.
 54. Delgoffe GM, et al. The mTOR kinase differential-
ly regulates effector and regulatory T cell lineage 
commitment. Immunity. 2009;30(6):832–844.
 55. Baeder WL, Sredy J, Sehgal SN, Chang JY, Adams 
LM. Rapamycin prevents the onset of insulin- 
dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) in NOD 
mice. Clin Exp Immunol. 1992;89(2):174–178.
 56. Rabinovitch A, Suarez-Pinzon WL, Shapiro AM, 
Rajotte RV, Power R. Combination therapy with 
sirolimus and interleukin-2 prevents sponta-
neous and recurrent autoimmune diabetes in 
NOD mice. Diabetes. 2002;51(3):638–645.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 7 7 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
 57. Battaglia M, et al. Induction of tolerance in type 
1 diabetes via both CD4+CD25+ T regulatory 
cells and T regulatory type 1 cells. Diabetes. 
2006;55(6):1571–1580.
 58. Battaglia M, Stabilini A, Migliavacca B, Hore-
js-Hoeck J, Kaupper T, Roncarolo MG. Rapamy-
cin promotes expansion of functional CD4+ 
CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T cells of both  
healthy subjects and type 1 diabetic patients.  
J Immunol. 2006;177(12):8338–8347.
 59. Monti P, et al. Rapamycin monotherapy in 
patients with type 1 diabetes modifies CD4+ 
CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T-cells. Diabetes. 
2008;57(9):2341–2347.
 60. van den Elsen LW, van Esch BC, Dingjan GM, 
Hofman GA, Garssen J, Willemsen LE. Increased 
intake of vegetable oil rich in n-6 PUFA enhances 
allergic symptoms and prevents oral tolerance 
induction in whey-allergic mice. Br J Nutr. 
2015;114(4):577–585.
 61. Pestka JJ, Vines LL, Bates MA, He K, Langohr I. 
Comparative effects of n-3, n-6 and n-9 unsatu-
rated fatty acid-rich diet consumption on lupus 
nephritis, autoantibody production and CD4+ T 
cell-related gene responses in the autoimmune 
NZBWF1 mouse. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(6):e100255.
 62. Ghosh S, Molcan E, DeCoffe D, Dai C, Gibson 
DL. Diets rich in n-6 PUFA induce intestinal 
microbial dysbiosis in aged mice. Br J Nutr. 
2013;110(3):515–523.
 63. Ueda T, et al. Beneficial effect of an omega-6 
PUFA-rich diet in non-steroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug-induced mucosal damage in the 
murine small intestine. World J Gastroenterol. 
2015;21(1):177–186.
 64. Xu X, et al. Beta cells can be generated from 
endogenous progenitors in injured adult mouse 
pancreas. Cell. 2008;132(2):197–207.
 65. Minami K, et al. Lineage tracing and characteri-
zation of insulin-secreting cells generated from 
adult pancreatic acinar cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 2005;102(42):15116–15121.
 66. Thorel F, et al. Conversion of adult pancreatic 
alpha-cells to beta-cells after extreme beta-cell 
loss. Nature. 2010;464(7292):1149–1154.
 67. Jonsson J, Carlsson L, Edlund T, Edlund 
H. Insulin-promoter-factor 1 is required 
for pancreas development in mice. Nature. 
1994;371(6498):606–609.
 68. Sosa-Pineda B, Chowdhury K, Torres M, Oliver  
G, Gruss P. The Pax4 gene is essential for 
differentiation of insulin-producing beta 
cells in the mammalian pancreas. Nature. 
1997;386(6623):399–402.
 69. von Herrath M, Nepom GT. Animal mod-
els of human type 1 diabetes. Nat Immunol. 
2009;10(2):129–132.
 70. Gill RG, et al. A preclinical consortium approach 
for assessing the efficacy of combined anti-
CD3 plus IL-1 blockade in reversing new-onset 
autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice. Diabetes. 
2016;65(5):1310–1316.
 71. Zhang L, et al. Monoclonal antibody blocking the 
recognition of an insulin peptide-MHC complex 
modulates type 1 diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 2014;111(7):2656–2661.
 72. Karumuthil-Melethil S, Gudi R, Johnson BM, 
Perez N, Vasu C. Fungal β-glucan, a Dectin-1 
ligand, promotes protection from type 1 diabetes 
by inducing regulatory innate immune response. 
J Immunol. 2014;193(7):3308–3321.
 73. Ablamunits V, et al. Synergistic reversal of type 1 
diabetes in NOD mice with anti-CD3 and inter-
leukin-1 blockade: evidence of improved immune 
regulation. Diabetes. 2012;61(1):145–154.
 74. National Research Council (US) Subcommit-
tee on Laboratory Animal Nutrition. Nutrient 
Requirements of Laboratory Animals: Fourth 
Revised Edition, 1995. Washington (DC): 
National Academies Press (US); 1995.
 75. Bligh EG, Dyer WJ. A rapid method of total lipid 
extraction and purification. Can J Biochem Physi-
ol. 1959;37(8):911–917.
 76. Tiscornia G, Singer O, Verma IM. Production 
and purification of lentiviral vectors. Nat Protoc. 
2006;1(1):241–245.
 77. Li L, et al. Opposite effects of gene deficiency 
and pharmacological inhibition of soluble epox-
ide hydrolase on cardiac fibrosis. PLoS ONE. 
2014;9(4):e94092.
