 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Primary Care Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement
US Preventive Services Task Force
T
heUSPreventiveServicesTaskForce(USPSTF)makesrec-
ommendationsabouttheeffectivenessofspecificpreven-
tivecareservicesforpatientswithoutobviousrelatedsigns
or symptoms.
It bases its recommendations on the evidence of both the
benefits and harms of the service and an assessment of the bal-
ance. The USPSTF does not consider the costs of providing a ser-
vice in this assessment.
TheUSPSTFrecognizesthatclinicaldecisionsinvolvemorecon-
siderations than evidence alone. Clinicians should understand the
evidence but individualize decision making to the specific patient
or situation. Similarly, the USPSTF notes that policy and coverage
decisionsinvolveconsiderationsinadditiontotheevidenceofclini-
cal benefits and harms.
Summary of Recommendation and Evidence
The USPSTF recommends providing interventions during preg-
nancy and after birth to support breastfeeding. (B recommenda-
tion) (Figure 1)
Rationale
Importance
There is convincing evidence that breastfeeding provides sub-
stantial health benefits for children and adequate evidence that
breastfeeding provides moderate health benefits for women.
However, nearly half of all mothers in the United States who ini-
tially breastfeed stop doing so by 6 months, and there are signifi-
cant disparities in breastfeeding rates among younger mothers
and in disadvantaged communities.1
Effectiveness of Interventions to Change Behavior
Adequate evidence indicates that interventions to support breast-
feeding increase the duration and rates of breastfeeding, including
exclusive breastfeeding.
Harms of Interventions to Change Behavior
There is adequate evidence to bound the potential harms of inter-
ventions to support breastfeeding are no greater than small,
based on the nature of the intervention, the low likelihood of
IMPORTANCE There is convincing evidence that breastfeeding provides substantial health
benefits for children. However, nearly half of all US mothers who initially breastfeed stop
doing so by 6 months, and there are significant disparities in breastfeeding rates among
younger mothers and in disadvantaged communities.
OBJECTIVE To update the 2008 US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
recommendation on primary care interventions to promote breastfeeding.
EVIDENCE REVIEW The USPSTF reviewed the evidence on the effectiveness of interventions
to support breastfeeding on breastfeeding initiation, duration, and exclusivity. The USPSTF
also briefly reviewed the literature on the effects of these interventions on child and maternal
health outcomes.
FINDINGS The USPSTF found adequate evidence that interventions to support
breastfeeding, including professional support, peer support, and formal education, change
behavior and that the harms of these interventions are no greater than small. The USPSTF
concludes with moderate certainty that interventions to support breastfeeding have a
moderate net benefit.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION The USPSTF recommends providing interventions
during pregnancy and after birth to support breastfeeding. (B recommendation)
JAMA. 2016;316(16):1688-1693. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.14697
Editorial page 1685
Author Audio Interview
Related article page 1694 and
JAMA Patient Page page 1726
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 1710
Related article at
jamapediatrics.com
Author/Group Information: The
USPSTF members are listed at the
end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Kirsten
Bibbins-Domingo, PhD, MD, MAS
(chair@uspstf.net)
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA | US Preventive Services Task Force | RECOMMENDATION STATEMENT
1688
JAMA
October 25, 2016
Volume 316, Number 16
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a DALHOUSIE UNIVERSITY-DAL-11762 User  on 10/25/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
serious harms, and the available information from studies report-
ing few harms.
USPSTF Assessment
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that interventions
to support breastfeeding have a moderate net benefit for women
and their children.
Clinical Considerations
Patient Population Under Consideration
Thisrecommendationappliestopregnantwomen,newmothers,and
their infants and children. Interventions to support breastfeeding
may also involve a woman'
s partner, other family members, and
friends. This recommendation does not apply to circumstances
inwhichtherearecontraindicationstobreastfeeding(eg,certainma-
ternal medical conditions or infant metabolic disorders, such as
galactosemia). The USPSTF did not review evidence on interven-
tions directed at breastfeeding of preterm infants (Figure 2).
Interventions
Breastfeeding support can begin during pregnancy and continue
through the early life of the child. Primary care clinicians can sup-
port women before and after childbirth by providing interventions
directly or through referral to help them make an informed choice
about how to feed their infants and to be successful in their choice.
Interventions include promoting the benefits of breastfeeding,
Figure 1. US Preventive Services Task Force Grades and Levels of Certainty
What the USPSTF Grades Mean and Suggestions for Practice
Grade
Definition
A
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
Suggestions for Practice
B
The USPSTF recommends the service. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or
there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial.
Offer or provide this service.
C
The USPSTF recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients
based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty
that the net benefit is small.
Offer or provide this service for selected
patients depending on individual
circumstances.
D
The USPSTF recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the service
has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits.
Discourage the use of this service.
I statement
The USPSTF concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits
and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the balance of
benefits and harms cannot be determined.
Read the Clinical Considerations section
of the USPSTF Recommendation
Statement. If the service is offered,
patients should understand the
uncertainty about the balance of benefits
and harms.
USPSTF Levels of Certainty Regarding Net Benefit
Level of Certainty
Description
High
The available evidence usually includes consistent results from well-designed, well-conducted studies in representative primary care
populations. These studies assess the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes. This conclusion is therefore unlikely to be
strongly affected by the results of future studies.
Moderate
The available evidence is sufficient to determine the effects of the preventive service on health outcomes, but confidence in the estimate
is constrained by such factors as 
the number, size, or quality of individual studies.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
limited generalizability of findings to routine primary care practice.
lack of coherence in the chain of evidence.
As more information becomes available, the magnitude or direction of the observed effect could change, and this change may be large
enough to alter the conclusion.
The USPSTF defines certainty as “likelihood that the USPSTF assessment of the net benefit of a preventive service is correct.” The net benefit is defined as
benefit minus harm of the preventive service as implemented in a general, primary care population. The USPSTF assigns a certainty level based on the nature
of the overall evidence available to assess the net benefit of a preventive service.
Low
The available evidence is insufficient to assess effects on health outcomes. Evidence is insufficient because of
the limited number or size of studies.
important flaws in study design or methods.
inconsistency of findings across individual studies.
gaps in the chain of evidence.
findings not generalizable to routine primary care practice.
lack of information on important health outcomes.
More information may allow estimation of effects on health outcomes.
USPSTF Recommendation: Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
October 25, 2016
Volume 316, Number 16
1689
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a DALHOUSIE UNIVERSITY-DAL-11762 User  on 10/25/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
providing practical advice and direct support on how to breastfeed,
and providing psychological support. Interventions can be catego-
rized as professional support, peer support, and formal education,
although none of these categories are mutually exclusive, and
interventions may be combined within and between categories.
Professional Support
Professional support is 1-on-1 counseling about breastfeeding pro-
vided by a health professional (medical, nursing, or allied profes-
sionals, including those providing lactation care). Some interven-
tions include the provision of supplies, such as educational
materials, nursing bras, and breast pumps. Professional support
can include providing information about the benefits of breastfeed-
ing, psychological support (encouraging the mother, providing
reassurance, and discussing the mother’s questions and problems),
and direct support during breastfeeding observations (helping with
the positioning of the infant and observing latching). Professional
support may be delivered during pregnancy, the hospital stay, the
postpartum period, or at multiple stages. It may be conducted in an
office setting, in the hospital, through home visits, through tele-
phone support, or any combination of these. Sessions generally last
from 15 to 45 minutes, although some programs have used shorter
or longer sessions. Most successful interventions include multiple
sessions and are delivered at more than 1 point in time.
Peer Support
Similartoprofessionalsupport,peersupportprovideswomenwith
1-on-1 counseling about breastfeeding but is delivered by a layper-
son (generally a mother with successful breastfeeding experience
and a background similar to that of the patient) who has received
training in how to provide support. Like professional support, peer
supportmaybedeliveredthroughavarietyofstages,settings,meth-
ods, and durations.
Formal Education
Formal education interventions typically include a formalized pro-
gram to convey general breastfeeding knowledge, most often in the
prenatal period, although some may span time periods. Education is
usually offered in group sessions and may include telephone sup-
port, electronic interventions, videos, and print materials. They are
directedatmothersbutmayincludeotherfamilymembers.Content
generally focuses on the benefits of breastfeeding, practical breast-
feedingskills(eg,latching),andthemanagementofcommonbreast-
feeding complications; these programs may also offer family mem-
bers encouragement and advice on how to support the mother.
Useful Resources
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides informa-
tionondifferentbreastfeedinginterventionstrategies,includingpro-
gramexamplesandresources.2AnotherresourceistheSurgeonGen-
eral’s “
Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding.”
3
Other Considerations
Implementation
Although there is moderate certainty that breastfeeding is of mod-
erate net benefit to women and their infants and children, not all
womenchoosetoorareabletobreastfeed.Cliniciansshould,aswith
any preventive service, respect the autonomy of women and their
familiestomakedecisionsthatfittheirspecificsituation,values,and
preferences.
Figure 2. Primary Care Interventions to Support Breastfeeding: Clinical Summary
Population
Pregnant women, new mothers, and their children
Recommendation 
Provide interventions during pregnancy and after birth to support breastfeeding.
Grade: B
Interventions
Implementation
Balance of Benefits
and Harms   
For a summary of the evidence systematically reviewed in making this recommendation, the full recommendation statement, and supporting documents, please
go to http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org.
Primary care clinicians can support women before and after childbirth by providing interventions directly or by referral to help them
make an informed choice about how to feed their infants and to be successful in their choice. Interventions include promoting the
benefits of breastfeeding, providing practical advice and direct support on how to breastfeed, and providing psychological support.
Interventions can be categorized as professional support, peer support, and formal education, although none of these categories
are mutually exclusive, and interventions may be combined within and between categories. Interventions may also involve a
woman's partner, other family members, and friends.
Not all women choose to or are able to breastfeed. Clinicians should, as with any preventive service, respect the autonomy of women
and their families to make decisions that fit their specific situation, values, and preferences.
The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that interventions to support breastfeeding have a moderate net benefit.
USPSTF indicates US Preventive Services Task Force.
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
1690
JAMA
October 25, 2016
Volume 316, Number 16
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a DALHOUSIE UNIVERSITY-DAL-11762 User  on 10/25/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
In addition to clinicians’ direct activities to support breast-
feeding, there are system-level interventions intended to promote
breastfeeding. System-level interventions include policies, pro-
grams, and staff training, usually implemented within hospitals or
health care systems. The Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative is the
most widely implemented system-level intervention and is
based on the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) “10 Steps to Successful Breast-
feeding for Hospitals.”
4 Other system-level interventions include
maternity care practices such as encouraging skin-to-skin contact,
rooming-in, restricted pacifier use, and distributing breast pumps.
Community-based interventions include social marketing initia-
tives, workplace initiatives, and public policy actions. A compre-
hensive review of the evidence on the effectiveness of these types
of system-level interventions for the purposes of making a recom-
mendation is beyond the scope of the USPSTF. A focused review of
system-level interventions is included in the full evidence report,5
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also provides
information about individual, system-level, and community-based
interventions.6
Research Needs and Gaps
To better assess how population-level interventions would affect
breastfeeding rates, future studies should include women who
have not already declared their intention to breastfeed. To better
understand the effects of different interventions and patient
populations, future research should include adequate sample
sizes, clear descriptions of the included populations and com-
parators, and standardized reporting of outcomes. Studies would
be more useful if they were designed to allow assessment of the
relative contributions of individual components of multicompo-
nent breastfeeding support programs. Trials should include reli-
able and valid measures of infant and maternal health outcomes
and be powered to detect potential effects on these outcomes.
Studies also should explore maternal satisfaction with the inter-
vention and any potential negative feelings or feelings of inad-
equacy that could result if mothers choose not to or are unable to
breastfeed. Studies in populations with low breastfeeding rates
are especially needed, and more research is needed to better
understand the root causes of breastfeeding disparities and how
they can be addressed through health care and community inter-
ventions. Other areas for research include the potential benefits
and harms of supporting indirect breastfeeding (eg, use of breast
pumps), the role of breastfeeding support for adoptive or surro-
gate families, the role of systems to distribute donor breast milk,
and the effect of new technologies to support breastfeeding
(eg, web- or computer-based interventions).
Discussion
Benefits of Breastfeeding
A history of being breastfed has been found to be associated with a
reduced risk of a variety of negative health outcomes in infancy and
childhood, including illnesses such as acute otitis media, asthma,
atopic dermatitis, and gastrointestinal tract infection, and chronic
conditions such as obesity, diabetes, and high blood pressure.5,7
Although the majority of studies are observational and definitions
and comparisons vary widely, any breastfeeding appears to be
more beneficial than no breastfeeding, and longer durations of
breastfeeding confer greater benefits than shorter durations.
Breastfeeding is also associated with positive maternal health out-
comes, such as reduced risk of maternal breast and ovarian cancer
and type 2 diabetes.
Breastfeeding Rates
Estimates for any breastfeeding among infants born in 2012 in the
United States were 80.0% for initiation, 51.4% at 6 months, and
29.2%at12months.Ratesofexclusivebreastfeedingthrough3and
6 months were 43.3% and 21.9%, respectively.1 These rates have
beenincreasingoverthepastfewdecadesbutarestilllessthanthe
Healthy People 2020 targets for initiating breastfeeding (81.9%),
breastfeedingto6months(60.6%),andbreastfeedingto12months
(34.1%). Targets for exclusive breastfeeding at 3 and 6 months are
46% and 25%, respectively.8
Scope of Review
The USPSTF commissioned a systematic evidence review to up-
dateits2008recommendationonprimarycareinterventionstopro-
mote breastfeeding.5,7 This update focused on the effectiveness of
interventions to support breastfeeding on breastfeeding initiation,
duration, and exclusivity. The USPSTF briefly reviewed the litera-
tureontheeffectsofbreastfeedingonchildandmaternalhealthout-
comespublishedsincethepreviousreviewtoensurethattherehave
been no major changes in the direction of the evidence but did not
formally assess the literature. The population of interest included
mothers of full- or near-term infants and members of the mother-
infant support system (eg, partners, grandparents, or friends). The
review used a broad conception of primary care interventions that
encompassed activities initiated, conducted, or referred by pri-
mary care clinicians.
Effectiveness of Interventions to Change Behavior
and Outcomes
TheUSPSTFfoundinsufficientevidencetodeterminethedirectef-
fects of interventions to support breastfeeding on child and mater-
nalhealthoutcomes.Sixtrialsreportedinconsistenteffectsofcoun-
selinginterventionsonarangeofinfanthealthoutcomes,including
gastrointestinal illness, otitis media, respiratory tract illness, and
health care use. None of the studies reported maternal health
outcomes.5,9-14
However, the USPSTF found evidence that interventions to
support breastfeeding can increase the rate and duration of breast-
feeding. An analysis of 43 trials found that breastfeeding support
and education interventions targeting women were associated
with a higher likelihood of any and exclusive breastfeeding at less
than 3 months and at 3 to 6 months compared with usual care.
Pooled estimates indicate a beneficial association for any breast-
feeding at less than 3 months (risk ratio [RR], 1.07 [95% CI, 1.03-
1.11]; 26 studies) and at 3 to 6 months (RR, 1.11 [95% CI, 1.04-1.18];
23 studies) and for exclusive breastfeeding at less than 3 months
(RR, 1.21 [95% CI, 1.11-1.33]; 22 studies) and at 3 to 6 months (RR,
1.20 [95% CI, 1.05-1.38]; 18 studies). At 6 months, individual-level
interventions among women were associated with a 16% higher
likelihood of exclusive breastfeeding (RR, 1.16 [95% CI, 1.02-1.32]; 17
studies) but not any breastfeeding. The association between
USPSTF Recommendation: Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
October 25, 2016
Volume 316, Number 16
1691
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a DALHOUSIE UNIVERSITY-DAL-11762 User  on 10/25/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
individual-level interventions and breastfeeding initiation was not
significant, based on the pooled point estimate (RR, 1.00 [95% CI,
0.99-1.02]; 14 studies).5 Based on these data, it can be projected
that for every 30 women offered support, 1 additional woman will
breastfeed for up to 6 months.
Despitegreatvariationininterventionsandstudydesign,there
was little evidence that the effects of individual-level interventions
varyacrossdifferentpopulationsorinterventioncharacteristics,al-
though the variability may have masked such relationships. There
was some suggestion that interventions taking place during a com-
bination of prenatal, peripartum, or postpartum time periods were
more effective than those taking place only during 1 time period.
Some data also suggested that interventions are effective in both
adolescents and adults. All 4 trials of individual-level interventions
amongadolescentsoryoungadultsreportedhigherratesofbreast-
feeding among intervention vs control group participants.
Potential Harms of Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
There are very few data on the potential harms of interventions to
support breastfeeding, which in theory could include guilt related
to not breastfeeding, increased anxiety about breastfeeding, and
increased postpartum depression. Only 2 trials among adults
reported on adverse events related to a breastfeeding support
intervention. One trial found no significant differences in maternal
anxiety between groups at 2 weeks. The other trial reported that a
few mothers expressed feelings of anxiety and decreased confi-
dence in their breastfeeding ability despite breastfeeding going
well and discontinued their participation in the peer counseling
intervention.
Estimate of Magnitude of Net Benefit
There is adequate evidence that interventions to support breast-
feeding change behavior and that the harms of these interventions
are no greater than small. Therefore, the USPSTF concludes with
moderatecertaintythatinterventionstosupportbreastfeedinghave
a moderate net benefit.
Response to Public Comment
A draft version of this recommendation statement was posted for
public comment on the USPSTF website from April 26 to May 23,
2016. Many comments expressed concern that the recommenda-
tion did not explicitly include the term “
promotion”of breastfeed-
ing. The USPSTF interprets support as including promotion. The
USPSTF revised the recommendation statement to clarify that it
has not changed its confidence in the benefits of breastfeeding
and that it continues to recommend interventions to encourage
breastfeeding. The USPSTF also clarified that there has been no
change from the previous recommendation in the type of inter-
ventions being recommended. Other comments expressed con-
cern that the recommendation would lead to undue pressure on
women who decide not to breastfeed. The USPSTF reviewed the
language in the recommendation to ensure that the autonomy of
women is respected. Comments also requested that the USPSTF
address policy- and society-level barriers to breastfeeding;
although these are indeed important issues, they are beyond the
scope of the USPSTF.
Update of Previous USPSTF Recommendation
This recommendation updates the 2008 USPSTF recommenda-
tion on primary care interventions to promote and support
breastfeeding. The scope of the review and type of interventions
recommended did not change. The grade of the recommendation
remains a B.
Recommendations of Others
Several national and international organizations, including the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP),15 the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG),16 and WHO/UNICEF,17
recommend exclusive breastfeeding up to around 6 months,
followed by continued breastfeeding for at least 1 year, as mutually
desired by mother and infant, while complementary foods
are introduced. ACOG also recommends that all obstetrician-
gynecologists and other providers of obstetric care develop and
maintain knowledge and skills in anticipatory guidance and support
each woman’s informed decision about whether to initiate or con-
tinue breastfeeding. ACOG endorses the integration of the
WHO/UNICEF “10 Steps to Successful Breastfeeding”into mater-
nity care to increase the likelihood that women achieve their per-
sonal breastfeeding goals.16 AAP recommends that pediatricians
serve as breastfeeding advocates and educators, provides
resources that pediatricians can use in their practices, and endorses
the WHO/UNICEF “10 Steps to Successful Breastfeeding.”15
The American Academy of Family Physicians recommends provid-
ing interventions during pregnancy and after birth to support
breastfeeding.18 The National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practi-
tioners endorses the optimization of infant breastfeeding and
breastfeeding promotion as part of pediatric care.19 In 2011, the US
Surgeon General issued a call to action that clinicians, health sys-
tems, community programs, and government policy support
women who choose to breastfeed.3
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Authors/US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) members: Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo,
PhD, MD, MAS; David C. Grossman, MD, MPH;
Susan J. Curry, PhD; Karina W. Davidson, PhD,
MASc; John W. Epling Jr, MD, MSEd; Francisco A. R.
García, MD, MPH; Alex R. Kemper, MD, MPH, MS;
Alex H. Krist, MD, MPH; Ann E. Kurth, PhD, RN,
MSN, MPH; C. Seth Landefeld, MD;
Carol M. Mangione, MD, MSPH; William R.
Phillips, MD, MPH; Maureen G. Phipps, MD, MPH;
Michael P. Pignone, MD, MPH.
Affiliations of Authors/US Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) members: University of
California, San Francisco (Bibbins-Domingo); Group
Health Research Institute, Seattle, Washington
(Grossman); University of Iowa, Iowa City (Curry);
Columbia University, New York, New York
(Davidson); State University of New York Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse (Epling); Pima County
Department of Health, Tucson, Arizona (García);
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina (Kemper);
Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia
(Krist); Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond (Krist); Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut (Kurth); University of Alabama at
Birmingham (Landefeld); University of California,
Los Angeles (Mangione); University of Washington,
Seattle (Phillips); Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island (Phipps); University of Texas at Austin
(Pignone).
Clinical Review & Education US Preventive Services Task Force
USPSTF Recommendation: Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
1692
JAMA
October 25, 2016
Volume 316, Number 16
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a DALHOUSIE UNIVERSITY-DAL-11762 User  on 10/25/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Author Contributions: Dr Bibbins-Domingo had
full access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. The USPSTF
members contributed equally to the
recommendation statement.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported. Authors followed the policy
regarding conflicts of interest described at
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org
/Page/Name/conflict-of-interest-disclosures.
All members of the USPSTF receive travel
reimbursement and an honorarium for participating
in USPSTF meetings.
Funding/Support: The USPSTF is an independent,
voluntary body. The US Congress mandates
that the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ) support the operations
of the USPSTF.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: AHRQ staff
assisted in the following: development and
review of the research plan, commission of the
systematic evidence review from an Evidence-
based Practice Center, coordination of expert
review and public comment of the draft evidence
report and draft recommendation statement, and
the writing and preparation of the final
recommendation statement and its submission for
publication. AHRQ staff had no role in the approval
of the final recommendation statement or the
decision to submit for publication.
Disclaimer: Recommendations made by the
USPSTF are independent of the US government.
They should not be construed as an official position
of AHRQ or the US Department of Health and
Human Services.
Additional Contributions: We thank Elisabeth
Kato, MD, MRP, who contributed to the
writing of the manuscript, and Lisa Nicolella, MA,
of AHRQ, who assisted with coordination
and editing.
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
National Immunization Survey: Breastfeeding
Among US Children Born 2002–2012. http://www
.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/nis_data/index.htm.
2016. Accessed August 19, 2016.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The CDC Guide to Strategies to Support
Breastfeeding Mothers and Babies. Atlanta, GA:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2013.
3. Office of the Surgeon General. The Surgeon
General’s Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding.
Rockville, MD: Office of the Surgeon General; 2011.
4. World Health Organization, United Nations
Children’s Fund. Protecting, Promoting and
Supporting Breast-Feeding: The Special Role of
Maternity Services. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 1989.
5. Patnode CD, Henninger ML, Senger CA, Perdue
LA, Whitlock EP. Primary Care Interventions to
Support Breastfeeding: An Updated Systematic
Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force:
Evidence Synthesis No. 143. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016. AHRQ
publication 15-05218-EF-1.
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Breastfeeding Promotion & Support. http://www
.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/promotion/index.htm.
2016. Accessed August 19, 2016.
7. Patnode CD, Henninger ML, Senger CA, Perdue
LA, Whitlock EP. Primary care interventions to
support breastfeeding: an updated systematic
review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.8882
8. US Department of Health and Human Services.
Healthy People 2020: Maternal, Infant, and Child
Health. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020
/topics-objectives/topic/maternal-infant-and-child
-health. 2016. Accessed August 19, 2016.
9. Anderson AK, Damio G, Young S, Chapman DJ,
Pérez-Escamilla R. A randomized trial assessing the
efficacy of peer counseling on exclusive
breastfeeding in a predominantly Latina
low-income community. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med.
2005;159(9):836-841.
10. Bonuck KA, Freeman K, Trombley M.
Randomized controlled trial of a prenatal and
postnatal lactation consultant intervention on
infant health care use. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med.
2006;160(9):953-960.
11. Bunik M, Shobe P, O’Connor ME, et al. Are 2
weeks of daily breastfeeding support insufficient to
overcome the influences of formula? Acad Pediatr.
2010;10(1):21-28.
12. Chapman DJ, Morel K, Bermúdez-Millán A,
Young S, Damio G, Pérez-Escamilla R. Breastfeeding
education and support trial for overweight and
obese women: a randomized trial. Pediatrics. 2013;
131(1):e162-e170.
13. Gagnon AJ, Dougherty G, Jimenez V, Leduc N.
Randomized trial of postpartum care after hospital
discharge. Pediatrics. 2002;109(6):1074-1080.
14. Hopkinson J, Konefal Gallagher M. Assignment
to a hospital-based breastfeeding clinic and
exclusive breastfeeding among immigrant Hispanic
mothers: a randomized, controlled trial. J Hum Lact.
2009;25(3):287-296.
15. Section on Breastfeeding. Breastfeeding and
the use of human milk. Pediatrics. 2012;129(3):
e827-e841.
16. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Committee on Obstetric Practice;
Breastfeeding Expert Work Group. Committee
Opinion No. 658: optimizing support for
breastfeeding as part of obstetric practice. Obstet
Gynecol. 2016;127(2):e86-e92.
17. World Health Organization, United Nations
Children’s Fund. Global Strategy for Infant and
Young Child Feeding. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 2003.
18. American Academy of Family Physicians.
Clinical Preventive Service Recommendation:
Breastfeeding. http://www.aafp.org/patient-care
/clinical-recommendations/all/breastfeeding.html.
2016. Accessed August 19, 2016.
19. National Association of Pediatric Nurse
Practitioners. NAPNAP position statement on
breastfeeding. J Pediatr Health Care. 2013;27(1):
e13-e15.
USPSTF Recommendation: Interventions to Support Breastfeeding
US Preventive Services Task Force Clinical Review & Education
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
October 25, 2016
Volume 316, Number 16
1693
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a DALHOUSIE UNIVERSITY-DAL-11762 User  on 10/25/2016
