 REVIEW ARTICLE
What is gluten?
Jessica R Biesiekierski
*Translational Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Key words
gluten, protein, wheat.
Accepted for publication 25 November 2016.
Correspondence
Jessica R. Biesiekierski, Translational Research
Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders, KU
Leuven Campus Gasthuisberg O&N1,
Herestraat 49-Box 701, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Email: jessica.biesiekierski@med.kuleuven.be
Disclosures: None.
Abstract
Gluten is the main storage protein of wheat grains. Gluten is a complex mixture of hun-
dreds of related but distinct proteins, mainly gliadin and glutenin. Similar storage pro-
teins exist as secalin in rye, hordein in barley, and avenins in oats and are
collectively referred to as “gluten.” The objective was to discuss the biochemical and
functional properties of the gluten proteins, including structure, sources, and dietary
intakes. Literature was reviewed from food science and nutrition journals. The gluten
protein networks vary because of different components and sizes, and variability caused
by genotype, growing conditions, and technological processes. The structures and inter-
actions of this matrix contribute to the unique properties of gluten. The resulting func-
tions are essential to determining the dough quality of bread and other baked products.
Gluten is heat stable and has the capacity to act as a binding and extending agent and is
commonly used as an additive in processed foods for improved texture, moisture reten-
tion, and flavor. Gliadin contains peptide sequences that are highly resistant to gastric,
pancreatic, and intestinal proteolytic digestion in the gastrointestinal tract. The average
daily gluten intake in a Western diet is thought to be 5–20 g/day and has been
implicated in several disorders. Gluten containing grains (wheat, rye, barley, and oats)
are important staple foods. Gluten is among the most complex protein networks and
plays a key role in determining the rheological dough properties.
Introduction
Wheat is one of world’s major food crops, cultivated, consumed,
and traded worldwide. The common wheat species (Triticum
aestivum L.) is often used to describe many other cultivated wheat
species and genotypes.
The wheat kernel contains 8%–15% of protein, from which
10%–15% is albumin/globulin and 85%–90% is gluten (Fig. 1).1
Gluten is a complex mixture of hundreds of related but distinct
proteins, mainly gliadin and glutenin. Different wheat varieties
vary in protein content and in the composition and distribution
of gluten proteins.1 Collectively, the gliadin and glutenin proteins
are referred to as prolamins, which represent seed proteins
insoluble in water, but extractable in aqueous ethanol and are
characterized by high levels of glutamine (38%) and proline
residues (20%).1
The gluten proteins can be classified into subgroups dependent
on key differences including sulfur content and molecular weight
and then further classified according to their different primary
structures into alpha, beta, gamma, and omega (α, β, γ, and ω)
gliadins.2 Individual gluten proteins are bound by strong covalent
and non-covalent forces, which, together with the structure and
interaction of these proteins, contribute to the unique properties
of gluten.2
Gluten properties and sources
The gluten matrix and its resulting functions are essential to
determining the dough quality of bread and other baked
products such as pasta, cakes, pastries, and biscuits. Gluten is
heat stable and has the capacity to act as a binding and extend-
ing agent and is commonly used as an additive in processed
foods for improved texture, flavor, and moisture retention.
Therefore, less obvious sources of gluten include processed
meat, reconstituted seafood, and vegetarian meat substitutes;
and as thickeners, emulsifiers, or gelling agents in candies,
ice cream, butter, seasonings, stuffings, marinades and dress-
ings; and as fillers and coatings used in medications or
confectionary. In addition, gluten is increasingly separated from
wheat (known as “vital wheat gluten”) or modified for specific
uses (known as “isolated wheat proteins”) to improve the
structural integrity of industrial bakery products and to fortify
low-protein flours.3
The unusual rheological and functional properties of gluten are
dependent upon the ratio of glutenins to gliadins, and the interac-
tions of these structures. Each component has slightly different
functions crucial in determining the viscoelastic properties
(entrapment of carbon dioxide released during bread leavening)
and quality of the end product. For example, purified hydrated
gliadins contribute more to the viscosity and extensibility of the
dough, whereas hydrated glutenins are cohesive and contribute
to dough strength and elasticity.1 Much work has focused on
improving dough strength, for example, increasing the high
molecular weight subunit gene copy number to improve glutenin
elasticity.4
Similar proteins to the gliadin found in wheat exist as secalin in
rye, hordein in barley, and avenins in oats and are collectively
referred to as “gluten.” Derivatives of these grains such as triticale
doi:10.1111/jgh.13703
78
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2017; 32 (Suppl. 1): 78–81
© 2017 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd
bs_bs_banner
 and malt and other ancient wheat varieties such as spelt and kamut
also contain gluten. The gluten found in all of these grains has
been identified as the component capable of triggering the
immune-mediated disorder, coeliac disease.
Structure
Gluten is a very complex compound, characterized by high allelic
polymorphism encoding its specific proteins, glutenin, and gliadin.
Furthermore, each wheat genotype produces unique types and
quantities of these compounds, which can also differ by varied
growing conditions and technological processes. The protein
(and also carbohydrate) expression of one genotype can change
depending on the environment where it was grown, for example,
the ω-5 gliadin content increases with fertilization and temperature
during maturity.3 Some of the α gliadins located in the subaleurone
of the wheat kernel can be partially removed by roller milling.
Potential toxic components
Gliadin contains peptide sequences (known as epitopes) that are
highly resistant to gastric, pancreatic, and intestinal proteolytic
digestion in the gastrointestinal tract, escaping degradation in the
human gut. This difficult digestion is due to gliadin’s high content
of the amino acids, proline, and glutamine, which many proteases
are unable to cleave.5 These proline-rich residues create tight and
compact structures that can mediate the adverse immune reactions
in coeliac disease.
A variety of sequences from α, γ, and ω gliadins, as well as from
the glutenins, have been identified to activate coeliac disease.
However, several hundred gluten peptides are predicted to be im-
munogenic and trigger the T-cell mediated response.6 The most
immunodominant T-cell epitope is from α gliadin, although T-cell
cross-reactivity
against
gluten-derived,
secalin-derived,
and
hordein-derived peptides have been confirmed. Additionally,
within
each
grain,
there
exists
a
distinct
hierarchy
of
immunostimulatory gluten peptides.6 Of all the peptides known
to stimulate the T-cell response in coeliac disease, a given patient
may react to only a few.
Amylase-trypsin inhibitors. Amylase-trypsin inhibitors
(ATIs) account for approximately 2%–4% of the total protein in
modern wheat (where gluten accounts for 80%–90%). ATIs are
albumin proteins, acting as plant defense proteins and have
recently been implicated in wheat sensitivity. Some of the ATI
fractions have been reported to activate a toll-like receptor-4
dependent pathway leading to the release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines from monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells
derived from both coeliac and non-coeliac patients.7
Wheat germ agglutinin. Wheat germ agglutinin is a
carbohydrate binding protein (a lectin), found mostly in the wheat
kernel. In vitro, wheat germ agglutinin has been shown to have
epithelial-damaging and immune effects and, therefore, might also
contribute to both intestinal and extraintestinal manifestations
associated with gluten intake.8
Dietary gluten intakes
Wheat is an important staple food because of its high nutritional
characteristics, technological properties, and long shelf life. Wheat
is a good source of several nutrients and is a fermentable substrate
for the human colonic microflora, which conveys substantial
benefits to the host. Wheat can form the basis of all daily meals
and is eaten in large amounts worldwide. Information regarding
gluten intake in the general population is scarce, because there is
a lack of detailed information on the gluten content of food
products. Calculations of dietary gluten intakes are approximate
as they are normally estimated by calculating the amount of cereal
protein within gluten-containing cereals and from recipe informa-
tion. The average daily gluten intake in a Western diet is thought
to range from 5 to 20 g/day, with the most recent data coming from
a national Danish survey showing a mean total gluten intake of
10.4 g/day for adults aged 20–75 years.9
While wheat-containing bread is one of our major sources of
gluten (each slice of bread contains approximately 4 g of gluten),
there is some evidence that exposure to gluten may be increasing
with changes in cereal technology. Modern baking practices have
Figure 1
Approximate breakdown of wheat components.
JR Biesiekierski
What is gluten?
79
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2017; 32 (Suppl. 1): 78–81
© 2017 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd
 shortened bread leavening, increased the use of chemical/yeast
leavening agents, and increased inputs of nitrogen fertilizer and
agrochemicals for higher yields of protein content required for
bread making.10
Gluten-free diet
There is a lack of a consensus definition of the term, “gluten free.”
Food Standards Australia New Zealand defines gluten free as
having no detectable gluten (less than 5 ppm) using the most
sensitive and specific testing method and must not contain oats
or malt. The Food and Drug Administration in the United States
and the International standard, the Codex Alimentarius Commis-
sion, define gluten free as the allowable level of gluten detectable
to 20 ppm. The Australian Food and Grocery Council has made an
application to Food Standards Australia New Zealand to alter the
definition to the 20 ppm to be in line with the Codex.
Historically, there has been controversy about the inclusion of
oats in the gluten-free diet, because although there is a low rate
of avenin-specific T-cell response after oat challenges in certain
patients with coeliac disease and reports of oats being tolerated
by most,11 there have also been reports of patients with coeliac dis-
ease who are oat sensitive and develop histological damage.12
Likewise, the safe threshold of gluten consumption for individuals
with coeliac disease can vary significantly (10–100 mg/day).
Gluten analysis
The original ELISA is adopted as the official method of detection
by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists. The ELISA is
able to quantify native and heated gluten but lacks sensitivity to
barley prolamins. It can overestimate or underestimate gluten
content and cannot accurately quantify hydrolysed gluten. The
sandwich R5 ELISA assay endorsed by the Codex Alimentarius
can quantify gliadins and hordeins in unprocessed and heat-
processed wheat-based and barley-based products and can also
estimate the gluten content of hydrolysed foods. As testing
methods become increasingly sensitive, manufacturers have raised
concerns that many products will no longer meet “gluten-free”
labeling criteria.
Gluten (wheat)-related disorders
Evaluation of exclusion diets has historically and consistently
shown wheat to be one of the most common factors inducing
gastrointestinal symptoms.13 Specific diagnosis of wheat-related
conditions (including wheat allergy, coeliac disease, and the
suggested entity of non-coeliac gluten sensitivity) can follow the
algorithm shown in Figure 2.
Coeliac disease. Dietary gluten unequivocally causes coeliac
disease, an immune-mediated disease that affects about 1% of
Western populations. Coeliac disease is the best studied of the
spectrum of disorders related to gluten ingestion, whereby the
immune response triggered is specific to toxic peptides within
the gliadin fraction of the gluten protein and initiates an immune
response causing mucosal inflammation, small intestinal villous
atrophy, and increased gut permeability. The damage in the small
intestine can cause common gastrointestinal symptoms (distension
and altered bowel habits) that may or may not relate to malabsorp-
tion. There is a genetic disposition where the disease is triggered in
susceptible individuals carrying the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-DQ2 or DQ8.14 The only known treatment is a lifelong,
strict gluten-free diet.
Wheat allergy. Wheat allergy is an IgE-mediated reaction to
the insoluble gliadins of wheat. The symptoms usually develop
within minutes to hours after ingestion and include itching and
swelling, skin rash, and life-threatening anaphylaxis. Symptoms
can encompass baker’s asthma and rhinitis (from inhaled flour),
atopic dermatitis (from skin exposure), urticaria (forming hives
after contact with wheat), or wheat-dependent exercise-induced
anaphylaxis (when wheat is consumed before vigorous physical
activity). An estimated 0.4% of the world’s population are allergic
to wheat, where the majority of cases are children, and most will
outgrow their wheat allergy by age 6.3
Non-coeliac gluten sensitivity. While coeliac disease is a
well-established entity, much debate remains around whether the
gluten proteins can trigger symptoms in patients with no features
of
coeliac
disease,
so-called
non-coeliac
gluten
sensitive.
Considerable research is needed for confirmation of diagnosis,
Figure 2
Classification of gluten-related disorders.
What is gluten?
JR Biesiekierski
80
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2017; 32 (Suppl. 1): 78–81
© 2017 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd
 mechanism, prevalence, and management. However, it is likely
that this syndrome encompasses a heterogeneous group of
patients, reporting a range of gastrointestinal and extraintestinal
symptoms, clinical histories and characteristics, and may only
exist in a small number of people.15
Conclusions
Gluten-containing grains (wheat, rye, barley, and oats) are widely
consumed. Gluten is a complex protein network and plays a key
role in determining the rheological dough properties and baking
qualities. The protein structure can vary dependent on several
factors, making analysis and definitions difficult. Coeliac disease
and wheat allergy are well-defined disorders associated with
gluten (or wheat intake), but further work is needed to completely
understand non-coeliac gluten sensitive. Interpreting data from
gluten-related and wheat-related studies must be performed with
caution and with consideration of all components of wheat,
including non-gluten proteins and carbohydrates.
Acknowledgement
Jessica Biesiekierski is a postdoctoral research fellow of the
Research Foundation–Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen).
References
1 Wieser H. Chemistry of gluten proteins. Food Microbiol. 2007; 24:
115–19.
2 Shewry PR, Lookhart GL. Wheat Gluten Protein Analysis. American
Association of Cereal Chemists: St Paul, Minnesota, 2003.
3 Kucek LK, Veenstra LD, Amnuaycheewa P et al. A grounded guide to
gluten: how modern genotypes and processing impact wheat
sensitivity. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2015; 14: 285–302.
4 Payne PI. Genetics of wheat storage proteins and the effect of allelic
variation on breadmaking quality. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 1987; 38:
141–53.
5 Hausch F, Shan L, Santiago NA et al. Intestinal digestive resistance of
immunodominant gliadin peptides. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver
Physiol. 2002; 283: G996–G1003.
6 Arentz-Hansen H, McAdam SN, Molberg O et al. Celiac lesion T cells
recognize epitopes that cluster in regions of gliadins rich in proline
residues. Gastroenterology 2002; 123: 803–9.
7 Junker Y, Zeissig S, Kim SJ et al. Wheat amylase trypsin inhibitors
drive intestinal inflammation via activation of toll-like receptor 4.
J. Exp. Med. 2012; 209: 2395–408.
8 de Punder K, Pruimboom L. The dietary intake of wheat and other
cereal grains and their role in inflammation. Nutrients 2013; 5:
771–87.
9 Hoppe C, Gøbel R, Kristensen M et al. Intake and sources of gluten in
20-to 75-year-old Danish adults: a national dietary survey. Eur. J. Nutr.
2015; doi:10.1007/s00394-015-1062-3.
10 Shewry PR. Wheat. J. Exp. Bot. 2009; 60: 1537–53.
11 Janatuinen EK, Kemppainen TA, Julkunen RJK et al. No harm
from five year ingestion of oats in coeliac disease. Gut 2002; 50:
332–5.
12 Lundin KE, Nilsen EM, Scott HG et al. Oats induced villous atrophy in
coeliac disease. Gut 2003; 52: 1649–52.
13 Jones VA. Food intolerance: a major factor in the pathogenesis of
irritable bowel syndrome. Lancet 1982; 2: 1115–7.
14 Tye-Din JA, Stewart JA, Dromey JA et al. Comprehensive,
quantitative mapping of T cell epitopes in gluten in celiac disease. Sci.
Transl. Med. 2010; 2: 41ra51.
15 Biesiekierski JR, Iven J. Non-coeliac gluten sensitivity: piecing the
puzzle together. United European Gastroenterol J 2015; 3: 160–5.
JR Biesiekierski
What is gluten?
81
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2017; 32 (Suppl. 1): 78–81
© 2017 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd
