 Continuing Education Examination available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted.html. 
Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
May 13, 2016 
Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne 
Rickettsial Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever 
and Other Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses, 
Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis — United States
A Practical Guide for Health Care and  
Public Health Professionals
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 Recommendations and Reports
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65(No. RR-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Kristina B. Clark, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King,
Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
Disclosure of Relationship
CDC, our planners, and our presenters wish to disclose 
that they have no financial interests or other relationships 
with the manufacturers of commercial products, suppliers 
of commercial services, or commercial supporters with the 
following exceptions:
J. Stephen Dumler, MD, receives a royalty from the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine for license of patent 
on in vitro growth of Anaplasma phagocytophilum for diagnostic 
antigen production. Bobbi S. Pritt, MD, is employed by 
Mayo Clinic, which performs reference laboratory testing for 
physicians throughout the United States. Planning committee 
reviewed content to ensure there is no bias.
Content will not include any discussion of the unlabeled use 
of a product or a product under investigational use. 
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................1
Methods 
....................................................................................................................2
Epidemiology 
..........................................................................................................3
Clinical Signs and Symptoms and Pathophysiology of Disease ........ 13
Treatment and Management ......................................................................... 21
Special Considerations ..................................................................................... 25
Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests....................................................................... 26
Prevention of Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases ........................................... 30
Surveillance and Reporting ............................................................................ 32
References 
............................................................................................................. 32
Appendix A ........................................................................................................... 43
Appendix B ........................................................................................................... 44
Front cover photos: Top row, left to right: adult female Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick), immunohistochemical stain demonstrating Rickettsia rickettsii 
(red) in blood vessel endothelial cells, Wright stain of peripheral blood smear showing an intramonocytic morula associated with Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection. 
Bottom row, left to right: eschar associated with Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis, dog infested with Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks, adult female Dermacentor 
andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick).
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
Ticks (Acari: Ixodidae and Argasidae) transmit multiple and 
diverse pathogens (including bacteria, protozoa, and viruses), 
which cause a wide range of human and animal diseases, 
including rickettsial diseases, caused by bacteria in the order 
Rickettsiales. Vertebrate animals play an integral role in the 
life cycle of tick species, whereas humans are incidental hosts. 
Awareness, diagnosis, and control of tickborne rickettsial 
diseases are most effectively addressed by considering the 
intersecting components of human, animal, and environmental 
health that collectively form the foundation of One Health (1), 
an approach that integrates expertise from multiple disciplines 
and facilitates understanding of these complex zoonoses.
Tickborne rickettsial diseases in humans often share similar 
clinical features yet are epidemiologically and etiologically distinct. 
In the United States, these diseases include 1) Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever (RMSF) caused by Rickettsia rickettsii; 2) other 
spotted fever group (SFG) rickettsioses, caused by Rickettsia 
parkeri and Rickettsia species 364D; 3) Ehrlichia chaffeensis 
ehrlichiosis, also called human monocytic ehrlichiosis; 4) other 
ehrlichioses, caused by Ehrlichia ewingii and Ehrlichia muris-
like (EML) agent; and 5) anaplasmosis, caused by Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum (2), also called human granulocytic anaplasmosis. 
Rickettsial pathogens transmitted by arthropods other than ticks, 
including fleas (Rickettsia typhi), lice (Rickettsia prowazekii), and 
mites (Rickettsia akari) are not included in this report. Imported 
tickborne rickettsial infections that might be diagnosed in returning 
Corresponding author: Holly M. Biggs, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC. Telephone: 
404-639-1075; E-mail: Rzbepidiag@cdc.gov.
Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases: 
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and Other Spotted Fever Group 
Rickettsioses, Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis — United States
A Practical Guide for Health Care and  
Public Health Professionals
Holly M. Biggs, MD1; Casey Barton Behravesh, DVM, DrPH1; Kristy K. Bradley, DVM2; F. Scott Dahlgren, MSPH1; Naomi A. Drexler, MPH1; 
J. Stephen Dumler, MD3; Scott M. Folk, MD4; Cecilia Y. Kato, PhD1; R. Ryan Lash, MA1; Michael L. Levin, PhD1; Robert F. Massung, PhD1; 
Robert B. Nadelman, MD5; William L. Nicholson, PhD1; Christopher D. Paddock, MD1; Bobbi S. Pritt, MD6; Marc S. Traeger, MD7
1National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia
2Oklahoma State Department of Health, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
3University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
4Mosaic Life Care, St. Joseph, Missouri
5New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York
6Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
7Indian Health Service, Whiteriver, Arizona
Summary
Tickborne rickettsial diseases continue to cause severe illness and death in otherwise healthy adults and children, despite the 
availability of low-cost, effective antibacterial therapy. Recognition early in the clinical course is critical because this is the period 
when antibacterial therapy is most effective. Early signs and symptoms of these illnesses are nonspecific or mimic other illnesses, 
which can make diagnosis challenging. Previously undescribed tickborne rickettsial diseases continue to be recognized, and since 
2004, three additional agents have been described as causes of human disease in the United States: Rickettsia parkeri, Ehrlichia 
muris-like agent, and Rickettsia species 364D. This report updates the 2006 CDC recommendations on the diagnosis and 
management of tickborne rickettsial diseases in the United States and includes information on the practical aspects of epidemiology, 
clinical assessment, treatment, laboratory diagnosis, and prevention of tickborne rickettsial diseases. The CDC Rickettsial Zoonoses 
Branch, in consultation with external clinical and academic specialists and public health professionals, developed this report to 
assist health care providers and public health professionals to 1) recognize key epidemiologic features and clinical manifestations 
of tickborne rickettsial diseases, 2) recognize that doxycycline is the treatment of choice for suspected tickborne rickettsial diseases 
in adults and children, 3) understand that early empiric antibacterial therapy can prevent severe disease and death, 4) request the 
appropriate confirmatory diagnostic tests and understand their usefulness and limitations, and 5) report probable and confirmed 
cases of tickborne rickettsial diseases to public health authorities.
 Recommendations and Reports
2 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
international travelers are summarized; however, tickborne and 
nontickborne rickettsial illnesses typically encountered outside the 
United States are not addressed in detail in this report.
The reported incidence of tickborne rickettsial diseases in 
the United States has increased during the past decade (3–5). 
Tickborne rickettsial diseases continue to cause severe illness 
and death in otherwise healthy adults and children, despite the 
availability of effective antibacterial therapy. Early signs and 
symptoms of tickborne rickettsial illnesses are nonspecific, and 
most cases of RMSF are misdiagnosed at the patient’s first visit 
for medical care, even in areas where awareness of RMSF is high 
(6,7). To increase the likelihood of an early, accurate diagnosis, 
health care providers should be familiar with risk factors, signs, 
and symptoms consistent with tickborne rickettsial diseases.
This report provides practical information to help health 
care providers and public health professionals to
• recognize the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of 
tickborne rickettsial diseases;
• obtain an appropriate clinical history for suspected 
tickborne rickettsial diseases;
• recognize potential severe manifestations of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases;
• make treatment decisions on the basis of epidemiologic 
and clinical evidence;
• recognize that early and empiric treatment with doxycycline 
can prevent severe morbidity or death;
• recognize doxycycline as the treatment of choice for adults 
and children of all ages with suspected rickettsial disease;
• make treatment decisions for patients with certain 
conditions, such as a doxycycline allergy or pregnancy;
• recognize when to consider coinfection with other 
tickborne pathogens;
• determine appropriate confirmatory diagnostic tests for 
tickborne rickettsial diseases;
• understand the availability, limitations, and usefulness of 
confirmatory diagnostic tests;
• recognize unusual transmission routes, such as transfusion- 
or transplantation-associated transmission;
• recognize selected rickettsial diseases among returning 
travelers;
• advise patients regarding how to avoid tick bites; and
• report probable and confirmed cases to appropriate public 
health authorities to assist with surveillance, control 
measures, and public health education efforts.
Additional information concerning the tickborne rickettsial 
diseases described in this report is available from medical 
and veterinary specialists, various medical and veterinary 
societies, state and local health authorities, and CDC. The 
information and recommendations in this report are meant to 
serve as a source of general guidance for health care providers 
and public health professionals; however, individual clinical 
circumstances should always be considered. This report is not 
intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice for 
individual patients, and persons should seek advice from their 
health care providers if they have concerns about tickborne 
rickettsial diseases.
Methods
This report updates the 2006 CDC recommendations 
for the diagnosis and management of tickborne rickettsial 
diseases in the United States (8). Updated recommendations 
are needed to address the changing epidemiology of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases, provide current information about new 
and emerging tickborne rickettsial pathogens, and highlight 
advances in recommended diagnostic tests and updated 
treatment information.
The CDC Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch reviewed the 2006 
report and determined which subject-matter areas required 
updates or revisions. Internal and external subject-matter 
experts in tickborne rickettsial diseases, representing a range 
of professional experiences and viewpoints, were identified by 
the CDC Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch to contribute to the 
revision. Contributors represented various areas of expertise 
within the field of tickborne rickettsioses and included 
practicing physicians specializing in internal medicine, family 
medicine, infectious diseases, and pathology; veterinarians 
with expertise in state, national, and international public 
health; epidemiologists; tick ecologists; microbiologists; and 
experts in rickettsial laboratory diagnostics. The peer-reviewed 
literature, published guidelines, and public health data were 
reviewed, with particular attention to new material available 
since preparation of the previous report. The scientific literature 
was searched through February 2016 using the MEDLINE 
database of the National Library of Medicine. The terms 
searched were Rickettsia, Rickettsia infections, R. rickettsii, 
RMSF, Ehrlichia, ehrlichiosis, E. chaffeensis, anaplasmosis, 
Anaplasma, and A. phagocytophilum. Text word searches were 
performed on multiple additional terms tailored to specific 
questions, which included epidemiology, treatment, diagnosis, 
and prevention. Titles of articles and abstracts extracted by the 
search were reviewed, and if considered potentially relevant, the 
full text of the article was retrieved. Reference lists of included 
articles were reviewed, and additional relevant citations were 
provided by contributors. In certain instances, textbook 
references were used to support statements considered general 
knowledge in the field. Articles selected were in English or 
had available translations. Peer-reviewed publications and 
published guidelines were used to support recommendations 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
when possible. Abstracts without a corresponding full-length 
publication, dissertations, or other non–peer-reviewed 
literature were not used to support recommendations. When 
possible, data were obtained from studies that determined the 
presence of tickborne rickettsial infection using confirmatory 
diagnostic methods. Additional criteria were applied on a per-
question basis. For some questions, an insufficient number 
of studies was identified to support the development of a 
recommendation. In these instances, the report indicates that 
the evidence was insufficient for a recommendation, and when 
possible, general guidance is provided based on the available 
evidence and expert opinion of the CDC Rickettsial Zoonoses 
Branch. All contributors had the opportunity to review and 
provide input on multiple drafts of the report, including the 
final version. Future updates to this report will be dictated by 
new data in the field of tickborne rickettsial diseases.
Epidemiology
Overview
Tickborne rickettsial pathogens are maintained in natural 
cycles involving domestic or wild vertebrates and primarily 
hard-bodied ticks (Acari: Ixodidae). The epidemiology of each 
tickborne rickettsial disease reflects the geographic distribution 
and seasonal activities of the tick vectors and vertebrate hosts 
involved in the transmission of these pathogens, as well as the 
human behaviors that place persons at risk for tick exposure, 
tick attachment, and subsequent infection (Box 1). SFG 
rickettsiosis, ehrlichiosis, and anaplasmosis are nationally 
notifiable in the United States. Cases have been reported in 
each month of the year, although most cases are reported 
during April–September, coincident with peak levels of tick 
host-seeking activity (3–5,9–14). The distribution of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases varies geographically in the United States 
and approximates the primary tick vector distributions, making 
it important for health care providers to be familiar with the 
regions where tickborne rickettsial diseases are common. 
Travelers within the United States might be exposed to different 
tick vectors during travel, which can result in illness after they 
return home. Travelers outside of the United States might also 
be exposed to different tick vectors and rickettsial pathogens 
in other countries, which can result in illness after they return 
to the United States (see Travel Outside of the United States). 
Health care, public health, and veterinary professionals should 
be aware of changing vector distributions, emerging and 
newly identified human tickborne rickettsial pathogens, and 
increasing travel among persons and pets within and outside 
of the United States.
Spotted Fever Group Rickettsiae
SFG rickettsiae are related closely by various genetic and 
antigenic characteristics and include R. rickettsii (the cause of 
RMSF), R. parkeri, and Rickettsia species 364D, as well as many 
other Rickettsia species of unknown pathogenicity. RMSF is 
the rickettsiosis in the United States that is associated with the 
highest rates of severe and fatal outcomes. During 2008–2012, 
passive surveillance indicated that the estimated average annual 
incidence of SFG rickettsiosis was 8.9 cases per million persons 
in the United States (4). The passive surveillance category in 
the United States for SFG rickettsiosis might not differentiate 
between RMSF and other SFG rickettsioses because of the 
limitations of submitted diagnostic evidence. Reported annual 
incidence of SFG rickettsiosis has increased substantially 
during the past 2 decades. The highest incidence occurs in 
persons aged 60–69 years, and the highest case-fatality rate is 
among children aged <10 years, although illness occurs in all 
age groups (4). Incidence varies considerably by geographic 
area (Figure 1). During 2008–2012, 63% of reported SFG 
rickettsiosis cases originated from five states: Arkansas, 
Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, and Tennessee (4). 
However, SFG rickettsiosis cases have been reported from 
each of the contiguous 48 states and the District of Columbia 
(4,9,12,14).
A notable regional increase in the reported incidence of SFG 
rickettsiosis occurred in Arizona during 2003–2013. Over 
this period, approximately 300 cases of RMSF and 20 deaths 
were reported from American Indian reservations in Arizona 
compared with three RMSF cases reported in the state during 
the previous decade (15). Since identification of the first case 
of locally transmitted RMSF in 2003 (16), RMSF has been 
found to be endemic in several American Indian communities 
in Arizona. On the three most affected reservations, the average 
annual incidence rate for 2009–2012 was approximately 1,360 
cases per million persons (17). The 7%–10% case-fatality rate 
in these communities, which is the highest of any region in the 
United States, has been associated predominantly with delayed 
recognition and treatment (4,18).
Rickettsia rickettsii
In the United States, the tick species that is most frequently 
associated with transmission of R. rickettsii is the American 
dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis (Figure 2). This tick is found 
primarily in the eastern, central, and Pacific coastal United States 
(Figure 3). The Rocky Mountain wood tick, Dermacentor 
andersoni (Figure 4), is associated with transmission in the 
western United States (Figure 5). More recently, the brown 
dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Figure 6), which is 
located throughout the United States (Figure 7), has been 
 Recommendations and Reports
4 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
recognized as an important vector in parts of Arizona (16) 
and along the U.S.-Mexico border. Several tick species of the 
genus Amblyomma are vectors of R. rickettsii from Mexico to 
Argentina, including A. cajennense, A. aureolatum, A. imitator, 
and A. sculptum (19–22). Although the geographic ranges 
of A. imitator and A. mixtum (a species closely related to 
A. cajennense) extend into Texas, the role of Amblyomma ticks 
in transmission of R. rickettsii in the United States has not 
been established.
D. variabilis ticks often are encountered in wooded, shrubby, 
and grassy areas and tend to congregate along walkways and 
trails. These ticks also can be found in residential areas and city 
parks. Larval and nymphal stages of most Dermacentor spp. 
ticks in the United States usually do not bite humans. Although 
adult D. variabilis and D. andersoni ticks bite humans, the 
principal hosts tend to be deer, dogs, and livestock. Adult 
Dermacentor ticks are active from spring through autumn, with 
maximum activity during late spring through early summer.
The brown dog tick, Rh. sanguineus, has been a recognized 
vector of R. rickettsii in Mexico since the 1940s (23); however, 
Rhipicephalus-transmitted R. rickettsii in the United States was 
not identified until 2003, when it was confirmed in a child on 
tribal lands in Arizona (16). Canids, especially domestic dogs, 
are the preferred hosts for the brown dog tick at all life stages. 
Humans are incidental hosts, bitten as a result of contact with 
tick-infested dogs or tick-infested environments. All active 
stages (larvae, nymphs, and adults) of Rh. sanguineus will bite 
humans and can transmit R. rickettsii. Heavily parasitized dogs 
FIGURE 1. Reported incidence rate* of spotted fever rickettsiosis,† by county — United States, 2000–2013
* As reported through national surveillance, per 1,000,000 persons per year. Cases are reported by county of residence, which is not always where the infection 
was acquired.
† Includes Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) and other spotted fever group rickettsioses. In 2010, the name of the reporting category changed from RMSF to 
spotted fever rickettsiosis. 
>60
>20 to ≤60
>5 to ≤20
>0 to ≤5
0
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(Figure 8), as well as sizable infestations of brown dog ticks in 
and around homes, have been found in affected communities 
in Arizona (16,17,24). Free-roaming dogs can spread infected 
ticks among households within a neighborhood, resulting 
in community-level clusters of infection. Children aged 
<10 years represent more than half of reported cases in this 
region and are theorized to have higher rates of exposure to 
Rh. sanguineus ticks because of increased interaction with dogs 
and their habitats (16,25). On Arizona tribal lands, the warm 
climate and proximity of ticks to domiciles provide a suitable 
environment for Rh. sanguineus to remain active year-round 
(26). The majority of human cases of RMSF in Arizona occur 
during July–October after seasonal monsoon rains; however, 
cases have been reported every month of the year (25).
Similar epidemiologic characteristics and transmission 
dynamics have been reported in parts of Mexico (27–30). A 
high incidence of RMSF occurs in several northern Mexican 
states, including Baja California and Sonora, which border the 
United States. Persons infected with R. rickettsii in Mexico have 
sought health care across the U.S. border; health care providers 
should be aware of the risk for RMSF in persons traveling 
from areas where the disease incidence is high. Rh. sanguineus 
is found worldwide but is reported to transmit R. rickettsii in 
the southwestern United States, Mexico, and possibly some 
RMSF-endemic areas of South America (16,29–32). This 
species might contribute to the enzootic cycle more commonly 
than has been recognized (33,34).
Rickettsia parkeri
The first confirmed case of human R. parkeri infection was 
reported in 2004 (35). During 2004–2015, at least 40 patients 
FIGURE 3. Approximate U.S. distribution of Dermacentor variabilis 
(American dog tick) 
FIGURE 2. Adult female Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick)
Photo/CDC 
FIGURE 4. Adult female Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain 
wood tick) 
Photo/CDC 
FIGURE 5. Approximate U.S. distribution of Dermacentor andersoni 
(Rocky Mountain wood tick) 
 Recommendations and Reports
6 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
with R. parkeri rickettsiosis were identified from 10 states 
(35–41) (CDC, unpublished data, 2015). The median age of 
patients from case reports was 53 years (range: 23–83 years) 
(38); R. parkeri rickettsiosis has not been documented in 
children, and no fatal cases have been reported. R. parkeri is 
transmitted by the Gulf Coast tick, Amblyomma maculatum 
(Figure 9). The geographic range of A. maculatum extends 
across the southern United States from Texas to South Carolina 
and as far north as Kansas, Maryland, Oklahoma, and 
Virginia (Figure 10). The Gulf Coast tick is typically found in 
prairie grassland and coastal upland habitats (42). R. parkeri 
rickettsiosis cases have been documented during April–
October, with most cases occurring during July–September.
Rickettsia Species 364D
The first confirmed case of human disease associated 
with Rickettsia species 364D was described in 2010 from 
California and likely was transmitted by the Pacific Coast tick, 
Dermacentor occidentalis (43). Fewer than 10 cases of Rickettsia 
species 364D infection, all from California, have been reported 
in the literature (43,44). Cases have been documented in 
children and adults (44). The Pacific Coast tick is found in 
the coastal ranges of Oregon and California and in the states 
of Baja California and Sinaloa in Mexico. Principal hosts of 
adult ticks are horses, cattle, and black-tailed deer, whereas 
immature ticks feed on rodents and rabbits. The prevalence 
and distribution of Rickettsia species 364D in D. occidentalis 
ticks suggests that these infections in humans might be more 
common in California than currently recognized (45,46). 
Reported cases of Rickettsia species 364D rickettsiosis have 
occurred during July–September (43,44).
Ehrlichiae
In the United States, three Ehrlichia species are known to 
cause symptomatic human infection. E. chaffeensis, the cause 
of human monocytic ehrlichiosis, was described first in 1987 
and is the most common agent of human ehrlichiosis (47). 
E. ewingii was reported as a human pathogen in 1999 after 
FIGURE 7. Approximate U.S. distribution of Rhipicephalus sanguineus 
(brown dog tick)
FIGURE 8. Dog infested with Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks
Photo/CDC 
FIGURE 6. Adult female Rhipicephalus sanguineus (brown dog tick)
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
being detected in peripheral blood leukocytes of four patients 
with illness during 1996–1998 (48). EML agent ehrlichiosis, 
first described in 2011, is the most recently recognized form 
of human ehrlichiosis in the United States and was detected 
originally in the blood of four patients from Minnesota and 
Wisconsin in 2009 (49).
During 2008–2012, the average annual incidence of 
ehrlichiosis was 3.2 cases per million persons, which is more 
than twice the estimated incidence during 2000–2007 (5). Cases 
have been reported from an increasing number of counties (5) 
(Figure 11). Incidence generally increases with age, with the 
highest age-specific incidences occurring among persons aged 
60–69 years (5,13,50). Case-fatality rates are highest among 
children aged <10 years and adults aged ≥70 years, and an 
increased risk for death has been documented among persons 
who are immunosuppressed (5,13). In areas where ehrlichiosis is 
endemic, the actual disease incidence is likely underrepresented 
in estimates that are based on passive surveillance (51–53).
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
E. chaffeensis is transmitted to humans by the lone star tick, 
Amblyomma americanum (Figure 12). The lone star tick is among 
the most commonly encountered ticks in the southeastern 
United States, with a range that extends into areas of the Midwest 
and New England states (Figure 13). Ehrlichiosis cases have been 
reported throughout the range of the lone star tick; states with 
the highest reported incidence rates include Arkansas, Delaware, 
Missouri, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Virginia (5). The white-
tailed deer is a major host of all stages of lone star ticks and is 
thought to be an important natural reservoir for E. chaffeensis 
(54). Consequently, the lone star tick is found most commonly 
in woodland habitats that have white-tailed deer populations. The 
lone star tick feeds on a wide range of hosts, including humans, 
and has been implicated as the most common tick to bite humans 
in the southern United States (55,56). Although all stages of this 
tick feed on humans, only adult and nymphal ticks are known 
to be responsible for transmission of E. chaffeensis to humans. 
Most cases of E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis occur during May–August.
Ehrlichia ewingii
E. ewingii ehrlichiosis became a notifiable disease in 2008. 
During 2008–2012, cases were primarily reported from 
Missouri; however, cases also were reported from 10 other states 
within the distribution of the principal vector, the lone star 
tick, A. americanum (5,57) (Figure 13). Although E. ewingii 
ehrlichiosis initially was reported predominantly among 
persons who were immunosuppressed, passive surveillance 
data from 2008–2012 indicated that the majority of persons 
(74%) with reported E. ewingii infection did not report 
immunosuppression (5). No fatal cases of E. ewingii ehrlichiosis 
have been reported. The ecologic features of E. ewingii are not 
completely known; however, dogs, goats, and deer have been 
infected naturally and experimentally (58–60).
Ehrlichia muris-Like Agent
In 2011, a new species of Ehrlichia referred to as the EML 
agent was described as a human pathogen after detection in the 
blood from four patients (three from Wisconsin and one from 
Minnesota) by using molecular testing techniques (49). The 
EML agent subsequently was identified in blood specimens 
from 69 symptomatic patients who lived in or were exposed 
to ticks in Minnesota or Wisconsin during 2007‒2013 (61). 
The blacklegged tick, Ixodes scapularis (Figure 14), is an 
efficient vector for the EML agent in experimental studies 
(62,63), and DNA from the EML agent has been detected 
from I. scapularis collected in Minnesota and Wisconsin but 
has not been detected in I. scapularis from other states (64,65).
FIGURE 10. Approximate U.S. distribution of Amblyomma maculatum 
(Gulf Coast tick)
FIGURE 9. Adult female Amblyomma maculatum (Gulf Coast tick)
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
8 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Anaplasma phagocytophilum
A. phagocytophilum causes human anaplasmosis, which is also 
known as human granulocytic anaplasmosis (formerly known 
as human granulocytic ehrlichiosis). Passive surveillance from 
2008–2012 indicates that the average annual incidence of 
anaplasmosis was 6.3 cases per million persons (3). Incidence 
is highest in the northeastern and upper Midwestern states, 
and the geographic range of anaplasmosis appears to be 
expanding (3,66) (Figure 15). In Wisconsin, anaplasmosis has 
been identified as an important cause of nonspecific febrile 
illness during the tick season (67). Age-specific incidence of 
anaplasmosis is highest among those aged ≥60 years (3). The 
reported case-fatality rate during 2008–2012 was 0.3% and 
was higher among persons aged ≥70 years and those with 
immunosuppression (3).
I. scapularis (Figure 14) is the vector for A. phagocytophilum in 
the northeastern and Midwestern United States (68) (Figure 16), 
whereas the western blacklegged tick, Ixodes pacificus (Figure 17), 
is the principal vector along the West Coast (Figure 18). The 
bites of nymphal and adult ticks can transmit A. phagocytophilum 
to humans. The relative roles of particular animal species as 
reservoirs of A. phagocytophilum strains that cause human illness 
are not fully understood and likely vary geographically; however, 
mice, squirrels, woodrats, and other wild rodents are thought 
to be important in the enzootic cycle. Most anaplasmosis cases 
occur during June–November. The seasonality of anaplasmosis 
is bimodal, with the first peak during June–July and a smaller 
peak during October, which corresponds to the emergence of 
the adult stage of I. scapularis (13).
The blacklegged tick also transmits nonrickettsial pathogens 
in certain geographic areas, including Borrelia burgdorferi (the 
cause of Lyme disease), Babesia microti (the primary cause of 
human babesiosis in the United States), Borrelia miyamotoi, 
(a cause of tickborne relapsing fever), and deer tick virus 
FIGURE 11. Reported incidence rate* of Ehrlichia chaffeensis ehrlichiosis, by county — United States, 2000–2013
>60
>20 to ≤60
>5 to ≤20
>0 to ≤5
0
* As reported through national surveillance, per 1,000,000 persons per year. Cases are reported by county of residence, which is not always where the infection 
was acquired.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(Powassan virus, lineage II; a cause of tickborne encephalitis). 
The preponderance of cases of human anaplasmosis occur 
in the same states that report high incidences of Lyme 
disease and human babesiosis. Simultaneous infections with 
A. phagocytophilum and B. burgdorferi or B. microti have been 
described (69–73), and discerning such a mixed infection is 
important because it might affect antimicrobial choice (see 
Coinfections of Anaplasma with Other Tickborne Pathogens).
FIGURE 13. Approximate U.S. distribution of Amblyomma americanum 
(lone star tick)
FIGURE 12. Adult female Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick)
Photo/CDC 
BOX 1. Summary of epidemiologic features of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases
• Incidence varies geographically in the United States, 
thus it is important for health care providers to know 
the regions in which particular tickborne rickettsial 
diseases typically occur.
• Occurrence is seasonal and corresponds with the feeding 
period for the life stage of the primary tick vector; the 
majority of illness occurs during the spring and summer 
months but might occur throughout the year, especially 
in geographic regions with warmer climates.
• In the past decade, Rickettsia parkeri, Rickettsia species 
364D, and EML agent were newly recognized as agents 
of tickborne rickettsial disease in the United States.
• SFG rickettsioses, including RMSF
, are reported from all 
of the contiguous 48 states and the District of Columbia.
• RMSF and Ehrlichia chaffeensis ehrlichiosis most 
commonly are reported in states from Missouri and 
Oklahoma east to North Carolina and Virginia.
• RMSF has emerged in parts of Arizona where it is 
associated with a different tick vector, Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus. RMSF in this area is characterized by 
unusually high incidence and case-fatality rates 
(particularly among children) and associated with 
prolonged periods of seasonal tick exposure and 
increased domestic and peridomestic exposures.
• Cases of RMSF have been reported in persons who 
acquire infection in areas of Mexico where disease 
incidence is high and subsequently seek health care 
across the U.S.-Mexico border.
• R. parkeri rickettsiosis first was described in 2004, and 
cases most commonly are reported along the Gulf 
Coast and the eastern seaboard.
• Rickettsia species 364D rickettsiosis first was described 
in 2010, and all reported cases are from California.
• Although recognized human cases of Ehrlichia ewingii 
ehrlichiosis are uncommon, cases increasingly are 
recognized and reported over a wider geographic range.
• EML agent ehrlichiosis first was described in 2011, 
and cases have been identified in persons exposed to 
ticks in Minnesota and Wisconsin.
• Anaplasmosis is reported predominantly from the 
northeastern United States, Minnesota, and Wisconsin.
Abbreviations: EML = Ehrlichia muris-like; RMSF = Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever; SFG = spotted fever group.
 Recommendations and Reports
10 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Epidemiologic Clues from 
the Clinical History
Obtaining a thorough clinical history that includes questions 
about recent 1) tick exposure, 2) recreational or occupational 
exposure to tick-infested habitats, 3) travel to areas where 
tickborne rickettsial diseases are endemic, and 4) occurrence of 
similar illness in family members, coworkers, or pet dogs can 
provide critical information to make a presumptive diagnosis 
of tickborne rickettsial disease. However, the absence of one or 
more of these factors does not exclude a diagnosis of tickborne 
rickettsial disease. Health care providers should be familiar with 
the epidemiologic clues that support the diagnosis of tickborne 
rickettsial disease but recognize that classic epidemiologic 
features are not reported in many instances (Box 2).
History of Tick Bite or Exposure
A detailed history should be taken to elicit information about 
known tick bites or activities that might be associated with 
exposure to ticks. Although the recognition of a tick bite is 
helpful, unrecognized tick bites are common in patients who are 
later confirmed to have a tickborne rickettsial disease. A history 
of a tick bite within 14 days of illness onset is reported in only 
55%–60% of RMSF cases (9,12,25) and 68% of ehrlichiosis 
cases (10). Therefore, absence of a recognized tick bite should 
never dissuade health care providers from considering tickborne 
rickettsial disease in the appropriate clinical context. In fact, the 
absence of classic features, such as a reported tick bite, has been 
associated with delays in RMSF diagnosis and increased risk 
for death (9,18,74,75). The location of the tick bite might be 
obscure, and the bite is typically painless. Bites from immature 
stages of ticks (e.g., nymphs, which are 1–2 mm, or the size 
of a pinhead) (Figure 19) might be even less apparent. Some 
patients who do not report tick exposure might describe other 
pruritic, erythematous, or ulcerated cutaneous lesions that they 
refer to as mosquito, spider, chigger, or bug bites, all of which 
might be indistinguishable from a recent tick bite.
A thorough recreational and occupational history can help 
reveal potential exposures to tick habitats. In areas endemic 
for ticks, activities as commonplace as playing in a backyard, 
visiting a neighborhood park, gardening, or walking dogs are 
potential sources of tick exposure. Many types of environments 
serve as tick habitats, depending on the specific tick vector 
species. Areas with high uncut grass, weeds, and low brush 
might pose a high risk for certain vector species; however, 
these tick species also seek hosts in well-maintained grass lawns 
around suburban homes (76). Moreover, certain species can 
withstand drier conditions and might be found in vegetation-
free areas or forest floors covered with only leaf litter or pine 
needles. Additional areas that might be inhabited by ticks 
include vegetation bordering roads, trails, yards, or fields; urban 
and suburban recreational parks; golf courses; and debris piles 
or refuse around homes (24,77–80). Activities that commonly 
result in contact with potential tick habitats include recreational 
pursuits (e.g., camping, hiking, fishing, hunting, gardening, 
and golfing) and occupational activities (e.g., forestry work, 
farming, landscaping, and military exercises). Although peak 
tick season is an important consideration, health care providers 
should remain aware that tickborne rickettsial illnesses have 
been reported in every month of the year, including winter 
(3–5,25,81). Climate differences and seasonal weather patterns 
can influence the duration and peak of tick season in a given 
geographic region and a given year. 
Queries about contact with pets, especially dogs, and a 
history of tick attachment or recent tick removal from pets 
might be useful in assessing potential human tick exposure. 
Pet dogs with attached ticks can serve as useful indicators of 
peridomestic tick infestation (17,82,83). Tick-infested dogs 
can transfer ticks directly to humans during interactions and 
serve as transport hosts, carrying ticks in and around dwellings 
where the ticks can then transfer to the human occupants 
(84) (see Similar Illness in Household Members, Coworkers, 
or Pets).
Recent Travel to Areas Known To Be Endemic for 
Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases
Health care providers practicing in areas where the incidence 
of tickborne rickettsial disease is historically low might be less 
likely to distinguish these diseases from other clinically similar 
and more commonly encountered infectious and noninfectious 
syndromes. Tickborne rickettsial diseases typically are sporadic, 
and identifying these infections requires a high index of clinical 
suspicion, especially in environments in which the infections 
FIGURE 14. Adult female Ixodes scapularis (blacklegged tick)
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
have not been recognized previously as occurring frequently. 
Knowledge of the epidemiology of tickborne rickettsial 
diseases, including the regions of the United States with a 
high incidence, is important. The distribution of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases is influenced by the geographic range of the 
tick vector, which can change over time. Distribution maps of 
tick vectors and disease incidence can serve as guides; however, 
the distribution borders are not fixed in space or over time, and 
the ranges for many tick species might be expanding.
Travel history within and outside of the United States 
can provide an important clue in considering the diagnosis 
of a tickborne rickettsial disease. Travel from an area where 
tickborne rickettsial diseases are endemic within 2 weeks of 
the onset of a clinically compatible illness could support a 
presumptive diagnosis of tickborne illness, especially if travel 
activities that might result in tick exposure are reported. 
Tickborne rickettsial diseases occur worldwide, and the 
FIGURE 15. Reported incidence rate* of anaplasmosis, by county — United States, 2000–2013
>60
>20 to ≤60
>5 to ≤20
>0 to ≤5
0
* As reported through national surveillance, per 1,000,000 persons per year. Cases are reported by county of residence, which is not always where the infection 
was acquired.
FIGURE 16. Approximate U.S. distribution of Ixodes scapularis 
(blacklegged tick)
 Recommendations and Reports
12 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
imported diseases might have epidemiologic, seasonal, and 
clinical features that differ from those in the United States. 
Selected additional tickborne rickettsial diseases that might be 
considered in returning international travelers are presented 
(see Travel Outside of the United States and Appendix A). 
Similar Illness in Household Members, 
Coworkers, or Pets
Clustering of certain tickborne rickettsial diseases is a 
well-recognized epidemiologic occurrence, particularly after 
common exposures to natural foci of infected ticks. Temporally 
and geographically related clusters of illness have occurred 
among family members (including their pet dogs), coworkers, 
or persons frequenting a particular common area. Described 
clusters include ehrlichiosis among residents of a golfing 
community (80), ehrlichiosis and RMSF among soldiers on 
field maneuvers (85,86), and RMSF among family members 
(87–89). Infections with R. rickettsii and Ehrlichia species 
have been observed concurrently in humans and their pet 
dogs (48,83,90). Recognition of a dog’s death from RMSF 
has even prompted recognition and appropriate treatment of 
RMSF in the sick owner (90). Health care providers should 
ask ill patients about similar illnesses among family members, 
coworkers, community residents, and pet dogs.
Dogs are frequently exposed to ticks and are susceptible to 
infections with many of the same tickborne rickettsial pathogens 
as humans, including R. rickettsii, E. chaffeensis, E. ewingii, and 
A. phagocytophilum (82). Evidence of current or past rickettsial 
infection in dogs might be useful in determining the presence of 
human risk for tickborne rickettsial diseases in a given geographic 
area (82). Tickborne rickettsial infection in dogs can range from 
inapparent to severe. RMSF in dogs manifests with fever, lethargy, 
decreased appetite, tremors, scleral injection, maculopapular 
rash on ears and exposed skin, and petechial lesions on mucous 
membranes (91–93). A veterinarian should be consulted when 
tickborne rickettsial disease is suspected in dogs or other animals 
(see Protecting Pets from Tick Bites). Documentation of a 
tickborne rickettsial disease in a dog should prompt veterinary 
professionals to warn pet owners about the risk for acquiring 
human tickborne disease. Cases of RMSF in dogs preceding 
illness in their owners (83) illustrate the value of communication 
between veterinarians and human health care providers when 
zoonotic diseases are suspected and emphasize the importance 
of a One Health approach to address zoonotic diseases.
FIGURE 19. Sizes of the larva, nymph, and adult stages of Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus (brown dog tick) compared with a human finger
Photo/CDC 
FIGURE 18. Approximate U.S. distribution of Ixodes pacificus (western 
blacklegged tick)
FIGURE 17. Adult female Ixodes pacificus (western blacklegged tick)
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Clinical Signs and Symptoms and 
Pathophysiology of Disease
Tickborne rickettsial diseases commonly have nonspecific 
clinical signs and symptoms early in the course of disease. 
Although the clinical presentations of tickborne rickettsial 
disease overlap, the frequency of certain associated signs and 
symptoms (e.g., rash and other cutaneous findings), typical 
laboratory findings, and case-fatality rates differ by pathogen 
(Table 1). Familiarity with the clinical signs and symptoms and 
pathophysiology of tickborne rickettsial diseases, including 
RMSF and other SFG rickettsioses (Box 3), ehrlichioses 
(Box 4), and anaplasmosis (Box 5) will assist health care 
providers in developing a differential diagnosis, prescribing 
appropriate antibacterial treatment, and ordering appropriate 
confirmatory diagnostic tests.
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and Other 
Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
Pathophysiology
R. rickettsii is an obligate intracellular pathogen that 
primarily infects vascular endothelial cells, and, less commonly, 
underlying smooth muscle cells of small and medium vessels 
(Figure 20). Infection with R. rickettsii leads to systemic 
vasculitis that manifests externally as characteristic petechial 
skin lesions. If disease progresses untreated, it can result in 
end-organ damage associated with severe morbidity and death. 
Pathogen-mediated injury to the vascular endothelium results 
in increased capillary permeability, microhemorrhage, and 
platelet consumption (94). Late-stage manifestations, such as 
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema (acute respiratory distress 
syndrome [ARDS]) and cerebral edema, are consequences 
of microvascular leakage. Hyponatremia occurs as a result of 
appropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone in response to 
hypovolemia (95).
Signs and Symptoms
Symptoms of RMSF typically appear 3–12 days after the 
bite of an infected tick or between the fourth and eighth day 
after discovery of an attached tick (96). The incubation period 
is generally shorter (5 days or less) in patients who develop 
severe disease (97). Initial symptoms include sudden onset 
of fever, headache, chills, malaise, and myalgia. Other early 
symptoms might include nausea or vomiting, abdominal pain, 
anorexia, and photophobia. A rash typically appears 2–4 days 
after the onset of fever; however, most patients initially seek 
health care before appearance of a rash (25,74,98). The classic 
triad of fever, rash, and reported tick bite is present in only 
a minority of patients during initial presentation to health 
care (6,25); therefore, health care providers should not wait 
for development of this triad before considering a diagnosis 
of RMSF.
The RMSF rash classically begins as small (1–5 mm in 
diameter), blanching, pink macules on the ankles, wrists, or 
forearms that subsequently spread to the palms, soles, arms, 
legs, and trunk, usually sparing the face. Over the next several 
days of illness, the rash typically becomes maculopapular, 
sometimes with central petechiae (Figures 21 and 22). 
The classic spotted or generalized petechial rash, including 
involvement of the palms and soles, usually appears by day 5 or 
6 and is indicative of advanced disease. Absence of rash should 
not preclude consideration of RMSF; <50% of patients have 
a rash in the first 3 days of illness, and a smaller percentage 
of patients never develop a rash (6,25). The rash might be 
atypical, localized, faint, or evanescent (99). In some persons, 
skin pigmentation might make the rash difficult to recognize. 
The rash might resemble those of other infectious and 
noninfectious etiologies (see Differential Diagnosis of Fever 
and Rash). Children aged <15 years more frequently have a rash 
than older patients and develop the rash earlier in the course 
of illness (6–8). Lack of rash or late-onset rash in RMSF has 
been associated with delays in diagnosis and increased mortality 
(6,18,74). Unlike some SFG rickettsioses, an inoculation 
eschar is rarely present with RMSF (100,101). Other clinical 
BOX 2. Summary of epidemiologic clues from the clinical history
• The absence of known tick attachment should never 
dissuade a health care provider from considering the 
diagnosis of tickborne rickettsial disease.
• A detailed history of recent recreational and 
occupational activities and travel might reveal 
potential exposure to ticks or tick habitats.
• Familiarity with tickborne rickettsial disease 
epidemiology is helpful when asking patients about 
recent travel to areas (domestic and international) 
where these diseases are endemic.
• Clustering of certain tickborne rickettsial diseases is 
well recognized and has been reported among family 
members, pet dogs, coworkers, military personnel, 
and other groups.
• Dogs and humans are susceptible to infection with 
many of the same tickborne rickettsial pathogens, 
including Rickettsia rickettsii, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 
Ehrlichia ewingii, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum; in 
some instances, pet dogs might serve as sentinels for 
tickborne rickettsial disease in humans.
 Recommendations and Reports
14 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
features that have been observed in association with RMSF 
include abdominal pain that mimics acute appendicitis (102), 
cholecystitis (103), or gastroenteritis; diarrhea; conjunctival 
suffusion; periorbital and peripheral edema (more common in 
children); calf pain; acute transient hearing loss; hepatomegaly; 
and splenomegaly (6,104).
Severe, late-stage manifestations of RMSF include 
meningoencephalitis, acute renal failure, ARDS, cutaneous 
necrosis, shock, arrhythmia, and seizure. Features of late illness 
might be confused with other diseases or syndromes. For example, 
RMSF-associated cutaneous necrosis and gangrene might 
be difficult to distinguish clinically from purpura fulminans 
associated with meningococcemia (105). RMSF-associated 
neurologic manifestations, renal failure, and thrombocytopenia 
have led to confusion with the diagnosis of thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) (106–108). RMSF-associated 
vasculitis has been confused with idiopathic, acute vasculitides, 
such as Kawasaki disease in pediatric patients. RMSF might 
also mimic bacterial or viral meningoencephalitis (109). Focal 
neurologic deficits, including cranial or peripheral motor nerve 
paralysis, or sudden transient hearing loss can occur (110–112).
TABLE 1. Selected clinical features of tickborne rickettsial diseases — United States
Disease
Incubation 
period
Common initial signs and 
symptoms
Cutaneous signs
Common laboratory findings
Estimated 
case-fatality 
rate
Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever
3–12 days
Fever, headache, chills, 
malaise, myalgia, nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, 
photophobia, anorexia
Maculopapular rash 
approximately 2–4 days after 
fever onset in most, might 
become petechial and involve 
palms and soles
Thrombocytopenia, slightly 
increased hepatic transaminase 
levels, normal or slightly 
increased white blood cell count 
with increased immature 
neutrophils, hyponatremia
5%–10%
Rickettsia parkeri 
rickettsiosis
2–10 days
Fever, myalgia, headache
Eschar, sparse maculopapular or 
vesiculopapular rash that 
might involve palms and soles
Mild thrombocytopenia, mild 
leukopenia, increased hepatic 
transaminase levels
—*
Rickettsia species 364D 
rickettsiosis
—†
Fever, headache, myalgia, 
fatigue
Eschar or ulcerative lesion with 
regional lymphadenopathy
—†
—*
Ehrlichia chaffeensis 
ehrlichiosis (human 
monocytic ehrlichiosis)
5–14 days
Fever, headache, malaise, 
myalgia, nausea, diarrhea, 
vomiting
Rash in approximately 30% of 
adults and 60% of children, 
variable rash pattern that 
might involve palms and soles, 
appears a median of 5 days 
after illness onset
Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
increased hepatic transaminase 
levels, hyponatremia, anemia 
3%
Ehrlichia ewingii 
ehrlichiosis
—†
Fever, headache, malaise, 
myalgia
Rash rare
Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
increased hepatic transaminase 
levels
—*
Ehrlichia muris-like agent 
ehrlichiosis
—†
Fever, headache, malaise, 
myalgia
Rash in approximately 12%
Thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, 
leukopenia, increased hepatic 
transaminase levels, anemia
—*
Human anaplasmosis 
(human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis)
5–14 days
Fever, headache, malaise, 
myalgia, chills
Rash rare, in <10%
Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, 
mild anemia, increased hepatic 
transaminase levels, increased 
numbers of immature 
neutrophils
<1%
* No known deaths.
† Not documented.
FIGURE 20. Immunohistochemical stain demonstrating Rickettsia 
rickettsii (red) in blood vessel endothelial cells
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Clinical Course
Clinical suspicion for RMSF should be maintained in cases of 
nonspecific febrile illness and sepsis of unclear etiology, particularly 
during spring and summer months. Delay in diagnosis and 
treatment is the most important factor associated with increased 
likelihood of death, and early empiric therapy is the best way to 
prevent RMSF progression. Without treatment, RMSF progresses 
rapidly. Patients treated after the fifth day of illness are more 
likely to die than those treated earlier in the course of illness 
(9,18,74,75). The frequency of hospital admission, intensive care 
unit admission, and death increases with time from symptom 
onset to initiation of appropriate antibacterial treatment (18) 
(Table 2). Delays in diagnosis and initiation of antirickettsial 
therapy have been associated with seeking health care early in 
the course of the illness (7,74), late-onset or absence of rash 
(6,18), and nonspecific or atypical early manifestations, such as 
gastrointestinal symptoms (18,98) or absence of headache (75). 
Epidemiologic factors associated with increased risk for death 
include disease that occurs early or late in the typical tick season 
(74) and the lack of a report of a tick bite (9,75,98). Although 
knowledge of the epidemiology might help guide diagnosis, the 
absence of epidemiologic clues can be misleading.
RMSF is the most frequently fatal rickettsial illness in the 
United States; the case-fatality rate in the preantibiotic era was 
approximately 25% (113–115). Present-day case-fatality rates, 
estimated at 5%–10% overall, depend in part on the timing 
of initiation of appropriate treatment; case-fatality rates of 
40%–50% among patients treated on days 8 or 9 of illness 
have been described recently (18) (Table 2). Additional risk 
factors for fatal RMSF include age ≥40 years, age <10 years, 
and alcohol abuse (18,75,116,117). Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency is a risk factor for fulminant RMSF, 
with death occurring in ≤5 days (118). Experimental and 
accumulated anecdotal clinical data suggest that treatment of 
patients with RMSF using a sulfonamide antimicrobial can 
result in increased disease severity and death (119,120).
Long-term neurologic sequelae of RMSF include cognitive 
impairment; paraparesis; hearing loss; blindness; peripheral 
neuropathy; bowel and bladder incontinence; cerebellar, 
vestibular, and motor dysfunction; and speech disorders 
(7,110,121–124). These complications are observed most 
frequently in persons recovering from severe, life-threatening 
disease, often after lengthy hospitalizations, and are most likely 
the result of R. rickettsii-induced vasculopathy. Cutaneous 
necrosis and gangrene (Figure 23) might result in amputation 
of digits or limbs (105). Long-term or persistent disease caused 
by R. rickettsii has not been observed.
Laboratory Findings
The total white blood cell count is typically normal or 
slightly increased in patients with RMSF, and increased 
numbers of immature neutrophils often are observed. 
Thrombocytopenia, slight elevations in hepatic transaminases 
(aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase), and 
hyponatremia might be present, particularly as the disease 
advances (25,77); however, laboratory values cannot be 
relied on to guide early treatment decisions because they are 
often within or slightly deviated from the reference range 
early in the course of illness (25). Indicators of diffuse tissue 
injury, such as elevated levels of creatine kinase or serum 
lactate dehydrogenase, might be present later in the course 
FIGURE 22. Late-stage petechial purpuric rash involving the sole of 
the foot in a patient with Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Photo/CDC 
FIGURE 21. Maculopapular rash with central petechiae associated with 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
16 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of illness. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is 
rare (125,126). When cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is evaluated, 
a lymphocytic (or less commonly, neutrophilic) pleocytosis 
(usually <100 cells/µL) can be observed (122). CSF protein 
might be moderately elevated (100–200 mg/dL), and the 
glucose level is typically within normal range (111,127).
Rickettsia parkeri Rickettsiosis
Compared with RMSF, R. parkeri rickettsiosis is less severe. 
Symptoms develop a median of 5 days (range: 2–10 days) 
after the bite of an infected tick (39). The first manifestation 
in nearly all patients is an inoculation eschar (a dark, scabbed 
plaque overlying a shallow ulcer, typically 0.5–2 cm in 
diameter), which generally is nonpruritic, nontender or mildly 
tender, and surrounded by an indurated, erythematous halo 
and occasionally a few petechiae (Figure 24). The presence 
of more than one eschar has been described (39). Fever 
typically develops within a few days of the eschar. Shortly 
after the onset of fever (approximately 0.5–4 days later), a 
nonpruritic maculopapular or vesiculopapular rash commonly 
develops (90%) (Figure 25). The rash primarily involves the 
trunk and extremities and might involve the palms and soles 
in approximately half of patients and the face in <20% of 
patients (39). Other common symptoms include myalgia 
(76%) and headache (86%). Regional lymphadenopathy is 
detected in approximately 25% of patients. Gastrointestinal 
manifestations, such as nausea or vomiting, are rare (38,39). 
Mild thrombocytopenia has been observed in 40%, mild 
leukopenia in 50%, and modest elevation of hepatic 
transaminase levels in 78% of cases (39). Hospitalization from 
R. parkeri rickettsiosis occurs in less than one third of patients; 
no severe manifestations or deaths have been reported. Because 
the clinical description of R. parkeri infection is based on 
observations from a limited number of cases, the full clinical 
spectrum of illness is likely incomplete.
Rickettsia Species 364D Rickettsiosis
The first clinical description of a confirmed case of Rickettsia 
species 364D infection was published in 2010 (43). Although 
the full spectrum of illness has yet to be described, 364D 
infection appears to be characterized by an eschar (Figure 26) 
or ulcerative skin lesion with regional lymphadenopathy 
(43,44). Fever, headache, myalgia, and fatigue have occurred 
among persons with confirmed infection. Rash has not been a 
notable feature of this illness. Illnesses among the few described 
patients have been relatively mild and have readily responded 
to appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
TABLE 2. Outcome for confirmed cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, by day of illness that treatment with doxycycline was started —  two 
tribal communities in eastern Arizona, 2002–2011
Day (no. of patients)*
Outpatient
No. (%)
Hospitalized
No. (%)
ICU patients among 
those hospitalized
No. (%)
Deaths among hospitalized  
and ICU patients
No. (%)
Day 1 (6)
5 (83)
1 (17)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Day 2 (11)
8 (73)
3 (27)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Day 3 (9)
4 (44)
5 (56)
1 (11)
0 (0)
Day 4 (7)
3 (43)
4 (57)
1 (14)
0 (0)
Day 5 (8)
2 (25)
6 (75)
4 (50)
0 (0)
Day 6 (9)
0 (0)
9 (100)
5 (55)
3 (33)
Day 7 (11)
0 (0)
11 (100)
4 (36)
3 (27)
Day 8 (5)
1 (20)
4 (80)
2 (40)
2 (40)
Day 9 (4)
0 (0)
4 (100)
4 (100)
2 (50)
Source: Adapted from Regan JJ, Traeger MS, Humpherys D, et al. Risk factors for fatal outcome from Rocky Mountain spotted fever in a highly endemic area—Arizona, 
2002–2011. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:1659–66.
Abbreviation: ICU = intensive care unit. 
* Day of illness that treatment was started and the total number of confirmed patients treated on that day.
FIGURE 23. Gangrene of the digits in a patient with late-stage 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Ehrlichioses
Ehrlichia chaffeensis Ehrlichiosis (Human 
Monocytic Ehrlichiosis)
Pathophysiology
Ehrlichiae are obligate intracellular bacteria that infect 
peripheral blood leukocytes. E. chaffeensis, the pathogen that 
causes human monocytic ehrlichiosis, predominantly infects 
monocytes and tissue macrophages (Figure 27). The organisms 
multiply in cytoplasmic membrane-bound vacuoles, forming 
tightly packed clusters of bacteria called morulae. In patients with 
fatal E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis, systemic, multiorgan involvement 
has been described with the greatest distribution of bacteria in the 
spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow (128). Unlike in RMSF
, 
direct vasculitis and endothelial injury are rare in ehrlichiosis. 
The host systemic inflammatory response, rather than direct 
effects of the pathogen, is likely to be largely responsible for 
many of the clinical manifestations of ehrlichiosis (129).
Signs and Symptoms
Symptoms of E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis typically appear 
a median of 9 days (range: 5–14 days) after the bite of an 
infected tick (128). Fever (96%), headache (72%), malaise 
(77%), and myalgia (68%) are common signs and symptoms. 
Gastrointestinal manifestations can be prominent, including 
nausea (57%), vomiting (47%), and diarrhea (25%) (129–
131). Abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea might be more 
common among children (132). Approximately one-third 
of patients develop a skin rash during the course of illness; 
rash occurs more frequently in children than in adults. Rash 
patterns vary in character from petechial or maculopapular 
(128,132) to diffuse erythema (133) and typically occur a 
median of 5 days after illness onset (10). The rash typically 
involves the extremities and trunk but can affect the palms, 
soles, or face (134). Cough or respiratory symptoms are 
reported in approximately 28% of patients and are more 
common among adults (10,51,129). Central nervous system 
involvement, such as meningitis or meningoencephalitis, is 
present in approximately 20% of patients (135).
Other severe manifestations include ARDS, toxic shock-
like or septic shock-like syndromes, renal failure, hepatic 
failure, coagulopathies, and occasionally, hemorrhagic 
BOX 3. Summary of clinical features of Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
and other spotted fever group rickettsioses
• RMSF is the most severe rickettsial illness in the 
United States.
• Delay in recognition and treatment is the most 
important factor associated with risk for death from 
RMSF.
• Early empiric therapy is the best way to prevent 
RMSF progression and resultant morbidity and 
mortality.
• The classic triad of fever, rash, and reported tick bite is 
rarely present when patients with RMSF first seek care.
• Rash is present in most patients during the course of 
RMSF, although it can appear late or be atypical, 
localized, faint, evanescent, and difficult to recognize 
in persons with darker pigmented skin.
• Thrombocytopenia, increased immature neutrophils, 
elevations in hepatic transaminase levels, and 
hyponatremia might be present in patients with 
RMSF; however, laboratory findings are often within 
or slightly deviated from the reference ranges early in 
the course of illness.
• Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis is typically milder than 
RMSF, and the first manifestation in nearly all 
patients is an inoculation eschar.
• The few described cases of Rickettsia species 364D 
rickettsiosis have involved a relatively mild illness 
characterized by eschar and regional lymphadenopathy.
Abbreviation: RMSF = Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
FIGURE 24. Various appearances of eschars associated with Rickettsia 
parkeri rickettsiosis
Photos/CDC 
FIGURE 25. Vesiculopapular rash associated with Rickettsia parkeri 
rickettsiosis
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
18 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
manifestations (133). E. chaffeensis infection might rarely 
trigger hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (136–140). Severe 
cases have been mistaken for TTP (141), appendicitis (142), 
or fulminant viral hepatitis (143). Heartland virus disease, a 
recently identified tickborne viral infection transmitted by the 
lone star tick, can closely resemble ehrlichiosis (144). 
Clinical Course
E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis can cause severe disease or death, 
although at lower rates than have been observed for RMSF. 
Approximately 3% of patients with symptoms severe enough 
to seek medical attention die from the infection (51,128). 
The severity of ehrlichiosis could be related, in part, to host 
factors such as age and the immune status of the patient. 
Persons who have compromised immune systems as a result 
of immunosuppressive therapies, human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection (145,146), organ transplantation 
(147,148), or splenectomy more frequently have severe 
symptoms of ehrlichiosis and are hospitalized more often (13). 
Case-fatality rates among persons who are immunosuppressed 
are higher than those among the general population, on 
the basis of U.S. passive surveillance and some case series 
(5,13,145); delays in recognition and initiation of appropriate 
antibacterial treatment in this population might contribute 
to increased mortality (149). Although older age (≥60 years) 
and immunosuppression are risk factors for severe ehrlichiosis 
(5,10,13), many cases of severe or fatal ehrlichiosis have been 
described in previously healthy children and young adults 
(128). Pediatric patients frequently have an asymptomatic or a 
mild infection (51,128,132); however, children aged <10 years 
have the highest case-fatality rate among passively reported 
cases (5,13). Receiving a sulfonamide antimicrobial agent 
might also predispose to severe ehrlichial illness (150–153). 
Confirmed reinfection with E. chaffeensis has been described 
in an immunosuppressed patient; however, the frequency of 
reinfection in immunocompetent persons is unknown (154). 
Laboratory Findings
Characteristic laboratory findings in the first week of 
E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis include leukopenia (nadir usually 
1,300–4,000 cells/µL) (129), thrombocytopenia (nadir 
usually 50,000–140,000 platelets/µL, although occasionally 
<20,000 platelets/µL), and mildly or moderately elevated levels 
of hepatic transaminases. Anemia occurs later in clinical illness 
and is reported in 50% of patients (129). Mild-to-moderate 
hyponatremia might also be present (128). During the recovery 
period, a relative and absolute lymphocytosis is seen in most 
patients (155). In some cases, pancytopenia due to ehrlichiosis 
has prompted bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, which typically 
reveals normocellular or hypercellular marrow (128,156). In 
some patients, morulae might be observed in monocytes in 
peripheral blood (157) (Figure 28) and occasionally in CSF 
(158,159) or bone marrow. In this context, a routine blood 
smear can provide a presumptive clue for early diagnosis; 
however, the visualization of morulae still requires confirmatory 
diagnostic testing (see Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests). 
When CSF is evaluated, a lymphocytic pleocytosis is most 
commonly observed, although neutrophilic pleocytosis also 
can occur (128,135). CSF white blood cell counts are typically 
FIGURE 26. Eschar on a patient with Rickettsia species 364D rickettsiosis
Photo/Samantha H. Johnston, Children’s Hospital & Research Center Oakland
FIGURE 27. Immunohistochemical stain demonstrating Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis morulae (red) within monocytes in the kidney of a patient 
with ehrlichiosis
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
<250 cells/µL but can be higher in children (128,135,158). 
Elevated CSF protein levels are common (135).
Ehrlichia ewingii Ehrlichiosis
Clinical manifestations of E. ewingii ehrlichiosis are similar 
to E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis and include fever, headache, 
malaise, and myalgia. Gastrointestinal symptoms have been 
described less commonly in E. ewingii ehrlichiosis, and 
rash is rare. Fewer severe manifestations have been reported 
with E. ewingii than with E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis (145), 
and no deaths have been described. Although E. ewingii 
infection has been considered more common in persons who 
are immunosuppressed (149), recent passive surveillance 
data indicated that most (74%) reported cases were not in 
persons with documented immunosuppression (5). Similar to 
E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis, patients with E. ewingii ehrlichiosis 
commonly have leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated 
hepatic transaminase levels. E. ewingii has a predilection for 
granulocytes, and morulae might be observed in granulocytes 
during examination of a blood smear, bone marrow, or CSF 
(48,160) (Figure 28).
Ehrlichia muris-Like Agent Ehrlichiosis
EML agent ehrlichiosis is associated with fever (87%), 
malaise (76%), headache (67%), and myalgia (60%) (49,61). 
Rash is reported in 12% of described cases (61). Symptomatic 
EML agent ehrlichiosis might be more common among persons 
who are immunosuppressed. No fatal cases have been reported 
to date. Thrombocytopenia (67%), lymphopenia (53%), 
leukopenia (39%), elevated levels of hepatic transaminases 
(78%), and anemia (36%) are described (61). Morulae have 
not been observed yet in peripheral blood cells of patients 
infected with the EML agent.
Anaplasmosis
Anaplasma phagocytophilum 
(Human Granulocytic Anaplasmosis)
Pathophysiology
A. phagocytophilum is an obligate, intracellular bacterium that is 
found predominantly within granulocytes. Similar to ehrlichiae, 
anaplasmae multiply in cytoplasmic membrane-bound vacuoles as 
microcolonies called morulae. Infection with A. phagocytophilum 
induces a systemic inflammatory response, which is thought to be 
the mechanism for tissue damage in anaplasmosis (161). Altered 
host neutrophil function occurs with A. phagocytophilum infection 
FIGURE 28. Wright stain of peripheral blood smears showing an 
intramonocytic morula associated with Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection 
(left) and an intragranulocytic morula (right), such as associated with 
Ehrlichia ewingii or Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection
Photos/J. Stephen Dumler, University of Maryland (left); Bobbi S. Pritt, Mayo 
Clinic (right)
BOX 4. Summary of clinical features of ehrlichioses
• Symptoms of Ehrlichia chaffeensis ehrlichiosis typically 
include fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, and 
gastrointestinal symptoms.
• With E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis, rash is present in 
approximately one third of patients but is more 
common among children than among adults.
• Neurologic manifestations are reported for 
approximately 20% of patients with E. chaffeensis 
ehrlichiosis.
• Increased severity of E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis has been 
associated with increased age (≥60 years) and 
immunosuppression.
• Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated hepatic 
transaminase levels are characteristic laboratory 
findings in the first week of E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis.
• E. chaffeensis has a predilection for mononuclear 
phagocytic cells, and morulae might be observed 
in monocytes of the blood, CSF, or bone 
marrow phagocytes.
• Ehrlichia ewingii ehrlichiosis has similar clinical 
features as E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis; however, rash 
and gastrointestinal symptoms are less common.
• E. ewingii has a predilection for granulocytes, and 
morulae might be observed in granulocytes of the 
blood, CSF, or bone marrow.
• Signs and symptoms of EML agent ehrlichiosis are 
similar to those of E. ewingii ehrlichiosis.
• EML agent ehrlichiosis has recently been described, 
and the target cell type is not known.
• The case-fatality rate for E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis is 
approximately 3%; no deaths from E. ewingii or EML 
agent ehrlichiosis have been reported.
Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; EML = Ehrlichia muris-like.
 Recommendations and Reports
20 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Borrelia burgdorferi, Babesia microti, Borrelia miyamotoi, and deer 
tick virus (Powassan virus, lineage II). Simultaneous infections 
with A. phagocytophilum and B. burgdorferi or B. microti have 
occurred (69–71,172). Confirmed Anaplasma coinfection has 
been reported in <10% of patients with Lyme disease (69,70,172).
Response to treatment can provide clues to possible 
coinfection. For example, anaplasmosis should respond 
readily to treatment with doxycycline. If the clinical response 
is delayed, coinfection or an alternative infection might 
be considered in the appropriate epidemiologic setting 
(173–175). Conversely, if Lyme disease is treated with a 
beta-lactam antibacterial drug in a patient with unrecognized 
A. phagocytophilum coinfection, symptoms of anaplasmosis 
could persist (70,173). Leukopenia or thrombocytopenia in 
a patient with Lyme disease should raise clinical suspicion for 
possible coinfection with A. phagocytophilum (173).
Differential Diagnosis of Fever and Rash
The differential diagnosis of fever and rash is broad 
(176,177) (Box 6), and during the early stages of illness, 
tickborne rickettsial diseases can be clinically indistinguishable 
from many viral exanthemas and other illnesses, particularly 
in children. Tickborne rickettsial diseases can be mistaken 
for viral gastroenteritis, upper respiratory tract infection, 
pneumonia, urinary tract infection, nonrickettsial bacterial 
sepsis, TTP
, idiopathic vasculitides, or viral or bacterial 
meningoencephalitides (104,129). Despite nonspecific 
initial symptoms of tickborne rickettsial diseases (e.g., fever, 
malaise, and headache), early consideration in the differential 
diagnosis and empiric treatment is critical in preventing poor 
outcomes, especially for RMSF, which progresses rapidly 
without treatment. The dermatologic classification of the rash, 
and could result in host neutrophils being ineffective at regulating 
inflammation or microbicidal activity (161).
Signs and Symptoms
Symptoms of anaplasmosis typically appear 5–14 days 
after the bite of an infected tick and usually include fever 
(92%–100%), headache (82%), malaise (97%), myalgia 
(77%), and shaking chills (129). Rash is present in <10% of 
patients, and compared with E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis and 
RMSF, gastrointestinal symptoms are less frequent and central 
nervous system involvement is rare (129,162). Patients with 
anaplasmosis typically seek medical care later in the course of 
illness (4–8 days after onset) than patients with other tickborne 
rickettsial diseases (2–4 days after onset) (8,163).
Clinical Course
In most cases, anaplasmosis is a self-limiting illness. Severe or 
life-threatening manifestations are less frequent with anaplasmosis 
than with RMSF or E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis; however, ARDS, 
peripheral neuropathies, DIC-like coagulopathies, hemorrhagic 
manifestations, rhabdomyolysis, pancreatitis, and acute renal 
failure have been reported. Severe anaplasmosis can also 
resemble toxic shock syndrome, TTP (164), or hemophagocytic 
syndromes (165). Serious and fatal opportunistic viral and 
fungal infections during the course of anaplasmosis infection 
have been described (166,167). Although the case-fatality rate 
among patients who seek health care for anaplasmosis is <1%, 
approximately 7% of hospitalized patients require admission 
to the intensive care unit (13,166,168). Predictors of a more 
severe course of anaplasmosis include advanced patient age, 
immunosuppression, comorbid medical conditions such as 
diabetes, and delay in diagnosis and treatment (13,168).
Laboratory Findings
Characteristic laboratory findings in anaplasmosis include 
thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, elevated hepatic transaminase 
levels, increased numbers of immature neutrophils, and mild 
anemia (169). Similar to ehrlichiosis, lymphocytosis can be 
present during the recovery period (170). CSF evaluation 
typically does not reveal any abnormalities (168). Blood 
smear examination might reveal morulae within granulocytes 
(Figure 28) (see Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests). Bone marrow 
is usually normocellular or hypercellular in acute anaplasmosis, 
and morulae might be observed (161,166,171).
Coinfections of Anaplasma  
with Other Tickborne Pathogens
The tick vector responsible for A. phagocytophilum transmission 
in the eastern United States, I. scapularis, also transmits 
nonrickettsial pathogens in certain geographic areas, including 
BOX 5. Summary of clinical features of anaplasmosis
• Patients with anaplasmosis typically have fever, 
headache, and myalgia; rash is rare.
• The case-fatality rate for anaplasmosis is <1%.
• Serious and fatal opportunistic viral and fungal infections 
have occurred during the course of anaplasmosis.
• Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated hepatic 
transaminase levels, and mild anemia are characteristic 
laboratory findings in anaplasmosis.
• Anaplasma phagocytophilum has a predilection for 
granulocytes, and blood smear or bone marrow 
examination might reveal morulae within these cells.
• The tick vector that transmits A. phagocytophilum also 
transmits other pathogens, and coinfections with Borrelia 
burgdorferi or Babesia microti have been described.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
its distribution, pattern of progression, and timing relative to 
onset of fever, and other systemic signs provide clues to help 
guide the differential diagnosis. A complete blood count, 
peripheral blood smear, and routine chemistry and hepatic 
function panels also can be helpful in guiding the differential 
diagnosis. Epidemiologic clues (e.g., season, tick bite history, 
travel, outdoor activities, exposure to pets or other animals, 
and exposures or risk factors relevant to diagnoses other than 
tickborne rickettsial diseases) might prove useful. Other life-
threatening illnesses that can have signs and symptoms that 
are similar to those of tickborne rickettsial diseases, such as 
meningococcemia, are important to recognize, consider in 
the initial differential diagnosis, and treat empirically pending 
further diagnostic evaluation.
Treatment and Management
Doxycycline is the drug of choice for treatment of all 
tickborne rickettsial diseases in patients of all ages, including 
children aged <8 years, and should be initiated immediately 
in persons with signs and symptoms suggestive of rickettsial 
disease (8,178–180) (Box 7). Diagnostic tests for rickettsial 
diseases, particularly for RMSF, are usually not helpful in 
making a timely diagnosis during the initial stages of illness. 
Treatment decisions for rickettsial pathogens should never 
be delayed while awaiting laboratory confirmation. Delay in 
treatment can lead to severe disease and long-term sequelae 
or death (74,116,181).
A thorough clinical history, physical examination, and 
laboratory results (e.g., complete blood count with differential 
leukocyte count, hepatic transaminase levels, and serum sodium 
level) collectively guide clinicians in developing a differential 
diagnosis and treatment plan. Because of the nonspecific signs 
and symptoms of tickborne rickettsial diseases, early empiric 
treatment for rickettsial diseases often needs to be administered 
concomitantly with empiric treatment for other conditions 
in the differential diagnosis. For example, for a patient in 
whom meningococcal disease and tickborne rickettsial disease 
are being considered, administering antibacterial therapy to 
treat potential Neisseria meningitidis infection in addition 
to administering doxycycline to treat rickettsial agents is 
appropriate while awaiting additional diagnostic information.
The recommended dose of doxycycline for the treatment 
of tickborne rickettsial diseases is 100 mg twice daily (orally 
or intravenously) for adults and 2.2 mg/kg body weight twice 
daily (orally or intravenously) for children weighing <100 lbs 
(45 kg) (8) (Table 3). Oral therapy is appropriate for patients 
with early stage disease who can be treated as outpatients. 
Intravenous therapy might be indicated for more severely ill 
patients who require hospitalization, particularly in patients 
who are vomiting or obtunded. The recommended duration 
of therapy for RMSF and ehrlichiosis is at least 3 days after 
subsidence of fever and until evidence of clinical improvement 
BOX 6. Selected conditions other than tickborne rickettsial diseases that can result in acute illness with fever and rash
Bacterial infections
Meningococcemia*
Secondary syphilis*
Disseminated gonococcal infection*
Bacterial endocarditis* 
Scarlet fever 
Rat bite fever*
Lyme disease 
Relapsing fever 
Leptospirosis
Murine typhus 
Rickettsialpox 
Sylvatic and epidemic typhus 
Scrub typhus 
Capnocytophaga canimorsus infection
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection
Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers
Viral infections
Hand, foot, and mouth disease*
Roseola 
Measles 
Rubella 
Mononucleosis 
Acute (primary) HIV infection
Cytomegalovirus infection
Human parvovirus B19 infection
Chickenpox 
Colorado tick fever
West Nile virus disease
Chikungunya virus disease
Dengue fever
Zika virus disease
Viral hemorrhagic fevers
Other conditions
Drug eruptions*
Kawasaki disease*
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura 
Immune complex vasculitis
Toxic shock syndrome*
Erythema multiforme*
Stevens-Johnson syndrome*
Abbreviation: HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
* Might cause rash or skin lesions involving the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.
 Recommendations and Reports
22 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
is noted (8,180,182,183); typically the minimum total course 
of treatment is 5–7 days. Severe or complicated disease could 
require longer treatment courses. Patients with anaplasmosis 
should be treated with doxycycline for 10 days to provide 
appropriate length of therapy for possible coinfection with 
B. burgdorferi (173). Children aged <8 years with anaplasmosis 
in whom concurrent Lyme disease is not suspected can be 
treated for a duration similar to that for other tickborne 
rickettsial diseases (173,183).
Fever typically subsides within 24–48 hours after treatment 
when the patient receives doxycycline in the first 4–5 days of 
illness. Lack of a clinical response within 48 hours of early 
treatment with doxycycline could be an indication that the 
condition is not a tickborne rickettsial disease, and alternative 
diagnoses or coinfection should be considered. Severely ill 
patients might require >48 hours of treatment before clinical 
improvement is noted, especially if they have multiple 
organ dysfunction.
Patients with evidence of organ dysfunction, severe 
thrombocytopenia, mental status changes, or the need for 
supportive therapy should be hospitalized. Other important 
considerations for hospitalization include social factors, the 
likelihood that the patient can and will take oral medications, 
and existing comorbid conditions, including the patient’s 
immune status. Certain patients with tickborne rickettsial 
disease can be treated on an outpatient basis with oral 
medication, particularly if a reliable caregiver is available in 
the home and the patient adheres to follow-up medical care. 
A critical step is for clinicians to keep in close contact with 
patients who are treated as outpatients to ensure that they 
are responding to therapy as expected. Similarly, if a 24-hour 
watch-and-wait approach is taken with a febrile patient 
who otherwise appears well and has no obvious history of 
tick bite or exposure, a normal physical examination, and 
laboratory findings within reference ranges, ensuring close 
patient follow-up is essential. Patients should be monitored 
closely because of the potential for rapid decline in untreated 
patients with tickborne rickettsial diseases, especially among 
those with RMSF.
Management of severely ill patients with tickborne rickettsial 
disease should include assessment of fluid and electrolyte 
balance. Vasopressors and careful fluid management might be 
needed when the illness is complicated by hypotension or renal 
failure. Patients with RMSF can develop ARDS or pulmonary 
infiltrates related to microvascular leakage that might be 
erroneously attributed to cardiac failure or pneumonia (184). 
Consultation with an intensive care or infectious disease 
specialist could be helpful in managing these complications.
Doxycycline in Children
The American Academy of Pediatrics and CDC recommend 
doxycycline as the treatment of choice for children of all ages 
with suspected tickborne rickettsial disease (8,178). Previous 
concerns about tooth staining in children aged <8 years stem 
from experience with older tetracycline-class drugs that bind 
more readily to calcium than newer members of the drug class, 
such as doxycycline (185). Doxycycline used at the dose and 
duration recommended for treatment of RMSF in children 
aged <8 years, even after multiple courses, did not result in 
tooth staining or enamel hypoplasia in a 2013 retrospective 
cohort study of 58 children who received doxycycline before 
the age of 8 years, compared with 213 children who had not 
received doxycycline (186). These results support the findings 
of a study published in 2007 reporting no evidence of tooth 
staining among 31 children with asthma exacerbation who were 
treated with doxycycline (187). Combined data from these two 
studies indicate a tooth staining prevalence rate of 0% (none 
of the 89 patients; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0%–3%) 
among those treated with short courses of doxycycline before 
age 8 (186).
The use of doxycycline to treat children with suspected 
tickborne rickettsial disease should no longer be a subject of 
controversy (186–188). Nonetheless, recent surveys of health 
care providers revealed that most (61%–65%) practicing 
TABLE 3. Recommended treatment for tickborne rickettsial diseases
Age category
Drug
Dosage
Maximum
Duration
Adults*
Doxycycline
100 mg twice per day, orally or IV
100 mg per dose
At least 3 days after fever 
subsides and until evidence 
of clinical improvement is 
noted; minimum treatment 
course of 5–7 days†
Children weighing <100 lbs (45 kg)
Doxycycline
2.2 mg/kg of body weight per dose 
twice per day, orally or IV
100 mg per dose
Source: CDC, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases. Tickborne diseases of the United States, a reference manual for health care providers. 3rd ed. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/resources/tickbornediseases.pdf
Abbreviation: IV = intravenously.
* Guidance is available for the treatment of suspected tickborne rickettsial disease during pregnancy (see Pregnancy and Lactation).
† Treatment for patients with anaplasmosis should be extended to 10 days if concurrent Lyme disease is suspected, or alternatively, another antimicrobial with efficacy 
against Borrelia burgdorferi should be included.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
primary care providers did not recognize doxycycline as the 
appropriate treatment for suspected RMSF in children aged 
<8 years (189–191). During 1999–2012, children aged 
<10 years were five times more likely than older children 
and adults to die from RMSF (4,116). A similar finding 
also has been observed among children aged <5 years with 
ehrlichiosis (5). These data suggest that inappropriate or 
delayed RMSF treatment decisions might be contributing 
to disproportionately high RMSF case-fatality rates among 
young children.
Alternative Antibacterial Agents 
to Doxycycline
Tetracyclines, including doxycycline, are the only antibacterial 
agents recommended for treatment of all tickborne rickettsial 
diseases. Chloramphenicol is the only alternative drug that 
has been used to treat RMSF; however, epidemiologic studies 
using CDC case report data suggest that patients with RMSF 
treated with chloramphenicol are at higher risk for death than 
persons who received a tetracycline (9,75). Chloramphenicol is 
no longer available in the oral form in the United States, and 
the intravenous form is not readily available at all institutions. 
Chloramphenicol is associated with adverse hematologic effects, 
which have resulted in its limited use in the United States, and 
monitoring of blood indices is required if this drug is used 
(192,193). In vitro evidence indicates that chloramphenicol 
is not effective in the treatment of ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis 
(194,195). Therefore, if chloramphenicol is substituted for 
doxycycline in the empiric treatment of tickborne rickettsial 
diseases, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis will not be covered and 
RMSF treatment might be suboptimal.
Rifamycins demonstrate in vitro activity against E. chaffeensis 
and A. phagocytophilum (194,195). Case reports document 
favorable maternal and pregnancy outcomes in small numbers 
of pregnant women treated with rifampin for anaplasmosis 
(196–198). Small numbers of children also have been treated 
successfully for anaplasmosis using rifampin (199); however, 
no clinical trials demonstrating in vivo efficacy of rifampin 
in the treatment of anaplasmosis or ehrlichiosis have been 
conducted. Rifampin could be an alternative for the treatment 
of mild illness due to anaplasmosis in the case of pregnancy or 
documented allergy to tetracycline-class drugs (173). The dose 
of rifampin is 300 mg orally twice daily for adults or 10 mg/kg 
of body weight for children (not to exceed 300 mg/dose) 
(162,173). Before considering treatment with rifampin, 
clinicians should use caution and ensure that RMSF can be 
ruled out because the early signs and symptoms of RMSF and 
anaplasmosis are similar, and rifampin is not considered an 
acceptable treatment for RMSF. In addition, rifampin does 
not effectively treat potential coinfection of A. phagocytophilum 
with B. burgdorferi (173).
Many classes of broad-spectrum antibacterial agents that 
are used empirically to treat febrile patients, such as beta-
lactams, macrolides, aminoglycosides, and sulfonamides, are 
not effective against tickborne rickettsial diseases (18,77). 
Although some fluoroquinolones have in vitro activity against 
rickettsiae (200), their use for treatment of certain rickettsial 
infections has been associated with delayed subsidence of fever, 
increased disease severity, and longer hospital stay (201,202). 
No human efficacy data on fluoroquinolone use in RMSF exist, 
and fluoroquinolones are not recommended for treatment 
of RMSF (77). E. chaffeensis exhibits in vitro resistance to 
fluoroquinolones. Although A. phagocytophilum is susceptible 
to levofloxacin in vitro (195,203), relapse of infection after 
treatment with levofloxacin has been reported (204), and, as 
with the other tickborne rickettsial diseases, fluoroquinolones 
are not recommended for treatment of anaplasmosis (173).
Sulfonamide antimicrobials are associated with increased 
severity of tickborne rickettsial diseases. Experimental and 
accumulated anecdotal clinical data suggest that treatment 
of patients with RMSF with a sulfonamide drug can result 
in increased disease severity and death (119,120). Cases of 
severe ehrlichiosis also have been associated with the use of 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (150–153). In some patients 
treated with sulfonamide or beta-lactam drugs, diagnosis 
and appropriate treatment of tickborne rickettsial illness was 
delayed because the development of a rash was mistaken for 
a drug eruption rather than recognized as a manifestation of 
rickettsial illness (205).
Doxycycline Allergy
Severe doxycycline or tetracycline allergy in a patient with a 
suspected tickborne rickettsial disease poses a challenge because 
of the lack of equally effective alternative antimicrobial agents. 
In a patient reporting an allergy to a tetracycline-class drug, 
determining the type of adverse drug reaction and whether 
it is potentially life threatening (e.g., anaphylaxis or Stevens-
Johnson syndrome) by history or medical documentation is 
important. Consultation with an allergy and immunology 
specialist could be helpful in making this determination. 
In patients with non–life-threatening tetracycline-class 
drug reactions, administering doxycycline in an observed 
setting is an option; however, the risks and benefits should 
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. In patients with a 
life-threatening tetracycline allergy, options include use of 
alternative antibacterial agents discussed in the preceding 
section or, possibly for immediate hypersensitivity reactions, 
rapid doxycycline desensitization in consultation with an 
 Recommendations and Reports
24 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
allergy and immunology specialist. Anaphylactic reactions 
to tetracycline-class drugs, although rare, have been reported 
(206,207). Rapid doxycycline desensitization accomplished 
within several hours in an inpatient intensive care setting in 
patients with a history of immediate hypersensitivity reactions 
(including anaphylaxis) has been described (206,208); however, 
data are limited to individual case reports.
Pregnancy and Lactation
Use of tetracycline-class drugs has generally been 
contraindicated during pregnancy because of concerns about 
potential risk to the musculoskeletal development of the fetus, 
cosmetic staining of primary dentition in fetuses exposed 
during the second or third trimester, and development of 
acute fatty liver of pregnancy in the mother (209–213). 
Although these adverse effects were observed in association 
with the use of tetracycline and older tetracycline derivatives, 
the contraindication for use during pregnancy has been 
applied across the class of tetracyclines, which includes newer 
derivatives, such as doxycycline. Controlled studies to assess 
the safety of doxycycline use in pregnant women have not been 
conducted, and available data are primarily observational. An 
expert review on doxycycline use during pregnancy concluded 
that therapeutic doses were unlikely to pose a substantial 
teratogenic risk; however, the data were insufficient to 
conclude that no risk exists (214,215). The risk for cosmetic 
staining of the primary teeth by doxycycline could not be 
determined because of limited data (214). A recent systematic 
review reported no evidence of teratogenicity associated with 
doxycycline use during pregnancy; however, limited data and 
a lack of controlled studies were limitations (216). No reports 
of maternal hepatic toxicity associated with doxycycline use 
have been published (215–217). Rarely, fatty liver of pregnancy 
has occurred in patients who received high-dose intravenous 
tetracycline (215,218); however, the dosages administered in 
these cases exceeded what is recommended for the treatment 
of tickborne rickettsial disease.
Only limited clinical data exist that support the use of 
antibacterial agents other than doxycycline in the treatment 
of tickborne rickettsial disease during pregnancy. Doxycycline 
has been used successfully to treat tickborne rickettsial 
diseases in several pregnant women without adverse effects 
to the mother; however, follow-up to address adverse effects 
to the fetus was limited (142,197). Chloramphenicol is a 
potential alternative treatment for RMSF during pregnancy; 
however, care must be used when administering the drug 
late during the third trimester of pregnancy because of the 
theoretical risk for gray baby syndrome (193,217). 
Chloramphenicol is not an alternative for the treatment of 
ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis (194,195). Limited case report 
data suggest that rifampin could be considered an alternative 
to doxycycline for the treatment of mild anaplasmosis 
during pregnancy (173,196,197). Patient counseling and 
discussion of potential risks versus benefits with the 
pregnant woman by the health care provider are important 
components in treatment decision-making during 
pregnancy; nonetheless, for potentially life-threatening 
illnesses, such as RMSF and E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis, 
consideration of disease-related risks for the mother and 
fetus is of paramount importance.
Doxycycline is excreted into breast milk at low levels; 
however, the extent of absorption by nursing infants is 
unknown. Short-term use of doxycycline as recommended 
for the treatment of tickborne rickettsial disease is considered 
probably safe during lactation on the basis of available 
literature and expert opinion (219). Although doxycycline is 
not specifically addressed, tetracycline is listed by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs as “usually 
compatible with breastfeeding” (220).
Preventive Therapy After Tick Bite
Studies of preventive antibacterial therapy for rickettsial 
infection in humans are limited. Available data (221) do not 
support prophylactic treatment for rickettsial diseases in 
persons who have had recent tick bites and are not ill.
Treatment of Asymptomatic Persons 
Seropositive for 
Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases
Treatment of asymptomatic persons seropositive for 
tickborne rickettsial diseases is not recommended regardless 
of past treatment status. Antirickettsial antibodies can persist 
in the absence of clinical disease for months to years after 
primary infection; therefore, serologic tests cannot be used 
to monitor response to treatment for tickborne rickettsial 
diseases (222–224).
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
25
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Special Considerations
Transfusion- and Transplant-Associated 
Transmission
Blood Product Transfusion
Transmission of R. rickettsii, A. phagocytophilum, and 
E. ewingii via transfusion of infected blood products has 
been reported infrequently. E. chaffeensis, EML agent, 
R. parkeri, and Rickettsia species 364D transmission via 
infected blood products has not been documented in the 
United States. Infected donors who are asymptomatic or in the 
presymptomatic period, defined as the period of rickettsemia 
before the onset of symptoms, pose the greatest risk to the 
blood supply (225). For example, in the single documented 
transfusion-acquired case of R. rickettsii, the blood donation 
occurred 3 days before the onset of symptoms in the donor 
(226). Potential donors with symptomatic rickettsial disease 
pose less risk because they are likely to be identified by the 
routine screening for symptomatic infections that is already 
in place as part of the blood donation process.
Among tickborne rickettsial diseases, anaplasmosis is 
the most frequently associated with transfusion-acquired 
infection, with eight published reports from the United States 
(198,227–232). Transmission of A. phagocytophilum despite 
leukoreduction of red blood cells and platelets has occurred 
(227,228,231,232). Transmission of E. ewingii infection via 
leukoreduced, irradiated platelet transfusion also has been 
reported (233). Although the risk for transmission of certain 
rickettsial pathogens might be reduced by leukoreduction 
of blood products (234), the risk for transfusion-acquired 
infection is not eliminated (227,228,231,233,235). In vitro 
studies demonstrate that A. phagocytophilum and E. chaffeensis 
survive in refrigerated packed erythrocytes for up to 
18 and 11 days, respectively (236,237). Transfusion-acquired 
R. rickettsii infection, reported in 1978, was transmitted in 
whole blood stored for 9 days (226).
Transfusion-associated transmission is of special concern for 
persons who are immune suppressed, such as those undergoing 
chemotherapy, solid organ transplantation, or stem cell 
transplantation; these persons are at greater risk for severe or 
fatal outcomes from tickborne rickettsial diseases. No practical 
screening method has been identified to prevent asymptomatic 
donors infected with tickborne rickettsiae from donating 
blood products. Suspected transfusion-associated transmission 
of a rickettsial disease should be reported as early as possible 
to the blood product supplier and public health authorities. 
Early reporting is essential in facilitating timely tracking and 
quarantining of potentially infectious co-components and 
notification of the infected donor and blood product recipients. 
In addition, if a recent blood donor develops symptoms of a 
tickborne rickettsial disease, the blood bank should be notified so 
that donated blood can be appropriately quarantined or recalled.
Solid Organ Transplantation
Two cases of transplant-acquired ehrlichiosis associated with 
a common deceased donor have been reported (238). Both 
renal allograft recipients, 20–22 days after transplantation, 
BOX 7. Summary of the treatment and management of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases
• Doxycycline is the drug of choice for treatment of all 
tickborne rickettsial diseases in children and adults; 
empiric therapy should be initiated promptly in 
patients with a clinical presentation suggestive of a 
rickettsial disease.
• Tickborne rickettsial diseases respond rapidly to 
doxycycline, and fever persisting for >48 hours after 
initiation of therapy should prompt consideration of 
an alternative or additional diagnosis, including the 
possibility of coinfection.
• Doxycycline is recommended by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and CDC as the treatment of 
choice for patients of all ages, including children aged 
<8 years, with a suspected tickborne rickettsial disease.
• Delay in treatment of tickborne rickettsial diseases 
can lead to severe disease and death.
• In persons with severe doxycycline allergy or who are 
pregnant, chloramphenicol may be an alternative 
treatment for Rocky Mountain spotted fever; however, 
persons treated with chloramphenicol have a greater risk 
for death compared with those treated with doxycycline.
• Chloramphenicol is not an acceptable alternative for 
the treatment of ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis.
• For mild cases of anaplasmosis, rifampin might be an 
alternative to doxycycline for patients with a severe 
drug allergy or who are pregnant.
• Data on the risks of doxycycline use during pregnancy 
suggest that treatment at the recommended dose and 
duration for tickborne rickettsial diseases is unlikely 
to pose a substantial teratogenic risk; however, data 
are insufficient to state that no risk exists.
• Prophylactic use of doxycycline after a tick bite is not 
recommended for the prevention of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases.
• Treatment of asymptomatic persons seropositive for 
tickborne rickettsial disease is not recommended, 
regardless of past treatment status, because antibodies 
can persist for months to years after infection.
 Recommendations and Reports
26 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
developed an acute febrile illness with rapid clinical 
deterioration characterized by delirium, new or progressive 
cytopenias, and renal failure. An extensive infectious disease 
workup in one recipient led to detection by polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) amplification of E. chaffeensis DNA in 
peripheral blood. Ehrlichiosis was suspected in the second renal 
allograft recipient after communication with the care team 
of the other recipient. Transmission of tickborne rickettsial 
infections through solid organ transplantation is possible 
(238) and is important to consider during the assessment of 
early transplant recipients with undifferentiated febrile illness 
or sepsis syndromes characterized by thrombocytopenia or 
leukopenia. In this context, a donor from a region highly 
endemic for tickborne rickettsial diseases with an appropriate 
epidemiologic history could support clinical suspicion for a 
donor-transmitted tickborne rickettsial disease.
Travel Outside of the United States
International travel can pose a risk for infection with 
rickettsial pathogens not encountered in the United States 
(Appendix A). SFG rickettsioses are the most commonly 
diagnosed tickborne rickettsial diseases among returning 
travelers (239). The most frequently occurring among these 
are African tick bite fever, caused by Rickettsia africae, and 
Mediterranean spotted fever (also known as boutonneuse 
fever), caused by Rickettsia conorii (240,241). Approximately 
90% of imported SFG rickettsioses occur among travelers 
returning from sub-Saharan Africa (239,242), and nearly all 
of these represent African tick bite fever (241,243).
Patients with African tick bite fever typically have fever, 
headache, myalgia, one or more inoculation eschars, regional 
lymphadenopathy, and sometimes maculopapular or vesicular 
rash (241,244). The incubation period is typically 5–7 days but 
can be up to 10 days after the bite of an infected Amblyomma 
hebraeum or Amblyomma variegatum tick (241,244). The 
course of illness usually is mild. African tick bite fever can 
occur in clusters among game hunters, safari tourists, deployed 
troops, and humanitarian workers (243,245,246). Travel for 
tourism has been identified as a risk factor (239,241), and 
African tick bite fever is the second most common cause of 
febrile illness after malaria among travelers returning from 
sub-Saharan Africa (247,248).
Mediterranean spotted fever is endemic in the Mediterranean 
basin, Middle East, parts of Africa, and the Indian subcontinent 
(240). This infection can be severe or fatal; in Portugal, 
a case-fatality rate of 21% among hospitalized adults has 
been described (249). Onset of Mediterranean spotted fever 
typically occurs abruptly with fever, myalgia, headache, 
eschar (usually singular), and maculopapular or petechial rash 
that can involve the palms and soles. Severe manifestations 
including neurologic, cardiac, and renal complications have 
been described. The mean incubation period is 6 days (range: 
1–16 days) after being bitten by an infected tick (250). 
Rh. sanguineus is the principal tick vector in Europe, Israel, and 
North Africa. Dogs can serve as reservoir hosts for R. conorii 
(251), and infected Rh. sanguineus ticks can transfer from dogs 
to humans during interactions. Other tick vectors might play 
a role in transmission in sub-Saharan Africa (250,252). Like 
other tickborne rickettsial diseases, Mediterranean spotted 
fever and African tick bite fever respond readily to antibacterial 
treatment with doxycycline.
Tickborne rickettsial pathogens found in the United States 
can also be encountered abroad. For example, R. rickettsii 
infection can be acquired in Canada and Mexico, as well as 
in Central America and South America, where cases are 
reported from Costa Rica, Panama, Brazil, Colombia, and 
Argentina (253–260). R. parkeri infections have been 
described in Uruguay, Brazil, and Argentina (38,253,261,262). 
Human anaplasmosis has been reported from several 
countries throughout Europe (263), as well as from several 
Asian countries, including China, Korea, Russia, and 
Japan (264–267).
Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests
Several categories of laboratory methods are used to diagnose 
tickborne rickettsial diseases; these vary in availability, time 
to obtain results, performance characteristics, and the type of 
information each provides. Rapid confirmatory assays are rarely 
available to guide treatment decisions for acutely ill patients; 
therefore, it is imperative that therapeutic interventions 
are based on clinical suspicion. Because of the rapidly 
progressive nature of certain rickettsial diseases, antibacterial 
treatment should never be delayed while awaiting laboratory 
confirmation of a rickettsial illness (268), nor should treatment 
be discontinued solely on the basis of a negative test result on 
an acute phase specimen. Nonetheless, these laboratory assays 
provide vital information that validates the accuracy of the 
clinical diagnosis (268–270) and are crucial for defining the 
changing epidemiology and public health impact of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases (3–5).
Determining the most appropriate diagnostic assays to 
request for suspected tickborne rickettsial illness requires 
consideration of several factors (Box 8). These include 
the suspected pathogen, the timing relative to symptom 
onset, and the type of specimens available for testing 
(Appendix B) (Table 4). Diagnostic assays should always be 
ordered and interpreted in the context of a compatible illness 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
27
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and appropriate epidemiologic setting to obtain optimal 
positive and negative predictive values (271). Misuse of 
specialized assays for patients with a low pretest probability 
of a rickettsial disease can result in confusion. For example, 
antirickettsial antibodies can remain detectable for months 
to years after infection (222,223,272,273); however, in the 
absence of a clinically compatible acute illness, detectable 
antibodies are not an indication for treatment for tickborne 
rickettsial disease.
Serologic Assays
Indirect immunofluorescence antibody (IFA) assays using 
paired acute and convalescent sera are the reference standard 
for serologic confirmation of rickettsial infection (269,270). 
The IFA assay consists of rickettsial antigens fixed on a slide 
that are detected by specific antibodies in patient serum, which 
can then be identified by a fluorescein-labeled conjugate. IFA 
assays for immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies reactive against 
many types of tickborne rickettsial pathogens are commercially 
available and are the recommended serologic method for 
confirming tickborne rickettsial disease in the United States 
(274,275). However, IFA assays are insensitive during the 
first week of rickettsial infection, which is the period during 
which most patients seek medical attention and when the 
majority of specimens are collected for evaluation (268). As 
the illness progresses past 7 days, the sensitivity of most IFA 
assays increases in tandem with pathogen-specific antibody 
production (268). IFA assays are highly sensitive at detecting 
antibody 2–3 weeks after illness onset, and assay results are 
best interpreted if serum samples collected in the acute and 
convalescent phases of illness are tested in tandem (222,276). 
Clinical observations have suggested that very early therapy 
with a tetracycline-class drug can sometimes diminish or delay 
the development of antibodies in RMSF (277,278); however, 
this should not dissuade appropriate serologic testing.
For serologic confirmation of SFG rickettsioses, ehrlichioses, 
or anaplasmosis, IgG IFA testing of at least two serum samples 
collected, ideally, 2–4 weeks apart, during acute and convalescent 
phases of illness, is recommended (271,274,275,279). 
A diagnosis of tickborne rickettsial disease is confirmed with 
a fourfold or greater increase in antibody titer in samples 
collected at appropriately timed intervals in patients with a 
clinically compatible acute illness (274,275). A diagnosis of 
tickborne rickettsial disease is supported but not confirmed by 
one or more samples with an IgG antibody reciprocal titer ≥64 
in patients with a clinically compatible acute illness (274,275). 
A single elevated antibody titer is never sufficient to confirm 
acute infection with a rickettsial pathogen.
Although the majority of persons have increased IgG titers 
by the second week of the illness, persons infected with certain 
Rickettsia species might have delayed development of significant 
antibody titers. For example, patients infected with R. africae 
might not show seroconversion until 4 weeks after illness onset 
(280). Antigen-specific assays are not available commercially in 
the United States for R. africae; however, commercially available 
tests that use R. conorii or R. rickettsii antigens can often be 
useful diagnostically because of the frequent cross-reactions 
among the spotted fever group rickettsiae (271). Alternatively, 
pathogen-specific testing may be submitted to CDC through 
the state public health laboratories.
The duration that antibodies persist after recovery from the 
infection varies and depends on the pathogen and host factors. 
The serologic diagnosis of rickettsioses is often confounded 
by the occurrence of preexisting antibodies that are reactive 
with a particular pathogen although unrelated entirely to 
the disease under investigation (272). In certain persons 
high titers of antibodies against A. phagocytophilum have 
TABLE 4. Recommended diagnostic tests for tickborne rickettsial diseases
Disease
PCR
Microscopy for 
morulae detection
IFA assay for 
IgG antibodies  
(acute and 
convalescent)*
Whole  
blood
Eschar biopsy  
or swab
Rash  
biopsy
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Yes†
—
Yes
—
Yes
Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis
—
Yes
Yes
—
Yes
Rickettsia species 364D rickettsiosis
—
Yes
—
—
Yes
Ehrlichia chaffeensis ehrlichiosis (human monocytic 
ehrlichiosis)
Yes
—
—
Yes
Yes
Ehrlichia ewingii ehrlichiosis
Yes
—
—
Yes
Yes
Ehrlichia muris-like agent ehrlichiosis
Yes
—
—
—
Yes
Human anaplasmosis (human granulocytic anaplasmosis)
Yes
—
—
Yes
Yes
Abbreviations: IFA = indirect immunofluorescence antibody; IgG = immunoglobulin G; PCR = polymerase chain reaction.
* IFA assay is insensitive during the first week of illness for most tickborne rickettsial diseases; a sample should be collected during this interval (acute specimen), and 
a second sample should be collected 2–4 weeks later (convalescent specimen) for comparison. Elevated titers alone are not sufficient to diagnose infection with 
tickborne rickettsial diseases; serial titers are needed for confirmation. Demonstration of at least a fourfold rise in antibody titer is considered confirmatory evidence 
of acute infection. 
† PCR of whole blood samples for Rickettsia rickettsii has low sensitivity; sensitivity increases in patients with severe disease.
 Recommendations and Reports
28 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
been observed for over 4 years after the acute illness (223). 
For R. rickettsii, detectable IgG titers can persist for >1 year 
after primary infection in some patients (222). In the United 
States, IgG antibodies reactive with antigens of R. rickettsii 
at reciprocal titers ≥64 can be found in 5%–10% of the 
population (273,281–283) and might be higher in certain 
regions. Misinterpretation of serologic data based on single 
or inappropriately timed samples is problematic and should 
be avoided, particularly when no other diagnostic techniques 
are included in patient assessments (279,284).
The majority of commercial reference laboratories that conduct 
testing for rickettsial pathogens test for IgG antibodies. Some 
commercial laboratories also perform IFA assays and other 
serologic testing for IgM antibodies. However, IgM antibodies 
reactive with R. rickettsii are frequently detected in patients for 
whom no other supportive evidence of a recent rickettsiosis exists 
(285). IgM antibodies against ehrlichiae and A. phagocytophilum 
also might have lower specificity than IgG antibodies (286,287). 
In this context, IgM antibody titers should be interpreted carefully 
and should not be used as a stand-alone method for diagnosis and 
public health reporting of tickborne rickettsial diseases.
Cross-reactive immune responses to rickettsial antigens result 
in antibodies that are typically group-specific, although perhaps 
not species-specific, for tickborne rickettsial pathogens (269). 
For example, antibodies reactive with R. rickettsii detected by 
a serologic test could result from infection with other SFG 
rickettsiae (288). Similarly, antibodies reactive with E. chaffeensis 
or A. phagocytophilum can react with the other species, which 
can impede epidemiologic distinction between the infections 
(286,289). Patients with E. ewingii or EML agent infections 
might develop antibodies that react with E. chaffeensis and, less 
commonly, A. phagocytophilum antigens (49,145).
Some rickettsial serologic testing is available in the enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) format. Commercial 
laboratories might offer ELISA because of the ease in reading 
and higher throughput. Unfortunately, the currently marketed 
ELISA kits offer only qualitative results (i.e., antibody presence 
or absence relative to a threshold value) and do not provide a 
quantitative method of demonstrating increases or decreases 
in antibody levels. Confirmation of an acute infection by 
documenting the rise in antibody titer between the acute and 
convalescent serum samples is the most useful serologic strategy 
for evaluating etiology of an acute illness.
Nucleic Acid Detection
Amplification of species-specific DNA by conventional and 
real-time PCR assays provides a useful method for detecting 
tickborne rickettsial infections and identifying the infecting 
agent (269,270). PCR amplification of DNA extracted from 
whole blood specimens collected during the acute stage of 
illness is particularly useful for confirming E. chaffeensis, 
A. phagocytophilum, E. ewingii, and EML agent infections 
because of the tropism of these pathogens for circulating cells. 
PCR detection of R. rickettsii in whole blood is possible but 
less sensitive because low numbers of rickettsiae typically 
circulate in the blood in the absence of advanced disease 
(16,269,290). Tissue specimens are a more useful source of 
SFG rickettsial DNA than acute blood samples (8). No optimal 
time frame for blood collection during the acute phase of 
infection has been established to ensure the highest sensitivity 
for diagnosing ehrlichioses, anaplasmosis, or RMSF using 
PCR, and this likely varies among the diseases. Doxycycline 
treatment decreases the sensitivity of PCR (51,167); therefore, 
obtaining blood for molecular testing before antibacterial 
agents are administered is recommended to minimize the 
likelihood of a false-negative result. PCR tests for tickborne 
rickettsial diseases are available at CDC, certain state health 
laboratories, and certain research and commercial laboratories. 
These tests are laboratory developed, target differing genes, 
and vary in sensitivity and specificity.
Diagnostic molecular methods for tickborne rickettsial 
diseases have incorporated new technologies such as real-time 
PCR assays that offer the advantages of speed, reproducibility, 
quantitative capability, and reduced risk for contamination 
compared with conventional PCR assays (291). The 
acquisition and evaluation of clinical samples previously 
believed suboptimal for a particular molecular method are 
now more frequently being considered as important sources 
of diagnostic information. For example, improved nucleic acid 
extraction technology has facilitated recovery of rickettsial 
DNA from some types of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
skin biopsies or autopsy tissues to allow species-specific PCR 
and sequence analysis (292,293). Testing of CSF by PCR 
assays has successfully identified E. chaffeensis (135,159,294). 
For eschar-producing tickborne rickettsial diseases, including 
R. parkeri, Rickettsia species 364D, and R. africae, an eschar 
biopsy, a swab of eschar exudate, or scab material from the 
eschar surface can provide suitable specimens for molecular 
confirmation of SFG rickettsial DNA (41,44,292,295).
Immunostaining of Biopsy or 
Autopsy Tissue
Another approach to diagnosing tickborne rickettsial diseases 
is immunostaining, including immunohistochemistry and 
immunofluorescence of antigens in formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded biopsy or autopsy tissues (Figure 29). For patients 
with a rash or eschar, immunohistochemical staining of a 
skin punch biopsy is a useful diagnostic technique for SFG 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
rickettsioses (296–298). Immunostaining of skin biopsy 
specimens is 100% specific and 70% sensitive in diagnosing 
RMSF (290,299). Sensitivities might be higher for tests using 
eschars than for those using rash lesions (269) because of the 
higher concentration of organisms in eschars compared with rash 
lesions. In cases of ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis in which bone 
marrow biopsies are performed as part of the investigation of 
cytopenias, immunostaining of bone marrow biopsy specimens 
can reveal the diagnosis (156,160). Immunostaining can be 
particularly useful for diagnosing fatal tickborne rickettsial 
diseases in tissue specimens from patients who had not developed 
diagnostic levels of antibodies before death (16,141,293,300). 
Immunostaining methods are most likely to reveal organisms 
in patients before or within the first 48 hours after initiating 
appropriate antibacterial therapy. Immunostaining for SFG 
rickettsiae, E. chaffeensis, and A. phagocytophilum is offered by 
CDC and certain academic hospitals in the United States.
Blood-Smear Microscopy
Careful microscopic examination of blood smears or buffy-
coat preparations stained with eosin-azure–type dyes (e.g., 
Wright-Giemsa stains) during the first week of illness might 
reveal morulae in the cytoplasm of infected circulating leukocytes 
of patients with E. chaffeensis ehrlichiosis (157) or anaplasmosis 
(166). Observation of morulae is highly suggestive of infection 
by ehrlichiae or anaplasmae (Figure 28). However, blood-smear 
examination is a relatively insensitive and inconsistent technique 
and should be performed by experienced microscopists who 
must distinguish morulae from other intraleukocytic structures 
including overlying platelets, Döhle bodies, phagocytosed 
bacteria, toxic granulations, and other cytoplasmic inclusions. 
A concentrated buffy-coat smear might improve the yield of 
morulae evaluation compared with a standard blood smear 
(270,301). Blood-smear examination is not useful for diagnosis 
of RMSF, other SFG rickettsioses, or EML agent infection.
Culture
Culture represents the reference standard for microbiological 
diagnosis (302) (Figure 30); however, the agents that cause 
tickborne rickettsial diseases are obligate intracellular 
pathogens and must be isolated from patient samples using cell 
culture techniques that are not widely available. Depending 
on the agent and the expertise of the diagnostic laboratory, the 
sensitivity of detection by culture can be lower than molecular 
or serologic techniques (303,304). Clinical specimens used to 
inoculate cell cultures should be collected before the start of 
appropriate antibacterial therapy and preferably not frozen. 
Theoretically, any laboratory capable of performing routine 
viral isolations has the expertise to isolate these pathogens; 
however, R. rickettsii is classified as a biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) 
agent, and attempts to isolate this agent should be made only 
in laboratories equipped for and with laboratorians trained to 
work with BSL-3 pathogens (305).
FIGURE 29. Immunohistochemical stain demonstrating Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum morulae (red) in the spleen of a patient with splenic 
rupture associated with anaplasmosis 
Photo/CDC 
FIGURE 30. Acridine orange stain of Rickettsia africae isolated in 
Vero E6 cells from an eschar biopsy specimen from a patient with 
African tick bite fever
Photo/CDC 
 Recommendations and Reports
30 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Prevention of 
Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases
No vaccine is licensed for the prevention of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases in the United States. Avoiding tick bites 
and promptly removing attached ticks remain the best disease 
prevention strategies. General tick bite prevention strategies 
include various personal protective measures and behavior 
change components (Box 9).
Regular Tick Checks on Humans and Pets
After spending time with tick-infested animals or in tick-
infested habitats, persons should inspect themselves, their 
children, and their pets for ticks. Sites where ticks commonly 
attach to humans include, but are not limited to, the scalp, 
abdomen, axillae, and groin, as well as under socks and along 
the belt line (306). Using a mirror, or having someone assist for 
hard-to-see areas, might be helpful. Bathing soon after spending 
recreational time or working in tick-infested habitats also can be 
an effective method of locating attached or crawling ticks and has 
been shown to be an important personal protective measure for 
other tickborne diseases (307). Several hours might elapse before 
ticks attach and transmit pathogens; therefore, timely tick checks 
increase the likelihood of finding and removing ticks before they 
can transmit an infectious agent. Dogs and other pets should 
be checked routinely for ticks because they can carry ticks back 
to their home, which increases the risk for human exposure. 
Ticks on dogs are commonly found around and inside the ears, 
between the toes, and in the axillae and groin.
The duration of tick attachment necessary to transmit rickettsial 
organisms varies and has been reported to range from 2 to 20 hours 
for R. rickettsii (308,309). Limited data exist regarding the interval 
of transmission after tick attachment for A. phagocytophilum; 
however, animal studies indicate that 24–48 hours might elapse 
before pathogen transmission occurs (310,311). No comparable 
data exist for E. chaffeensis. Removing a tick as soon as possible is 
critical because longer periods of attachment considerably increase 
the probability of transmission of tickborne pathogens.
Use of Repellents and Protective Clothing
Repellents can reduce the risk for tick bites from numerous tick 
species (312–320). Various repellent products registered with 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) are available and 
can be applied to exposed skin and clothing to repel ticks and 
prevent tick bites. Repellents labeled for use against mosquitoes, 
fleas, or other arthropods might not be effective tick repellents, 
and repellency varies by tick species. All commercial products 
should be used according to the label instructions, and persons 
should pay particular attention to frequency of application. 
BOX 8. Summary of confirmatory diagnostic tests
• Antibacterial treatment should never be delayed while 
awaiting laboratory confirmation of rickettsial illness, 
nor should treatment be discontinued solely on the basis 
of a negative test result with an acute phase specimen.
• The reference standard for diagnosis of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases is the IFA assay using paired serum 
samples obtained soon after illness onset and 
2–4 weeks later. Demonstration of at least a fourfold 
rise in antibody titer is considered confirmatory 
evidence of acute infection.
• Patients usually do not have diagnostic serum 
antibody titers during the first week of illness, and a 
negative result by IFA assay or ELISA during this 
period does not exclude the diagnosis of tickborne 
rickettsial diseases.
• For ehrlichioses and anaplasmosis, diagnosis during 
the acute stage can be made using PCR amplification 
of DNA extracted from whole blood.
• PCR assay of whole blood is less sensitive for diagnosis of 
RMSF than it is for ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis; however, 
sensitivity increases in patients with severe disease.
• For SFG rickettsioses, immunostaining of skin rash or 
eschar biopsy specimens or a PCR assay using DNA 
extracted from these specimens can help provide a 
pathogen-specific diagnosis.
• Immunostaining of autopsy specimens can be 
particularly useful for diagnosing fatal tickborne 
rickettsial infections.
• Blood-smear or buffy-coat preparation microscopy 
might reveal the presence of morulae in infected 
leukocytes, which is highly suggestive of anaplasmosis or 
ehrlichiosis. Blood-smear microscopy is not useful for 
RMSF
, other SFG rickettsioses, or EML agent 
ehrlichiosis.
• Rickettsiae cannot be isolated with standard blood 
culture techniques because they are obligate 
intracellular pathogens; specialized cell culture 
methods are required. Because of limitations in 
availability and facilities, culture is not often used as a 
routine confirmatory diagnostic method for tickborne 
rickettsial diseases.
Abbreviations: ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; IFA = 
indirect immunofluorescence antibody; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; 
RMSF = Rocky Mountain spotted fever; SFG = spotted fever group.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET) effectively repels ticks and 
can be applied directly to the skin. Products with 20%–30% 
DEET are considered optimal for protection against most tick 
species (321), and concentrations >50% do not confer additional 
protection (320). IR3535 (3-[N-Butyl-N-acetyl]-aminopropionic 
acid, ethyl ester) and picaridin (1-piperidinecaboxylic acid, 
2-[2-hydroxyethyl], 1-methlypropyl ester) at concentrations >15% 
can repel as well as DEET when applied to skin (315,322–325) and 
are considered effective DEET alternatives. Products containing 
permethrin should be applied to outer clothing (e.g., shirts and 
pants) and not directly to skin (314). Permethrin-impregnated 
clothing can reduce tick bites by >80% among outdoor workers 
(326,327). Repellents, including plant-derived repellents, have a 
wide range of efficacy, periods of use, and safety (328,329); check 
listed EPA-registered products for efficacy against ticks (http://
cfpub.epa.gov/oppref/insect).To help prevent ticks from reaching 
the skin and attaching, protective clothing should be worn when 
outdoors, including long-sleeved shirts, pants, socks, and closed-
toe shoes (330). T
ucking pants into socks and shirt into pants 
could prevent ticks from crawling inside clothing.
Protecting Pets from Tick Bites
Various domestic animals are susceptible to tickborne 
rickettsial diseases and can increase the likelihood of human 
exposure (1,82,331,332). For example, dogs serve as the 
primary host for Rh. sanguineus, which is known to transmit 
R. rickettsii both to humans and dogs in certain geographic 
areas. Regular use of pet ectoparasite control products (e.g., 
monthly topical acaricide products, acaricidal tick collars, oral 
acaricidal products, and acaricidal shampoos) can help reduce 
the risk for human exposure to ticks on pets.
Limiting Exposure 
to Tick-Infested Habitats
The habitats of humans, pets, and ticks overlap. 
Understanding the habitats where ticks might be encountered 
is important for preventing tickborne disease in persons and 
pets. The preferred habitats of ticks can vary widely on the 
basis of the biology of the tick and that of their hosts. Ticks 
have varying abilities to withstand desiccation. Ixodes spp. ticks 
require damper environments, whereas Rhipicephalus sanguineus 
ticks can survive high heat and low humidity. Dermacentor 
variabilis is found along wooded meadows, whereas Amblyomma 
americanum can be in dry woodlands. Rh. sanguineus ticks are 
well adapted for domestic infestation and are commonly found 
in and around homes (24,26). Certain ticks seek their hosts 
from grass or other leafy vegetation, whereas others are found in 
leaf litter or pine needles. Some ticks actively move toward their 
hosts, and others lie in wait for their host to pass nearby. The 
wide diversity of habitats makes avoiding tick-suitable habitats 
difficult; however, knowing this allows preventive measures to be 
taken before and after time spent outdoors. Walking on cleared 
trails, sidestepping vegetation, and creating tick-safe zones in 
yards can all help reduce the risk for tick bites (333). 
Tick Removal
Attached ticks should be removed immediately. The preferred 
method of removal is to grasp the tick close to the skin with 
tweezers or fine-tipped forceps and gently pull back and upward 
with constant pressure (334). The application of gasoline, kerosene, 
petroleum jelly, fingernail polish, or lit matches should never 
be used to remove ticks (334). A wide array of devices has been 
marketed to help assist in the removal of attached ticks; however, 
their efficacy has not been proven to exceed that of regular forceps 
or tweezers. If possible, removing ticks with bare fingers should be 
avoided because fluids from the tick’s body might contain infectious 
organisms; however, prompt removal of the tick is the primary 
consideration. Removed ticks should not be crushed with fingers. 
After removing a tick, the bite area should be cleaned thoroughly 
with soap and water, alcohol, or an iodine scrub (321). The hands of 
persons who might have touched the tick also should be thoroughly 
washed, especially before touching their face or eyes.
BOX 9. Summary of prevention of tickborne rickettsial diseases
• Perform regular tick checks on persons and pets and 
remove ticks immediately. Use tweezers or forceps, rather 
than bare fingers, to remove attached ticks when possible.
• Use tick repellents containing DEET, IR3535, 
picaridin (1-piperidinecaboxylic acid, 
2-[2-hydroxyethyl], 1-methlypropyl ester), or other 
EPA-registered products when outdoors. Follow 
package label instructions for application. 
• Wear protective clothing, including long-sleeved 
shirts, pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes.
• Permethrin-treated or impregnated clothing can 
significantly reduce the number of tick bites when 
working outdoors.
• Protect pets from tick bites by regularly applying 
veterinarian-approved ectoparasite control products, such 
as monthly topical acaricide products, acaricidal tick 
collars, oral acaricidal products, and acaricidal shampoos.
• Limit exposure to tick-infested habitats and tick-
infested animals when possible.
Abbreviations: DEET = N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide; EPA = Environmental 
Protection Agency; IR3535 = 3-[N-Butyl-N-acetyl]-aminopropionic acid, 
ethyl ester.
 Recommendations and Reports
32 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Surveillance and Reporting
SFG rickettsioses (including RMSF), ehrlichioses, and 
anaplasmosis are nationally notifiable diseases in the United 
States (Box 10). RMSF has been nationally notifiable since 
1920 (335) and anaplasmosis and ehrlichiosis since 1999 
(336). In 2010, the reporting category of RMSF was changed 
to spotted fever rickettsiosis to reflect the limitations of serology 
specificity, which does not readily distinguish RMSF from 
other SFG rickettsioses (274).
When health care providers identify a potential case of tickborne 
rickettsial disease, they should notify the state or local health 
department according to the respective public health jurisdiction’s 
disease reporting requirements. The health department can assist 
the health care provider in obtaining appropriate laboratory 
testing to confirm the diagnosis of a tickborne rickettsial disease. 
Although many state laboratories have systems that automatically 
report specific diseases on the basis of positive confirmatory 
diagnostic tests, these vary by state. As part of the standard case 
identification of tickborne rickettsial diseases, health department 
staff might contact health care providers and the patient to collect 
demographic, clinical, laboratory, and exposure information 
to determine the surveillance case classification. The national 
surveillance case definitions of notifiable tickborne rickettsial 
diseases are maintained collaboratively by the Council of 
State and Territorial Epidemiologists and the CDC National 
Notifiable Disease Surveillance System (NNDSS) (Box 10). 
Surveillance case definitions are used for standardization of 
national reporting and as a public health surveillance tool but are 
not intended to supplant clinical diagnoses on which treatment 
decisions are based.
Surveillance systems are critical for studying the changing 
epidemiology of tickborne rickettsial diseases and for 
developing effective prevention strategies and public health 
outreach activities. CDC collects and analyzes surveillance data 
on tickborne rickettsial diseases by using two complementary 
systems. As part of NNDSS, states submit standardized reports 
electronically, which include diagnosis, date of onset, basic 
demographics, and geographic data related to the case (Box 10). 
Data from NNDSS are published by CDC. A supplementary 
case report form system was designed to capture additional 
epidemiologic variables, including diagnostic tests used, clinical 
presentation, and illness outcome. Data in the case report 
form system is collected by CDC from local and state health 
departments most often using a standardized supplemental case 
report form. Data collected on the case report form are useful 
for guiding public health interventions and for identifying 
risk factors for hospitalization and death, changing trends in 
diagnostic test use, and emerging trends.
Acknowledgments
Marc Fischer, Paul Mead, Matthew Kuehnert, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases; Barbara 
Herwaldt, Center for Global Health; Joy Hsu, National Center 
for Environmental Health; James Gathany, Office of the Associate 
Director for Communication, CDC.
References
 1. Dantas-Torres F, Chomel BB, Otranto D. Ticks and tick-borne diseases: 
a One Health perspective. Trends Parasitol 2012;28:437–46. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2012.07.003
 2. Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP
, et al. Reorganization of genera in the 
families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales: 
unification of some species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with 
Ehrlichia and Ehrlichia with Neorickettsia, descriptions of six new species 
combinations and designation of Ehrlichia equi and ‘HGE agent’ as 
subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 
2001;51:2145–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/00207713-51-6-2145
 3. Dahlgren FS, Heitman KN, Drexler NA, Massung RF, Behravesh CB. 
Human granulocytic anaplasmosis in the United States from 2008 to 
2012: a summary of national surveillance data. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2015;93:66–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0122
 4. Drexler NA, Dahlgren FS, Heitman KN, Massung RF, Paddock CD, 
Behravesh CB. National surveillance of spotted fever group rickettsioses 
in the United States, 2008–2012. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2016;23–34.
 5. Nichols  KH, Dahlgren FS, Drexler NA, Massung RF, Behravesh CB. 
Increasing incidence of ehrlichiosis in the United States: a summary 
of national surveillance of Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Ehrlichia ewingii 
infections in the United States, 2008–2012. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2016;94:52–60. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0540
BOX 10. Summary of surveillance and reporting for tickborne 
rickettsial diseases, with surveillance websites
• Spotted fever group rickettsiosis, ehrlichiosis, and 
anaplasmosis are nationally notifiable diseases in the 
United States.
• Health care providers who identify a potential case of 
tickborne rickettsial disease should notify their state 
or local health department, which can assist with 
obtaining diagnostic testing to confirm the diagnosis.
• Surveillance and reporting of tickborne rickettsial 
diseases inform public health practice and guide 
disease prevention efforts.
CSTE case definition for spotted fever rickettsiosis: http://
wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/spotted-fever-rickettsiosis 
CSTE case definition for ehrlichiosis and 
anaplasmosis: http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/
ehrlichiosis-and-anaplasmosis 
CSTE suggested timelines for reporting: http://wwwn.
cdc.gov/nndss/document/NNC_2014_Notification_
Requirements_By_Category.pdf
Tickborne rickettsial disease case report form: http://
www.cdc.gov/ticks/forms/2010_tbrd_crf.pdf 
Abbreviation: CSTE = Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 6. Helmick CG, Bernard KW, D’Angelo LJ. Rocky Mountain spotted fever: 
clinical, laboratory, and epidemiological features of 262 cases. J Infect 
Dis 1984;150:480–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/150.4.480
 7. Buckingham SC, Marshall GS, Schutze GE, et al; Tick-borne Infections 
in Children Study Group. Clinical and laboratory features, hospital 
course, and outcome of Rocky Mountain spotted fever in children. 
J Pediatr 2007;150:180–4, 184.e1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpeds.2006.11.023
 8. Chapman AS, Bakken JS, Folk SM, et al. Diagnosis and management of 
tickborne rickettsial diseases: Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichioses, 
and anaplasmosis—United States: a practical guide for physicians and 
other health-care and public health professionals. MMWR Recomm 
Rep 2006;55(No. RR-4).
 9. Dalton MJ, Clarke MJ, Holman RC, et al. National surveillance for 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 1981–1992: epidemiologic summary 
and evaluation of risk factors for fatal outcome. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1995;52:405–13.
 
10. Fishbein DB, Dawson JE, Robinson LE. Human ehrlichiosis in the 
United States, 1985 to 1990. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:736–43. http://
dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-120-9-199405010-00003
 
11. Gardner SL, Holman RC, Krebs JW, Berkelman R, Childs JE. National 
surveillance for the human ehrlichioses in the United States, 1997–2001, 
and proposed methods for evaluation of data quality. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci 2003;990:80–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.
tb07341.x
 
12. Treadwell TA, Holman RC, Clarke MJ, Krebs JW, Paddock CD, Childs 
JE. Rocky Mountain spotted fever in the United States, 1993–1996. Am 
J Trop Med Hyg 2000;63:21–6.
 
13. Dahlgren FS, Mandel EJ, Krebs JW, Massung RF, McQuiston 
JH. Increasing incidence of Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum in the United States, 2000–2007. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2011;85:124–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2011.10-0613
 
14. Openshaw JJ, Swerdlow DL, Krebs JW, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever in the United States, 2000–2007: interpreting contemporary 
increases in incidence. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:174–82. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2010.09-0752
 
15. AZDHS.gov. [Internet]. Number of reported cases of notifiable diseases 
by year for Arizona, 2003–2013. Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Department 
of Health Services, Bureau of Epidemiology and Disease Control 
Services, Office of Infectious Disease Services; 2015. http://azdhs.gov/
preparedness/epidemiology-disease-control/index.php#data-home
 
16. Demma LJ, Traeger MS, Nicholson WL, et al. Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever from an unexpected tick vector in Arizona. N Engl J Med 
2005;353:587–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa050043
 
17. Drexler N, Miller M, Gerding J, et al. Community-based control of 
the brown dog tick in a region with high rates of Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever, 2012–2013. PLoS One 2014;9:e112368. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0112368
 
18. Regan JJ, Traeger MS, Humpherys D, et al. Risk factors for fatal 
outcome from Rocky Mountain spotted fever in a highly endemic 
area—Arizona, 2002–2011. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:1659–66. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ116
 
19. Szabó MP
, Pinter A, Labruna MB. Ecology, biology, and distribution 
of spotted-fever tick vectors in Brazil. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 
2013;3:27. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2013.00027
 
20. Guedes E, Leite RC, Pacheco RC, Silveira I, Labruna MB. Rickettsia 
species infecting Amblyomma ticks from an area endemic for Brazilian 
spotted fever in Brazil. Rev Bras Parasitol Vet 2011;20:308–11. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1984-29612011000400009
 
21. Labruna MB. Ecology of rickettsia in South America. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
2009;1166:156–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04516.x
 
22. Oliveira KA, Pinter A, Medina-Sanchez A, et al. Amblyomma imitator 
ticks as vectors of Rickettsia rickettsii, Mexico. Emerg Infect Dis 
2010;16:1282–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1608.100231
 
23. Bustamante ME, Varela G. Una nueva rickettsiosis en Mexico: existencia 
de la fiebre manchada americana en los estadoes de Sinaloa y Sonora 
[Spanish]. Rev Inst Salubr Enferm Trop 1943;4:189–210.
 
24. Nicholson WL, Paddock CD, Demma L, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever in Arizona: documentation of heavy environmental infestations 
of Rhipicephalus sanguineus at an endemic site. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
2006;1078:338–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1196/annals.1374.065
 
25. Traeger MS, Regan JJ, Humpherys D, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever characterization and comparison to similar illnesses in a highly 
endemic area—Arizona, 2002–2011. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:1650–8. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ115
 
26. Dantas-Torres F. The brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Latreille, 
1806) (Acari: Ixodidae): from taxonomy to control. Vet Parasitol 
2008;152:173–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vetpar.2007.12.030
 
27. Alvarez-Hernandez G, Murillo-Benitez C, del Carmen Candia-Plata 
M, Moro M. Clinical profile and predictors of fatal Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever in children from Sonora, Mexico. Pediatr Infect Dis J 
2015;34:125–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000000496
 
28. Alvarez Hernández G, Contreras Soto JJ. Mortality from Rickettsia 
rickettsii spotted fever in patients at a pediatric hospital in the state of 
Sonora, 2004–2012 [Spanish]. Salud Publica Mex 2013;55:151–2.
 
29. Eremeeva ME, Zambrano ML, Anaya L, et al. Rickettsia rickettsii in 
Rhipicephalus ticks, Mexicali, Mexico. J Med Entomol 2011;48:418–21. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/ME10181
 
30. Sanchez R, Alpuche C, Lopez-Gatell H, et al. Rhipicephalus sanguineus-
associated Rocky Mountain spotted fever in Mexicali, Mexico: observations 
from an outbreak in 2008–2009. Presented at the 23rd American Society 
for Rickettsiology meeting, Hilton Head, SC; August 15–18, 2009.
 
31. Moraes-Filho J, Pinter A, Pacheco RC, et al. New epidemiological 
data on Brazilian spotted fever in an endemic area of the state of São 
Paulo, Brazil. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2009;9:73–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/vbz.2007.0227
 
32. Pacheco RC, Moraes-Filho J, Guedes E, et al. Rickettsial infections of 
dogs, horses, and ticks in Juiz de Fora, southeastern Brazil, and isolation of 
Rickettsia rickettsii from Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks. Med Vet Entomol 
2011;25:148–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2915.2010.00915.x
 
33. Wikswo ME, Hu R, Metzger ME, Eremeeva ME. Detection of Rickettsia 
rickettsii and Bartonella henselae in Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks from 
California. J Med Entomol 2007;44:158–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmedent/41.5.158
 
34. Garrison LE, Kelly R, Nicholson WL, et al. Tick surveillance notes: 
Rickettsia rickettsii in Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks from Gordon County. 
Ga Epidemiol Rep 2007;23:3.
 
35. Paddock CD, Sumner JW, Comer JA, et al. Rickettsia parkeri: a newly 
recognized cause of spotted fever rickettsiosis in the United States. Clin 
Infect Dis 2004;38:805–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/381894
 
36. Cragun WC, Bartlett BL, Ellis MW, et al. The expanding spectrum 
of eschar-associated rickettsioses in the United States. Arch Dermatol 
2010;146:641–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archdermatol.2010.48
 
37. Ekenna O, Paddock CD, Goddard J. Gulf Coast tick rash illness 
in Mississippi caused by Rickettsia parkeri. J Miss State Med Assoc 
2014;55:216–9.
 
38. Paddock CD, Goddard J. The evolving medical and veterinary 
importance of the Gulf Coast tick (Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol 
2015;52:230–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jme/tju022
 
39. Paddock CD, Finley RW, Wright CS, et al. Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis 
and its clinical distinction from Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Clin 
Infect Dis 2008;47:1188–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/592254
 
40. Kaskas NM, Ledet JJ, Wong A, Muzny CA, Elopre L, Hughey L. 
Rickettsia parkeri: eschar diagnosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2014;71:e87–9. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2014.03.024
 
41. Myers T, Lalani T, Dent M, et al. Detecting Rickettsia parkeri infection 
from eschar swab specimens. Emerg Infect Dis 2013;19:778–80. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1905.120622
 Recommendations and Reports
34 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
42. Teel PD, Ketchum HR, Mock DE, Wright RE, Strey OF. The Gulf Coast 
tick: a review of the life history, ecology, distribution, and emergence 
as an arthropod of medical and veterinary importance. J Med Entomol 
2010;47:707–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/47.5.707
 
43. Shapiro MR, Fritz CL, Tait K, et al. Rickettsia 364D: a newly recognized 
cause of eschar-associated illness in California. Clin Infect Dis 
2010;50:541–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/649926
 
44. Johnston SH, Glaser CA, Padgett K, et al. Rickettsia spp. 364D causing 
a cluster of eschar-associated illness, California. Pediatr Infect Dis J 
2013;32:1036–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/INF.0b013e318296b24b
 
45. Eremeeva ME. Molecular epidemiology of rickettsial diseases in 
North America. Ticks Tick Borne Dis 2012;3:332–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ttbdis.2012.10.022
 
46. Wikswo ME, Hu R, Dasch GA, et al. Detection and identification of 
spotted fever group rickettsiae in Dermacentor species from southern 
California. J Med Entomol 2008;45:509–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmedent/45.3.509
 
47. Maeda K, Markowitz N, Hawley RC, Ristic M, Cox D, McDade JE. 
Human infection with Ehrlichia canis, a leukocytic rickettsia. N Engl J Med 
1987;316:853–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198704023161406
 
48. Buller RS, Arens M, Hmiel SP
, et al. Ehrlichia ewingii, a newly recognized 
agent of human ehrlichiosis. N Engl J Med 1999;341:148–55. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199907153410303
 
49. Pritt BS, Sloan LM, Johnson DK, et al. Emergence of a new pathogenic 
Ehrlichia species, Wisconsin and Minnesota, 2009. N Engl J Med 
2011;365:422–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1010493
 
50. Demma LJ, Holman RC, McQuiston JH, Krebs JW, Swerdlow DL. 
Human monocytic ehrlichiosis and human granulocytic anaplasmosis 
in the United States, 2001–2002. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2006;1078:118–9. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1196/annals.1374.017
 
51. Olano JP
, Masters E, Hogrefe W, Walker DH. Human monocytotropic 
ehrlichiosis, Missouri. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:1579–86. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid0912.020733
 
52. Carpenter CF, Gandhi TK, Kong LK, et al. The incidence of ehrlichial 
and rickettsial infection in patients with unexplained fever and recent 
history of tick bite in central North Carolina. J Infect Dis 1999;180:900–
3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/314954
 
53. Fishbein DB, Kemp A, Dawson JE, Greene NR, Redus MA, Fields DH. 
Human ehrlichiosis: prospective active surveillance in febrile hospitalized 
patients. J Infect Dis 1989;160:803–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
infdis/160.5.803
 
54. Paddock CD, Yabsley MJ. Ecological havoc, the rise of white-tailed deer, 
and the emergence of Amblyomma americanum-associated zoonoses in 
the United States. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2007;315:289–324. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_12
 
55. Felz MW, Durden LA, Oliver JH Jr. Ticks parasitizing humans in 
Georgia and South Carolina. J Parasitol 1996;82:505–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/3284095
 
56. Merten HA, Durden LA. A state-by-state survey of ticks recorded from 
humans in the United States. J Vector Ecol 2000;25:102–13.
 
57. Childs JE, Paddock CD. The ascendancy of Amblyomma americanum 
as a vector of pathogens affecting humans in the United States. Annu 
Rev Entomol 2003;48:307–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
ento.48.091801.112728
 
58. Loftis AD, Levin ML, Spurlock JP
. Two USA Ehrlichia spp. cause 
febrile illness in goats. Vet Microbiol 2008;130:398–402. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.01.010
 
59. Breitschwerdt EB, Hegarty BC, Hancock SI. Sequential evaluation 
of dogs naturally infected with Ehrlichia canis, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 
Ehrlichia equi, Ehrlichia ewingii, or Bartonella vinsonii. J Clin Microbiol 
1998;36:2645–51.
 
60. Beall MJ, Alleman AR, Breitschwerdt EB, et al. Seroprevalence 
of Ehrlichia canis, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, and Ehrlichia ewingii in 
dogs in North America. Parasit Vectors 2012;5:29. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1756-3305-5-29
 
61. Johnson DKH, Schiffman EK, Davis JP
, et al. Human infection with 
Ehrlichia muris-like pathogen, United States, 2007–2013. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2015;21:1794–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2110.150143
 
62. Saito TB, Walker DH. A tick vector transmission model of 
monocytotropic ehrlichiosis. J Infect Dis 2015;212:968–77. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiv134
 
63. Karpathy SE, Allerdice MEJ, Sheth M, Dasch GA, Levin ML. Co-feeding 
transmission of the Ehrlichia muris-like agent (EMLA) to mice (Mus 
musculus). Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2016;16:145–50. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/vbz.2015.1878
 
64. Pritt BS, McFadden JD, Stromdah E, et al. Emergence of a novel 
Ehrlichia sp. agent pathogenic for humans in the Midwestern United 
States [Poster]. Presented at the 6th International Meeting on Rickettsiae 
and Rickettsial Diseases, Heraklion, Greece; June 5–7, 2011.
 
65. Stromdahl E, Hamer S, Jenkins S, et al. Comparison of phenology 
and pathogen prevalence, including infection with the Ehrlichia muris-
like (EML) agent, of Ixodes scapularis removed from soldiers in the 
Midwestern and the northeastern United States over a 15 year period 
(1997–2012). Parasit Vectors 2014;7:553. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
s13071-014-0553-z
 
66. Robinson SJ, Neitzel DF, Moen RA, et al. Disease risk in a dynamic 
environment: the spread of tick-borne pathogens in Minnesota, 
USA. EcoHealth 2015;12:152–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10393-014-0979-y
 
67. Belongia EA, Reed KD, Mitchell PD, et al. Tickborne infections as 
a cause of nonspecific febrile illness in Wisconsin. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1434–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/320160
 
68. Eisen RJ, Eisen L, Beard CB. County-scale distribution of Ixodes 
scapularis and Ixodes pacificus (Acari: Ixodidae) in the continental United 
States. J Med Entomol 2016;pii:tjv237.
 
69. Horowitz HW, Aguero-Rosenfeld ME, Holmgren D, et al. Lyme 
disease and human granulocytic anaplasmosis coinfection: impact of 
case definition on coinfection rates and illness severity. Clin Infect Dis 
2013;56:93–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/cis852
 
70. Krause PJ, McKay K, Thompson CA, et al; Deer-Associated Infection 
Study Group. Disease-specific diagnosis of coinfecting tickborne 
zoonoses: babesiosis, human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, and Lyme disease. 
Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:1184–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/339813
 
71. Nadelman RB, Horowitz HW, Hsieh TC, et al. Simultaneous 
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis and Lyme borreliosis. N Engl J Med 
1997;337:27–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199707033370105
 
72. Moss WJ, Dumler JS. Simultaneous infection with Borrelia burgdorferi 
and human granulocytic ehrlichiosis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2003;22:91–2. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00006454-200301000-00023
 
73. De Martino SJ, Carlyon JA, Fikrig E. Coinfection with Borrelia burgdorferi 
and the agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis. N Engl J Med 
2001;345:150–1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200107123450218
 
74. Kirkland KB, Wilkinson WE, Sexton DJ. Therapeutic delay and 
mortality in cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Clin Infect Dis 
1995;20:1118–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/clinids/20.5.1118
 
75. Holman RC, Paddock CD, Curns AT, Krebs JW, McQuiston JH, 
Childs JE. Analysis of risk factors for fatal Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever: evidence for superiority of tetracyclines for therapy. J Infect Dis 
2001;184:1437–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/324372
 
76. Falco RC, Fish D. Prevalence of Ixodes dammini near the homes of Lyme 
disease patients in Westchester County, New York. Am J Epidemiol 
1988;127:826–30.
 
77. Walker DH. Rocky Mountain spotted fever: a seasonal alert. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:1111–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/clinids/20.5.1111
 
78. Blanton LS, Walker DH, Bouyer DH. Rickettsiae and ehrlichiae within 
a city park: is the urban dweller at risk? Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 
2014;14:168–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2013.1473
 
79. Falco RC, Fish D. Potential for exposure to tick bites in recreational 
parks in a Lyme disease endemic area. Am J Public Health 1989;79:12–5. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.79.1.12
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
35
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
80. Standaert SM, Dawson JE, Schaffner W, et al. Ehrlichiosis in a golf-
oriented retirement community. N Engl J Med 1995;333:420–5. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199508173330704
 
81. Lange JV, Walker DH, Wester TB. Documented Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever in wintertime. JAMA 1982;247:2403–4. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/jama.1982.03320420053034
 
82. Nicholson WL, Allen KE, McQuiston JH, Breitschwerdt EB, Little 
SE. The increasing recognition of rickettsial pathogens in dogs and 
people. Trends Parasitol 2010;26:205–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pt.2010.01.007
 
83. Elchos BN, Goddard J. Implications of presumptive fatal Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever in two dogs and their owner. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2003;223:1450–2. http://dx.doi.org/10.2460/javma.2003.223.1450
 
84. Uspensky I, Ioffe-Uspensky I. The dog factor in brown dog tick 
Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Acari: Ixodidae) infestations in and near human 
dwellings. Int J Med Microbiol 2002;291(Suppl 33):S156–63. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1438-4221(02)80030-3
 
85. Yevich SJ, Sánchez JL, DeFraites RF, et al. Seroepidemiology of infections 
due to spotted fever group rickettsiae and Ehrlichia species in military 
personnel exposed in areas of the United States where such infections are 
endemic. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1266–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
infdis/171.5.1266
 
86. McCall CL, Curns AT, Rotz LD, et al. Fort Chaffee revisited: the 
epidemiology of tick-borne rickettsial and ehrlichial diseases at a natural 
focus. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2001;1:119–27. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/153036601316977723
 
87. Jones TF, Craig AS, Paddock CD, et al. Family cluster of Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:853–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/515213
 
88. CDC. Fatal cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever in family clusters—
three states, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;53:407–10.
 
89. Tribaldos M, Zaldivar Y, Bermudez S, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
in Panama: a cluster description. J Infect Dev Ctries 2011;5:737–41.
 
90. Paddock CD, Brenner O, Vaid C, et al. Short report: concurrent Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever in a dog and its owner. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2002;66:197–9.
 
91. Breitschwerdt EB, Meuten DJ, Walker DH, et al. Canine Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever: a kennel epizootic. Am J Vet Res 1985;46:2124–8.
 
92. Piranda EM, Faccini JL, Pinter A, et al. Experimental infection of dogs 
with a Brazilian strain of Rickettsia rickettsii: clinical and laboratory 
findings. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2008;103:696–701. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1590/S0074-02762008000700012
 
93. Levin ML, Killmaster LF, Zemtsova GE, Ritter JM, Langham G. Clinical 
presentation, convalescence, and relapse of Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
in dogs experimentally infected via tick bite. PLoS One 2014;9:e115105. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115105
 
94. Valbuena G, Walker DH. Infection of the endothelium by members of 
the order Rickettsiales. Thromb Haemost 2009;102:1071–9.
 
95. Kaplowitz LG, Robertson GL. Hyponatremia in Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever: role of antidiuretic hormone. Ann Intern Med 1983;98:334–5. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-98-3-334
 
96. Wolbach SB. Studies on Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Med Res 
1919;41:1–198.41.
 
97. Harrell GT. Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Medicine (Baltimore) 
1949;28:333–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005792-194912000-00001
 
98. Hattwick MA, Retailliau H, O’Brien RJ, Slutzker M, Fontaine RE, 
Hanson B. Fatal Rocky Mountain spotted fever. JAMA 1978;240:1499–
503. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1978.03290140041019
 
99. Sexton DJ, Corey GR. Rocky Mountain “spotless” and “almost spotless” 
fever: a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:439–48. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/clind/15.3.439
 
100. Walker DH, Gay RM, Valdes-Dapena M. The occurrence of eschars in 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Am Acad Dermatol 1981;4:571–6. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0190-9622(81)70059-8
 
101. Argüello AP
, Hun L, Rivera P
, Taylor L. A fatal urban case of Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever presenting an eschar in San Jose, Costa Rica. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012;87:345–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/
ajtmh.2012.12-0153
 
102. Walker DH, Henderson FW, Hutchins GM. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever: mimicry of appendicitis or acute surgical abdomen? Am J Dis 
Child 1986;140:742–4.
 
103. Walker DH, Lesesne HR, 
Varma 
VA, 
Thacker 
WC. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever mimicking acute cholecystitis. Arch Intern Med 1985;145:2194–6. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1985.00360120062010
 
104. Walker DH, Blanton LS. Rickettsia rickettsii and other spotted fever 
group rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other spotted 
fevers) [Chapter 188]. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, 
Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and practice of infectious diseases. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:2198–205.
 
105. Kirkland KB, Marcom PK, Sexton DJ, Dumler JS, Walker DH. Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever complicated by gangrene: report of six cases and 
review. Clin Infect Dis 1993;16:629–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
clind/16.5.629
 
106. Booth KK, Terrell DR, Vesely SK, George JN. Systemic infections 
mimicking thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Am J Hematol 
2011;86:743–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajh.22091
 
107. Turner RC, Chaplinski TJ, Adams HG. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever presenting as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Am J Med 
1986;81:153–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(86)90201-9
 
108. George JN, Vesely SK, Terrell DR. The Oklahoma Thrombotic 
Thrombocytopenic Purpura-Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (TTP-
HUS) Registry: a community perspective of patients with clinically 
diagnosed TTP-HUS. Semin Hematol 2004;41:60–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1053/j.seminhematol.2003.10.001
 
109. Horney LF, Walker DH. Meningoencephalitis as a major manifestation 
of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. South Med J 1988;81:915–8. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/00007611-198807000-00028
 
110. Archibald LK, Sexton DJ. Long-term sequelae of Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever. Clin Infect Dis 1995;20:1122–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/clinids/20.5.1122
 
111. Massey EW, Thames T, Coffey CE, Gallis HA. Neurologic complications 
of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. South Med J 1985;78:1288–90, 
1303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00007611-198511000-00004
 
112. Bleck TP. Central nervous system involvement in rickettsial 
diseases. Neurol Clin 1999;17:801–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0733-8619(05)70167-5
 
113. Childs JE, Paddock CD. Passive surveillance as an instrument to identify 
risk factors for fatal Rocky Mountain spotted fever: is there more to 
learn? Am J Trop Med Hyg 2002;66:450–7.
 
114. Smadel JE. Status of the rickettsioses in the United States. Ann Intern Med 
1959;51:421–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-51-3-421
 
115. Topping NH. Rocky Mountain spotted fever: a note on some aspects 
of its epidemiology. Public Health Rep 1941;56:1699–703. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2307/4583839
 
116. Dahlgren FS, Holman RC, Paddock CD, Callinan LS, McQuiston JH. 
Fatal Rocky Mountain spotted fever in the United States, 1999–2007. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012;86:713–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/
ajtmh.2012.11-0453
 Recommendations and Reports
36 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
117. Walker DH. The role of host factors in the severity of spotted fever 
and typhus rickettsioses. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;590:10–9. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1990.tb42201.x
 
118. Walker DH, Hawkins HK, Hudson P
. Fulminant Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever. Its pathologic characteristics associated with glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Arch Pathol Lab Med 
1983;107:121–5.
 
119. Topping NH. Experimental Rocky Mountain spotted fever and 
endemic typhus treated with prontosil or sulfapyridine. Public Health 
Rep 1939;54:1143–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/4582935
 120. Harrell GT. Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Medicine (Baltimore) 
1949;28:333–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005792-194912000-00001
 
121. Bergeron JW, Braddom RL, Kaelin DL. Persisting impairment 
following Rocky Mountain spotted fever: a case report. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil 1997;78:1277–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0003-9993(97)90345-2
 
122. Kirk JL, Fine DP
, Sexton DJ, Muchmore HG. Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever. A clinical review based on 48 confirmed cases, 
1943–1986. Medicine (Baltimore) 1990;69:35–45. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00005792-199001000-00003
 
123. Wright L. Intellectual sequelae of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J 
Abnorm Psychol 1972;80:315–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0033742
 
124. Gorman RJ, Saxon S, Snead OC 3rd. Neurologic sequelae of Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. Pediatrics 1981;67:354–7.
 
125. Walker DH. Rickettsiae and rickettsial infections: the current state of 
knowledge. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45(Suppl 1):S39–44. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/518145
 
126. Elghetany MT, Walker DH. Hemostatic changes in Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever and Mediterranean spotted fever. Am J Clin Pathol 
1999;112:159–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ajcp/112.2.159
 
127. Kaplowitz LG, Fischer JJ, Sparling PF. Rocky Mountain spotted fever: 
a clinical dilemma. In: Remington JS, Swartz MN, eds. Current clinical 
topics in infectious diseases. Vol 2. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 
1981:89–109.
 
128. Paddock CD, Childs JE. Ehrlichia chaffeensis: a prototypical emerging 
pathogen. Clin Microbiol Rev 2003;16:37–64. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/CMR.16.1.37-64.2003
 
129. Dumler JS, Walker DH. Ehrlichia chaffeensis (human monocytotropic 
ehrlichiosis), Anaplasma phagocytophilum (human granulocytotropic 
anaplasmosis), and other anaplasmataceae [Chapter 194]. In: 
Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s 
Principles and practice of infectious diseases. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
Elsevier Saunders; 2015:2227–33.
 
130. Zaidi SA, Singer C. Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestations of 
tickborne diseases in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:1206–12. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/339871
 
131. Devereaux CE. Human monocytic ehrlichiosis presenting as febrile 
diarrhea. J Clin Gastroenterol 1997;25:544–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00004836-199710000-00014
 
132. Schutze GE, Buckingham SC, Marshall GS, et al; Tick-borne Infections 
in Children Study (TICS) Group. Human monocytic ehrlichiosis 
in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2007;26:475–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/INF.0b013e318042b66c
 
133. Fichtenbaum CJ, Peterson LR, Weil GJ. Ehrlichiosis presenting as a life-
threatening illness with features of the toxic shock syndrome. Am J Med 
1993;95:351–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(93)90302-6
 
134. Harkess JR. Ehrlichiosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1991;5:37–51.
 
135. Ratnasamy N, Everett ED, Roland WE, McDonald G, Caldwell CW. 
Central nervous system manifestations of human ehrlichiosis. Clin 
Infect Dis 1996;23:314–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/clinids/23.2.314
 
136. Abbott KC, Vukelja SJ, Smith CE, et al. Hemophagocytic syndrome: 
a cause of pancytopenia in human ehrlichiosis. Am J Hematol 
1991;38:230–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajh.2830380315
 
137. Burns S, Saylors R, Mian A. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis 
secondary to Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection: a case report. J Pediatr 
Hematol Oncol 2010;32:e142–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
MPH.0b013e3181c80ab9
 
138. Vijayan V, Thambundit A, Sukumaran S. Hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis secondary to ehrlichiosis in a child. Clin Pediatr 
(Phila) 2015;54:84–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0009922814529183
 
139. Hanson D, Walter AW, Powell J. Ehrlichia-induced hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis in two children. Pediatr Blood Cancer 
2011;56:661–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pbc.22814
 
140. Pandey R, Kochar R, Kemp S, Rotaru D, Shah SV. Ehrlichiosis presenting 
with toxic shock-like syndrome and secondary hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis. J Ark Med Soc 2013;109:280–2.
 
141. Marty AM, Dumler JS, Imes G, Brusman HP
, Smrkovski LL, Frisman 
DM. Ehrlichiosis mimicking thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. 
Case report and pathological correlation. Hum Pathol 1995;26:920–5. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0046-8177(95)90017-9
 
142. Smith Sehdev AE, Sehdev PS, Jacobs R, Dumler JS. Human monocytic 
ehrlichiosis presenting as acute appendicitis during pregnancy. Clin 
Infect Dis 2002;35:e99–102. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/342887
 
143. Smith Sehdev AE, Dumler JS. Hepatic pathology in human monocytic 
ehrlichiosis. Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection. Am J Clin Pathol 
2003;119:859–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1309/F7EAB5P7321716LJ
 
144. McMullan LK, Folk SM, Kelly AJ, et al. A new phlebovirus associated 
with severe febrile illness in Missouri. N Engl J Med 2012;367:834–41. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1203378
 
145. Paddock CD, Folk SM, Shore GM, et al. Infections with Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis and Ehrlichia ewingii in persons coinfected with human 
immunodeficiency virus. Clin Infect Dis 2001;33:1586–94. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1086/323981
 
146. Talbot TR, Comer JA, Bloch KC. Ehrlichia chaffeensis infections among 
HIV-infected patients in a human monocytic ehrlichiosis-endemic 
area. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:1123–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid0909.020560
 
147. Lawrence KL, Morrell MR, Storch GA, Hachem RR, T
rulock EP
. Clinical 
outcomes of solid organ transplant recipients with ehrlichiosis. T
ranspl Infect 
Dis 2009;11:203–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3062.2009.00373.x
 
148. Esbenshade A, Esbenshade J, Domm J, Williams J, Frangoul H. Severe 
Ehrlichia infection in pediatric oncology and stem cell transplant 
patients. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2010;54:776–8.
 
149. Thomas LD, Hongo I, Bloch KC, Tang YW, Dummer S. Human 
ehrlichiosis in transplant recipients. Am J Transplant 2007;7:1641–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-6143.2007.01821.x
 
150. Peters TR, Edwards KM, Standaert SM. Severe ehrlichiosis in an adolescent 
taking trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2000;19:170–2. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00006454-200002000-00021
 
151. Brantley RK. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fulminant 
ehrlichiosis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2001;20:231. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00006454-200102000-00028
 
152. Nayak SU, Simon GL. Myocarditis after trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 
treatment for ehrlichiosis. Emerg Infect Dis 2013;19:1975–7. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1912.121459
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
37
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
153. Patel RG, Byrd MA. Near fatal acute respiratory distress syndrome in a 
patient with human ehrlichiosis. South Med J 1999;92:333–5. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/00007611-199903000-00017
 
154. Liddell AM, Sumner JW, Paddock CD, et al. Reinfection with 
Ehrlichia chaffeensis in a liver transplant recipient. Clin Infect Dis 
2002;34:1644–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/340523
 
155. Caldwell CW, Everett ED, McDonald G, Yesus YW, Roland WE. 
Lymphocytosis of gamma/delta T cells in human ehrlichiosis. Am J Clin 
Pathol 1995;103:761–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ajcp/103.6.761
 
156. Dumler JS, Dawson JE, Walker DH. Human ehrlichiosis: 
hematopathology and immunohistologic detection of Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis. Hum Pathol 1993;24:391–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0046-8177(93)90087-W
 
157. Hamilton KS, Standaert SM, Kinney MC. Characteristic peripheral 
blood findings in human ehrlichiosis. Mod Pathol 2004;17:512–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3800075
 
158. Berry DS, Miller RS, Hooke JA, Massung RF, Bennett J, 
Ottolini MG. Ehrlichial meningitis with cerebrospinal fluid 
morulae. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:552–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00006454-199906000-00016
 
159. Dunn BE, Monson TP
, Dumler JS, et al. Identification of Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis morulae in cerebrospinal fluid mononuclear cells. J Clin 
Microbiol 1992;30:2207–10.
 
160. Allen MB, Pritt BS, Sloan LM, et al. First reported case of 
Ehrlichia ewingii involving human bone marrow. J Clin Microbiol 
2014;52:4102–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01670-14
 
161. Dumler JS, Choi KS, Garcia-Garcia JC, et al. Human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis and Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Emerg Infect Dis 
2005;11:1828–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1112.050898
 
162. Dumler JS, Madigan JE, Pusterla N, Bakken JS. Ehrlichioses 
in humans: epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and 
treatment. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45(Suppl 1):S45–51. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/518146
 
163. Bakken JS, Krueth J, Wilson-Nordskog C, Tilden RL, Asanovich K, 
Dumler JS. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis. JAMA 1996;275:199–205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.1996.03530270039029
 
164. Bellone M, Chiang J, Ahmed T, Galanakis D, Senzel L. Thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura and its look-alikes: a single institution 
experience. Transfus Apheresis Sci 2012;46:59–64. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.transci.2011.11.003
 
165. Dumler JS. The biological basis of severe outcomes in Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum infection. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 
2012;64:13–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.2011.00909.x
 
166. Bakken JS, Dumler S. Human granulocytic anaplasmosis. Infect Dis 
Clin North Am 2008;22:433–48, viii. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
idc.2008.03.011
 
167. Bakken JS, Dumler JS. Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. Infect Med 
2004;21:433–51.
 
168. Bakken JS, Dumler JS. Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis. Clin Infect 
Dis 2000;31:554–60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/313948
 
169. Bakken JS, Aguero-Rosenfeld ME, Tilden RL, et al. Serial measurements 
of hematologic counts during the active phase of human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:862–70. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/319350
 
170. Aguero-Rosenfeld ME, Horowitz HW, Wormser GP
, et al. Human 
granulocytic ehrlichiosis: a case series from a medical center in 
New York State. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:904–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-125-11-199612010-00006
 
171. Jereb M, Pecaver B, Tomazic J, et al. Severe human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis transmitted by blood transfusion. Emerg Infect Dis 
2012;18:1354–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1808.120180
 
172. Belongia EA, Reed KD, Mitchell PD, et al. Clinical and epidemiological 
features of early Lyme disease and human granulocytic ehrlichiosis 
in Wisconsin. Clin Infect Dis 1999;29:1472–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/313532
 
173. Wormser GP
, Dattwyler RJ, Shapiro ED, et al. The clinical assessment, 
treatment, and prevention of Lyme disease, human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis, and babesiosis: clinical practice guidelines by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43:1089–
134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/508667
 
174. Swanson SJ, Neitzel D, Reed KD, Belongia EA. Coinfections acquired 
from Ixodes ticks. Clin Microbiol Rev 2006;19:708–27. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/CMR.00011-06
 
175. Chowdri HR, Gugliotta JL, Berardi VP
, et al. Borrelia miyamotoi 
infection presenting as human granulocytic anaplasmosis: a 
case report. Ann Intern Med 2013;159:21–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-159-1-201307020-00005
 
176. Weber DJ, Cohen MS, Morrell DS, Rutala WA. The acutely ill patient 
with fever and rash [Chapter 52]. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin 
R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and practices of 
infectious diseases. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 
2010:791–808.
 
177. Weber DJ, Cohen MS, Rutala WA. The acutely ill patient with fever and 
rash [Chapter 57]. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, 
Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and practice of infectious diseases. 
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2015:732–46.
 
178. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Rickettsial diseases. In: Kimberlin DW, Long SS, Brady MT, Jackson M, 
eds. Red book: 2015 report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 
2015:677–80.
 
179. Donovan BJ, Weber DJ, Rublein JC, Raasch RH. Treatment of tick-
borne diseases. Ann Pharmacother 2002;36:1590–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1345/aph.1C089
 
180. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. In: Kimberlin DW, Long SS, Brady MT, 
Jackson M, eds. Red book: 2015 report of the Committee on Infectious 
Diseases. 30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2015:682–84.
 
181. CDC. Consequences of delayed diagnosis of Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever in children—West Virginia, Michigan, Tennessee, and Oklahoma, 
May–July 2000. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2000;49:885–8.
 
182. Peterson JC. Rickettsial infections. Pediatr Clin North Am 
1960;7:1003–14.
 
183. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and related infections (human ehrlichiosis, 
anaplasmosis, and related infections). In: Kimberlin DW, Brady MT, 
Jackson M, et al., eds. Red book: 2015 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. 30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy 
of Pediatrics; 2015:329–33.
 
184. Weber DJ, Walker DH. Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Infect Dis Clin 
North Am 1991;5:19–35.
 
185. Schach von Wittenau M. Some pharmacokinetic aspects of doxycycline 
metabolism in man. Chemotherapy 1968;13(Suppl 1):S41–50. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1159/000220581
 Recommendations and Reports
38 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
186. Todd SR, Dahlgren FS, Traeger MS, et al. No visible dental 
staining in children treated with doxycycline for suspected Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. J Pediatr 2015;166:1246–51. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.02.015
 
187. Volovitz B, Shkap R, Amir J, Calderon S, Varsano I, 
Nussinovitch M. Absence of tooth staining with doxycycline treatment 
in young children. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2007;46:121–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0009922806290026
 
188. Lochary ME, Lockhart PB, Williams WT Jr. Doxycycline and staining 
of permanent teeth. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:429–31. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/00006454-199805000-00019
 
189. Zientek J, Dahlgren FS, McQuiston JH, Regan J. Self-reported 
treatment practices by healthcare providers could lead to death from 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Pediatr 2014;164:416–8. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.10.008
 
190. Mosites E, Carpenter LR, McElroy K, et al. Knowledge, attitudes, and 
practices regarding Rocky Mountain spotted fever among healthcare 
providers, Tennessee, 2009. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013;88:162–6. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2012.12-0126
 
191. O’Reilly M, Paddock C, Elchos B, Goddard J, Childs J, Currie M. 
Physician knowledge of the diagnosis and management of Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever: Mississippi, 2002. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
2003;990:295–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.
tb07379.x
 
192. Feder HM Jr, Osier C, Maderazo EG. Chloramphenicol: a review of its 
use in clinical practice. Rev Infect Dis 1981;3:479–91. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/clinids/3.3.479
 
193. Frensenius-kabi.us. [Internet]. Chloramphenicol sodium succinate. 
Lake Zurich, IL: APP
, A Frensius Kabi Company; 2008. http://editor.
fresenius-kabi.us/PIs/Chloramphenicol_for_Inj_45841E_Jan_08.pdf
 
194. Brouqui P
, Raoult D. In vitro antibiotic susceptibility of the newly 
recognized agent of ehrlichiosis in humans, Ehrlichia chaffeensis. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1992;36:2799–803. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/AAC.36.12.2799
 
195. Klein MB, Nelson CM, Goodman JL. Antibiotic susceptibility of the 
newly cultivated agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis: promising 
activity of quinolones and rifamycins. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1997;41:76–9.
 
196. Buitrago MI, IJdo JW, Rinaudo P
, et al. Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis 
during pregnancy treated successfully with rifampin. Clin Infect Dis 
1998;27:213–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/517678
 
197. Dhand A, Nadelman RB, Aguero-Rosenfeld M, Haddad FA, Stokes DP
, 
Horowitz HW. Human granulocytic anaplasmosis during pregnancy: 
case series and literature review. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45:589–93. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1086/520659
 
198. Shields K, Cumming M, Rios J, et al. Transfusion-associated Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum infection in a pregnant patient with thalassemia trait: 
a case report. Transfusion 2015;55:719–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
trf.12908
 
199. Krause PJ, Corrow CL, Bakken JS. Successful treatment of human 
granulocytic ehrlichiosis in children using rifampin. Pediatrics 
2003;112:e252–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.112.3.e252
 
200. Rolain JM, Maurin M, Vestris G, Raoult D. In vitro susceptibilities 
of 27 rickettsiae to 13 antimicrobials. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1998;42:1537–41.
 
201. Botelho-Nevers E, Rovery C, Richet H, Raoult D. Analysis of risk 
factors for malignant Mediterranean spotted fever indicates that 
fluoroquinolone treatment has a deleterious effect. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2011;66:1821–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jac/dkr218
 
202. Gudiol F, Pallares R, Carratala J, et al. Randomized double-blind 
evaluation of ciprofloxacin and doxycycline for Mediterranean spotted 
fever. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1989;33:987–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/AAC.33.6.987
 
203. Maurin M, Bakken JS, Dumler JS. Antibiotic susceptibilities 
of Anaplasma (Ehrlichia) phagocytophilum strains from various 
geographic areas in the United States. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2003;47:413–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AAC.47.1.413-415.2003
 
204. Wormser GP
, Filozov A, Telford SR 3rd, et al. Dissociation between 
inhibition and killing by levofloxacin in human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2006;6:388–94. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2006.6.388
 
205. Walker DH, Sexton DJ. Rickettsia rickettsii. In: Yu VL, Merigan TC, 
Barriere SL, eds. Antimicrobial therapy and vaccines. Baltimore, MD: 
Williams & Wilkins; 1999:562–8.
 
206. Fernando SL, Hudson BJ. Rapid desensitization to doxycycline. Ann 
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2013;111:73–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
anai.2013.05.005
 
207. Fellner MJ, Baer RL. Anaphylactic reaction to tetracycline in a penicillin-
allergic patient: immunologic studies. JAMA 1965;192:997–8. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1965.03080240067023
 
208. Stollings JL, Chadha SN, Paul AM, Shaver CM, Hagaman D. 
Doxycycline desensitization for a suspected case of ehrlichiosis. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2:103–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaip.2013.08.002
 
209. Kutscher AH, Zegarelli EV, Tovell HM, Hochberg B, Hauptman J. 
Discoloration of deciduous teeth induced by administration of tetracycline 
antepartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1966;96:291–2. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0002-9378(66)90328-0
 
210. Wenk RE, Gebhardt FC, Bhagavan BS, Lustgarten JA, McCarthy EF. 
Tetracycline-associated fatty liver of pregnancy, including possible 
pregnancy risk after chronic dermatologic use of tetracycline. J Reprod 
Med 1981;26:135–41.
 
211. Allen WM. The use of progestational agents in pregnancy. Rocky Mt 
Med J 1965;62:31–5.
 
212. Genot MT, Golan HP
, Porter PJ, Kass EH. Effect of administration 
of tetracycline in pregnancy on the primary dentition of the offspring. 
J Oral Med 1970;25:75–9.
 
213. Porter PJ, Sweeney EA, Golan H, Kass EH. Controlled study of the 
effect of prenatal tetracycline on primary dentition. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother (Bethesda) 1965;5:668–71.
 
214. Friedman JM, Polifka JE. Teratogenic effects of drugs: a resource for 
clinicians (TERIS). 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins 
University Press; 2000.
 
215. FDA.gov. [Internet]. Doxycycline (vibramycin, monodox, doryx, 
doxy, atridox, periodox, vibra-tabs) use by pregnant and lactating 
women. Silver Spring, MD: US Food and Drug Administration; 
2015. http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/EmergencyPreparedness/
BioterrorismandDrugPreparedness/ucm131011.htm
 
216. Cross R, Ling C, Day NP
, McGready R, Paris DH. Revisiting 
doxycycline in pregnancy and early childhood—time to rebuild its 
reputation? Expert Opin Drug Saf 2015. Epub Dec 17, 2015. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1517/14740338.2016.1133584
 
217. Meaney-Delman D, Rasmussen SA, Beigi RH, et al. Prophylaxis 
and treatment of anthrax in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 
2013;122:885–900. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0b013e3182a5fdfd
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
39
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
218. Schultz JC, Adamson JS Jr, Workman WW, Norman TD. Fatal liver 
disease after intravenous administration of tetracycline in high dosage. 
N Engl J Med 1963;269:999–1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM196311072691903
 
219. Nahum GG, Uhl K, Kennedy DL. Antibiotic use in pregnancy and 
lactation: what is and is not known about teratogenic and toxic risks. 
Obstet Gynecol 2006;107:1120–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.
AOG.0000216197.26783.b5
 
220. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs. Transfer of drugs 
and other chemicals into human milk. Pediatrics 2001;108:776–89. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.108.3.776
 
221. Kenyon RH, Williams RG, Oster CN, Pedersen CE Jr. Prophylactic 
treatment of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Clin Microbiol 
1978;8:102–4.
 
222. Clements ML, Dumler JS, Fiset P
, Wisseman CL Jr, Snyder MJ, 
Levine MM. Serodiagnosis of Rocky Mountain spotted fever: 
comparison of IgM and IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays 
and indirect fluorescent antibody test. J Infect Dis 1983;148:876–80. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/148.5.876
 
223. Bakken JS, Haller I, Riddell D, Walls JJ, Dumler JS. The 
serological response of patients infected with the agent of human 
granulocytic ehrlichiosis. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:22–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/323811
 
224. Dawson JE, Fishbein DB, Eng TR, Redus MA, Greene NR. Diagnosis 
of human ehrlichiosis with the indirect fluorescent antibody test: 
kinetics and specificity. J Infect Dis 1990;162:91–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/162.1.91
 
225. McQuiston JH, Childs JE, Chamberland ME, Tabor E. Transmission 
of tick-borne agents of disease by blood transfusion: a review of known 
and potential risks in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:274–84. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1537-2995.2000.40030274.x
 
226. Wells GM, Woodward TE, Fiset P
, Hornick RB. Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever caused by blood transfusion. JAMA 1978;239:2763–5. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.239.26.2763
 
227. Alhumaidan H, Westley B, Esteva C, Berardi V, Young C, 
Sweeney J. Transfusion-transmitted anaplasmosis from leukoreduced 
red blood cells. Transfusion 2013;53:181–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1537-2995.2012.03685.x
 
228. Annen K, Friedman K, Eshoa C, Horowitz M, Gottschall J, Straus T. 
Two cases of transfusion-transmitted Anaplasma phagocytophilum. 
Am J Clin Pathol 2012;137:562–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1309/
AJCP4E4VQQQOZIAQ
 
229. CDC. Anaplasma phagocytophilum transmitted through blood 
transfusion—Minnesota, 2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2008;57:1145–8.
 
230. Eastlund T, Persing D, Mathiesen D, et al. Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis 
after red cell transfusion. Transfusion 1999;39(10 Suppl 1):S117.
 
231. Fine AB, Sweeney JD, Nixon CP
, Knoll BM. Transfusion-transmitted 
anaplasmosis from a leukoreduced platelet pool. Transfusion 2015. 
Epub Dec 9, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/trf.13392
 
232. Townsend RL, Moritz ED, Fialkow LB, Berardi V, Stramer SL. 
Probable transfusion-transmission of Anaplasma phagocytophilum by 
leukoreduced platelets. Transfusion 2014;54:2828–32. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/trf.12675
 
233. Regan J, Matthias J, Green-Murphy A, et al. A confirmed Ehrlichia 
ewingii infection likely acquired through platelet transfusion. Clin 
Infect Dis 2013;56:e105–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/cit177
 
234. Mettille FC, Salata KF
, Belanger KJ, Casleton BG, Kelly DJ. Reducing the 
risk of transfusion-transmitted rickettsial disease by WBC filtration, using 
Orientia tsutsugamushi in a model system. Transfusion 2000;40:290–6. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1537-2995.2000.40030290.x
 
235. Proctor MC, Leiby DA. Do leukoreduction filters passively reduce the 
transmission risk of human granulocytic anaplasmosis? Transfusion 
2015;55:1242–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/trf.12976
 
236. McKechnie DB, Slater KS, Childs JE, Massung R F, 
Paddock CD. Survival of Ehrlichia chaffeensis in refrigerated, 
ADSOL-treated RBCs. Transfusion 2000;40:1041–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1046/j.1537-2995.2000.40091041.x
 
237. Kalantarpour F, Chowdhury I, Wormser GP
, Aguero-Rosenfeld ME. 
Survival of the human granulocytic ehrlichiosis agent under refrigeration 
conditions. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:2398–9.
 
238. Sachdev SH, Joshi V, Cox ER, Amoroso A, Palekar S. Severe life-
threatening Ehrlichia chaffeensis infections transmitted through solid 
organ transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 2014;16:119–24. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/tid.12172
 
239. Jensenius M, Davis X, von Sonnenburg F
, et al; GeoSentinel Surveillance 
Network. Multicenter GeoSentinel analysis of rickettsial diseases in 
international travelers, 1996–2008. Emerg Infect Dis 2009;15:1791–8. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1511.090677
 
240. Jensenius M, Fournier PE, Raoult D. Tick-borne rickettsioses in 
international travellers. Int J Infect Dis 2004;8:139–46. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijid.2003.06.004
 
241. Raoult 
D, 
Fournier 
PE, 
Fenollar 
F
, 
et 
al. Rickettsia 
africae, 
a 
tick-borne 
pathogen 
in travelers to sub-Saharan Africa. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1504–10. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200105173442003
 
242. McQuiston JH, Paddock CD, Singleton J Jr, Wheeling JT, Zaki SR, 
Childs JE. Imported spotted fever rickettsioses in United States travelers 
returning from Africa: a summary of cases confirmed by laboratory 
testing at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1999–2002. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2004;70:98–101.
 
243. Jensenius M, Fournier PE, Vene S, et al; Norwegian African Tick Bite 
Fever Study Group. African tick bite fever in travelers to rural sub-
Equatorial Africa. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:1411–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/375083
 
244. Jensenius M, Fournier PE, Kelly P
, Myrvang B, Raoult D. African 
tick bite fever. Lancet Infect Dis 2003;3:557–64. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(03)00739-4
 
245. Smoak BL, McClain JB, Brundage JF, et al. An outbreak of spotted 
fever rickettsiosis in U.S. Army troops deployed to Botswana. Emerg 
Infect Dis 1996;2:217–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid0203.960309
 
246. CDC. African tick-bite fever among international travelers—Oregon, 
1998. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1998;47:950–2.
 
247. Freedman DO, Weld LH, Kozarsky PE, et al; GeoSentinel Surveillance 
Network. Spectrum of disease and relation to place of exposure among 
ill returned travelers. N Engl J Med 2006;354:119–30. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa051331
 
248. Leder K, Torresi J, Libman MD; GeoSentinel Surveillance 
Network. GeoSentinel surveillance of illness in returned travelers, 
2007–2011. Ann Intern Med 2013;158:456–68. http://dx.doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-158-6-201303190-00005
 
249. Sousa R, França A, Dória Nòbrega S, et al. Host- and microbe-related 
risk factors for and pathophysiology of fatal Rickettsia conorii infection 
in Portuguese patients. J Infect Dis 2008;198:576–85. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/590211
 
250. Rovery C, Raoult D. Mediterranean spotted fever. Infect Dis Clin North 
Am 2008;22:515–30, ix. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2008.03.003
 Recommendations and Reports
40 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
251. Levin ML, Killmaster LF, Zemtsova GE. Domestic dogs (Canis 
familiaris) as reservoir hosts for Rickettsia conorii. Vector Borne Zoonotic 
Dis 2012;12:28–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2011.0684
 
252. Rovery C, Brouqui P
, Raoult D. Questions on Mediterranean spotted 
fever a century after its discovery. Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:1360–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1409.071133
 
253. Parola P
, Paddock CD, Socolovschi C, et al. Update on tick-borne 
rickettsioses around the world: a geographic approach. Clin Microbiol 
Rev 2013;26:657–702. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00032-13
 
254. Angerami RN, Câmara M, Pacola MR, et al. Features of Brazilian 
spotted fever in two different endemic areas in Brazil. Ticks Tick Borne 
Dis 2012;3:346–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ttbdis.2012.10.010
 
255. Paddock CD, Fernandez S, Echenique GA, et al. Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever in Argentina. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2008;78:687–92.
 
256. Hidalgo M, Orejuela L, Fuya P
, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, Colombia. Emerg Infect Dis 2007;13:1058–60. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid1307.060537
 
257. Ripoll CM, Remondegui CE, Ordonez G, et al. Evidence of rickettsial 
spotted fever and ehrlichial infections in a subtropical territory of Jujuy, 
Argentina. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999;61:350–4.
 
258. Hun L, Cortés X, Taylor L. Molecular characterization of Rickettsia 
rickettsii isolated from human clinical samples and from the rabbit tick 
Haemaphysalis leporispalustris collected at different geographic zones in 
Costa Rica. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2008;79:899–902.
 
259. Eremeeva ME, Berganza E, Suarez G, et al. Investigation of an 
outbreak of rickettsial febrile illness in Guatemala, 2007. Int J Infect 
Dis 2013;17:e304–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2012.11.011
 
260. Estripeaut D, Aramburú MG, Sáez-Llorens X, et al. Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever, Panama. Emerg Infect Dis 2007;13:1763–5. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1311.070931
 
261. Romer Y, Seijo AC, Crudo F, et al. Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis, 
Argentina. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17:1169–73. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid1707.101857
 
262. Conti-Díaz IA, Moraes-Filho J, Pacheco RC, Labruna MB. Serological 
evidence of Rickettsia parkeri as the etiological agent of rickettsiosis in 
Uruguay. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo 2009;51:337–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1590/S0036-46652009000600005
 
263. Blanco JR, Oteo JA. Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis in 
Europe. Clin Microbiol Infect 2002;8:763–72. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1046/j.1469-0691.2002.00557.x
 
264. Ohashi N, Gaowa, Wuritu, et al. Human granulocytic anaplasmosis, 
Japan. Emerg Infect Dis 2013;19:289–92. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1902.120855
 
265. Zhang L, Wang G, Liu Q, et al. Molecular analysis of Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum isolated from patients with febrile diseases of 
unknown etiology in China. PLoS One 2013;8:e57155. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057155
 
266. Heo EJ, Park JH, Koo JR, et al. Serologic and molecular detection of 
Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Anaplasma phagocytophila (human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis agent) in Korean patients. J Clin Microbiol 2002;40:3082–5. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JCM.40.8.3082-3085.2002
 
267. Sidel’nikov IuN, Mediannikov O, Ivanov LI, et al. The first case of 
granulocytic ehrlichiosis in the Far East of the Russian Federation 
[Russian]. Klin Med (Mosk) 2003;81:67–8.
 
268. Walker DH, Dumler JS. Rickettsiae: spotted fever and typhus group 
[Chapter 40]. In: Lennette EH, Lennette DA, Lennette ET, eds. 
Diagnostic procedures for viral, rickettsial, and chlamydial infections. 
7th ed. Washington, DC: American Public Health Association; 
1995:575–81.
 
269. Walker DH, Bouyer DH. Rickettsia and Orientia [Chapter 64]. In: 
Jorgensen JH, Pfaller MA, Carroll KC, et al., eds. Manual of clinical 
microbiology. 11th ed. Washington, DC: American Society of 
Microbiology Press; 2015:1122–34.
 
270. Reller ME, Dumler JS. Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and related intracellular 
bacteria [Chapter 65]. In: Jorgensen JH, Pfaller MA, Carroll KC, 
et al., eds. Manual of clinical microbiology. 11th ed. Washington, DC: 
American Society of Microbiology Press; 2015:1135–49.
 
271. Dumler JS. Indirect fluorescent-antibody test [Chapter 11.7.2 ]. In: 
Isenberg HD, ed. Clinical microbiology procedures handbook. 2nd 
ed. Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press; 2004.
 
272. Bakken JS, Goellner P
, Van Etten M, et al. Seroprevalence of human 
granulocytic ehrlichiosis among permanent residents of northwestern 
Wisconsin. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:1491–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/515048
 
273. Wilfert CM, MacCormack JN, Kleeman K, et al. The prevalence 
of antibodies to Rickettsia rickettsii in an area endemic for Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. J Infect Dis 1985;151:823–31. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/151.5.823
 
274. CSTE.org. [Internet]. Smithee L, Hull HF, Lynch C, Parrish RG. 
Position statement 09-ID-16, Public health reporting and national 
notification for spotted fever rickettsiosis (including Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever). Atlanta, GA: Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists; 2009. http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.cste.org/
resource/resmgr/PS/09-ID-16.pdf
 
275. CSTE.org. [Internet]. Engel J, Bradley K, Swerdlow D, et al. Position 
statement 07-ID-03, Revision of the national surveillance case 
definition for ehrlichiosis (ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis). Atlanta, GA: 
Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists; 2007. http://c.ymcdn.
com/sites/www.cste.org/resource/resmgr/PS/07-ID-03.pdf
 
276. Newhouse VF, Shepard CC, Redus MD, Tzianabos T, McDade JE. 
A comparison of the complement fixation, indirect fluorescent antibody, 
and microagglutination tests for the serological diagnosis of rickettsial 
diseases. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1979;28:387–95.
 
277. Davis JP
, Wilfert CM, Sexton DJ, Burgdorfer W, Casper EA. Philip RN. 
Serologic comparison of R. rickettsii isolated from patients in North 
Carolina to R. rickettsii isolated from patients in Montana. In: 
Burgdorfer W, Anacker RL, eds. Rickettsiae and rickettsial diseases. 
New York, NY: Academic Press, Inc.; 1981:139–47.
 
278. Philip RN, Casper EA, MacCormack JN, et al. A comparison of 
serologic methods for diagnosis of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Am J 
Epidemiol 1977;105:56–67.
 
279. Crump JA, Corder JR, Henshaw NG, Reller LB. Development, 
implementation, and impact of acceptability criteria for serologic tests 
for infectious diseases. J Clin Microbiol 2004;42:881–3. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/JCM.42.2.881-883.2004
 
280. Fournier PE, Jensenius M, Laferl H, Vene S, Raoult D. Kinetics of 
antibody responses in Rickettsia africae and Rickettsia conorii infections. 
Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2002;9:324–8.
 
281. Taylor JP
, Tanner WB, Rawlings JA, et al. Serological evidence of 
subclinical Rocky Mountain spotted fever infections in Texas. J Infect 
Dis 1985;151:367–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/151.2.367
 
282. Hilton E, DeVoti J, Benach JL, et al. Seroprevalence and seroconversion 
for tick-borne diseases in a high-risk population in the northeast 
United States. Am J Med 1999;106:404–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0002-9343(99)00046-7
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
283. Marshall GS, Stout GG, Jacobs RF; Tick-Borne Infections in Children 
Study Group. Antibodies reactive to Rickettsia rickettsii among 
children living in the southeast and south central regions of the United 
States. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2003;157:443–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1001/archpedi.157.5.443
 
284. Paddock CD. Perspectives on the laboratory diagnosis of rickettsial diseases 
in the 21st century. Acta Med Costarric 2013;55(Suppl 1):S13–24.
 
285. McQuiston JH, Wiedeman C, Singleton J, et al. Inadequacy of IgM 
antibody tests for diagnosis of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Am J Trop 
Med Hyg 2014;91:767–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.14-0123
 
286. Walls JJ, Aguero-Rosenfeld M, Bakken JS, et al. Inter- and 
intralaboratory comparison of Ehrlichia equi and human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis (HGE) agent strains for serodiagnosis of HGE by the 
immunofluorescent-antibody test. J Clin Microbiol 1999;37:2968–73.
 
287. Brouqui P
, Salvo E, Dumler JS, Raoult D. Diagnosis of granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis in humans by immunofluorescence assay. Clin Diagn Lab 
Immunol 2001;8:199–202.
 
288. Vaughn MF, Delisle J, Johnson J, et al. Seroepidemiologic study 
of human infections with spotted fever group rickettsiae in North 
Carolina. J Clin Microbiol 2014;52:3960–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1128/JCM.01733-14
 
289. Comer JA, Nicholson WL, Olson JG, Childs JE. Serologic testing for 
human granulocytic ehrlichiosis at a national referral center. J Clin 
Microbiol 1999;37:558–64.
 
290. Kaplowitz LG, Lange JV, Fischer JJ, Walker DH. Correlation of 
rickettsial titers, circulating endotoxin, and clinical features in Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. Arch Intern Med 1983;143:1149–51. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1983.00350060073012
 
291. Kato CY, Chung IH, Robinson LK, Austin AL, Dasch GA, Massung RF
. 
Assessment of real-time PCR assay for detection of Rickettsia spp. 
and Rickettsia rickettsii in banked clinical samples. J Clin Microbiol 
2013;51:314–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01723-12
 
292. Denison AM, Amin BD, Nicholson WL, Paddock CD. Detection of 
Rickettsia rickettsii, Rickettsia parkeri, and Rickettsia akari in skin biopsy 
specimens using a multiplex real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. 
Clin Infect Dis 2014;59:635–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciu358
 
293. Paddock CD, Denison AM, Lash RR, et al. Phylogeography of Rickettsia 
rickettsii genotypes associated with fatal Rocky Mountain spotted fever. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2014;91:589–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/
ajtmh.14-0146
 
294. Standaert SM, Yu T, Scott MA, et al. Primary isolation of Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis from patients with febrile illnesses: clinical and molecular 
characteristics. J Infect Dis 2000;181:1082–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/315346
 
295. Bechah Y, Socolovschi C, Raoult D. Identification of rickettsial 
infections by using cutaneous swab specimens and PCR. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2011;17:83–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1701.100854
 
296. Walker DH, Cain BG, Olmstead PM. Laboratory diagnosis of Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever by immunofluorescent demonstration of 
Rickettsia in cutaneous lesions. Am J Clin Pathol 1978;69:619–23. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ajcp/69.6.619
 
297. Procop GW, Burchette JL Jr, Howell DN, Sexton DJ. Immunoperoxidase 
and immunofluorescent staining of Rickettsia rickettsii in skin biopsies. 
A comparative study. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1997;121:894–9.
 
298. Dumler JS, Gage WR, Pettis GL, Azad AF, Kuhadja FP
. Rapid 
immunoperoxidase demonstration of Rickettsia rickettsii in fixed 
cutaneous specimens from patients with Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever. Am J Clin Pathol 1990;93:410–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
ajcp/93.3.410
 
299. Walker DH, Burday MS, Folds JD. Laboratory diagnosis of Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. South Med J 1980;73:1443–6, 1449. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/00007611-198011000-00007
 
300. Dawson JE, Paddock CD, Warner CK, et al. Tissue diagnosis of 
Ehrlichia chaffeensis in patients with fatal ehrlichiosis by use of 
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and polymerase chain 
reaction. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001;65:603–9.
 
301. Aguero-Rosenfeld ME. Laboratory aspects of tick-borne diseases: 
Lyme, human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, and babesiosis. Mt Sinai J Med 
2003;70:197–206.
 
302. Lagier JC, Edouard S, Pagnier I, Mediannikov O, Drancourt M, 
Raoult D. Current and past strategies for bacterial culture in clinical 
microbiology. Clin Microbiol Rev 2015;28:208–36. 
 
303. Horowitz HW, Aguero-Rosenfeld ME, McKenna DF, et al. Clinical 
and laboratory spectrum of culture-proven human granulocytic 
ehrlichiosis: comparison with culture-negative cases. Clin Infect Dis 
1998;27:1314–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/515000
 
304. Angelakis E, Richet H, Rolain JM, La Scola B, Raoult D. Comparison 
of real-time quantitative PCR and culture for the diagnosis of emerging 
Rickettsioses. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2012;6:e1540. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001540
 
305. CDC. Chosewood LC, Wilson DE, eds. Biosafety in microbiological 
and biomedical laboratories (BMBL). 5th ed. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; National Institutes 
of Health; 2009. http://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/bmbl5/
BMBL.pdf
 
306. Felz MW, Durden LA. Attachment sites of four tick species (Acari: 
Ixodidae) parasitizing humans in Georgia and South Carolina. J Med 
Entomol 1999;36:361–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/36.3.361
 
307. Connally NP
, Durante AJ, Yousey-Hindes KM, Meek JI, Nelson RS, 
Heimer R. Peridomestic Lyme disease prevention: results of a population-
based case-control study. Am J Prev Med 2009;37:201–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.amepre.2009.04.026
 
308. Moore JJ. Time relationship of the wood-tick in the transmission of 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Infect Dis 1911;8:339–47. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/8.3.339
 
309. Spencer RR, Parker RR. Rocky Mountain spotted fever: infectivity 
of fasting and recently fed ticks. Public Health Rep 1923;38:333–9. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/4576667
 
310. Katavolos P
, Armstrong PM, Dawson JE, Telford SR 3rd. Duration of 
tick attachment required for transmission of granulocytic ehrlichiosis. 
J Infect Dis 1998;177:1422–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/517829
 
311. des Vignes F, Piesman J, Heffernan R, Schulze TL, Stafford KC 3rd, 
Fish D. Effect of tick removal on transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi 
and Ehrlichia phagocytophila by Ixodes scapularis nymphs. J Infect Dis 
2001;183:773–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/318818
 
312. Carroll JF, Klun JA, Debboun M. Repellency of DEET and 
SS220 applied to skin involves olfactory sensing by two species 
of ticks. Med Vet Entomol 2005;19:101–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.0269-283X.2005.00559.x
 
313. Kumar S, Prakash S, Kaushik MP
, Rao KM. Comparative activity 
of three repellents against the ticks Rhipicephalus sanguineus and 
Argas persicus. Med Vet Entomol 1992;6:47–50. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2915.1992.tb00034.x
 
314. Lane RS. Treatment of clothing with a permethrin spray for personal 
protection against the western black-legged tick, Ixodes pacificus (Acari: 
Ixodidae). Exp Appl Acarol 1989;6:343–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF01193304
 Recommendations and Reports
42 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
315. Pretorius AM, Jensenius M, Clarke F, Ringertz SH. Repellent 
efficacy of DEET and KBR 3023 against Amblyomma hebraeum 
(Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol 2003;40:245–8. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1603/0022-2585-40.2.245
 
316. Schreck CE, Snoddy EL, Spielman A. Pressurized sprays of permethrin 
or DEET on military clothing for personal protection against Ixodes 
dammini (Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol 1986;23:396–9. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/23.4.396
 
317. Solberg VB, Klein TA, McPherson KR, Bradford BA, Burge JR, 
Wirtz RA. Field evaluation of DEET and a piperidine repellent 
(AI3–37220) against Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae). 
J Med Entomol 1995;32:870–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmedent/32.6.870
 
318. Jensenius M, Pretorius AM, Clarke F, Myrvang B. Repellent efficacy 
of four commercial DEET lotions against Amblyomma hebraeum 
(Acari: Ixodidae), the principal vector of Rickettsia africae in southern 
Africa. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2005;99:708–11. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.trstmh.2005.01.006
 
319. Jordan RA, Schulze TL, Dolan MC. Efficacy of plant-derived and 
synthetic compounds on clothing as repellents against Ixodes scapularis 
and Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol 
2012;49:101–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/ME10241
 
320. Pages F, Dautel H, Duvallet G, Kahl O, de Gentile L, Boulanger N. 
Tick repellents for human use: prevention of tick bites and tick-borne 
diseases. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2014;14:85–93. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/vbz.2013.1410
 
321. CDC, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases. 
Ticks. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases; 
2015. http://www.cdc.gov/ticks/index.html
 
322. Bissinger BW, Zhu J, Apperson CS, Sonenshine DE, Watson DW, 
Roe RM. Comparative efficacy of BioUD to other commercially 
available arthropod repellents against the ticks Amblyomma americanum 
and Dermacentor variabilis on cotton cloth. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2009;81:685–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2009.09-0114
 
323. Carroll JF, Benante JP
, Klun JA, et al. Twelve-hour duration testing 
of cream formulations of three repellents against Amblyomma 
americanum. Med Vet Entomol 2008;22:144–51. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2915.2008.00721.x
 
324. Carroll JF, Benante JP
, Kramer M, Lohmeyer KH, Lawrence K. 
Formulations of DEET, picaridin, and IR3535 applied to skin 
repel nymphs of the lone star tick (Acari: Ixodidae) for 12 hours. 
J Med Entomol 2010;47:699–704. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmedent/47.4.699
 
325. Staub D, Debrunner M, Amsler L, Steffen R. Effectiveness of 
a repellent containing DEET and EBAAP for preventing tick 
bites. Wilderness Environ Med 2002;13:12–20. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1580/1080-6032(2002)013[0012:EOARCD]2.0.CO;2
 
326. Vaughn MF, Funkhouser SW, Lin FC, et al. Long-lasting permethrin 
impregnated uniforms: a randomized-controlled trial for tick 
bite prevention. Am J Prev Med 2014;46:473–80. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.amepre.2014.01.008
 
327. Miller NJ, Rainone EE, Dyer MC, González ML, Mather TN. Tick bite 
protection with permethrin-treated summer-weight clothing. J Med 
Entomol 2011;48:327–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/ME10158
 
328. Semmler M, Abdel-Ghaffar F, Al-Rasheid KA, Mehlhorn H. 
Comparison of the tick repellent efficacy of chemical and biological 
products originating from Europe and the USA. Parasitol Res 
2011;108:899–904. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00436-010-2131-4
 
329. Katz TM, Miller JH, Hebert AA. Insect repellents: historical perspectives 
and new developments. J Am Acad Dermatol 2008;58:865–71. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2007.10.005
 
330. Piesman J, Eisen L. Prevention of tick-borne diseases. Annu Rev 
Entomol 2008;53:323–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
ento.53.103106.093429
 
331. Colwell DD, Dantas-Torres F, Otranto D. Vector-borne parasitic 
zoonoses: emerging scenarios and new perspectives. Vet Parasitol 
2011;182:14–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.07.012
 
332. Day MJ. One health: the importance of companion animal 
vector-borne diseases. Parasit Vectors 2011;4:49. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1756-3305-4-49
 
333. Stafford KC III; Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station. Tick 
management handbook. An integrated guide for homeowners, pest 
control operators, and public health officials for the prevention of 
tick-associated disease. New Haven, CT: Connecticut Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Connecticut General Assembly; 2007. http://
www.ct.gov/caes/lib/caes/documents/publications/bulletins/b1010.pdf
 
334. Needham GR. Evaluation of five popular methods for tick removal. 
Pediatrics 1985;75:997–1002.
 
335. CDC, National Office of Vital Statistics. Reported incidence of selected 
notifiable diseases: United States, each division and state, 1920–1950. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 
CDC; 1953:240–2.
 
336. CSTE.org. [Internet]. Position statement 98-ID-06, Adding ehrlichiosis 
as a condition reportable to the national public health surveillance 
system (NPHSS). Atlanta, GA: Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists; 1998. http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.cste.org/
resource/resmgr/PS/1998-ID-6.pdf
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
43
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Appendix A
Selected Tickborne Rickettsioses Outside of the United States
Tickborne rickettsial diseases are found worldwide. This appendix highlights some of the more common tickborne rickettsial 
pathogens typically transmitted outside the United States and known to cause disease in humans.
Disease
Geographic distribution 
of human cases
Pathogen
Signs and symptoms
African tick bite fever
Sub-Saharan Africa, 
Caribbean (French West 
Indies), and Oceania
Rickettsia africae
Fever, headache, myalgia, eschar (sometimes multiple), regional 
lymphadenopathy, rash (maculopapular or vesicular); typically mild 
illness with benign course
Mediterranean spotted fever 
(also known as 
boutonneuse fever)
Europe (Mediterranean 
basin), Middle East, Indian 
subcontinent, and Africa
Rickettsia conorii
Fever, headache, myalgia, eschar (usually singular), and rash 
(maculopapular or petechial, sometimes involving palms and soles); 
typically moderately severe illness, can be severe or fatal
Queensland tick typhus
Eastern Australia, including 
Tasmania
Rickettsia australis
Fever, headache, myalgia, eschar, regional lymphadenopathy, and rash 
(maculopapular or vesicular); typically mild illness, can be severe 
or fatal
Flinders Island spotted fever
Australia and southeast Asia
Rickettsia honei
Fever, headache, myalgia, eschar (in a minority of patients), and rash; 
typically mild illness
Japanese spotted fever
Japan and South Korea
Rickettsia japonica
Fever, headache, eschar, and rash; can be severe or fatal
Siberian tick typhus (also 
known as North Asian 
tick typhus)
North Asia
Rickettsia sibirica
Fever, eschar, regional lymphadenopathy, and rash (maculopapular); 
typically mild illness
Lymphangitis associated 
rickettsiosis*
Southern Europe and Africa
Rickettsia sibirica 
mongolitimonae
Fever, eschar (single or multiple), regional lymphadenitis, 
lymphangitis, and rash (maculopapular); typically mild illness, can 
have severe complications
Tickborne lymphadenopathy 
(also known as Dermacentor-
borne necrosis and 
lymphadenopathy or scalp 
eschar and neck 
lymphadenopathy after 
tick bite)
Europe
Rickettsia slovaca and 
Rickettsia raoultii
Eschar (typically on the scalp), painful regional lymphadenopathy, 
alopecia surrounding eschar, low fever (<50%), rash (rare), and 
asthenia; typically mild illness with benign course
Rickettsia massiliae spotted 
fever*
Europe and South America
Rickettsia massiliae
Fever, eschar, and rash; typically mild to moderately severe illness
* Few human cases are described in the peer-reviewed literature, and the clinical picture and geographic distribution might be incomplete.
 Recommendations and Reports
44 
MMWR / May 13, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Appendix B
Diagnostic Assays for Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases 
Stage 
of illness
Specimen
Optimal specimen 
characteristics
Pathogen
Assay
Test advantages and limitations
Acute 
(active 
signs and 
symptoms 
of disease)
Whole 
blood
• EDTA-anticoagulated blood
• Preferred volume of 3–5 mL
• Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
• SFG rickettsiae
PCR
• Test is most sensitive during the first week of illness and before or 
within 48 hours of beginning therapy with doxycycline.
• Sensitivity diminishes within 1 week after the collection date.
Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
Blood 
smear
• A blood smear can provide a rapid presumptive diagnosis. 
• Sensitivity is low.
• An experienced microscopist is required.
• Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
• SFG rickettsiae
Culture
• Culture is the microbiological reference standard.
• Confirmation of diagnosis might require ≥10 days, and 
propagation requires BSL-3 facilities.
• Test is most sensitive during the first week of illness and before 
beginning therapy with doxycycline.
• Availability is restricted to reference centers or research 
laboratories.
Serum
Preferred volume of 3–5 mL
• Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
• SFG rickettsiae
PCR
• Molecular assessment of serum is generally less sensitive than 
evaluation of whole blood.
• Serum can be used if whole blood is not available.
IFA
• Antibodies are often absent during the first week of illness.
• Antibodies are usually specific to the genus rather than the species 
of pathogen.
• Confirmation requires a fourfold or greater increase in titer 
between acute and convalescent serum specimens (see below for 
convalescent serum).
Eschar
Swab of unroofed eschar
SFG rickettsiae
PCR
• Swab is less invasive than skin biopsy.
• Assessment of swab might be less sensitive than evaluation of 
eschar biopsy and does not allow for culture or IHC.
Fresh 
tissue
Punch biopsy specimens 
(≥4 mm) of eschar or rash
SFG rickettsiae
PCR
• Eschars contain abundant numbers of SFG rickettsiae relative to 
blood; when present, they represent the best clinical sample for a 
specific diagnosis.
• Test is most sensitive during the first week of illness and before or 
within 48 hours of beginning therapy with doxycycline.
Culture
• Isolation is more effective from tissue than from blood for 
SFG rickettsiae.
• Collect specimen before beginning therapy with doxycycline.
• Availability is restricted to reference centers or research 
laboratories.
Autopsy specimens might 
include representative 
samples of all major organs
• Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
• SFG rickettsiae
PCR
Test is most sensitive during the first week of illness and before or 
within 48 hours of beginning therapy with doxycycline.
Culture
• Isolation is more effective from tissue than from blood for 
SFG rickettsiae.
• Isolation is most effective from spleen, lymph node, liver, or bone 
marrow for Anaplasma and Ehrlichia spp.
• Collect specimen before beginning therapy with doxycycline.
• Availability is restricted to reference centers or research 
laboratories.
IHC
Availability is restricted to reference centers or research laboratories.
Formalin-
fixed 
tissue
• Biopsy specimens might 
include skin, bone marrow, or 
lymph node
• Autopsy specimens might 
include representative samples 
of all major organs
• Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
• SFG rickettsiae 
PCR
Formalin fixation results in cross-linking and fragmentation of DNA, 
which might limit sensitivity of nucleic acid detection methods.
IHC
Availability is restricted to reference centers or research laboratories.
Convalescent 
(2–4 weeks 
after 
resolution 
of illness)
Serum
Preferred volume of 3–5 mL
• Anaplasma and 
Ehrlichia spp.
• SFG rickettsiae 
IFA
• Antibodies are usually specific to the genus rather than the species 
of pathogen.
• Confirmation of acute infection requires a fourfold or greater 
increase in titer between acute and convalescent serum 
specimens.
Abbreviations: BSL-3 = biosafety level 3; DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid; EDTA = ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; IFA = indirect immunofluorescence antibody; 
IHC = immunohistochemical stain; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; SFG = spotted fever group.
  ISSN: 1057-5987 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 
charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/rr/rr6502a1.htm?s_cid=rr6502a1_w.
htm. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, 
CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
