 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
Standard 
2003 Standards 
2011 Standards 
Principles/Introduction 
A. Principles 
1. The program must be committed to and be responsible for 
promoting patient safety and resident well‐being and to 
providing a supportive educational environment. 
 
2. The learning objectives of the program must not be 
compromised by excessive reliance on residents to fulfill 
service obligations. 
 
3. Didactic and clinical education must have priority in the 
allotment of residents’ time and energy. 
 
4. Duty hour assignments must recognize that faculty and 
residents collectively have responsibility for the safety and 
welfare of patients. 
Introduction 
Residency is an essential dimension of the transformation of the medical 
student to the independent practitioner along the continuum of medical 
education. It is physically, emotionally, and intellectually demanding, and 
requires longitudinally‐concentrated effort on the part of the resident. 
The specialty education of physicians to practice independently is 
experiential, and necessarily occurs within the context of the health care 
delivery system. Developing the skills, knowledge, and attitudes leading 
to proficiency in all the domains of clinical competency requires the 
resident physician to assume personal responsibility for the care of 
individual patients. For the resident, the essential learning activity is 
interaction with patients under the guidance and supervision of faculty 
members who give value, context, and meaning to those interactions. As 
residents gain experience and demonstrate growth in their ability to care 
for patients, they assume roles that permit them to exercise those skills 
with greater independence. This concept—graded and progressive 
responsibility—is one of the core tenets of American graduate medical 
education. Supervision in the setting of graduate medical education has 
the goals of assuring the provision of safe and effective care to the 
individual patient; assuring each resident’s development of the skills, 
knowledge, and attitudes required to enter the unsupervised practice of 
medicine; and establishing a foundation for continued professional 
growth. 
Professionalism, 
Personal 
Responsibility, and 
Patient Safety 
 
VI.A.1. Programs and sponsoring institutions must educate residents and 
faculty members concerning the professional responsibilities of 
physicians to appear for duty appropriately rested and fit to provide the 
services required by their patients. 
VI.A.2. The program must be committed to and responsible for 
promoting patient safety and resident well‐being in a supportive 
educational environment. 
VI.A.3. The program director must ensure that residents are integrated 
and actively participate in interdisciplinary clinical quality improvement 
and patient safety programs. 
VI.A.4. The learning objectives of the program must: 
VI.A.4.a) be accomplished through an appropriate blend of supervised 
patient care responsibilities, clinical teaching, and didactic educational 
events; and, 
1 
 
 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
VI.A.4.b) not be compromised by excessive reliance on residents to fulfill
non‐physician service obligations. 
VI.A.5. The program director and institution must ensure a culture of 
professionalism that supports patient safety and personal responsibility. 
Residents and faculty members must demonstrate an understanding and 
acceptance of their personal role in the following: 
VI.A.5.a) assurance of the safety and welfare of patients entrusted to 
their care; 
VI.A.5.b) provision of patient‐ and family‐centered care; 
VI.A.5.c) assurance of their fitness for duty; 
VI.A.5.d) management of their time before, during, and after clinical 
assignments; 
VI.A.5.e) recognition of impairment, including illness and fatigue, in 
themselves and in their peers; 
VI.A.5.f) attention to lifelong learning; 
VI.A.5.g) the monitoring of their patient care performance improvement 
indicators; and, 
VI.A.5.h) honest and accurate reporting of duty hours, patient outcomes, 
and clinical experience data. 
VI.A.6. All residents and faculty members must demonstrate 
responsiveness to patient needs that supersedes self‐interest. Physicians 
must recognize that under certain circumstances, the best interests of 
the patient may be served by transitioning that patient’s care to another 
qualified and rested provider. 
Transitions of Care 
 
VI.B.1. Programs must design clinical assignments to minimize the 
number of transitions in patient care. 
VI.B.2. Sponsoring institutions and programs must ensure and monitor 
effective, structured hand‐over processes to facilitate both continuity of 
care and patient safety. 
VI.B.3. Programs must ensure that residents are competent in 
communicating with team members in the hand‐over process. 
VI.B.4. The sponsoring institution must ensure the availability of 
schedules that inform all members of the health care team of attending 
physicians and residents currently responsible for each patient’s care. 
 
Alertness 
Management/Fatigue 
Mitigation 
Faculty and residents must be educated to recognize the signs 
of fatigue and sleep deprivation and must adopt and apply 
policies to prevent and counteract its potential negative 
VI.C.1. The program must:
VI.C.1.a) educate all faculty members and residents to recognize the 
signs of fatigue and sleep deprivation; 
2 
 
 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
effects on patient care and learning.
VI.C.1.b) educate all faculty members and residents in alertness
management and fatigue mitigation processes; and, 
VI.C.1.c) adopt fatigue mitigation processes to manage the potential 
negative effects of fatigue on patient care and learning, such as naps or 
back‐up call schedules. 
VI.C.2. Each program must have a process to ensure continuity of patient 
care in the event that a resident may be unable to perform his/her 
patient care duties. 
VI.C.3. The sponsoring institution must provide adequate sleep facilities 
and/or safe transportation options for residents who may be too 
fatigued to safely return home. 
Supervision of 
Residents 
The program must ensure that qualified faculty provide 
appropriate supervision of residents in patient care activities. 
VI.D.1. In the clinical learning environment, each patient must have an 
identifiable, appropriately‐credentialed and privileged attending 
physician (or licensed independent practitioner as approved by each 
Review Committee) who is ultimately responsible for that patient’s care. 
VI.D.1.a) This information should be available to residents, faculty 
members, and patients. 
VI.D.1.b) Residents and faculty members should inform patients of their 
respective roles in each patient’s care. 
VI.D.2. The program must demonstrate that the appropriate level of 
supervision is in place for all residents who care for patients.  
Supervision may be exercised through a variety of methods. Some 
activities require the physical presence of the supervising faculty 
member. For many aspects of patient care, the supervising physician 
may be a more advanced resident or fellow. Other portions of care 
provided by the resident can be adequately supervised by the immediate 
availability of the supervising faculty member or resident physician, 
either in the institution, or by means of telephonic and/or electronic 
modalities. In some circumstances, supervision may include post‐hoc 
review of resident‐delivered care with feedback as to the 
appropriateness of that care. 
VI.D.3. Levels of Supervision 
To ensure oversight of resident supervision and graded authority and 
responsibility, the program must use the following classification of 
supervision: 
VI.D.3.a) Direct Supervision – the supervising physician is physically 
present with the resident and patient. 
VI.D.3.b) Indirect Supervision: 
3 
 
 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
VI.D.3.b).(1) with direct supervision immediately available – the 
supervising physician is physically within the hospital or other site of 
patient care, and is immediately available to provide Direct Supervision. 
VI.D.3.b).(2) with direct supervision available – the supervising physician 
is not physically present within the hospital or other site of patient care, 
but is immediately available by means of telephonic and/or electronic 
modalities, and is available to provide Direct Supervision. 
VI.D.3.c) Oversight – The supervising physician is available to provide 
review of procedures/encounters with feedback provided after care is 
delivered. 
VI.D.4. The privilege of progressive authority and responsibility, 
conditional independence, and a supervisory role in patient care 
delegated to each resident must be assigned by the program director 
and faculty members. 
VI.D.4.a) The program director must evaluate each resident’s abilities 
based on specific criteria. When available, evaluation should be guided 
by specific national standards‐based criteria. 
VI.D.4.b) Faculty members functioning as supervising physicians should 
delegate portions of care to residents, based on the needs of the patient 
and the skills of the residents. 
VI.D.4.c) Senior residents or fellows should serve in a supervisory role of 
junior residents in recognition of their progress toward independence, 
based on the needs of each patient and the skills of the individual 
resident or fellow. 
VI.D.5. Programs must set guidelines for circumstances and events in 
which residents must communicate with appropriate supervising faculty 
members, such as the transfer of a patient to an intensive care unit, or 
end‐of‐life decisions. 
VI.D.5.a) Each resident must know the limits of his/her scope of 
authority, and the circumstances under which he/she is permitted to act 
with conditional independence. 
VI.D.5.a).(1) In particular, PGY‐1 residents should be supervised either 
directly or indirectly with direct supervision immediately available. [Each 
Review Committee will describe the achieved competencies under which 
PGY‐1 residents progress to be supervised indirectly, with direct 
supervision available.] 
VI.D.6. Faculty supervision assignments should be of sufficient duration 
to assess the knowledge and skills of each resident and delegate to 
4 
 
 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
him/her the appropriate level of patient care authority and 
responsibility. 
Clinical 
Responsibilities 
 
VI.E. The clinical responsibilities for each resident must be based on PGY‐
level, patient safety, resident education, severity and complexity of 
patient illness/condition and available support services. 
[Optimal clinical workload will be further specified by each Review 
Committee.] 
Teamwork 
 
VI.F. Residents must care for patients in an environment that maximizes 
effective communication. This must include the opportunity to work as a 
member of effective interprofessional teams that are appropriate to the 
delivery of care in the specialty. 
[Each Review Committee will define the elements that must be present 
in each specialty.] 
Maximum Hours of 
Work per Week 
Duty hours must be limited to 80 hours per week, averaged 
over a four‐week period, inclusive of all in‐house call 
activities. 
VI.G.1. Duty hours must be limited to 80 hours per week, averaged over 
a four‐week period, inclusive of all in‐house call activities and all 
moonlighting. 
Duty Hour Exceptions 
A Review Committee may grant exceptions for up to 10% or a 
maximum of 88 hours to individual programs based on a 
sound educational rationale. 
1. In preparing a request for an exception, the program 
director must follow the duty hour exception policy from the 
ACGME Manual on Policies and Procedures. 
2. Prior to submitting the request to the Review Committee, 
the program director must obtain approval of the institution’s 
GMEC and DIO. 
VI.G.1.a) A Review Committee may grant exceptions for up to 10% or a 
maximum of 88 hours to individual programs based on a sound 
educational rationale. 
VI.G.1.a).(1) In preparing a request for an exception the program 
director must follow the duty hour exception policy from the 
ACGME Manual on Policies and Procedures. 
VI.G.1.a).(2) Prior to submitting the request to the Review Committee, 
the program director must obtain approval of the institution’s GMEC and 
DIO. 
Moonlighting 
1. Moonlighting must not interfere with the ability of the 
resident to achieve the goals and objectives of the 
educational program. 
2. Internal moonlighting must be considered part of the 80‐
hour weekly limit on duty hours. 
VI.G.2.a) Moonlighting must not interfere with the ability of the resident 
to achieve the goals and objectives of the educational program. 
VI.G.2.b) Time spent by residents in Internal and External Moonlighting 
(as defined in the ACGME Glossary of Terms) must be counted towards 
the 80‐hour Maximum Weekly Hour Limit. 
VI.G.2.c) PGY‐1 residents are not permitted to moonlight. 
Mandatory Time Free 
of Duty 
Residents must be provided with one day in seven free from 
all educational and clinical responsibilities, averaged over a 
four‐week period, inclusive of call. 
VI.G.3. Residents must be scheduled for a minimum of one day free of 
duty every week (when averaged over four weeks). At‐home call cannot 
be assigned on these free days. 
Maximum Duty Period 
Length 
Continuous on‐site duty, including in‐house call, must not 
exceed 24 consecutive hours. Residents may remain on duty 
for up to six additional hours to participate in didactic 
activities, transfer care of patients, conduct outpatient clinics, 
VI.G.4.a) Duty periods of PGY‐1 residents must not exceed 16 hours in 
duration. 
VI.G.4.b) Duty periods of PGY‐2 residents and above may be scheduled 
to a maximum of 24 hours of continuous duty in the hospital. Programs 
5 
 
 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
and maintain continuity of medical and surgical care.
No new patients may be accepted after 24 hours of 
continuous duty. 
must encourage residents to use alertness management strategies in the 
context of patient care responsibilities. Strategic napping, especially 
after 16 hours of continuous duty and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. 
and 8:00 a.m. is strongly suggested. 
VI.G.4.b).(1) It is essential for patient safety and resident education that 
effective transitions in care occur. Residents may be allowed to remain 
on‐site in order to accomplish these tasks; however, this period of time 
must be no longer than an additional four hours. 
VI.G.4.b).(2) Residents must not be assigned additional clinical 
responsibilities after 24 hours of continuous in‐house duty. 
VI.G.4.b).(3) In unusual circumstances, residents, on their own initiative, 
may remain beyond their scheduled period of duty to continue to 
provide care to a single patient. Justifications for such extensions of duty 
are limited to reasons of required continuity for a severely ill or unstable 
patient, academic importance of the events transpiring, or humanistic 
attention to the needs of a patient or family. 
VI.G.4.b).(3).(a) Under those circumstances, the resident must: 
VI.G.4.b).(3).(a).(i) appropriately hand over the care of all other 
patients to the team responsible for their continuing care; and, 
VI.G.4.b).(3).(a).(ii) document the reasons for remaining to care for the 
patient in question and submit that documentation in every 
circumstance to the program director. 
VI.G.4.b).(3).(b) The program director must review each submission of 
additional service, and track both individual resident and program‐wide 
episodes of additional duty. 
Minimum Time Off 
between Scheduled 
Duty Periods 
Adequate time for rest and personal activities must be 
provided. This should consist of a 10‐hour time period 
provided between all daily duty periods and after in‐house 
call. 
 
VI.G.5.a) PGY‐1 residents should have 10 hours, and must have eight
hours, free of duty between scheduled duty periods. 
VI.G.5.b) Intermediate‐level residents [as defined by the Review 
Committee] should have 10 hours free of duty, and must have eight 
hours between scheduled duty periods. They must have at least 14 hours 
free of duty after 24 hours of in‐house duty. 
VI.G.5.c) Residents in the final years of education [as defined by the 
Review Committee] must be prepared to enter the unsupervised 
practice of medicine and care for patients over irregular or extended 
periods. 
VI.G.5.c).(1) This preparation must occur within the context of the 80‐ 
hour, maximum duty period length, and one‐day‐off‐in‐seven standards. 
While it is desirable that residents in their final years of education have 
6 
 
 Resident Duty Hours in the Learning and Working Environment 
Comparison of 2003 and 2011 Standards 
7 
 
eight hours free of duty between scheduled duty periods, there may be
circumstances [as defined by the Review Committee] when these 
residents must stay on duty to care for their patients or return to the 
hospital with fewer than eight hours free of duty. 
VI.G.5.c).(1).(a) Circumstances of return‐to‐hospital activities with fewer 
than eight hours away from the hospital by residents in their final years 
of education must be monitored by the program director. 
Maximum Frequency 
of In‐House Night Float 
 
VI.G.6. Residents must not be scheduled for more than six consecutive 
nights of night float. 
[The maximum number of consecutive weeks of night float, and 
maximum number of months of night float per year may be further 
specified by the Review Committee.] 
Maximum In‐House 
On‐Call Frequency 
In‐house call must occur no more frequently than every third 
night, averaged over a four‐week period. 
 
VI.G.7. PGY‐2 residents and above must be scheduled for in‐house call no 
more frequently than every‐third‐night (when averaged over a four‐
week period). 
At‐Home Call 
1. The frequency of at‐home call is not subject to the every‐
third‐night, or 24+6 limitation. However at‐home call must 
not be so frequent as to preclude rest and reasonable 
personal time for each resident. 
2. Residents taking at‐home call must be provided with one 
day in seven completely free from all educational and clinical 
responsibilities, averaged over a four‐week period. 
3. When residents are called into the hospital from home, the 
hours residents spend in‐house are counted toward the 80‐
hour limit. 
VI.G.8.a) Time spent in the hospital by residents on at‐home call must 
count towards the 80‐hour maximum weekly hour limit. The frequency 
of at‐home call is not subject to the every‐third‐night limitation, but 
must satisfy the requirement for one‐day‐in‐seven free of duty, when 
averaged over four weeks. 
VI.G.8.a).(1) At‐home call must not be so frequent or taxing as to 
preclude rest or reasonable personal time for each resident. 
VI.G.8.b) Residents are permitted to return to the hospital while on at‐
home call to care for new or established patients. Each episode of this 
type of care, while it must be included in the 80‐hour weekly maximum, 
will not initiate a new “off‐duty period”. 
 
