 Review ARticle
https:/
/doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0014-x
1Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 2UCSF Immunoprofiler Initiative, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 3Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA. 4Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 5Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
OR, USA. 6The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 7Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, 
USA. 8Huntsman Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 9Division of Inflammation Biology, La Jolla 
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA. 10Department of Medicine, Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA. 11Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 12Edwin L. Steele Laboratories for Tumor Biology, Department 
of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 13Department of Surgery, University of Michigan 
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 14Division of Cancer Biology, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. 15Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. *e-mail: weinberg@wi.mit.edu; matthew.krummel@ucsf.edu
T
he past decade has seen a revolution in cancer treatments 
by moving away from drugs that target tumors broadly (for 
example, chemotherapy and radiation) and toward the use of 
antibody-based immunotherapies that modulate immune responses 
against tumors. The first generation of antibody-based immuno-
therapy, so-called immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB), works by 
blocking the receptor and/or ligand interactions of molecules, such 
as CTLA-4 and PD-1, that are involved in dulling T cell activation 
or function1. ICB therapies have shown significant clinical ben-
efit for a minority of patients, who demonstrate durable responses. 
Unfortunately, there is still an unmet clinical need for the majority 
of patients, who do not respond to ICB. Retrospective analyses of 
patient populations treated with ICB have revealed that there are 
classes of TIME that are associated with those tumors more prone 
to ICB responsiveness.
Deeper analysis of complexity within the TIME is likely to reveal 
advanced biomarkers that will prove fruitful in identifying patient 
populations responsive to current ICB therapy and will benefit the 
search for novel targets for therapeutic modulation. Past efforts to 
characterize the TIME have provided a foundation for future efforts 
in which recent technological advances in techniques such as high-
resolution single-cell RNA sequencing, flow cytometry and imaging 
are expected to provide an unprecedented view of the composition, 
function and location of immune cells within the TIME. In this 
Review, we provide a summary of the current knowledge centered 
around classes of TIME, focusing on the use of new technologies to 
study the TIME with increased granularity and the roles of systemic 
immune- and nonimmune-related factors in influencing TIME char-
acter and quality, and hence how tumors respond to immunotherapy.
Classification of the TIME
Predicting responsiveness to ICB on the basis of high-resolution 
data on the character and quality of tumor immune infiltrates is a 
critical next step in improving the success of current ICB and devel-
oping next-generation immunotherapies. To date, large bodies of 
work have established moderate-resolution TIME data from low-
resolution sources, such as bulk tissue microarrays and immuno-
histochemistry2,3. Techniques such as CIBERSORT3 and XCell4 can 
estimate the abundance of immune infiltrate into the tumor by using 
gene expression data from bulk tissues. Immunoscore5 uses a com-
bination of immunohistochemistry and bulk tissue gene expression 
data to stratify patients according to immune-related criteria and 
subsequently predict disease outcome.
Unfortunately, because of the nature of the datasets being used, 
most of these studies can estimate the immunological frequency and 
cellular status in the tumor microenvironment, but they lack infor-
mation related to actual cellular proportions, cellular heterogeneity 
and deeper spatial distribution. Nonetheless, these techniques have 
gleaned substantial information that has provided a basis for clas-
sifying TIME according to broad criteria—the composition of the 
immune infiltrate and the character of the inflammatory response. 
Using next-generation technologies to improve TIME classifica-
tions should expand understanding of how the immunological 
composition and quality vary in tumor types (such as breast) and 
Understanding the tumor immune 
microenvironment (TIME) for effective therapy
Mikhail Binnewies1, Edward W. Roberts1, Kelly Kersten1, Vincent Chan  2, Douglas F. Fearon3,  
Miriam Merad4, Lisa M. Coussens5, Dmitry  I. Gabrilovich6, Suzanne Ostrand-Rosenberg  7,8, 
Catherine C. Hedrick9, Robert H. Vonderheide10, Mikael J. Pittet11, Rakesh K. Jain12, Weiping Zou13,  
T. Kevin Howcroft14, Elisa C. Woodhouse14, Robert A. Weinberg15* and Matthew F. Krummel  1,2*
The clinical successes in immunotherapy have been both astounding and at the same time unsatisfactory. Countless patients 
with varied tumor types have seen pronounced clinical response with immunotherapeutic intervention; however, many more 
patients have experienced minimal or no clinical benefit when provided the same treatment. As technology has advanced, so 
has the understanding of the complexity and diversity of the immune context of the tumor microenvironment and its influence 
on response to therapy. It has been possible to identify different subclasses of immune environment that have an influence on 
tumor initiation and response and therapy; by parsing the unique classes and subclasses of tumor immune microenvironment 
(TIME) that exist within a patient’s tumor, the ability to predict and guide immunotherapeutic responsiveness will improve, and 
new therapeutic targets will be revealed.
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
541
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
subtypes (such as luminal B), inform the success or failure of cur-
rent ICB, and encourage the discovery of new immunotherapeutics. 
Currently, three broad classes of moderate-resolution TIME can be 
described according to recent human and mouse data. These three 
classes almost certainly miss key subclasses that should be revealed 
by ongoing studies using higher-resolution techniques to uncover 
heterogeneity in immunological composition, spatial distribution 
and function.
TIMEs that are broadly populated with immune cells but are 
relatively void of cytotoxic lymphocytes (CTLs) in the tumor core 
are termed infiltrated–excluded (I–E) TIMEs herein. I–E TIMEs 
have CTLs localized along the border of the tumor mass in the 
invasive margin or ‘caught’ in fibrotic nests (Fig. 1a). I–E TIMEs 
are associated with various epithelial cancers such as colorectal 
carcinoma (CRC)6, melanoma7 and pancreatic ductal adenocarci-
noma (PDAC)8, in which Ly6Clo F4/80hi tumor-associated macro-
phages (TAMs) along the tumor margins have been hypothesized 
to prevent CTL infiltration into the tumor core9. Tumors classified 
as I–E TIMEs have been hypothesized to be poorly immunogenic 
or ‘cold’
, although this hypothesis remains to be clearly verified10. 
I–E TIMEs, compared with more inflamed TIMEs, contain CTLs 
with low expression of the activation markers GZMB (GRZB) and 
IFNG and poor infiltration of CTLs into the tumor core. A lack of 
 
activation-marker expression and exclusion from the tumor core are 
characteristics indicative of immunological ignorance, an immuno-
logical state in which adaptive immunity is unable to recognize or 
respond to a pathogen or malignancy11.
Infiltrated–inflamed (I–I) TIMEs (Fig. 1b) are considered to 
be immunologically ‘hot’ tumors and are characterized by high 
infiltration of CTLs expressing PD-1 and leukocytes and tumor 
cells expressing the immune-dampening PD-1 ligand PD-L1. A 
subset of CRC, known as microsatellite instability high (MSI-H), 
bears a higher rate of nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymor-
phisms, thus leading to increased numbers of neoepitopes and of 
tumor-infiltrating PD-1+ CTLs, which have significantly higher 
responses to ICBs than do microsatellite instability low (MSI-L) or 
microsatellite stable (MSS) CRCs.
A subclass of I–I TIMEs, here termed TLS-TIMEs (Fig. 1c), dis-
play histological evidence of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs), 
lymphoid aggregates whose cellular composition is similar to that 
in lymph nodes. TLSs are often12,13 but not always correlated with a 
positive prognosis14. Similarly to lymph nodes, TLSs can contain a 
substantial diversity of lymphocytes, including naive and activated 
conventional T cells, regulatory T (Treg) cells, B cells and dendritic 
cells (DCs)15. TLSs are generally present at the invasive tumor mar-
gin and in the stroma, and are thought to act as sites of lymphoid 
recruitment and immune activation that are typically formed in 
settings of enhanced inflammation, such as after administration 
of an autologous tumor vaccine16. The ability to characterize a TLS 
thoroughly (for example, spatially, compositionally and function-
ally) is an important step in describing the TIME at a high resolu-
tion. For example, the TIME can be characterized in terms of not 
only the total number and type of cells present within a tissue but 
also the unique spatial collection of cells that may share a common 
program—in this case, a geographical feature established to recruit 
and activate adaptive immune cells. Spatial information paired with 
immunological composition and cellular status can help identify the 
presence of micro-niches within the TIME.
Broad classifications of immune context within a tumor micro-
environment represent the first level of addressing how immuno-
logical composition and status (i.e., activated or suppressed) affect 
overall survival and dictate responsiveness to therapy. Beyond pars-
ing the TIME with higher-resolution techniques, these classifica-
tions improve understanding of how mutational burden, oncogenes 
and distinct tumor types affect the establishment and maintenance 
of specific immunological compositions.
Interconnectivity of tumor genotypes and phenotypes and 
the TIME
It remains to be understood how tumor-produced cytokines and 
chemokines, tumor oncogenes and mutation landscapes determine 
the composition of the TIME. There are several examples strong 
enough to indicate relationships between both tumor genotype/
phenotype and immunological composition, but these examples 
a  Infiltrated–excluded
b  Infiltrated–inflamed
c  Infiltrated–TLS
TAM
Fibrotic ‘nest’
Tumor
CTL
Blood vessel
PD-1
PD-L1
B cell
DC
Blood vessel
Blood vessel
Tumor
Tumor
IFNγ
Grzb
IFNγ
Grzb
Tumor core
Fig. 1 | General classes of TIME. Three classes of TIME are displayed. a, I–E TIMEs are characterized by the exclusion of CTLs from the tumor core. CTLs 
in I–E TIMEs are instead present along the tumor periphery, where they can be found in contact with Ly6Clo F4/80+ tumor-associated macrophages or 
‘stuck’ in fibrotic nests. b, In comparison, I–I TIMEs are defined by an abundance of PD-L1 expression on tumor and myeloid cells and highly activated 
CTLs characterized by expression of Grzb, IFNγ 
 and PD-1. In some subsets of I–I TIME, tumor cells will have defects in DNA mismatch repair (MSI-H), 
thus resulting in an increased number of neoepitopes. c, TLS-TIMEs have histological evidence of containing TLSs, aggregates of immune cells with a 
composition similar to that in lymph nodes, including B cells, dendritic cells and T
reg cells.
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
542
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
are not sufficiently strong for this understanding to be immediately 
applied toward therapeutic intervention (Fig. 2a)
Tumor genotype contribution to cytokine production. Oncogene-
driven expression of cytokines critical for the recruitment and phe-
notype of immune cells, particularly cells of the myeloid lineage, 
has been reported. In human melanoma, BRAFV600E, a mutated and 
highly oncogenic form of the MAPK family member BRAF, and 
STAT3, a potent transcriptional regulator often linked to oncogenic 
signaling, have been shown to drive expression of IL-6, IL-10 and 
VEGF, cytokines that promote a tolerogenic monocyte-derived DC 
phenotype in vitro, a process that would theoretically affect antitu-
mor T cell function in vivo17.
Multiple reports have demonstrated that KRASG12D-driven PDAC 
secretes high levels of the growth factor GM-CSF, which is associ-
ated with an increase in tumor-associated Gr-1+CD11b+ myeloid 
cells of reported immunosuppressive function18,19. Interestingly, 
genetic ablation or neutralization of GM-CSF in mice leads to 
decreased myeloid infiltration, improved CD8+ T cell infiltration 
into tumors and markedly smaller lesion size. These data demon-
strate that an oncogene promotes the establishment of an immuno-
suppressive TIME that supports malignant development. Missing 
from these studies, however, is an assessment of the character of DC 
infiltration, because GM-CSF has been shown to induce the genera-
tion of CD11b+ DCs, a DC population ill defined in the tumor20.
Tumor-derived chemokines. Secretion of tumor-derived che-
mokines, driven by specific oncogenes, is another critical point of 
interaction between tumor genotype and recruited immune cells. 
Recent data in a BRAFV600E and Pten-deficient mouse model of 
melanoma suggest that constitutive tumor-intrinsic WNT/β 
-catenin 
signaling is associated with poor immune infiltration and ineffec-
tive antitumor T cells, largely because of a decrease in the recruit-
ment and frequency of CD103+ DCs21,22. Transcriptional analysis 
of tumor cells and in vitro DC migration assays have revealed that 
constitutive WNT/β 
-catenin signaling leads to decreased produc-
tion of Ccl4, a potent chemoattractant for a variety of myeloid cells 
including CD103+ DCs, thus potentially explaining the decreased 
recruitment of CD103+ DCs and the corresponding poor infiltra-
tion of CD8+ T cells into the tumor microenvironment. Although 
the direct oncogenic determinant of expression is unclear, several 
studies in mice have reported that tumor-secreted CCL2 causes the 
recruitment of CCR2+ classical monocytes to the tumor, where they 
differentiate into TAMs, a protumoral myeloid population23.
Humoral factors. There is also evidence for a role for humoral factors 
in regulating the TIME. Recent data from mice suggest that TIME-
derived PTX3, a critical component regulating complement activation 
through interaction with factor H, plays an essential role in suppress-
ing tumor growth by indirectly controlling monocyte recruitment and 
TAM phenotype24. Epigenetic profiling of human tumors has revealed 
hypermethylation of the PTX3 promoter, thus suggesting that human 
PTX3 may similarly affect the architecture of the TIME.
Paracrine feedback loops. Paracrine feedback loops of cytokines 
between specific immune infiltrates and tumor cells play critical 
a
b
Macrophages
Immunosuppressive
myeloid cell
CSF
M2
macrophage
M1
macrophage
CCL4
GM-CSF
CTL
BRAFV600E
p53
CAFs
IL-6
IL-10
VEGF-A
Tolerogenic DC
KRASG12D
IL-1α
IL-1β
R
e
p
r
o
g
r
a
m
m
i
n
g
CMS1 tumor
CMS2, CMS3 and CMS4 tumors
CD8+ T cell
Responsive
to therapy
Double-strand
breaks
TH1
Myeloid
cell
High frequency of
CD8+ T cells and TH1
High myeloid infiltrate
Low frequency of CD8+ T cells
CD103+ DC
p53 loss in tumor stroma
has been shown to induce
M1     M2
Immunogenicity
IFNγ
Grzb
IFNγ
Grzb
Fig. 2 | How tumor genotypes and phenotypes shape the TIME. a, Tumors are known to establish protumoral and immunosuppressive environments to 
support their growth and promote immune evasion. Central to building an immunosuppressive TIME are oncogenes and aberrant signaling pathways that 
lead to the production of cytokines and chemokines with potent effects. The tumor shown is representative of a spectrum of cancer types. In melanoma, 
BRAFV600E (green triangle) has been shown to induce constitutive WNT/β 
-catenin signaling, which in turn decreases production of CCL4, a chemokine 
important for the recruitment of CD103+ DCs. Additionally, BRAFV600E has been shown to induce expression of factors such as IL-10 and IL-1α 
, which 
can induce tolerogenic forms of DC and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), respectively. Oncogenic KRASG12D in PDAC leads to the secretion of GM-
CSF, corresponding to increased development of CD11b+ myeloid cells with reported immunosuppressive function. Deficiency in p53 in hepatic stellate 
cells, a stromal population, leads to production of factors that polarize TAMs from the immunoactivating M1 phenotype to the immunosuppressive M2 
phenotype. Interestingly, many tumors have been shown to secrete high levels of the monocyte/macrophage-promoting cytokine CSF-1. b, The mutational 
landscape of tumors can profoundly affect the quality and character of the TIME. In CRC, there are four consensus molecular subtypes (CMS1–4). CMS1 is 
defined by defects in DNA mismatch repair leading to microsatellite instability or hypermutation rates. Because of the abundance of possible neoepitopes, 
CTL infiltration is generally high, and CTLs display gene expression patterns indicative of an ongoing immune response. Patients with CMS1 tumors have 
generally more favorable outcomes with checkpoint-blockade treatment than do patients with CMS2–4. Although there are differences in the histological 
and immunological character of CMS2, 3 and 4 CRC subtypes, they are generally less immune infiltrated, as is suggestive of antigenically cold tumors.
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
543
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
roles in influencing tumor phenotype and ultimately metastasis. 
TAMs are prominent components of the TIME and are involved 
in cross-talk with tumor cells, thus resulting in tumorigenic repro-
gramming25. Tumors in both mice26 and humans27 have been found 
to secrete high levels of colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1), a potent 
chemoattractant, survival and differentiation factor for monocytes 
and macrophages26, in addition to CCL2. T helper 2–polarized CD4+ 
T cells, through secretion of IL-4 and IL-13, have been shown to 
potentiate the ability of TAMs to secrete angiogenic growth factors, 
proteases and protumoral survival factors28, including VEGF-A, 
MMP-9, EGF and uPA26,29.
Modulating the stroma. In addition to tumor-intrinsic factors 
directly affecting immune cells within the TIME, tumor cells can 
elicit profound phenotypic changes in nonimmune stromal com-
ponents that reside within the local tumor microenvironment and 
affect the immune component of the TIME. Indeed, oncogenic 
BRAFV600E signaling in human melanoma cells has been shown to 
perturb T cell–mediated antitumor responses by modulating the 
phenotype of cancer-associated fibroblasts. BRAFV600E in melanoma 
drives production of IL-1α 
 and IL-1β 
, thereby enhancing the abil-
ity of cancer-associated fibroblasts to suppress melanoma-specific 
CTLs, in part through COX-2 secretion and upregulation of the 
PD-1 ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2 (ref. 30). Interestingly the loss of spe-
cific tumor suppressors in stromal cell types, has also been shown 
to influence the type and character of immune cells present within 
the TIME. For example, in a mouse model of chronic liver damage, 
p53-deficient hepatic stellate cells, a stromal cell type, secrete factors 
that polarize TAMs toward a more protumorigenic M2-like pheno-
type often associated with immunosuppression31. Interestingly, that 
study has also revealed that natural killer cells, TAMs and resident 
Kupffer cells are less able to eliminate p53-deficient proliferating 
hepatic stellate cells in vitro, although the mechanism of dampened 
elimination of hepatic stellate cells is unclear.
The mutational landscape of the tumor and the TIME. Beyond the 
effects of tumor-derived cytokines, chemokines and nonimmune 
cells on the character of the TIME, the overall mutational landscape 
of tumor cells, a direct reflection of tumor immunogenicity, can dic-
tate the extent and phenotype of immune infiltrate. A particularly 
strong example of this influence is in CRC (Fig. 2b). As mentioned 
briefly in the previous section, CRC can be stratified through gene-
expression-based subtyping into four consensus molecular subtypes 
(CMS1–4) (ref. 32). For example, in CMS1 CRC, there are DNA 
mismatch-repair defects, as indicated by microsatellite instability or 
hypermutation rates. CMS1 tumors have been found to be deeply 
infiltrated with CD8+ T cells and to display global gene expres-
sion patterns consistent with a high number of T helper 1 (TH1) 
cells6, as is indicative of an antitumor immune response. However, 
the antitumor response is likely to be moderated by the presence 
of immunosuppressive cell types, a protumor cytokine milieu 
and/or the expression of immune-checkpoint proteins includ-
ing CTLA-4, PD-1, PD-L1 and IDO-1 (refs 33–35). The expression 
of immune-checkpoint proteins by CMS1 CRC is notable, because 
those tumors show substantial responses to anti-PD-1 ICB, thus 
suggesting that the large mutational burden and high frequencies 
of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ CTLs and TH1 cells has opened up the 
potential for many T cell clones to become potently antitumor after 
 
tolerance is broken36.
CMS4 CRC, characterized by tumor cells with a mesenchy-
mal-like phenotype, is associated with poor prognosis and high 
expression of protumoral genes, including those associated with 
T helper 17 cells, the TGF-β 
 pathway and the monocyte/macro-
phage lineage34, on the basis of bulk tissue RNA expression. Hence, 
CMS4 CRC antitumor responses might be easily overwhelmed by 
a TIME skewed toward immunosuppression. CMS2 and CMS3 
CRCs, tumors that are microsatellite stable, nonhypermutated and 
epithelial according to their gene expression, exhibit low-immune 
and low-inflammatory signatures and are typically PD-L1 negative. 
CMS2 and CMS3 CRCs have phenotypes suggestive of antigenically 
cold tumors, and in both cases the tumors have lower lymphocyte 
infiltration into the tumor than that observed in CMS1. CMS2–4 
are thought to respond poorly to ICBs, partly as a result of low anti-
genic diversity and generally low tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte 
(TIL) numbers34,36.
Analyzing progressive development of the TIME at primary 
and metastatic sites
In progressing cancers, neither the tumor nor the TIME is static. 
Reciprocal interactions between tumor and associated immune and 
stromal cell types evolve as the tumor grows, thus allowing for mod-
ulation of both tumor cell intrinsic and extrinsic processes37–39. The 
evolution of the TIME during tumor growth and dissemination is 
surmised to occur broadly and not just at the level of specific T cell 
clones recognizing variations in antigenic identities.
The role of the TIME in establishing primary tumors. A major 
factor determining tumor progression over time is the overall pro-
portion and character of T cells within the TIME (Fig. 3). Several 
studies in mouse models have revealed that during de novo carci-
nogenesis, antitumor T cells cannot control tumor growth, owing 
to tumor-induced tolerance mechanisms40–42. Interestingly, T cell 
dysfunction in cancer shares many features with the T cell exhaus-
tion (Fig. 3a) observed in chronic viral infections43 and is gener-
ally characterized by high surface expression of inhibitory receptors 
(CTLA-4, PD-1, TIM-3, LAG-3 and 2B4) on T cells; loss of effector 
functions, such as the production of cytokines IFNγ 
, IL-2 and TNFα 
; and loss of proliferative capacity43,44. The plasticity and reversibility 
of T cell exhaustion is an important and open question in studies 
of tumor immunology. Reversible and irreversible states of T cell 
exhaustion have been identified45, and the irreversible exhausted 
cells are unresponsive to ICB-like anti-PD-1/anti-PD-L1 therapy46. 
Preventing or reversing T cell exhaustion for long-term tumor 
control will be challenging, and perhaps simultaneous targeting of 
other tolerance pathways, such as the immunosuppressive TIME, 
or encouraging the priming of new T cell clones, might be required 
to obtain durable antitumor T cell responses. T cell exhaustion and 
establishment of an immunosuppressive TIME are likely to be linked 
events, such that exhaustion occurs as a result of the combination 
of chronic exposure to tumor antigen47, unproductive interactions 
from DCs present in the TME48 and exposure to immunosuppres-
sive cytokines and cell types.
Numerous populations of immune cells have been reported 
to have suppressive functions in the TIME (for example, neutro-
phils49 and Treg cells50); however, TAMs are the most extensively 
studied and well characterized. Recent data in mice suggest 
that the immunological origin of TAMs (yolk sac or monocyte 
derived) can substantially affect their overall suppressiveness. In 
studies of spontaneous mouse PDAC, yolk-sac-derived tumor-
associated macrophages (YS-TAMs), which are seeded into tissues 
in early development and thus before malignant transformation, 
have been shown to be more tumor supporting than monocyte-
derived TAMs51 (Fig. 3b). Moreover, that study has found com-
parable expression of immunoinhibitory and immunostimulatory 
receptors on both YS-TAMs and monocyte-derived TAMs, but has 
demonstrated that tumor burden is significantly decreased only 
by loss of YS-TAMs but not monocyte-derived TAMs, thus sug-
gesting a more immunologically suppressive role for YS-TAMs. 
Because YS-TAMs are theoretically more dominant during the 
early stages of malignant development and consequently during 
the initial adaptive antitumor response, elimination of nascent 
tumors may be fundamentally different from the targeting of 
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
544
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
more advanced tumors. Although the results of that paper are 
intriguing, the origins of TAMs in different tumor types might 
be ontologically and functionally distinct. In the MMTV-PyMT 
breast cancer model, the proportion of exhausted PD-1+ CD8+ T 
cells has been found to increase in parallel with monocyte-derived 
TAMs52. In that study, depletion of monocyte-derived TAMs and 
Tumor-induced
exhaustion/dysfunction
PD-1/PD-L1-blockade
reversal
Tumor initiation
Premalignancy
Malignancy/solid tumor
Teff
Tex
Effector function
Exhaustion
a
T cell
Proliferation
IFNγ
Proliferation
IFNγ
PD-1
LAG3
TCR
pMHC
PD-L1/2
Tumor/APC
T cell
Tumor/APC
2B4
TIM3
CD48
b
YS-mac
TAM/mono
Neutrophil
Cancer cell
Nc mono
Metastasis
Initiation
Malignancy
CD103+ DC
Teff
Tex
Bone
marrow
Monocyte
Infiltration/
differentiation
Infiltration/
differentiation
Metastatic failure
Metastatic success
Premetastatic
site
Tumor
initiation
Malignancy
Cellular proportion
Teff/Tex
CD103+ DC
Cancer cell
Mono/TAM
YS-TAM
Prometastatic
neutrophil
Tumor cell death
Antimetastatic
neutrophil
Fig. 3 | Character of the TIME during progressive tumor development. a, A major contributing factor in the failure to immunologically reject tumors stems 
from induction of T cell exhaustion, a state in which T cells become less responsive to antigens and are ineffective at providing T cell help or eliminating 
appropriate targets. Recent evidence suggests that T cell exhaustion occurs rapidly after oncogenic initiation, possibly because of chronic antigen exposure 
on tumor cells. As a T cell transitions from effector (T
eff) to exhausted (T
ex), there is increased expression of exhaustion-associated molecules such as 
LAG3, 2B4 and TIM3, and downregulation of effector cytokines such as IFNγ 
. From a therapeutic standpoint, epigenetic evidence suggests that there are 
types of T cell exhaustion that are irreversible, thus potentially explaining why some patients are completely unresponsive to some forms of ICB. APC, 
antigen-presenting cell; pMHC, peptide-bound major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T cell receptor. b, During tumor development, progressive changes 
in the character and quality of the TIME occur that coincide with disease severity and influence responsiveness to therapeutics. Recent evidence in mice 
suggests that YS-TAMs are more potently immunosuppressive than their monocyte-derived counterparts (TAMs). Whereas TAMs have been shown 
to suppress CD103+ DCs through secretion of IL-10, only depletion of YS-TAMs in a model of PDAC has been found to lessen tumor burden. Because 
YS-TAMs are theoretically present in the tumor site during oncogenic initiation, they may make the first contact with antitumor T cells and may be 
responsible for early T cell exhaustion. As tumors progress, TAMs of both types expand, whereas T
eff cells slowly become T
ex cells, and stimulatory CD103+ 
DCs become a more marginal and rare population. During metastatic seeding, pioneering metastatic tumor cells arrive and die. Their debris is taken up by 
distinct waves of myeloid cells, with monocytes and macrophages being the dominant phagocytes in the premetastatic site. CD103+ DCs have been shown 
to uptake minimal tumor debris/antigen, and this process is thought to partially contribute to reduced antitumor T cell priming. Whereas populations such 
as neutrophils have been associated with both metastatic success and failure, macrophages are often ascribed a prometastatic function, because their 
absence leads to pronounced metastatic failure. Mac, macrophage; mono, monocyte; nc mono, nonclassical monocyte.
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
545
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
not tissue-resident macrophage equivalents relieved suppression 
of cytotoxic T cells.
The inconsistencies regarding which ontologically distinct mac-
rophage subset is the dominantly immunosuppressive and tumor-
promoting type might have more to do with macrophage phenotype 
than origin. Although the specific macrophage phenotype or sub-
set most involved in T cell dysfunction in tumor progression is 
unclear, and the diversity of macrophage states in vivo53 remains 
an open question, in vitro macrophages can be generated with two 
extremes of phenotypes suggested to be tumoricidal (M1) and pro-
tumorigenic (M2)54,55. The plasticity of these cells makes therapeu-
tic targeting challenging, but recent studies have shed more light 
on the molecular switches that control macrophage phenotype. 
One source of phenotypic switching from immunostimulatory to 
immunoinhibitory transcriptional macrophage programming may 
be controlled by either BTK56, a signal transducer downstream of 
the bacterial lipopolysaccharide receptor TLR4, or PI3Kγ 
57, a com-
plex signaling molecule linked to the regulation of central myeloid 
transcriptional regulators NF-κ 
B and C/EBPβ 
. Inhibition of either 
BTK or PI3Kγ 
 has been found to restore antitumor cytotoxic T cell 
responses, thus demonstrating the involvement of these pathways in 
promoting immune tolerance. In pancreatic cancer, signaling of the 
innate immune receptor Dectin-1 promotes a tolerogenic macro-
phage phenotype and T cell suppression, thereby facilitating tumor 
progression58. Together, these data indicate that therapeutic target-
ing of macrophages to alter their phenotype may alleviate immuno-
suppression and improve antitumor immunity.
Although TAM numbers increase in tumors over time in mice 
and humans, mouse studies have demonstrated a progressive slow 
loss of CD103+ DCs, which are potent activators of antitumor CD8+ 
T cells20,48,59–61. Migratory DCs, such as CD103+ DCs, use expression 
of the chemokine receptor CCR7 to traffic antigen from the periph-
ery to the source of CCR7 ligand, CCL19 and CCL21, in draining 
lymph nodes. CD103+ DCs are critical for directing CD8+ T cell 
immunity, because depletion of CD103+ DCs abrogates CD8+ T cell 
priming and decreases the response to anti-PD-L1 ICB. Importantly, 
expansion and activation of CD103+ DCs has been found to syner-
gize with ICB in multiple experimental models60,62. Although these 
findings demonstrate that enhancing the functionality of these cells 
can improve the efficacy of immunotherapy, their loss in mouse 
models over time suggests that the ability to prime T cells will 
slowly wane. Gene expression analysis of human cancer biopsies 
has revealed a correlations among a ‘CD103-associated gene sig-
nature’
, T cell infiltration into tumors and improved prognosis20,59; 
however, longitudinal studies have not yet confirmed that these cells 
are also progressively lost in human tumors. As studies advance 
understanding of how the human TIME correlates with therapeutic 
response, it will also be interesting to determine whether patients 
with elevated frequencies of BDCA3+ DCs, the human equivalent of 
mouse CD103+ DCs, have a superior response to ICB. Beyond this 
possibility, other less well-defined DC populations exist within the 
TIME in mice and humans, and their function and importance has 
yet to be fully determined.
The immune environment in metastasis
Tumor-induced immunological changes affect the progression 
to metastatic disease, even before disseminated cancer cells have 
reached a secondary organ. Systemic immune tolerance and changes 
in the character of circulating myeloid cells can predispose a tumor 
for success in seeding a metastatic site. As tumor cells metastasize 
to distant tissue sites, they are immediately swarmed by distinct sets 
of immune populations that can both aid in and inhibit metastasis 
formation (Fig. 1b).
An overwhelming amount of data support the prometastatic 
function of classical inflammatory monocytes as well as macropha
ges23,26,28,63,64. A seminal study using the MMTV-PyMT breast cancer 
mouse model has found that mice lacking Csf-1, which is required 
for the development of CSF-1-dependent cells, including mono-
cytes and macrophages, exhibit delayed progression of mammary 
tumors to metastasis26. Recent data suggest that, beyond being pro-
moted by TAMs in the primary tumor, metastasis is potently pro-
moted by macrophages and their precursor populations present in 
premetastatic sites64,65.
Mouse studies have indicated that CD4+ T cell–derived IL-4 
indirectly promotes breast cancer metastasis by regulating macro-
phage phenotype, thus demonstrating a role of both the innate and 
the adaptive immune system in suppressing productive antitumor 
effects28. A recent study using multiphoton intravital imaging of 
the lung premetastatic site in mice has revealed that as pioneering 
metastatic tumor cells arrive and die, distinct waves of myeloid cells 
ingest tumor material, thereby supplying antigen to both pro- and 
antitumor immune compartments65. However, monocytes engulf 
most of the tumor material and consequently may sequester valu-
able tumor antigen from stimulatory DC populations; moreover, a 
reduction in monocytes result in higher antigen loads in those DCs. 
Although classical inflammatory monocytes have a known meta-
static-promoting function, nonclassical or ‘patrolling’ monocytes 
have been shown to have antimetastatic properties66.
Like monocytes and macrophages, neutrophils play critical roles 
in tumor development. Several preclinical mouse cancer models 
have revealed that, similarly to observations in patients, neutro-
phil proportions are elevated in the circulation and accumulate in 
peripheral organs during tumor progression67–70. However, the roles 
of neutrophils in metastasis remain controversial. Whereas some 
studies have reported antimetastatic functions of neutrophils71,72, 
others have demonstrated prometastatic properties67,69,73–76. In 
the 4T1 mouse breast tumor model, tumor-entrained neutrophils 
have been found to inhibit metastatic seeding in the lung via direct 
cytotoxicity toward disseminated cancer cells71. Moreover, a recent 
study has reported that a subpopulation of neutrophils expressing 
the MET proto-oncogene protects against the formation of metas-
tasis72. In contrast, in the MMTV-PyMT mammary tumor model, 
neutrophils have been found to facilitate metastasis to the lung by 
propagating the number of metastasis-initiating cancer cells via 
the secretion of leukotrienes67. Furthermore, in a model of lobular 
breast cancer, neutrophils have been found to promote metastasis by 
dampening antitumor immunity69. Systemic expansion and polar-
ization of prometastatic neutrophils is driven by tumor-induced 
IL17-producing γ 
δ T cells69, thus demonstrating the tight inter-
play between the innate and the adaptive immune system during 
metastasis. Although much of what is known about immunological 
composition at the metastatic site relates to cells with immunosup-
pressive functions, emerging evidence suggests that stimulatory 
myeloid cells can also potentiate antitumor T cell responses.
Although macrophages take up most tumor antigen, they often fail 
to successfully activate T cells in vitro20, in agreement with their pre-
viously described protumoral role. However, although their presence 
in tumors and metastatic lesions is scarce, CD103+ DCs are far better 
T cell activators20,59, and their loss results in a significant increase in 
pulmonary metastasis65, thus suggesting that even in the metastatic 
site, CD103+ DCs are important for eliciting potent antitumor CD8+ 
T cell responses. Together, these data support that therapeutic strat-
egies that target myeloid cells to alleviate immunosuppression and 
reinvigorate T cell responses may be a feasible immunotherapeutic 
approach to treat patients with metastatic cancer.
The contribution of systemic factors to the TIME
Understanding the spatiotemporal dynamics of the TIME necessi-
tates dissecting the potential roles that systemic factors may have 
in predisposing certain TIMEs to be fostered. As the broad effects 
of factors such as exercise77, age78, diet79, adiposity80, the microbi-
ome81 and sex82 on the immune system have become clearer, an 
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
546
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
understanding of how these factors directly affect the quality of the 
antitumor immune response has also emerged. Both these patient-
intrinsic and tumor-dependent effects intersect on many levels 
and will be important considerations in improving the efficacy of 
existing therapies or developing orthogonal immunotherapeutic 
approaches.
The systemic inflammatory state of an individual can affect the 
character of the TIME in premalignancies, thus leading to an occult 
tumor’s eventual elimination or supporting progression to advanced 
disease. A recent study has found that patients with atherosclero-
sis treated with anti-IL-1β 
 had lower incidence of lung cancer than 
did patients who had received placebo83. IL-1β 
 has been shown to 
induce synthesis of COX-2, which in turn leads to high-level pro-
duction of PGE2, a potent immunosuppressive molecule, in a subset 
of cancers. Aspirin, a COX inhibitor, has only very modest protec-
tive benefits when viewed across all cancers84, although its use is 
associated with lower disease incidence in patient populations 
predisposed to develop specific types of cancer85. These findings 
may indicate key differences in the TIMEs of patient populations. 
Interestingly, COX inhibition may also have utility in cancer treat-
ments, because it has been shown to synergize with anti-PD-1 ther-
apy in established tumors86.
As discussed above, tumors can make numerous cytokines 
and chemokines that attract and inform specific components of 
the immune system. Although these factors affect the local TIME 
itself, they can also become systemic, inducing broader changes 
in the tumor macroenvironment. Tumor cell production of the 
growth factors G-CSF70 and GM-CSF, as well as of IL-6 (ref. 87), can 
affect bone marrow myeloid progenitor expansion, thus leading to 
enhanced release of myeloid cells into circulation, and ultimately 
affect the number of circulating and tumor-infiltrating immuno-
suppressive myeloid cells and contribute to more severe disease and 
greater metastatic burden74,88. Tumor-induced systemic factors can 
affect the bone marrow and in turn promote tumor infiltration of 
cancer-promoting immune components, including neutrophils89, 
monocytes90 and platelets91.
Certain aspects that affect the tumor microenvironment pre-
date tumor establishment. Both aging92,93 and obesity94 have been 
reported to produce a proinflammatory state and to lead to an 
increase in the number of suppressive immature myeloid cells in 
circulation. Moreover, sex hormones may lead to altered TIME 
responses in male as compared with female patients, because estro-
gen has been shown to activate the STAT3 pathway in human and 
mouse bone marrow myeloid progenitor cells, thereby leading to 
an increased presence of potentially suppressive myeloid cells in 
circulation95. In contrast, estrogen may also induce a more tolero-
genic phenotype or subset in tumor DC populations96, thus partially 
explaining the difference in tumor growth between male and female 
mice. There is an added uncertainty, at present, of the heterogeneity 
of the myeloid lineage as it exists in circulation and whether each of 
these features of patients may influence the exact same or different 
subpopulations of cells.
More clearly, the microbiome has been found to have an impor-
tant role in determining DC functionality. Two recent studies have 
reported that responses to checkpoint blockade are dependent on 
the microbiomes of the mice studied97,98. Moreover, patients can be 
stratified according to their microbiomes, and this stratification is 
predictive of the response to anti-CTLA-4 therapy98. Both of these 
studies have hypothesized that this effect may be at least partly due 
to improvements in DC functionality either through improved 
maturation and cross-presentation leading to improved CD8+ T cell 
priming97 or through improved CD11b+ DC migration from the 
tumor and improved TH1 responses98. DC phenotype is also affected 
by the temperature of the animal being studied: placing mice under 
mild cold stress in laboratory conditions leads to increased tumor 
growth and reduced immune control99, effects at least partly due to 
decreased DC functionality100. As such, the immune macroenviron-
ment of a patient can dramatically affect the tumor microenviron-
ment.
Tumor-derived factors, as well as those affecting myeloid cell 
production from the bone marrow, can also alter patient metabolic 
status, which in turn can influence antitumor immunity. Recent 
research has revealed that in the CT26 and KPC tumor models, 
tumor-derived IL-6 alters liver metabolism and consequently, in the 
context of caloric restriction, leads to increased corticosterone and 
suppressed antitumor immunity101. In this setting, tumor-derived 
factors alter systemic metabolic tone and consequently lead to 
alterations in the tumor microenvironment. Interestingly in other 
models, caloric restriction101 or the administration of a fasting 
mimetic102, both of which trigger autophagy, have led to improved 
antitumor immunity in mice. These fasting-related effects have 
been linked to potentiated responses to chemotherapy, partially as a 
result of increased TIL infiltration103 and loss of tumoral Treg cells102.
These findings indicate that there may be more complexity to 
uncover regarding the effects of nutrition on tumor immunity and 
that the effects may be model dependent, in a manner analogous to 
the opposing effects of fasting on responses to bacterial and viral 
disease104. These factors should thus be taken into account when 
considering potential orthogonal immunotherapeutic approaches 
as well as when deciding upon appropriate animal models for pre-
clinical evaluation. The use of sex-matched, young and lean mice 
in most animal studies may explain some of the failures of mouse 
studies to predict therapeutic responses in the more diverse human 
population. Indeed, given that population obesity rates are increas-
ing and that most tumors develop in elderly patients, understand-
ing these factors is likely to prove critical for understanding of the 
tumor microenvironment. Moreover, other factors such as housing 
temperature (although this factor may not affect patient treatment, 
because hospitals are kept relatively thermoneutral) may greatly 
affect the findings from experimental systems.
Future directions
Further characterization of the tumor immune microenviron-
ment. Major successes with ICB and the potential for substantial 
clinical effects are driving thousands of clinical trials. These suc-
cesses include alternative ICB-like targets and drugs that modulate 
myeloid biology105, which may be paired with nonimmunological 
drug approaches. Pharmaceutical companies and clinical investiga-
tors alike are well aware of the value of tracking biomarkers associ-
ated with tumor growth, but more attention must be paid to how 
the TIME of a specific patient is altered before, during and after 
a trial. Using high-dimensional techniques to characterize patients 
with improved granularity should reveal as much about human 
immunology in an in vivo setting as any experiment in a mouse 
could. Similarly to the cases of anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1/PD-L1, 
breakthroughs will occur when basic-science discoveries are trans-
lated into actionable improvements in human disease. Therefore, 
the fastest route to demonstrable successes will depend on asking 
useful questions and using applicable animal models and valuable, 
innovative tools.
Because immunotherapeutic intervention is attempted in dis-
parate tumor types, there is a growing need to identify the unify-
ing features and critical differences that define distinct classes and 
subclasses of TIME, which relate to the likelihood of response to 
immunotherapeutics. For substantial progress to occur in this area, 
use of the highest-resolution methods will be critical to assess total 
cellular composition (for example, flow cytometry versus mass 
cytometry), functional status (for example, bulk RNA sequencing 
versus single-cell RNA sequencing) and cellular localization (for 
example, immunohistochemistry versus multidimensional immu-
nohistochemistry) in parallel to define highly granular classes and 
subclasses of TIME. Major advances have already been made in 
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
547
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
stratifying patients according to tumor type. We believe that fur-
ther stratification of patients on the basis of not only their tumor 
type but also their TIME type will yield better insight into overall 
survival and the likelihood of response to immunotherapeutics, 
and will provide vast datasets to help identify new druggable tar-
gets. This progress will be garnered by using the most cutting-edge 
techniques in multiparametric imaging106, mass cytometry107,108 and 
single-cell RNA sequencing109. Critical to this goal is that improved 
resolution of cellular composition and analysis of functional status 
and spatial distribution must be paired with relevant patient out-
comes (Fig. 1b). In particular, by casting a wider unbiased net, it will 
be possible to detect subtle changes in rare populations while also 
appreciating prominent effector activation states in situ.
A major goal in moving into truly orthogonal pathways to treat 
cancers is to understand the fundamental conditions in which 
TIMEs are arrayed; these conditions almost certainly reflect genetic 
programs engaged by the tumors themselves, if not also by the tis-
sue in which the tumor is located. Distinct collections of stroma, 
epithelium and immune cell types present nearly countless ways to 
parse a TIME, but it is still unknown how many of these cellular 
combinations help permit the rapid cellular proliferation and dis-
organization associated with a growing tumor. To that end, parallel 
studies to characterize tissue-specific responses to pathogens, heal-
ing wounds, chronic viral infections and tolerance in the gut may 
provide powerful datasets for comparison with the classes of TIME, 
because they are all analyzed at this detail.
Using preexisting drugs to modulate immune-associated targets. 
As immune–immune and immune–tumor interaction networks 
are better characterized, it will become possible to define classes 
of TIME and determine which cells, molecules and pathways are 
essential for suppressing antitumor immunity, and in what tumor 
contexts. In some cases, such definition may already be possible, 
because of the existence of failed, orphan, poorly efficacious drugs 
or drugs without an obvious direct application as immunotherapeu-
tic agents.
To advance immunotherapy, the state of thinking must be 
revamped in terms of the treatment goals (i.e., decreasing disease 
incidence versus combating advanced disease), and drugs that have 
had previous marginal success should be revisited. After paltry early 
clinical success, recent preclinical data in a mouse model of PDAC 
suggest that a combination of chemotherapy and anti-CD40 ago-
nistic antibody unleashes a potent antitumor immune response; 
moreover, early data in humans show enhanced lymphocyte infil-
tration. Although investigations are still in their early days, drugs 
to normalize vasculature, alter metabolism and suppress individual 
components of the immune system may find new life in the clinic, 
either as single agents or in combination with ICB, for long-term 
use as prophylactic measures.
Mouse to human and back again. Translating clinical insights into 
improvements in mouse models is necessary to ensure that discov-
eries made at the bench can derive applicable and high-quality ther-
apeutics. As classes of human TIME are elaborated (as described 
above), it is critical that parallel efforts take place to ascertain the 
best ways to generate reflective TIME in mouse models. Solid 
human tumors develop in situ and over long periods of time, char-
acteristics not reflected in ectopic mouse tumor models, which very 
often grow in the subcutaneous space and are formed through bolus 
injection of thousands of highly malignant tumor cells. Ectopic 
mouse tumor models have been invaluable for preclinical validation 
of countless therapeutics but have fallen short of being good indica-
tors of therapeutic efficacy in humans. Although genetically engi-
neered mouse models of cancer have brought immuno-oncology 
 
research a step closer toward recapitulating the stepwise progres-
sion of human disease, the resultant spontaneous tumors still leave 
something to be desired. The discovery of CRISPR–Cas9 now 
allows for rapid and parallel introduction of numerous mutations or 
engineered constructs into a single mouse110,111, thus changing how 
genetically engineered mouse models can be created, with less of 
an emphasis on severe oncogenic drivers and more of an emphasis 
on tunable oncogenic induction and mutational landscapes more 
similar to those in human disease.
Furthermore, major advances in the development of humanized 
mouse models have made xenografts with matching patient tumor 
and immune compartments possible, thereby enabling studies in 
which a patient’s own adoptively transferred TILs can be used to 
recapitulate the exhaustion or the introduction of targeted gene 
reporter loci to visualize intravital tumor immune interactions. 
Although these models have downsides, being able to implant 
human tumor tissue with a native mutational landscape into a par-
tially reconstituted human immune repertoire represents major 
progress. Even if mouse models fail to ever fully recapitulate human 
disease, it is important to understand the minutiae that make the 
most difference in dictating therapeutic response versus nonre-
sponse. Distilling a disease into a few critical parameters is challeng-
ing, but understanding what cell types can be modulated and when 
may enable the next biggest improvements in immunotherapy.
Received: 20 March 2017; Accepted: 29 March 2018;  
Published online: 23 April 2018
References
 
1. 
Topalian, S. L., Drake, C. G. & Pardoll, D. M. Immune checkpoint blockade: 
a common denominator approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 27, 
450–461 (2015).
 
2. 
Ali, H. R., Chlon, L., Pharoah, P. D., Markowetz, F. & Caldas, C. Patterns of 
immune infiltration in breast cancer and their clinical implications: a 
gene-expression-based retrospective study. PLoS Med. 13, e1002194 (2016).
 
3. 
Newman, A. M. et al. Robust enumeration of cell subsets from tissue 
expression profiles. Nat. Methods 12, 453–457 (2015).
 
4. 
Aran, D., Hu, Z. & Butte, A. J. xCell: digitally portraying the tissue cellular 
heterogeneity landscape. Genome Biol. 18, 220 (2017).
 
5. 
Bindea, G. et al. Spatiotemporal dynamics of intratumoral immune cells 
reveal the immune landscape in human cancer. Immunity 39,  
782–795 (2013).
 
6. 
Mlecnik, B. et al. Integrative analyses of colorectal cancer show 
immunoscore is a stronger predictor of patient survival than microsatellite 
instability. Immunity 44, 698–711 (2016).
 
7. 
Herbst, R. S. et al. Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1 
antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature 515, 563–567 (2014).
 
8. 
Ademmer, K. et al. Effector T lymphocyte subsets in human pancreatic 
cancer: detection of CD8+CD18+ cells and CD8+CD103+ cells by 
multi-epitope imaging. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 112, 21–26 (1998).
 
9. 
Beatty, G. L. et al. Exclusion of T cells from pancreatic carcinomas in mice 
is regulated by Ly6Clow F4/80+ extratumoral macrophages. Gastroenterology 
149, 201–210 (2015).
 
10. 
Spranger, S. Mechanisms of tumor escape in the context of the  
T-cell-inflamed and the non-T-cell-inflamed tumor microenvironment.  
Int. Immunol. 28, 383–391 (2016).
 
11. 
Evans, R. A. et al. Lack of immunoediting in murine pancreatic cancer 
reversed with neoantigen. JCI Insight 1, e88328 (2016).
 
12. 
Lee, H. J. et al. Tertiary lymphoid structures: prognostic significance and 
relationship with tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes in triple-negative breast 
cancer. J. Clin. Pathol. 69, 422–430 (2016).
 
13. 
Sautès-Fridman, C. et al. Tertiary lymphoid structures in cancers: 
prognostic value, regulation, and manipulation for therapeutic intervention. 
Front. Immunol. 7, 407 (2016).
 
14. 
Finkin, S. et al. Ectopic lymphoid structures function as microniches for 
tumor progenitor cells in hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat. Immunol. 16, 
1235–1244 (2015).
 
15. 
Neyt, K., Perros, F., GeurtsvanKessel, C. H., Hammad, H. & Lambrecht, B. N. 
 
Tertiary lymphoid organs in infection and autoimmunity. Trends Immunol. 
33, 297–305 (2012).
 
16. 
Lutz, E. R. et al. Immunotherapy converts nonimmunogenic pancreatic 
tumors into immunogenic foci of immune regulation. Cancer Immunol. Res. 
2, 616–631 (2014).
 
17. 
Sumimoto, H., Imabayashi, F., Iwata, T. & Kawakami, Y. The BRAF-MAPK 
signaling pathway is essential for cancer-immune evasion in human 
melanoma cells. J. Exp. Med. 203, 1651–1656 (2006).
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
548
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
 
18. 
Pylayeva-Gupta, Y., Lee, K. E., Hajdu, C. H., Miller, G. & Bar-Sagi, D. 
Oncogenic Kras-induced GM-CSF production promotes the development 
of pancreatic neoplasia. Cancer Cell 21, 836–847 (2012).
 
19. 
Bayne, L. J. et al. Tumor-derived granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor regulates myeloid inflammation and T cell immunity in 
pancreatic cancer. Cancer Cell 21, 822–835 (2012).
 
20. 
Broz, M. L. et al. Dissecting the tumor myeloid compartment reveals rare 
activating antigen-presenting cells critical for T cell immunity. Cancer Cell 
26, 638–652 (2014).
 
21. 
Spranger, S., Dai, D., Horton, B. & Gajewski, T. F. Tumor-residing Batf3 
dendritic cells are required for effector T cell trafficking and adoptive T cell 
therapy. Cancer Cell 31, 711–723.e714 (2017). 
 
22. 
Spranger, S., Bao, R. & Gajewski, T. F. Melanoma-intrinsic β 
-catenin 
signalling prevents anti-tumour immunity. Nature 523, 231–235 (2015).
 
23. 
Qian, B.-Z. et al. CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate 
breast-tumour metastasis. Nature 475, 222–225 (2011).
 
24. 
Bonavita, E. et al. PTX3 is an extrinsic oncosuppressor regulating 
complement-dependent inflammation in cancer. Cell 160, 700–714 (2015).
 
25. 
Condeelis, J. & Pollard, J. W. Macrophages: obligate partners for tumor cell 
migration, invasion, and metastasis. Cell 124, 263–266 (2006).
 
26. 
Lin, E. Y., Nguyen, A. V., Russell, R. G. & Pollard, J. W. Colony-stimulating 
factor 1 promotes progression of mammary tumors to malignancy.  
J. Exp. Med. 193, 727–740 (2001).
 
27. 
Scholl, S. M. et al. Anti-colony-stimulating factor-1 antibody staining in 
primary breast adenocarcinomas correlates with marked inflammatory cell 
infiltrates and prognosis. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 86, 120–126 (1994).
 
28. 
DeNardo, D. G. et al. CD4+ T cells regulate pulmonary metastasis of 
mammary carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of macrophages. 
Cancer Cell 16, 91–102 (2009).
 
29. 
Pollard, J. W. Tumour-educated macrophages promote tumour progression 
and metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 4, 71–78 (2004).
 
30. 
Khalili, J. S. et al. Oncogenic BRAF(V600E) promotes stromal cell-mediated 
immunosuppression via induction of interleukin-1 in melanoma.  
Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 5329–5340 (2012).
 
31. 
Lujambio, A. et al. Non-cell-autonomous tumor suppression by p53. Cell 
153, 449–460 (2013).
 
32. 
Guinney, J. et al. The consensus molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer. 
Nat. Med. 21, 1350–1356 (2015).
 
33. 
Angelova, M. et al. Characterization of the immunophenotypes and 
antigenomes of colorectal cancers reveals distinct tumor escape mechanisms 
and novel targets for immunotherapy. Genome Biol. 16, 64 (2015).
 
34. 
Becht, E. et al. Immune and stromal classification of colorectal cancer is 
associated with molecular subtypes and relevant for precision 
immunotherapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 22, 4057–4066 (2016).
 
35. 
Gatalica, Z. et al. Programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) and its ligand (PD-L1) 
in common cancers and their correlation with molecular cancer type. 
Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 23, 2965–2970 (2014).
 
36. 
Boland, P. M. & Ma, W. W. Immunotherapy for colorectal cancer.  
Cancers (Basel) 9, E50 (2017).
 
37. 
Egeblad, M., Nakasone, E. S. & Werb, Z. Tumors as organs: complex tissues 
that interface with the entire organism. Dev. Cell 18, 884–901 (2010).
 
38. 
Quail, D. F. & Joyce, J. A. Microenvironmental regulation of tumor 
progression and metastasis. Nat. Med. 19, 1423–1437 (2013).
 
39. 
Kitamura, T., Qian, B.-Z. & Pollard, J. W. Immune cell promotion of 
metastasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 73–86 (2015).
 
40. 
Willimsky, G. & Blankenstein, T. Sporadic immunogenic tumours avoid 
destruction by inducing T-cell tolerance. Nature 437, 141–146 (2005).
 
41. 
Garbe, A. I. et al. Genetically induced pancreatic adenocarcinoma is highly 
immunogenic and causes spontaneous tumor-specific immune responses. 
Cancer Res. 66, 508–516 (2006).
 
42. 
DuPage, M. et al. Endogenous T cell responses to antigens expressed in 
lung adenocarcinomas delay malignant tumor progression. Cancer Cell 19, 
72–85 (2011).
 
43. 
Pauken, K. E. & Wherry, E. J. Overcoming T cell exhaustion in infection 
and cancer. Trends Immunol. 36, 265–276 (2015).
 
44. 
Wherry, E. J. T cell exhaustion. Nat. Immunol. 12, 492–499 (2011).
 
45. 
Philip, M. et al. Chromatin states define tumour-specific T cell dysfunction 
and reprogramming. Nature 545, 452–456 (2017).
 
46. 
Pauken, K. E. et al. Epigenetic stability of exhausted T cells limits durability 
of reinvigoration by PD-1 blockade. Science 354, 1160–1165 (2016).
 
47. 
Schietinger, A. et al. Tumor-specific T cell dysfunction is a dynamic 
antigen-driven differentiation program initiated early during tumorigenesis. 
Immunity 45, 389–401 (2016).
 
48. 
Ruffell, B. et al. Macrophage IL-10 blocks CD8+ T cell-dependent responses 
to chemotherapy by suppressing IL-12 expression in intratumoral dendritic 
cells. Cancer Cell 26, 623–637 (2014).
 
49. 
Kumar, V. et al. Cancer-associated fibroblasts neutralize the anti-tumor 
effect of CSF1 receptor blockade by inducing PMN-MDSC infiltration of 
tumors. Cancer Cell 32, 654–668.e5 (2017).
 
50. 
Bos, P. D., Plitas, G., Rudra, D., Lee, S. Y. & Rudensky, A. Y. Transient 
regulatory T cell ablation deters oncogene-driven breast cancer and 
enhances radiotherapy. J. Exp. Med. 210, 2435–2466 (2013).
 
51. 
Zhu, Y. et al. Tissue-resident macrophages in pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma originate from embryonic hematopoiesis and promote 
tumor progression. Immunity 47, 323–338.e6 (2017).
 
52. 
Franklin, R. A. et al. The cellular and molecular origin of tumor-associated 
macrophages. Science 344, 921–925 (2014).
 
53. 
Murray, P. J. et al. Macrophage activation and polarization: nomenclature 
and experimental guidelines. Immunity 41, 14–20 (2014).
 
54. 
Mantovani, A. et al. The chemokine system in diverse forms of macrophage 
activation and polarization. Trends Immunol. 25, 677–686 (2004).
 
55. 
Mills, C. D., Kincaid, K., Alt, J. M., Heilman, M. J. & Hill, A. M. M-1/M-2 
macrophages and the Th1/Th2 paradigm. J. Immunol. 164,  
6166–6173 (2000).
 
56. 
Gunderson, A. J. et al. Bruton tyrosine kinase-dependent immune cell 
cross-talk drives pancreas cancer. Cancer Discov 6, 270–285 (2016).
 
57. 
Kaneda, M. M. et al. PI3Kγ 
 is a molecular switch that controls immune 
suppression. Nature 539, 437–442 (2016).
 
58. 
Daley, D. et al. Dectin 1 activation on macrophages by galectin 9 promotes 
pancreatic carcinoma and peritumoral immune tolerance. Nat. Med. 23, 
556–567 (2017).
 
59. 
Roberts, E. W. et al. Critical role for CD103+/CD141+ dendritic cells 
bearing CCR7 for tumor antigen trafficking and priming of T cell immunity 
in melanoma. Cancer Cell 30, 324–336 (2016).
 
60. 
Salmon, H. et al. Expansion and activation of CD103+ dendritic cell 
progenitors at the tumor site enhances tumor responses to therapeutic 
PD-L1 and BRAF inhibition. Immunity 44, 924–938 (2016).
 
61. 
Hildner, K. et al. Batf3 deficiency reveals a critical role for CD8α 
+ dendritic 
cells in cytotoxic T cell immunity. Science 322, 1097–1100 (2008).
 
62. 
Sánchez-Paulete, A. R. et al. Cancer immunotherapy with 
immunomodulatory anti-CD137 and anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibodies 
requires BATF3-dependent dendritic cells. Cancer Discov 6, 71–79 (2016).
 
63. 
Qian, B.-Z. et al. FLT1 signaling in metastasis-associated macrophages 
activates an inflammatory signature that promotes breast cancer metastasis. 
J. Exp. Med. 212, 1433–1448 (2015).
 
64. 
Kitamura, T. et al. CCL2-induced chemokine cascade promotes breast 
cancer metastasis by enhancing retention of metastasis-associated 
macrophages. J. Exp. Med. 212, 1043–1059 (2015).
 
65. 
Headley, M. B. et al. Visualization of immediate immune responses to 
pioneer metastatic cells in the lung. Nature 531, 513–517 (2016).
 
66. 
Hanna, R. N. et al. Patrolling monocytes control tumor metastasis to the 
lung. Science 350, 985–990 (2015).
 
67. 
Wculek, S. K. & Malanchi, I. Neutrophils support lung colonization of 
metastasis-initiating breast cancer cells. Nature 528, 413–417 (2015).
 
68. 
Nywening, T. M. et al. Targeting tumour-associated macrophages with 
CCR2 inhibition in combination with FOLFIRINOX in patients with 
borderline resectable and locally advanced pancreatic cancer: a single-
centre, open-label, dose-finding, non-randomised, phase 1b trial.  
Lancet Oncol. 17, 651–662 (2016).
 
69. 
Coffelt, S. B. et al. IL-17-producing γ 
δ T cells and neutrophils conspire to 
promote breast cancer metastasis. Nature 522, 345–348 (2015).
 
70. 
Casbon, A.-J. et al. Invasive breast cancer reprograms early myeloid 
differentiation in the bone marrow to generate immunosuppressive 
neutrophils. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, E566–E575 (2015).
 
71. 
Granot, Z. et al. Tumor entrained neutrophils inhibit seeding in the 
premetastatic lung. Cancer Cell 20, 300–314 (2011).
 
72. 
Finisguerra, V. et al. MET is required for the recruitment of anti-tumoural 
neutrophils. Nature 522, 349–353 (2015).
 
73. 
Steele, C. W. et al. CXCR2 inhibition profoundly suppresses metastases and 
augments immunotherapy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.  
Cancer Cell 29, 832–845 (2016).
 
74. 
Kowanetz, M. et al. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor promotes lung 
metastasis through mobilization of Ly6G+Ly6C+ granulocytes. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 21248–21255 (2010).
 
75. 
Jamieson, T. et al. Inhibition of CXCR2 profoundly suppresses 
inflammation-driven and spontaneous tumorigenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 122, 
3127–3144 (2012).
 
76. 
Bald, T. et al. Ultraviolet-radiation-induced inflammation promotes 
angiotropism and metastasis in melanoma. Nature 507, 109–113 (2014).
 
77. 
Koelwyn, G. J., Quail, D. F., Zhang, X., White, R. M. & Jones, L. W. 
Exercise-dependent regulation of the tumour microenvironment.  
Nat. Rev. Cancer 17, 620–632 (2017).
 
78. 
Shaw, A. C., Goldstein, D. R. & Montgomery, R. R. Age-dependent 
dysregulation of innate immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 875–887 (2013).
 
79. 
Julia, V., Macia, L. & Dombrowicz, D. The impact of diet on asthma and 
allergic diseases. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 308–322 (2015).
 
80. 
Tall, A. R. & Yvan-Charvet, L. Cholesterol, inflammation and innate 
immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 104–116 (2015).
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
549
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 Review ARticle
NATurE MEdICINE
 
81. 
Hooper, L. V., Littman, D. R. & Macpherson, A. J. Interactions between the 
microbiota and the immune system. Science 336, 1268–1273 (2012).
 
82. 
Robinson, D. P., Lorenzo, M. E., Jian, W. & Klein, S. L. Elevated  
17β 
-estradiol protects females from influenza A virus pathogenesis  
by suppressing inflammatory responses. PLoS Pathog. 7,  
e1002149 (2011).
 
83. 
Ridker, P. M. et al. Effect of interleukin-1β 
 inhibition with canakinumab on 
incident lung cancer in patients with atherosclerosis: exploratory results 
from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 390, 
1833–1842 (2017).
 
84. 
Cook, N. R. et al. Low-dose aspirin in the primary prevention of cancer: 
the Women’s Health Study: a randomized controlled trial. J. Am. Med. 
Assoc. 294, 47–55 (2005).
 
85. 
Burn, J. et al. Long-term effect of aspirin on cancer risk in carriers of 
hereditary colorectal cancer: an analysis from the CAPP2 randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 378, 2081–2087 (2011).
 
86. 
Zelenay, S. et al. Cyclooxygenase-dependent tumor growth through evasion 
of immunity. Cell 162, 1257–1270 (2015).
 
87. 
Marigo, I. et al. Tumor-induced tolerance and immune suppression depend 
on the C/EBPβ transcription factor. Immunity 32, 790–802 (2010).
 
88. 
Waight, J. D., Hu, Q., Miller, A., Liu, S. & Abrams, S. I. Tumor-derived 
G-CSF facilitates neoplastic growth through a granulocytic myeloid-derived 
suppressor cell-dependent mechanism. PLoS One 6, e27690 (2011).
 
89. 
Engblom, C. et al. Osteoblasts remotely supply lung tumors with 
cancer-promoting SiglecFhigh neutrophils. Science 358, eaal5081 (2017).
 
90. 
Cortez-Retamozo, V. et al. Angiotensin II drives the production of 
tumor-promoting macrophages. Immunity 38, 296–308 (2013).
 
91. 
Pucci, F. et al. PF4 promotes platelet production and lung cancer growth. 
Cell Rep. 17, 1764–1772 (2016).
 
92. 
Verschoor, C. P. et al. Blood CD33+HLA-DR– myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells are increased with age and a history of cancer. J. Leukoc. Biol. 93, 
633–637 (2013).
 
93. 
Ruhland, M. K. et al. Stromal senescence establishes an immunosuppressive 
microenvironment that drives tumorigenesis. Nat. Commun. 7,  
11762 (2016).
 
94. 
Hale, M. et al. Obesity triggers enhanced MDSC accumulation in murine 
renal tumors via elevated local production of CCL2. PLoS One 10, 
e0118784 (2015).
 
95. 
Svoronos, N. et al. Tumor cell-independent estrogen signaling drives disease 
progression through mobilization of myeloid-derived suppressor cells. 
Cancer Discov 7, 72–85 (2017).
 
96. 
Thompson, M. G., Peiffer, D. S., Larson, M., Navarro, F. & Watkins, S. K. 
FOXO3, estrogen receptor alpha, and androgen receptor impact tumor 
growth rate and infiltration of dendritic cell subsets differentially  
between male and female mice. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 66,  
615–625 (2017).
 
97. 
Sivan, A. et al. Commensal Bifidobacterium promotes antitumor immunity 
and facilitates anti-PD-L1 efficacy. Science 350, 1084–1089 (2015).
 
98. 
Vétizou, M. et al. Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on 
the gut microbiota. Science 350, 1079–1084 (2015).
 
99. 
Kokolus, K. M. et al. Baseline tumor growth and immune control in 
laboratory mice are significantly influenced by subthermoneutral housing 
temperature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 20176–20181 (2013).
 
100. Kokolus, K. M. et al. Stressful presentations: mild cold stress in laboratory 
mice influences phenotype of dendritic cells in naïve and tumor-bearing 
mice. Front. Immunol. 5, 23 (2014).
 
101. Flint, T. R. et al. Tumor-induced IL-6 reprograms host metabolism to 
suppress anti-tumor immunity. Cell Metab. 24, 672–684 (2016).
 
102. Pietrocola, F. et al. Caloric restriction mimetics enhance anticancer 
immunosurveillance. Cancer Cell 30, 147–160 (2016).
 
103. Di Biase, S. et al. Fasting-mimicking diet reduces HO-1 to promote  
T cell-mediated tumor cytotoxicity. Cancer Cell 30, 136–146 (2016).
 
104. Wang, A. et al. Opposing effects of fasting metabolism on tissue tolerance 
in bacterial and viral inflammation. Cell 166, 1512–1525 (2016). e1512.
 
105. Smyth, M. J., Ngiow, S. F., Ribas, A. & Teng, M. W. Combination cancer 
immunotherapies tailored to the tumour microenvironment. Nat. Rev.  
Clin. Oncol. 13, 143–158 (2016).
 
106. Tsujikawa, T. et al. Quantitative multiplex immunohistochemistry reveals 
myeloid-inflamed tumor-immune complexity associated with poor 
prognosis. Cell Rep. 19, 203–217 (2017).
 
107. Spitzer, M. H. et al. Systemic immunity is required for effective cancer 
immunotherapy. Cell 168, 487–502.e15 (2017).
 
108. Lavin, Y. et al. Innate immune landscape in early lung adenocarcinoma by 
paired single-cell analyses. Cell 169, 750–765.e17 (2017). 
 
109. Tirosh, I. et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic 
melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352, 189–196 (2016).
 
110. Cong, L. et al. Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems. 
Science 339, 819–823 (2013).
 
111. Wang, H. et al. One-step generation of mice carrying mutations in multiple 
genes by CRISPR/Cas-mediated genome engineering. Cell 153,  
910–918 (2013).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence should be addressed to R.W. or M.K.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
NATURE MEDICINE | VOL 24 | MAY 2018 | 541–550 | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
550
© 2018 Nature America Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
