 A 
60 
volume 124 | number 4 | April 2016 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Perspectives | Brief Communication
Introduction
Understanding and preventing adverse impacts from chemicals in the 
environment is fundamental to protecting public health, and scientifi-
cally sound chemical risk assessments are needed to support a variety 
of environmental protection decisions across the United States and 
around the world. Risk assessments provide qualitative information 
about a chemical’s health effects and quantitative information that 
helps inform the scope of national regulatory decisions, state and 
community decisions, and industry practices. 
The 1983 four-step framework—hazard identification, dose 
response, exposure assessment, and risk characterization—developed 
by the National Research Council (NRC 1983) has shaped chemical 
risk assessments worldwide. However, the wide range of policy and 
regulatory applications within and across federal and state agencies 
in the United States and internationally, has led to an equally wide 
range of risk assessment practices. These different approaches may 
yield conflicting results and have contributed to concerns about the 
scientific credibility of risk assessments and related risk management 
decisions. The emergence of new methods in computational toxi-
cology, exposure science, epidemiology, and systematic review hold 
great promise for advancing risk assessment. However, integration of 
these new approaches into established regulatory frameworks presents 
scientific and policy challenges. 
The majority of regulatory frameworks guide risk assessment from 
the perspective of a single chemical or single component of a product 
formulation and often do not account for multiple chemical expo-
sures and mixtures. Furthermore, most chemical risk assessments of 
potential human health effects rely on testing in animal models using 
exposures that are typically higher than those experienced by humans. 
This testing model requires the assessor to extrapolate to lower doses 
and across species, and it provides limited consideration of variability 
within species. All of these factors undermine confidence that current 
risk assessments are protective of human health, particularly for the 
most vulnerable individuals, communities, and life stages. 
Results from environmental epidemiology studies have raised 
questions about whether traditional animal toxicology studies 
adequately predict health effects in human populations. These 
studies sometimes report effects that are not seen in animal studies, 
and hypothesis-based epidemiological studies may not yield data 
that can be easily incorporated into chemical risk assessments using 
existing frameworks and guidelines. Myriad publications in environ-
mental and public health journals describe subtle chemical–biological 
interactions with population health effects that are not captured in 
traditional toxicity testing. The health effects observed in the epide-
miological studies are typically different from end points evaluated 
in animal-based toxicity tests for hazard evaluation in chemical risk 
assessments. The real world exposure events depicted in epidemiology 
studies often do not correlate with exposures traditionally used in 
toxicity testing, which are most often much higher than exposures 
experienced in human populations. Furthermore, epidemiological 
studies incorporate background and chronic low-dose exposures that 
are not considered in traditional toxicity testing. Likewise, they may 
be able to capture population variability, which can be important for 
organizations charged with protecting public health.
Twenty-first century science is providing tremendous advances in 
systems biology, genomics and epigenetics, bioinformatics, exposure 
science, and environmental epidemiology, as well as innovations in 
chemical measurement and analytical technologies: All these advances 
are expanding our understanding of how chemicals can interact with 
biological systems. New approaches such as Toxicology in the 21st 
Century (Tox21; https://ncats.nih.gov/sites/default/files/factsheet-
tox21.pdf) and exposure forecasting (ExpoCast; http://www.epa.gov/
sites/production/files/2014-12/documents/exposure_forecasting_fact-
sheet.pdf) are generating data that provide broad coverage of chemical 
space, chemical mixtures, and potential associated health outcomes, 
along with improved exposure estimates. Further development and 
use of systematic review will provide more transparency and more 
consistency and confidence in the integration of mechanistic, animal, 
and human data for use in risk assessments.
To provide a forum to discuss how science in the 21st century can 
bring about improvements in the risk assessment process, the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) cosponsored the workshop 
“Strengthening the Scientific Basis for Chemical Safety Assessments,” 
which took place 15–16 July 2015 in Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina. Participants included individuals with the diverse expertise 
in toxicology, epidemiology, and risk assessment needed to move this 
discussion forward. At the workshop, participants discussed the gaps 
in understanding between the new scientific methods and conven-
tional approaches: These discussions led to proposed activities to 
bridge the gaps.
Introductory talks reviewed the growing evidence that exposures 
to a wide variety of chemicals encountered in daily life in the United 
States are linked to adverse health effects, including neurological 
deficits in children and adults, asthma, cardiovascular disease, and 
cancer. Invited speakers presented case studies to illustrate and provide 
background information for key topic areas including accounting for 
exposures during critical developmental windows, capturing variability 
A Section 508–conformant HTML version of this article 
is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1511135. 
Informing 21st-Century Risk 
Assessments with 21st-Century 
Science
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1511135
Summary: Understanding and preventing adverse impacts from 
 
chemicals in the environment is fundamental to protecting public 
health, and chemical risk assessments are used to inform public health 
decisions in the United States and around the world. Traditional 
chemical risk assessments focus on health effects of environmental 
contaminants on a chemical-by-chemical basis, largely based on data 
from animal models using exposures that are typically higher than 
those experienced by humans. Results from environmental epidemiol-
ogy studies sometimes show effects that are not observed in animal 
studies at human exposure levels that are lower than those used in 
animal studies. In addition, new approaches such as Toxicology in 
the 21st Century (Tox21) and exposure forecasting (ExpoCast) are 
generating mechanistic data that provide broad coverage of chemical 
space, chemical mixtures, and potential associated health outcomes, 
along with improved exposure estimates. It is becoming clear that risk 
assessments in the future will need to use the full range of available 
mechanistic, animal, and human data to integrate multiple types of 
data and to consider nontraditional health outcomes and end points. 
This perspective was developed at the “Strengthening the Scientific 
Basis of Chemical Safety Assessments” workshop, which was cospon-
sored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, where gaps between 
the emerging science and traditional chemical risk assessments were 
explored, and approaches for bridging the gaps were considered.
 Brief Communication
Environmental Health Perspectives • volume 124 | number 4 | April 2016 
A 
61
in population susceptibility, translating experimental animal find-
ings to humans, and addressing cumulative exposures. The group 
also discussed the perception prevalent in the public health commu-
nity that chemical risk assessments, as currently carried out by the 
U.S. EPA and other agencies, are not sufficiently health protective. A 
strong theme among the participants was that new approaches have 
to be developed to incorporate data beyond traditional experimental 
and animal studies to support chemical safety evaluations that could 
prevent adverse health effects in the U.S. population.
Understanding the Gaps between New and 
Conventional Methodologies
The Chasm between Environmental Epidemiology 
and Risk Assessment
It was immediately apparent that there is limited understanding or 
familiarity, outside of the practitioners, with how risk assessments 
are conducted in federal regulatory agencies. As a consequence, most 
research investigations are not optimally designed to provide the 
types of information that are needed in current assessments. This 
lack of appropriate design can extend through the selection of study 
end points and the recording and reporting of findings, to an appre-
ciation of required study design elements to inform a risk assess-
ment. Conversely, current chemical risk assessment practices of the 
U.S. EPA and other federal agencies have not evolved to optimally 
consider and incorporate the information emerging from obser-
vational human research. Many risk assessment professionals lack 
understanding of epidemiology study designs, methods, strengths, 
and limitations. As a result, much potentially valuable information is 
excluded from the regulatory risk assessment process. 
Exposure, the Missing Link
Exposures, as observed, measured, and reported in environmental 
epidemiology studies, typically represent real-world exposures. These 
are often reported at levels below those used and delivered in tradi-
tional animal toxicology studies, and they are rarely confined to a 
single or few agents of concern, making it difficult to definitively 
elucidate causality in the hypothesized association with exposures. 
In contrast, when estimating the risks of use of a single pesticide, 
the assessment only considers the risk of exposure to the pesticide 
active ingredient, but the inert components in a pesticide formula-
tion to which individuals are inevitably co-exposed, and which could 
modify the response, are usually not considered in the risk assessment. 
In addition, whereas exposures in observational studies encompass 
background exposures and chronic low-dose exposures to single or 
multiple chemicals, toxicological studies do not typically model or 
account for these. 
Importance of Life-Stage Exposures and 
Multigenerational Effects
Many of the environmental epidemiology studies discussed at the 
workshop probed the importance of windows of exposures, with the 
focus on parent and child exposures during critical life stages, such 
as preconception and perinatal periods, and understanding early-life 
determinants of lifelong diseases. While data from epidemiological 
studies also point to potential amplification of the adverse effects of 
these early-life exposures, including multigenerational effects, it was 
recognized that these effects are not modeled in standard toxicological 
studies or evaluated in risk assessments because data on which to 
judge such health outcomes are largely missing and not required. It 
will be necessary to expand approaches used to integrate mechanistic, 
animal, and human data in order to bridge gaps and inform risk 
assessment methods. The U.S. EPA and the NIEHS are committed to 
helping support cross-disciplinary efforts to achieve this goal.
Understanding the Role of Nonchemical Stressors
There are many nonchemical stressors that are often overlooked in the 
conduct of risk assessments. Yet, current data, both from toxicological 
and epidemiological studies, demonstrate that physical agents such 
as light and noise, infectious agents, the microbiome, psychosocial 
factors, and nutrition can have significant impacts on health effects 
from chemical exposures. For example, while all the workshop partici-
pants agreed that stress is an important modifying factor for health, 
it is currently not considered as a risk cofactor or modeled in most 
studies on which risk assessments are based. However, the science 
that addresses biochemical markers of stress is evolving, and it was 
proposed that this evolution would be important to quantitatively 
study the interactions between stress and chemical exposures and 
account for both in chemical risk assessments. Stress is but one of 
many factors that may contribute to vulnerability within a popula-
tion. Current practices that risk assessors use to account for vulner-
ability, such as uncertainty or safety factor adjustments, may not 
adequately capture true population vulnerability, such as that associ-
ated with stress or genetic variance. The extent to which this might 
be the case is currently unknown. There likely will be challenges in 
using data on nonchemical stressors in assessments that support regu-
latory action under various regulatory statutes in ways that promote 
improved public health.
Influence of Funding Priorities
It was acknowledged that research specifically aimed at addressing a 
data gap for the purpose of a risk assessment is not likely to be funded 
through the typical grants review processes of the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH). Perhaps because of the funding priorities, academic 
investigators by and large study environmental exposures in the 
context of understanding their contributions to a disease or related 
adverse mechanistic event that is often not well aligned with the 
typical phenotypic end points measured and relied upon in regulatory 
or guideline toxicology studies. At this time, these types of toxicology 
studies are at the foundation of most chemical risk assessments that 
inform chemical safety evaluations. The U.S. EPA and the NIEHS 
recognize the value of fostering and funding such studies and collabo-
rations. There is concern that the funding gap is likely to grow if not 
addressed systematically and deliberately.
Proposed Bridging Activities
Based on discussions of immediate and longer-term activities to 
bridge the gaps in understanding, the workshop participants drew 
conclusions and recommended several activities.
Increase Communication
It is important to find mechanisms to increase communication among 
researchers in multiple disciplines, including toxicology, epidemi-
ology, and risk assessment. Suggestions were made to advance this 
communication. For example, the U.S. EPA could sponsor hands-on 
risk assessment experiences for researchers through short residential 
courses. Scientists within the U.S. EPA and outside the agency could 
also form scientific teams to work together to develop ways to improve 
the consideration and incorporation of epidemiology data into risk 
assessments, including in-depth analyses of study designs, dose metrics, 
confounding, and sampling issues. This could be accomplished by 
collaborating on consensus workshops or white papers.
Enrich Funding Mechanisms
Teams of experimental and observational scientists and risk assessors 
could explore collaborations to design competitive grants programs 
that promote and fund studies to provide data of direct relevance to 
chemical risk assessment. This could be facilitated by the creation of 
dedicated grant review study sections.
 Brief Communication
A 
62 
volume 124 | number 4 | April 2016 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Examine Methods to Make Risk Assessments More 
Robust and  
Inclusive
It was suggested that teams carry out targeted case studies to 
examine how well risk assessment projections for “safe exposures” 
relate to exposures in a human population that are being linked to 
adverse health effects. To help with this examination, the U.S. EPA 
has asked the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine to help develop a strategy for evaluating whether the agen-
cy’s current regulatory toxicity-testing practices allow for adequate 
consideration of evidence of low-dose adverse human effects. A 
published report from this committee—Unraveling Low-Dose 
Toxicity: Case Studies of Systematic Review of Evidence (http://
www8.nationalacademies.org/cp/projectview.aspx?key=49716)—is 
expected in early 2016 and could help improve understanding of 
cases where low-dose effects may have not been detected in current 
regulatory studies.
Move Away from Reliance on Apical End Points
The risk assessment community should continue to explore ways 
to move away from the use of traditional phenotypic effects and 
outcomes in regulatory guideline animal safety assessment studies. 
Perturbations of molecular pathways involved in adverse pheno-
typic end points were considered to be potentially useful and might 
provide a better link between molecular epidemiology findings 
and traditional animal toxicology studies. It was suggested that 
the U.S. EPA and the NIEHS convene workshops to explore the 
relationships between a) observed potentially environmentally 
induced diseases, b) the typical phenotypic responses seen in animal 
toxicology studies, and c) the adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) 
that might relate the two together. A logical follow-on to these 
activities would be to expand studies to examine chemical inter-
actions that work through different points of an AOP, particularly 
with respect to dose–response relationships and considerations of 
 
chemical mixtures.
Another suggestion was to simply begin to routinely use alter-
native end points, such as analyzing key characteristics of biologic 
pathways, for risk assessments, rather than only using apical health 
effects. Such analyses would require significant policy and possibly 
legislative changes, as well as significant outreach and education, 
considering some of the recent judicial interpretations of regulations 
promulgated under existing laws. 
Incorporate Interindividual Variability in Place 
of Default Safety Factors 
One of the critical challenges in risk assessment is how  
interindividual 
variability and differential susceptibility are evaluated and incorpo-
rated. In order to address this challenge, scientific findings could be 
used in place of default uncertainty or safety factors to address popu-
lation susceptibility. For example, one might use the profile of popu-
lation variance in phase 1 or phase 2 enzyme activities for metabolism 
of selected chemical structures in place of default safety factors. It was 
pointed out, however, that variability in these enzymes in humans 
could be in excess of 100-fold. An alternate but related suggestion 
was to examine chemical structures agnostically with the intent of 
understanding chemical attributes that tend to produce highly vari-
able responses across populations. This could be approached through 
an expansion of the Tox21–1000 Genomes Project (Abdo et al. 
2015). Data from this project—with respect to 156 compounds in 
nearly 900 lymphoblastoid cell lines from five ethnic groups—has 
demonstrated that variability among individuals can be more than 
200-fold. However, data from this project addresses genetic variability 
but does not consider other critical influences, such as life stage, diet, 
and the microbiome.
Characterize and Incorporate Chemical Co-exposures
Methods need to be developed to incorporate emerging data on 
 
chemical co-exposures into risk assessments. Broader applications of 
novel technologies to examine patterns of common chemical co-expo-
sures in populations, as well as advances in bioinformatics and in 
nontargeted chemical analyses of human biospecimens, hold promise 
to provide this in ways that avoid the current need for large volumes 
of blood (Guo et al. 2015). Current chemical risk assessments do not 
consider every stressor, since we do not have the data or know how to 
do this. Instead, they most often assess cumulative risk for common 
modes of action as required by law and supported by science. While 
imperfect, this may be a useful starting point for considering improving 
current practices and generating missing data on co-exposures.
Study and Consider Multigenerational Effects
The potential significance of multigenerational inheritance of risks 
was noted, and there was recognition that this adds another vastly 
complicating dimension to understanding and estimating the risks of 
current exposures. This concept is one of the areas of scientific focus 
for the NIEHS 2012–2017 Strategic Goals (https://www.niehs.nih.
gov/about/strategicplan/), and a systematic review of the current 
literature pertaining to this topic is underway. This comprehensive 
review will hopefully provide a basis for more definitive research in 
this area. Current multigenerational toxicity test methods in rats and 
other species have limitations, and there are opportunities to improve 
test guidelines and create integrated testing and assessment strategies 
that include mechanistic, animal, and human data.
Relevance of Emerging Science to Risk Assessments 
The U.S. EPA and NIEHS, in collaboration with other  
agencies, 
have asked the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine to provide guidance on integrating new scien-
tific approaches into risk-based evaluations. The report from this 
committee—Incorporating 21st Century Science into Risk-Based 
Decisions (http://www8.nationalacademies.org/cp/projectview.
aspx?key=49652)—is not expected to be published until early 
2016, and as such, this topic was not central to the discussions at 
the meeting. Nevertheless, it was broadly acknowledged that there 
is currently little experience or precedence for incorporating the 
emerging 21st-century science into risk assessments: This includes the 
appropriate use of Tox21 high-throughput screening (HTS) informa-
tion, commensurate high-throughput exposure estimations, nontar-
geted metabolomics, high-throughput transcriptomic, and other 
forms of emerging big data. This may also require an appreciation and 
understanding of how to assess the validity of proposed AOPs and 
networks and how to use them in informing risk assessments. 
Conclusions
Understanding the environmental determinants of disease and 
protecting susceptible and vulnerable populations are daunting scien-
tific challenges. Addressing these challenges will require an inclusive 
multidisciplinary research approach and an improved recognition 
of the methods and informational needs of risk assessors. Progress 
will also require coordination across multiple federal programs and 
 
agencies—especially in resource-constrained times. 
The 2015 workshop started with the recognition that there is a 
chasm between current risk assessment practices and evolving data 
from mechanistic and environmental epidemiological studies; it 
concluded with several concrete, practical, and achievable steps to 
help the U.S. EPA, the NIEHS, and the broader scientific commu-
nity strengthen the scientific basis for chemical risk assessments. The 
resounding message of the workshop is that both federal  
agencies 
need to work with the research community to ensure that our 
 Brief Communication
Environmental Health Perspectives • volume 124 | number 4 | April 2016 
A 
63
assessments incorporate current science and consider the full range of 
vulnerabilities within the population. This research and assessement 
strategies are fundamental to our mission to ensure that our commu-
nities are safe, our air and water are clean, and our most vulnerable 
populations are adequately protected. 
Linda S. Birnbaum,1 Thomas A. Burke,2 and James J. Jones3
1Office of the Director, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Department of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS), Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA; 2Office of Research and 
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington DC, USA; 
3Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention, U.S. EPA, Washington DC, USA
Address correspondence to L.S. Birnbaum, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and 
Human Services, P.O. Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA. 
Telephone: (919) 541-3201. E-mail: birnbaumls@niehs.nih.gov
The authors would like to thank their colleagues who participated in the work-
shop and for the discussions that shaped this article. In particular, we thank 
J. Bucher, National Toxicology Program, NIEHS, NIH, DHHS; T. Bahadori, 
Office of Research and Development, Chemical Safety for Sustainability Research 
Program, U.S. EPA; and D. Dix, Office of Science Coordination and Policy, U.S. 
EPA, for fostering these conversations among our diverse communities. 
T.A.B. is Science Advisor and Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of 
Research and Development at the U.S. EPA. J.J.J. is the Assistant Administrator 
for the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention at the U.S. EPA. The 
views expressed are their own and do not necessarily reflect the policy  
positions of 
the U.S. EPA.
The authors declare they have no actual or potential competing financial interests.
RefeRences
Abdo N, Xia M, Brown CC, Kosyk O, Huang R, Sakamuru S, et al. 2015. Population-based 
in vitro hazard and concentration–response assessment of chemicals: the 1000 Genomes 
high-throughput screening study. Environ Health Perspect 123(5):458–466, doi: 10.1289/
ehp.1408775.
Guo L, Milburn MV, Ryals JA, Lonergan SC, Mitchell MW, Wulff JE, et al. 2015. Plasma metabo-
lomic profiles enhance precision medicine for volunteers of normal health. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 112(35):E4901–E4910, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1508425112.
NRC (National Research Council). 1983. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: Managing 
the Process. Washington, DC:National Academy Press. Available: http://www.nap.edu/
catalog/366/risk-assessment-in-the-federal-government-managing-the-process [accessed 
18 February 2016].
