 Early childhood stress exposure, reward pathways, and
adult decision making
Rasmus M. Birna,1, Barbara J. Roeberb, and Seth D. Pollakb,c,1
aDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53719; bWaisman Center, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53705;
and cDepartment of Psychology, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706
Edited by Valerie F. Reyna, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Michael S. Gazzaniga November 3, 2017 (received for
review May 26, 2017)
Individuals who have experienced chronic and high levels of stress
during their childhoods are at increased risk for a wide range of
behavioral problems, yet the neurobiological mechanisms under-
lying this association are poorly understood. We measured the life
circumstances of a community sample of school-aged children and
then followed these children for a decade. Those from the highest
and lowest quintiles of childhood stress exposure were invited to
return to our laboratory as young adults, at which time we reassessed
their life circumstances, acquired fMRI data during a reward-
processing task, and tested their judgment and decision making.
Individuals who experienced high levels of early life stress showed
lower levels of brain activation when processing cues signaling
potential loss and increased responsivity when actually experiencing
losses. Specifically, those with high childhood stress had reduced
activation in the posterior cingulate/precuneus, middle temporal
gyrus, and superior occipital cortex during the anticipation of
potential rewards; reduced activation in putamen and insula during
the anticipation of potential losses; and increased left inferior
frontal gyrus activation when experiencing an actual loss. These
patterns of brain activity were associated with both laboratory
and real-world measures of individuals’ risk taking in adulthood.
Importantly, these effects were predicated only by childhood stress
exposure and not by current levels of life stress.
childhood development | social behavior | early life stress | reward |
decision making
I
ndividuals who have experienced chronic and high levels of
early life stress (ELS) exposure are at increased risk for a wide
range of behavioral problems that begin in childhood and con-
tinue to increase throughout their lives. These correlates of ex-
treme childhood adversity include health-related issues such as
drug and alcohol abuse and threats to well-being that range from
teen pregnancy to criminality (1–3). Although the association
between early adversity and later maladaptive behaviors has been
well-documented, critical gaps remain in our understanding about
how and why these problems emerge and persist. One challenge to
addressing this issue has been a lack of understanding about why
early childhood stress exposure seems to create risk for a very broad
range of maladaptive behaviors. A second issue is that it has been
difficult to parse the effects of early versus cumulative life experi-
ence, given that most people who experience highly stressful
childhoods tend to continue to live in stressful situations through
adolescence and adulthood (4). For these reasons, in part, we
have yet to identify neurobiological mechanisms through which
children’s environmental experiences might lead to the emergence
and maintenance of a broad range of maladaptive behaviors.
Knowledge of specific mechanisms can improve our understanding
of why extreme childhood stress exposure leads to a broad array of
maladaptive behaviors, provide future biomarkers of early risk, and
guide the development of effective interventions for these children.
Here, we test a potential mechanism that could account for the
poor decisions and choices that stress-exposed individuals often
make. These suboptimal decisions contribute to a broad range of
social and health-related behaviors often associated with childhood
stress exposure.
To address this issue, we first measured the life circumstances
of a community sample of elementary school-aged children.
These children had a range of life experiences from relatively low
or normative life stress to extremely high levels of adversity. We
followed these children for a decade and invited those from the
highest and lowest quintiles of childhood stress exposure to
return to our laboratory as young adults. This group of 54 in-
cluded 29 individuals (17 female) who had extremely high and
verifiable levels of stress during childhood, and 25 individuals
(11 female) who had relatively low levels of stress during their
early childhoods. When these individuals returned in adulthood,
we reassessed their life circumstances and also measured their
reward processing and decision making.
Prior nonhuman animal studies have shown that chronic stress
during development can lead to long-term alterations in certain
reward-related behaviors. For example, stress-exposed animals
evince less motivation to work toward a reward, and this appears
to be mediated, in part, by alterations of neuronal function in the
basal ganglia (5–7). Based on these data, we tested our partici-
pants on a Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) task, which taps
activation of the brain’s reward circuitry, including the basal
ganglia (8–10). In this task, participants were first presented with
a cue indicating a possible monetary gain, loss, or no gain–loss.
After a variable delay, a target appeared, and participants were
instructed to press a button as quickly as possible while the target
Significance
Individuals who have experienced high levels of stress in early
childhood are at risk for a wide range of behavioral problems,
yet the neurobiological processes underlying these associa-
tions are poorly understood. In this experiment, we uncover a
potential mechanism leading to maladaptive decision making:
altered brain activation during anticipation of rewards and
losses. Individual differences in neural responses to cues of
potential reward or loss were associated with early life stress
and both laboratory and real-world measures of risk-taking
behaviors. These effects were predicted only by childhood
stress exposure, not by current levels of stress in the partici-
pants’ adult lives. Early life stress was assessed prospectively,
when the participants were children, thereby avoiding the
potential biases associated with adult retrospective recall.
Author contributions: R.M.B. and S.D.P. designed research; R.M.B., B.J.R., and S.D.P. per-
formed research; R.M.B., B.J.R., and S.D.P. analyzed data; and R.M.B., B.J.R., and S.D.P.
wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. V.F.R. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: rbirn@wisc.edu or seth.pollak@wisc.
edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1708791114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1708791114
PNAS
|
December 19, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 51
|
13549–13554
NEUROSCIENCE
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 was on the screen. If the button was pressed during the target,
the participant either won money or avoided losing money; a
press too early or late resulted in no win or a loss. Feedback
(win–loss) was provided after the response. The duration of the
target was dynamically adjusted for each trial based on the
performance of prior trials so that each participant maintained a
success (hit) rate of 67% for each cue (Fig. 1). This task allowed
us to dissociate the anticipation and motivation to work toward a
reward (or away from a loss) from the response to actually ex-
periencing a reward or loss. In this manner, the present experi-
ment tests whether alterations in how individuals process
potential rewards or losses could explain the increased pro-
pensity of individuals who have experienced high childhood
stress to engage in frequent maladaptive behaviors.
We sought to isolate various stages of reward processing be-
cause prior animal and human studies suggest that stress exposure
may differentially affect the anticipation of, versus the response to,
rewards and losses. For example, marmosets that experienced early
maternal deprivation showed reduced motivation to obtain a re-
ward, but no alterations in their consummatory behavior (11). This
type of dissociation is consistent with the theory that reward-
related brain activation consists of multiple processes. One pro-
cess, an incentive salience or motivational process, is critical during
the anticipation of a reward (or loss) and reflects an individual
“wanting” an outcome. The other process, a later hedonic response
to reward (or loss), is reflective of “liking” an outcome (12). We
reasoned that brain activity during the anticipation of potential
rewards and losses would index the individual’s ability to effec-
tively use environmental cues to guide subsequent successful be-
havioral choices. In contrast, brain activity in response to receipt
of a reward or loss could be critical to subsequent learning in
anticipation of future choices. There is increasing evidence that
individuals who have experienced high levels of childhood stress
exposure have altered responses to the actual receipt of rewards
(13). Furthermore, maladaptive risk-taking behavior (and, by
implication, poor decision making) is associated with deficits in
both the ability to process potential rewards and the ability to
anticipate potential losses (14–16). For these reasons, we sepa-
rately evaluated anticipation and receipt of both rewards and
losses.
We hypothesized that individuals who had very high levels of
early childhood adversity would show abnormalities in process-
ing the initial cues signaling potential reward and loss. More
specifically, based on prior studies, we hypothesized that indi-
viduals with high levels of early childhood adversity would show
decreased activation in reward-related brain areas following cues
signaling potential rewards and less activation following cues that
could warn them of potential losses (13, 17). We also planned on
examining how these individuals process the receipt of a reward
or a loss. Reward processes are associated with a network of
regions that include the ventral and dorsal striatum of the basal
ganglia (including the nucleus accumbens, putamen, and globus
pallidus), the thalamus, and the insula; therefore, we examined
neural activation of these regions. To better understand possible
links between brain activity and behavior, we also tested these
participants on behavioral tasks assessing decision making and
queried their daily risk-taking behaviors. Our hypothesis was that
reduced activation during the anticipation of potential rewards
and losses (a fundamental aspect of reward processing assessed
by our neuroimaging task) would be correlated with poorer
reward-related decision making in a laboratory gambling task
and increased maladaptive risk-taking behaviors in these indi-
viduals’ everyday lives. Finally, we examined whether childhood
experiences accounted for any resulting patterns of behavior above
and beyond measures of participants’ current levels of stress
in adulthood.
Results
Is Early Life Stress Associated with Altered Behavior in Reward-
Motivated Tasks? We began by confirming that behavioral as-
pects of decision making are associated with childhood stress
exposure. To do so, we administered the Cambridge Gambling
Task (CGT; Cambridge Cognition Ltd.), a well-validated mea-
sure of risk taking in the context of decision making. In this task,
participants are presented with a row of 10 red and blue boxes.
The ratio of red to blue boxes varies for each trial (e.g., four blue
boxes and six red boxes or three blue boxes and seven red boxes,
etc.). The participant must guess whether a yellow token is hidden
in a red box or a blue box. Participants select a proportion of their
points to gamble based on their confidence about the location of
the hidden token. The points that can be bet are presented alter-
nately in ascending and descending orders; the reaction time dif-
ference between these two conditions can then be compared to
determine the patience that the participant has in placing a higher-
or lower-value bet. We found that individuals with higher levels of
early life stress were more averse to waiting to place their bets,
making their decisions about how much money to bet more quickly
than those who had less childhood stress (P < 0.01). Those who
had more stressful childhoods also made poorer decisions com-
pared with the individuals with low childhood stress exposure;
those with high child stress exposure chose targets that had a lower
likelihood of winning (P < 0.05; this variable is called “Quality of
Decision Making” in the Cambridge Gambling Task). Of most rel-
evance to the hypotheses being tested here, individuals who ex-
perienced high child stress exposure had difficulty adjusting their
subsequent behavior as they accumulated more experience and
feedback during the task. Specifically, even after receiving more
information about risk through previous experiences of losing in the
task, those who had experienced high childhood stress continued to
place large bets on trials with high probabilities of loss (P < 0.05;
this variable is called “Risk Adjustment” in the Cambridge Gam-
bling Task). In contrast, individuals who had lower levels of child-
hood stress benefited more from their experiences and began to
place lower bets on trials with high probability of loss. Values for
these variables are presented in SI Appendix, Fig. S1.
In sum, individuals who had experienced high levels of child-
hood stress exposure made poor decisions with regard to risk
taking compared with individuals with lower early stress expo-
sure, and those with high early life stress exposure appeared
unable to effectively learn from loss trials to improve their sub-
sequent risk assessments.
Does Brain Activation During Anticipation or Response to Reward–
Loss Account for the Association Between Early Life Stress and Poor
Decision Making? We next sought to better understand why indi-
viduals who experienced early life stress engaged in poor-quality
decision making. First, we examined individuals’ patterns of brain
Fig. 1.
Schematic of the MID task used in this study. Participants were
presented with a cue indicating the amount of potential monetary gain or
loss. A triangle (“TARGET”) briefly appeared on the screen, and the partic-
ipant had to press a button while the triangle was on the screen to win or
avoid losing money. Pressing the button too early or too late resulted in no
win or a loss. Feedback was then provided to indicate success or failure on
that trial.
13550
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1708791114
Birn et al.
 activation on the Monetary Incentive Delay task (8). Fig. 1 depicts
a schematic of the task, and SI Appendix, Fig. S2, shows the re-
gressors used to model the task-related activation.
The anticipation of a reward or loss—the period of time be-
tween the cue and the target, assessed before participants know
whether or not they have gained or lost money—provides a
window into how these individuals use predictive cues from the
environment. Across all participants, the anticipation of a poten-
tial reward versus no reward was associated with greater activation
in numerous brain regions including the caudate, putamen, globus
pallidus, and nucleus accumbens (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). However,
as shown in Fig. 2, individuals who experienced higher levels of
childhood stress showed less brain activation during the anticipa-
tion of potential rewards (compared with no rewards). These
differences (measured by comparing brain activity in the potential
reward condition to the no-reward condition) emerged in the
posterior cingulate/precuneus, middle temporal gyrus, lingual gy-
rus, right middle frontal gyrus, and cerebellum (SI Appendix, Table
S1). Participants with higher levels of childhood stress also dis-
played less brain activity during the anticipation of potential losses
(compared with no losses). Specifically, those with higher child-
hood stress had less activity in the putamen and insula before
losses (Fig. 3) compared with those with lower stress exposure.
Although our primary interest was in how individuals used
predictive cues to guide their behavior, we also examined pat-
terns of activation once participants knew that they had actually
received or lost rewards. Participants who had experienced
higher childhood stress showed greater activation in the left in-
ferior frontal gyrus in response to losses (Fig. 4); these individuals
also had decreased activation when they avoided a loss, observed
in the cingulate gyrus, right precentral gyrus, and right middle
temporal gyrus. No significant correlations with childhood stress
emerged during the response to successfully responding to or
missing a reward trial.
In sum, individuals with high levels of childhood stress expo-
sure failed to fully engage the same neural circuitry as those with
lower levels of childhood stress exposure during the encoding
and processing of cues that signaled potential reward or loss.
After not effectively engaging these predictive cues, those indi-
viduals who experienced high levels of childhood stress displayed
higher levels of neural activation when they did in fact lose.
To better understand how the neural processing of reward–
punishment cues was related to overt behavior, we compared
fMRI data with the individuals’ performance on the laboratory
gambling task. This allowed us to test whether the neural mea-
sures of reward and loss processing were related to the behav-
ioral measures of the quality of the participants’ risk assessment
and decision making. Brain activation during anticipation of
potential loss was associated with successful risk adjustment on
the Cambridge Gambling Task (P < 0.01). Risk adjustment re-
flects an individual’s ability to update their behavior based on
more information from their previous experience. In other words,
the more neural activity that an individual had when processing
cues signaling potential loss, the better improvement they showed
in terms of making good choices on the gambling task. This re-
lationship was most evident in the putamen: Individuals who
showed greater activation of the putamen in response to cues of
potential losses were also more likely to adjust their risk assess-
ment across the experiment. Finally, the overall quality of partic-
ipants’ decision making on the Cambridge Gambling Task (i.e.,
placing bets on the most likely outcome) was related to their brain
responses to cues indicating potential rewards and losses. Both
greater activation in the precuneus, middle temporal gyrus, and
right middle frontal gyrus during the anticipation of rewards and
greater activation of the putamen during the anticipation of potential
losses were associated with better “quality of decision making”
during the laboratory gambling task (P < 0.04). Furthermore,
participants with greater activation in this network of brain areas
during the anticipation of potential rewards and losses in the
fMRI task took significantly less time to place their bet (“delib-
eration time”) in the laboratory gambling task (P < 0.05).
Given these consistent patterns of associations between the
participants’ levels of childhood stress exposure, the behavioral
measures of their decision making on the Cambridge Gambling
Task, and the neural indices of reward–loss processing, we ex-
amined whether these laboratory measures were related to behav-
iors in the participants’ actual daily lives. To do so, we queried
participants about the frequencies with which they engaged in
behaviors such as driving without wearing a seatbelt or not seeking
medical attention for injuries (SI Appendix). As shown in Fig. 5,
participants who had experienced high levels of stress in their
childhoods engaged in more maladaptive risky behaviors as adults
(r = 0.54, P < 0.001). Higher levels of these maladaptive risky
behaviors were associated with less activation of the putamen
during the anticipation of potential losses (r = −0.34, P < 0.03; Fig.
6A) in adulthood. This relationship did not reflect a global level of
less activation among the high childhood stress group, but was
specific to anticipating a potential loss: No significant correlation
was found between individual differences in maladaptive risk-
taking behavior and brain activation during the anticipation or
receipt of rewards, or following an actual loss (Fig. 6B and SI
Appendix, Fig. S12).
We next used a mediation analysis to determine if individual
differences in brain activation during the reward-processing task
accounted for the relationships between childhood stress and
laboratory measures of reward-related decision making. Across
participants, activation in the precuneus during the anticipation
of potential rewards mediated the relationship between childhood
stress exposure and the deliberation time during the laboratory
gambling task (P < 0.04). SI Appendix, Table S2, describes other
brain regions that appear to mediate the relationship between
childhood stress and laboratory tests of behavior, but that fell
below our a priori threshold for significance. Potentially mean-
ingful among these results were that activation of the putamen
during anticipation of potential losses mediated the relationship
between childhood stress and the quality of decision making (P <
0.06) as well as the ability to adjust risk in the laboratory gambling
task (P < 0.06). Finally, we examined whether the measures of
brain activation mediated the relationship between childhood
Fig. 2.
Brain areas where the difference between the anticipation of po-
tential large rewards (+$5) vs. no rewards (+$0) is significantly correlated
with early life stress. Blue regions indicate areas where the brain activation
during the anticipation of potential rewards vs. no rewards is negatively
correlated with early life stress. That is, the participants with higher early life
stress showed lower activation in the precuneus, middle temporal gyrus, and
cerebellum during the anticipation of potential rewards (P < 0.05).
Fig. 3.
Brain areas where the difference between the anticipation of po-
tential large losses (−$5) vs. no loss (−$0) is significantly correlated with early
life stress. Blue regions indicate areas where the brain activation during the
anticipation of potential losses vs. no loss is negatively related to early life
stress. That is, subjects with higher early life stress showed lower activation
in the insula and putamen during the anticipation of potential losses (P < 0.01).
Birn et al.
PNAS
|
December 19, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 51
|
13551
NEUROSCIENCE
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 stress and real-life measures of adult risk-taking behaviors. The
activation in the lingual gyrus and precuneus during the antici-
pation of potential rewards as well as the activation in the left
inferior frontal gyrus during the response to losses significantly
mediated the association between early life stress and real-life
maladaptive risk-taking behaviors (P < 0.04).
Are These Findings Specific to Early Life Stress? The last question
that we sought to address has been one of the most vexing in
studies of the effects of childhood adversity. It is well known that
individuals who have stressful childhoods are likely to encounter
cumulative stressors throughout their lives. For this reason, it is
often difficult to garner data that are informative about the
relative role of early childhood life events. Consistent with the
view that stressful childhoods are associated with stressful adult-
hoods, we observed a correlation between the Youth Life Stress
Interview (YLSI), completed during the participants’ childhoods,
and their reported levels of current life stress when we assessed
them in early adulthood with the University of California at
Los Angeles Life Stress Interview (UCLA LSI) (R2 = 0.28) (SI
Appendix, Fig. S13). To determine the relative roles of stress
early in participants’ lives versus the effects of their current stress
in adulthood, we repeated all of the analyses described above,
substituting the measure of the participants’ current life stress for
the measure of childhood stress. The mediation analyses were no
longer significant, and none of the key relationships between
brain measures and behavior emerged when the measures of
adult stress were used. Activation of the putamen during the
anticipation of losses and activation of the precuneus, middle
occipital cortex, middle frontal gyrus, and middle temporal gyrus
during the anticipation of potential rewards were not significantly
correlated with levels of current life stress; these relationships
held only when based on childhood stress exposure. As expected,
participants current real-life maladaptive risk-taking behaviors
were associated with both childhood stress (P < 0.0003) and
current life stress (P < 0.0001), but the measures of childhood
stress contributed variance above and beyond the measures of
current life stress (P < 0.05).
Discussion
The present experiment sought to test the role of specific mech-
anisms that might account for some of the manifold negative life
outcomes that have been observed in people who experienced high
levels of adversity and stress in their early childhoods. Tradition-
ally, a problem in addressing this question has been the potential
confound of asking adults who are currently experiencing a high
level of life difficulties to retrospectively recall their childhood
experiences. This is because their current contexts or mental states
may cause them to have a negative bias of their lives as children.
Conversely, studying individuals only in childhood cannot address
how these individuals will function in adulthood. Therefore, we
combined these approaches to gain an objective assessment of
stress exposure during childhood and then tested neurocognitive
mechanisms and overt behavior in these same individuals later
in development. By doing so, we observed that individuals who
experienced high levels of childhood stress displayed significant
alterations in fundamental aspects of reward processing com-
pared with those with lower levels of childhood stress. Specifi-
cally, those with very high levels of early life stress were much
slower to make decisions on a laboratory gambling task; yet,
despite spending more time on their choices, those individuals
ended up making poorer decisions. For example, the high-
childhood-stress participants consistently placed large bets on
trials that had a low chance of winning, failed to place large bets
on trials with a good chance of winning, and—perhaps most
importantly—failed to change this behavior after repeated losses. In
addition, these behaviors meaningfully converged with patterns of
brain activity when these individuals were presented with environ-
mental cues signaling potential positive and negative outcomes.
The neuroimaging data revealed that individuals who experi-
enced high levels of childhood stress had reduced activation in a
number of brain areas when they were presented with cues that
could have helped them anticipate future rewards and losses. In
contrast, individuals with lower levels of childhood stress showed
greater neural activation when they were presented with a cue
that signaled the potential for a larger loss; those who experi-
enced higher childhood stress did not show this modulation. One
interpretation of this finding is that extremely high levels of
childhood stress exposure affect development of the mechanisms
that allow individuals to avoid a loss by attending to the mag-
nitude of potential negative consequences. An alternative ex-
planation for our data might be that those with more stressful
childhood experiences have some sort of generalized deficit in
cognitive functioning. But the lower levels of brain activation
that we observed did not occur in all brain areas activated in the
task; rather, group differences were restricted to key brain regions
commonly involved in processing rewards and losses. Moreover,
the high-childhood-stress group performed equivalently to the low-
stress group on neurocognitive tasks not related to decision
making. In addition, individuals with high childhood stress show
greater left inferior frontal activation in response to actually re-
ceiving a loss, suggesting that their difficulties do not stem from an
inability to process or experience rewards and punishments. In-
creased activation within this frontal brain region has been found
in a previous study using the monetary incentive delay task and
was suggested to be associated with altered action-contingent learning
or performance monitoring (18). Another study using a different
gambling task also found increased activation within this region
to be associated with regret and disappointment (19). Therefore,
there is some convergence of findings in this regard.
One further possibility is that a higher level of emotional re-
sponse experienced by individuals with high childhood stress
following a loss may further undermine their ability to learn from
the loss and update their behavior on subsequent events. While
we have no direct measure of participants’ emotional reactions
during the MID task, prior studies using this task have found that
participants have affective reactions to winning and losing money
(e.g., ref. 20). If the increased left inferior frontal gyrus activation
does reflect greater negative emotions (a relationship that we
Fig. 5.
Individual differences in risky behaviors, measured from the Youth
Risk Behavior Survey, are correlated with measures of early life stress
(assessed using the YLSI; P < 0.0003). This effect held even after controlling
for current life stress (assessed using the LSI; P < 0.05).
Fig. 4.
Brain areas where differences in the response to missing the target
on a loss vs. no-loss trial (i.e., response to losing money) is correlated with
early life stress. Yellow/orange regions show brain areas where the activa-
tion during the response to loss vs. no-loss trials is positively correlated with
early life stress. Significantly greater activation was observed in the putamen
and inferior frontal gyrus in subjects with higher early life stress.
13552
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1708791114
Birn et al.
 can only infer), this would be consistent with this view as well. In
other words, both poor initial learning of, and heightened
emotional reactivity to, loss might leave high-stress-exposed in-
dividuals less able to modify and better use the anticipation of
(and motivation to avoid) subsequent potential future losses. It is
also interesting to note that reduced activation of the putamen
when participants were presented with cues about potential fu-
ture losses was associated with the frequency of their real-world
maladaptive risk-taking behaviors and judgments in their daily
lives. This again underscores the importance of the activation
during the anticipation of reward–loss period in guiding indi-
viduals adaptive and maladaptive behavioral choices.
Individuals with low levels of childhood stress showed robust
activation in the posterior precuneus (BA31), middle temporal
gyrus, and middle frontal gyrus during the anticipation of po-
tential rewards compared with no-reward trials, while those with
high childhood stress failed to showed this increased activation in
these regions in rewarded versus nonrewarded trials. Among
other functions, these regions of the precuneus, parietal cortex,
and middle temporal gyrus are involved in visual attention (21,
22). It is difficult to ascribe specific functional roles to individual
regions of detected activation—both because of the challenges of
reverse inference and because brain function typically involves
coordinated networks of activity. However, one possibility is that
individuals with relatively low childhood stress devote more at-
tention to signals of reward, while those with high childhood
stress do not show this attentional modulation. Such a finding
converges with extant studies demonstrating alterations in attention
to emotional cues among young children living in stressful environ-
ments (23). In the present task, differences in attention were man-
ifested more in visuospatial attention regions including the precuneus
and parietal cortex. This may be because the Monetary Incentive
Delay task, which requires rapidly pressing a button when a target
appears, places particularly strong demands on visuospatial attention.
Similarly, individual differences in activation of these networks
were also related to differences in real-world risk-taking behav-
iors. Furthermore, individual differences in the amplitude of this
activation were associated with differences in participants’ ability
to delay their decisions about how much money to bet in the
laboratory “gambling” task. This ability to delay a decision could
be interpreted as impulsivity, but an alternative view is that this
variable reflects differences in the value or importance that an
individual assigns to actually placing a bet. The distinct associ-
ations observed between brain activation and laboratory mea-
sures of reward processing also suggest different pathways by
which increased risk-taking behaviors in the real world emerge,
which are mediated by different brain structures.
Our observed associations between activations in the Monetary
Incentive Delay task and early life stress appear distinct from
patterns that have been observed following acute stress. For
example, Kumar et al. (24) report that in a typical community
sample, acute stress increased activation during the anticipation
of reward versus no-reward trials in the MID task and decreased
the activation during the response to the reward. This is consistent
with prior findings that show opposite effects from acute versus
chronic stress (e.g., acute stress increases incentive-triggered mo-
tivation, while chronic stress abolishes this effect) (25).
Despite much convergence with extant literatures, our findings
differ slightly from a recent report using a similar type of task
(17). Whereas Dillon et al. (17) found reduced striatal activation
during the anticipation of potential reward in participants with
higher life stress, we did not observe significant effects in this
region. Furthermore, we found alterations in both the anticipa-
tion and the response to losses among our high-childhood-stress
participants, while Dillion et al. reported no differences during
these conditions as a function of early stress exposure. In con-
sidering how to reconcile these findings, we observed that Dillon
et al. used a slightly different task. Key differences included:
(i) the hit/miss ratio of these researchers was fixed at 50/50
rather than being tied to the subject’s actual behavior, (ii) they
used a narrower range of monetary gain and losses, and (iii) they
used a smaller amount for the monetary loss relative to the
amount of potential gain, whereas we kept the amount of po-
tential rewards and losses equivalent. For these reasons, it is
possible that the larger loss amounts used in the present exper-
iment resulted in greater salience of these cues for participants,
and thus more brain activation during the anticipation and re-
sponse to those greater losses.
In some ways, it could have been informative to have collected
fMRI measures of individuals’ decision making during childhood
and to have been able to compare these measures over time.
However, such a design would also have limitations. For exam-
ple, young children could not be expected to be able to complete
the same decision-making tasks as adults; therefore, any alter-
ation of these tasks to make them equally appropriate for both
young children and adults could well have major implications for
the types of neural systems activated in a task. Such a design
would also bring up concerns about whether the rewards and
losses used (whether money, points, or prizes) would be expected
to have comparable salience across age. In brief, if we had col-
lected such data during our participants’ childhoods, some issues
could be addressed, but other methodological concerns would
emerge. In future research, it would also be informative to assess
whether the money offered as rewards and losses held different
salience across participants. It may be that $5 meant more to
those with stressful lives compared with those with less stressful
lives. However, if this were the case, we might expect those who
valued the rewards more to devote even greater attention to cues
signaling reward possibilities, and this did not occur.
Finally, it is meaningful that all of the associations reported
here between life stress, brain activation, and reward-related
decision making and behavior—especially the ability to anticipate
and benefit from cues signaling potential rewards and losses—was
accounted for by childhood stress exposure, not by the current
levels of stress in these young adults’ lives. Although it is unlikely
that the relationships between brain and complex social behaviors
would rely on any single mechanism or factor, the ability to dis-
tinguish here between early versus cumulative life stress does help
focus attention on the role of childhood experience in the devel-
opment of these systems.
Conclusions
The present experiment reveals that very high levels of stress
early in development are associated with significant alterations in
reward and loss processing in adulthood. The data reported here
indicate that individuals who experienced very high levels of
stress in their early childhoods appear to have problems as adults
in effectively using cues in the environment that signal rewards
and losses. These data provide a window into understanding how
and why patterns of poor decisions and maladaptive risk-taking
behaviors that are known to create manifold health and social
risks are common among those individuals who experienced very
high levels of child adversity.
Fig. 6.
Across participants, an index of risky behaviors (measured from the
Youth Risk Behavior Survey) is significantly correlated with the activation of
the putamen during the anticipation of potential loss in the MID task (A),
but not with the activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus during the re-
sponse to the loss (B).
Birn et al.
PNAS
|
December 19, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 51
|
13553
NEUROSCIENCE
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 Methods
Participants. Fifty-four individuals ranging in age from 19.0 y to 23.7 y (mean
age: 20.5 y) participated in the current study. Within this group of 54 par-
ticipants, 29 individuals (17 female) were assessed as having had high levels of
stress during early childhood, and 25 individuals (11 female) were assessed as
having had relatively low levels of childhood stress. The current study was
approved by the University of Wisconsin Institutional Review Board, and all
participants provided informed consent. A number of participants had to be
excluded from the data analysis due to claustrophobia, excessive head mo-
tion, or significant mental health issues, resulting in a final group of 42
participants (19 low stress, 23 high stress) for fMRI analysis. For further details,
see SI Appendix.
Procedures. Participants had their life stress measured in our laboratory when
they were children (mean age: 10.2 y) and were recontacted ∼10 y later. They
returned to our laboratory as young adults (mean age: 20.6 y) and under-
went an MRI scan during which they performed a reward-processing (MID)
task. Following the MRI scan, participants had their current life stress re-
evaluated, completed a battery of neuropsychological tests including the
Cambridge Gambling Task, and reported their current risk-taking behaviors.
Behavioral Measures. Childhood stress exposure was assessed using the YLSI, a
semistructured interview using trained interviewers and an independent
team of raters. Current life stress was evaluated using the UCLA LSI (26).
Neuropsychological functioning in reward processing was assessed through
the CGT, a subtest of the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated
Battery (Cambridge Cognition Ltd.). To measure actual risky behaviors in
participants’ daily lives, participants completed a modified version of the
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (27) developed and used by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. These measures are described in greater
detail in SI Appendix.
fMRI Tasks. Brain activation related to reward processing was assessed using
an MID task (8, 9). This task allows separate measurement of both the an-
ticipation of reward or loss and the response to the receipt of reward–loss. A
schematic of the paradigm is presented in Fig. 1. This task has been shown to
reliably activate reward-processing regions (ventral striatum, insula, thalamus,
medial prefrontal cortex) and allows the dissociation of reward anticipation
and outcome.
MRI Data Acquisition. A series of structural and functional brain images was
acquired on a 3T General Electric MR750 MRI scanner using an eight-channel
receive-only radiofrequency head coil (General Electric Medical Systems).
fMRI Task Analyses. All MRI data analyses were performed using the Analysis
of Functional NeuroImages analysis package (28), unless otherwise specified.
Activation amplitudes were estimated for the anticipation of gains, losses, or
no gains or losses, as well as the response to success or failure in hitting the
target. Differences in activation as a function of ELS were assessed on a
voxel-wise level using a t test including either (i) the YLSI scores from the
interview administered when the participants were children or (ii) the LSI
scores from the interview conducted in young adulthood on the same day as
the scanning session. Voxel-wise t tests were corrected for multiple com-
parisons by estimating the spatial autocorrelation function from the pre-
processed fMRI data and setting a minimum cluster-size threshold based on
a Monte Carlo simulation that incorporates this estimated autocorrelation
function (29, 30).
Mediation Analysis. We used a standard multivariate analytic framework (31)
to test whether the relationship between ELS and risk taking, as measured
by the CGT, is statistically mediated by the brain’s activation during either
the anticipation or the receipt of rewards and losses, as measured by the
MID task. Significance of mediation was assessed using the Causal Mediation
Analysis package in R, using a nonparametric bootstrap resampling with 5,000
iterations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Brian Knutson for providing us with the
Monetary Incentive Delay task scripts; Joanna Swinarska, Alex Rokni, and
Anna Bechner for assistance; and the individuals who agreed to participate
in this study for their generous participation. This work was supported by
National Institute of Mental Health Grants MH61285 and MH68858 (to
S.D.P.) and by a core grant to the Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
Research Center at the Waisman Center from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (Grant P30-
HD03352).
1. Shonkoff JP, Garner AS; Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family
Health; Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption, and Dependent Care; Section on
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics (2012) The lifelong effects of early child-
hood adversity and toxic stress. Pediatrics 129:e232–e246.
2. Norman RE, et al. (2012) The long-term health consequences of child physical abuse,
emotional abuse, and neglect: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 9:
e1001349.
3. Pechtel P, Pizzagalli DA (2011) Effects of early life stress on cognitive and affective
function: An integrated review of human literature. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 214:
55–70.
4. Evans GW, Li D, Whipple SS (2013) Cumulative risk and child development. Psychol
Bull 139:1342–1396.
5. Cabib S, Puglisi-Allegra S (1996) Stress, depression and the mesolimbic dopamine
system. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 128:331–342.
6. Hollon NG, Burgeno LM, Phillips PE (2015) Stress effects on the neural substrates of
motivated behavior. Nat Neurosci 18:1405–1412.
7. Matthews K, Robbins TW (2003) Early experience as a determinant of adult behav-
ioural responses to reward: The effects of repeated maternal separation in the rat.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 27:45–55.
8. Knutson B, Fong GW, Adams CM, Varner JL, Hommer D (2001) Dissociation of reward
anticipation and outcome with event-related fMRI. Neuroreport 12:3683–3687.
9. Knutson B, Westdorp A, Kaiser E, Hommer D (2000) FMRI visualization of brain ac-
tivity during a monetary incentive delay task. Neuroimage 12:20–27.
10. Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW, Hommer D (2001) Anticipation of increasing
monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci 21:RC159.
11. Pryce CR, Dettling AC, Spengler M, Schnell CR, Feldon J (2004) Deprivation of par-
enting disrupts development of homeostatic and reward systems in marmoset mon-
key offspring. Biol Psychiatry 56:72–79.
12. Berridge KC, Robinson TE (2016) Liking, wanting, and the incentive-sensitization
theory of addiction. Am Psychol 71:670–679.
13. Boecker R, et al. (2014) Impact of early life adversity on reward processing in young
adults: EEG-fMRI results from a prospective study over 25 years. PLoS One 9:e104185.
14. Balodis IM, et al. (2012) Diminished frontostriatal activity during processing of
monetary rewards and losses in pathological gambling. Biol Psychiatry 71:749–757.
15. Choi JS, et al. (2012) Altered brain activity during reward anticipation in pathological
gambling and obsessive-compulsive disorder. PLoS One 7:e45938.
16. Harms MB, Shannon Bowen KE, Hanson JL, Pollak SD (October 19, 2017) Instrumental
learning and cognitive flexibility processes are impaired in children exposed to early
life stress. Dev Sci, 10.1111/desc.12596.
17. Dillon DG, et al. (2009) Childhood adversity is associated with left basal ganglia
dysfunction during reward anticipation in adulthood. Biol Psychiatry 66:206–213.
18. Enzi B, et al. (2015) Alterations of monetary reward and punishment processing in
chronic cannabis users: An fMRI study. PLoS One 10:e0119150.
19. Chua HF, Gonzalez R, Taylor SF, Welsh RC, Liberzon I (2009) Decision-related loss:
Regret and disappointment. Neuroimage 47:2031–2040.
20. Knutson B, Greer SM (2008) Anticipatory affect: Neural correlates and consequences
for choice. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:3771–3786.
21. Kanwisher N, Wojciulik E (2000) Visual attention: Insights from brain imaging. Nat
Rev Neurosci 1:91–100.
22. Cavanna AE, Trimble MR (2006) The precuneus: A review of its functional anatomy
and behavioural correlates. Brain 129:564–583.
23. Pollak SD (2015) Multilevel developmental approaches to understanding the effects
of child maltreatment: Recent advances and future challenges. Dev Psychopathol 27:
1387–1397.
24. Kumar P, et al. (2014) Differential effects of acute stress on anticipatory and con-
summatory phases of reward processing. Neurosci 266:1–12.
25. Lemos JC, et al. (2012) Severe stress switches CRF action in the nucleus accumbens
from appetitive to aversive. Nature 490:402–406.
26. Hammen C, et al. (1987) Children of depressed mothers: Maternal strain and symptom
predictors of dysfunction. J Abnorm Psychol 96:190–198.
27. Eaton DK, et al.; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2012) Youth risk
behavior surveillance United States, 2011. MMWR Surveill Summ 61:1–162.
28. Cox RW (1996) AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic
resonance neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 29:162–173.
29. Cox RW, Chen G, Glen DR, Reynolds RC, Taylor PA (2017) fMRI clustering and false-
positive rates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114:E3370–E3371.
30. Cox RW, Chen G, Glen DR, Reynolds RC, Taylor PA (2017) fMRI clustering in AFNI:
False-positive rates redux. Brain Connect 7:152–171.
31. MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, Sheets V (2002) A comparison
of methods to test mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychol Methods
7:83–104.
13554
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1708791114
Birn et al.
