 Complex systems approach for sports injuries:
moving from risk factor identification to injury
pattern recognition—narrative review
and new concept
N F N Bittencourt,1 W H Meeuwisse,2 L D Mendonça,3 A Nettel-Aguirre,4
J M Ocarino,5 S T Fonseca5
1Physical Therapy Department,
Minas Tenis Clube and Uni-BH
University, Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil
2Sport Injury Prevention
Research Centre, Faculty of
Kinesiology, University of
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
3Physical Therapy Department,
Universidade dos Vales do
Jequitinhonha e Mucuri, Minas
Gerais, Diamantina, Brazil
4Departments of Paediatrics
and Community Health
Sciences, University of Calgary,
Alberta, Canada
5Graduate Program in
Rehabilitation Science, Physical
Therapy Department,
Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Minas Gerais,
Diamantina, Brazil
Correspondence to
Dr ST Fonseca, Graduate
Program in Rehabilitation
Science, Physical Therapy
Department, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais,
Minas Gerais, Avenida
Presidênte Antônio Carlos,
6627—Pampulha, Belo
Horizonte—MG 31270-901,
Brazil; sfonseca@ufmg.br
Accepted 18 June 2016
Published Online First
22 July 2016
To cite: Bittencourt NFN,
Meeuwisse WH,
Mendonça LD, et al. Br J
Sports Med 2016;50:1309–
1314.
ABSTRACT
Injury prediction is one of the most challenging issues in
sports and a key component for injury prevention. Sports
injuries aetiology investigations have assumed a
reductionist view in which a phenomenon has been
simplified into units and analysed as the sum of its basic
parts and causality has been seen in a linear and
unidirectional way. This reductionist approach relies on
correlation and regression analyses and, despite the vast
effort to predict sports injuries, it has been limited in its
ability to successfully identify predictive factors. The
majority of human health conditions are complex. In this
sense, the multifactorial complex nature of sports injuries
arises not from the linear interaction between isolated
and predictive factors, but from the complex interaction
among a web of determinants. Thus, the aim of this
conceptual paper was to propose a complex system
model for sports injuries and to demonstrate how the
implementation of complex system thinking may allow us
to better address the complex nature of the sports
injuries aetiology. According to this model, we should
identify features that are hallmarks of complex systems,
such as the pattern of relationships (interactions) among
determinants, the regularities (profiles) that
simultaneously characterise and constrain the
phenomenon and the emerging pattern that arises from
the complex web of determinants. In sports practice, this
emerging pattern may be related to injury occurrence or
adaptation. This novel view of preventive intervention
relies on the identification of regularities or risk profile,
moving from risk factors to risk pattern recognition.
INTRODUCTION
Injury prediction is one of the most challenging
issues in sports and a key component for injury
prevention, since the successful identification of
injury predictors forms the basis for effective pre-
ventive measures.1 Traditionally, scientific investiga-
tions have assumed a reductionist view in an
attempt to understand sports injuries. According to
this approach, the phenomenon (injury) has been
reduced into units and explained by rational deduc-
tion.2 3 The sports injury literature has revealed
important injury predictors by means of typical sta-
tistics tools, such as logistic regression. However,
for some injuries (eg, hamstring strain and patellar
tendinopathy (PT)), these techniques have not yet
yielded consistent identification of risk factors.4 5
Unfortunately, these inconsistencies show that the
majority
of
the
human
health
conditions
are
complex. In this sense, we need a broader approach
to better understand the complex relationships
between risk factors/predictors and injuries.2–4 6–8
To address this issue, Meeuwisse et al9 developed
a dynamic, recursive model for risk and causes of
sports injuries, considering that the injury has a
non-linear behavior. This model brought many
advances to the understanding of sports injuries
aetiology, because it assumes that there may be
recurrent changes in susceptibility to injury along
the participation in sports, and the primary risk
factors exposure can produce adaptations and con-
tinuously change the risk. Despite the recognition
of the non-linear and recursive characteristics of
sports injuries, the model described by Meeuwisse
et al9 was not sufficient to address the complex
interactions among several factors.
The multifactorial and complex nature of sports
injuries arises not from the linear combination of
isolated and predictive factors, but from the inter-
action among what Philippe and Mansi8 called ‘the
web of determinants’. These determinants may be
linked to each other in a non-linear manner, in the
sense that small changes in a few determinants can
lead to large and, sometimes, unexpected conse-
quences.6 10 W
e propose that, to fully uncover this
complex
nature
of
sports
injury
aetiology,
a
complex
systems
approach
is
necessary.
This
approach rests on identifying interactions and clari-
fying how these interactions contribute to the
emergence of sports injuries.10 11 In addition, it
allows seeking regularities (see explanation in the
characteristics of a complex system section), by
means of pattern recognition techniques,12 that
enable the identification of the risk profile for an
athlete or group. Thus, the aim is to introduce a
complex system model for sports injuries and to
demonstrate how the implementation of complex
system thinking may allow us to better address the
dynamic nature of the sports injuries aetiology.
This conceptual paper was developed on the
basis of reflections on the difficulties related to
sports injuries prediction and how different areas
are trying to solve similar problems. These reflec-
tions and subsequent exhaustive literature review
led to several discussions among the authors that
resulted in this work. To facilitate the understand-
ing of our proposition, this paper is organised into
six sections: introduction; a paradigm shift: from
reductionism to complexity describing the reduc-
tionist and complexity paradigms; characteristics of
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
1 of 7
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 a complex system; a complex model for sports injury which
assumes sports injury is an emergent phenomenon that arises
from interactions within a web of determinants; methodological
implications of using a complex systems approach and applying
a complex model for sports injury.
A PARADIGM SHIFT: FROM REDUCTIONISM TO
COMPLEXITY
The simplification of complex problems into basic units is the
classical science method of analysis in the reductionism para-
digm.2 4 8 This approach has focused on identifying isolated
factors that are frequently assumed as causes of injuries or dis-
eases.8 12 In many aspects, this has been a successful approach,
such as establishing a strong causal connection between smoking
and lung cancer.13 Reductionism has thus helped identify some
apparently existing linear relationships.8 Linearity assumes that
the outcome is somehow related to the sum of the system’s units
and that it can be predicted (although subject to random errors)
by looking for these direct relationships.7 8 However, this linear
association characterises a singular circumstance of relationship:
the closer the exposure is to the end point, the greater is its
impact.8 A typical example in sports injury is the identification of
dynamic knee valgus (DKV) as a risk factor for ACL rupture.14 It
has been identified that female athletes who demonstrated knee
valgus during landing, 50 ms after initial contact, are five times
more prone to injuring their ACL than male athletes (relative risk
(RR)=5.3, p=0.002).15 Since the scales we use measure the trig-
gering factors that are proximal to end point outcome, such
linear relationships can be revealed.8 The concern here is that
this relationship represents only a segment of the total picture.8
The picture is different when the initial event (exposure) is
distant or when there are several factors at multiple levels (bio-
mechanical, behavioural, physiological, etc) that can influence
each other. For instance, restriction in ankle dorsiflexion range
of motion (ROM) and training load are found to be risk factors
(although inconsistent) for PT
.5 However, in some cases,
restricted ankle dorsiflexion ROM only will be relevant in the
presence of high training load. This last risk factor will influence
the former because high frequency of vertical jump increases the
total mechanical energy reaching the tissues, which should be
dissipated by the hip, knee and ankle. In the presence of
restricted ankle dorsiflexion ROM, this energy may not be pro-
perly dissipated at the ankle and could overload the patellar
tendon.16 Additionally, the amount of training load could be
modulated by the excessive demands of external sponsors or
coaches’ training philosophy. This chain of possible related
events establishes a complex web of injury determinants, which
requires a complexity approach to be better understood.8
Historically, complexity thinking was influenced by develop-
ments in several areas, such as information theory, cybernetics
and systems theory, and, in turn, has been adopted by many dis-
ciplines.6 10 17–20 Biology and medicine recognise that living
organisms are understood as complex systems characterised by
multiple
interactions
among
units,
self-organisation,
non-
linearity and emergent properties.6 21 More recently, a complex
systems approach has been used in epidemiology to improve the
knowledge about multilevel causes of health and diseases.12
Prediction of complex problems, such as financial crises,20 dis-
eases,12 21 athlete high performance22 and, potentially, sports
injury should involve the identification of the complex web of
determinants. In sports, the focus should be on identifying the
stable (sometimes complex) relationships among injury determi-
nants that support the emergence of injuries and not on the con-
tribution of isolated factors.11 W
e need to be aware that when we
reduce a complex problem into its units, the relationships are
neglected and prediction may not be possible.11 23 Sports injury
will be better understood if we recognise the frequent patterns of
interaction among multilevel risk factors instead of focusing on
identifying
risk
factor
at
the
units
level.11
Accordingly,
Mendiguchia et al,4 Quatman et al2 and Hulme and Finch11 have
proposed a paradigm shift in sports injury research. These
authors emphasised that the literature is limited to consistently
identifying predictive factors, because current research methods
based on unidirectional and analytical approaches neglect the
multifactorial and complex conditions for sports injuries emer-
gence.11 The lack of proper methodological approaches limits
our ability to identify effective preventive strategies, as we fre-
quently fail to properly recognize the web of injuries determi-
nants. Consequently, some injuries rates, such as hamstring
strain, have not improved over the past three decades.24
The complexity paradigm contributes to examining sports
injury in terms of relationships rather than factors. However, com-
plexity paradigm should not completely replace reductionism.11 12
It is possible to argue that complexity paradigm is an advance
from reductionism. Although linear approaches may facilitate the
identification of triggering factors that are close to the sports
injury mechanism, they fail to recognise the inherent non-linearity
of biological processes that are related to sports injuries. This inter-
relationship explains why the search for cause–effect relationships
will always be problematic. Given the complexity of the sports
injuries process, the future of aetiology research must advance
towards the integrated view of the complex systems approach.
CHARACTERISTICS OF A COMPLEX SYSTEM
The understanding about interactions is the cornerstone of the
complex systems approach. von Bertalanfly25 has defined a
complex system as a whole with units (parts) that interact with
each other. However, according to Rosen,26 these interactions
are complex in the sense that the participating units are modified
by the occurring interactions or due to the fact that new and
unpredictable units emerge during the process. When units A
and B interact, the behaviour of A in interaction with B is differ-
ent from the behaviour of A alone.25 26 Regarding sports injuries,
the athlete should be analysed as a complex system and the
research focus would be on how relationships between units (ie,
biomechanical, behavioural, physiological and psychological)
give rise to the collective behaviour of the athlete and how the
athlete interacts and forms stable relationships (regularities) with
his/her environment.
Complex systems are dynamic, open systems with inherent
non-linearity due to the existence of recursive loops and complex
interactions among units, which spontaneously organise them-
selves to generate emerging properties that cannot be deduced
solely from their original properties (self-organisation).3 10 Such
systems are posed with some level of uncertainty as the multiple
levels and scales (size and time) of the interacting units are fre-
quently unknown or not directly observable.17 These character-
istics are explained in more detail below.
Open system
In physics, all living organisms are open systems, as they
exchange matter and energy with the environment, without
losing their identity.7 27 In contrast, a system is closed if the
influence of the environment on it can be ignored, as no matter
or energy enters or leaves the system.27 To better distinguish
closed and open systems, the concept of equifinality must be
introduced.27 Equifinality means that there are many diverse
ways in which the same emergent outcome can be generated.27
2 of 7
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 This type of behaviour is frequently seen in sports injuries, in
which different relations among risk factors produce the same
injury (emergent outcome; see example in applying complex
model for sports injury section). Open systems fully interact
with the environment and evolve over time, producing multiple
pathways to similar outcomes.7
Inherent non-linearity
Complex systems exhibit non-linear behaviours that are uncer-
tainly related to the input provided.3 7 A linear system is charac-
terised by the superposition principle. This principle implies
that the observed final system’s global behaviour is directly
related to the sum of the contribution of its individual parts.7 8
However, the superposition principle cannot be applied to non-
linear systems, because inputs are not proportional to the
output.7 19 T
ypically, large changes in one variable do not neces-
sarily produce a large effect on the outcome. Conversely, small
changes may produce a large and sometimes unexpected effect
on the outcome.19 The process related to abrupt changes in the
system’s configuration that is observed in non-linear systems is
termed ‘emergence’.6 The emergent properties of a complex
system are the result of interactions among units and are not
equivalent to units themselves.7 28
Injury prediction in sports is less straightforward and fre-
quently
dependent
on
dose–response
relationships.
For
example: DKV (high frontal plane knee angle) has been asso-
ciated with hip abductor weakness.29 30 In a linear view, one
could assume that the weaker the hip abductors, the larger the
DKV
. However, evidence has shown a non-linear relationship
between hip muscle strength and DKV
.30 When participants
have high hip internal rotation stiffness (as in the case of hip
retroversion), even a high strength level of the hip abductor is
not capable of preventing DKV
.30 There are several examples in
the sports literature in which a variable is important but not
determinant for injury occurrence.31–33 Therefore, the non-
linear nature of sports injury precludes us from finding the
expected relationships among predictors and outcomes.
Recursive loop
Another essential characteristic of a complex system is the exist-
ence of a recursive loop (feedback), in which the output is
reprocessed
and
becomes
new
input
for
the
system.7
9
Interacting units in a system create overall patterns, and these
overall patterns in turn cause the interacting units to change or
adapt.20 26 For example, there is a recursive loop among the
hypothalamus, pituitary and ovary. The hypothalamus releases a
gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates the pituitary
gland to produce the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinising hormone (LH). The FSH and LH in turn stimulate
the ovary, resulting in the production of female hormones,
which further controls the secretion by the hypothalamus and
pituitary. The hypothalamus, pituitary and ovary interactions
are so intricate that any dysfunctional activity at any level in the
recursive loop can result in menstrual dysfunction.34 This
‘global to local’ recursive loop indicates that the global pattern
emerges from interactions among local units, and this global
pattern influences and constrains the local units’ interactions
(eg, the enslaving principle described by Haken28). Recognising
the existence of recursive loops should remind us that, after an
injury occurrence, the system might change in an unpredictable
way.7 9 In this case, the previous states of the so-called injury
predictors are changed as to no longer exhibit the same relation-
ship to the outcome or even be present at all.
Self-organisation (regularities and emerging patterns)
The non-linear interactions among individual units of a system
result in the emergence of properties that could not be predicted
on the basis of the behaviour of the individual units alone.6 7 19
These emergent properties are the result of a process called
self-organisation, which is governed by universal laws.28 These
universal laws, or rules, enable self-organisation, creating spon-
taneous occurrence of order within the system.7 28 Owing to
self-organisation, the overall behaviour of the system is not
proportional to the individual behaviour of the units, as it is
through the units’ interactions (cooperation) that the new
pattern is produced.7
28 When certain critical values of the
system’s units are reached, specific configurations of the interact-
ing units will produce observable regularities. In sports injuries,
these regularities are regularly occurring patterns that are related
to the final emerging outcome. Observed regularities could be
classified as an injury risk or protective profile.
In complex systems, since the existing units (risk factors) and
their interactions are frequently unknown and their direct rela-
tionship with the outcome is non-existent (or weak),33 the only
means to infer system dynamics is by means of observing its
regularities (risk profile). As with the weather, the occurrence of
certain regularities may help scientists to predict the occurrence
of certain events. For example, the irregularly occurring El Niño
phenomenon is a kind of regularity (identified as a specific vari-
ation in sea surface temperature) that is related to the occur-
rence of floods and droughts in many regions. In sports, the
complex nature of the mechanisms involved with the emergence
of a given injury can be compressed into the simpler relation-
ship between the observable regularity and the emerging
outcome (eg, injury or adaptation).
Uncertainty
In the emergence of many phenomena, prediction cannot be
made by means of the identification of the relationship between
cause and effect.8 In those instances, prediction relies only on
the identification of the probability of the occurrence of emer-
ging phenomena. This uncertainty in the behaviour of complex
systems is the result of self-organisation and existence of non-
linear relationships within the system that lead to many path-
ways to environmental adaptation.3 35 Despite the lack of full
predictability, some approaches can be used to reduce uncer-
tainty, such as identifying recurring patterns that consider
context and history.3 7 35 Relatively simple patterns have been
shown in biological systems (such as beat-to-beat variation in
heart rate), social systems (nurse’s staffing pattern on a hospital
ward) and financial markets (exchange rates) that are related to
the outcome of interest.3 19 20
The aforementioned characteristics, such as open system, non-
linearity,
recursive
loop,
self-organisation
and
uncertainty,
support the understanding of sports injury as a complex phe-
nomenon. To facilitate this understanding, a complex model for
sports injury is required.
A COMPLEX MODEL FOR SPORTS INJURY
W
e propose an alternative model for sports injury that might
serve as a new perspective for understanding injury aetiology.
This model is graphically represented in figure 1. Interacting
units of a complex system result in a web of determinants, in
which the units interact with each other in unpredictable and
unplanned ways (frequently unknown).7 8 These complex inter-
actions arise from the system’s own history and form observable
regularities (risk or protective profile), which in turn emerge as
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
3 of 7
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 a global pattern (injury or adaptation). This emerging pattern
constrains the
interactions
among
the
system’s
units
(the
model’s recursive loops) and will dynamically shape the existing
interactions. In this case, the web of determinants may change
according to the outcome they produce.
Complexity requires accepting some level of uncertainty
(despite a possible determinism) in regard to the occurrence of
the phenomena.17 As in a weather forecast, prediction is improv-
ing over time, but errors are always a possibility. To face this
uncertainty problem, this paper proposes that sports injury
research needs to concentrate on analysing the observable regular-
ities that arise from the existing simple and complex interactions
among the elements of the web of determinants and not the units
themselves (risk factors). Consequently, to identify the overall
functioning of a system in relation to its principles and improve
prediction, it is necessary to apply complex system methods.
METHODOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS OF USING A COMPLEX
SYSTEMS APPROACH
Improvements in sports injuries prediction, as well as in preven-
tion, depend on coherence among the phenomena of interest
(sports injuries as an emergent event), philosophical paradigm
(complexity) and methods of analysis. In this sense, non-linear
and complex system approaches should be explored. At the meth-
odological level, complexity assumes that prediction relies on
probability and not on straightforward causality (even in deter-
ministic systems, the lack of knowledge about the initial conditions
of the existing elements leads to a great degree of uncertainty).
T
o improve our prediction capability, we need to capture stable
interactions among units (risk factors) and the observable regular-
ities (profiles). Economists have considered characteristics of
individuals and of global societal dynamics to show how different
stock market trading strategies can emerge from simple rules.20
Likewise, meteorologists have been using complex system compu-
tation technics to improve the weather forecast.36
Advances in predicting complex problems, such as financial
crises and sports performance,20 22 37 have been possible by
using classification methods in the statistical learning arena like
neural networks (eg, Self-Organizing Feature Maps (SOFM)).38
Pfeiffer and Hohmann22 found that sports talent development
outcome was better predicted by means of the non-linear
method of neural network (SOFM) than by linear methods such
as discriminant analysis (DA). Percentages of total correctly pre-
dicted cases by SOFM were 87.9% vs 69% by DA. The authors
highlighted that neural networks are able to recognise global pat-
terns of different talent development and that SOFM are worth-
while tools in the analysis of non-linear sports talent processes.22
In
medicine,
the
array
of
recursive
partitioning
based
methods such as classification and regression trees (CART),
random forests and boosting, which allow non-linear interac-
tions among predictors, as well as depict and make use of these
interactions, have been successful in identifying the subset of
risk and predictive factors to explain different outcomes.30 39 40
Bittencourt et al30 have used CART to predict high frontal
plane knee angle (DKV) during landing from a vertical jump.30
They have shown that the contribution of the shank-forefoot
varus alignment to the occurrence of high frontal knee angle
depended on the presence of hip abductor weakness. Varus
alignment and abductor weakness were defined in terms of
cut-off points, in the sense that having values above or below
the cut-offs did not increase or decrease the probability of the
occurrence of DKV (non-linearity).30 Recently, an agent-based
model (ABMs) has been used in epidemiology to capture
complex relationships not identified by logistic regression.41
Although these methods are not commonly introduced in statis-
tical courses, computer programs are becoming easily available
on the internet. For example, the software NetLogo (written in
java) allows modelling ABMs, by means of simple commands,
and enables the construction of webs of interrelated units.42 W
e
proposed that these statistical models should be adopted in
sports science to investigate processes involving interactions
among different predictors and identify dynamic interactions,
with the final purpose of prediction.
Another statistical approach that might be an appropriate can-
didate to reveal possible interacting predictors of sports injury is
machine/statistical
learning.
Statistical
learning
has
been
expressed as the overlapping area of statistics, computational
data mining, artificial intelligence and engineering.38 Much of
its use has been in the area of supervised learning, in which an
observed outcome is investigated by looking at the patterns of
other factors, in an attempt to learn which pattern leads to that
specific outcome. Many of the statistical learning tools do not
necessarily yield only one coefficient or rate of change for one
specific predictor. For example, in the case of CART
, a predictor
may play a role in several splits of different branches, depending
on the other predictors higher up in the tree.30
Up
to
the
recent
development
of
Bayesian
Additive
Regression Trees,43 the usual expected and idolised ‘p value’
that accompanies the regression models, or any other form of
inferential confidence or probability value on point estimates, is
not part of the output obtained from recursive partitioning
models. Owing to these two main issues, the paradigm has to be
challenged to move into the arena of prediction rather than on
examining the impact of a factor and on relying on other mea-
sures of ‘success’ such as misclassification rates. Statistical
Figure 1
Complex model for sports injury. The group of variables at
the bottom makes up the web of determinants, which is composed of
contributing units with different weights. Variables circled by darker
lines have more interactions than variables circled by lighter lines and
exert a greater influence on the outcome. Dotted lines represent a
weak interaction and thick lines represent a strong interaction between
variables. Arrows indicate the relationship between the observable
regularities, which captures the risk/protective profile, and the
emerging outcome (figure adapted from ref. 47).
4 of 7
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 learning tools may be more accurate in predictions than the
usual linear models, and the amount of assumptions could be
lessened.38 Accordingly, we need to ask ourselves, without
taking away the epidemiological importance of identifying risk
factors and their potential modifiability, whether we are aiming
at prediction or solely at finding relationships. In order to catch
patterns and be able to prevent, we need to predict.
Apart from statistical issues, we also have to methodologically
incorporate the complex system thinking. Meeuwisse et al9
highlighted the dynamic nature of risk factors, as the pattern of
change in one variable (ie, change of strength during a season)
could influence injury risk more than its absolute value in one
point in time. Such a concept requires examining risk factor
change longitudinally over a period of time, in order to incorp-
orate the history of the event. For this reason, study designs and
statistical analyses must consider the existence of complex inter-
actions and changing risks. In practice, assessing risk profile
should occur along the season, not only in the preseason, and
the analyses should focus on the changing web of determinants
that lead to an emergent injury.
APPLYING COMPLEX MODEL FOR SPORTS INJURY
Sports injury is a complex emergent phenomenon11 and needs
to be seen through a ‘lens of complexity’. In this case, we
should seek to identify features that are present in complex
systems: (1) the pattern of relationships (interactions) between
units (determinants); (2) the regularities (profiles) that simultan-
eously characterise and constrain the phenomenon and (3) the
emerging pattern that arises from the complex web of determi-
nants. The sports injuries literature has long sought for some of
these features. However, the existing information about these
features is still not organised according to a complex system
framework that allows us to have some insights on injury predic-
tion (despite its limitations).
To illustrate the complexity, let us consider the example of
ACL injury, where there are some observed regularities that lead
to its emergence. Figure 2A depicts the web of determinants for
an ACL injury in basketball. For basketball athletes, the typical
unanticipated environmental events (UEE),44 the presence of
DKV44 and hip weakness (HW) are the main elements compris-
ing the web of determinants. These elements take part in most
of the existing interactions (unidirectional or bidirectional rela-
tionships) and, as such, influence and are influenced by other
elements. In this case, the interacting configuration could be pic-
tured as follows: the presence of DKV is influenced by
fatigue,44 hip muscle strength, neuromuscular control (ability to
properly recruit the required muscles), foot complex anatomical
alignment and training load. These variables are themselves
modulated by other factors such as age and sex (eg, influence of
age on hip muscle strength).45 In addition, training load influ-
ences the attention level and anxiety, which may increase fatigue
and, by this connection, increase DKV
. The manner in which
these interactions play and how they together influence the
occurrence of an ACL injury will create a risk profile (regularity)
that is specific for the analysed context.
A single risk factor (ie, DKV) does not warrant the occurrence
of the injury. On the other hand, the identification of the risk
profile may inform about the probability of the injury occurrence.
Since injury is a complex phenomenon characterised by uncer-
tainties and inherent non-linearity, an ACL injury will emerge
when a specific pattern of interaction happens in the presence of
an inciting event of a given value. Thus, the best manner to
predict an injury is by understanding the interactions among the
web of determinants and not the determinants themselves.
As another example, figure 2B depicts the web of determi-
nants of an ACL injury in ballet dancers. Owing to the type of
training received and the need for movement quality, these ath-
letes do not have, as the main elements, the presence of DKV
and HW
.46 In addition, in ballet, UEE are rare when compared
to collective sports.46 In this sense, fatigue, attention level,
anxiety and, possibly, other unidentified variables may be the
main interacting units of the web of determinants. Fatigue, in
turn, is modulated by the amount of training sessions, which
will also influence other psychological factors that may be differ-
ently influenced by sex. In the presence of a specific interacting
pattern, the level of fatigue may alter the quality of movement
and lead to the occurrence of DKV
, which may produce an ACL
injury. The web of determinants for ballet dancers has a differ-
ent configuration of interactions among factors, when compared
to basketball players. Similar factors have different contributions
(weights) and interact differently with other factors, as the
context of practice also differs. However, in each context, the
observance of a given interacting pattern or risk profile will be
related to a given probability of ACL occurrence.
Instead of looking for the units (first level risk factors), we
should look for the existing pattern of interactions among the
units (regularities). Only after we learn about those regularities,
the identification of the relationships between contributing units
(second level risk factors) will be necessary. This approach will
allow the development of effective interventions to address the
Figure 2
(A) Web of determinants for an ACL injury in basketball athletes and (B) web of determinants for an ACL injury in ballet dancer.
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
5 of 7
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 identified risk profile. Therefore, injury prediction, as in a stock
market and weather forecast, should rely on the probability that
the presence of observable regularities (risk or protective
profile) may be associated with the emergence of a given injury.
CONCLUSION
Recently, a complex systems approach has been used to predict
complicated problems in medicine, biology, economics and social
science. This conceptual paper serves as a challenge and as a
support, as it indicates the weaknesses of the established model
of thinking and proposes a model, which moves us from trying
to find ‘causes’ to finding ‘relations’ that support the emergence
of a sports injury. The limitation of our ‘explanation power’ of
complex phenomena should not prevent us from trying to
improve our ‘predictive power’ for injury occurrence. Adopting
the complex systems approach may push us forward in terms of
concepts and methods to improve sports injury prediction. In
this sense, moving research from isolated risk factors to injury
pattern recognition, by means of identification of the complex
pattern of interactions among the web of determinants, is obliga-
tory. Although difficult, it is feasible to identify and even under-
stand the regularities of a web of determinants using real data
and statistical modelling. This approach may be the only option
if we accept the non-linearity and complexity of sports injury.
What are the findings?
▸ Sports injuries are complex emergent phenomena, produced
by interactions among different units (web of determinants),
which may produce regularities (risk profile) that prompt the
emerging pattern (injury).
▸ Sports injury prevention relies on the identification of risk
profiles, which means moving from risk factors to risk
pattern recognition. This approach considers an
interconnected and multidirectional interaction between all
factors, which embrace the complex nature of the sports
injury.
▸ Improvements in sports injuries prediction, as well as in
prevention, depend on coherence among the phenomena of
interest (sports injuries as an emergent event), philosophical
paradigm (complexity) and methods of analysis. In this
sense, non-linear and complex system approaches should be
explored.
How might it impact on clinical practice in the near
future?
▸ Clinicians should be aware of how risk factors may interact,
rather than list several isolated risk factors, in order to plan
effective preventive intervention.
▸ Risk profile may include non-linear interaction between risk
factors from different scales, such as biomechanical, training
characteristics, psychological and physiological. Additionally,
risk profile should be continuously assessed throughout
preseason and in season.
▸ The recognition of the web of determinants in clinical
practice might include risk factors that strongly influence the
outcome and interact in many different ways with several
variables.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge Dr Roberto
Bittencourt and Dr Rosana Sampaio for introducing the role of complexity in health.
Contributors NFNB, LDM, JMO and STF contributed to the manuscript’s
conception and design. AN-A contributed to the analyses and interpretation of the
statistical session, accurate and critical revision of the manuscript as well as approval
of the final version. NFNB was the primary author and was responsible for the initial
preparation of the manuscript. WM and STF contributed to the accurate and critical
revision of the manuscript as well as approval of the final version. All authors were
involved in the preparation and editing of the manuscript.
Funding The Minas Gerais state research-funding agency FAPEMIG and the
Brazilian research-funding agencies CAPES and CNPq have supported this study.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HC. Incidence, severity, aetilogy and prevention
of sports injuries. A review of concepts. Sports Med 1992;14:82–99.
2
Quatman CE, Quatman CC, Hewett TE. Prediction and prevention of
musculoskeletal injury: a paradigm shift in methodology. Br J Sports Med
2009;43:1100–7.
3
Plsek P, Greenhalgh T. Complexity science: the challenge of complexity in health
care. BMJ 2001;323:625–8.
4
Mendiguchia J, Alentorn-Geli E, Brughelli M. Hamstring strain injuries: are we
heading in the right direction? Br J Sports Med 2012;46:81–5.
5
van der Worp H, van Ark M, Roerink S, et al. Risk factors for patellar tendinopathy:
a systematic review of the literatute. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:446–52.
6
Coffey DS. Self-organization, complexity and chaos: the new biology for medicine.
Nat Med 1998;4:882–85.
7
Rickles D, Hawe P, Shiell A. A simple guide to chaos and complexity. J Epidemiol
Community Health 2007;61:933–7.
8
Philippe P, Mansi O. Nonlinearity in the epidemiology of complex health and
disease processes. Theor Med Bioeth 1998;19:591–607.
9
Meeuwisse WH, Tyreman H, Hagel B, et al. A dynamic model of etiology in sport
injury: the recursive nature of risk and causation. Clin J Sport Med
2007;17:215–19.
10
Holland JH. Hidden order: how adaptation builds complexity from chaos. Redwood
City, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Company, 1995. ISBN:
0-201-40793-0.
11
Hulme A, Finch CF. From monocausality to system thinking: a complementary and
alternative conceptual approach for better understanding the development and
prevention of sports injury. Inj Epidemiol 2015:2–31.
12
Galea S, Riddle M, Kaplan GA. Causal thinking and complex system approaches in
epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol 2010;39:97–106.
13
Doll R, Hill AB. A study of the aetiology of carcinoma of the lung. Br Med J
1952;13:1271–86.
14
Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromuscular
control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament injury risk
in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:492–501.
15
Krosshaug T, Nakamae A, Boden BP, et al. Mechanism of anterior cruciate ligament
injury in basketball: video analysis of 39 cases. Am J Sports Med 2006;35:359–67.
16
Malliaras P, Cook JL, Kent P. Reduced ankle dorsiflexion range May increase the
risk of patellar tendon injury among volleyball players. J Sci Med Sports
2006;9:304–9.
17
Doll WE Jr, Trueit D. Complexity and the health care professions. J Eval Clin Pract
2010;16:841–8.
18
Weaver W. Science and Complexity. Am Sci 1948;36:536–44.
19
Higgins JP. Nonlinear systems in medicine. Yale J Biology Medicine
2002;45:247–60.
20
Farmer D, Gallegati M, Hommes C, et al. A complex systems approach to
constructing better models for managing financial markets and the economy.
Eur Phys J Special Topics 2012;21:295–324.
21
Rea TJ, Brown CM, Sing CF. Complex adaptive system models and the genetic
analysis of plasma HDL-cholesterol concentration. Perspect Biol Med
2006;49:490–503.
22
Pfeiffer M, Hohmann A. Applications of neural networks in training science. Hum
Mov Sci 2012;31:344–59.
23
Emery CA. Identifying risk factors for hamstring and groin injuries in sport: a
daunting task. Clin J Sports Med 2012;22:75–7.
24
Ekstrand J, Hägglund M, Waldén M. Injury incidence and injury patterns in
professional football: the UEFA injury study. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:553–8.
25
von Bertalanfly L. General system theory: foundations, development, applications.
Penguin university books. New York, USA: George Braziller Inc., 1969.
26
Rosen R. Essays of life itself. New York, USA: Columbia University Press, 2000.
ISBN: 0-231-10511-8.
6 of 7
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 27
von Bertalanffy L. The theory of open systems in physics and biology. Science
1950;111:23–9.
28
Haken H. Synergetics: are cooperative phenomena governed by universal principles?
Naturwissenschaften 1980;67:121–8.
29
Bolgla LA, Malone TR, Umberger BR, et al. Hip strength and hip and knee
kinematics during stair descent in females with and without patellofemoral pain
syndrome. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2008;38:12–18.
30
Bittencourt NF, Ocarino JM, Mendonça LD, et al. Foot and hip contribution to high
frontal plane knee projection angle in athletes: a classification and regression tree
approach. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2012; 42:996–1004.
31
Myer GD, Ford KR, Barber Foss KD, et al. The relationship of hamstrings and
quadriceps strength to anterior cruciate ligament injury in female athletes. Clin J
Sport Med 2009;19:3–8.
32
Freckleton G, Pizzari T. Risk factors for hamstring muscle strain injury in sport: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:351–8.
33
Bahr R. Why screening tests to predict injury do not work—and probably never
will…: a critical review. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:776–80.
34
Mais V, Yen SS. Prolactin-releasing action of gonadotropin-releasing hormone in
hypogonadal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1986;62:1089–92.
35
Firth WJ. Chaos—predicting the unpredictable. BMJ 1991;303:1565–8.
36
Niska H, Hiltunen T, Karppinen A, et al. Evolving the neural network model
for forecasting air pollution time series. Eng App Artif Intell 2004;17:
159–67.
37
Serrano-Cinca C. Self Organizing Neural Networks for Financial Diagnosis 1996.
Decis Support Syst 1996;17:227–38.
38
Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J. The elements of statistical learning. New York,
USA: Springer, 2001.
39
Butchart C, Ismailoglu F, Myint PK, et al. Identification of possible determinants of
inpatient mortality using Classification and Regression Tree (CART) analysis in
hospitalized oldest old patients. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2013;56:188–91.
40
D’alisa S, Miscio G, Baudo S, et al. Depression is the main determinant of quality of
life in multiple sclerosis: a classification-regression (CART) study. Disabil Rehabil
2006;28:307–14.
41
Auchincloss AH, Diez Roux AV. A new tool for epidemiology: the usefulness of
dynamic-agent models in understanding place effects on health. Am J Epidemiol
2008;168:1–8.
42
http:goo.gl/veJ74Q (accessed Feb 2016).
43
Chipman HA, George EI, McCulloch RE. BART: Bayesian additive regression trees.
Ann Appl Stat 2010;1:266–98.
44
Liederbach M, Kremenic IJ, Orishimo KF, et al. Comparison of landing biomechanics
between male and female dancers and athletes, part 2 influence of fatigue and
implications for anterior cruciate ligament injury. Am J Sports Med
2014;42:1089–95.
45
Brent J, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. The effect of sex and age on isokinetic hip
abduction torques. J Sports Rehabil 2013;22:41–6.
46
Orishimo KF, Liederbach M, Kremenic IJ, et al. Comparison of landing biomechanics
between male and female dancers and athletes, part 1: Influence of sex on risk of
anterior cruciate ligament injury. Am J Sports Med 2014;42:1082–8.
47
http://www.trojanmice.com/articles/complexadaptivesystems.htm (accessed
Feb 2016).
Bittencourt NFN, et al. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1309–1314. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850
7 of 7
Review
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2015-095850 on 21 July 2016. Downloaded from 
