 Continuing Education examination available at  
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted_info.html#weekly. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Weekly / Vol. 65 / No. 49 
December 16, 2016
INSIDE
1390 Assessing Change in Avian Influenza A(H7N9) Virus 
Infections During the Fourth Epidemic — China, 
September 2015–August 2016
1395 Leading Causes of Cancer Mortality — Caribbean 
Region, 2003–2013
1401 Monitoring of Persons with Risk for Exposure to 
Ebola Virus — United States, November 3, 2014–
December 27, 2015
1405 Use of a 2-Dose Schedule for Human 
Papillomavirus Vaccination — Updated 
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices
1409 Preliminary Report of Microcephaly Potentially 
Associated with Zika Virus Infection During 
Pregnancy — Colombia, January–November 2016
1414 Notes from the Field: New Delhi Metallo-ß-
Lactamase–Producing Carbapenem-Resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae Identified in Patients Without 
Known Health Care Risk Factors — Colorado, 
2014–2016
1416 QuickStats
Resurgence of Progressive Massive Fibrosis in Coal Miners —  
Eastern Kentucky, 2016
David J. Blackley, DrPH1; James B. Crum, DO2; Cara N. Halldin, PhD1; Eileen Storey, MD1; A. Scott Laney, PhD1
Coal workers’ pneumoconiosis, also known as “black lung 
disease,” is an occupational lung disease caused by overexposure 
to respirable coal mine dust. Inhaled dust leads to inflammation 
and fibrosis in the lungs, and coal workers’ pneumoconiosis 
can be a debilitating disease. The Federal Coal Mine Health 
and Safety Act of 1969 (Coal Act),* amended in 1977, estab-
lished dust limits for U.S. coal mines and created the National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)–
administered Coal Workers’ Health Surveillance Program 
with the goal of reducing the incidence of coal workers’ pneu-
moconiosis and eliminating its most severe form, progressive 
massive fibrosis (PMF),† which can be lethal. The prevalence 
of PMF fell sharply after implementation of the Coal Act 
and reached historic lows in the 1990s, with 31 unique cases 
identified by the Coal Workers’ Health Surveillance Program 
during 1990–1999. Since then, a resurgence of the disease 
has occurred, notably in central Appalachia (Figure 1) (1,2). 
This report describes a cluster of 60 cases of PMF identified 
in current and former coal miners at a single eastern Kentucky 
radiology practice during January 2015–August 2016. This 
cluster was not discovered through the national surveillance 
program. This ongoing outbreak highlights an urgent need for 
effective dust control in coal mines to prevent coal workers’ 
pneumoconiosis, and for improved surveillance to promptly 
identify the early stages of the disease and stop its progression 
to PMF.
On June 9, 2016, a radiologist contacted NIOSH to report 
a sharp increase during the past 2 years in the number of 
PMF cases among patients who were coal miners seen at his 
practice serving the easternmost counties of Kentucky. The 
radiologist requested assistance in conducting an investigation 
and developing and implementing interventions to reduce 
the prevalence of disease in the community. NIOSH per-
sonnel traveled to Pike County, Kentucky, to assist with the 
investigation. A case of practice-identified PMF was defined 
as an International Labor Office classification of large opacity 
category A, B, or C pneumoconiosis (PMF) in a current or 
former coal miner receiving a chest radiograph from a single 
* http://arlweb.msha.gov/solicitor/coalact/69act.htm.
† PMF is a fibrotic pneumoconiotic lesion at least 1 cm in diameter; both coal 
workers’ pneumoconiosis and silicosis can progress to PMF.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
1386 
MMWR / December 16, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 49
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Report title]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Weekly)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Jacqueline Gindler, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor 
Douglas W. Weatherwax, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Soumya Dunworth, PhD, Teresa M. Hood, MS,  
Technical Writer-Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
radiology practice in Pike County, Kentucky, during January 1, 
2015–August 17, 2016, with completed radiograph classifica-
tion and occupational history forms. All radiographic classifica-
tions were performed by the reporting radiologist, who is an 
experienced, board-certified radiologist and a NIOSH-certified 
B Reader (i.e., a physician certified by NIOSH as proficient in 
classifying radiographs of pneumoconioses) (3).
Sixty male patients who were active or former coal miners 
had radiographic findings consistent with PMF, including 49 
(82%) whose radiographs were taken during 2016. Fifty-six 
(93%) patients were residents of Kentucky; 48 (86%) of the 
56 resided in four contiguous counties (Floyd, Knott, Letcher, 
and Pike) in the southeastern part of the state that are part of 
the central Appalachian coalfield. The mean age of patients was 
60.3 years (range = 44.9–77.4 years; median = 59.4 years). The 
mean coal mining tenure was 29.2 years (range = 15–47 years; 
median = 30.0 years). Thirty-one patients (52%) were deter-
mined to have category A PMF (one or more large opacities 
each >10 mm in diameter with combined dimension ≤50 mm); 
23 (38%) had category B (combined dimension >50 mm but 
not exceeding equivalent area of right upper lung zone); and 
six (10%) had category C (size larger than category B).§ All 
60 patients had radiographic evidence of pneumoconiosis, 
including 12 (20%) with a small opacity profusion classified 
as major category 1, 30 (50%) classified as major category 2, 
and 18 (30%) classified as major category 3. Seven patients 
had large, rounded opacities, a finding associated with silicosis 
lung pathology (4). Twenty-six patients reported being roof 
bolters (persons who install the bolts that support the roof 
of an underground coal mine) for most of their careers, and 
20 reported being operators of continuous miners, a type of 
mining machine that produces a constant flow of coal or other 
solid material from the working face of the mine (Figure 2).
Discussion
The voluntary Coal Workers’ Health Surveillance Program 
stipulates that active coal miners be offered no-cost medical 
monitoring that includes a chest radiograph at entry into 
coal mining and then at approximately 5-year intervals. 
During August 2011–July 2016, a total of 99 unique cases of 
PMF were detected nationwide by the Coal Workers’ Health 
Surveillance Program, including 19 in Kentucky residents. 
Although surveillance data have indicated a resurgence of PMF 
in recent years (Figure 1), this large cluster of cases brought to 
the attention of NIOSH by a single local radiologist was not 
discovered through the national surveillance program offered 
to active miners. The finding in the current report of 56 cases 
among Kentucky residents indicates that many cases were not 
identified through routine national surveillance; however, this 
finding is consistent with historically low Coal Workers’ Health 
§ Radiographs for the pneumoconioses are classified by small opacity profusion 
and large opacity size, compared with standard radiograph images from the 
International Labour Office. Large opacities are classified as category A, B, or C. 
Small opacity profusion is classified into four major categories (0, 1, 2, 3), with 
category 1 or higher considered to be radiographic evidence of pneumoconiosis 
(http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/chestradiography/breader.html).
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / December 16, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 49 
1387
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Surveillance Program participation rates among Kentucky coal 
miners: during 2011–16 only 17% of Kentucky coal miners 
participated (personal communication, Coal Workers’ Health 
Surveillance Program data, October 5, 2016).
The factor or combination of factors that led to this increase 
in cases of PMF in eastern Kentucky and whether there are 
more unrecognized cases in neighboring coal mining regions 
are unknown. Because PMF takes years to become manifest, 
the specific exposures or mining practices that led to these 
cases are also unknown. New or modified mining practices in 
the region might be causing hazardous dust exposures. While 
obtaining detailed occupational histories, the reporting physi-
cian identified the practice of “slope mining” (5) as a potential 
exposure in eastern Kentucky (slope mining involves teams of 
miners operating continuous miner machines, designed to cut 
coal and other soft rock, to cut shafts through hundreds of feet 
of sandstone to reach underground coal seams) (Figure 2). The 
sandstone formation underlying eastern Kentucky is >90% 
quartz (6), and dust generated during the slope cutting could 
expose miners to hazardous dust containing high concentrations 
of respirable crystalline silica. Previous research found that 25 of 
37 (68%) Kentucky and Virginia coal miners with “advanced 
pneumoconiosis” (defined as PMF or simple coal workers’ 
pneumoconiosis with high small opacity profusion) reported 
working as roof bolters, a mining job associated with high silica 
dust exposure (7). The current investigation was limited to 
miners with PMF and found that 26 (43%) reported working 
as roof bolters, and 20 (33%) reported working as continuous 
miner operators. Operating a continuous miner machine has 
typically been considered a “coal-face position” (i.e., a work 
position located at the face, or seam, of coal), and therefore not 
a position usually associated with higher silica dust exposures. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
100
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Percentage of miners with PMF
Year
FIGURE 1. Prevalence of progressive massive fibrosis (PMF)* among 
underground-working coal miners with ≥25 years of underground 
mining tenure — Coal Workers’ Health Surveillance Program, 
Kentucky, Virginia, and West Virginia, 1974–2015
Source: Blackley DJ, Halldin CN, Laney AS. Resurgence of a debilitating and 
entirely preventable respiratory disease among working coal miners. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2014;190:708–9. Adapted with permission.
* Data are 5-year moving average (e.g., data plotted for 1974 = [PMF1970 + 
PMF1971 + PMF1972 + PMF1973 + PMF1974] / [Total participants1970–1974]); 
surveillance is conducted on a 5-year national cycle.
FIGURE 2. Photographs of workers and equipment under typical 
conditions in an underground coal mine*
A.
* A. Two miners use a roof-bolting machine to install the bolts that support the 
roof of an underground coal mine. B. A continuous miner machine extracts 
coal from the mine face with a rotating drum.
B.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1388 
MMWR / December 16, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 49
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
However, the use of a continuous miner machine during shaft 
cutting or thin seam coal mining (i.e., occurring when the height 
of the coal seam requires that rock above and below the coal 
seam is cut along with the coal) requires cutting through rock 
and creates the potential for respirable silica exposures, which 
might explain why working as a continuous miner operator 
could pose an increased risk for PMF.
In addition, recent industry trends might have led to a 
higher number of miners seeking radiographs, either to gather 
information about their health status or to seek benefits 
through state workers’ compensation or federal black lung 
programs. A steep decline in coal miner employment and coal 
production during recent years has occurred (8), with 1,501 
jobs lost in Kentucky (17.9% of state coal workforce) during 
the first quarter of 2016. Miners might feel that future coal-
related employment is unlikely and that previous barriers to 
health-seeking behaviors have been removed. For example, in 
Kentucky a miner has 3 years to file a state compensation claim 
“after the last injurious exposure to the occupational hazard or 
after the employee first experiences a distinct manifestation of 
an occupational disease in the form of symptoms reasonably 
sufficient to apprise the employee that he or she has contracted 
the disease, whichever shall last occur.”¶ Because the earlier 
stages of coal workers’ pneumoconiosis can be associated with 
few or no overt symptoms, and because coal mining jobs have 
historically been among the best-paying in the region, some 
miners might have chosen to not seek radiographs or other 
health-related information during the earlier stages of their 
career to avoid threatening their ability to continue working 
in the industry.
The findings in this report are subject to at least three limita-
tions. First, the cases highlighted in this report represent the 
recent experience of one single-radiologist practice in eastern 
Kentucky and might underestimate the actual extent of PMF 
in coal miners in the broader region. Second, classifications of 
chest radiographs were performed by a single B Reader, who was 
aware of miners’ occupational histories and other clinical data, 
such as results of chest computed tomography scans. For clas-
sifications performed for worker monitoring and surveillance, 
NIOSH recommends that a single reader is generally sufficient, 
particularly for radiographs that are clearly normal or abnormal. 
However, for radiographs with findings at the boundary between 
normal and abnormal, or for settings such as epidemiologic 
research or contested proceedings where it is important to ensure 
a high degree of accuracy, NIOSH recommends summary clas-
sifications derived from multiple independent readers (3) and 
is taking measures to obtain independent confirmation of the 
classifications by sending them to additional B-readers. Finally, 
cases in this report were not identified through standard coal 
workers’ pneumoconiosis surveillance, and whether similar 
clusters of cases exist in other communities is not known. Thus, 
the actual extent of PMF in U.S. coal miners remains unclear. 
Because the cases described in this report were identified during 
a span of fewer than 2 years and previous radiographs were 
not available, it was not possible to ascertain the time of PMF 
onset for these patients.
Although PMF is preventable through well-established dust 
control practices, each of the 60 patients in this report was 
exposed to coal mine dust over a period of years in an amount 
sufficient to cause this severe disease. Finding these cases in such 
a small geographic area is a strong signal that action is needed in 
the area to identify existing cases at an earlier stage and prevent 
future cases. A new federal rule has been implemented to protect 
all U.S. coal miners through expansion of medical surveillance, 
including respiratory symptom assessment and spirometry test-
ing (9). The rule also mandates lowering the amount of respirable 
dust allowed in U.S. coal mines and the use of a continuous 
personal dust monitor, a device that can measure respirable coal 
mine dust in real time. Availability of real-time respirable dust 
measurements, lower exposure limits, and expanded medical 
surveillance are intended to prevent future cases and identify 
early signs of respiratory impairment in coal miners before a 
disabling condition has developed.
The findings in this report serve as a reminder that more 
than 45 years after the Coal Act’s passage, one of its core objec-
tives has not been achieved. In the coming years, NIOSH 
will focus active surveillance measures on miners in central 
Appalachia and will continue to work with miners, mine 
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
The prevalence of coal workers’ pneumoconiosis fell precipitously 
after implementation of the Coal Mine Health and Safety Act and 
reached historic lows in the 1990s, with the most severe form, 
progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), nearly eradicated. Since that 
time, increases in the prevalence and severity of coal workers’ 
pneumoconiosis have occurred, especially in central Appalachia.
What is added by this report?
During January 1, 2015–August 17, 2016, a total of 60 patients 
identified through a single radiologist’s practice had radiographic 
findings consistent with PMF; 49 had their radiograph taken during 
2016. Surveillance data have indicated a resurgence of PMF in 
recent years, but the cases described in this report represent a large 
cluster not discovered through routine surveillance.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Effective dust control, enhanced educational outreach, and 
improved surveillance are needed to protect the respiratory 
health of U.S. coal miners.
¶ http://www.lrc.ky.gov/statutes/statute.aspx?id=32472.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / December 16, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 49 
1389
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
operators, regulatory and disability compensation agencies, and 
others to better characterize the scope of the problem, expand 
educational outreach to miners to increase their awareness of 
the right to confidential medical screening, and prevent over-
exposures to coal mine dust.
Acknowledgments
Heather Wilson, United Medical Group; the NIOSH Coal 
Workers’ Health Surveillance Program; participating miners.
 1Respiratory Health Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, CDC; 2United Medical Group, Pikeville, Kentucky.
Corresponding author: David J. Blackley, dblackley@cdc.gov, 304-285-6379.
References
1. Blackley DJ, Halldin CN, Laney AS. Resurgence of a debilitating and 
entirely preventable respiratory disease among working coal miners. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 2014;190:708–9.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.201407-1286LE
2. Laney AS, Weissman DN. Respiratory diseases caused by coal mine dust. 
J Occup Environ Med 2014;56(Suppl 10):S18–22.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/JOM.0000000000000260
3. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Chest radiography. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; 2011. http://www.
cdc.gov/niosh/topics/chestradiography/
4. Laney AS, Petsonk EL, Attfield MD. Pneumoconiosis among underground 
bituminous coal miners in the United States: is silicosis becoming more 
frequent? Occup Environ Med 2010;67:652–6.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/oem.2009.047126
5. Kentucky Geological Survey. Methods of mining. Lexington, KY: 
University of Kentucky, Kentucky Geological Survey; 2012. https://www.
uky.edu/KGS/coal/coal_mining.htm
6. Rice CL. Sandstone units of the Lee Formation and related strata in eastern 
Kentucky. Professional Paper 1151-G. Washington, DC: US Department 
of the Interior, US Geological Survey; 1984. https://pubs.usgs.gov/
pp/1151g/report.pdf
7. CDC. Advanced pneumoconiosis among working underground coal 
miners—Eastern Kentucky and Southwestern Virginia, 2006. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2007;56:652–5.
8. Kentucky Department for Energy Development and Independence. 
Kentucky Quarterly Coal Report (Q1–2016). Frankfort, KY: Kentucky 
Department for Energy Development and Independence; 2016. http://
energy.ky.gov/Coal%20Facts%20Library/Kentucky%20Quarterly%20
Coal%20Report%20(Q1-2016).pdf
9. Lowering Miners’ Exposure to Respirable Coal Mine Dust, Including 
Continuous Personal Dust Monitors. 79 FR 24813 (2014). https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2014/05/01/2014-09084/lowering-
miners-exposure-to-respirable-coal-mine-dust-including-continuous-
personal-dust-monitors
