 ARTICLE
OPEN
Serotonergic stimulation induces nerve growth and promotes
visual learning via posterior eye grafts in a vertebrate model of
induced sensory plasticity
Douglas J. Blackiston1, Khanh Vien1 and Michael Levin1
The major goal of regenerative medicine is to repair damaged tissues and organ systems, thereby restoring their native functions in
the host. Control of innervation by re-grown or implanted structures, and integration of the nascent nerves into behavioral/
cognitive programs of the host, remains a critical barrier. In the case of sensory organs, this is particularly true, as afferent neurons
must form connections with the host to communicate auditory, visual, and tactile information. Xenopus embryos and tadpoles are
powerful models for such studies, as grafting techniques allow for the creation of eyes and other sensory structures along the body
axis, and the behavior of the resulting organism can be quantitatively analyzed. Previous work has demonstrated that ectopic eyes
could be grafted in blinded tadpoles, allowing some of the animals to learn in a simple light-preference assay. Here, we show that it
is possible to improve the efficiency of the process in the context of a novel image-forming vision assay, using a drug already
approved for human use. Innervation of the host by ectopic eyes can be increased by targeting a serotonergic signaling
mechanism: grafts treated with a 5-HT1B/D agonist strongly innervate the recipient compared with untreated grafts, without large-
scale disruption of the host nervous system. Blind animals possessing eye grafts with the augmented innervation demonstrate
increased performance over untreated siblings in wavelength-based learning assays. Furthermore, treated animals also exhibit
enhanced visual pattern recognition, suggesting that the increased innervation in response to 5-HT1B/D activation leads to
enhanced functional integration of the ectopic organ with the host central nervous system and behavioral programs. These data
establish a model system and reveal a new roadmap using small molecule neurotransmitter drugs to augment innervation,
integration, and function of transplanted heterologous organs in regenerative medicine.
npj Regenerative Medicine  (2017) 2:8 ; doi:10.1038/s41536-017-0012-5
INTRODUCTION
The future of regenerative medicine will surely involve the
transplantation of a wide variety of bioengineered structures,
from hybrid artificial constructs to stem cell-derived organoids
grown in vitro. A key aspect of this research program is the
establishment of neural connections between the host central
nervous system (CNS) and the implanted tissue, to restore normal
function or to provide augmented sensory/motor capability to
patients. In addition to the biomedical aspects, this research
provides an unprecedented opportunity for basic research into
the relationship between the brain and body, and the evolution of
plasticity of cognitive programs in the face of altered bodyplans.
Novel models in which the ability of the brain to make use of
ectopic organs must be developed in vertebrate animal species
that are tractable to molecular, physiological, and behavioral
assays. Such platforms would enable the study of the inherent
plasticity that might be exploited for sensory repair or even
enhancement, and the evaluation of potential treatments to
improve function in such contexts.
The resolution with which implanted structures must commu-
nicate with the host’s CNS remains poorly understood. Conven-
tional
theory
suggests
that
specific,
direct
communication
between sensory structures and their corresponding processing
centers within the brain is required for function. However, sensory
substitution
studies
using
human–machine
interfaces
have
revealed a striking plasticity of the CNS to interpret sensory data
presented at novel locations. The majority of this work has
focused on tactile-vision substitution devices, which transmit
wavelength information from a camera to electrical or vibratory
stimulation via a small array that the patent places on their body
(dermal stimulation) or tongue (where the saliva allows less
current to deliver a similar stimulus).1 Blind individuals using these
devices report imaging formation consistent with vision,2 and
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of the brains of users
reveal activity within the visual centers of the occipital lobe.3, 4
This tactile vision involved more than simple object recognition:
subjects were able to time their actions to intercept a ball rolling
off of a surface and coordinate eye-hand movements in three-
dimensional space.5 Beyond vision, similar devices have been
used
in
a
variety
of
other
sensory
modalities,
including
auditory–visual substitution,6, 7 tactile-vestibular (balance) sub-
stitution,8 and a sensory augmentation belt that signals the
direction of magnetic north.9
All of these devices highlight the adaptive nature and
remarkable plasticity of the brain:body system. However, the
cross-modal functionality revealed by these studies is limited in
comparison with the goal of fully integrated biological organs
such as regenerated or transplanted eyes. Progress in the
Received: 17 October 2016 Revised: 3 January 2017 Accepted: 5 February 2017
1Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, 200 Boston Avenue, Suite 4600, Medford, MA 02155, USA
Correspondence: Michael Levin (michael.levin@tufts.edu)
www.nature.com/npjregenmed
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
 sophistication of 3D culture methods allows for the in vitro
creation of morphologically complete mouse and human optic
cups,10, 11 and a major goal of regenerative medicine is to one day
implant these structures in human patients, thereby restoring the
function of damaged or missing sensory systems. However, what
remains unknown are the necessary signals that could be used to
promote sufficient afferent innervation between the implant and
host and whether the host brain could properly interpret sensory
information
from
structures
that
were
added
long
after
embryogenesis.
A number of secreted molecules involved in axon growth cone
extension and pathfinding have been identified using in vitro
developmental models and neuronal culture systems. In the case
of the visual system these include sonic hedgehog as well as
Ephrin, Netrin, Semaphorin, and Slit family members, which
coordinate the exit of retinal ganglion cell axons from the optic
cup to visual-processing centers within vertebrate brain. In
addition to these well-studied factors, serotonin has also been
identified as a pathfinding cue during neural development. In
invertebrates, cultured Helisomia snail neurons show growth
changes response to extracellular serotonin.12 In vertebrates,
serotonin has been shown to reverse the effect of netrin-1 from
attraction to repulsion when both were presented to cultured
mouse thalamocortical axons13; in addition, serotonin levels have
been shown to alter segregation of retinal ganglion projections
within the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and superior colliculus
in vivo.14
Xenopus laevis represents an ideal model to investigate graft
and implant innervation. Specifically, cut and paste experiments
allow the generation of eyes and ears at any position along the
body axis of developing tadpoles15–21: in both cases, afferent
innervation between the graft and host CNS was observed, even
when the sensory structures were positioned far from their native
locations. Remarkably, behavioral assays showed that such grafted
eyes were capable of conferring light-sensing ability to blinded
tadpoles. However, good performance in visual assays was
infrequent because most grafts failed to innervate the host. We
have been testing strategies for inducing innervation of ectopic
structures, focusing on bioelectric properties of the host and the
neurotransmitter molecules downstream of voltage-dependent
signaling.22–25 Here, we demonstrate that strong innervation can
be induced for eye grafts by exposure to a 5-HT1B/D agonist,
without significantly altering elements of the host CNS. Moreover,
this induced innervation, causing animals receiving treated grafts
to perform significantly better in wavelength-discrimination tasks
than animals receiving untreated grafts. We show that the
function of ectopic eyes in otherwise blind animals is not only
for light sensing, but to confer performance in a novel behavior
assay that requires image-forming vision (pattern detection).
Taken together, these data demonstrate that organ grafts are
capable of providing sensory information to a vertebrate host,
even when located far from the brain, and they reveal a novel
strategy for promoting innervation of implanted sensory struc-
tures using a pharmacological reagent already approved for
human use.
RESULTS
5-HT1B/D activation induces innervation of transplanted tissue
following eye graft in Xenopus embryos
In an effort to identify methods to increase the innervation of
implanted sensory structures, we utilized an eye primordia graft
method developed in Xenopus laevis, which results in morpholo-
gically complete eyes developing at the site of the graft. Grafts
were performed embryonically between tdTomato mRNA injected
donors and untreated recipients at Neiuwkoop and Faber stage
24, which allowed afferent innervation to be visualized under
fluorescence. In addition, microsurgery at stage 34 could be
performed to create blinded animals (compare Fig. 1a, b). Grafts
were positioned caudally, which resulted in an ectopic eye
forming in the posterior of the animal along the trunk of the tail
(Fig. 1c). Induced eyes were morphologically similar to native eyes
in both proximal/distal orientation and size, and vasculature could
be seen carrying blood to the structure (Fig. 1d).
Donor tissue and innervation could be observed through
fluorescence of the injected tdTomato protein (Fig. 1e) and
imaging of the ventral fin posterior to the graft revealed little
innervation of the host (Fig. 1f). Previous work that promoted graft
innervation through modulation of host cells’ bioelectrical proper-
ties showed that innervation was induced by extracellular 5-HT
exposure and could be blocked by inhibition of 5-HT receptor 1
family members.24 Based on these prior data identifying seroto-
nergic signaling downstream of somatic depolarization,24, 25 we
hypothesized that activation of these receptors should promote
neurite outgrowth. Treatment of grafted animals with 50 µM of the
5-HT1B/D activator Zolmitriptan following surgery had a dramatic
effect on innervation: 40% of treated animals (n = 38) displayed a
hyper-innervated
phenotype
with
labeled
neurites
present
throughout the ventral fin and trunk of the animal (Fig. 1g, h).
To determine whether 5-HT1B/D activation altered innervation of
eyes in their native locations, developing eye tissue was removed
from stage 24 wild-type animals and replaced with labeled donor
tissue from the same location. In untreated animals, grafts
produce labeled optic nerves which migrate ventrally below the
brain before penetrating the contralateral side at the location of
the optic tecta, as in the endogenous pattern (Fig. 2a). Animals
receiving rostral grafts in the presence of 5-HT1B/D activation
demonstrate the normal innervation outcomes, sending specific,
targeted
projections
to
the
brain
rather
than
the
broad,
distributed innervation observed in caudal grafts (Fig. 2b). Thus,
sham operations do not induce the hyperinnervated phenotype.
As innervation from such grafts was easily visible in the brain,
posterior transplants were then specifically examined to deter-
mine if any of ectopic neurites were present in the brain of the
host. In no case did we detect labeled neurons in brain of animals
receiving posterior grafts (n = 20), even when strong innervation
was present throughout the trunk and fin of the animal (Fig. 2c–e).
We conclude that posterior grafts do not innervate directly into
the brain.
To examine the timing of neurite outgrowth, animals were
imaged daily for 8 days following surgery. No labeled axons were
observed during the initial 3 days following surgery, but labeled
tissue was clearly visible on day 4 (Fig. 3a). After this period,
continued neurite elongation and branching was observed
through the remainder of the experiment (Fig. 3b–e), with donor
tissue innervating much of the ventral fin and trunk of the host.
We conclude that a drastic hyper-innervation of transplants could
be induced by Zolmitriptan exposure without toxic side effects.
5-HT1B/D activation does not disrupt native innervation in the host
The massive increase in graft innervation after 5-HT1B/D receptor
activation could be expected to be part of a universal neural
response, which would disrupt the host nervous system. To test
this hypothesis, we examined the anatomy of another sensory
system, the host’s lateral line, in the presence or absence of 5-
HT1B/D
activation.
Using
immunohistochemistry
against
the
neuronal marker acetylated-tubulin, we also examined whether
blinding animals caused a large-scale disruption to this system, as
any perturbations could alter future behavioral trials. Immunohis-
tochemical detection of neurons in wild-type animals revealed the
stereotypic anatomy of lateral line elements in the anterior of the
animal, with the post-orbital, maxillary, supra-orbital, and parietal
lateral line being clearly defined (Fig. 4a). In addition, just anterior
to the gut, the anterior lower, upper, middle, and occipital lateral
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
2
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
 Fig. 1
Serotonin receptor 1B/D activation increases afferent innervation of eye grafts in Xenopus tadpoles. a Wild-type animals possess fully
developed eyes by stage 47. b Microsurgery performed on stage 34 animals to remove developing eye tissue leads to blind animals that are
otherwise healthy. c Grafts of eye primordia transferred from stage 24 donors to recipients result in ectopic eyes forming at the site of the
graft. d Eyes forming from grafts display proper proximal-distal orientation with a clearly visible lens (arrow) facing outward from the body. e
Grafts between tdTomato labeled donors and non-labeled recipients allow donor tissue to be visualized at later stages. f Higher magnification
of the region posterior to the graft (white arrow) reveals little innervation of the host, with few if any neurites present in the fin or trunk region
of the animal. g Treatment of grafts with the 5-HT1B/D activator Zolmitriptan does not alter the morphology of the ectopic eye. h Higher
magnification of the region posterior to the graft (white arrow) reveals extensive afferent innervation in response to the treatment, with
neurites present throughout the fin and trunk of the tadpole
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
3
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
 line was visible (Fig. 4ai). Finally, in lateral images of the ventral tail
fin around the anus of the animal, the caudal lateral line was
visualized its standard branching phenotype (Fig. 4aii).
In animals raised in 50 µM of the 5-HT1B/D agonist Zolmitriptan
from stages 24–46, the lateral line elements were unperturbed,
showing the same anatomy and branching patterns as that of
untreated animals (Fig. 4bi–iii). Further, lateral line anatomy was
also visualized in blinded animals to determine if the removal of
native eyes altered host innervation in the presence of 5-HT1B/D
activation. No differences were noted between the lateral line
elements of these animals compared with wild types, other than
the connection between the post-orbital and maxillary lateral line
being visible, as it is normally obstructed by the presence of the
eye (Fig. 4ci–iii). The nostrils of the animals in all three treatments
were also similar with regard to morphology and position
(compare “no”, Fig. 4a, b, c). In the posterior, the motor axons
located between somite boundaries maintained their character-
istic chevron pattern, regardless of treatment (“m.a.” in Fig. 4aii, bii,
cii). Finally, the ventral fin, which is the site of eye primordia grafts,
did not show aberrant innervation by the lateral line and was
devoid of ectopic innervation in the absence of donor tissue (“fin”
in Fig. 4aii, bii, cii). Taken together, these data indicate that while
grafted eye primordia respond to the 5-HT1B/D agonist, the host
nervous system is not detectably altered when these receptors are
activated. These findings highlight the ability to functionally
dissociate responses between the host’s own innervation and
ectopic structures.
Animals with innervated grafts demonstrate learning in an
automated visual assay
To determine if blinded animals receiving eye grafts could learn in
a visual assay and whether increased innervation leads to better
performance, a custom automated behavior apparatus was
employed. The device uses motion tracking cameras to record
animals’ positions in an arena illuminated with red or blue light
and issues commands to punish animals with a 1.2 mA current
based on location. Briefly, the general training regime evaluates
the animal’s preference for red or blue, trains the animal to avoid
red by punishing it when it occupies a red quadrant, and
examines any change in color preference after a rest periods
(Fig. 5a, b). By repeating this procedure, a reproducible red-
avoidance behavior is observed; this approach has been used to
successfully train animals in multiple studies.26, 27
The majority of wild-type animals learn in our automated assay
(Fig. 5c), with 76% of trained animals (n = 50) demonstrating
Fig. 2
5-HT1B/D-induced innervation is location-specific. a When developing eye tissue is removed in stage 24 embryos and replaced with
labeled donor tissue of the same type, optic nerves are visualized (white arrow) crossing to the contralateral side of the brain and penetrating
at the optic tecta. b Grafts at correct developmental locations do not change their innervation in response to 5-HT1B/D activation. c Animals
with posterior grafts were visualized under fluorescence to determine if neurites reached the host brain. d Signal was never observed in the
host brain (red arrows), e even when innervation was observed throughout the trunk and fin region of the animal (n = 20). Yellow boxes in (c)
indicate location imaged at high magnification in (d) and (e)
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
4
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
 learning, compared with blinded animals, which rarely meet the
learning criteria (5%, n = 20). Non-blinded animals raised in 50 µM
Zolmitriptan were also able to learn in the device, but at a reduced
frequency compared with untreated siblings (z = 2.05, p = 0.02).
The presence of an eye graft in blinded animals resulted in a
learning frequency of 11%, a rate which was not significantly
higher than non-grafted siblings (n = 43, z = −0.77, p = −0.221).
However, in animals receiving grafts that innervated the host in
response to 5-HT1B/D activation, the frequency of learning was
significantly higher compared with blinded animals (n = 24, z =
−2.30, p = 0.011). Taken together, these results indicate that
blinded animals fail to learn in an automated visual assay, but
learning can be induced when animals receive eye grafts that
were made to innervate the host by 5-HT1B/D activation.
To better characterize the behavior of innervated graft animals
that learned in the assay and those that did not, the following
behaviors were compared between the two groups during across
the innate portion of the trial: time spent at the edge vs. center of
the arena, time spent swimming in a clockwise/counterclockwise
direction, time spent in the red half of the dish, area of the dish
explored, and speed (Fig. 5d). None of these behaviors differed
between
innervated
learners
and
non-learners,
except
for
exploration: animals that learned explored a greater portion of
the dish than non-learning siblings (t-test, p = 0.024). These results
were similar when comparing across treatments, as wild-type and
blind
controls
showed
minimal
differences
between
basic
behaviors in the device (Sup. Fig. 1). In addition to basic behavior,
the proportion of time punished during each of the training
periods was compared for innervated learners and non-learners,
as poor performance during training could indicate a difficulty in
perceiving the overhead lighting conditions. This analysis revealed
a significant difference between groups (Fig. 5e), with non-
learners receiving more punishments than learners in any given
training session (two-way ANOVA, p = 0.004). In addition, punish-
ments during training sessions tended to decrease among the
animals that demonstrated learning, while non-learners trended
upward across trials. These data support the learning results and
indicate that the 5-HT1B/D-activated eye-graft animals that learned
in the device were better able to discriminate the associative
stimuli (color) during training sessions in the automated assay.
Graft innervation confers image-forming vision: a moving pattern
assay
In addition to wavelength discrimination, tadpoles were tested for
true vision—the ability to follow patterns rotating clockwise and
counterclockwise directions. The patterns were presented from
below the tadpoles, and consisted of groups of triangular clusters
rotating at a rate of 18° per second (Fig. 6a). Cohorts from each
treatment were placed in dishes above the pattern, and their
swimming direction as scored after 15 min of clockwise and
counterclockwise pattern rotation—final performance scores were
averaged between the two tests. Wild-type animals were able to
follow the pattern well, with 80% of tested animals following the
pattern after averaging the clockwise and counterclockwise
portions of the trial (Fig. 6b). In comparison, blinded animals
performed poorly, with only 38% of individuals swimming in the
correct direction. Animals with an untreated ectopic eye also
performed poorly, with 32% of tadpoles following the pattern.
However, blinded animals with innervated grafts induced by
exposure
to
the
5-HT1B/D
activator
exhibited
much
better
performance levels, with 57% of animals able to follow the
rotating patterns. Analysis of the distribution revealed a significant
effect of the treatment on the result compared with expected
values (χ2 = 18.76, p < 0.001). Taken together, these data reveal
that animals receiving grafts in the presence of 5-HT1B/D activation
perform better in a pattern-movement task than those with non-
treated grafts.
Fig. 3
Time-lapse imaging of 5-HT1B/D-activated eye grafts reveals
continued
innervation
and
branching
following
treatment.
a
tdTomato labeled donor tissue was first observed innervating the
host 4 days post-transplant. By 5 and 6 days post-transplant (b, c),
neurites began to arborize and cover the ventral fin of the host.
Arborization continued through days 7 and 8 (d, e), at which time
high-branched neurites were present throughout the posterior of
the recipient
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
5
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
 DISCUSSION
Previous work
demonstrated
that
depolarization
of
resting
potential in host tissue could be used to induce innervation of
eye
grafts
in
Xenopus
tadpoles
in
a
serotonin-dependent
manner.21 Here, we examined the downstream pathway and
showed that 5-HT1B/D activation is sufficient to drive afferent
innervation, even in the absence of bioelectric cues. Untreated
grafts demonstrate very low rates of innervation, with less than
5% of grafts showing any neurites penetrating the host via
fluorescent labeling. However, when grafted animals were reared
in the 5-HT1B/D activator Zolmitriptan, 40% of the transplants
innervated the host, with afferent innervation present in the
ventral fin and trunk of the tadpoles (an affect which only
occurred when the eyes were placed at ectopic locations). Neurite
extension could be observed 4 days post-transplant, a timing that
is similar to that of untreated grafts or those which innervate in
response to extracellular 5-HT exposure24; axons continued to
arborize for the 5 days of imaging prior to behavior experiments.
The phenotype appeared to be specific to the eye, as other
elements of the host CNS were unaffected by the presence of
Zolmitriptan. Immunohistochemistry against anti-acetylated alpha
tubulin allowed visualization of the lateral line, olfactory organs,
and motor axons of the posterior fin, none of which were altered
in treated animals. These results are similar to work in mouse,
which have also found roles for serotonin in retinal ganglion axon
guidance.
Monoamine
oxidase
A
knockout
mice
display
improper segregation of retinal ganglion cells originating from
the left and right eye,14 and similar to the present study 5-HT1B/D
activation has been shown to have effects on both retinal and CNS
patterning.13, 28, 29 Conservation of mechanism across models
suggest serotonin receptor activation/repression may be of future
clinical use in medical stem cell therapies and transplant surgeries,
helping tune retinal ganglion innervation in the host.
A possible mechanism by which 5-HT1B/D activation leads to
increased innervation can be proposed based on in vivo and
in vitro data in mammalian systems. 5-HT1B/D receptor binding
initiates a number of physiological and metabolic changes in an
expressing neuron including: the inhibition of neurotransmitter
release, increased inositol phospholipid hydrolysis, opening of
potassium channels, closure of voltage-gated calcium channels,
and inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity. With regard to
pathfinding,
the
latter
mechanism
has
received
the
most
attention, as cyclic nucleotide levels have been correlated with a
number of neurite pathfinding behaviors. The effect of 5-HT1B/D
activation on mouse dorsal thalamus axons (conversion of netrin-1
attraction to repulsion) is inhibited in vitro by pharmacological
activation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), while
chemical reduction of cAMP recapitulates the effect even in the
absence of 5-HT1B/D activation.13 Dynamic cyclic nucleotide levels
have been observed in a number of axon growth and pathfinding
Fig. 4
5-HT1B/D activation does not alter host innervation. ai–iii Immunohistochemistry against acetylated-tubulin allowed visualization of
lateral line components, nostrils, and motor axons. When comparing wild-type animals to 5-HT1B/D-activated (bi–iii) or 5-HT1B/D-activated blind
animals (ci–iii), no differences were observed between treatments. a. aortic lateral line, a.l.lat anterior lower lateral line, c. caudal lateral line, m.
a. motor axon, max. maxillary lateral line, mid.lat. middle lateral line, o.c. occipital lateral line, no. nostril, p. parietal lateral line, p.o. post-orbital
lateral line, s.o. supra-orbital lateral line, u.lat. upper lateral line
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
6
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
 systems,30 and suite of recent fluorescent biosensors have been
developed allowing for finer scale resolution of cAMP dynamics
across neural development.31
Using an automated training assay, we demonstrated that
blinded animals receiving eye grafts in combination with 5-HT1B/D
activation can learn wavelength-based cues with greater fre-
quency than animals with untreated grafts. The underlying
mechanism behind this observation is not yet clear, although in
no cases were labeled neurons from the grafted eyes visualized
within the brain of the host. Given this finding, we suggest that
retinal ganglion cells from the graft do not connect to the host
brain directly, but may pass information through other nerves in
the spinal cord, and/or may interact with other sensory systems,
such as those in the epidermis. This would be similar to data on
human patients in studies of sensory substitution devices
(including
a
number
of
well-characterized
human–machine
interfaces) such as cameras that deliver electrical stimuli to the
skin or tongue of blind individuals.1 Use of these devices over
extended periods of time leads to activation of the patients visual
hemisphere,
even
though
such
machines
are
not
directly
connected to the users CNS.32–35 Dissecting the encoding and
cellular paths for the ectopic eye-derived information, via whole-
body neural imaging during active behavior, is a key area for
future advances in this system.
Comparing the basic behaviors of animals that learned in the
device to those that did not learn across the pre-training portion
of the test did not reveal any notable differences in speed, time
spent at the edge vs. center of the arena, clockwise vs.
counterclockwise frequency, time spent in the red half of the
dish, or area explored. This is perhaps unsurprising as wild-type
Fig. 5
Eye grafts result in better performance in a visual assay when exposed to a 5-HT1B/D activator. a The training regime used with stage
48–49 tadpoles consisted of an innate preference test, a training phase, a rest period, and finally a learning probe. b Training and testing was
executed using an automated training device. Motion tracking cameras under each arena recorded tadpole position/behavior and software
issued punishments according to the training parameters. c Wild-type animals learn with high frequency in the device, while few blind
animals show learning. Animals with untreated eye grafts do not learn at a greater frequency than blind individuals, while those with
innervated grafts in response to 5-HT1B/D activation demonstrate significantly higher learning frequency than do blind animals. d When
comparing basic behaviors between 5-HT1B/D innervated learners and non-learners, the only significant difference detected was that animals
that learned in the device explored more of the arena than those which did not. e Comparing the time punished during training for 5-HT1B/D
innervated animals reveals that learners receive significantly less punishments than individuals who do not learn in the device. n = 50, 38, 32,
43, and 24 for wild-type, wt + 5-HT1B/D, blind, ectopic eye, and ectopic eye + 5-HT1B/D, respectively. n = 8 for learners and 16 for non-learners.
Asterisk indicates p ≤ 0.05. Values represent mean ± 1 standard deviation
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
7
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
 and blind animals also did not show any large changes in these
metrics: the only significant difference detected was that blind
animals swim faster than untreated siblings. Given that the basic
behaviors of all treatments receiving grafts are indistinguishable
from wild-type animals, it is likely the presence of a posterior eye
does not significantly alter swimming behavior in a way that
would confound the learning results; when analyzing basic
behavior, grafted animals move about the arena exactly as
unoperated individuals.
Significant differences were detected between 5-HT1B/D-acti-
vated graft recipients when punishment was analyzed across
training periods in the learning assay. Animals that were able to
learn in the device received fewer punishments across all training
sessions, which suggests they were better able to distinguish the
wavelength cues present on both sides of the dishes. Further
evidence for this hypothesis is that the frequency of punishments
decreased by 50% between the first and last training session for
animals that learned in the device, while the frequency remained
constant for non-learners. This result provides further support that
animals possessing innervated eye grafts in response to 5-HT1B/D
activation were able to use color as a cue in the associative
learning assay.
In addition to color-learning data, we developed a novel test for
image-forming vision: a rotation test pattern where tadpoles
follow a rotating pattern of triangles presented from below via a
LED monitor. Wild-type animals responded well in the assay, and
the results corroborated earlier reports that Xenopus tadpoles tend
to aggregate even when separated by physical barriers,36 which
suggests the behavior is visually mediated. Anecdotal evidence
suggested numerous reasons for grouping and aligning, from
enhanced efficiency of fluid flow, aiding in filter feeding, to
protection from predation via group effects; we hypothesize that
the tadpoles are perceiving the triangles as conspecifics, but
cannot rule out that they may identify the triangles themselves as
food. Regardless, wild-type animals preferentially established a
rotation direction corresponding to the rotating pattern below the
dish. Blind animals performed poorly in the assay: individuals still
spent the majority of their time swimming in circular patterns, but
the direction was random with respect to the rotating display.
Blinded animals receiving eye grafts in the presence of 5-HT1B/D
activation performed at intermediate levels to those of wild-type
or blind animals without 5-HT1B/D activation (significantly better
than blinded animals in a pairwise comparison [z = 1.75, p =
0.040]), similar to the intermediate performance in the color-
learning assay. This suggests that forcibly innervated grafts
improve not only wavelength identification, but also the ability
to resolve movement and directionally of external objects—a
fairly sophisticated vision task.
Taken together, our study contributes a number of novel
elements to the interdisciplinary science at the intersection of
regenerative medicine, neuroscience, and developmental/evolu-
tionary biology. We established a highly tractable model in which
the anatomical and functional fate of transplanted organs can be
studied in vivo. Remarkably, tadpoles can see via posterior eyes;
the brain is not only plastic enough to make use of visual data no
matter where in the body they originate, but can also do it when
the data are communicated to the spinal cord. This suggests that
biomedical implants may not need to interface to the brain but
could instead provide function via connection to anatomical sites
with lower surgery risk. Xenopus transplantation of eyes and other
organs will facilitate the study of the mutual plasticity of the brain
and body, as these larvae can be subjected to genetic, biophysical,
pharmacological,
and
behavioral
manipulations
and
assays.
Understanding these processes will be crucial to the development
of therapies ranging from individual stem cell implants to whole
organ
transplantation
for
somatic
repair
or
even
sensory
enhancement/augmentation. We identified a serotonergic com-
pound that can be used to control the extent of nerve growth
in vivo and are currently testing it in mammalian bioengineering
contexts in vitro. Given the increasing recognition of neurotrans-
mitter functions in developmental contexts outside the brain, it is
likely that neurotransmitter-targeting compounds will be increas-
ingly exploited as an exciting toolkit for modulation of form and
function in vivo. Our identification of a human-approved drug that
drastically increases innervation between the host and implant,
and improves behavioral function, suggests numerous applica-
tions. We envision a roadmap that exploits the innate plasticity
Fig. 6
Xenopus tadpoles follow a rotating pattern presented from
below. a Schematic of rotation trial in which dishes containing 3–5
tadpoles were placed above a monitor that displayed a rotating
patterns of triangles. Animals were given 15 min of the pattern
rotating in the clockwise direction followed by 15 min in the
counterclockwise direction. Behavior was scored and averaged
across both phases of the trial. b Wild-type animals perform well in
the assay, with 80% of individuals correctly following the direction
of rotation and wild-type animals raised in a 5-HT1B/D agonist
perform similarly. Blind animals and individuals with untreated eye
grafts perform poorly, while animals with innervated grafts perform
at intermediate levels. χ2 = 18.76, p < 0.001. n = 34, 28, 25, 28, 23, for
wild-type, wt + 5-HT1B/D, blind, ectopic eye, and 5-HT1B/D-activated,
respectively. Values represent mean ± 1 standard deviation
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
8
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
 and robustness of embodied neural systems for advances in
regenerative therapies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal husbandry
Xenopus tadpoles were reared in 0.1× Marc’s Modified Ringers solution
(MMR), pH 7.8, under standard procedures37 and were staged according to
Neiuwkoop and Faber.38 All embryos (pooled from separate mothers then
randomly divided between treatments) were placed at 22 °C overnight, to
achieve the correct stages for microsurgery, and were then moved to 16 °C
for the remainder of the experiment. For animals used in behavioral trials,
individuals were raised under a 12 h:12 h light:dark cycle in a 100 × 25 mm
petri dish at a density of no more than 30 individuals per dish. Upon
reaching swimming stages, animals were fed 5 days a week, M-F, once a
day in the evening with Sierra Micron powdered diet, and water changes
were performed M/W/F. All experimental procedures using animals for
experimental purposes were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee and Tufts University Department of Laboratory Animal
Medicine under protocol number M2014-79.
Microinjection
Labeled fluorescent donor embryos were created through microinjection
of tdTomato mRNA. All mRNA was synthesized using standard message
machine kits (Life Technologies) and stored at −80 °C until used. Embryos
were transferred to 3% Ficoll solution before being microinjection with a
pulled capillary, which delivered approximately 550 ng of RNA in a 50 nl
volume to each of four cells at the three-cell stage (to maximize
expression). Two hours after microinjection, embryos were washed twice
in 0.1× MMR and moved to a 22 °C incubator overnight. The following
morning, each embryo was screened for fluorescence using an Olympus
BX-61 microscope equipped with a Hamamatsu ORCA AG CCD camera,
and the animals with the most intense signal were separated to be used as
graft donors. This step was necessary as we found tdTomato expression to
be more mosaic among animals than other fluorescent reporters.
Microsurgery
Prior to microsurgery, the vitelline membranes of stage 23 tdTomato
donors and wild-type recipients were removed and the embryos were
anesthetized in 0.02% tricaine solution, pH 7.5, in 0.1× MMR. Using surgical
forceps, the developing eye primordia of tdTomato embryos was excised,
taking care to remove as little underlying tissue as possible. Then, a small
slit was placed in the posterior of wild-type recipients, just ventral to the
neural tube, by puncturing the tissue with the forceps in the closed
position and then opening them slightly to expand the wound for graft
implantation. Once the recipient was prepped, the tdTomato eye
primordium was carefully lifted by hand and placed into the wild-type
recipient at the wound location. Care was made to orient the graft with the
appropriate proximal/distal orientation (i.e., with the eye facing “out”),
although tissue could be rotated along its radial axis. Grafts fused with the
host within 10 min and animals were given 30 min to heal before being
washed in 0.1× MMR and moved to a 16 °C incubator. In addition, to avoid
any possible confounding effects of laterality, only the left eye of the donor
was removed, and all grafts were placed on the left side of the recipient
embryo. For blinded animals used as controls, stage 34 animals were
anesthetized in 0.02% tricaine for 30 min. Using surgical forceps, a cut was
made in the epidermis just dorsal to the eye, and the entire ocular
structure was removed. Animals were allowed to heal for 30 min before
being washed twice in 0.1× MMR and returned to the 16 °C incubator until
behavior testing.
Pharmaceutical exposure
For animals exposed to the 5-HT1B/D activator Zolmitriptan (Sigma
SML0248), 50 mM stocks were prepared in DMSO and frozen at −20 °C
until used. Once operated animals were given 30 min to heal, they were
moved to new dishes containing 50 µM Zolmitriptan in 0.1× MMR.
Pharmaceuticals were refreshed every other day and removed at stage 46,
after which all animals were reared in standard 0.1× MMR.
Immunohistochemistry
Host innervation was visualized through immunohistochemistry with the
monoclonal anti-acetylated alpha tubulin antibody (Sigma T7451) using a
previously described protocol.39 Briefly, animals were anesthetized in
0.02% tricaine for 30 min, then fixed for 2 h at room temperature in MEMFA
(100 mM
MOPS
(pH
7.4),
2 mM
EGTA,
1 mM
MgSO4,
3.7%
(v/v)
formaldehyde). Following fixation, animals were washed three times,
10 min per wash, in phosphate buffered saline + Tween 20 (PBST), and
then blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 10% goat serum in PBST.
Samples were then rocked overnight at 4 °C in monoclonal anti-acetylated
alpha tubulin antibody, diluted 1:500 in PBST + 10% goat serum. Following
primary exposure, samples were washed three times for 15 min in PBST
before a 60 min secondary incubation with AlexaFlour-555 conjugated
secondary at 1:1000 diluted in PBST. Following secondary incubation,
samples were washed three times for 15 min in PBST and imaged on an
Olympus BX-61 microscope.
Behavior testing
All wavelength-learning trials were performed with a custom built
automated training system.26, 40 The device consists of an array of 12
individual chambers, each containing a disposable 60 × 15 mm petri dish
filled with 15 ml of 0.1× MMR. Below each dish is a machine vision camera
(Insight-Micro 1400, Cognex Corporation, Natick, MA, USA), which uses a
firmware-embedded
background
subtraction
algorithm
to
plot
the
location of any animals in the chamber in a Cartesian manner. Illumination
can be provided to each chamber independently from above, by an
illumination control module which can specify color and intensity by
quadrant. Red or blue light is delivered by light-emitting diodes (Osram
Semiconductors, blue LED; 470 nm part no. LBW5SM, red LED, 635 nm part
no. LRG6SP) and Xenopus are expected to see both given the spectral
profiles of their three known cone classes.41 Finally, within each chamber is
also a set of six iridium oxide-coated titanium electrodes allowing the
delivery of mild to strong electric shocks. All shocks delivered during
wavelength-mediated training experiments were 1.2 mA AC currents,
pulsed for 100 ms followed by 300 ms of no shock. This value was
previously determined to be the lowest that elicits a behavioral response
and no animals displayed physiological or behavioral abnormalities upon
completion of testing.
To determine if tadpoles could learn in a color-based associative assay,
the following trial was performed26: individuals were first presented with
an arena which was illuminated half with red light, half with blue light,
in the absence of any punishment to probe innate color preferences.
Innate testing lasted 30 min and the position of the colors was inverted
after 15 min to avoid having stationary tadpoles be scored as having
a 100% preference for either color (inverting the lights would result in a
50/50 preference). After innate testing, tadpoles enter the learning
acquisition phase, where individuals are again presented with red and
blue halves of the dish, but in this case the tadpole receives a 1.2 mA shock
if it occupies a red quadrant. Acquisition duration is 20 min, with the colors
in the chamber being inverted every 5 min. Following acquisition, tadpoles
are given a 90-min rest in which the entire chamber is illuminated with
blue light, and no punishment is delivered. Finally, individuals are probed
for learning by giving them a choice between red and blue for 5 min, with
neither sample receiving punishment. The entire block of acquisition-rest-
probe is repeated six times. All tadpoles used in learning trials were stage
48, and an individual was determined to have learned if their preference
for red was below 30%, averaged across the final three probes of the
experiment. Further, tadpoles were fed directly before associative learning
experiments, and food was added to each arena during training, as hungry
animals fail to learn in the assay. Animal location was varied across trials to
ensure treatments were evenly distributed between chambers, avoiding
any confounding effect of position.
In addition to red/blue wavelength discrimination, tadpoles were tested
to determine whether they could respond to the movement of patterns on
a white background. For this assay, 3–5 tadpoles were tested simulta-
neously in a 15-cm diameter petri dish filled with 0.1× MMR. Dishes were
placed on top of a LCD monitor screen (model Lenovo D221), and animated
patterns were displayed under the bottom of the dish. The animated
pattern consisted of groups of triangles around the outer portion of the
dish, which would rotate in a clockwise or counterclockwise direction at a
speed of 1 revolution per 20 sec (or 18°/s)—the approximate speed of a
stage 48 tadpole swimming around the edge of the dish. Tadpoles were
placed in the dish for 15 min with the pattern rotating clockwise, after
which their direction of swimming was scored [with the possible outcomes
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
9
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
 being clockwise, counterclockwise, or other—which included no move-
ment, traversing the center of the dish (defined as any open area not
covered
by the
pattern),
or
colliding with
another animal].
After
the clockwise test, the rotation of the pattern was set to counterclockwise
and the tadpole swimming direction was scored again after 15 min had
passed. For all pattern movement trials, food was withheld for 24 h pre-
experiment, as satiated animals often did not swim often enough to score
directionality.
Imaging
To image innervation by implanted eye grafts, stage 46 animals were
anesthetized for 10 min in 0.02% tricaine solution, pH 7.5, and transferred
to depression slides. Donor fluorescence was imaged with an Olympus BX-
61 microscope using a TRITC filter set, which was then overlaid with bright
field images. Individuals were imaged at 40× and 100× magnifications, and
widefield stacks were used to resolve the region of interests. Host
innervation was imaged following immunohistochemistry using the same
Olympus BX-61 and TRITC filter set.
Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism v.5 (GraphPad Software, La
Jolla, CA, USA). Animal numbers were chosen based on previous studies as
well as sample size estimates given a type I error rate of 5% and power of
0.8. Host innervation data were collected as binomial outputs (presence or
absence of innervation phenotype) and analyzed using non-parametric
statistics. For color-learning assays, animals were considered to have
learned if their average preference over the last three testing periods was
equal to or below 30%. Results were then compared using a two
proportion z-test, with Bonferroni corrections to adjust experiment-wide α
level, where multiple comparisons were made within an experiment.
Comparison of punishment between tadpole learners and non-leaners was
performed using a two-way ANOVA.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Joshua Finkelstein for comments on drafts of this manuscript, Erin Switzer
for Xenopus husbandry assistance, as well as Gerhart Ryffel and Roger Tsien for the
TdTomato clones. This research was supported by the Allen Discovery Center
program through The Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group, and by The G. Harold and Leila Y.
Mathers Charitable Foundation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.B. and M.L. conceived and designed the experiments. K.V. created, and collected
data for, the behavioral rotation assay and D.B. performed all other experiments. D.B.,
K.V., and M.L. all contributed to writing the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Bach-y-Rita, P. & S, W. K. Sensory substitution and the human-machine interface.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 541–546 (2003).
2. Bach-y-Rita, P. Brain Plasticity. 113-118 (Mosby, 1988).
3. Arno, P. et al. Occipital activation by pattern recognition in the early blind using
auditory
substitution
for
vision.
Neuroimage
13,
632–645,
doi:10.1006/
nimg.2000.0731 (2001).
4. De Volder, A. G. et al. Changes in occipital cortex activity in early blind humans
using a sensory substitution device. Brain Res. 826, 128–134, doi:10.1016/S0006-
8993(99)01275-5 (1999).
5. Bach-y-Rita, P. Nonsynapctic Diffusion Neurotransmission and Late Brain Reorga-
nization (Demos-Vermande, 1995).
6. De Volder, A. G. et al. Auditory triggered mental imagery of shape involves visual
association areas in early blind humans. Neuroimage 14, 129–139, doi:10.1006/
nimg.2001.0782 (2001).
7. Meijer, P. B. An experimental system for auditory image representations. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 39, 112–121, doi:10.1109/10.121642 (1992).
8. Tyler, M., Danilov, Y. & Bach, Y. R. P. Closing an open-loop control system: ves-
tibular substitution through the tongue. J. Integr. Neurosci. 2, 159–164 (2003).
9. Karcher, S. M., Fenzlaff, S., Hartmann, D., Nagel, S. K. & Konig, P. Sensory aug-
mentation
for
the
blind.
Front.
Hum.
Neurosci.
6,
37,
doi:10.3389/
fnhum.2012.00037 (2012).
10. Nakano, T. et al. Self-formation of optic cups and storable stratified neural retina
from human ESCs. Cell Stem Cell 10, 771–785, doi:10.1016/j.stem.2012.05.009 (2012).
11. Eiraku, M. et al. Self-organizing optic-cup morphogenesis in three-dimensional
culture. Nature 472, 51–56, doi:10.1038/nature09941 (2011).
12. Haydon, P. G., McCobb, D. P. & Kater, S. B. The regulation of neurite outgrowth,
growth cone motility, and electrical synaptogenesis by serotonin. J. Neurobiol. 18,
197–215, doi:10.1002/neu.480180206 (1987).
13. Bonnin, A., Torii, M., Wang, L., Rakic, P. & Levitt, P. Serotonin modulates the
response of embryonic thalamocortical axons to netrin-1. Nat. Neurosci. 10,
588–597, doi:10.1038/nn1896 (2007).
14. Upton, A. L. et al. Excess of serotonin (5-HT) alters the segregation of ispilateral
and contralateral retinal projections in monoamine oxidase A knock-out mice:
possible role of 5-HT uptake in retinal ganglion cells during development. J.
Neurosci. 19, 7007–7024 (1999).
15. Elliott, K. L. & Fritzsch, B. Transplantation of Xenopus laevis ears reveals the ability
to form afferent and efferent connections with the spinal cord. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 54,
1443–1451, doi:10.1387/ijdb.103061ke (2010).
16. Elliott, K. L., Houston, D. W. & Fritzsch, B. Transplantation of Xenopus laevis tissues
to determine the ability of motor neurons to acquire a novel target. PLoS ONE 8,
e55541, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0055541 (2013).
17. Elliott, K. L., Houston, D. W. & Fritzsch, B. Sensory afferent segregation in three-
eared frogs resemble the dominance columns observed in three-eyed frogs. Sci.
Rep. 5, 8338, doi:10.1038/srep08338 (2015).
18. Constantine-Paton, M. & Capranica, R. R. Axonal guidance of developing optic
nerves in the frog. II. Electrophysiological studies of the projection from trans-
planted eye primordia. J. Comp. Neurol. 170, 33–51, doi:10.1002/cne.901700104
(1976).
19. Constantine-Paton, M. & Capranica, R. R. Axonal guidance of developing optic
nerves in the frog. I. Anatomy of the projection from transplanted eye primordia.
J. Comp. Neurol. 170, 17–31, doi:10.1002/cne.901700103 (1976).
20. Constantine-Paton, M. & Caprianica, R. R. Central projection of optic tract
from translocated eyes in the leopard frog (Rana pipiens). Science 189, 480–482
(1975).
21. Blackiston, D. J. & Levin, M. Ectopic eyes outside the head in Xenopus tadpoles
provide sensory data for light-mediated learning. J. Exp. Biol. 216, 1031–1040,
doi:10.1242/jeb.074963 (2013).
22. Levin, M. Molecular bioelectricity: how endogenous voltage potentials control
cell behavior and instruct pattern regulation in vivo. Mol. Biol. Cell 25, 3835–3850,
doi:10.1091/mbc.E13-12-0708 (2014).
23. Levin, M. Reprogramming cells and tissue patterning via bioelectrical pathways:
molecular mechanisms and biomedical opportunities. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst.
Biol. Med. 5, 657–676, doi:10.1002/wsbm.1236 (2013).
24. Blackiston, D. J., Anderson, G. M., Rahman, N., Bieck, C. & Levin, M. A novel
method for inducing nerve growth via modulation of host resting potential: gap
junction-mediated and serotonergic signaling mechanisms. Neurotherapeutics 12,
170–184, doi:10.1007/s13311-014-0317-7 (2015).
25. Blackiston, D., Adams, D. S., Lemire, J. M., Lobikin, M. & Levin, M. Transmembrane
potential of GlyCl-expressing instructor cells induces a neoplastic-like conversion
of melanocytes via a serotonergic pathway. Dis. Model Mech. 4, 67–85,
doi:10.1242/dmm.005561 (2011).
26. Blackiston, D. J. & Levin, M. Aversive training methods in Xenopus laevis: general
principles. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2012, doi:10.1101/pdb.top068338 (2012).
27. Blackiston, D. J. & Levin, M. Inversion of left-right asymmetry alters performance
of Xenopus tadpoles in nonlateralized cognitive tasks. Anim. Behav. 86, 459–466,
doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2013.05.043 (2013).
28. Salichon, N. et al. Excessive activation of serotonin (5-HT) 1B receptors disrupts
the formation of sensory maps in monoamine oxidase a and 5-HT transporter
knock-out mice. J. Neurosci. 21, 884–896 (2001).
29. Upton, A. L. et al. Lack of 5-HT(1B) receptor and of serotonin transporter
have different effects on the segregation of retinal axons in the lateral geniculate
nucleus compared to the superior colliculus. Neuroscience 111, 597–610 (2002).
30. Piper, M., van Horck, F. & Holt, C. The role of cyclic nucleotides in axon
guidance. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 621, 134–143, doi:10.1007/978-0-387-76715-4_10
(2007).
31. Gorshkov, K. & Zhang, J. Visualization of cyclic nucleotide dynamics in neurons.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8, 395, doi:10.3389/fncel.2014.00395 (2014).
32. De Volder, A. G. et al. Changes in occipital cortex activity in early blind humans
using a sensory substitution device. Brain Res. 826, 128–134 (1999).
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
10
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
 33. Dobelle, W. H. Artificial vision for the blind by connecting a television camera to
the visual cortex. ASAIO J. 46, 3–9 (2000).
34. Humayun, M. S. et al. Visual perception in a blind subject with a chronic micro-
electronic retinal prosthesis. Vision Res. 43, 2573–2581 (2003).
35. Ptito, M., Moesgaard, S. M., Gjedde, A. & Kupers, R. Cross-modal plasticity revealed
by electrotactile stimulation of the tongue in the congenitally blind. Brain 128,
606–614, doi:10.1093/brain/awh380 (2005).
36. Wassersug, R. J. & Hessler, C. M. Tadpole behaviour: aggregation in larval Xenopus
laevis. Anim. Behav. 19, 386–389 (1971).
37. Sive, H. L., Grainger, R. M. & Harland, R. M. Early Development of Xenopus laevis
(Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2000).
38. Nieuwkoop, P. D. & Faber, J. Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin). (North-
Holland Publishing Company, 1967).
39. Blackiston, D., Vandenberg, L. N. & Levin, M. High-throughput Xenopus laevis
immunohistochemistry using agarose sections. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2010,
doi:10.1101/pdb.prot5532 (2010).
40. Blackiston, D., Shomrat, T., Nicolas, C. L., Granata, C. & Levin, M. A second-
generation device for automated training and quantitative behavior analyses of
molecularly-tractable model organisms. PLoS ONE 5, e14370, doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0014370 (2010).
41. Rohlich, P. & Szel, A. Photoreceptor cells in the Xenopus retina. Microsc. Res. Tech.
50, 327–337 (2000). doi:10.1002/1097-0029(20000901)50:5<327::AID-JEMT2>3.0.
CO;2-P.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Regenerative Medicine website (doi:10.1038/s41536-017-0012-5).
Control of eye-graft innervation by 5-HT1B/D activation
DJ Blackiston et al
11
Published in partnership with the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute
npj Regenerative Medicine (2017)  8 
