 Clinical Practice Guidelines
PETER R. BLANPIED, PT
, PhD • ANITA R. GROSS, PT, MSc • JAMES M. ELLIOTT, PT
, PhD • LAURIE LEE DEVANEY, PT
, MSc 
DEREK CLEWLEY, DPT • DAVID M. WALTON, PT
, PhD • CHERYL SPARKS, PT
, PhD • ERIC K. ROBERTSON, PT
, DPT
Neck Pain:  
Revision 2017
Clinical Practice Guidelines Linked to the 
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health From the Orthopaedic Section  
of the American Physical Therapy Association
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2017;47(7):A1-A83. doi:10.2519/jospt.2017
.0302
REVIEWERS: Roy D. Altman, MD • Paul Beattie, PT
, PhD • Eugene Boeglin, DPT
Joshua A. Cleland, PT
, PhD • John D. Childs, PT
, PhD • John DeWitt, DPT • Timothy W. Flynn, PT
, PhD
Amanda Ferland, DPT • Sandra Kaplan, PT
, PhD • David Killoran, PhD • Leslie Torburn, DPT
For author, coordinator, contributor, and reviewer affiliations, see end of text. ©2017 Orthopaedic Section, American Physical Therapy Association (APTA), Inc, and the 
Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. The Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc, and the Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy consent to the 
reproduction and distribution of this guideline for educational purposes. Address correspondence to Brenda Johnson, ICF-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines Coordinator, 
Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc, 2920 East Avenue South, Suite 200, La Crosse, WI 54601. E-mail: icf@orthopt.org
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A2
INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A4
METHODS 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A5
CLINICAL GUIDELINES:  
Impairment/Function-Based Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A11
CLINICAL GUIDELINES: 
Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A18
CLINICAL GUIDELINES:  
Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A25
AUTHOR/REVIEWER AFFILIATIONS AND CONTACTS . . . . . . A44
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A45
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a2  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
PATHOANATOMICAL FEATURES/DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A
Clinicians should perform assessments and identify clinical 
findings in patients with neck pain to determine the potential 
for the presence of serious pathology (eg, infection, cancer, cardiac 
involvement, arterial insufficiency, upper cervical ligamentous insuffi-
ciency, unexplained cranial nerve dysfunction or fracture), and refer 
for consultation as indicated.
IMAGING
A
Clinicians should utilize existing guidelines and appropriate-
ness criteria in clinical decision making regarding referral or 
consultation for imaging studies for traumatic and nontraumatic 
neck pain in the acute and chronic stages.
EXAMINATION – OUTCOME MEASURES
A
Clinicians should use validated self-report questionnaires for 
patients with neck pain, to identify a patient’s baseline status 
and to monitor changes relative to pain, function, disability, and psycho-
social functioning.
EXAMINATION – ACTIVITY LIMITATIONS AND  
PARTICIPATION MEASURES
F
Clinicians should utilize easily reproducible activity limitation 
and participation restriction measures associated with the 
patient’s neck pain to assess the changes in the patient’s level of 
function over the episode of care.
EXAMINATION – PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT MEASURES
B
When evaluating a patient with neck pain over an episode of 
care, clinicians should include assessments of impairments 
of body function that can establish baselines, monitor changes over 
time, and be helpful in clinical decision making to rule in or rule out 
(1) neck pain with mobility deficits, including cervical active range of 
motion (ROM), the cervical flexion-rotation test, and cervical and 
thoracic segmental mobility tests; (2) neck pain with headache, in-
cluding cervical active ROM, the cervical flexion-rotation test, and 
upper cervical segmental mobility testing; (3) neck pain with radiat-
ing pain, including neurodynamic testing, Spurling’s test, the distrac-
tion test, and the Valsalva test; and (4) neck pain with movement 
coordination impairments, including cranial cervical flexion and neck 
flexor muscle endurance tests. Clinicians should include algometric 
assessment of pressure pain threshold for classifying pain.
DIAGNOSIS/CLASSIFICATION
C
Clinicians should use motion limitations in the cervical and 
upper thoracic regions, presence of cervicogenic headache, 
history of trauma, and referred or radiating pain into an upper ex-
tremity as useful clinical findings for classifying a patient with neck 
pain into the following categories:
• Neck pain with mobility deficits
• Neck pain with movement coordination impairments (including 
whiplash-associated disorder [WAD])
• Neck pain with headaches (cervicogenic headache)
• Neck pain with radiating pain (radicular)
INTERVENTIONS: NECK PAIN WITH MOBILITY DEFICITS
Acute
For patients with acute neck pain with mobility deficits:
B
Clinicians should provide thoracic manipulation, a program 
of neck ROM exercises, and scapulothoracic and upper  
extremity strengthening to enhance program adherence.
C
Clinicians may provide cervical manipulation and/
or 
mobilization.
Subacute
For patients with subacute neck pain with mobility deficits:
B
Clinicians should provide neck and shoulder girdle endurance 
exercises.
C
Clinicians may provide thoracic manipulation and cervical 
manipulation and/
or mobilization.
Chronic
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits:
B
Clinicians should provide a multimodal approach of the 
following:
• Thoracic manipulation and cervical manipulation or 
mobilization
• Mixed exercise for cervical/scapulothoracic regions: neuromus-
cular exercise (eg, coordination, proprioception, and postural 
training), stretching, strengthening, endurance training, aerobic 
conditioning, and cognitive affective elements
• Dry needling, laser, or intermittent mechanical/manual traction
C
Clinicians may provide neck, shoulder girdle, and trunk en-
durance exercise approaches and patient education and 
counseling strategies that promote an active lifestyle and address 
cognitive and affective factors.
INTERVENTIONS: NECK PAIN WITH MOVEMENT  
COORDINATION IMPAIRMENTS
Acute
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination  
impairments (including WAD):
B
Clinicians should provide the following:
• Education of the patient to
- Return to normal, nonprovocative preaccident activities as  
soon as possible
- Minimize use of a cervical collar
- Perform postural and mobility exercises to decrease pain and 
increase ROM
• Reassurance to the patient that recovery is expected to occur 
within the first 2 to 3 months.
Summary of Recommendations*
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a3
B
Clinicians should provide a multimodal intervention ap-
proach including manual mobilization techniques plus exer-
cise (eg, strengthening, endurance, flexibility, postural, coordination, 
aerobic, and functional exercises) for those patients expected to ex-
perience a moderate to slow recovery with persistent impairments.
C
Clinicians may provide the following for patients whose  
condition is perceived to be at low risk of progressing  
toward chronicity:
• A single session consisting of early advice, exercise instruction, 
and education
• A comprehensive exercise program (including strength and/
or 
endurance with/without coordination exercises)
• Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
F
Clinicians should monitor recovery status in an attempt to 
identify those patients experiencing delayed recovery who 
may need more intensive rehabilitation and an early pain education 
program.
Chronic
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordination im-
pairments (including WAD):
C
Clinicians may provide the following:
• Patient education and advice focusing on assurance, encouragement, 
prognosis, and pain management
• Mobilization combined with an individualized, progressive submax-
imal exercise program including cervicothoracic strengthening,  
endurance, flexibility, and coordination, using principles of cogni-
tive behavioral therapy
• TENS
INTERVENTIONS: NECK PAIN WITH HEADACHES
Acute
For patients with acute neck pain with headache:
B
Clinicians should provide supervised instruction in active 
mobility exercise.
C
Clinicians may provide C1-2 self-sustained natural apophyseal 
glide (self-SNAG) exercise.
Subacute
For patients with subacute neck pain with headache:
B
Clinicians should provide cervical manipulation and 
mobilization.
C
Clinicians may provide C1-2 self-SNAG exercise.
Chronic
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache:
B
Clinicians should provide cervical or cervicothoracic manipu-
lation or mobilizations combined with shoulder girdle and 
neck stretching, strengthening, and endurance exercise.
INTERVENTIONS: NECK PAIN WITH RADIATING PAIN
Acute
For patients with acute neck pain with radiating pain:
C
Clinicians may provide mobilizing and stabilizing exercises, 
laser, and short-term use of a cervical collar.
Chronic
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain:
B
Clinicians should provide mechanical intermittent cervical 
traction, combined with other interventions such as stretching 
and strengthening exercise plus cervical and thoracic mobilization/
manipulation.
B
Clinicians should provide education and counseling to  
encourage participation in occupational and exercise 
activities.
*These recommendations and clinical practice guidelines are based 
on the scientific literature published prior to August 2016.
Summary of Recommendations* (continued)
List of Abbreviations
ACR: American College of Radiology
AMSTAR: assessment of multiple systematic  
reviews
APTA: American Physical Therapy Association
CCFT: cranial cervical flexion test
CCR: Canadian cervical spine rule
CFRT: cervical flexion-rotation test
CI: confidence interval
CPG: clinical practice guideline
CROM: cervical range of motion
CT: computed tomography
GRADE: Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation
ICC: intraclass correlation coefficient
ICD: International Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems
ICF: International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a4  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
AIM OF THE GUIDELINES
The Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical Therapy 
Association (APTA) has an ongoing effort to create evidence-
based clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) for orthopaedic 
physical therapy evaluation and management of adult pa-
tients with musculoskeletal impairments described in the 
World Health Organization’s International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF).242
The purposes of these clinical guidelines are to:
• Describe evidence-based physical therapy practice includ-
ing diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and assessment of 
outcome for musculoskeletal disorders commonly man-
aged by orthopaedic physical therapists
• Classify and define common musculoskeletal conditions 
using the World Health Organization’s terminology related 
to impairments of body function and body structure, activ-
ity limitations, and participation restrictions
• Identify interventions supported by current best evidence 
to address impairments of body function and structure, 
activity limitations, and participation restrictions associ-
ated with common musculoskeletal conditions
• Identify appropriate outcome measures to assess chang-
es resulting from physical therapy interventions in body 
function and structure as well as in activity and participa-
tion of the individual
• Provide a description of the practice of orthopaedic physi-
cal therapists to policy makers
• Provide information for patients, payers, and claims re-
viewers regarding the practice of orthopaedic physical 
therapy for common musculoskeletal conditions
• Create a reference publication for orthopaedic physi-
cal therapy clinicians, academic instructors, clinical 
instructors, students, interns, residents, and fellows re-
garding the best current practice of orthopaedic physi-
cal therapy
STATEMENT OF INTENT
These guidelines are not intended to be construed or to serve 
as a standard of medical care. Standards of care are deter-
mined on the basis of all clinical data available for an individ-
ual patient and are subject to change as scientific knowledge 
and technology advance and patterns of care evolve. These 
parameters of practice should be considered guidelines only. 
Adherence to them will not ensure a successful outcome in 
every patient, nor should they be construed as including all 
proper methods of care or excluding other acceptable meth-
ods of care aimed at the same results. The ultimate judgment 
regarding a particular clinical procedure or treatment plan 
must be made based on clinician experience and expertise in 
light of the clinical presentation of the patient, the available 
evidence, available diagnostic and treatment options, and the 
patient’s values, expectations, and preferences. However, we 
suggest that significant departures from accepted guidelines 
should be documented in the patient’s health records at the 
time the relevant clinical decision is made.
Introduction
List of Abbreviations (continued)
ICON: International Collaboration on Neck Pain
IFOMPT: International Federation of Orthopaedic 
Manipulative Physical Therapists
JOSPT: Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy
LOINC: Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes
LR: likelihood ratio
MDC: minimal detectable change
MDT: Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy
MRI: magnetic resonance imaging
MVC: motor vehicle collision
NDI: Neck Disability Index
NEXUS: National Emergency X-Radiography Utilization 
Study
NSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
PAIVM: passive accessory intervertebral motion
PICOT-SD: population, problem, or patients (P), 
intervention (I), comparison or control (C), outcome (O), 
time (T), study design (SD)
PSFS: Patient-Specific Functional Scale
RCT: randomized controlled trial
ROM: range of motion
SEM: standard error of measurement
SF-36: Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form 
Health Survey
SIGN: Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
SNAG: sustained natural apophyseal glide
SR: systematic review
TENS: transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
VAS: visual analog scale
WAD: whiplash-associated disorder
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a5
Content experts were appointed by the Orthopaedic Section 
of the APTA to conduct a review of the literature and to de-
velop an updated neck pain CPG as indicated by the current 
state of the evidence in the field. The aims of the revision 
were to provide a concise summary of the evidence since 
publication of the original guideline and to develop new rec-
ommendations or revise previously published recommenda-
tions to support evidence-based practice. The authors of this 
guideline revision worked with research librarians possessing 
expertise in systematic reviews to perform a systematic search 
for concepts associated with neck pain in articles published 
from 2007 to August 2016 related to classification, exami-
nation, and intervention strategies for neck pain consistent 
with previous guideline development methods related to ICF 
classification.29 Primary electronic search methods were per-
formed using a standard structured approach from January 
2007 to August 2016 in the following databases: PubMed, 
Cochrane Library, Web of Science, CINAHL, ProQuest Dis-
sertations and Abstracts, PEDro, ProQuest Nursing and Al-
lied Health Sources, and Embase, by research librarians. The 
search strategy guided by PICOT-SD (Population, problem, 
or patients [P], Intervention [I], Comparison or control [C], 
Outcome [O], Time [T], Study design [SD]) was designed 
to locate systematic reviews, meta-analyses, or narrative re-
views that addressed 6 clinical areas (classification, examina-
tion, intervention, harms, prognosis, and outcome measures), 
when applicable contrasting with a control or comparison 
treatments, and used at least 1 measurement property of an 
outcome measure in adult patients with neck pain or mus-
culoskeletal neck conditions in primary to tertiary settings 
from immediate posttreatment to long-term follow-up. The 
study designs included reviews on interventions and cohort/
case-control trials for prognosis, diagnostic, and outcome mea-
surement studies. Secondary reviews were identified through 
several grey literature sources (references within eligible cita-
tions screened for any additional references, personal files from 
the investigative team, and content experts). See APPENDIX A for 
example search strategies and APPENDIX B for example search 
dates and results, available at www.orthopt.org. 
In addition, the guideline revision team worked with, and 
benefited greatly from, the efforts of members of the Inter-
national Collaboration on Neck Pain (ICON), a multidisci-
plinary group currently producing an extensive review of 
the literature on neck pain.179 Bridging methods and deci-
sion rules were guided by recommendations established by 
Whitlock et al237 and Robinson et al.173,174 Additionally, recent 
publications on the lived experiences of people with neck 
pain were reviewed126 as part of our deliberations and imple-
mentation when creating the final recommendations. The 
potential organizational and implementation barriers in ap-
plying the recommendations were discussed and consider-
ations were folded into the expert opinion section following 
each evidence table. The guideline has been piloted among 
end users through International Federation of Orthopaedic 
Manipulative Physical Therapists (IFOMPT) member orga-
nizations, and through APTA, Inc through a public posting.
The guideline development group members declared rela-
tionships and developed a conflict management plan that 
included submitting a Conflict of Interest form to the Or-
thopaedic Section, APTA, Inc. Articles that were authored 
by a group member were assigned to an alternate member 
for assessment. Partial funding was provided to the CPG 
development team for travel and expenses for CPG training 
and development; the content of this guideline was not in-
fluenced by this funding. The CPG development team main-
tained editorial independence. A list of competing interests, 
conflicts of interest, and author contributions is available at 
www.orthopt.org. Group members believe the guideline pro-
cess and development of recommendations were free from 
influence from competing interests and conflicts of interest.
In the Impairment/Function-Based Diagnosis and the 
Examination sections, a narrative review is provided with 
emphasis placed on systematic reviews and meta-analyses 
when available. In the Interventions section, only systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses were considered in this revision. 
When there was a systematic review of reviews, those ap-
praisals were used, and literature was searched for system-
atic reviews and meta-analyses published since the end date 
of the published review of reviews. If a systematic review 
or meta-analysis published prior to January 2007 and not 
included in the 2008 CPG, or published after August 2016, 
was identified by the authors during writing, then that ar-
ticle was also appraised and included using methods similar 
to those recommended by Robinson et al.173 Articles contrib-
uting to recommendations were reviewed based on specified 
inclusion and exclusion criteria with the goal of identifying 
evidence relevant to physical therapist clinical decision mak-
ing for adult persons with noncancer (neuromusculoskel-
etal) neck pain. The titles and abstracts of each article were 
reviewed independently by 2 members of the CPG develop-
ment team for inclusion. See APPENDIX C for inclusion and ex-
clusion criteria (available at www.orthopt.org). The full texts 
were then similarly appraised to obtain the final set of ar-
ticles for contribution to recommendations. The team leader 
(P.R.B.) provided the final decision for rare (less than 10) 
discrepancies that were not resolved by the review team. The 
Methods
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a6  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
ratings of the primary sources contained in the systematic 
reviews or meta-analyses were used by the team in making 
recommendations. If the systematic reviews or meta-anal-
yses did not provide the necessary information (eg, study 
quality,77 participant characteristics, stage of disorder) or 
there were discrepancies between the reviews, the reviewers 
obtained the information directly from the primary source. 
Quality ratings used in the systematic reviews came from a 
variety of tools (eg, Cochrane Risk of Bias, PEDro). Rating of 
the body of evidence came from other tools (eg, Grading of 
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evalua-
tion [GRADE], Cochrane Collaboration Back and Neck Re-
view Group218), and the CPG team calibrated these ratings 
into high, moderate, low, and very low quality. Very low-
quality evidence was not considered in this revision. Ratings 
of systematic reviews came from 2 tools (AMSTAR187 or the 
closely related SIGN185), and these ratings were also cali-
brated into high, acceptable, low, and very low categories. 
Very low-quality reviews and findings from very low-quality 
primary sources were not considered in this revision. See 
 
APPENDIX D for a flow chart of articles and APPENDIX E for 
articles included in recommendations (available at www.
orthopt.org). Articles on topics that were not immediately 
relevant to the development of these recommendations, 
such as shockwave therapy or injection, were not subject 
to the systematic review process and were not included in 
the flow chart.
This guideline was issued in 2017 based on the published 
literature up to August 26, 2016. This guideline will be con-
sidered for review in 2021, or sooner if new evidence becomes 
available. Any updates to the guideline in the interim period 
will be noted on the Orthopaedic Section of the APTA web-
site (www.orthopt.org).
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Since the original neck pain CPG was published in 2008, 
publication of the results of a large number of trials has 
coincided with an increased number of systematic reviews 
and reviews of reviews. The current update appraises high-
level systematic reviews using updated criteria for levels of 
evidence and recommendations consistent with contem-
porary research methodology. The authors encourage the 
reader to note these changes in interpreting the guideline 
recommendations.
Individual systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and reviews 
of reviews were graded according to criteria adapted from 
the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, Oxford, United 
Kingdom for diagnostic, prospective, and therapeutic studies 
(www.cebm.net). In 4 teams of 2, each reviewer independently 
evaluated the quality of each article using a critical appraisal 
tool and assigned a level of evidence. A description of the grad-
ing system is provided in TABLE 1. See also APPENDIX F for evi-
dence level criteria details on procedures used for assigning 
Methods (continued)
 
TABLE 1
Levels of Evidence*
Level
Intervention/Prevention
Pathoanatomic/Risk/ 
Clinical Course/Prognosis/
Differential Diagnosis
Diagnosis/ 
Diagnostic  
Accuracy
Prevalence of  
Condition/ 
Disorder
Exam/ 
Outcomes
I
•  
High-quality SR† containing consistent 
findings from multiple high-quality 
primary sources‡
• SR of prospective cohort 
studies
• High-quality prospective 
cohort study§
• SR of high-quality 
diagnostic studies
• High-quality 
diagnostic study║ 
with validation
• SR, high-quality 
cross-sectional 
studies
• High-quality 
cross-sectional 
study¶
• SR of prospec-
tive cohort 
studies
• High-quality 
prospective 
cohort study
II
•  
High- or acceptable-quality SR contain-
ing mostly consistent findings from 
generally high-quality primary sources, 
or
•  
Consistent findings from at least 1 high-
quality large (n>100 in each arm) RCT
, 
or
•  
Consistent findings from more than 1 
small, high-quality RCT
• SR of retrospective cohort 
study
• Lower-quality prospective 
cohort study
• High-quality retrospective 
cohort study
• Consecutive cohort
• Outcomes study or ecologi-
cal study
• SR of exploratory 
diagnostic studies 
or consecutive 
cohort studies
• High-quality 
exploratory 
diagnostic studies
• Consecutive retro-
spective cohort
• SR of studies that 
allows relevant 
estimate
• Lower-quality 
cross-sectional 
study
• SR of 
lower-quality 
prospective 
cohort studies
• Lower-quality 
prospective 
cohort study
Table continues on page A7.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a7
levels of evidence (available at www.orthopt.org). Systematic 
review AMSTAR scores are available in APPENDIX G, and arti-
cles containing very low-quality primary sources are listed in 
 
APPENDIX H (available at www.orthopt.org).
The levels of evidence were assigned with alignment to the 
definitions contained in TABLE 1.
Weaker diagnostic criteria and reference standards, improp-
er randomization, no blinding, and less than 80% follow-up 
may add bias and threats to validity.
When available, a second factor, the magnitude of effect 
versus harm, contributed to the recommendation, and was 
characterized according to TABLE 2.
Methods (continued)
 
TABLE 1
Levels of Evidence* (continued)
Abbreviations: AMSTAR, assessment of multiple systematic reviews; RCT, randomized clinical trial; SIGN, Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; 
SR, systematic review.
*Adapted from Phillips B, Ball C, Sackett D, et al. Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine - Levels of Evidence (March 2009). Available at: http://
www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=1025. Accessed August 4, 2009. See also APPENDIX F.
†SRs were rated using AMSTAR or SIGN criteria, where 8 or higher received a “high,” 6 to 7 received an “acceptable,” 4 to 5 received a “low,” and below 4 
received a “ very low” score. Very low–quality reviews were not used.
‡Quality of the primary sources was calibrated to “high,” “moderate,” “low,” and “very low” levels. Results from very low–quality primary sources were not used.
§Quality cohort study includes greater than 80% follow-up.
║High-quality diagnostic study includes consistently applied reference standard and blinding.
¶High-quality prevalence study is a cross-sectional study that uses a local and current random sample or censuses.
Level
Intervention/Prevention
Pathoanatomic/Risk/ 
Clinical Course/Prognosis/
Differential Diagnosis
Diagnosis/ 
Diagnostic  
Accuracy
Prevalence of  
Condition/ 
Disorder
Exam/ 
Outcomes
III
• High- or acceptable-quality SR contain-
ing mostly consistent findings from 
moderate primary sources, or
• Mostly consistent findings from 1 high-
quality RCT or more than 1 moderate-
quality RCT
• Lower-quality retrospective 
cohort study
• High-quality cross-sectional 
study
• Case-control study
• Lower-quality 
exploratory 
diagnostic studies
• Nonconsecutive 
retrospective 
cohort
• Local nonrandom 
study
• High-quality 
cross-section-
al study
IV
• High- or acceptable-quality SR where 
higher-quality primary sources tend to 
favor a clear direction, or
• Inconsistent findings from case-control 
studies or retrospective studies, or 
inconsistent findings from RCTs where 
the higher-quality trials tend to favor a 
clear direction (even when lower-quality 
trials favor the opposite), or
• Consensus statements from content 
experts
• Case series
• Case-control 
study
...
• Lower-quality 
cross-section-
al study
V
• Inconsistent evidence drawn from a low-
rated (score of 5 or below on AMSTAR 
or SIGN scales) SR that may indicate 
the balance of evidence favoring one 
direction but with very low confidence, 
regardless of the quality of the primary 
sources, or
• Case series or individual expert opinion, 
or direct or indirect evidence from 
physiology, bench research, or  
theoretical constructs
• Individual expert opinion
• Individual expert 
opinion
• Individual expert 
opinion
• Individual 
expert opinion
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a8  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATION
The strength of the recommendation was graded according 
to the confidence in the evidence and the magnitude of effect 
as indicated in TABLE 3.
SYMPTOM STAGES AND FOLLOW-UP PERIODS
Following a review of included studies, results were assigned 
a stage related to symptom duration: acute (less than 6 
weeks), subacute (6-12 weeks), or chronic (greater than 12 
weeks). Time periods for follow-up results were characterized 
according to TABLE 4.
 
TABLE 2
Magnitude of Effect Versus Harm: Grades of Recommendation
Strong
Weak
None
Weak
Strong
Desirable consequences 
clearly outweigh undesir-
able consequences. This 
considers the magnitude of 
effect (none, small, medium, 
large), numbers needed to 
treat, probability of harms, 
resources and patient 
burden, etc. A strong grade 
requires a medium to large 
effect with low risk of harms 
and low patient burden
Desirable consequences 
probably outweigh undesir-
able consequences (small  
to moderate effect, some  
risk of harms, higher  
burden)
Consequences equally  
balanced or uncertain 
(none or small effect, 
unclear harms, unclear 
burden)
Undesirable consequences 
probably outweigh 
desirable consequences 
(probability of harms likely 
outweighs any small-to-
moderate effect, burden 
might be high)
Undesirable consequences 
clearly outweigh desirable 
consequences (small 
effect, clear probability 
of harms or high patient 
burden)
Methods (continued)
 
TABLE 3
Method of Assigning Confidence to Recommendations
Grade
Strength of Evidence
Basis of Strength Assignment
A
Strong
One or more level I systematic reviews support the recommendation, providing evidence for a 
strong magnitude of effect
B
Moderate
One or more level II systematic reviews or a preponderance of level III systematic reviews or 
studies support the recommendation, providing evidence for a mild to moderate magnitude 
of effect
C
Weak
One or more level III systematic reviews or a preponderance of level IV evidence supports the 
recommendation, providing minimal evidence of effect
D
Conflicting
Higher-quality studies conducted on this topic disagree with respect to their conclusions and 
effect. The recommendation is based on these conflicting studies
E
Theoretical/foundational 
evidence
A preponderance of evidence from animal or cadaver studies, from conceptual models or 
principles, or from basic science or bench research supports the recommendation, providing 
theoretical/foundational evidence of effect
F
Expert opinion
Best practice to achieve a beneficial effect and/
or minimize a harmful effect, based on the  
clinical experience of the guidelines development team
 
TABLE 4
 Follow-up Periods
Follow-up
Time Interval
Immediate
Closest to immediately following intervention
Short term
Closest to 1 mo
Intermediate term
Closest to 6 mo
Long term
Closest to 12 mo or longer
Beneficial Effect
Neutral Effect
Harmful Effect
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a9
gov). The implementation tools planned to be available for 
patients, clinicians, educators, payers, policy makers, and 
researchers, and the associated implementation strategies, 
are listed in TABLE 5.
CLASSIFICATION
The primary International Classification of Diseases-10 
(ICD-10) codes and conditions associated with neck pain 
include M54.2 Cervicalgia, M54.6 Pain in the thoracic 
spine, R51 Cervicogenic headache, M53.0 Cervicocranial 
syndrome, M53.1 Cervicobrachial syndrome, M53.2 Spi-
nal instability, S13.4 Sprain of ligaments of cervical spine, 
S13.8 Sprain of joints and ligaments of other parts of neck, 
M54.1x Dorsalgia with cervical radiculopathy, M47.2x 
Cervical spondylosis with radiculopathy, M47.1x Cervical 
spondylosis with myelopathy, M50.x Cervical disc disor-
ders, M62.5 Muscle wasting and atrophy, M79.1 Myalgia, 
and M99.01 Segmental and somatic dysfunction.241
Andelic et al5 linked ICF categories to functional problems 
reported on the Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS) by 
249 participants with neck pain in Norway. Agreeing with a 
previous study by Tschiesner et al,210 Andelic et al5 found that 
categories linking to 10% or more functional problems were 
labeled as “more frequent” and that those linking to fewer 
GUIDELINE REVIEW PROCESS AND VALIDATION
Experts in neck pain reviewed these CPGs’ content and 
methods for integrity, accuracy, and representation of the 
condition. The draft was also reviewed by: (1) representa-
tives of member organizations of IFOMPT and members of 
the Orthopaedic Section of the APTA, Inc through a public 
posting, and (2) a panel of consumer/patient representatives 
and external stakeholders, such as claims reviewers, medi-
cal coding experts, academic educators, clinical educators, 
physician specialists, and researchers. All comments, feed-
back, and suggestions were considered for revision. Addition-
ally, a panel of experts in physical therapy practice guideline 
methodology annually review the Orthopaedic Section of 
the APTA’s ICF-based Clinical Practice Guidelines Policies 
and provide feedback and comments to the Clinical Practice 
Guidelines Coordinator and editors to improve the APTA’s 
guidelines development and implementation processes.
DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS
In addition to publishing these guidelines in the Journal 
of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy (JOSPT), these 
guidelines will be posted on the CPG areas of both the JOSPT 
and the Orthopaedic Section of the APTA websites for free 
access and will be submitted for posting on the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality’s website (www.guideline.
Methods (continued)
 
TABLE 5
Planned Strategies and Tools to Support the Dissemination  
and Implementation of This Clinical Practice Guideline
Tool
Strategy
“Perspectives for Patients”
Patient-oriented guideline summary available on www.jospt.org and  
www.orthopt.org
Mobile app of guideline-based exercises for patients/
clients and health  
care practitioners
Marketing and distribution of app using www.orthopt.org and www.
jospt.org
Clinician’s quick-reference guide
Summary of guideline recommendations available on www.orthopt.org
Read-for-credit continuing education units
Continuing education units available for physical therapists and ath-
letic trainers through JOSPT
Educational webinars for health care practitioners
Guideline-based instruction available for practitioners on www.orthopt.
org
Mobile and web-based app of guideline for training of health care 
practitioners
Marketing and distribution of app using www.orthopt.org and www.
jospt.org
Physical Therapy National Outcomes Data Registry
Support the ongoing usage of data registry for common musculoskel-
etal conditions of the head and neck region
Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes mapping
Publication of minimal data sets and their corresponding Logical 
Observation Identifiers Names and Codes for the head and neck region 
on www.orthopt.org
Non-English versions of the guidelines and guideline implementation 
tools
Development and distribution of translated guidelines and tools to 
JOSPT’s international partners and global audience via www.jospt.org
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a10  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
position, d4158 Maintaining a body position, and d4452 
Reaching.
ICF body structure codes associated with neck pain include 
s7103 Joints of head and neck, s7104 Muscles of head and 
neck region, s7105 Ligaments and fascia of head and neck 
region, s76000 Cervical vertebral column, and s1201 Spi-
nal nerves.
ICF codes can be accessed at http//apps.who.int/classifica-
tions/icfbrowser/. A comprehensive list of codes was pub-
lished in the previous guideline.29
ORGANIZATION OF THE GUIDELINES
For each topic, the summary recommendation and grade of 
evidence from the 2008 guideline are presented, followed by 
a synthesis of the recent literature with the corresponding 
evidence levels. Each topic concludes with the 2017 summary 
recommendation and its updated grade of evidence.
than 10% were labeled as “less frequent.” The more frequent 
categories of body function to which they were linked includ-
ed b134 Sleep functions (27.2%) and b710 Mobility of joint 
functions (26.2%). The most frequent categories of activity 
and participation were d850 Remunerative employment 
(15%), d640 Doing housework (14%), d920 Recreation 
and leisure activities (13%), and d430 Lifting and carry-
ing objects (10%).5
Additional ICF body function codes associated with neck 
pain are (1) sensory functions related to pain, and (2) move-
ment functions related to joint motion and control of volun-
tary movements. These body function codes include b28010 
Pain in neck and head, b2803 Radiating pain in a derma-
tome, b2804 Radiating pain in a segment or region, b7101 
Mobility of several joints, and b7601 Control of complex 
voluntary movements.
Additional ICF activities and participation codes associat-
ed with neck pain include d4108 Changing a basic body 
Methods (continued)
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a11
PREVALENCE
2008 Summary
Pain and impairment of the neck is common. It is estimated 
that 22% to 70% of the population will have neck pain some 
time in their lives.16,18,37,38,57,123,159 In addition, it has been sug-
gested that the incidence of neck pain is increasing.153,243 At 
any given time, 10% to 20% of the population reports neck 
problems,16,39,88,215 with 54% of individuals having experi-
enced neck pain within the last 6 months.37 Prevalence of 
neck pain increases with age and is most common in women 
around the fifth decade of life.7,16,40,128,201
Although the natural history of neck pain appears to be fa-
vorable,48,99 rates of recurrence and chronicity are high.12,90 
One study reported that 30% of patients with neck pain will 
develop chronic symptoms, with neck pain of greater than 6 
months in duration affecting 14% of all individuals who expe-
rience an episode of neck pain.16 Additionally, a recent survey 
demonstrated that 37% of individuals who experience neck 
pain will report persistent problems for at least 12 months.39 
Five percent of the adult population with neck pain will 
be disabled by the pain, representing a serious health con-
cern.16,97 In a survey of workers with injuries to the neck and 
upper extremity, Pransky et al162 reported that 42% missed 
more than 1 week of work and 26% experienced recurrence 
within 1 year. The economic burden due to disorders of the 
neck is high, and includes costs of treatment, lost wages, and 
compensation expenditures.13,168 Neck pain is second only to 
low back pain in annual workers’ compensation costs in the 
United States.243 In Sweden, neck and shoulder problems ac-
count for 18% of all disability payments.153 Jette et al98 report-
ed that individuals with neck pain make up approximately 
25% of patients receiving outpatient physical therapy care. 
Additionally, patients with neck pain frequently are treated 
with nonsurgical interventions by primary care and physical 
therapy providers.15,48,99
EVIDENCE UPDATE
I
The Global Burden of Disease Injuries and Risk 
Factors 2010 study measured population health 
through disability-adjusted life years and years of 
life lived in less than ideal health, measured as years lived 
with disability. Years lived with disability is the number of 
incident cases, multiplied by the average duration of the con-
dition (average number of years that the condition lasts until 
remission or death), multiplied by the disability weight. In 
this large study, neck pain ranked 21st overall in global cause 
of disability-adjusted life years144 and fourth overall in years 
lived with disability.230 The 2013 data indicated a worsening 
problem, with neck pain ranking 19th overall in global cause 
of disability-adjusted life years.143
I
In a systematic review by Haldeman et al,80 preva-
lence depended on the definitions used; for neck 
pain, the 1-year prevalence ranged from 30% to 50% 
in the general population. For neck pain with associated dis-
ability, the 1-year prevalence ranged from 2% to 11% in the 
general population, and from 11% to 14% in workers who re-
ported being limited in their activities because of neck pain.80
II
March et al129 reported on neck pain without refer-
ral into the upper limbs that lasted at least 1 day. 
The global point prevalence in 2010 was estimated 
to be 4.9% (females, 5.8%; males, 4.0%).129
II
Hoy et al91 published a systematic review of epide-
miologic studies of activity-limiting neck pain, in-
cluding neck-related upper-limb pain and head and/
or trunk pain lasting at least 1 day. The 1-year incidence of neck 
pain was 10.4% to 21.3%. The 1-year remission rate ranged 
from 33% to 65%. The 1-year prevalence of neck pain in the 
general population was on average 25.8% (range, 4.8%-79.5%), 
with a point prevalence of 14.4% (range, 0.4%-41.5%).91
IV
Goode et al67 performed a telephone survey of 141 
individuals in North Carolina, and found the esti-
mated prevalence of chronic neck pain among non-
institutionalized individuals for the state of North Carolina 
to be 2.2% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.7%, 2.6%). Indi-
viduals with chronic neck pain were largely middle aged 
(mean age, 48.9 years) and the majority were females (56%) 
and non-Hispanic whites (81%).67
2017 SUMMARY
Significant variation exists in the definition of neck pain and 
the research methods employed within the epidemiological 
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
Impairment/Function-Based 
Diagnosis
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a12  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
literature on neck pain. This variation limits the ability to 
compare or combine data across studies to arrive at consen-
sus; however, there is agreement that neck pain is common 
and increasing worldwide in both the general population and 
in specific subgroups.
RISK FACTORS
2008 Recommendation
Clinicians should consider age greater than 40, coexisting 
low back pain, a long history of neck pain, cycling as a regu-
lar activity, loss of strength in the hands, worrisome attitude, 
poor quality of life, and less vitality as predisposing factors 
for the development of chronic neck pain. (Recommendation 
based on moderate evidence.)
For the purposes of this CPG, the term risk will be reserved 
specifically for risk factors for new onset of neck pain, while 
prognosis (discussed below) will refer to the predicted course 
of the condition after onset.
Evidence Update
McLean et al137 conducted a systematic review of risk factors 
for the onset of new neck pain across different populations. 
Of 14 independent studies (13 rated high quality), the fol-
lowing risk factors for new-onset neck pain were identified: 
female sex, older age, high job demands, being an ex-smoker, 
low social or work support, and a previous history of neck or 
low back disorders. Paksaichol et al158 conducted a similar 
review of 7 independent cohorts (5 rated high quality) fo-
cused on office workers,158 with results indicating that only 
the female sex and prior history of neck pain were strong risk 
factors of new-onset neck pain in this population.
2017 Summary
Evidence from 2 recent systematic reviews indicates that the 
female sex and prior history of neck pain are the strongest 
and most consistent risk factors for new-onset neck pain in 
office workers and the general population. Older age, high 
job demands, smoking history, low social/work support, and 
prior history of low back pain may also be risk factors.
CLINICAL COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Clinical Course
Risk and prognosis are ideally considered in the context of 
the “natural course” of a condition, assuming no interven-
tion, or the “clinical course” a condition can be expected to 
take in response to a specific intervention. Clinical progno-
sis is based on 2 important pieces of information: what is 
known about the clinical course of the condition, and the 
presence or absence of factors that may lead to deviation 
from that course.
Evidence Update
Six systematic reviews addressed the clinical course of neck 
pain.12,25,26,78,105,165 The reviews commonly included studies us-
ing observational research designs in which the type of inter-
vention is not controlled; therefore, the individuals included 
in these reviews can be assumed to have participated in a 
range of interventions, including medical, surgical, physical 
therapy, and chiropractic treatments, among others. Results 
of this research can most logically be interpreted as “the av-
erage rate of recovery—in this cohort—under this clinical 
context.” It is also worth noting that reported outcomes are 
rarely consistent across studies (eg, pain intensity, self-rated 
disability scale, work status, medication usage232), rendering 
meta-synthesis very difficult.
In general, the reviews in the field have arrived at a similar 
conclusion: the clinical course of neck pain is variable and 
not entirely favorable. Kamper et al105 used a meta-analytic 
approach to synthesize recovery data following acute whip-
lash-associated disorder (WAD).105 Their results indicate that 
recovery is slow when the outcome is pain intensity, requiring 
6 months or more for average pain intensity to achieve the 
clinically meaningful reduction of 20%. When self-rated dis-
ability was the outcome, recovery fared no better. Standard-
ized mean scores did not reach 20% improvement over the 
12 months for which data were available. A similar conclu-
sion was reached by Hush et al,94 who focused on individuals 
with acute idiopathic neck pain, with the additional finding 
that idiopathic neck pain does not resolve further after the 
first 6.5 weeks.94 Sterling et al194 reported recovery trajecto-
ries for outcomes of neck disability and posttraumatic stress 
following acute traumatic neck pain. Three trajectories were 
identified: mild disability/posttraumatic stress (40% to 45% 
of individuals), initially moderate improving to mild (39% 
to 43% of individuals), and chronic severe problems (16% 
to 17% of individuals). For neck disability and posttraumatic 
stress, recovery appears to happen most rapidly within the 
first 6 to 12 weeks postinjury, with the rate of recovery slow-
ing considerably after that critical window.194 Casey et al27 
conducted a similar study and again found 3 trajectories 
for outcomes measured using the Functional Rating Index 
(low-moderate-severe continued disability for 47%, 31%, and 
22% of individuals, respectively), Pain Catastrophizing Scale 
(55%, 32%, and 13%), and Mental Component Score of the 
Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Sur-
vey (SF-36) (40%, 42%, and 18%, respectively).27 Casey et 
al27 collected data at baseline, 12 months, and 24 months, so 
lacked the precision of the study by Sterling et al194 to iden-
tify important inflection points in recovery, but reported no 
further recovery between 12 and 24 months.27 The newer 
data generally appear consistent with earlier reviews from 
the Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck 
Pain and Its Associated Disorders that approximately 50% 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a13
many patients with acute cervical radiculopathy, the clinical 
course appears favorable, with resolution of symptoms occur-
ring over weeks to months. As described below, monitoring 
for worsening of clinical status is advised during nonsurgical 
management.
CLINICAL PROGNOSIS
Evidence Update
In the context of neck pain, prognostic factors are most 
commonly evaluated in acute trauma-related conditions (eg, 
WAD). This is likely due to the ability to identify a clear start 
time (time of whiplash injury) for the onset of the condition 
and offers the potential to quantify the magnitude of the in-
citing event (eg, motor vehicle collision [MVC]). A derived 
and validated clinical prediction rule for prognosis for in-
dividuals with WAD exists.170,171 Insidious-onset conditions, 
such as degenerative disc disease or postural syndromes, of-
fer a less accurate onset date or magnitude of event, making 
prognostic research more difficult.
Since the Quebec Task Force monograph of 1995,191 several pri-
mary research studies and systematic reviews on the topic of 
prognosis following WAD have been published. An overview of 
systematic reviews sought to identify consistencies in the pool 
of literature from January 2000 to March 2012 and quantify 
confidence in the prognostic value of more than 130 different 
factors.233 The results of that procedure led to high or moder-
ate confidence that each of the following were risk factors for 
persistent problems when captured in acute or subacute WAD 
(less than 6 weeks from injury): (1) high pain intensity, (2) high 
self-reported disability scores (Neck Disability Index [NDI]), 
(3) high posttraumatic stress symptoms, (4) strong catastrophic 
beliefs, and (5) cold hyperalgesia. In work-related or nonspecific 
neck pain, only older age and a prior history of other musculo-
skeletal disorders offered the same level of confidence.
Factors that were not supported as useful for establishing a 
prognosis were: (1) angular deformity of the neck (eg, scolio-
sis, flattened lordosis), (2) impact direction, (3) seating posi-
tion in the vehicle, (4) awareness of the impending collision, 
(5) having a headrest in place at the time of collision, (6) 
stationary versus moving when hit, and (7) older age (note 
the difference between WAD and nonspecific neck pain). For 
nonspecific neck pain, a preinjury history of regular physical 
activity was not a useful prognostic factor.233
Walton et al235 used meta-analytic techniques to quantify 
the prognostic utility of many of these factors as reported 
in previous primary evidence. Their results are presented in 
TABLE 6 below, and indicate that high pain intensity and high 
self-reported disability offer the greatest prognostic value. 
However, this may simply be a function of research using 
will fully recover within 1 year following WAD.24 It is worth 
noting that these estimates may be highly dependent on the 
definition of recovery used.232
Chronic or insidious neck pain follows a clinical course de-
scribed best as “recurrent” or “episodic,”78 suggesting that 
complete resolution of such symptoms is the exception rather 
than the rule. An early review by Borghouts et al12 reported 
the median frequency of “general improvement” in people 
with nonspecific neck pain to be 47% (range, 37% to 95%, 
depending on outcome) within 6 months.
Rao165 reported the results of a knowledge synthesis for cervi-
cal myelopathy with or without radiculopathy. While much of 
the evidence synthesis came from very early research of the 
1950s and 1960s, the most recent evidence regarding cervi-
cal myelopathy suggested a course of neck pain that could 
show periods of functional stability (neither decreasing nor 
increasing) or a gradual worsening. That synthesis found that 
only 18% of individuals report improvements in neck dis-
ability, while 67% report progressive deterioration over time, 
regardless of intervention. Those who underwent surgical 
management showed better outcomes than those managed 
nonsurgically.165
Thoomes et al208 reported that little is known about the 
natural course of cervical radiculopathy. They reported on a 
single 1963 study of 51 patients, reporting that 43% of cases 
had no further symptoms after a few months, with 29% and 
27% having mild and more disabling pain, respectively, at 
a follow-up of up to 19 years.121 Across several more recent 
studies, Thoomes et al208 reported low-level evidence of a 
more favorable natural course, with resolution of symptoms 
over weeks to months.
2017 Summary
The overall balance of evidence supports a variable view of 
the clinical course of neck pain. In acute traumatic condi-
tions, clinicians can expect individuals to follow 1 of 3 likely 
trajectories: mild problems with rapid recovery (approxi-
mately 45% of individuals depending on outcome), moderate 
problems with some but incomplete recovery (approximately 
40% of individuals), and severe problems with no recovery 
(approximately 15% of individuals). Regardless of the out-
come, recovery appears to occur most rapidly in the first 6 
to 12 weeks postinjury, with considerable slowing after that 
and little recovery after 12 months.194 Less evidence is avail-
able for acute nontraumatic (idiopathic) neck pain, but cli-
nicians can still expect recovery to slow considerably after 
6 to 12 weeks from onset. In chronic conditions, the course 
may be stable or fluctuating, but in most cases can be best 
classified as recurrent, characterized by periods of relative 
improvement followed by periods of relative worsening.78 For 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a14  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
pain at follow-up, as were lower social support and preference 
for passive coping strategies. Regarding neck pain in workers 
specifically, Carroll et al24 found relatively little evidence upon 
which to base prognostic decisions. Workplace decision-mak-
ing capacity (control over work) had a small but significant 
association with worse outcomes, and white collar workers 
generally fared better than their blue collar counterparts, but 
the evidence was not strong for either. Poor prior health (lack 
of exercise, prior neck pain, prior sick leave) showed some ad-
ditional promise as a prognostic factor.24
2017 Summary
Moderate- to high-level evidence indicates that the female sex 
and/or prior history of neck pain are consistent risk factors 
for new-onset neck pain. Low- to moderate-level evidence sug-
gests that older age, high job demands, being an ex-smoker, 
low support, and prior history of low back pain may also be 
risk factors.
Moderate- to high-level evidence indicates that clinicians 
should collect and consider pain intensity, level of self-rated 
disability, pain-related catastrophizing, posttraumatic stress 
symptoms (traumatic onset only), and cold hyperalgesia 
when establishing a prognosis for their patients. These con-
structs and related recommended tools are summarized in 
TABLE 6. Prior health, including regular exercise, neck pain, 
and sick leave, may offer some additional prognostic value, 
more so in nontraumatic neck pain in the general population 
or in workers. TABLE 6 offers a list of sample tools that can be 
used to capture these variables. For nonspecific neck pain, 
age and prior history of musculoskeletal problems may offer 
prognostic value. There is still relatively little guidance re-
garding the combination of risk factors and how those should 
be interpreted and managed. New research focusing on more 
integrated complex models or prediction rules may shed light 
on this challenge in the near future.
pain and disability as the predicted outcomes, meaning that 
the predictive value of these factors may be different when 
the outcome to be predicted is something else, such as work 
status or health care usage.235
Two more narrowly focused systematic reviews in the area 
of traumatic neck pain prognosis were published, but not in-
cluded in the overviews by Walton et al.235 Goldsmith et al66 
reviewed the evidence for cold hyperalgesia as a prognostic 
variable, and found consistent moderate-grade evidence (4 
cohorts) that cold hyperalgesia holds prognostic value. Dae-
nen et al43 conducted a systematic review of cervical motor 
dysfunction as a prognostic variable and found inconclusive 
results (4 cohorts), preventing endorsement of such tests as 
being prognostic.
A systematic review by Kelly et al112 explored the readiness 
for clinical adoption of 15 formalized prognostic clinical pre-
diction rules for early identification of the patient at risk of 
transitioning to chronic neck pain. Of those, 11 remained in 
the derivation stage, lacking external validation. Four had 
undergone some degree of external validation, but none were 
at the stage of readiness to be endorsed for widespread clini-
cal adoption.112,171
For nontraumatic neck pain, Carroll et al25 reported that be-
tween 50% and 85% of people who experience neck pain will 
report neck pain 1 to 5 years later, but it is unclear whether 
this is persistence of the initiating event, recurrence following 
a refractory period, or new-onset neck pain. Older age was a 
consistent but not strong predictor of neck pain at follow-up 
after an initial event. Generally, poor physical health showed 
moderate association with ongoing neck pain, but this was not 
a consistent finding. One study even found that regular cycling 
was associated with worse outcomes. Similar to that in WAD, 
poorer psychological health was a consistent predictor of neck 
 
TABLE 6
Recommended Tools for Developing a Prognosis
Construct
Recommended Tool
High pain intensity
Numeric rating scale (0-10): consider score of 6 or greater a useful cut score for prognosis
High self-reported disability
Neck Disability Index, original225 or shorter adaptations1: consider greater than 30% as a useful cut 
score for prognosis
High pain catastrophizing
Pain Catastrophizing Scale198,214: consider score of 20 or greater a useful cut score for prognosis
High acute posttraumatic stress symptoms Impact of Events Scale-Revised: consider score of 33 or greater a useful cut score for prognosis.199 
High posttraumatic distress is not uncommon in acute injuries; here, this scale is used to predict 
symptom chronicity, not to assess for posttraumatic stress disorder
Cold hyperalgesia
The TSA-II – NeuroSensory Analyzer (Medoc Ltd, Ramat Yishai, Israel) is largely considered the 
gold standard. However, the cost of such equipment may render it impractical for clinicians. Alter-
natives include the cold pressor task as a test of cold endurance (similar but not identical to cold 
pain threshold), use of an ice cube,133,166 or use of cold metal bars
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a15
The 2012 IFOMPT “International Framework for Examina-
tion of the Cervical Region for potential of Cervical Arterial 
Dysfunction prior to Orthopaedic Manual Therapy Inter-
vention” provides a decision-making pathway for assess-
ment of suspected arterial insufficiency and upper cervical 
ligamentous integrity.177 Because clinicians cannot rely on 
the results of any single test, including imaging,146 the frame-
work provides a tool to guide assessment of both risk fac-
tors and clinical presentation, and to make patient-centered, 
evidence-driven decisions on management. One high-quality 
systematic review by Hutting et al95 revealed poor diagnostic 
accuracy for all upper cervical ligament integrity tests evalu-
ated. Generally, these tests have sufficient specificity and can 
rule in upper cervical ligamentous insufficiency, but extent 
of sensitivity varied.
The Valsalva maneuver, previously described in the Physical 
Impairment section of the 2008 neck pain guidelines, may 
also be a useful screen for serious intracranial pathology in 
patients presenting with headache that worsens with exer-
tion, and may be used to assist in deciding whether referral 
for neuroimaging is appropriate (positive likelihood ratio 
[LR] = 2.3; 95% CI: 1.4, 3.8).47 Clinicians should refer to 
the American College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriateness 
Criteria guidelines to decide which type of imaging to use.3
Clinicians should utilize the Canadian cervical spine rule 
(CCR)32,196,197 and/or the National Emergency X-Radiography 
Utilization Study (NEXUS) criteria85,160 (APPENDIX H) to rule 
out the need for radiographic study in clinical conditions of 
suspected trauma-related fracture.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence pro-
duced a guideline that lists signs, symptoms, and conditions 
that should be considered when deciding the need for addi-
tional screening in patients who present with a headache in 
addition to neck pain.149
2017 Summary
Direct pathoanatomical causes of mechanical neck pain are 
rarely identifiable. Clinicians should inquire and test for 
clinical findings (red flags) in patients with neck pain to help 
determine the potential for the presence of serious pathology, 
such as infection, cancer, and cardiac involvement,65 and the 
need for referral. Clinicians should also be alert for and assess 
patients with neck pain for signs and symptoms of serious 
pathology, including suspected arterial insufficiency, upper 
cervical ligamentous insufficiency, unexplained cranial nerve 
dysfunction, and fracture. Clinicians should utilize existing 
guidelines and appropriateness criteria (CCR, NEXUS, and 
ACR recommendations) in clinical decision making regard-
ing imaging studies for traumatic and nontraumatic neck 
pain in the acute and chronic stages.
PATHOANATOMICAL FEATURES/ 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
2008 Summary
Although the cause of neck pain may be associated with de-
generative processes or pathology identified during diagnostic 
imaging, the tissue that is causing a patient’s neck pain is 
most often unknown. Thus, clinicians should assess for im-
paired function of muscle, connective, and nerve tissues asso-
ciated with the identified pathological tissues when a patient 
presents with neck pain.
Evidence Update
There are numerous anatomical structures in the cervical re-
gion that can be sources of nociception, including zygapophy-
seal joints, vertebrae, muscles, ligaments, neural structures, 
and the intervertebral disc.42,115,165,188,239 However, evidence is 
lacking to support the hypothesis that these pathoanatomi-
cal features are a primary source of mechanical neck pain 
across the age spectrum in the majority of patients.86 The 
source of neck symptoms may on occasion be something 
more serious; therefore, screening for clinical conditions 
such as cervical myelopathy, cervical ligamentous instability, 
fracture, neoplasm, vascular insufficiency, or systemic disease 
is required.80,183,239
Space-occupying lesions (eg, osteophytosis or herniated cer-
vical disc) are commonly associated with cervical spondylotic 
myelopathy and central canal stenosis.206 These may be sec-
ondary to acquired degenerative processes, and can give rise 
to signs and symptoms in the neck and/or upper or lower 
quarter as well as potentially bowel or bladder problems or 
neurologic deficits. Congenital narrowing of the spinal canal 
may also increase the risk for developing spinal canal stenosis 
later in life.106 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful 
in determining the diagnosis of myelopathy.114 Clinical tests 
used in the diagnostic process for cervical myelopathy gener-
ally have low sensitivity; therefore, they should not be used 
when screening for and diagnosing this condition.35 While 
cervical disc herniation and spondylosis are most commonly 
linked to cervical myelopathy, the patient’s ultimate presen-
tation may reflect pain mechanisms beyond these discrete 
pathoanatomical findings.2,80,106
Little consensus exists on the definition of cervical radicu-
lopathy related to the exact location, intensity, or duration of 
painful symptoms in patients. Therefore, it is suggested that 
pain radiating into the arm coupled with motor, reflex, and/
or sensory changes in the upper limb, including paresthesia 
or numbness, be considered in making clinical determina-
tion for cervical radiculopathy.207 Limited evidence suggests 
that neurodynamic testing of the median nerve, but not the 
radial nerve, is clinically useful in determining the presence/
absence of cervical radiculopathy.150
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a16  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
ultrasonography, CT, and MRI, in patients without neuro-
logic insult (or deficits) or other disease processes may not 
be warranted.147
Following are issues in imaging specific to the subcategories 
of neck pain. Neck pain classification categories are discussed 
later in these clinical guidelines.
Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits
As this is described in terms of acute or chronic neck pain, in 
the absence of red flag signs, no imaging is indicated.80
Neck Pain With Radiating Pain
Patients with normal radiographs and with neurologic signs 
or symptoms should undergo cervical MRI that includes the 
cranial cervical junction and the upper thoracic region. If 
there is a contraindication to the MRI examination such as, 
but not limited to, a cardiac pacemaker or severe claustro-
phobia, CT myelography with multiplanar reconstruction is 
recommended.3
Magnetic resonance imaging is usually the preferred first im-
aging modality for patients with nonresolving radiculopathy 
or progressing myelopathy. Gadolinium contrast administra-
tion is preferred when oncological, infectious, inflammatory, 
or vascular causes of myelopathy are suspected.148
In the case of traumatic myelopathy, the priority is to assess 
mechanical stability of the spine. While radiographs are use-
ful for this purpose, a higher probability of identifying bony 
injury or ligamentous disruption in the cervical spine is real-
ized with CT.148 Magnetic resonance imaging is usually ap-
propriate for problem solving or operative planning, and is 
most useful when injury is not explained by bony fracture.3
Neck Pain With Movement Coordination Impairment
Johansson et al100 investigated imaging changes in individu-
als with acute WAD from an MVC. They assessed whether the 
presence of a cervical spine kyphotic deformity on MRI in the 
acute stage (approximately 10 days following the MVC) was 
associated with greater severity of baseline symptoms and a 
worse 1-year prognosis as compared to lordotic or straight 
postures following a whiplash injury. Findings suggest that 
kyphotic deformity is not significantly associated with chron-
ic whiplash-associated pain.
High-resolution proton density-weighted MRI has identi-
fied abnormal signal intensity (indicative of tissue damage) 
in both the alar and transverse ligaments in some individu-
als with chronic WAD.117 Separate studies initially indicated 
a strong relationship between alar ligament damage, head 
position (turned) at time of impact, and disability levels (as 
measured with the NDI).101,102,116 However, a 2011 study by 
2017 Recommendation
A
Clinicians should perform assessments and identify 
clinical findings in patients with neck pain to deter-
mine the potential for the presence of serious pa-
thology (eg, infection, cancer, cardiac involvement, arterial 
insufficiency, upper cervical ligamentous insufficiency, unex-
plained cranial nerve dysfunction, or fracture), and refer for 
consultation as indicated.
IMAGING STUDIES
As noted in the 2008 CPG, alert and stable adult patients 
with cervical pain precipitated by trauma should be classified 
for risk level based on the CCR197 or the NEXUS criteria69 
(APPENDIX H). The ACR Appropriateness Criteria should also 
be used for suspected spine trauma and chronic neck pain.148 
According to the CCR, patients are considered high risk if 
they (1) are greater than 65 years of age, (2) have had a dan-
gerous mechanism of injury, or (3) have paresthesias in the 
extremities. Those classified as high risk should undergo 
computed tomography (CT) or cervical radiography. Further-
more, the following low-risk factors indicate that safe cervi-
cal range of motion (ROM) assessment can be done: if the 
patient (1) is able to sit in the emergency department, (2) has 
had a simple rear-end MVC, (3) is ambulatory at any time, 
(4) has had a delayed onset of neck pain, or (5) does not have 
midline cervical spine tenderness. Finally, if able to actively 
rotate the head 45° in each direction, the patient is classified 
as low risk. Imaging in the acute stage is not required for 
those who are classified as low risk.
The NEXUS low-risk criteria suggest that cervical spine ra-
diography is indicated for patients with trauma unless they 
meet the following: (1) no posterior midline cervical spine 
tenderness; (2) no evidence of intoxication; (3) a normal 
level of cognition, orientation, and alertness; (4) no focal 
neurologic deficit; and (5) no painful distracting injuries. 
A recent systematic review suggests that the CCR appears 
to have better diagnostic accuracy than the NEXUS criteria 
(APPENDIX H).139
While this section focuses on imaging in the adult population, 
noteworthy is the paucity of available literature to help guide 
decision making for imaging in the pediatric population. Adult 
risk classification features should be applied in children great-
er than 14 years of age. Due to the added radiation exposure of 
CT, the ACR recommends plain radiography (3 views) in those 
under 14 years of age, regardless of mental status.148
Guidelines on use of diagnostic imaging in patients with 
acute or chronic (traumatic or nontraumatic) neck pain ex-
ist.148 However, in view of the frequency of abnormal findings, 
and the lack of prognostic value,147 routine imaging, such as 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a17
sectional area was believed to represent larger amounts of 
fatty infiltrate. Effectively, removal of fat signal from the MRI 
measures in these patients revealed that the majority of the 
muscles were not larger; rather, they were atrophied when 
compared with healthy controls and those with idiopathic 
neck pain.56 In contrast, others have shown that atrophy of 
the neck muscles with MRI is not associated with long-term 
functional outcomes.6,131,213
Longitudinal observations (10 years or more) of modic signs 
(degenerative changes of the vertebral bone marrow adjacent 
to the end plates) and degenerative changes in the cervical 
intervertebral discs are common in patients with WAD. How-
ever, they occur with a similar frequency in healthy controls 
and are not significantly associated with changes in clinical 
symptoms, suggesting they may be more the result of the 
physiological aging process rather than pathological findings 
related to the whiplash injury.96,132
2017 Summary
Clinicians should utilize existing guidelines and appropri-
ateness criteria (CCR, NEXUS, and ACR recommendations) 
in clinical decision making regarding imaging studies for 
traumatic and nontraumatic neck pain in the acute and 
chronic stages. Imaging studies often fail to identify any 
structural pathology related to symptoms in patients with 
whiplash injury. Although MRI can easily visualize ligamen-
tous structures in the upper cervical spine, there is little 
evidence that MRI examination of alar and transverse liga-
ments should be used as the routine workup of patients with 
whiplash injury. Evidence is available for changes in muscle 
morphology; however, more high-quality prospective and 
cross-sectional research is needed to confirm these changes 
and to identify potential underlying causes and influence 
on recovery rates.46 Magnetic resonance imaging is the 
preferred choice of imaging in painful and traumatic my-
elopathy. In the absence of neurological signs or symptoms, 
patients with normal radiographic findings or evidence of 
spondylosis need no further imaging studies.
2017 Recommendation
A
Clinicians should utilize existing guidelines and ap-
propriateness criteria in clinical decision making 
regarding referral or consultation for imaging stud-
ies for traumatic and nontraumatic neck pain in the acute 
and chronic stages.
Vetti et al227 demonstrated that alar and transverse ligament 
signal within 1 year of injury most likely reflected normal 
variation. More recent evidence suggests that MRI signal 
changes of alar and transverse ligaments are not caused by 
whiplash injury, and MRI examination of alar and transverse 
ligaments should not be used as the routine workup of pa-
tients with whiplash injury.122,145,146,228
Previous work in chronic WAD from an MVC demonstrated 
that female patients (18-45 years of age) with persistent WAD 
(grade II Quebec Task Force rating: neck pain, tenderness to 
palpation, and limited neck ROM) have increased fat infil-
tration of the neck extensors50 and flexors55 on conventional 
MRI. These changes in muscle structure were significantly 
less in individuals with chronic insidious-onset neck pain or 
healthy controls,53 suggesting that traumatic factors may play 
a role. The differential development of neck muscle fatty infil-
trates was observed in individuals with varying levels of func-
tional recovery following whiplash injury. Findings identified 
longitudinal structural muscle pathology with T1-weighted 
MRI. These findings were used to differentiate between 
those with varying levels of functional recovery, establishing 
a relationship between muscle fat at 6 months postinjury, 
and initial pain intensity, as well as signs/symptoms of post-
traumatic stress disorders. Posttraumatic stress disorders 
have been identified as a strong factor in the prediction of 
recovery following whiplash, and these findings were recently 
replicated in a separate longitudinal study in Australia.52 In 
a later study, the receiver operating characteristic analysis 
indicated that muscle fat levels of 20.5% or above resulted 
in a sensitivity of 87.5% and a specificity of 92.9% for pre-
dicting level of recovery at 3 months.54 These results provide 
further evidence that muscle degeneration occurs in tandem 
with known predictive risk factors (older age, pain-related 
disability, and posttraumatic stress). An independent cross-
sectional replication study from Sweden suggests similar 
findings.107 The mechanisms by which changes in muscle 
structure occur, or respond to rehabilitation strategies, re-
main largely unknown.
There remains uncertainty about whether changes in the 
relative cross-sectional area (square millimeters) of the cervi-
cal paraspinal musculature are related to functional recovery 
following whiplash injury. Elliott et al51 observed a consistent 
pattern of larger cross-sectional area with MRI in the multifi-
dus muscles of those with persistent WAD. The larger cross-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a18  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
OUTCOME MEASUREMENT
2008 Recommendation
A
Clinicians should use validated self-report ques-
tionnaires, such as the NDI and the PSFS, for pa-
tients with neck pain. These tools are useful for 
identifying a patient’s baseline status relative to pain, func-
tion, and disability and for monitoring a change in a patient’s 
status throughout the course of treatment.
Evidence Update
Outcome tools can be used for at least 3 purposes: (1) evalua-
tion (including determining change over time), (2) prognosis, 
and (3) diagnosis. Tools for evaluation are addressed below, 
tools for prognosis are described in the section on risk, and 
tools for diagnosis are described in the section on diagnosis.
II
Many patient-reported outcome tools for neck pain 
are described in the literature. For the most part, 
these are not validated and the measurement prop-
erties of these scales remain uncertain. A notable exception 
is the most commonly used patient-reported functional out-
come tool, the NDI.127 In a 2012 moderate-quality systematic 
review of patient-reported outcome measures, Schellinger-
hout et al181 focused on 8 different tools. Of these, the NDI 
was the most extensively studied over a variety of neck pain 
conditions and has been translated into many languag-
es.180,181,224 The NDI was also extensively assessed for its psy-
chometric properties. Schellingerhout et al181 found the 
measurement properties of the NDI to be adequate, except 
for reliability, and provisionally recommended its use. In an 
earlier low-quality review, Holly et al87 found the NDI, the 
PSFS, and the North American Spine Society scale to be reli-
able, valid, and responsive for assessing radiculopathy for 
nonsurgical interventions. Further, a high-quality clinical 
guideline strongly recommended the use of the NDI, SF-36, 
Medical Outcomes Study 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey 
(SF-12), and visual analog scale (VAS) for assessing treatment 
of cervical radiculopathy arising from degenerative disor-
ders.11 Other scales, including the modified Prolo, the Modi-
fied Million Index, the PSFS, the Health Status Questionnaire, 
the Sickness Impact Profile, the McGill Pain Scores, and the 
Modified Oswestry Disability Index, were rated lower, but 
were still recommended outcome measures for assessing 
treatment of cervical radiculopathy arising from degenerative 
disorders. An acceptable-quality review by Horn et al89 found 
the PSFS to have greater reliability than the NDI in patients 
with cervical dysfunction or cervical radiculopathy. Ferreira 
et al60 found that the NDI, along with the Neck Bournemouth 
Questionnaire and the Neck Pain and Disability scale, dem-
onstrated a balanced distribution of items across the ICF 
components.
II
Fairbairn et al58 used a thematic analysis technique 
to map patient-generated items on the PSFS to ICF 
components. From 283 neck-related items on the 
PSFS, they classified 29.3% of the items into body functions 
and structures, 57.6% of the items into activity, 8.5% into 
participation, and 4.6% into a combination of activity and 
participation.
V
While not a measure of function, pain has an effect 
on function and can be used as an evaluative tool. 
Fillingim et al61 recommended assessing 4 compo-
nents of pain: (1) pain intensity (eg, numeric pain-rating 
scale84), (2) other perceptual qualities of pain (eg, asking the 
patient to describe the character of the pain), (3) bodily dis-
tribution of the pain (eg, by using a body chart), and (4) tem-
poral features of pain (eg, asking the patient how the pain 
fluctuates with activity and rest, and over a day, week, or 
month). In some patients, Fillingim et al61 also recommended 
considering the use of a mechanism-based approach, such as 
screening tools for neuropathic pain. Quantitative sensory 
testing, including tuning forks, monofilaments,61 and tools 
for cold hyperalgesia described earlier, also could play a role 
in the assessment of a patient’s pain. Finally, Fillingim et al61 
recommended that pain assessment be combined with other 
domains such as physical and psychosocial functioning. A 
review by Turk et al212 provides an overview of measures and 
procedures to assess a set of key psychosocial and behavioral 
factors that could be important in chronic pain.
2017 Recommendation
A
Clinicians should use validated self-report question-
naires for patients with neck pain, to identify a pa-
tient’s baseline status and to monitor changes relative 
to pain, function, disability, and psychosocial functioning.
ACTIVITY LIMITATION AND PARTICIPATION  
RESTRICTION MEASURES
Evidence Update
III
The Spinal Function Sort tool is used to measure a 
person’s perceived ability to engage in functional 
activities by rating his or her ability on a series of 
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
Examination
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a19
50 functional tasks graphically depicted and simply de-
scribed.130 Each task is rated on a 0-to-4-point scale, yielding 
a range of scores from 0 to 200. Although the Spinal Func-
tion Sort tool shows promise in predicting return to work in 
people with chronic low back pain,14,154 it was not useful in 
predicting return to work at follow-up periods longer than 1 
month in people with subacute WAD.209
V
The measures identified in the 2008 neck pain CPG 
continue to be options that a clinician may use to 
assess changes in a patient’s level of function over 
an episode of care. In addition, clinicians may ascertain activ-
ity limitations or participation restrictions through a physical 
task analysis approach on activities associated with the indi-
vidual’s daily living, employment, and leisure pursuits.
2008 and 2017 Recommendation
F
Clinicians should utilize easily reproducible activ-
ity limitation and participation restriction mea-
sures associated with the patient’s neck pain to 
assess the changes in the patient’s level of function over the 
episode of care.
PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT MEASURES
Evidence Update
I
In a high-quality review, Snodgrass et al189 studied 
cervical ROM as an outcome measure following 
cervical mobilization/manipulation. Of 36 studies, 
they found the cervical range of motion (CROM) device (Per-
formance Attainment Associates, Lindstrom, MN), the stan-
dard goniometer, and the inclinometer to be the most 
commonly used tools to measure cervical ROM. It was sug-
gested, based on limited evidence, that cervical ROM assess-
ment was potentially a valuable tool in the screening/
diagnostic process related to cervicogenic headache, cervical 
radiculopathy, and cervical spinal injury.
I
In a 2010 acceptable-quality review, Williams et al238 
reviewed 46 articles on reliability and 21 articles on 
validity of cervical ROM assessment, finding “good” 
reliability and validity for the CROM device, the single incli-
nometer method, and the Spin-T goniometer. However, it 
should be noted that 32 of the 46 articles included in this re-
view used asymptomatic individuals; application of these re-
sults to patients with neck pain should be done cautiously.
I
An acceptable-quality review by Rubio-Ochoa et 
al176 included 9 studies that assessed diagnostic util-
ity of physical examination measures in individuals 
with cervicogenic headache compared to asymptomatic con-
trols or individuals with other headache types. The most 
commonly used measures were cervical active ROM, passive 
accessory intervertebral motion (PAIVM) from C0 to C3, and 
the cervical flexion-rotation test (CFRT), and the authors de-
termined that all of these tests demonstrated good utility in 
differential diagnosis of headache. The CFRT exhibited the 
strongest diagnostic metrics; kappa values ranged from 0.67 
to 0.85, and intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were 
0.95 (95% CI: 0.90, 0.98) for CFRT right and 0.97 (95% CI: 
0.94, 0.99) for CFRT left. Sensitivity/specificity ranged from 
0.70/0.70 to 0.91/0.91, with positive and negative LRs of 2.3 
to 10.65 and 0.095 to 0.43. The authors suggest that given 
the high specificity and positive LR, clinicians should use the 
CFRT near the end of the examination to rule in cervicogenic 
headache. Reliability and diagnostic accuracy were also re-
ported for C0-C3 PAIVM testing in identifying cervicogenic 
headache. Kappa values ranged from 0.53 to 0.72, and the 
most common symptomatic segment was C1-2. Values for 
sensitivity were between 0.59 and 0.65, specificity between 
0.78 and 0.87, positive LR from 2.9 to 4.9, and negative LR 
from 0.43 to 0.49. Interestingly, 1 high-quality study in the 
review clustered cervical active ROM, PAIVMs, and the cra-
nial cervical flexion test (CCFT), with a resulting sensitivity 
of 0.94 and specificity of 1.00.176
I
A high-quality review by Stanton et al192 examined 
evidence of impaired proprioception in individuals 
with chronic, idiopathic neck pain and concluded 
that these individuals are worse than asymptomatic controls 
at head-to-neutral repositioning tests. However, due to a lack 
of studies evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of the reposi-
tioning tests, the authors did not draw conclusions about 
these measures.192
II
In an acceptable-quality systematic review of 7 ar-
ticles,217 the interexaminer reliability of determin-
ing passive intervertebral motion of the cervical 
spine was poor to fair, and assessment of C1-2 and C2-3 mo-
tion segments was fair. Reliability tended to be higher (per-
cent agreement ranging from 68% to 90%) when assessed on 
symptomatic versus asymptomatic individuals.
II
An acceptable-quality systematic review by Rubin-
stein et al175 evaluated the Spurling test, neck dis-
traction test, Valsalva test, shoulder abduction test, 
and the neurodynamic test [upper-limb tension test] for the 
median nerve. A positive Spurling test (sensitivity, 0.50; 
specificity, 0.86-0.93), traction/neck distraction test (sensi-
tivity, 0.44; specificity, 0.90-0.97), and Valsalva test (sensitiv-
ity, 0.22; specificity, 0.94) may suggest cervical radiculopathy, 
while a negative neurodynamic test (sensitivity, 0.17-0.78; 
specificity, 0.72-0.83) may rule it out. Caution should be used 
when considering any of these physical impairment measures 
independently. Clinicians should look for patterns between 
patient-reported and physical examination findings that rule 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a20  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
• Units of measurement: pressure (eg, N/cm2, psi, or kPa)
• Measurement properties: reference values are established 
for patients with acute and chronic neck pain. Lowered 
values seen locally (about the neck) suggest a local me-
chanical hypersensitivity. Widespread lowered values (eg, 
about the neck and lower extremity) raise the possibility 
of a central nociceptive processing disorder. Reliability is 
excellent for intrarater agreement (ICC2,1 = 0.96; 95% CI: 
0.91, 0.98),236 interrater agreement (0.89; 95% CI: 0.83, 
0.93),234,236 and 2- to 4-day test-retest reliability (0.83; 95% 
CI: 0.69, 0.91)234
- SEM intrarater, 20.5 kPa; interrater, 50.3 kPa234,236
- MDC90 intrarater, 47.2 kPa; interrater, 117-156 kPa236,234
2017 Recommendation
B
When evaluating a patient with neck pain over an 
episode of care, clinicians should include assess-
ments of impairments of body function that can 
establish baselines, monitor changes over time, and be 
helpful in clinical decision making to rule in or rule out (1) 
neck pain with mobility deficits, including cervical active 
ROM, the cervical flexion-rotation test, and cervical and 
thoracic segmental mobility tests; (2) neck pain with head-
ache, including cervical active ROM, the cervical flexion-
rotation test, and upper cervical segmental mobility 
testing; (3) neck pain with radiating pain, including neu-
rodynamic testing, Spurling’s test, the distraction test, and 
the Valsalva test; and (4) neck pain with movement coor-
dination impairments, including cranial cervical flexion 
and neck flexor muscle endurance tests. Clinicians should 
include algometric assessment of pressure pain threshold 
for classifying pain.
DIAGNOSIS/CLASSIFICATION
The 2008 neck pain clinical practice guidelines classified 
neck pain into 4 categories linked to the treatment-based 
model proposed by Fritz and Brennan62: (1) neck pain with 
mobility deficits, (2) neck pain with movement coordination 
impairments, (3) neck pain with headache, (4) neck pain 
with radiating pain. Classification/diagnostic criteria were 
described in the 2008 recommendations.
Evidence Update
II
In a high-quality systematic review of 5 trials, Ta-
kasaki and May202 compared the effectiveness of the 
Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy (MDT) ap-
proach to other therapeutic approaches or a “wait and see” 
approach in a wide variety of types of neck pain. Treatments 
were provided by therapists who had moderate training in 
the MDT approach. Results on pain intensity and function 
had wide CIs, and the authors concluded that any benefit 
from the MDT approach over other therapeutic approaches 
in or rule out a particular diagnostic classification for a 
patient.
This revision of the neck pain CPGs adds 2 additional physi-
cal impairment measures to the list presented in the 2008 
guidelines: the CFRT and algometric assessment of pressure 
pain threshold.
Cervical Flexion-Rotation Test
• ICF category: measurement of impairment of body func-
tion; movement of several joints
• Description: measurement of passive rotation ROM at the 
C1-2 segment
• Measurement method: the patient lies supine while the cli-
nician passively flexes the cervical spine maximally to end 
range. The clinician then passively rotates the head left and 
right. The end ROM in rotation is determined either by pa-
tient report of onset of pain or firm resistance felt by the 
clinician, whichever comes first. The clinician quantifies the 
ROM either by visual estimate or use of the CROM device. 
A positive test has been defined as a restriction of rotation 
ROM with a cutoff of less than 32° of rotation,81,155 or a 10° 
reduction in the visually estimated range to either side.82
• Nature of variable: continuous
• Units of measurement: degrees
• Measurement properties: mean ROM was 39° to 45° in 
healthy individuals and 20° to 28° in patients with cervi-
cogenic headache.81,82,155 Reliability was excellent, as indi-
cated by interrater agreement (κ = 0.81)155 and test-retest 
reliability (ICC2,1 = 0.92).82 The standard error of measure-
ment (SEM) is 2 ° to 3°, with a minimal detectable change 
(MDC90) of 4.7° to 7°.82
- Sensitivity, 0.90-0.9581,82,155; negative LR = 0.11-0.2781,155
- Specificity, 0.90-0.9781,82,155; positive LR = 9.0-9.481,155
• Instrument variations: clinicians may use visual estimate 
or goniometry
Algometric Assessment of Pressure Pain Threshold
• ICF category: measurement of impairment of body func-
tion; pain in head and neck
• Description: measurement of local pressure pain threshold 
in the upper trapezius
• Measurement method: the patient is seated. A digital pres-
sure algometer is applied perpendicular to the muscle at the 
angle of the upper fibers of the trapezius muscle (approxi-
mately 5 to 8 cm superomedial to the superior angle of the 
scapula), with pressure increasing at a rate of approximately 
4 to 5 N/s (40-50 kPa/s). Patients are instructed to push a 
button or tell the examiner the precise moment the sensation 
changes from pressure to pain. The examiner then repeats 
the test on the opposite side, and 3 tests of each site are con-
ducted, with a minimum 30-second interval between tests
• Nature of variable: continuous
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a21
properly, (2) it must be tested or validated, and (3) it must 
pass a clinical impact phase.135 The 2008 neck pain CPG de-
scribed clinical prediction rules at the derivation phase for 
manipulation of the cervical spine,211 for manipulation of the 
thoracic spine,31 and for the use of cervical spine traction.164
II
A systematic review by Kelly et al112 explored the 
readiness for adoption of 11 formalized prescriptive 
clinical prediction rules in the development or vali-
dation stage for early identification of patients response to a 
certain intervention for neck pain, including the 3 identified 
in the 2008 neck pain CPG. The authors concluded none of 
the identified prescriptive clinical prediction rules were at the 
stage of readiness to be endorsed for clinical adoption.112
2017 Recommendation
C
Clinicians should use motion limitations in the cer-
vical and upper thoracic regions, presence of cervi-
cogenic headache, history of trauma, and referred 
or radiating pain into an upper extremity as useful clinical 
findings for classifying a patient with neck pain into the fol-
lowing categories:
• Neck pain with mobility deficits
• Neck pain with movement coordination impairments 
 
(including WAD)
• Neck pain with headaches (cervicogenic headache)
• Neck pain with radiating pain (radicular)
With recognition that these categories will not be exclusive or 
exhaustive, the assignation of an individual patient into the 
category that “best fits” the patient’s current clinical picture 
relies on clinical reasoning and judgment of the clinician.
The proposed model for examination, diagnosis, and treat-
ment planning for patients with neck pain uses the follow-
ing components111: (1) evaluation/intervention component 1, 
medical screening; (2) evaluation/intervention component 
2, classify condition through evaluation of clinical findings 
suggestive of musculoskeletal impairments of body function-
ing (ICF) and associated tissue pathology/disease (ICD); (3) 
evaluation/intervention component 3, determination of con-
dition stage (acute/subacute/chronic); (4) evaluation/inter-
vention component 4, intervention strategies for patients 
with neck pain. This model is depicted in the FIGURE.
Component 1111
Medical screening incorporates the findings of the history 
and physical examination to determine whether the patient’s 
symptoms originate from a condition that requires referral to 
another health care provider. The 2012 IFOMPT International 
Framework for Examination of the Cervical Region, the CCR, 
and the NEXUS criteria, all discussed earlier, are examples of 
tools that may be helpful in this decision-making process. In 
or a “wait and see” approach may not be clinically relevant for 
pain, and was not clinically relevant for function.202
III
Bergström et al9 studied the effectiveness of differ-
ent types of intervention on patients with cervico-
thoracic or low back pain. They classified patients 
using the Swedish version of the Multidimensional Pain In-
ventory into the following categories: adaptive copers (n = 
62), interpersonally distressed (n = 52), and dysfunctional (n 
= 80). The types of intervention were: (1) behavioral-oriented 
physical therapy for approximately 20 hours per week; (2) 
cognitive behavioral therapy for approximately 14 hours per 
week; (3) behavioral medicine rehabilitation, which was a 
combination of the other 2 interventions, for approximately 
40 hours per week; and (4) treatment as usual, consisting of 
no treatment offered. The outcome measure was sickness ab-
sence measured in days. Overall attendance rate for treat-
ment alternatives was 62%. Outcomes indicated that the 
multidisciplinary behavioral medicine rehabilitation inter-
vention resulted in decreased sickness absence more than 
treatment as usual in the adaptive coper and interpersonally 
distressed groups.
III
In a retrospective analysis, Verhagen et al222 failed 
to find significant differences in outcomes or prog-
nostic factors between nonspecific neck pain asso-
ciated with traumatic (WAD) and nontraumatic neck pain. 
Patients with headache were included in both the WAD 
(prevalence, 49/63) and nontraumatic (prevalence, 268/395) 
groups. Patients received an individualized, nonstandardized 
program, which could include medication, advice, education, 
exercises, modalities, and/or manual therapy. Based on non-
significant differences in outcomes or prognostic factors, Ver-
hagen et al222 concluded that patients postwhiplash should 
not be considered a separate subgroup from patients with 
nontraumatic neck pain.
V
Similar to a previously developed classification sys-
tem for WAD, Guzman et al78 classified all neck 
pain into 4 categories depending on signs, symp-
toms, and the extent of interference with activities of daily 
living. Currently, this classification system does not have the 
level of specificity necessary to guide decisions on choice of 
interventions.78
TREATMENT-BASED CLINICAL PREDICTION  
RULES FOR NECK PAIN
Clinical prediction rules may prove helpful toward identify-
ing patients who may respond well to a certain treatment. 
However, clinical prediction rules must go through a 3-step 
validation process before a clinician can use them with high 
confidence in clinical practice: (1) the rule must be derived 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a22  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
Neck Pain With 
Mobility Deficits
Common symptoms
• Central and/or unilateral neck 
pain
• Limitation in neck motion that 
consistently reproduces 
symptoms
• Associated (referred) shoulder 
girdle or upper extremity pain 
may be present
Expected exam findings
• Limited cervical ROM
• Neck pain reproduced at end 
ranges of active and passive 
motions
• Restricted cervical and thoracic 
segmental mobility
• Intersegmental mobility testing 
reveals characteristic restriction
• Neck and referred pain 
reproduced with provocation of 
the involved cervical or upper 
thoracic segments or cervical 
musculature
• Deficits in cervicoscapulotho-
racic strength and motor control 
may be present in individuals 
with subacute or chronic neck 
pain
Neck Pain With Movement 
Coordination Impairments (WAD)
Common symptoms
• Mechanism of onset linked to 
trauma or whiplash
• Associated (referred) shoulder 
girdle or upper extremity pain
• Associated varied nonspecific 
concussive signs and symptoms
• Dizziness/nausea
• Headache, concentration, or 
memory difculties; confusion; 
hypersensitivity to mechanical, 
thermal, acoustic, odor, or light 
stimuli; heightened afective 
distress
Expected exam findings
• Positive cranial cervical flexion 
test
• Positive neck flexor muscle 
endurance test
• Positive pressure algometry
• Strength and endurance deficits 
of the neck muscles
• Neck pain with mid-range 
motion that worsens with 
end-range positions
• Point tenderness may include 
myofascial trigger points
• Sensorimotor impairment may 
include altered muscle 
activation patterns, propriocep-
tive deficit, postural balance or 
control
• Neck and referred pain 
reproduced by provocation of 
the involved cervical segments
Neck Pain With Headache 
(Cervicogenic)*
Common symptoms*
• Noncontinuous, unilateral neck 
pain and associated (referred) 
headache
• Headache is precipitated or 
aggravated by neck movements 
or sustained positions/postures
Expected exam findings
• Positive cervical flexion-
rotation test
• Headache reproduced with 
provocation of the involved 
upper cervical segments
• Limited cervical ROM
• Restricted upper cervical 
segmental mobility
• Strength, endurance, and 
coordination deficits of the neck 
muscles
Neck Pain With Radiating Pain 
(Radicular)
Common symptoms
• Neck pain with radiating (narrow 
band of lancinating) pain in the 
involved extremity
• Upper extremity dermatomal 
paresthesia or numbness, and 
myotomal muscle weakness
Expected exam findings
• Neck and neck-related radiating 
pain reproduced or relieved with 
radiculopathy testing: positive 
test cluster includes upper-limb 
nerve mobility, Spurling’s test, 
cervical distraction, cervical 
ROM
• May have upper extremity 
sensory, strength, or reflex 
deficits associated with the 
involved nerve roots
Evaluation/Intervention Component 1: medical screening
Appropriate for physical therapy 
evaluation and intervention
Evaluation/Intervention Component 2: classify condition through evaluation of clinical 
findings suggestive of musculoskeletal impairments of body functioning (ICF) and the 
associated tissue pathology/disease (ICD)
Appropriate for physical therapy 
evaluation and intervention along 
with consultation with another 
health care provider
Not appropriate for physical therapy 
evaluation and intervention
Consultation with appropriate health 
care provider
versus
versus
FIGURE. Proposed model for examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning for patients with neck pain. *Clinicians are encouraged to refer to the International Classification 
of Headache Disorders83 for a more inclusive list of headache types/
classifications (https://www.ichd-3.org/how-to-use-the-classification/), and to The National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence149 for signs, symptoms, and conditions that should be considered in patients who present with a headache in addition to neck pain.
Figure continues on page A23.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a23
Neck Pain With 
Mobility Deficits
Acute
• Thoracic manipulation
• Cervical mobilization or 
manipulation
• Cervical ROM, stretching, and 
isometric strengthening exercise
• Advice to stay active plus home 
cervical ROM and isometric 
exercise
• Supervised exercise, including 
cervicoscapulothoracic and 
upper extremity stretching, 
strengthening, and endurance 
training
• General fitness training (stay 
active)
Subacute
• Cervical mobilization or 
manipulation
• Thoracic manipulation
• Cervicoscapulothoracic 
endurance exercise
Chronic
• Thoracic manipulation
• Cervical mobilization
• Combined cervicoscapulotho-
racic exercise plus mobilization 
or manipulation
• Mixed exercise for cervicoscapu-
lothoracic regions—neuromus-
cular exercise: coordination, 
proprioception, and postural 
training; stretching; strengthen-
ing; endurance training; aerobic 
conditioning; and cognitive 
afective elements
• Supervised individualized 
exercises
• “Stay active” lifestyle 
approaches
• Dry needling, low-level laser, 
pulsed or high-power 
ultrasound, intermittent 
mechanical traction, repetitive 
brain stimulation, TENS, 
electrical muscle stimulation
Neck Pain With Movement 
Coordination Impairments (WAD)
Acute if prognosis is for a quick 
and early recovery
• Education: advice to remain 
active, act as usual
• Home exercise: pain-free 
cervical ROM and postural 
element
• Monitor for acceptable progress
• Minimize collar use
Subacute if prognosis is for a 
prolonged recovery trajectory
• Education: activation and 
counseling
• Combined exercise: active 
cervical ROM and isometric 
low-load strengthening plus 
manual therapy (cervical 
mobilization or manipulation) 
plus physical agents: ice, heat, 
TENS
• Supervised exercise: active 
cervical ROM or stretching, 
strengthening, endurance, 
neuromuscular exercise 
including postural, coordination, 
and stabilization elements
Chronic
• Education: prognosis, 
encouragement, reassurance, 
pain management
• Cervical mobilization plus 
individualized progressive 
exercise: low-load cervicoscapu-
lothoracic strengthening, 
endurance, flexibility, functional 
training using cognitive 
behavioral therapy principles, 
vestibular rehabilitation, 
eye-head-neck coordination, 
and neuromuscular coordination 
elements
• TENS
Neck Pain With Headache
 (Cervicogenic)
Acute
• Exercise: C1-2 self-SNAG
Subacute
• Cervical manipulation and 
mobilization
• Exercise: C1-2 self-SNAG
Chronic
• Cervical manipulation
• Cervical and thoracic 
manipulation
• Exercise for cervical and 
scapulothoracic region: 
strengthening and endurance 
exercise with neuromuscular 
training, including motor control 
and biofeedback elements
• Combined manual therapy 
(mobilization or manipulation) 
plus exercise (stretching, 
strengthening, and endurance 
training elements)
Neck Pain With Radiating Pain
 (Radicular)
Acute
• Exercise: mobilizing and 
stabilizing elements
• Low-level laser
• Possible short-term collar use
Chronic
• Combined exercise: stretching 
and strengthening elements plus 
manual therapy for cervical and 
thoracic region: mobilization or 
manipulation
• Education counseling to 
encourage participation in 
occupational and exercise 
activity
• Intermittent traction
Evaluation/Intervention Component 3: determination of condition stage (acute/subacute/chronic)
Evaluation/Intervention Component 4: intervention strategies for patients with neck pain
Acute, subacute, and chronic stages are time-based stages helpful in classifying patient conditions. Time-based stages are helpful in making 
treatment decisions only in the sense that in the acute phase, the condition is usually highly irritable (pain experienced at rest or with initial to 
mid-range spinal movements: before tissue resistance); in the subacute phase, the condition often exhibits moderate irritability (pain 
experienced with mid-range motions that worsen with end-range spinal movements: with tissue resistance); and chronic conditions often have 
a low degree of irritability (pain that worsens with sustained end-range spinal movements or positions: overpressure into tissue resistance). 
There are cases where the alignment of irritability and the duration of symptoms does not match accordingly, requiring clinicians to make 
judgments when applying time-based research results on a patient-by-patient basis
FIGURE. Proposed model for examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning for patients with neck pain. *Clinicians are encouraged to refer to the International Classification 
of Headache Disorders83 for a more inclusive list of headache types/
classifications (https://www.ichd-3.org/how-to-use-the-classification/), and to The National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence149 for signs, symptoms, and conditions that should be considered in patients who present with a headache in addition to neck pain.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a24  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
neck pain often exhibit signs and symptoms that fit more 
than 1 classification, and that the most relevant impairments 
of body function and the associated intervention strategies 
often change during the patient’s episode of care. Thus, con-
tinual re-evaluation of the patient’s response to treatment 
and the patient’s emerging clinical findings is important for 
providing the optimal interventions throughout the patient’s 
episode of care.
Component 3111
For research purposes, acute, subacute, and chronic stages 
are time-based stages helpful in classifying patient condi-
tions and in making treatment decisions. In part, they de-
fine the stage of healing: in the acute phase, the condition is 
usually more irritable; in the subacute phase, the condition 
often exhibits moderate irritability; chronic conditions often 
have a lower degree of irritability. There are cases where the 
alignment of irritability and the duration of symptoms does 
not match, requiring clinicians to make judgments when ap-
plying time-based research results on a patient-by-patient 
basis. Irritability is a term used by rehabilitation practitio-
ners to reflect the tissue’s ability to handle physical stress,142 
and is presumably related to physical status and the extent 
of inflammatory activity that is present. Assessment of tissue 
irritability relies on clinical judgment, and is important for 
guiding the clinical decisions regarding treatment frequency, 
intensity, duration, and type, with the goal of matching the 
optimal dosage of treatment to the status of the tissue being 
treated. There are other biopsychosocial elements that may 
relate to staging of the condition, including, but not limited 
to, the level of disability reported by the patient, extent of in-
terrupted sleep, medication dosage, and activity avoidance.34
Component 4
Interventions are listed by category of neck pain, and ordered 
by stage (acute/subacute/chronic). Because irritability level 
often reflects the tissue’s ability to accept physical stress, clini-
cians should match the most appropriate intervention strate-
gies to the irritability level of the patient’s condition.34,45,110,111 
Additionally, clinicians should attend to influences from psy-
chosocial86 and altered pain processing elements151 in patients 
with conditions in all stages of recovery.
addition to these conditions, clinicians should screen for the 
presence of psychosocial issues that may affect prognostica-
tion and treatment decision making for rehabilitation. For ex-
ample, elevated scores on the Impact of Events Scale have been 
associated with other severe symptoms and a longer recovery 
in individuals with neck pain after whiplash injury.195 Accord-
ingly, identifying cognitive behavioral tendencies during the 
patient’s evaluation can direct the therapist to employ specific 
patient education strategies to optimize patient outcomes to 
physical therapy interventions and potentially provide indica-
tions for referring the patient for consultation with another 
medical or mental health practitioner.8
Component 2111
Differential evaluation of musculoskeletal clinical findings is 
used to determine the most relevant physical impairments 
associated with the patient’s reported activity limitations and 
medical diagnosis. Clusters of these clinical findings, which 
commonly coexist in patients, are described as impairment 
patterns in the physical therapy literature4 and for neck pain 
are classified according to the key impairment(s) of body 
function, along with the characteristic and distribution of 
pain associated with that classification. The ICD-10 and pri-
mary and secondary ICF codes associated with neck pain are 
provided in the 2008 ICF-based neck pain CPG.29 These clas-
sifications are useful in determining interventions focused 
on normalizing the key impairments of body function, which 
in turn strive to improve the movement and function of the 
patient and lessen or alleviate pain and/or activity limita-
tions. Key clinical findings to differentiate the classifications 
are shown in the FIGURE. In addition, when it comes to neck-
related headaches, clinicians are encouraged to refer to the 
International Classification of Headache Disorders83 for a 
more inclusive list of headache types/classifications (https://
www.ichd-3.org/how-to-use-the-classification/), and to The 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence149 for ad-
ditional signs, symptoms, and conditions that should be 
considered in patients who present with a headache in addi-
tion to neck pain. Overall, classification is critical for match-
ing the intervention strategy that is most likely to provide 
the optimal outcome for a patient’s condition. However, it 
is important for clinicians to understand that patients with 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a25
The literature concerning nonsurgical interventions for neck 
pain rarely describes subject populations with terms synony-
mous with the 4 categories of the 2008 neck pain CPG29 and 
carried forward in this revision. As such, the results of the 
literature can rarely be applied exclusively and exhaustively 
to these separate categories. Additionally, the evidence is very 
weak regarding the differential effectiveness of many inter-
ventions for neck pain based on subpopulations (eg, age, sex, 
ethnicity). Reporting of intervention dosage in terms of in-
tensity, duration, and frequency is variable and may not allow 
confident translation into practice. One method of arriving 
at possible intervention dosage is to combine original trial 
dosage descriptions with clinical judgment, including prin-
ciples of exercise, movement, and pain science, and patient 
preferences.
This CPG attempts to differentiate the effects of interven-
tions as they may be applied to the categories of neck pain. 
When available, information regarding stage (acute, less than 
6 weeks; subacute, 6 to 12 weeks; or chronic, greater than 12 
weeks), comparison group, and follow-up (immediate, within 
1 day; short term, closest to 4 weeks; intermediate term, clos-
est to 6 months; and long term, closest to 12 months) is pro-
vided. The concepts of immediate, short, intermediate, and 
long-term follow-up are research-based periods and do not 
represent duration of care, but do provide an estimate of the 
duration of the treatment effects. Similarly, the concepts of 
acute, subacute, and chronic stages represent unequal peri-
ods, and it is acknowledged that the duration of symptoms 
may be less relevant than the characteristics of the condition 
to a patient’s progression from one stage to the next stage.
The 2008 intervention recommendations and literature syn-
theses were not specifically aligned to the ICF-based neck 
pain categories, but some guidance in this regard can be 
gained from TABLE 4 of that document.29 In this revision, the 
tables presenting the evidence update are organized first by 
intervention type (eg, manual therapy, exercise, multimodal, 
education, and physical agents), then by stage (eg, acute, sub-
acute, and chronic), and finally by comparison group and ef-
fect (eg, benefit compared to control, benefit compared to 
an alternate treatment, no benefit compared to control, and 
no benefit compared to an alternate treatment). In general, 
the interventions described below have a low risk profile for 
causing adverse events. While major adverse events can and 
do occur on a patient-by-patient basis, as evidenced by case 
reports and medicolegal documents, reports of serious events 
in randomized controlled trials are ostensibly absent. None-
theless, clinicians should apply a benefit to harm screening 
protocol, such as the IFOMPT framework for risk assess-
ment,177 prior to performing any intervention.
NECK PAIN WITH MOBILITY DEFICITS
2008 Recommendations
The intervention literature analyses were not specifically 
aligned to the neck pain categories, but the recommendations 
were made for cervical mobilization/manipulation, thoracic 
mobilization/manipulation, stretching exercises, and coordi-
nation, strengthening, and endurance exercises.
Evidence Update
Identified were 43 systematic reviews investigating physical 
therapy interventions on patients who could be classified as 
having neck pain with mobility deficits. Levels of evidence 
assigned to systematic reviews in this section were assessed 
according to TABLE 1. Primary sources were generally of high 
or moderate methodological quality with low risk of bias, but 
had numbers of participants that were considered small. This 
resulted in downgrading the strength of the evidence by 1 
or 2 levels due to imprecision and limited directness (TABLE 
1).63 TABLE 7 details the levels of evidence of included studies 
with underpinning evidence statements. Consideration of the 
trade-offs between desirable and undesirable consequences 
(important adverse events) was made. Adverse events or side 
effects were rarely reported in the studies, and when reported 
were minor, transient, and of short duration. For manual ther-
apy or exercise, the only consistently reported problem was a 
mild transient exacerbation of symptoms.36,93 For manipula-
tion, rare but serious adverse events such as stroke or seri-
ous neurological deficits were not reported in any of the trials. 
Serious but rare adverse events for manipulation are known 
to occur.23 Graham et al68 reported mild adverse events equal 
in treatment and placebo groups, including tiredness, nausea, 
headache, and increased pain following laser treatment.
V
The following are expert opinions of the CPG de-
velopment group:
• Clinicians should integrate the recommenda-
tions below with consideration of the results of the patient 
evaluation (eg, physical impairments most related to the 
patient’s reported activity limitation or concerns, severity 
and irritability of the condition, patient values and motivat-
ing factors).
CLINICAL GUIDELINES
Interventions
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a26  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
III
Brown et al21
Cross et al41
Furlan et al64
Gross et al72
Huisman et al92
Hurwitz et al93
Scholten-Peeters et al182
For patients with acute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit compared to control for 
using multiple sessions of thoracic manipulation for reducing pain over the immediate and short 
term.21,41,64,72,92,93,182 This finding was consistent over the intermediate term but the magnitude of effect 
was small for pain, function, and quality of life.72
IV
Coronado et al36
Gross et al73
Gross et al72
For patients with acute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit compared to control for 
using 1 to 4 sessions of a single cervical manipulation for reducing pain over the immediate term but 
not short term.36,72,73
IV
Gross et al72
For patients with acute and chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there is conflicting evidence sup-
porting the use of multiple sessions of cervical manipulation as a stand-alone therapy.72
II
Clar et al30
Furlan et al64
Gross et al72
Hurwitz et al93
Vincent et al229
For patients with acute and chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit compared 
to cervical mobilization, in using multiple sessions of cervical manipulation for reducing pain and 
improving function, quality of life, global perceived effect, and patient satisfaction over the immediate, 
short, and intermediate term.30,64,72,93,229
III
Leaver et al119
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit compared to 
only using cervical manipulation or only using cervical mobilization, in using combinations of manual 
therapies for providing analgesic benefits over the short term.119
III
Gross et al72
Vincent et al229
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit compared to 
varied oral medication combinations (oral analgesic, opioid analgesic, NSAID, muscle relaxant), in 
using multiple sessions of cervical manipulation for reducing pain and improving function over the 
long term.72,229
IV
Furlan et al64
Vernon et al226
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit when compared 
to control, in using cervical mobilization and ipsilateral, but not contralateral, cervical manipulation 
for reducing pain over the immediate term. 64,226
Subacute
IV
Furlan et al64
Huisman et al92
Young et al244
For patients with subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit when compared to 
control, in using:
• A single session of thoracic manipulation for reducing pain and improving ROM over the short 
term92,244
• A single session of thoracic manipulation for reducing disability over the immediate term64
III
Cross et al41
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, when 
compared to a control, in using a single session of thoracic manipulation for reducing pain over the 
immediate term.41
IV
Coronado et al36
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, when 
compared to a control, in using a single session of cervical manipulation for reducing pain over the 
immediate term.36
III
Leaver et al119
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using 2 weeks 
of cervical manipulation compared to 2 weeks of cervical mobilization (low velocity, oscillating passive 
movements) on improving function or reducing pain, disability, or days to perceived recovery.119
III
Hurwitz et al93
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using 
cervical manipulation alone or with advice and home exercises, compared to cervical mobilization 
and strengthening exercises, or instrumented manipulation, for reducing pain and disability over the 
short or long term.93
IV
Furlan et al64
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using 
cervical mobilization, when compared to usual care, for reducing pain over the intermediate term.64
Manual Therapy
Table continues on page A27.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a27
 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Chronic
III
Furlan et al64
Gross et al73
Hurwitz et al93
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using a single session of thoracic manipulation on pain over the immediate term.64,73,93
IV
Cross et al41
Damgaard et al 44
Furlan et al64
Gross et al73
Huisman et al92
Hurwitz et al93
Leaver et al119
Scholten-Peeters et al182
Vincent et al229
Walser et al231
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control in using
• A single session of supine thoracic manipulation on pain over the immediate term41,64,73,92,93,119,182,231
• 8 sessions of thoracic manipulation, for reducing pain and disability over the immediate and interme-
diate term44,92,229
IV
Gross et al72
Young et al244
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using the following 
techniques:
• Upper thoracic manipulation, when compared to cervical manipulation, for reducing pain over the 
immediate term244
• 12 sessions over 4 wk of anterior-posterior unilateral accessory movement procedures, when 
compared to a rotational or transverse accessory movement procedures, for reducing pain over the 
immediate term72
III
Furlan et al64
Gross et al72
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using cervical manipu-
lation, when compared to medication (NSAIDs, Celebrex, Paracetamol) for reducing pain or improving 
function over the short term.64,72
IV
Gross et al72
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using cervical mobili-
zation, when compared to exercise, laser, pulsed ultrasound, acupuncture, and massage for reducing 
pain, improving function, and improving quality of life over the immediate to intermediate term.72
IV
Gross et al72
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using the following 
mobilization techniques:
• Mobilization at the most symptomatic segment when compared to mobilization at a randomly chosen 
segment
• Central PA passive accessory movement mobilization technique when compared to random PAs at the 
same segment
• Ipsilateral PAs when compared to a randomly selected PAs at the same segment
• Mobilization perpendicular to the facet plane at most symptomatic segment when compared to the 
same mobilization 3 levels above, for reducing pain over the immediate term72
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
III
Bertozzi et al10
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
For patients with acute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared 
to a control, in using scapulothoracic and upper extremity strengthening for reducing pain over the 
short term.10,71,109
III
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
O’Riordan et al157
Southerst et al190
Zronek et al247
For patients with acute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared 
to a control, in using the following:
• Scapulothoracic and upper extremity endurance training for reducing pain over the immediate 
term71,109,157,247
• Stretching exercises plus education for reducing pain and disability and improving quality of life over 
the short term190
Manual Therapy
Exercise
Table continues on page A28.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a28  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
IV
Bertozzi et al10
Kay et al109
Gross et al71
For patients with acute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared 
to a control, in using:
• General fitness training for reducing pain over the immediate and short term.10,71,109
• Deep neck flexor recruitment combined with upper extremity strengthening/
endurance exercises for 
reducing pain over the immediate term.71
III
Southerst et al190
Zronek et al247
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using a home 
exercise program of daily cervical ROM exercises, education, and advice, when compared to medica-
tion, for reducing pain and disability for the intermediate term.190,247
III
Schroeder et al184
For patients with acute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using stretching, strength-
ening, ROM /flexibility, and relaxation exercise, when compared to soft tissue and cervical joint 
mobilization plus coordination, stabilization, and postural exercise.184
IV
Schroeder et al184
Southerst et al190
Zronek et al247
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using a 
home exercise program of daily cervical ROM exercises, education, and advice, when compared to 
cervical and thoracic manipulation, for reducing pain or improving function over the immediate and 
long term.184,190,247
Subacute
III
Hurwitz et al93
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using neck 
and shoulder endurance exercises, when compared to neck and shoulder strengthening exercises, for 
reducing pain or improving function or global perceived effect over the short and long term.93
Chronic
III
Bertozzi et al10
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
Leaver et al119
Monticone et al141
Nunes and Moita152
Southerst et al190
Verhagen et al221
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using the following:
• Neuromuscular exercise (eg, proprioception, eye-head-neck coordination) for reducing pain and 
improving function over the short term, but not intermediate or long term, and for improving global 
perceived effect over the intermediate term109,119,141
• Cervical stretching and strengthening for reducing pain and improving function over the immediate 
and intermediate term109,190
• Combined cervical and scapulothoracic stretching and strengthening for reducing pain and improving 
function over the intermediate and long term.71,109 However, there is conflicting evidence when these 
exercises are combined with other elements of exercise152,221
• Deep neck flexor isometric strengthening for reducing pain and disability over the immediate and 
short term10
IV
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
Lee et al120
O’Riordan et al157
Southerst et al190
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using the following:
• A combination of stretching, strengthening, endurance training, and balance/
coordination exercises 
and aerobic conditioning, with a cognitive/
affective component (Qigong) exercise for reducing pain 
and improving function over the immediate, short, and intermediate terms.71,109,120,190 Conflicting results 
reported by Lee et al120 are due to a combination of different primary sources
• Postural and isometric exercise added to the use of a cervical pillow for reducing pain and improving 
function over the immediate and short term71,109
• Isometric neck flexion exercise, plus upper extremity strengthening and stretching for reducing pain 
and improving function over the immediate term157
• Whole body group exercise of cardiovascular training with coordination and extensibility exercise for 
reducing pain over the immediate term109
III
Hurwitz et al93
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using strengthening 
exercises alone or in combination with manipulation, when compared to manipulation alone, for 
reducing pain and disability over the long term93
Exercise
Table continues on page A29.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a29
 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
IV
Damgaard et al44
Haines et al79
Kay et al108
Macaulay et al125
Monticone et al141
Nunes and Moita152
O’Riordan et al157
Schroeder et al184
Southerst et al190
Verhagen et al221
Vincent et al229
Zronek et al247
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using the following:
• Stretching combined with upper body and neck strengthening on pain, when compared to a program 
of manipulation, massage, and sham micro-current, over the long term125,184,229
• Cervical stretching and strengthening, when compared to Qigong exercise, for improving function over 
the intermediate term190
• A 1-year home exercise program of 3 times per week neck flexion endurance exercise, plus upper 
extremity strengthening and stretching, when compared to aerobic exercise, for reducing pain and 
improving function and health related quality of life over the immediate term44,157,247
• Cervical stretching or strengthening or endurance, when compared to a stress management program, 
for reducing pain over the immediate, but not long term152
• Supervised exercise programs of neck and upper body strengthening and stretching, when compared 
to an individualized home exercise program of neck and shoulder mobilization, advice, and education, 
for reducing pain and improving global perceived effect over the short and long term44,157,190
• Methods to increase physical activity at work and leisure (eg, bike to work, take stairs, general 
strengthening and conditioning exercise, and advice), when compared to specific exercise (eg, pos-
tural exercise, strengthening exercise for neck and shoulder, body awareness training), for reducing 
pain over the short term.221 There was no difference for function, or on pain and function over the long 
term221
• Deep neck flexor recruitment and strengthening, when compared to infrared radiation and advice, for 
reducing pain over the immediate term. There was no effect on function over the immediate term, or 
on pain or function over the intermediate term157
• Individualized home exercise programs of stabilization, relaxation, and postural control, compared to 
written advice to stay active, for reducing pain and improving function over the intermediate term, but 
not over the long term79,108,141,157
• Supervised group yoga, when compared to unsupervised home exercise program of postural exercise 
and neck and shoulder stretching and strengthening, for reducing pain and disability over the short 
term190
III
Bertozzi et al10
Gross et al71
Leaver et al119
O’Riordan et al157
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using upper extremity and trunk strengthening exercise,10,71,157 and upper extremity stretch-
ing and endurance training,71 and aerobic conditioning,119 for reducing pain and improving function 
over the immediate, short, and long term.
IV
Bertozzi et al10
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
Leaver et al119
O’Riordan et al157
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using the following:
• A strengthening component added to a home based stretching program for reducing pain and dis-
ability, over the long term157
• Breathing exercises for reducing pain and improving function and quality of life, over the immediate 
term71
• McKenzie stretch/ROM plus dynamic stabilization exercises for reducing pain and disability over the 
immediate through long term71,109,119
• Stretching exercise either before or after a manipulation for reducing pain and improving function over 
the immediate term71,109
• General endurance, flexibility, coordination, and postural awareness training (Feldenkrais) for reducing 
pain over the short and long term10,109
• Combination of strengthening, stretching, endurance, postural, and coordination exercise not specific 
to the neck, for reducing pain over the short term10,109
• General strengthening for reducing pain and improving function or quality of life over the long term157
Exercise
Table continues on page A30.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a30  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
IV
Gross et al71
McCaskey et al134
O’Riordan et al157
Southerst et al190
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using:
• Active ROM, stabilization, and postural exercises specific to the neck, when compared to generalized 
exercises to the body, for reducing disability over the short term190
• Neck and upper extremity endurance training plus stretching, when compared to aerobic conditioning 
plus stretching, for reducing pain and improving function over the immediate term, and for improving 
global perceived effect over the long term157
• General endurance, flexibility, coordination, and postural awareness training (Feldenkrais), when com-
pared to physiotherapy intervention (lumbopelvic stabilization, whole body strengthening, coordina-
tion, endurance and flexibility exercise, advice and home exercise program), for reducing pain over the 
long term71
• Proprioceptive training, compared to stretching and strengthening exercise on pain and function over 
the short term134
• Deep neck flexor training with pressure biofeedback, when compared to strength training of the neck 
flexor muscles with weights, for reducing pain and disability over the immediate term157
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
III
Gross et al75
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, with or without radiating pain, and with or 
without headache there was a benefit, compared to control, in using mobilization or manipulation 
combined with stretching and strengthening for reducing pain over the short and long term, and func-
tion over the long term.75
III
Miller et al140
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using a combination 
of exercise plus manipulation or mobilization, compared to manipulation or mobilization alone, for 
reducing pain and improving quality of life over the long term.140
III
McCaskey et al134
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in using a multimodal 
intervention including proprioceptive elements, compared to no intervention, on reducing pain over 
the immediate term.134
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
IV
Monticone et al141
For patients with subacute neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit in cognitive behavioral 
therapy in reducing pain and improving disability, compared to manipulation and mobilization plus 
exercise plus advice over the long term, but the difference was not clinically meaningful.141 
Chronic
No update evidence identified
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Exercise
Multimodal: Exercise and Manual Therapy
Education
Physical Agents
Table continues on page A31.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a31
 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Chronic
III
Cagnie et al22
Damgaard et al44
Graham et al68
Gross et al74
Kadhim-Saleh et al104
Kietrys et al113
Liu et al124
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using the following:
• Dry needling for reducing pain over the immediate113,124 and short22,124 term
• 830-nm laser for reducing pain and improving function, global perceived effect, and quality of life over 
the immediate, short, and intermediate terms44,68,74,104
• Pulsed ultrasound for reducing pain, but was inferior to mobilization over the immediate term68
• Mechanical traction of the intermittent type, but not the continuous type, for reducing pain over the 
short term68
• A variety of noninjection inserted needle treatment approaches for reducing pain over the immediate 
or short term68
III
Graham et al68
Gross et al74
Nunes and Moita152
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using the following:
• Laser for reducing pain over the immediate74 and short term,74,152, but not over the intermediate 
term.152 Gross et al74 reported that the super-pulse type of laser drive technology may improve out-
comes in patients with chronic myofascial pain syndrome
• TENS and repetitive magnetic stimulation for reducing pain over the immediate and short term.68
• TENS combined with infrared, hot pack/
exercise, and collar/
exercise/
analgesic interventions for  
reducing pain and disability, and improving function over the immediate and short term68
• Electric muscle stimulation for reducing pain over the intermediate term68
IV
Cagnie et al22
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was a benefit, in using dry needling 
when compared to another treatment, over the short term:
• Non–trigger point dry needling on reducing pain and improving function22
• Standard acupuncture on reducing pain and improving function22
III
Liu et al124
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, in using dry needling 
when compared to wet needling for reducing pain over the immediate or intermediate term. However, 
wet needling showed a benefit over dry needling in the short term.124
IV
Graham et al68
Kroeling et al118
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using a static magnetic necklace for reducing pain over the immediate term68,118
IV
Cagnie et al22
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, in using dry needling 
when compared to another treatment, over the short term:
• Miniscalpel needling on reducing pain22
• Lidocaine injection on reducing pain22
• Lidocaine on reducing pain, but equal in terms of improving quality of life22
• Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) for quality of life22
IV
Liu et al124
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit, in using dry needling 
when compared to wet needling for reducing pain over the intermediate term124
IV
Graham et al68
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits associated with osteoarthritis, there was 
conflicting evidence of benefit, when compared to a control, for using pulsed electromagnetic field for 
reducing pain over the immediate term.68
III
Ong and Claydon156
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using dry needling on 
myofascial trigger points when compared to lidocaine injections, for reducing pain over the immediate 
through intermediate terms, and for improving function over the immediate term.156
Physical Agents
Table continues on page A32.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a32  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
Abbreviations: NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PA, posterior to anterior; ROM, range of motion; TENS, transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation.
• Clinicians should utilize a multimodal approach in manag-
ing patients with neck pain with mobility deficits.
• In the subacute to chronic stage, the benefit of manual 
therapy appears to decrease. Manipulation may not offer 
any benefit over mobilization, and may be associated with 
transient discomfort.
• Exercise targeting cervical and scapulothoracic regions is a 
necessary component of managing patients with subacute 
and chronic neck pain with mobility deficits.
• Available adherence strategies (eg, McLean et al136) for 
adoption and maintenance of home exercise should be 
integrated to maximize clinical benefit over the long 
term.
2017 Recommendations
Acute
B
For patients with acute neck pain with mobility 
deficits, clinicians should provide thoracic manipu-
lation, a program of neck ROM exercises, and 
scapulothoracic and upper extremity stretching and strength-
ening exercises to enhance program adherence.
C
For patients with acute neck pain with mobility 
deficits, clinicians may provide cervical manipula-
tion and/or mobilization.
Subacute
B
For patients with subacute neck pain with mobility 
deficits, clinicians should provide neck and shoul-
der girdle endurance exercises.
C
For patients with subacute neck pain with mobility 
deficits, clinicians may provide thoracic manipula-
tion 
and 
cervical 
manipulation 
and/or 
mobilization.
Chronic
B
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility 
deficits, clinicians should provide a multimodal ap-
proach of:
• Thoracic manipulation and cervical manipulation or 
mobilization
• Mixed exercise for cervical/scapulothoracic regions: neu-
romuscular exercise (eg, coordination, proprioception, 
and postural training), stretching, strengthening, endur-
ance training, aerobic conditioning, and cognitive affective 
elements
• Dry needling, laser, or intermittent traction
C
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility 
deficits, clinicians may provide neck, shoulder gir-
dle, and trunk endurance exercise approaches and 
patient education and counseling strategies that promote an 
active lifestyle and address cognitive and affective factors.
NECK PAIN WITH MOVEMENT  
COORDINATION IMPAIRMENTS
2008 Recommendation
The 2008 neck pain CPG intervention literature analyses 
were not specifically aligned to the neck pain categories or 
TABLE 7
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits by  
Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence, Evidence of Benefit  
or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
III
Graham et al68
Kietrys et al113
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using the following:
• Dry needling (as long as it elicited a localized twitch response), when compared to lidocaine injection 
for reducing pain in the immediate term. However, lidocaine injections were more effective than dry 
needling for reducing pain over the short term113
• A hot pack, when compared to mobilization, manipulation, or electric muscle stimulation, for reducing 
pain and improving function over the intermediate term68
• Infrared light, when compared to sham TENS, for reducing pain and improving function over the short term68
IV
Graham et al68
Parreira et al161
For patients with chronic neck pain with mobility deficits, there was no benefit in using the following:
• Electric muscle stimulation, when compared to manual therapy, TENS, or heat for reducing pain over 
the intermediate term68
• Evaporative cooling spray and stretch, when compared to active control, placebo, or active treatment 
(heat, education, or exercise), for pain over the immediate term68
• TENS, when compared to manual therapy or ultrasound, for reducing pain over the immediate and 
short term68
• Kinesio Tape when compared to cervical manipulation on pain over the immediate term161
Physical Agents
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a33
staging, but the recommendations were made for coordi-
nation, strengthening, and endurance exercises, stretching 
exercises, and patient education and counseling that (1) pro-
motes early return to normal, nonprovocative preinjury ac-
tivities, and (2) provides reassurance to the patient that good 
prognosis and full recovery commonly occur.
Evidence Update
Identified were 27 systematic reviews investigating physical 
therapy interventions on patients who could be classified as 
having neck pain with movement coordination impairments. 
All of the studies in this section were on WAD. Levels of evi-
dence assigned to systematic reviews in this section were as-
sessed according to TABLE 1. Primary sources were generally of 
high or moderate methodological quality with low risk of bias, 
but had numbers of participants that were considered small. 
This resulted in downgrading the strength of the evidence by 1 
or 2 levels due to imprecision and limited directness (TABLE 1).63 
TABLE 8 details the levels of evidence of included studies with 
underpinning evidence statements. Consideration was made 
for the trade-offs between desirable and undesirable conse-
quences (important adverse events). Adverse events or side 
effects were rarely reported in the studies, and when reported 
were minor, transient, and of short duration.
III
In a 2015 systematic review of CPGs, Wong et al240 
found all guidelines to recommend education and 
exercise in the management of acute WAD, with 
most guidelines recommending education and exercise for 
the subacute and chronic stages as well. The components of 
education were: emphasis on remaining active, advice on 
management and coping, reassurance about the prognosis, 
and functional improvement goals. Further, this review 
found recommendations for mobilization or manipulation, a 
multimodal approach, and recommendations against the use 
of a cervical collar.240
V
The following are expert opinions of the CPG de-
velopment group:
• Clinicians should integrate the recommenda-
tions below with consideration of the results of the patient 
evaluation (eg, physical impairments most related to the 
patient’s reported activity limitation or concerns, severity 
and irritability of the condition, patient values, and moti-
vating factors).
• Existing evidence indicates that recovery from neck pain 
with movement coordination impairments is most likely to 
follow 1 of 3 trajectories: quick and early recovery, moderate 
to slow recovery with lingering impairments, and poor re-
covery with severe disability.172 A patient’s course of recovery 
within and between trajectories may not be fixed, as there 
are many factors that can influence the course of recovery. 
Appropriate evaluation of the acutely injured patient should 
focus on identifying risk factors for chronicity and predicting 
the most likely course of recovery for that patient. This prog-
nostic subgrouping is conspicuously absent from many RCTs 
evaluated for these guidelines, but makes clinical sense. 
While early intervention may impede recovery in the quick 
and early recovery group, it is likely more appropriate for the 
severe and nonrecovered group. The available evidence pro-
vides little guidance for treatment recommendations based 
on anticipated trajectories. In light of this gap in knowl-
edge, we endorse early, informed risk-based assessment and 
prognosis from which treatment recommendations should 
flow naturally. An aggressive search for the pain-generating 
“tissue at fault” is currently unlikely to be productive in the 
acute stage of injury.
Low Risk for Chronicity/Quick and Early Recovery Expected
As mentioned in the Clinical Course section in these guide-
lines, a significant portion of clients with acute neck pain 
with movement coordination impairments should expect 
to recover significantly within the first 2 to 3 months. For 
those clients whose condition is perceived to be at low risk of 
progressing into chronicity, clinicians should provide early 
advice, education, and counseling that includes reassurance 
of the expected course of recovery, encouragement to remain 
active at a level similar to prior to the current episode, and 
training in home exercises to maintain/improve movement of 
the neck within a comfortable range. Helpful information can 
be found at an Australian government-sponsored website.193
A supervised exercise program (minimum 1 session, and 1 
follow-up session) is preferable over an unsupervised pro-
gram (verbal instruction or pamphlet). Intensive exercise or 
work-hardening programs are not recommended in the early 
acute or subacute phases.
Unclear Risk for Chronicity/Moderate to Slow Recovery,  
With Lingering Impairments Expected
Repeated or ongoing examination may be required to make 
an informed assessment, which should be utilized to guide 
management decisions. Impairment-based treatment should 
flow naturally from evaluation findings. This group is more 
suitable for responding to a more intensive nonsurgical 
program combined with low-level pharmaceuticals. Clients 
should be monitored closely. The timing and achievement 
of defined favorable outcomes are often undetermined and 
unpredictable.
High Risk for Chronicity/Poor Recovery,  
With Severe Disability Expected
In consideration of the factors discussed in “Risk, Prognosis, 
and Clinical Course” and in “Imaging,” some patients may be 
perceived to be at a higher risk of developing chronic prob-
lems and poor functional recovery. For those patients, a more 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a34  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 8
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Movement Coordination  
Impairments by Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
No update evidence identified
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
III
Drescher et al49
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using 
neck postural/stabilization exercise, when compared to use of a cervical collar, for reducing pain over the 
short through long term.49
IV
Teasell et al204
Verhagen et al223
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using 
supervised exercise (endurance, stretch, stabilization, coordination), when compared to unsupervised 
exercise, for reducing pain and disability, and improving self-efficacy over the short but not intermediate 
term.204,223
IV
Conlin et al33
Drescher et al49
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using 
neck kinesthetic and coordination exercise, when compared to advice to stay active, for reducing pain over 
the short and intermediate term.33,49
Subacute
IV
Teasell et al204
Verhagen et al223
For patients with subacute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using 
strengthening of the cervical and shoulder muscles, or balance and postural exercises, when compared 
to a control, for reducing pain or improving the ability to perform work activities, over the short and long 
term.204,223
Chronic
IV
Damgaard et al44
Gross et al71
Kabisch103
Kay et al109
O’Riordan et al157
Southerst et al190
Teasell et al205
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordination impairments, when compared to a control, 
there was a benefit in using the following:
• An individualized, progressive submaximal exercise program and pain education including strengthening, 
endurance, flexibility, coordination, aerobic, and functional exercise using cognitive behavioral therapy 
principles, for reducing pain and improving function over the immediate, but not long term44,71,103,109,157,190,205
• Vestibular rehabilitation for improving Dizziness Handicap Inventory scores, but not for reducing pain, over 
the short term71,205
• Eye-head-neck coordination exercise for improving head repositioning accuracy over the short term. An im-
provement in pain was realized, but the magnitude of the effect is questionable given the group differences 
in initial pain scores71,205
IV
Teasell et al205
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using 
cervical rotation strength training, when compared to endurance training, for reducing pain, improving 
muscle strength, and improving SF-36 physical function scores, over the short term.205
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
IV
Kay et al108
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using a 
home program consisting of cervical ROM exercise, advice, physical agents, and limited collar use, when 
compared to a control, for reducing pain over the short term.108
Manual Therapy
Exercise
Table continues on page A35.
Multimodal: Exercise and Manual Therapy
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a35
 
TABLE 8
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Movement Coordination  
Impairments by Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
III
Conlin et al33
Drescher et al49
Hurwitz et al93
Kay et al109
Miller et al140
Shaw et al186
Sutton et al200
Teasell et al203
Verhagen et al223
Yu et al245
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using the 
following:
• Intensive physical therapy program (including, manual therapy, cervical ROM and isometric strengthening 
exercise, advice, and physical agents), when compared to 1 session of physical therapy consisting of home 
exercise instruction and advice, for reducing pain and work days lost, and improving self-perceived benefit, 
over the intermediate term. These differences were statistically significant but of small magnitude, and 
thus, possibly not clinically relevant200,245
• Cervical mobilization or manipulation combined with active cervical ROM exercise when compared to rest, 
use of a collar and/
or analgesic medications and/
or advice, for reducing pain,140 but there was no difference 
in function, over the short term33,49,93,109,140,186,203,223
IV
Kabisch103
Teasell et al203
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using the 
following:
• Massage, active and resisted exercise of the neck and shoulder, and heat, when compared to collar use, for 
reducing pain and disability over the intermediate term203
• Cervical mobilization plus low intensity active kinesthetic, postural and ROM exercise, when compared 
to a self-managed exercise and education program, for reducing pain and disability, over the immediate 
term103,205
IV
Haines et al79
Hurwitz et al93
Teasell et al203
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using 
massage plus mobilization plus active ROM exercises, when compared to collar use or advice to stay 
active, for affecting pain disability, work capacity, and quality of life, over the long term.79,93,203
IV
Kay et al108
Verhagen et al223
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments who received intensive multi-
modal physical therapy, a higher percentage reported symptoms after 2 years, as compared with those 
who received a single session of physical therapy consisting of home active cervical ROM exercise and 
advice.108,223
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
IV
Kabisch103
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using 
cervical mobilization combined with low load cervical and scapular muscle activation and kinesthetic train-
ing, when compared to a booklet on education and exercise, for reducing pain and improving function over 
the immediate term.103
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
III
Gross et al76
Gross et al70
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using an 
educational video, when compared to the following:
• No treatment, for reducing pain over the short, intermediate, and long term76
• Control, for improving muscular activation over the intermediate term but not the long term70
III
Meeus et al138
Teasell et al203
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using the 
following:
• Instructions to decrease the use of a cervical collar, improve posture, and perform mobilizing exercises, 
when compared to only receiving rest and analgesics, to increase ROM and decrease pain, over the inter-
mediate term138
• Advice to act as usual, when compared to use of a soft collar, for reducing pain over the intermediate and 
long term203
Multimodal: Exercise and Manual Therapy
Table continues on page A36.
Education
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a36  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 8
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Movement Coordination  
Impairments by Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Education
Physical Agents
 Abbreviations: ROM, range of motion; SF-36, Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey.
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
IV
Meeus et al138
Gross et al76
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using  
the following:
• Verbal education on the mechanism of injury to reduce fear and uncertainty, and advice to remain active, 
when compared to the use of a semi-rigid collar or active mobilization, for reducing neck pain, headache 
disability, and improving work ability over the long term138
• Instructions to decrease the use of a cervical collar, improve posture and perform mobilizing exercise, 
when compared to active physiotherapy, for improving cervical ROM and reducing pain intensity over the 
intermediate term138
• Advice to act as usual, when compared to use of a Philadelphia collar plus manual therapy plus exercise, 
on improving pain, function, or quality of life over the long term76
• Whiplash pamphlet focusing on activity, when compared to a generic information sheet, on reducing pain 
or improving function over the short term76
IV
Gross et al70
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using a 
pamphlet focusing on activity, when compared to generic information provided in the emergency depart-
ment, for reducing pain or improving function over the short term.70
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
IV
Meeus et al138
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using 
verbal education focusing on prognosis, encouragement, assurance, and activity integrated with exercise, 
when compared to a control, for reducing pain and disability over the short term.138
IV
Gross et al76
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in adding 
cognitive behavioral training to a physical therapy program, on reducing pain or improving disability over 
the short term.76
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
IV
Gross et al76
Parreira et al161
Vanti et al216
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a benefit in using  
Kinesiotape when compared to sham Kinesio Tape on reducing pain over the immediate term. The  
difference was small and possibly not clinically meaningful.76,161,216
IV
Graham et al68
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit, when 
compared to a control, in using the following:
• Laser for reducing pain over the immediate or intermediate term68
• Pulsed ultrasound on function or global perceived effect over the immediate term68
• Iontophoresis for reducing pain over the immediate term68
IV
Graham et al68
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was no benefit in using 
iontophoresis, when compared to interferential current, and was inferior to a multimodal treatment of  
traction, exercise, and massage, for reducing pain over the immediate term.68
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
IV
Graham et al68
For patients with an unspecified duration of neck pain with movement coordination impairments, there was a 
benefit, when compared to a control, in using transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation for reducing pain 
over the immediate term.68
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a37
strengthening, endurance, flexibility, and coordination, 
using principles of cognitive behavioral therapy
• TENS
NECK PAIN WITH HEADACHE
2008 Recommendation
The intervention literature analyses were not specifically 
aligned to the neck pain categories or staging, but recom-
mendations were made for coordination, strengthening, and 
endurance exercises to reduce neck pain and headache.
Evidence Update
Identified were 17 systematic reviews investigating physical 
therapy interventions for neck pain with cervicogenic head-
ache. Levels of evidence assigned to systematic reviews in this 
section were assessed according to TABLE 1. Primary sources 
were generally of high or moderate methodological quality, 
that is, with low risk of bias, but had numbers of participants 
that were considered small. This resulted in downgrading the 
strength of the evidence by 1 or 2 levels due to imprecision 
and limited directness (TABLE 1).63 TABLE 9 details the levels 
of evidence of included studies with underpinning evidence 
statements. Considerations were made of the trade-offs be-
tween desirable and undesirable consequences (important 
adverse events). Adverse events or side effects were poorly 
reported in the studies, and when reported were minor, tran-
sient, and of short duration. For manual therapy or exercise, 
the only consistently reported problem was local discom-
fort or dizziness. For manipulation, rare but serious adverse 
events such as stroke or serious neurological deficits were not 
reported in any of the trials. Serious but rare adverse events 
for manipulation are known to occur.23
V
The following are expert opinions of the CPG 
 
development group:
• Clinicians should integrate the recommenda-
tions below with consideration of the results of the patient 
evaluation (eg, physical impairments most related to the 
patient’s reported activity limitation or concerns, severity 
and irritability of the condition, patient values, and moti-
vating factors).
• With patients in this category, clinicians should follow 
the screening and assessment procedures outlined in the 
 
IFOMPT framework before implementing interventions.
• Treatments for subgroups of patients having neck pain with 
headache need further research, including patients post-
concussion and patients experiencing symptoms related to 
the temporomandibular joint.
• Craniocervical strength training may be of particular 
benefit.
• Available adherence strategies (eg, McLean et al136) for 
adoption and maintenance of home exercise should be 
integrated to maximize clinical benefit over the long term.
concerted multimodal treatment program that could include 
medical and psychological consultation would be indicated.
• Available adherence strategies (eg, McLean et al136) for 
adoption and maintenance of home exercise should be in-
tegrated to maximize clinical benefit over the long term
2017 Recommendation
Acute
For patients with acute neck pain with movement coordina-
tion impairments (including WAD):
B
Clinicians should provide the following:
1. Education of the patient to
 • Return to normal, nonprovocative preaccident 
activities as soon as possible
• Minimize use of a cervical collar
• Perform postural and mobility exercises to decrease pain 
and increase ROM
2. 
Reassurance to the patient that recovery is expected to oc-
cur within the first 2 to 3 months.
B
Clinicians should use a multimodal intervention 
approach including manual mobilization tech-
niques plus exercise (eg, strengthening, endurance, 
flexibility, postural, coordination, aerobic, and functional ex-
ercises) for those patients expected to experience a moderate 
to slow recovery with persistent impairments.
C
Clinicians may provide to patients whose condition 
is perceived to be at low risk of progressing toward 
chronicity:
• A single session consisting of early advice, exercise instruc-
tion, and education
• A comprehensive exercise program (including strength 
and/or endurance with/without coordination exercises)
• TENS
F
Clinicians should monitor recovery status in an at-
tempt to identify those patients experiencing de-
layed recovery and who may need more intensive 
rehabilitation and an early pain education program.
Chronic
For patients with chronic neck pain with movement coordi-
nation impairments (including WAD):
C
Clinicians may provide the following:
• Patient education and advice focusing on reas-
surance, encouragement, prognosis, and pain 
management
• Mobilization combined with an individualized, progressive 
submaximal exercise program including cervicothoracic 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a38  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 9
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Headache  
by Intervention Type, Stage, Levels of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
III
Chaibi and Russell28
Fernández-de-las-Peñas et al59
Hurwitz et al93
Racicki et al163
For patients with subacute to chronic neck pain with headache, there was a benefit, when 
compared to a control, in using cervical manipulation and mobilization for reducing neck pain, 
headache intensity, and headache frequency over the immediate through long term.28,59,93,163
Chronic
III
Brønfort et al20
Chaibi and Russell28
Fernández-de-las-Peñas et al59
Gross et al72
Racicki et al163
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache, there was a benefit in using the following:
• Cervical manipulation done 3 or 4 times per week for 12 to 18 sessions, when compared to 
cervical manipulations done 1 time per week for 3 to 8 sessions, for reducing headache pain 
and frequency over the short term.21,57 This benefit was not maintained over the intermediate 
term28,72
• Multiple sessions of cervical or cervicothoracic manipulation, when compared to multiple 
sessions of massage or placebo treatments, for reducing pain and improving function over the 
short and intermediate term28,59,163
• Cervical manipulation, when compared to cervical mobilization, for reducing pain, over the 
immediate, but not the short term20
III
Brønfort et al20
Chaibi and Russell28
Gross et al72
Hurwitz et al93
Macaulay et al125
Racicki et al163
Varatharajan et al220
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache, there was no benefit in using the following:
• Cervical manipulation and mobilization, when compared to exercise alone or manipulation plus 
exercise, affecting neck pain and headache intensity, frequency, and duration, over the long 
term.20,93,220 However 2 other reviews reported a small advantage in using manual therapy and 
exercise, when compared to manipulation alone, for reducing pain and improving function, 
with a 69% advantage in global perceived effect, over the long term71,125
• Cervical manipulation alone, when compared to laser and massage, for reducing headache 
intensity or duration, over the immediate term28,163
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
III
Gross et al76
For patients with acute whiplash with neck pain with headache, there was a benefit for active mo-
bility exercise (physical therapist provided instruction, then home exercise), when compared to 
collar use, in reducing pain and disability over the short term, and pain over the intermediate 
term.76
IV
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
Racicki et al163
Zronek et al247
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with headache, there was a benefit, when com-
pared to a control, in C1-2 self-SNAG for reducing pain and headache intensity163 over the short 
and long term.71,109,163,247 
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
III
Gross et al75
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
Racicki et al163
Varatharajan et al220
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using cervicoscapular strengthening and endurance exercise including craniocervi-
cal flexion training with pressure biofeedback for reducing pain and function, and improving 
global perceived effect, over the long term.71,75,109,163,220
III
Bronfort et al19
Gross et al71
Kay et al109
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache, there was no benefit in using endurance, iso-
metric, and stretching exercise, when compared to manipulation, for reducing pain, headache 
frequency, or headache duration, over the short and long term.19,71,109
Manual Therapy
Exercise
Table continues on page A39.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a39
 
TABLE 9
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Headache  
by Intervention Type, Stage, Levels of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Multimodal: Exercise and Manual Therapy
Abbreviations: SNAG, sustained natural apophyseal glide.
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
III
Brønfort et al20
Chaibi and Russell28
Fernández-de-las-Peñas et al59
Gross et al75
Hurwitz et al93
Miller et al140
Racicki et al163
Reid and Rivett167
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache, there was a benefit, when compared to a 
control, in using mobilization, manipulation, and exercise (stretching, strengthening, and 
endurance), for reducing pain, headache frequency, headache intensity, and improving  
function and global perceived effect, over the short and long term.20,28,59,75,93,140,163,167
III
Gross et al75
For patients with mechanical neck pain, with or without radiating pain, and with or without 
headache there was a benefit, compared to control, in using mobilization or manipulation 
combined with stretching and strengthening to reduce pain over the short and long term,  
sand improve function over the long term.75
IV
Chaibi and Russell28
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache who also report at least 1 sign of temporoman-
dibular dysfunction (eg, pain in the area of the jaw [or face, or ear], a click or pop heard when 
opening or closing the mouth, restrictions or deviations of jaw motion, or pain in the muscles of 
mastication), there was a benefit, when compared to manual therapy and exercise focused on the 
craniocervical region, in using manual therapy and exercise interventions focused on the temporo-
mandibular joint, for reducing pain and improving function over the short and intermediate term.28
2017 Recommendation
Acute
B
For patients with acute neck pain with headache, 
clinicians should provide supervised instruction in 
active mobility exercise.
C
Clinicians may utilize C1-2 self-sustained natural 
apophyseal glide (self-SNAG) exercise.
Subacute
B
For patients with subacute neck pain with head-
ache, clinicians should provide cervical manipula-
tion and mobilization.
C
Clinicians may provide C1-2 self-SNAG exercise.
Chronic
B
For patients with chronic neck pain with headache, 
clinicians should provide cervical or cervicothoracic 
manipulation or mobilizations combined with 
shoulder girdle and neck stretching, strengthening, and en-
durance exercise.
NECK PAIN WITH RADIATING PAIN
2008 Recommendation
B
Clinicians should consider the use of upper-quar-
ter and nerve mobilization procedures to reduce 
pain and disability in patients with neck and arm 
pain.
C
Specific repeated movements or procedures to pro-
mote centralization are not more beneficial in re-
ducing disability when compared to other forms of 
interventions.
B
Clinicians should consider the use of mechanical 
intermittent cervical traction, combined with other 
interventions such as manual therapy and strength-
ening exercises, for reducing pain and disability in patients 
with neck and neck-related arm pain.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a40  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
TABLE 10
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Radiating Pain  
by Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
IV
Boyles et al17
For patients with acute to chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit from using the following: 
combined cervical lateral glides, thoracic mobilizations, and nerve mobilization procedures for the median 
nerve, when compared to general strengthening, for reducing pain and disability, over the immediate term17
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
IV
Zhu et al246
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was a benefit in using cervical manipulation on 
pain, compared to mechanical traction over the immediate term.246
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
IV
Southerst et al190
Kay et al109
Salt et al178
Gross et al71
Zronek et al247
For patients with acute neck pain with radiating pain, there was a benefit, when compared to a control, in 
using cervical mobilizing and stabilizing exercises for reducing pain but not for improving function over 
the immediate term. The benefit for relief of pain was not sustained over the short190 or intermediate 
term.71,109,178,247
IV
Southerst et al190
Salt et al178
For patients with acute to subacute neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit in using cervical 
stretching and strengthening exercises, when compared to wearing a semi-hard cervical collar, for reducing 
pain and improving function, over the immediate, short, and intermediate term.178,190
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
No update evidence identified
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
III
Gross et al75
For patients with mechanical neck pain, with or without radiating pain, and with or without headache, there 
was a benefit, when compared to a control, in using mobilization or manipulation combined with stretching 
and strengthening exercises for reducing pain over the short and long term, and for improving function over 
the long term.75
III
Salt et al178
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit in using manual therapy plus 
exercise, when compared to advice plus sham ultrasound, or when compared to manual therapy, or when 
compared to exercise alone, for reducing pain or improving function, over the short and long term.178
IV
Salt et al178
Boyles et al17
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit in using manual therapy plus 
exercise, when compared to rigid or soft collar, or when compared to surgery, for reducing pain or improv-
ing function, over the immediate and long term.17,178
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
No update evidence identified
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
III
Salt et al178
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was a benefit, when compared to a control, for 
using patient education and counseling that encourage exercise and moderate to heavy physical activities 
related to work, for reducing pain, but not for improving function or reducing disability over the long term.178
Manual Therapy
Exercise
Multimodal: Exercise and Manual Therapy
Education
Table continues on page A41.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a41
Evidence Update
Identified were 15 systematic reviews investigating physical 
therapy interventions for neck pain with radiating pain. Levels 
of evidence assigned to systematic reviews in this section were 
assessed according to TABLE 1. Primary sources were generally 
of high or moderate methodological quality, that is, with low 
risk of bias, but had numbers of participants that were con-
sidered small. This resulted in downgrading the strength of 
the evidence by 1 or 2 levels due to imprecision and limited 
directness (TABLE 1).63 TABLE 10 details the levels of evidence of 
included studies with underpinning evidence statements. Con-
sideration of the trade-offs between desirable and undesirable 
consequences (important adverse events) was made. Adverse 
events or side effects were poorly reported in the studies, and 
when reported were minor, transient, and of short duration.
V
The following are expert opinions of the CPG de-
velopment group:
• Clinicians should integrate the recommendations 
below with consideration of the results of the patient evalu-
ation (eg, related impairments, severity, and irritability of 
the condition, and values). Clinicians have a responsibility 
to make appropriate referrals if signs and symptoms are 
not resolving or are worsening.
• Since the 2008 neck pain CPG, there has been little ad-
vancement in our knowledge of how to nonsurgically 
 
TABLE 10
Intervention Evidence for Neck Pain With Radiating Pain  
by Intervention Type, Stage, Level of Evidence,  
Evidence of Benefit or No Benefit, and Comparison (continued)
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
IV
Varatharajan  
et al219
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit, when compared to a control, for 
adding job stress education to ergonomic interventions for reducing pain, ergonomic risk, or work stress, 
or for improving function, over the intermediate and long term.219
Stage/Level
Study
Evidence Statement
Acute
IV
Graham et al68
Gross et al76
Kadhim-Saleh  
et al104
Thoomes et al208
For patients with acute neck pain with radiating pain, there was a benefit, when compared to a control, in 
using the following:
• 905-nm laser for reducing pain, improving function, global perceived effect, and quality of life over the im-
mediate and intermediate term.68,76,104 Graham et al68 reported mild adverse events equal in treatment and 
placebo groups, including tiredness, nausea, headache, and increased pain following laser treatment
• A cervical collar for reducing arm pain over the short but not intermediate term76,208
IV
Rhee et al169
For neck pain with radiating pain and a diagnosis of mild cervical myelopathy, there was a benefit, compared 
to surgery, in using multimodal nonsurgical management (intermittent use of collar or bed rest, medica-
tions, and activity modification) for improving gait speed over the long term, but no difference in neurologi-
cal status or performance of daily living activities as compared to surgical management.169 Rhee et al169 
also strongly recommended that traction, as part of nonsurgical management, should not be routinely 
prescribed for patients with moderate to severe cervical myelopathy.
IV
Gross et al76
For patients with acute neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit, when compared to a control, in 
using a semi-rigid collar for improving function over the short, intermediate, or long term.76
III
Graham et al68
Thoomes et al208
For patients with acute and chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit, when compared 
to a control, in using continuous traction for reducing pain or disability over the immediate, short, and 
intermediate term.68,208
IV
Thoomes et al208
For patients with acute and chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit in using a collar, when 
compared to multimodal physical therapy, for reducing pain over the short term.208
Subacute
No update evidence identified
Chronic
III
Graham et al68
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was a benefit, when compared to a control, in 
using intermittent traction for reducing pain in the short term.68
IV
Graham et al68
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating pain, there was no benefit, when compared to a control, 
in using electric muscular stimulation, or modified galvanic current for reducing pain over the immediate 
term.68
Education
Physical Agents
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a42  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
treat neck pain with radiating pain. While 1 meta-analysis 
showed benefit from manual therapy and exercise in a 
population that included a mixture of neck pain categories, 
other studies that were selective to neck pain with radiat-
ing pain were not able to show similar benefits from this 
approach.
• Clinicians should monitor symptom irritability, and 
adjust treatment accordingly, when applying manual 
therapy and exercise approaches applied to patients with 
radicular pain.
• Because of the detrimental effects of prolonged use, collars 
should be restricted to a limited time in the acute phase 
only, and only in individuals who do not obtain relief from 
other treatments.
• Available adherence strategies (eg, McLean et al136) for 
adoption and maintenance of home exercise should be in-
tegrated to maximize clinical benefit over the long term.
2017 Recommendation
Acute
C
For patients with acute neck pain with radiating 
pain, clinicians may utilize mobilizing and stabiliz-
ing exercises, laser, and short-term use of a cervical 
collar.
Chronic
B
For patients with chronic neck pain with radiating 
pain, clinicians should provide mechanical inter-
mittent cervical traction, combined with other in-
terventions such as stretching and strengthening exercise 
plus cervical and thoracic mobilization/manipulation.
B
Clinicians should provide education and counseling 
to encourage participation in occupational and ex-
ercise activities.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a43
 1. The estimates of the prevalence of neck pain vary so wide-
ly, with respect to definitions and associated estimates, 
that reporting the actual prevalence is likely impossible.
 2. Reviews of musculoskeletal clinical research frequently 
draw somewhat vague conclusions that are only partially 
helpful to clinical practice. This makes the development 
of absolute or firm recommendations or guidelines dif-
ficult at this point in time.
 3. Health care research does not account well for the dy-
namic or individualized nature of the less well-defined di-
agnoses, such as those afflicting patients with neck pain, 
the solutions to those problems, or the ongoing doubt as-
sociated with whether a solution to any given problem has 
been reached after the implementation of treatment.
 4. The comparable sign, a highly adaptable patient response 
to a specific clinical test, appears to not be present in the 
scientific literature. This may complicate attempts to in-
corporate scientific findings into clinical practice.
 5. Health care research attempts to classify and quantify the 
scientific aspects of patient care but cannot sufficiently 
capture the intuitive, responsive process so frequently 
associated with both the evaluation and management 
processes. This, to a certain extent, will of course limit 
the applicability of CPGs in certain scenarios.
 6. Comparison across scientific papers is problematic 
when discrepencies exist in experience and mastery of 
the diagnostic process and intervention delivery. In ad-
dition, intervention specifics (eg, position, dosage) are 
frequently poorly described, further complicating com-
parison between and among studies. The clinician may 
have to return to the original articles in an attempt to 
determine evidence-based dosage.
 7. The guideline recommends interventions predominantly 
for their effect on pain, and thus the reader may be under 
the impression that the authors have ignored other com-
mon symptoms associated with neck disorders, such as 
light-headedness and poor balance/dizziness (which are 
common symptoms in persons with whiplash and even 
cervicogenic headache).
 8. The guideline discusses the major problem of the recur-
rent nature of neck pain and the transition to chronicity. 
Recommendations are based on higher-level evidence 
that considered relief of an episode of pain.
 9. The guideline does not review a large body of research on 
neuromuscular and sensorimotor impairments in neck 
pain disorders. In many cases, the available evidence did 
not meet our threshold for inclusion.
 
10. The guideline positions itself within the ICF but does 
not consider the biopsychosocial context informing 
assessment, prognostic, and theranostic strategies on 
a patient-by-patient basis. In time and with more re-
search, it is anticipated that this information will com-
bine, if not refine, using strict inclusion criteria.
Limitations to This CPG
The guideline development group members declared rela-
tionships and developed a conflict management plan that 
included submitting a Conflict of Interest form to the 
Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc. Articles that were authored 
by a group member were assigned to an alternate member 
for assessment. Partial funding was provided to the CPG 
development team for travel and expenses for CPG training 
and development; the content of this guideline was not in-
fluenced by this funding. The CPG development team main-
tained editorial independence.
Competing Interests, Disclosures, and Author Contributions
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a44  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
AUTHORS
Peter R. Blanpied, PT
, PhD
Professor
Physical Therapy Department
University of Rhode Island
Kinston, RI
blanpied@uri.edu
Anita R. Gross, PT
, MSc
Associate Clinical Professor
Rehabilitation Sciences
McMaster University
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
grossa@mcmaster.ca
James M. Elliott, PT
, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Physical Therapy and 
Human Movement Sciences
Feinberg School of Medicine
Northwestern University
Chicago, IL
j-elliott@northwestern.edu
Laurie Lee Devaney, PT
, MSc
Clinical Instructor
Physical Therapy Program
Department of Kinesiology
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT
laurie.devaney@uconn.edu
Derek Clewley, DPT
Assistant Professor
Division of Physical Therapy
Duke University
Durham, NC
derek.clewley@duke.edu
David M. Walton, PT
, PhD
Associate Professor
School of Physical Therapy
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada
dwalton5@uwo.ca
Cheryl Sparks, PT
, PhD
Director
Rehabilitation Center of  
Expertise
OSF HealthCare
Peoria, IL
Cheryl.L.Sparks@osfhealthcare.org
Eric Robertson, PT
, DPT
Clinical Assistant Professor
Physical Therapy Department
University of Texas-El Paso
El Paso, TX
ekrdpt@gmail.com
REVIEWERS
Roy Altman, MD
Professor of Medicine
Division of Rheumatology and 
Immunology
David Geffen School of Medicine
University of California at Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA
journals@royaltman.com
Paul Beattie, PT
, PhD
Clinical Professor
Doctoral Program in Physical Therapy
Department of Exercise Science
Arnold School of Public Health
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC
pbeattie@gwm.sc.edu
Eugene R. Boeglin, DPT
Principal
Milton Orthopaedic & Sports Physical 
Therapy, PC
Milton, MA
erboeglin@verizon.net
John Childs, PT
, PhD, MBA
Associate Professor and Director of 
Research
School of Physical Therapy
South College
Knoxville, TN
jchilds@southcollegetn.edu
Joshua Cleland, PT
, PhD
Professor
Doctor of Physical Therapy Program
Franklin Pierce University
Manchester, NH
clelandj@franklinpierce.edu
John Dewitt, DPT
Director
Physical Therapy Sports and 
Orthopaedic Residencies and 
Fellowships
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH
john.dewitt@osumc.edu
Amanda Ferland, DPT
Clinical Faculty
Intech Rehabilitation Group/Division 
of Biokinesiology and Physical 
Therapy
Orthopaedic Physical Therapy 
Residency
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
and
Spine Rehabilitation Fellowship
Beijing, China
AmandaFerland@incarehab.com
Timothy Flynn, PT
, PhD
Professor
School of Physical Therapy
South College
Knoxville, TN
tflynn1@southcollegetn.edu
Sandra Kaplan, PT
, PhD
Clinical Practice Guidelines 
Coordinator
Academy of Pediatric Therapy,  
APTA, Inc
and
Professor
Doctoral Programs in Physical 
Therapy
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ
kaplansa@shp.rutgers.edu
David Killoran, PhD
Patient/Consumer Representative 
for the ICF-Based Clinical Practice 
Guidelines
Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Professor Emeritus
Loyola Marymount University
Los Angeles, CA
david.killoran@lmu.edu
Leslie Torburn, DPT
Principal and Consultant
Silhouette Consulting, Inc
Sacramento, CA
torburn@yahoo.com
GUIDELINES EDITORS
Christine M. McDonough, PT
, PhD
ICF-Based Clinical Practice  
Guidelines Editor
Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Adjunct Clinical Assistant Professor
Department of Orthopaedic  
Surgery
Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical  
Center
Lebanon, NH
and
Research Assistant Professor
Health and Disability Research 
Institute
Boston University School of  
Public Health
Boston, MA
cmm@bu.edu
Joseph J. Godges, DPT
, MA
ICF-Based Clinical Practice  
Guidelines Editor
Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Adjunct Associate Professor
Clinical Physical Therapy
Division of Biokinesiology and 
Physical Therapy
Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
godges@pt.usc.edu
Guy. G. Simoneau, PT
, PhD, FAPTA
ICF-Based Clinical Practice  
Guidelines Editor
Orthopaedic Section, APTA, Inc
La Crosse, WI
and
Professor
Department of Physical Therapy
Marquette University
Milwaukee, WI
guy.simoneau@marquette.edu
AFFILIATIONS AND CONTACTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The authors wish to acknowledge and graciously thank P. Lina Santaguida and the members of the International 
Collaboration on Neck Pain (ICON) for their assistance and sharing their work. In addition, the authors wish to thank Christine 
McDonough and Joseph Godges for their valuable guidance and assistance in editing drafts.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a45
 1.   
Ackelman BH, Lindgren U. Validity and reliability of a modified version of 
the Neck Disability Index. J Rehabil Med. 2002;34:284-287
. https://doi.
org/10.1080/165019702760390383
 2.   
Amenta PS, Ghobrial GM, Krespan K, Nguyen P
, Ali M, Harrop JS. Cervical 
spondylotic myelopathy in the young adult: a review of the literature and 
clinical diagnostic criteria in an uncommon demographic. Clin Neurol 
Neurosurg. 2014;120:68-72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2014.02.019
 3.   
American College of Radiology. Appropriateness Criteria. Available at: 
https://www.acr.org/Quality-Safety/
Appropriateness-Criteria. Accessed 
December 2, 2015.
 4.   
American Physical Therapy Association. Guide to physical therapist prac-
tice. Second edition. Phys Ther. 2001;81:9-746.
 5.   
Andelic N, Johansen JB, Bautz-Holter E, Mengshoel AM, Bakke E, Roe C. 
Linking self-determined functional problems of patients with neck pain to 
the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF). 
Patient Prefer Adherence. 2012;6:749-755. https://doi.org/10.2147
/PPA.
S36165
 6.   
Anderson SE, Boesch C, Zimmermann H, et al. Are there cervical spine 
findings at MR imaging that are specific to acute symptomatic whiplash 
injury? A prospective controlled study with four experienced blinded read-
ers. Radiology. 2012;262:567-575. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.11102115
 7.   
Andersson HI. The epidemiology of chronic pain in a Swedish rural 
area. Qual Life Res. 1994;3 suppl 1:S19-S26. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
BF00433371
 8.   
Bergbom S, Boersma K, Overmeer T
, Linton SJ. Relationship among 
pain catastrophizing, depressed mood, and outcomes across physical 
therapy treatments. Phys Ther. 2011;91:754-764. https://doi.org/10.2522/
ptj.20100136
 9.   
Bergström C, Jensen I, Hagberg J, Busch H, Bergström G. Effectiveness 
of different interventions using a psychosocial subgroup assignment in 
chronic neck and back pain patients: a 10-year follow-up. Disabil Rehabil. 
2012;34:110-118. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2011.607218
 10.   
Bertozzi L, Gardenghi I, T
uroni F
, et al. Effect of therapeutic exercise on 
pain and disability in the management of chronic nonspecific neck pain: 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Phys Ther. 
2013;93:1026-1036. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20120412
 11.   
Bono CM, Ghiselli G, Gilbert TJ, et al. An evidence-based clinical guide-
line for the diagnosis and treatment of cervical radiculopathy from 
degenerative disorders. Spine J. 2011;11:64-72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
spinee.2010.10.023
 12.   
Borghouts JA, Koes BW, Bouter LM. The clinical course and prognostic 
factors of non-specific neck pain: a systematic review. Pain. 1998;77:1-13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(98)00058-X
 13.   
Borghouts JA, Koes BW, Vondeling H, Bouter LM. Cost-of-illness of neck 
pain in The Netherlands in 1996. Pain. 1999;80:629-636. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0304-3959(98)00268-1
 14.   
Borloz S, T
rippolini MA, Ballabeni P
, Luthi F
, Deriaz O. Cross-cultural 
adaptation, reliability, internal consistency and validation of the Spinal 
Function Sort (SFS) for French- and German-speaking patients with back 
complaints. J Occup Rehabil. 2012;22:387-393. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s10926-012-9356-2
 15.   
Bot SD, van der Waal JM, Terwee CB, et al. Incidence and prevalence 
of complaints of the neck and upper extremity in general practice. Ann 
Rheum Dis. 2005;64:118-123. https://doi.org/10.1136/
ard.2003.019349
 16.   
Bovim G, Schrader H, Sand T
. Neck pain in the general population. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 1994;19:1307-1309.
 17.   
Boyles R, Toy P
, Mellon J, Jr., Hayes M, Hammer B. Effectiveness of manual 
physical therapy in the treatment of cervical radiculopathy: a systematic 
review. J Man Manip Ther. 2011;19:135-142. https://doi.org/10.1179/204261
8611Y.0000000011
 18.   
Brattberg G, Thorslund M, Wikman A. The prevalence of pain in a general 
population. The results of a postal survey in a county of Sweden. Pain. 
1989;37:215-222. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(89)90133-4
 19.   
Bronfort G, Haas M, Evans R, Leininger B, T
riano J. Effectiveness of manual 
therapies: the UK evidence report. Chiropr Osteopat. 2010;18:3. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1746-1340-18-3
 
20.   
Brønfort G, Nilsson N, Haas M, et al. Non-invasive physical treat-
ments for chronic/recurrent headache. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2004:CD001878. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001878.pub2
 21.   
Brown K, Luszeck T
, Nerdin S, Yaden J, Young JL. The effectiveness of 
cervical versus thoracic thrust manipulation for the improvement of 
pain, disability, and range of motion in patients with mechanical neck 
pain. Phys Ther Rev. 2014;19:381-391. https://doi.org/10.1179/1743288X1
4Y.0000000155
 22.   
Cagnie B, Castelein B, Pollie F
, Steelant L, Verhoeyen H, Cools A. Evidence 
for the use of ischemic compression and dry needling in the manage-
ment of trigger points of the upper trapezius in patients with neck pain: a 
systematic review. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;94:573-583. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/PHM.0000000000000266
 23.   
Carlesso LC, MacDermid JC, Santaguida PL, Thabane L. Determining 
adverse events in patients with neck pain receiving orthopaedic manual 
physiotherapy: a pilot and feasibility study. Physiother Can. 2013;65:255-
265. https://doi.org/10.3138/ptc.2012-28
 24.   
Carroll LJ, Hogg-Johnson S, Côté P
, et al. Course and prognostic fac-
tors for neck pain in workers: results of the Bone and Joint Decade 
2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S93-S100. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e31816445d4
 25.   
Carroll LJ, Hogg-Johnson S, van der Velde G, et al. Course and prognostic 
factors for neck pain in the general population: results of the Bone and 
Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2009;32:S87-S96. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.013
 26.   
Carroll LJ, Holm LW, Hogg-Johnson S, et al. Course and prognostic fac-
tors for neck pain in whiplash-associated disorders (WAD): results of the 
Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its As-
sociated Disorders. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S83-S92. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181643eb8
 27.   
Casey PP
, Feyer AM, Cameron ID. Course of recovery for whiplash as-
sociated disorders in a compensation setting. Injury. 2015;46:2118-2129. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2015.08.038
 28.   
Chaibi A, Russell MB. Manual therapies for cervicogenic headache: a sys-
tematic review. J Headache Pain. 2012;13:351-359. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s10194-012-0436-7
 29.   
Childs JD, Cleland JA, Elliott JM, et al. Neck pain: clinical practice guide-
lines linked to the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, 
and Health from the Orthopaedic Section of the American Physical 
Therapy Association. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2008;38:A1-A34. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.0303
 
30.   
Clar C, Tsertsvadze A, Court R, Hundt GL, Clarke A, Sutcliffe P
. Clinical 
effectiveness of manual therapy for the management of musculoskeletal 
and non-musculoskeletal conditions: systematic review and update 
of UK evidence report. Chiropr Man Therap. 2014;22:12. https://doi.
org/10.1186/2045-709X-22-12
 31.   
Cleland JA, Childs JD, Fritz JM, Whitman JM, Eberhart SL. Development 
REFERENCES
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a46  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
of a clinical prediction rule for guiding treatment of a subgroup of patients 
with neck pain: use of thoracic spine manipulation, exercise, and patient 
education. Phys Ther. 2007;87:9-23. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20060155
 32.   
Coffey F
, Hewitt S, Stiell I, et al. Validation of the Canadian c-spine rule in 
the UK emergency department setting. Emerg Med J. 2011;28:873-876. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/
emj.2009.089508
 33.   
Conlin A, Teasell R, Bhogal S, Sequeira K. T
reatment of whiplash-
associated disorders - part I: non-invasive interventions. Pain Res Manag. 
2005;10:21-32. https://doi.org/10.1155/2005/503704
 
34.   
Cook CE. Orthopedic Manual Therapy: An Evidence-Based Approach. Up-
per Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 2007
.
 35.   
Cook CE, Wilhelm M, Cook AE, Petrosino C, Isaacs R. Clinical tests for 
screening and diagnosis of cervical spine myelopathy: a systematic review. 
J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2011;34:539-546. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmpt.2011.08.008
 36.   
Coronado RA, Bialosky JE, Cook CE. Temporal effects of a single session 
of high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust manipulation on subjects with spinal 
pain. Phys Ther Rev. 2010;15:29-35. https://doi.org/10.1179/17432881
0X12647087218712
 37.   
Côté P
, Cassidy JD, Carroll L. The factors associated with neck pain and its 
related disability in the Saskatchewan population. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
2000;25:1109-1117
.
 38.   
Côté P
, Cassidy JD, Carroll L. The Saskatchewan Health and Back Pain 
Survey. The prevalence of neck pain and related disability in Saskatch-
ewan adults. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1998;23:1689-1698.
 39.   
Côté P
, Cassidy JD, Carroll LJ, Kristman V. The annual incidence and 
course of neck pain in the general population: a population-based cohort 
study. Pain. 2004;112:267-273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2004.09.004
 
40.   
Croft PR, Lewis M, Papageorgiou AC, et al. Risk factors for neck pain: 
a longitudinal study in the general population. Pain. 2001;93:317-325. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(01)00334-7
 41.   
Cross KM, Kuenze C, Grindstaff TL, Hertel J. Thoracic spine thrust ma-
nipulation improves pain, range of motion, and self-reported function in 
patients with mechanical neck pain: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther. 2011;41:633-642. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3670
 
42.   
Curatolo M, Bogduk N, Ivancic PC, McLean SA, Siegmund GP
, Winkelstein 
BA. The role of tissue damage in whiplash-associated disorders: discus-
sion paper 1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2011;36:S309-S315. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e318238842a
 
43.   
Daenen L, Nijs J, Raadsen B, Roussel N, Cras P
, Dankaerts W. Cervical mo-
tor dysfunction and its predictive value for long-term recovery in patients 
with acute whiplash-associated disorders: a systematic review. J Rehabil 
Med. 2013;45:113-122. https://doi.org/10.2340/16501977-1091
 
44.   
Damgaard P
, Bartels EM, Ris I, Christensen R, Juul-Kristensen B. Evi-
dence of physiotherapy interventions for patients with chronic neck 
pain: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. ISRN Pain. 
2013;2013:567175. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/567175
 45.   
Delitto A, George SZ, Van Dillen LR, et al. Low back pain. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther. 2012;42:A1-A57
. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.42.4.A1
 
46.   
De Pauw R, Coppieters I, Kregel J, De Meulemeester K, Danneels L, Cagnie 
B. Does muscle morphology change in chronic neck pain patients? – A 
systematic review. Man Ther. 2016;22:42-49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2015.11.006
 47.   
Detsky ME, McDonald DR, Baerlocher MO, Tomlinson GA, McCrory DC, 
Booth CM. Does this patient with headache have a migraine or need 
neuroimaging? JAMA. 2006;296:1274-1283. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.296.10.1274
 
48.   
Di Fabio RP
, Boissonnault W. Physical therapy and health-related out-
comes for patients with common orthopaedic diagnoses. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther. 1998;27:219-230. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.1998.27
.3.219
 49.   
Drescher K, Hardy S, MacLean J, Schindler M, Scott K, Harris SR. Ef-
ficacy of postural and neck-stabilization exercises for persons with acute 
whiplash-associated disorders: a systematic review. Physiother Can. 
2008;60:215-223. https://doi.org/10.3138/physio.60.3.215
 
50.   
Elliott J, Jull G, Noteboom JT
, Darnell R, Galloway G, Gibbon WW. Fatty 
infiltration in the cervical extensor muscles in persistent whiplash-
associated disorders: a magnetic resonance imaging analysis. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2006;31:E847-E855. https://doi.org/10.1097
/01.
brs.0000240841.07050.34
 51.   
Elliott J, Jull G, Noteboom JT
, Galloway G. MRI study of the cross-sectional 
area for the cervical extensor musculature in patients with persistent 
whiplash associated disorders (WAD). Man Ther. 2008;13:258-265. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2007
.01.012
 52.   
Elliott J, Pedler A, Kenardy J, Galloway G, Jull G, Sterling M. The temporal 
development of fatty infiltrates in the neck muscles following whiplash 
injury: an association with pain and posttraumatic stress. PLoS One. 
2011;6:e21194. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021194
 53.   
Elliott J, Sterling M, Noteboom JT
, Darnell R, Galloway G, Jull G. Fatty infil-
trate in the cervical extensor muscles is not a feature of chronic, insidious-
onset neck pain. Clin Radiol. 2008;63:681-687
. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
crad.2007
.11.011
 
54.   
Elliott JM, Courtney DM, Rademaker A, Pinto D, Sterling MM, Parrish 
TB. The rapid and progressive degeneration of the cervical multifidus 
in whiplash: an MRI study of fatty infiltration. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
2015;40:E694-E700. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000000891
 55.   
Elliott JM, O’Leary S, Sterling M, Hendrikz J, Pedler A, Jull G. Magnetic 
resonance imaging findings of fatty infiltrate in the cervical flexors in 
chronic whiplash. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2010;35:948-954. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181bb0e55
 56.   
Elliott JM, Pedler AR, Jull GA, Van Wyk L, Galloway GG, O’Leary SP
. Differ-
ential changes in muscle composition exist in traumatic and nontraumatic 
neck pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2014;39:39-47
. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0000000000000033
 57.   
Elnaggar IM, Nordin M, Sheikhzadeh A, Parnianpour M, Kahanovitz N. Ef-
fects of spinal flexion and extension exercises on low-back pain and spinal 
mobility in chronic mechanical low-back pain patients. Spine (Phila Pa 
1976). 1991;16:967-972.
 58.   
Fairbairn K, May K, Yang Y, Balasundar S, Hefford C, Abbott JH. Map-
ping Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS) items to the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). Phys Ther. 
2012;92:310-317
. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20090382
 59.   
Fernández-de-las-Peñas C, Alonso-Blanco C, Cuadrado ML, 
Pareja JA. Spinal manipulative therapy in the management of cer-
vicogenic headache. Headache. 2005;45:1260-1263. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1526-4610.2005.00253_1.x
 
60.   
Ferreira ML, Borges BM, Rezende IL, et al. Are neck pain scales and ques-
tionnaires compatible with the international classification of functioning, 
disability and health? A systematic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32:1539-
1546. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638281003611045
 61.   
Fillingim RB, Loeser JD, Baron R, Edwards RR. Assessment of chronic 
pain: domains, methods, and mechanisms. J Pain. 2016;17:T10-
T20. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2015.08.010
 62.   
Fritz JM, Brennan GP
. Preliminary examination of a proposed treatment-
based classification system for patients receiving physical therapy 
interventions for neck pain. Phys Ther. 2007;87:513-524. https://doi.
org/10.2522/ptj.20060192
 63.   
Furlan AD, Malmivaara A, Chou R, et al. 2015 updated method guide-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a47
line for systematic reviews in the Cochrane Back and Neck Group. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1660-1673. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0000000000001061
 
64.   
Furlan AD, Yazdi F
, Tsertsvadze A, et al. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of efficacy, cost-effectiveness, and safety of selected 
complementary and alternative medicine for neck and low-back pain. 
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:953139. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2012/953139
 65.   
George SZ, Beneciuk JM, Bialosky JE, et al. Development of a review-
of-systems screening tool for orthopaedic physical therapists: results 
from the Optimal Screening for Prediction of Referral and Outcome 
(OSPRO) cohort. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2015;45:512-526. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5900
 
66.   
Goldsmith R, Wright C, Bell SF
, Rushton A. Cold hyperalgesia as a prog-
nostic factor in whiplash associated disorders: a systematic review. Man 
Ther. 2012;17:402-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2012.02.014
 67.   
Goode AP
, Freburger J, Carey T
. Prevalence, practice patterns, and evi-
dence for chronic neck pain. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2010;62:1594-
1601. https://doi.org/10.1002/
acr.20270
 
68.   
Graham N, Gross AR, Carlesso LC, et al. An ICON overview on physi-
cal modalities for neck pain and associated disorders. Open Orthop J. 
2013;7:440-460. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010440
 69.   
Griffith B, Kelly M, Vallee P
, et al. Screening cervical spine CT in the emer-
gency department, phase 2: a prospective assessment of use. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 2013;34:899-903. https://doi.org/10.3174/
ajnr.A3306
 70.   
Gross A, Forget M, St George K, et al. Patient education for neck 
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD005106. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD005106.pub4
 71.   
Gross A, Kay TM, Paquin JP
, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck dis-
orders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004250. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub5
 72.   
Gross A, Langevin P
, Burnie SJ, et al. Manipulation and mobilisation 
for neck pain contrasted against an inactive control or another active 
treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015:CD004249. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD004249.pub4
 73.   
Gross A, Miller J, D’Sylva J, et al. Manipulation or mobilisation for 
neck pain: a Cochrane Review. Man Ther. 2010;15:315-333. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2010.04.002
 74.   
Gross AR, Dziengo S, Boers O, et al. Low level laser therapy (LLLT) for 
neck pain: a systematic review and meta-regression. Open Orthop J. 
2013;7:396-419. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010396
 75.   
Gross AR, Goldsmith C, Hoving JL, et al. Conservative management 
of mechanical neck disorders: a systematic review. J Rheumatol. 
2007;34:1083-1102.
 76.   
Gross AR, Kaplan F
, Huang S, et al. Psychological care, patient educa-
tion, orthotics, ergonomics and prevention strategies for neck pain: an 
systematic overview update as part of the ICON project. Open Orthop J. 
2013;7:530-561. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010530
 77.   
Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction—
GRADE evidence profiles and summary of findings tables. J Clin Epide-
miol. 2011;64:383-394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.04.026
 78.   
Guzman J, Hurwitz EL, Carroll LJ, et al. A new conceptual model of 
neck pain: linking onset, course, and care: the Bone and Joint Decade 
2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders. J 
Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2009;32:S17-S28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmpt.2008.11.007
 79.   
Haines T
, Gross A, Burnie SJ, Goldsmith CH, Perry L. Patient education 
for neck pain with or without radiculopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2009:CD005106. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD005106.pub3
 
80.   
Haldeman S, Carroll L, Cassidy JD. Findings from the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000 to 2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Dis-
orders. J Occup Environ Med. 2010;52:424-427
. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
JOM.0b013e3181d44f3b
 81.   
Hall T
, Briffa K, Hopper D, Robinson K. Long-term stability and minimal de-
tectable change of the cervical flexion-rotation test. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2010;40:225-229. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3100
 82.   
Hall TM, Robinson KW, Fujinawa O, Akasaka K, Pyne EA. Intertester 
reliability and diagnostic validity of the cervical flexion-rotation test. J 
Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2008;31:293-300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmpt.2008.03.012
 83.   
Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache 
Society. The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd 
edition (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629-808. https://doi.
org/10.1177
/0333102413485658
 
84.   
Hjermstad MJ, Fayers PM, Haugen DF
, et al. Studies comparing Numeri-
cal Rating Scales, Verbal Rating Scales, and Visual Analogue Scales for 
assessment of pain intensity in adults: a systematic literature review. J 
Pain Symptom Manage. 2011;41:1073-1093. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpainsymman.2010.08.016
 85.   
Hoffman JR, Wolfson AB, Todd K, Mower WR. Selective cervical spine 
radiography in blunt trauma: methodology of the National Emergency 
X-Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS). Ann Emerg Med. 1998;32:461-
469. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-0644(98)70176-3
 
86.   
Hogg-Johnson S, van der Velde G, Carroll LJ, et al. The burden and 
determinants of neck pain in the general population: results of the Bone 
and Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2009;32:S46-S60. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.010
 87.   
Holly LT
, Matz PG, Anderson PA, et al. Functional outcomes assessment 
for cervical degenerative disease. J Neurosurg Spine. 2009;11:238-244. 
https://doi.org/10.3171/2009.2.SPINE08715
 
88.   
Holmstrom EB, Lindell J, Moritz U. Low back and neck/
shoulder pain in 
construction workers: occupational workload and psychosocial risk fac-
tors. Part 2: Relationship to neck and shoulder pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
1992;17:672-677
.
 89.   
Horn KK, Jennings S, Richardson G, van Vliet D, Hefford C, Abbott JH. 
The patient-specific functional scale: psychometrics, clinimetrics, and 
application as a clinical outcome measure. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2012;42:30-42. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.3727
 
90.   
Hoving JL, Gross AR, Gasner D, et al. A critical appraisal of review articles 
on the effectiveness of conservative treatment for neck pain. Spine (Phila 
Pa 1976). 2001;26:196-205.
 91.   
Hoy DG, Protani M, De R, Buchbinder R. The epidemiology of neck 
pain. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2010;24:783-792. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.berh.2011.01.019
 92.   
Huisman PA, Speksnijder CM, de Wijer A. The effect of thoracic spine ma-
nipulation on pain and disability in patients with non-specific neck pain: a 
systematic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2013;35:1677-1685. https://doi.org/10. 
3109/09638288.2012.750689
 93.   
Hurwitz EL, Carragee EJ, van der Velde G, et al. T
reatment of neck 
pain: noninvasive interventions: results of the Bone and Joint Decade 
2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S123-S152. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3181644b1d
 94.   
Hush JM, Lin CC, Michaleff ZA, Verhagen A, Refshauge KM. Prognosis of acute 
idiopathic neck pain is poor: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2011;92:824-829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2010.12.025
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a48  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 95.   
Hutting N, Scholten-Peeters GG, Vijverman V, Keesenberg MD, Verhagen 
AP
. Diagnostic accuracy of upper cervical spine instability tests: a sys-
tematic review. Phys Ther. 2013;93:1686-1695. https://doi.org/10.2522/
ptj.20130186
 
96.   
Ichihara D, Okada E, Chiba K, et al. Longitudinal magnetic resonance 
imaging study on whiplash injury patients: minimum 10-year follow-up. J 
Orthop Sci. 2009;14:602-610. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00776-009-1378-z
 97.   
Jacobsson L, Lindgarde F
, Manthorpe R. The commonest rheumatic com-
plaints of over six weeks’ duration in a twelve-month period in a defined 
Swedish population. Prevalences and relationships. Scand J Rheumatol. 
1989;18:353-360.
 
98.   
Jette AM, Smith K, Haley SM, Davis KD. Physical therapy episodes of care for 
patients with low back pain. Phys Ther. 1994;74:101-110; discussion 110-115.
 99.   
Jette DU, Jette AM. Physical therapy and health outcomes in patients with 
spinal impairments. Phys Ther. 1996;76:930-941; discussion 942-945.
 
100.   
Johansson MP
, Baann Liane MS, Bendix T
, Kasch H, Kongsted A. Does 
cervical kyphosis relate to symptoms following whiplash injury? Man 
Ther. 2011;16:378-383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2011.01.004
 
101.   
Kaale BR, Krakenes J, Albrektsen G, Wester K. Head position and impact 
direction in whiplash injuries: associations with MRI-verified lesions of 
ligaments and membranes in the upper cervical spine. J Neurotrauma. 
2005;22:1294-1302. https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2005.22.1294
 
102.   
Kaale BR, Krakenes J, Albrektsen G, Wester K. Whiplash-associated 
disorders impairment rating: Neck Disability Index score according to 
severity of MRI findings of ligaments and membranes in the upper cervi-
cal spine. J Neurotrauma. 2005;22:466-475. https://doi.org/10.1089/
neu.2005.22.466
 
103.   
Kabisch N. [Comparison of the effects of physiotherapeutic and al-
ternative treatment modalities in the case of whiplash-associated 
chronic problems]. manuelletherapie. 2008;12:216-225. https://doi.
org/10.1055/
s-2008-1027973
 
104.   
Kadhim-Saleh A, Maganti H, Ghert M, Singh S, Farrokhyar F
. Is low-level 
laser therapy in relieving neck pain effective? Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Rheumatol Int. 2013;33:2493-2501. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00296-013-2742-z
 
105.   
Kamper SJ, Rebbeck TJ, Maher CG, McAuley JH, Sterling M. Course and 
prognostic factors of whiplash: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Pain. 2008;138:617-629. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2008.02.019
 
106.   
Karadimas SK, Erwin WM, Ely CG, Dettori JR, Fehlings MG. Pathophysiolo-
gy and natural history of cervical spondylotic myelopathy. Spine (Phila Pa 
1976). 2013;38:S21-S36. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7f2c3
 
107.   
Karlsson A, Leinhard OD, Åslund U, et al. An investigation of fat infiltration 
of the multifidus muscle in patients with severe neck symptoms associ-
ated with chronic whiplash-associated disorder. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2016;46:886-893. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6553
 
108.   
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith C, Santaguida PL, Hoving J, Brønfort G. 
Exercises for mechanical neck disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2005:CD004250. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub3
 
109.   
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith CH, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck 
disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD004250. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub4
 
110.   
Kelley MJ, McClure PW, Leggin BG. Frozen shoulder: evidence and a 
proposed model guiding rehabilitation. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2009;39:135-148. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2009.2916
 
111.   
Kelley MJ, Shaffer MA, Kuhn JE, et al. Shoulder pain and mobility deficits: 
adhesive capsulitis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2013;43:A1-A31. https://
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.0302
 
112.   
Kelly J, Ritchie C, Sterling M. Clinical prediction rules for prognosis and 
treatment prescription in neck pain: A systematic review. Musculoskelet 
Sci Pract. 2017;27:155-164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2016.10.066
 
113.   
Kietrys DM, Palombaro KM, Azzaretto E, et al. Effectiveness of dry 
needling for upper-quarter myofascial pain: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2013;43:620-634. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4668
 
114.   
Kim HJ, Tetreault LA, Massicotte EM, et al. Differential diagnosis for 
cervical spondylotic myelopathy: literature review. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
2013;38:S78-S88. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7eb06
 
115.   
Kirpalani D, Mitra R. Cervical facet joint dysfunction: a review. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2008;89:770-774. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2007
.11.028
 
116.   
Krakenes J, Kaale BR. Magnetic resonance imaging assessment of 
craniovertebral ligaments and membranes after whiplash trauma. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2006;31:2820-2826. https://doi.org/10.1097
/01.
brs.0000245871.15696.1f
 
117.   
Krakenes J, Kaale BR, Moen G, Nordli H, Gilhus NE, Rorvik J. MRI assess-
ment of the alar ligaments in the late stage of whiplash injury – a study 
of structural abnormalities and observer agreement. Neuroradiology. 
2002;44:617-624. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00234-002-0799-6
 
118.   
Kroeling P
, Gross A, Graham N, et al. Electrotherapy for neck 
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD004251. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD004251.pub5
 
119.   
Leaver AM, Refshauge KM, Maher CG, McAuley JH. Conservative 
interventions provide short-term relief for non-specific neck pain: a 
systematic review. J Physiother. 2010;56:73-85. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1836-9553(10)70037-0
 
120.   
Lee MS, Pittler MH, Ernst E. Internal qigong for pain conditions: a sys-
tematic review. J Pain. 2009;10:1121-1127
.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpain.2009.03.009
 
121.   
Lees F
, T
urner JW. Natural history and prognosis of cervical spondylosis. 
Br Med J. 1963;2:1607-1610.
 
122.   
Li Q, Shen H, Li M. Magnetic resonance imaging signal changes of alar 
and transverse ligaments not correlated with whiplash-associated disor-
ders: a meta-analysis of case-control studies. Eur Spine J. 2013;22:14-20. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-012-2490-x
 
123.   
Linton SJ, Ryberg M. Do epidemiological results replicate? The preva-
lence and health-economic consequences of neck and back pain in the 
general population. Eur J Pain. 2000;4:347-354. https://doi.org/10.1053/
eujp.2000.0190
 
124.   
Liu L, Huang QM, Liu QG, et al. Effectiveness of dry needling for myofas-
cial trigger points associated with neck and shoulder pain: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;96:944-955. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2014.12.015
 
125.   
Macaulay J, Cameron M, Vaughan B. The effectiveness of manual therapy 
for neck pain: a systematic review of the literature. Phys Ther Rev. 
2007;12:261-267
. https://doi.org/10.1179/108331907X223038
 
126.   
MacDermid JC, Walton DM, Bobos P
, Lomotan M, Carlesso L. A qualitative 
description of chronic neck pain has implications for outcome assess-
ment and classification. Open Orthop J. 2016;10:746-756. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001610010746
 
127.   
MacDermid JC, Walton DM, Côté P
, Santaguida PL, Gross A, Carlesso 
L. Use of outcome measures in managing neck pain: an international 
multidisciplinary survey. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:506-520. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010506
 
128.   
Mäkela M, Heliövaara M, Sievers K, Impivaara O, Knekt P
, Aromaa A. 
Prevalence, determinants, and consequences of chronic neck pain in 
Finland. Am J Epidemiol. 1991;134:1356-1367
. https://doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordjournals.aje.a116038
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a49
 
129.   
March L, Smith EU, Hoy DG, et al. Burden of disability due to musculoskel-
etal (MSK) disorders. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2014;28:353-366. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2014.08.002
 
130.   
Matheson LN, Matheson ML, Grant J. Development of a measure of 
perceived functional ability. J Occup Rehabil. 1993;3:15-30. https://doi.
org/10.1007
/BF01076739
 
131.   
Matsumoto M, Ichihara D, Okada E, et al. Cross-sectional area of the 
posterior extensor muscles of the cervical spine in whiplash injury 
patients versus healthy volunteers – 10 year follow-up MR study. Injury. 
2012;43:912-916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2012.01.017
 
132.   
Matsumoto M, Ichihara D, Okada E, et al. Modic changes of the cer-
vical spine in patients with whiplash injury: a prospective 11-year 
follow-up study. Injury. 2013;44:819-824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
injury.2012.12.001
 
133.   
Maxwell S, Sterling M. An investigation of the use of a numeric pain rating 
scale with ice application to the neck to determine cold hyperalgesia. Man 
Ther. 2013;18:172-174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2012.07
.004
 
134.   
McCaskey MA, Schuster-Amft C, Wirth B, Suica Z, de Bruin ED. Effects of 
proprioceptive exercises on pain and function in chronic neck- and low 
back pain rehabilitation: a systematic literature review. BMC Musculo-
skelet Disord. 2014;15:382. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-15-382
 
135.   
McGinn TG, Guyatt GH, Wyer PC, Naylor CD, Stiell IG, Richardson WS. 
Users’ guides to the medical literature: XXII: how to use articles about 
clinical decision rules. Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA. 
2000;284:79-84. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.284.1.79
 
136.   
McLean SM, Burton M, Bradley L, Littlewood C. Interventions for en-
hancing adherence with physiotherapy: a systematic review. Man Ther. 
2010;15:514-521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2010.05.012
 
137.   
McLean SM, May S, Klaber-Moffett J, Sharp DM, Gardiner E. Risk factors 
for the onset of non-specific neck pain: a systematic review. J Epide-
miol Community Health. 2010;64:565-572. https://doi.org/10.1136/
jech.2009.090720
 
138.   
Meeus M, Nijs J, Hamers V, Ickmans K, Oosterwijck JV. The efficacy of 
patient education in whiplash associated disorders: a systematic review. 
Pain Physician. 2012;15:351-361.
 
139.   
Michaleff ZA, Maher CG, Verhagen AP
, Rebbeck T
, Lin CW. Accuracy of the 
Canadian C-spine rule and NEXUS to screen for clinically important cervi-
cal spine injury in patients following blunt trauma: a systematic review. 
CMAJ. 2012;184:E867-E876. https://doi.org/10.1503/
cmaj.120675
 
140.   
Miller J, Gross A, D’Sylva J, et al. Manual therapy and exercise for neck 
pain: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2010;15:334-354. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2010.02.007
 
141.   
Monticone M, Ambrosini E, Cedraschi C, et al. Cognitive-behavioral 
treatment for subacute and chronic neck pain: a Cochrane Review. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1495-1504. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0000000000001052
 
142.   
Mueller MJ, Maluf KS. Tissue adaptation to physical stress: a proposed 
“Physical Stress Theory” to guide physical therapist practice, education, 
and research. Phys Ther. 2002;82:383-403.
 
143.   
Murray CJ, Barber RM, Foreman KJ, et al. Global, regional, and national 
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and 
healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 188 countries, 1990-2013: quantifying 
the epidemiological transition. Lancet. 2015;386:2145-2191. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61340-X
 
144.   
Murray CJ, Vos T
, Lozano R, et al. Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 
291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis 
for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2197-
2223. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61689-4
 
145.   
Myran R, Kvistad KA, Nygaard OP
, Andresen H, Folvik M, Zwart JA. Mag-
netic resonance imaging assessment of the alar ligaments in whiplash 
injuries: a case-control study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:2012-2016. 
https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e31817bb0bd
 
146.   
Myran R, Zwart JA, Kvistad KA, et al. Clinical characteristics, pain, and 
disability in relation to alar ligament MRI findings. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
2011;36:E862-E867
. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181ff1dde
 
147.   
Nakashima H, Yukawa Y, Suda K, Yamagata M, Ueta T
, Kato F
. Abnormal 
findings on magnetic resonance images of the cervical spines in 1211  
asymptomatic subjects. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:392-398.  
https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000000775
 
148.   
National Guideline Clearinghouse. ACR Appropriateness Criteria: sus-
pected spine trauma. Available at: https://www.guideline.gov/
summaries/
summary/37931? Accessed March 30, 2012.
 
149.   
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Headaches in over 12s: 
diagnosis and management. Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/
guid-
ance/
cg150. Accessed October 5, 2012.
 
150.   
Neo M, Fujibayashi S, Takemoto M, Nakamura T
. Clinical results of and 
patient satisfaction with cervical laminoplasty for considerable cord 
compression with only slight myelopathy. Eur Spine J. 2012;21:340-346. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-011-2050-9
 
151.   
Nijs J, Van Houdenhove B, Oostendorp RA. Recognition of central 
sensitization in patients with musculoskeletal pain: Application of pain 
neurophysiology in manual therapy practice. Man Ther. 2010;15:135-141. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2009.12.001
 
152.   
Nunes AM, Moita JP
. Effectiveness of physical and rehabilitation tech-
niques in reducing pain in chronic trapezius myalgia: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Int J Osteopath Med. 2015;18:189-206. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijosm.2015.03.004
 
153.   
Nygren A, Berglund A, von Koch M. Neck-and-shoulder pain, an increasing 
problem. Strategies for using insurance material to follow trends. Scand J 
Rehabil Med Suppl. 1995;32:107-112.
 
154.   
Oesch PR, Hilfiker R, Kool JP
, Bachmann S, Hagen KB. Perceived 
functional ability assessed with the spinal function sort: is it valid for 
European rehabilitation settings in patients with non-specific non-acute 
low back pain? Eur Spine J. 2010;19:1527-1533. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-010-1429-3
 
155.   
Ogince M, Hall T
, Robinson K, Blackmore AM. The diagnostic validity of 
the cervical flexion-rotation test in C1/2-related cervicogenic headache. 
Man Ther. 2007;12:256-262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2006.06.016
 
156.   
Ong J, Claydon LS. The effect of dry needling for myofascial trigger 
points in the neck and shoulders: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Bodyw Mov Ther. 2014;18:390-398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbmt.2013.11.009
 
157.   
O’Riordan C, Clifford A, Van De Ven P
, Nelson J. Chronic neck pain and 
exercise interventions: frequency, intensity, time, and type principle. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014;95:770-783. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apmr.2013.11.015
 
158.   
Paksaichol A, Janwantanakul P
, Purepong N, Pensri P
, van der Beek AJ. 
Office workers’ risk factors for the development of non-specific neck pain: 
a systematic review of prospective cohort studies. Occup Environ Med. 
2012;69:610-618. https://doi.org/10.1136/
oemed-2011-100459
 
159.   
Palmer KT
, Walker-Bone K, Griffin MJ, et al. Prevalence and occupational 
associations of neck pain in the British population. Scand J Work Environ 
Health. 2001;27:49-56.
 
160.   
Panacek EA, Mower WR, Holmes JF
, Hoffman JR. Test performance of 
the individual NEXUS low-risk clinical screening criteria for cervical 
spine injury. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;38:22-25. https://doi.org/10.1067
/
mem.2001.116499
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a50  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
 
161.   
Parreira PC, Costa LC, Hespanhol Junior LC, Lopes AD, Costa LO. Current 
evidence does not support the use of Kinesio Taping in clinical practice: a 
systematic review. J Physiother. 2014;60:31-39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2013.12.008
 
162.   
Pransky G, Benjamin K, Hill-Fotouhi C, et al. Outcomes in work-
related upper extremity and low back injuries: results of a retrospec-
tive study. Am J Ind Med. 2000;37:400-409. https://doi.org/10.1002/
(SICI)1097-0274(200004)37:4<400::AID-AJIM10>3.0.CO;2-C
 
163.   
Racicki S, Gerwin S, DiClaudio S, Reinmann S, Donaldson M. Conservative 
physical therapy management for the treatment of cervicogenic head-
ache: a systematic review. J Man Manip Ther. 2013;21:113-124. https://doi.
org/10.1179/2042618612Y.0000000025
 
164.   
Raney NH, Petersen EJ, Smith TA, et al. Development of a clinical 
prediction rule to identify patients with neck pain likely to benefit from 
cervical traction and exercise. Eur Spine J. 2009;18:382-391. https://doi.
org/10.1007
/
s00586-008-0859-7
 
165.   
Rao R. Neck pain, cervical radiculopathy, and cervical myelopathy: patho-
physiology, natural history, and clinical evaluation. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2002;84-A:1872-1881.
 
166.   
Rebbeck T
, Moloney N, Azoory R, et al. Clinical ratings of pain sensitivity 
correlate with quantitative measures in people with chronic neck pain and 
healthy controls: cross-sectional study. Phys Ther. 2015;95:1536-1546. 
https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20140352
 
167.   
Reid SA, Rivett DA. Manual therapy treatment of cervicogenic dizziness: 
a systematic review. Man Ther. 2005;10:4-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2004.03.006
 
168.   
Rempel DM, Harrison RJ, Barnhart S. Work-related cumulative trauma 
disorders of the upper extremity. JAMA. 1992;267:838-842. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jama.1992.03480060084035
 
169.   
Rhee JM, Shamji MF
, Erwin WM, et al. Nonoperative management of cervi-
cal myelopathy: a systematic review. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S55-
S67
. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7f41d
 
170.   
Ritchie C, Hendrikz J, Jull G, Elliott J, Sterling M. External validation of a 
clinical prediction rule to predict full recovery and ongoing moderate/
se-
vere disability following acute whiplash injury. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2015;45:242-250. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5642
 
171.   
Ritchie C, Hendrikz J, Kenardy J, Sterling M. Derivation of a clinical pre-
diction rule to identify both chronic moderate/
severe disability and full 
recovery following whiplash injury. Pain. 2013;154:2198-2206. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pain.2013.07
.001
 
172.   
Ritchie C, Sterling M. Recovery pathways and prognosis after whip-
lash injury. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2016;46:851-861. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6918
 
173.   
Robinson KA, Chou R, Berkman ND, et al. Twelve recommendations 
for integrating existing systematic reviews into new reviews: EPC guid-
ance. J Clin Epidemiol. 2016;70:38-44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclinepi.2015.05.035
 
174.   
Robinson KA, Whitlock EP
, Oneil ME, et al. Integration of existing system-
atic reviews into new reviews: identification of guidance needs. Syst Rev. 
2014;3:60. https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-4053-3-60
 
175.   
Rubinstein SM, Pool JJ, van T
ulder MW, Riphagen, II, de Vet HC. A system-
atic review of the diagnostic accuracy of provocative tests of the neck for 
diagnosing cervical radiculopathy. Eur Spine J. 2007;16:307-319. https://
doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-006-0225-6
 
176.   
Rubio-Ochoa J, Benítez-Martínez J, Lluch E, Santacruz-Zaragozá S, 
Gómez-Contreras P
, Cook CE. Physical examination tests for screening 
and diagnosis of cervicogenic headache: A systematic review. Man Ther. 
2016;21:35-40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2015.09.008
 
177.   
Rushton A, Rivett D, Carlesso L, Flynn T
, Hing W, Kerry R. International 
framework for examination of the cervical region for potential of Cervical 
Arterial Dysfunction prior to Orthopaedic Manual Therapy intervention. 
Man Ther. 2014;19:222-228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2013.11.005
 
178.   
Salt E, Wright C, Kelly S, Dean A. A systematic literature review on the 
effectiveness of non-invasive therapy for cervicobrachial pain. Man Ther. 
2011;16:53-65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2010.09.005
 
179.   
Santaguida PL, Keshavarz H, Carlesso LC, et al. A description of the 
methodology used in an overview of reviews to evaluate evidence on the 
treatment, harms, diagnosis/
classification, prognosis and outcomes used 
in the management of neck pain. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:461-472. https://
doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010461
 
180.   
Schellingerhout JM, Heymans MW, Verhagen AP
, de Vet HC, Koes BW, Ter-
wee CB. Measurement properties of translated versions of neck-specific 
questionnaires: a systematic review. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2011;11:87
. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-11-87
 
181.   
Schellingerhout JM, Verhagen AP
, Heymans MW, Koes BW, de Vet HC, 
Terwee CB. Measurement properties of disease-specific questionnaires in 
patients with neck pain: a systematic review. Qual Life Res. 2012;21:659-
670. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s11136-011-9965-9
 
182.   
Scholten-Peeters GG, Thoomes E, Konings S, et al. Is manipulative 
therapy more effective than sham manipulation in adults : a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Chiropr Man Therap. 2013;21:34. https://doi.
org/10.1186/2045-709X-21-34
 
183.   
Schomacher M, Suess O, Kombos T
. Osteochondromas of the cervical 
spine in atypical location. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2009;151:629-633; dis-
cussion 633. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00701-009-0235-3
 
184.   
Schroeder J, Kaplan L, Fischer DJ, Skelly AC. The outcomes of manipula-
tion or mobilization therapy compared with physical therapy or exercise 
for neck pain: a systematic review. Evid Based Spine Care J. 2013;4:30-41. 
https://doi.org/10.1055/
s-0033-1341605
 
185.   
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Critical appraisal: notes and 
checklists. Available at: http://www.sign.ac.uk/methodology/
checklists.
html. Accessed December 23, 2015.
 
186.   
Shaw L, Descarreaux M, Bryans R, et al. A systematic review of chiroprac-
tic management of adults with Whiplash-Associated Disorders: recom-
mendations for advancing evidence-based practice and research. Work. 
2010;35:369-394. https://doi.org/10.3233/WOR-2010-0996
 
187.   
Shea BJ, Grimshaw JM, Wells GA, et al. Development of AMSTAR: 
a measurement tool to assess the methodological quality of sys-
tematic reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2007;7:10. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2288-7-10
 
188.   
Siegmund GP
, Winkelstein BA, Ivancic PC, Svensson MY, Vasavada A. The 
anatomy and biomechanics of acute and chronic whiplash injury. T
raffic 
Inj Prev. 2009;10:101-112. https://doi.org/10.1080/15389580802593269
 
189.   
Snodgrass SJ, Cleland JA, Haskins R, Rivett DA. The clinical utility of cervi-
cal range of motion in diagnosis, prognosis, and evaluating the effects 
of manipulation: a systematic review. Physiotherapy. 2014;100:290-304. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2014.04.007
 
190.   
Southerst D, Nordin MC, Côté P
, et al. Is exercise effective for the man-
agement of neck pain and associated disorders or whiplash-associated 
disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol for T
raffic Injury 
Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 2016;16:1503-1523. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.02.014
 
191.   
Spitzer WO, Skovron ML, Salmi LR, et al. Scientific monograph of the Que-
bec Task Force on Whiplash-Associated Disorders: redefining “whiplash” 
and its management. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1995;20:1S-73S.
 
192.   
Stanton TR, Leake HB, Chalmers KJ, Moseley GL. Evidence of impaired 
proprioception in chronic, idiopathic neck pain: systematic review and 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a51
meta-analysis. Phys Ther. 2016;96:876-887
. https://doi.org/10.2522/
ptj.20150241
 
193.   
State Insurance Regulatory Authority. Guidelines for the Management of 
Acute Whiplash-Associated Disorders for Health Professionals. Sydney, 
Australia: State Insurance Regulatory Authority; 2014.
 
194.   
Sterling M, Hendrikz J, Kenardy J. Compensation claim lodgement and 
health outcome developmental trajectories following whiplash injury: 
a prospective study. Pain. 2010;150:22-28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pain.2010.02.013
 
195.   
Sterling M, Kenardy J, Jull G, Vicenzino B. The development of psychologi-
cal changes following whiplash injury. Pain. 2003;106:481-489. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2003.09.013
 
196.   
Stiell IG, Clement CM, Grimshaw J, et al. Implementation of the Cana-
dian C-Spine Rule: prospective 12 centre cluster randomised trial. BMJ. 
2009;339:b4146. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b4146
 
197.   
Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen KL, et al. The Canadian C-spine rule for 
radiography in alert and stable trauma patients. JAMA. 2001;286:1841-
1848. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.286.15.1841
 
198.   
Sullivan MJ, Bishop SR, Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: devel-
opment and validation. Psychol Assess. 1995;7:524-532. https://doi.
org/10.1037
/1040-3590.7
.4.524
 
199.   
Sullivan MJ, Thibault P
, Simmonds MJ, Milioto M, Cantin AP
, Velly AM. 
Pain, perceived injustice and the persistence of post-traumatic stress 
symptoms during the course of rehabilitation for whiplash injuries. Pain. 
2009;145:325-331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.031
 
200.   
Sutton DA, Côté P
, Wong JJ, et al. Is multimodal care effective for the 
management of patients with whiplash-associated disorders or neck pain 
and associated disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol for 
T
raffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 2016;16:1541-
1565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.06.019
 
201.   
Takala EP
, Viikari-Juntura E, Tynkkynen EM. Does group gymnastics at the 
workplace help in neck pain? A controlled study. Scand J Rehabil Med. 
1994;26:17-20.
 
202.   
Takasaki H, May S. Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy has similar effects 
on pain and disability as ‘wait and see’ and other approaches in people 
with neck pain: a systematic review. J Physiother. 2014;60:78-84. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2014.05.006
 
203.   
Teasell RW, McClure JA, Walton D, et al. A research synthesis of therapeu-
tic interventions for whiplash-associated disorder (WAD): part 2 – inter-
ventions for acute WAD. Pain Res Manag. 2010;15:295-304. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2010/640164
 
204.   
Teasell RW, McClure JA, Walton D, et al. A research synthesis of therapeu-
tic interventions for whiplash-associated disorder (WAD): part 3 – inter-
ventions for subacute WAD. Pain Res Manag. 2010;15:305-312. https://
doi.org/10.1155/2010/108685
 
205.   
Teasell RW, McClure JA, Walton D, et al. A research synthesis of therapeu-
tic interventions for whiplash-associated disorder (WAD): part 4 – nonin-
vasive interventions for chronic WAD. Pain Res Manag. 2010;15:313-322. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/487279
 
206.   
Tetreault LA, Dettori JR, Wilson JR, et al. Systematic review of magnetic 
resonance imaging characteristics that affect treatment decision mak-
ing and predict clinical outcome in patients with cervical spondylotic 
myelopathy. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S89-S110. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7eae0
 
207.   
Thoomes EJ, Scholten-Peeters GG, de Boer AJ, et al. Lack of uniform 
diagnostic criteria for cervical radiculopathy in conservative intervention 
studies: a systematic review. Eur Spine J. 2012;21:1459-1470. https://doi.
org/10.1007
/
s00586-012-2297-9
 
208.   
Thoomes EJ, Scholten-Peeters W, Koes B, Falla D, Verhagen AP
. The 
effectiveness of conservative treatment for patients with cervical radicu-
lopathy: a systematic review. Clin J Pain. 2013;29:1073-1086. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/
AJP
.0b013e31828441fb
 
209.   
T
rippolini MA, Dijkstra PU, Geertzen JH, Reneman MF
. Measurement 
properties of the spinal function sort in patients with sub-acute whiplash-
associated disorders. J Occup Rehabil. 2015;25:527-536. https://doi.
org/10.1007
/
s10926-014-9559-9
 
210.   
Tschiesner U, Linseisen E, Baumann S, et al. Assessment of functioning in 
patients with head and neck cancer according to the International Clas-
sification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF): a multicenter study. 
Laryngoscope. 2009;119:915-923. https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.20211
 
211.   
Tseng YL, Wang WT
, Chen WY, Hou TJ, Chen TC, Lieu FK. Predictors for the 
immediate responders to cervical manipulation in patients with neck pain. 
Man Ther. 2006;11:306-315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2005.08.009
 
212.   
T
urk DC, Fillingim RB, Ohrbach R, Patel KV. Assessment of psychosocial 
and functional impact of chronic pain. J Pain. 2016;17:T21-
T49. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpain.2016.02.006
 
213.   
Ulbrich EJ, Anderson SE, Busato A, et al. Cervical muscle area measure-
ments in acute whiplash patients and controls. J Magn Reson Imaging. 
2011;33:668-675. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.22446
 
214.   
Van Damme S, Crombez G, Bijttebier P
, Goubert L, Van Houdenhove B. 
A confirmatory factor analysis of the Pain Catastrophizing Scale: invari-
ant factor structure across clinical and non-clinical populations. Pain. 
2002;96:319-324. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(01)00463-8
 
215.   
van der Donk J, Schouten JS, Passchier J, van Romunde LK, Valkenburg 
HA. The associations of neck pain with radiological abnormalities of the 
cervical spine and personality traits in a general population. J Rheumatol. 
1991;18:1884-1889.
 
216.   
Vanti C, Bertozzi L, Gardenghi I, T
uroni F
, Guccione AA, Pillastrini P
. Effect 
of taping on spinal pain and disability: systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Phys Ther. 2015;95:493-506. https://doi.
org/10.2522/ptj.20130619
 
217.   
van T
rijffel E, Anderegg Q, Bossuyt PM, Lucas C. Inter-examiner reliability 
of passive assessment of intervertebral motion in the cervical and lumbar 
spine: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2005;10:256-269. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2005.04.008
 
218.   
van T
ulder M, Furlan A, Bombardier C, Bouter L. Updated method 
guidelines for systematic reviews in the Cochrane Collaboration Back 
Review Group. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2003;28:1290-1299. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/01.BRS.0000065484.95996.AF
 
219.   
Varatharajan S, Côté P
, Shearer HM, et al. Are work disability prevention 
interventions effective for the management of neck pain or upper extrem-
ity disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol for T
raffic Injury 
Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. J Occup Rehabil. 2014;24:692-708. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s10926-014-9501-1
 
220.   
Varatharajan S, Ferguson B, Chrobak K, et al. Are non-invasive interven-
tions effective for the management of headaches associated with neck 
pain? An update of the Bone and Joint Decade Task Force on Neck Pain 
and Its Associated Disorders by the Ontario Protocol for T
raffic Injury 
Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Eur Spine J. 2016;25:1971-1999. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-016-4376-9
 
221.   
Verhagen AP
, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, Burdorf A, Stynes SM, de Vet HC, 
Koes BW. Conservative interventions for treating work-related complaints 
of the arm, neck or shoulder in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013:CD008742. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008742.pub2
 
222.   
Verhagen AP
, Lewis M, Schellingerhout JM, et al. Do whiplash patients dif-
fer from other patients with non-specific neck pain regarding pain, func-
tion or prognosis? Man Ther. 2011;16:456-462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a52  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
math.2011.02.009
 
223.   
Verhagen AP
, Scholten-Peeters GG, van Wijngaarden S, de Bie RA, 
Bierma-Zeinstra SM. Conservative treatments for whiplash. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD003338. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD003338.pub3
 
224.   
Vernon H. The psychometric properties of the Neck Disability Index. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89:1414-1415; author reply 1415-1416. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apmr.2008.05.003
 
225.   
Vernon H, Mior S. The Neck Disability Index: a study of reliability and 
validity. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 1991;14:409-415.
 
226.   
Vernon HT
, Humphreys BK, Hagino CA. A systematic review of con-
servative treatments for acute neck pain not due to whiplash. J Ma-
nipulative Physiol Ther. 2005;28:443-448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmpt.2005.06.011
 
227.   
Vetti N, Kråkenes J, Ask T
, et al. Follow-up MR imaging of the alar and 
transverse ligaments after whiplash injury: a prospective controlled study. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2011;32:1836-1841. https://doi.org/10.3174/
ajnr.
A2636
 
228.   
Vetti N, Kråkenes J, Eide GE, Rørvik J, Gilhus NE, Espeland A. MRI of the 
alar and transverse ligaments in whiplash-associated disorders (WAD) 
grades 1-2: high-signal changes by age, gender, event and time since 
trauma. Neuroradiology. 2009;51:227-235. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00234-008-0482-7
 
229.   
Vincent K, Maigne JY, Fischhoff C, Lanlo O, Dagenais S. Systematic 
review of manual therapies for nonspecific neck pain. Joint Bone Spine. 
2013;80:508-515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2012.10.006
 
230.   
Vos T
, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, et al. Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 
1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a systematic anal-
ysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2163-
2196. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61729-2
 
231.   
Walser RF
, Meserve BB, Boucher TR. The effectiveness of thoracic spine 
manipulation for the management of musculoskeletal conditions: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Man Ma-
nip Ther. 2009;17:237-246. https://doi.org/10.1179/106698109791352085
 
232.   
Walton D. A review of the definitions of ‘recovery’ used in prognostic stud-
ies on whiplash using an ICF framework. Disabil Rehabil. 2009;31:943-
957
. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638280802404128
 
233.   
Walton DM, Carroll LJ, Kasch H, et al. An overview of systematic reviews 
on prognostic factors in neck pain: results from the International Col-
laboration on Neck Pain (ICON) project. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:494-505. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010494
 
234.   
Walton DM, Levesque L, Payne M, Schick J. Clinical pressure pain thresh-
old testing in neck pain: comparing protocols, responsiveness, and asso-
ciation with psychological variables. Phys Ther. 2014;94:827-837
. https://
doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20130369
 
235.   
Walton DM, MacDermid JC, Giorgianni AA, Mascarenhas JC, West SC, 
Zammit CA. Risk factors for persistent problems following acute whiplash 
injury: update of a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther. 2013;43:31-43. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4507
 
236.   
Walton DM, MacDermid JC, Nielson W, Teasell RW, Chiasson M, Brown 
L. Reliability, standard error, and minimum detectable change of clini-
cal pressure pain threshold testing in people with and without acute 
neck pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2011;41:644-650. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3666
 
237.   
Whitlock EP
, Lin JS, Chou R, Shekelle P
, Robinson KA. Us-
ing existing systematic reviews in complex system-
atic reviews. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:776-782. https://doi.
org/10.7326/0003-4819-148-10-200805200-00010
 
238.   
Williams MA, McCarthy CJ, Chorti A, Cooke MW, Gates S. A systematic 
review of reliability and validity studies of methods for measuring ac-
tive and passive cervical range of motion. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 
2010;33:138-155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2009.12.009
 
239.   
Wilson JR, Barry S, Fischer DJ, et al. Frequency, timing, and predictors of 
neurological dysfunction in the nonmyelopathic patient with cervical spi-
nal cord compression, canal stenosis, and/
or ossification of the posterior 
longitudinal ligament. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S37-S54. https://
doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7f2e7
 
240.   
Wong JJ, Côté P
, Shearer HM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the 
management of conditions related to traffic collisions: a systematic 
review by the OPTIMa Collaboration. Disabil Rehabil. 2015;37:471-489. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2014.932448
 
241.   
World Health Organization. ICD-10: International Statistical Classification 
of Diseases and Related Health Problems: Tenth Revision. Geneva, Swit-
zerland: World Health Organization; 2005.
 
242.   
World Health Organization. International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health: ICF. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza-
tion; 2009.
 
243.   
Wright A, Mayer TG, Gatchel RJ. Outcomes of disabling cervical spine 
disorders in compensation injuries. A prospective comparison to tertiary 
rehabilitation response for chronic lumbar spinal disorders. Spine (Phila 
Pa 1976). 1999;24:178-183.
 
244.   
Young JL, Walker D, Snyder S, Daly K. Thoracic manipulation versus 
mobilization in patients with mechanical neck pain: a systematic review. 
J Man Manip Ther. 2014;22:141-153. https://doi.org/10.1179/204261861
3Y.0000000043
 
245.   
Yu H, Côté P
, Southerst D, et al. Does structured patient education 
improve the recovery and clinical outcomes of patients with neck pain? 
A systematic review from the Ontario Protocol for T
raffic Injury Manage-
ment (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 2016;16:1524-1540. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.03.039
 
246.   
Zhu L, Wei X, Wang S. Does cervical spine manipulation reduce pain in 
people with degenerative cervical radiculopathy? A systematic review of 
the evidence, and a meta-analysis. Clin Rehabil. 2016;30:145-155. https://
doi.org/10.1177
/0269215515570382
 
247.   
Zronek M, Sanker H, Newcomb J, Donaldson M. The influence of home 
exercise programs for patients with non-specific or specific neck pain: 
a systematic review of the literature. J Man Manip Ther. 2016;24:62-73. 
https://doi.org/10.1179/2042618613Y.0000000047
@
MORE INFORMATION
WWW.JOSPT
.ORG
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a53
APPENDIX A
SEARCH STRATEGIES
Below is an example EMBASE search strategy for articles 
related to the Physical Agents section of Interventions.
Modalities =#1
‘combined modality therapy’/de OR ‘electrostimulation 
therapy’/exp OR ‘electrostimulation’/de OR ‘traction thera-
py’/exp OR ‘phototherapy’/exp OR ‘physiotherapy’/exp OR 
‘rehabilitation’/exp OR ‘ultrasound therapy’/exp OR ‘laser’/
de OR ‘cryotherapy’/exp OR ‘cryoanesthesia’/de OR ‘ice’/de 
OR ‘acupuncture’/exp OR Modalit* OR ‘electric stimulation’ 
OR ‘electrical stimulation’ OR electrotherapy OR tens OR 
‘transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation’ OR electroacu-
puncture OR acupuncture OR needling OR heat OR cold OR 
traction OR laser OR lasers OR rehabilitation OR ‘physical 
therapy’ OR ultrasound OR ultrasonic OR cryotherapy OR 
hyperthermia OR ‘vapocoolant spray’ OR cryoanesthesia OR 
ice OR faradic OR traction OR iontophoresis OR phonopho-
resis OR phototherapy OR hydrotherapy OR ‘light therapy’ 
OR diathermy OR ultraviolet OR infrared OR ((trigger* OR 
dry) and needl*)
neck anatomy =#2
‘neck’/exp OR ‘cervical plexus’/de OR ‘cervical spine’/de OR 
‘atlantoaxial joint’/de OR ‘atlantooccipital joint’/de OR ‘spi-
nal root’/de OR ‘brachial plexus’/de OR ‘atlas’/de OR ‘axis’/
de OR ‘thoracic spine’/de OR (brachial NEAR/3 plexus) OR 
neck OR (thoracic NEAR/3 spine) OR (thoracic NEAR/3 
outlet) OR (thoracic NEAR/3 vertebra*) OR trapezius OR 
odontoid* OR occip* OR atlant* OR ((cervical OR cervico*) 
NOT (‘gynecologic disease’/exp OR ‘uterus’/exp OR uterus 
OR cervix))
pain =#3
‘pain’/exp OR pain* OR ache* OR sore* OR stiff* OR dis-
comfort OR injur* OR neuropath* OR neuralgia* OR 
neurodynia*
neck pain =#4
‘atlantoaxial dislocation’/de OR ‘neck pain’/de OR ‘brachial 
plexus neuropathy’/de OR ‘neck injury’/exp OR ‘thorax outlet 
syndrome’/de OR ‘torticollis’/de OR ‘cervical pain’ OR neck-
ache* OR neck ache* OR whiplash OR cervicodynia* OR cer-
vicalgia* OR brachialgia* OR ‘brachial neuritis’ OR brachial 
neuralgia* OR ‘cervicobrachial neuritis’ OR cervicobrachial 
neuralgia* OR neck pain* OR neck injur* OR brachial plexus 
neuropath* OR ‘brachial plexus neuritis’ OR monoradicul* 
OR monoradicl* OR torticollis OR ‘thoracic outlet syndrome’ 
OR ‘cervical dystonia’ OR (headache* AND cervic*)
disc problems =#5
‘vertebra dislocation’/exp OR ‘intervertebral disk disease’/exp 
OR ((‘intervertebral disk’/exp OR disks OR disk OR discs OR 
disc) AND (herniat* OR slipped OR prolapse* OR displace* 
OR degenerat* OR bulge OR bulged OR bulging))
diseases =#6
‘radiculopathy’/exp OR ‘temporomandibular joint disorder’/
de OR ‘myofascial pain’/de OR ‘musculoskeletal disease’/exp 
OR ‘neuritis’/exp OR radiculopath* OR radiculitis OR tem-
poromandibular OR (myofascial NEAR/3 pain*) OR (tho-
racic outlet syndrome*) OR ‘spinal osteophytosis’ OR neuritis 
OR spondylosis OR splondylitis OR spondylolisthesis OR 
spondylolysis OR arthritis OR osteoarthritis OR spondylar-
thritis OR fibromyalgia OR sprain* OR strain*
disease rehab =#7
‘radiculopathy’/exp/dm_rh OR ‘temporomandibular joint 
disorder’/dm_rh OR ‘myofascial pain’/dm_rh OR ‘musculo-
skeletal disease’/exp/dm_rh OR ‘neuritis’/exp/dm_rh
neck pain rehab =#8
‘atlantoaxial dislocation’/dm_rh OR ‘neck pain’/dm_rh OR 
‘brachial plexus neuropathy’/dm_rh OR ‘neck injury’/exp/
dm_rh OR ‘thorax outlet syndrome’/dm_rh OR ‘torticollis’/
dm_rh
Systematic Review Filter =#9
‘meta analysis’/de OR ‘meta analysis (topic)’/de OR ‘system-
atic review’/de OR ‘systematic review (topic)’/de OR Meta 
analy* OR metaanaly* OR meta analy* OR Systematic re-
view* OR systematic overview* OR Cochrane OR embase 
OR psyclit OR psychlit OR psycinfo OR psychinfo OR cinahl 
OR cinhal OR science citation index OR bids OR cancerlit 
OR ‘web of science’ OR Reference list* OR bibliograph* OR 
hand search* OR ‘relevant journals’ OR manual search* OR 
((‘selection criteria’ OR data NEAR/3 extract*) AND (review 
OR reviews))
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a54  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX A
Embase Session Results
Number
Query
Results, n
1
‘combined modality therapy’/de OR ‘electrostimulation therapy’/
exp OR ‘electrostimulation’/de OR ‘traction 
therapy’/
exp OR ‘phototherapy’/
exp OR ‘physiotherapy’/
exp OR ‘rehabilitation’/
exp OR ‘ultrasound therapy’/
exp 
OR ‘laser’/de OR ‘cryotherapy’/
exp OR ‘cryoanesthesia’/de OR ‘ice’/de OR ‘acupuncture’/
exp OR modalit* OR 
‘electric stimulation’ OR ‘electrical stimulation’ OR electrotherapy OR tens OR ‘transcutaneous electric nerve 
stimulation’ OR electroacupuncture OR acupuncture OR needling OR heat OR cold OR laser OR lasers OR reha-
bilitation OR ‘physical therapy’ OR ultrasound OR ultrasonic OR cryotherapy OR hyperthermia OR ‘vapocoolant 
spray’ OR cryoanesthesia OR ice OR faradic OR traction OR iontophoresis OR phonophoresis OR phototherapy OR 
hydrotherapy OR ‘light therapy’ OR diathermy OR ultraviolet OR infrared OR (trigger* OR dry AND needl*) AND 
[english]/lim AND ([embase]/lim OR [embase classic]/lim)
1647419
2
‘neck’/
exp OR ‘cervical plexus’/de OR ‘cervical spine’/de OR ‘atlantoaxial joint’/de OR ‘atlantooccipital joint’/de 
OR ‘spinal root’/de OR ‘brachial plexus’/de OR ‘atlas’/de OR ‘axis’/de OR ‘thoracic spine’/de OR brachial NEAR/3 
plexus OR neck OR thoracic NEAR/3 spine OR thoracic NEAR/3 outlet OR thoracic NEAR/3 vertebra* OR trape-
zius OR odontoid* OR occip* OR atlant* OR (cervical OR cervico* NOT (‘gynecologic disease’/
exp OR ‘uterus’/
exp 
OR uterus OR cervix))
1467424
3
‘pain’/
exp OR pain* OR ache* OR sore* OR stiff* OR discomfort OR injur* OR neuropath* OR neuralgia* OR 
neurodynia*
3295582
4
‘atlantoaxial dislocation’/de OR ‘neck pain’/de OR ‘brachial plexus neuropathy’/de OR ‘neck injury’/
exp OR ‘thorax 
outlet syndrome’/de OR ‘torticollis’/de OR ‘cervical pain’ OR neckache* OR neck AND ache* OR whiplash OR cer-
vicodynia* OR cervicalgia* OR brachialgia* OR ‘brachial neuritis’ OR brachial AND neuralgia* OR ‘cervicobrachial 
neuritis’ OR cervicobrachial AND neuralgia* OR neck AND pain* OR neck AND injur* OR brachial AND plexus 
AND neuropath* OR ‘brachial plexus neuritis’ OR monoradicul* OR monoradicl* OR torticollis OR ‘thoracic outlet 
syndrome’ OR ‘cervical dystonia’ OR (headache* AND cervic*)
22970
5
‘vertebra dislocation’/
exp OR ‘intervertebral disk disease’/
exp OR (‘intervertebral disk’/
exp OR disks OR disk  
OR discs OR disc AND (herniat* OR slipped OR prolapse* OR displace* OR degenerat* OR bulge OR bulged OR 
bulging))
46463
6
‘radiculopathy’/
exp OR ‘temporomandibular joint disorder’/de OR ‘myofascial pain’/de OR ‘musculoskeletal dis-
ease’/
exp OR ‘neuritis’/
exp OR radiculopath* OR radiculitis OR temporomandibular OR myofascial NEAR/3 pain* 
OR (thoracic AND outlet AND syndrome*) OR ‘spinal osteophytosis’ OR neuritis OR spondylosis OR splondylitis 
OR spondylolisthesis OR spondylolysis OR arthritis OR osteoarthritis OR spondylarthritis OR fibromyalgia OR 
sprain* OR strain*
2801790
7
‘radiculopathy’/
exp/dm_rh OR ‘temporomandibular joint disorder’/dm_rh OR ‘myofascial pain’/dm_rh OR  
‘musculoskeletal disease’/
exp/dm_rh OR ‘neuritis’/
exp/dm_rh
20066
8
‘atlantoaxial dislocation’/dm_rh OR ‘neck pain’/dm_rh OR ‘brachial plexus neuropathy’/dm_rh OR ‘neck injury’/
exp/dm_rh OR ‘thorax outlet syndrome’/dm_rh OR ‘torticollis’/dm_rh
644
9
‘meta analysis’/de OR ‘meta analysis (topic)’/de OR ‘systematic review’/de OR ‘systematic review (topic)’/de OR 
meta AND analy* OR metaanaly* OR meta AND analy* OR systematic AND review* OR systematic AND overview* 
OR cochrane OR embase OR psyclit OR psychlit OR psycinfo OR psychinfo OR cinahl OR cinhal OR science AND 
citation AND index OR bids OR cancerlit OR ‘web of science’ OR reference AND list* OR bibliograph* OR hand 
AND search* OR ‘relevant journals’ OR manual AND search* OR (‘selection criteria’ OR data NEAR/3 extract* 
AND (review OR reviews))
75731
10
#1 AND #2 AND #3
71583
11
#1 AND #4
4332
12
#1 AND #2 AND #5
1956
13
#1 AND #2 AND #6
31349
14
#2 AND #7
2689
15
#8 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12 OR #13 OR #14
83564
16
#9 AND #15
979
17
#16 AND [english]/lim AND ([embase]/lim OR [embase classic]/lim)
957
18
#17 AND (2010:py OR 2011:py OR 2012:py OR 2013:py OR 2014:py)
500
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a55
APPENDIX A
Below is an example Medline-OVID search for articles relat-
ed to Interventions. We only used articles published between 
January 2007 and August 2016.
1. 
Neck Pain/
2. 
exp Brachial Plexus Neuropathies/
3. 
exp neck injuries/ or exp whiplash injuries/
4. 
cervical pain.mp.
5. 
neckache.mp.
6. 
whiplash.mp.
7. 
cervicodynia.mp.
8. 
cervicalgia.mp.
9. 
brachialgia.mp.
10. 
brachial neuritis.mp.
11. 
brachial neuralgia.mp.
12. 
neck pain.mp.
13. 
neck injur*.mp.
14. 
brachial plexus neuropath*.mp.
15. 
brachial plexus neuritis.mp.
16. 
thoracic outlet syndrome/ or cervical rib syndrome/
17. 
Torticollis/
18. 
exp brachial plexus neuropathies/ or exp brachial 
plexus neuritis/
19. 
cervico brachial neuralgia.ti,ab.
20. 
cervicobrachial neuralgia.ti,ab.
21. 
(monoradicul* or monoradicl*).tw.
22. 
or/1-21
23. 
exp headache/ and cervic*.tw.
24. 
exp genital diseases, female/
25. 
genital disease*.mp.
26. 
or/24-25
27. 
23 not 26
28. 
22 or 27
29. 
neck/
30. 
neck muscles/
31. 
exp cervical plexus/
32. 
exp cervical vertebrae/
33. 
atlanto-axial joint/
34. 
atlanto-occipital joint/
35. 
Cervical Atlas/
36. 
spinal nerve roots/
37. 
exp brachial plexus/
38. 
(odontoid* or cervical or occip* or atlant*).tw.
39. 
axis/ or odontoid process/
40. 
Thoracic Vertebrae/
41. 
cervical vertebrae.mp.
42. 
cervical plexus.mp.
43. 
cervical spine.mp.
44. 
(neck adj3 muscles).mp.
45. 
(brachial adj3 plexus).mp.
46. 
(thoracic adj3 vertebrae).mp.
47. 
neck.mp.
48. 
(thoracic adj3 spine).mp.
49. 
(thoracic adj3 outlet).mp.
50. 
trapezius.mp.
51. 
cervical.mp.
52. 
cervico*.mp.
53. 
51 or 52
54. 
exp genital diseases, female/
55. 
genital disease*.mp.
56. 
exp *Uterus/
57. 
54 or 55 or 56
58. 
53 not 57
59. 
29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or 
38 or 39 or 40 or 41 or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45 or 46 or 
47 or 48 or 49 or 50 or 58
60. 
exp pain/
61. 
exp injuries/
62. 
pain.mp.
63. 
ache.mp.
64. 
sore.mp.
65. 
stiff.mp.
66. 
discomfort.mp.
67. 
injur*.mp.
68. 
neuropath*.mp.
69. 
or/60-68
70. 
59 and 69
71. 
Radiculopathy/
72. 
exp temporomandibular joint disorders/ or exp tem-
poromandibular joint dysfunction syndrome/
73. 
myofascial pain syndromes/
74. 
exp “Sprains and Strains”/
75. 
exp Spinal Osteophytosis/
76. 
exp Neuritis/
77. 
Polyradiculopathy/
78. 
exp Arthritis/
79. 
Fibromyalgia/
80. 
spondylitis/ or discitis/
81. 
spondylosis/ or spondylolysis/ or spondylolisthesis/
82. 
radiculopathy.mp.
83. 
radiculitis.mp.
84. 
temporomandibular.mp.
85. 
myofascial pain syndrome*.mp.
86. 
thoracic outlet syndrome*.mp.
87. 
spinal osteophytosis.mp.
88. 
neuritis.mp.
89. 
spondylosis.mp.
90. 
spondylitis.mp.
91. 
spondylolisthesis.mp.
92. 
or/71-91
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a56  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX A
93. 
59 and 92
94. 
exp neck/
95. 
exp cervical vertebrae/
96. 
Thoracic Vertebrae/
97. 
neck.mp.
98. 
(thoracic adj3 vertebrae).mp.
99. 
cervical.mp.
100. cervico*.mp.
101. 99 or 100
102. exp genital diseases, female/
103. genital disease*.mp.
104. exp *Uterus/
105. or/102-104
106. 101 not 105
107. (thoracic adj3 spine).mp.
108. cervical spine.mp.
109. 94 or 95 or 96 or 97 or 98 or 106 or 107 or 108
110. Intervertebral Disk/
111. 
(disc or discs).mp.
112. (disk or disks).mp.
113. 110 or 111 or 112
114. 109 and 113
115. herniat*.mp.
116. slipped.mp.
117. 
prolapse*.mp.
118. displace*.mp.
119. degenerat*.mp.
120. (bulge or bulged or bulging).mp.
121. 115 or 116 or 117 or 118 or 119 or 120
122. 114 and 121
123. intervertebral disk degeneration/ or intervertebral 
disk displacement/
124. intervertebral disk displacement.mp.
125. intervertebral disc displacement.mp.
126. intervertebral disk degeneration.mp.
127. intervertebral disc degeneration.mp.
128. 123 or 124 or 125 or 126 or 127
129. 109 and 128
130. 28 or 70 or 93 or 122 or 129
131. animals/ not (animals/ and humans/)
132. 130 not 131
133. exp *neoplasms/
134. exp *wounds, penetrating/
135. 133 or 134
136. 132 not 135
137. Neck Pain/rh [Rehabilitation]
138. exp Brachial Plexus Neuropathies/rh
139. exp neck injuries/rh or exp whiplash injuries/rh
140. thoracic outlet syndrome/rh or cervical rib  
syndrome/rh
141. Torticollis/rh
142. exp brachial plexus neuropathies/rh or exp brachial 
plexus neuritis/rh
143. 137 or 138 or 139 or 140 or 141 or 142
144. Radiculopathy/rh
145. exp temporomandibular joint disorders/rh or exp 
temporomandibular joint dysfunction syndrome/rh
146. myofascial pain syndromes/rh
147. exp “Sprains and Strains”/rh
148. exp Spinal Osteophytosis/rh
149. exp Neuritis/rh
150. Polyradiculopathy/rh
151. exp Arthritis/rh
152. Fibromyalgia/rh
153. spondylitis/rh or discitis/rh
154. spondylosis/rh or spondylolysis/rh or spondylolisthesis/
rh
155. or/144-154
156. 59 and 155
157. exp Combined Modality Therapy/
158. Exercise/
159. Physical Exertion/
160. exp Exercise Therapy/
161. exp Electric Stimulation Therapy/
162. Transcutaneous Electric Nerve Stimulation/
163. pulsed electro magnetic field.mp.
164. pulsed electromagnetic field.tw.
165. Electromagnetic Fields/
166. Magnetic Field Therapy/
167. Electric Stimulation/
168. exp Orthotic Devices/
169. kinesiotaping.tw.
170. taping.tw.
171. 
oral splints.tw.
172. Occlusal Splints/
173. pillow?.tw.
174. collar?.tw.
175. Traction/
176. traction.tw.
177. 
exp Laser Therapy/
178. laser therapy.tw.
179. exp Rehabilitation/
180. Ultrasonic Therapy/
181. exp Phototherapy/
182. Lasers/
183. exp Physical Therapy Modalities/
184. repetitive magnetic stimulation.tw.
185. exp Cryotherapy/
186. Hydrotherapy/
187. exp Hyperthermia, Induced/
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a57
APPENDIX A
188. vapocoolant spray.mp.
189. Cryoanesthesia/
190. Ice/
191. postur* correction.mp.
192. Feldenkrais.mp.
193. (alexander adj (technique or method)).tw.
194. Relaxation Therapy/
195. Biofeedback, Psychology/
196. faradic stimulation.mp.
197. or/157-196
198. 136 and 197
199. 143 or 156 or 198
200. animals/ not (animals/ and humans/)
201. 199 not 200
202. guidelines as topic/
203. practice guidelines as topic/
204. guideline.pt.
205. practice guideline.pt.
206. (guideline? or guidance or recommendations).ti.
207. consensus.ti.
208. or/202-207
209. 201 and 208
210. 136 and 208
211. 209 or 210
212. limit 211 to yr=”2006 -Current”
213. limit 211 to yr=”1902 - 2005”
214. meta-analysis/
215. exp meta-analysis as topic/
216. (meta analy* or metaanaly* or met analy* or  
metanaly*).tw.
217. review literature as topic/
218. (collaborative research or collaborative review* or 
collaborative overview*).tw.
219. (integrative research or integrative review* or inter-
grative overview*).tw.
220. (quantitative adj3 (research or review* or overview*)).tw.
221. (research integration or research overview*).tw.
222. (systematic* adj3 (review* or overview*)).tw.
223. (methodologic* adj3 (review* or overview*)).tw.
224. exp technology assessment biomedical/
225. (hta or thas or technology assessment*).tw.
226. ((hand adj2 search*) or (manual* adj search*)).tw.
227. ((electronic adj database*) or (bibliographic* adj da-
tabase*)).tw.
228. ((data adj2 abstract*) or (data adj2 extract*)).tw.
229. (analys* adj3 (pool or pooled or pooling)).tw.
230. mantel haenszel.tw.
231. (cohrane or pubmed or pub med or medline or em-
base or psycinfo or psyclit or psychinfo or psychlit or 
cinahl or science citation indes).ab.
232. or/214-231
233. 201 and 232
234. limit 233 to yr=”2006 -Current”
235. limit 233 to yr=”1902 - 2005”
Below is an example MEDLINE-OVID search for articles 
related to Manual Therapy. We only used articles published 
between January 2007 and August 2016. Last update: April 
21, 2012.
1. 
Neck Pain/
2. 
exp Brachial Plexus Neuropathies/
3. 
exp neck injuries/ or exp whiplash injuries/
4. 
cervical pain.mp.
5. 
neckache.mp.
6. 
whiplash.mp.
7. 
cervicodynia.mp.
8. 
cervicalgia.mp.
9. 
brachialgia.mp.
10. 
brachial neuritis.mp.
11. 
brachial neuralgia.mp.
12. 
neck pain.mp.
13. 
neck injur*.mp.
14. 
brachial plexus neuropath*.mp.
15. 
brachial plexus neuritis.mp.
16. 
thoracic outlet syndrome/ or cervical rib syndrome/
17. 
Torticollis/
18. 
exp brachial plexus neuropathies/ or exp brachial 
plexus neuritis/
19. 
cervico brachial neuralgia.ti,ab.
20. 
cervicobrachial neuralgia.ti,ab.
21. 
(monoradicul* or monoradicl*).tw.
22. 
or/1-21
23. 
exp headache/ and cervic*.tw.
24. 
exp genital diseases, female/
25. 
genital disease*.mp.
26. 
or/24-25
27. 
23 not 26
28. 
22 or 27
29. 
neck/
30. 
neck muscles/
31. 
exp cervical plexus/
32. 
exp cervical vertebrae/
33. 
atlanto-axial joint/
34. 
atlanto-occipital joint/
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a58  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX A
35. 
Cervical Atlas/
36. 
spinal nerve roots/
37. 
exp brachial plexus/
38. 
(odontoid* or cervical or occip* or atlant*).tw.
39. 
axis/ or odontoid process/
40. 
Thoracic Vertebrae/
41. 
cervical vertebrae.mp.
42. 
cervical plexus.mp.
43. 
cervical spine.mp.
44. 
(neck adj3 muscles).mp.
45. 
(brachial adj3 plexus).mp.
46. 
(thoracic adj3 vertebrae).mp.
47. 
neck.mp.
48. 
(thoracic adj3 spine).mp.
49. 
(thoracic adj3 outlet).mp.
50. 
trapezius.mp.
51. 
cervical.mp.
52. 
cervico*.mp.
53. 
51 or 52
54. 
exp genital diseases, female/
55. 
genital disease*.mp.
56. 
exp *Uterus/
57. 
54 or 55 or 56
58. 
53 not 57
59. 
29 or 30 or 31 or 32 or 33 or 34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or 
38 or 39 or 40 or 41 or 42 or 43 or 44 or 45 or 46 or 
47 or 48 or 49 or 50 or 58
60. 
exp pain/
61. 
exp injuries/
62. 
pain.mp.
63. 
ache.mp.
64. 
sore.mp.
65. 
stiff.mp.
66. 
discomfort.mp.
67. 
injur*.mp.
68. 
neuropath*.mp.
69. 
or/60-68
70. 
59 and 69
71. 
Radiculopathy/
72. 
exp temporomandibular joint disorders/ or exp tem-
poromandibular joint dysfunction syndrome/
73. 
myofascial pain syndromes/
74. 
exp “Sprains and Strains”/
75. 
exp Spinal Osteophytosis/
76. 
exp Neuritis/
77. 
Polyradiculopathy/
78. 
exp Arthritis/
79. 
Fibromyalgia/
80. 
spondylitis/ or discitis/
81. 
spondylosis/ or spondylolysis/ or spondylolisthesis/
82. 
radiculopathy.mp.
83. 
radiculitis.mp.
84. 
temporomandibular.mp.
85. 
myofascial pain syndrome*.mp.
86. 
thoracic outlet syndrome*.mp.
87. 
spinal osteophytosis.mp.
88. 
neuritis.mp.
89. 
spondylosis.mp.
90. 
spondylitis.mp.
91. 
spondylolisthesis.mp.
92. 
or/71-91
93. 
59 and 92
94. 
exp neck/
95. 
exp cervical vertebrae/
96. 
Thoracic Vertebrae/
97. 
neck.mp.
98. 
(thoracic adj3 vertebrae).mp.
99. 
cervical.mp.
100. cervico*.mp.
101. 99 or 100
102. exp genital diseases, female/
103. genital disease*.mp.
104. exp *Uterus/
105. or/102-104
106. 101 not 105
107. (thoracic adj3 spine).mp.
108. cervical spine.mp.
109. 94 or 95 or 96 or 97 or 98 or 106 or 107 or 108
110. Intervertebral Disk/
111. 
(disc or discs).mp.
112. (disk or disks).mp.
113. 110 or 111 or 112
114. 109 and 113
115. herniat*.mp.
116. slipped.mp.
117. 
prolapse*.mp.
118. displace*.mp.
119. degenerat*.mp.
120. (bulge or bulged or bulging).mp.
121. 115 or 116 or 117 or 118 or 119 or 120
122. 114 and 121
123. intervertebral disk degeneration/ or intervertebral 
disk displacement/
124. intervertebral disk displacement.mp.
125. intervertebral disc displacement.mp.
126. intervertebral disk degeneration.mp.
127. intervertebral disc degeneration.mp.
128. 123 or 124 or 125 or 126 or 127
129. 109 and 128
130. 28 or 70 or 93 or 122 or 129
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a59
APPENDIX A
131. animals/ not (animals/ and humans/)
132. 130 not 131
133. exp *neoplasms/
134. exp *wounds, penetrating/
135. 133 or 134
136. 132 not 135
137. Neck Pain/rh, th [Rehabilitation, Therapy]
138. exp Brachial Plexus Neuropathies/rh, th
139. exp neck injuries/rh, th or exp whiplash injuries/rh, th
140. thoracic outlet syndrome/rh, th or cervical rib syn-
drome/rh, th
141. Torticollis/rh, th
142. exp brachial plexus neuropathies/rh, th or exp bra-
chial plexus neuritis/rh, th
143. or/137-142
144. Radiculopathy/rh, th
145. exp temporomandibular joint disorders/rh, th or exp 
temporomandibular joint dysfunction syndrome/rh, 
th
146. myofascial pain syndromes/rh, th
147. exp “Sprains and Strains”/rh, th
148. exp Spinal Osteophytosis/rh, th
149. exp Neuritis/rh, th
150. Polyradiculopathy/rh, th
151. exp Arthritis/rh, th
152. Fibromyalgia/rh, th
153. spondylitis/rh, th or discitis/rh, th
154. spondylosis/rh, th or spondylolysis/rh, th or spondy-
lolisthesis/rh, th
155. or/144-154
156. 59 and 155
157. acupuncture/ or chiropractic/
158. exp Musculoskeletal Manipulations/
159. massage.tw.
160. mobili?ation.tw.
161. Acupuncture Therapy/
162. (acupuncture or acu-puncture or needling or acu-
pressure or mox?bustion).tw.
163. ((neck or spine or spinal or cervical or chiropractic* 
or musculoskeletal* or musculo-skeletal*) adj3 (ad-
just* or manipulat* or mobiliz* or mobilis*)).tw.
164. (manual adj therap*).tw.
165. (manipulati* adj (therap* or medicine)).tw.
166. (massag* or reflexolog* or rolfing or zone therap*).tw.
167. Nimmo.mp.
168. exp Vibration/tu [Therapeutic Use]
169. (vibration adj5 (therap* or treatment*)).tw.
170. (Chih Ya or Shiatsu or Shiatzu or Zhi Ya).tw.
171. 
(flexion adj2 distraction*).tw.
172. (myofascial adj3 (release or therap*)).tw.
173. muscle energy technique*.tw.
174. trigger point.tw.
175. proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation*.tw.
176. cyriax friction.tw.
177. 
(lomilomi or lomi-lomi or trager).tw.
178. aston patterning.tw.
179. (strain adj counterstrain).tw.
180. (craniosacral therap* or cranio-sacral therap*).tw.
181. (amma or ammo or effleuurage or petrissage or  
hacking or tapotment).tw.
182. Complementary Therapies/
183. ((complement* or alternat* or osteopthic*) adj  
(therap* or medicine)).tw.
184. (Tui Na or Tuina).tw.
185. or/157-184
186. 136 and 185
187. 143 or 156 or 186
188. animals/ not (animals/ and humans/)
189. 187 not 188
190. exp randomized controlled trials as topic/
191. randomized controlled trial.pt.
192. controlled clinical trial.pt.
193. (random* or sham or placebo*).tw.
194. placebos/
195. random allocation/
196. single blind method/
197. double blind method/
198. ((singl* or doubl* or trebl* or tripl*) adj25 (blind* or 
dumm* or mask*)).ti,ab.
199. (rct or rcts).tw.
200. (control* adj2 (study or studies or trial*)).tw.
201. or/190-200
202. 189 and 201
203. limit 202 to yr=”2006 -Current”
204. limit 202 to yr=”1902 -Current”
205. limit 202 to yr=”1902 -2005”
206. guidelines as topic/
207. practice guidelines as topic/
208. guideline.pt.
209. practice guideline.pt.
210. (guideline? or guidance or recommendations).ti.
211. consensus.ti.
212. or/206-211
213. 189 and 212
214. limit 213 to yr=”2006 -Current”
215. limit 213 to yr=”1902 -2005”
216. meta-analysis/
217. exp meta-analysis as topic/
218. (meta analy* or metaanaly* or met analy* or  
metanaly*).tw.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a60  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX A
219. review literature as topic/
220. (collaborative research or collaborative review* or 
collaborative overview*).tw.
221. (integrative research or integrative review* or  
intergrative overview*).tw.
222. (quantitative adj3 (research or review* or  
overview*)).tw.
223. (research integration or research overview*).tw.
224. (systematic* adj3 (review* or overview*)).tw.
225. (methodologic* adj3 (review* or overview*)).tw.
226. exp technology assessment biomedical/
227. (hta or thas or technology assessment*).tw.
228. ((hand adj2 search*) or (manual* adj search*)).tw.
229. ((electronic adj database*) or (bibliographic* adj  
database*)).tw.
230. ((data adj2 abstract*) or (data adj2 extract*)).tw.
231. (analys* adj3 (pool or pooled or pooling)).tw.
232. mantel haenszel.tw.
233. (cohrane or pubmed or pub med or medline or em-
base or psycinfo or psyclit or psychinfo or psychlit  
or cinahl or science citation indes).ab.
234. or/216-233
235. 189 and 234
236. limit 235 to yr=”2006 -Current”
237. limit 235 to yr=”1902 -2005”
238. (ae or to or po or co).fs.
239. (safe or safety or unsafe).tw.
240. (side effect* or side event*).tw.
241. ((adverse or undesirable or harm* or injurious or  
serious or toxic) adj3 (effect* or event* or reaction*  
or incident* or outcome*)).tw.
242. (abnormalit* or toxicit* or complication* or  
consequence* or noxious or tolerabilit*).tw.
243. or/238-242
244. 189 and 243
245. limit 244 to yr=”2006 -Current”
246. limit 244 to yr=”1902 -2005”
247. limit 202 to ed=20100701-20120321
248. limit 213 to ed=20100701-20120321
249. limit 235 to ed=20100701-20120321
250. limit 245 to ed=20100701-20120321
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a61
APPENDIX B
SEARCH DATES AND RESULTS
August 25, 2016
Database
Platform
Years Covered
Date Conducted
Results, n
MEDLINE
OVID
2014-August 2016
8-25-16
835
CINAHL
EBSCO
2014-August 2016
8-25-16
40
Web of Science
Web of Knowledge
2014-August 2016
8-25-16
…
Cochrane
Wiley
2014-August 2016
8-25-16
27
Embase
2014-August 2016
8-25-16
161
Total
1063
With duplicates removed
177
April 25, 2014: Neck Pain Modalities
Database
Platform
Years Covered
Date Conducted
Results, n
MEDLINE
OVID
2010-2014
4-21-14
153
CINAHL
EBSCO
2010-2014
4-21-14
92
Web of Science
Web of Knowledge
2010-2014
4-21-14
235
Cochrane
Wiley
2010-2014
4-21-14
57
Embase
2010-2014
4-25-14
500
Total
1037
With duplicates removed
793
May 29, 2015: Update Through November 2014
Database
Platform
Years Covered
Date Conducted
Results, n
MEDLINE
OVID
2014
5-29-15
31
CINAHL
EBSCO
2014
5-29-15
11
Web of Science
Web of Knowledge
2014
5-29-15
52
Cochrane
Wiley
2014
5-29-15
13
Embase
2014
5-29-15
47
Total
154
With duplicates removed
114
September 29, 2014: Education*
Database
Platform
Years Covered
Date Conducted
Results, n
MEDLINE
OVID
2010-current
9-29-14
34
CINAHL
EBSCO
2010-current
9-29-14
15
Web of Science
Web of Knowledge
2010-current
9-29-14
33
Cochrane
Wiley
2010-current
9-29-14
10
Embase
2010-current
9-29-14
26
Total
118
With duplicates removed
88
*Some Overlap With ICON, Whose Search Went From 2000 to 2010.
                                                   
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a62  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX B
September 29, 2014: Cervical Orthoses*
Database
Platform
Years Covered
Date Conducted
Results, n
MEDLINE
OVID
2010-current
9-29-14
43
CINAHL
EBSCO
2010-current
9-29-14
17
Web of Science
Web of Knowledge
2010-current
9-29-14
46
Cochrane
Wiley
2010-current
9-29-14
10
Embase
2010-current
9-29-14
32
Total
148
With duplicates removed
91
*Some Overlap With ICON, Whose Search Went From 2000 to 2010.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a63
APPENDIX C
CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION OF  
STUDIES OF INTERVENTIONS
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses published in peer-reviewed 
journals were reviewed.
Exclusions: experimental and quasi-experimental trials, cohort, case 
series, and cross-sectional studies, meeting abstracts, press releas-
es, theses, nonsystematic review articles, case reports, and articles 
that could not be retrieved in English.
Inclusion Criteria
• screening / differential diagnosis
OR
• diagnosis / classification
OR
• patient reported outcome measures related to neck pain.
OR
• measurement properties of physical impairments, or of activity 
limitation/participation restriction using data from a sample of 
patients with neck pain
AND
• adults (≥18 years old)
AND
• interventions within the scope of physical therapist practice for 
neck pain, including:
- manual therapy
- exercise
- multimodal physical therapy treatments
- patient education
- physical agents
• heat and cold
• electrotherapeutic modalities
• laser
• inserted needle techniques (reviews clearly identified as  
dry needling)
• traction
• ultrasound
• orthoses (neck braces)
Exclusion Criteria
Articles reporting on the following were excluded:
• primarily infants, children, or adolescents (<18 years old)
• postsurgical neck pain
• cervical vertebral fracture
• nonmusculoskeletal neck pain:
- visceral or vascular referral
- integumentary
• topics outside the scope of physical therapist practice  
(eg, surgery)
• pharmacological interventions
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a64  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX D
FLOW DIAGRAM OF ARTICLES LEADING TO INTERVENTION RECOMMENDATIONS
Records identified through 
database searching, 
n = 10059
Gray literature and additional 
records identified from 
other sources, n = 234
Update search, n = 1457
Update search 2, n = 1063
Identification
Screening
Eligibility
Included
Records after duplicates removed, n = 3874
Records screened, n = 3874
Title and abstract exclusion, n = 3126
Articles used in other Sections, n = 163
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility, n = 748
Articles used in intervention recommendations (some articles 
contributed to more than 1 category), n = 72
Full-text articles excluded, n = 513
• Incorrect publication type, n = 121
• No/incorrect intervention, n = 241
• Incorrect population, n = 76
• Unable to obtain PDF
, n = 3
• Unable to translate, n = 3
• Other, n = 69
Manual therapy, 
n = 38
Exercise, n = 43
Education, n = 7
Physical agents,
n = 15
Other, n = 4
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a65
APPENDIX E
ARTICLES INCLUDED IN RECOMMENDATIONS  
BY TOPIC
IMPAIRMENT/FUNCTION-BASED DIAGNOSIS
Prevalence
Andersson HI. The epidemiology of chronic pain in a Swedish 
rural area. Qual Life Res. 1994;3 suppl 1:S19-S26. https://doi.
org/10.1007
/BF00433371
Borghouts JA, Koes BW, Bouter LM. The clinical course and prognos-
tic factors of non-specific neck pain: a systematic review. Pain. 
1998;77:1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(98)00058-X
Borghouts JA, Koes BW, Vondeling H, Bouter LM. Cost-of-illness of 
neck pain in The Netherlands in 1996. Pain. 1999;80:629-636. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(98)00268-1
Bot SD, van der Waal JM, Terwee CB, et al. Incidence and prevalence 
of complaints of the neck and upper extremity in general prac-
tice. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005;64:118-123. https://doi.org/10.1136/
ard.2003.019349
Bovim G, Schrader H, Sand T
. Neck pain in the general population. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1994;19:1307-1309.
Brattberg G, Thorslund M, Wikman A. The prevalence of pain 
in a general population. The results of a postal survey in 
a county of Sweden. Pain. 1989;37:215-222. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0304-3959(89)90133-4
Côté P
, Cassidy JD, Carroll L. The factors associated with neck pain 
and its related disability in the Saskatchewan population. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2000;25:1109-1117.
Côté P
, Cassidy JD, Carroll L. The Saskatchewan Health and Back 
Pain Survey. The prevalence of neck pain and related disability in 
Saskatchewan adults. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1998;23:1689-1698.
Côté P
, Cassidy JD, Carroll LJ, Kristman V. The annual incidence and 
course of neck pain in the general population: a population-based 
cohort study. Pain. 2004;112:267-273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pain.2004.09.004
Croft PR, Lewis M, Papageorgiou AC, et al. Risk factors for neck pain: 
a longitudinal study in the general population. Pain. 2001;93:317-
325. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(01)00334-7
Di Fabio RP
, Boissonnault W. Physical therapy and health-related 
outcomes for patients with common orthopaedic diagnoses. J Or-
thop Sports Phys Ther. 1998;27:219-230. https://doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.1998.27.3.219
Elnaggar IM, Nordin M, Sheikhzadeh A, Parnianpour M, Kahanovitz N. 
Effects of spinal flexion and extension exercises on low-back pain 
and spinal mobility in chronic mechanical low-back pain patients. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1991;16:967-972.
Goode AP
, Freburger J, Carey T
. Prevalence, practice patterns, and 
evidence for chronic neck pain. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 
2010;62:1594-1601. https://doi.org/10.1002/
acr.20270
Haldeman S, Carroll L, Cassidy JD. Findings from the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000 to 2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Occup Environ Med. 2010;52:424-427. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/JOM.0b013e3181d44f3b
Holmstrom EB, Lindell J, Moritz U. Low back and neck/shoulder pain 
in construction workers: occupational workload and psychosocial 
risk factors. Part 2: Relationship to neck and shoulder pain. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 1992;17:672-677.
Hoving JL, Gross AR, Gasner D, et al. A critical appraisal of review 
articles on the effectiveness of conservative treatment for neck 
pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2001;26:196-205.
Hoy DG, Protani M, De R, Buchbinder R. The epidemiology of neck 
pain. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2010;24:783-792. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2011.01.019
Jacobsson L, Lindgarde F
, Manthorpe R. The commonest rheumatic 
complaints of over six weeks’ duration in a twelve-month period 
in a defined Swedish population. Prevalences and relationships. 
Scand J Rheumatol. 1989;18:353-360.
Jette DU, Jette AM. Physical therapy and health outcomes in patients 
with spinal impairments. Phys Ther. 1996;76:930-941; discussion 
942-945.
Jette AM, Smith K, Haley SM, Davis KD. Physical therapy episodes of 
care for patients with low back pain. Phys Ther. 1994;74:101-110; 
discussion 110-115.
Linton SJ, Ryberg M. Do epidemiological results replicate? The preva-
lence and health-economic consequences of neck and back pain 
in the general population. Eur J Pain. 2000;4:347-354. https://doi.
org/10.1053/
eujp.2000.0190
Mäkela M, Heliövaara M, Sievers K, Impivaara O, Knekt P
, Aromaa 
A. Prevalence, determinants, and consequences of chronic neck 
pain in Finland. Am J Epidemiol. 1991;134:1356-1367. https://doi.
org/10.1093/
oxfordjournals.aje.a116038
March L, Smith EU, Hoy DG, et al. Burden of disability due to mus-
culoskeletal (MSK) disorders. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 
2014;28:353-366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2014.08.002
Murray CJ, Vos T
, Lozano R, et al. Disability-adjusted life years 
(DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: 
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2197-2223. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(12)61689-4
Murray CJ, Barber RM, Foreman KJ, et al. Global, regional, and 
national disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 306 dis-
eases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 188 
countries, 1990-2013: quantifying the epidemiological transi-
tion. Lancet. 2015;386:2145-2191. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(15)61340-X
Nygren A, Berglund A, von Koch M. Neck-and-shoulder pain, an 
increasing problem. Strategies for using insurance material to fol-
low trends. Scand J Rehabil Med Suppl. 1995;32:107-112.
Palmer KT
, Walker-Bone K, Griffin MJ, et al. Prevalence and occupa-
tional associations of neck pain in the British population. Scand J 
Work Environ Health. 2001;27:49-56.
Pransky G, Benjamin K, Hill-Fotouhi C, et al. Outcomes 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a66  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX E
in work-related upper extremity and low back in-
juries: results of a retrospective study. Am J Ind 
Med. 2000;37:400-409. https://doi.org/10.1002/
(SICI)1097-0274(200004)37:4<400::AID-AJIM10>3.0.CO;2-C
Rempel DM, Harrison RJ, Barnhart S. Work-related cumulative trau-
ma disorders of the upper extremity. JAMA. 1992;267:838-842. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1992.03480060084035
Takala EP
, Viikari-Juntura E, Tynkkynen EM. Does group gymnastics 
at the workplace help in neck pain? A controlled study. Scand J 
Rehabil Med. 1994;26:17-20.
van der Donk J, Schouten JS, Passchier J, van Romunde LK, Valken-
burg HA. The associations of neck pain with radiological abnor-
malities of the cervical spine and personality traits in a general 
population. J Rheumatol. 1991;18:1884-1889.
Vos T
, Flaxman AD, Naghavi M, et al. Years lived with disability 
(YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries 1990-2010: 
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2163-2196. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(12)61729-2
Wright A, Mayer TG, Gatchel RJ. Outcomes of disabling cervical spine 
disorders in compensation injuries. A prospective comparison to 
tertiary rehabilitation response for chronic lumbar spinal disor-
ders. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1999;24:178-183.
Risk Factors
McLean SM, May S, Klaber-Moffett J, Sharp DM, Gardiner E. Risk fac-
tors for the onset of non-specific neck pain: a systematic review. 
J Epidemiol Community Health. 2010;64:565-572. https://doi.
org/10.1136/jech.2009.090720
Paksaichol A, Janwantanakul P
, Purepong N, Pensri P
, van der Beek 
AJ. Office workers’ risk factors for the development of non-specif-
ic neck pain: a systematic review of prospective cohort studies. 
Occup Environ Med. 2012;69:610-618. https://doi.org/10.1136/
oemed-2011-100459
Clinical Course and Clinical Prognosis
Ackelman BH, Lindgren U. Validity and reliability of a modified ver-
sion of the Neck Disability Index. J Rehabil Med. 2002;34:284-287. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/165019702760390383
Borghouts JA, Koes BW, Bouter LM. The clinical course and prognos-
tic factors of non-specific neck pain: a systematic review. Pain. 
1998;77:1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(98)00058-X
Carroll LJ, Hogg-Johnson S, van der Velde G, et al. Course and prog-
nostic factors for neck pain in the general population: results 
of the Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck 
Pain and Its Associated Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 
2009;32:S87-S96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.013
Carroll LJ, Holm LW, Hogg-Johnson S, et al. Course and prog-
nostic factors for neck pain in whiplash-associated disorders 
(WAD): results of the Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010 
Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S83-S92. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3181643eb8
Casey PP
, Feyer AM, Cameron ID. Course of recovery for whip-
lash associated disorders in a compensation setting. Injury. 
2015;46:2118-2129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2015.08.038
Daenen L, Nijs J, Raadsen B, Roussel N, Cras P
, Dankaerts W. Cervi-
cal motor dysfunction and its predictive value for long-term 
recovery in patients with acute whiplash-associated disorders: a 
systematic review. J Rehabil Med. 2013;45:113-122. https://doi.
org/10.2340/16501977-1091
Goldsmith R, Wright C, Bell SF
, Rushton A. Cold hyperalgesia as a 
prognostic factor in whiplash associated disorders: a systematic 
review. Man Ther. 2012;17:402-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2012.02.014
Guzman J, Hurwitz EL, Carroll LJ, et al. A new conceptual model of 
neck pain: linking onset, course, and care: the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2009;32:S17-S28. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.007
Hush JM, Lin CC, Michaleff ZA, Verhagen A, Refshauge KM. Prognosis 
of acute idiopathic neck pain is poor: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;92:824-829. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2010.12.025
Kamper SJ, Rebbeck TJ, Maher CG, McAuley JH, Sterling M. Course 
and prognostic factors of whiplash: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Pain. 2008;138:617-629. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pain.2008.02.019
Kelly J, Ritchie C, Sterling M. Clinical prediction rules for prog-
nosis and treatment prescription in neck pain: A systematic 
review. Musculoskelet Sci Pract. 2017;27:155-164. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2016.10.066
Manchikanti L, Boswell MV, Singh V, et al. Comprehensive evidence-
based guidelines for interventional techniques in the manage-
ment of chronic spinal pain. Pain Physician. 2009;12:699-802.
Maxwell S, Sterling M. An investigation of the use of a numeric pain 
rating scale with ice application to the neck to determine cold hy-
peralgesia. Man Ther. 2013;18:172-174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2012.07.004
Rao R. Neck pain, cervical radiculopathy, and cervical myelopathy: 
pathophysiology, natural history, and clinical evaluation. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 2002;84-A:1872-1881.
Rebbeck T
, Moloney N, Azoory R, et al. Clinical ratings of pain sensi-
tivity correlate with quantitative measures in people with chronic 
neck pain and healthy controls: cross-sectional study. Phys Ther. 
2015;95:1536-1546. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20140352
Ritchie C, Hendrikz J, Kenardy J, Sterling M. Derivation of a clinical 
prediction rule to identify both chronic moderate/severe disability 
and full recovery following whiplash injury. Pain. 2013;154:2198-
2206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2013.07.001
Ritchie C, Sterling M. Recovery pathways and prognosis after whip-
lash injury. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2016;46:851-861. https://
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a67
APPENDIX E
doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6918
Spitzer WO, Skovron ML, Salmi LR, et al. Scientific monograph of 
the Quebec Task Force on Whiplash-Associated Disorders: rede-
fining “whiplash” and its management. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
1995;20:1S-73S.
Sterling M, Hendrikz J, Kenardy J. Compensation claim lodgement 
and health outcome developmental trajectories following whip-
lash injury: a prospective study. Pain. 2010;150:22-28. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pain.2010.02.013
Sullivan MJ, Bishop SR, Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: 
development and validation. Psychol Assess. 1995;7:524-532. 
https://doi.org/10.1037
/1040-3590.7.4.524
Sullivan MJ, Thibault P
, Simmonds MJ, Milioto M, Cantin AP
, Velly AM. 
Pain, perceived injustice and the persistence of post-traumatic 
stress symptoms during the course of rehabilitation for whip-
lash injuries. Pain. 2009;145:325-331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pain.2009.06.031
Thoomes EJ, Scholten-Peeters W, Koes B, Falla D, Verhagen AP
. The 
effectiveness of conservative treatment for patients with cervical 
radiculopathy: a systematic review. Clin J Pain. 2013;29:1073-
1086. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
AJP
.0b013e31828441fb
Van Damme S, Crombez G, Bijttebier P
, Goubert L, Van Houdenhove 
B. A confirmatory factor analysis of the Pain Catastrophizing 
Scale: invariant factor structure across clinical and non-clinical 
populations. Pain. 2002;96:319-324. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0304-3959(01)00463-8
Vernon H, Mior S. The Neck Disability Index: a study of reliability and 
validity. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 1991;14:409-415.
Walton D. A review of the definitions of ‘recovery’ used in prognostic 
studies on whiplash using an ICF framework. Disabil Rehabil. 
2009;31:943-957. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638280802404128
Walton DM, Carroll LJ, Kasch H, et al. An overview of systematic re-
views on prognostic factors in neck pain: results from the Interna-
tional Collaboration on Neck Pain (ICON) project. Open Orthop J. 
2013;7:494-505. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010494
Walton DM, MacDermid JC, Giorgianni AA, Mascarenhas JC, West 
SC, Zammit CA. Risk factors for persistent problems following 
acute whiplash injury: update of a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2013;43:31-43. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4507
Pathoanatomical Features/Differential Diagnosis
Amenta PS, Ghobrial GM, Krespan K, Nguyen P
, Ali M, Harrop JS. 
Cervical spondylotic myelopathy in the young adult: a review of 
the literature and clinical diagnostic criteria in an uncommon 
demographic. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2014;120:68-72. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2014.02.019
American College of Radiology. Appropriateness Criteria. Available 
at: https://www.acr.org/Quality-Safety/
Appropriateness-Criteria. 
Accessed December 2, 2015.
Coffey F
, Hewitt S, Stiell I, et al. Validation of the Canadian c-spine 
rule in the UK emergency department setting. Emerg Med J. 
2011;28:873-876. https://doi.org/10.1136/
emj.2009.089508
Cook CE, Wilhelm M, Cook AE, Petrosino C, Isaacs R. Clinical tests for 
screening and diagnosis of cervical spine myelopathy: a system-
atic review. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2011;34:539-546. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2011.08.008
Curatolo M, Bogduk N, Ivancic PC, McLean SA, Siegmund GP
, 
Winkelstein BA. The role of tissue damage in whiplash-
associated disorders: discussion paper 1. Spine (Phila 
Pa 1976). 2011;36:S309-S315. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e318238842a
Detsky ME, McDonald DR, Baerlocher MO, Tomlinson GA, McCrory 
DC, Booth CM. Does this patient with headache have a migraine 
or need neuroimaging? JAMA. 2006;296:1274-1283. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jama.296.10.1274
George SZ, Beneciuk JM, Bialosky JE, et al. Development of a review-
of-systems screening tool for orthopaedic physical therapists: 
results from the Optimal Screening for Prediction of Referral 
and Outcome (OSPRO) cohort. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2015;45:512-526. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2015.5900
Haldeman S, Carroll L, Cassidy JD. Findings from the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000 to 2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Occup Environ Med. 2010;52:424-427. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/JOM.0b013e3181d44f3b
Hoffman JR, Wolfson AB, Todd K, Mower WR. Selective cervical 
spine radiography in blunt trauma: methodology of the Na-
tional Emergency X-Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS). 
Ann Emerg Med. 1998;32:461-469. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0196-0644(98)70176-3
Hogg-Johnson S, van der Velde G, Carroll LJ, et al. The burden and 
determinants of neck pain in the general population: results 
of the Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck 
Pain and Its Associated Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 
2009;32:S46-S60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.010
Hutting N, Scholten-Peeters GG, Vijverman V, Keesenberg MD, Ver-
hagen AP
. Diagnostic accuracy of upper cervical spine instability 
tests: a systematic review. Phys Ther. 2013;93:1686-1695. https://
doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20130186
Karadimas SK, Erwin WM, Ely CG, Dettori JR, Fehlings MG. Patho-
physiology and natural history of cervical spondylotic myelopathy. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S21-S36. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3182a7f2c3
Kim HJ, Tetreault LA, Massicotte EM, et al. Differential diagnosis 
for cervical spondylotic myelopathy: literature review. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S78-S88. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3182a7eb06
Kirpalani D, Mitra R. Cervical facet joint dysfunction: a review. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89:770-774. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apmr.2007.11.028
Myran R, Zwart JA, Kvistad KA, et al. Clinical characteristics, pain, 
and disability in relation to alar ligament MRI findings. Spine 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a68  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX E
(Phila Pa 1976). 2011;36:E862-E867. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3181ff1dde
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Headaches in over 
12s: diagnosis and management. Available at: https://www.nice.
org.uk/
guidance/
cg150. Accessed October 5, 2012.
Neo M, Fujibayashi S, Takemoto M, Nakamura T
. Clinical results of 
and patient satisfaction with cervical laminoplasty for consider-
able cord compression with only slight myelopathy. Eur Spine J. 
2012;21:340-346. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00586-011-2050-9
Panacek EA, Mower WR, Holmes JF
, Hoffman JR. Test performance 
of the individual NEXUS low-risk clinical screening criteria for 
cervical spine injury. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;38:22-25. https://doi.
org/10.1067
/mem.2001.116499
Rushton A, Rivett D, Carlesso L, Flynn T
, Hing W, Kerry R. International 
framework for examination of the cervical region for potential 
of Cervical Arterial Dysfunction prior to Orthopaedic Manual 
Therapy intervention. Man Ther. 2014;19:222-228. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2013.11.005
Schomacher M, Suess O, Kombos T
. Osteochondromas of the cervical 
spine in atypical location. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2009;151:629-
633; discussion 633. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00701-009-0235-3
Siegmund GP
, Winkelstein BA, Ivancic PC, Svensson MY, Vasa-
vada A. The anatomy and biomechanics of acute and chronic 
whiplash injury. Traffic Inj Prev. 2009;10:101-112. https://doi.
org/10.1080/15389580802593269
Stiell IG, Clement CM, Grimshaw J, et al. Implementation of the Ca-
nadian C-Spine Rule: prospective 12 centre cluster randomised 
trial. BMJ. 2009;339:b4146. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b4146
Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen KL, et al. The Canadian C-spine 
rule for radiography in alert and stable trauma patients. JAMA. 
2001;286:1841-1848. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.286.15.1841
Tetreault LA, Dettori JR, Wilson JR, et al. Systematic review of mag-
netic resonance imaging characteristics that affect treatment 
decision making and predict clinical outcome in patients with cer-
vical spondylotic myelopathy. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S89-
S110. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7eae0
Thoomes EJ, Scholten-Peeters GG, de Boer AJ, et al. Lack of uniform 
diagnostic criteria for cervical radiculopathy in conservative inter-
vention studies: a systematic review. Eur Spine J. 2012;21:1459-
1470. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00586-012-2297-9
Wilson JR, Barry S, Fischer DJ, et al. Frequency, timing, and predic-
tors of neurological dysfunction in the nonmyelopathic patient 
with cervical spinal cord compression, canal stenosis, and/
or ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2013;38:S37-S54. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3182a7f2e7
Imaging Studies
Anderson SE, Boesch C, Zimmermann H, et al. Are there cervical 
spine findings at MR imaging that are specific to acute symptom-
atic whiplash injury? A prospective controlled study with four ex-
perienced blinded readers. Radiology. 2012;262:567-575. https://
doi.org/10.1148/radiol.11102115
De Pauw R, Coppieters I, Kregel J, De Meulemeester K, Danneels 
L, Cagnie B. Does muscle morphology change in chronic neck 
pain patients? – A systematic review. Man Ther. 2016;22:42-49. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2015.11.006
Elliott J, Jull G, Noteboom JT
, Darnell R, Galloway G, Gibbon WW. 
Fatty infiltration in the cervical extensor muscles in persistent 
whiplash-associated disorders: a magnetic resonance imaging 
analysis. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2006;31:E847-E855. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/01.brs.0000240841.07050.34
Elliott J, Sterling M, Noteboom JT
, Darnell R, Galloway G, Jull G. 
Fatty infiltrate in the cervical extensor muscles is not a feature of 
chronic, insidious-onset neck pain. Clin Radiol. 2008;63:681-687. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crad.2007.11.011
Elliott JM, O’Leary S, Sterling M, Hendrikz J, Pedler A, Jull G. Mag-
netic resonance imaging findings of fatty infiltrate in the cervical 
flexors in chronic whiplash. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2010;35:948-
954. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181bb0e55
Elliott J, Jull G, Noteboom JT
, Galloway G. MRI study of the cross-
sectional area for the cervical extensor musculature in patients 
with persistent whiplash associated disorders (WAD). Man Ther. 
2008;13:258-265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2007.01.012
Elliott JM, Pedler AR, Jull GA, Van Wyk L, Galloway GG, O’Leary SP
. 
Differential changes in muscle composition exist in traumatic and 
nontraumatic neck pain. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2014;39:39-47. 
https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000000033
Elliott J, Pedler A, Kenardy J, Galloway G, Jull G, Sterling M. The tem-
poral development of fatty infiltrates in the neck muscles follow-
ing whiplash injury: an association with pain and posttraumatic 
stress. PLoS One. 2011;6:e21194. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0021194
Griffith B, Kelly M, Vallee P
, et al. Screening cervical spine CT in the 
emergency department, phase 2: a prospective assessment 
of use. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2013;34:899-903. https://doi.
org/10.3174/
ajnr.A3306
Haldeman S, Carroll L, Cassidy JD. Findings from the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000 to 2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Occup Environ Med. 2010;52:424-427. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/JOM.0b013e3181d44f3b
Ichihara D, Okada E, Chiba K, et al. Longitudinal magnetic resonance 
imaging study on whiplash injury patients: minimum 10-year 
follow-up. J Orthop Sci. 2009;14:602-610. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00776-009-1378-z
Johansson MP
, Baann Liane MS, Bendix T
, Kasch H, Kongsted A. 
Does cervical kyphosis relate to symptoms following whiplash 
injury? Man Ther. 2011;16:378-383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2011.01.004
Kaale BR, Krakenes J, Albrektsen G, Wester K. Head position and im-
pact direction in whiplash injuries: associations with MRI-verified 
lesions of ligaments and membranes in the upper cervical spine. 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a69
APPENDIX E
J Neurotrauma. 2005;22:1294-1302. https://doi.org/10.1089/
neu.2005.22.1294
Kaale BR, Krakenes J, Albrektsen G, Wester K. Whiplash-associated 
disorders impairment rating: Neck Disability Index score accord-
ing to severity of MRI findings of ligaments and membranes in the 
upper cervical spine. J Neurotrauma. 2005;22:466-475. https://
doi.org/10.1089/neu.2005.22.466
Karlsson A, Leinhard OD, Åslund U, et al. An investigation of fat 
infiltration of the multifidus muscle in patients with severe neck 
symptoms associated with chronic whiplash-associated disor-
der. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2016;46:886-893. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6553
Krakenes J, Kaale BR. Magnetic resonance imaging assessment 
of craniovertebral ligaments and membranes after whiplash 
trauma. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2006;31:2820-2826. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/01.brs.0000245871.15696.1f
Krakenes J, Kaale BR, Moen G, Nordli H, Gilhus NE, Rorvik J. MRI 
assessment of the alar ligaments in the late stage of whiplash 
injury – a study of structural abnormalities and observer agree-
ment. Neuroradiology. 2002;44:617-624. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00234-002-0799-6
Li Q, Shen H, Li M. Magnetic resonance imaging signal changes 
of alar and transverse ligaments not correlated with whiplash-
associated disorders: a meta-analysis of case-control stud-
ies. Eur Spine J. 2013;22:14-20. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-012-2490-x
Matsumoto M, Ichihara D, Okada E, et al. Cross-sectional area of 
the posterior extensor muscles of the cervical spine in whiplash 
injury patients versus healthy volunteers – 10 year follow-up 
MR study. Injury. 2012;43:912-916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
injury.2012.01.017
Matsumoto M, Ichihara D, Okada E, et al. Modic changes of the 
cervical spine in patients with whiplash injury: a prospective 
11-year follow-up study. Injury. 2013;44:819-824. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.injury.2012.12.001
Michaleff ZA, Maher CG, Verhagen AP
, Rebbeck T
, Lin CW. Accuracy 
of the Canadian C-spine rule and NEXUS to screen for clinically 
important cervical spine injury in patients following blunt trauma: 
a systematic review. CMAJ. 2012;184:E867-E876. https://doi.
org/10.1503/
cmaj.120675
Myran R, Kvistad KA, Nygaard OP
, Andresen H, Folvik M, Zwart 
JA. Magnetic resonance imaging assessment of the alar 
ligaments in whiplash injuries: a case-control study. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:2012-2016. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e31817bb0bd
Myran R, Zwart JA, Kvistad KA, et al. Clinical characteristics, pain, 
and disability in relation to alar ligament MRI findings. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2011;36:E862-E867. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0b013e3181ff1dde
Nakashima H, Yukawa Y, Suda K, Yamagata M, Ueta T
, Kato 
F
. Abnormal findings on magnetic resonance images of 
the cervical spines in 1211 asymptomatic subjects. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:392-398. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
BRS.0000000000000775
National Guideline Clearinghouse. ACR Appropriateness Criteria: 
suspected spine trauma. Available at: https://www.guideline.gov/
summaries/summary/37931? Accessed March 30, 2012.
Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen KL, et al. The Canadian C-spine 
rule for radiography in alert and stable trauma patients. JAMA. 
2001;286:1841-1848. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.286.15.1841
Ulbrich EJ, Anderson SE, Busato A, et al. Cervical muscle area mea-
surements in acute whiplash patients and controls. J Magn Reson 
Imaging. 2011;33:668-675. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.22446
Vetti N, Kråkenes J, Ask T
, et al. Follow-up MR imaging of the alar and 
transverse ligaments after whiplash injury: a prospective con-
trolled study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2011;32:1836-1841. https://
doi.org/10.3174/
ajnr.A2636
Vetti N, Kråkenes J, Eide GE, Rørvik J, Gilhus NE, Espeland A. MRI 
of the alar and transverse ligaments in whiplash-associated 
disorders (WAD) grades 1-2: high-signal changes by age, gender, 
event and time since trauma. Neuroradiology. 2009;51:227-235. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00234-008-0482-7
EXAMINATION
Outcome Measures
Bono CM, Ghiselli G, Gilbert TJ, et al. An evidence-based clinical 
guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of cervical radiculopa-
thy from degenerative disorders. Spine J. 2011;11:64-72. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2010.10.023
Ferreira ML, Borges BM, Rezende IL, et al. Are neck pain scales 
and questionnaires compatible with the international clas-
sification of functioning, disability and health? A system-
atic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32:1539-1546. https://doi.
org/10.3109/09638281003611045
Fairbairn K, May K, Yang Y, Balasundar S, Hefford C, Abbott JH. 
Mapping Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS) items to the 
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
(ICF). Phys Ther. 2012;92:310-317. https://doi.org/10.2522/
ptj.20090382
Fillingim RB, Loeser JD, Baron R, Edwards RR. Assessment of chronic 
pain: domains, methods, and mechanisms. J Pain. 2016;17:T10-
T20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2015.08.010
Hjermstad MJ, Fayers PM, Haugen DF
, et al. Studies comparing Nu-
merical Rating Scales, Verbal Rating Scales, and Visual Analogue 
Scales for assessment of pain intensity in adults: a systematic 
literature review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2011;41:1073-1093. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2010.08.016
Holly LT
, Matz PG, Anderson PA, et al. Functional outcomes as-
sessment for cervical degenerative disease. J Neurosurg Spine. 
2009;11:238-244. https://doi.org/10.3171/2009.2.SPINE08715
Horn KK, Jennings S, Richardson G, van Vliet D, Hefford C, Abbott 
JH. The patient-specific functional scale: psychometrics, clini-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a70  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX E
metrics, and application as a clinical outcome measure. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther. 2012;42:30-42. https://doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2012.3727
MacDermid JC, Walton DM, Côté P
, Santaguida PL, Gross A, Carlesso 
L. Use of outcome measures in managing neck pain: an interna-
tional multidisciplinary survey. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:506-520. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1874325001307010506
Schellingerhout JM, Heymans MW, Verhagen AP
, de Vet HC, Koes BW, 
Terwee CB. Measurement properties of translated versions of 
neck-specific questionnaires: a systematic review. BMC Med Res 
Methodol. 2011;11:87. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-11-87
Schellingerhout JM, Verhagen AP
, Heymans MW, Koes BW, de Vet HC, 
Terwee CB. Measurement properties of disease-specific question-
naires in patients with neck pain: a systematic review. Qual Life 
Res. 2012;21:659-670. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s11136-011-9965-9
Turk DC, Fillingim RB, Ohrbach R, Patel KV. Assessment of psycho-
social and functional impact of chronic pain. J Pain. 2016;17:T21-
T49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2016.02.006
Vernon H. The psychometric properties of the Neck Disability Index. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89:1414-1415; author reply 1415-
1416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2008.05.003
Activity Limitation and Participation Restriction Measures
Borloz S, Trippolini MA, Ballabeni P
, Luthi F
, Deriaz O. Cross-cultural 
adaptation, reliability, internal consistency and validation of the 
Spinal Function Sort (SFS) for French- and German-speaking 
patients with back complaints. J Occup Rehabil. 2012;22:387-393. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/s10926-012-9356-2
Matheson LN, Matheson ML, Grant J. Development of a measure 
of perceived functional ability. J Occup Rehabil. 1993;3:15-30. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/BF01076739
Oesch PR, Hilfiker R, Kool JP
, Bachmann S, Hagen KB. Perceived 
functional ability assessed with the spinal function sort: is it valid 
for European rehabilitation settings in patients with non-specific 
non-acute low back pain? Eur Spine J. 2010;19:1527-1533. https://
doi.org/10.1007
/s00586-010-1429-3
Trippolini MA, Dijkstra PU, Geertzen JH, Reneman MF
. Measurement 
properties of the spinal function sort in patients with sub-acute 
whiplash-associated disorders. J Occup Rehabil. 2015;25:527-
536. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s10926-014-9559-9
Physical Impairment Measures
Hall T
, Briffa K, Hopper D, Robinson K. Long-term stability and 
minimal detectable change of the cervical flexion-rotation 
test. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2010;40:225-229. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2010.3100
Hall TM, Robinson KW, Fujinawa O, Akasaka K, Pyne EA. Intertester 
reliability and diagnostic validity of the cervical flexion-rotation 
test. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2008;31:293-300. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.03.012
Ogince M, Hall T
, Robinson K, Blackmore AM. The diagnostic validity 
of the cervical flexion-rotation test in C1/2-related cervicogenic 
headache. Man Ther. 2007;12:256-262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2006.06.016
Rubinstein SM, Pool JJ, van Tulder MW, Riphagen, II, de Vet HC. A 
systematic review of the diagnostic accuracy of provocative tests 
of the neck for diagnosing cervical radiculopathy. Eur Spine J. 
2007;16:307-319. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00586-006-0225-6
Snodgrass SJ, Cleland JA, Haskins R, Rivett DA. The clinical utility of 
cervical range of motion in diagnosis, prognosis, and evaluating 
the effects of manipulation: a systematic review. Physiotherapy. 
2014;100:290-304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2014.04.007
van Trijffel E, Anderegg Q, Bossuyt PM, Lucas C. Inter-examiner 
reliability of passive assessment of intervertebral motion in 
the cervical and lumbar spine: a systematic review. Man Ther. 
2005;10:256-269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2005.04.008
Walton DM, MacDermid JC, Nielson W, Teasell RW, Chiasson M, 
Brown L. Reliability, standard error, and minimum detectable 
change of clinical pressure pain threshold testing in people 
with and without acute neck pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2011;41:644-650. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3666
Walton DM, Levesque L, Payne M, Schick J. Clinical pressure pain 
threshold testing in neck pain: comparing protocols, responsive-
ness, and association with psychological variables. Phys Ther. 
2014;94:827-837. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20130369
Williams MA, McCarthy CJ, Chorti A, Cooke MW, Gates S. A sys-
tematic review of reliability and validity studies of methods for 
measuring active and passive cervical range of motion. J Manipu-
lative Physiol Ther. 2010;33:138-155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmpt.2009.12.009
Diagnosis/Classification
American Physical Therapy Association. Guide to physical therapist 
practice. Second edition. Phys Ther. 2001;81:9-746.
Bergbom S, Boersma K, Overmeer T
, Linton SJ. Relationship among 
pain catastrophizing, depressed mood, and outcomes across 
physical therapy treatments. Phys Ther. 2011;91:754-764. https://
doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20100136
Bergström C, Jensen I, Hagberg J, Busch H, Bergström G. Effective-
ness of different interventions using a psychosocial subgroup 
assignment in chronic neck and back pain patients: a 10-year 
follow-up. Disabil Rehabil. 2012;34:110-118. https://doi.org/10.310
9/09638288.2011.607218
Cleland JA, Childs JD, Fritz JM, Whitman JM, Eberhart SL. Devel-
opment of a clinical prediction rule for guiding treatment of a 
subgroup of patients with neck pain: use of thoracic spine manip-
ulation, exercise, and patient education. Phys Ther. 2007;87:9-23. 
https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20060155
Childs JD, Cleland JA, Elliott JM, et al. Neck pain: clinical practice 
guidelines linked to the International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability, and Health from the Orthopaedic Section of the Ameri-
can Physical Therapy Association. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a71
APPENDIX E
2008;38:A1-A34. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.0303
Cook CE. Orthopedic Manual Therapy: An Evidence-Based Approach. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 2007.
Delitto A, George SZ, Van Dillen LR, et al. Low back pain. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther. 2012;42:A1-A57. https://doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2012.42.4.A1
Fritz JM, Brennan GP
. Preliminary examination of a proposed treat-
ment-based classification system for patients receiving physical 
therapy interventions for neck pain. Phys Ther. 2007;87:513-524. 
https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20060192
Guzman J, Hurwitz EL, Carroll LJ, et al. A new conceptual model of 
neck pain: linking onset, course, and care: the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2009;32:S17-S28. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.007
Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache 
Society. The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 
3rd edition (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629-808. https://
doi.org/10.1177
/0333102413485658
Hogg-Johnson S, van der Velde G, Carroll LJ, et al. The burden and 
determinants of neck pain in the general population: results 
of the Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck 
Pain and Its Associated Disorders. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 
2009;32:S46-S60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2008.11.010
Horn KK, Jennings S, Richardson G, van Vliet D, Hefford C, Abbott 
JH. The patient-specific functional scale: psychometrics, clini-
metrics, and application as a clinical outcome measure. J Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther. 2012;42:30-42. https://doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2012.3727
Jacobson GP
, Ramadan NM, Aggarwal SK, Newman CW. The Henry 
Ford Hospital Headache Disability Inventory (HDI). Neurology. 
1994;44:837-842. https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.44.5.837
Kelley MJ, McClure PW, Leggin BG. Frozen shoulder: evidence and 
a proposed model guiding rehabilitation. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther. 2009;39:135-148. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2009.2916
Kelley MJ, Shaffer MA, Kuhn JE, et al. Shoulder pain and mobility def-
icits: adhesive capsulitis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2013;43:A1-
A31. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.0302
Kelly J, Ritchie C, Sterling M. Clinical prediction rules for prog-
nosis and treatment prescription in neck pain: A systematic 
review. Musculoskelet Sci Pract. 2017;27:155-164. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2016.10.066
McGinn TG, Guyatt GH, Wyer PC, Naylor CD, Stiell IG, Richardson 
WS. Users’ guides to the medical literature: XXII: how to use 
articles about clinical decision rules. Evidence-Based Medicine 
Working Group. JAMA. 2000;284:79-84. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.284.1.79
Mueller MJ, Maluf KS. Tissue adaptation to physical stress: a pro-
posed “Physical Stress Theory” to guide physical therapist prac-
tice, education, and research. Phys Ther. 2002;82:383-403.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Headaches in over 
12s: diagnosis and management. Available at: https://www.nice.
org.uk/
guidance/
cg150. Accessed October 5, 2012.
Nijs J, Van Houdenhove B, Oostendorp RA. Recognition of central 
sensitization in patients with musculoskeletal pain: Application 
of pain neurophysiology in manual therapy practice. Man Ther. 
2010;15:135-141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2009.12.001
Raney NH, Petersen EJ, Smith TA, et al. Development of a clinical 
prediction rule to identify patients with neck pain likely to benefit 
from cervical traction and exercise. Eur Spine J. 2009;18:382-391. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00586-008-0859-7
Sterling M. Physical and psychological aspects of whiplash: impor-
tant considerations for primary care assessment, part 2 – case 
studies. Man Ther. 2009;14:e8-e12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2008.03.004
Sterling M, Kenardy J, Jull G, Vicenzino B. The development of psy-
chological changes following whiplash injury. Pain. 2003;106:481-
489. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2003.09.013
Stewart M, Maher CG, Refshauge KM, Bogduk N, Nicholas M. 
Responsiveness of pain and disability measures for chronic 
whiplash. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007;32:580-585. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/01.brs.0000256380.71056.6d
Takasaki H, May S. Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy has similar ef-
fects on pain and disability as ‘wait and see’ and other approach-
es in people with neck pain: a systematic review. J Physiother. 
2014;60:78-84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2014.05.006
Tseng YL, Wang WT
, Chen WY, Hou TJ, Chen TC, Lieu FK. Predic-
tors for the immediate responders to cervical manipulation in 
patients with neck pain. Man Ther. 2006;11:306-315. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2005.08.009
Verhagen AP
, Lewis M, Schellingerhout JM, et al. Do whiplash pa-
tients differ from other patients with non-specific neck pain re-
garding pain, function or prognosis? Man Ther. 2011;16:456-462. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2011.02.009
INTERVENTIONS
Childs JD, Cleland JA, Elliott JM, et al. Neck pain: clinical practice 
guidelines linked to the International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability, and Health from the Orthopaedic Section of the Ameri-
can Physical Therapy Association. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2008;38:A1-A34. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2008.0303
Rushton A, Rivett D, Carlesso L, Flynn T
, Hing W, Kerry R. International 
framework for examination of the cervical region for potential 
of Cervical Arterial Dysfunction prior to Orthopaedic Manual 
Therapy intervention. Man Ther. 2014;19:222-228. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2013.11.005
Neck Pain With Mobility Deficits
Bertozzi L, Gardenghi I, Turoni F
, et al. Effect of therapeutic exercise 
on pain and disability in the management of chronic nonspecific 
neck pain: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
trials. Phys Ther. 2013;93:1026-1036. https://doi.org/10.2522/
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a72  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX E
ptj.20120412
Brown K, Luszeck T
, Nerdin S, Yaden J, Young JL. The effectiveness of 
cervical versus thoracic thrust manipulation for the improvement 
of pain, disability, and range of motion in patients with mechani-
cal neck pain. Phys Ther Rev. 2014;19:381-391. https://doi.org/10.
1179/1743288X14Y.0000000155
Cagnie B, Castelein B, Pollie F
, Steelant L, Verhoeyen H, Cools 
A. Evidence for the use of ischemic compression and dry 
needling in the management of trigger points of the upper 
trapezius in patients with neck pain: a systematic review. Am J 
Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;94:573-583. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
PHM.0000000000000266
Carlesso LC, MacDermid JC, Santaguida PL, Thabane L. Determining 
adverse events in patients with neck pain receiving orthopaedic 
manual physiotherapy: a pilot and feasibility study. Physiother 
Can. 2013;65:255-265. https://doi.org/10.3138/ptc.2012-28
Clar C, Tsertsvadze A, Court R, Hundt GL, Clarke A, Sutcliffe P
. 
Clinical effectiveness of manual therapy for the management of 
musculoskeletal and non-musculoskeletal conditions: systematic 
review and update of UK evidence report. Chiropr Man Therap. 
2014;22:12. https://doi.org/10.1186/2045-709X-22-12
Coronado RA, Bialosky JE, Cook CE. Temporal effects of a single 
session of high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust manipulation on 
subjects with spinal pain. Phys Ther Rev. 2010;15:29-35. https://
doi.org/10.1179/174328810X12647087218712
Cross KM, Kuenze C, Grindstaff TL, Hertel J. Thoracic spine thrust 
manipulation improves pain, range of motion, and self-reported 
function in patients with mechanical neck pain: a systematic 
review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2011;41:633-642. https://doi.
org/10.2519/jospt.2011.3670
Damgaard P
, Bartels EM, Ris I, Christensen R, Juul-Kristensen 
B. Evidence of physiotherapy interventions for patients with 
chronic neck pain: a systematic review of randomised con-
trolled trials. ISRN Pain. 2013;2013:567175. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/567175
Furlan AD, Yazdi F
, Tsertsvadze A, et al. A systematic review and me-
ta-analysis of efficacy, cost-effectiveness, and safety of selected 
complementary and alternative medicine for neck and low-back 
pain. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:953139. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/953139
Furlan AD, Malmivaara A, Chou R, et al. 2015 updated method 
guideline for systematic reviews in the Cochrane Back and Neck 
Group. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1660-1673. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000001061
Graham N, Gross AR, Carlesso LC, et al. An ICON over-
view on physical modalities for neck pain and associ-
ated disorders. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:440-460. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010440
Gross A, Kay TM, Paquin JP
, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck dis-
orders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub5
Gross A, Langevin P
, Burnie SJ, et al. Manipulation and mobilisation 
for neck pain contrasted against an inactive control or another 
active treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015:CD004249. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004249.pub4
Gross A, Miller J, D’Sylva J, et al. Manipulation or mobilisation for 
neck pain: a Cochrane Review. Man Ther. 2010;15:315-333. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2010.04.002
Gross AR, Dziengo S, Boers O, et al. Low level laser therapy 
(LLLT) for neck pain: a systematic review and meta-
regression. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:396-419. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010396
Gross AR, Goldsmith C, Hoving JL, et al. Conservative management 
of mechanical neck disorders: a systematic review. J Rheumatol. 
2007;34:1083-1102.
Haines T
, Gross A, Burnie SJ, Goldsmith CH, Perry L. Patient 
education for neck pain with or without radiculopathy. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD005106. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD005106.pub3
Huisman PA, Speksnijder CM, de Wijer A. The effect of thoracic spine 
manipulation on pain and disability in patients with non-specific 
neck pain: a systematic review. Disabil Rehabil. 2013;35:1677-
1685. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2012.750689
Hurwitz EL, Carragee EJ, van der Velde G, et al. Treatment of neck 
pain: noninvasive interventions: results of the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S123-S152. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181644b1d
Kadhim-Saleh A, Maganti H, Ghert M, Singh S, Farrokhyar F
. Is low-
level laser therapy in relieving neck pain effective? Systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Rheumatol Int. 2013;33:2493-2501. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00296-013-2742-z
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith C, Santaguida PL, Hoving J, Brønfort 
G. Exercises for mechanical neck disorders. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2005:CD004250. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD004250.pub3
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith CH, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck 
disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub4
Kietrys DM, Palombaro KM, Azzaretto E, et al. Effectiveness of dry 
needling for upper-quarter myofascial pain: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2013;43:620-634. 
https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2013.4668
Kroeling P
, Gross A, Graham N, et al. Electrotherapy for neck pain. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD004251. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD004251.pub5
Leaver AM, Refshauge KM, Maher CG, McAuley JH. Conservative 
interventions provide short-term relief for non-specific neck pain: 
a systematic review. J Physiother. 2010;56:73-85. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1836-9553(10)70037-0
Lee MS, Pittler MH, Ernst E. Internal qigong for pain conditions: a 
systematic review. J Pain. 2009;10:1121-1127.e14. https://doi.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a73
APPENDIX E
org/10.1016/j.jpain.2009.03.009
Liu L, Huang QM, Liu QG, et al. Effectiveness of dry needling for 
myofascial trigger points associated with neck and shoulder pain: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2015;96:944-955. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2014.12.015
McCaskey MA, Schuster-Amft C, Wirth B, Suica Z, de Bruin ED. Ef-
fects of proprioceptive exercises on pain and function in chronic 
neck- and low back pain rehabilitation: a systematic literature 
review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014;15:382. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2474-15-382
Macaulay J, Cameron M, Vaughan B. The effectiveness of 
manual therapy for neck pain: a systematic review of the 
literature. Phys Ther Rev. 2007;12:261-267. https://doi.
org/10.1179/108331907X223038
McLean SM, Burton M, Bradley L, Littlewood C. Interventions for 
enhancing adherence with physiotherapy: a systematic re-
view. Man Ther. 2010;15:514-521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2010.05.012
Miller J, Gross A, D’Sylva J, et al. Manual therapy and exercise for 
neck pain: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2010;15:334-354. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2010.02.007
Monticone M, Ambrosini E, Cedraschi C, et al. Cognitive-behavioral 
treatment for subacute and chronic neck pain: a Cochrane 
Review. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1495-1504. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000001052
Nunes AM, Moita JP
. Effectiveness of physical and rehabilitation tech-
niques in reducing pain in chronic trapezius myalgia: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Int J Osteopath Med. 2015;18:189-206. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijosm.2015.03.004
O’Riordan C, Clifford A, Van De Ven P
, Nelson J. Chronic neck pain 
and exercise interventions: frequency, intensity, time, and type 
principle. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014;95:770-783. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apmr.2013.11.015
Ong J, Claydon LS. The effect of dry needling for myofascial trig-
ger points in the neck and shoulders: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Bodyw Mov Ther. 2014;18:390-398. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbmt.2013.11.009
Parreira PC, Costa LC, Hespanhol Junior LC, Lopes AD, Costa LO. 
Current evidence does not support the use of Kinesio Taping in 
clinical practice: a systematic review. J Physiother. 2014;60:31-39. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2013.12.008
Scholten-Peeters GG, Thoomes E, Konings S, et al. Is manipula-
tive therapy more effective than sham manipulation in adults 
: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Chiropr Man Therap. 
2013;21:34. https://doi.org/10.1186/2045-709X-21-34
Schroeder J, Kaplan L, Fischer DJ, Skelly AC. The outcomes of manip-
ulation or mobilization therapy compared with physical therapy 
or exercise for neck pain: a systematic review. Evid Based Spine 
Care J. 2013;4:30-41. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1341605
Southerst D, Nordin MC, Côté P
, et al. Is exercise effective for the 
management of neck pain and associated disorders or whiplash-
associated disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol 
for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 
2016;16:1503-1523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.02.014
Verhagen AP
, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, Burdorf A, Stynes SM, de Vet 
HC, Koes BW. Conservative interventions for treating work-
related complaints of the arm, neck or shoulder in adults. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD008742. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD008742.pub2
Vincent K, Maigne JY, Fischhoff C, Lanlo O, Dagenais S. System-
atic review of manual therapies for nonspecific neck pain. 
Joint Bone Spine. 2013;80:508-515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbspin.2012.10.006
Vernon HT
, Humphreys BK, Hagino CA. A systematic review of con-
servative treatments for acute neck pain not due to whiplash. 
J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2005;28:443-448. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2005.06.011
Walser RF
, Meserve BB, Boucher TR. The effectiveness of thoracic 
spine manipulation for the management of musculoskeletal 
conditions: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
clinical trials. J Man Manip Ther. 2009;17:237-246. https://doi.
org/10.1179/106698109791352085
Young JL, Walker D, Snyder S, Daly K. Thoracic manipulation versus 
mobilization in patients with mechanical neck pain: a systematic 
review. J Man Manip Ther. 2014;22:141-153. https://doi.org/10.117
9/2042618613Y.0000000043
Zronek M, Sanker H, Newcomb J, Donaldson M. The influence 
of home exercise programs for patients with non-specific or 
specific neck pain: a systematic review of the literature. J Man 
Manip Ther. 2016;24:62-73. https://doi.org/10.1179/204261861
3Y.0000000047
Neck Pain With Movement Coordination Impairments
Conlin A, Teasell R, Bhogal S, Sequeira K. Treatment of whiplash-
associated disorders - part I: non-invasive interventions. Pain Res 
Manag. 2005;10:21-32. https://doi.org/10.1155/2005/503704
Damgaard P
, Bartels EM, Ris I, Christensen R, Juul-Kristensen 
B. Evidence of physiotherapy interventions for patients with 
chronic neck pain: a systematic review of randomised con-
trolled trials. ISRN Pain. 2013;2013:567175. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/567175
Drescher K, Hardy S, MacLean J, Schindler M, Scott K, Harris SR. 
Efficacy of postural and neck-stabilization exercises for persons 
with acute whiplash-associated disorders: a systematic review. 
Physiother Can. 2008;60:215-223. https://doi.org/10.3138/
physio.60.3.215
Furlan AD, Malmivaara A, Chou R, et al. 2015 updated method 
guideline for systematic reviews in the Cochrane Back and Neck 
Group. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1660-1673. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000001061
Graham N, Gross AR, Carlesso LC, et al. An ICON over-
view on physical modalities for neck pain and associ-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a74  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX E
ated disorders. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:440-460. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010440
Gross A, Forget M, St George K, et al. Patient education for neck 
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD005106. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD005106.pub4
Gross A, Kay TM, Paquin JP
, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck dis-
orders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub5
Gross AR, Kaplan F
, Huang S, et al. Psychological care, patient 
education, orthotics, ergonomics and prevention strategies 
for neck pain: an systematic overview update as part of the 
ICON project. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:530-561. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010530
Haines T
, Gross A, Burnie SJ, Goldsmith CH, Perry L. Patient 
education for neck pain with or without radiculopathy. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD005106. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD005106.pub3
Hurwitz EL, Carragee EJ, van der Velde G, et al. Treatment of neck 
pain: noninvasive interventions: results of the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S123-S152. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181644b1d
Kabisch N. [Comparison of the effects of physiotherapeutic and al-
ternative treatment modalities in the case of whiplash-associated 
chronic problems]. manuelletherapie. 2008;12:216-225. https://
doi.org/10.1055/s-2008-1027973
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith C, Santaguida PL, Hoving J, Brønfort 
G. Exercises for mechanical neck disorders. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2005:CD004250. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD004250.pub3
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith CH, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck 
disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub4
McLean SM, Burton M, Bradley L, Littlewood C. Interventions for 
enhancing adherence with physiotherapy: a systematic re-
view. Man Ther. 2010;15:514-521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2010.05.012
Meeus M, Nijs J, Hamers V, Ickmans K, Oosterwijck JV. The efficacy of 
patient education in whiplash associated disorders: a systematic 
review. Pain Physician. 2012;15:351-361.
Miller J, Gross A, D’Sylva J, et al. Manual therapy and exercise for 
neck pain: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2010;15:334-354. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2010.02.007
O’Riordan C, Clifford A, Van De Ven P
, Nelson J. Chronic neck pain 
and exercise interventions: frequency, intensity, time, and type 
principle. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014;95:770-783. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apmr.2013.11.015
Parreira PC, Costa LC, Hespanhol Junior LC, Lopes AD, Costa LO. 
Current evidence does not support the use of Kinesio Taping in 
clinical practice: a systematic review. J Physiother. 2014;60:31-39. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2013.12.008
Shaw L, Descarreaux M, Bryans R, et al. A systematic review of chi-
ropractic management of adults with Whiplash-Associated Disor-
ders: recommendations for advancing evidence-based practice 
and research. Work. 2010;35:369-394. https://doi.org/10.3233/
WOR-2010-0996
Southerst D, Nordin MC, Côté P
, et al. Is exercise effective for the 
management of neck pain and associated disorders or whiplash-
associated disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol 
for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 
2016;16:1503-1523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.02.014
Sutton DA, Côté P
, Wong JJ, et al. Is multimodal care effective for the 
management of patients with whiplash-associated disorders or 
neck pain and associated disorders? A systematic review by the 
Ontario Protocol for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Col-
laboration. Spine J. 2016;16:1541-1565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
spinee.2014.06.019
Teasell RW, McClure JA, Walton D, et al. A research synthesis of thera-
peutic interventions for whiplash-associated disorder (WAD): part 
2 – interventions for acute WAD. Pain Res Manag. 2010;15:295-
304. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/640164
Teasell RW, McClure JA, Walton D, et al. A research synthesis of 
therapeutic interventions for whiplash-associated disorder 
(WAD): part 3 – interventions for subacute WAD. Pain Res Manag. 
2010;15:305-312. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/108685
Teasell RW, McClure JA, Walton D, et al. A research synthesis of 
therapeutic interventions for whiplash-associated disorder (WAD): 
part 4 – noninvasive interventions for chronic WAD. Pain Res 
Manag. 2010;15:313-322. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/487279
Vanti C, Bertozzi L, Gardenghi I, Turoni F
, Guccione AA, Pillastrini P
. 
Effect of taping on spinal pain and disability: systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Phys Ther. 2015;95:493-
506. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20130619
Verhagen AP
, Scholten-Peeters GG, van Wijngaarden S, de Bie RA, 
Bierma-Zeinstra SM. Conservative treatments for whiplash. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD003338. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD003338.pub3
Wong JJ, Côté P
, Shearer HM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for 
the management of conditions related to traffic collisions: a 
systematic review by the OPTIMa Collaboration. Disabil Rehabil. 
2015;37:471-489. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2014.932448
Yu H, Côté P
, Southerst D, et al. Does structured patient education 
improve the recovery and clinical outcomes of patients with neck 
pain? A systematic review from the Ontario Protocol for Traffic In-
jury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 2016;16:1524-
1540. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.03.039
Neck Pain With Headache
Bronfort G, Haas M, Evans R, Leininger B, Triano J. Effectiveness of 
manual therapies: the UK evidence report. Chiropr Osteopat. 
2010;18:3. https://doi.org/10.1186/1746-1340-18-3
Brønfort G, Nilsson N, Haas M, et al. Non-invasive physical treat-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a75
APPENDIX E
ments for chronic/recurrent headache. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2004:CD001878. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD001878.pub2
Carlesso LC, MacDermid JC, Santaguida PL, Thabane L. Determining 
adverse events in patients with neck pain receiving orthopaedic 
manual physiotherapy: a pilot and feasibility study. Physiother 
Can. 2013;65:255-265. https://doi.org/10.3138/ptc.2012-28
Chaibi A, Russell MB. Manual therapies for cervicogenic headache: a 
systematic review. J Headache Pain. 2012;13:351-359. https://doi.
org/10.1007
/s10194-012-0436-7
Fernández-de-las-Peñas C, Alonso-Blanco C, Cuadrado ML, Pareja 
JA. Spinal manipulative therapy in the management of cervi-
cogenic headache. Headache. 2005;45:1260-1263. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1526-4610.2005.00253_1.x
Furlan AD, Malmivaara A, Chou R, et al. 2015 updated method 
guideline for systematic reviews in the Cochrane Back and Neck 
Group. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1660-1673. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000001061
Gross A, Kay TM, Paquin JP
, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck dis-
orders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub5
Gross A, Langevin P
, Burnie SJ, et al. Manipulation and mobilisation 
for neck pain contrasted against an inactive control or another 
active treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015:CD004249. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004249.pub4
Gross AR, Goldsmith C, Hoving JL, et al. Conservative management 
of mechanical neck disorders: a systematic review. J Rheumatol. 
2007;34:1083-1102.
Gross AR, Kaplan F
, Huang S, et al. Psychological care, patient 
education, orthotics, ergonomics and prevention strategies 
for neck pain: an systematic overview update as part of the 
ICON project. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:530-561. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010530
Hurwitz EL, Carragee EJ, van der Velde G, et al. Treatment of neck 
pain: noninvasive interventions: results of the Bone and Joint 
Decade 2000-2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated 
Disorders. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008;33:S123-S152. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3181644b1d
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith CH, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck 
disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub4
McLean SM, Burton M, Bradley L, Littlewood C. Interventions for 
enhancing adherence with physiotherapy: a systematic re-
view. Man Ther. 2010;15:514-521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2010.05.012
Macaulay J, Cameron M, Vaughan B. The effectiveness of 
manual therapy for neck pain: a systematic review of the 
literature. Phys Ther Rev. 2007;12:261-267. https://doi.
org/10.1179/108331907X223038
Miller J, Gross A, D’Sylva J, et al. Manual therapy and exercise for 
neck pain: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2010;15:334-354. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2010.02.007
Racicki S, Gerwin S, DiClaudio S, Reinmann S, Donaldson M. 
Conservative physical therapy management for the treatment 
of cervicogenic headache: a systematic review. J Man Manip 
Ther. 2013;21:113-124. https://doi.org/10.1179/204261861
2Y.0000000025
Reid SA, Rivett DA. Manual therapy treatment of cervicogenic dizzi-
ness: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2005;10:4-13. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.math.2004.03.006
Varatharajan S, Ferguson B, Chrobak K, et al. Are non-invasive inter-
ventions effective for the management of headaches associated 
with neck pain? An update of the Bone and Joint Decade Task 
Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders by the Ontario 
Protocol for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collabora-
tion. Eur Spine J. 2016;25:1971-1999. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s00586-016-4376-9
Zronek M, Sanker H, Newcomb J, Donaldson M. The influence 
of home exercise programs for patients with non-specific or 
specific neck pain: a systematic review of the literature. J Man 
Manip Ther. 2016;24:62-73. https://doi.org/10.1179/204261861
3Y.0000000047
Neck Pain With Radiating Pain
Boyles R, Toy P
, Mellon J, Jr., Hayes M, Hammer B. Effectiveness of 
manual physical therapy in the treatment of cervical radiculopa-
thy: a systematic review. J Man Manip Ther. 2011;19:135-142. 
https://doi.org/10.1179/2042618611Y.0000000011
Furlan AD, Malmivaara A, Chou R, et al. 2015 updated method 
guideline for systematic reviews in the Cochrane Back and Neck 
Group. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015;40:1660-1673. https://doi.
org/10.1097
/BRS.0000000000001061
Graham N, Gross AR, Carlesso LC, et al. An ICON over-
view on physical modalities for neck pain and associ-
ated disorders. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:440-460. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010440
Gross A, Kay TM, Paquin JP
, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck dis-
orders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub5
Gross A, Langevin P
, Burnie SJ, et al. Manipulation and mobilisation 
for neck pain contrasted against an inactive control or another 
active treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015:CD004249. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004249.pub4
Gross AR, Goldsmith C, Hoving JL, et al. Conservative management 
of mechanical neck disorders: a systematic review. J Rheumatol. 
2007;34:1083-1102.
Gross AR, Kaplan F
, Huang S, et al. Psychological care, patient 
education, orthotics, ergonomics and prevention strategies 
for neck pain: an systematic overview update as part of the 
ICON project. Open Orthop J. 2013;7:530-561. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1874325001307010530
Kadhim-Saleh A, Maganti H, Ghert M, Singh S, Farrokhyar F
. Is low-
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a76  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX E
level laser therapy in relieving neck pain effective? Systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Rheumatol Int. 2013;33:2493-2501. 
https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00296-013-2742-z
Kay TM, Gross A, Goldsmith CH, et al. Exercises for mechanical neck 
disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012:CD004250. https://
doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004250.pub4
McLean SM, Burton M, Bradley L, Littlewood C. Interventions for 
enhancing adherence with physiotherapy: a systematic re-
view. Man Ther. 2010;15:514-521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2010.05.012
Rhee JM, Shamji MF
, Erwin WM, et al. Nonoperative management of 
cervical myelopathy: a systematic review. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 
2013;38:S55-S67. https://doi.org/10.1097
/BRS.0b013e3182a7f41d
Salt E, Wright C, Kelly S, Dean A. A systematic literature review 
on the effectiveness of non-invasive therapy for cervicobra-
chial pain. Man Ther. 2011;16:53-65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
math.2010.09.005
Southerst D, Nordin MC, Côté P
, et al. Is exercise effective for the 
management of neck pain and associated disorders or whiplash-
associated disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol 
for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. Spine J. 
2016;16:1503-1523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2014.02.014
Thoomes EJ, Scholten-Peeters W, Koes B, Falla D, Verhagen AP
. The 
effectiveness of conservative treatment for patients with cervical 
radiculopathy: a systematic review. Clin J Pain. 2013;29:1073-
1086. https://doi.org/10.1097
/
AJP
.0b013e31828441fb
Varatharajan S, Côté P
, Shearer HM, et al. Are work disability preven-
tion interventions effective for the management of neck pain or 
upper extremity disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario 
Protocol for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. 
J Occup Rehabil. 2014;24:692-708. https://doi.org/10.1007
/
s10926-014-9501-1
Zhu L, Wei X, Wang S. Does cervical spine manipulation reduce pain 
in people with degenerative cervical radiculopathy? A system-
atic review of the evidence, and a meta-analysis. Clin Rehabil. 
2016;30:145-155. https://doi.org/10.1177
/0269215515570382
Zronek M, Sanker H, Newcomb J, Donaldson M. The influence 
of home exercise programs for patients with non-specific or 
specific neck pain: a systematic review of the literature. J Man 
Manip Ther. 2016;24:62-73. https://doi.org/10.1179/204261861
3Y.0000000047
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a77
APPENDIX F
PROCEDURES FOR ASSIGNING LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
• Levels of evidence were assigned based on the study design, the 
quality of the study, and the quality of the primary sources (if the 
study is a systematic review or meta-analysis), using the Levels of 
Evidence table (TABLE 1).
• Quality of systematic reviews (or review of reviews) was assessed 
using a critical appraisal tool (AMSTAR, or the closely related SIGN 
II), and the review was assigned 1 of 4 overall quality ratings based 
on the critical appraisal results:
- High, AMSTAR or SIGN score of 8 or better
- Acceptable, AMSTAR or SIGN score of 6 or 7
- Low, AMSTAR or SIGN score of 4 or 5
- Very low, AMSTAR or SIGN score of less than 4 (Reviews scored 
very low were not used in this revision)
• Quality of primary sources was calibrated to a 4-level scale. If the 
quality of the primary sources were not available in the systematic 
review, or if the quality appraisal tool was unique or not familiar 
to the guideline authors, or if the quality ratings differed between 
reviews, the primary source was graded by the guideline authors  
using the GRADE system and methods described in the text. Sources 
receiving a rating of very low were not used in this guideline.
- GRADE system77
• Study starts with a “high” rating
• Downgrade at least 1 level for violations of
- Risk of bias
- Precision
- Directness
- publication bias
• Results in 4 levels of quality of evidence
- High
- moderate
- Low
- very low
- PEDro system (http://
abiebr.com/set/1-introduction-and- 
methodology/determining-levels-evidence)
• High, score of 9 or better
• moderate, score of 6 to 8
• Low, score of 4 or 5
• Very low, score of 3 or lower
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a78  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX G
AMSTAR SCORES*
Study
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Quality†
Included articles
Bertozzi et al10
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Boyles et al17
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Brønfort et al20
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
High
Bronfort et al19
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Brown et al21
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
Y
High
Cagnie et al22
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
High
Chaibi and Russell28
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
NA
N
Low
Clar et al30
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Conlin et al33
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Acceptable
Coronado et al36
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Cross et al41
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Damgaard et al44
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
High
Drescher et al49
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Fernández-de-las-Peñas 
et al59
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Ferreira et al60
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
NA
NA
N
N
Low
Furlan et al64
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Graham et al68
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Gross et al75
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Gross et al73
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Gross et al70
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Gross et al74
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Gross et al76
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Gross et al71
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Gross et al72
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Haines et al79
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Holly et al87
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Horn et al89
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Huisman et al92
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Hurwitz et al93
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Kabisch103
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Acceptable
Kadhim-Saleh et al104
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Kay et al108
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Kay et al109
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Kelly et al112
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Kietrys et al113
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Kroeling et al118
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Leaver et al119
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Acceptable
Lee et al120
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
High
Liu et al124
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Macaulay et al125
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Table continues on page A79.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a79
APPENDIX G
Study
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Quality†
MacDermid et al127
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
McCaskey et al134
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
McLean et al136
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Meeus et al138
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Miller et al140
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Monticone et al141
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Acceptable
Nunes and Moita152
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Ong and Claydon156
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
O’Riordan et al157
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
NA
N
N
Low
Parreira et al161
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Racicki et al163
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
NA
N
N
Low
Reid and Rivett167
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Rhee et al169
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Rubio-Ochoa et al176
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Salt et al178
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Schellingerhout et al180
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Schellingerhout et al181
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Moderate
Scholten-Peeters et al182
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Shaw et al186
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Snodgrass et al189
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
Southerst et al190
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
NA
N
N
Low
Stanton et al192
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Sutton et al200
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Takasaki and May202
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Teasell et al203
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Teasell et al204
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Teasell et al205
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Thoomes et al208
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Vanti et al216
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
van Trijffel et al217
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Varatharajan et al219
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Varatharajan et al220
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Verhagen et al223
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Verhagen et al221
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Vernon et al226
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Vincent et al229
Y
N
Nr
N
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Low
Walser et al231
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Acceptable
Williams et al238
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
Y
Y
NA
N
Y
Low
Wong et al240
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
High
Young et al244
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Yu et al245
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Zhu et al246
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
AMSTAR SCORES* (CONTINUED)
Table continues on page A80.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a80  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX G
Study
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Quality†
Zronek et al247
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
High
Excluded articles
Ainpradub et al
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Ambrosio et al
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
High
Bervoets et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Clay et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Ernst et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
Acceptable
Ernst et al
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Very low
Fernández-de-las-Peñas 
et al
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
NA
N
N
Low
France et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
Franke et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Furlan et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Garcia et al
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
N
N
NA
N
Y
Low
Hug et al
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Low 
Jang et al
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Kim et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
NA
N
Y
Acceptable
Kroeling et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
High
Lee et al
N
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
Very low
Lu et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
High
MacPherson et al
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
Low
Mao et al
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Very low
Misailidou et al
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
NA
N
N
Very low
Moon et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
Murphy et al
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
NA
N
N
Very low
Rodine et al
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
N
NA
NA
N
N
Very low
Ruston et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
High
Schroeder et al
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Very low
Sihawong et al
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Trinh et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Vernon et al
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
NA
N
N
Very low
Wanderley et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
N
Acceptable
Yuan et al
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Acceptable
Wei et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
NA
N
Y
High
Wiangkham et al
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
y
y
Y
Y
N
N
High
Zarghooni et al
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
NA
N
N
Very low
Abbreviations: N, no; NA, not applicable; Y, yes.
*Yes/no. Items: 1, the study addresses a clearly defined research question; 2, at least two people should select studies and extract data; 3, a comprehensive litera-
ture search is carried out; 4, the authors clearly state if or how they limited their review by publication type; 5, the included and excluded studies are listed; 6, 
the characteristics of the included studies are provided; 7, the scientific quality of the included studies is assessed and documented; 8, yhe scientific quality of 
the included studies was assessed appropriately; 9, appropriate methods are used to combine the individual study findings; 10, the likelihood of publication 
bias is assessed; 11, conflicts of interest are declared.
†Quality rating: 8 or higher, high; 6 or 7, acceptable; 5 or 4, low; 3 or below, very low.
AMSTAR SCORES* (CONTINUED)
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a81
APPENDIX H
(A) Dangerous Mechanism = Fall from ≥3 ft/5 stairs, axial load, MVC at >60 mph or rollover or ejection, motorized recreational vehicle acci-
dent, bicycle collision.
(B) Simple Rear-End MVC excludes pushed into on-coming traffic, hit by bus or large truck, rollover, hit by high speed vehicle
(C) Delayed onset neck pain = No immediate onset after trauma
(D) At time of derivation, radiograph was chosen imaging. Now, American College of Radiology recommends computed tomography, if positive 
on criteria.
Reproduced from Elliott JM, Dayanidhi S, Hazle C, et al. Advancements in imaging technology: do they (or will they) equate to advancements in 
our knowledge of recovery in whiplash? J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2016;46:862-873. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2016.6735
Sensitivity, Specificity, and Negative Predictive Values of the Canadian Cervical Spine Rules and the NEXUS Low-Risk Criteria for 162 Cases of 
“Clinically Important” Injury in 7438 Patients32,85,160,196,197
IMAGING CONDITIONS FOR SUSPECTED SPINE TRAUMA FROM THE AMERICAN COLLEGE  
OF RADIOLOGY APPROPRIATENESS CRITERIA
Able to rotate neck 45° left 
and right?
Able to rotate neck 45° left 
and right?
Any high-risk factor?
• Age ≥65 y, or
• Dangerous mechanism 
(A), or
• Upper extremity 
paresthesia
Any high-risk factor?
• Age ≥65 y, or
• Dangerous mechanism 
(A), or
• Upper extremity 
paresthesia
Imaging (D)
Imaging (D)
Any low-risk factor allowing 
range-of-motion 
assessment?
• Simple rear-end motor 
vehicle collision (B), or
• Sitting position in external 
rotation, or
• Ambulatory at any 
time, or
• Delayed-onset neck pain 
(C) , or
• Absence of midline 
cervical spine tenderness
Any low-risk factor allowing 
range-of-motion 
assessment?
• Simple rear-end motor 
vehicle collision (B), or
• Sitting position in external 
rotation, or
• Ambulatory at any 
time, or
• Delayed-onset neck pain 
(C) , or
• Absence of midline 
cervical spine tenderness
No imaging (D)
No imaging (D)
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
a82  |  july 2017  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy
APPENDIX H
Decision Rule
Yes
No
Yes
No
Positive
161
3995
147
4599
Negative
1
3281
15
2677
Sensitivity, %*
99.4 (96, 100)
90.7 (85, 94)
Specificity, %*
45.1 (44, 46)
36.8 (36, 88)
Negative predictive value, %
100.0
99.4
Abbreivation: NEXUS, National Emergency X-Radiography Utilization Study.
*Values in parentheses are 95% confidence interval.
Interests that were disclosed include financial interests and secondary interests (eg, personal, academic, political).
Author
Competing Interests
Disclosures
Peter Blanpied
None known
None known
Anita Gross
ICON - International Collaboration on Neck - I am a lead and 
reviewer within this body of work.
COG - Cervical Overview Group contributing to a series of 
systematic reviews for Neck Pain in Cochrane Collaboration - I 
am the coordinator and reviewer on primary systematic reviews 
on this topic.
None known
James Elliott
JOSPT - Board of Directors - Advisory Member
JOSPT - International Editorial Board
Spine - Advisory Board Member
Musculoskeletal Science and Practice (formerly Manual Therapy) 
- International Advisory Board
NIHR01HD079076 - NICHD/NCMRR
Partial ownership/investment interest 
in Pain ID, LLC (a medical-consulting 
start-up).
Laurie Devaney
None known
None known
Derek Clewley
None known
None known
David Walton
ICON - International Consensus on Neck Pain, Prognosis section 
lead reviewer
Journal of Musculoskeletal Science and Practice (formerly 
Manual Therapy) - Associate Editor
JOSPT - International Editor
International Association for the Study of Pain - Education 
Special Interest Group Secretary
Owner/Operator - David Walton Rehabilita-
tion Education, Consulting and Research
Cheryl Sparks
None known
None known
Eric Robertson
None known
None known
Peter Blanpied coordinated the Neck Pain CPG Revision, secured limited funding, coordinated and collated searches and search results, organized 
retrieval of papers, screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
Anita Gross coordinated and collated searches and search results, organized retrieval of papers, screened and appraised papers, extracted 
data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
James Elliott screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
Canadian Cervical Spine Rule
NEXUS Low-Risk Criteria
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
 Neck Pain: Clinical Practice Guidelines Revision 2017
journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy  |  volume 47  |  number 7  |  july 2017  |  a83
APPENDIX H
Laurie Devaney screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
Derek Clewley screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
David Walton screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
Cheryl Sparks screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
Eric Robertson screened and appraised papers, extracted data from papers, analyzed and interpreted data, provided a methodological, clinical, 
and end-user perspective, and wrote the revision.
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on June 2, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
