 PAPER
Epistemic injustice in healthcare encounters:
evidence from chronic fatigue syndrome
Charlotte Blease,1,2 Havi Carel,3 Keith Geraghty4
ABSTRACT
Chronic fatigue syndrome or myalgic encephalomyelitis
(CFS/ME) remains a controversial illness category. This
paper surveys the state of knowledge and attitudes
about this illness and proposes that epistemic concerns
about the testimonial credibility of patients can be
articulated using Miranda Fricker’s concept of epistemic
injustice. While there is consensus within mainstream
medical guidelines that there is no known cause of CFS/
ME, there is continued debate about how best to
conceive of CFS/ME, including disagreement about how
to interpret clinical studies of treatments. Against this
background, robust qualitative and quantitative research
from a range of countries has found that many doctors
(and medical students) display uncertainty about whether
CFS/ME is real, which may result in delays in diagnosis
and treatment for patients. Strikingly, qualitative research
evinces that patients with CFS/ME often experience
suspicion by healthcare professionals, and many patients
vocally oppose the effectiveness, and the
conceptualisation, of their illness as psychologically
treatable. We address the intersection of these issues
and healthcare ethics, and claim that this state of affairs
can be explained as a case of epistemic injustice (2007).
We find evidence that healthcare consultations are fora
where patients with CFS/ME may be particularly
vulnerable to epistemic injustice. We argue that the
(often unintentional) marginalisation of many patients is
a professional failure that may lead to further ethical and
practical consequences both for progressive research into
CFS/ME, and for ethical care and delivery of current
treatments among individuals suffering from this
debilitating illness.
INTRODUCTION
Chronic fatigue syndrome or myalgic encephalomy-
elitis (CFS/ME),i also known as ME, is a contested
illness domain: even how we label the disorder is
disputed by clinicians, diagnosticians and patient
groups.1 During the 1980s and 1990s, the media
coined the term ‘yuppie flu’, characterising suf-
ferers as ‘stressed out professionals’ unable to cope
with the fast pace of life. However, CFS/ME is
more thoroughly understood to be a disabling,
debilitating condition of prolonged unexplained
fatigue lasting 6 months or longer, together with
other symptoms, such as postexertional malaise,
cognitive problems and pain;2 many persons with
CFS/ME
become
homebound
and
bedbound.
Many
patients
are
vulnerable
to
anxiety
and
depression,ii 3 4 indeed, there is evidence that CFS/
ME impinges on quality of life to a greater extent
than
other chronic
illnesses
including
cancer.5
Evidence also shows that CFS/ME does not respect
socioeconomic status (undermining the ‘yuppie flu’
epithet) with evidence that the condition is more
common among females than males.6 Current esti-
mates indicate that around 2.5 million people
suffer from CFS/ME in the USA, with around
250 000 sufferers in the UK.7
Today, CFS/ME is a condition that mainstream
medical science has yet to explain in terms of aeti-
ology or pathophysiology. While there is consensus
that CFS/ME is a chronic illness, controversy exists
over how to conceive of the illness and how to
interpret the evidence base for treatments. Studies
report that many sufferers report negative encoun-
ters with doctors with significant numbers of
patients
feeling
dissatisfied,
disbelieved
and
distressed.8
W
e suggest that the complaint that healthcare
professionals fail to take seriously these patient
reports amounts to an epistemic concern that can
be brought to light most effectively using Miranda
Fricker’s concept of epistemic injustice. Fricker9
has argued that epistemology is deeply entwined
with ethics. For Fricker, the sharing and production
of knowledge is a valued good: as such, inequalities
in legitimate access to such knowledge and to par-
ticipation in knowledge formation constitute an
ethical wrong leading to primary and secondary
harms. Fricker classifies these wrongs and harms as
‘epistemic injustice’. Developing its application,
Havi Carel and Ian Kidd have recently argued that
Fricker’s framework provides a fruitful perspective
for analysing the distinctive epistemic injustice that
may arise within the healthcare arena, and in par-
ticular in healthcare consultations, medical educa-
tion and policymaking.10 11 This paper applies this
theoretical framework to the case of CFS/ME and
examines the ethical repercussions of the deep dif-
ferences between lay and healthcare professional
perspectives on this illness.
In this paper, we suggest that there is empirical
evidence to substantiate the claim that patients with
CFS/ME are indeed being negatively stereotyped in
ways that unfairly deflate their credibility and that
iIn
this
paper,
we
acknowledge
that
there
is
no
uncontroversial name for the illness but in the interests of
consistency, we refer to the illness as chronic fatigue
syndrome or ‘CFS/ME’.
iiA recent study in The Lancet Psychiatry reported that the
suicide rate among individuals with CFS/ME in the UK is
six times greater than in the general population.4
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
   549
Clinical ethics
To cite: Blease C, Carel H, 
Geraghty K. J Med Ethics 
2017;43:549–557.
1School of Philosophy, University 
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
2Program in Placebo Studies, 
Harvard Medical School, Harvard 
University, Boston, USA
3School of Philosophy, University 
of Bristol, Bristol, UK
4Centre for Primary Care, 
University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Charlotte Blease, Centre for 
Medical Humanities, University 
of Leeds, Humanities Research 
Institute, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK;  
 
charlotteblease@ 
gmail. 
com
Received 18 May 2016
Revised 30 October 2016
Accepted 11 November 2016
Published Online First 
5 December 2016
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 they also suffer disadvantage due to lack of shared hermeneut-
ical resources through which to frame and interpret their experi-
ences. Importantly, such epistemic injustice, when playing itself
out in the healthcare arena, has significant consequences for
patient care, as we argue in ‘Epistemic injustice leads to patient
harm’ section. W
e claim that an analysis of empirical studies of
patient and healthcare professional attitudes is required in order
to reveal epistemic injustice. This epistemic injustice, we argue,
is also bound with other forms of injustice in the healthcare
arena, and hence uncovering it has broader significance to our
understanding of healthcare, patienthood and the relationships,
epistemic and otherwise, between patient and healthcare profes-
sionals. The injustices we identify and discuss in the paper are
epistemically and ethically bad, but they are also clinically bad
in ways that are important to consider.
The structure of the paper is as follows. W
e begin with an
overview of the state of knowledge of CFS/ME in medicine,
encompassing
international
mainstream
medical
consensus
about the explanatory gap with respect to the causes of CFS/
ME, as well as prominent clinical disagreements about the value
of treatments. Following this, we outline Fricker’s account of
epistemic injustice which describes how social practices entangle
epistemic and ethical dimensions. In this section, we define
Fricker’s key concepts of testimonial injustice and hermeneutical
injustice
which—as
Fricker
has
argued—may
infringe
on
medical professionalism and lead to patient harm.9 More specif-
ically, we suggest that the aetiological and nosological uncer-
tainty of CFS/ME arguably affects healthcare professionals’ tacit
judgements of the testimonies of those reporting CFS/ME symp-
toms. Our claim is that in this case an uncertainty about the
condition translates into uncertainty about its sufferers. This, we
argue, is where the epistemic injustice arises in the case of CFS/
ME.
It is also important to emphasise from the outset that testimo-
nial and hermeneutical practices (which can be characterised
roughly as giving information to others and making sense of
one’s experiences) are foundational social-epistemic practices,
both within medical practice and beyond it. Thus, a concern
about epistemic injustice is not merely a narrow medical or bio-
ethical concern, but a broad and pervasive problem that has par-
ticular ethical consequences, in terms of suffering, health
inequality and medical treatment, when it plays itself out in the
healthcare arena (for a full discussion of epistemic injustice in
healthcare, see Carel and Kidd and Kidd and Carel).10 11
Next, we present qualitative and quantitative studies of
patients’ and doctors’ attitudes towards CFS/ME (including
respective experiences of CFS/ME and understanding of the
condition). W
e find that a range of evidence appears to corrob-
orate the possibility of recurrent testimonial and hermeneutical
injustice among patients with CFS/ME in some healthcare
encounters. The paper concludes with discussion of the ethical
implications of epistemic injustice for patients with CFS/ME,
including recommendations for how healthcare professionals
and patients might reduce the risk of epistemic injustice. W
e end
by suggesting that if epistemic justice is a professional virtue of
healthcare professionals, and required for the exercise of other
medical-professional duties and virtues, then epistemic justice
ought to be the focus of further reflection for professional
ethical practice in healthcare and in particular in CFS/ME.
CFS/ME: THE UNEXPLAINED, CONTESTED ILLNESS
The aetiology and pathogenesis of CFS/ME remain unknown
and there are no laboratory or diagnostic tests to identify suf-
ferers and no known cures for CFS/ME.12 While medical
authorities recognise that CFS/ME exists, the lack of a specific
and sensitive diagnostic test and clearly defined diagnostic cri-
teria has hampered research on pathogenesis, treatment and
conceptualisation of CFS/ME as a distinct entity.13
Explanatory models of CFS/ME
T
wo broad approaches to the aetiology of CFS/ME dominate
current research: a biopsychosocial model (hereafter ‘BPS’) and
biomedical theories of the illness.14 A number of prominent psy-
chiatrists in the UK propose that CFS/ME is a multifaceted
illness, which results from an interaction between biology,
psychology and social conditions. Theoretically, at least, on this
BPS model, it is hypothesised that CFS/ME is the result of an
(as yet unknown) biological vulnerability and/or trigger, but the
illness may be perpetuated by abnormal illness beliefs with
somatisation of bodily sensations among patients.15 Proponents
of this model contend that cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
is therapeutically important in helping patients to alter ‘unhelp-
ful illness beliefs’ and that graded exercise therapy (GET) may
help to alter ‘fear avoidance behaviours’, thereby progressively
engaging patients in physical activities.15
Biomedical models of the illness include a wide range of the-
ories including hypotheses that CFS/ME is a cellular level dys-
function, immune system disorder, muscular system disorder, an
inflammatory condition and/or a neurological dysfunction.16 17
Ambiguities over psychological treatments
T
o date, there is consensus among clinical researchers that no
research programme has resulted in a cure for CFS/ME.
However, unlike biomedical theories, the BPS model has led to
treatment recommendations that have been endorsed in the UK
by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) and the National Health Service.18 19 Indeed, in the
UK, in the last 10 years health and government bodies have
invested considerable sums into testing the effectiveness of CBT
and GET treatments for CFS/ME. In 2011, the largest clinical
trial in the UK on CFS/ME known as the ‘PACE trial’iii (part-
funded by the Department for W
ork and Pensions, the NHS
and the Medical Research Council) attracted almost £5 million
of funding, but the published results have been controversial.
The PACE trial compared CBT
, GET and pacing (pacing refers
to ‘doing things within physical limits and not exerting oneself
if one feels unwell’) with standard medical care and reported a
20%+ recovery rate with CBT-GET
.20
This
trial
has
faced
a
number
of
serious
criticisms.21
Commentators have argued that ‘recovery’ did not mean return
to full functional status and critics have pointed out that the
positive results were not mirrored in so-called objective mea-
sures of functional ability (eg, walking tests).22–24 Recently, a
Cochrane Review of psychotherapies, including CBT for func-
tional syndromes concluded that there was only weak to moder-
ate improvement outcomes for patients with CFS/ME.25 In
September 2016, concerns with the PACE trial culminated in a
court tribunal which ruled that investigators must release trial
data. The data released now show that the previously published,
purported benefits of CBT and GET have a much lower efficacy
than previously thought. In addition to these concerns, the
limited (and so far, controversial) outcomes of the trial have not
yet been successfully replicated.22 Finally, some very recent
iiiPACE stands for Pacing, graded Activity and Cognitive behaviour
therapy: a randomised Evaluation.
550
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 reviews conclude that CBT and GET may be harmful, exacerbat-
ing symptoms of CFS/ME.iv 23 24
In the UK, the NICE and NHS guidelines reflect the
unknown causes of CFS/ME, and the ambiguities about treat-
ment options.18 19 For example, among other advice, NICE
asserts that, ‘your healthcare professional should recognise that
your condition is real and how the symptoms are affecting you;
give you information about CFS/ME, the treatments and care
described in this information’.18 Among a list of advice on treat-
ments—including CBT and GET—it notes that, ‘If you are
offered CBT
, it does not mean that your healthcare professionals
think your symptoms are in your head’.18 Similarly, the NHS
Choices website (providing information about illnesses and
treatments) asserts that there is no known cause for CFS/ME,
and that various theories have been proposed (including viral
infections, problems with the immune system and psychological
causes).19 The NHS further advises that ‘an individual pro-
gramme of treatment should be offered to you’, and again lists
CBT and GET as possible treatments.19 It asserts, for example,
that CBT may help patients to ‘manage CFS/ME by changing
the way (you) think and behave’, emphasising that ‘the use of
CBT does not mean that CFS/ME is considered to be a psycho-
logical condition’.19 This advice seems to advocate psychological
treatment as well as acknowledging the somatic nature of
CFS/ME.
Explanations for patient dissatisfaction
The previous two sections gave a brief overview of the current
clinical state-of-the-art knowledge of CFS/ME. W
e now provide
an account of how aetiological and nosological uncertainties
about the condition negatively affect judgements of patients
with CFS/ME, ultimately providing the basis for epistemic
injustice. As we show, despite the relative evenhandedness of the
UK guidelines in their conceptualisation of CFS/ME, some
research has emphasised an explicit schism between patient
advocacy groups and medical authorities over how to conceive
CFS/ME.8
26
27 For example, in a recent literature review,
Hossenbaccus and White argued that patient groups and
medical authorities in the UK differ considerably in their atti-
tudes towards CFS/ME.27 Using a content analysis of newspaper
articles, patient organisation websites and medical websites, text-
books and selected articles regarding ME (CFS/ME) found that,
‘89 per cent of patient groups considered the illness to be phys-
ical […] compared with 24% of medical authorities’.27 Like
other researchers, they contend that this discrepancy in views
leads to disagreement in medical encounters, and in turn, this
disagreement causes patient dissatisfaction.8 27–29
W
e identify three problems with the methodology in this
study. First, the content analysis of ‘medical authorities’ in the
survey by Hossenbaccus and White is overinclusive.27 Their
study goes beyond the NICE and NHS guidelines to include
text books, and selected ‘recommended reading lists’ (articles).
However, the literature classified under the rubric ‘medical
authorities’ is arguably vulnerable to selection bias since the
recommended reading lists were obtained from the hospitals in
which the authors taught (St. Bart’s and the London Medical
School) and it is at least conceivable that the lists may have been
weighted more heavily in favour of BPS models of CFS/ME.
Second, perhaps more substantially, it is unclear what this lit-
erature review shows about disagreement: as we have seen, the
symptomatology of CFS/ME often includes both physical and
cognitive dysfunctions (including, eg, impaired memory) and
there is consensus in the NICE and NHS guidelines in the UK
that the causes of CFS/ME remain a mystery, and that there is
no agreed explanatory model for the illness.18 19 Thus, it is
unclear whether the literature review reflects differences in
beliefs with respect to physical versus mental symptoms, differ-
ences in explanations for the causes of the illness or differences
with respect to the treatment level (including, perhaps, its effect-
iveness). While there may indeed be substantial differences
between patient groups and doctors, the review methodology is
too coarse-grained to form the basis for firm conclusions.
Third, while it may be the case that some (perhaps even
many) patients and doctors in fact disagree over explicit concep-
tualisations of CFS/ME, we contend that the causes of patient
dissatisfaction are likely to be subtler and more complex than a
straightforward intellectual or taxonomical dispute.v Instead, we
explore the claim that patient dissatisfaction may arise from: (i)
the implicit and explicit negative stereotyping of patients
leading to the downgrading of patient reports on their condition
(what Fricker calls ‘testimonial injustice’) and (ii) conceptual
impoverishment about CFS/ME within healthcare, giving rise to
a lack of a framework within which to account for CFS/ME
(which Fricker terms ‘hermeneutical injustice’).9 In the remain-
der of the paper, we develop these two claims. Before we do
that, it is necessary to examine Fricker’s account of epistemic
injustice in more detail.
EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE
The notion of epistemic injustice points to a specific kind of
injustice done to someone in their capacity as a knower, that is,
unfair treatment that takes place in the context of distinctively
epistemic practices and activities.9 Fricker suggests two founda-
tional kinds of discriminative epistemic injustice, testimonial and
hermeneutical, which are discussed below. Before we turn to
these, it is important to note that subsequent work by Fricker
and others has identified many subforms within the two kinds
of epistemic injustice, testimonial and hermeneutical. W
e do not
discuss these in detail here.
Testimonial injustice
Fricker proposes that testimonial injustice occurs when a
speaker is unfairly accorded a lower level of credibility as a
result of prejudice—centrally, prejudice concerning their mem-
bership of a negatively stereotyped group. In such circum-
stances, a listener (implicitly and/or explicitly) interprets the
speaker to have a diminished capacity qua testifier and bearer of
knowledge (eg, they may view the speaker as untrustworthy or
unreliable due to prejudice). The result is that the speaker’s con-
tribution to the shared epistemic enterprise is unjustly excluded,
dismissed or relegated to a lower status as a result of negative
stereotyping associated with some of the speaker’s character-
istics (eg, race, accent, age, gender, disability). It is important to
ivA 2015 patient survey of 1428 patients conducted by the ME
Association found that CBT had minimal impact on illness symptoms
with 88% individuals reporting that GET had no positive impact or an
adverse impact on symptoms. ME Association (May 2015) ‘ME/CFS/
ME Illness Management Survey Results: No decisions about me without
me’, Patient Survey (Accessed 18 May 2016).
vIndeed, we argue that should any such intellectual disagreement in fact
be a direct source of patient dissatisfaction, this also necessitates further
investigation
since
it
suggests
that
medical
communication
and
disclosure within the consultation may be failing, and potentially leading
to patient harm.
551
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 note that testimonial injustice can occur both to those who are
or who are not perceived as being members of such groups.
Fricker claims that the individual suffers an epistemic insult or
injustice, and that since the discrediting occurs in a social arena,
the individual is also thereby dehumanised—degraded as a con-
tributor of knowledge. She argues, “a speaker suffers testimonial
injustice just if prejudice on the hearer’s part causes him to give
the speaker less credibility than he would otherwise have
given”.9
A growing body of work has suggested that individuals
suffering from ill health are more vulnerable to testimonial
injustice, and this vulnerability exists across the different stages
and epistemic practices of medical work.10 11 30–32 There is a
risk of testimonial injustice when, for example, the inadvertent
negative stereotyping of an illness or disability (on the part of a
healthcare professional) constrains the patient’s epistemic contri-
bution to consultations, and wider conversations, about their
condition.
It is important to emphasise that we do not object to the
justified level of epistemic privilege that individuals (such as
healthcare professionals) have owed to their training. Rather, we
propose that patients (and other marginalised groups and indivi-
duals) have a different kind of epistemic privilege that also
deserves to be recognised and respected. As Carel has argued,
conceptions of the lived experience of chronic illness are under-
represented in healthcare theory and practice in ways that can
unfairly obscure certain forms of epistemic privilege that
patients might possess.33 Respect for multiple domains of
knowledge ensures a collaborative working relationship in
healthcare encounters. Moreover, there is also scope for trans-
gression of these boundaries: patients can be experts in their
own condition (eg, researching clinical trials of treatments, the
causes of their illness and so on); and doctors may have deep
personal insights into illness experiences.34 35 Injustice arises
with respect to epistemic privilege when one group fails to rec-
ognise the unique expertise of another group, or when an indi-
vidual fails to fully appreciate the epistemic contributions of
another individual.
In summation, in the medical context, unwarranted epistemic
privilege can be accorded to either group (healthcare profes-
sionals and patients); however, it is patients who have most to
lose from the effects of such epistemic skewing. W
e do not
claim that all ill persons are de facto epistemically reliable, but
that negative stereotypes attached to illness give rise to certain
biases about ill people, which make them more vulnerable to
epistemic injustice.11 Certain illnesses may impair the cognitive
judgements and insights of patients (eg, dementia, psychoses or
certain brain injuries). It is certainly true that patients may
dispute medical facts on ill-judged grounds; yet, even in such
cases the patient may be vulnerable to epistemic injustice. This
is because judgements about credibility are elicited and sustained
by prejudicial
stereotypes. The systematic
undermining
of
patient testimony ‘can lead to a vicious circle of increasing frus-
tration, leading to more extreme styles of expression, which in
turn lead to further epistemic disenfranchisement’.11
Hermeneutical injustice
Whereas testimonial injustice is perpetrated by individuals,
Fricker defines hermeneutical injustice as a collective shortfall in
our shared conceptual resources: in this way, she defines her-
meneutical injustice as a structural problem.9 Hermeneutic prac-
tice (making sense of our own and others’ social experiences)
are fundamental to our social life and requires access to relevant
resources
(eg,
concepts,
ideas,
narratives).
Hermeneutical
injustice takes place when those resources are absent or impo-
verished or when one cannot fairly access them: it can be char-
acterised as a failure by the members of one or more social
groups to employ or to develop the shared hermeneutical
resources necessary for mutual understanding of some set of dis-
tinctive social experiences. Fricker contends that hermeneutic
injustice takes place when ‘both speaker and hearer are labour-
ing under the same inadequate tools’.9 For Fricker, such her-
meneutical
shortcomings
may
impinge
asymmetrically
on
particular groups of people negatively affecting one group yet
often conferring an advantage on another group. Hermeneutical
injustice occurs when hermeneutic resources are absent or impo-
verished, but it can also arise when such resources not respected
and/or ignored by members of other social groups.vi
Fricker uses the example of sexual harassment in an era when
the labelling (the very conceptualisation of such occurrences as
abuse) was either uncommon or simply did not occur: the
upshot was that victims struggled to interpret, comprehend and
articulate their experiences.9 She contends that this kind of con-
ceptual impoverishment is more likely to affect members of
marginalised or oppressed groups, and amounts to a ‘cognitive
disadvantage’.9 The collective conceptual gap occurs because
marginalised individuals have unequal access to the arena of
shared, social interpretation. In the case of sexual harassment,
there may even be a sense in which conceptual inarticulacy on
the part of the victim suits the purposes of the perpetrator.
In the healthcare context, hermeneutical practices play a sig-
nificant role. They enable sense-making reflective activity on the
part of patients, helping to turn a bewildering and frightening
set of symptoms into an understandable illness, often with an
aetiological explanation and a treatment protocol. Other prac-
tices support other kinds of medical activity, such as supporting
patients in self-management of chronic illness, understanding
issues around non-compliance and physician mistrust and of
course the epistemic labour involved in providing a diagnosis.
Thus, the hermeneutical resources relevant to healthcare and
illness are having concepts of health, illness and disease, posi-
tioning illness narratives within a social context and enabling an
interpretation of negative bodily experiences, such as pain.
Hermeneutical
injustice can
lead to
lack of resources
in
researching and treating patients with particular illnesses or dis-
abilities; it can also result in inferior interpersonal care of
patients; in other cases, the marginalised group may recognise
their disadvantage, and discern their systematic exclusion from
formal medical discourse and medical and policy decision
making. A salient and tragic case is that of AIDS research in the
1980s, which was delayed and obstructed by the Republican
government’s refusal to recognise the medical urgency and legit-
imacy of AIDS sufferers’ complaints.36
Kidd and Carel describe two kinds of strategies that may
underpin hermeneutical injustice. It should be pointed out that
these strategies refer to social and epistemic practices and are
thereby neutral with respect to whether such practices arise
from conscious intention or unconscious bias. ‘Strategies of
exclusion’ “take the form of excluding a currently hermeneutic-
ally marginalized group from the practices and places where
social meanings are made and legitimated, such as professional
committees or legislative bodies”.11 p. 12 Such exclusion can
range ‘from physical exclusion to subtler forms of epistemic
exclusion, such as the procedural insistence on the employment
viW
e thank an anonymous reviewer for providing clarification on this
point.
552
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 of strenuous legal, medical, or academic terminologies and con-
ventions, so as to exclude those who are not members of those
groups from participating in deliberative processes’.11 p. 12 In
such cases, as Kidd and Carel point out, the ill persons may be
able to describe their experiences of illness (typically in non-
expert terms), but ‘such experiences are: (a) largely considered
inappropriate for public discussion and (b) play little or no role
in clinical decision-making’.11
Marginalised groups may also be subject to ‘strategies of
expression’ in which their particular forms of expression are
taken as evidence of the group’s lack of rationality and lack of
understanding of the modes of expression that are recognised as
appropriate by the dominant group. Here, a form of expression
that a marginalised group ‘uses in its efforts to make the case
for the recognition of its hermeneutical resources can serve to
undermine those very efforts. And this can lead to a vicious
circle of increasing frustration, leading to more extreme styles of
expression, which in turn lead to further epistemic disenfran-
chisement’.11 p. 13.
The mobilisation of these two strategies results in an epi-
stemic insult towards the speaker, who is not perceived as ‘fully
rational’9 and imposes a double injury on the patient: the
patient is marginalised for her testimony when that testimony
involves a degree of inarticulacy. Patients are also excluded from
engagement in the activities that would help enhance knowledge
of their illness, and which could improve articulacy of the
illness experience. In this way, hermeneutical injustice (exclusion
from the structural processes of knowledge formation) may also
intensify testimonial injustice and vice versa.
USING EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE TO UNDERSTAND THE
EXPERIENCES OF SUFFERERS OF CFS/ME
Analysis of the scope of epistemic injustice among patients with
CFS/ME is intrinsically fraught with difficulties. For example,
some patients may not be aware they have been the victims of
negative stereotyping and testimonial injustice (perhaps they
expect the medical profession to assume a paternalistic tone, or
are embarrassed to admit this in surveys). Alternatively, some
patients may not realise they have been victims of hermeneutical
injustice simply because they have failed to receive a diagnosis of
CFS/ME. Perhaps we can generalise and suggest that a speaker will
not be able to recognise fully that they have been a victim of epi-
stemic injustice until they have the concept in hand. Nonetheless,
from the 1980s to the present day, there have been a number of
qualitative and quantitative studies that provide foundational
research about healthcare professionals’ and patients’ attitudes
towards CFS/ME. In this section, we examine how empirical find-
ings support the epistemic injustice framework we propose, and
suggest that these findings show that CFS/ME is negatively stereo-
typed in ways that introduce unjust credibility deficits. W
e also
suggest that this framework can shed light on the high levels of dis-
satisfaction reported by patients with CFS/ME.
It is worth reiterating that built into diagnostic descriptions
by NICE and the NHS (to date) is an acknowledgement that the
causes of CFS/ME are not yet understood, and treatments
(where offered) may help to manage CFS/ME, but there are no
known cures for the illness. Formally at least, it would appear
that conceptual resources for identifying and understanding
CFS/ME are in place in mainstream healthcare (even in spite of
ongoing controversies into the evidence base for CBT and
GET); although where conceptual resources are absent or
ambiguous, this may point to a possible source of hermeneutical
injustice. W
e also seek to identify other sources of hermeneutical
injustice and of testimonial injustice, as each has distinct sources
and forms and it is important not to conflate them.
Evidence from the medical community
Despite official medical guidelines, a range of studies appear to
suggest that general practitioners (GPs) struggle to recognise the
legitimacy of CFS/ME. Surveys of GPs in the UK reveal a signifi-
cant degree of scepticism about CFS/ME. In one survey, only
half the respondents believed that CFS/ME was a real illness.37
This degree of scepticism towards the existence of the condition
could lead to testimonial injustice because patient reports would
not be seen to have a genuine medical cause. It could also lead
to hermeneutical injustice because patient complaints may not
be interpreted as cohering into a set of recognised symptoms,
nor given meaning as clustering around CFS/ME.
In another survey (conducted in the same year, 2005), nearly
25% of doctors did not accept CFS/ME as a clinical entity, and
of those who did nearly 50% were not confident about diagnos-
ing patients.38 A UK study reports that diagnosis occurred after
an average of six appointments.39 These data also support the
possibility of twin injustices, testimonial and hermeneutical,
because the symptoms were not interpreted as part of a recog-
nised condition, and a delay in diagnosis may point to reluc-
tance to take the complaints seriously or to anchor them in
CFS/ME. It is also possible that lack of confidence in diagnosing
translates also into a lowered credibility assigned to patient
reports, which can be another cause of testimonial injustice.
Surveys in other countries have revealed comparable findings:
a recent Australian study found that nearly a third of GPs did
not accept CFS/ME as a distinct syndrome;40 a recent survey in
Belgium reported that patients suffering from CFS/ME waited
an average of 5 years to receive a diagnosis.41 This research indi-
cates that, even when faced with patients with CFS/ME, many
doctors reject the illness category of CFS/ME, or require consid-
erable time to reach a CFS/ME diagnosis, again supporting our
suggestion that patient testimonies are not readily interpreted as
arising from a recognised medical condition and are not acted
on decisively. It is important to note that the period prior to
diagnosis may be fraught with suffering and symptom experi-
ence, which are exacerbated by the anxiety resulting from the
uncertainty about the condition and the lack of diagnosis. Such
a lengthy period may also negatively affect patients’ relationship
with healthcare professionals, as it may erode the trust they
have in their knowledge and ability to help.
Qualitative research confirms these conceptual and hermen-
eutical deficits: a range of surveys conclude that negative stereo-
typing
of
patients
with
CFS/ME
persists
among
doctors.8 28 40 42 43 For example, a study by Raine et al39 con-
cluded that there are mixed attitudes about CFS/ME among
GPs; some doctors claimed that they would ‘do anything for
these patients’ while others described patients with CFS/ME
pejoratively as ‘heartsinky’ and a ‘burden’. This indicates a nega-
tive stereotyping of such patients, and may lead to testimonies
from patients being so described and/or met with doubt. A
recent study of GPs by Chew-Graham et al29 documented com-
ments such as: “I thought it was people sort of passively giving
into symptoms and just sort of saying ‘right that’s it’ and giving
up”. This study also revealed that many doctors believe a diag-
nosis of CFS/ME is inherently problematic: ‘Once you start
labeling a patient if you’re not careful you might have a self-
fulfilling prophecy’.29 Cross-cultural research also shows that
doctors who accept CFS/ME as a real clinical syndrome or
disease are 2.5 times more likely to enjoy working with patients
with CFS/ME.29 32 44
553
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 In the UK, the most common treatment provided by GPs sur-
veyed was antidepressant therapy (84%): whether this indicated
a tendency to psychologise symptoms and the treatment of CFS/
ME, or whether the majority of patients presenting with CFS/
ME exhibited comorbidity with depression is underdeter-
mined.39 However, Raine et al39 found that in cases where
doctors ascribed to a BPS model of CFS/ME, some doctors
were, “not motivated to shift responsibility for management to
other professionals; patients were able to manage themselves
with ‘their own cack-handed CBT’”. Such reports indicate a
level of negative stereotyping among GPs who otherwise
appeared to have awareness of the illness. W
e suggest that such
negative stereotyping can lead to testimonial injustice and also
to ‘strategies of expression’ that label such patients as ‘moaners’
or depressed.
This is supported by the study by Chew-Graham et al,29 who
found that GPs queried the value of referral as unnecessary and
even harmful. Of particular note, the GPs surveyed in this study
were part of the FINE trial (Fatigue Intervention by Nurses
Evaluation trial) on CFS/ME and therefore (presumably) had
prior knowledge of CFS/ME that may have exceeded that of
other doctors.29 This again indicates a degree of disbelief about
the reality of the condition, which may give rise to both testimo-
nial and hermeneutic injustice.
The failure to conceive of CFS/ME as a legitimate illness clas-
sification was also reported in the only study among students
conducted in the UK at the University of Manchester School of
Medicine (2015).26 Stenhoff et al26 reported that students have
‘limited knowledge but many opinions’ with many students’
knowledge restricted to CFS/ME as mere ‘tiredness’. This study
also found that negative attitudes were explicitly expressed by
trainee doctors illustrating how testimonial injustice may be a
real risk in this group, and may engender hermeneutical gaps:
“[…] ‘you think god they are just knackered […] like everyone
gets knackered no-one really cares’”.26 Indeed, all the students
surveyed in this study reported that they had received no train-
ing in CFS/ME—that it was ‘brushed under the rug’.26 Some
students expressed the sentiment that if it had been included it
would have been ‘a wasted week’; while others felt the condi-
tion was too rare, complex or unclear to warrant inclusion in
the medical curriculum.26 vii Some students offered psychiatric
explanations for CFS/ME, psychologising the causes of CFS/
ME, perhaps instinctually filling in a gap in learning.26 In these
responses, we can see echoes of the negative stereotyping identi-
fied among physicians, demonstrating the pervasiveness of such
stereotyping and hence its putative pervasive effect on their jud-
gements and decisions. This study echoed the finding among
doctors that personal knowledge of someone with CFS/ME is a
positive determinant in enhancing medics’ attitudes towards
patients and the legitimacy of the illness: in this respect, per-
sonal encounters with patients appear to partly fill the apparent
lacunae in medical education.
The conclusion we draw, based on interviews and studies
among doctors and medical students, is that patients with CFS/
ME are especially vulnerable to both testimonial and hermen-
eutical injustice. Insofar as these studies are to be relied on,
there is conceptual ambiguity among doctors about diagnosing
and treating CFS/ME and as we suggest, this may give rise to
reduced patient credibility, slower and more tentative reactions
of medical staff, refusal to refer to specialist clinics and delayed
diagnosis. It may also lead to hermeneutic injustice as patient
interpretations of their symptoms may be rejected due to disbe-
lief in the reality of the condition. CFS/ME may be a particu-
larly difficult condition to diagnose; however, evidence of
delays in diagnosis among patients also indicates a hermeneut-
ical gap in the state of medical education, training and practice.
Evidence from patients
The evidence for this hermeneutical gap, including the cross-
cultural findings that significant percentages of doctors continue
to ignore or deny the legitimacy of CFS/ME as an illness, is sup-
ported by studies of patient experience. For example, a survey
in Belgium found that most of the randomly sampled patients
surveyed (84%) reported that their GP needed more education
on CFS/ME, with around 50% of patients changing doctors to
seek better treatment.41 This is a natural response to one’s sense
that their testimony is devalued and disbelieved: the patient
thereby seeks someone else to tell their problems to and obtain
help from. If strategies for exclusion were not in place, there
would be a better exchange between patients and GPs with
further opportunities for GPs to understand the condition and
the concepts and ideas through which sufferers interpret it.
A number of cross-cultural studies provide robust evidence of
testimonial injustice: patients with CFS/ME still experience
heavy stigmatisation, including by healthcare professionals. For
example, the study conducted in Sweden by Asbring and
Närvänen44 found that many patients experienced their moral
character being questioned, and that this was perceived to be
more burdensome than the illness itself: “[t]hat one is not
believed […] it is so hard that it is almost the worst thing”. In
addition, the perception of malingering and even the feeling of
‘police interrogation’ during consultations, including the need
to defend the experience of illness, were common; only a
minority of patients did not report implicit or explicit expres-
sions of suspicion by healthcare professionals.44 In light of this,
perhaps a better explanation for the strength of feeling among
advocacy groups is that a significant number of patients feel the
need to express their epistemic concerns and have a distinctive
sense of, perhaps unarticulated but nonetheless robust, epistemic
injustice. As Carel and Kidd have argued, online blogs and
patient fora provide individuals with the platform to ‘attest to
persistent experiences of feeling ignored, marginalized, or epis-
temically excluded by health professionals’ (pp. 529–530).
With regard to furnishing patients with information on CFS/
ME, a study by Thomas and Smith found that only 14.8% of
the UK surgeries provided literature on CFS/ME (supplied, for
the most part, by the ME Association).37 An extensive Swedish
study revealed a tendency among doctors to psychologise
patient symptoms, and while many patients in the study did not
object to discussing psychological causes (perhaps also adhering
to a BPS model of CFS/ME), the occurrence of implicit psycho-
logising when the healthcare professional did not explicitly dis-
close their preferred explanation for CFS/ME, was considered
by patients to be condescending and undermining.38 This
finding supports Fricker’s contention that negatively stereotyped
patients may thereby find themselves ‘excluded from trustful
conversation’.9 It is also an instance of exclusion, whereby the
interpretation of the condition and its causes excluded the
patients’ preferred explanation.
Raine et al39 reported that some GPs considered patients with
CFS/ME to be ‘adversarial’; these doctors reportedly considered
patients who rejected their views on the causation of CFS/ME
viiOthers claimed these attitudes were transmitted by medical educators
and doctors (“I have spoken to doctors in hospital […] they just say it’s
bullshit […] that it’s a made up thing’ […]; ‘GPs will kind of make […]
comments about how it’s just […] people are lazy”).
554
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 to challenge their medical authority, and may have led them to
employ strategies of exclusion. The authors concluded that
‘both doctor and patient seemed to violate their expected roles’,
and that doctors’ stereotyping of patients with CFS/ME ‘meant
that the condition ceased to be seen as a discrete disorder and
became the defining feature of that patient’.39 However, defer-
ring to ‘expected roles’ can on its own be epistemically unjust—
for example, if the roles in question are ‘authoritative doctor’
and ‘submissive patient’. Also, complaints about adversarial
modes of engagement might be seen as ‘strategies of expression’
(patients being perceived as ‘irrational’). If patients are being
too assertive, they are failing to adopt an acceptable style of
expression, so what they are offering will be excluded, thus per-
petuating gaps in shared hermeneutical resources.
The findings of this study contrast with the study by
Hossenbaccus and White (pp. 7–8), who argue that extensive
patient dissatisfaction arises from a clash over how to conceive
CFS/ME among patients and doctors.27 The implication of the
study by Hossenbaccus and White is that some patients with
CFS/ME simply are disagreeable and adversarial due to their
dissent from medical opinion; such patients may be construed
as displaying a level of epistemic autonomy unacceptable to phy-
sicians, in the request for a particular interpretation of their
illness. Such a struggle over hermeneutical resources and the
right to declare a cause for the condition is an instance of strat-
egies of exclusion, in which, again, patients’ interpretations play
no role in the diagnostic and clinical process.
However, in light of the foregoing evidence of negative
stereotyping, and the lack of consensus within medicine about
how to explain CFS/ME, we argue that medical doctors who
espouse a BPS model are not thereby entitled to stake a claim of
incontestable epistemic privilege. Their favoured interpretation
excludes alternative interpretations in ways which may amount
to hermeneutical injustice towards the patients contesting this
interpretation. Such exclusion strategies, where they occur, are
indicative of both testimonial and hermeneutical injustice: the
patient may feel belittled or even maligned for voicing a differ-
ent (and, given the state of research, plausible) viewpoint, and
his or her testimony may be minimised, interpreted as a symptom
of, say, depression, or entirely disregarded. W
e suggest that gaps
in relevant shared resources are being subjected to strategies of
exclusion, whereby physicians are refusing to heed calls on them
to enrich their conceptual resources or to engage in debate about
the enrichment of these resources. The psychologising of
patients’ complaints evidenced above is an example of such exclu-
sion; offerings of testimonies and interpretations about somatic
suffering is reduced to psychological complaint, thus obviating
the need to directly engage with the somatic symptoms.10
Evidence of patients’ experiences with psychotherapists corro-
borates these findings. A British study of client-centred therapy is
particularly illuminating because it documents the anonymised
views of patients in non-directive therapy, a version of therapy in
which patients direct the sessions according to their own per-
ceived problems and experiences, setting the agenda for dialogue.
The study reported that the issue which was identified and dis-
cussed most in conversations between patients with CFS/ME and
therapists was ‘the difficulties in relating to others due to misun-
derstandings of, and attitudes about ME (CFS/ME)’.45 In add-
ition, clients reported ‘anger due to the way in which relatives
had reacted’.45 This anger and frustration may fuel the style of
expression such patients adopt and eventually lead to ‘strategies
of expression’-based hermeneutic and testimonial injustices as
patient attempts at communication become more fraught and
angry, thus making their expression less accessible to others.
Summary
In this paper, we have argued that patients with CFS/ME are
negatively stereotyped and unfairly prevented from making
sense of their experiences. This then deflates their credibility
and undermines their hermeneutic and communicative efforts.
W
e suggested that this effect can be articulated using the
concept of epistemic injustice, and provided such an analysis,
highlighting the ways in which evidence and patient and phys-
ician testimonies can reveal the operation of both hermeneutic
and testimonial injustices.
Even the most modest conclusion based on these findings sup-
ports the claim that negative stereotyping of patients suffering
from CFS/ME still persists in many healthcare encounters and
more broadly in society. W
e therefore suggest that, as the above
discussion shows, these negative stereotypes make patients with
CFS/ME more vulnerable to both testimonial and hermeneutical
injustice, in the ways described above. W
e emphasise that
research shows that the experiences of patients, and the attitudes
of healthcare professionals, is mixed; nonetheless, we conclude
that testimonial injustice—the deflation of testimony of patients
with CFS/ME on the ground of unjustified negative stereotyping
—appears to be a continued problem within mainstream health-
care across a range of settings and countries. Furthermore, it
would seem that the testimonial injustice is sustained and also
accompanied by hermeneutical injustice because the dominant
group (healthcare professionals) may routinely fail to provide
adequate training about CFS/ME, leading to prejudiced defla-
tions of patient credibility, and/or an unfair lack of shared con-
cepts with which to make mutual sense of the experience of the
patient.
EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE LEADS TO PATIENT HARM
Consultations whereby patient testimony is discredited, or
otherwise marginalised or ignored, or where patients’ contribu-
tions to meaningful dialogue are excluded, risk undermining
diagnostic accuracy and provision of adequate treatment. In the
worst case, this can lead to isolation, confusion and patient
withdrawal from the healthcare system. Patients who feel that
they are disbelieved, mistrusted and treated with suspicion may
choose
to withdraw
contact
with
healthcare
professionals
altogether. A study conducted in Belgium by Van Hoof revealed
that there is a lack of ongoing professional development and dis-
belief among doctors that CFS/ME is real, and that this, in turn
leads to inferior communication and management of the condi-
tion
among
patients.41
Furthermore,
medical
‘ambivalence
about treatment options’ has been directly attributed to the
breakdown in the relationship between doctor and patient.41
Research reveals that the earlier the diagnosis of CFS/ME, the
better the prognosis;41 46 47 the failure to diagnose CFS/ME is
cited as a direct cause of lack of empathy in primary care.41
The continued psychologising of patients’ problems is a
complex issue in CFS/ME. Given that no psychological-level or
biological-level causal factors have been identified, research into
psychological therapies remains controversial. Indeed, there is
evidence that some patients with CFS/ME are excluded from
full disclosure about the rationale for psychological treatments
suggesting that patients with CFS/ME may be perceived as, in
some sense, epistemically immature, or incapacitated when it
comes to autonomous decision-making:39 one UK study of
patient experiences with psychotherapy reported that most
patients were unaware which form of therapy they had under-
gone (only one in three were clear that they had received
CBT).36 While it is at least conceivable that lack of disclosure is
555
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 a common experience among all psychotherapy patients, in the
case of clearly defined mental health issues the rationale for
therapy must at least be understandable to clients.48–50 Yet
studies reveal that patients with CFS/ME report mixed feelings
about psychotherapy: while some patients find sessions helpful
in countering engulfing depressive feelings about their illness,
others have reported sessions as ‘very patronising and negative’
with the perception that they were being ‘blamed’ for their
ongoing illness.36
It is therefore not surprising that one British survey estimates
that as many as two-thirds of patients with CFS/ME are dissatis-
fied with the quality of care they have experienced.8 This con-
clusion is consistent with a number of studies that found that
negative stereotyping acts as a barrier to successful support for
the patient,51
52 leading to a ‘vicious spiral of alienation
between doctor and patient’.39
When patients perceive negative attitudes from healthcare
professionals, this risks their trust and confidence in services.
Patients surveyed in qualitative studies reported adopting social
distancing and concealing strategies to avoid stigmatisation by
others38—to preserve what Goffman referred to as ‘the presen-
tation of self in everyday life’.53 Some patients even reported
withdrawal from healthcare professionals (in particular doctors)
in order to avoid ‘feeling as though they were called into ques-
tion or violated in another way’; while significant numbers of
patients changed doctors in order to avoid being labelled a
problem patient.38
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
There are deep differences between patients and healthcare pro-
fessionals in conceptualising CFS/ME. In extreme cases, the dif-
ferences amount to an epistemic gulf between healthcare
professionals who do not believe in the existence of CFS/ME,
and patients who experience distressing and debilitating symp-
toms. Our first recommendation is that even if patients are com-
mitted to the idea that their illness has a physical basis, and
healthcare professionals think otherwise, the professionals ought
to find ways to work with this conceptualisation to ensure that
patients feel listened to, rather than use the consultation as a
forum for ‘correcting’ or disputing fundamental aetiological
factors of CFS/ME.36
Second, medical education clearly has a role to play in
improving healthcare professionals’ knowledge and attitudes
about CFS/ME. A recent study of medical students in the UK
found that, like qualified GPs, the students appeared to struggle
with a classification that had no known cause: without a known
biomedical framework, students articulated the view that the
illness was not real. W
e thus suggest that CFS/ME and other
conditions that are currently medically unexplained ought to be
addressed clearly in medical teaching and training. It is esti-
mated that around 20% of GP visits are triggered by medically
unexplained symptoms (MUS).54 Such a significant proportion
merits both attention and specialist training to ensure that
patients presenting with MUS have their needs met and that
healthcare professionals refer appropriately and involve other
agencies as needed, rather than committing epistemic injustice
by dismissing the complaints. Such training would also combat
the sense of helplessness that such consultations may give rise to
in both patients and healthcare professionals.viii
W
e strongly believe that recognition of epistemic injustice,
and having philosophical tools with which to articulate it, are a
first step towards the future abolition and prevention of such
injustice recurring. W
e therefore suggest that further reflection is
sought on the issue of how patients with CFS/ME are communi-
cated with, and treated.
Acknowledgements The authors thank the editor and two anonymous reviewers
for meticulous and generous responses to a previous draft of this paper.
Contributors CB conceived the paper; CB, HC and KG co-wrote the paper and
appraised the final draft.
Funding HC was funded by the Wellcome Trust (103340).
Competing interests None.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Cooper R. Mental health and disorder. In: Chadwick R, ten Have H, Meslin E, eds.
The Sage handbook of health care ethics. London: Sage, 2011:251–60.
2
Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis:
International Consensus Criteria. J Intern Med 2011;270:327–38.
3
Kirmayer L, Groleau D, Looper K, et al. Explaining medically unexplained symptoms.
Can J Psychiatry 2004;1:663–72.
4
Roberts E, Wessely S, Chalder T, et al. Mortality of people with chronic fatigue
syndrome: a retrospective cohort study in England and Wales from the South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust Biomedical Research Centre (SLaM
BRC) Clinical Record Interactive Search (CRIS) Register. Lancet 2016;387:1638–43.
5
Dancey CP, Friend J. Symptoms, impairment and illness intrusiveness—their
relationship with depression in women with CFS/ME. Psychol Health
2008;23:983–99.
6
Jason LA, Jordan KM, Richman JA, et al. A community-based study of prolonged
fatigue and chronic fatigue. J Health Psychol 1999;4:9–26.
7
Department of Health. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis Report,
“Working group on CFS/ME/ME (Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis Report”. Epidemiology of ME/CFS: Annex 1. 2007. http://www.
dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/
Browsable/DH_4879305 (retrieved 29 July 2015).
8
Deale A, Wessely S. Patients’ perceptions of medical care in chronic fatigue
syndrome. Soc Sci Med 2001;52:1859–64.
9
Fricker M. Epistemic justice: power and the ethics of knowing. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2007.
10
Carel H, Kidd IJ. Epistemic injustice in healthcare: a philosophical analysis. Med
Health Care and Philos 2014;17:529–40.
11
Kidd IJ, Carel H. Epistemic injustice and illness. J Appl Philos 2016;3(2):1–19.
12
Green CR, Cowan P, Elk R, et al. National institutes of health pathways to
prevention workshop: advancing the research on myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome. Ann Intern Med 2015;162:860–5.
13
Geraghty KJ, Blease C. Cognitive behavioural therapy in the treatment of chronic
fatigue syndrome: A narrative review on efficacy and informed consent. Journal of
Health Psychology. J Health Psychol Published Online First: 15 Sep
2016:1359105316667798.
14
Maes M, Twisk FN. Chronic fatigue syndrome: Harvey and Wessely’s (bio)
psychosocial model versus a bio(psychosocial) model based on inflammatory and
oxidative and nitrosative stress pathways. BMC Med 2010;8:35.
15
Harvey SB, Wessely S. Chronic fatigue syndrome: identifying zebras amongst the
horses. BMC Med 2009;7:58.
16
Maes M, Twisk FN. Why myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/
CFS/ME) may kill you: disorders in the inflammatory and oxidative and nitrosative
stress (IO&NS) pathways may explain cardiovascular disorders in ME/CFS/ME. Neuro
Endocrinol Lett 2009;30:677–93.
17
Hornig M, Montoya JG, Kilmas NG, et al. Distinct plasma immune signatures in ME/
CFS/ME are present early in the course of the illness. Sci Adv 2015;1:e1400121.
viiiOne recommendation is to consider using Carel’s phenomenological
toolkit, which can support mixed groups of patients and healthcare
professionals in their attempt to discern and express the experience of
CFS/ME. The toolkit was developed in order to support patients in
their goal of reflecting on and expressing their illness experience.34 The
toolkit (and similar reflective practices) may improve communication
between patients with CFS/ME and healthcare professionals because
patients may be better able to articulate their experiences and thereby be
more
effective
contributors
to
their
care.
Similarly,
healthcare
professionals may gain a more nuanced grasp of CFS/ME experience, as
well as honing their epistemic sensibilities and skills, such as listening to
and understanding multiple perspectives.
556
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 18
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence: Guideline Development Group.
Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)—diagnosis
and management of CFS/ME in adults and children. NICE clinical guideline, number
53. 2007. http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg53/resources/
guidance-chronic-fatigue-syndromemyalgic-encephalomyelitis-or-encephalopathy-pdf
(retrieved December 2015).
19
NHS Choices. NHS website, 2015. http://www.nhs/uk/conditions/
chronic-fatigue-syndrome/pages/treatment (retrieved July 2015).
20
White P, Goldsmith K, Johnson A, et al., PACE trial management group.
Comparison of adaptive pacing therapy, cognitive behaviour therapy, graded
exercise therapy, and specialist medical care for chronic fatigue syndrome (PACE): a
randomised trial. Lancet 2011;377:823–36.
21
Geraghty K. Pace-gate: when clinical trial evidence meets open data access.
J Health Psychol Published Online First: 1 Nov 2016. doi:10.1177/
1359105316675213
22
Núñez M, Fernández-Solà J, Nuñez E, et al. 2011 Health-related quality of life in
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: group cognitive behavioural therapy and
graded exercise versus usual treatment. A randomised controlled trial with 1 year of
follow-up. Clin Rheumatol 2011;30:381–9.
23
Kindlon T. Elements of rehabilitative strategies associated with negative outcomes in
CFS/ME: the need for further investigations. Disabil Rehabil 2015;37:466–7.
24
Twisk F, Geraghty K. Deviant cellular and physiological responses to exercise in
myalgic encephalomyelitis and chronic fatigue syndrome. JJ Physiology 2015;1(2):1–6.
25
van Dessel N, den Boeft M, van der Wouden JC, et al. Non-pharmacological
interventions for somatoform disorders and medically unexplained physical
symptoms (MUPS) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;(11):CD011142.
26
Stenhoff AL, Sadreddini S, Peters S, et al. Understanding medical students’ views on
chronic fatigue syndrome: a qualitative study. J Health Psychol 2015;20:198–209.
27
Hossenbaccus Z, White PD. Views on the nature of chronic fatigue syndrome:
content analysis. JRSM Short Rep 2013;4:4.
28
Ax S, Green VH, Jones D. Chronic fatigue syndrome: sufferers’ evaluation of medical
support received. J Roy Soc Med 1997;90:250–4.
29
Chew-Graham C, Dowrick C, Wearden A, et al. Making the diagnosis of chronic
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalitis in primary care: a qualitative study. BMC Fam
Pract 2010;11:16.
30
Wardrope A. Medicalization and epistemic injustice. Med Health Care Philos
2015;18:341–52.
31
Freeman L. Confronting diminished epistemic privilege and epistemic injustice in
pregnancy by challenging a “panoptics of the womb”. J Med Philos
2015;40:44–68.
32
Carel H, Györffy G. Seen but not heard: epistemic injustice and children. Lancet
2014;384:1256–7.
33
Carel HH. Illness, phenomenology, and philosophical method. Theor Med Bioeth
2013;34:345–57.
34
Kalanithi P, Verghese A. When breath becomes air. Random House, 2016.
35
Klitzman R. When doctors become patients. Oxford University Press, 2007.
36
Lawson R. The Reagan Administration’s Unearthed Response to the AIDS Crisis is
Chilling. Vanity Fair (1 December 2015). http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2015/11/
reagan-administration-response-to-aids-crisis (accessed 26 Apr 2016).
37
Thomas MA, Smith AP. Primary healthcare provision and chronic fatigue syndrome:
a survey of patients’ and general practitioners’ beliefs. BMC Fam Pract 2005;6:49.
38
Bowen J, Pheby D, Charlett A, et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome: a survey of GP’s
attitudes and knowledge. Fam Pract 2005;22:389–93.
39
Raine S, Carter S, Sensky T, et al. General practitioners’ perceptions of chronic
fatigue syndrome and beliefs about its management, compared with irritable bowel
syndrome: qualitative study. BMJ 2004;328:1354.
40
Steven ID, McGrath B, Quereshi F, et al. General practitioners’ beliefs, attitudes, and
reported actions towards chronic fatigue syndrome. Aust Fam Physician
2000;29:80–5.
41
Van Hoof E. The doctor–patient relationship in chronic fatigue syndrome: survey of
patient perspectives. Qual Prim Care 2009;17:263–70.
42
Najman JM, Klein D, Munro C. Patient characteristics negatively stereotyped by
doctors. Soc Sci Med 1982;16:1781–2.
43
Ward T, Hogan K, Stuart V, et al. The experiences of counselling for persons with
ME. Couns Psychother Res 2008;8:73–9.
44
Asbring P, Närvänen AL. Women’s experiences of stigma in relation to chronic
fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. Qual Health Res 2002;12:148–60.
45
Ward T, Hogan K. A trial of client-centred counselling over the telephone for
persons with ME. Couns Psychother Res 2009;24:34–40.
46
Joyce J, Hotopf M, Wessely S. The prognosis of chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue
syndrome: a systematic review. QJM 1997;90:223–33.
47
Nisenbaum R, Jones JF, Unger ER, et al. A population-based study of the clinical
course of chronic fatigue syndrome. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2003;1:49.
48
Blease CR. Talking more about talking cures: cognitive behavioral therapy and
informed consent. J Med Ethics 2015;41:750–5.
49
Gaab J, Blease C, Locher C, et al. Go open: a plea for transparency in
psychotherapy. Psychol Conscious Theory Res Pract 2015;3(2):175–198.
50
Blease CR, Lilienfeld SO, Kelley JM. Evidence-based practice and psychological
treatments: the imperatives of informed consent. Front Psychol 2016;7:1170.
51
Horton SM, Poland F, Kale S. Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis
(CFS/ME) in adults: a qualitative study of perspectives from professional practice.
BMC Fam Pract 2010;11:89.
52
Woodward RV, Broom DH, Legge DG. Diagnosis in chronic illness: disabling or
enabling—the case of chronic fatigue syndrome. J R Soc Med 1995;88:
325–9.
53
Goffman E. The presentation of self in everyday life. London: Penguin, 1978/1990.
54
Chitnis A, Dowrick C, Byng R, et al. Guidance for health professionals on medically
unexplained symptoms (MUS). Royal College of Psychiatrists. January 2011. http://
www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/CHECKED%20MUS%20Guidance_A4_4pp_6.pdf (accessed
on 27 Apr 2016).
557
Blease C, et al. J Med Ethics 2017;43:549–557. doi:10.1136/medethics-2016-103691
Clinical ethics
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2016-103691 on 5 December 2016. Downloaded from 
