 February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
1
HypotHesis and tHeory
published: 15 February 2018
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00229
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Simona Zompi, 
University of California, 
 
San Francisco, United States
Reviewed by: 
DeAunne Denmark, 
Open Medical Institute (OMI), 
 
United States 
 
Maureen Hanson, 
Cornell University, United States
*Correspondence:
Jonas Blomberg 
jonas.blomberg@medsci.uu.se
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Microbial Immunology, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 01 September 2017
Accepted: 26 January 2018
Published: 15 February 2018
Citation: 
Blomberg J, Gottfries C-G, 
Elfaitouri A, Rizwan M and Rosén A 
(2018) Infection Elicited Autoimmunity 
and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: An 
Explanatory Model. 
Front. Immunol. 9:229. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00229
infection elicited autoimmunity and 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue syndrome: an explanatory 
Model
Jonas Blomberg1*, Carl-Gerhard Gottfries2, Amal Elfaitouri3, Muhammad Rizwan1  
and Anders Rosén4
1 
Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Clinical Microbiology, Academic Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, 
2 
Gottfries Clinic AB, Mölndal, Sweden, 3 
Department of Infectious Disease and Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Public  
Health, Benghazi University, Benghazi, Libya, 4 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of Cell  
Biology, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) often also called chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is 
a common, debilitating, disease of unknown origin. Although a subject of controversy 
and a considerable scientific literature, we think that a solid understanding of ME/
CFS pathogenesis is emerging. In this study, we compiled recent findings and placed 
them in the context of the clinical picture and natural history of the disease. A pattern 
emerged, giving rise to an explanatory model. ME/CFS often starts after or during an 
infection. A logical explanation is that the infection initiates an autoreactive process, 
which affects several functions, including brain and energy metabolism. According to 
our model for ME/CFS pathogenesis, patients with a genetic predisposition and dysbi-
osis experience a gradual development of B cell clones prone to autoreactivity. Under 
normal circumstances these B cell offsprings would have led to tolerance. Subsequent 
exogenous microbial exposition (triggering) can lead to comorbidities such as fibromy-
algia, thyroid disorder, and orthostatic hypotension. A decisive infectious trigger may 
then lead to immunization against autoantigens involved in aerobic energy production 
and/or hormone receptors and ion channel proteins, producing postexertional malaise 
and ME/CFS, affecting both muscle and brain. In principle, cloning and sequencing 
of immunoglobulin variable domains could reveal the evolution of pathogenic clones. 
Although evidence consistent with the model accumulated in recent years, there are 
several missing links in it. Hopefully, the hypothesis generates testable propositions 
that can augment the understanding of the pathogenesis of ME/CFS.
Keywords: chronic fatigue syndrome, myalgic encephalomyelitis, irritable bowel syndrome, postexertional 
malaise, autoimmunity
introdUCtion
ME/CFS is a common disease of unknown etiology characterized by postexertional malaise (PEM; 
a type of fatigability), cognitive disturbance, unrefreshing sleep, autonomic nerve dysfunction, and 
a few characteristic comorbidities, see, e.g., Ref. (1–3). It often starts with an infection and has a 
strong tendency to remain a chronic condition.
 taBLe 1 | Some outstanding questions regarding ME/CFS, which are addressed 
in this conceptual review.
the hypothesis gives rise to several verifiable general questions
• What is the nature of the genetic predisposition?
• Can the infection history of ME/CFS patients be traced?
• Does it differ from those of other diseases, e.g., autoimmune ones?
• Is there a common sequence of infection, postexertional malaise, and comor-
bidity occurrence during ME/CFS pathogenesis?
• Can defects in tolerance development be detected in ME/CFS patients?
• Can the path of B cell clones from germ line to various autoreactivities be traced 
in ME/CFS patients?
• Which autoantibodies can be detected in ME/CFS patients and its comorbidities?
• Can clues to ME/CFS biomarkers be derived from this explanatory model?
2
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
ME/CFS diagnostic criteria have gradually become more 
stringent, see, e.g., Ref. (2–7). These are based on somatic, 
often self-reported symptoms (8, 9). Although often used inter-
changeably, studies using the “CDC,” (also called the “Fukuda”) 
criteria (5) mainly use the term “CFS,” while those using the 
“Canada” (3) or International consensus (2) criteria use the 
term “ME.” This creates an ambiguity, which may explain 
some contradicting results. There are so far no specific labora-
tory tests (10) for ME/CFS diagnosis. Recently, a committee 
recommended a new name for ME/CFS, systemic exhaustion 
 
intolerance disease (SEID) (11, 12) with diagnostic criteria 
that emphasize PEM as the central ME/CFS symptom (13). 
The disease entity ME/CFS is not uncontroversial. Like many 
times before in medical history, psychiatric and somatic 
explanations compete with each other. A recent critical review, 
which emphasized psychiatric aspects, stated that “there is no 
convincing pathogenesis model for CFS” (14). However, in this 
review, we forward that evidence for a somatic origin of the 
disease is accumulating.
From a research perspective it is important that patients are 
diagnosed using strict criteria. A thorough clinical examination 
is necessary. It does not matter how sophisticated the analyses 
are in a study if patient selection is ambiguous. In the case of 
“fatigue” it is important to distinguish ME/CFS fatigue from 
other types of fatigue, such as burnout syndrome and depres-
sion, see, e.g., Ref. (15). In ME/CFS, repetition of a physical or 
mental exertion can reveal objective evidence of fatigability. 
This exertion-elicited fatigue, PEM, is required for the diagnosis 
of ME/CFS using the Canadian criteria (3), the International 
consensus (2), and the SEID (12), but not using CDC (5) cri-
teria. Although the term “ME/CFS,” encompassing both “ME” 
and “CFS,” has a built-in ambiguity it covers much of the current 
studies and is operationally judged as the best available concept. 
Fatigue similar to PEM also occurs in Sjögren’s syndrome (SS), 
primary biliary cholangitis (also named primary biliary cir-
rhosis) (PBC), and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The 
relation of ME/CFS to the similar condition Gulf War Illness 
(GWI) is uncertain, see, e.g., Ref. (16). However, a recent study 
describes a laboratory-based distinction between the two ill-
nesses (17).
Recent ME/CFS reports brought optimism (18). National 
Institutes of Health in the US announced that it will prioritize the 
disease. Cornerstones are studies on PEM (12, 19) and effects of 
immunosuppressive treatment (20–22) although not substanti-
ated in a phase III trial.
There are several partly competing explanatory models for 
ME/CFS, for example; autoimmunity, chronic infection, energy 
metabolic defect, imbalance in autonomous nervous system and/
or hormones, and psychosomatic dysfunction. In this laboratory-
oriented review, we present an overview of recent findings and 
attempt to bring a substantial portion of ME/CFS symptoms and 
its disease history into one explanatory model. The model draws 
analogies from more established autoimmune diseases (even if 
much remains to be understood in these too) is based on clinical 
experience and on recent immunometabolic results. Clues for 
further research are given in Table 1 and as separate statements 
in the text.
tryinG to pLaCe it aLL Under one 
UMBreLLa: a HypotHesis For Me/CFs 
patHoGenesis
We propose a pathogenetic model reminiscent of current think-
ing on the pathogenesis of autoimmunity.
A genetically predisposed person (A) is exposed to successive 
infections (B), e.g., in the gastrointestinal tract—manifested as 
dysbiosis or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)—or in the airways, 
with microbes carrying epitopes mimicking human self-epitopes, 
or microbes which activate autoreactive B cells to produce the 
so-called natural antibodies with non-rearranged germ line 
immunoglobulin genes. Such autoreactive B cells may be deleted 
or persist in a state of anergy (C). A proportion of these B cells 
remain in spleen and lymph nodes as memory IgM+, IgA+, or 
IgG+ B cells (D). Individuals differ in time and extent of encoun-
ters with autoreactivity eliciting microbes. Some encounters are 
here postulated to give rise to autoantibodies (E) against key 
enzymes in energy metabolism hence causing a defective aerobic 
energy metabolism and PEM, the central symptom of ME/CFS, 
others to fibromyalgia (FM), yet others to postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome (POTS) or other comorbidities. If the 
autoimmunization events are independent of each other they 
can occur in any order. If there are cooperativity effects they may 
follow a rather specific order (F). The upper case letters refer to 
stages in Figures 1 and 2.
Thus, the basic property of ME/CFS patients would be a 
defect in tolerance coupled with a chance exposure to microbes 
carrying relevant mimicking autoantigen epitopes.
The italicized text of Figure 1 shows a hypothetical expla-
nation of the events behind ME/CFS. A known function of 
microbes in the gut is to train, from within, the immune 
system to recognize and react correctly to microbes (including 
bacteria and viruses), which come from the outside (25–29). 
The correct reaction includes, among other things, anergy and 
unresponsiveness to microbial antigens that cross-react with 
self-antigens. It is known that ME/CFS patients often have IBS 
(30–32). In this IBS there is also a modified gut flora (33, 34). 
A less symptomatic gut dysbiosis may also occur (33, 35). In 
addition, there is also occasional epithelial barrier leakage of 
gut microbes. It is reasonable to assume that the innate mucosal 
immunity defenses have been breached or that peripheral 
tolerance maintenance (training function) of the gut flora has 
 FiGUre 1 | Approximate course of events during which ME/CFS develops, and overview of the explanatory model. The postulated immunometabolic energy  
block is shown as an antibody and a mitochondrion. Italicized text refers to the explanatory model presented under “Trying to place it all under one umbrella.” 
Abbreviations are explained in the text.
FiGUre 2 | Mutational fate of a hypothetic germ line immunoglobulin heavy 
chain sequence (Vhy) in successive B cell clones, which gradually expand 
their paratope diversity in interplay with gut microbiota, T cells, and dendritic 
cells. If there is a chronic antigen stimulation, sequences more or less close 
to germ line sequence may be selected. Resulting B cells are stored as 
memory cells in germinal centers of gut-associated lymph nodes. Some  
of the developmental branches end due to clonal anergy or deletion 
(tolerization). Others are postulated to descend along a path to autospecificity 
due to an abnormality in gut commensal spectrum. An exogenous, triggering, 
antigenic stimulation (e.g., infection), eventually leads to overt pathogenic 
autospecificity (“evil” B cell clones, magenta) and ME/CFS. Similar fates of 
other B cell clones, which eventually turn autopathic and give comorbidities, 
are indicated under “F.” Characters A–F in bold refer to the stages mentioned 
under “Trying to place it under one umbrella.” This figure was inspired by 
work on the autoreactive clone VH4-34 (23, 24).
3
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
often leads to tolerance (36). When there is microleakage toler-
ance may not function properly leading to loss of checkpoints 
that normally prevent development of autoreactivity (37–42). 
The profile of B cell subpopulations is different in ME/CFS 
compared with controls (43). A factor behind that could be 
new memory B cells with autoreactivity, which normally would 
be sorted out, arising and persisting. When the body is exposed 
to a new infection, these B cells could produce antibodies 
which react both to microbe and autoantigen. Autoantibodies 
and T cells that recognize self-peptides can damage cells which 
carry autoantigens. This is the so-called mimicry (antigen 
similarity) theory behind autoimmune disease (44). Part of the 
explanation for ME/CFS would then be the disturbed gut flora 
and microleakage from the gut. At the left side of Figure 1 is 
written “Genetic predisposition.” This is compatible with the 
increased frequency of ME/CFS in certain families. Like for 
many other common diseases ME/CFS could depend on both 
inheritance and environment.
If this hypothesis is correct, a tendency for autoreactivity 
would arise gradually, via a changed gut flora and microleakage 
from the gut. After a decisive immunization event autoim-
munity leading to ME/CFS would arise, as shown in Figure 1. 
The prerequisites for autoimmunity would arise gradually 
because B cells with a tendency for autoimmunity would arise 
after recurring microleakage across the mucosal barrier of the 
gastrointestinal tract inducing a state of chronic inflamma-
tion. The normal contact between gut microbes and immune 
system occurs at the gut/mucosa interphase. Central tolerance 
often develops by elimination of autoreactive B cells. However, 
 
a proportion of autoreactive B cells remain which are kept unre-
sponsive (anergic). When there is microleakage, the mucosal 
barrier is bypassed and tolerance may not be maintained. 
Autoreactive B cells can then be activated and differentiate to 
autopathic B cells.
been disturbed. Normally, the mucosal immune system must 
maintain tolerance to harmless foreign antigens including food 
and commensal microbes. Presentation of antigens at mucosae 
 4
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
The frequency of IBS, alterations in microbiome and extent of 
microleakage should be further studied in ME/CFS. Attempts to 
find autoreactive B cells to find their origin and their evolution 
should be made. Maybe it is possible to trace how they evolved 
by systematic sequencing of their antigen-binding structures 
(paratopes and idiotypes), from germ line to anti-gut microbe to 
autoimmune clone?
GenetiC predisposition and 
preMorBid pHenotype
There is evidence for a strong genetic component in some auto-
immune diseases, such as complement component deficiencies 
in SLE which may lead to reduced self-antigen elimination. 
Likewise, in ME/CFS, autoimmune diseases, for example, thyroid 
disease (45), SS (46), and SLE (47), often occur among relatives 
and sometimes among the patients themselves.
Presence of an HLA association is a hallmark of many auto-
immune diseases. It indicates an aberrant immune presentation 
to either cytotoxic T cells (HLA Class I) or T helper cells (HLA 
Class II) which predisposes for autoimmunity. One study found 
an overrepresentation of HLA Class II DQA1*01, with an odds 
ratio of 1.93 (48).
Specific cytokine gene polymorphisms were observed; an 
increase of one, for TNFα, and a decrease of one, for IFNγ, were 
found in CFS (49).
Recent genome-wide association studies showed an increased 
frequency in ME/CFS of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 
some isolated, some concentrated to three gene regions: microtu-
bule associated protein 7, CCDC7 (coiled-coil domain containing 
7) and a T-cell receptor alpha chain gene (50). The latter may 
confine an increased tendency to autoimmunity. The comorbidity 
with autoimmune disease or disease having an increased preva-
lence of autoantibodies, e.g., FM (51–57), IBS (58–63), POTS (64), 
and hypothyroidism (45, 51, 55, 65–67), also indicate a tendency 
for autoimmunity in ME/CFS patients (further detailed in the sec-
tion on autoreactivie B cell clones and autoantibodies, including 
Table 4). SS (46) and SLE (47) often occur among relatives and 
sometimes among the patients themselves.
IgG3 and mannose binding lectin deficiency were more com-
mon among ME/CFS patients than in controls (102, 103). IgG 
subclass deficiency is more frequent in ME/CFS than in controls 
(104, 105). Such deficiencies could increase the risk of recurrent 
infections.
In a genetic study concentrating on hormone and hormone 
receptor genes, certain TRPM3 and CHRNA2 SNPs were found 
to be more common in ME/CFS (106–108).
are there also epigenetic Changes  
in Me/CFs?
DNA modification (methylation) of promoters of some genes 
associated with immune cell regulation; glucocorticoid recep-
tors, ATPase and IL6 receptor, respectively, was reported to differ 
between ME/CFS and controls (109). DNA methylation depends 
on the one-carbon metabolism, where ME/CFS changes have 
been recorded. Although the reason for such hypomethylation 
can only be speculated upon, it is interesting that the combined 
action of the vitamins B12 and folic acid play a fundamental role 
in providing methyl groups to hundreds of substrates in various 
elementary cell processes (see the section “can autoimmunity 
explain energy metabolic disturbances and PEM”).
Gene expression in Me/CFs
In a recent RNA-seq study, there were no specific RNAs expres-
sed in ME/CFS compared with healthy controls and other 
chronic diseases (110). In another expression study, prominent 
differentially expressed genes were EIF4G1, EIF2B4, MRPL23, 
which control RNA translation, in cytoplasm and/or mitochon-
dria (111). A differential expression of genes crucial for T-cell 
activation and innate response to viruses was also described 
(111–114) in CFS.
A novel angle was the report that the pattern in cerebrospi-
nal fluid (CSF) and blood of another kind of RNA, the small 
regulatory RNAs, differed between ME/CFS, GWI, and controls 
 
(17, 115). Another pattern was found in FM (116). The 
pathophysiological roles of the small regulatory RNAs are still 
uncertain, but the findings indicate additional levels of patho-
physiological regulation, which also could provide diagnosti-
cally useful biomarkers.
A prerequisite for calling a disease chronic is duration of at 
least 6 months. This often means that one has not been able to 
take samples during the period when the disease commenced. 
A common situation is that the patients remember that ME/CFS 
started with an infection, often infectious mononucleosis (IM), or 
a general virosis-like disease (117). When the acute infection with 
fever, myalgia, and swollen lymph nodes and/or cough subsides, 
a malaise and fatigability remains. According to the literature 
approximately 70% of ME/CFS cases start rather abruptly in this 
way. Others have a more gradual debut. The natural history of the 
disease should be studied systematically.
In a few cases, ME/CFS appear epidemically, with several 
cases being derived from a common index case. Even if epidemic 
outbreaks are uncommon it indicates that the disease might be 
contagious. Further epidemiological studies are needed.
Many diFFerent inFeCtions HaVe 
Been oBserVed at tHe oUtset oF 
Me/CFs LiKe disease
There is abundant evidence for infection as a trigger of chronic 
fatigue in a more general sense (often manifested as fatigability) 
(68, 72–74, 77–79, 82, 84, 118–128) (Table 2). But negative evidence 
also exists (129, 130). Some of this evidence is inconclusive (131, 
132). Whether all these instances of postinfectious fatigability have 
identical properties (e.g., Do they fulfill criteria for PEM?; For ME/
CFS?; How chronic are they?; etc.) should be systematically investi-
gated. These infections can be traced in the patient history, by direct 
detection of the microbe(s) (133), or by detection of antibodies to 
the microbe(s) (94, 119, 133–146), see, however, Ref. (147).
How often does it happen that spouses are afflicted? This 
would advocate a transmissible factor rather than inheritance.
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) seems to be a frequent trigger of 
ME/CFS (also referred to as “postviral fatigue”). Glandular fever 
 taBLe 2 | Long-standing fatigue, or fatigability, after an infection.
Microbe
infection
diagnostic term
approximate % of fatigued post infection
reference
Epstein–Barr virus
Infectious mononucleosis
Postviral fatigue
11% (6 months); 4% (12 months)
(68, 69)
Coxiella burnetii
Q fever
Post Q fever fatigue
10–20% (6–12 months)
(69–71)
Giardia lamblia
Giardiasis
Post Giardia fatigue
<1% (12 months)
(72, 73)
Ross River virus
Ross River virus infection
Post Ross River fatigue
11% (6 months); 9% (12 months)
(69, 74)
Chikungunya virus
Chikungunya virus infection
Post Chikungunya fatigue (often together 
with arthralgia)
20% over background (≥12 months)
(75, 76)
West Nile virus
West Nile virus infection
Post West Nile fatigue
31% (6 months)
(77–79)
Dengue virus
Dengue fever
Post Dengue fatigue
8% (2 months)
(80, 81)
Ebola virus
Ebola hemorrhagic fever
Post Ebola fatigue
Not clear, at least 10% (6 months)
(82, 83)
SARS corona virus
Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Post SARS syndrome
Approximately 22/400 = 6% (≥12 months)
(84)
5
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
(127), also called IM, is most frequently caused by EBV. A rea-
sonably specific laboratory test for IM (the “Mono” test) is based 
on heterophilic antibodies, which bind to carbohydrate antigens 
on non-human erythrocytes (148–150). If infectious triggers of 
ME/CFS are investigated, a positive Mono test provides an often 
recorded marker. Other infections are often not diagnosed as 
objectively. EBV belongs to the herpes virus family. It can infect 
and remain latent in B cells. At primary infection, EBV trig-
gers massive activation of multiple B cell clones each secreting 
monoclonal antibodies which are coded by immunoglobulin 
heavy and light (IGH and IGL) chain genes with unique vari-
able [immunoglobulin heavy chain variable (IGHV) and IGLV] 
genes, with the so-called complementarity-determining regions. 
The result is a polyclonal B cell stimulation, with massive 
release of natural antibodies, including autoreactive antibodies. 
Besides B cell growth stimulation, EBV stimulates production 
of EBI3, one of two chains of the tolerance-control heterodimer 
cytokines IL27 and IL35 (151). Thus, EBV is deeply influencing 
immune functions. EBV is also coding for antigens with highly 
repetitive structure (e.g., Gly–Ala–Gly–Ala repeats in EBNA1). 
This may be a source for antigenic mimicry and development 
of autoreactivity. Both the B cell growth stimulation and such 
antigenic mimicry make EBV a prime suspect of inducing 
autoreactivity. There is a correlation between occurrence of IM 
and the autoimmune diseases MS (152–154) and SLE (155–158). 
How EBV is involved, be it frequent reactivations of latent EBV 
or defects in the T cell and NK cell surveillance mechanisms 
against the virus, is not clear, but the presence of EBV, and the 
immune response to it, should be compared in ME/CFS, MS, 
and SLE, see Ref. (134).
Summarizing, EBV is especially interesting as a facilitator 
of autoreactivity. Some autoantibodies may have an origin in a 
mimicry between EBV antigen and self-antigens. EBV is a ubiq-
uitous virus. EBV can stimulate thousands of B cells to produce 
thousands of different antibodies, each with its own unique 
antigen-binding site. It often occurs as an eliciting factor trig-
gering ME/CFS, in this case referred to as “postviral fatigue.” As 
mentioned, it stimulates growth of a wide variety of B cells, and it 
has viral proteins that can give rise to autoantibodies (159, 160).
Transmissibility is a microbial property. Most ME/CFS cases 
are sporadic (118). However, there are a few recorded outbreaks, 
where healthy ME/CFS patient contacts developed symptoms of 
the disease (118, 161), forming ME/CFS outbreaks in ME/CFS, 
indicating a transmissible agent.
Many observations support that a condition similar to ME/
CFS occurs in approximately 10% of those who had Q fever, an 
infection with the bacterium Coxiella burnetii (69, 70, 74) which 
often occurs in outbreaks. Q fever is unevenly spread throughout 
the world. ME/CFS is more widespread. Q fever is therefore 
unlikely to be a common cause of ME/CFS, globally.
A chronic postinfectious fatigue/fatigability reminiscent of 
PEM occurs after a number of life-threatening virus infections 
(Table 2). There is not much antigenic similarity between these 
infective agents. Many infections which fundamentally challenge 
or reorganize the immune system give rise to a persistent, perhaps 
autoimmune, malfunctioning state.
Note that the number of ME/CFS cases triggered by severe 
zoonotic infections such as Ebola must be very small, on a global 
scale. Besides IM, mild respiratory infections like those caused by 
mycoplasma (162–168) and chlamydia (164, 169, 170), or general 
infections due to parvovirus B19 (136, 171) and herpes 6 and 7 
(133), have been mentioned, although the diagnostic evidence is 
not strong.
Although much remains unclear before the role of infection in 
autoimmunity is understood, there are diseases where a known 
antigenic challenge triggers autoimmune disease, an infection 
(172) or a vaccination. Surprisingly often it is the brain that is the 
target for this autoimmunity (Table 3).
In addition to commonly known microbes (virus, bacteria, 
and protozoa), a large number of new ones have been discovered 
during the last 5 years (171, 173–179). Many of them are viruses 
which do not cause any known disease. We need to keep an eye 
on these microbes. Maybe there are some among them which can 
precipitate ME/CFS?
In these examples of infection elicited autoimmunity, the 
microbial antigen mimics epitope(s) on human cells. Such 
microbial epitopes may either be small molecules, like lipids, or 
added to proteins posttranslationally (172), randomly similar 
sequences, repetitive sequence motifs, or highly conserved anti-
genic structures.
An example of the former mechanism (posttranslational anti-
genic modification) is PBC. The antibodies are directed against a 
small fatty acid molecule, lipoic acid, added posttranslationally to 
a protein in the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) enzyme complex. 
PDH is part of the energy producing machinery at the surface of 
mitochondria (180, 181), and governs the transition from glycoly-
sis (anaerobic energy metabolism) to the tricarboxylic acid cycle 
and respiratory chain (aerobic energy metabolism), occurring 
 taBLe 3 | Autoimmune syndromes secondary to infections–association/hypothetical relationship.
disease
Microbe
type of microbe
Mimicry (likely structure)
reference
Postinfectious encephalitis
Measles, Varicella-zoster, etc.
Virus
Anti-myelin oligodendrocyte  
glycoprotein and unknown antigens
(85, 86)
Guillain–Barré syndrome
Campylobacter (primarily)  
and Zika virus
Bacterium  
and virus
Gangliosides; unknown antigen
(87, 88)
“Nodding disease”
Onchocerca volvulus
Worm
Unknown antigen
(89)
Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric 
disorders associated with streptococcal 
infection (PANDAS)
Streptococcus infections,  
i.e., strep throat or scarlet fever
Bacterium
Carbohydrate antigens?
(90)
Multiple sclerosis
Epstein–Barr virus and other 
pathogens
Virus and bacteria
Myelin basic protein, proteolipid protein, 
 
and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
(91, 92)
6
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
inside mitochondria. Lipoylation is a posttranslational modifica-
tion, which also occurs in a few bacteria, such as Novosphingobium 
(182). Gut infection with Novosphingobium is a possible cause of 
PBC. The PBC patients have a PEM reminiscent of the PEM of 
ME/CFS. Likewise, periodontal infection with Aggregatibacter, 
which citrullinates its own as well as human proteins, may provide 
the final trigger for rheumatoid arthritis (183).
An example of the latter mechanism (conserved epitopes) 
is a family of highly conserved proteins, which are present in 
both humans and microbes, called “heat shock proteins” (HSP). 
Antibodies against HSPs occur in many often studied autoim-
mune diseases, for example, MS and SLE (94, 184–188). We found 
a higher frequency and levels of antibodies against a specific 
portion of HSP60 in ME/CFS patients (94). Even though HSP60 
is a mitochondrial protein it is unknown if these antibodies can 
influence mitochondrial function.
iMMUnoLoGiCaL aspeCts oF Me/CFs
How does autoreactivity develop? Much remains to be learned. 
The adaptive portion of the immune system (B and T cells) has a 
formidable task, to distinguish “self” from “non-self,” i.e., autoan-
tigens from antigens of invading microbes. After an infection 
the immune response is initially relying on players of the innate 
immune system with natural antibodies, receptors for pathogen-
associated molecular patterns, danger-associated molecular 
patterns, and DNA sensors for exogenous pathogens. However, 
within a few weeks the immune system acquires a higher preci-
sion with the developing adaptive immune B and T cells ensuring 
that only the targeted microbe is destroyed. The target selection 
(and tolerance development) may go wrong. Some microbial 
targets are very similar to self-molecules. This is the basis for the 
so-called molecular mimicry theory, although the evolutionary 
lines for microbes and humans diverged long ago. There are still 
some structures, such as HSP, which have hardly changed at all 
since then. An immune defense against them thus constitutes a 
risk of promoting an autoreactive response.
So-called “natural antibodies,” which occur in all persons and 
mostly are of IgM nature, often both poly- and autoreactive, are 
produced by a CD20+, CD27+, and CD43+ subset of B cells 
(189). One function of these natural antibodies is scavenging of 
dead/apoptotic, damaged and infected cells. Only sometimes do 
they result in disease. In a healthy person, B cells that can produce 
autoantibodies often rest in an “anergic” state and do not produce 
their potentially damaging antibodies. They can be activated by 
the so-called “cell danger” signals. B cells which produce natural 
IgM have regulatory functions (190). Such “innate” immune cells 
which are on the border of auto- and alloreactivity may be start-
ing points for development of autoimmune disease.
Disturbance in the composition of the gut microbiome, dys-
biosis, has been detected in several diseases (33–35, 86, 191–195). 
A major function of the microbiome probably is to train the 
immune system (e.g., T cells, B cells, and dendritic cells) with a 
large variety of antigens. Disturbance in it may lead to a defective 
immune repertoire and imbalance of tolerance induction (196). 
As the tools for studying microbiota gradually become more pre-
cise, the possibility of more or less specific changes in microbiota 
predisposing to autoreactivity is increasingly being addressed. 
This is the case for type 1 diabetes (27, 197, 198), multiple sclerosis 
(199), rheumatoid arthritis (200), SLE (201), Behcet’s syndrome 
(202), autoimmune gastritis (203), and ankylosing spondylitis 
(204). ME/CFS patients also seem to have aberrations in their 
gut microbiota (33, 192, 205, 206).
A symptomatic variant of gut dysbiosis, IBS (207), a common 
comorbidity in ME/CFS, may influence mucosal tolerance induc-
tion. Indeed, ME/CFS with IBS was suggested to be a distinct 
subset of ME/CFS (208).
It is conceivable that if the mucosal barrier also is broken by 
microleakage (28, 34, 37, 41, 192, 209–210), tolerance develop-
ment may become impaired, facilitating development of autore-
activity (37–42, 211–213). Autoimmunity often seems to be a hit 
and run phenomenon. However, a chronic underlying infection 
cannot be excluded, also in the ME/CFS case (214, 215).
The hypothesis presented in Figure 2 is based on findings 
regarding the IGHV gene sequence VH4-34 (23, 24) in SLE. 
It elaborates the immunoevolutionary aspect of Figure 1. 
 
Its explanatory model is similar to current thinking regarding 
the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease. It tries to clarify the 
genesis of autoreactive B cell clones from germ line to patho-
genicity. The original specificity conferred to a B cell and 
immunoglobulin by VH4-34 is anti-branched lactosamine 
containing carbohydrates. This then gradually mutates, prob-
ably due to exposure to epitopes from commensal gut bacteria. 
The original specificity exists in the beginning of a mutational 
walk in the Vh genetic maze, an example of epistasis, where one 
mutation facilitates other mutations during avidity maturation. 
 taBLe 4 | Occurrence of autoantibodies in ME/CFS and some of its comorbidities.a
disease (frequency in Me/CFs),  
reference
antigen to which autoantibody occurs more often than in controls
phospholipid
Carbohydrate
Hormone
Hormone receptor
ion channel protein
other protein
ME/CFS
Cardiolipin (54)
Ganglioside (54)
β-Adrenergic and  
muscarinic cholinergic 
(93)
HSP60 (94)
Fibromyalgia (35–73%) (95)
Potassium channel 
transporter (96, 97)
(hypo)Thyroidism (thyroiditis  
by cytology, 40%, wide definition  
of chronic fatigue) (98)
Thyroperoxidase 
(45)
Thyroid-stimulating  
hormone (99)
Postural orthostatic tachycardia  
syndrome and/or orthostatic  
hypotension (27%) (100)
Acetylcholine (101)
Calcium channel 
transporter (101)
Irritable bowel syndrome  
(35–90%) (30–32)
Vinculin and cytolethal 
distending toxin B (58)
aThe list is not complete. More studies are needed to obtain better statistics. Some of these autoantibodies have the potential to become diagnostic biomarkers. Abbreviations are 
explained in the text.
7
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
Other unknown antigenic stimulations then give rise to various 
autoantibodies, some with anti-DNA specificity. We hypoth-
esize that pathogenic autoantibodies in ME/CFS are created by a 
similar mechanism. Thus, we postulate that a genetically predis-
posed person gets a deranged gut microbiome which gives rise 
to apathogenic B cells with a weak autospecificity. They are not 
eliminated due to a defective tolerance induction. Finally, these 
clones are given an antigenic stimulation from an exogenous 
infection which yields pathogenic B cell clones. Thus, memory 
B cell clones with a paratope spectrum derived from germline 
and subsequent exposure to commensal microbes, e.g., in gut, 
may be an important intermediary step before development of 
outright autoimmunity. It should be possible to follow the path 
to autopathic clones by isolation and sequencing the variable 
immunoglobulin chains in B lymphocytes in ME/CFS, like what 
was done with VH4-34.
autoreactive B Cell Clones and 
autoantibodies in Me/CFs
Several autoantibodies have been found in ME/CFS (54, 93, 
94, 216–222), and some of its comorbidities (Table 4). This is 
circumstantial evidence for ME/CFS being an autoimmune con-
dition. Especially interesting are the results where an increased 
frequency of antibodies to certain hormone receptors was found 
(93). Several ME/CFS symptoms may be explainable by receptor 
interference from such autoantibodies.
In autoimmune conditions with pathological autoantibodies, 
erroneously activated and mutated B cells are the root of the 
evil (Figure 2). These should be studied in detail (43). One can 
envisage large scale sequencing of immunoglobulin gene vari-
able domains of such clones to define aberrant specificities, with 
autoreactivity. A characteristic variation in B cell subsets (43) has 
been described in ME/CFS.
This should be studied systematically. At which time point did 
these diseases manifest themselves, before or after the ME/CFS 
started? How large is the frequency of autoantibodies in patients 
with these conditions, preferably measured simultaneously in 
an antigen matrix? Maybe there are autoimmunity biomarkers 
which could be used for ME/CFS diagnosis?
Cytokine patterns in Blood and CsF  
in Me/CFs
The immune system is engaged in ME/CFS (220). Several studies 
have found changes in cytokine pattern in blood and CSF, and in 
expression of cytokine genes (223–231), especially after exercise 
(232–238), concomitant with an increase in reactive oxygen spe-
cies (ROS) levels and a decrease of HSP70 concentration (239), 
often in connection with a “flare,” an acute exacerbation of ME/
CFS symptoms (237, 238). A difficulty is that cytokine patterns 
(Table 5) are inherently variable. The cytokine profiles may be 
different in different stages of the disease (225, 240).
A more permanent dysregulation of cytokines in plasma has 
also been reported (223, 225, 226, 228, 230, 243), see Table 5. 
A correlation with disease duration was seen (225, 242). A meta-
analysis showed that an increased level of TGFβ in plasma in 
ME/CFS versus controls was the most consistent finding (227). 
Cytokines in CSF were also deranged in ME/CFS (224, 228).
Table 5 is a compilation from recent publications on cytokine 
abnormalities in ME/CFS. A recent meta-analysis concluded that 
many of the reported findings are not reproducible (227). This 
could reflect different levels of physical activity, the volatile nature 
of cytokine levels and methodological problems, such as collec-
tion, handling, and preparation of samples. There could also be a 
heterogeneity within the ME/CFS group which blurs the patterns, 
see, e.g., Ref. (224, 234).
Whether there are cytokine changes after exercise peculiar to 
ME/CFS is a related subject (244). A recent meta-analysis con-
cluded that complement factor C4a split products, oxidative stress 
markers and leukocyte expression of IL10 and toll-like receptor 4 
genes are reproducibly different from controls in ME/CFS (233). 
However, there may be subgroups within the ME/CFS group with 
radically different reactions to exercise. A clear-cut difference in 
 taBLe 5 | A selective list of cytokines whose concentrations were reported to change in ME/CFS.
Cytokine
Body fluid
Up- or downregulation
reference
Comment
TGFα
Serum
+
(225)
TGFβ
Serum
+
(226, 227)
Most consistent finding, although one inconclusive (241)
TNFα
Serum
+
(225)
Elevated early after debut
IFN-γ
Serum
+
(225)
Elevated early after debut
IL1α
Serum
+
(225)
Elevated in early stage of ME/CFS
Eotaxin-1 (CCL11)
Serum
−, +
(225, 226)
Positively correlated with severity and low early after debut
Eotaxin-2 (CCL24)
Serum
+
(223)
Leptin
Serum
−
(230)
Inversely correlated with severity
IL13
Serum
+
(226)
Positively correlated with severity
IL6
Serum
+
(242)
Elevated early after debut
IL7
Serum
−
(223)
IL8
Serum
+
(242)
Elevated early after debut
IL10
Cerebrospinal fluid
−
(228)
IL16
Serum
−
(223)
IL17A
Serum
+
(225)
Elevated early after debut
VEGFα
Serum
−
(223)
8
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
gene expression after exercise between ME/CFS patients which 
have POTS comorbidity, and those who do not, was found (234).
The activity of the so-called natural killer cells is also changed 
(231, 244–248) in ME/CFS. However, a negative report came 
recently (249). The latter may be due to methodological differ-
ences. Both kinds of immune change (cytokines and immune cell 
activity) are potential biomarkers and should be studied more.
is there a General defect in tolerance 
development in Me/CFs?
Tolerance induction is a major property of the gut mucosal 
immune system (196). A special kind of T helper cells, Treg, medi-
ate mucosal tolerance, and anergy of tolerized B cell clones, via 
IL10 and TGFβ. It may be more than a coincidence that a change 
in TGFβ levels in serum was the most consistent cytokine change 
in ME/CFS versus controls (Table 5).
A defective tolerance development could in principle be 
detectable as a tendency to develop autoimmune disease in ME/
CFS. The comorbidity between ME/CFS and better studied auto-
immune disorders such as SS (250), SLE, and multiple sclerosis 
(251) is an indication of this. Fatigability, which may or may not 
be related to the PEM of ME/CFS (252–255), occurs as a major 
symptom in some autoimmune (6, 184, 256–261), mitochondrial 
(262, 263) and infectious (264) diseases. Immunostimulation, 
e.g., with Staphylococcal vaccine, theoretically could induce 
tolerance to autoepitopes involved in ME/CFS pathogenesis 
(265–267). It was reported to be effective in ME/CFS in a double-
blind study (267). Symptom relief paralleled anti-staphylococcal 
antibody presence (266), arguing for impaired development 
of tolerance to autoepitopes of microbial origin in ME/CFS. 
Further studies are needed.
A strong argument for B cell-mediated autoimmunity in ME/
CFS has been the  rituximAab effect (20, 22). Around 60% of 
patients improved after a lag period. Rituximab is a monoclonal 
antibody directed against CD20, a surface antigen expressed on 
the majority of B cells. They are killed when the antibody binds to 
them. However, in a recent phase III trial there was no statistically 
significant effect observed (Mella, personal communication). 
Until results of the trial are published, it is not known whether 
this was due to a major placebo, or a minor rituximab, effect. 
CD20 is mainly present on B cells, but is neither expressed on 
immature B cells nor on most antibody producing cells such as 
plasmablasts and plasma cells (268). Part of the problem may be 
the subjective estimation of symptoms, prone to overestimation 
of placebo effects. In future double-blind studies of treatments 
for ME, objective symptom measures should be used to a larger 
extent. Another confounding factor may be heterogeneity within 
the ME/CFS patients although they were diagnosed according to 
the Canada criteria. Detailed studies are strongly recommended. 
Unpublished phase I and II studies have shown improvement 
in ME/CFS patients after treatment with the more unspecific 
immunosuppressant cyclophosphamide (Fluge, personal com-
munication). It is another sign of autoimmunity contributing to 
ME/CFS.
In autoimmunity dependent on autoantibodies, the errone-
ously activated B cells are the root of the evil.
increased Frequency of Lymphomas  
in Me/CFs
Chronic immune stimulation increases the risk for B cell lym-
phomas. This happens in many autoimmune diseases. In accord-
ance with the autoimmune hypothesis for ME/CFS presented 
here, CFS patients have a greater risk of B cell non-Hodgkin 
lymphomas, in particular marginal zone lymphoma (OR = 1.88, 
95% CI = 1.38–2.57), compared with sex and age matched 
controls (269).
In summary, the evidence for autoimmunity in ME/CFS is 
indirect or circumstantial. It rests on the effect of immunosup-
pression (although unsubstantiated in a double-blind trial) of 
anti-CD20, comorbidities with known autoimmunity (thyroiditis, 
thyroidism) or possible autoimmunity (FM, POTS, IBS), prob-
able improvement after immunostimulation, and an increased 
frequency of certain autoantibodies and of B cell lymphomas. 
Of the Witebsky–Rose criteria for autoimmunity (270), direct; 
transfer of disease by antibody, and indirect; transfer of disease 
by cells to SCID mice, induction of disease by autoantigen, 
 FiGUre 3 | Metabolites and enzymes that are reportedly changed in ME/CFS. Molecules localized in energy metabolic organelles (peroxisome and mitochondrion), 
and the whole cell, are shown in pink if increased in abundance and green if decreased in abundance. Changes may sometimes be visible only after exercise. The 
blue “X” indicates a metabolic block implicated in ME/CFS (275). Normally functioning mitochondria convert oxygen to water through the respiratory chain. If the 
aerobic energy production is impaired, some oxygen can be converted to hydrogen peroxide and reactive oxygen species (ROS). PPP is the pentose phosphate 
pathway, an alternative pathway for energy production from carbohydrates. It produces the antioxidant NADPH. Together with glutathione, a product of one-carbon 
metabolism, NADPH controls ROS accumulation (“Redox ctrl”). A panel including some of the marked molecules may be useful as biomarker for ME/CFS.
9
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
identification of antibodies within lesions, genetic predisposition, 
autoantibodies or self-reactive T cells, a few (genetic predisposi-
tion and increased frequency of autoantibodies) are partially 
fulfilled. Much work remains.
Can aUtoiMMUnity eXpLain enerGy 
MetaBoLiC distUrBanCes and peM?
The objective measurement of energy metabolism by repeated 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing revealed a defective aerobic 
energy production in ME/CFS (19). This is manifested as an 
abnormal fatigability. Fatigability, which may or may not be 
related to the PEM of ME/CFS (252–255), occurs as a major 
symptom in some autoimmune (6, 184, 256–261), mitochondrial 
(262, 263) and infectious (264) diseases. It remains to be studied 
how unique the PEM of ME/CFS is.
Several observations indicate that the oxygen dependent 
(aerobic) energy metabolism is disturbed in ME/CFS (8, 19, 
262, 271–273) (Figure 3; Table 6). That disturbance may be the 
reason for PEM. Mitochondria are the main producers of energy. 
They derive from α-proteobacteria which, over one billion years 
ago, were taken up into eukaryotic cells, see, e.g., Ref. (274). 
 
It is not unreasonable to guess that an immune defense against 
an infecting bacterium can cause collateral damage to mitochon-
dria. While there must be protective mechanisms against this 
 
(e.g., tolerization), they may not always work.
A new dimension for understanding ME/CFS was added 
by recent publications (275, 279, 280, 282, 284). They revealed 
profound metabolic differences between ME/CFS patients and 
controls. Some of these changes may derive from an abnormal 
mitochondrial function in ME/CFS. Whether these abnormali-
ties have an autoimmune origin is not known.
evidence for inhibition of Key energy 
Metabolic processes in Me/CFs
A number of reports indicate a metabolic disturbance, indicative 
of mitochondrial dysfunction (19, 273, 275, 276, 279, 280, 282, 
284–286) in ME/CFS. Evidence points to a defective aerobic 
energy metabolism. The aerobic energy metabolism (TCA + res-
piratory chain) gives an around 10-fold higher yield of ATP per 
glucose molecule than the anaerobic metabolism. There are 
similarities with PBC, a model of autoantibody mediated energy 
blockade (180, 287–292). In analogy with PBC, where IgG were 
found to be energy inhibitory, circulating energy inhibitors have 
been found in ME/CFS (275), although their molecular nature is 
unknown. The demonstration of such inhibitors has the potential 
 taBLe 6 | Potential energy metabolic biomarkers for ME/CFS.
Metabolic role
Metabolite or protein
Body fluid
Gain (+) or loss (−) in  
Me/CFs vs healthy controls
reference
Comment
One-carbon metabolism
Taurine
Blood
−
(276)
Homocysteine
Cerebrospinal  
fluid (CSF)
+
(277)
Oxidation
Reactive oxygen species  
(peroxide, etc.)
Serum
+
(239, 278)
Measured using thiobarbituric 
acid reactive substances
Amino acid metabolism  
(anaplerotic amino acids)
Leucine, isoleucine,  
phenylalanine, and tyrosine
Blood
−
(275)
Urea cycle and amino  
acid metabolism
Citrulline
Blood and urine
−
(279)
Ornithine
Blood and urine
+
(279)
Lipid metabolism
Phospholipids, including  
cardiolipin
Blood
−
(280)
Acyl carnitine
Blood
−
(276, 280)
(Glyco)sphingolipids
Blood
−
(280)
Glycolysis
Lactate
Blood and CSF  
(muscle)
+
(271, 275, 281)
Higher after exercise  
(physical and mental)
Tricarboxylic acid  
cycle (TCA)
Isocitrate
Blood
−
(279)
TCA
Succinate
Blood and urine
−
(282)
TCA
Aconitate hydratase protein
Saliva
+
(283)
ATP synthase protein
Saliva
+
(283)
ATP translocase
Saliva
−
(283)
10
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
to explain the disease and create efficient diagnostic tests. It would 
be logical if, like in PBC, these circulating inhibitors turned out to 
be immunoglobulins, presumably directed against mitochondrial 
proteins.
It is an important research task to compare PEM of PBC with 
the PEM of ME/CFS, and PEM-like fatigability in other diseases.
Fibromyalgia is a common comorbidity of ME/CFS, which 
also occurs in several established autoimmune conditions 
 
(55, 293–298). The delineation of ME/CFS from FM is sometimes 
not straightforward. FM muscle displays metabolic abnormalities 
(299, 300) reminiscent of those observed in ME/CFS. Besides the 
comorbidity, there seem to be both common (myalgia, muscle 
metabolic abnormalities, increased frequency of autoantibod-
ies) and distinct (PEM, cognitive disturbance) aspects of these 
conditions.
Can a defective energy Metabolism also 
explain the Cognitive disturbances?
A deficient energy supply may also cause cognitive disturbance 
 
in ME/CFS (195). It can be elicited by both physical and mental 
(301, 302) activity. In analogy with accumulation of lactate in 
serum and muscle after exercise, increased concentrations of 
lactate in CSF have been found in ME/CFS (281, 303) and the 
related condition GWI (304). ME/CFS-specific changes in the 
CSF proteome which included accumulation of complement 
components, a sign of antibody activity, were also described (305).
Homocysteine is part of the one-carbon metabolism, which 
was reported to be deranged in ME/CFS patients, perhaps 
as a compensation for other energy metabolic disturbances. 
Homocysteine levels in CSF are a widely used marker of 
reduced cognition. In 1997, an investigation of homocysteine 
and vitamin B12 in CSF of patients who fulfilled the criteria 
of both FM and chronic fatigue syndrome was carried out. 
In comparison with a large healthy control group, all eleven 
patients in the study had increased homocysteine levels in 
CSF, although the blood levels were usually not increased. The 
CSF-B12 level appeared to be generally low. The high CSF-
homocysteine and low CSF-B12 levels correlated significantly 
with ratings of mental fatigue. The results were at the time 
interpreted as suggesting a block of inflow over the blood 
brain barrier of B12 and/or folic acid (277). The derangement 
in one-carbon metabolism is supported by 20 years’ experience 
of vitamin B12 and B9 treatment in ME/CFS patients, which 
tends to diminish impaired cognition (“brain fog”) (306). It is 
not immediately evident why the one-carbon metabolic path-
way would change after a block of aerobic energy production. 
The genesis of this metabolic aberration in ME/CFS should be 
further studied.
The state of the one-carbon metabolism also has profound 
epigenetic consequences. Both DNA and histone methylation 
depend on the availability of S-adenosyl-methionine.
How are Metabolic disturbances  
related to the Flare after exercise?
The “flare” is a central event after exercise, accounting for much 
of the malaise in PEM.
A link between mitochondrial dysfunction and innate 
immune dysregulation is suggested by recent immunometabolic 
findings which demonstrate that the energy producing organelles 
(mitochondria and peroxisomes) are coupled via mitochondrial 
 11
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
taBLe 7 | How do recent findings fit into the explanatory model?
proposed step
Finding
degree of fit with presented  
explanatory model
Genetic predisposition
GWAS: ME/CFS-specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms  
in microtubule associated protein 7, CCDC7, and TCRα (50)
HLA: increase in DQA1*01 (48)
IgG subclass deficiency (102–105)
Imperfect, needs deeper study
Presence of transmissible agent  
not excluded
Changes in microbiota
Reduced overall diversity (34, 191, 192)
Divergence more concentrated to certain taxa (33, 35)
Imperfect, needs deeper study
Gut microleakage
Increased lipopolysaccharide (LPS), LPS-binding protein,  
and sCD14 in blood (34, 192)
Imperfect, needs deeper study
Autoantibodies
Yes, but maybe not disease specific (see table 4)
Imperfect, needs deeper study
Triggering antigenic challenge
Epstein–Barr virus infection is a common trigger, some  
other infections also (see table 2)
Imperfect. Retrospective diagnosis  
of infections is often problematic
Autopathic B cell clones
Removal of B cells by anti-CD20 or other immunosuppressants  
improves 50–60% of ME/CFS patients in phase I–II trials (20–22)
Increased frequency of B cell lymphomas in ME/CFS patients (269)
Larger study with as objective measures  
as possible is necessary. Autologous  
bone marrow transplantation could  
give additional evidence
Defective tolerization  
of autoreactive B cell clones
Increased frequency of autoimmune disorders and comorbidities  
in ME/CFS patients
Effect of microbial immune modulation (266, 321, 322)
Imperfect, needs deeper study
Disturbance of energy  
metabolism
Clear evidence of energy metabolic disturbance (275, 276, 279, 280)
Imperfect. Needs more observations,  
especially with reference to exercise
Autoimmunity causing energy 
 
metabolic disturbance
Circulating energy inhibitory factors demonstrated  
(like in primary biliary cirrhosis) (275, 292)
Molecular nature of inhibitors is unknown.  
If they are immunoglobulins, can they reach 
intracellular targets?
antiviral signaling protein, a signaling molecule, to the inflamma-
some, which can orchestrate release of inflammatory cytokines 
(307–314). Another sign of mitochondrial derangement in ME/
CFS is the occurrence of ROS in serum, measured as increase 
in thiobarbituric acid reactive substances or decrease of reduced 
ascorbic acid (239, 278). These tests may also become part of a 
biomarker panel for ME/CFS. It was recently shown that oxida-
tion of a critical cysteine residue in pyruvate kinase M2, one of 
the enzymes of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), can 
lead to a block in pyruvate production, potentially mimicking an 
autoimmune block of PDC activity (315, 316). Thus, although 
the pattern of metabolic changes in ME/CFS is compatible with 
a PDH block (275) (blue X in Figure 3), possibly of autoimmune 
origin, the block could also be caused by ROS (317), frequently 
increased in ME/CFS. ROS are produced in four places in the cell; 
NADPH oxidase (in Figure 3), peroxisomes and in respiratory 
chain complexes I and III (318). ROS production can be evoked 
by starvation (319) and respiratory complex I malfunction 
(320). ROS influence glutathione levels and indirectly the whole 
one-carbon metabolism. It could be a key player in ME/CFS 
pathogenesis. The origin and pathobiology of ROS in ME/CFS 
should be investigated.
HoW WeLL do CLiniCaL and 
LaBoratory data Fit into tHe 
eXpLanatory ModeL?
As shown in Table 7, much work remains before the autoimmune 
nature of ME/CFS can be considered established.
WHiCH FaCts do not Fit into tHe 
eXpLanatory ModeL?
Even if ME/CFS is of autoimmune origin, is it the metabolic 
block (275) or the autoantibodies to hormone receptors (93) 
which are most important for pathogenesis?
The mechanism behind the flare after exercise (238) is 
obscure. Maybe a mitochondrial defect can lead to an increased 
activity in the innate immune network.
The disturbance in one-carbon metabolism (277, 280) may 
or may not be related to the disturbed transition between 
glycolysis and TCA cycle. It is indicative of a wider metabolic 
derangement than a block of PDH (275) would be expected to 
lead to. There are several papers on hormones (322), including 
glucocorticoids (257) and transient receptor potential channel 
hormones (222), and their receptors (106, 107, 109), in ME/
CFS. It is conceivable that parts of the autonomic dysfunction 
can be explained in this way.
ConCLUsion
ME/CFS is a challenge for the patients, for medical research 
and ethics, for all of public health, and for society. The intensi-
fied hunt for scientific evidence explaining ME/CFS has large 
consequences for many thousands of people. Many of the 
published results need repetition. But as shown in this article 
the signs that autoimmunity and energy metabolic deficiency 
is involved in the disease have increased. A hypothetical 
but logical path, from gastrointestinal tract dysbiosis, to 
 12
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
reFerenCes
1. Nacul LC, Lacerda EM, Pheby D, Campion P, Molokhia M, Fayyaz S, et al. 
Prevalence of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/
CFS) in three regions of England: a repeated cross-sectional study in primary 
care. BMC Med (2011) 9:91. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-9-91 
2. Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, Klimas NG, Broderick G, 
Mitchell T, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis: International Consensus Criteria. 
J Intern Med (2011) 270:327–38. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02428.x 
3. Carruthers BM. Definitions and aetiology of myalgic encephalomyelitis: how 
the Canadian consensus clinical definition of myalgic encephalomyelitis 
works. J Clin Pathol (2007) 60:117–9. doi:10.1136/jcp.2006.042754 
4. Jason LA, McManimen S, Sunnquist M, Brown A, Furst J, Newton JL, 
 
et al. Case definitions integrating empiric and consensus perspectives. 
Fatigue (2016) 4:1–23. doi:10.1080/21641846.2015.1124520
5. Fukuda K, Straus SE, Hickie I, Sharpe MC, Dobbins JG, Komaroff A. 
 
The chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive approach to its defi-
nition and study. International Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Study Group. 
Ann Intern Med (1994) 121:953–9. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-121-12- 
199412150-00009 
6. Bansal AS. Investigating unexplained fatigue in general practice with a 
particular focus on CFS/ME. BMC Fam Pract (2016) 17:81. doi:10.1186/
s12875-016-0493-0 
7. Unger ER, Lin JS, Brimmer DJ, Lapp CW, Komaroff AL, Nath A, et al.  
Chronic fatigue syndrome – advancing research and clinical education. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2016) 65:1434–8. doi:10.15585/mmwr.
mm655051a4 
8. Davenport TE, Stevens SR, Baroni K, Van Ness M, Snell CR. Diagnostic 
accuracy of symptoms characterising chronic fatigue syndrome. Disabil 
Rehabil (2011) 33:1768–75. doi:10.3109/09638288.2010.546936 
9. Davenport TE, Stevens SR, Baroni K, Van Ness JM, Snell CR. Reliability 
and validity of Short Form 36 Version 2 to measure health perceptions in a 
sub-group of individuals with fatigue. Disabil Rehabil (2011) 33:2596–604. 
doi:10.3109/09638288.2011.582925 
10. Haney E, Smith ME, McDonagh M, Pappas M, Daeges M, Wasson N, 
et al. Diagnostic methods for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a systematic review for a National Institutes of Health Pathways 
to Prevention Workshop. Ann Intern Med (2015) 162:834–40. doi:10.7326/
M15-0443 
11. Jason LA, Sunnquist M, Brown A, Newton JL, Strand EB, Vernon SD. 
Chronic fatigue syndrome versus systemic exertion intolerance disease. 
Fatigue (2015) 3:127–41. doi:10.1080/21641846.2015.1051291
12. Committee_on_Diagnostic_Criteria_for_Myalgic_Encephalomyelitis_
Chronic_Fatigue_Syndrome. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness. Washington (DC): Institute of 
Medicine (2015).
13. Chu L, Friedberg F, Friedman KJ, Littrell N, Stevens S, Vallings R. 
 
Exercise and chronic fatigue syndrome: maximize function, minimize 
post-exertional malaise. Eur J Clin Invest (2012) 42:1362; author reply 1363–5. 
 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2362.2012.02723.x 
14. Rollnik JD. [Chronic fatigue syndrome: a critical review]. Fortschr Neurol 
Psychiatr (2017) 85:79–85. doi:10.1055/s-0042-121259
15. Bianchi R, Schonfeld IS, Laurent E. Is it time to consider the “Burnout 
syndrome” a distinct illness? Front Public Health (2015) 3:158. doi:10.3389/
fpubh.2015.00158
16. White RF, Steele L, O’Callaghan JP, Sullivan K, Binns JH, Golomb BA, 
 
et al. Recent research on Gulf War illness and other health problems in vet-
erans of the 1991 Gulf War: effects of toxicant exposures during deployment. 
Cortex (2016) 74:449–75. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2015.08.022 
17. Baraniuk JN, Shivapurkar N. Exercise – induced changes in cerebrospinal 
fluid miRNAs in Gulf War Illness, chronic fatigue syndrome and sedentary 
control subjects. Sci Rep (2017) 7:15338. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-15383-9 
18. Edwards JC, McGrath S, Baldwin A, Livingstone M, Kewley A. The biological 
challenge of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a solvable 
problem. Fatigue (2016) 4:63–9. doi:10.1080/21641846.2016.1160598
19. Keller BA, Pryor JL, Giloteaux L. Inability of myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome patients to reproduce VO(2)peak indicates 
functional impairment. J Transl Med (2014) 12:104. doi:10.1186/1479-5876- 
12-104 
20. Fluge O, Bruland O, Risa K, Storstein A, Kristoffersen EK, Sapkota D, et al. 
Benefit from B-lymphocyte depletion using the anti-CD20 antibody rituxi-
mab in chronic fatigue syndrome. A double-blind and placebo-controlled 
study. PLoS One (2011) 6:e26358. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0026358 
21. Fluge O, Mella O. Clinical impact of B-cell depletion with the anti-CD20 
antibody rituximab in chronic fatigue syndrome: a preliminary case series. 
BMC Neurol (2009) 9:28. doi:10.1186/1471-2377-9-28 
22. Fluge O, Risa K, Lunde S, Alme K, Rekeland IG, Sapkota D, et al. B-lymphocyte 
depletion in myalgic encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome. An open- 
formation of pathogenic autoimmune B cells, to inhibition 
of energy production and deficient cognition, to flares of 
cytokine production, can be delineated. The natural history 
indicates that in many cases infections can elicit or worsen 
this autoimmunity.
The recently intensified research on ME/CFS yielded many 
biomarker candidates, as mentioned in this study. The main 
consequence of this work is that the proposition that there is 
no logical somatic explanatory model for ME/CFS (14) can be 
refuted. However, like for virtually all autoimmune diseases, the 
explanatory model has several tentative steps which need further 
exploration. The elucidation of the molecular nature of circulat-
ing metabolic inhibitors in ME/CFS (275) is a central question. 
If they turn out to be immunoglobulins, they may directly yield 
diagnostically useful biomarkers and an explanation of the 
mechanism underlying ME/CFS.
The risk of giving a hypothetical unifying explanation, as in 
this study, is that hypothesis can be perceived as fact, and that it 
influences the perception of the disease. But contacts with ME/
CFS patients and those who care for them have convinced us 
that most can handle the uncertainty that hypotheses involve. 
Without hypotheses we cannot direct the acquisition of further 
knowledge of ME/CFS.
aUtHor ContriBUtions
JB conceived of the paper and wrote most of it. C-GG added 
substantial parts especially regarding the clinical aspects. AE 
participated in the writing. She is writing a book on ME/CFS, her 
comprehensive knowledge was valuable. MR participated in the 
writing. He concentrated on checking references. AR contributed 
substantially, especially regarding the immunological aspects.
aCKnoWLedGMents
The authors thank Dr. Geraldine Cambridge for fruitful discus-
sions on mechanisms of ME/CFS pathogenesis and Dr. Lucinda 
Bateman for discussions on clinical aspects of ME/CFS.
FUndinG
The authors thank the SolveME/CFS Initiative, the Swedish 
ME Association, the Open Medicine Foundation (project 
no. 1011454), and the Uppsala Academic Hospital (Grant 
FOU2017-0039) for economic support, as well as the Invest in 
ME Foundation, London, for travel grants. The funders did not 
influence the research or the manuscript in any way.
 13
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
label phase II study with rituximab maintenance treatment. PLoS One 
(2015) 10:e0129898. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0129898 
23. Tipton CM, Fucile CF, Darce J, Chida A, Ichikawa T, Gregoretti I, 
 
et al. Diversity, cellular origin and autoreactivity of antibody-secreting cell 
population expansions in acute systemic lupus erythematosus. Nat Immunol 
(2015) 16:755–65. doi:10.1038/ni.3175 
24. Pugh-Bernard AE, Silverman GJ, Cappione AJ, Villano ME, Ryan DH, 
Insel RA, et al. Regulation of inherently autoreactive VH4-34 B cells in the 
maintenance of human B cell tolerance. J Clin Invest (2001) 108:1061–70. 
doi:10.1172/JCI200112462 
25. Vaz NM, Carvalho CR. On the origin of immunopathology. J Theor Biol 
(2015) 375:61–70. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.06.006 
26. Ferreira CM, Vieira AT, Vinolo MA, Oliveira FA, Curi R, Martins Fdos S. 
The central role of the gut microbiota in chronic inflammatory diseases. 
J Immunol Res (2014) 2014:689492. doi:10.1155/2014/689492 
27. Vaarala O. Gut microbiota and type 1 diabetes. Rev Diabet Stud (2012) 
9:251–9. doi:10.1900/RDS.2012.9.251 
28. Fasano A, Shea-Donohue T. Mechanisms of disease: the role of intestinal 
barrier function in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal autoimmune dis-
eases. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol (2005) 2:416–22. doi:10.1038/
ncpgasthep0259 
29. Noverr MC, Huffnagle GB. Does the microbiota regulate immune 
responses outside the gut? Trends Microbiol (2004) 12:562–8. doi:10.1016/j.
tim.2004.10.008 
30. Aaron LA, Arguelles LM, Ashton S, Belcourt M, Herrell R, Goldberg J, 
 
et al. Health and functional status of twins with chronic regional and wide-
spread pain. J Rheumatol (2002) 29:2426–34. 
31. Aaron LA, Herrell R, Ashton S, Belcourt M, Schmaling K, Goldberg J, et al. 
Comorbid clinical conditions in chronic fatigue: a co-twin control study. 
J Gen Intern Med (2001) 16:24–31. doi:10.1111/j.1525-1497.2001.03419.x 
32. Hausteiner-Wiehle C, Henningsen P. Irritable bowel syndrome: relations 
with functional, mental, and somatoform disorders. World J Gastroenterol 
(2014) 20:6024–30. doi:10.3748/wjg.v20.i20.6024 
33. Navaneetharaja N, Griffiths V, Wileman T, Carding SR. A role for the 
intestinal microbiota and virome in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? J Clin Med (2016) 5:1–22. doi:10.3390/ 
jcm5060055 
34. Shukla SK, Cook D, Meyer J, Vernon SD, Le T, Clevidence D, et al.  
Changes in gut and plasma microbiome following exercise challenge in 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). PLoS One 
(2015) 10:e0145453. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145453 
35. Nagy-Szakal D, Williams BL, Mishra N, Che X, Lee B, Bateman L, et al. 
Fecal metagenomic profiles in subgroups of patients with myalgic enceph-
alomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Microbiome (2017) 5:44. doi:10.1186/
s40168-017-0261-y 
36. Holmgren J, Czerkinsky C. Mucosal immunity and vaccines. Nat Med 
(2005) 11:S45–53. doi:10.1038/nm1213 
37. Quigley EM. Leaky gut – concept or clinical entity? Curr Opin Gastroenterol 
(2016) 32:74–9. doi:10.1097/MOG.0000000000000243 
38. Michielan A, D’Inca R. Intestinal permeability in inflammatory bowel dis-
ease: pathogenesis, clinical evaluation, and therapy of leaky gut. Mediators 
Inflamm (2015) 2015:628157. doi:10.1155/2015/628157 
39. Lin R, Zhou L, Zhang J, Wang B. Abnormal intestinal permeability and 
microbiota in patients with autoimmune hepatitis. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 
(2015) 8:5153–60. 
40. Taneja V. Arthritis susceptibility and the gut microbiome. FEBS Lett (2014) 
588:4244–9. doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2014.05.034 
41. Fasano A. Leaky gut and autoimmune diseases. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 
(2012) 42:71–8. doi:10.1007/s12016-011-8291-x 
42. de Kort S, Keszthelyi D, Masclee AA. Leaky gut and diabetes mellitus: what 
is the link? Obes Rev (2011) 12:449–58. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2010. 
00845.x 
43. Mensah F, Bansal A, Berkovitz S, Sharma A, Reddy V, Leandro MJ, et al. 
Extended B cell phenotype in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome: a cross-sectional study. Clin Exp Immunol (2016) 
184:237–47. doi:10.1111/cei.12749 
44. Oldstone MB. Molecular mimicry: its evolution from concept to mecha-
nism as a cause of autoimmune diseases. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn 
Immunother (2014) 33:158–65. doi:10.1089/mab.2013.0090 
45. Lee HJ, Li CW, Hammerstad SS, Stefan M, Tomer Y. Immunogenetics of 
autoimmune thyroid diseases: a comprehensive review. J Autoimmun (2015) 
64:82–90. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2015.07.009 
46. Theander E, Jacobsson LT. Relationship of Sjogren’s syndrome to other con-
nective tissue and autoimmune disorders. Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2008) 
34:935–47,viii–ix. doi:10.1016/j.rdc.2008.08.009 
47. Kurien BT, Scofield RH. Autoantibody determination in the diagnosis 
of systemic lupus erythematosus. Scand J Immunol (2006) 64:227–35. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-3083.2006.01819.x 
48. Smith J, Fritz EL, Kerr JR, Cleare AJ, Wessely S, Mattey DL. Association of 
chronic fatigue syndrome with human leucocyte antigen class II alleles. J Clin 
Pathol (2005) 58:860–3. doi:10.1136/jcp.2004.022681 
49. Carlo-Stella N, Badulli C, De Silvestri A, Bazzichi L, Martinetti M, Lorusso L, 
 
et al. A first study of cytokine genomic polymorphisms in CFS: positive 
association of TNF-857 and IFNgamma 874 rare alleles. Clin Exp Rheumatol 
(2006) 24:179–82. 
50. Schlauch KA, Khaiboullina SF, De Meirleir KL, Rawat S, Petereit J, 
 
Rizvanov AA, et al. Genome-wide association analysis identifies genetic 
variations in subjects with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Transl Psychiatry (2016) 6:e730. doi:10.1038/tp.2015.208 
51. Ahmad J, Blumen H, Tagoe CE. Association of antithyroid peroxidase 
antibody with fibromyalgia in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatol Int (2015) 
35:1415–21. doi:10.1007/s00296-015-3278-1 
52. Giacomelli C, Talarico R, Bombardieri S, Bazzichi L. The interaction 
between autoimmune diseases and fibromyalgia: risk, disease course and 
management. Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2013) 9:1069–76. doi:10.1586/174
4666X.2013.849440 
53. Suk JH, Lee JH, Kim JM. Association between thyroid autoimmunity and 
fibromyalgia. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes (2012) 120:401–4. doi:10.1055/s- 
0032-1309008 
54. Klein R, Berg PA. High incidence of antibodies to 5-hydroxytryptamine, 
gangliosides and phospholipids in patients with chronic fatigue and fibro-
myalgia syndrome and their relatives: evidence for a clinical entity of both 
disorders. Eur J Med Res (1995) 1:21–6. 
55. Bazzichi L, Rossi A, Zirafa C, Monzani F, Tognini S, Dardano A, et al. 
Thyroid autoimmunity may represent a predisposition for the development 
of fibromyalgia? Rheumatol Int (2012) 32:335–41. doi:10.1007/s00296- 
010-1620-1 
56. Borchers AT, Gershwin ME. Fibromyalgia: a critical and comprehensive 
review. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2015) 49:100–51. doi:10.1007/s12016- 
015-8509-4 
57. Wallace DJ, Gavin IM, Karpenko O, Barkhordar F, Gillis BS. Cytokine and 
chemokine profiles in fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus 
erythematosus: a potentially useful tool in differential diagnosis. Rheumatol 
Int (2015) 35:991–6. doi:10.1007/s00296-014-3172-2 
58. Pimentel M, Morales W, Rezaie A, Marsh E, Lembo A, Mirocha J, et al. 
Development and validation of a biomarker for diarrhea-predominant 
irritable bowel syndrome in human subjects. PLoS One (2015) 10:e0126438. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0126438 
59. van Tilburg MA, Zaki EA, Venkatesan T, Boles RG. Irritable bowel syn-
drome may be associated with maternal inheritance and mitochondrial 
DNA control region sequence variants. Dig Dis Sci (2014) 59:1392–7. 
doi:10.1007/s10620-014-3045-2 
60. Van Oudenhove L, Vandenberghe J, Vos R, Holvoet L, Tack J. Factors 
associated with co-morbid irritable bowel syndrome and chronic fatigue-
like symptoms in functional dyspepsia. Neurogastroenterol Motil (2011) 
23:524–e202. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01667.x 
61. Sperber AD, Dekel R. Irritable bowel syndrome and co-morbid gastrointes-
tinal and extra-gastrointestinal functional syndromes. J Neurogastroenterol 
Motil (2010) 16:113–9. doi:10.5056/jnm.2010.16.2.113 
62. Lakhan SE, Kirchgessner A. Gut inflammation in chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Nutr Metab (Lond) (2010) 7:79. doi:10.1186/1743-7075-7-79 
63. Hamilton WT, Gallagher AM, Thomas JM, White PD. Risk markers for 
 
both chronic fatigue and irritable bowel syndromes: a prospective case- 
control study in primary care. Psychol Med (2009) 39:1913–21. doi:10.1017/
S0033291709005601 
64. Dahan S, Tomljenovic L, Shoenfeld Y. Postural orthostatic tachycardia syn-
drome (POTS) – a novel member of the autoimmune family. Lupus (2016) 
25:339–42. doi:10.1177/0961203316629558 
 14
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
65. Tagoe CE. Rheumatic symptoms in autoimmune thyroiditis. Curr Rheumatol 
Rep (2015) 17:5. doi:10.1007/s11926-014-0479-7 
66. Ahmad J, Tagoe CE. Fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain in auto-
immune thyroid disease. Clin Rheumatol (2014) 33:885–91. doi:10.1007/
s10067-014-2490-9 
67. Carayanniotis G. The cryptic self in thyroid autoimmunity: the paradigm 
of thyroglobulin. Autoimmunity (2003) 36:423–8. doi:10.1080/0891693031
0001602975 
68. Katz BZ, Jason LA. Chronic fatigue syndrome following infections 
 
in adolescents. Curr Opin Pediatr (2013) 25:95–102. doi:10.1097/MOP. 
0b013e32835c1108 
69. Hickie I, Davenport T, Wakefield D, Vollmer-Conna U, Cameron B, 
 
Vernon SD, et al. Post-infective and chronic fatigue syndromes precipitated 
by viral and non-viral pathogens: prospective cohort study. BMJ (2006) 
333:575. doi:10.1136/bmj.38933.585764.AE 
70. Morroy G, Keijmel SP, Delsing CE, Bleijenberg G, Langendam M, Timen A, 
et al. Fatigue following acute Q-fever: a systematic literature review. PLoS 
 
One (2016) 11:e0155884. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0155884 
71. Parker NR, Barralet JH, Bell AM. Q fever. Lancet (2006) 367:679–88. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68266-4 
72. Wensaas KA, Langeland N, Hanevik K, Morch K, Eide GE, Rortveit G. 
 
Irritable bowel syndrome and chronic fatigue 3 years after acute giar-
diasis: historic cohort study. Gut (2012) 61:214–9. doi:10.1136/gutjnl- 
2011-300220 
73. Hunskar GS, Langeland N, Wensaas KA, Hanevik K, Eide GE, Morch K, 
 
et al. The impact of atopic disease on the risk of post-infectious fatigue and 
irritable bowel syndrome 3 years after Giardia infection. A historic cohort 
study. Scand J Gastroenterol (2012) 47:956–61. doi:10.3109/00365521.2012. 
 
696681 
74. Cvejic E, Lemon J, Hickie IB, Lloyd AR, Vollmer-Conna U. Neurocognitive 
disturbances associated with acute infectious mononucleosis, Ross River 
fever and Q fever: a preliminary investigation of inflammatory and genetic 
correlates. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 36:207–14. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2013. 
11.002 
75. Soumahoro MK, Gerardin P, Boelle PY, Perrau J, Fianu A, Pouchot J, et al. 
Impact of Chikungunya virus infection on health status and quality of life: 
a retrospective cohort study. PLoS One (2009) 4:e7800. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0007800 
76. Elsinga J, Gerstenbluth I, van der Ploeg S, Halabi Y, Lourents NT, Burgerhof JG, 
 
et al. Long-term Chikungunya Sequelae in Curacao: burden, determinants, 
and a novel classification tool. J Infect Dis (2017) 216:573–81. doi:10.1093/
infdis/jix312 
77. Garcia MN, Hause AM, Walker CM, Orange JS, Hasbun R, Murray KO. 
Evaluation of prolonged fatigue post-West Nile virus infection and associa-
tion of fatigue with elevated antiviral and proinflammatory cytokines. Viral 
Immunol (2014) 27:327–33. doi:10.1089/vim.2014.0035 
78. Berg PJ, Smallfield S, Svien L. An investigation of depression and fatigue post 
West Nile virus infection. S D Med (2010) 63:127–9. 
79. Sejvar JJ, Curns AT, Welburg L, Jones JF, Lundgren LM, Capuron L, et al. 
Neurocognitive and functional outcomes in persons recovering from West 
Nile virus illness. J Neuropsychol (2008) 2:477–99. doi:10.1348/1748664
07X218312 
80. Stanaway JD, Shepard DS, Undurraga EA, Halasa YA, Coffeng LE, Brady OJ, 
 
et al. The global burden of dengue: an analysis from the Global Burden 
of Disease Study 2013. Lancet Infect Dis (2016) 16:712–23. doi:10.1016/
S1473-3099(16)00026-8 
81. Seet RC, Quek AM, Lim EC. Post-infectious fatigue syndrome in dengue 
infection. J Clin Virol (2007) 38:1–6. doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2006.10.011 
82. Carod-Artal FJ. Post-Ebolavirus disease syndrome: what do we know? 
Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2015) 13:1185–7. doi:10.1586/14787210.2015. 
1079128 
83. Epstein L, Wong KK, Kallen AJ, Uyeki TM. Post-Ebola signs and symptoms in 
U.S. Survivors. N Engl J Med (2015) 373:2484–6. doi:10.1056/NEJMc1506576 
84. Moldofsky H, Patcai J. Chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, 
depression and disordered sleep in chronic post-SARS syndrome; a case- 
controlled study. BMC Neurol (2011) 11:37. doi:10.1186/1471-2377-11-37 
85. Pohl D, Alper G, Van Haren K, Kornberg AJ, Lucchinetti CF, 
Tenembaum S, et al. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis: updates on an 
inflammatory CNS syndrome. Neurology (2016) 87:S38–45. doi:10.1212/
WNL.0000000000002825 
86. Lim M, Hacohen Y, Vincent A. Autoimmune encephalopathies. Pediatr Clin 
North Am (2015) 62:667–85. doi:10.1016/j.pcl.2015.03.011 
87. Nyati KK, Nyati R. Role of Campylobacter jejuni infection in the pathogenesis 
of Guillain-Barre syndrome: an update. Biomed Res Int (2013) 2013:852195. 
doi:10.1155/2013/852195
88. Ozkurt Z, Tanriverdi EC. Global alert: Zika virus-an emerging arbovirus. 
Eurasian J Med (2017) 49:142–7. doi:10.5152/eurasianjmed.2017.17147 
89. Johnson TP, Tyagi R, Lee PR, Lee MH, Johnson KR, Kowalak J, et al.  
Nodding syndrome may be an autoimmune reaction to the parasitic worm 
Onchocerca volvulus. Sci Transl Med (2017) 9:1–10. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.
aaf6953 
90. Cunningham MW. Post-streptococcal autoimmune sequelae: rheumatic 
fever and beyond. In: Ferretti JJ, Stevens DL, Fischetti VA, editors. Strep­
tococcus pyogenes: Basic Biology to Clinical Manifestations. Oklahoma City, 
OK: University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (2016).
91. Libbey JE, Cusick MF, Fujinami RS. Role of pathogens in multiple sclerosis. 
Int Rev Immunol (2014) 33:266–83. doi:10.3109/08830185.2013.823422 
92. Greenlee JE. Encephalitis and postinfectious encephalitis. Continuum 
(Minneap Minn) (2012) 18:1271–89. doi:10.1212/01.CON.0000423847. 
40147.06
93. Loebel M, Grabowski P, Heidecke H, Bauer S, Hanitsch LG, Wittke K, et al. 
Antibodies to beta adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in 
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav Immun (2016) 52:32–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2015.09.013 
94. Elfaitouri A, Herrmann B, Bolin-Wiener A, Wang Y, Gottfries CG, 
Zachrisson O, et al. Epitopes of microbial and human heat shock protein 
60 and their recognition in myalgic encephalomyelitis. PLoS One (2013) 
8:e81155. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081155 
95. McManimen SL, Jason LA. Post-exertional malaise in patients with ME and 
CFS with comorbid fibromyalgia. SRL Neurol Neurosurg (2017) 3:22–7. 
96. Goebel A. Autoantibody pain. Autoimmun Rev (2016) 15:552–7. doi:10.1016/j.
autrev.2016.02.011 
97. Klein CJ, Lennon VA, Aston PA, McKeon A, Pittock SJ. Chronic pain as a 
manifestation of potassium channel-complex autoimmunity. Neurology 
(2012) 79:1136–44. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182698cab 
98. Wikland B, Lowhagen T, Sandberg PO. Fine-needle aspiration cytology 
of the thyroid in chronic fatigue. Lancet (2001) 357:956–7. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(05)71654-8 
99. Akamizu T, Kohn LD, Mori T. Molecular studies on thyrotropin (TSH) 
receptor and anti-TSH receptor antibodies. Endocr J (1995) 42:617–27. 
doi:10.1507/endocrj.42.617 
100. Hoad A, Spickett G, Elliott J, Newton J. Postural orthostatic tachycardia 
syndrome is an under-recognized condition in chronic fatigue syndrome. 
QJM (2008) 101:961–5. doi:10.1093/qjmed/hcn123 
101. Kimpinski K, Iodice V, Vernino S, Sandroni P, Low PA. Association of 
N-type calcium channel autoimmunity in patients with autoimmune 
autonomic ganglionopathy. Auton Neurosci (2009) 150:136–9. doi:10.1016/j.
autneu.2009.06.002 
102. Lobel M, Mooslechner AA, Bauer S, Gunther S, Letsch A, Hanitsch LG, 
et al. Polymorphism in COMT is associated with IgG3 subclass level and 
susceptibility to infection in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Transl 
Med (2015) 13:264. doi:10.1186/s12967-015-0628-4 
103. Guenther S, Loebel M, Mooslechner AA, Knops M, Hanitsch LG, Grabowski P
, 
 
et al. Frequent IgG subclass and mannose binding lectin deficiency in 
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Hum Immunol (2015) 76:729–35. 
doi:10.1016/j.humimm.2015.09.028 
104. Natelson BH, Haghighi MH, Ponzio NM. Evidence for the presence of 
immune dysfunction in chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 
(2002) 9:747–52. doi:10.1128/CDLI.9.4.747–752.2002
105. Robertson MJ, Schacterle RS, Mackin GA, Wilson SN, Bloomingdale KL, 
Ritz J, et al. Lymphocyte subset differences in patients with chronic fatigue 
syndrome, multiple sclerosis and major depression. Clin Exp Immunol (2005) 
141:326–32. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02833.x 
106. Marshall-Gradisnik S, Johnston S, Chacko A, Nguyen T, Smith P, 
 
Staines D. Single nucleotide polymorphisms and genotypes of transient 
receptor potential ion channel and acetylcholine receptor genes from isolated 
 15
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
B lymphocytes in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
patients. J Int Med Res (2016) 44:1381–94. doi:10.1177/0300060516671622 
107. Marshall-Gradisnik S, Huth T, Chacko A, Johnston S, Smith P, Staines D. 
Natural killer cells and single nucleotide polymorphisms of specific ion 
channels and receptor genes in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Appl Clin Genet (2016) 9:39–47. doi:10.2147/TACG.S99405 
108. Johnston S, Staines D, Klein A, Marshall-Gradisnik S. A targeted genome 
association study examining transient receptor potential ion channels, ace-
tylcholine receptors, and adrenergic receptors in chronic fatigue syndrome/
myalgic encephalomyelitis. BMC Med Genet (2016) 17:79. doi:10.1186/
s12881-016-0342-y 
109. Vangeel E, Van Den Eede F, Hompes T, Izzi B, Del Favero J, Moorkens G, 
 
et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome and DNA hypomethylation of the gluco-
corticoid receptor gene promoter 1F region: associations with HPA axis 
hypofunction and childhood trauma. Psychosom Med (2015) 77:853–62. 
doi:10.1097/PSY.0000000000000224 
110. Bouquet J, Gardy JL, Brown S, Pfeil J, Miller RR, Morshed M, et al.  
RNA-seq analysis of gene expression, viral pathogen, and B-cell/T-cell recep-
tor signatures in complex chronic disease. Clin Infect Dis (2017) 64:476–81. 
doi:10.1093/cid/ciw767 
111. Kaushik N, Fear D, Richards SC, McDermott CR, Nuwaysir EF, Kellam P, 
et al. Gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients 
with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin Pathol (2005) 58:826–32. doi:10.1136/
jcp.2005.025718 
112. Fang H, Xie Q, Boneva R, Fostel J, Perkins R, Tong W. Gene expression 
profile exploration of a large dataset on chronic fatigue syndrome. Phar­
macogenomics (2006) 7:429–40. doi:10.2217/14622416.7.3.429 
113. Maes M, Mihaylova I, Leunis JC. Chronic fatigue syndrome is accompanied 
by an IgM-related immune response directed against neopitopes formed 
by oxidative or nitrosative damage to lipids and proteins. Neuro Endocrinol 
Lett (2006) 27:615–21. doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e32831a4728
114. De Meirleir K, Bisbal C, Campine I, De Becker P, Salehzada T, 
 
Demettre E, et al. A 37 kDa 2-5A binding protein as a potential biochemi-
cal marker for chronic fatigue syndrome. Am J Med (2000) 108:99–105. 
doi:10.1016/S0002-9343(99)00300-9 
115. Brenu EW, Ashton KJ, Batovska J, Staines DR, Marshall-Gradisnik SM. 
 
High-throughput sequencing of plasma microRNA in chronic fatigue 
 
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. PLoS One (2014) 9:e102783. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0102783 
116. Cerda-Olmedo G, Mena-Duran AV, Monsalve V, Oltra E. Identification of 
a microRNA signature for the diagnosis of fibromyalgia. PLoS One (2015) 
10:e0121903. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0121903 
117. Bested AC, Marshall LM. Review of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome: an evidence-based approach to diagnosis and manage-
ment by clinicians. Rev Environ Health (2015) 30:223–49. doi:10.1515/
reveh-2015-0026 
118. Underhill RA. Myalgic encephalomyelitis, chronic fatigue syndrome: 
an infectious disease. Med Hypotheses (2015) 85:765–73. doi:10.1016/j.
mehy.2015.10.011 
119. Loebel M, Strohschein K, Giannini C, Koelsch U, Bauer S, Doebis C, et al. 
Deficient EBV-specific B- and T-cell response in patients with chronic fatigue 
syndrome. PLoS One (2014) 9:e85387. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0085387 
120. Moss-Morris R, Spence MJ, Hou R. The pathway from glandular fever to 
chronic fatigue syndrome: can the cognitive behavioural model provide the 
map? Psychol Med (2011) 41:1099–107. doi:10.1017/S003329171000139X 
121. Komaroff AL, Cho TA. Role of infection and neurologic dysfunction in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Semin Neurol (2011) 31:325–37. doi:10.1055/s- 
0031-1287654 
122. Katz BZ, Stewart JM, Shiraishi Y, Mears CJ, Taylor R. Autonomic symptoms 
at baseline and following infectious mononucleosis in a prospective cohort 
of adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med (2011) 165:765–6. doi:10.1001/
archpediatrics.2011.124 
123. Naess H, Sundal E, Myhr KM, Nyland HI. Postinfectious and chronic fatigue 
syndromes: clinical experience from a tertiary-referral centre in Norway. 
In Vivo (2010) 24:185–8. 
124. Katz BZ, Boas S, Shiraishi Y, Mears CJ, Taylor R. Exercise tolerance testing 
in a prospective cohort of adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome and 
recovered controls following infectious mononucleosis. J Pediatr (2010) 
157:468–72,472.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.03.025 
125. Huang Y, Katz BZ, Mears C, Kielhofner GW, Taylor R. Postinfectious 
fatigue in adolescents and physical activity. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med (2010) 
164:803–9. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.144 
126. Rees CJ, Henderson AH, Belafsky PC. Postviral vagal neuropathy. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol (2009) 118:247–52. doi:10.1177/000348940911800402 
127. Katz BZ, Shiraishi Y, Mears CJ, Binns HJ, Taylor R. Chronic fatigue syndrome 
after infectious mononucleosis in adolescents. Pediatrics (2009) 124:189–93. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2008-1879 
128. Leis AA, Stokic DS. Neuromuscular manifestations of west nile virus infec-
tion. Front Neurol (2012) 3:37. doi:10.3389/fneur.2012.00037 
129. Sullivan PF, Allander T, Lysholm F, Goh S, Persson B, Jacks A, et al.  
An unbiased metagenomic search for infectious agents using mono-
zygotic twins discordant for chronic fatigue. BMC Microbiol (2011) 11:2. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-2 
130. Zhang L, Gough J, Christmas D, Mattey DL, Richards SC, Main J, et al. 
Microbial infections in eight genomic subtypes of chronic fatigue syndrome/
myalgic encephalomyelitis. J Clin Pathol (2010) 63:156–64. doi:10.1136/
jcp.2009.072561 
131. Lane RJ, Soteriou BA, Zhang H, Archard LC. Enterovirus related metabolic 
myopathy: a postviral fatigue syndrome. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
(2003) 74:1382–6. doi:10.1136/jnnp.74.10.1382 
132. Bowman SJ, Brostoff J, Newman S, Mowbray JF. Postviral syndrome – how 
can a diagnosis be made? A study of patients undergoing a Monospot test. 
J R Soc Med (1989) 82:712–6. 
133. Chapenko S, Krumina A, Logina I, Rasa S, Chistjakovs M, Sultanova A, 
 
et al. Association of active human herpesvirus-6, -7 and parvovirus b19 
infection with clinical outcomes in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome. Adv Virol (2012) 2012:205085. doi:10.1155/ 
2012/205085 
134. Loebel M, Eckey M, Sotzny F, Hahn E, Bauer S, Grabowski P, et al. 
Serological profiling of the EBV immune response in chronic fatigue 
syndrome using a peptide microarray. PLoS One (2017) 12:e0179124. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0179124 
135. Halpin P, Williams MV, Klimas NG, Fletcher MA, Barnes Z, Ariza ME. 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and gulf war illness 
patients exhibit increased humoral responses to the herpesviruses-encoded 
dUTPase: implications in disease pathophysiology. J Med Virol (2017) 
89:1636–45. doi:10.1002/jmv.24810 
136. Kerr JR, Gough J, Richards SC, Main J, Enlander D, McCreary M, et al. 
Antibody to parvovirus B19 nonstructural protein is associated with chronic 
arthralgia in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomy-
elitis. J Gen Virol (2010) 91:893–7. doi:10.1099/vir.0.017590-0 
137. Kato YH, Yamate M, Tsujikawa M, Nishigaki H, Tanaka Y, Yunoki M, et al. 
No apparent difference in the prevalence of parvovirus B19 infection between 
chronic fatigue syndrome patients and healthy controls in Japan. J Clin Virol 
(2009) 44:246–7. doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2009.01.001 
138. Seishima M, Mizutani Y, Shibuya Y, Arakawa C. Chronic fatigue syn-
drome after human parvovirus B19 infection without persistent viremia. 
Dermatology (2008) 216:341–6. doi:10.1159/000116723 
139. McGhee SA, Kaska B, Liebhaber M, Stiehm ER. Persistent parvovirus- 
associated chronic fatigue treated with high dose intravenous immu-
noglobulin. Pediatr Infect Dis J (2005) 24:272–4. doi:10.1097/01.inf. 
0000155194.66797.20 
140. Knosel T, Meisel H, Borgmann A, Riebel T, Krenn V, Schewe C, et al. 
Parvovirus B19 infection associated with unilateral cervical lymphadenopa-
thy, apoptotic sinus histiocytosis, and prolonged fatigue. J Clin Pathol (2005) 
58:872–5. doi:10.1136/jcp.2004.022756 
141. Matano S, Kinoshita H, Tanigawa K, Terahata S, Sugimoto T. Acute parvovi-
rus B19 infection mimicking chronic fatigue syndrome. Intern Med (2003) 
42:903–5. doi:10.2169/internalmedicine.42.903 
142. Kerr JR, Bracewell J, Laing I, Mattey DL, Bernstein RM, Bruce IN, et al. 
Chronic fatigue syndrome and arthralgia following parvovirus B19 infection. 
J Rheumatol (2002) 29:595–602. 
143. Kerr JR, Cunniffe VS. Antibodies to parvovirus B19 non-structural protein 
are associated with chronic but not acute arthritis following B19 infection. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) (2000) 39:903–8. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/39.8.903 
144. Jacobson SK, Daly JS, Thorne GM, McIntosh K. Chronic parvovirus B19 
infection resulting in chronic fatigue syndrome: case history and review. Clin 
Infect Dis (1997) 24:1048–51. doi:10.1086/513627 
 16
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
145. Ilaria RL Jr, Komaroff AL, Fagioli LR, Moloney WC, True CA, Naides SJ. 
 
Absence of parvovirus B19 infection in chronic fatigue syndrome. Arthritis 
Rheum (1995) 38:638–41. doi:10.1002/art.1780380510 
146. Leventhal LJ, Naides SJ, Freundlich B. Fibromyalgia and parvovirus infec-
tion. Arthritis Rheum (1991) 34:1319–24. doi:10.1002/art.1780341018 
147. Baboonian C, Halliday D, Venables PJ, Pawlowski T, Millman G, Maini RN. 
Antibodies in rheumatoid arthritis react specifically with the glycine alanine 
repeat sequence of Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen-1. Rheumatol Int (1989) 
9:161–6. 
148. Patarca R, Fletcher MA. Structure and pathophysiology of the erythrocyte 
membrane-associated Paul-Bunnell heterophile antibody determinant in 
Epstein-Barr virus-associated disease. Crit Rev Oncog (1995) 6:305–26. 
doi:10.1615/CritRevOncog.v6.i3-6.70 
149. Fletcher MA, Klimas NG, Latif ZA, Caldwell KE. Serodiagnosis of infectious 
mononucleosis with a bovine erythrocyte glycoprotein. J Clin Microbiol 
(1983) 18:495–9. 
150. Fletcher MA, Lo TM, Graves WR. Immunochemical studies of infectious 
mononucleosis. VII. Isolation and partial characterization of a glycopep-
tide from bovine erythrocytes. Vox Sang (1977) 33:150–63. doi:10.1159/ 
000467504 
151. Tedder TF, Leonard WJ. Autoimmunity: regulatory B cells – IL-35 and IL-21 
regulate the regulators. Nat Rev Rheumatol (2014) 10:452–3. doi:10.1038/
nrrheum.2014.95 
152. Lunemann JD, Munz C. Epstein-Barr virus and multiple sclerosis. Curr 
Neurol Neurosci Rep (2007) 7:253–8. doi:10.1007/s11910-007-0038-y 
153. Marquez AC, Horwitz MS. The role of latently infected B cells in CNS 
autoimmunity. Front Immunol (2015) 6:544. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2015. 
00544 
154. Posnett DN. Herpesviruses and autoimmunity. Curr Opin Investig Drugs 
(2008) 9:505–14. 
155. Cuomo L, Cirone M, Di Gregorio AO, Vitillo M, Cattivelli M, Magliocca V, 
 
et al. Elevated antinuclear antibodies and altered anti-Epstein-Barr virus 
immune responses. Virus Res (2015) 195:95–9. doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2014. 
09.014 
156. Nelson P, Rylance P, Roden D, Trela M, Tugnet N. Viruses as potential patho-
genic agents in systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus (2014) 23:596–605. 
doi:10.1177/0961203314531637 
157. Niller HH, Wolf H, Ay E, Minarovits J. Epigenetic dysregulation of epstein-
barr virus latency and development of autoimmune disease. Adv Exp Med 
Biol (2011) 711:82–102. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-8216-2_7 
158. Fust G. The role of the Epstein-Barr virus in the pathogenesis of some auto-
immune disorders – similarities and differences. Eur J Microbiol Immunol 
(Bp) (2011) 1:267–78. doi:10.1556/EuJMI.1.2011.4.2 
159. Lindsey JW, deGannes SL, Pate KA, Zhao X. Antibodies specific for 
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-1 cross-react with human heterogeneous 
nuclear ribonucleoprotein L. Mol Immunol (2016) 69:7–12. doi:10.1016/j.
molimm.2015.11.007 
160. Elliott SE, Parchim NF, Kellems RE, Xia Y, Soffici AR, Daugherty PS. 
 
A pre-eclampsia-associated Epstein-Barr virus antibody cross-reacts with 
placen 
tal GPR50. Clin Immunol (2016) 168:64–71. doi:10.1016/j.clim. 
2016.05.002 
161. Wallis AL. An unusual epidemic. Lancet (1955) 269:290. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(55)92711-2 
162. Endresen GK. [Systemic Mycoplasma blood infection in fibromyalgia and 
chronic fatigue syndrome]. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen (2004) 124:203–5. 
163. Vernon SD, Shukla SK, Reeves WC. Absence of Mycoplasma species DNA in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Med Microbiol (2003) 52:1027–8. doi:10.1099/
jmm.0.05316-0 
164. Nicolson GL, Gan R, Haier J. Multiple co-infections (Mycoplasma, 
Chlamydia, human herpes virus-6) in blood of chronic fatigue syndrome 
patients: association with signs and symptoms. APMIS (2003) 111:557–66. 
doi:10.1034/j.1600-0463.2003.1110504.x 
165. Endresen GK. Mycoplasma blood infection in chronic fatigue and fibro-
myalgia syndromes. Rheumatol Int (2003) 23:211–5. doi:10.1007/s00296- 
003-0355-7 
166. Vojdani A, Choppa PC, Tagle C, Andrin R, Samimi B, Lapp CW. Detection 
of Mycoplasma genus and Mycoplasma fermentans by PCR in patients 
with chronic fatigue syndrome. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol (1998) 
22:355–65. doi:10.1111/j.1574-695X.1998.tb01226.x 
167. Choppa PC, Vojdani A, Tagle C, Andrin R, Magtoto L. Multiplex PCR for 
the detection of Mycoplasma fermentans, M. hominis and M. penetrans in 
cell cultures and blood samples of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Mol Cell Probes (1998) 12:301–8. doi:10.1006/mcpr.1998.0186 
168. Komaroff AL, Bell DS, Cheney PR, Lo SC. Absence of antibody to Mycoplasma 
fermentans in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Infect Dis (1993) 
17:1074–5. doi:10.1093/clinids/17.6.1074 
169. Chia JK, Chia LY. Chronic Chlamydia pneumoniae infection: a treatable 
cause of chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Infect Dis (1999) 29:452–3. 
doi:10.1086/520239 
170. Komaroff AL, Wang SP, Lee J, Grayston JT. No association of chronic 
Chlamydia pneumoniae infection with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Infect Dis 
(1992) 165:184. doi:10.1093/infdis/165.1.184 
171. Kerr JR. The role of parvovirus B19 in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity 
and autoimmune disease. J Clin Pathol (2016) 69:279–91. doi:10.1136/
jclinpath-2015-203455 
172. Binder CJ, Horkko S, Dewan A, Chang MK, Kieu EP, Goodyear CS, 
 
et al. Pneumococcal vaccination decreases atherosclerotic lesion formation: 
molecular mimicry between Streptococcus pneumoniae and oxidized LDL. 
Nat Med (2003) 9:736–43. doi:10.1038/nm876 
173. Moens U, Van Ghelue M, Song X, Ehlers B. Serological cross-reactivity 
between human polyomaviruses. Rev Med Virol (2013) 23:250–64. 
doi:10.1002/rmv.1747 
174. Van Ghelue M, Khan MT, Ehlers B, Moens U. Genome analysis of the new 
human polyomaviruses. Rev Med Virol (2012) 22:354–77. doi:10.1002/
rmv.1711 
175. Berry M, Gamieldien J, Fielding BC. Identification of new respiratory viruses 
in the new millennium. Viruses (2015) 7:996–1019. doi:10.3390/v7030996 
176. Fallahi P, Ferrari SM, Vita R, Benvenga S, Antonelli A. The role of human 
parvovirus B19 and hepatitis C virus in the development of thyroid disorders. 
Rev Endocr Metab Disord (2016) 17:529–35. doi:10.1007/s11154-016-9361-4 
177. Young JC, Chehoud C, Bittinger K, Bailey A, Diamond JM, Cantu E, et al. 
Viral metagenomics reveal blooms of anelloviruses in the respiratory tract 
of lung transplant recipients. Am J Transplant (2015) 15:200–9. doi:10.1111/
ajt.13031 
178. Gorzer I, Jaksch P, Kundi M, Seitz T, Klepetko W, Puchhammer-Stockl E. 
Pre-transplant plasma Torque Teno virus load and increase dynamics after 
lung transplantation. PLoS One (2015) 10:e0122975. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0122975 
179. Walton AH, Muenzer JT, Rasche D, Boomer JS, Sato B, Brownstein BH, et al. 
Reactivation of multiple viruses in patients with sepsis. PLoS One (2014) 
9:e98819. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0098819 
180. Chen RC, Naiyanetr P, Shu SA, Wang J, Yang GX, Kenny TP, et al. 
Antimitochondrial antibody heterogeneity and the xenobiotic etiology of 
primary biliary cirrhosis. Hepatology (2013) 57:1498–508. doi:10.1002/
hep.26157 
181. Kaplan MM. Novosphingobium aromaticivorans: a potential initia 
tor of pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol (2004) 99:2147–9. doi:10.1111/j. 
1572-0241.2004.41121.x 
182. Smyk DS, Rigopoulou EI, Bogdanos DP. Potential roles for infectious agents 
in the pathophysiology of primary biliary cirrhosis: what’s new? Curr Infect 
Dis Rep (2013) 15:14–24. doi:10.1007/s11908-012-0304-2 
183. Konig MF, Abusleme L, Reinholdt J, Palmer RJ, Teles RP, Sampson K, et al. 
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans-induced hypercitrullination links 
periodontal infection to autoimmunity in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci Transl 
Med (2016) 8:369ra176. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aaj1921 
184. Bardsen K, Nilsen MM, Kvaloy JT, Norheim KB, Jonsson G, Omdal R. Heat 
shock proteins and chronic fatigue in primary Sjogren’s syndrome. Innate 
Immun (2016) 22:162–7. doi:10.1177/1753425916633236 
185. Zilaee M, Ferns GA, Ghayour-Mobarhan M. Heat shock proteins and 
cardiovascular disease. Adv Clin Chem (2014) 64:73–115. doi:10.1016/
B978-0-12-800263-6.00002-1 
186. Rai R, Chauhan SK, Singh VV, Rai M, Rai G. Heat shock protein 27 and 
its regulatory molecules express differentially in SLE patients with distinct 
autoantibody profiles. Immunol Lett (2015) 164:25–32. doi:10.1016/j.imlet. 
2015.01.007 
187. Shukla HD, Pitha PM. Role of hsp90 in systemic lupus erythematosus and 
its clinical relevance. Autoimmune Dis (2012) 2012:728605. doi:10.1155/ 
2012/728605 
 17
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
188. Komiya I, Arimura Y, Nakabayashi K, Yamada A, Osaki T, Yamaguchi H, 
et al. Increased concentrations of antibody against heat shock protein in 
patients with myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody 
positive microscopic polyangiitis. Microbiol Immunol (2011) 55:531–8. 
doi:10.1111/j.1348-0421.2011.00351.x 
189. Rothstein TL, Quach TD. The human counterpart of mouse B-1 cells. Ann N 
Y Acad Sci (2015) 1362:143–52. doi:10.1111/nyas.12790 
190. Baumgarth N. B-1 cell heterogeneity and the regulation of natural and 
antigen-induced IgM production. Front Immunol (2016) 7:324. doi:10.3389/
fimmu.2016.00324 
191. Giloteaux L, Hanson MR, Keller BA. A pair of identical twins discordant 
for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome differ in physio-
logical parameters and gut microbiome composition. Am J Case Rep (2016) 
17:720–9. doi:10.12659/AJCR.900314 
192. Giloteaux L, Goodrich JK, Walters WA, Levine SM, Ley RE, Hanson MR. 
Reduced diversity and altered composition of the gut microbiome in 
individuals with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Microbiome (2016) 4:30. doi:10.1186/s40168-016-0171-4 
193. Buchwald D, Ashley RL, Pearlman T, Kith P, Komaroff AL. Viral serolo-
gies in patients with chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome. J Med 
Virol (1996) 50:25–30. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9071(199609)50:1<25::AID- 
JMV6>3.0.CO;2-V 
194. Morris G, Berk M, Walder K, Maes M. Central pathways causing fatigue in 
neuro-inflammatory and autoimmune illnesses. BMC Med (2015) 13:28. 
doi:10.1186/s12916-014-0259-2 
195. Nakatomi Y, Mizuno K, Ishii A, Wada Y, Tanaka M, Tazawa S, et al. 
Neuroinflammation in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalomyelitis: an (1)(1)C-(R)-PK11195 PET study. J Nucl Med (2014) 
55:945–50. doi:10.2967/jnumed.113.131045 
196. Chistiakov DA, Bobryshev YV, Kozarov E, Sobenin IA, Orekhov AN. 
Intestinal mucosal tolerance and impact of gut microbiota to mucosal toler-
ance. Front Microbiol (2014) 5:781. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2014.00781
197. de Goffau MC, Luopajarvi K, Knip M, Ilonen J, Ruohtula T, Harkonen T, 
et al. Fecal microbiota composition differs between children with beta-cell 
autoimmunity and those without. Diabetes (2013) 62:1238–44. doi:10.2337/
db12-0526 
198. Mejia-Leon ME, Petrosino JF, Ajami NJ, Dominguez-Bello MG, de la Barca AM. 
 
Fecal microbiota imbalance in Mexican children with type 1 diabetes. Sci 
Rep (2014) 4:3814. doi:10.1038/srep03814 
199. Chen J, Chia N, Kalari KR, Yao JZ, Novotna M, Soldan MM, et al. Multiple 
sclerosis patients have a distinct gut microbiota compared to healthy controls. 
Sci Rep (2016) 6:28484. doi:10.1038/srep28484 
200. Scher JU, Sczesnak A, Longman RS, Segata N, Ubeda C, Bielski C, et al. 
Expansion of intestinal Prevotella copri correlates with enhanced suscepti-
bility to arthritis. Elife (2013) 2:e01202. doi:10.7554/eLife.01202 
201. He Z, Shao T, Li H, Xie Z, Wen C. Alterations of the gut microbiome in 
Chinese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Gut Pathog (2016) 8:64. 
doi:10.1186/s13099-016-0146-9 
202. Consolandi C, Turroni S, Emmi G, Severgnini M, Fiori J, Peano C, 
et al. Behcet’s syndrome patients exhibit specific microbiome signature. 
Autoimmun Rev (2015) 14:269–76. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2014.11.009 
203. D’Elios MM, Appelmelk BJ, Amedei A, Bergman MP, Del Prete G. Gastric 
autoimmunity: the role of Helicobacter pylori and molecular mimicry. Trends 
Mol Med (2004) 10:316–23. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2004.06.001 
204. Wen C, Zheng Z, Shao T, Liu L, Xie Z, Le Chatelier E, et al. Quantitative 
metagenomics reveals unique gut microbiome biomarkers in ankylosing 
spondylitis. Genome Biol (2017) 18:142. doi:10.1186/s13059-017-1271-6 
205. Billing-Ross P, Germain A, Ye K, Keinan A, Gu Z, Hanson MR. Mito-
chondrial DNA variants correlate with symptoms in myalgic encephalo-
myelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J Transl Med (2016) 14:19. doi:10.1186/
s12967-016-0771-6 
206. Wallis A, Butt H, Ball M, Lewis DP, Bruck D. Support for the microgen-
derome: associations in a human clinical population. Sci Rep (2016) 6:19171. 
doi:10.1038/srep19171 
207. Ford AC, Talley NJ. Mucosal inflammation as a potential etiological factor 
in irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review. J Gastroenterol (2011) 
46:421–31. doi:10.1007/s00535-011-0379-9 
208. Fukuda S, Nojima J, Kajimoto O, Yamaguti K, Nakatomi Y, Kuratsune H, et al. 
Ubiquinol-10 supplementation improves autonomic nervous function and 
cognitive function in chronic fatigue syndrome. Biofactors (2016) 42:431–40. 
doi:10.1002/biof.1293 
209. Kell DB, Pretorius E. On the translocation of bacteria and their lipopolysac-
charides between blood and peripheral locations in chronic, inflammatory 
diseases: the central roles of LPS and LPS-induced cell death. Integr Biol 
(Camb) (2015) 7:1339–77. doi:10.1039/c5ib00158g 
210. Hollander D. Intestinal permeability, leaky gut, and intestinal disorders. Curr 
Gastroenterol Rep (1999) 1:410–6. doi:10.1007/s11894-999-0023-5 
211. Odenwald MA, Turner JR. Intestinal permeability defects: is it time to treat? 
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2013) 11:1075–83. doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2013.07.001 
212. Anders HJ, Andersen K, Stecher B. The intestinal microbiota, a leaky gut, 
and abnormal immunity in kidney disease. Kidney Int (2013) 83:1010–6. 
doi:10.1038/ki.2012.440 
213. Gecse K, Roka R, Sera T, Rosztoczy A, Annahazi A, Izbeki F, et al. Leaky 
 
gut in patients with diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome and 
inactive ulcerative colitis. Digestion (2012) 85:40–6. doi:10.1159/000333083 
214. Montoya JG, Kogelnik AM, Bhangoo M, Lunn MR, Flamand L, Merrihew LE, 
 
et al. Randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of valganci-
clovir in a subset of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Med Virol 
(2013) 85:2101–9. doi:10.1002/jmv.23713 
215. Watt T, Oberfoell S, Balise R, Lunn MR, Kar AK, Merrihew L, et al. Response 
to valganciclovir in chronic fatigue syndrome patients with human her-
pesvirus 6 and Epstein-Barr virus IgG antibody titers. J Med Virol (2012) 
84:1967–74. doi:10.1002/jmv.23411 
216. Hokama Y, Campora CE, Hara C, Kuribayashi T, Le Huynh D, Yabusaki K. 
Anticardiolipin antibodies in the sera of patients with diagnosed chronic 
fatigue syndrome. J Clin Lab Anal (2009) 23:210–2. doi:10.1002/jcla.20325 
217. Hokama Y, Empey-Campora C, Hara C, Higa N, Siu N, Lau R, et al.  
Acute phase phospholipids related to the cardiolipin of mitochondria in the 
sera of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), chronic Ciguatera 
fish poisoning (CCFP), and other diseases attributed to chemicals, Gulf 
War, and marine toxins. J Clin Lab Anal (2008) 22:99–105. doi:10.1002/
jcla.20217 
218. Morris G, Berk M, Galecki P, Maes M. The emerging role of autoimmunity 
in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/cfs). Mol 
Neurobiol (2014) 49:741–56. doi:10.1007/s12035-013-8553-0 
219. Ortega-Hernandez OD, Cuccia M, Bozzini S, Bassi N, Moscavitch S, 
 
Diaz-Gallo LM, et al. Autoantibodies, polymorphisms in the serotonin 
pathway, and human leukocyte antigen class II alleles in chronic fatigue 
syndrome: are they associated with age at onset and specific symptoms? Ann 
N Y Acad Sci (2009) 1173:589–99. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04802.x 
220. Lorusso L, Mikhaylova SV, Capelli E, Ferrari D, Ngonga GK, Ricevuti G. 
Immunological aspects of chronic fatigue syndrome. Autoimmun Rev (2009) 
8:287–91. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2008.08.003 
221. Nancy AL, Shoenfeld Y. Chronic fatigue syndrome with autoantibodies – 
 
the result of an augmented adjuvant effect of hepatitis-B vaccine and 
silicone implant. Autoimmun Rev (2008) 8:52–5. doi:10.1016/j.autrev. 
2008.07.026 
222. Staines DR. Is chronic fatigue syndrome an autoimmune disorder of endog-
enous neuropeptides, exogenous infection and molecular mimicry? Med 
Hypotheses (2004) 62:646–52. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2004.01.010 
223. Landi A, Broadhurst D, Vernon SD, Tyrrell DL, Houghton M. Reductions 
in circulating levels of IL-16, IL-7 and VEGF-A in myalgic encephalomy-
elitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Cytokine (2016) 78:27–36. doi:10.1016/j.
cyto.2015.11.018 
224. Hornig M, Gottschalk CG, Eddy ML, Che X, Ukaigwe JE, Peterson DL, 
 
et al. Immune network analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in myalgic encephalo-
myelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome with atypical and classical presentations. 
Transl Psychiatry (2017) 7:e1080. doi:10.1038/tp.2017.44 
225. Hornig M, Montoya JG, Klimas NG, Levine S, Felsenstein D, Bateman L, 
et al. Distinct plasma immune signatures in ME/CFS are present early in the 
course of illness. Sci Adv (2015) 1:1–10. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1400121 
226. Montoya JG, Holmes TH, Anderson JN, Maecker HT, Rosenberg-Hasson Y, 
 
Valencia IJ, et al. Cytokine signature associated with disease severity 
in chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017) 
114:E7150–8. doi:10.1073/pnas.1710519114 
227. Blundell S, Ray KK, Buckland M, White PD. Chronic fatigue syndrome 
and circulating cytokines: a systematic review. Brain Behav Immun (2015) 
50:186–95. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2015.07.004 
 18
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
228. Peterson D, Brenu EW, Gottschalk G, Ramos S, Nguyen T, Staines D, et al. 
Cytokines in the cerebrospinal fluids of patients with chronic fatigue syn-
drome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. Mediators Inflamm (2015) 2015:929720. 
doi:10.1155/2015/929720 
229. Hardcastle SL, Brenu EW, Johnston S, Nguyen T, Huth T, Ramos S, et al. 
Longitudinal analysis of immune abnormalities in varying severities of 
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis patients. J Transl Med 
(2015) 13:299. doi:10.1186/s12967-015-0653-3 
230. Stringer EA, Baker KS, Carroll IR, Montoya JG, Chu L, Maecker HT, et al. 
Daily cytokine fluctuations, driven by leptin, are associated with fatigue 
severity in chronic fatigue syndrome: evidence of inflammatory pathology. 
J Transl Med (2013) 11:93. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-11-93 
231. Brenu EW, van Driel ML, Staines DR, Ashton KJ, Ramos SB, Keane J, 
et al. Immunological abnormalities as potential biomarkers in chronic 
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. J Transl Med (2011) 9:81. 
doi:10.1186/1479-5876-9-81 
232. James K, Al-Ali S, Tarn J, Cockell SJ, Gillespie CS, Hindmarsh V, et al.  
A transcriptional signature of fatigue derived from patients with Primary 
Sjogren’s syndrome. PLoS One (2015) 10:e0143970. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0143970 
233. Nijs J, Nees A, Paul L, De Kooning M, Ickmans K, Meeus M, et al. Altered 
immune response to exercise in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/
myalgic encephalomyelitis: a systematic literature review. Exerc Immunol 
Rev (2014) 20:94–116. 
234. Light KC, Agarwal N, Iacob E, White AT, Kinney AY, VanHaitsma TA, 
 
et al. Differing leukocyte gene expression profiles associated with fatigue 
in patients with prostate cancer versus chronic fatigue syndrome. Psy­
choneuroendocrinology (2013) 38:2983–95. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013. 
08.008 
235. White AT, Light AR, Hughen RW, Vanhaitsma TA, Light KC. Differences 
in metabolite-detecting, adrenergic, and immune gene expression after 
moderate exercise in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome, patients with 
multiple sclerosis, and healthy controls. Psychosom Med (2012) 74:46–54. 
doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e31824152ed 
236. Light AR, Bateman L, Jo D, Hughen RW, Vanhaitsma TA, White AT, et al. 
Gene expression alterations at baseline and following moderate exercise in 
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia syndrome. J Intern 
Med (2012) 271:64–81. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02405.x 
237. White AT, Light AR, Hughen RW, Bateman L, Martins TB, Hill HR, et al. 
Severity of symptom flare after moderate exercise is linked to cytokine 
activity in chronic fatigue syndrome. Psychophysiology (2010) 47:615–24. 
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.00978.x 
238. Light AR, White AT, Hughen RW, Light KC. Moderate exercise increases 
expression for sensory, adrenergic, and immune genes in chronic fatigue 
syndrome patients but not in normal subjects. J Pain (2009) 10:1099–112. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2009.06.003 
239. Jammes Y, Steinberg JG, Delliaux S. Chronic fatigue syndrome: acute 
infection and history of physical activity affect resting levels and response 
to exercise of plasma oxidant/antioxidant status and heat shock proteins. 
J Intern Med (2012) 272:74–84. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02488.x 
240. Hornig M, Gottschalk G, Peterson DL, Knox KK, Schultz AF, Eddy ML, et al. 
Cytokine network analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Mol Psychiatry (2016) 21:261–9. doi:10.1038/
mp.2015.29 
241. Clark LV, Buckland M, Murphy G, Taylor N, Vleck V, Mein C, et al. Cytokine 
responses to exercise and activity in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: 
case-control study. Clin Exp Immunol (2017) 190:360–71. doi:10.1111/
cei.13023 
242. Russell L, Broderick G, Taylor R, Fernandes H, Harvey J, Barnes Z, et al. 
Illness progression in chronic fatigue syndrome: a shifting immune baseline. 
BMC Immunol (2016) 17:3. doi:10.1186/s12865-016-0142-3 
243. Keijmel SP, Raijmakers RP, Bleeker-Rovers CP, van der Meer JW, Netea MG, 
 
Schoffelen T, et al. Altered interferon-gamma response in patients with 
Q-fever fatigue syndrome. J Infect (2016) 72:478–85. doi:10.1016/j.jinf. 
2016.01.004 
244. Smylie AL, Broderick G, Fernandes H, Razdan S, Barnes Z, Collado F, 
 
et al. A comparison of sex-specific immune signatures in Gulf War illness and 
chronic fatigue syndrome. BMC Immunol (2013) 14:29. doi:10.1186/1471- 
2172-14-29 
245. Petty RD, McCarthy NE, Le Dieu R, Kerr JR. MicroRNAs hsa-miR-99b, hsa-
miR-330, hsa-miR-126 and hsa-miR-30c: potential diagnostic biomarkers 
in natural killer (NK) cells of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome 
(CFS)/myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME). PLoS One (2016) 11:e0150904. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0150904 
246. Brenu EW, van Driel ML, Staines DR, Ashton KJ, Hardcastle SL, Keane J, et al. 
Longitudinal investigation of natural killer cells and cytokines in chronic 
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. J Transl Med (2012) 10:88. 
doi:10.1186/1479-5876-10-88 
247. Klimas NG, Koneru AO. Chronic fatigue syndrome: inflammation, immune 
function, and neuroendocrine interactions. Curr Rheumatol Rep (2007) 
9:482–7. doi:10.1007/s11926-007-0078-y 
248. Brenu EW, Ashton KJ, van Driel M, Staines DR, Peterson D, Atkinson GM, 
et al. Cytotoxic lymphocyte microRNAs as prospective biomarkers for 
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. J Affect Disord (2012) 
141:261–9. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2012.03.037 
249. Theorell J, Bileviciute-Ljungar I, Tesi B, Schlums H, Johnsgaard MS, Asadi-
Azarbaijani B, et al. Unperturbed cytotoxic lymphocyte phenotype and 
function in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients. 
Front Immunol (2017) 8:723. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2017.00723 
250. Calabrese LH, Davis ME, Wilke WS. Chronic fatigue syndrome and a 
disorder resembling Sjogren’s syndrome: preliminary report. Clin Infect 
Dis (1994) 18(Suppl 1):S28–31. doi:10.1093/clinids/18.Supplement_ 
1.S28 
251. Morris G, Maes M. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
and encephalomyelitis disseminata/multiple sclerosis show remarkable 
levels of similarity in phenomenology and neuroimmune characteristics. 
BMC Med (2013) 11:205. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-11-205 
252. Klimas NG, Broderick G, Fletcher MA. Biomarkers for chronic fatigue. Brain 
Behav Immun (2012) 26:1202–10. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2012.06.006 
253. Norheim KB, Jonsson G, Omdal R. Biological mechanisms of chronic fatigue. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) (2011) 50:1009–18. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/
keq454 
254. Nijs J, Van Oosterwijck J, Meeus M, Lambrecht L, Metzger K, Fremont M, 
 
et al. Unravelling the nature of postexertional malaise in myalgic enceph-
alomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: the role of elastase, complement 
C4a and interleukin-1beta. J Intern Med (2010) 267:418–35. doi:10.1111/j. 
1365-2796.2009.02178.x 
255. Stein E, MacQuarrie M. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syn-
drome (ME/CFS) program and interdisciplinary research symposium on 
disabling fatigue in chronic illness. Chronic Dis Can (2009) 29:136–8. 
256. Piche T, Gelsi E, Schneider SM, Hebuterne X, Giudicelli J, Ferrua B, et al. 
Fatigue is associated with high circulating leptin levels in chronic hepatitis 
C. Gut (2002) 51:434–9. doi:10.1136/gut.51.3.434 
257. Harvey JM, Broderick G, Bowie A, Barnes ZM, Katz BZ, O’Gorman MR, 
et al. Tracking post-infectious fatigue in clinic using routine Lab tests. BMC 
Pediatr (2016) 16:54. doi:10.1186/s12887-016-0596-8 
258. Clark JE, Fai Ng W, Watson S, Newton JL. The aetiopathogenesis of fatigue: 
unpredictable, complex and persistent. Br Med Bull (2016) 117:139–48. 
doi:10.1093/bmb/ldv057 
259. Maughan D, Toth M. Discerning primary and secondary factors responsible 
for clinical fatigue in multisystem diseases. Biology (Basel) (2014) 3:606–22. 
doi:10.3390/biology3030606 
260. Light AR, Vierck CJ, Light KC. Myalgia and fatigue: translation from 
mouse sensory neurons to fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndromes. 
In: Kruger L, Light AR, editors. Translational Pain Research: From Mouse 
to Man. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press (2010).
261. Abbas G, Jorgensen RA, Lindor KD. Fatigue in primary biliary cirrhosis. 
 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2010) 7:313–9. doi:10.1038/nrgastro. 
2010.62 
262. Gorman GS, Elson JL, Newman J, Payne B, McFarland R, Newton JL, 
et al. Perceived fatigue is highly prevalent and debilitating in patients with 
mitochondrial disease. Neuromuscul Disord (2015) 25:563–6. doi:10.1016/j.
nmd.2015.03.001 
263. Finsterer J, Ahting U. Mitochondrial depletion syndromes in children and 
adults. Can J Neurol Sci (2013) 40:635–44. doi:10.1017/S0317167100014852 
264. Piraino B, Vollmer-Conna U, Lloyd AR. Genetic associations of fatigue and 
other symptom domains of the acute sickness response to infection. Brain 
Behav Immun (2012) 26:552–8. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2011.12.009 
 19
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
265. Proal AD, Albert PJ, Marshall TG, Blaney GP, Lindseth IA. Immunostimulation 
in the treatment for chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. 
Immunol Res (2013) 56:398–412. doi:10.1007/s12026-013-8413-z 
266. Zachrisson O, Colque-Navarro P, Gottfries CG, Regland B, Mollby R. 
Immune modulation with a staphylococcal preparation in fibromyalgia/
chronic fatigue syndrome: relation between antibody levels and clinical 
improvement. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis (2004) 23:98–105. doi:10.1007/
s10096-003-1062-8 
267. Andersson M, Bagby JR, Dyrehag L, Gottfries C. Effects of staphylococcus 
toxoid vaccine on pain and fatigue in patients with fibromyalgia/chronic 
fatigue syndrome. Eur J Pain (1998) 2:133–42. doi:10.1016/S1090-3801 
(98)90006-4 
268. Tedder TF. CD19: a promising B cell target for rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol (2009) 5:572–7. doi:10.1038/nrrheum.2009.184 
269. Chang CM, Warren JL, Engels EA. Chronic fatigue syndrome and sub-
sequent risk of cancer among elderly US adults. Cancer (2012) 118:5929–36. 
doi:10.1002/cncr.27612 
270. Rose NR, Bona C. Defining criteria for autoimmune diseases (Witebsky’s 
postulates revisited). Immunol Today (1993) 14:426–30. doi:10.1016/0167- 
5699(93)90244-F 
271. Rutherford G, Manning P, Newton JL. Understanding muscle dysfunction 
in chronic fatigue syndrome. J Aging Res (2016) 2016:2497348. doi:10.1155/ 
2016/2497348 
272. Twisk FN. Accurate diagnosis of myalgic encephalomyelitis and chronic 
fatigue syndrome based upon objective test methods for characteristic 
symptoms. World J Methodol (2015) 5:68–87. doi:10.5662/wjm.v5.i2.68 
273. Snell CR, Stevens SR, Davenport TE, Van Ness JM. Discriminative validity 
of metabolic and workload measurements for identifying people with 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Phys Ther (2013) 93:1484–92. doi:10.2522/
ptj.20110368 
274. Margulis L. Origin of Eukaryotic Cells. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press 
(1970).
275. Fluge O, Mella O, Bruland O, Risa K, Dyrstad SE, Alme K, et al. Metabolic 
profiling indicates impaired pyruvate dehydrogenase function in myalgic 
encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight (2016) 1:e89376. 
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.89376 
276. Germain A, Ruppert D, Levine SM, Hanson MR. Metabolic profiling of a 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome discovery cohort 
reveals disturbances in fatty acid and lipid metabolism. Mol Biosyst (2017) 
13:371–9. doi:10.1039/c6mb00600k 
277. Regland B, Andersson M, Abrahamsson L, Bagby J, Dyrehag LE, Gottfries CG. 
 
Increased concentrations of homocysteine in the cerebrospinal fluid in 
patients with fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome. Scand J Rheumatol 
(1997) 26:301–7. doi:10.3109/03009749709105320 
278. Fenouillet E, Vigouroux A, Steinberg JG, Chagvardieff A, Retornaz F, 
 
Guieu R, et al. Association of biomarkers with health-related quality of life 
and history of stressors in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syn-
drome patients. J Transl Med (2016) 14:251. doi:10.1186/s12967-016-1010-x 
279. Yamano E, Sugimoto M, Hirayama A, Kume S, Yamato M, Jin G, et al.  
Index markers of chronic fatigue syndrome with dysfunction of TCA and 
urea cycles. Sci Rep (2016) 6:34990. doi:10.1038/srep34990 
280. Naviaux RK, Naviaux JC, Li K, Bright AT, Alaynick WA, Wang L, et al. 
Metabolic features of chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
(2016) 113:E5472–80. doi:10.1073/pnas.1607571113 
281. Shungu DC, Weiduschat N, Murrough JW, Mao X, Pillemer S, Dyke JP, et al. 
Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome. III. Relationships 
to cortical glutathione and clinical symptoms implicate oxidative stress in 
disorder pathophysiology. NMR Biomed (2012) 25:1073–87. doi:10.1002/
nbm.2772 
282. Armstrong CW, McGregor NR, Butt HL, Gooley PR. Metabolism in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Adv Clin Chem (2014) 66:121–72. doi:10.1016/
B978-0-12-801401-1.00005-0 
283. Ciregia F, Kollipara L, Giusti L, Zahedi RP, Giacomelli C, Mazzoni MR, 
et al. Bottom-up proteomics suggests an association between differential 
expression of mitochondrial proteins and chronic fatigue syndrome. Transl 
Psychiatry (2016) 6:e904. doi:10.1038/tp.2016.184 
284. Armstrong CW, McGregor NR, Sheedy JR, Buttfield I, Butt HL, Gooley PR. 
NMR metabolic profiling of serum identifies amino acid disturbances in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Chim Acta (2012) 413:1525–31. doi:10.1016/j.
cca.2012.06.022 
285. Myhill S, Booth NE, McLaren-Howard J. Targeting mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion in the treatment of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(ME/CFS) – a clinical audit. Int J Clin Exp Med (2013) 6:1–15. 
286. Booth NE, Myhill S, McLaren-Howard J. Mitochondrial dysfunction and the 
pathophysiology of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(ME/CFS). Int J Clin Exp Med (2012) 5:208–20. 
287. Purohit T, Cappell MS. Primary biliary cirrhosis: pathophysiology, clinical 
presentation and therapy. World J Hepatol (2015) 7:926–41. doi:10.4254/wjh.
v7.i7.926 
288. Zavala-Cerna MG, Martinez-Garcia EA, Torres-Bugarin O, Rubio-Jurado B, 
 
Riebeling C, Nava A. The clinical significance of posttranslational modi-
fication of autoantigens. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2014) 47:73–90. 
doi:10.1007/s12016-014-8424-0 
289. Wang L, Wang FS, Chang C, Gershwin ME. Breach of tolerance: pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis. Semin Liver Dis (2014) 34:297–317. doi:10.1055/s- 
0034-1383729 
290. Juran BD, Lazaridis KN. Environmental factors in primary biliary cirrhosis. 
Semin Liver Dis (2014) 34:265–72. doi:10.1055/s-0034-1383726 
291. Christen U, Hintermann E. Pathogen infection as a possible cause for auto-
immune hepatitis. Int Rev Immunol (2014) 33:296–313. doi:10.3109/088301
85.2014.921162 
292. Kadaja L, Kisand KE, Peet N, Braun U, Metskula K, Teesalu K, et al. IgG 
from patients with liver diseases inhibit mitochondrial respiration in 
permeabilized oxidative muscle cells: impaired function of intracellu-
lar energetic units? Mol Cell Biochem (2004) 256-257(1–2):291–303. 
doi:10.1023/B:MCBI.0000009876.23921.e6 
293. Torrente-Segarra V, Salman-Monte TC, Rua-Figueroa I, Perez-Vicente S, 
Lopez-Longo FJ, Galindo-Izquierdo M, et al. Fibromyalgia prevalence and 
related factors in a large registry of patients with systemic lupus erythemato-
sus. Clin Exp Rheumatol (2016) 34:40–7. 
294. Giacomelli C, Talarico R, Baldini C, Bazzichi L. Pain in Sjogren’s syndrome. 
Reumatismo (2014) 66:39–43. doi:10.4081/reumatismo.2014.763 
295. Fox RI. Sjogren’s syndrome. Lancet (2005) 366:321–31. doi:10.1016/S0140- 
6736(05)66990-5 
296. Bonafede RP, Downey DC, Bennett RM. An association of fibromyalgia with 
primary Sjogren’s syndrome: a prospective study of 72 patients. J Rheumatol 
(1995) 22:133–6. 
297. Donmez S, Pamuk ON, Umit EG, Top MS. Autoimmune rheumatic disease 
associated symptoms in fibromyalgia patients and their influence on anxiety, 
depression and somatisation: a comparative study. Clin Exp Rheumatol 
(2012) 30:65–9. 
298. Aaron LA, Burke MM, Buchwald D. Overlapping conditions among 
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and temporoman-
dibular disorder. Arch Intern Med (2000) 160:221–7. doi:10.1001/archinte. 
160.2.221 
299. Gerdle B, Forsgren MF, Bengtsson A, Leinhard OD, Soren B, Karlsson A, 
 
et al. Decreased muscle concentrations of ATP and PCR in the quadriceps 
muscle of fibromyalgia patients – a 31P-MRS study. Eur J Pain (2013) 
17:1205–15. doi:10.1002/j.1532-2149.2013.00284.x 
300. Lund E, Kendall SA, Janerot-Sjoberg B, Bengtsson A. Muscle metabolism 
in fibromyalgia studied by P-31 magnetic resonance spectroscopy during 
aerobic and anaerobic exercise. Scand J Rheumatol (2003) 32:138–45. 
doi:10.1080/03009740310002461 
301. Cook DB, O’Connor PJ, Lange G, Steffener J. Functional neuroimaging 
correlates of mental fatigue induced by cognition among chronic fatigue syn-
drome patients and controls. Neuroimage (2007) 36:108–22. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2007.02.033 
302. Keech A, Sandler CX, Vollmer-Conna U, Cvejic E, Lloyd AR, Barry BK. 
Capturing the post-exertional exacerbation of fatigue following physical 
and cognitive challenge in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. 
J Psychosom 
Res 
(2015) 
79:537–49. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpsychores.2015. 
08.008 
303. Murrough JW, Mao X, Collins KA, Kelly C, Andrade G, Nestadt P, et al. 
Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome measured by 1H 
MRS imaging at 3.0 T. II: comparison with major depressive disorder. NMR 
Biomed (2010) 23:643–50. doi:10.1002/nbm.1512 
 20
Blomberg et al.
Infection Elicited Autoimmunity and ME/CFS
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 229
304. Rayhan RU, Raksit MP, Timbol CR, Adewuyi O, Vanmeter JW, Baraniuk JN. 
Prefrontal lactate predicts exercise-induced cognitive dysfunction in Gulf 
War Illness. Am J Transl Res (2013) 5:212–23. 
305. Schutzer SE, Angel TE, Liu T, Schepmoes AA, Clauss TR, Adkins JN, 
 
et al. Distinct cerebrospinal fluid proteomes differentiate post-treatment 
lyme disease from chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS One (2011) 6:e17287. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017287 
306. Regland B, Forsmark S, Halaouate L, Matousek M, Peilot B, Zachrisson O, 
et al. Response to vitamin B12 and folic acid in myalgic encephalomyelitis 
and fibromyalgia. PLoS One (2015) 10:e0124648. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0124648 
307. Prochnicki T, Mangan MS, Latz E. Recent insights into the molecular mech-
anisms of the NLRP3 inflammasome activation. F1000Res (2016) 5:1–15. 
doi:10.12688/f1000research.8614.1 
308. Weinberg SE, Sena LA, Chandel NS. Mitochondria in the regulation of 
innate and adaptive immunity. Immunity (2015) 42:406–17. doi:10.1016/j.
immuni.2015.02.002 
309. Zevini A, Olagnier D, Hiscott J. Crosstalk between cytoplasmic RIG-I and 
STING sensing pathways. Trends Immunol (2017) 38:194–205. doi:10.1016/j.
it.2016.12.004 
310. Sandhir R, Halder A, Sunkaria A. Mitochondria as a centrally positioned hub 
in the innate immune response. Biochim Biophys Acta (2016) 1863:1090–7. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.10.020
311. Bender S, Reuter A, Eberle F, Einhorn E, Binder M, Bartenschlager R. 
Activation of type I and III interferon response by mitochondrial and 
peroxisomal MAVS and inhibition by hepatitis C virus. PLoS Pathog (2015) 
11:e1005264. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1005264 
312. Zeng M, Hu Z, Shi X, Li X, Zhan X, Li XD, et al. MAVS, cGAS, and 
endogenous retroviruses in T-independent B cell responses. Science (2014) 
346:1486–92. doi:10.1126/science.346.6216.1486 
313. Ding S, Robek MD. Peroxisomal MAVS activates IRF1-mediated 
IFN-lambda production. Nat Immunol (2014) 15:700–1. doi:10.1038/ 
ni.2924 
314. Sasaki O, Yoshizumi T, Kuboyama M, Ishihara T, Suzuki E, Kawabata S, 
et al. A structural perspective of the MAVS-regulatory mechanism on 
the mitochondrial outer membrane using bioluminescence resonance 
energy transfer. Biochim Biophys Acta (2013) 1833:1017–27. doi:10.1016/j.
bbamcr.2013.01.010 
315. Holmstrom KM, Finkel T. Cellular mechanisms and physiological con-
sequences of redox-dependent signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2014) 
15:411–21. doi:10.1038/nrm3801 
316. Anastasiou D, Poulogiannis G, Asara JM, Boxer MB, Jiang JK, Shen M, 
 
et al. Inhibition of pyruvate kinase M2 by reactive oxygen species con-
tributes to cellular antioxidant responses. Science (2011) 334:1278–83. 
doi:10.1126/science.1211485 
317. Hurd TR, Collins Y, Abakumova I, Chouchani ET, Baranowski B, Fearnley IM, 
 
et al. Inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 2 by mitochondrial 
reactive oxygen species. J Biol Chem (2012) 287:35153–60. doi:10.1074/jbc.
M112.400002 
318. Raha S, Robinson BH. Mitochondria, oxygen free radicals, disease and ageing. 
Trends Biochem Sci (2000) 25:502–8. doi:10.1016/S0968-0004(00)01674-1 
319. Scherz-Shouval R, Elazar Z. Monitoring starvation-induced reactive oxygen 
species formation. Methods Enzymol (2009) 452:119–30. doi:10.1016/
S0076-6879(08)03608-2 
320. Guaras A, Perales-Clemente E, Calvo E, Acin-Perez R, Loureiro-Lopez M, 
 
Pujol C, et al. The CoQH2/CoQ ratio serves as a sensor of respiratory chain 
efficiency. Cell Rep (2016) 15:197–209. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.009 
321. Zachrisson O, Regland B, Jahreskog M, Jonsson M, Kron M, Gottfries CG. 
Treatment with staphylococcus toxoid in fibromyalgia/chronic fatigue 
syndrome – a randomised controlled trial. Eur J Pain (2002) 6:455–66. 
doi:10.1016/S1090-3801(02)00044-7 
322. Moutschen M, Triffaux JM, Demonty J, Legros JJ, Lefebvre PJ. Pathogenic 
tracks in fatigue syndromes. Acta Clin Belg (1994) 49:274–89. doi:10.1080/1
7843286.1994.11718404 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Blomberg, Gottfries, Elfaitouri, Rizwan and Rosén. This is an 
open­access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the 
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
