 Peer review
Copyright © Royal Society for Public Health 2016 
July 2016 Vol 136 No 4 l Perspectives in Public Health 213
SAGE Publications
ISSN 1757-9139 DOI: 10.1177/1757913916650225
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer reView
IntroductIon
Allergic diseases including asthma, hay fever, 
eczema and food allergies have dramatically 
increased over the last century, initially in high-
income communities but now elsewhere. At the 
same time, threats of infectious disease pandemics, 
antibiotic resistance and numbers of immune-
compromised people living in the community have 
increased. Taken together, these diseases are a 
significant burden on health and prosperity.
Abstract
Aims: To review the burden of allergic and infectious diseases and the evidence for a link to 
microbial exposure, the human microbiome and immune system, and to assess whether we 
could develop lifestyles which reconnect us with exposures which could reduce the risk of 
allergic disease while also protecting against infectious disease.
Methods: Using methodology based on the Delphi technique, six experts in infectious and 
allergic disease were surveyed to allow for elicitation of group judgement and consensus view 
on issues pertinent to the aim.
results: Key themes emerged where evidence shows that interaction with microbes that 
inhabit the natural environment and human microbiome plays an essential role in immune 
regulation. Changes in lifestyle and environmental exposure, rapid urbanisation, altered diet 
and antibiotic use have had profound effects on the human microbiome, leading to failure of 
immunotolerance and increased risk of allergic disease. Although evidence supports the 
concept of immune regulation driven by microbe–host interactions, the term ‘hygiene 
hypothesis’ is a misleading misnomer. There is no good evidence that hygiene, as the public 
understands, is responsible for the clinically relevant changes to microbial exposures.
conclusion: evidence suggests a combination of strategies, including natural childbirth, 
breast feeding, increased social exposure through sport, other outdoor activities, less time 
spent indoors, diet and appropriate antibiotic use, may help restore the microbiome and 
perhaps reduce risks of allergic disease. Preventive efforts must focus on early life. The term 
‘hygiene hypothesis’ must be abandoned. Promotion of a risk assessment approach (targeted 
hygiene) provides a framework for maximising protection against pathogen exposure while 
allowing spread of essential microbes between family members. To build on these findings, we 
must change public, public health and professional perceptions about the microbiome and 
about hygiene. we need to restore public understanding of hygiene as a means to prevent 
infectious disease.
Time to abandon the hygiene 
hypothesis: new perspectives on 
allergic disease, the human 
microbiome, infectious disease 
prevention and the role of targeted 
hygiene
Corresponding author:
Sally F Bloomfield, as above
Keywords
allergy; infectious disease; 
hygiene; cleaning; 
antibiotics; diet
650225 RSH0010.1177/1757913916650225Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygieneTime to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
research-article2016
Authors
Sally F Bloomfield
London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine and 
International Scientific Forum 
on Home Hygiene, The Old 
Dairy Cottage, Montacute, 
Somerset TA15 6XL, UK 
Email: sallyfbloomfield@aol.
com
Graham AW Rook
Centre for Clinical 
Microbiology, Department of 
Infection, University College 
London (UCL), London, UK
Elizabeth A Scott
Center for Hygiene and 
Health, Department of 
Biology, Simmons College, 
Boston, MA, USA
Fergus Shanahan
APC Microbiome Institute, 
University College Cork – 
National University of Ireland, 
Cork, Ireland
Rosalind Stanwell-Smith
London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK
 Paul Turner
Section of Paediatrics (Allergy 
& Infectious Diseases) and 
MRC & Asthma UK Centre in 
Allergic Mechanisms of 
Asthma, Imperial College 
London, London, UK; 
Discipline of Paediatrics and 
Child Health, The University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia
 214 Perspectives in Public Health l July 2016 Vol 136 No 4
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer reView
The idea that there might be a link 
between the rise in allergic disease and 
reduced microbial exposure as a result of 
measures introduced to protect against 
infection was first proposed in 1989.1,2 
This so-called hygiene hypothesis, as 
outlined by Dr David Strachan, proposed 
that a lower incidence of infection in early 
childhood could be an explanation for 
the 20th century rise in atopic diseases. 
Although a simple idea in itself, it raised 
the thought that rising allergies may be 
an inevitable price to be paid for freedom 
from the burden of killer infectious 
diseases. Although evidence still 
supports the concept that immune 
regulation is driven by microbe–host 
interactions, the term ‘hygiene 
hypothesis’ is now being seen by many 
as a misleading misnomer for a concept 
with far-reaching consequences for 
public health and an issue which needs 
to be addressed.3,4
Humans are ecosystems, where the 
microbes that live on and within us (the 
human microbiome) constitute an organ 
at least as essential to health as our liver 
or kidneys.5 The immune system is a 
learning device, and at birth it resembles 
a computer with hardware and software 
but few data. Additional data must be 
supplied during the first years of life, 
through contact with microorganisms 
from other humans and the natural 
environment. if these inputs are 
inadequate or inappropriate, the 
regulatory mechanisms of the immune 
system can fail. As a result, the system 
attacks not only harmful organisms 
which cause infections but also 
innocuous targets such as pollen, house 
dust and food allergens resulting in 
allergic diseases.
Despite this new understanding, the 
hygiene hypothesis concept – that we 
have become too clean – still persists in 
the minds of the public. As a result, the 
public has lost confidence in hygiene. 
This is happening at a time when 
infectious disease issues mean that 
hygiene is becoming more, rather than 
less, important.
The aim of this study is to review the 
burden of allergic and infectious diseases 
and the evidence for a link to microbial 
exposure, the human microbiome and 
immune system. Also, it is to assess 
whether and to what extent we could 
develop lifestyles which reconnect us 
with exposures and thereby reduce the 
risks of allergic disease while also 
protecting against infectious disease.
Methods
Using methodology based on the Delphi 
technique,6–9 six experts in infectious and 
allergic disease were surveyed to allow 
for elicitation of group judgement in order 
to arrive at a consensus view on issues 
pertinent to the aim of the study.
Key themes emerged: first, the extent 
of the health burden of allergic and 
hygiene-related diseases; second, the 
most recent evidence regarding the 
nature of the link between reduced 
microbial exposure and its impact on the 
human microbiome and the immune 
regulatory system; third, the question of 
relationship between lifestyles and 
protection against infectious diseases. 
The Delphi technique is a qualitative 
research method that relies on the 
judgement of individuals presumed to be 
knowledgeable and expert at what they 
do. when a sufficient degree of 
consensus is achieved, the Delphi 
process is curtailed and the resulting 
judgement is published. Six experts in 
infectious diseases and allergies were 
invited to participate, and the issues to 
be addressed were agreed via online 
communication. The authors participated 
in a conference in which each presented 
evidence related to their area of 
expertise. Following this, authors 
submitted a written contribution. These 
were analysed and key themes were 
integrated into a paper which was made 
available online to all authors for review. 
This included further questions soliciting 
the author’s views. After further rounds of 
questions and revision, a consensus 
position was obtained.
results
Why hygIene Is IMportAnt In 
the 21st century
in the 1950s and 1960s, there was 
optimism that, with vaccination and 
antibiotics freely available, conquest of 
most infections would follow. During the 
last four decades, this opinion has been 
reversed. infectious disease continues to 
exert a heavy burden on health and 
prosperity. The various infectious disease 
issues are most often considered in 
isolation, but when viewed together, they 
represent a powerful argument for 
renewed emphasis on hygiene, which 
alongside vaccination strategies remain 
key to containing infectious disease.10
During the 1980s, there was a rapid 
increase in reported cases of food 
poisoning in the United Kingdom, 
particularly related to Salmonella and 
Campylobacter.11 Although reported 
cases have somewhat declined, food, 
waterborne, and non-food-related 
infectious intestinal diseases (iiDs) remain 
at unacceptable levels. The latest study 
of iiD (food and non-foodborne iiD) 
reported that the true incidence in the 
community is 43% higher than in the 
mid-1990s: this study estimated 
17 
million cases a year in the United 
Kingdom.12 The estimated cost of food-
related iiD is £1.5 
billion a year, including 
resource and welfare losses.12 Norovirus, 
mainly spread from person-to-person, is 
the most significant cause of intestinal 
infections in the developed world, 
including 3 
million cases per year in the 
United Kingdom.12
evidence shows that respiratory 
hygiene involving hands and surfaces 
can limit spread of respiratory infections, 
particularly colds, and also influenza.13–15 
Since respiratory and intestinal viral 
infections are not treatable by antibiotics, 
prevention through hygiene is key.
in developed countries, about 7% of 
inpatients acquire an infection in 
hospital.16 recent figures show a decline 
in health-care-associated infection 
(HCAi), in the United Kingdom, 
particularly of Clostridium difficile and 
MrSA (methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus),17,18 while other 
causes of HCAi have emerged, including 
new epidemic strains of Escherichia coli, 
Pseudomonas spp. and viruses.
Governments, looking at prevention as 
a means to reduce health spending, have 
introduced shorter hospital stays and 
increased homecare. This requires new 
policies to prevent HCAis in community 
settings19 where there is no evidence of a 
decline. Until recently, most episodes of 
C. difficile infection were believed to 
result from acquisition in health-care 
 July 2016 Vol 136 No 4 l Perspectives in Public Health 215
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
settings. There is now increasing 
evidence of multiple other potential 
sources, including asymptomatic 
patients, and sources in the wider 
environment, such as water, farm animals 
or pets, and food.20 The contribution of 
cases acquired from these sources to 
the overall burden of disease is unclear, 
particularly with concerns about 
increased community-associated C. 
difficile infection.21
Societal changes mean that people 
with greater susceptibility to infectious 
disease make up an increasing 
proportion of the population, up to 20% 
or more.10 The largest proportion 
comprises the elderly who have reduced 
immunity, often exacerbated by other 
illnesses. it also includes the very young 
and family members with invasive 
devices such as catheters and people 
whose immuno-competence is impaired 
as a result of chronic and degenerative 
illness (including HiV/AiDS) or drug 
therapies such as cancer chemotherapy.
emerging pathogens and new strains 
are a significant concern. it is remarkable 
that norovirus, Campylobacter and 
Legionella were largely unknown as 
human pathogens before the 1970s, with 
others such as E. coli O157 and O104 
emerging in subsequent decades. it is 
now thought likely that we shall identify 
many more, the latest being Zika virus.22 
Agencies worldwide recognise that for 
threats such as new influenza strains, 
SArS (severe acute respiratory 
syndrome) and ebola, hygiene is a first 
line of defence during the early critical 
period before mass measures such as 
vaccination become available.23 The low 
infectious dose observed for several of 
the emerging pathogens, such as E. coli 
O157:H7 and norovirus, is an additional 
concern that emphasises the role that 
hygiene can play in prevention.24,25
Antibiotic resistance is a global 
priority.26 Hygiene addresses this 
problem by reducing the need for 
antibiotic prescribing and reducing 
‘silent’ spread of antibiotic resistant 
strains in the community and hospitals.27 
As persistent nasal or bowel carriage of 
these strains spreads in the healthy 
population, this increases the risk of 
infection with resistant strains in both 
hospitals and the community.27
infections can act as co-factors in 
diseases, such as cancer and chronic 
degenerative diseases. Syndromes such 
as Guillain–Barré28 and triggering of 
allergy by viral infections29 add to the 
burden of hygiene-related infection.
the rIse of AllergIes In the 
20th century
while infectious disease and hygiene 
have been key public health issues for 
centuries,30 allergic diseases have only 
relatively recently been regarded as a 
significant health burden. The marked 
increase in prevalence of allergic 
diseases, such as eczema,31 allergic 
rhinitis32 and food allergy,32 has been a 
prominent trend over the past century in 
all regions of the world, but most 
characterised in western countries.33 
while this is frequently presented as an 
‘epidemic’, epidemiological data indicate 
the situation is more complex. As 
highlighted by Platts-Mills34 (Figure 1), the 
‘spikes’ in prevalence of allergic rhinitis, 
asthma and food allergy have occurred 
at different times in the past 120 
years, 
and thus different atopic diseases may 
have different contributing factors. 
indeed, there are emerging data that in 
some areas (mostly in ‘western’ 
countries) these increases may have 
plateaued and even begun to subside.34 
A further issue is that at least for food 
allergy, prevalence may have been 
overestimated, depending on the 
methodology used. Venter et al.35 
assessed the rate of challenge-positive 
food allergy in three birth cohorts on the 
isle of wight (UK) between 1989 and 
2002. A major finding of this study, 
confirmed in other reports, is that rates of 
parent-reported allergy were significantly 
higher (33%) than those confirmed by 
placebo-controlled food challenge (6%) 
(the accepted gold standard for 
diagnosis). For peanut allergy, the same 
study reported a rate of 1 in 200 children 
aged 3–4 
years in 1989, increasing to 1 
in 70 in the mid-1990s, but plateauing 
thereafter. A 2016 UK intervention study, 
in children breast-fed to at least 6 
months 
of age, reported a rate of 1 in 40.36 Of 
note, the development of an 
inappropriate immune response to foods 
(‘sensitisation’), which occurs before 
onset of clinical disease, is an early event 
often occurring in the first few months of 
life.36
Perhaps the relatively late appearance 
of food allergy over the past few decades 
is a consequence of a progression from 
allergic airways disease (hay fever, 
Figure 1
trends in allergic disease
reprinted from Platts-Mills,34 Copyright (2015), with permission from American Academy of 
Allergy, Asthma & immunology and elsevier
 216 Perspectives in Public Health l July 2016 Vol 136 No 4
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
asthma) in parents to a more severe 
clinical phenotype (food allergy) in their 
offspring.37 However, a compelling 
alternative is the interaction between 
genetic predisposition and environmental 
influences, particularly for food allergy, 
where immune sensitisation to foods 
may originate with exposure to food 
allergens in the environment through the 
skin, a situation exacerbated by eczema 
and reduced skin barrier function.36 At 
the same time, there have been changes 
in how foods are consumed (e.g. roasted 
peanut, as consumed in europe and 
North America, is more allergenic than 
raw or other forms of processed peanut).
froM hygIene hypothesIs to 
old frIends MechAnIsM
Building on the significant amount of 
research published since 1989, a 
number of refinements to the original 
hygiene hypothesis now seem to offer 
more plausible explanations. The Old 
Friends (OF) Mechanism was proposed 
by rook in 2003 and argues that the vital 
microbial exposures are not colds, 
measles and other childhood infections 
(the crowd infections), but rather 
microbes already present during primate 
evolution and in hunter-gatherer times 
when the human immune system was 
evolving.38–40 OF microbes include 
environmental species which inhabit 
indoor and outdoor environments, and 
the largely non-harmful commensal 
microbes acquired from the skin, gut and 
respiratory tract of other humans. in 
evolving humans, before the advent of 
modern medicine, the OF also included 
organisms such as helminths, 
Helicobacter pylori, and hepatitis A virus 
that could persist for life in hunter-
gatherer groups and that needed to be 
tolerated. They all therefore activated 
immunoregulatory mechanisms,38 but 
few experts believe that they need to be 
replaced or even that there is any 
feasible way of doing so.
whereas the hygiene hypothesis 
implicated childhood virus infections as 
the vital exposures, from an evolutionary 
point of view this was never likely. Crowd 
infections were not part of human 
evolutionary experience because they 
either kill or induce solid immunity, so 
could not persist in small hunter-gatherer 
groups.41 epidemiological studies carried 
out in Finland, Denmark and the United 
Kingdom now confirm that childhood 
infections do not protect against allergic 
disorders.42–44
Studies show how OF exposures are 
vital because they interact with the 
regulatory systems that keep the immune 
system in balance and prevent 
overreaction, which is an underlying 
cause of allergies. Diversity of microbial 
exposure is key. First, a large experience 
of harmless bacteria and archaea during 
infancy, when immunoregulatory systems 
are being established, increases the 
repertoire of organisms that can be 
tolerated. Second, since all life-forms are 
ultimately constructed from similar 
building blocks, exposed individuals 
acquire some memory lymphocytes that 
recognise novel pathogens or even novel 
viruses.45
What are the likely causes of 
reduced or altered microbial 
exposures
in order to look for strategies which 
might restore the necessary microbial 
exposures, it is first necessary to 
understand the underlying causes of the 
loss of exposure. Since allergic diseases 
are largely conditions of the last 
100 
years, an obvious assumption is that 
the sanitary revolution is a root cause. 
The latter part of the 19th century saw 
radical improvements in sanitation, 
cleaner food and water, clean-up of 
cities, and rapid decline in infectious 
diseases.46 However, it is likely that these 
changes also inadvertently reduced 
exposure to OF microbes which occupy 
the same habitats. Since the major 
changes in water, sanitation and hygiene 
had occurred by 1920, it is difficult to 
ascribe the massive changes in the 
asthma prevalence from 1960 onwards 
to these changes.34
it is now clear that the most important 
times for OF exposure are early in 
development, during pregnancy, delivery, 
and the first few days or months of 
infancy.47,48 A 2008 review of 
epidemiological studies show that 
Caesarean section is linked to increased 
risk of allergy.49 C-sections have become 
increasingly common since 1950 and 
now account for 25% of UK births.50 
Furthermore, transfer of microbiota 
occurs via the mother’s milk, which is not 
sterile.51 Breast versus bottle feeding has 
a large influence on gut microbiome,52,53 
but further studies are needed to confirm 
any association with allergic disease. in 
high-income settings, there is likely to be 
a trans-generational effect where each 
generation receives a more impoverished 
microbiota, and essential microbiota are 
lost from the community.54
Continuing early-life exposure from the 
mother and siblings is also important.55,56 
Studies show that children from large 
families are at lower risk of developing 
allergies.52,57 exposure to pets protects 
against allergies,58,59 although domestic 
animals in the home have increased 
rather than decreased.60 People seem to 
share their microbiota via dogs,61 which 
greatly increase the microbial biodiversity 
of the home.62,63
There is good evidence that contact 
with microbial diversity from the natural 
environment is crucial. Numerous studies 
now show that exposure to farm 
environments during the first 2–3 
years of 
life protects against allergic disorders64–66 
and correlates with microbial biodiversity 
in the air67 and the home.68 Animal 
models show candidate organisms from 
these environments protect against 
allergic disorders.69 Studies in Finland 
show that living close to green space 
and agriculture rather than close to a 
town increases biodiversity of the skin 
microbiota and correlates with reduced 
allergic sensitisation.70 Urbanisation has 
accelerated loss of exposure to the 
natural environment. in the United 
Kingdom, 82% of the population now live 
in urban areas,71 with up to 90% of our 
time spent indoors.72
Although research has tended to focus 
on the gut microbiome, it seems likely 
that the microbiome of skin and airways 
is also involved.73–75 Much of the 
exposure obtained from outdoor 
environments is likely to be via the 
airways. The air contains bacteria, 
archaea, viruses, fungi, spores, pollen, 
plant biomass and dust. Depending on 
the environment and on degree of 
exertion, the number of bacteria/archaea 
breathed in could vary between about 
106 and 1010 in 24 
h. A proportion of 
these will be retained in the airways, and 
 July 2016 Vol 136 No 4 l Perspectives in Public Health 217
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
recent work reveals that exposure to 
bacterial components causes increased 
expression of a protein that inhibits 
inflammation.73,74 Gut exposure is also 
mediated via the airways where ciliary 
action brings about transfer to the gut. 
The likelihood that skin microbiota are OF 
microbes is indicated by studies showing 
that Acinetobacter species in skin protect 
against allergy.75
Factors that maintain the gut 
microbiota
Once the microbiome has been acquired 
and evolved during childhood,48 the 
critical question becomes what factors 
maintain optimum composition and 
biodiversity, because loss of biodiversity 
is strongly associated with disease 
states, inflammation and decline.76–78
increasingly, the answer appears to be 
that the optimal composition of the 
microbiota is maintained by diet,79 which 
needs to be diverse, and contain fibre 
(polysaccharides digested by the 
microbiota rather than the human host),80 
and polyphenols found in plant 
products.81–83 A diet deficient in fibre can 
lead to progressive extinctions of 
important groups of organisms,54 which 
are cumulative and increasingly difficult to 
reverse in subsequent generations.42 
Polyphenols and also fish oils also 
appear to modulate the composition of 
the microbiota.84,85
Citizens of high-income countries have 
less diverse microbiota than do hunter-
gatherers.77–79 Other studies show that 
the elderly living in the community with 
healthy diets78 have higher gut 
microbiota diversity than those in long-
stay residential care who have a less 
diverse diet. Studies in Sweden and 
Denmark show that reduced gut 
microbiota diversity in infants is 
associated with increased risk of allergic 
disease in childhood.86–88
introduction of antibiotics in the 1950s 
and subsequent prescribing trends, 
show a compelling temporal fit with rising 
allergies since the 1970s. A 2014 review 
of evidence from over 50 epidemiological 
studies shows a reasonably consistent 
relationship between excessive antibiotic 
use, particularly in early childhood, and 
increased risk of allergic disease.89 
evidence showing that exposure to 
antibiotics during pregnancy increases 
the risk of allergic disorders in infants90,91 
has been further confirmed in recent 
studies.92,93 Antibiotics, particularly 
macrolides, have lasting effects on the 
microbiota of young children and 
increase risks of asthma.92 This mirrors 
effects documented in animal models, 
where early disruption of gut microbiota 
causes long-term damage to metabolic 
regulation.94
Disruptions of maternal microbiota 
diversity by antibiotics or inadequate diet 
are found to be transmitted to future 
generations.54
Domestic and personal hygiene
Of all the trends that might explain 
declining OF exposure, one of the 
weakest is the popular notion of ‘being 
too clean in our own homes’. if this 
factor contributes, its role is likely to be 
small relative to other factors. An 
explosion of data, obtained using high-
throughput rNA sequencing of samples 
from US homes, suggests that modern 
homes are ‘teeming with microbes’. it 
also suggests that the bacterial 
communities found in the home relate to 
the people and domestic animals living 
there and the food they eat, together 
with input from the local outdoor 
environment.63,95
Microbiological studies in westernised 
homes indicate that routine daily or 
weekly cleaning habits (even involving 
use of antibacterial cleaners) have no 
sustained effect on levels of microbes in 
our homes.96–98 The idea that we could 
create ‘sterile’ homes through excessive 
cleanliness is implausible; as fast as 
microbes are removed, they are 
replaced, via dust and air from the 
outdoor environment, and commensal 
microbes shed from the human body 
and our pets, and contaminated foods 
brought into the homes. Strachan’s1 
1989 proposition that ‘higher standards 
of personal cleanliness’ could also 
contribute to reduced exposure to 
essential microbes may be compatible 
with increased bathing/showering/
shampooing since around 1950s,46 but 
although bathing and so on removes 
large numbers of microbes from the skin, 
these are rapidly replaced.
Although data from westernised homes 
suggest that more diverse communities 
can be found on less-cleaned surfaces 
(TV screen, door trims, floors) than 
regularly cleaned surfaces (cutting board, 
kitchen surface, toilet seat),63,95 to date, 
there is no confirmed evidence of a link 
between personal or home cleanliness 
and increased risk of allergic disease. in a 
German birth cohort study of 399 
families, personal cleanliness (e.g. 
handwashing and showering) was 
associated with lower levels of endotoxin 
and muramic acid (bacterial markers) in 
bedding and floor dust. in comparison, 
household cleanliness (e.g. cleaning 
floors and bathrooms, dusting, and 
changing towels) was associated with 
less dust but not with lower microbial 
marker levels. endotoxin in infancy was 
associated with less allergic sensitisation 
and less asthma when these children 
reached school age, whereas muramic 
acid exposure at school age, but not 
infancy, was associated with less school-
age asthma and eczema.99 it might seem 
surprising that neither personal nor home 
cleanliness activities were directly 
associated with allergy outcomes, but 
Liu100 suggests that this may reflect the 
importance of early-life timing of microbial 
exposures and not cleanliness 
behaviours, with the influence of 
endotoxin exposure being in infancy. A 
2002 data analysis of UK children born in 
1991/1992 found association between 
parent-reported frequency of hand and 
face washing, showering and bathing at 
15 
months and wheezing and atopic 
eczema at 30–42 
months, but this 
association was not reported in other 
studies.101,102
The key point may be that the 
microbial content of modern urban 
homes has altered relative to earlier 
generations, not because of home and 
personal cleanliness but because, prior 
to the 1800s, people lived in 
predominantly rural surroundings. Also, 
although human gut and skin microbiota 
are constantly shed from family 
members, it is likely that exposure has 
altered reflecting the reduced diversity of 
the human microbiota due to factors 
described above. This means we now 
interact with an altogether different and 
less diverse mix of microbes.
Other factors also argue against the 
 218 Perspectives in Public Health l July 2016 Vol 136 No 4
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
role of hygiene. Hygiene is irrelevant to 
microbiome disruption through altered 
diet and antibiotics. Also, if contact with 
the natural environment and microbial 
components of house dust occurs 
mostly via the airways, hygiene and 
cleanliness is unlikely to be responsible 
for reduced inputs from this key source.
coMMunIcAtIng MIcrobIoMe 
scIence to socIety – prelude 
to reversIng 
IMMunoAllergIc dIsorders
Although evidence suggests that 
strategies such as promoting natural 
childbirth and breast feeding, increased 
social exposure through sport, other 
outdoor activities, less time spent 
indoors, diet and appropriate antibiotic 
use could help restore the microbiome 
and perhaps reduce risks of allergic 
disease, clinical and other evaluations are 
required to establish whether and to 
what extent this might occur and when 
intervention is most beneficial.
There is a window of time when the 
developing microbiome is critical for the 
education of the maturing immune 
system. Disruption or delay in acquisition 
of the microbiome in the first few years of 
life may predispose to later immune 
dysfunction. it follows that preventive 
efforts against immuno-allergic disorders 
must be focussed on early life events. 
Attempts to correct abnormal host–
microbe interactions, once 
immunological events which lead to 
allergic disease are established, may be 
too late. These issues are further 
discussed by Shanahan and 
colleagues.103–105 Gaps in understanding 
host–microbe interactions will be 
addressed as research continues, and 
one can anticipate a time, when optimal 
conditions for colonisation of the 
newborn are understood and can be 
controlled by strategies ensuring 
neonates begin life with a robust and 
diverse microbiota. in the interim, there is 
much that can be achieved by education 
and behaviour change, based on current 
information.
Several factors seem to conspire to 
limit effective communication of 
microbiome science to society (Table 
1). Some elements within the popular 
media do disservice to their readership. 
examples include mis-representation of 
the role of hygiene and cleanliness, 
failure to clarify that probiotics are not 
all the same, and failure to probe 
unsubstantiated health claims or 
address seemingly complex concepts in 
detail. Fault also lies elsewhere (Table 1). 
in contrast to policy makers and public 
health officials, clinicians deal with 
individual patients, not populations. 
Unless concerns about antibiotic usage 
are brought to an individual level, with 
emphasis on the consumer rather than 
the prescriber, reform initiatives will 
have limited impact. Patients are less 
likely to demand antibiotics if provided 
with information on the impact of such 
agents on the microbiota and the risk 
of immune disorders in later life.106
Promotion of breast feeding is lacking 
in precise rationale for modern women. 
Breast-feeding mothers need to know 
they are promoting a lifelong healthy 
microbiota for their offspring. Since the 
neonate acquires its microbiome 
primarily from its mother, greater 
attention needs to be paid to the 
mother’s diet, faecal and vaginal 
microbiome. increasing awareness of the 
importance of the microbiome and the 
factors which sustain or disrupt it should 
be part of antenatal education.
Microbiome science already provides a 
glimpse of how the microbiota may be 
preserved or restored, including 
development of smart antibiotics,107 non-
antibiotic anti-microbials, microbial 
transplants, microbial consortia or single 
strains, and use of personalised 
biomarkers of disease risk 
prediction.108,109 restoration of the 
microbiome by vaginal microbiota 
transplants in C-section infants has been 
demonstrated,110 albeit of unproven 
long-term benefit and controversial.111 in 
addition, the molecular basis by which 
bifidobacteria engage with the host 
immune system is emerging;112,113 this is 
important because such organisms are a 
predominant component of the 
microbiota in neonates.
Because of the multiplicity of factors 
involved, strategies to preserve or 
manipulate the microbiota will probably 
require a personalised approach tailored 
to individual genetics and lifestyle 
factors.109
developIng And proMotIng  
A tArgeted ApproAch to 
hygIene In hoMe And 
everydAy lIfe
Over the last 20 
years or so, for reasons 
outlined above, there has not only been a 
revival of concern about infection and the 
role of hygiene10,114 but also a realisation 
that the ‘scrupulous cleanliness’ 
approach advocated by Florence 
Nightingale115 is no longer appropriate. if, 
as this review suggests, allergic diseases 
are not the price we have to pay for 
protection against infection, this is good 
news for hygiene. However, if we are to 
maximise protection against infection 
while at the same time sustaining 
exposure to essential microbes, we need 
a revised approach to hygiene based on 
current scientific evidence.
The international Scientific Forum on 
Home Hygiene (iFH) (http://www.ifh-
homehygiene.org) was established in 
1997 with the aim of developing and 
promoting a more effective approach to 
hygiene, based on scientific principles 
and the growing database of evidence 
about pathogen transmission.116 To 
achieve this, iFH adopted the principle of 
targeted hygiene.117 Targeted Hygiene is 
based on a four-step risk assessment 
requiring identification of the sources and 
reservoirs of pathogens, the routes of 
transmission, the critical control points, 
and appropriate hygiene interventions.
Targeted hygiene is based on the 
chain of infection transmission (Figure 2) 
which shows that pathogenic organisms 
are continually shed into the environment 
from sources such as human occupants, 
pets and raw foods.118
To get from an infected source to 
another individual, pathogens use well 
defined routes. Sampling studies record 
the presence of non-pathogenic bacteria 
and bacteria and viruses of medical 
interest on environmental surfaces in home 
and community settings, and laboratory 
and field studies have evaluated the rates 
of transfer of viral and bacterial pathogens 
via hands and common touch surfaces.116 
These demonstrate that the critical control 
points for transmission of infection are the 
hands, hand contact surfaces, food 
contact surfaces, and cleaning utensils 
and that these present the highest risk of 
transmission (Figure 3).
 July 2016 Vol 136 No 4 l Perspectives in Public Health 219
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
equally important considerations are 
the interventions used to eliminate 
pathogens from critical control points 
before they spread further. This is 
important since inadequate procedures 
can increase transmission.119–123 
Hygienic (as opposed to visible) cleaning 
of hands, surfaces, fabrics and so on can 
be achieved by the following:
 
•
Physical removal of pathogens from 
inanimate or skin surfaces using soap 
or detergent-based cleaning. To be 
effective as a hygiene measure, this 
should be accompanied with 
thorough rinsing under running water, 
such that pathogens are not further 
disseminated.
 
•
Using an antimicrobial product 
(disinfectants or alcohol hand 
sanitisers) or processes (heat) that 
inactivate pathogens in situ. 
Antimicrobials are required where 
adequate removal is not possible by 
wiping/cleaning and/or rinsing alone, 
or in situations of higher risk.124
 
•
Combined action, for example, 
laundering, where physical removal is 
combined with inactivation by heat 
together with an oxygen bleach–
based laundry product.
while it is difficult to quantify the 
impact, evidence suggests that targeted 
hygiene reduces spread of infection. A 
review of evidence published between 
1980 and 2001 concluded that the 
Table 1 
science and society – communication barriers
the stakeholders
challenge
Media
Preoccupation with sensationalism rather than truth
Over-simplification and mis-portrayal of concepts such as hygiene, probiotics, and microbiota
Assumption that the readership cannot understand complex concepts
Medical/clinical 
professionals
Lagging behind the science
Medical curricula focus on threat of infection rather than benefits of indigenous microbiota
inadequately equipped to address patients’ questions on information acquired from the media
inadequate response by the medical establishment to inaccurate and misleading material presented in the 
media
Scientists
excessive use of hyperbole
Poor language
Failure to standardise terminology and methodology
Policy makers and 
Public health officials
ineffective and mixed messages to the public
excessive focus on antibiotic resistance rather than risk of collateral damage to microbiota in promoting 
judicious use of antibiotics
Poor communication of influence of diet on microbiota
Lay public
Poor conceptualisation of risk versus benefit
inadequately served by media for appraisal of medical and scientific claims
Figure 2
the chain of infection transmission in the home
 220 Perspectives in Public Health l July 2016 Vol 136 No 4
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
strength of the association between 
hygiene in the community and infections, 
as measured by the relative reduction in 
risk of illness by one or more hygiene 
measures (including handwashing), was 
generally greater than 20%.125 A meta-
analysis of community studies showed 
that improvements in hand hygiene alone 
resulted in reductions in gastrointestinal 
and respiratory illness of 31% and 21%, 
respectively.126
Changing hygiene behaviour, however, 
requires changing public perceptions 
about hygiene, most particularly that 
hygiene is different from cleanliness, that 
is, more than just absence of dirt. 
Hygiene is what we do in the places and 
at the times that matter (hand, food, 
toilet and respiratory hygiene, health 
care, etc.) to protect against infection.
Communication and social marketing 
campaigns are now being evaluated and 
used as a means to achieve behaviour 
change mainly (but not exclusively) in 
relation to food and respiratory hygiene. 
These campaigns, however, focus on 
changing behaviours rather than 
changing understanding and dispelling 
misconceptions.13,127–130 The e-bug 
project is a europe-wide initiative aimed 
at ensuring all children leave school with 
an understanding of targeted hygiene.131 
An important feature of this teaching 
resource is that it is based on 
understanding infection and how it is 
transmitted.
conclusIon
The evidence reviewed in this study 
reflects the significant shift in thinking in 
the last 25 
years. it shows that the 
interaction of the OF microbes which 
inhabit the natural environment and 
human microbiome with our immune 
system plays an essential role in immune 
regulation, promoting a tolerising milieu 
for the immune system which may 
impact against the development of 
allergic disease. Changes in lifestyle and 
environment, along with rapid 
urbanisation, have all contributed to 
changes in our exposure to essential 
microbes.132 in addition, altered diet and 
excessive antibiotic use have also 
sustained detrimental effects on the 
content and diversity of the human 
microbiome. Together, these factors have 
had profound effects on the immune 
system, which are likely to have 
contributed to the onset of allergic 
disease.
By contrast, the public idea that 
obsessive hygiene and cleanliness is the 
root cause of the rise in allergies is no 
longer supported. Data show that 
relevant microbial exposures are almost 
entirely unrelated to hygiene as the public 
understands it. This is partly because 
sustaining the human microbiome 
through diet and avoiding excessive 
antibiotic usage are factors entirely 
unrelated to hygiene.
As far as understanding strategies 
which may reduce the risk of allergic 
disease, work is progressing fast, but 
there is still a long way to go. The 
multiple factors involved (including those 
not directly associated with microbiome 
interactions (allergen exposure, genetic, 
pollution, etc.)) make it impossible to 
assess the contribution of each factor. it 
is likely that success will only be achieved 
through combined effects of lifestyle 
changes, together with improved diet 
and reduced antibiotic prescribing. 
Nevertheless, data are now strong 
enough to encourage changes, such as 
encouraging natural childbirth, physical 
interaction between siblings and non-
siblings, more sport and other outdoor 
activities (including babies in prams), and 
less time spent indoors, and reduced 
antibiotic consumption.
This review further supports the view 
that the term ‘hygiene hypothesis’ is a 
misleading and dangerous misnomer 
which needs to be abandoned in favour 
of a more appropriate term such as the 
OF Mechanism. However, in order to 
tackle both allergy and infection issues 
we also need to develop a smarter 
approach to hygiene. Although targeted 
hygiene was developed to optimise 
protection against infection, it provides a 
framework for maximising protection 
against pathogen exposure but, at the 
same time, minimising disturbance of the 
indoor microbiome and spread of 
essential microbes between family 
members.
As summarised in Table 1, if we want 
to take advantage of these new findings, 
we first have to change public, public 
health and professional perceptions 
about the microbiome and about 
hygiene. Unstructured and conflicting 
advice and vague health warnings in the 
consumer and professional media must 
be replaced with simple clear 
mechanistic explanations and consistent 
messages using consistent terminology 
which avoids the use of the term 
‘hygiene hypothesis’ to define the 
concept of a link between microbial 
exposure and allergies. recent media 
articles which promote unsubstantiated 
suggestions that reduced handwashing 
could be a means to build and sustain a 
diverse gut microbiome are in direct 
conflict with public health agency advice 
on handwashing which is identified as 
probably the most important ‘critical 
control point’ for preventing spread of 
infection in all settings.133,134
An underlying problem that needs 
addressing is that, both nationally and 
internationally there are no lead agencies 
which take ownership of hygiene 
promotion, looking at it from the point of 
view of the public at large and what they 
need to understand and know. 
Campaigns targeting food or respiratory, 
pet or health-care hygiene are developed 
Figure 3
ranking of sites and surfaces based on risk of transmission of infection
 July 2016 Vol 136 No 4 l Perspectives in Public Health 221
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
by different agencies, often with 
conflicting messages. They also do little 
to address public misunderstandings 
about how infections are transmitted, the 
difference between hygiene, cleanliness 
and dirt, the widespread misuse of the 
term ‘germs’, and the hygiene 
hypothesis misnomer.135
The imperative to understand and 
reverse the epidemiologic trends in 
allergic and immune-mediated disorders 
relates not solely to the personal suffering 
and health-care burden in the developed 
world. without urgent effective 
intervention, such trends will be 
replicated around the globe as societies 
undergo socio-economic 
development.105
fundIng
P.J.T. holds a Clinician Scientist Award 
from the UK Medical research Council 
(reference Mr/K010468/1) and is 
supported through the National institute 
for Health research (NiHr)/imperial 
Biomedical research Centre. F.S. is a 
founder shareholder in Atlantia Food 
Clinical Trials, Tucana Health, and 
Alimentary Health Ltd. He is director of the 
APC Microbiome institute, a research 
centre funded in part by Science 
Foundation ireland (APC/SFi/12/rC/2273) 
and which has recently been in receipt of 
research grants from the following 
companies: Abbvie, Alimentary Health Ltd, 
Cremo, Danone, General Mills, Friesland 
Campina, Janssen, Kerry, MeadJohnson, 
Nutricia, 4D Pharma plc, Second Genome, 
and Sigmoid pharma. The authors 
received an honorarium from the 
international Scientific Forum on Home 
Hygiene for their time in preparation of this 
manuscript.
references
 
1. 
Strachan D. Hay fever, hygiene, and household 
size. British Medical Journal 1989; 299: 1259–
60.
 
2. 
Strachan D. Family size, infection and atopy: 
The first decade of the ‘hygiene hypothesis’. 
Thorax 2000; 55: S2–10.
 
3. 
Parker w. The ‘hygiene hypothesis’ for allergic 
disease is a misnomer. British Medical Journal 
2014; 349: g5267.
 
4. 
Kramer A, Bekeschus S, Broker BM, 
Scheibinger H, razavi B, Assadian O. 
Maintaining health by balancing microbial 
exposure and prevention of infection: The 
hygiene hypothesis versus the hypothesis of 
early immune challenge. Journal of Hospital 
Infection 2013; 83: S29–34.
 
5. 
McFall-Ngai M, Hadfield MG, Bosch TC, Carey 
HV, Domazet-Lošo T, Douglas Ae et al. 
Animals in a bacterial world, a new imperative 
for the life sciences. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences U S A 2013; 
110: 3229–36.
 
6. 
Aylon P
, Ferrel wr, Stewart Tr. Commentaries 
on ‘the Delphi technique as a forecasting tool: 
issues and analysis’ by rowe and wright. 
International Journal of Forecasting 1999; 15: 
377–81.
 
7. 
Garrod B, Fyall A. revisiting Delphi: the Delphi 
technique in tourism research. in: richie Bw, 
Burns P
, Palmer C. Tourism Research 
Methods: Integrating Theory with Practice. 
Oxfordshire: Cabi Publishing, 2005, pp.85–98.
 
8. 
Van Teijlingen e, Pitchforth e, Bishop C, russle 
e. Delphi method and nominal group technique 
in family planning and reproductive health 
technique. Journal of Family Planning and 
Reproductive Health 2006; 32: 249–52.
 
9. 
iqbal S, Pipon-Young L. The Delphi method. 
The Psychologist 2009; 22: 598–601.
 
10. Bloomfield SF, exner M, Fara GM, Nath KJ, 
Scott eA, Van der Voorden C. The global 
burden of hygiene-related diseases in relation 
to the home and community. International 
Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene 2009. 
Available online at: http://www.ifh-
homehygiene.org/review/global-burden-
hygiene-related-diseases-relation-home-and-
community
 
11. Parliamentary Office of Science and 
Technology. Food poisoning, 2003. Available 
online at: http://www.parliament.uk/
documents/post/pn193.pdf
 
12. Tam CG, Larose T, O’Brien SJ. Costed 
extension to the Second Study of infectious 
intestinal Disease in the Community: identifying 
the proportion of foodborne disease in the UK 
and attributing foodborne disease by food 
commodity. Food Standards Agency, 2014. 
Available online at: http://www.food.gov.uk
 
13. Little P
, Stuart B, Hobbs FD, Moore M, Barnett 
J, Popoola D et al. An internet-delivered 
handwashing intervention to modify influenza-
like illness and respiratory infection 
transmission (PriMiT): A primary care 
randomised trial. Lancet 2015; 386: 1631–9.
 
14. winther B, McCue K, Ashe K, rubino J, 
Hendley JO. rhinovirus contamination of 
surfaces in homes of adults with natural colds: 
Transfer of virus to fingertips during normal 
daily activities. Journal of Medical Virology 
2011; 83: 905–9.
 
15. Kirsch K. The most contaminated surfaces in 
hotel rooms. Presentation at the 2012 General 
Meeting of the American Society for 
Microbiology, San Francisco, CA, 16–19 June 
2012. Available online at: http://www.
eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2012-06/asfm-
tmc061312.php
 
16. world Health Organization (wHO). Healthcare-
associated infections fact sheet, 2015. 
Available online at: http://www.who.int/gpsc/
country_work/gpsc_ccisc_fact_sheet_en.pdf
 
17. Department of Health and Health Protection 
Agency. Clostridium difficile infection: How to 
deal with the problem, 2008. Available online 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/340851/
Clostridium_difficile_infection_how_to_deal_
with_the_problem.pdf
 
18. Health Protection Agency. Trends in rates of 
healthcare associated infection in england 
2004 to 2008. report for the National Audit 
Office, National Audit Office, London, June 
2009.
 
19. Kings Fund. Healthcare associated infections: 
Stemming the rise of the ‘superbug’? 2008. 
Available online at: http://www.kingsfund.org.
uk/sites/files/kf/briefing-healthcare-associated-
infections-stemming-rise-of-superbug-rachel-
turner-kings-fund-july-2008.pdf
 
20. eyre Dw, Cule ML, wilson DJ, Griffiths D, 
Vaughan A, O’Connor L et al. Diverse sources 
of C. difficile infection identified on whole-
genome sequencing. New England Journal of 
Medicine 2013; 369(13): 1195–205.
 
21. Health Protection Agency. Quarterly 
epidemiological commentary: Mandatory 
MrSA, MSSA and e. coli infection data (up to 
October–December 2012). Available online at: 
http://www.hpa.org.uk/webc/HPAwebFile/
HPAweb_C/1284473407318
 
22. Jones Ke, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, 
Balk D, Gittleman JL et al. Global trends in 
emerging infectious diseases. Nature 2008; 
451(7181): 990–3.
 
23. World Health Organization (WHO) global 
influenza preparedness plan: The role of WHO 
and recommendations for national measures 
before and during pandemics. Geneva: wHO, 
2005. Available online at: http://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/10665/68998/1/wHO_CDS_
CSr_GiP_2005.5.pdf
 
24. Behling rG, eifert J, erickson MC, Gurtler JB, 
Kornacki JL, Line e et al. Selected pathogens 
of concern to industrial food processors: 
infectious, toxigenic, toxico-infectious, selected 
emerging pathogenic bacteria. in JL Kornacki 
(ed.) Principles of Microbiological 
Troubleshooting in the Industrial Food 
Processing Environment. New York: Springer, 
2010, pp. 5–61.
 
25. Hall AJ. Noroviruses: The perfect human 
pathogens? Journal of Infectious Diseases 
2012; 205: 1622–4.
 
26. recommendations for future collaboration 
between the U.S. and eU. Transatlantic 
Taskforce on Antimicrobial Resistance, 2011. 
Available online at: http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/
activities/diseaseprogrammes/TATFAr/
Documents/210911_TATFAr_report.pdf
 
27. Bloomfield SF. Spread of antibiotic resistant 
strains in the home and community. 
International Scientific Forum on Home 
Hygiene 2013. Available online at: http://www.
ifh-homehygiene.org/review/spread-antibiotic-
resistant-strains-home-and-community
 
28. Nachamkin i, Allos BM, Ho T. Campylobacter 
Species and Guillain-Barré Syndrome. Clinical 
Microbiology Reviews 1998; 11: 555–67.
 
29. Yoo J, Tcheurekdjian H, Lynch SV, Cabana M, 
Boushey HA. Microbial manipulation of immune 
function for asthma prevention: inferences from 
clinical trials. Proceedings of the American 
Thoracic Society 2007; 4: 277–82.
 
30. Smith V. Chapter 3. Greek hygiene. in V Smith 
(ed.) Clean: A History of Personal Hygiene and 
Purity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007, 
pp. 74–83.
 
31. Deckers iA, McLean S, Linssen S, Mommers 
M, van Schayck CP
, Sheikh A. investigating 
international time trends in the incidence and 
prevalence of atopic eczema 1990-2010:  
 222 Perspectives in Public Health l July 2016 Vol 136 No 4
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
A systematic review of epidemiological studies. 
PLoS ONE 2012; 7(7): e39803.
 
32. Asher Mi, Montefort S, Björkstén B, Lai CK, 
Strachan DP
, weiland SK et al.; iSAAC Phase 
Three Study Group. worldwide time trends in 
the prevalence of symptoms of asthma, allergic 
rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in childhood: 
iSAAC Phases One and Three repeat 
multicountry cross-sectional surveys. Lancet 
2006; 368(9537): 733–43.
 
33. Prescott SL, Pawankar r, Allen KJ, Campbell 
De, Sinn JK, Fiocchi A et al. A global survey of 
changing patterns of food allergy burden in 
children. World Allergy Organ Journal 2013;  
6: 21.
 
34. Platts-Mills TA. The allergy epidemics: 1870-
2010. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 2015; 136: 3–13.
 
35. Venter C, Hasan Arshad S, Grundy J, Pereira 
B, Bernie Clayton C, Voigt K et al. Time trends 
in the prevalence of peanut allergy: Three 
cohorts of children from the same geographical 
location in the UK. Allergy 2010; 65: 103–8.
 
36. Perkin Mr, Logan K, Tseng A, raji B, Ayis S, 
Peacock J et al. randomized trial of 
introduction of allergenic foods in breast-fed 
infants. New England Journal of Medicine. 
epub 2016 March 4. DOi: 10.1056/
NeJMoa1514210.
 
37. Prescott S, Allen KJ. Food allergy: riding the 
second wave of the allergy epidemic. Pediatric 
Allergy and Immunology 2011; 22: 155–60.
 
38. rook GAw. 99th Dahlem conference on 
infection, inflammation and chronic 
inflammatory disorders: Darwinian medicine 
and the ‘hygiene’ or ‘old friends’ hypothesis. 
Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2010; 
160: 70–9.
 
39. rook GAw. regulation of the immune system 
by biodiversity from the natural environment: 
An ecosystem service essential to health. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Science U S A 2013; 110: 18360–7.
 
40. rook GAw, raison CL, Lowry CA. Microbial 
‘old friends’, immunoregulation and 
socioeconomic status. Clinical and 
Experimental Immunology 2014; 177: 1–12.
 
41. wolfe ND, Dunavan CP
, Diamond J. Origins of 
major human infectious diseases. Nature 2007; 
447: 279–83.
 
42. Benn CS, Melbye M, wohlfahrt J, Bjorksten B, 
Aaby P
. Cohort study of sibling effect, 
infectious diseases, and risk of atopic 
dermatitis during first 18 months of life. British 
Medical Journal 2004; 328: 1223–8.
 
43. Dunder T, Tapiainen T, Pokka T, Uhari M. 
infections in child day care centers and later 
development of asthma, allergic rhinitis, and 
atopic dermatitis: Prospective follow-up survey 
12 years after controlled randomized hygiene 
intervention. Archives of Pediatric & Adolescent 
Medicine 2007; 161: 972–7.
 
44. Bremner SA, Carey iM, Dewilde S, richards 
N, Maier wC, Hilton Sr et al. infections 
presenting for clinical care in early life and later 
risk of hay fever in two UK birth cohorts. 
Allergy 2008; 63: 274–83.
 
45. Su LF, Kidd BA, Han A, Kotzin JJ, Davis MM. 
Virus-specific CD4(+) memory-phenotype T 
cells are abundant in unexposed adults. 
Immunity 2013; 38: 373–83.
 
46. Stanwell Smith r, Bloomfield SF. The hygiene 
hypothesis and implications for home hygiene. 
International Scientific Forum on Home 
Hygiene 2006. Available online at: http://www.
ifh-homehygiene.org/best-practice-review/
hygiene-hypothesis-and-implications-home-
hygiene
 
47. Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu r, 
Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The placenta harbors 
a unique microbiome. Scientific Transational 
Medicine 2014; 6: 237–65.
 
48. Meropol SB, edwards A. Development of the 
infant intestinal microbiome: A bird’s eye view 
of a complex process. Birth Defects Research 
Part C: Embryo Today – Reviews 2015; 105: 
228–39.
 
49. Thavagnanam S, Fleming J, Bromley A, 
Shields MD, Cardwell Cr. A meta-analysis of 
the association between Caesarean section 
and childhood asthma. Clinical and 
Experimental Allergy 2008; 38: 629–33.
 
50. NHS Choices. Caesarean section, 2016. 
Available online at: http://www.nhs.uk/
Conditions/pregnancy-and-baby/pages/
caesarean-section.aspx
 
51. Jost T, Lacroix C, Braegger CP
, rochat F, 
Chassard C. Vertical mother-neonate transfer 
of maternal gut bacteria via breastfeeding. 
Environmental Microbiology 2013; 16: 2891–4.
 
52. Penders J, Gerhold K, Stobberingh ee, Thijs 
MD, Zimmermann K, Lau S et al. 
establishment of the intestinal microbiota and 
its role for atopic dermatitis in early childhood. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
2013; 132: 601–7.
 
53. Charbonneau Mr, O’Donnell D, Blanton LV, 
Totne SM. Sialylated milk oligosaccharides 
promote microbiota-dependent growth in 
models of infant undernutrition. Cell 2016; 164: 
859–71.
 
54. Sonnenburg eD, Smits SA, Tikhonov M, 
Higginbottom SK, wingreen NS, Sonnenburg 
JL. Diet-induced extinctions in the gut 
microbiota compound over generations. 
Nature 2016; 529: 212–5.
 
55. Pelto GH, Zhang Y, Habicht JP
. Premastication: 
The second arm of infant and young child 
feeding for health and survival? Maternal & 
Child Nutrition 2010; 6: 4–18.
 
56. Hesselmar B, Sjoberg F, Saalman r, Aberg N, 
Adlerberth i, wold Ae. Pacifier cleaning 
practices and risk of allergy development. 
Pediatrics 2013; 131: e1829–37.
 
57. Penders J, Gerhold K, Thijs C, Zimmermann K, 
wahn U, Lau S et al. New insights into the 
hygiene hypothesis in allergic diseases: 
Mediation of sibling and birth mode effects by 
the gut microbiota. Gut Microbes 2014; 5: 
239–44.
 
58. Ownby Dr, Johnson CC, Peterson eL. 
exposure to dogs and cats in the first year of 
life and risk of allergic sensitization at 6 to 7 
years of age. JAMA 2002; 288: 963–72.
 
59. Aichbhaumik N, Zoratti eM, Strickler r, 
wegienka G, Owndy Dr, Havstad S et al. 
exposure to household pets influences fetal 
immunoglobulin e production. Clinical and 
Experimental Allergy 2008; 38: 1787–94.
 
60. Pet Foods Manufacturers Association, 2013. 
Available online at: http://www.pfma.org.uk/
pet-population/
 
61. Song SJ, Lauber C, Costello eK, Lozupone 
CA, Humphrey G, Berg-Lyons D et al. 
Cohabiting family members share microbiota 
with one another and with their dogs. eLife 
2013; 2: e00458. Available online at: http://doi.
org/10.7554/eLife.00458
 
62. Fujimura Ke, Johnson CC, Ownby Dr. Man’s 
best friend? The effect of pet ownership on 
house dust microbial communities. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2010; 126: 
410–2.
 
63. Dunn rr, Fierer N, Henley JB, Leff Jw, 
Menninger HL. Home life: Factors structuring 
the bacterial diversity found within and 
between homes. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e64133.
 
64. Campbell Be, Lodge CJ, Lowe AJ, Burgess 
JA, Matheson MC, Dharmage SC. exposure to 
‘farming’ and objective markers of atopy: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical 
and Experimental Allergy 2015; 45: 744–57.
 
65. Von Mutius e, Vercelli D. Farm living: effects on 
childhood asthma and allergy. Nature Reviews 
Immunology 2010; 10: 861–8.
 
66. Kauth M, Heine H. Allergy protection by 
cowshed bacteria – recent findings and future 
prospect. Pediatric Allergy and Immunology. 
epub 2016 February 26. DOi: 10.1111/
pai.12559.
 
67. ege MJ, Mayer M, Normand AC, Genuneit J, 
Cookson wO, Braun-friedlander C et al. 
exposure to environmental microorganisms 
and childhood asthma. New England Journal 
of Medicine 2011; 364: 701–9.
 
68. Lynch SV, wood rA, Boushey H, Bacharier 
LB, Bloomberg Gr, Kattan M et al. effects of 
early-life exposure to allergens and bacteria on 
recurrent wheeze and atopy in urban children. 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 
2014; 134: 593–601.
 
69. Hagner S, Harb H, Zhao M, Stein K, Holst O, 
ege MJ et al. Farm-derived Gram-positive 
bacterium Staphylococcus sciuri w620 
prevents asthma phenotype in HDM- and 
OVA-exposed mice. Allergy 2013; 68: 322–9.
 
70. Hanski i, von Hertzen L, Fyhrquist N, Koskinen K, 
Torppa K, Laatikainen T et al. environmental 
biodiversity, human microbiota, and allergy are 
interrelated. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences U S A 2012; 109: 8334–9.
 
71. The world Bank. Urban population, 2014. 
Available online at: http://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/SP
.UrB.TOTL.iN.ZS
 
72. indoor Air Quality UK. Available online at: 
http://www.iaquk.org.uk/
 
73. Schuijs MJ, willart MA, Vergote K, Gras D, 
Deswarte K, ege MJ et al. Farm dust and 
endotoxin protect against allergy through A20 
induction in lung epithelial cells. Science 2015; 
349: 1106–10.
 
74. Zhou Q, wang H, Schwartz DM, Stoffels M, 
Park YH, Zhang Y et al. Loss-of-function 
mutations in TNFAiP3 leading to A20 
haploinsufficiency cause an early-onset 
autoinflammatory disease. Nature Genetics 
2016; 48: 67–73.
 
75. Fyhrquist N, ruokolainen L, Suomalainen A, 
Lehtimaki S, Veckman V, Vendelin J et al. 
Acinetobacter species in the skin microbiota 
protect against allergic sensitization and 
inflammation. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 2014; 134: 1301–9.
 
76. Hildebrand F, Nguyen TL, Brinkman B, Yunta 
rG, Cauwe B, Vandenabeele P et al. 
inflammation-associated enterotypes, host 
genotype, cage and inter-individual effects drive 
gut microbiota variation in common laboratory 
mice. Genome Biology 2013; 14: r4.
 
77. O’Toole Pw, Jeffery iB. Gut microbiota and 
aging. Science 2015; 350: 1214–5.
 
78. Claesson MJ, Jeffery iB, Conde S, Power Se, 
O’Connor eM, Cusack S et al. Gut microbiota 
composition correlates with diet and health in 
the elderly. Nature 2012; 488: 178–84.
 July 2016 Vol 136 No 4 l Perspectives in Public Health 223
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
 
79. Thorburn AN, Macia L, Mackay Cr. Diet, 
metabolites, and ‘western-lifestyle’ 
inflammatory diseases. Immunity 2014; 40: 
833–42.
 
80. Zeng H, Chi H. Metabolic control of regulatory 
T cell development and function. Trends in 
Immunology 2015; 36: 3–12.
 
81. Martín-Peláez S, Mosele Ji, Pizarro N, Farràs 
M, de la Torre r, Subirana i et al. effect of 
virgin olive oil and thyme phenolic compounds 
on blood lipid profile: implications of human 
gut microbiota. European Journal of Nutrition. 
epub 2015 November 5. DOi: 10.1007/
s00394-015-1063-2.
 
82. Cuervo A, Hevia A, López P
, Suárez A, Diaz C, 
Sánchez B et al. Phenolic compounds from 
red wine and coffee are associated with 
specific intestinal microorganisms in allergic 
subjects. Food & Function 2016; 7: 104–9.
 
83. Vanamala JK, Knight r, Spector TD. Can your 
microbiome tell you what to eat? Cell 
Metabolism 2015; 22: 960–1.
 
84. Caesar r, Tremaroli V, Kovatcheva-Datchary P
, 
Cani PD, Backhed F. Crosstalk between gut 
microbiota and dietary lipids aggravates wAT 
inflammation through TLr signaling. Cell 
Metabolism 2015; 22: 658–68.
 
85. Kaliannan K, wang B, Li XY, Kim KJ, Kang JX. 
A host-microbiome interaction mediates the 
opposing effects of omega-6 and omega-3 
fatty acids on metabolic endotoxemia. 
Scientific Reports 2015; 5: 11276.
 
86. wang M, Karlsson C, Olsson C, Adlerberth i, 
wold Ae, Strachan DP et al. reduced diversity 
in the early fecal microbiota of infants with 
atopic eczema. Journal of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology 2008; 121: 129–34.
 
87. Bisgaard H, Li N, Bonnelykke K, Chawes BL, 
Skov T, Paludan-Müller G et al. reduced 
diversity of the intestinal microbiota during 
infancy is associated with increased risk of 
allergic disease at school age. Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2011; 128: 
646–52.
 
88. Abrahamsson Tr, Jakobsson He, Andersson 
AF, Björkstén B, engstrand L, Jenmalm MC. 
Low diversity of the gut microbiota in infants 
with atopic eczema. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 2012; 129: 434–40.
 
89. Bloomfield SF. Are antibiotics a contributory 
factor to the rise in allergic and other chronic 
inflammatory diseases? International Scientific 
Forum on Home Hygiene 2014. Available online 
at: http://www.ifh-homehygiene.org/review/are-
antibiotics-contributory-factor-rise-allergic-and-
other-chronic-inflammatory-diseases
 
90. McKeever TM, Lewis SA, Smith C, Hubbard r. 
The importance of prenatal exposures on the 
development of allergic disease: A birth cohort 
study using the west Midlands General 
Practice Database. American Journal of 
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 2002; 
166: 827–32.
 
91. Metsala J, Lundqvist A, Virta LJ, Kaila M, 
Gissler M, Virtanen SM. Prenatal and post-
natal exposure to antibiotics and risk of asthma 
in childhood. Clinical and Experimental Allergy 
2015; 45: 137–45.
 
92. Lapin B, Piorkowski J, Ownby D, Freels S, 
Chavez N, Hernandez e et al. relationship 
between prenatal antibiotic use and asthma in 
at-risk children. Annals of Allergy, Asthma & 
Immunology 2015; 114: 203–7.
 
93. Korpela K, Salonen A, Virta LJ, Kekkonen rA, 
Forslund K, Bork P et al. intestinal microbiome 
is related to lifetime antibiotic use in Finnish 
pre-school children. Nature Communications 
2016; 7: 10410.
 
94. Cox LM, Yamanishi S, Sohn J, Alekseyenko 
AV, Leung JM, Cho i et al. Altering the intestinal 
microbiota during a critical developmental 
window has lasting metabolic consequences. 
Cell 2014; 158: 705–21.
 
95. Flores Ge, Bates ST, Caporaso JG, Lauber CL, 
Leff Jw, Knight r et al. Diversity, distribution 
and sources of bacteria in residential kitchens. 
Environmental Microbiology 2013; 15: 588–96.
 
96. Scott eA, Bloomfield SF, Barlow CG. 
evaluation of disinfectants in the domestic 
environment under ‘in use’ conditions. Journal 
of Hygiene 1984; 92: 193–203.
 
97. rusin P
, Orosz-Coughlin P
, Gerba C. 
reduction of faecal coliform, coliform and 
heterotrophic plate count bacteria in the 
household kitchen and bathroom by 
disinfection with hypochlorite cleaners. Journal 
of Applied Microbiology 1998; 85: 819–28.
 
98. Josephson KL, rubino Jr, Pepper iL. 
Characterization and quantification of bacterial 
pathogens and indicator organisms in 
household kitchens with and without the use of 
a disinfectant cleaner. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology 1997; 83: 737–50.
 
99. weber J, illi S, Nowak D, Schierl r, Holst O, 
von Mutius e et al. Asthma and the hygiene 
hypothesis. Does cleanliness matter? 
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical 
Care Medicine 2015; 191: 522–9.
 
100. Liu AH. revisiting the hygiene hypothesis for 
allergy and asthma. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 136; 4: 860–5.
 
101. Sherriff A, Golding J and the ALSPAC study 
team. Factors associated with different hygiene 
practices in the homes of 15 month old infants. 
Archives of Diseases of Childhood 2002; 86: 
30–5.
 
102. Sherriff A, Golding J and the ALSPAC study 
team. Hygiene levels in a contemporary 
population cohort are associated with 
wheezing and atopic eczema in preschool 
children. Archives of Diseases of Childhood 
2002; 87: 26–9.
 
103. Hill C, Shanahan F. The enteric microbiota. in 
M Feldman, LS Friedman. LJ Brandt (eds) 
Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and 
Liver Disease, 10th edn. Philadelphia, PA: 
elsevier Saunders, 2015, pp. 28–35.
 
104. Shanahan F, Quigley eMM. Manipulation of the 
microbiota for treatment of iBS and iBD-
challenges and controversies. 
Gastroenterology 2014; 146: 1554–63.
 
105. Shanahan F. The gut microbiota – A clinical 
perspective on lessons learned. Nature 
Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2012; 
9: 609–14.
 
106. Shanahan F. Changing the narrative on 
antibiotics. Gut 2015; 64: 1674–5.
 
107. rea MC, Dobson A, O’Sullivan O, Crispie F
, Fouhy 
F
, Cotter PD et al. effect of broad- and narrow-
spectrum antimicrobials on Clostridium difficile and 
microbial diversity in a model of the distal colon. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
U S A 2011; 108: 4639–44.
 
108. Franzosa eA, Huang K, Meadow JF, Gevers D, 
Lemon KP
, Bohannan BJ et al. identifying 
personal microbiomes using metagenomic 
codes. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences U S A 2015; 112: e2930–8.
 
109. Zeevi D, Korem T, Zmora N, israeli D, 
rothschild D, weinberger A et al. Personalized 
nutrition by prediction of glycemic responses. 
Cell 2015; 163: 1079–94.
 
110. Dominguez-Bello MG, De Jesus-Laboy KM, 
Shen N, Cox LM, Amir A, Gonzalez A et al. 
Partial restoration of the microbiota of 
cesarean-born infants via vaginal microbial 
transfer. Nature Medicine 2016; 22: 250–3.
 
111. Cunnington AJ, Sim K, Deierl A, Kroll JS, 
Brannigan e, Darby J. Vaginal seeding of 
infants born by caesarean section. British 
Medical Journal 2016; 352: i227.
 
112. Motherway MO, Zomer A, Leahy SC, 
reunanen J, Bottacini F, Claesson MJ et al. 
Functional genome analysis of Bifidobacterium 
breve UCC2003 reveals type iVb tight 
adherence (Tad) pili as an essential and 
conserved host-colonization factor. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences U S A 2011; 108: 11217–22.
 
113. Fanning S, Hall LJ, Cronin M, Zomer A, 
MacSharry J, Goulding D et al. Bifidobacterial 
surface-exopolysaccharide facilitates 
commensal-host interaction through immune 
modulation and pathogen protection. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences U S A 2012; 109: 2108–13.
 
114. Scott e. Foodborne disease and other hygiene 
issues in the home. Journal of Applied 
Bacteriology 1996; 80: 5–9.
 
115. Nightingale F. Notes on Nursing: What It Is and 
What It Is Not. Glasgow; London: Blackie & 
Son Ltd, 1859.
 
116. Bloomfield SF, exner M, Signorelli C, Nath KJ, 
Scott eA. The chain of infection transmission in 
the home and everyday life settings, and the 
role of hygiene in reducing the risk of infection. 
International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene 
2012. Available online at: http://www.ifh-home 
hygiene.org/review/chain-infection-transmission-
home-and-everyday-life-settings-and-role-
hygiene-reducing-risk
 
117. Scott e. The Survival and Transfer of 
Pathogenic Bacteria from Environmental Sites 
and Surfaces. PhD thesis, Department of 
Pharmacy, Kings College, University of 
London, London, 1990.
 
118. Scott e. Community-based infections and the 
potential role of common touch surfaces as 
vectors for the transmission of infectious 
agents in home and community settings. 
American Journal of Infection Control 2013; 
41: 1087–92.
 
119. Cogan TA, Bloomfield SF, Humphrey TJ. The 
effectiveness of hygiene procedures for 
prevention of cross-contamination from chicken 
carcases in the domestic kitchen. Letters in 
Applied Microbiology 1999; 29: 354–8.
 
120. ramm L, Siani H, wesgate r, Maillard J-Y. 
Pathogen transfer and high variability in 
pathogen removal by detergent wipes. 
American Journal of Infection Control 2015; 
43: 724–8.
 
121. Barker J, Vipond iB, Bloomfield SF. The effects 
of cleaning and disinfection in reducing the 
spread of Norwalk-like virus contamination via 
environmental surfaces. Journal of Hospital 
Infection 2004; 58: 42–9.
 
122. exner M, Vacata V, Hornei B, Dietlein e, Gebel 
J. Household cleaning and surface disinfection: 
New insights and strategies. Journal of 
Hospital Infection 2004; 56(Suppl. 2): S70–5.
 
123. Sifuentes LY, Koenig Dw, Philips rL, reynolds 
KA, Gerba CP
. Use of hygiene protocols to 
control the spread of viruses in a hotel. Food 
and Environmental Virology 2014; 6: 175–81.
 224 Perspectives in Public Health l July 2016 Vol 136 No 4
Time to abandon the hygiene hypothesis: new perspectives on allergic disease, the human microbiome, infectious disease prevention and the role of targeted hygiene
Peer review
 
124. Bloomfield SF, Scott eA. A risk assessment 
approach to use of antimicrobials in the home 
to prevent spread of infection. American 
Journal of Infection Control 2013; 41: S87–93.
 
125. Aiello Ae, Larson eL. what is the evidence for 
a causal link between hygiene and infections? 
Lancet Infectious Disease 2002; 2: 103–10.
 
126. Aiello Ae, Coulborn rM, Perez V, Larson eL. 
effect of hand hygiene on infectious disease 
risk in the community setting: A meta-analysis. 
American Journal of Infection Control 2008; 
98: 1372–81.
 
127. Phillipson L, Jones SC, Larsen-Truong K, 
robinson L, Barrie L. Using social marketing to 
promote cold and flu prevention behaviors on 
an Australian university campus. Cases in 
Public Health Communication & Marketing 
2013; 7: 99–119.
 
128. FiGHTBAC The partnership for food safety 
education. Available online at: http://www.
fightbac.org/
 
129. NHS Choices. Food safety. Available online at: 
http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/homehygiene/
Pages/Homehygienehub.aspx
 
130. Catch it, bin it, kill it; campaign to reduce flu 
infections. Available online at: https://www.gov.
uk/government/news/catch-it-bin-it-kill-it-
campaign-to-help-reduce-flu-infections
 
131. The e-bug project. Available online at: www.e-
bug.eu
 
132. Haahtela T, Laatikainen H, Alenius P
, Auvinen 
N, Fyhrquist i, Hanski L et al. Hunt for the 
origin of allergy – Comparing the Finnish and 
russian Karelia. Clinical and Experimental 
Allergy 2015; 45: 891–901.
 
133. http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/health/
article4602687.ece
 
134. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/
article-3398553/Don-t-wash-hands-bit-dirt-
good-experts-say-cleaning-protect-against-
allergies-allowing-helpful-bacteria-body.
html#ixzz3xDe
 
135. Bloomfield SF. in future we are going to have to 
view our microbial world very differently. 
Perspectives in Public Health 2016; 136(4).
Putting compassionate  
care at the centre
Raising awareness of dementia is a  
priority focus for public health and an 
essential step in tackling the disease.  
If you are caring for someone 
with dementia either in a care 
setting or as a partner or friend, 
our one day training* will offer 
an invaluable insight into good 
quality person centred care.
A better understanding of dementia will make a 
real difference to the care we offer.
For more information visit www.rsph.org.uk/understandingdementia  
or email dementia@rsph.org.uk
*Ofqual accredited qualification, the Level 2 Award in Understanding Dementia. One day training with multiple choice question paper.
