 Guideline-concordant weight-loss programs in an urban area are 
uncommon and difficult to identify through the Internet
Benjamin BloomA, Ambereen K. MehtaB, Jeanne M. ClarkC,E, and Kimberly A. GudzuneC,D
A University of Maryland Medical School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
B Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore, MD, US
C Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
D Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology, and Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
E Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA
Abstract
Objective—To determine the reliability of Internet-based information on community-based 
weight-loss programs and grade their degree of concordance with 2013 American Heart 
Association, American College of Cardiology, and The Obesity Society weight management 
guidelines.
Methods—We conducted an online search for weight-loss programs in the Maryland-
Washington, DC-Virginia corridor. We performed content analysis to abstract program 
components from their websites, and then randomly selected 80 programs for a telephone survey 
to verify this information. We determined reliability of Internet information in comparison with 
telephone interview responses.
Results—Of the 191 programs, we graded 1% as high, 8% as moderate, and 91% as low with 
respect to guideline concordance based on website content. Fifty-two programs participated in the 
telephone survey (65% response rate). Program intensity, diet, physical activity, and use of 
behavioral strategies were underreported on websites as compared to description of these activities 
during phone interview. Within our subsample, we graded 6% of programs as high based on 
website information, whereas we graded 19% as high after telephone interview.
Conclusions—Most weight-loss programs in an urban, mid-Atlantic region do not currently 
offer guideline-concordant practices and fail to disclose key information online, which may make 
clinician referrals challenging.
Corresponding Author Address: Kimberly A. Gudzune, MD, MPH, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; Division of 
General Internal Medicine, 2024 E. Monument St, Room 2-621; Baltimore, MD 21287, Fax: (410) 614-0588; Phone: (443) 287-7238; 
gudzune@jhu.edu. 
Disclosure
The authors have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article to disclose.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016 March ; 24(3): 583–588. doi:10.1002/oby.21403.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
weight loss; Internet information
Introduction
Two-thirds of U.S. adults are overweight or obese (1), and excess body weight increases the 
risk of coronary artery disease, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus among many other 
comorbidities (2). Studies have demonstrated that losing weight can prevent the 
development of these conditions including hypertension and diabetes (3-4), and a 3 to 5% 
weight loss has been recommended (5). Obesity and its related conditions have been 
estimated to cost $147 billion annually (6).
Despite U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendations for primary care providers 
(PCPs) to counsel their obese patients to lose weight, patients have not reported increased 
receipt of weight-loss counseling (7). PCPs have cited a number of barriers to this 
counseling including lack of time, inadequate training, and pessimism regarding weight loss 
(8). Recent guidelines on weight management published by the American Heart Association, 
American College of Cardiology, and The Obesity Society (AHA/ACC/TOS) recommended 
that clinicians refer obese patients to high intensity, comprehensive lifestyle interventions by 
a trained interventionist (5). These programs should include: 1) a moderately reduced calorie 
diet; 2) increased physical activity; and 3) use of behavioral strategies to facilitate adherence 
to recommendations. However, it is unclear how many weight-loss programs currently 
available in the community meet these evidence-based guidelines.
To identify guideline-concordant weight-loss programs, physicians and patients may turn to 
the Internet. Surveys indicate that both physicians and U.S. adults increasingly use the 
Internet for gathering health and medical information. Physician Internet use for medical 
information gathering has increased from 2.8 to 4 hours per week between 2009 and 2013 
(9). In 2014, 87% of U.S. adults were identified as “Internet users;” 72% of whom had 
searched online for health information within the previous year (10). However, a prior study 
found that the quality of general weight-loss information online was suboptimal (11).
Our goal was to evaluate whether web-based information provided by community-based 
weight-loss centers reported their practices on key areas identified in the 2013 
AHA/ACC/TOS weight management guidelines. We then compared this web-based 
information to information obtained through phone interview within a randomly selected 
sub-sample of programs.
Methods
Identification of community-based weight-loss programs
In June 2014, we conducted a systematic online search to identify community-based weight-
loss programs that were located within a 10-mile radius of a large practice network of 17 
primary care clinics in the Maryland-Washington, DC-Virginia corridor (Maryland: 
Baltimore City, Baltimore County, Anne Arundel County, Howard County, Prince George’s 
Bloom et al.
Page 2
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 County, Montgomery County. Washington D.C. Virginia: Arlington County, Fairfax 
County, Alexandria). We searched Yellowpages.com and Yellowbook.com using the terms 
“overweight OR obesity OR weight management OR weight loss OR weight loss services” 
to identify centers located within 10 miles of each primary care clinic. We also searched 
Google Maps using the same search terms and identified centers located within the same zip 
code of each primary care clinic (distance search unavailable). We recorded the name, 
address, phone and website address (if available) for all identified centers. We then verified 
that the identified centers offered weight-loss services by reviewing their websites. We only 
included centers with valid website addresses that were currently offering a weight 
management program in the Maryland-Washington, DC-Virginia corridor in the final 
sample.
The Johns Hopkins Medicine IRB reviewed and exempted this study protocol as non-
Human subjects research.
Data abstraction and grading of guideline concordance of programs’ websites
To determine the information available from all included programs’ websites, we performed 
a content analysis. Prior studies have used content analysis to examine visual portrayals of 
overweight and obesity in the U.S. media focusing on images associated with news articles 
and television series (12-14), and we adapted these strategies for this study. We captured all 
pages available from each program’s website between June 6 and June 11, 2014. We 
developed a coding scheme based upon 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS weight management 
guidelines (5) and prior reviews on efficacy of prescription medications and supplements for 
weight loss (15-16) to identify relevant content (Supporting Information S1). We considered 
supplements to include dietary supplements, nutraceuticals, or other products that are not 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the treatment of obesity (e.g., 
vitamins, minerals, herbal, botanicals, amino acids, enzymes, hormones, etc). Efficacy and 
safety of supplements vary (17). Two investigators independently (BB, AM) reviewed the 
pages from these websites to abstract this information from text and images. Discrepancies 
between the two coders were resolved through consensus adjudication by the third 
investigator (KG).
Using the information abstracted from their websites during content analysis, we evaluated 
each program based on five key components (Table 1) and then graded them on their degree 
of guideline concordance. We graded a program as “high” if the program met all five 
criteria; as “moderate” if the program did not report use of supplements and met at least two 
of the other four criteria; and as “low” if the program reported using supplements or met less 
than two of the other criteria. We report the frequencies of abstracted data elements and 
guideline concordance assessments for the overall sample.
Validation subsample for telephone survey
We examined the reliability of information abstracted from the programs’ websites 
compared with information obtained during a telephone query. Using a computer program, 
we randomly selected 80 programs to participate in the telephone survey for this validation 
subsample. We created a survey instrument to capture the same elements contained in our 
Bloom et al.
Page 3
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 content analysis abstraction form (Supporting Information S2). We called each randomized 
program to describe the study purpose and perform the interview with a staff representative 
if the program was willing to participate. We made at least 5 calls to a program before 
labeling them as a non-responder. Fifty-two programs completed the telephone survey (65% 
response rate with 6 refusals and 22 non-responders).
We compared the data obtained from the websites to the information gathered during the 
telephone interview using cross-tabulations in STATA (College Station, TX). We examined 
the reliability (reliable, misrepresentation, lacking representation) and calculated the 
sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of program intensity, dietary change, physical 
activity, behavior modification, and supplement use. We considered information as 
“reliable” if information gathered from the website was the same as reported in the 
telephone interview; as “misrepresentation” if the program reported practices on the website 
that were not endorsed in the telephone interview; and “lacking representation” if the 
program endorsed practices in the telephone interview that were not reported on the website. 
We also compared the grading of guideline concordance using the website data to the 
grading of guideline concordance using the telephone data.
Results
We identified 191 community-based weight-loss programs that were operating and had 
active websites in our catchment area (Figure S1). In our sample, 29% of programs were 
physician supervised, 6% were affiliates of nationally available commercial weight-loss 
programs (e.g., Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig), and 5% were associated with a bariatric 
surgery practice. Nearly all programs were delivered in-person (96%).
Table 2 displays the frequency of reported elements on program websites. Only 59% of 
programs described their intensity, and only 17% overall could be identified as high-
intensity programs that advised more than 14 sessions in a 6-month period. The majority of 
programs (75%) described dietary change as a part of their weight-loss program; however, 
the type of dietary change was often not specified. Most programs (57%) described 
increased physical activity as a part of their weight-loss program, but only 3% reported 
advising the recommended goal of 150 minutes or more of moderate physical activity per 
week. Only 53% of programs described using any behavioral strategies (e.g., self-
monitoring of weight, tracking of food intake and/or exercise). Few programs reported 
prescribing FDA-approved medications (15%), yet 34% endorsed the use of supplements 
and 29% offered other alternative therapies (e.g., body wraps, infrared therapy, liposuction, 
etc.) for weight loss.
With respect to guideline concordance within our overall sample, we graded 1% of 
programs as highly concordant, 8% as moderate, and 91% as low based on website content 
(Figure 1).
Comparison of web-based information to telephone interviews
Out of the 80 programs randomly selected for inclusion in the subsample, representatives 
from 52 programs agreed to be interviewed (average length of employment of interviewee: 7 
Bloom et al.
Page 4
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 years, range 5 months to 23 years). In this subsample, 35% of programs were physician 
supervised, 12% were affiliates of nationally available commercial weight-loss programs, 
and 10% were associated with a bariatric surgery practice. Nearly all programs were 
delivered in-person (96%).
We compared the information provided on program websites to that obtained during 
telephone interviews to determine reliability of web-based information (Figure 2). Key 
elements including program intensity, physical activity, and use of behavioral strategies 
were reported reliably on less than 60% of programs’ websites. Program intensity, dietary 
change, physical activity and use of behavioral strategies were often not reported or were 
inadequately described on websites, although program contacts endorsed these activities and 
provided detailed descriptions during phone interview (lacking representation). In contrast, 
reported use of FDA-approved medications had a high degree of reliability (92%). Reported 
use of supplements also had a high degree of reliability, although 21% of program contacts 
endorsed use of these products during phone interview when the website did not mention 
their use (lacking representation). Table S1 contains calculations of sensitivity, specificity 
and predictive values for each key element.
Within our subsample, we graded 6% of programs as high, 2% as moderate, and 92% as low 
with respect to guideline concordance based on website information (Figure 1). In contrast, 
we graded 19% of programs as high, 12% as moderate, and 69% as low guideline 
concordance based on information from telephone interviews.
Discussion
This is the first study to capture the breadth and quality of services offered by community-
based weight-loss programs. Given that surveys have reported 29% to 48% of Americans 
are actively trying to lose weight (18-19) and recent guidelines promote referral to high-
intensity, multi-component programs (5), our results suggest that few guideline-concordant 
weight-loss programs may currently be available in the urban, mid-Atlantic region (Internet: 
1% rated as highly concordant within total sample; Phone: 19% rated as highly concordant 
within subsample). Our findings indicate that patients and clinicians in this area may have 
difficulties identifying community-based programs concordant with recent recommendations 
if they rely on information from the Internet. Most programs failed to represent key elements 
of program structure and content on their website such as program intensity, physical 
activity and use of behavioral strategies, which are essential in determining guideline 
concordance. We were able to obtain additional details regarding the services provided 
during phone interview. Therefore, clinicians planning to refer a patient to weight-loss 
services may need to consider calling to verify program details and assess guideline 
concordance prior to patient referral, although this practice may be difficult to implement 
during the typical primary care visit.
Website information was reliable with respect to use of FDA-approved weight-loss 
medication and use of supplements. Clinicians and patients can feel relatively confidant that 
if a website reports that a program uses FDA-approved medications that this is likely to be a 
part of their practice. Reported use of supplements on a website is also likely to represent 
Bloom et al.
Page 5
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that these products are a part of their practice; however, clinicians should remain somewhat 
cautious given that 21% of programs in the subsample endorsed using these products when 
this practice was not advertised online. Therefore, clinicians may consider discussing the 
overall evidence of benefits and risks of supplements for weight loss with their patients prior 
to referral to any community-based weight-loss program. Our definition of supplements 
included dietary supplements, nutraceuticals, or other products that are not approved by the 
FDA for obesity treatment; however, heterogeneity exists among the included products with 
respect to efficacy and safety. For example, ephedra may aid weight loss but has potentially 
harmful cardiovascular effects, while chitosan has no demonstrated weight loss effect (17). 
If a program uses supplements, clinicians may need to closely examine and verify which 
products are used given the variability in efficacy and safety.
Few studies have previously examined the validity of weight-loss information available on 
the Internet. However, our findings are consistent with one such study that concluded that 
most webpage content likely to be accessed by layperson Internet-users seeking weight-loss 
information was of suboptimal quality (11). Our findings also indicate that within the 
weight-loss services industry, detailed information regarding services offered is also limited.
In general, consumer protection laws are designed “to ensure that products or services are 
described truthfully online and that consumers understand what they are paying for” (20). 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) regulates these practices in the U.S. The FTC has 
already created guidelines with respect to advertising claims by the weight-loss and 
supplement industries (21). Expanding this resource to also encourage or require weight-loss 
programs to disclose their practices online regarding key guideline-concordant elements 
may improve awareness of what services consumers are paying for, and thus enhance 
consumer protection practices. This may be particularly relevant to programs’ online 
content, given that patients and clinicians alike rely on the Internet for health information 
(9-10). Improved disclosure online would make it easier for clinicians to identify programs 
using the Internet alone, as we suspect that many will not have time available during 
appointments to call programs to verify their practices. Encouraging the disclosure of these 
key elements would help patients and clinicians to easily identify highly guideline 
concordant programs, as well as highlighting and possibly increasing referral to the 19% of 
such programs that we identified through phone verification. Additional oversight from 
regulatory agencies or perhaps guidelines from medical associations like The Obesity 
Society may be a potential mechanism to promote the adoption of better disclosure practices 
by community-based weight loss programs.
Our study has limitations. First, we only examined programs within the Maryland-
Washington, DC-Virginia corridor, which may limit the generalizability of our results. It is 
unknown whether our findings might apply in rural settings or to other U.S. regions. Factors 
that vary with geographic location, such as travel distance or parking fees, might influence 
whether community-based programs can realistically expect participants to engage as 
frequently as recommended by the guidelines. Our strategy identified in-person programs 
within the community; therefore, we cannot comment whether our results apply to weight-
loss programs delivered remotely by phone or Internet. In addition, our subsample included 
a higher percentage of programs that were physician-supervised (35% vs 29%), affiliates of 
Bloom et al.
Page 6
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 nationally available commercial weight-loss programs (12% vs 6%), or associated with a 
bariatric surgery practice (10% vs 5%) as compared to the overall sample. These types of 
programs might have been more inclined to participate in the telephone survey and their 
practices may not represent the weight-loss community as a whole. For example, we rated 
6% of the subsample as highly concordant based on their website information, where only 
1% of the overall sample was graded as high. These differences between the subsample and 
overall sample may contribute to bias within the subsample. Second, we considered the 
information obtained by phone within our subsample to be a more accurate representation of 
program practices than information available online. The quality of this information may 
vary based on the degree of expertise of the individual being interviewed, although the 
average duration of employment for these individuals was 7 years. In addition, interviewee 
phone responses may be subject to social desirability bias. Third, we used an arbitration 
strategy with a third reviewer in our abstraction process, and therefore, we were unable to 
conduct an inter-rater reliability analysis. Future studies could consider examining inter-rater 
reliability to better validate the abstraction process. Finally, we did not capture information 
regarding program costs or insurance coverage, which may be important factors that patients 
and clinicians might desire from online information when making an informed decision 
regarding program referral.
Conclusion
In an urban, mid-Atlantic region, the majority of community-based weight-loss programs do 
not currently offer practices concordant with the 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guidelines and the 
failure to disclose key information online may make clinician referral to guideline 
concordant programs challenging. Given that only 19% of programs were rated as highly 
guideline-concordant based on information obtained during phone interviews, clinicians 
should be aware that few weight management programs might exist that meet the criteria 
recommended for consideration of patient referral. Our findings highlight the need for 
regulatory agencies to promote more complete and accurate disclosure of weight-loss 
program practices online. Until such disclosures are common, clinicians should consider 
calling weight-loss programs to verify what services are offered.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank the medical librarian, Victoria Riese, for her help with devising the search strategy to identify 
community-based weight-loss centers.
Funding
BB was supported by the Medical Student Research Program in Diabetes at Johns Hopkins University-University 
of Maryland Diabetes Research Center from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases 
(P30DK079637). KAG was supported by a career development award from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute (K23HL116601).
Bloom et al.
Page 7
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the 
United States, 2011-2012. JAMA. 2014; 311:806–14. [PubMed: 24570244] 
2. Flegal KM, Graubard BI, Williamson DF, Gail MH. Cause-specific excess deaths associated with 
underweight, overweight, and obesity. JAMA. 2007; 298:2028–37. [PubMed: 17986696] 
3. Appel LJ, Champagne CM, Harsha DW, Cooper LS, Obarzanek E, Elmer PJ, et al. Effects of 
comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood pressure control: main results of the PREMIER 
clinical trial. JAMA. 2003; 289:2083–93. [PubMed: 12709466] 
4. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. 10-year follow-up of diabetes incidence and weight 
loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet. 2009; 374:1677–86. [PubMed: 
19878986] 
5. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, Ard JD, Comuzzie AG, Donato KA, et al. 2013 
AHA/ACC/TOS Guideline for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
and The Obesity Society. Circulation. 2014; 129:S102–38. [PubMed: 24222017] 
6. Finkelstein EA, Trogdon JG, Cohen JW, et al. Annual medical spending attributable to obesity: 
payer and service specific estimates. Health Aff (Millwood). 2009; 28:w822–31. [PubMed: 
19635784] 
7. Felix H, West DS, Bursac Z. Impact of USPSTF practice guidelines on provider weight loss 
counseling as reported by obese patients. Prev Med. 2008; 47:394–7. [PubMed: 18598712] 
8. Bleich SN, Bennett WL, Gudzune KA, Cooper LA. Do physician beliefs about causes of obesity 
translate into actionable issues on which physicians counsel their patients? Prev Med. 2013:326–
328. [PubMed: 23399006] 
9. Salinas GD. Trends In Physician Preferences for Use and Sources of Medical Information in 
Response to Questions Arising at the Point of Care: 2009-2013. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2014; 
34:S11–S16. [PubMed: 24935878] 
10. Pew Research Center. Pew Internet: health fact sheet 2015. Available at: http://
www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/health-fact-sheet. Accessed on 2/24/15
11. Modave F, Shokar NK, Peñaranda E, Nguyen N. Analysis of the accuracy of weight loss 
information search engine results on the Internet. Am J Public Health. 2014; 104:1971–8. 
[PubMed: 25122030] 
12. Gollust SE, Eboh I, Barry CL. Picturing Obesity: Analyzing the social epidemiology of obesity 
conveyed through US news media images. Social Science & Medicine. 2012; 74:1544–51. 
[PubMed: 22445762] 
13. Heuer CA, McClure KJ, Puhl RM. Obesity Stigma in Online News: A Visual Content Analysis. 
Journal of Health Communication: International Perspectives. 2011; 16(9):976–87.
14. Greenberg BS, Brownell KD, et al. Portrayals of Overweight and Obese Individuals on 
Commercial Television. American Journal of Public Health. 2003; 93:342–1348.
15. Yanovski SZ, Yanovski JA. Long-term Drug Treatment for Obesity: A systematic and Clinical 
Review. JAMA. 2014; 311:74–86. [PubMed: 24231879] 
16. Poddar K, Cheskin LJ, et al. Nutraceutical Supplements for Weight Loss: A Systematic Review. 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice. 2011; 26:539–52. [PubMed: 21947637] 
17. Saper RB, Eisenberg DM, Phillips RS. Common dietary supplements for weight loss. American 
Family Physician. 2004; 70:1731–8. [PubMed: 15554492] 
18. Saad, L. To lose weight, Americans rely more on dieting than exercise. Gallup Poll Social Series: 
Health and Healthcare; 2011. Accessed at www.gallup.com/poll/150986/Lose-Weight-Americans 
-Rely-Dieting-Exercise.aspx on 27 September 2014
19. Yaemsiri S, Slining MM, Agarwal SK. Perceived weight status, overweight diagnosis, and weight 
control among US adults: the NHANES 2003-2008 study. Int J Obes (Lond). 2011; 35:1063–70. 
[PubMed: 21042327] 
20. Federal Trade Commission. .com disclosures: how to make effective disclosures in digital 
advertising. March 2013. Accessed at https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/press-
Bloom et al.
Page 8
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 releases/ftc-staff-revises-online-advertising-disclosure-guidelines/130312dotcomdisclosures.pdf 
on 15 September 2015
21. Cleland RL, Gross WC, Koss LD, Daynard M, Muoio KM. Weight-loss advertising: an analysis of 
current trends. Federal Trade Commission Staff Report, September 2002. Accessed at https://
www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/weight-loss-advertisingan-analysis-current-
trends/weightloss_0.pdf on 27 September 2014. 
Bloom et al.
Page 9
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Study Importance Questions
1. What is already known about this subject?
•
Guidelines recommend that clinicians refer obese patients to high intensity, 
comprehensive lifestyle interventions by a trained interventionist; however, it is 
unclear how such programs are currently available in the community.
•
Clinicians use the Internet for medical information gathering; however, the 
quality of general weight-loss information online is suboptimal.
2. What does your study add?
•
Our results suggest that few guideline-concordant weight-loss programs may 
currently be available within an urban area in the mid-Atlantic region.
•
Our findings might suggest that patients and clinicians could have difficulties 
identifying community-based programs concordant with recent 
recommendations if they rely on information from the Internet.
•
Highlights the need for regulatory agencies to promote more complete and 
accurate disclosure of weight-loss program practices online.
Bloom et al.
Page 10
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Grading of Guideline Concordance among Overall Sample and Subsample
The overall sample includes website information from 191 programs. The subsample 
includes 52 programs that participated in a telephone interview, and information is reported 
by data source (website or phone). We assessed each program for 5 key elements as 
recommended in recent guidelines (5): high program intensity, use of evidence-based dietary 
strategy, recommendation for physical activity, use of any behavioral strategy, and 
avoidance of supplements. We graded a program as “high,” if the program met all five 
criteria; as “moderate,” if the program did not report use of supplements and met at least two 
of the other four criteria; and as “low,” if the program reported using supplements or met 
less than two of the other criteria.
Bloom et al.
Page 11
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Comparison of Elements Reported on Website with Information from Telephone 
Interview among Subsample
A total of 52 programs agreed to participate in the telephone interview. We compared 
information from the website with that from the telephone interview. We labeled the 
information from each key element as reliable, if the information from website and 
telephone were the same. We labeled the information as misrepresentation, if the website 
reported the use of an element that was not endorsed via phone. We labeled the information 
as lacking representation, if the website failed to mention a practice that was endorsed 
during phone interview.
Bloom et al.
Page 12
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bloom et al.
Page 13
Table 1
Key Components in Assessing Guideline Concordance of Community-based Weight Loss Programs
Component
Criteria for Guideline Concordance
Program Intensity
Reports offering a high intensity intervention (≥14 sessions in 6 months)
Dietary change
Reports recommending a moderate calorie deficit, using an evidence-
based named dieta), and/or providing meal replacements
Physical activity
Reports encouraging increased physical activity of any type or duration
Behavior modification
Reports recommending regular self-monitoring of weight, meal planning,
food tracking, and/or exercise tracking
Supplement use
Does not report dispensing or recommending supplementsb)
a)Evidence-based named diets include those listed in 2013 weight management guidelines (8): European Association for the Study of Diabetes 
Guidelines, Higher protein, Higher Protein Zone ™, Lacto-ovo-vegetarian, Low calorie, Low carbohydrate, Low fat, Low fat vegan, Low glycemic 
load, Lower Fat, Macronutrient-targeted diets, Mediterranean style, Moderate protein, AHA-style 1 Step 1 diet.
b)Supplements include dietary supplements, nutraceuticals, or other products that are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the 
treatment of obesity (e.g., vitamins, minerals, herbal, botanicals, amino acids, enzymes, hormones, etc).
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bloom et al.
Page 14
Table 2
Frequency of Reported Elements on Community-based Weight Loss Program Websites as Obtained from 
Content Analysis
Overall Sample
(n=191)
Stipulated any program intensity
59%
 • Self-directed program
31%
 • High-intensity programa)
17%
Recommended any dietary change
75%
 • Moderate calorie deficit
10%
 • Evidence-based named dietb)
14%
 • Meal replacements
24%
Recommended any physical activity
57%
 • Advises ≥150 minutes activity per week
3%
Used any behavior modification strategy
53%
 • Self-monitoring of weight
15%
 • Tracking food intake or meal planning
45%
Prescribes FDA-approved weight loss medication(s)
15%
 • Phentermine
3%
 • Otherc)
0
Recommends/dispenses supplementsd)
34%
 • B12 injections
17%
 • hCG
7%
 • Green tea products
3%
 • “Fat burners”
9%
Other alternative therapiese)
29%
Abbreviations: FDA – Food and Drug Administration; hCG – human chorionic gonadatropin.
a)High intensity program advises more than 14 sessions in 6 months.
b)Named diets as listed in footnote of Table 1.
c)At time of abstraction, other FDA-approved medications included Phentermine/Topiramate, Lorcaserin, and Orlistat.
d)Supplements include dietary supplements, nutraceuticals, or other products that are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the 
treatment of obesity (e.g., vitamins, minerals, herbal, botanicals, amino acids, enzymes, hormones, etc).
e)Alternative therapies include body wraps, infrared therapy, liposuction, body sculpting, acupuncture, and hypnosis.
Obesity (Silver Spring). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 01.
