 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
1
Original research
published: 18 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01634
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Amy Rasley, 
 
United States Department of 
 
Energy (DOE), United States
Reviewed by: 
Catherine Ayn Brissette, 
 
University of North Dakota, 
 
United States 
 
Janis J. Weis, 
 
University of Utah, United States
*Correspondence:
William H. Robinson 
w.robinson@stanford.edu
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Microbial Immunology, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 30 April 2018
Accepted: 03 July 2018
Published: 18 July 2018
Citation: 
Blum LK, Adamska JZ, Martin DS, 
Rebman AW, Elliott SE, Cao RRL, 
Embers ME, Aucott JN, Soloski MJ 
and Robinson WH (2018) Robust B 
Cell Responses Predict Rapid 
Resolution of Lyme Disease. 
Front. Immunol. 9:1634. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01634
robust B cell responses Predict 
rapid resolution of lyme Disease
Lisa K. Blum1,2, Julia Z. Adamska1,2, Dale S. Martin 3, Alison W. Rebman4,  
Serra E. Elliott1,2, Richard R. L. Cao1, Monica E. Embers3, John N. Aucott 4,  
Mark J. Soloski4 and William H. Robinson1,2*
1 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 2 
VA Palo Alto Healthcare System, Palo Alto, CA, 
United States, 3 
Division of Bacteriology and Parasitology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Tulane University Health 
Sciences Center, Covington, LA, United States, 4 
Lyme Disease Research Center, Division of Rheumatology, Department of 
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi infection) is increasingly recognized as a significant 
source of morbidity worldwide. Here, we show that blood plasmablasts and CD27− 
memory B cells are elevated in untreated Lyme disease, with higher plasmablast levels 
associated with more rapid resolution of clinical symptoms. Stronger serum reactivity 
to surface proteins and peptides from B. burgdorferi was also associated with faster 
resolution of clinical symptoms. Through molecular identifier-enabled antibody heavy-
chain sequencing of bulk B cells and single-cell paired-chain antibody sequencing of 
blood plasmablasts, we characterized immunoglobulin gene usage patterns specific to 
B. burgdorferi infection. Recombinantly expressed antibodies from expanded lineages 
bound B. burgdorferi antigens, confirming that these clones are driven by the infection. 
Furthermore, recombinant sequence-derived antibodies were functional, inhibiting 
growth of B. burgdorferi in vitro. Elevations and clonal expansion of blood plasmab-
lasts were associated with rapid return to health, while poor plasmablast responses 
were associated with a longer duration of symptoms following treatment. Plasmablasts 
induced by B. burgdorferi infection showed preferential antibody gene segment usage, 
while bulk sequencing of total B cells revealed convergent CDR3 motifs specific to 
B. burgdorferi-infected patients. Our results show that robust plasmablast responses 
encoding Bb-static antibodies are associated with more rapid resolution of Lyme dis-
ease, and these antibodies could provide the basis for next-generation therapeutics for 
Lyme disease.
Keywords: lyme disease, Borrelia, antibodies, plasmablasts, immune repertoire
inTrODUcTiOn
Lyme disease, caused by Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (Bb) infection, is a debilitating disease in 
which patients vary in their symptoms, serology, and response to treatment. Although host immunity 
 
is not sufficient to clear established untreated disease in many patients, B cells and the antibodies they 
produce can protect against infection in experimentally infected mice (1, 2). Antibody-mediated 
protection wanes over time both in mice and humans (3, 4). Nevertheless, our understanding of the 
role of B cell responses in human Lyme disease remains limited.
In murine models, B cells have been shown to have a role in reducing the duration of active Bb 
infection and the severity of the associated arthritis and carditis (2). Following infection-associated 
 2
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
accumulation of CD19+ B cells in mouse lymph nodes, there 
is a disruption in the germinal center architecture, which is 
accompanied by insufficient anti-Bb antibody responses (5, 6). 
Specifically, experimental infection of mice with Bb induces rapid 
differentiation of B cells into antibody-secreting plasma cells, 
while long-lived plasma cells and memory B cells are not robustly 
induced (6–8). Furthermore, the long-term antibody response to 
influenza vaccination is also diminished in Bb-infected, but not 
Bb-immunized mice, demonstrating that this effect extends to 
exogenous antigens (8). Continual T-dependent production of 
IgM antibodies, believed to be the result of a non-class switched 
B-2 cell response, has also been reported in experimentally 
infected mice (6). Thus, it is believed that Bb ensures its own 
survival in the host by subverting protective B cell responses that 
would otherwise limit infection. It is unknown whether similar 
phenomena occur in humans, or how dysregulated human B cell 
responses may contribute to the heterogeneous disease severity 
and progression observed among Bb-infected patients.
To address the hypothesis that variable B cell responses to Bb 
correlate with variable outcomes following treatment, we char-
acterized B cell populations in Bb-infected humans using flow 
cytometry and antibody repertoire sequencing. We identified 
robust plasmablast responses encoding Bb-static antibodies that 
are associated with resolution of symptoms following treatment. 
This work identifies a putative prognostic biomarker associated 
with return to health following treatment for Bb infection and 
provides insight into an important immune mechanism of Bb 
clearance.
MaTerials anD MeThODs
study Design
The purpose of this exploratory study was to improve our under-
standing of the human B cell response to Bb, how it changes over 
time following doxycycline treatment, and how it differs among 
clinical subsets of patients. We analyzed peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs) from Bb-infected patients over a range of 
time points spanning the initial (untreated) visit through 2 years 
following treatment. PBMCs were also collected from healthy 
controls in the same geographic region (the Mid-Atlantic United 
States). We assessed the prevalence of B cell populations and 
performed single-cell plasmablast antibody sequencing as well 
as unique molecular identifier (UMI) barcode-based bulk heavy-
chain sequencing of total B cells. Representative plasmablast 
antibody sequences were selected for recombinant expression 
and downstream characterization.
inclusion criteria and clinical 
classification
Human subjects protocols were approved by the institutional 
review boards of Johns Hopkins University and Stanford 
University, and all subjects provided written informed consent 
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Bb-infected 
patients with an erythema migrans (EM) rash of at least 5 cm 
and either multiple skin lesions or at least one new-onset 
concurrent symptom were included in the study. Patients 
were recruited and enrolled at a suburban clinical practice in 
Maryland, and those with a previous history of Lyme disease, 
 
or preexisting confounding medical conditions associated with 
fatigue, pain, or neurocognitive symptoms were excluded. 
Following Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
treatment guidelines, all patients were treated with 3 weeks of 
oral doxycycline (9). Lyme patients were seen regularly over the 
course of 2 years for a total of four study visits (at the acute-
phase pretreatment visit, at 1-month posttreatment, 6-month 
posttreatment, and 2-year posttreatment). Samples from 
healthy controls were collected at an initial visit, 6 months, and 
1 year. To differentiate between subjects who returned to health 
following treatment and those with persistent symptoms, we 
applied a previously published definition of posttreatment 
Lyme disease syndrome (PTLDS), which is based on the 
IDSA’s proposed case definition and incorporates the presence 
of fatigue, pain, and/or cognitive complaints with functional 
impact determined by scores on the SF-36, with a composite T 
score of less than 45 (9–11). This definition was applied at all 
study visits after 6 months from initial diagnosis and treatment. 
This case definition was chosen on the basis of its previously 
demonstrated sensitivity for determining the impact of symp-
toms on the daily function of Lyme disease patients. Subjects 
with disseminated EM rash were defined as those having more 
than one visible rash site, while local rash applied to those with 
a single EM rash site. Re-analysis of published Luminex array 
data was based on early Lyme disease subjects who were previ-
ously described (12).
sample Processing and Flow cytometry
Blood was collected in green-top heparin tubes and processed 
into PBMCs with Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE Healthcare, Chicago, 
IL, USA). PBMC aliquots were frozen in recovery cell culture 
freezing medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, 
USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and shipped 
to Stanford for further analysis. After thawing, PBMCs were 
stained in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution with 2% fetal bovine 
serum using the following antibodies: CD20 (clone L27), 
CD38 (clone HB7), IgD (clone IA6-2), CD3 (clone UCHT1), 
and CD14 (clone MφP9) from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, 
USA); CD19 (clone HIB19), CD27 (clone O323), and IgM 
(clone MHM-88) from BioLegend (San Diego, CA, USA); 
and IgA (clone IS11-8E10) from Miltenyi Biotec (San Diego, 
CA, USA). Cells were stained for viability by the addition of 
Sytox blue dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA) 
10 min before analysis. Single cells were identified by compar-
ing forward scatter area with forward scatter height and gating 
out cells with increased area relative to height, as compared 
with the shape plotted by most cells. Plasmablasts were defined 
as CD19+/INTCD3−CD14−CD20−CD27+CD38hi live single cells 
(13). As plasmablasts have a low level of IgG surface expression, 
IgG-producing plasmablasts were classified by the absence 
of both IgA and IgM surface staining, and antibody isotypes 
were further confirmed by gene-specific PCR and antibody 
constant region sequences. Plasmablasts were single-cell 
sorted into 96-well plates using a FACSAria II instrument (BD 
Biosciences).
 3
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
Bulk heavy-chain sequencing
Bulk heavy-chain sequencing was performed using a method 
similar to that described by Turchaninova et al. (14), in which the 
original 3′ and 5′ of each initial immunoglobulin RNA molecule 
are each oriented in Read 1 for half the library and in Read 2 for the 
other half, thus enabling high quality assembly of the full-length 
VDJ sequence from each initial transcript. Total RNA from Lyme 
and control PBMCs was extracted with Trizol (Thermo Fisher) and 
subsequently purified using RNA Clean & Concentrator-5 (Zymo 
Research) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. Purified 
RNA was tagged with UMI sequences and a common primer site 
by template switching during reverse transcription (SmartScribe 
Reverse Transcriptase, Takara Bio USA, Inc., Mountain View, CA, 
USA). UMI-barcoded cDNA was amplified with SeqAmp DNA 
polymerase (Takara Bio USA, Inc.) using the 5′ bridge sequence 
and gene-specific reverse sequences. This product was then 
split into two separate reactions per sample, for which Illumina 
sequencing adapters were added by overlap extension PCR in 
opposite orientations between the two reactions using Q5 DNA 
Polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). Libraries 
were sequenced at the University of California, Berkeley Genome 
Sciences Lab (GSL) on a HiSeq 2500 instrument (Illumina, Inc.) 
for 325 × 275 cycles (rapid run mode). The 325 cycles used for 
Read 1 is significantly longer than the Illumina-supported read 
length of 250, and successful runs were highly dependent on the 
individual instrument. All samples in the study were analyzed on 
the same specific HiSeq 2500 instrument at GSL. Oligonucleotide 
sequences used for bulk antibody sequencing are listed in Table 
S1 in Supplementary Material.
Bulk heavy-chain sequence Data analysis
HiSeq 2500 data of total B cell heavy-chain sequences were 
processed and analyzed using a series of existing tools. Fastq 
files were produced and de-multiplexed using the Illumina 
CASAVA/bcl2fastq pipeline. After demultiplexing, fastq files for 
each sample were concatenated to combine the two lanes, and 
subsequently processed with MIGEC (15) and MiTools (16) 
software to combine reads from each umi and build a merged 
consensus sequence, using pipeline options as described (14). 
Fastq sequence headers for the UMI-compiled sequences were 
converted to the pRESTO format (17) before IMmunoGeneTics 
(IMGT)-HighV-Quest alignment (18) and post-analysis with the 
Immcantation software suite (Change-O, SHazaM, Alakazam) 
(19). The rationale for combining MIGEC and Immcantation 
pipelines was due to the faster performance characteristics of 
MIGEC in pre-processing large amounts of antibody sequence 
data from the HiSeq platform, and the flexibility and available 
functions of the Immcantation post-processing software. Bulk 
antibody repertoire sequence data are available in GEO (acces-
sion number GSE114310).
single-cell sequencing
After single-cell sorting, plasmablast cDNA was labeled with 
oligonucleotide barcode sequences, and paired antibody heavy- 
and light-chain variable regions were sequenced as previously 
described (20–23). Well-specific barcode sequences (TruGrade 
DNA oligos; IDT; Coralville, IA, USA) were added to the cDNA of 
each cell by template switching (Maxima Reverse Transcriptase, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific). Barcoded cDNA was pooled, gene-
specific PCR used to amplify the immunoglobulin heavy- and 
light-chain variable regions, and MiSeq 2 × 330 paired-end 
sequencing performed (Illumina, Inc.; San Diego, CA, USA). 
Oligonucleotide sequences for this method were identical to 
those reported previously (23).
sequence analysis of Paired-chain  
single-cell Data
Sequence analysis was performed as previously described (23). 
Briefly, fastq generation and plate demultiplexing were performed 
using the onboard MiSeq Generate FASTQ workflow. After 
quality filtering, paired reads were stitched, separated by well ID, 
and consensus sequences determined by clustering well ID reads 
into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) (24). Consensus OTU 
sequences were analyzed with version 1.3.1 of IMGT HighV-
QUEST (18). Clonal families (CF) of plasmablasts were defined 
based on sharing IMGT-predicted HC (Heavy Chain) and LC 
(Light Chain) VJ genes and exhibiting >60% amino acid identity 
within the HC and LC CDR3s. Percent clonality was calculated 
as the percent of paired sequences that fall into any CF. Single-
cell sequence data are available in GEO with accession numbers 
(awaiting database acceptance).
recombinant antibody expression
Antibodies were selected for recombinant expression based 
on previously identified criteria including clonal relationships, 
gene usage, and somatic mutations (20, 23, 25, 26), and were 
synthesized, cloned, and expressed as previously described 
(22, 23). To enable comparison of binding using the same 
secondary antibody, variable domains from all isotypes were 
expressed on the human IgG1 Fc constant region.
characterization of recombinant 
Monoclonal antibody (rmab) Binding
Plasmablast sequence-derived rmAbs were screened to deter-
mine the binding target of each plasmablast antibody using: 
(i) a custom-developed bead array built with Luminex xMAP 
technology. This array included 39 peptides and 36 proteins from 
Borrelia, its tick vector (Ixodes spp.), and common tick-borne 
co-infecting pathogens; (ii) two commercial strip-blot assays 
comprised purified Borrelia antigens spotted on a membrane, the 
Virastripe Borrelia Burgdorferi assay and the Virastripe European 
Borrelia spp. assay (Viramed Biotech AG, Planegg, Germany); and 
(iii) ELISA measurement of rmAb binding to a sonicated native 
Bb strain B31 lysate (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). 
Individual rmAbs with strong reactivity on the Luminex array 
were subsequently validated by ELISA with the recombinant 
antigen of interest.
Borrelia growth inhibition assay
Low passage Bb sensu stricto strain B31 clonal isolate 5A19 was 
cultured in BSK-II medium at 34°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2, 
3% O2, and 92% N2 as previously described (27). Bb spirochetes 
 FigUre 1 | Circulating blood plasmablasts and CD27− memory cells are elevated following Bb infection, and plasmablast numbers differ with patient symptoms. 
Flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells was used to analyze B cell populations in Bb-infected humans at serial time points starting from the 
initial (untreated) presentation to 2 years following doxycycline treatment. (a) Representative flow cytometry gating of plasmablast and memory B cell populations, 
starting from CD3−CD14− live cells. (B) Plasmablast abundance as a percent of CD19+ B cells. P values shown are versus healthy controls. (c) Patients with 
disseminated erythema migrans rash have significantly higher plasmablast numbers than those with a single rash. (D) Patients who reported persistent symptoms 
exhibited lower plasmablasts levels at the initial visit as compared with those that returned to health. (e) Conventional CD27+ memory B cells were not significantly 
altered following infection, but IgD−CD27− memory B cells were elevated (F), peaking at 1 month following completion of doxycycline treatment. P values were 
determined using ANOVA with Dunnett’s (B,F) or Sidak’s (c,D) multiple comparisons tests. Dashed lines represent the median values of healthy controls, and error 
bars represent the SEs.
4
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
were grown to early log phase and plated at 5 × 106 cells/mL in 
200 µL microtiter plate cultures before treatment with rmAbs 
(20 μg/well). An influenza hemagglutinin-specific rmAb, derived 
from sequencing a healthy donor 7 days after Influenza vac-
cination, was used as the negative control (26). A conventional 
murine OspA-specific mAb (clone CB10) was used as the positive 
control. Replicate cultures were collected at time points 0, 24, and 
48 h after the initiation of treatment, and growth inhibition was 
assessed by counting the number of spirochetes per low power 
field from at least six fields per well.
statistical Methods
Pre-processing and analysis of bulk and single-cell antibody 
sequence data is described in dedicated sections above. All 
other analyses were performed either with Prism version 7.0c 
(GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA), or with R version 
3.3.2 using base/stats functions for statistical analyses and the 
tidyverse suite (including ggplot2) for data compilation, summary, 
and visualization. Chord diagrams were drawn with the circlize 
package in R, and igraphs of cd-hit clustering were produced as 
previously described (23). Specific statistical tests are detailed in 
the legend of each figure. One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s mul-
tiple comparisons test was used to determine significance when 
comparing Bb-infected patients at multiple time points with 
uninfected healthy controls. Comparison of two clinical subsets 
of Bb-infected patients over time was performed using one-way 
ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests, and Student’s 
t-test was used when comparing a single measurement, such as 
repertoire stability, between two groups. P values of less than 0.05 
were considered significant. Analysis of data comparing antibody 
gene segment usage was performed by Significance Analysis of 
Microarrays (SAMs) with a Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test, using the 
samr package in R.
resUlTs
Blood Plasmablasts are elevated in lyme 
Patients Who return to health
Plasmablasts are a population of activated B cells that transiently 
circulate in the blood during an adaptive immune response, 
such as to a microbial infection or vaccination [reviewed in Ref. 
(28)]. We used flow cytometry to analyze plasmablast numbers, 
as a percent of B cells, in PBMC samples derived from Bb-infected 
(n = 32) and healthy control (n = 18) subjects (Figures 1A,B). 
Bb-infected subjects were untreated at the initial study visit and 
then treated for 3 weeks with doxycycline following sample col-
lection at the initial visit; there were no significant differences 
in age, gender, EM rash, or diagnostic criteria among any of 
the subject groups (Table 1). Blood plasmablasts, defined by 
flow cytometry as CD19+/intCD3−CD14−CD20−CD27+CD38hi 
live single cells, were significantly elevated in untreated Lyme 
patients as compared with healthy controls, and returned to 
baseline levels by 6 months following completion of antibi-
otic treatment (Figure 1B). Plasmablast numbers differed 
 TaBle 1 | Bb infected and healthy control subject characteristics.
lyme (total) (n = 32)
lyme (persistent) (n = 7)
lyme (return to health) (n = 25)
healthy (n = 18)
Female sex, n (%)
17 (53%)
3 (43%)
14 (56%)
10 (56%)
Age, mean ± SD
50.4 ± 15.2
47.9 ± 18.0
51.1 ± 14.7
58.7 ± 11.7
Disseminated rash, n (%)
11 (34%)
1 (14%)
10 (40%)
–
Two-tier positive, n (%)
26 (81%)
5 (71%)
21 (84%)
–
5
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
significantly between defined clinical subsets of Bb-infected 
patients—patients with disseminated EM rash exhibited sig-
nificantly higher plasmablast numbers compared with those 
with local EM rash (Figure 1C). Subjects who fully returned 
to health following doxycycline treatment had significantly 
higher blood plasmablasts than those who experienced per-
sistent symptoms for at least 6 months following treatment 
(Figure 1D). To address the potential for variation in B cell 
numbers to confound plasmablast percentages, we also calcu-
lated the number of plasmablasts per 103 live single cells, which 
confirmed all differences that were observed in plasmablast 
percentages (Figure S1 in Supplementary Material). There were 
no significant differences in plasmablast frequency according 
to age or gender of the subjects (not shown). Together, the data 
suggest that there is a correlation between initial activation 
of B cells in response to Bb-infection and recovery from the 
infection after treatment.
circulating cD27− but not cD27+ Memory 
B cells increase Following Bb infection
Memory B cells are critical to the development of recall responses 
to infectious disease. They can be divided into subpopulations 
based on their expression of surface markers including IgD and 
CD27. In most cases, CD27+ switched (IgD−) and unswitched 
(IgD+) memory B cells predominate. Nevertheless, there is a 
population of CD27− memory B cells (differentiated from naïve 
cells by a lack of surface IgD) that express somatically hypermu-
tated antibody genes (29). Bb infection is associated with deficient 
memory B cell responses in mice (8). In humans, we observed 
that while CD27+ memory B cell numbers did not increase fol-
lowing Bb infection (Figure 1E), CD27−IgD− memory B cells 
exhibited significant increases following Bb infection, peaking 
at 1 month following completion of doxycycline treatment 
(Figure 1F). In contrast to plasmablasts, memory B cell popula-
tions did not differ according to resolution of symptoms (Figure 
S2 in Supplementary Material). To address the potential for vari-
ation in B cell numbers to confound memory B cell percentages, 
we also calculated the number of memory B cells per 103 live 
single cells, which confirmed all differences that were observed 
in memory B cell percentages (Figure S1 in Supplementary 
Material).
Published luminex Data support a 
correlation Between robust B cell 
responses and return to health 
Following Treatment for lyme Disease
We previously reported a bead-based array for “digital” sero-
diagnosis of Lyme disease, which identifies a high proportion 
of infected patients using a 10-antigen panel selected from an 
original set of 62 Bb surface proteins and peptides (12). This 
study focused on the development of a panel appropriate for 
the diagnosis of Lyme disease in all affected subjects and did 
not include significant biological analysis of clinical subgroups. 
Based on the observed differences in B cell activation between 
groups of Lyme disease patients (Figure 1), we reanalyzed 
reactivity to all 62 antigens to identify differences in serum 
reactivity at the initial study visit between recently infected 
Lyme disease patients who developed persistent symptoms 
(n = 10) and those who promptly returned to health following 
treatment (n = 64, Figure 2). Nineteen subjects overlapped 
between the Luminex diagnostic data (12) and this study. 
Patients who returned to health following treatment had sig-
nificantly higher IgG and IgM reactivity to 8 and 26 markers, 
respectively (Figure 2).
antibody repertoire characteristics of 
Total (Bulk) B cells show increased clonal 
expansion in Patients Who return to 
health
Molecular identifier-based heavy-chain antibody sequencing was 
performed on mRNA isolated from unsorted PBMCs derived 
from Bb-infected patients and healthy controls (n = 12, n = 7, 
respectively). Unique B cell clones were defined as sequences 
sharing HC V and J gene usage as well as 84% amino acid similar-
ity in the CDR3 region. Clonally expanded families were defined 
as unique clones making up more than 1% of all sequences 
derived from a patient at a given time point. The threshold of 84% 
CDR3 similarity was determined based on the local minimum 
of a bimodal distribution of nearest neighbor distances, similar 
to previously described methods used in the Change-O software 
suite (19). Antibody clonal expansion, measured as the percent 
of clones that were part of an expanded family, was significantly 
increased in untreated Lyme disease patients as compared with 
healthy controls (Figure 3A). There was no difference in clonality 
between subjects with disseminated rash and those with a single 
local rash (Figure 3B). However, in samples collected before treat-
ment, subjects who would later return to health had significantly 
more clonally expanded families than those who experienced 
persistent symptoms (Figure 3C), paralleling our observation 
for circulating plasmablast numbers (Figure 1D). There were 
no significant differences in somatic hypermutation or heavy-
chain CDR3 length among any of the groups. However, somatic 
hypermutation was significantly higher among expanded clones 
as compared with infrequent clones (<1% of patient-derived 
sequences at an individual time point) for healthy controls as 
well as Bb-infected patients at all time points (Figures 3D,E). 
 FigUre 2 | Serum reactivity to Bb surface proteins is stronger in patients who return to health following treatment. Serum IgG and IgM reactivity to 62 Bb surface 
proteins and peptides was measured in a previously published study to assess the diagnostic utility of these markers (12). Based on observed differences in B cell 
populations (Figure 1), serum Luminex data were reanalyzed to assess differences between recently infected Lyme disease patients who reported persistent 
symptoms and those who returned to health following treatment. Mean fluorescence intensities (MFI) were compared using Significance Analysis of Microarrays, and 
the MFI of markers with significantly different reactivity are displayed on the heatmap.
6
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
Due to the number of persistent Lyme subjects with no expanded 
clones at later time points, it was not possible to calculate muta-
tion numbers or CDR3 lengths for expanded clones of this group 
at the 6-month time point. Together, these data suggest that the 
degree of clonal expansion seen in the total B cell population may 
be indicative of ability to recover from Bb-infection.
 FigUre 3 | Bulk heavy-chain antibody repertoire sequencing shows increased clonal expansions in untreated Bb-infected humans. Total RNA from peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells was used for unique molecular identifier barcode-based sequencing of immunoglobulin heavy chains, yielding a mean of 49,293 
full-length error-corrected VDJ sequences per subject. Percentage of expanded clones was analyzed across serial time points from the initial (untreated) 
presentation to 2 years following the completion of doxycycline treatment. (a) Degree of clonal lineage expansion was significantly increased in untreated Lyme 
disease. Percent clonality was calculated as the percent of clones that expanded to comprise more than 1% of the sequences at a given time point for each 
patient. (B) Degree of clonal lineage expansion was similar between patients with disseminated and local erythema migrans rash. (c) Patients with a shorter 
duration of symptoms (return to health) had significantly greater clonality as compared with those who experienced persistent symptoms following treatment.  
(D) The median number of somatic hypermutations and (e) median CDR3 amino acid lengths were similar between patient groups, for both expanded and 
infrequent clones. P values are from ANOVA with Dunnett’s (a) or Sidak’s (c) multiple comparisons tests. Dashed lines represent the median value of healthy 
controls, and error bars represent the SE.
7
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
Plasmablast repertoire characteristics 
Differ among subsets of Bb-infected 
humans
Blood plasmablasts from Lyme disease (n = 27) and healthy 
controls (n = 16) were single-cell sorted, and paired-chain 
antibody repertoire sequencing was performed using an oligo-
nucleotide cell barcoding method we have previously developed 
and applied to a diverse set of diseases (20–22, 25, 26, 30). For 
plasmablasts, unique clones were defined by cell barcodes, and 
clonally expanded families defined as clones sharing HC and LC 
V and J gene segment usage and 60% CDR3 amino acid similar-
ity. A lower threshold of CDR3 similarity was used for paired 
HC + LC sequencing because the probability of a clonal relation-
ship is higher when both HC + LC V and J genes match (rather 
than solely HC) and because comparison of both HC + LC CDR3 
 
sequences provides more information than HC CDR3 alone. The 
degree of clonal expansion before treatment was significantly 
higher in plasmablasts derived from Bb-infected humans as 
compared with healthy controls (Figure 4A). Plasmablast 
antibody clonal expansions also trended higher among subjects 
with disseminated EM rash as compared with those with a 
single rash site (Figure 4B). Similar to what was observed in 
total B cells, plasmablast clonal expansion was significantly 
higher in untreated subjects who later returned to health as 
compared with those who experienced persistent symptoms 
(Figure 4C). Among clonally expanded sequences, patients with 
persistent symptoms had significantly more mutations from the 
predicted germline sequence at 1 month following treatment, 
as compared with patients who returned to health (Figure 4D). 
There were no differences in somatic hypermutation or heavy-
chain CDR3 length between the groups at other time points 
(Figures 4D,E). Using the alakazam package in R (19), CDR3 
amino acid sequences were assessed for eight biochemical 
properties including amino acid bulk, charge, polarity, and 
grand average hydropathy (GRAVY). Biochemical properties 
of the CDR3 amino acid sequences were similar across groups 
for both bulk B cells and single plasmablasts (Figures S3 and 
S4 in Supplementary Material). Thus, clonal expansion of both 
plasmablasts and total B cells is indicative of poor predicted 
outcomes following treatment for Bb infection.
Plasmablast repertoires show Preferred 
antibody gene segment Usage
Paired-chain antibody sequences from blood plasmablasts and 
bulk heavy-chain sequences from total B cells were aligned 
using IMGT HighV-QUEST with the IMGT database, which 
enables prediction of the germline gene segments that were used 
for each transcript (18). Preferred usage of specific antibody and 
TCR gene segments has previously been reported in autoim-
mune and infectious diseases. Plasmablasts from subjects with 
untreated Bb infection showed differences in preferred gene 
segment usage when compared with the gene usage observed 
in healthy controls (Figure 5A). However, gene usage among 
total B cells was similar between the groups (Figure 5B). SAMs 
identified significant differences between plasmablast usage 
of 12 individual gene combinations between Lyme disease 
 FigUre 4 | Paired-chain plasmablast repertoire sequence characteristics are similar to those observed in bulk B cell heavy-chain sequencing. Blood plasmablasts 
were single-cell sorted and tagged with cell-specific barcode oligonucleotides to enable sequencing of their paired heavy- and light-chain genes, yielding a mean of 
436 full-length variable region paired sequences per subject. Plasmablasts were defined as CD19int/+CD3−CD33−CD14−CD20int/−CD27+CD38hi live single cells.  
(a) Degree of clonal lineage expansion was significantly increased in plasmablasts from untreated Lyme disease. Percent clonality was calculated, across serial time 
points, as the percent of cells that were part of an expanded clonal family out of the total number of paired sequences from that time point. (B) Clonality showed a 
trend of increase in plasmablasts from patients with disseminated erythema migrans rash. (c) As was seen with bulk B cells, patients with a shorter duration of 
symptoms (return to health) exhibited significantly greater plasmablast clonality than those with persistent symptoms. (D) Mutations from germline and (e) CDR3 
amino acid lengths showed minor variations among patient subsets. P values are ANOVA with Dunnett’s (a) or Sidak’s (B–e) multiple comparisons tests. Dashed 
lines represent the median value of healthy controls, and error bars represent SE.
8
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
patients and healthy controls, while no significant differences 
were observed between patients with persistent symptoms 
and those who returned to health (Figure 5C). For example, 
usage of IGHV3-74 + IGKV3-20 and IGHV5-51 + LV3-25 was 
observed in sequences from the majority of Bb-infected patients, 
but rarely observed among healthy controls. When assessed 
in combination, usage of at least three out of eight selected V 
gene combinations was predictive of Lyme disease with 84% 
sensitivity and 100% specificity, an improvement upon currently 
available diagnostic assays (Figure 5D).
Total B cells From lyme subjects show 
Usage of Disease-specific cDr3 
sequence Motifs
The cd-hit algorithm (31, 32) was used with a cutoff of 0.8 to 
identify clusters of heavy-chain CDR3 amino acid sequences 
with motifs shared by at least three subjects among either 
healthy controls or Lyme patients (Figure 6A). Only five small 
clusters were shared among three or more healthy controls, 
while >60 shared clusters of varying size were observed among 
at least three individuals with Lyme disease. Of these Lyme 
clusters, several were observed in one or more healthy con-
trols, while the majority was unique to Bb-infected patients 
(Figure 6B). Cross-patient clusters were aligned to enable 
visualization of their sequence motifs (Figure 6C). In many 
cross-patient clusters, motifs arose from usage of different 
V genes (Figure 6D), suggesting that convergent evolution 
of the antibody response toward binding a common antigen 
underlies this observation.
a subset of clones Persist in the 
circulation of Both lyme Disease  
and healthy controls
To investigate the stability of antibody repertoires over time fol-
lowing Bb infection, we compared individual clonal expansions 
across time points spanning the initial (untreated) visit through 
2 years following antibiotic treatment. Persistent plasmablast 
clones were visualized using chord diagrams (Figure S5 in 
Supplementary Material), and differences were quantified by 
calculating the percent of clones from the initial visit that per-
sisted after 6 months. Neither plasmablast nor bulk PBMC B cell 
repertoires exhibited significant differences in repertoire stability 
between the groups (Figure S5 in Supplementary Material).
Plasmablast clones encode Bb-specific 
antibodies
Paired-chain antibody repertoire sequencing of individual plas-
mablasts enables expression and characterization of sequence-
derived rmAbs. Of the available paired sequences from all subjects, 
144 native HC–LC sequence pairs were selected for expression. 
Selection was based on sequence characteristics including clonal 
relationships, presence at multiple time points or at the initial 
(untreated) time point, isotype, mutations from the predicted 
germline sequence, and CDR3 length. Selected sequences were 
gene synthesized and cloned into a mammalian expression 
vector containing the human IgG1 constant region, followed by 
expression by transient transfection. To enable equal binding and 
functional comparisons of the rmAbs, all rmAbs were expressed 
on the human IgG1 Fc regardless of the native isotype. Purified 
 FigUre 5 | Sequencing the paired-chain plasmablast antibody repertoires, but not HC sequencing of bulk blood B cells, reveals preferred gene segment usage in 
Lyme disease. Predicted V and J gene segment usage by plasmablasts (heavy and light chain) and total B cells (heavy chain) were identified by alignment with the 
IMmunoGeneTics database. The percent usage of each gene combination was compared between Lyme disease patients and healthy controls. (a) The relative number 
of paired plasmablast sequences using a given heavy- and light-chain V and J gene combination was compared between untreated Lyme disease patients and healthy 
controls, and the median value from each group is displayed on the heatmap. The presented heatmap is subsetted to show only the most frequent combinations from 
among all subjects, with significantly different combinations (q < 10%) highlighted in a pink box. (B) Heavy-chain gene segment usage for bulk B cell sequencing was 
calculated as the relative usage of a given predicted heavy-chain V and J gene combination. (c) Representative gene combinations preferentially enriched or reduced in 
Lyme disease were plotted to show individual subject values and statistics. (D) Number of expressed V-gene-combination markers for each patient, of eight selected 
markers. Using a cutoff of >2 markers, the maximum number observed for healthy controls provides 84% sensitivity and 100% specificity for Lyme disease. Q values 
were calculated by Significance Analysis of Microarray with the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test (a–c). P values were calculated using the Student’s t-test (D).
9
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
rmAbs were analyzed to identify binding specificity using a soni-
cated lysate ELISA, a commercial strip-blot assay, and a custom 
magnetic bead-based assay containing 75 different proteins and 
peptides (Figure 7A). Subsets of Bb-infected patient rmAbs 
from single time points and from persistent families bound to 
Borrelia antigens including VlsE, DbpA, DbpB, OspC, and others 
(Figure 7A).
sequence-Derived rmabs inhibit Bb 
growth In Vitro
Sequence-derived rmAbs that bound Borrelia surface antigens 
were further characterized to assess their ability to inhibit Bb 
growth after 24 and 48 h (Figure 7B). Of the rmAbs assayed, 
seven mediated statistically significant inhibition of Bb growth 
in vitro at both 24 and 48 h. The antigen targets of Bb-static rmAbs 
are listed in Table S2 in Supplementary Material.
DiscUssiOn
The mechanisms by which B cells control Bb infection in 
humans are poorly understood. Here, we describe a key role for 
plasmablasts that express Bb-static antibodies and report B cell 
characteristics associated with more rapid resolution of symptoms 
following doxycycline treatment in Bb-infected humans. These 
observations provide new insights into immune mechanisms that 
correlate with successful antibiotic-mediated clearance of Bb and 
return to health.
Plasmablasts are activated B cells generated by germinal 
center responses and are released into the blood where they 
transiently circulate before homing to secondary lymphoid 
and diseased tissues. The release of plasmablasts into the blood 
combined with their transient nature provides a window into 
the B cells generated in an acute ongoing immune response, 
differentiating them from the >108 total immunoglobulin 
specificities in a human’s B cell repertoire (33). We herein 
identify plasmablasts as a key B cell population that correlates 
with resolution of Bb infection and Lyme disease in humans. 
Although many aspects of B cell responses to Bb are deficient 
in experimentally infected mice, the presence of affinity matu-
ration and/or CDR3 convergence in a subset of cells has not 
specifically been addressed. Thus, our findings are consistent 
with and extend the findings in experimentally infected mice, 
 FigUre 6 | Heavy-chain immunoglobulin sequencing of bulk mRNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMBCs) derived from untreated Bb-infected patients 
reveals disease-specific CDR3 sequence motifs. Bulk heavy-chain CDR3 sequences from PMBCs of untreated Lyme disease patients and healthy controls were 
clustered using the cd-hit algorithm to identify convergent sequence motifs. A total of 379,457 full-length error-corrected VDJ sequences were included in the 
analysis. Each dot represents a sequenced antibody clone, with colors representing individual subjects. (a) Clusters were filtered based on those containing at least 
three separate subjects, and the size and number of these convergent clusters visualized using the igraph package in R. Healthy controls revealed only five 
cross-patient clusters, while numerous convergent clusters were revealed untreated Lyme disease patients. (B,c) Convergent clusters present in at least three 
separate Lyme subjects (B), but not present in any healthy controls were visualized using igraph, and individual sequences from four clusters with multiple subjects 
were aligned to display specific sequence motifs (c). (D) Sequence alignment of cluster 4, which includes five separate Bb-infected patients, including the predicted 
V gene used by each clone. Colored dots correspond to matching subjects in panel (B).
10
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
in which antibody-secreting cells are rapidly induced following 
infection and the presence of B cells is necessary for the resolu-
tion of arthritis and carditis (2, 6).
We utilized both single-cell paired chain and bulk heavy-chain 
antibody repertoire sequencing to investigate Bb-induced B cell 
responses. Increased clonal expansion at the initial study visit, 
before treatment, was observed in both bulk and single-cell 
datasets. However, many Bb-associated differences, including 
preferred germline gene segment usage and persistently expanded 
clones, were only detectable in plasmablasts, highlighting the 
importance of characterizing this population. Furthermore, 
paired-chain antibody repertoire sequencing enables expres-
sion of representative rmAbs followed by downstream binding 
and functional characterization of the encoded sequences. We 
identified 12 immunoglobulin HC V + LC V gene combinations 
that were significantly overrepresented in the plasmablasts of 
Bb-infected patients, including IGHV3-74 + IGKV3-20 and 
IGHV5-51 + LV3-25. In contrast to the preferred gene usage 
combinations observed in paired-chain sequencing data, no 
significantly preferred gene usage combinations were identified 
in single-chain data from either total PBMC B cells or sorted 
plasmablasts.
Applying a targeted panel of eight preferred HC V + LC V 
gene combinations gave 84% sensitivity and 100% specificity for 
Bb infection, a significant improvement over the current CDC-
recommended diagnostic regimen. More than three million 
Lyme disease tests are performed in the United States each year, 
at an estimated cost of $492 million dollars (34). These tests fail 
to capture more than 50% of patients during the earliest stages 
of infection, although their sensitivity is significantly improved 
30 days following manifestation of clinical symptoms (35). 
Prompt diagnosis is particularly important for Lyme disease, as 
delays in treatment are associated with an increased likelihood 
of persistent symptoms following treatment (36). It will be 
important to systematically assess the presence of these V gene 
combinations in large validation cohort to further assess their 
diagnostic utility.
In addition to plasmablasts, CD27− memory B cell responses 
have been associated with infection and autoimmunity (37–41). 
We show herein that these cells expand following Bb infection 
in humans. The CD27− memory B cell population is not well 
understood, but it has been reported to increase in autoimmune 
diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, and multiple sclerosis, as well as during infections with 
rotavirus or human immunodeficiency virus (37–41). Evidence 
supporting the identity of this population as memory B cells 
includes studies showing that these cells are physically larger than 
antigen-inexperienced CD27−IgD+ cells, as well as the observa-
tion of class-switching and somatic hypermutation in this popu-
lation (29, 42). Further investigation is needed to characterize the 
encoded antibodies and functional properties of CD27− memory 
B cells following Bb infection.
Limitations of this study include the limited number 
of patients sequenced. Comparisons of Bb-infected versus 
healthy individuals and persistent versus resolving symptoms 
included a sufficient number of subjects to identify statistically 
significant differences. However, comparisons of subjects with 
disseminated versus local EM rash may have been limited by the 
small proportion of patients with a disseminated rash. Given 
the identified differences between these groups, future studies 
will be needed to further characterize patients with dissemi-
nated EM rash. While this study included directed sequencing 
of plasmablasts, as well as total PBMC B cell sequencing, we 
did not perform directed sequencing of CD27− memory B cells, 
 11
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
which we observed to increase following infection. Further 
characterization of this population will also fall under the scope 
of a future study.
Following the recent use of monoclonal antibody therapies in 
Ebola and respiratory syncytial virus infections, anti-microbial 
monoclonal antibodies are re-emerging as an important therapeutic 
 
strategy for emerging infectious diseases (43, 44). While vaccine 
and infection-induced antibody responses have the potential 
to protect against and clear Bb infection, in many cases such 
responses are inadequately induced or maintained. We show 
here that in patients who lack a robust B cell response, doxy-
cycline treatment alone does not ensure full recovery. Passive 
FigUre 7 | Plasmablast-derived recombinant monoclonal antibodies (rmAbs) from both acute and persistent B cell clones bind Bb-specific antigens and 
inhibit growth in vitro. Sequence-derived antibodies representative of the identified clonal families were synthesized, cloned, and recombinantly expressed. 
Recombinant expression enabled characterization of the rmAb binding targets with an in-house ELISA and multiplex bead-based assay, a commercial 
strip-blot assay, and in in vitro Bb growth assays. (a) Custom Luminex assay containing whole proteins and peptides derived from Bb and related species, 
sonicated Bb B31 lysate ELISA, and Virastripe strip-blot assay. Red arrows indicate successful ELISA validation of rmAb binding. (B) rmAbs were added to Bb 
cultures to assess their ability to inhibit Bb growth in vitro. The negative control was an rmAb specific for Influenza hemagglutinin, and the positive control was 
a conventional murine mAb specific for Bb OspA (clone CB10). P values were determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test relative to negative 
control, **P < 0.01.
 12
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
reFerences
1. Wormser GP. Vaccination as a modality to prevent Lyme disease. A status 
report. Infect Dis Clin North Am (1999) 13(1):135–148, vii. doi:10.1016/
S0891-5520(05)70047-7 
2. McKisic MD, Barthold SW
. T-cell-independent responses to Borrelia burgdor-
feri are critical for protective immunity and resolution of Lyme disease. Infect 
Immun (2000) 68(9):5190–7. doi:10.1128/IAI.68.9.5190-5197.2000 
3. Barthold SW, Bockenstedt LK. Passive immunizing activity of sera from mice 
infected with Borrelia burgdorferi. Infect Immun (1993) 61(11):4696–702. 
4. Hammers-Berggren S, Lebech AM, Karlsson M, Svenungsson B, Hansen K, 
Stiernstedt G. Serological follow-up after treatment of patients with erythema 
migrans and neuroborreliosis. J Clin Microbiol (1994) 32(6):1519–25. 
5. Tunev SS, Hastey CJ, Hodzic E, Feng S, Barthold SW, Baumgarth N. 
Lymphoadenopathy during Lyme borreliosis is caused by spirochete 
 
migration-induced specific B cell activation. PLoS Pathog (2011) 7(5):e1002066. 
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002066 
6. Hastey CJ, Elsner RA, Barthold SW, Baumgarth N. Delays and diversions 
mark the development of B cell responses to Borrelia burgdorferi infection. 
J Immunol (2012) 188(11):5612–22. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1103735 
7. Elsner RA, Hastey CJ, Baumgarth N. CD4+ T cells promote antibody 
production but not sustained affinity maturation during Borrelia burgdorferi 
infection. Infect Immun (2015) 83(1):48–56. doi:10.1128/IAI.02471-14 
8. Elsner RA, Hastey CJ, Olsen KJ, Baumgarth N. Suppression of long-lived 
humoral immunity following Borrelia burgdorferi infection. PLoS Pathog 
(2015) 11(7):e1004976. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1004976 
9. Wormser GP
, Dattwyler RJ, Shapiro ED, Halperin JJ, Steere AC, Klempner MS, 
 
et al. The clinical assessment, treatment, and prevention of Lyme disease, 
human granulocytic anaplasmosis, and babesiosis: clinical practice guide-
lines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis (2006) 
43(9):1089–134. doi:10.1086/508667 
10. Ware JE, Kosinski M, Dewey JE. How to Score Version 2 of the SF-36 Health 
Survey. Lincoln: QualityMetric Incorporated (2000).
11. Aucott JN, Crowder LA, Kortte KB. Development of a foundation for a case 
definition of post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome. Int J Infect Dis (2013) 
17(6):e443–9. doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2013.01.008 
12. Lahey LJ, Panas MW, Mao R, Delanoy M, Flanagan JJ, Binder SR, et al. 
Development of a multiantigen panel for improved detection of Borrelia burg-
dorferi infection in early Lyme disease. J Clin Microbiol (2015) 53(12):3834–41. 
doi:10.1128/JCM.02111-15 
treatment or prophylaxis with Bb-specific monoclonal antibodies 
could promote clearance of Bb, facilitate doxycycline-mediated 
pathogen clearance, reduce the likelihood of developing PTLDS, 
and/or prevent infection in highly endemic areas such as the 
Northeastern United States. Improvements in our understand-
ing of the factors affecting the pharmacokinetics of therapeutic 
antibodies have increased the feasibility of prophylactic use, as 
mAb half-lives can be extended beyond 1 month (45, 46), poten-
tially enabling seasonal protection from a single dose. Although 
cost may be a limiting factor in the usefulness of Bb-specific 
therapeutic mAbs, future improvements in mAb manufacturing 
techniques and development of Bb-specific mAbs with extremely 
high affinities (thus requiring a low dose) may mitigate this 
limitation.
The presence and underlying pathobiology of persistent 
Lyme disease symptoms has historically proven controversial. 
However, a significant body of work from multiple research 
groups now supports the verity of this syndrome, demonstrates 
that live spirochetes persist under certain conditions following 
antibiotic treatment of rhesus macaques (47), and identifies 
CCL19 and IL-23 as biomarkers associated with the failure of 
symptom resolution (48, 49). This study adds blood plasmablast 
levels, B cell clonal expansion, and serum reactivity to a subset 
of Bb surface proteins to the set of cellular characteristics that 
are associated with development of symptoms that can arise 
following Bb infection.
Herein, we demonstrate that following Bb infection eleva-
tions and clonal expansion of blood plasmablasts are correlated 
with rapid return to health, while poor plasmablast responses 
are associated with a longer duration of symptoms following 
doxycycline treatment. Bb-induced plasmablasts exhibited 
preferential antibody gene segment usage, while bulk sequencing 
of total B cells revealed convergent Lyme-specific CDR3 motifs. 
Resolution of symptoms following antibiotic treatment was 
associated with robust plasmablast responses encoding Bb-static 
antibodies, suggesting that plasmablast-derived anti-Bb antibod-
ies could provide the basis for next-generation antibody-based 
therapeutics for Lyme disease.
DaTa aVailaBiliTY sTaTeMenT
The antibody repertoire sequence data reported in this paper 
have been deposited in GEO (accession number GSE114310). All 
other data will be made available by the authors, without undue 
reservation, to any qualified researcher.
eThics sTaTeMenT
Human subjects protocols were approved by the institutional 
review boards of Johns Hopkins University and Stanford 
University, and all subjects provided written informed consent in 
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns
Conceptualization: LB, WR, JNA, and MS; methodology: LB, JZA, 
and SE; software: LB and SE; formal analysis: LB; investigation: 
LB, JZA, DM, and RC; resources, ME, JNA, MS, and WR; data 
curation: LB, JZA, and AR; writing—original draft preparation: 
LB and WR; writing—reviewing and editing: JZA, DM, AR, SE, 
RC, ME, JNA, MS, and WR; visualization: LB and WR; supervi-
sion: LB, WR, ME, JNA, MS, and WR.
acKnOWleDgMenTs
We thank the Stanford Shared FACS facility (SSFF), Stanford 
Functional Genomics Facility (SFGF), and U.C. Berkeley Genome 
Sciences Lab (GSL) for assistance, and Michelle S. Bloom and 
Rong Mao for advice/discussion. Funding was provided by the 
Bay Area Lyme Foundation (www.bayarealyme.org) and the 
Brennan Family.
sUPPleMenTarY MaTerial
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2018.01634/
full#supplementary-material.
 13
Blum et al.
B Cell Responses in Lyme Disease
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1634
13. Maecker HT, McCoy JP, Nussenblatt R. Standardizing immunophenotyping 
for the human immunology project. Nat Rev Immunol (2012) 12(3):191–200. 
doi:10.1038/nri3158 
14. Turchaninova MA, Davydov A, Britanova OV, Shugay M, Bikos V, Egorov ES, 
 
et al. High-quality full-length immunoglobulin profiling with unique molecu-
lar barcoding. Nat Protoc (2016) 11(9):1599–616. doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.093 
15. Shugay M, Britanova OV, Merzlyak EM, Turchaninova MA, Mamedov IZ, 
Tuganbaev TR, et al. Towards error-free profiling of immune repertoires. Nat 
Methods (2014) 11(6):653–5. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2960 
16. MiTools: Yet Another Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Data Processing Tool 
(Based on MiLib). Github Repository. Available from: https://github.com/
milaboratory/mitools (Accessed: April 29, 2018).
17. Vander Heiden JA, Yaari G, Uduman M, Stern JN, O’Connor KC, Hafler DA, 
et al. pRESTO: a toolkit for processing high-throughput sequencing raw reads 
of lymphocyte receptor repertoires. Bioinformatics (2014) 30(13):1930–2. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu138 
18. Alamyar E, Duroux P, Lefranc MP, Giudicelli V. IMGT((R)) tools for the 
nucleotide analysis of immunoglobulin (IG) and T cell receptor (TR) 
V-(D)-J repertoires, polymorphisms, and IG mutations: IMGT/V-QUEST 
and IMGT/HighV-QUEST for NGS. Methods Mol Biol (2012) 882:569–604. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-61779-842-9_32 
19. Gupta NT, Vander Heiden JA, Uduman M, Gadala-Maria D, Yaari G, 
 
Kleinstein SH. Change-O: a toolkit for analyzing large-scale B cell immuno-
globulin repertoire sequencing data. Bioinformatics (2015) 31(20):3356–8. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv359 
20. Tan YC, Kongpachith S, Blum LK, Ju CH, Lahey LJ, Lu DR, et al. Barcode-
enabled sequencing of plasmablast antibody repertoires in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol (2014) 66(10):2706–15. doi:10.1002/art.38754 
21. Kinslow JD, Blum LK, Deane KD, Demoruelle MK, Okamoto Y, Parish MC, 
et al. Elevated IgA plasmablast levels in subjects at risk of developing rheumatoid 
arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol (2016) 68(10):2372–83. doi:10.1002/art.39771 
22. Nair N, Feng N, Blum LK, Sanyal M, Ding S, Jiang B, et al. VP4- and VP7-
specific antibodies mediate heterotypic immunity to rotavirus in humans. 
 
Sci Transl Med (2017) 9(395):eaam5434. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aam5434 
23. Blum LK, Cao RRL, Sweatt AJ, Bill M, Lahey LJ, Hsi AC, et al. Circulating 
plasmablasts are elevated and produce pathogenic anti-endothelial cell 
autoantibodies in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. Eur J Immunol 
(2018) 48(5):874–84. doi:10.1002/eji.201747460 
24. Edgar RC. UPARSE: highly accurate OTU sequences from microbial amplicon 
reads. Nat Methods (2013) 10(10):996–8. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2604 
25. Lu DR, Tan YC, Kongpachith S, Cai X, Stein EA, Lindstrom TM, et al. 
Identifying functional anti-Staphylococcus aureus antibodies by sequencing 
antibody repertoires of patient plasmablasts. Clin Immunol (2014) 152(1–2): 
77–89. doi:10.1016/j.clim.2014.02.010 
26. Tan YC, Blum LK, Kongpachith S, Ju CH, Cai X, Lindstrom TM, et al. High-
throughput sequencing of natively paired antibody chains provides evidence 
for original antigenic sin shaping the antibody response to influenza vaccina-
tion. Clin Immunol (2014) 151(1):55–65. doi:10.1016/j.clim.2013.12.008 
27. Caskey JR, Embers ME. Persister development by Borrelia burgdorferi 
populations in vitro. Antimicrob Agents Chemother (2015) 59(10):6288–95. 
doi:10.1128/AAC.00883-15 
28. Fink K. Origin and function of circulating plasmablasts during acute viral 
infections. Front Immunol (2012) 3:78. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2012.00078 
29. Wu YC, Kipling D, Dunn-Walters DK. The relationship between CD27 nega-
tive and positive B cell populations in human peripheral blood. Front Immunol 
(2011) 2:81. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2011.00081 
30. Hansmann L, Blum L, Ju CH, Liedtke M, Robinson WH, Davis MM. 
Mass cytometry analysis shows that a novel memory phenotype B cell is 
expanded in multiple myeloma. Cancer Immunol Res (2015) 3(6):650–60. 
doi:10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0236-T 
31. Li W, Godzik A. Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large 
sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics (2006) 22(13):1658–9. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btl158 
32. Fu L, Niu B, Zhu Z, Wu S, Li W. CD-HIT: accelerated for clustering the 
next-generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics (2012) 28(23):3150–2. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565 
33. Robinson WH. Sequencing the functional antibody repertoire – diagnostic and 
therapeutic discovery. Nat Rev Rheumatol (2015) 11(3):171–82. doi:10.1038/
nrrheum.2014.220 
34. Hinckley AF, Connally NP
, Meek JI, Johnson BJ, Kemperman MM, Feldman KA, 
 
et al. Lyme disease testing by large commercial laboratories in the United 
States. Clin Infect Dis (2014) 59(5):676–81. doi:10.1093/cid/ciu397 
35. Wormser GP, Nowakowski J, Nadelman RB, Visintainer P, Levin A, Aguero-
Rosenfeld ME. Impact of clinical variables on Borrelia burgdorferi-specific 
antibody seropositivity in acute-phase sera from patients in North America 
with culture-confirmed early Lyme disease. Clin Vaccine Immunol (2008) 
15(10):1519–22. doi:10.1128/CVI.00109-08 
36. Steere AC, Hutchinson GJ, Rahn DW, Sigal LH, Craft JE, DeSanna ET, et al. 
Treatment of the early manifestations of Lyme disease. Ann Intern Med (1983) 
99(1):22–6. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-99-1-76 
37. Wei C, Anolik J, Cappione A, Zheng B, Pugh-Bernard A, Brooks J, et al.  
A new population of cells lacking expression of CD27 represents a notable 
component of the B cell memory compartment in systemic lupus erythema-
tosus. J Immunol (2007) 178(10):6624–33. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.178.10.6624 
38. Moir S, Ho J, Malaspina A, Wang W, DiPoto AC, O’Shea MA, et al. Evidence for 
HIV-associated B cell exhaustion in a dysfunctional memory B cell compart-
ment in HIV-infected viremic individuals. J Exp Med (2008) 205(8):1797–805. 
doi:10.1084/jem.20072683 
39. Rojas OL, Narvaez CF, Greenberg HB, Angel J, Franco MA. Characterization 
of rotavirus specific B cells and their relation with serological memory. 
Virology (2008) 380(2):234–42. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2008.08.004 
40. Fleischer SJ, Giesecke C, Mei HE, Lipsky PE, Daridon C, Dorner T. Increased 
frequency of a unique spleen tyrosine kinase bright memory B cell population 
in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheumatol (2014) 66(12):3424–35. 
doi:10.1002/art.38854 
41. Moura RA, Quaresma C, Vieira AR, Goncalves MJ, Polido-Pereira J, Romao VC, 
 
et al. B-cell phenotype and IgD-CD27- memory B cells are affected by TNF-
inhibitors and tocilizumab treatment in rheumatoid arthritis. PLoS One 
(2017) 12(9):e0182927. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0182927 
42. Fecteau JF, Cote G, Neron S. A new memory CD27-IgG+ B cell population in 
peripheral blood expressing VH genes with low frequency of somatic muta-
tion. J Immunol (2006) 177(6):3728–36. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.177.6.3728 
43. Kisalu NK, Idris AH, Weidle C, Flores-Garcia Y, Flynn BJ, Sack BK, et al.  
A human monoclonal antibody prevents malaria infection by targeting 
a new site of vulnerability on the parasite. Nat Med (2018) 24(4):408–16. 
doi:10.1038/nm.4512 
44. Marston HD, Paules CI, Fauci AS. Monoclonal antibodies for emerging infec-
tious diseases—borrowing from history. N Engl J Med (2018) 378(16):1469–72. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMp1802256 
45. Tabrizi M, Bornstein GG, Suria H. Biodistribution mechanisms of therapeutic 
monoclonal antibodies in health and disease. AAPS J (2010) 12(1):33–43. 
doi:10.1208/s12248-009-9157-5 
46. Ryman JT, Meibohm B. Pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies. CPT 
Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol (2017) 6(9):576–88. doi:10.1002/psp4.12224 
47. Embers ME, Hasenkampf NR, Jacobs MB, Tardo AC, Doyle-Meyers LA, 
Philipp MT, et al. Variable manifestations, diverse seroreactivity and 
post-treatment persistence in non-human primates exposed to Borrelia 
burgdorferi by tick feeding. PLoS One (2017) 12(12):e0189071. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0189071 
48. Strle K, Stupica D, Drouin EE, Steere AC, Strle F. Elevated levels of IL-23 in 
a subset of patients with post-Lyme disease symptoms following erythema 
migrans. Clin Infect Dis (2014) 58(3):372–80. doi:10.1093/cid/cit735 
49. Aucott JN, Soloski MJ, Rebman AW, Crowder LA, Lahey LJ, Wagner CA, et al. 
CCL19 as a chemokine risk factor for posttreatment Lyme disease syndrome: a 
Prospective Clinical Cohort Study. Clin Vaccine Immunol (2016) 23(9):757–66. 
doi:10.1128/CVI.00071-16 
Conflict of Interest Statement: WR owns equity in, is a consultant to, and is a 
member of the Board of Directors of Atreca, Inc. All other authors declare no 
competing interests.
Copyright © 2018 Blum, Adamska, Martin, Rebman, Elliott, Cao, Embers, Aucott, 
Soloski and Robinson. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduc-
tion in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright 
owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in 
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is 
permitted which does not comply with these terms.
