 A microphysiological model of the human placental barrier
Cassidy Blundell1, Emily R. Tess1, Ariana S. R. Schanzer1, Christos Coutifaris2, Emily J. 
Su3, Samuel Parry4, and Dongeun Huh1,*
1Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
2Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
3Department of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO
4Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
Abstract
During human pregnancy, the fetal circulation is separated from maternal blood in the placenta by 
two cell layers – the fetal capillary endothelium and placental trophoblast. This placental barrier 
plays an essential role in fetal development and health by tightly regulating the exchange of 
endogenous and exogenous materials between the mother and the fetus. Here we present a 
microengineered device that provides a novel platform to mimic the structural and functional 
complexity of this specialized tissue in vitro. Our model is created in a multilayered microfluidic 
system that enables co-culture of human trophoblast cells and human fetal endothelial cells in a 
physiologically relevant spatial arrangement to replicate the characteristic architecture of the 
human placental barrier. We have engineered this co-culture model to induce progressive fusion of 
trophoblast cells and to form a syncytialized epithelium that resembles the syncytiotrophoblast in 
vivo. Our system also allows the cultured trophoblasts to form dense microvilli under dynamic 
flow conditions and to reconstitute expression and physiological localization of membrane 
transport proteins, such as glucose transporters (GLUTs), critical to the barrier function of the 
placenta. To provide a proof-of-principle for using this microdevice to recapitulate native function 
of the placental barrier, we demonstrated physiological transport of glucose across the 
microengineered maternal-fetal interface. Importantly, the rate of maternal-to-fetal glucose 
transfer in this system closely approximated that measured in ex vivo perfused human placentas. 
Our “placenta-on-a-chip” platform represents an important advance in the development of new 
technologies to model and study the physiological complexity of the human placenta for a wide 
variety of applications.
Graphical Abstract
We present a microphysiological model that reconstitutes the functional unit of the human 
placenta.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: huhd@seas.upenn.edu, Tel: 1-215-898-5208. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Lab Chip. 2016 August 2; 16(16): 3065–3073. doi:10.1039/c6lc00259e.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
The placenta is a highly specialized organ in the human body that plays an integral role in 
the development and maintenance of pregnancy1,2. As evidenced by the recent launching of 
the Human Placenta Project by the US National Institutes of Health, the current dearth of 
knowledge about the human placenta is providing an impetus to improve our ability to probe 
and understand the inner workings of this vital organ. Specifically, collective research efforts 
emerging in this area focus on developing new technologies to examine and monitor human-
specific placental structure and function during health and disease3. These studies are further 
justified by the poor physiological relevance and predictive power of existing animal models 
that have proven problematic for the study of the human placenta4,5.
Motivated by these unmet challenges and emerging opportunities in reproductive biology 
and medicine, we have developed a microengineered cell culture system that enables a new 
approach to modeling the salient features of the human placenta (Figs.1A,B). The primary 
role of the placenta is to mediate the exchange of various endogenous and exogenous 
substances between the mother and fetus during pregnancy6,7. Central to this critical organ 
function is a multilayered membranous structure that consists of the syncytiotrophoblast and 
the fetal capillary endothelium, separated by a thin interstitium (Fig. 1C). This specialized 
barrier, which separates the maternal intervillous space and fetal circulation, is responsible 
for regulating the rate and selectivity of placental transport. Aberrant changes in its structure 
and function are implicated in various complications of pregnancy, such as preeclampsia and 
intrauterine growth restriction8,9. Our microsystem provides a novel platform to emulate this 
essential unit of the placenta by allowing human placental cells to grow and organize into a 
multilayered living tissue that replicates the native architecture of the maternal-fetal 
interface. Specifically, this model is a compartmentalized microfluidic system consisting of 
two closely apposed microchannels to enable culture of human trophoblasts and human 
placental villous endothelial cells on opposite sides of a thin semipermeable membrane 
under dynamic flow conditions (Fig. 1D). The design of this device also makes it possible to 
engineer the soluble microenvironment of the maternal compartment to induce 
syncytialization of the trophoblast cells and to reproduce their differentiated morphological 
and biochemical phenotypes. We show progressive fusion of the cultured trophoblast cells 
and their increased production of human chorionic gonadotropin during the course of 
syncytialization induced by the activation of the protein kinase A pathway.
Blundell et al.
Page 2
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To further demonstrate the potential of this biomimetic microengineering approach, we 
present our “placenta-on-a-chip” system as a promising alternative to existing models for the 
study of physiological transport function of the human placenta. Current research on 
placental transport relies heavily on in vitro techniques based on Transwell cell culture 
inserts that provide a polarized environment conducive to barrier formation10. This 
traditional approach, however, has been used predominantly for establishing monoculture of 
trophoblast cells to study their transport function. Consequently, existing Transwell models 
do not mimic the multi-layered structure of the placental barrier, failing to recapitulate 
endothelial contribution to physiological barrier function11. Furthermore, static culture 
conditions in these models do not reconstitute the dynamic flow environment of the placenta 
in vivo that has been shown to influence cellular phenotypes in the placental barrier12. As an 
alternative approach, researchers utilize ex vivo models involving controlled perfusion of the 
whole human placenta13. Although this technique has gained widespread acceptance in 
placental transport studies, significant challenges remain due to the requirement for human 
specimens, the limited amount of time that tissue remains viable, and the inconsistent results 
produced by these models14. The whole organ strategy also makes high-resolution analysis 
at the cellular and tissue levels difficult, which is often required for a mechanistic 
understanding of placental transport. As a new approach to address the shortcomings of 
these existing techniques, we demonstrate the feasibility of leveraging our microengineered 
platform to model physiological biomolecular transport across the maternal-fetal interface. 
Using glucose as a model substance, we show that our microengineered placental barrier is 
capable of mediating net directional molecular transport from the maternal to fetal 
compartments. Our data also reveal the advantage of this biomimetic microsystem over 
Transwell inserts for accurately predicting the physiological rate of glucose transport in the 
human placenta.
Methods
Cell culture
The BeWo b30 human trophoblast cell line15 was obtained from Dr. Nicholas Illsley of 
Hackensack University Medical Center and was cultured in DMEM/F-12K medium (GE 
Healthcare) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (Gibco). Human primary placental villous endothelial cells (HPVECs) were 
isolated from term placentas as described previously16 and maintained in EGM-2 medium 
containing 2% FBS (Lonza).
For static Transwell cell culture studies, Transwell inserts (24-well plate; pore size = 0.4 μm; 
surface area = 0.33 cm2) were coated with human fibronectin solution (0.1 mg/ml in PBS). 
For cell seeding, the insert was first inverted, and a drop of HPVEC suspension (50,000 
cells/insert) was placed on the basal surface of the insert membrane. The seeded insert was 
then placed in a cell culture incubator for 1 hour for cell attachment. Following HPVEC 
adhesion, the insert was washed and placed back in the well plate, and the basal 
compartment was filled with endothelial media. Subsequently, the apical chamber of the 
insert was filled with a BeWo cell suspension (50,000 cells/insert), incubated for 1 hour, and 
washed to seed the upper side of the membrane with trophoblast cells.
Blundell et al.
Page 3
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Microdevice fabrication
The upper and lower layers of the microdevice were fabricated using standard soft 
lithography techniques. Briefly, poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) (Sylgard, Dow Corning) 
base was mixed with curing agent at a weight ratio of 10:1 and degassed to remove air 
bubbles. The mixture was then cast on a silicon master containing photolithographically 
prepared microchannel features made of SU-8 (MicroChem). The microchannel dimensions 
were 1 mm (width) × 1.5 cm (length) × 135 μm (height). A biopsy punch was used to create 
1 mm-diameter holes through the upper PDMS slab to gain fluidic access to the upper and 
lower microchannels.
To assemble the device, the two PDMS layers were bonded to a semipermeable 
polycarbonate membrane containing 1 μm pores (GE Healthcare) using adhesive PDMS 
mortar17. To create this layer, PDMS precursor was mixed with curing agent at a weight 
ratio of 10:3 and spin-coated on a 100 mm Petri dish at 2500 rpm for 5 minutes. 
Subsequently, both the upper and lower microdevice layers were gently placed on the dish to 
transfer the spin-coated mortar film onto the surfaces of the PDMS slabs containing the 
microchannel features. This step was followed by bonding of the polycarbonate membrane 
to the upper PDMS slab. These two layers were then aligned and attached to the lower 
PDMS slab, and cured at room temperature overnight to ensure complete bonding.
Microfluidic cell culture
The assembled microdevice was first sterilized using UV irradiation. Following sterilization, 
the surface of the intervening porous membrane was coated with extracellular matrix (ECM) 
by filling and incubating the microchannels with a human fibronectin solution (0.1 mg/ml in 
PBS) at 37C for at least 4 hours. The channels were then rinsed with PBS to remove the 
ECM solution prior to cell seeding. To form the fetal endothelium, we introduced a 
suspension of trypsinized HPVECs (4 × 106 cells/ml) into the lower microchannel and 
immediately inverted the device to allow the cells to settle to the original lower side of the 
porous membrane. Subsequently, the seeded microdevice was incubated at 37C for 1 hour to 
enable cell attachment and spreading. During this period, the inlet and outlet access ports 
were blocked to prevent unwanted convective motion of culture medium in the 
microchannels. Once attachment of HPVECs was confirmed, the device was flipped back, 
and the upper microchannel was seeded with BeWo cells suspended in DMEM/F-12K at a 
concentration of 4 × 106 cells/ml. After incubation at 37C for 1 hour, the microdevice was 
connected to syringe pumps that generated continuous flow of culture media in the upper 
and lower microchannels at a volumetric flow rate of 100 μL/hr.
Analysis of intercellular junctions
In order to assess the formation of intercellular junctions, the trophoblast cells and HPVECs 
were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 minutes, permeabilized in 0.25% Triton 
X-100 for 10 minutes, and then incubated in 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 hour. 
All steps were performed at room temperature. The trophoblast cells and HPVECs were 
incubated with anti-E-cadherin (Life Technologies) and anti-VE-cadherin antibodies (Cell 
Signaling Technologies), respectively. These primary antibodies were diluted in 2% BSA 
and incubated in the microdevice for 1 hour at room temperature. Next, the samples were 
Blundell et al.
Page 4
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thoroughly washed with PBS. Secondary antibodies (Life Technologies) were diluted in 2% 
BSA, incubated for 45 minutes at room temperature, and then washed with PBS. Nuclei 
were labeled using DAPI subsequent to the secondary antibody incubation. Following 
staining, the membrane was carefully removed from the microdevice and mounted onto a 
coverslip. Images were acquired using an inverted microscope (Zeiss Axio Observer) and a 
confocal laser-scanning microscope (Leica TCS SP8). Image processing and three-
dimensional rendering were carried out using Volocity (PerkinElmer).
Analysis of microvilli formation
Following 72 hours of culture, trophoblast cells grown in Transwell and microfluidic devices 
were fixed, permeabilized, and incubated with 2% BSA as described above. Next, the 
samples were stained with Alexa 488-conjugated phalloidin (Life Technologies) for 30 
minutes at room temperature and washed to visualize F-actin in the microvilli. The cell 
nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. A confocal laser-scanning microscope (Leica TCS 
SP8) was used to acquire Z-stack images. For quantification of relative fluorescence, Z-stack 
data were converted to a maximum intensity projection image and manual thresholding was 
performed in FIJI to isolate fluorescent pixels18. Histogram counting was used to determine 
the relative amount of actin fluorescence in static and dynamic conditions.
Trophoblast syncytialization
Following formation of a confluent epithelial monolayer on the membrane surface in the 
upper microchannel, we treated the apical side of the epithelium with forskolin to activate 
the protein kinase A pathway in the cultured trophoblasts. A stock solution of forskolin 
(Sigma; 5 mg/mL in DMSO) was diluted with F-12K medium to a final concentration of 50 
uM and perfused through the upper microchannel. After 72 hours of forskolin treatment, the 
trophoblast cells were fixed in 4% PFA, permeabilized in Triton-X 100, and then incubated 
with 2% BSA in PBS for immunofluorescence staining. To analyze changes in junctional 
protein expression, the samples were incubated with anti-E-cadherin antibody (Life 
Technologies) in 2% BSA, followed by secondary antibody and DAPI. Additionally, media 
perfusate was collected at 48, 72, and 96 hours from both untreated and forskolin-treated 
devices. The collected samples were analyzed using a human chorionic gonadotropin beta 
(β-hCG) ELISA kit (Abcam) to quantify the levels of β-hCG produced by the trophoblast 
population at each time point.
Measurement of barrier permeability after syncytialization
Barrier function of the syncytialized epithelium was assessed by measuring the transport of 
3 kDa fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran (FITC-dextran; Life Technologies) between the 
maternal and fetal compartments. FITC-dextran (0.1 mg/mL in DMEM/F-12K media) was 
introduced to the upper maternal microchannel and perfused for 3 hours. The media 
perfusate was collected from both microchannels during this period and the fluorescence 
intensity of the collected samples was quantified using a microplate reader (Tecan). The 
amount of dextran transport was assessed based on the mean fluorescence intensity in the 
outflow from the lower fetal microchannel.
Blundell et al.
Page 5
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Visualization of cell membrane transporters
After 3 days of microfluidic culture, cells were processed for immunofluorescence imaging 
as described above in order to evaluate the presence and spatial distribution of glucose 
transporters in the microengineered placental barrier. Briefly, cells were fixed on-chip in 4% 
PFA, permeabilized in Triton-X 100, and incubated in 2% BSA in PBS. The samples were 
then incubated with mouse anti-glucose transporter 1 antibody (Abcam), followed by 
secondary antibody (Life Technologies). Images were acquired using a confocal laser-
scanning microscope (Leica), and image processing was carried out using Volocity software 
(PerkinElmer). Assessment of transporter membrane localization was performed using 
FIJI18. The apical and basal membranes were manually segmented in 10 representative 
images, and the mean fluorescence intensity was measured in each image. These values 
were adjusted for background fluorescence.
Analysis of glucose transport
To analyze glucose transport across the maternal-fetal interface, the maternal compartment 
was perfused with culture medium containing 10 mM glucose. This increased glucose 
concentration was generated by adding D-glucose (Gibco) to F-12K medium. Media on the 
fetal side contained 5.5 mM of glucose during perfusion. Outflow from the maternal and 
fetal microchannels was collected over a period of 2 hours and analyzed by a glucose meter 
(Accu-Chek Aviva) to measure glucose concentration. These studies were carried out to 
measure the rate of transport across three types of barriers: (1) a bare membrane in a cell-
free device, (2) a monolayer of BeWo cells without the endothelium, and (3) an epithelial-
endothelial barrier formed by co-culture of BeWo cells and HPVECs. For each group, 
barrier function was quantified by the percent increase in fetal glucose concentration over 
the period of perfusion. Additionally, the percent rate of transfer was calculated for the co-
culture model using the following equation previously described in placental transport 
studies19,
where ΔCF and ΔCM denote changes in glucose concentration in the fetal and maternal 
compartments during perfusion, respectively. This value was compared to the percent rate of 
transfer previously measured in the human placenta to investigate the physiological 
relevance of our model.
To measure glucose transport in Transwell, the apical and basal chambers were filled with 
200 μL of epithelial media containing 10 mM glucose and 500 μL of endothelial media with 
5.5 mM glucose, respectively. A 50 μL sample was taken from each chamber every 30 
minutes over the course of transport experiments. The concentration of glucose in the 
samples was measured using a handheld glucose meter (Accu-Chek Aviva). The percent rate 
of transfer was calculated as described above.
Blundell et al.
Page 6
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Statistical Analysis
Results are reported as mean ± S.E.M. Statistical significance was assessed using a two-
tailed Student’s t-test or analysis of variance (ANOVA). Each experiment was repeated at 
least three times.
Results and Discussion
Reconstituting the microarchitecture of the human placental barrier
The function of the maternal-fetal interface as a mediator of placental transport is imparted 
primarily by its multilayered physical structure, characterized by the trophoblast epithelium 
and the fetal endothelium held in close apposition. Our microengineered system made it 
possible to replicate this critical microarchitecture of the placental barrier by permitting 
compartmentalization of its two key cell types in the maternal and fetal circulations. The 
trophoblast and endothelial cell populations introduced into the microchannels established 
firm adhesion to the ECM-coated membrane and began to spread within a few hours of cell 
seeding. During perfusion culture, these cells proliferated in a continuous manner to form 
fully confluent monolayers in both the upper and lower chambers, which covered the entire 
surface of the membrane within 24 hours of initial cell seeding. The resulting bi-layer tissue 
closely resembled the trophoblast-endothelial interface of the chorionic villus in vivo (Figs. 
2A,B). Despite porosity of the interstitial membrane, we did not observe cell transmigration 
between the microchannels, presumably due to the small size of the membrane pores (1 μm). 
Under perfusion culture conditions, the microengineered placental barrier was maintained 
without a significant loss of cell viability for prolonged periods (> 1 week).
Next, we evaluated the formation of cell-cell junctions to assess structural integrity of the 
barrier. A specific focus of this analysis was on the visualization of VE-cadherin expression 
in the fetal endothelium and E-cadherin in the trophoblast cells. Immunofluorescence 
imaging of the bilayer tissue cultured for 3 days clearly showed a network of continuous and 
well-defined junctional complexes throughout both the trophoblast and endothelial layers 
(Figs. 2C,D). Importantly, expression of the junctional proteins was found to be uniform 
across the entire cell culture membrane, showing no indication of localized regions with 
immature junctions. Considering that intercellular adhesion plays an essential role in 
placental transport in vivo, these results together demonstrate the capability of our model to 
recapitulate not only the relative spatial arrangement of the maternal and fetal tissue in the 
placental barrier but also the structural integrity necessary for its function.
Microfluorimetric analysis of the placental barrier in our device also revealed evidence of 
extracellular matrix deposition by trophoblast cells. In the human placenta, laminin is a 
critical component of the trophoblast basement membrane in the chorionic villus that 
contributes to barrier integrity20. Confocal microscopy of the trophoblast cells cultured in 
our device for 6 days showed extensive extracellular deposition of laminin (Fig. 2E). 
Moreover, this deposition was localized to the basal side of the cells, forming a thin layer of 
laminin between the epithelium and underlying semipermeable membrane (Fig. 2F), which 
was reminiscent of the basal lamina in vivo.
Blundell et al.
Page 7
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Microvilli formation in the microengineered placental barrier
Another vital structural feature of the placental barrier is the membrane protrusions on the 
apical surface of trophoblasts facing the maternal intervillous space. These microvilli 
increase the overall surface area available for placental transport, enabling highly efficient 
exchange of nutrients and waste products between the mother and the fetus6,21. The 
microvillous surface also contains key molecular transporters, as well as hormone receptors 
that influence cellular function. Our microfluidic device allowed the cultured trophoblast 
cells to recapitulate this critical phenotype.
As illustrated in Figs. 3A and 3B, the apical surface of the trophoblasts cultured in the 
maternal chamber for 3 days was covered with a dense layer of microvilli that appeared as 
fine hair-like protrusions in the fluorescence micrographs. Although cell-to-cell variability 
was observed in the extent of microvilli formation, this morphological differentiation was 
evident in the vast majority of the cells. In contrast, the trophoblast cells grown in Transwell 
for the same period exhibited reduced expression of microvilli (Figs. 3C,D). Image analysis 
of these cells showed a smaller number of microvilli per cell, as well as marked 
morphological alterations characterized by decreased villus length and thickness. This 
significant difference may be attributed to the effect of fluid mechanical forces that have 
recently been shown to trigger microvilli formation in trophoblast cells12. Continuous flow 
of culture medium in the maternal chamber of our microdevice generates fluid shear stress 
that approximates the level of hemodynamic shear stress in the intervillous space12, 22. 
Presumably, this physiological biomechanical cue stimulates the trophoblasts to form 
microvilli, whereas static culture conditions in Transwell inserts fail to provide the dynamic 
microenvironment required for this process. Considering that the microvilli serve as a key 
regulator of placental transport, these observations illustrate that our system is advantageous 
over traditional in vitro models not only for reproducing the structural phenotype of the 
placental barrier but also for mimicking its physiological barrier function.
Syncytialization of the microengineered placental barrier
With the progression of pregnancy, cytotrophoblast cells covering the chorionic villi of the 
human placenta differentiate and fuse to form a multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast (Fig. 
4A). This terminally differentiated syncytium forms the continuous outer lining of the 
chorionic villi and comes in direct contact with maternal blood in the intervillous space. This 
process of syncytialization is a hallmark of placentation and plays a central role in 
physiological function of the placental barrier as a key regulator of material exchange 
between the maternal and fetal circulations23. While the underlying molecular pathways of 
syncytialization are not fully understood, studies have shown that activation of adenylate 
cyclase, which is the regulatory subunit of protein kinase A, by 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate 
(cAMP) or forskolin induces BeWo cells and primary villous cytotrophoblast cells to fuse 
and acquire differentiated phenotypes of the syncytiotrophoblast24,25.
Based on these previous findings, we engineered the soluble microenvironment of 
trophoblast cells using forskolin-supplemented media to induce syncytialization. When the 
BeWo cells in the maternal compartment were exposed to forskolin, they began to undergo 
cell-cell fusion as illustrated by nuclear aggregation that was evident at 72 hours of forskolin 
Blundell et al.
Page 8
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment (Fig. 4B). This response occurred in approximately 50% of the BeWo population 
and did not exert deleterious effects on cell viability. Concurrent to the fusion of trophoblast 
cells was a loss of epithelial cell-cell junctions. As shown in Fig. 4B, microscopic inspection 
of the trophoblasts showed significant downregulation of E-cadherin throughout the 
epithelial layer. Interestingly, this reduced expression of junctional proteins did not 
compromise the structural integrity of the barrier. On the contrary, syncytialization in our 
model led to improved barrier function. When we measured paracellular permeability using 
FITC-dextran, the amount of dextran transport across the barrier decreased over the course 
of forskolin exposure (Fig. 4C). These observations closely match characteristic alterations 
in the morphology and barrier function of BeWo cells during their acquisition of 
syncytiotrophoblast-like phenotypes26, indicating successful syncytialization of the 
trophoblast epithelium in our model.
One of the most important functional consequences of trophoblast syncytialization in the 
human placenta is the production of hormones that play a crucial role in the progression of 
both placental and fetal development27. As a representative example of a placental hormone, 
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is secreted by the syncytiotrophoblast and serves as a 
biochemical marker of in vitro trophoblast differentiation. Therefore, we sought to measure 
the production of the β subunit of hCG in the maternal compartment of our model as a way 
to quantitatively examine syncytialization. In the absence of forskolin, analysis of maternal 
outflow yielded no detectable β-hCG (Fig. 4D). In contrast, administration of forskolin 
triggered production of hCG by trophoblast cells within 48 hours, and the hormone levels 
continued to increase over the course of 96 hours of forskolin treatment (Fig. 4D). 
Interestingly, the extent of increase was substantially greater in the first 48 hours, implying 
positive feedback control of cell differentiation during the initial period of stimulation. This 
may be explained by the previous discovery that hCG produced by differentiated trophoblast 
cells activates adenylyl cyclase to increase intracellular cAMP and thus to further promote 
trophoblast differentiation28. Taken together, these results demonstrate that our placenta-on-
a-chip platform enables both morphological and functional differentiation of trophoblast 
cells to reconstitute the syncytium of the placental barrier.
Glucose transport across the microengineered placental barrier
Glucose from the maternal circulation is a primary source of energy for fetal growth and 
development during pregnancy. The maternal-to-fetal transport of glucose across the 
placental barrier is mediated by facilitated diffusion via a family of membrane-bound 
glucose transporters (GLUTs)29,30. GLUT1 is the most abundant type of glucose transporter 
in the human placenta and is found in the syncytium of the placental barrier. Its expression 
has been shown to increase over the second half of pregnancy to meet the increased rate of 
fetal growth31. While GLUT1 transporters are expressed in both the apical and basolateral 
surfaces of the syncytiotrophoblast layer, studies have revealed their asymmetric 
localization, with a greater proportion located on the apical microvillous membrane facing 
the maternal intervillous space32. Our model recapitulates this pattern of GLUT1 expression. 
Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated robust expression of GLUT1 transporters in the 
population of differentiated trophoblast cells comprising the microengineered syncytium 
Blundell et al.
Page 9
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Fig. 5A). More importantly, there was increased GLUT1 expression on the apical side of 
the epithelium, resembling the native spatial distribution of the transporter (Figs. 5B,C).
Based on this evidence of transporter expression and localization, we then carried out 
quantitative analysis of glucose transport in the placenta-on-a-chip system. In this study, 
facilitated diffusion of glucose from the maternal to fetal compartment was induced by 
creating a concentration gradient across the microengineered tissue interface (Fig. 5D). As a 
control condition, we first evaluated glucose transport in a model consisting of the upper and 
lower microchannels separated by a bare membrane. Measurements taken from this acellular 
system were used to establish the baseline permeability of the porous membrane to maternal 
glucose. To assess the contribution of the epithelium to barrier function, another control 
group was generated by similar devices used for monoculture of trophoblasts in the maternal 
compartment. As shown in Fig. 5E, the presence of the epithelial barrier in this group led to 
approximately 50% reduction in the percent increase in fetal glucose concentration as 
compared to the baseline data obtained from the acellular model. When fetal endothelial 
cells were included to establish a co-culture model, permeability decreased further due to the 
additional cell layer, and the increase in fetal glucose was evaluated to be roughly 30% of 
that measured in the trophoblast monoculture group. These results demonstrate the ability of 
the differentiated trophoblasts in our model to mediate glucose transport. It also indicates 
that the fetal endothelium may have a previously underappreciated effect on the rate of 
glucose transport by providing an additional barrier to facilitated diffusion.
Our analysis revealed that the percent rate of glucose transfer from the maternal to the fetal 
compartments was 34.8%. Importantly, this value lies within the range of glucose transfer 
rates measured in the perfused ex vivo human placenta (26.5–38.3%) (Fig. 5F)33, which is 
regarded as the gold standard for the study of human placental transport11. Co-culture of 
trophoblasts and villous endothelial cells in Transwell inserts yielded decreased transport at 
a reduced rate of 22.5% (Fig. 5F), failing to fall within the physiological range. These data 
serve to validate the physiological relevance of the placenta-on-a-chip system and to 
demonstrate its advantage over conventional in vitro techniques. The ability of our model to 
accurately approximate transport rates in the human placenta is particularly compelling, as 
animal data poorly predict glucose transfer across the human placental barrier due to 
interspecies differences in the molecular underpinnings of transport function. For example, 
glucose transport in the murine and rodent placenta is mediated predominantly by GLUT3, 
whereas GLUT1 is the primary glucose transporter in the human placental barrier34. Hence, 
our data illustrate the feasibility of using the placenta-on-a-chip system as an alternative to 
existing animal models to simulate physiological glucose transport across the intact human 
placental barrier.
Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a microphysiological system that reconstitutes the most 
essential unit of the human placenta. The design of this placenta-on-a-chip microdevice was 
inspired by the anatomy of the critical tissue-tissue interface that separates the maternal and 
fetal circulations in pregnancy. This system has the potential to serve as a powerful platform 
for in vitro investigation of the human placenta in that it allows for precise spatiotemporal 
Blundell et al.
Page 10
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 control of placental cells and their extracellular microenvironment to simulate, directly 
visualize, and quantitatively analyze human-specific placental structure and function.
These capabilities provide new opportunities to create cell-based screening assays for 
evaluating the placental transfer of pathogens, drugs, chemicals, and environmental toxins. 
Our approach may also enable the development of specialized in vitro models to mimic 
aberrant changes in the placental barrier under pathological conditions of pregnancy. These 
types of microengineered systems will greatly improve our ability to mechanistically 
examine and understand placental barrier dysfunction that has been identified as an 
important feature of various pregnancy-related diseases.
Our current model, however, still leaves room for improvement to realize its full potential. 
Although BeWo cells used in this study have proven effective for recapitulating key aspects 
of the maternal-fetal interface, questions remain regarding the validity of using these cancer-
derived cells to represent the normal epithelium of the placental barrier. To address this 
limitation, subsequent iterations of this system should include culture of primary villous 
trophoblast cells for improved physiological relevance. Future studies should also investigate 
transport of other essential nutrients, such as amino acids and fatty acids, across the 
microengineered placental barrier to further validate the predictive capability of our model. 
The effects of fluid flow on microvilli formation and placental transport documented in this 
and previous studies warrant more rigorous investigation of how placental structure and 
function are regulated by hemodynamic forces and other microenvironmental cues. In 
addition, opportunities remain in reconstituting the dynamic structural remodeling and 
functional adaptation of the placental barrier during the progression of pregnancy.
Despite the limited scope of our study, however, the results described here clearly 
demonstrate the potential of microengineering technologies for the study of the human 
placenta. We believe that our work represents a critical step to pioneer innovative research 
approaches that may improve our fundamental understanding of human reproductive health 
and disease.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the March of Dimes Prematurity Research Center at the University of Pennsylvania 
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New Innovator Award to D.H. (1DP2HL127720-01). We 
thank N.P. Illsley and A. Schwartz for providing the BeWo b30 clone, R. Simmons for helpful discussions, V. Good 
and R. Leite for technical assistance in cell sourcing, and M. Helfrick for administrative support. We also thank M. 
Farrell, J. Seo, J. Cho, and M. Mondrinos for their valuable input.
References
1. Gude NM, Roberts CT, Kalionis B, King RG. Thrombosis Research. 2004; 114:397–407. [PubMed: 
15507270] 
2. Jones HN, Powell TL, Jansson T. Placenta. 2007; 28:763–774. [PubMed: 17582493] 
3. Dilworth MR, Sibley CP. Placenta. 2013; 34:S34–S39. [PubMed: 23153501] 
4. Carter AM. Placenta. 2007; 28(Suppl A):S41–7. [PubMed: 17196252] 
5. Moffett A, Loke C. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 6:584–594. [PubMed: 16868549] 
6. Lager S, Powell TL. Journal of Pregnancy. 2012; 2012:179827–14. [PubMed: 23304511] 
7. Syme MR, Paxton JW, Keelan JA. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2004; 43:487–514. [PubMed: 15170365] 
Blundell et al.
Page 11
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Sibley CP. The Journal of Physiology. 2009; 587:3431–3440. [PubMed: 19417095] 
9. Spencer RN, Carr DJ, David AL. Prenat Diagn. 2014; 34:677–684. [PubMed: 24799349] 
10. Sastry B. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 1999; 38:17–39. [PubMed: 10837744] 
11. Elad D, Levkovitz R, Jaffa AJ, Desoye G, Hod M. Traffic. 2013; 15:122–126. [PubMed: 
24127903] 
12. Miura S, Sato K, Kato-Negishi M, Teshima T, Takeuchi S. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:1–11.
13. Omarini D, Pistotti V, Bonati M. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 1992; 28:61–66. [PubMed: 
1482787] 
14. Mathiesen L, Mose T, Mørck TJ, Nielsen JKS, Nielsen LK, Maroun LL, Dziegiel MH, Larsen LG, 
Knudsen LE. Reproductive Toxicology. 2010; 30:138–146. [PubMed: 20096346] 
15. Wice B, Menton D, Geuze H, Schwartz AL. Exp Cell Res. 1990; 186:306–316. [PubMed: 
2153559] 
16. Su EJ, Cheng YH, Chatterton RT, Lin ZH, Yin P, Reierstad S, Innes J, Bulun SE. Biology of 
Reproduction. 2007; 77:517–525. [PubMed: 17538076] 
17. Chueh BH, Huh D, Kyrtsos CR, Houssin T, Futai N, Takayama S. Analytical chemistry. 2007; 
79:3504–3508. [PubMed: 17388566] 
18. Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden 
C, Saalfeld S, Schmid B, Tinevez JY, White DJ, Hartenstein V, Eliceiri K, Tomancak P, Cardona 
A. Nat Meth. 2012; 9:676–682.
19. Lee JS, Romero R, Han YM, Kim HC, Kim CJ, Hong JS, Huh D. The Journal of Maternal-Fetal & 
Neonatal Medicine. 2015; 29:1046–1054. [PubMed: 26075842] 
20. Amenta PS, Gay S, Vaheri A, Martinez-Hernandez A. Collagen and Related Research Clinical and 
Experimental. 1986; 6:125–152. [PubMed: 3731745] 
21. Wang, Y. … Series on Integrated Systems Physiology: from …. 2010. 
22. Burton GJ, Woods AW, Jauniaux E, Kingdom JCP. Placenta. 2009; 30:473–482. [PubMed: 
19375795] 
23. Huppertz B, Borges M. Methods Mol Biol. 2008; 475:135–147. [PubMed: 18979242] 
24. Gerbaud P, Pidoux G. Placenta. 2015; 36:S35–S42. [PubMed: 25564303] 
25. Gerbaud P, Taskén K, Pidoux G. Front Pharmacol. 2015; 6:202. [PubMed: 26441659] 
26. Liu F, Soares MJ, Audus KL. Am J Physiol. 1997; 273:C1596–604. [PubMed: 9374645] 
27. Costa MA. Reprod Biomed Online. 2016; 32:14–43. [PubMed: 26615903] 
28. Costa MA. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology. 2016; 420:180–193. [PubMed: 26586208] 
29. Tadokoro C, Yoshimoto Y, Sakata M, Fujimiya M, Kurachi H, Adachi E, Maeda T, Miyake A. 
Histol Histopathol. 1996; 11:673–681. [PubMed: 8839758] 
30. Baumann MU, Deborde S, Illsley NP. Endocrine. 2002; 19:13–22. [PubMed: 12583599] 
31. Jansson T, Wennergren M, Illsley NP. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1993; 77:1554–1562. [PubMed: 
8263141] 
32. Illsley NP. Placenta. 2000; 21:14–22. [PubMed: 10692246] 
33. Brandes JM, Tavoloni N, Potter BJ, Sarkozi L, Shepard MD, Berk PD. The American Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1983; 146:800–806. [PubMed: 6869452] 
34. Hahn T, Barth S, Weiss U, Mosgoeller W, Desoye G. FASEB J. 1998; 12:1221–1231. [PubMed: 
9737725] 
Blundell et al.
Page 12
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
A. Schematic of a human fetus and placenta within the uterine cavity. The placenta is 
anchored to the uterine wall and connected to the developing fetus via the umbilical cord. B. 
Cross-sectional view of the placenta illustrates the placental cotyledons. Each cotyledon 
consists of a stem chorionic villus and its branches. These villi are in direct contact with 
maternal blood in the intervillous space. C. The maternal intervillous space is separated 
from the lumen of the fetal capillary by the maternal-fetal interface composed of the 
syncytiotrophoblast, basal lamina, and villous endothelial cells. D. The three-dimensional 
microarchitecture of the placental barrier is reconstituted within our microengineered 
system. The placenta-on-a-chip consists of upper and lower microchannels separated by a 
thin, semipermeable membrane. Trophoblast cells are cultured in the upper microchannel on 
the apical side of the membrane, and villous endothelial cells are grown in the lower 
microchannel on the basal side of the membrane.
Blundell et al.
Page 13
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
A. Three-dimensional rendering of the microengineered placental barrier. The trophoblast 
and endothelial cell populations are stained for E-cadherin (red) and VE-cadherin (green), 
respectively. Nuclei are shown in blue. Scale bar: 30 μm. B. Cross-sectional view of the 
same microengineered barrier. Scale bar: 30 μm. C. The trophoblast cells form a continuous 
network of epithelial adherens junctions (E-cadherin, red). Nuclei are stained with DAPI 
(blue). Scale bar: 20 μm. D. The placental villous endothelium also displays intact cell-cell 
junctions (VE-cadherin, red). Green and blue show actin and nuclear staining, respectively. 
Scale bar: 20 μm. E. The trophoblast cells produce laminin (green) during culture in our 
microdevice. The image shows cells on Day 6. Scale bar: 30 μm. F. Cross-sectional view of 
laminin deposition. Laminin is stained green, and trophoblast nuclei are labeled in blue. The 
location of the cell culture membrane is indicated by the dotted line. Scale bar: 10 μm.
Blundell et al.
Page 14
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
A. Trophoblast cells cultured under dynamic flow conditions in the placenta-on-a-chip show 
widespread microvilli formation on the apical cell surface. Scale bar: 15 μm. B. Three-
dimensional rendering of microvilli on the surface of BeWo cells in the placenta-on-a-chip. 
Scale bar: 20 μm. C. Microvilli in BeWo cells cultured in Transwell appear finer and 
significantly less abundant. Scale bar: 15 μm. D. Quantification of relative fluorescence of 
microvilli F-actin (green) in static and dynamic culture conditions. Cell nuclei were 
counterstained with DAPI (blue). The intensity of fluorescence generated by microvilli was 
increased substantially when the trophoblast cells were grown under flow conditions in the 
placenta-on-a-chip, as compared to static Transwell culture (****, p<0.0001).
Blundell et al.
Page 15
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Trophoblast syncytialization. A. In the human placenta, cytotrophoblast cells in early 
gestation go through a process of cell fusion to form a multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast. 
The resulting syncytium makes up the outer lining of the chorionic villi that comes into 
contact with maternal blood in the intervillous space. B. The BeWo cells cultured in our 
model exhibit high levels of E-cadherin (red) expression prior to forskolin treatment (left). 
Continuous epithelial exposure to forskolin over 72 hours induces trophoblasts to undergo 
cell-cell fusion, leading to nuclear aggregation and deceased expression of epithelial 
junctions. C. During forskolin-induced syncytialization, the permeability of the 
microengineered barrier to dextran decreases over time. * represents a statistically 
significant difference between 24 h and 72h (p<0.05; a.u. represents arbitrary unit), as well 
as between 48h and 72h (**, p<0.01). D. The BeWo cells produce increasing levels of β-
human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) over 120 hours of forskolin treatment (red bars). 
Hormone secretion by untreated cells is negligible.
Blundell et al.
Page 16
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
A. The syncytial epithelium in our model expresses high levels of GLUT1 transporters (red). 
Blue shows DAPI staining. Scale bar: 10 μm. B. This cross-sectional view of the 
trophoblasts shows the asymmetric localization of GLUT1 transporters to the apical 
membrane. Scale bar: 5 μm. C. Immunofluorescence staining of GLUT1 on the apical side is 
substantially stronger than that on the basal side (****, p<0.0001). a.u. represents arbitrary 
unit. D. A concentration gradient of glucose (green dots) is generated across the 
microengineered placental barrier to drive glucose transport from the maternal to fetal 
compartments. E. Percent increase in fetal glucose concentration for the bare membrane, 
trophoblast monoculture, and co-culture conditions (*, p<0.05). F. The percent rate of 
glucose transfer in the placenta-on-a-chip device is similar to that measured in the perfused 
ex vivo placenta. The in vitro placental barrier formed in Transwell fails to reconstitute the 
physiological glucose transport rates.
Blundell et al.
Page 17
Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
