 The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap
for Facial Reanimation
Kofi O. Boahene, MD; James Owusu, MD; Lisa Ishii, MD, MHS; Masaru Ishii, MD, PhD; Shaun Desai, MD;
Irene Kim, MD; Leslie Kim; Patrick Byrne, MD
IMPORTANCE A multivector functional muscle flap that closely simulates the biomechanical
effects of facial muscle groups is essential for complete smile restoration after facial paralysis.
OBJECTIVE To determine the feasibility of a multivector gracilis muscle flap design for
reanimation after facial paralysis and to analyze the effect on the smile display zone.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Prospective analysis of patients who underwent a
double paddle multivector gracilis flap for complete facial paralysis between June 2015 and
December 2016 was carried out in a tertiary hospital.
INTERVENTIONS The gracilis muscle was harvested as a double paddle flap and inserted along
2 vectors for facial reanimation.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES The primary outcome measures were: (1) dental display
(the number of maxillary teeth displayed on paralyzed vs normal sides), (2) exposed maxillary
gingival scaffold width, (3) interlabial gap at midline and canine, (4) facial asymmetry index
(FAI), and (5) dynamic periorbital wrinkling.
RESULTS There were 10 women and 2 men between ages 20 and 64 years (mean [SD], 46
[15] years). Five flaps were reinnervated with facial and masseteric nerves, 5 with masseteric
nerve only, and 2 with crossfacial nerve only. There was functional muscle recovery in all
cases. On average there was additional 3.1 maxillary teeth exposed posttreatment when
smiling (5.5 vs 8.6; CI, 7.9 to 16.6; P < .001). The mean exposed maxillary gingival scaffold
width improved from 31.5 mm to 43.7 mm (95% CI, 1.9 to 4.3; P < .001). There was no
significant difference in interlabial exposure at midline (7.1 mm vs 7.7 mm; CI, −1.5 to 2.7;
P = .56) but a 56.4% improvement at the level of the canines (3.9 vs 6.1; CI, 0.1 to 4.3;
P = .04). The mean FAI when smiling was reduced from 9.1 mm to 4.5 mm (CI, −8.0 to −1.2;
P = .01). Dynamic wrinkling of the periorbital area with smiling was noted in 4 patients.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE The gracilis flap can be reliably designed as a functional
double paddle muscle flap for a multivector facial reanimation. The multivector gracilis flap
design is effective in improving all components of the smile display zone and has the potential
for producing periorbital-wrinkling characteristic of a Duchenne smile.
JAMA Facial Plast Surg. doi:10.1001/jamafacial.2018.0048
Published online March 22, 2018.
Video
Author Affiliations: Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland (Boahene,
L. Ishii, M. Ishii, Desai, Byrne); Mid
Atlantic Permanente Medical Group,
McLean, Virginia (Owusu); University
of California Los Angeles, Santa
Monica (I. Kim); Ohio State
University, Columbus (L. Kim).
Corresponding Author: Kofi D. O.
Boahene, MD, 6th Flr, Johns Hopkins
Outpatient Center, Department of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 601 N Caroline
St, Baltimore, 21878
(dboahen1@jhmi.edu).
Research
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
E1
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
 T
he power of a smile is in its ability to engender feelings
of happiness and positivity. The smile has been rated
as the facial expression with the highest positive emo-
tional substance and has been shown to reduce stress.1 How-
ever, not all smiles are equal in their emotional content and
social impression. A genuine enjoyment smile (Duchenne
smile), is a positive display of facial emotion characterized by
upper lip and oral commissure elevation in tandem with peri-
ocular wrinkling.2 Electroencephalographic data has shown
that Duchenne smiles increase activity in the left anterior tem-
poral brain; an area connected with positivity.3 Duchenne
smiles result from strong action of the upper lip elevators that
maximally expose the dental display zone (Figure 1A). In con-
trast, a social smile is a posed, strained, or fake smile elicited
mainly from the corners of the mouth with suppressed den-
tal display. Social smiles result mostly from outward contrac-
tion of the zygomaticus major muscle with limited effect of
other upper lip elevators. Social smiles have little emotional
output.2 The illusionary contracted oral commissure in Leo-
nardo da Vinci’
s Mona Lisa painting is an example of a social
smile. The Mona Lisa smile portrays symmetric lateral com-
missure contraction with little or no dental display.
The neuromuscular circuit and processes that produce a
smile are complex and include orders of motor neurons inter-
actingwithotherneuronsinputtingemotionalsignals.Theend
organs in this complex pathway are the facial muscles. In long-
standing facial paralysis, irreversible degeneration of the fa-
cial muscles occur and the ability for normal facial expres-
sion is impaired. Paralysis of the zygomaticus major muscle
results in the drooping of the oral commissure. Paralysis of the
levator labii muscles result in draping of the upper lip over the
maxillary dentition obscuring the smile display zone. The lack
of wrinkling around the paralyzed eyelid takes the sparkle out
of a smile. The inability to smile and the associated facial
distortion that occurs in facial paralysis exacts significant so-
cial penalties that can lead to depression.4 These social and
emotional penalties can be reversed with facial reanimation
surgery.4,5
When facial muscles are irreversibly injured, smile resto-
ration requires the transfer of new functional muscle units that
mimic the function of the paralyzed facial muscles. Func-
tional muscles may be transferred as pedicled regional muscle
tendon unit (MTU) flaps (eg, temporalis tendon transfer) or as
free functional muscle flaps (FFMF) (eg, gracilis flap). Com-
pared with pedicled MTU flaps, FFMFs are more versatile. The
gracilis flap is a common FFMF used in contemporary facial
reanimation surgery for smile restoration. As a substitute do-
nor muscle, the gracilis muscle has parallel muscle fiber pen-
nation similar to facial muscles and adequate force genera-
tion and excursion for smile restoration. However, the gracilis
muscle is a bulky muscle with a comparatively larger physi-
ologic cross-sectional area (PCSA) than the smile muscles, and
thus requires secondary modifications during flap harvest and
insertion. The gracilis flap is commonly designed as a single
paddle with univector excursion often mimicking the out-
ward contraction of the zygomaticus major muscle. The smile
from of a single vector contraction is more likely to consis-
tently produce a Mona Lisa smile limited in the degree of lip
elevation and dental display and lacking in any periorbital ani-
mation. To restore a Duchenne type smile for patients with fa-
cial paralysis, it is necessary to refine the current design and
application of the gracilis flap for facial reanimation. In this
study, we present our experience with a double paddle mul-
tivector gracilis flap design and insertion for smile restora-
tion after facial paralysis.
The Smile Display Zone
A smile is a dynamic process that displays teeth and gingiva
as a result of lip movement. These displayed components com-
prise the smile display zone. The upper and lower lips frame
the smile display zone within which rests the teeth and gin-
gival scaffold. (Figure 1B and C) The different types of smile
(cuspid, social, Mona Lisa), a reflection of the extent to which
the smile display zone is exposed, depend on the vector and
degree of lip excursion (Figure 1). In facial paralysis, the para-
lyzed lip drapes and obscures the teeth and gingival scaffold
in the smile display zone (Figure 1D). The effectiveness of a re-
animation procedure may be analyzed by determining the re-
covery of maxillary anterior teeth display, lip drape, and gin-
gival scaffold display (Figure 1E).
Anatomic Basis for 2-Paddle Multivector Gracilis Flap Design
The gracilis muscle is a type II muscle based on the schema
of Mathes and Nahai.6 The dominant arterial supply origi-
nates from the profunda femoris vessels and passes
between the adductor longus and adductor brevis before
entering the muscle hilum 8 to 10 cm from its ischiopubic
attachment. Venous drainage is through paired venae com-
mitantes. The dominant pedicle divides on entering the
gracilis muscle, passing proximally and distally, parallel to
the longitudinal muscle fibers.7 The motor nerve arises from
the obturator nerve and enters the muscle in association
with the dominant vascular pedicle. In the muscle, the
nerve splits and runs longitudinally in 2 or 3 major branches
parallel to the arterial branches and muscle fibers. The par-
allel muscle fiber architecture and the longitudinal neuro-
vascular arrangement render the gracilis muscle suitable for
functional segmental harvest and transfer.
Key Points
Question Can a gracilis muscle flap be designed as a compound
flap with multiple paddles for multivector reanimation after facial
paralysis, and what effect does this design have on the smile
display zone?
Findings In this prospective cohort study of 12 patients who
underwent facial reanimation for complete paralysis, the gracilis
flap was reliably designed and transplanted as a functional double
paddle muscle flap for a multivector facial reanimation. The
multivector design resulted in statistically significant improvement
in the dental display, smile width, and correction of paralytic labial
drape.
Meaning Designing the gracilis flap as a multivector gracilis flap
with 2 or more paddles is an effective way of improving all
components of the smile display zone and has the potential for
restoring a Duchene-type smile in patients with facial paralysis.
Research Original Investigation
The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap for Facial Reanimation
E2
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online March 22, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
 Methods
Design, Settings, Participants
Twelve consecutive patients who underwent a double paddle
multivector gracilis flap for complete facial paralysis be-
tween June 2015 and December 2016 were analyzed for this
study. Patients who underwent a similar procedure for par-
tial paralysis were excluded. The Johns Hopkins institutional
review board approved this study and written informed con-
sent was obtained. Participants were not compensated.
Smile Analysis
The dynamic smile display zone before and after the multi-
vector gracilis flap were compared. The preoperative and
post-operative smile display zones were captured using
standardized digital videographic measurements adapted
from the orthodontic literature8 (Figure 1A-E). Primary mea-
sures included: (1) dental display (the number of maxillary
teeth displayed on both sides of midline recorded as a ratio
of the number of teeth on the paralyzed side [x] to the num-
ber of teeth on the nonparalyzed side [y]), (2) width of
visible maxillary gingival scaffold, (3) interlabial gap
Figure 1. The Anatomy of a Smile
Full smile
A
Frame
B
Smile display zone
C
Paralytic labial drape
D
Smile analysis
E
Paralytic labial drape
Gingival scaffold
Dental display
Labial drape
Gingival scaffold width
Interlabial gap,
midline
Interlabial
gap, canine
A, A full smile is the result of a multivector (black arrowheads) and multizonal
action (blue triangle, square, and circle zones) of the smile muscles. Upper lip
and commissure elevation results from muscle action within the square and
triangular zones respectively, and periorbital wrinkling in the circular zone. B,
The upper and lower lip frames the smile display zone. In this framework are the
components of a smile including the gingival scaffold and displayed teeth. C,
The smile display zone. D, The paralyzed upper lip drapes over the smile display
zone obscuring the gingival scaffold and limiting dental display. Correction of
the paralytic labial drape requires a multivector muscle action (blue
arrowheads). E, The horizontal and vertical components of the smile display
zone can be analyzed by measuring the maximal gingival scaffold width and
interlabial gap at the midline and between the canines.
Figure 2. Design and Insertion of the Multivector Gracilis Flap
Clinical image
C
Flap placement location
D
Muscle tissue harvest
A
Flap design
B
Gracilis flap
E
A, A right-sided gracilis flap designed
for a left-sided paralysis. The
tendinous segment (blue
arrowheads) was inserted into the
orbicular oris and the distal end
(black arrowheads) fixated to the
periosteum of the malar bone and
zygoma. The primary (larger) muscle
paddle was harvested from the
anterior aspect of the gracilis muscle
and the secondary (smaller) paddle
from the posterior aspect. B, Two
divergent muscle vectors simulating
the function of the zygomaticus and
levator labii muscles. C, Outline of
planned muscle insertion. D, Design
of 3-paddle multivector gracilis flap.
E, The gracilis flap is harvested as a
free functional composite flap with 2
isolated muscle paddles connected
by a common-source neurovascular
pedicle.
The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap for Facial Reanimation
Original Investigation Research
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online March 22, 2018
E3
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
 measured as the distance between the upper and lower lip
margins at midline and canine, (4) and Facial Asymmetry
Index (FAI). The FAI during smile, a measure of the symme-
try of the oral commissure, was determined using
measurement of standardized points between the affected
and nonaffects sides as previously described.9 The distance
between the medial canthus to the ipsilateral oral
commissure was measured on the paralyzed and nonpara-
lyzed sides. The difference was recorded as the FAI. An
FAI of 1 mm depicts a difference of 1 mm between the
oral commissure positions. Videographic analysis and
measurements were performed using the Canfield
Mirror imaging software (version 7.4, Canfield scientific).
The measurements were calibrated to millimeters using
the standardized corneal white-to-white diameter as a refer-
ence for all measurements. The presence or absence of
dynamic lateral periorbital wrinkling when smiling was
recorded.
Patient Preparation and Surgical Planning
The pattern of the patient’
s smile is marked to show the vec-
tor of upward upper lip elevation and oral commissure con-
traction. By manually elevating the paralyzed upper lip, we
determine and mark the ideal insertion sites and vector of
pull necessary to achieve equal dental show. A video of the
patient’
s smile is captured and played in the operating room
for reference throughout the case. Measurements taken
from the normal side help determine and outline the
desired length and vector of the muscle segments
(Figure 2). The procedure is performed without any para-
lytic agents.
Muscle Harvest
We typically harvest a right-sided gracilis flap for a para-
lyzed left face and vice versa (Figure 2A and B). This natu-
rally aligns the graciis pedicle with the facial artery and vein
and the tendinous portion of the muscle with the lip. Har-
vesting the gracilis flap from the ipsilateral side is also fea-
sible. The gracilis muscle belly and neurovascular pedicle is
exposed and dissected in a typical fashion. To determine
and guide the optimal length- tension relationship, marking
sutures are placed on the gracilis surface at measured inter-
vals prior to dividing the muscle. This is a rough guide to
reestablishing the ideal sarcomere length for optimal force
generation. The primary muscle belly (approximately 2.5 to
3 cm wide) is harvested from the anterior third of the
muscle and the secondary belly (approximately 1 to 1.5 cm
wide) from the posterior third. The central intervening
muscle segment is carefully resected around a bridging neu-
rovascular pedicle. A small cuff of muscle may be preserved
around the bridging pedicle. The 2 muscle bellies are dis-
sected and separated in situ with the aid of a Doppler and
nerve stimulator. The muscle is reduced in thickness as
needed. We are careful to maintain a layer of myomysium
and gliding fascia around the harvested muscle. At the end
of the dissection the 2 muscle bellies can be independently
oriented (Figure 2E). Doppler signals to each segment and
independent muscle contraction are verified (Video).
Preparation of the Recipient Bed
The incision to expose and prepare the recipient bed is typi-
cally a modified facelift incision. A relaxing temporal hair tuft
incision facilitates exposure of the subzygomatic triangle for
mobilization of the masseteric nerve, exposure of the malar
eminence, zygomatic arch and temporalis fascia for flap
fixation.10 The surgical bed is infiltrated with 1:100 000 epi-
nephrine solution. A skin flap is elevated in a subcutaneous
musculoaponeurotic system (subSMAS) plane extending be-
yond the melolabial fold to expose the orbicularis oris muscle.
When a crossfacial nerve has been previously placed, it is iden-
tified and preserved during flap elevation. When a masse-
teric nerve innervation is planned, the nerve is identified and
mobilized in the subzygomatic triangle and tagged with a ves-
sel loop. To accommodate the added bulk from the gracilis
muscle, we created a trough by removing a section of the buc-
cal fat and masseter muscle. The source vessels for revascu-
larizing the gracilis flap, commonly the facial artery and vein,
are isolated and prepped. Anchoring sutures were placed
around the lip at the desired insertion sites. The sutures were
placed close to the free lip margin capturing the orbicularis oris
muscle or its fibrous replacement, to maximize the trans-
lated effect of muscle contraction on the smile display zone.
Separate anchor sutures were placed for the 2 muscle paddles.
We usually used 2.0 PDS sutures but alternative sutures may
be used.
Flap Insertion, Revascularization, and Nerve Coaptation
For stable flap insertion, we created a pseudotendon with run-
ning vicryl sutures when the tendinous portion of the har-
vested flap was inadequate to hold sutures. Under direct vi-
sualization, the anchoring sutures were sequentially secured
to the muscle tendon or psuedotendon. The secondary paddle
was secured to the periosteum over the lateral aspect of the
malar bone at the level of the lower eyelid. The tension on the
muscle was set close to its passive length. The tension was ad-
justedtoaccountforsecondaryslippageatthesuturesites.The
muscle flap was revascularized using the recipient source ves-
sels. In cases of dual innervation, the masseteric nerve was co-
apted end-to-end to the obturator nerve and the crossfacial
nervewasconnectedtotheobturatornerveinageometricend-
to-side manner through a small neurotomy closer to the hi-
lum of the muscle. The nerve coaptation was performed with
10-0 nylon sutures, reinforced with fibrin glue, and covered
with a collagen matrix or entubulated in a vein graft. The pri-
mary muscle paddle was then secured at the desired tension
totheperiosteumofthezygomaticarchanddeeptemporalfas-
cia. The SMAS flap was suspended as in a facelift to support
themuscleflapfrombulgingordrooping.Theskinincisionwas
then closed over a drain.
Statistical Analysis
Statisticalanalysisfortheimpactofthemultivectorgracilisflap
on the smile display zone was performed using the paired t test
with Bonferroni adjusted α levels. An outcome measure was
considered statistically significant for adjusted P< .01. Statis-
tical analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel (version
2013, Microsoft).
Research Original Investigation
The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap for Facial Reanimation
E4
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online March 22, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
 Results
There were 10 women and 2 men between ages 20 and 64
years. Five flaps were reinnervated with combined facial
and masseteric neural input, 5 with masseteric neural input
only, and 2 crossfacial innervation (Table 1). In all cases
there was clinical evidence of recovered gracilis function by
4 months and improvement in all measures of the smile dis-
play zone. The mean FAI when smiling was reduced from
9.1 mm to 4.5 mm (P = .01) (Table 2). On average, there was
exposure of 3.1 additional maxillary teeth when smiling
after the multivector gracilis flap. The horizontal exposure
of the gingival scaffold posttreatment improved from a
mean of 31.5 mm to 43.7 mm (P < .001). There was no sig-
nificant difference in the average interlabial exposure at
midline (7.1 mm vs 7.7 mm, P = .06) but a 56.4% improve-
ment at the level of the canine (3.9 mm vs 6.1 mm, P = .04).
Animated wrinkling of the periorbital area when smiling
was noted in 4 patients. A sample smile outcome is shown
in Figure 3.
Discussion
We have shown that the gracilis muscle can be reliably trans-
ferred as a multivector flap for smile restoration. Analysis of
the multivector gracilis flap showed improved exposure of the
smile display zone and oral commissure symmetry when smil-
ing. The composite effective of the multivector design was im-
proved lip excursion in the vertical and horizontal dimen-
sions closely matching the nonparalyzed side. The secondary
Table 1. Effect of the Multivector Gracilis Flap on the Smile Display Zone
Patient Age,
y/Sex
Type of Innervation
Facial Asymmetry
Index, mm
Maxillary Dental
Display (x/y)a
Maximum Gingival
Scaffold Width, mm
Interlabial Distance
at Midline, mm
Interlabial Distance
at Canine, mm
23/M
Single stage xVII + V
8.4
1/5
34.4
10.3
6.8
4.9
3/5
39.9
7.4
5.8
53/F
V
5.1
0/3
34.4
5.3
0.0
5.7
4/5
44.3
6.1
4.2
22/F
Single stage VII+ V
11.7
1/4
33.4
5.1
2.2
2.1
4/4
47.7
8.9
6.3
43/F
2 Stages xVII + V
10.5
1/5
31.6
4.0
2.8
0.7
4/4
50.7
6.4
4.4
54/F
2 Stages xVII + V
2.8
1/5
40.7
9.5
3.8
9.4
4/4
46.4
8.4
6.9
54/F
V
17.6
1/5
31.1
12.1
9.1
9.3
4/4
47.2
12.3
12.0
59/F
V
5.8
0/5
25.5
4.8
3.1
2.2
5/5
41.6
4.6
4.2
52/F
2 Stages xVII
14.1
1/5
21.1
5.4
1.7
8.5
5/5
42.3
6.2
6.2
56/F
V
13.3
2/5
31.6
4.5
2.1
0.5
5/6
43.4
9.9
7.3
64/F
VII + V
2.8
3/5
38.2
9.8
7.2
2.9
5/6
43.8
8.6
6.4
49/M
V
6.5
0/4
21.0
8.8
6.2
3.4
2/4
37.3
5.6
4.3
20/F
2 Stages xVII
11.0
1/4
34.7
5.5
1.4
4.2
3/4
39.7
8.1
4.7
a (x/y) Dental display on paralyzed side / dental display on normal side. Data recorded as preoperative in upper row, postoperative in lower row.
Table 2. Statistical Analysis of the Effect of the Mutivector Gracilis Flap on the Smile Display Zone
Variable
Pretreatment, Mean
Posttreatment,
Mean
Standard Error (95% CI)
T Statistic
P Value
FAI, mm
9.1
4.5
1.6 (−8.0 to −1.2)
−2.8
.01
Gingival scaffold
width, mm
31.5
43.7
0.6 (1.9 to 4.3)
5.2
<.001
Interlabial distance at
midline, mm
7.1
7.7
1.0 (−1.5 to 2.7)
0.6
.56
Interlabial distance at
canine, mm
3.9
6.1
1.0 (0.1 to 4.3)
2.1
.04
Dental display, no.
5.5
8.6
2.1 (7.9 to 16.6)
5.8
<.001
The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap for Facial Reanimation
Original Investigation Research
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online March 22, 2018
E5
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
 muscle paddle inserted close to the lateral orbital region in-
troduced a desirable periorbital wrinkling typical of a Duch-
enne smile.
The technique of harvesting a double paddle gracilis flap
is similar to the microvascular transfer of compound flaps.
Compound flaps are subtyped as composite, conjoined, and
chimeric. Composite flaps have multiple tissue components
dependent on a solitary vascular source. Conjoin flaps have
multiple flap territories, with some common physical conti-
nuity but each territory retains its independent vascular sup-
ply. Chimeric flaps have multiple physically independent ter-
ritories, each with an independent vascular supply linked by
a common source vessel.11 By this nomenclature, the double
belly gracilis flap is a sophisticated chimeric flap with pre-
served neural input for contraction.
The segmental neurovascular pattern of the gracilis
muscle allows for designing a functional flap with 2 or 3
muscle paddles.7 Each paddle can be oriented independent
of the other for a multivector effect (Figure 2B and D). In a
youthful smile, 75% to 100% of the maxillary central inci-
sors should be positioned below an imaginary line drawn
between the commissures (Morley ratio).12 In paralyzed
faces, the upper lip drapes over the maxillary dentition
masking their display when smiling. Correcting the vertical
dimension of paralytic smile improves anterior dental dis-
play and upper lip drape. A 2-paddle gracilis flap oriented to
more closely simulate the action of upper lip elevators has
the potential of reproducing a more youthful smile. The sec-
ondary paddle is ideally oriented to more effectively elevate
the medial upper lip. In addition, contraction of the second-
ary muscle in the periorbital region has the potential
of introducing a Duchenne-type periorbital wrinkling and
animation.
Multiplepaddlelatissimusandserratusflapshavebeende-
scribed for facial reanimation.12-14 Whitney et al13 described
100 cases using multiple slips of the seratus muscle. Allevi et
al14reportedtheoutcomeofasinglecaseofdouble-belliedlatis-
simus dorsi free flap used to restore a full dental smile. Ueda
et al15 presented 2 cases of a combined latissimus and serra-
tusflapusedforupperandlowerlipanimation.Comparedwith
the latissimus and serratus flaps, the gracilis is a more robust
muscle with a larger PCSA. Owing to the large PCSA, exces-
sive bulk is a common drawback of the gracilis flap. Introduc-
ing a second muscle paddle introduces more bulk. However,
the independence of the 2 muscle paddles allows optimal po-
sitioning of the composite flap while minimizing bulk in the
medial or lateral cheek. Dissecting out the secondary or even
athirdmusclepaddlerequirestechnicalconfidenceintheneu-
rovascular pattern of the gracilis muscle (Figure 2).
To evaluate the smile outcome of the multivector graci-
lis flap, we adopted measurements routinely used by ortho-
dontists for smile analysis.8,12 In 1 study, the faces of 122
male participants were filmed during spontaneous Duch-
enne and posed social smiling.16 Maxillary and mandibular
lip-line heights, tooth display, and smile width were mea-
sured using a digital videographic smile analysis similar to
the one used in our study. Compared with spontaneous
smiling, tooth display during social smiling decreased by up
to 30%, along with a significant reduction of smile width.
Using a similar smile analysis method, we showed that fol-
lowing the multivector gracilis flap, tooth display improved
by 3.1 teeth (56.4%, P < .001) and gingival scaffold width by
38.7% (P < .001). There was a 54.6% improvement in the
interlabial distance measured at the canines (2.2 mm,
P = .04). Paralytic labial drape is typically pronounced at the
mid upper lip. We inserted the secondary muscle paddle
close to the mid point of the paralyzed hemi-lip where it
was expected to have the most vertical effect on labial
drape. The effect of the primary muscle paddle on vertical
correction of labial drape at the level of the canine is likely
to be minimal given its vector. The vector of the secondary
muscle is divergent from that of the primary paddle and is
directed toward the lateral orbital rim (Figures 2B-D).
In4patientstherewasdynamicperiorbitalwrinklingwhich
was likely the effect of the secondary paddle in the perior-
bital region. Further technical refinement will be necessary to
achieve a more consistent periorbital animation. We will re-
port our experience with a third muscle paddle inserted for
lower eyelid support in future studies (Figure 2D).
Limitations
This study does not compare outcomes between a double-
paddle multivector and a single-paddle gracilis flap or other
forms of FFMF. We also do not assess other dimensions of a
smile such as initiation, melolabial folds, or cheeks mounds.17
Conclusions
Asabiomechanicalsystem,themultivectorgracilismuscleflap
design is an attempt to move from Mona Lisa and social smiles
toward full enjoyable smiles that reflect positive emotion for
patients undergoing facial reanimation. The multivector graci-
lis flap design is effective in improving all components of the
smile display zone and has the potential for producing peri-
orbital-wrinkling characteristic of a Duchenne smile.
Figure 3. Sample Smile Outcome Following Multivector Double Paddle
Gracilis Flap in 2 Patients With Complete Facial Paralysis
Preoperative clinical image
C
Postoperative clinical image
D
Preoperative clinical image
A
Postoperative clinical image
B
Research Original Investigation
The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap for Facial Reanimation
E6
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online March 22, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
 ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: January 10, 2018.
Published Online: March 22, 2018.
doi:10.1001/jamafacial.2018.0048
Author Contributions: Dr Boahene had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Boahene, Owusu, Byrne.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Boahene, L. Ishii, M. Ishii, I. Kim, l. kim.
Drafting of the manuscript: Boahene, I. Kim.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Boahene, Owusu, L. Ishii, M.
Ishii, l. kim, Byrne.
Statistical analysis: Boahene, L. Ishii.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Boahene, Owusu, M. Ishii, I. Kim, l. kim.
Study supervision: Boahene, M. Ishii, Byrne.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
REFERENCES
1. Kraft TL, Pressman SD. Grin and bear it: the
influence of manipulated facial expression on the
stress response. Psychol Sci. 2012;23(11):1372-1378.
2. Messinger DS, Fogel A, Dickson KL. What’
s in a
smile? Dev Psychol. 1999;35(3):701-708.
3. Ekman P, Davidson RJ, Friesen WV. The
Duchenne smile: emotional expression and brain
physiology. II. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1990;58(2):342-
353.
4. Dey JK, Ishii M, Boahene KD, Byrne PJ, Ishii LE.
Changing perception: facial reanimation surgery
improves attractiveness and decreases negative
facial perception. Laryngoscope. 2014;124(1):84-90.
5. Lindsay RW, Bhama P, Hadlock TA. Quality-of-life
improvement after free gracilis muscle transfer for
smile restoration in patients with facial paralysis.
JAMA Facial Plast Surg. 2014;16(6):419-424.
6. Mathes SJ, Nahai F. Classification of the vascular
anatomy of muscles: experimental and clinical
correlation. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1981;67(2):177-187.
7. Morris SF, Yang D. Gracilis muscle: arterial and
neural basis for subdivision. Ann Plast Surg. 1999;
42(6):630-633.
8. Krishnan V, Daniel ST, Lazar D, Asok A.
Characterization of posed smile by using visual
analog scale, smile arc, buccal corridor measures,
and modified smile index. Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop. 2008;133(4):515-523.
9. Albathi M, Oyer S, Ishii LE, Byrne P, Ishii M,
Boahene KO. Early nerve grafting for facial paralysis
after cerebellopontine angle tumor resection with
preserved facial nerve continuity. JAMA Facial Plast
Surg. 2016;18(1):54-60.
10. Collar RM, Byrne PJ, Boahene KD. The
subzygomatic triangle: rapid, minimally invasive
identification of the masseteric nerve for facial
reanimation. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132(1):183-188.
11. Hallock GG. Further clarification of the
nomenclature for compound flaps. Plast Reconstr
Surg. 2006;117(7):151e-160e.
12. Morley J, Eubank J. Macroesthetic elements of
smile design. J Am Dent Assoc. 2001;132(1):39-45.
13. Whitney TM, Buncke HJ, Alpert BS, Buncke GM,
Lineaweaver WC. The serratus anterior free-muscle
flap: experience with 100 consecutive cases. Plast
Reconstr Surg. 1990;86(3):481-490.
14. Ueda K, Harii K, Yamada A. Free vascularized
double muscle transplantation for the treatment of
facial paralysis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1995;95(7):
1288-1296.
15. Allevi F, Motta G, Colombo V, Biglioli F.
Double-bellied latissimus dorsi free flap to correct
full dental smile palsy [published online July 20,
2015]. BMJ Case Rep. doi:10.1136/bcr-2015-210436.
16. Van Der Geld P, Oosterveld P, Berge SJ,
Kuijpers-Jagtman AM. Tooth display and lip position
during spontaneous and posed smiling in adults.
Acta Odontol Scand. 2008;66(4):207-213.
17. Iacolucci CM, Banks C, Jowett N, et al.
Development and validation of a spontaneous smile
assay. JAMA Facial Plast Surg. 2015;17(3):191-196.
The Multivector Gracilis Free Functional Muscle Flap for Facial Reanimation
Original Investigation Research
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online March 22, 2018
E7
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 03/22/2018
