 1
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Special Report
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic 
Impact on Health and Survival
Balazs I Bodai, MD, FACS; Therese E Nakata, STAR Provider, CWFPBN; William T Wong, MD; Dawn R Clark, MD, FACOG;  
Steven Lawenda, MD, ABFM; Christine Tsou, MD; Raymond Liu, MD; Linda Shiue, MD; Neil Cooper, MD;  
Michael Rehbein, MD, FACP; Benjamin P Ha, MD, ABFM; Anne McKeirnan, MD, FACOG; Rajiv Misquitta, MD;  
Pankaj Vij, MD, FACP; Andrew Klonecke, MD; Carmelo S Mejia, MD; Emil Dionysian, MD, FACOS; Sean Hashmi, MD, FACM; 
Michael Greger, MD, FACLM; Scott Stoll, MD, FABPMR; Thomas M Campbell, MD 
Perm J 2018;22:17-025
E-pub: 09/20/2017  
https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/17-025
ABSTRACT
By ignoring the root causes of disease and neglecting to prioritize lifestyle measures 
for prevention, the medical community is placing people at harm. Advanced nations, 
influenced by a Western lifestyle, are in the midst of a health crisis, resulting largely from 
poor lifestyle choices. Epidemiologic, ecologic, and interventional studies have repeatedly 
indicated that most chronic illnesses, including cardiovascular disease, cancer, and type 
2 diabetes, are the result of lifestyles fueled by poor nutrition and physical inactivity. 
In this article, we describe the practice of lifestyle medicine and its powerful effect on 
these modern instigators of premature disability and death. We address the economic 
benefits of prevention-based lifestyle medicine and its effect on our health care system: A 
system on the verge of bankruptcy. We recommend vital changes to a disastrous course. 
Many deaths and many causes of pain, suffering, and disability could be circumvented if 
the medical community could effectively implement and share the power of healthy life-
style choices. We believe that lifestyle medicine should become the primary approach to 
the management of chronic conditions and, more importantly, their prevention. For future 
generations, for our own health, and for the Hippocratic Oath we swore to uphold (“First 
do no harm”), the medical community must take action. It is our hope that the information 
presented will inspire our colleagues to pursue lifestyle medicine research and incorpo-
rate such practices into their daily care of patients. The time to make this change is now. 
INTRODUCTION
Many consider lifestyle medicine to be 
a relatively new subspecialty, although it 
has been practiced for thousands of years.1 
Unlike conventional medicine, the focus of 
lifestyle medicine is not on the treatment 
of chronic diseases but rather on their pre-
vention. Chronic diseases are presently the 
leading cause of morbidity and mortality 
and are responsible for most of our health 
care expenditure.2 Most of these chronic 
conditions are preventable and are the result 
of an unhealthy lifestyle.3 More than 80% 
of chronic conditions could be avoided 
through the adoption of healthy lifestyle 
recommendations.3-5 Eighty percent of the 
population wants to live in a better state of 
health but do not know how to pursue it.6 
Minimal information is given by health 
care practitioners on how to implement an 
effective, long-term plan to achieve health.3 
The ongoing acceptance and adoption 
of a healthy lifestyle remains our great-
est challenge. Implementation of lifestyle 
recommendations can save lives because 
lifestyle-related diseases are now the lead-
ing cause of mortality in the “modernized” 
world.7 An aggressive analysis is needed to 
review the impact of lifestyle on our health. 
So why are we sick and dying prema-
turely? Cardiovascular disease (CVD) and 
cancer have come to be known as the two 
“killer diseases” and account for more than 
half of all deaths in the US.8 We are expe-
riencing these diseases in the wealthiest 
nation in the world, which spends more 
on health care per capita than any other 
advanced economy and yet has some of 
Balazs I Bodai, MD, FACS, is the Director of The Breast Cancer Survivorship Institute in Sacramento, CA. E-mail: balazs.bodai@kp.org. 
 
Therese E Nakata, STAR Provider, CWFPBN, is the Program Manager of The Breast Cancer Survivorship Institute in Sacramento, CA. E-mail: 
therese.e.nakata@kp.org. William T Wong, MD, is a Psychiatrist at the Redwood City Medical Center in CA. E-mail: william.t.wong@kp.org. 
 
Dawn R Clark, MD, FACOG, is the Chief Facilitator of the Physician Wellness Program and an Obstetrician/Gynecologist at the San Dimas-Baldwin 
Park Medical Center in San Dimas, CA. E-mail: dawn.r.clark@kp.org. Steven Lawenda, MD, ABFM, is an Internist at the Antelope Valley Medical 
Center in Lancaster, CA. E-mail: steven.a.lawenda@kp.org. Christine Tsou, MD, is an Internist at the San Jose Medical Center in CA. E-mail: 
 
christine.tsou@kp.org. Raymond Liu, MD, is the Chief of Hematology-Oncology at the San Francisco Medical Center in CA. E-mail: raymond.liu@kp.org. 
 
Linda Shiue, MD, is an Internist and the Director of Culinary Medicine at the San Francisco Medical Center in CA. E-mail: linda.w.shiue@kp.org. 
Neil Cooper, MD, is a Radiologist at the Glenlake Medical Center in Atlanta, GA. E-mail: neil.b.cooper@kp.org. Michael Rehbein, MD, FACP, is a 
Pediatrician and Assistant Physician-in-Charge for Outpatient Service at the Stockton Medical Office in CA. E-mail: michael.rehbein@kp.org. 
Benjamin P Ha, MD, ABFM, is the Associate Area Medical Director for Family Medicine at the Bakersfield Medical Center in CA. E-mail: 
benjamin.p.ha@kp.org. Anne McKeirnan, MD, FACOG, is an Obstetrician/Gynecologist at the San Diego Medical Center in CA. E-mail: 
anne.p.mckeirnan@kp.org. Rajiv Misquitta, MD, is a Primary Care Physician at the South Sacramento Medical Center in CA. He is also an 
Elected Representative on The Permanente Medical Group Board of Directors. E-mail: rajiv.misquitta@kp.org. Pankaj Vij, MD, FACP, is the Medical 
Director of the Kaiser Permanente Weight Management Program in Pleasanton, CA. E-mail: Pankaj.k.vij@kp.org. Andrew Klonecke, MD, is a 
 
Nuclear Medicine Specialist at the Sacramento Medical Center and at the Roseville Medical Center in CA. E-mail: andrew.klonecke@kp.org. 
Carmelo S Mejia, MD, is an Internist at the Skyline Medical Offices in Salem, OR. E-mail: carmelo.mejia@kp.org. Emil Dionysian, MD, FACOS, is an 
Orthopedic Surgeon at the Lakeview Medical Offices and at the Orange County Medical Center in Anaheim, CA. E-mail: emil.dionysian@kp.org. 
Sean Hashmi, MD, FACM, is an Internist at the Woodland Hills Medical Center in CA. E-mail: sean.x.hashmi@kp.org. Michael Greger, MD, FACLM,  
is a Physician and Founder of NutritionFacts.org in Kensington, MD. E-mail: mhg1@cornell.edu. Scott Stoll, MD, FABPMR, is the Co-Founder 
and Chairman of the Plantrician Project in Rieglesville, PA. E-mail: stollx7@gmail.com. Thomas M Campbell, MD, is an Instructor of Clinical  
Family Medicine at the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry and the Co-Founder and Clinical Director of the  
University of Rochester Program for Nutrition in Medicine in NY. E-mail: thomas_campbell@urmc.rochester.edu.
 2
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
the poorest health outcomes.2 The most 
important problem is our poor lifestyle 
choices based on misinformation.1,4
There has been a dramatic shift in the 
leading causes of death in the US in the 
past 100 years. Whereas infectious dis-
eases were the primary cause of death in 
the early 20th century, CVD and cancer 
have now assumed dominance in mortal-
ity (Figure 1).9 Additionally, obesity and 
diabetes are inflammatory conditions 
that not only contribute to CVD and 
cancer but also serve as profound comor-
bidities; their shared etiologies promote 
one another. Both are sentinel signals of 
seriously eroding health, each harboring 
its own morbidities. This can be changed 
through a shift in how we take charge of 
managing our health and the health of our 
patients—through lifestyle medicine. 
In this article, we address the pervasive 
effects of inflammation, obesity, and type 
2 diabetes and their cost on the health 
care system. We review evidence on how 
implementation of lifestyle medicine rec-
ommendations may lead to a paradigm shift 
not only in health care delivery but also on 
its dramatic impact on chronic conditions.
Lifestyle medicine addresses basic recom-
mendations, which may extend lives and 
may allow patients to live longer, in better 
health, with fewer disabilities, and with an 
improved quality of life. The intervention 
recommendations in lifestyle medicine 
are healthy eating, active living, healthy 
weight, and emotional resilience (see 
 
Figure 2 and the Sidebar: A Special Note 
on Emotional Resilience). Also represented 
in Figure 2 is what we refer to as the “red 
zone”—the percentage of the Western 
population that fails to adhere to such 
recommendations. Lifestyle determines 
in substantial ways the state of health; a 
poor lifestyle leads to poor health, and a 
good lifestyle generally leads to good health. 
The quadrants of total health can be 
affected by the adoption of whole, plant-
based foods; a moderate level of exercise; 
and emotional resilience. Whole, plant-
based food maximizes the consumption 
of nutrient-dense foods and minimizes 
animal-based products (including dairy) 
and processed foods with added sugar, salt, 
and oil. Consuming whole, plant-based 
foods is synonymous with an anti-inflam-
matory diet.10 A whole-foods, plant-based 
diet promotes the increased consumption 
of leafy greens, vegetables, fruits, legumes, 
and whole grains as staple foods.3,11,12 The 
benefits of a whole-foods, plant-based diet 
have been shown to substantially influence 
the development of CVD as well as many 
common malignancies.13-15 In addition, 
an anti-inflammatory diet has beneficial 
effects on obesity and diabetes, recognized 
as risk factors for CVD and numerous 
cancers.3,11,16-21 The benefits of adopting 
a healthy lifestyle have been extensively 
documented. A less-than-optimal lifestyle is 
associated with the development of chronic 
conditions and can have a profound impact 
on the prognosis of such diseases. We sum-
marize the evidence relevant to CVD and 
three of the most common malignancies: 
colorectal, prostate, and breast cancer. 
ENDEMIC CONDITIONS OF 
THE WESTERN WORLD
In the Western world, we subject our-
selves to a poorly recognized, self-inflicted 
death sentence. We have become victims 
of three major conditions endemic to the 
Western World: inflammation, obesity, 
and type 2 diabetes, which are intricately 
interrelated and largely result from poor 
lifestyle choices. Combined, these dis-
eases are lethal. That’s the bad news. The 
good news is that we can now affect these 
“invaders” of our health through lifestyle 
changes. Recent reports have addressed 
the importance of lifestyle interven-
tions (maintaining a healthy body mass 
index [BMI], a healthy diet, increasing 
physical activity, and managing stress) on 
chronic disease management.3,12,16,18,20,21 
Figure 1. Leading causes of death in the US, 1900 and 2010.a 
a Source: Centers for Disease Control and Infection data from Jones et al.9
Figure 2. Quadrants of total health.
 3
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
A Special Note on Emotional Resilience
Emotional resilience is defined as one’s ability to respond to an adverse situation 
and, more importantly, a return to the “pre-event” baseline state of health. Factors 
impairing or affecting emotional resilience include depression, anxiety, stress, 
insomnia, and the presence of comorbidities, namely, additional chronic conditions. 
Depression and anxiety are the most common issues that negatively affect emotional 
resilience in the Western population. Stress is difficult to measure scientifically 
because of its omnipresence in everyday life. Depression, in particular, is recognized 
as a leading cause of disability, forecast to be the second-largest contributor to 
the worldwide burden of disease by 2020.1 Many of the components of emotional 
resilience are interrelated, not just among themselves but also with other medical 
issues, most notably, obesity. The association of obesity and depression has been 
confirmed by several recent large meta-analysis studies.2,3
Depression is a recognized risk factor for the development of cardiovascular 
disease (CVD, as much as a twofold increase) and serves as a prognostic indicator 
for poorer outcomes in those already with a diagnosis of CVD.4,5 Depression in 
patients after an acute myocardial infarction has been associated with a threefold 
increase in mortality.4 The relationship of depression and CVD is reciprocal; 
each increases the risk of the other. Recent investigations have addressed the 
interrelationship of depression, stress, and CVD; depression and CVD may result 
from the cumulative effects of stress on the body.6 Stress provokes the body’s 
immune system to react by initiating a response to outside irritants, much the same 
as it does in reaction to bacterial, viral, or chemical intrusions. At the core of the 
immune response are white blood cells known as macrophages, resulting in the 
production of cytokines that aid communication in the immune system, promoting the 
establishment of a chronic inflammatory state and ongoing endothelial cell damage 
(see Figure 3). Physical activity may decrease such cellular injury.7 
Depression and anxiety are also seen at higher levels in patients diagnosed with 
colorectal and prostate cancer.8,9 Depression remains a major health concern, which is 
often underdiagnosed and, therefore, undertreated in patients with cancer.10 Caregivers 
are increasingly recognizing the importance of screening for and treating depression in 
patients with breast cancer, but such efforts must be extended to other malignancies.5 
A recent study, the largest to date, addresses the importance of strong 
social connections; socially integrated women who practiced a healthier 
lifestyle, perhaps minimizing their stress levels, had decreased recurrence 
rates and an increase in overall disease-free survival after a diagnosis of 
breast cancer.11 Emotional resilience addresses one’s potential to return 
to a “previous normal” and is enhanced by an intense support system. 
Unfortunately, a substantial number of patients face a cancer diagnosis, 
treatment, and their outcomes alone and without support from their clinicians in 
the promotion of a healthier lifestyle.
Interestingly, the gut microbiome is also involved or at least has been 
implicated, with emotional resilience, affecting anxiety and depression.12 
Processed foods lead to intestinal permeability, which, as previously 
described, allows toxins to affect distant organs, including the nervous 
system.13 It is recognized that lifestyle alterations, including a healthy diet and 
the pursuit of exercise, can have a positive impact on emotional resilience as 
well as cardiovascular health.14 In addition, the influence of exercise in the 
treatment of depression and anxiety has been well documented and is not 
limited to the cancer community. Physical activity decreases symptoms of 
depression and anxiety, and physical inactivity increases the potential for the 
development of such conditions.6 The association of psychological distress 
in the quality of life in patients with cancer has been noted, as well as an 
increase in the mortality of those with any malignancy.15,16
Current technology allows for the analysis of the effect of stress on the body 
at the molecular level.17,18 Telomere caplets at the end of each chromosome 
assist in the regulation of appropriate genetic replication. Each time a cell 
divides, telomere base pairs shorten, resulting in a lessening of their effective 
regulation of normal cell replication. Chronic stress and poor health, such as 
the development of CVD and cancer, are linked. Shortening of telomeres has 
been associated with the onset of malignancies and the process of aging, 
which itself is a major risk factor for the development of cancer. Chronic stress 
has been demonstrated to result in such “shortening damage” of telomeres.19 
References
 1. Lopez AD, Murray CC. The global burden of disease, 1990-2020. Nat Med 1990 Nov;4(11):1241-3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/3218.
 2. Luppino FS, de Wit LM, Bouvy PF, et al. Overweight, obesity, and depression: A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010 Mar;67(3):220-9. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.2.
 3. Nicholson A, Kuper H, Hemmingway H. Depression as an aetiologic and prognostic factor in coronary heart disease: A meta-analysis of 6362 events among 146 538 participants in 54 
observational studies. Eur Heart J 2006 Dec;27(23):2763-74. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehl338.
 4. Hare DL, Toukhsati SR, Johansson P, Jaarsma T. Depression and cardiovascular disease: A clinical review. Eur Heart J 2014 Jun 1;35(21):1365-72. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/
eht462.
 5. Tuso P. Treatment progress indicator: Application of a new assessment tool to objectively monitor the therapeutic progress of patients with depression, anxiety, or behavioral impairment. 
Perm J 2014 Summer;18(3):55-9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7812/tpp/13-091.
 6. Miller GE, Blackwell E. Turning up the heat: Inflammation as a mechanism linking chronic stress, depression, and heart disease. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2006;15(6):269-72. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2006.00450.x.
 7. Carek PJ, Laibstain SE, Carek SM. Exercise for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Int J Psychiatry Med 2011;41(1):15-28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2190/PM.41.1.c.
 8. Medeiros M, Oshima CT, Forones NM. Depression and anxiety in colorectal cancer patients. J Gastrointest Cancer 2010 Sep;41(3):179-84. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12029-010-9132-5.
 9. Korfage IJ, Essink-Bot ML, Janssens AJ, Schröder FH, de Koning HJ. Anxiety and depression after prostate cancer diagnosis and treatment: 5-year follow-up. Br J Cancer 2006 Apr 
24;94(8):1093-8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6603057.
 10. Massie MJ. Prevalence of depression in patients with cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2004;(32):57-71. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/jncimonographs/lgh014.
 11. Kroenke CH, Michael YL, Poole EM, et al. Postdiagnosis social networks and breast cancer mortality in the After Breast Cancer Pooling Project. Cancer 2017 Apr 1;123(7):1228-37. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.30440.
 12. Galland L. The gut microbiome and the brain. J Med Food 2014 Dec;17(12):1261-72. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1089/jmf.2014.7000.
 13. Kelly JR, Kennedy PJ, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Clarke G, Hyland NP. Breaking down the barriers: The gut microbiome, intestinal permeability and stress-related psychiatric disorders. Front 
Cell Neurosci 2015 Oct 14;9:392. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fncl.2015.00392.
 14. Mosovich SA, Boone RT, Reichenberg A, et al. New insights into the link between cardiovascular disease and depression. Int J Clin Pract 2008 Mar;62(3):423-32. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1742-1241.2007.01640.x.
 15. Brown LF, Kroenke K, Theobald DE, Wu J, Tu W. The association of depression and anxiety with health-related quality of life in cancer patients with depression and/or pain. 
Psychooncology 2010 Jun;19(7):734-41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/pon.1627.
 16. Russ TC, Stamatakis E, Hamer M, Starr JM, Kivimäki M, Batty GD. Association between psychological distress and mortality: Individual participant pooled analysis of 10 prospective  
cohort studies. BMJ 2012 Jul 31;345:e4933. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e4933.
 17. Hofker MH, Fu J, Wijmenga C. The genome revolution and its role in understanding complex diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 Oct;1842(10);1889-95. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.002.
 18. Wilson BJ, Nicholls SG. The Human Genome Project, and recent advances in personalized genomics. Risk Manage Healthc Policy 2015 Feb 16;8:9-20. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.2147/rmhp.s58728.
 19. Epel ES, Blackburn EH, Lin J, et al. Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 Dec 7;101(49):17312-5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0407162101
 4
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
Such interventions are based on large-
scale, prospective studies, which provide 
evidence-based conclusions.6,13,18-21
Inflammation
We live in a world that initiates, pro-
motes, and accelerates chronic inflamma-
tion. Inflammation has been implicated 
as a causative factor in nearly all chronic 
diseases.22 From an evolutionary perspec-
tive, the body’s inflammatory response was 
vital for survival before modern sanitation 
processes (water purification, sewage sys-
tems, and the recognition of hygiene issues 
such as hand washing). Today, we live lon-
ger, and thus inflammatory responses are 
more likely to confuse and overwhelm the 
body’s defense systems. Many attributes of 
our Western lifestyle incite an inflammatory 
response, and such continued lifestyle expo-
sures perpetuate unmitigated inflammation. 
Obesity
Obesity is the second endemic condi-
tion we face. Two of three Westerners 
are either overweight or obese (Figure 2). 
Furthermore, obesity is an inflammatory 
disease.23 Adequate physical activity and 
normalizing weight decreases the inflam-
matory reaction of the body and may help 
mitigate the massive immune response to 
infectious agents that serve as a stimulus 
for carcinogenesis. Inflammatory proteins 
(Interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor, and 
C-reactive protein, among others) are el-
evated in obese patients because of excess 
adipose tissue.
The current focus of obesity is centered 
on CVD, yet cancer is far more feared 
and less frequently addressed. A 2008 
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Re-
sults (SEER) Program Study21 estimated 
that nearly 90,000 cases of cancer were 
caused by obesity. Estimates are that the 
continuing trend in obesity will lead to 
an additional 500,000 deaths by the year 
2030.21 Additionally, obese individuals 
are more likely to live in a state of chronic 
inflammation.23 
The common link between inflamma-
tion and obesity may well reside in the 
gastrointestinal (gut) microbiome. The 
physiology of the gut remains poorly 
defined. However, recent advances in 
molecular tools, such as gene sequencing, 
have allowed a more intricate understand-
ing of the role of the gut microbiome as 
an endocrine organ that manufactures 
hundreds, if not thousands, of chemicals 
that influence the regulation of multiple 
distant organs.24 Such compounds play a 
substantial role in the development of a 
“leaky” gut, which allows toxins to enter 
the bloodstream and results in inflam-
mation and promotion of CVD, obesity, 
Type 2 diabetes, and chronic diseases.25-30 
The gut microbial complex appears to be 
a major factor responsible for metabolic 
and inflammatory diseases, linking inflam-
mation and obesity to additional factors 
such as alterations in lipid metabolism and 
insulin signaling. The accumulation of fat 
promotes a chronic inflammatory state 
that results in the activation and recruit-
ment of immune cells, which leads to an 
ongoing, self-perpetuating process.31 A ma-
jor hallmark of obesity is documentation 
of the occurrence of inflammation.32 The 
result is a state of chronic inflammation 
promoting the disease states of our modern 
civilization. The steps in the pathogenesis 
of inflammation are depicted in Figure 3 in 
their most simplified form to help readers 
understand chronic disease progression.
Diabetes
The rate of diabetes has steadily risen in 
the past decade.33 It is recognized as the 
leading cause of target organ complications 
(limb amputations, end-stage renal failure, 
and adult-onset blindness). Diabetes is 
also a major risk factor for CVD. With 
its increasing prevalence and long-term 
complications, diabetes has become one of 
the costliest medical conditions in the US. 
Between 2007 and 2012, costs associated 
with diabetes increased an alarming 48%.2 
Obesity, as described earlier, has been asso-
ciated with chronic inflammation, insulin 
resistance, and the development of type 2 
diabetes.34 Diabetes has been identified to 
be far beyond a metabolic disease and is 
now acknowledged to be an inflammatory 
condition.35,36 
The increasing prevalence and costs 
associated with diabetes have resulted in 
the need for improved efforts directed at 
prevention. Exercise and weight reduction 
are well established as important priorities 
in prevention, with strong supportive evi-
dence.37-40 Recent attention to diet quality 
as it pertains to diabetes prevention has 
focused on the reduction of refined sugar 
consumption, and rightfully so; each serv-
ing per day of sugar-sweetened beverages 
(eg, soft drinks) has been associated with 
a 25% increased risk of diabetes.41 
Refined sugar consumption is an im-
portant focus, but currently lacking in the 
conversation on diabetes prevention is the 
importance of animal product consump-
tion. A large study of more than 60,000 
North Americans showed a stepwise in-
crease in the prevalence of diabetes with 
increasing animal product consumption. 
Those eating no animal products at all 
(vegans) had the lowest diabetes prevalence 
overall, at 2.9%, with omnivores having 
the highest prevalence at 7.6%. Even when 
risk factors such as age, BMI, and physical 
activity were adjusted for, there persisted 
a statistically significant reduction of 49% 
Figure 3. Steps in the pathogenesis of inflammation leading to progression of chronic diseases. 
 5
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
in the risk of later development of diabe-
tes.21 Data from the Nurses and Physi-
cians’ Health Studies (more than 4 million 
person-years combined) demonstrated 
that the substitution of just 5% of calories 
from animal to plant protein reduced the 
risk of diabetes by 23%.42 Data looking at 
processed meats (bacon, sausage, hot dogs, 
and deli meat) and egg consumption in 
relation to diabetes risk have been impres-
sive. A meta-analysis of processed meat 
consumption revealed that each serving of 
processed meat daily was associated with a 
51% increased risk of diabetes.43 A separate 
meta-analysis looking at egg consumption 
demonstrated that high egg consumption 
was associated with a 68% increase in the 
risk of diabetes development.44
Prevention is ideal, but the reality is 
that more than 29 million Americans 
already have diabetes, making prevention 
management the priority. The past de-
cades have focused on glycemic manage-
ment with medications. However, recent 
studies question this approach, including 
a meta-analysis of 13 randomized con-
trolled trials, which found that intensive 
glycemic management with medications 
resulted in a doubling of the risk of severe 
hypoglycemia, with no overall mortality 
or cardiovascular mortality benefit.45 A 
separate review of 328 articles, 11 meta-
analyses, and 5 randomized controlled 
trials all published in the last decade cast 
doubt on the supposed benefits of fewer 
microvascular complications with inten-
sive glycemic management; specifically, no 
significant benefit was found with respect 
to the risk of dialysis/transplantation/renal 
death, blindness, or neuropathy.46 Medica-
tions used in the treatment of diabetes also 
carry a wide range of side effects, which 
include the following: diarrhea, vitamin 
B12 deficiency, lactic acidosis (caused by 
metformin), hypoglycemia, weight gain 
(sulfonylureas and insulin), heart failure, 
an increase in fractures (thiazolidinedio-
nes), pancreatitis, yeast infections, urinary 
tract infections, and acute kidney injury.47
With legitimate concerns about the util-
ity and safety of the intensive management 
of diabetes with medications, it is essential 
and timely to note that lifestyle changes are 
as effective as, and perhaps more so than, 
medications, with no side effects. The 
most effective lifestyle changes have been 
exercise and diets based on whole, plant 
foods (fruits, vegetables, whole grains, 
beans, nuts, and seeds). Regarding exercise, 
a meta-analysis of 27 studies found that 
regular exercise, regardless of type (aerobic, 
resistance, or combined), resulted in the 
improvement of hemoglobin A1C control 
by an average of 0.8%,48 a benefit com-
parable to current diabetes medications.47 
Dietary studies focused on diabetes 
have demonstrated consistent results when 
based on whole, plant foods. A randomized 
controlled trial of 99 patients compared 
a whole-foods, plant-based diet with the 
American Diabetes Association diet and 
found that although both diets improved 
glycemic control, the plant-based diet 
group had superior results.49 In the plant-
based diet group, hemoglobin A1C control 
improved by 1.23 points,49 an effect com-
parable to, if not superior to, that of the 
most currently prescribed medications.47 
A larger study analyzed 232 patients with 
diabetes who were placed on a plant-based 
diet as part of a residential dietary interven-
tion program. More than 90% of patients 
were able to decrease or discontinue their 
diabetes medications in just 7 days while 
improving or maintaining control of their 
diabetes.50 A review of 14 randomized diet 
trials concluded that the best results oc-
curred with plant-based diets.51 
The annual health care costs attributable 
to obesity alone exceed $100 billion.2 Add 
to this the rapid rise in the costs of treating 
type 2 diabetes, which total approximately 
$101 billion annually.2,52 Escalation of 
health care costs from other complica-
tions of obesity and type 2 diabetes are 
inevitable as these conditions continue to 
result in substantial future complications 
that will require further expensive medical 
care. Inflammation, obesity, and diabetes 
are intricately related, fuel one another, 
and will drive health care expenses beyond 
affordability.
Cardiovascular Disease
Despite major advances in the treat-
ment of cardiac events, CVD remains the 
leading cause of death and disability in 
the US.53-55 More than 600,000 deaths (1 
in 4) are attributable to heart disease each 
year, and CVD accounts for more than 
$70 billion annually (approximately 17% 
of the total health care expenditure).56-58 By 
the year 2030, 40% of the US population 
is projected to have some form of CVD, 
and care will exceed $800 billion, making 
it our most costly disease.56
The understanding of the pathogenesis 
of atherosclerosis has recently undergone a 
dramatic update. The role of chronic inflam-
mation in its development, particularly in the 
setting of obesity, serves as the foundation for 
the most current theory.59,60 Atherosclerosis 
appears to be the result of oxidative damage 
to the endothelial cells that line the vascular 
system, including, of course, the coronary 
arterial anatomy.61 The damage to the en-
dothelial layer of the coronary arteries is a 
progressive process beginning with inflam-
mation secondary to oxidative stresses that 
result from the oxidation of low-density 
lipoproteins, energizing the low-density 
lipoproteins to penetrate the endothelial 
layer; this process leads to the subsequent 
development of plaques, the rupture of 
which may result in a myocardial infarction 
or often sudden death.61,62 
Dietary components consumed by the 
Western population promote CVD by 
directly affecting the gut microbiota.63 
In particular, consumption of red meats, 
which are high in L-carnitine, elevate 
serum levels of trimethylamine oxide 
(TMAO) because of the hepatic conver-
sion of its microbially derived precursor, 
trimethylamine.63 Reducing red meat 
consumption results in decreased TMAO 
production, which downregulates the 
macrophagic uptake of oxidation of low-
density lipoproteins. Levels of TMAO are 
reduced in patients who are following an 
anti-inflammatory diet. Although mea-
surement of TMAO levels is not readily 
available, future technology may soon de-
velop a test measuring TMAO and allow 
for the early intervention of individuals 
at risk of atherogenic threats before they 
progress to the point of sudden death.61 
Some authors offer an in-depth discussion 
of the biochemical basis and pathogenesis 
of oxidative stress and vascular injury.59-62
A lifestyle program that incorporates a 
whole, plant-based diet has been shown to 
reverse CVD, a feat largely elusive to medi-
cations and technologic advances. Numer-
ous studies have demonstrated that lifestyle 
interventions can have a major impact on 
the development of, and even the reversal 
of, CVD.1,13,62,64 Evidence has accumulated 
 6
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
associating a healthy dietary pattern with 
lower rates of cardiac events, and an ex-
tensive review has been presented endors-
ing the cardioprotective effects of a diet 
that endorses the increased consumption 
of plant-based foods.65 Lifestyle manage-
ment offers support for the adoption of a 
diet consisting of mostly plants to prevent 
CVD.11 A whole-foods, plant-based diet 
offers additional protection against CVD 
because of the beneficial effect that poly-
phenols have on the endothelial layer of 
the vasculature, including the negation of 
oxidation of low-density lipoproteins and 
its impact on inflammation.11,61,66-68 Large 
epidemiologic studies support the fact 
that those following an anti-inflammato-
ry, plant-based diet may decrease the risk 
of CVD development by nearly 25%.69,70 
The promotion of a diet contrary to the 
standard American diet—embracing the 
increased consumption of plant-based 
foods and the avoidance of red meat, 
highly processed foods, added sugars, salt, 
and fat—appears to be beneficial in the 
improvement of cardiovascular health.71
Recent scientific advances have allowed 
us to characterize the human genome, 
opening the door to the genetic expression 
of disease in its earliest development.72,73 
Regarding CVD, a recently published 
study demonstrated the effect of lifestyle 
modification on pro-inflammatory gene 
expression.74 The impact of our under-
standing of disease at the epigenomic 
level presents an opportunity to intervene 
in the development of chronic diseases 
and increase the odds for cure. Lifestyle 
interventions (tobacco cessation; adop-
tion of a whole-foods, plant-based diet; 
and exercise) focusing on CVD have been 
documented as remarkably effective.75 
Even in patients with a high genetic risk 
profile, a favorable lifestyle has been asso-
ciated with a 50% decreased risk of CVD 
development.76
Physical activity in individuals at in-
creased risk of CVD has been noted to 
significantly decrease mortality.61,75,77 
Those who are least fit may, in fact, gain the 
most benefit from exercise and thus realize 
a more statistically significant impact on 
their survival.78 Interestingly, many com-
mon malignancies share similar pathologic 
characteristics that are akin to CVD—no-
tably, inflammation and obesity. 
CANCER
Despite enormous research efforts and 
funds expended, cancer continues to be a 
major cause of death. Each year, 17.5 mil-
lion cancers are diagnosed and 8.7 million 
deaths caused by cancer occur worldwide.79 
In the US, 1.6 million Americans receive 
a diagnosis of cancer, and more than 
600,000 deaths are attributable to this 
disease.80 In the next few years, the world 
population will exceed 7.5 billion, which 
is expected to drive these figures even 
higher.81 The current belief is that most 
cancers are the result of inherited genetic 
abnormalities, yet 90% of malignancies are 
rooted in our lifestyle and environmental 
exposures. Many of these exposures are 
modifiable; we can avoid tobacco and 
alcohol, decrease our exposure to ultra-
violet light, increase our level of physical 
activity, and, perhaps most importantly, 
alter our diets. 
In the US, October is National Breast 
Cancer Awareness Month; September is 
set aside for prostate cancer awareness; and 
March is dedicated to colorectal cancer 
awareness. These awareness campaigns are 
laudable; however, their emphasis on early 
detection, treatment, and survivorship does 
not address the more crucial issue that many 
such cancers can actually be prevented by 
lifestyle changes. For instance, obesity is a 
well-recognized risk factor for the develop-
ment of a large number of malignancies, 
as well as for cancer recurrence and mor-
tality.82,83 In 2016, the US will have more 
than 14 million persons alive as survivors of 
cancer. In comparison, in 1971, there were 
3 million cancer survivors. By 2020, there 
will be 20 million people in whom some 
form of cancer has been diagnosed who are 
alive and well. More than 75% of all cancer 
patients currently live beyond 5 years.84 As 
such, there is ample time for patients to 
implement lifestyle changes that may fur-
ther contribute to their overall disease-free, 
long-term survival.
Colorectal Cancer
In 2015, there were 1.7 million cases 
of colorectal carcinoma with 832,000 
deaths worldwide.79 More than 140,000 
people in the US will receive a diagnosis 
of colorectal carcinoma in 2016, and more 
than 50,000 will die.80 Colorectal cancer 
is the third most commonly diagnosed 
non-sex-specific cancer. Less than 20% 
of colorectal carcinomas have a genetic 
basis85; therefore, most colorectal cancer 
cases have been linked to environmental 
exposures (eg, food-borne mutagens) and 
chronic intestinal inflammation.86 Perhaps 
no malignancy other than colorectal car-
cinoma demonstrates so dramatically the 
connection between inflammation and 
the development of neoplasms. Patients 
with chronic inflammatory bowel disease 
(ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease) are at 
an increased risk of breast cancer develop-
ment,87 adding to the ever-growing body 
of evidence linking chronic inflammation 
to the progression of cancer. The risk of 
colorectal cancer developing increases with 
the duration and extent of inflammatory 
bowel disease.87 The microbiome of the gut 
has also been implicated in the develop-
ment of sporadic colorectal carcinoma.25,88 
Risk factors for the development of 
colorectal cancer include a sedentary 
lifestyle, obesity, and the dietary compo-
nents that form the basis of the standard 
American diet (large consumption of red 
meats and highly processed foods and low 
amounts of fruit, vegetables, legumes, and 
fiber intake).89 Low-fiber diets, such as the 
standard American or “Westernized” diet 
that promotes inflammation, have been 
linked to the increased risk and develop-
ment of colorectal cancer.90 In addition, 
patients with colorectal cancers appear to 
have more comorbidities at the time of di-
agnosis than patients with other malignan-
cies.91 For example, patients with diabetes 
have a 26% increased risk of developing 
colon cancer and a 30% increased risk of 
dying because of it compared with patients 
without diabetes.92 Data exist that modifi-
able lifestyle issues (diet and activity) are 
increasingly associated with the risk of 
colorectal cancer development, perhaps 
more so than any other malignancy.93,94
Prostate Cancer 
Prostate cancer is the most commonly 
diagnosed malignancy in men, affecting 
1.6 million worldwide and resulting in the 
death of nearly 370,000 in 2015.79 In the 
US, nearly 150,000 men received a diagno-
sis of prostate cancer in 2016, and close to 
40,000 will die of this cancer.80 Somewhat 
alarming is a recent report that the incidence 
of metastatic prostate cancer has increased 
by 72% since 2004.95 Of particular concern 
is that the largest increase in new cases was 
 7
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
in the age range of 55 to 69 years, ironi-
cally the same group most likely to benefit 
from early treatment.96 If this increase is, as 
some postulate, caused by a more aggres-
sive presentation of the disease, then the 
importance of lifestyle changes may further 
increase in relevancy. As with many other 
malignancies, diet and obesity contribute 
to chronic inflammatory processes that lead 
to disease aggressiveness.81,97 Furthermore, 
obesity has been implicated in not only the 
development but also the progression of 
prostate cancer.81,97 
Prostate cancer patients are often advised 
to make lifestyle changes. Such changes 
could be beneficial but need further verifi-
cation. In one study,98 changes in prostate-
specific antigen levels were monitored in a 
small group of patients. The experimental 
group was subjected to an intensive lifestyle 
intervention program, which included a 
vegan diet, soy protein, supplemental vi-
tamins (E and C), selenium, exercise (30 
minutes of walking 6 d/wk), and a support 
group/stress management program for 1 
hour per week. Prostate-specific antigen 
levels decreased 4% in the experimental 
group and increased 6% in the control 
group.99 In addition, blood taken from 
both groups demonstrated that the serum 
of the experimental group inhibited growth 
of prostate cancer cells nearly 8-fold more 
intensively than the serum of the control 
group. Furthermore, these comprehensive 
nutrition and lifestyle changes have been 
shown to downregulate prostate gene ex-
pression in men after a diagnosis of early-
stage prostate cancer.99
The incidence and mortality of pros-
tate cancer appear to be associated with a 
Western lifestyle, and a strong corollary re-
lationship has been noted with the intake of 
animal foods.97,100 Men in developing coun-
tries who drift toward a Western-oriented 
lifestyle experience an increased incidence 
of prostate cancer. Furthermore, migra-
tion studies have demonstrated that those 
populations that live in low-cancer-risk 
geographic areas assume Western rates of 
cancer within 1 to 2 decades of immigration 
to the West. This observation is not limited 
to prostate cancer but involves the develop-
ment of other malignancies as well.81
Breast Cancer
The most common malignancy among 
women in 2016 was breast cancer, affecting 
2.4 million women worldwide and tak-
ing the lives of more than 520,000.79 In 
2017, nearly 250,000 women will receive 
a diagnosis of breast cancer and more than 
40,000 will die in the US.80 Breast cancer 
is the most feared disease by many women, 
yet heart disease is the leading cause of death 
in women in the US.3 Interestingly, less than 
50% of women are aware that heart disease 
is the leading cause of death.3 
As with previously addressed malignan-
cies, breast cancer can be attributed in part 
to a lifestyle fueled by a poor diet that often 
results in obesity.101 Sinicrope and Dannen-
berg101 addressed this topic in a recent pub-
lication. Obesity leads to insulin resistance, 
resulting in elevated blood levels of insulin 
and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and a 
decrease in sex hormone-binding globulin. 
Consequently, the availability of estradiol 
increases, which may fuel the development 
and aggressiveness of breast cancers. Fatty 
tissues (adipocytes) have been demonstrated 
to be an independent endocrinogenic organ 
capable of manufacturing and storing estro-
genic compounds that contribute to mul-
tiple malignancies. Importantly, fatty tissues 
also store a dozen or more inflammatory 
proteins that promote carcinogenesis.101 In 
a recent study, low-dose aspirin was shown 
to reduce inflammation, resulting in a lower 
incidence of breast cancer.102
Not only is obesity a risk factor for breast 
cancer development, it is an independent 
prognostic factor for distant metastases and 
an increased risk of death.103 Comorbidities 
also have a role in oncogenesis. Patients with 
diabetes have a 23% increased risk of breast 
cancer developing and a 38% increased 
risk of dying of the disease compared with 
patients without diabetes.92 A substantial 
proportion of breast cancer patients are both 
obese and sedentary, emphasizing the need 
for lifestyle interventions that may improve 
prognosis and ultimate outcomes.3 
Understanding of breast cancer and the 
influence of dietary consumption patterns 
has recently advanced. Dietary recom-
mendations, including an increase in fiber 
intake, have been made to aid in the preven-
tion of this cancer.104,105 Recently the human 
“estrobolome” has been discovered as the 
set of gut bacterial genes that metabolize 
estrogen.106 Dysbiosis of the gastrointestinal 
tract is involved in the re-cycling of estro-
gen through the enterohepatic circulation, 
increasing its potency, which may further 
fuel the development of breast cancer.107,108 
Estrogen levels are further decreased by 
the increased consumption of fiber intake 
because fiber inhibits the absorption of 
estrogen in the gastrointestinal tract.104,109 
The American Institute for Cancer Research 
reported in 2014, from worldwide data, that 
diet, physical activity, and weight control are 
major contributors to long-term survival 
after a diagnosis of breast cancer.110 Fur-
thermore, a 2011 meta-analysis of postdiag-
nosis exercise in patients with breast cancer 
involving more than 12,000 patients dem-
onstrated a 34% decrease in risk of death 
caused by breast cancer, a 24% decrease in 
recurrence, and a 41% decrease in the risk of 
all-cause mortality.111 This conclusion is the 
result of the review of 67 published articles 
addressing lifestyle changes as they relate to 
the reduction of breast cancer recurrence.112 
Additional studies have documented 
that physical activity not only increases 
survival and decreases recurrence but also 
improves overall quality of life in patients 
with breast cancer and in patients with 
colon cancer.113-115 Another study followed 
nearly 1500 women diagnosed with early-
stage breast cancer. These patients were fol-
lowed for up to 9 years and demonstrated 
a 50% decreased death rate in those who 
adhered to a high fruit and vegetable intake 
(5 servings/d) and a regular physical activity 
regimen (30 minutes, 5 times weekly) com-
pared with those who did not.116 Although 
the exact mechanism of the action of ex-
ercise and its impact on cancer recurrence 
remains elusive, some have pointed to the 
possibility that exercise may affect the in-
flammatory response of the body, resulting 
in a decreased rate of recurrence.117 Regular 
exercise may also have a protective role in 
the initial development of breast cancer.118 
DISCUSSION
For far too long, patients have experi-
enced chronic illnesses because our health 
care system has not taken a proactive role 
in promoting healthy eating, active living, 
and the promotion of emotional resilience 
(see Sidebar: A Special Note on Emotional 
Resilience). The medical community has 
been proud to announce major achieve-
ments in health care and their impact, yet 
a recent analysis on cardiovascular mortal-
ity brings into question such advances; the 
 8
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
decreasing rate of CVD that has been noted 
since the 1970s appears to be declining at a 
slower pace.119 Advances in CVD survival 
no longer approach the prior rate of de-
cline despite improvements in treatment. 
Perhaps the management of CVD should 
focus more on lifestyle recommendations 
and prevention than on treatment once the 
disease has become symptomatic. In addi-
tion, it has been suggested that the recently 
noted decline in cancer incidence may be 
related to the recession of 2008, which may 
have decreased screening accessibility for 
many.120 It is increasingly recognized that 
the real issue in health care—lifestyle—
should become the primary prescription 
for the leading causes of disease that result 
in the highest rates of mortality.4-7,9,22 The 
slow progress in decreasing mortality rates 
from CVD incriminates an unhealthy diet 
and a sedentary lifestyle as major contribut-
ing factors.121 
Ample evidence exists to support the 
avocation of a diet on the basis of the recom-
mendations outlined in Table 1.3,7,116,122-127 
Lifestyle medicine addresses principles 
that are the cornerstone of health and well- 
being. The current practice of prescribing 
medications or performing surgery for 
nearly every illness must be revisited. A 
paradigm shift to lifestyle medicine needs 
urgent implementation. Dramatic effects 
using lifestyle interventions have been 
demonstrated in patients with chronic 
conditions. Several large studies have 
conclusively shown that diet and exercise 
modifications not only substantially im-
prove long-term survival but also result in 
a portrait more nearly approaching total 
health.5,105,116,122,128,129 As an example, a 
prospective study of 23,000 participants 
evaluated adherence to 4 simple recom-
mendations5: No tobacco use, 30 minutes 
of exercise 5 times per week, maintaining 
a BMI of less than 30 kg/m2, and eating a 
healthy diet as previously described. Par-
ticipants who adhered to these 4 recom-
mendations had an overall 78% decreased 
risk of development of a chronic condition 
during an 8-year timeframe. Furthermore, 
in participants adhering to these recom-
mendations, there was a 93% reduced 
risk of diabetes mellitus, an 81% reduced 
risk of myocardial infarction, and a 36% 
reduction in the risk of the development 
of cancer.5 
The additive effects of cellular damage, 
chronic conditions, and lifestyle practices 
appear to place us at an ever-increasing risk 
of CVD and cancer (Figure 4). Risk factors 
are interactive and should be recognized 
as such. Those who fall into the high-risk 
category in Figure 4 need urgent attention 
and lifestyle interventions.
Medications, particularly in chronic or 
repeated sequences, may also play an impor-
tant role in the development of malignan-
cies. The overprescription of antibiotics has 
received recent attention in the promotion 
of “super strain” bacteria that are resistant 
to most currently available antibiotics. 
Prostate cancer risk increased with the use 
of penicillin, quinolones, sulfonamides, and 
tetracycline; breast cancer risk was demon-
strated to modestly increase with exposure 
to sulfonamides.130 This increased risk may 
well be caused by the drugs’ influence and/
or the depletion of the natural microbiome 
resulting in a state of dysbiosis.
The potential carcinogenicity of red and 
processed meats has drawn extensive atten-
tion since the Interventional Agency for 
Research on Cancer evaluated these prod-
ucts.131 Consuming a whole, plant-based 
Figure 4. Effects of cellular damage, chronic conditions, and lifestyle practices appear to raise the risk of 
cardiovascular disease and cancer.
Table 1. Daily dietary recommendations1
Decrease substantially or eliminate
Increase or consume heavily
Inflammatory effects
Anti-Inflammatory effects
Low nutrient and/or high calorie
Meat: beef, pork, lamb, chicken, turkey, seafood
Processed meats: salami, bologna, ham, turkey, 
chicken
Animal dairy: milk, cheese, yogurt, kefir, sour  
cream, cottage cheese, butter
Sugar substitutes and refined sugars: aspartame, 
high-fructose corn syrup
Processed foods: refined grains (white bread, 
cookies, fried potato chips)
Soft drinks, alcohol
High nutrient/low calorie
Leafy greens
Vegetables: cruciferous, squash, garlic
Mushrooms
Fruits: berries, bananas, pomegranates
Legumes: green beans, lentils, soybeans,  
sugar snap peas
Whole grains: quinoa, wheat, oat, rice, pasta, 
barley, corn
Seeds: flax, chia, pumpkin, sesame
Plant-based “dairy”: soy, almond, rice milk
High nutrient/high fat: Limited consumption
Nuts: walnuts, pecans, almonds, etc
1 Bodai BI, Tuso P. Breast cancer survivorship: A comprehensive review of long-term medical issues and lifestyle 
recommendations. Perm J 2015 Spring;19(2):48-79. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/14-241.
 9
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
food (anti-inflammatory) diet promotes 
high-nutrient foods with fewer calories 
per pound compared with low-nutrient 
foods.3 This will result in a healthy BMI, 
potential weight loss, and a lower risk of 
development of CVD and some of the 
most common malignancies. Vegetables, 
fruits, legumes, whole grains, and healthy 
fats should become our staple foods and 
have been recommended as key compo-
nents of a healthy lifestyle to avert the three 
chronic conditions that are responsible for 
the majority of deaths in the US (Figure 1). 
Recently, the association of animal vs plant 
protein intake with all-cause mortality has 
been documented. Specifically, high con-
sumption of animal protein was associated 
with an increased risk of cardiovascular 
mortality and all-cause mortality.132 In this 
same study, high consumption of plant-
based protein demonstrated an overall 
decrease in all-cause mortality.132
Genetic variants have been associated 
with susceptibilities to the development of 
chronic disease. However, evidence is avail-
able that the hereditability of such variants 
may, in fact, be only modest.31 Thus, cred-
ibility is added to the fact that most chronic 
conditions are, in reality, the result of life-
style. An invitation to the development of 
chronic conditions is related to shifts in 
the human microbiome as represented by 
Western influence. Evidence for a strong 
correlation between the gut microflora and 
disease is exponentially expanding, particu-
larly relevant to the development of CVD 
and cancer.133-135 Along with our growth of 
knowledge comes an opportunity to inter-
vene in the prevention of disease. An incred-
ible shift in cancer care has recently become 
recognized because of technologic advances, 
and priming of the immune system has 
now been shown to be effective in treating 
patients with a wide variety of malignan-
cies. Epigenomics may play a major role 
in our immunogenetic capabilities, and, as 
such, lifestyle modifications, demonstrated 
to have an influence on the modulation of 
genetic expression profiles, are worthy of 
further investigation. Dietary and lifestyle 
changes can and should be pursued to avert 
poor outcomes.136 
Profit motives play a large role in the 
food industry as well as “Big Pharma” 
and health care; therefore, the delivery of 
information and the care of patients may 
themselves become the victims of politics. 
Most chronic conditions are influenced by 
lifestyle and account for 75% or more of 
health care costs.4,137 Since 2010, nearly 
18% of the US gross national product has 
been spent on health care, which exceeded 
$3.0 trillion in 2015.138,139 Few of these 
dollars have been spent on identifying the 
true underlying causes of patients’ chronic 
conditions. Lifestyle recommendations, as 
the primary treatment of disease, fail to be 
recognized as a priority. If we continue our 
current path of treating risk factors and ad-
vanced diseases, costs for care will continue 
to escalate and the health care system will 
approach bankruptcy in the near future.4 
As a consequence, lives will be lost. The 
enormous cost of health care directed to-
ward CVD and cancer account for up to 
one-third of the health care fiscal burden 
in the US. If 1 in 10 of the US population 
would adopt a healthy lifestyle, the amount 
of money saved could well fund others more 
in need. A 10% reduction in such costs may 
results in billions of dollars saved. 
Given the benefits of lifestyle medicine 
interventions, it would seem that our 
health care system would rush to embrace 
this movement; however, nothing could 
be further from the truth. Through the 
decades, leading proponents of lifestyle 
interventions have faced resistance or 
marginalization. Such resistance to change 
has to do with barriers on multiple levels 
affecting patients, clinicians, administra-
tors, government, and society in general. 
Most patients typically gather their food 
and nutrition information from popular 
media rather than from clinicians, many 
of whom may have limited knowledge of 
lifestyle interventions. In addition, much 
of this may reflect the limited time avail-
able in a typical office visit. Perhaps a more 
important issue stems from the formal 
education in medical school, residency, or 
fellowship programs, which lack a focus 
on scientific evidence supporting the im-
portance of nutrition related to a healthy 
lifestyle.140,141 Health care practitioners as 
well as administrators are often focused on 
the bottom line and find it challenging to 
direct resources toward new and innovative 
practices given low reimbursement rates for 
counseling on lifestyle changes. Adding to 
this, they may fear that patients will find 
such changes difficult and not sustainable. 
We are long overdue for a “rethink” about 
health care to achieve a more directive role 
in the lifestyle intervention of patients.
Currently, multiple forces maintaining 
the status quo exist at the systemic level. 
Special interest groups, including certain 
lobbyists, maintain barriers by spending 
monies to influence governmental and 
professional targets. For example, national 
dietary guidelines are watered down out 
of a concern over the economic interests 
of certain industries instead of reflecting 
on the evidence-based recommendations 
regarding the consumption of meat and 
dairy products. On the societal level, the 
hedonistic aspects of food are promoted 
over their health and nutritional aspects.
Despite the status quo, there is a ground-
swell of interest in lifestyle medicine and a 
hunger for change. There exists reason for 
optimism. The growing interest in well-
ness programs and the mainstreaming of 
yoga, tai chi, and mindfulness practices 
are examples of such changing attitudes. 
Integrating lifestyle medicine into clini-
cal practice in the areas of food, nutrition, 
exercise, and stress reduction is becoming 
more commonplace. Multiple organiza-
tions, including health care systems and 
large successful corporations, have come to 
realize the enormous benefits of a healthy 
lifestyle not only to wellness but also posi-
tively influencing enhanced productivity.
The establishment of lifestyle medicine 
as an effective therapy will ultimately de-
pend on a strategic plan to embrace the 
basic concepts addressed. We propose 
and advocate for a series of multiple ap-
proaches with a focus on potential future 
ventures. In an ideal setting, establishing 
a lifestyle medicine clinic within a health 
care organization would be a major step 
toward the promotion of patient well-
ness. Establishing a trained, interested 
team of dedicated professionals would be 
key to a successful patient experience. Al-
though many different lifestyle medicine 
approaches have been implemented, they 
all share some common characteristics: A 
physician trained in lifestyle techniques, 
supportive staff, patient educators who are 
strong in plant-based diets, and access to 
behavioral health. Such a team approach 
can be used to encourage, educate, and 
support patients for motivation to achieve 
their goals. 
 10
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
It will take time to break down the 
barriers that exist. We recommend the 
allocation of resources dedicated to the 
expansion and further development of 
such programs. More research document-
ing the efficacy and cost-saving benefits of 
innovative lifestyle clinics is needed. True 
preventive care must include tools and in-
formation on lifestyle recommendations. 
It is time for the medical community to 
intervene and provide the proper treat-
ment when confronting preventable con-
ditions. Many conditions are reversible 
with education and ongoing support to 
patients regarding lifestyle changes. Ad-
dressing the root cause of diseases and tak-
ing immediate corrective action may avert 
the health care crisis and restore a solid 
foundation for patients and the medical 
community. The practice of medicine is 
ever evolving, and the medical commu-
nity must keep pace of new information 
as it becomes available to implement best 
practices. Creating change takes courage 
and a willingness to think creatively as we 
begin to shift our medical system from 
one characterized by sick care to one de-
serving of the label of health care. 
In conjunction with building specific 
clinic workflows, we would recommend and 
endorse activities so that all practitioners 
possess at least an awareness and a basic 
understanding of what lifestyle modifica-
tions can do to prevent, treat, and even 
reverse chronic diseases. Large health care 
organizations must obligate themselves to 
such programs. Numerous health care prac-
titioners may not have the essential informa-
tion available to share with patients. Some, 
particularly in a solo-practice environment, 
may not have time to address lifestyle issues 
or have access to support such a program, 
despite their best intentions to do so. Many 
of our colleagues are uncomfortable in ad-
dressing lifestyle issues as they feel they are 
not qualified in such concerns, despite the 
fact that many of their patients seek such 
information. Multiple courses are available, 
at numerous conferences and through pro-
grams online, where practitioners can easily 
gain the knowledge they need to promote a 
healthy lifestyle. 
Healthy lifestyle interventions need not 
be limited to the clinic environment. Nu-
merous opportunities to share information 
with a direct impact on overall health are 
readily available. Community events, such 
as religious celebrations and festivals, pres-
ent a major forum for valuable information 
dissemination. Most large and influential 
companies have come to realize the im-
portance of a healthy lifestyle for their em-
ployees and now understand the increased 
effectiveness and productivity associated 
with good health. Social media, perhaps 
the most powerful contemporary means of 
connectivity, provides incredible opportu-
nities to disseminate information promot-
ing a healthy lifestyle. Although not all 
practitioners may be able to incorporate 
lifestyle goals into their practice, at least 
having the information easily available and 
knowing how to access such tools is a major 
step forward (see Sidebar: Moving Forward: 
Healthy Lifestyle Recommendations and 
Resources for Daily Practice).
CONCLUSION
Escalating health care costs and the im-
pact on care delivery are enormous and un-
derestimated. Projections of chronic diseases 
lack an accurate forecast because of our 
ongoing endorsement of a poor Western 
lifestyle. We have become a society that 
has embraced a lifestyle of convenience 
and availability, fueled by technology 
and misinformation. We are no longer 
forced to search for foods and nutrients; 
computers and electronics have replaced 
physical activity. 
A potential decline in life expectancy in 
the US in the current century was forecast 
12 years ago.142 That prediction has now 
come to fruition, verified by the latest sta-
tistics, which demonstrate a decrease in life 
expectancy by 0.1% years in 2015.143 This is 
the first decline noted since the 1990s. The 
evidence is irrefutable, and the message is 
clear. We must prevent disease in all aspects 
of our lives and in the lives of the people we 
love. It is time to change our health destiny 
by shifting our attitude toward a healthy 
lifestyle. It is time to move from a state of 
disease to a state of health. It is time to eat 
healthy, be active, and decrease stress.
We must address the impact of lifestyle 
changes on our future generations. Numer-
ous studies have shown that the positive 
Moving Forward: Healthy Lifestyle Recommendations and Resources for Daily Practice
Practitioner education regarding benefits of healthy lifestyle recommendations
• Plant-based nutrition certification, Cornell University
• American College of Lifestyle Medicine certification
• Lifestyle conference attendance (eg, The Plantrician Project: www.plantricianproject.org)
• Endorsement by providers to adopt such practices
• Online resources: T Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies (http://nutritionstudies.org); 
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (www.pcrm.org)
Identification of team members engaged in promotion of a healthy lifestyle
• Physician colleagues 
• Dietitians trained in whole-foods, plant-based nutrition
• Social workers
• Behavioral therapists
• Lifestyle coaches 
Promotion of exercise programs
• Walk to Thrive (https://kpwalktothrive.org/)
• Exercise coaches
Endorsement of alternative approaches to health and well-being
• Yoga
• Meditation
• Dance
• Aromatherapy
Establishment of and participation in cooking demonstrations and classes in the clinic  
and community—patient provision of resources
• Health education handouts and pamphlets addressing health and wellness
• Community-provided educational materials
• Reputable Web site resources 
• Vigorous endorsement by providers to adopt such practices
 11
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
impact of a healthy lifestyle carries forward 
as children mature. The youngest of our 
population must be exposed to a healthy 
lifestyle from their earliest ages because 
CVD risk factors begin in childhood.144 
Such recommendations have been demon-
strated to lead to a significant decrease in 
annual mortality owing to not only CVD 
but also type 2 diabetes.145 
We are charged with providing patients 
the information they need to live a long, 
healthy life, which can be readily accom-
plished through the practice of lifestyle 
medicine. It has been stated that we, as care-
givers, owe our patients this information to 
stay well and healthy.3 Changing medicine 
to a culture that teaches lifestyle empowers 
patients to take control of their own health. 
Nutritional education is key to the imple-
mentation of a healthy lifestyle. Authors of 
several recent articles address this and have 
come forth with solid recommendations, 
educational resources, and guidelines to aid 
physicians in achieving these objectives.11,146 
Positive recommendations are presented 
as how physicians can educate themselves 
and present an effective treatment plan to 
patients, which include multiple options.146
As an aging population, we are faced with 
confronting inflammation, obesity, and 
diabetes, resulting in a dysbiotic microbi-
ome, which contributes to our contempo-
rary chronic conditions. Most deaths from 
chronic illness in the US are preventable 
and related to how we live. The system 
has failed to implement well-documented 
strategies and has fallen short of addressing 
risk factors that continue to contribute to 
long-term disabilities that greatly influence 
the potential to extend our lifespan—in an 
enjoyable manner.
We have addressed current concerns re-
garding a healthy lifestyle; such factors are 
being increasingly recognized as prognostic 
indicators of health. Weight loss, a major 
concern in the US, is a priority of most 
people yet is often a goal unachieved. Ad-
herence to a healthy lifestyle, including a 
whole-foods, plant-based diet regimen and 
moderate exercise, has been shown to result 
in long-term weight loss comparable to 
that with conventional “reduced”-calorie 
diets, but with better results in overall 
health. A focus on lifestyle includes under-
standing the quadrants of health: Healthy 
eating, active living, healthy weight, and 
emotional resilience. This can be achieved 
by adopting a healthy lifestyle, and our 
goal is to deliver this message. 
We should all be concerned about the 
wellness of each other. It’s time to save our 
patients as well as ourselves. Medicine, as 
currently practiced, is approaching a strate-
gic inflection point; a need for change must 
be recognized and instituted. Practitioners, 
insurance providers, and governmental 
agencies must inform the population that 
we have identified the root causes of many 
of our diseases and must implement a plan 
to halt and reverse these conditions. The 
misconception that many chronic illnesses 
are simply the result of aging must be 
corrected. Maladies such as hypertension, 
heart disease, diabetes, and osteoarthritis 
are not inevitable outcomes of aging, but 
are an end product of poor lifestyles. To 
those of us looking for solutions to our 
health care crisis, the gaping need for life-
style medicine in daily practice is evident. 
Initiatives must be identified and put in 
place that focus on wellness promotion. 
We are running out of time to reverse a 
destructive trend. Our survival and the 
survival of the next generation are at risk. 
The modernization of our civilization has 
led to the birth of many current diseases, 
largely because of the adoption of a 21st-
century lifestyle. Our health problems are 
manmade and, therefore, solvable. We 
must multiply our wisdom regarding the 
future of health, our health care, and our 
survival. We constantly strive to protect 
endangered species from extinction, while, 
in fact, it may well be that we ourselves are 
far closer to extinction.
It is our hope and anticipation that 
this article will motivate and inspire our 
colleagues to share their stories and suc-
cesses with implementing lifestyle medi-
cine programs in their Regions, service 
areas, clinics, and practices. We are aware 
of faculty at numerous campuses, many 
of whom are coauthors of this paper, who 
have implemented successful projects that 
have incorporated lifestyle practices with 
excellent clinical results. Sharing “best 
practice” models will result in the most ef-
fective care of our patients. Because many 
of our colleagues are educated in the science 
of lifestyle medicine, this should serve as a 
call to action. The impact of such projects, 
when adequately publicized, may result in 
a dramatic impact on the future of health 
care delivery, and more importantly the 
long-term well-being of our patients. v
Disclosure Statement
The author(s) have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.
Acknowledgment
Kathleen Louden, ELS, of Louden Health 
Communications provided editorial assistance.
How to Cite this Article
Bodai BI, Nakata TE, Wong WT, et al. Lifestyle 
medicine: A brief review of its dramatic impact on 
health and survival. Perm J 2018;22:17-025. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/17-025.
Dedication
We dedicate this article to T Collin Campbell, 
PhD, whom many consider the patriarch of the 
whole-foods, plant-based diet and author of The 
China Study, a landmark work on health, and who 
has stated that “everything in food works together to 
create health or disease.”
References
 1. Minich DM, Bland JS. Personalized lifestyle 
medicine: Relevance for nutrition and lifestyle 
recommendations. Scientific World Journal 
2013 Jun 26;2013:129841. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/129841.
 2. Dieleman JL, Baral R, Birger M, et al. US spending 
on personal health care and public health, 1993-
2013. JAMA 2016 Dec 27;316(24):2627-46. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.16885.
 3. Bodai BI, Tuso P. Breast cancer survivorship: A 
comprehensive review of long-term medical issues 
and lifestyle recommendations. Perm J 2015 
Spring;19(2):48-79. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/14-241.
 4. Hyman MA, Ornish D, Roizen M. Lifestyle medicine: 
Treating the causes of diseases. Altern Ther Health 
Med 2009 Nov-Dec;15(6):12-4.
 5. Ford ES, Bergmann MM, Kröger J, Schienkiewitz A, 
Weikert C, Boeing H. Healthy living is the best 
revenge: Findings from the European Prospective 
Investigation Into Cancer and Nutrition-
Potsdam study. Arch Intern Med 2009 Aug 
10;169(15):1355-62. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/
archinternmed.2009.237.
 6. Alpert JS. Failing grades in the adoption of healthy 
lifestyle choices. Am J Med 2009 Jun;122(6):493-4. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.01.010.
 7. Murray CJ, Atkinson C, Bhalla K, et al; US Burden of 
Disease Collaborators. The state of US health, 1990-
2010: Burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. 
JAMA 2013 Aug 14;310(6):591-608. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1001/jama.2013.13805.
 8. Twombly R. Cancer surpasses heart disease as 
leading cause of death for all but the very elderly. J 
Natl Cancer Inst 2005 Mar 2;97(5):330-1. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1093/jnci/97.5.330.
 9. Jones DS, Podolsky SH, Greene JA. The burden of 
disease and the changing task of medicine. N Engl 
J Med 2012 Jun 21;366(25):2333-8. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMp1113569.
 10. Watzl B. Anti-inflammatory effects of plant-based foods 
and of their constituents. Int J Vitam Nutr Res 2008 
 12
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
Dec;78(6):293-8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1024/0300-
9831.78.6.293.
 11. Tuso PJ, Ismael MH, Ha BP, Bartolotto C. Nutritional 
update for physicians: Plant-based diets. Perm J 
2013 Spring;17(2):61-6. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7812/
TPP/12-085.
 12. Blaney D, Diehl H. The optimal diet: The official 
CHIP cookbook. Hagerstown, MD: Autumn House 
Publishing; 2009 Jan 1.
 13. Ornish D, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, et.al. Intensive 
lifestyle changes for reversal of coronary heart 
disease. JAMA 1998 Dec 16;280(23):2001-7. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.280.23.2001.
 14. Esselstyn CB Jr. Resolving the coronary artery disease 
epidemic through plant-based nutrition. Prev Cardiol 
2001 Autumn;4(4):171-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1520-037x.2001.00538.x.
 15. Esselstyn CB Jr, Gendy G, Doyle J, Golubic M, 
Roizen MF. A way to reverse CAD? J Fam Pract 2014 
Jun;63(7):356-364b.
 16. Wang Y, Beydoun MA. Meat consumption is 
associated with obesity and central obesity among US 
adults. Int J Obes (Lond) 2009 Jun;33(6):621-8. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2009.45.
 17. Berkow SE, Barnard N. Vegetarian diets and weight 
status. Nutr Rev 2006 Apr;64(4):175-88. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-4887.2006.tb00200.x.
 18. Farmer B, Larson BT, Fulgoni VL 3rd, Rainville AJ, 
Liepa GU. A vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-
dense approach to weight management: An analysis 
of the national health and nutrition examination survey 
1999-2004. J Am Diet Assoc 2011 Jun;111(6):819-27. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jada.2011.03.012.
 19. Ornish D, Brown SE, Scherwitz LW, et al. Can lifestyle 
changes reverse coronary heart disease? The Lifestyle 
Heart Trial. Lancet 1990 Jul 21;336(8708):129-33. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(90)91656-U.
 20. Tonstad S, Butler T, Yan R, Fraser GE. Type of 
vegetarian diet, body weight, and prevalence of type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009 May;32(5):791-6. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc08-1886.
 21. Polednak AP. Estimating the number of US incident 
causes attributable to obesity and the impact on 
temporal trends in incident rates for obesity-related 
cancers. Cancer Detect Prev 2008;32(3):190-9. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cdp.2008.08.004. 
 22. Hunter P. The inflammation theory of disease EMBO  
reports 2012. 13;11:968-70.doi:10.1038/embor.2012.142
 23. Cancello R, Clément K. Review article: Is obesity an 
inflammatory illness? Role of low-grade inflammation 
and macrophage infiltration in human white adipose 
tissue. BJOG 2006 Oct:1141-7. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1471-0528.2006.01004.x.
 24. Clarke G, Stilling RM, Kennedy PJ, Stanton C, 
Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Minireview: Gut microbiota: The 
neglected endocrine organ. Mol Endocrinol 2014 
Aug;28(8):1221-38. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1210/
me.2014-1108.
 25. Marchesi JR, Adams DH, Fava F, et al. The gut 
microbiota and host health: A new clinical frontier. Gut 
2016 Feb;65(2):330-9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1136/
gutjnl-2015-309990.
 26. Tang WH, Wang Z, Levison BS, et al. Intestinal 
microbial metabolism of phosphatidylcholine 
and cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med 2013 Apr 
25;368(17):1575-84. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1056/
nejmoa1109400.
 27. Rajendhran J, Shanker M, Dinakaren V, Rathinavel A, 
Gunasekaran P. Contrasting circulating microbiome 
in cardiovascular disease patients and healthy 
individuals. Int J Cardiol 2013 Oct 12;168(5):5118-20. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.07.232.
 28. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, 
Mardis ER, Gordon JI. An obesity-associated gut 
microbiome with increased capacity for energy 
harvest. Nature 2006 Dec 21;444(7122):1027-31. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05414.
 29. Larsen N, Vogensen FK, van den Berg FW, et al. 
Gut microbiota in human adults with type 2 diabetes 
differs from non-diabetic adults. PLoS One 2010 Feb 
5;5(2):e9085. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0009085.
 30. Windey K, De Preter V, Verbeke K. Relevance of 
protein fermentation to gut health. Mol Nutr Food Res 
2012 Jan;56(1):184-96. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
mnfr.201100542.
 31. Boulangé CL, Neves AL, Chilloux J, Nicholson JK, 
Dumas ME. Impact of the gut microbiota on 
inflammation, obesity, and metabolic disease. Genome 
Med 2016 Apr 20;8(1):42. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13073-016-0303-2.
 32. Gregor MF, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammatory 
mechanisms in obesity. Ann Rev Immunol 
2011;29:415-45. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
immunol-031210-101322.
 33. Klonoff DC. The increasing incidence of diabetes 
in the 21st century. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2009 
Jan;3(1):1-2. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
193229680900300101
 34. Goldfine AB, Shoelson SE. Therapeutic approaches 
targeting inflammation for diabetes and associated 
cardiovascular risk. J Clin Invest 2017 Jan 3;127(1): 
83-93. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88884.
 35. Navarro JF, Mora C. Role of inflammation in diabetic 
complications. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005 Dec;20(12): 
2601-4. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfi155.
 36. Wellen KE, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammation, stress, and 
diabetes. J Clin Invest 2005 May;115(5):1111-9. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1172/jci25102.
 37. Tuomilehto J, Lindström J, Eriksson JG, et al; Finnish 
Diabetes Prevention Study Group. Prevention of type 
2 diabetes mellitus by changes in lifestyle among 
subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl J 
Med 2001 May 3;344(18):1343-50. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1056/nejm200105033441801.
 38. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al; 
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. 
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with 
lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med 2002 
Feb 7;346(6):393-403. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1056/
nejmoa012512.
 39. Pan XR, Li GW, Hu YH, et al. Effects of diet and 
exercise in preventing NIDDM in people with impaired 
glucose tolerance. The Da Qing IGT and Diabetes 
Study. Diabetes Care 1997 Apr;20(4):537-44. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.2337/diacare.20.4.537.
 40. Saito T, Watanabe M, Nishida J, et al; Zensharen 
Study for Prevention of Lifestyle Diseases Group. 
Lifestyle modification and prevention of type 2 diabetes 
in overweight Japanese with impaired fasting glucose 
levels: A randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern 
Med 2011 Aug 8;171(15):1352-60. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1001/archinternmed.2011.275.
 41. Imamura F, O’Connor L, Ye Z, et al. Consumption of 
sugar sweetened beverages, artificially sweetened 
beverages, and fruit juice and incidence of type 2 
diabetes: Systematic review, meta-analysis, and 
estimation of population attributable fraction. BMJ 
2015 Jul 21;351:h3576. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.h3576.
 42. Malik VS, Li Y, Tobias DK, Pan A, Hu FB. Dietary 
protein intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in US men 
and women. Am J Epidemiol 2016 Apr 16;183(8):715-
28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwv268.
 43. Micha R, Michas G, Mozaffarian D. Unprocessed 
red and processed meats and risk of coronary 
artery disease and type 2 diabetes—An updated 
review of the evidence. Curr Atheroscler Rep 2012 
Dec;14(6):515-24. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11883-012-0282-8.
 44. Djoussé L. Relation of eggs with incident 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes: Friends or foes? 
Atherosclerosis 2013 Aug;229(2):507-8. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.05.003.
 45. Boussageon R, Bejan-Angoulvant T, Saadatian-
Elahi M, et al. Effect of intensive glucose lowering 
treatment on all cause mortality, cardiovascular death, 
and microvascular events in type 2 diabetes: Meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2011 Jul 
26;343:d4169. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d4169.
 46. Rodríguez-Gutiérrez R, Montori V. Glycemic control 
for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: Our evolving 
faith in the face of evidence. Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes 2016 Sep;9(5):504-12. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1161/circoutcomes.116.002901.
 47. American Diabetes Association. 8. Pharmacologic 
approaches to glycemic treatment. Diabetes Care 
2017 Jan;40(Suppl 1):S64-S74. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.2337/dc17-S011. Erratum in: Diabetes Care 2017 
Jul;40(7):985. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc17-er07b.
 48. Snowling NJ, Hopkins WG. Effects of different modes 
of exercise training on glucose control and risk factors 
for complications in type 2 diabetic patients: A meta-
analysis. Diabetes Care 2006 Nov;29(11):2518-27. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc06-1317.
 49. Barnard ND, Cohen J, Jenkins DJ, et al. A low-fat vegan 
diet improves glycemic control and cardiovascular risk 
factors in a randomized clinical trial in individuals with 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006 Aug;29(8):1777-
83. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2337/dc06-0606.
 50. McDougall J, Thomas LE, McDougall C, et al. Effects 
of 7 days on an ad libitum low-fat vegan diet: The 
McDougall Program cohort. Nutr J 2014 Oct 14;13:99. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2891-13-99. Erratum 
in: Nutr J 2017 Feb 10;16(1):12. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12937-017-0234-9.
 51. Wolfram T, Ismail-Beigi F. Efficacy of high-fiber diets in 
the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Endocr 
Pract 2011 Jan-Feb;17(1):132-42. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4158/ep10204.ra.
 52. Rowley WR, Bezold C, Arikan Y, Byrne E, Krohe S. 
Diabetes 2030: Insights from yesterday, today, and 
future trends. Popul Health Manag 2017 Feb;20(1):6-
12. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1089/pop.2015.0181.
 53. Roberston RM. Women and cardiovascular disease: 
The risks of misperception and the need for action. 
Circulation 2001 May 15;103(19):2318-20. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.103.19.2318.
 54. Mensah GA, Brown DW. An overview of cardiovascular 
disease burden in the United States. Health Aff 
(Millwood) 2007 Jan-Feb;26(1):38-48. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1377/hlthaff.26.1.38.
 55. Thom T, Haase N, Rosamond W, et al; American 
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke 
Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics—2006 update: A report from the American 
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke 
Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation 2006 Feb 
14;113(6):e85-151. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1161/
circulationaha.105.171600. Erratum in: Circulation 
2006 Apr 11;113(14):e696. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1161/circulationaha.106.174501. Erratum in: 
Circulation 2006 Dec 5;114(23):e630. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1161/circulationaha.106.180110.
 56. Heidenreich PA, Trogdon JG, Khavjou OA, 
et al; American Heart Association Advocacy 
Coordinating Committee; Stroke Council; Council on 
Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; Council 
on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Epidemiology and 
Prevention; Council on Arteriosclerosis; Thrombosis 
and Vascular Biology; Council on Cardiopulmonary; 
Critical Care; Perioperative and Resuscitation; 
Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on 
the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease; Council 
on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and 
Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and 
 13
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
Outcomes Research. Forecasting the future of 
cardiovascular disease in the United States: A policy 
statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation 2011 Mar 1;123(8):933-44. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1161/hhf.0b013e318291329a.
 57. Writing Group Members, Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, 
Go AS, et al; American Heart Association Statistics 
Committee; Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart 
disease and stroke statistics—2016 update: A report 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation 
2016 Jan 26;133(4):e38-360. DOI: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000350. Erratum in: Circulation 2016 
Apr 12;133(15):e599. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000409.
 58. Song Z, Blumenthal DM. Expanding payment reform 
in Medicare: The cardiology episode-based payment 
model. JAMA 2016 Nov 15;316(19):1973-4. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.16146.
 59. Mathieu P, Lemieux I, Deprés JP. Obesity, 
inflammation, and cardiovascular risk. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther 2010 Apr;87(4):407-16. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/clpt.2009.311.
 60. Libby P, Ridker PM, Hansson GK; Leducq 
Transatlantic Network on Atherothrombosis. 
Inflammation in atherosclerosis: From pathophysiology 
to practice. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009 Dec 1;54(23):2129-
38. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2009.09.009.
 61. Tuso P, Stoll SR, Li WW. A plant-based diet, 
atherogenesis, and coronary artery disease 
prevention. Perm J 2015 Winter;19(1):62-7. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/14-036.
 62. Esselstyn CB Jr. Is the present therapy for coronary 
artery disease the radical mastectomy of the twenty-
first century? Am J Cardiol 2010 Sep 15;106(6):902-4. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.05.016.
 63. Koeth RA, Wang Z, Levison BS, et al. Intestinal 
microbiota of L-carnitine, a nutrient in red 
meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat Med 2013 
May;19(5):576-85. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nm.3145.
 64. Ornish D. Avoiding revascularization with lifestyle 
changes: The Multicenter Lifestyle Demonstration 
Project. Am J Cardiol 1998 Nov 26;280(10B):72T-76T. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9149(98)00744-9.
 65. Franklin BA, Cushman M. Recent advances in 
preventive cardiology and lifestyle medicine: A themed 
series. Circulation 2011 May 24;123(20):2274-83. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1161/circulationaha.110.981613.
 66. Eichelmann F, Schwingshackl L, Fedirko V, 
Aleksandrova K. Effect of plant-based diets on obesity-
related inflammatory profiles: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of intervention trials. Obes Rev 2016 
Nov;17(11):1067-79. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/
obr.12349.
 67. Mink PJ, Scrafford CG, Barraj LM, et al. Flavonoid 
intake and cardiovascular disease mortality: A 
prospective study in postmenopausal women. Am J 
Clin Nutr 2007 Mar;85(3):895-909.
 68. Mente A, de Koning L, Shannon HS, Anand SS. 
A systematic review of the evidence supporting a 
causal link between dietary factors and coronary heart 
disease. Arch Intern Med 2009 Apr 13;169(7):659-69. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2009.38.
 69. Schwingshackl L, Hoffmann G. Diet quality as 
assessed by the healthy eating index, the alternate 
healthy eating index, the dietary approaches to 
stop hypertension score, and health outcomes: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. 
J Acad Nutr Diet 2015 May;115(5):780-800.e5. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2014.12.009.
 70. Dinu M, Abbate R, Gensini GF, Casini A, Sofi F. 
Vegetarian, vegan diets and multiple health 
outcomes: A systematic review with meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2017 
Nov 22;57(17):3640-3649. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080
/10408398.2016.1138447.
 71. Harland J, Garton L. An update of the evidence 
relating to plant-based diets and cardiovascular 
disease, type 2 diabetes and overweight. Nutr Bull 
2016 Dec;41(4):323-38. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/
nbu.12235.
 72. Hofker MH, Fu J, Wijmenga C. The genome revolution 
and its role in understanding complex diseases. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 Oct;1842(10):1889-95. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.002.
 73. Wilson BJ, Nicholls SG. The Human Genome Project, 
and recent advances in personalized genomics. Risk 
Manag Healthc Policy 2015 Feb 16;8:9-20. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.2147/rmhp.s58728.
 74. Ellsworth DL, Croft DT, Weyandt J, et al. Intensive 
cardiovascular risk reduction induces sustainable 
changes in expression of genes and pathways 
important to vascular function. Circulation: 
Cardiovascular Genetics 2014 Apr;7(2):151-60. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1161/circgenetics.113.000121.
 75. Chow CK, Jolly S, Rao-Melacini P, Fox KA, Anand SS, 
Yusuf S. Association of diet, exercise, and smoking 
modification with risk of early cardiovascular events 
after acute coronary syndrome. Circulation 2010 
Feb 16;121(6):750-8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1161/
circulationaha.109.891523.
 76. Khera AV, Emdin CA, Drake I, et al. Genetic risk, 
adherence to a healthy lifestyle, and coronary disease. 
N Engl J Med 2016 Dec 15;375(24):2349-58. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa1605086.
 77. Nocon M, Heimann T, Müller-Riemenschneider F, 
Thalau F, Roll S, Willich SN. Association of physical 
activity with all-cause and cardiovascular mortality: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J 
Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2008 Jun;15(3):239-46. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1097/hjr.0b013e3282f55e09.
 78. Franklin BA, McCullough PA. Cardiorespiratory 
fitness: An independent and additive marker of 
risk stratification and health outcomes. Mayo 
Clin Proc 2009 Sep;84(9):776-9. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4065/84.9.776.
 79. Global Burden of Disease Cancer Collaboration, 
Fitzmaurice C, Allen C, Barber RM, et al. Global, 
regional, and national cancer incidence, mortality, 
years of life lost, years lived with disability, and 
disability-adjusted life-years for 32 cancer groups, 
1990-2015. A systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study. JAMA Oncol 2017 
Apr 1;3(4):524-48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamaoncol.2016.5688.
 80. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2017. 
CA Cancer J Clin 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.3322/caac.21387.
 81. Anand P, Kunnumakkara AB, Sundaram C, et al. 
Cancer is a preventable disease that requires major 
lifestyle changes. Pharm Res 2008 Sep;25(9):2097-
116. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-008-9690-4.
 82. Ligibel J. Lifestyle factors in cancer survivorship. J Clin 
Oncol 2012 Oct 20;30(30):3697-704. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1200/jco.2012.42.0638.
 83. Kyrgiou M, Kalliala I, Markozannes G, et al. Adiposity 
and cancer at major anatomical sites: Umbrella review 
of the literature. BMJ 2017 Feb 28;356:j477. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j477.
 84. Miller KD, Siegel RL, Lin CC, et al. Cancer treatment 
and survivorship statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J Clin 
2016 Jul;66(4);271-89. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3322/
caac.21349.
 85. Rustgi AK. The genetics of hereditary colon cancer. 
Genes Dev 2007 Oct 15;21(20):2525-38. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1101/gad.1593107.
 86. Terzić J, Grivennikov S, Karin E, Karin M. 
Inflammation and colon cancer. Gastroenterology 
2010 Jun;138(6):2101-14.e5. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1053/j.gastro.2010.01.058.
 87. Tsai MS, Chen HP, Hung CM, Lee PH, Lin CL, 
Kao CH. Hospitalization for inflammatory bowel 
disease is associated with increased risk of breast 
cancer: A nationwide cohort study of an Asian 
population. Ann Surg Oncol 2015;22(6):1996-2002. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-014-4198-0.
 88. Ou J, Carbonero F, Zoetendal EG, et al. Diet, 
microbiota, and microbial metabolites in colon cancer 
risk in rural Africans and African Americans. Am J 
Clin Nutr 2013 Jul;98(1):111-20. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.3945/ajcn.112.056689.
 89. Platz EA, Willet WC, Colditz GA, Rimm EB, 
Spiegelman D, Giovannucci E. Proportion of 
colon cancer risk that might be preventable in 
cohort of middle-aged US men. Cancer Causes 
Control 2000 Aug;11(7):579-88. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1023/A:1008999232442.
 90. Bultman SJ. Emerging roles of the microbiome in 
cancer. Carcinogenesis 2014 Feb;35(2):249-55. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgt392.
 91. Edwards BK, Noone AM, Mariotto AB, et al. Annual 
report to the nation on the status of cancer, 1975-2010, 
featuring prevalence of comorbidity and impact on 
survival among persons with lung, colorectal, breast, 
or prostate cancer. Cancer 2014 May 1;120(9):1290-
314. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.28509.
 92. De Bruijn KM, Arends LR, Hansen BE, Leeflang S, 
Ruiter R, van Eijck CH. Systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the association between diabetes 
mellitus and the incidence and mortality in breast and 
colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 2013 Oct;100(11):1421-9. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.9229.
 93. Van Blarigan EL, Meyerhardt JA. Role of physical 
activity and diet after colorectal cancer diagnosis. J 
Clin Oncol 2015 Jun 1;33(16):1825-34. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1200/jco.2014.59.7799.
 94. Campbell PT, Patel AV, Newton CC, Jacobs EJ, 
Gapstur SM. Associations of recreational physical 
activity and leisure time spent sitting with colorectal 
cancer survival. J Clin Oncol 2013 Mar 1;31(7):876-85. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1200/jco.2012.45.9735.
 95. Weiner AB, Matulewicz RS, Eggener SE, 
Schaeffer EM. Increasing incidence of metastatic 
prostate cancer in the United States (2004-2013). 
Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis 2016 Dec;19(4):395-7. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/pcan.2016.30.
 96. Carter HB, Albertsen PC, Barry MJ, et al. Early 
detection of prostate cancer: AUA guideline. J 
Urol 2013 Aug;190(2):419-26. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.juro.2013.04.119.
 97. Freedland SJ, Aronson WJ. Examining the relationship 
between obesity and prostate cancer. Rev Urol 2004 
Spring;6(2):73-81.
 98. Ornish D, Weidner G, Fair WR, et al. Intensive lifestyle 
changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. 
J Urol 2005 Sep;174(3):1065-70. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1097/01.ju.0000169487.49018.73.
 99. Ornish D, Magbanua MJ, Weidner G, et al. Changes 
in prostate gene expression in men undergoing an 
intensive nutrition and lifestyle intervention. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 2008 Jun 17;105(24):8369-74. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0803080105.
 
100. Yang M, Kenfield SA, Van Blarigan EL, et al. Dietary 
patterns after prostate cancer diagnosis in relation 
to disease-specific and total mortality. Cancer Prev 
Res (Phila) 2015 Jun;8(6):545-51. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1158/1940-6207.capr-14-0442.
 
101. Sinicrope FA, Dannenberg AJ. Obesity and breast 
cancer prognosis: Weight of the evidence. J Clin Oncol 
2011 Jan 1;29(1):4-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1200/
JCO.2010.32.1752.
 
102. Clarke CA, Canchola AJ, Moy LM, et al. Regular and 
low-dose aspirin, other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
medications and prospective risk of HER2-defined 
breast cancer: The California Teachers Study. Breast 
 14
The Permanente Journal/Perm J 2018;22:17-025
ORIGINAL RESEARCH & CONTRIBUTIONS
Lifestyle Medicine: A Brief Review of Its Dramatic Impact on Health and Survival 
Cancer Res 2017 May 1;19(1):52. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13058-017-0840-7.
 
103. Ewertz M, Jensen MD, Gunnarsdóttir KÁ, et al. Effect 
of obesity on prognosis after early-stage breast cancer. 
J Clin Oncol 2011 Jan 1;29(1):25-31. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1200/jco.2010.29.7614.
 
104. Kotepui M. Diet and risk of breast cancer. Contemp 
Oncol (Pozn) 2016;20(1):13-9. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5114/wo.2014.40560.
 
105. Kushi LH, Doyle C, McCullough M, et al; American 
Cancer Society 2010 Nutrition and Physical Activity 
Guidelines Advisory Committee. American Cancer 
Society Guidelines on nutrition and physical activity for 
cancer prevention: Reducing the risk of cancer with 
healthy food choices and physical activity. CA Cancer 
J Clin 2012 Jan-Feb;62(1):30-67. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.3322/caac.20140.
 
106. Adams S. Estrobolome disparities may lead to 
developing biomarkers that could mitigate cancer risk. 
J Natl Cancer Inst 2016;108(8):djw130. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djw130.
 
107. Shapira I, Sultan K, Lee A, Taioli E. Evolving 
concepts: How diet and the intestinal microbiome 
act as modulators of breast malignancy. ISRN 
Oncol 2013 Sep 25;2013:693920. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/693920.
 
108. Goedert JJ, Jones G, Hua X, et al. Investigation 
of the association between the fecal microbiota 
and breast cancer in postmenopausal women: A 
population-based case-control pilot study. J Natl 
Cancer Inst 2015 Jun 1;107(8):dvj147. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djv147.
 
109. Kwa M, Plottel CS, Blaser MJ, Adams S. The 
intestinal microbiome and estrogen receptor-positive 
female breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2016 Apr 
22;108(8):djw029. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/
djw029.
 
110. What breast cancer survivors can do [Internet]. 
Washington, DC: American Institute for Cancer 
Research (AICR); 2014 Oct [cited 2017 Jul 27]. 
Available from: www.aicr.org.
 
111. Ibrahim EM, Al-Homaidh A. Physical activity and 
survival after breast cancer diagnosis: Meta-analysis of 
published studies. Med Oncol 2011 Sep;28(3):753-65. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12032-010-9536-x.
 
112. Hamer J, Warner E. Lifestyle modifications for patients 
with breast cancer to improve prognosis and optimize 
overall health. CMAJ 2017 Feb 1;189(7):E268-74. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.160464.
 
113. Irwin ML, McTiernan A, Manson JE, et al. Physical 
activity and survival in postmenopausal women with 
breast cancer: Results from the women’s health 
initiative. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2011 Apr;4(4):522-9. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1158/1940-6207.capr-10-0295.
 
114. Chlebowski RT. Nutrition and physical activity influence 
on breast cancer incidence and outcome. Breast 2013 
Aug;22 Suppl 2:S30-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
breast.2013.07.006.
 
115. Meyerhardt JA, Heseltine D, Niedzwiecki D, et al. 
Impact of physical activity on cancer recurrence 
and survival in patients with stage III colon cancer: 
Findings from CALGB 89803. J Clin Oncol 2006 
Aug 1;24(22):3535-41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1200/
jco.2008.26.15_suppl.4039.
 
116. Pierce JP, Stefanick ML, Flatt SW, et al. Greater 
survival after breast cancer in physically active women 
with high vegetable-fruit intake regardless of obesity. J 
Clin Oncol 2007 Jun 10;25(17):2345-51. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1200/jco.2006.08.6819.
 
117. Morgan RJ Jr. Underserved topics in oncology: The 
role of physical activity in improving quality of life and 
decreasing recurrence risk in patients with cancer. J 
Natl Compr Canc Netw 2014 May;12(5):735-7. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.6004/jnccn.2014.0075.
 
118. Fournier A, Dos Santos G, Guillas G, et al. Recent 
recreational physical activity and breast cancer risk in 
postmenopausal women in the E3N cohort. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2014 Sep;23(9):1893-902. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.epi-14-0150.
 
119. Sidney S, Quesenberry CP Jr, Jaffe MG, et al. 
Recent trends in cardiovascular mortality in the 
United States and public health goals. JAMA Cardiol 
2016 Aug 1;1(5):594-9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamacardio.2016.1326.
 
120. Gomez SL, Canchola AJ, Nelson DO, et al. Recent 
declines in cancer incidence: Related to the 
Great Recession? Cancer Causes Control 2017 
Feb;28(2):145-54. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10552-016-0846-y.
 
121. Lloyd-Jones DM. Slowing progress in cardiovascular 
mortality rates: You reap what you sow. JAMA Cardiol 
2016 Aug 1;1(5):599-600. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamacardio.2016.1348.
 
122. Gonzales JF, Barnard ND, Jenkins DJ, et al. Applying 
the precautionary principle to nutrition and cancer. J 
Am Coll Nutr 2014;33(3):239-46. DOI: https://doi.org/1
0.1080/07315724.2013.866527. 
 
123. Pan A, Sun Q, Bernstein AM, et al. Red meat 
consumption and mortality: Results from 2 
prospective cohort studies. Arch Intern Med 2012 
Apr 9;172(7):555-63. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/
archinternmed.2011.2287. 
 
124. Wang X, Ouyang Y, Liu J, et al. Fruit and vegetable 
consumption and mortality from all causes, 
cardiovascular disease, and cancer: Systematic review 
and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective 
cohort studies. BMJ 2014 Jul 29;349:g4490. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g4490.
 
125. Allen NE, Appleby PN, Davey GK, Kaaks R, Rinaldi S, 
Key TJ. The associations of diet with serum insulin-
like growth factor I and its main binding proteins in 292 
women meat-eaters, vegetarians, and vegans. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2002 Nov;11(11):1441-8.
 
126. Westley RL, May FE. A twenty-first century cancer 
epidemic caused by obesity: The involvement of 
insulin, diabetes, and insulin-like growth factors. Int J 
Endocrinol 2013;2013:632461. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2013/63246.
 
127. Bellavia A, Larsson SC, Bottai M, Wolk A, Orsini N. 
Fruit and vegetable consumption and all-cause 
mortality: A dose-response analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 
2013 Aug;98(2):454-9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3945/
ajcn.112.056119. 
 
128. Demark-Wahnefried W, Campbell KL, Hayes SC. 
Weight management and its role in breast 
cancer rehabilitation. Cancer 2012 Apr 15;118(8 
Suppl):2277-87. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
cncr.27466.
 
129. Ford ES, Bergmann MM, Boeing H, Li C, Capewell S. 
Healthy lifestyle behaviors and all-cause mortality 
among adults in the United States. Prev Med 2012 
Jul;55(1):23-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.ypmed.2012.04.016.
 
130. Boursi B, Mamtani R, Haynes K, Yang YX. Recurrent 
antibiotic exposure may promote cancer formation—
Another step in understanding the role of human 
microbiota? Eur J Cancer 2015 Nov;51(17):2655-64. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2015.08.015.
 
131. Bouvard V, Loomis D, Guyton KZ, et al; International 
Agency for Research on Cancer Monograph 
Working Group. Carcinogenicity of consumption of 
red and processed meat. Lancet Oncol 2015 Dec; 
16(16):1599-600. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s1470-
2045(15)00444-1.
 
132. Song M, Fund TT, Hu FB, et al. Association of  
animal and plant protein intake with all-cause and 
cause-specific mortality. JAMA Intern Med 2016  
Oct 1;176(10):1453-63. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2016.4182.
 
133. Tang WH, Hazen SL. The contributory role of gut 
microbiota in cardiovascular disease. J Clin Invest 
2014 Oct;124(10):4204-11. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1172/jci72331.
 
134. Brown JM, Hazen SL. The gut microbial 
endocrine organ: Bacterially derived signals 
driving cardiometabolic diseases. Ann Rev Med 
2015;66:343-59. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
med-060513-093205.
 
135. Plottel CS, Blaser MJ. Microbiome and malignancy. 
Cell Host Microbe 2011 Oct 20;10(4):324-35. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2011.10.003.
 
136. Deukota S, Chang EB. Nutrition, microbiomes, and 
intestinal inflammation. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 
2013 Nov;29(6):603-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/
mog.0b013e328365d38f.
 
137. Ornish D. Intensive lifestyle changes and health 
reform. Lancet Oncol 2009 Jul;10(7):638-9. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1470-2045(09)70175-5.
 
138. Iuga AO, McGuire MJ. Adherence and health care 
costs. Risk Manag Healthc Policy 2014 Feb 20;7:35-
44. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2147/rmhp.s19801.
 
139. National Center for Health Statistics. Fast Stats 
[Internet]. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention; 2016 [cited 2017 Jul 28]. Available 
from: www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/series.htm.
 
140. Adams KM, Butsch WS, Kohlmeier M. The state 
of nutrition education at US medical schools. J 
Biomed Educ 2015;2015:357627. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1155/2015/357627.
 
141. Lenders CM, Deen DD, Bistrian B, et al. Residency 
and specialties training in nutrition: A call for action. Am 
J Clin Nutr 2014 May;99(5 Suppl):1174S-83S. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.073528.
 
142. Olshansky SJ, Passaro DJ, Hershow RC, et al. A 
potential decline in life expectancy in the United 
States in the 21st century. N Engl J Med 2005 Mar 
17;352(11):1138-45. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1056/
nejmsr043743.
 
143. Xu J, Murphy SL, Kochanek KD, Arias E. Mortality 
in the United States, 2015. NCHS data brief no. 267 
[Internet]. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health 
Statistics; 2016 Dec 8 [cited 2017 Jul 27]. Available 
from: www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db267.pdf.
 
144. Macknin M, Kong T, Weier A, et al. Plant-based, 
no-added-fat or American Heart Association diets: 
Impact on cardiovascular risk in obese children 
with hypercholesterolemia and their parents. J 
Pediatr 2015 Apr;166(4):953-9.e1-3. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.12.058.
 
145. Micha R, Peñalvo JL, Cudhea F, Imamura F, 
Rehm CD, Mozaffarian D. Association between 
dietary factors and mortality from heart disease, 
stroke, and type 2 diabetes in the United States. 
JAMA 2017 Mar 7;317(9):912-24. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1001/jama.2017.0947.
 
146. Hever J. Plant-based diets: A physician’s guide. 
Perm J 2016 Summer;20(3):93-101. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.7812/TPP/15-082.
