 192  
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
Graphics and statistics for cardiology: designing 
effective tables for presentation and publication
Maarten Boers
AbstrAct
Research is of little use if its results are not effectively 
communicated. Data visualised in tables (and graphs) are 
key components in any scientific report, but their design 
leaves much to be desired. This article focuses on table 
design, following two general principles: clear vision 
and clear understanding. Clear vision is achieved by 
maximising the signal to noise ratio. In a table, the signal 
is the data in the form of numbers, and the noise is the 
support structure necessary to interpret the numbers. 
Clear understanding is achieved when the story in the 
data is told effectively, through organisation of the data 
and use of text. These principles are illustrated by original 
and improved tables from recent publications. Two 
special cases are discussed separately: tables produced 
by the pharmaceutical industry (in clinical study reports 
and reports to data safety monitoring boards), and 
study flow diagrams as proposed by the Consolidated 
Standards of Reporting Trials and Preferred Reporting 
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
initiatives.
bAckGround
Effective communication of scientific data is argu-
ably one of the most important skills of a scien-
tist. If the intended audience does not get the 
message in the data (and acts on it), the research 
effort is wasted. Data visualisation in tables and 
graphs can convey complex relationships in a way 
unmatched by simple text. Good communication 
implies proper choices between body text, tables 
and graphs optimised for audience and setting. 
Wrong choices can lead to misinterpretation and 
wrong decisions.1 
However, 
communication 
has 
traditionally 
received short thrift in scientific education, and it is 
not really stimulated by the parties responsible for 
dissemination of research: journals, scientific soci-
eties, etc. PhD programmes often have some sort of 
writing tutorage, but there, most time is spent on 
the body text. Guidance by editors in journals and 
conferences rarely goes beyond the description of 
sections, word count and limitation on the number 
of tables and figures.2 3 And finally, in my experi-
ence handling of tables and graphs has low priority 
in the production stage, often leading to suboptimal 
layout (size and placement of tables and figures in 
the text) and quality issues (especially loss of reso-
lution, i.e. ‘fuzzy’ graphs and letters) that need to be 
corrected in the proofs.
It is therefore not surprising that the practice is 
at best mediocre. A review of articles submitted to 
BMJ concluded that less than half of the tables and 
figures met their data presentation potential.4 Also, 
external peer reviewers seldom commented on 
tables or figures.
The series: ‘Graphics and Statistics for Cardi-
ology’ has previously featured articles on comparing 
categorical and continuous variables, survival anal-
ysis, data visualisation for meta-analysis and clinical 
prediction rules.5–8 This article focuses on effective 
table design. Most of the recommendations are 
based on sound design principles and tradition, 
informed by the science of human visual percep-
tion. There is little empirical evidence to support 
specific recommendations, so there is room for 
experimentation and innovation to see what works 
best. My own experience in data visualisation has 
been greatly inspired by three sources: Tufte, Cleve-
land and, specifically for tables, Few.9–11
General design principles
At the start of the design process, key questions to 
ask are: Who is the audience? What are my messages 
(to this audience)? Which of those need visualisation 
in a table or graph? And what would be the most 
effective form (for each of the messages)? Tables 
are best applied in situations where a considerable 
amount of exact/precise data needs to be reported, 
and the relationships between the data that need to 
be brought out are relatively simple.
T
wo design principles can be distinguished: clear 
vision and clear understanding. Clear vision is 
about maximising the signal to noise ratio in the 
visualisation. The signal is the data ‘ink’, that is, all 
pixels in a graph, all numbers in a table that depict 
or represent data. The noise (‘non-data ink’) is all of 
the supporting elements. In a graph, these include 
the axes, titles, labels, legends, etc. In a table, these 
include the supporting extra characters such as 
parentheses, ‘±’ marks, headings, footers, grids, 
supporting lines (rules), etc. (figure 1).12
Clear understanding is about telling the story in 
the data. This involves organising the data and opti-
mising the use of text.
A practical issue is the choice of software. This 
is a big issue for graphs, but less so for tables. Most 
standard software packages perform adequately. 
Nevertheless, detailed knowledge is required to 
fine-tune and optimise the details.
cleAr vision
T
wo main types of tables can be distinguished: the 
lookup table and the demonstration table. The 
former is intended to quickly find data associated 
with a label (like a telephone list). When required 
in a scientific report, such tables are usually simple 
in design, often lengthy and best placed in an online 
supplementary appendix. The demonstration table, 
like a graph, is used to bring out relationships in the 
data. The advantage of a demonstration table above 
review
 
► to cite: Boers M. Heart 
2018;104:192–200.
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
heartjnl- 
2017- 
311581).
Department of Epidemiology 
& Biostatistics, Amsterdam 
Rheumatology and Immunology 
Center, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands
correspondence to
Dr Maarten Boers, Department 
of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, 
VU University Medical Center, 
PO Box 7057,1007 MB 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands;  
eb@ 
vumc. 
nl
Received 10 July 2017
Revised 2 August 2017
Accepted 2 August 2017
Published Online First 
1 November 2017
http://www. 
goo. 
gl/ 
5GuPsl
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 193
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
a graph is the possibility to report in great precision, but the 
price is limited flexibility and interpretability.
Creating clear vision in a table involves the following steps: 
delineating rows and columns, arranging data, formatting text 
and summarising values where necessary.
delineating rows and columns
Delineation means creating visual cues to guide the eye towards 
the most important groupings and comparisons. The message 
determines the kind of grouping, and the extent to which rows, 
columns or both need to be emphasised. In any case, a minimum 
of white space around a number is necessary for easy reading. 
Usually, the amount of white space is OK for the columns as 
their width is determined by the headings; for the rows, a rule 
of thumb is that the white space above and below a row should 
be equal to the height of the numbers in the row. Many journals 
have their own typesetting conventions that may or may not be 
good, but it is never wrong to submit your tables in a proper 
format. Extra emphasis (on rows or columns) can be achieved 
by a very light background fill; stronger emphasis is achieved 
by a thin rule (horizontal below a row or vertical to the right 
of a column). Fills and rules are supporting elements, non-data 
ink. Thus, they should be as light and thin as possible to avoid 
obscuring the data. For that reason, grids (figure 1) are best 
avoided (too much non-data ink).
Arranging data 
The arrangement of data should facilitate the main comparisons 
for the message, and follow what the reader expects. Numbers 
are best compared when they are close together, and a hori-
zontal comparison is slightly easier than a vertical comparison. 
We read from left to right, so we expect to see source data on 
the left and calculated results on the right, and time series that 
run from left to right. In contrast, we expect ranked data to 
be ordered vertically, usually from highest to lowest. Where the 
table needs to break (eg, across a page), we expect this to be 
at a logical point (eg, not in the middle of a category), and we 
need clear header and footer labels to remain oriented. These 
principles can be challenging in the face of space limitations: 
especially the horizontal space on a page or a slide presents a 
barrier, so a set of categories with long headings (many letters), 
or a large number of categories can be too wide for the page 
or slide. Creative tinkering with headings (eg, multiple header 
rows with progressively indented headings) and column widths 
can sometimes help. Splitting a table between columns is rarely 
a good idea, and in such cases, a vertical orientation should be 
considered. The only exception is when the table can be printed 
on two adjacent and facing pages, as in an open book.
The sequence for the data is also a design issue. Numbers, 
dates and times are always sorted in ascending or descending 
order. However, named categories need thought to achieve a 
sequence that is most meaningful in light of the message. For 
sure, the ordering is almost never alphabetical, unless the table 
is a lookup table.
Formatting text
Text formatting has several components. First, precision is 
important: in the body text, tables and figures. Precision should 
match the purpose (or message): in bookkeeping, cents add up 
to euros, and rounding can create noticeable errors. In statistical 
reports, there is a convention to report the mean of a variable 
with one decimal added to the precision in the source, and the 
SD with two decimals added. These conventions are followed 
without question in many clinical study reports produced by 
industry, with huge impact on readability (see further comments 
on the format of clinical study reports under ‘special cases’ 
below). High precision is mostly irrelevant in the interpretation 
of scientific data. In most cases, two or three significant numbers 
are amply sufficient to interpret the message in the data. And 
the differences or changes that we need to detect (because 
they are clinically relevant) are usually much larger than those 
detectable in the source. So, for example, even though a lab can 
measure alkaline phosphatase in blood with one decimal preci-
sion, clinicians are interested in changes of 20 points or more. 
Likewise, percentages can almost always be reported as integer. 
Linked to precision is the choice of numeric format that may 
differ between countries: dates, decimal point or comma and 
thousands separator.
Second, vertical alignment is important. Unfortunately, 
existing conventions are usually ignored in scientific tables. 
Numbers are best right aligned, and decimally aligned when 
there are decimals. Text and dates are best left aligned, and one 
date format should be chosen so that like numbers match up 
vertically. Centre alignment is reserved only for special cases, 
such as a long header label and a single digit or character in 
the column cells (eg, header ‘response’ and cell entry ‘y’ or ‘n’). 
Note that for optimum readability, supporting characters such as 
the minus sign or parentheses should not be the alignment char-
acter, unless this character is present in all cells being aligned.
Apart from ignorance, there are several real problems that 
preclude effortless application of these conventions in scientific 
tables. The first problem is that scientific tables often contain 
categories with different kinds of variables, each with their 
own numeric precision and precision estimator. figure 1 shows 
a table that reports on results of variables as counts, percent-
ages, ORs and their CIs in one row. Frequently, such variables 
Figure 1 Names of table elements. The table, from a recent publication in Heart,12 is redesigned to display the available elements, not for optimal 
data communication.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 194
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
(with different types of results) are listed below each other in one 
column (figure 2).13
The second problem is that table cells often contain multiple 
entries. In figure 1, each entry is in its own cell, but we often see 
a precision estimator (SE, SD, IQR, CI) placed to the right of the 
point estimate, each with its own set of explanatory symbols: 
parentheses, hyphens, and the ‘±’ sign (figure 2).
This creates clutter that degrades readability and obscures the 
message. The third problem is that for ranges—containing two 
numbers—alignment is not straightforward. For all these prob-
lems, the solution most frequently applied is to simply left align 
or centre the data in each column. This creates columns that 
look the same without improving readability (figure 2).
I have been working on the alignment problem for quite a 
while, and offer several possible solutions, none of them perfect. 
These comprise:
1. Placing each element in its own column, as the authors of the 
example table have done (figure 1).
This makes alignment easier, and allows deletion of 
non-data ink, that is, the parentheses as separator, but 
only works well if the cell elements are the same down the 
column. Also, the alignment of ranges remains a problem 
if the type of precision estimator is not constant down the 
column.
2. Fully disentangling all elements and properly aligning each 
separately (figure 3).
Figure 2 Example of a recent table from Heart.13 The table suffers from poor readability due to multi-item cell entries and simple left alignment, 
suboptimal headings, overly high precision.
Figure 3 Figure 2 data (excerpt); improvement of headers and precision; single item per cell; proper alignment. Decimal points were changed to 
commas because of software localisation issues: the decimal separator character is a comma in the Dutch localisation of the word processor software.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 195
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
This works but can create large gaps when the precision of 
the numbers in ranges differs a lot.
3. Placing precision estimators below the point estimate 
(figure 4).
This improves horizontal comparisons by removing the inter-
vening precision numbers but increases the vertical table size.
4. Properly (decimally) aligning the main number/point esti-
mate, inserting white space and then left aligning the preci-
sion estimate (figure 5).
For long tables, this may be the best in terms of current 
practice.
5. New design: precision estimators comprising single numbers 
(eg, SD) remain on the right of the point estimate, but those 
comprising two numbers (range, CI) are placed on either 
side, in a smaller font (figure 6).
This results in better horizontal comparison, places the 
point estimate appropriately between the range limits and 
increases the prominence of the point estimate. Table length 
is unaltered. Disadvantages include longer design time and 
readers and editors unaccustomed to this format.
choice of fonts
For publication, most journals have their own style and will not 
allow you to choose. However, in reports published under your 
control (eg, study reports, theses) and in presentations, choices 
have to be made. Legibility is key. To start off: with current word 
processing and printing possibilities, there is *NO* excuse to 
choose a so-called ‘non-proportional’ font (figure 7).
These fonts take up a lot of horizontal space (limiting the 
amount of data that will fit) and are not very readable. Such 
fonts resemble the good old  typewriter font, where each letter 
required an equal width to fit on the typing hammer. An advan-
tage of the non-proportional font was that columns could be 
Figure 4 Figure 2 data: precision estimators below point estimate. Better horizontal comparison, but table becomes longer. 
Figure 5 Figure 2 data: point estimator decimally aligned; precision estimators left aligned. In this case, little change from figure 3, overall slightly 
less wide.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 196
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
aligned by inserting the correct number of spaces (as these had 
the same width as the letters), a feature still used by some statis-
tics packages such as SAS. However, horizontal formatting with 
spaces has been obsolete in word processing for a long time: it 
should always be done with the horizontal ruler (for line width, 
paragraph indents, etc.) and tabs. All output packages (including 
SAS) now have the option to work with tabs: these insert space 
on the typing line, from the end of an entry up to a specific point 
to the right. Tabs allow left, right, middle and decimal alignment. 
Use of non-proportional fonts is a huge problem in clinical study 
reports submitted to regulatory agencies and data safety moni-
toring boards (see below).
Another aspect of fonts is the presence or absence of ‘serifs’ 
(figure 7): these are the small horizontal and vertical stripes 
added to the ends of letters. Serifs make for better reading on 
a printed page, but work less well on computer and presenta-
tion screens. And even in printed material where serif fonts are 
the rule, ‘sans-serif’ is often applied to tables. The choice for 
serif or sans serif should be made with these considerations in 
mind. Finally, some proportional fonts (eg, Corbel, Candara) are 
also proportional for numbers, for example, the ‘1’ takes up less 
space than the ‘3’. Although this is OK for numbers placed in 
text and simple tables, such fonts are best avoided in complex 
tables because their use interferes with the vertical alignment.
emPhAsis order
Clear vision also involves choosing the right cues for emphasis. 
For printed publications, the order (starting with most important) 
is bold, italic, font and colour (colour printing can incur extra 
costs). For presentations, the order is colour, bold, font (italics 
work less well on screen). Choice of colour is beyond the scope 
of this article, but as a general guide, colours should be muted 
and, if possible, respect the challenges faced by colour-blind 
people. For further guidance and a special palette of colours, 
see Okabe et al.14 Alternatives include an extra border around 
important data (in colour on presentation), larger font size and 
colour intensity.
cleAr understAndinG
For the reader to understand the message in the data a story 
must be visible in the table. This means organising the data 
and optimising the supporting text (table title, category labels, 
footers). Organising the data involves grouping, prioritising and 
sequencing.
First, the data must be grouped into meaningful subsets, both 
in the horizontal and vertical direction. The choice for what 
goes vertical and what goes horizontal follows the arranging 
Figure 8 Excerpt of trial data15: horizontal design.
Figure 6 Figure 2 data: novel design. Lower range precision estimator placed on the left of the point estimator. To de-emphasise the precision 
estimators, they are produced in a smaller font and offset slightly below the point estimators. Point estimate columns are emphasised through extra 
shading.
Figure 7 Examples of font types. Proportional fonts have different 
widths depending on the character (eg, ‘i’ is narrow, but ‘m’ is wide). 
Serifs are the small vertical or horizontal lines placed at the end or 
beginning of a character line.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 197
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
conventions and space limitations outlined above, but is also 
strongly related to the message: for example, are we comparing 
two or more groups in multiple variables (groups in columns), 
or change over time (time points in columns)? Or are we 
ranking one or a few variables in multiple groups (variables in 
columns, groups in rows, ordered by most important variable)? 
And for each direction, meaningful subgroups may be formed: 
for example, two groups (columns), in each a baseline and 
end measurement (subcolumns). Or three categories of disease 
severity (rows), split by male/female (subrows).
Visual cues (taken from perception theory) are helpful to 
transmit the importance of the chosen grouping. Elements are 
seen as a group when they are close together, look similar, are 
enclosed, are continuous or when they are connected. For table 
layouts, this means judicious use of white space (column width, 
row height), indentation (rows), horizontal or vertical rules and 
use of font colour or background shading. Relations between 
adjacent columns or rows can be enforced by cues such as 
combining and centring text in header cells (‘spanner headings’), 
supported by ‘spanner rules’ where necessary (figure 1).
Next, the data should be prioritised and highlighted by impor-
tance, employing the emphasis order presented above. Finally, 
the data should be sequenced in the right reading order: the 
story should unfold from left to right, and from top to bottom. 
When necessary, sequenced labels (1,2,3 or A,B,C.) can be used 
for extra emphasis. However, the sequence can also intentionally 
be disrupted to create extra emphasis, for example, by placing a 
total at the top row (or the leftmost column) of a table (in bold, 
properly labelled) rather than at the bottom or right.
Figures 8 and 9 show the effects of choices made in vertical 
or horizontal organisation of the same data, a selection of results 
of a randomised trial in rheumatoid arthritis.15 In the vertical 
design, the treatment groups are in the columns, making this the 
main message. The means are on one row and the horizontal 
comparison is not hindered by the 95% 
CI because these are 
placed on the next row. Within-group change over time (placed 
in rows) is slightly more difficult to follow. In the horizontal 
design, change over time is placed in rows as the main message, 
and the groups are now placed as subcategory rows within each 
outcome variable. To reduce clutter, only the numerical value of 
one half of the 95% 
CI is shown.
Finally, the supporting text must be optimised for informa-
tion content. Supporting text should introduce, explain, rein-
force, highlight, sequence, inquire: all in service of the message. 
This applies to the title/caption, category (row/column) headers 
and subheader labels, footers, etc. The title should preferably 
summarise the data in the table (if journal style allows it). This 
certainly applies to the title of a presentation slide showing the 
table. Proper placement and choice of column width will allow 
the avoidance of abbreviations as much as possible (as these need 
to be explained in a footer), and in case of line breaks, phrases 
should be split at logical places: no automatic word wrap, but 
breaks where the reader naturally pauses.
Repeating text deserves special mention. This usually occurs 
where a main category is divided into subcategories. In this 
situation, the main category label is, for example, placed in one 
column, and the subcategory label in the next. For data sheets, 
for example, spreadsheets, cases (main category) are usually 
ordered in rows, and multiple observations in the same case 
(subcategories) fill subsequent rows. In this situation, the (sub)
category information is needed in every cell of the column to 
properly identify the case, so the main label has to be repeated in 
every row, for every sublabel. However, when this is carried to a 
results table for publication, a special case of avoidable non-data 
ink emerges, because the repeating label carries no new infor-
mation. Through continuity, the eye interprets all subcategories 
as a group even though the main label is only presented once, 
followed by empty space, or if the main label is centred across 
the sublabels (see the effect of redesigning the ‘HADS’ labels in 
the lower columns of Figures 2 and 3. 
sPeciAl cAses
Pharmaceutical clinical study reports and reports for data 
safety monitoring boards
A clinical study report is a very important document: it contains 
a comprehensive description of a clinical trial submitted to 
the regulatory agencies, often in the context of the approval 
of a new drug. As such, it must conform to a lot of standards 
imposed by the agency. In some cases, a Data Safety Monitoring 
Board is instituted. This usually happens when the drug has a 
completely new mechanism of action, or when safety concerns 
have emerged from early trials or preclinical work. In both cases, 
typically, reports are generated that can contain hundreds of 
pages filled with poorly formatted tables (and figures). It is clear 
that such reports are a challenge to read, let alone to recognise 
safety patterns important to patients, thus possibly jeopardising 
the functioning of the safety board, and, ultimately, the study. 
As frequent member and chair of such data safety monitoring 
boards, I have been the unhappy ‘consumer’ of many such 
reports. Unfortunately, tradition holds strong both in industry 
and in regulatory agencies, and to date, I have been unsuccessful 
in my attempts to improve this situation.
The main problems of tables in pharmaceutical reports are 
excessive precision and use of non-proportional fonts. In addi-
tion, numbers are often poorly aligned, choice and placement 
of categories leave much to be desired, category labels directly 
transferred from the database are often poorly formulated and 
contain much redundancy, and much of the table ‘real estate’ 
is filled with uninformative repeating headers and footers. A 
Figure 9 Figure 8 data: vertical design.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 198
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
fictitious example is excerpted in figure 10A, and shown in full 
in online supplementary appendix figure S1. Data and groups 
are imaginary, but categories, headers, footers and formatting are 
from a real report. The full table informs on four variables in five 
groups (plus a total column), split over two pages. In figure 10b 
and online supplementary figure S2, the same information has 
been placed on less than one page, and many improvements have 
been made by applying the principles elaborated in this article. 
The surface area of the original set of tables has been reduced 
from 823 to 281 
cm2, a staggering reduction of 66%!
When confronted with these improvements, the chief statisti-
cian of the company I was dealing with commented: ‘nice, but 
we don’t have time to make pretty tables.’ And I now realise 
that this statement exactly encapsulates two different view-
points: the statistician who is focused on making a table that 
presents a faithful and exact replica of the data in the database, 
that is, a lookup table, and the consumer (me) who expects a 
table optimising the presentation of messages in the data, that is, 
a demonstration table.
Flow diagrams for the ‘consolidated standards of reporting 
trials’ and ‘Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews 
and meta-Analyses’
The guidelines formulated by the Consolidated Standards of 
Reporting Trials (CONSORT) and Preferred Reporting Items 
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) initia-
tives have led to great improvements in the reporting of trials 
and  systematic reviews, respectively,16 17 and the associated 
flow diagrams18 19 have become a mandatory feature in publi-
cations of trials and systematic reviews in major journals. These 
diagrams clarify patient and study disposition, respectively, in 
terms of inclusion, exclusion and for patients, premature discon-
tinuation and dropout, complete with reasons. Unfortunately, 
the committees recommending these diagrams failed to include 
some basic formatting instructions, and the templates offered 
on their websites (and followed in this ‘graphics and statistics’ 
series7) are inadequate. As a result, most diagrams in publica-
tions suffer from all the woes of problematic tables: (repeating) 
Figure 10 Excerpt of an example table from a Data Safety Monitoring Board report (fictional data): (A) Original formatting. Poor design including 
use of non-proportional font; issues with alignment, excessive precision, suboptimal category labels, wastage of vertical white space and unnecessary 
(repeating) footnotes that refer to other tables. The table requires two pages because only three data columns fit on one page. (B) Improved 
formatting, with the above issues corrected. The excerpt requires fewer rows, and all six data columns fit on one page. To see the original and set of 
improvements in full, see online supplementary appendix figures S1 and S2.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 199
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
Figure 11 Example of a Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses flow diagram (reprinted with permission20), suffering 
from poor or non-existent alignment, text redundancy, category switching, exaggerated precision and sloppy design of boxes and arrows.
Figure 12 Figure 11, improved.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
 200
Boers M. Heart 2018;104:192–200. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581
review
text overload, alignment issues, excessive precision, suboptimal 
sequencing, etc. In addition, the drawing quality (lines, arrows, 
boxes) is often rudimentary. An example of these issues is shown 
in figure 11.20 Following the design guidelines given above, great 
improvements can be obtained (figure 12; online supplementary 
appendix figures S3–S6, including Word templates for personal 
use).
conclusion
Tables (and figures) are essential tools in the communication of 
the message, but receive too little attention in scientific reports 
and publications. Most common flaws are easily avoided by 
following design principles outlined in this article. Authors and 
editors should work together to improve data visualisation and 
stimulate innovation in design.
competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
reFerences
 1 Elting LS, Martin CG, Cantor SB, et al. Influence of data display formats on physician 
investigators’ decisions to stop clinical trials: prospective trial with repeated measures. 
BMJ 1999;318:1527–31.
 2 Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals: Writing and 
Editing for Biomedical Publication. http://www. 
ICMJE. 
org. (accessed 05 July 2017).
 3 Guidelines for authors. http:// 
heart. 
bmj. 
com/ 
pages/ 
authors/ (accessedJuly 05 2017).
 4 Schriger DL, Sinha R, Schroter S, et al. From submission to publication: a retrospective 
review of the tables and figures in a cohort of randomized controlled trials submitted 
to the British Medical Journal. Ann Emerg Med 2006;486:750e1–756.
 5 Rice K, Lumley T. Graphics and statistics for cardiology: comparing categorical and 
continuous variables. Heart 2016;102:349–55.
 6 May S, McKnight B. Graphics and statistics for cardiology: survival analysis. Heart 
2017;103:335–40.
 7 Kiran A, Crespillo AP, Rahimi K. Graphics and statistics for cardiology: data 
visualisation for meta-analysis. Heart 2017;103:19–23.
 8 Woodward M, Tunstall-Pedoe H, Peters SA. Graphics and statistics for cardiology: 
clinical prediction rules. Heart 2017;103:538–45.
 9 Tufte E. The visual display of quantitative information. 2nd ed. Cheshire CT USA: 
Graphics Press, 2001.
 
10 Cleveland WS. The elements of graphing data. New Jersey, USA: Hobart Press, 
Summit, 1994.
 
11 Few SC. Show me the numbers. Designing Tables and graphs to enlighten. 2nd ed. 
Burlingame: CA: Analytical Press, 2012.
 
12 Schnabel RB, Pecen L, Ojeda FM, et al. Gender differences in clinical presentation and 
1-year outcomes in atrial fibrillation. Heart 2017;103:1024–30.
 
13 Connolly SB, Kotseva K, Jennings C, et al. Outcomes of an integrated community-
based nurse-led cardiovascular disease prevention programme. Heart 
2017;103:840–7.
 
14 Color Universal Design (CUD). How to make figures and presentations that are 
friendly to Colorblind people.  
2008. 
http:// 
jfly. 
iam. 
u- 
tokyo. 
ac. 
jp/ 
color (accessed 24 July 
2017).
 
15 Boers M, Verhoeven AC, Markusse HM, et al. Randomised comparison of combined 
step-down prednisolone, methotrexate and sulphasalazine with sulphasalazine alone 
in early rheumatoid arthritis [see comments] [published erratum appears in Lancet 
1998 Jan 17;351(9097):220. Lancet 1997;350–.
 
16 Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: 
explanation and elaboration. J Clin Epidemiol 2009;62:e1–e34.
 
17 Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, et al. statement: updated guidelines for reporting 
parallel group randomised trials. PLoS Med 2010;2010:e1000251.
 
18 CONSORT 2010 Flow diagram http://www. 
consort- 
statement. 
org (accessed 10 July 
2017).
 
19  PRISMA flow diagram http://www. 
prisma- 
statement. 
org. (accessed 10 July 2017).
 
20 Singh JA, Yu S. Allopurinol and the risk of atrial fibrillation in the elderly: a study using 
Medicare data. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:72–8.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://heart.bmj.com/
Heart: first published as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311581 on 13 October 2017. Downloaded from 
