  
www.PRSGlobalOpen.com 
1
INTRODUCTION
The use of botulinum toxin A is considered one of the 
most revolutionary face rejuvenation methods, and is the 
nonsurgical cosmetic procedure most performed in the 
world.1
Furthermore, Carruthers et al.2 suggest that botulinum 
toxin A is remarkably safe and effective in reducing dy-
namic wrinkles.
The planning that precedes the application is criti-
cal to the construction of satisfactory results.3 A thor-
ough clinical assessment, considering the type of skin, 
the distribution of expression lines and mass, contrac-
tile force, and anatomical distribution of facial muscles, 
allows for a greater understanding of the needs of each 
individual.4 The best results occur from the determina-
tion of the application points according to the needs of 
each patient.5–9
Although rare, most of the complications secondary to 
the use of botulinum toxin A are technician dependent; 
therefore, a great effort from who minister on the subject, 
to properly prepare new injectors and provide for those 
who are already applying botulinum toxin A a chance to 
relearn and refine their techniques.10–12
Among the major shortcomings identified in the teach-
ing of botulinum toxin A administration is the applied ana-
tomical ignorance and lack of ability to interrelate muscle 
contraction to hyperkinetic wrinkles selectively.
The atlas of anatomy, anatomical resin parts, and cadav-
er dissections are excellent choices for the study of anatomy 
but do not allow the interrelation of muscles with dynamic 
Received for publication April 26, 2017; accepted August 22, 
2017.
Copyright © 2017 The Author. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, 
Inc. on behalf of The American Society of Plastic Surgeons. This 
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 
(CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the 
work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in 
any way or used commercially without permission from the journal.
DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000001525
From Clínica Boggio, São Paulo, Brazil.
Background: The use of botulinum toxin type A is considered one of the most rev-
olutionary and promising face rejuvenation methods. Although rare, most of the 
complications secondary to the use of botulinum toxin A are technician dependent. 
Among the major shortcomings identified in the toxin administration education is 
unfamiliarity with applied anatomy. This article proposes the use of body painting as 
an innovative method of teaching the application of botulinum toxin A.
Methods: Using the body painting technique, facial anatomy was represented on 
the face of a model showing the major muscle groups of botulinum toxin A tar-
gets. Photographic records and films were made for documentation of represented 
muscles at rest and contraction.
Results: Using the body painting technique, each of the muscles involved in facial 
expression and generation of hyperkinetic wrinkles can be faithfully reproduced 
on the model’s face. The documentation of the exact position of the points of ap-
plication, the distribution of the feature points in the muscular area, the proper 
angulation and syringe grip, as well as the correlation of the points of application 
with the presence of hyperkinetic wrinkles, could be properly registered, providing 
professional training with information of great practical importance, development 
of highly effective treatments, and low complication rates.
Conclusion: By making it possible to interrelate anatomy of a function, body paint-
ing is proposed in the present study as an innovative method, which in a demon-
strative and highly didactic manner presents great potential as a teaching tool in 
the application of botulinum toxin A. (Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open 2017;5:e1525; 
doi: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000001525; Published online 28 November 2017.)
Ricardo Frota Boggio, MD, PhD
Dynamic Model of Applied Facial Anatomy with 
Emphasis on Teaching of Botulinum Toxin A
Disclosure: Dr. Ricardo Frota Boggio is a member of the 
speakers’ bureau for Allergan, Inc. This study was funded, ex-
clusively, by an unrestricted publication grant from Allergan, 
Inc. The Article Processing Charge was paid by Allergan, Inc.
Cosmetic
Supplemental digital content is available for this 
 
article. Clickable URL citations appear in the text.
Original artiCle
 PRS Global Open • 2017
2
wrinkles, because the models are inanimate. The clinical ex-
amination of the patient, botulinum toxin A candidate, is 
mandatory and essential in developing the best application 
technique; however, as a sole teaching method, it does not 
allow the direct visualization and selection of the muscles 
responsible for facial hyperkinesia.13
Body painting is an art form that began in prehistory 
and that persists to the present time. In this type of art, the 
artist uses the human body as a true screen for expression 
of beauty and creativity in a unique way. Records of various 
tribes of Africa, Europe, Asia, and Australia reported the 
importance of body painting in the social and religious 
organization of these people.14
In modern times, the first record of the use of body 
painting as art dates back in the year 1933, when the fa-
mous inventor of cosmetics, Max Factor, caused a lot of 
confusion with the exhibition of a nude model at the Chi-
cago World’s Fair.15 Body painting spread intensively in 
the 60’s, when Western artists who were influenced by the 
hippie movement began using this type of art to explore 
sexuality and psychedelic experiences. With its popular-
ization, body painting has not been applied only to fully 
naked female body, but also to other parts of the body like 
the back, hands, legs, and face.16
Today, many medical schools have replaced traditional 
methods of anatomy study by living anatomy, with the use 
of realistic models and body painting.17–23
To contribute to the enrichment of teaching tech-
niques in botulinum toxin A, we propose the use of body 
painting as an innovative method, in a demonstrative and 
efficient manner providing the incredible opportunity to 
interrelate anatomy and function.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
To carry out this study, a 37-year-old model was select-
ed, phototype II, Mark Rubin II, and Glogau II, with the 
presence of hyperkinetic wrinkles in the forehead, glabel-
lar, side peripalpebral, nasal dorsum, and perioral region, 
in addition to the presence of platysmal bands. The model 
took part in the study voluntarily and signed terms of con-
sent and authorization of the use of her image.
After a thorough cleaning of the face using soap and 
makeup remover, the model was positioned 70 cm in 
front of a black lycra background, sitting on a revolving 
bench. The distance between the face of the model and 
the photo/video camera was kept constant (1.5 m). The 
height of the camera was also kept constant by a rigid 
rod and a universal support, and it was horizontally di-
rected to look at the model. The camera used for the re-
cords was a Canon 5D Mark III, Canon 24–70 mm lens, 
and an HDTV Sony camera with 1440 × 1080 resolution. 
In a bright room by 2 points of light of 600, E-4200 Image 
lumens LED, the model was photographed with her rest-
ing face in the following positions: front, anterior oblique 
right and left (45o), and bilateral complete profile. The 
photographic records and filming were performed in-
cluding the entire circumference of the head, extending 
Fig. 1. Photographic model records at rest (front position) and the muscular contraction indicating the presence of hyperkinetic wrinkles 
in each of the regions of interest.
Fig. 2. Dynamic registration of hyperkinetic wrinkles using camcord-
er to selectively characterize the influence of each muscle group on 
the facial movements.
Fig. 3. representation of the main muscles involved in facial mimics 
and targets of botulinum toxin a through the body painting tech-
nique.
  
Boggio • Dynamic Model of Applied Facial Anatomy
3
from the skull vertex to the sternoclavicular joint (sternal 
notch), with the major axis of the camera’s frame upright. 
Later, pictures were taken in detail plan, registering a way 
to segment and in maximum muscle contraction, the hy-
perkinetic wrinkles located in various areas of interest24–26 
(Figs. 1, 2).
With the collaboration of an artist who used water-
colors, appropriate for use on skin, as well as lipstick and 
eyeliner, the frontal muscles, corrugator, orbicularis oculi, 
procerus, transverse nose, orbicularis oris, and platysma 
were designed on the model’s face using the body painting 
technique. The muscles were plotted with respect to ori-
gin and insertion, as well as the dimensions and direction 
of fibers (Fig. 3). New photographic records and footage 
were then performed to document selectively anatomical 
details and contraction capacity of each of the muscles 
studied, as well as the presence of hyperkinetic wrinkles 
generated by these muscles.
RESULTS
Using the body painting technique, each of the mus-
cles involved in facial expression and generation of hy-
perkinetic wrinkles could be faithfully reproduced on the 
model’s face. Muscles such as the front, the corrugator, 
and procerus, among others, had their origins and in-
sertions represented. The arrangement of muscle fibers, 
possible anatomical variations, and interrelation with sur-
rounding muscles could be clearly recorded on the skin’s 
surface. However, the major technical contribution was to 
permit detailed study of the facial anatomy associated with 
dynamic muscle, the contraction of each of the muscles 
involved, and detailed analysis of wrinkles produced by 
them. Respecting the technical conditions laid down for 
the proper photographic documentation and recording, 
selective recording of each of the facial muscles provided 
the imaging with anatomical detail and highly realistic 
function (Fig. 4).
The reproduction of the facial muscles in all the mod-
el’s right hemiface provided, in great detail, the opportu-
nity to document the intrinsic relationship between them, 
which with synergistic or antagonistic movements, defines 
the facial mime.
To the observer, the body painting provided the chance of 
viewing all facial muscles involved in mimicry working jointly 
and dynamically, as well as their influence on the generation of 
hyperkinetic wrinkles (Fig. 5; see video, Supplemental Digital 
Content 1, which demonstrates facial muscles involved in mim-
icry working jointly and dynamically, as well as their influence 
Fig. 4. Major muscle groups involved in facial mime and generation of hyperkinetic wrinkles, demonstrated by body painting technique.
Fig. 5. Model with the muscles of the right hemifacial demonstrated by body painting technique, providing dynamic visualization of syn-
ergism, antagonisms, and the generation of hyperkinetic wrinkles.
 PRS Global Open • 2017
4
on the generation of dynamic wrinkles, http://links.lww.com/
PRSGO/A616).
The option to reproduce the facial muscles in just one 
hemiface gave the viewer the possibility of carrying out a 
comparative analysis with the other hemiface, which, with-
out the application of body painting, was subjected exclu-
sively to clinical examination.
As a teaching method applied to learning the admin-
istration of botulinum toxin A, body painting provided 
an effective didactic experiment with the registration 
of all technical detail of the drug application. With the 
positioning of syringe and needle for each target mus-
cles of the treatment, it was possible to document the 
exact position of the application points, distribution of 
the points on the muscular area, and action of the drug 
from halo, aside from the proper angle and grip the sy-
ringe should have, facing the anatomical requirements 
of each muscle (Fig. 6). The high technical point was to 
allow the correlation of each of the points, with muscle 
function and the presence of hyperkinetic wrinkles, 
providing professional training information of great 
practical importance for the preparation of highly effec-
tive treatments and low complication rates (see video, 
Supplemental Digital Content 2, which demonstrates 
the botulinum toxin A administration technique corre-
lating the application points with the anatomy, http://
links.lww.com/PRSGO/A617).
DISCUSSION
Facial dynamic wrinkles are secondary aesthetic altera-
tions to muscle contraction and skin quality impairment, 
which gradually settle along the natural aging process.
Botulinum toxin A is an important tool used in facial 
rejuvenation that has the main function of promoting 
muscle relaxation and hence the attenuation of the dy-
namic wrinkles.
Among the many fundamental conditions for being 
able to use botulinum toxin A to promote facial rejuve-
nation is applied anatomical knowledge. Knowing the 
various facial muscles involved in mimicry, their origins, 
insertions, and functions is thus mandatory.
For professionals who teach the subject, having a 
good educational model is fundamental in the transmis-
sion of knowledge. The models conventionally used do 
not allow the dynamic evaluation of facial muscles, while 
the evaluation of muscle contraction in an alive patient 
does not allow clear viewing of facial anatomy. In our 
opinion, the body painting is a highly didactic and easily 
reproducible tool, which provides the pleasant integra-
tion between anatomy and function. The body painting 
is a new educational trend that is able to provide the 
trainees the opportunity to connect with the living and 
realistic anatomy.
Video Graphic 1. See video, Supplemental Digital Content 1, which 
demonstrates facial muscles involved in mimicry working jointly 
and dynamically, as well as their influence on the generation of dy-
namic wrinkles. this video is available in the “related Videos” section 
of PrSglobalOpen.com or at http://links.lww.com/PRSGO/A616.
Fig. 6. a practical demonstration of the botulinum toxin a administration technique correlating the application points with the anatomy, 
muscle function, and presence of hyperkinetic wrinkles.
  
Boggio • Dynamic Model of Applied Facial Anatomy
5
CONCLUSIONS
In the application of botulinum toxin A, comprehen-
sive understanding of functional anatomy is crucial for 
maximizing outcomes. By providing a representation of the 
entire facial musculature on the cutaneous surface, interre-
lating anatomy and function, body painting is proposed in 
this study as an innovative method, which in a demonstra-
tive and highly didactic manner presents great potential as 
a teaching tool in the application of botulinum toxin A.
Ricardo Frota Boggio, MD, PhD
Rua Desembargador Eliseu Guilherme
200, cj. 201
Paraiso, 04004-030
São Paulo - SP, Brazil
E-mail: drboggio@clinicaboggio.com.br
REFERENCES
 1. Carruthers JD, Lowe NJ, Menter MA, et al. Double-blind, placebo-
controlled study of the safety and efficacy of botulinum toxin type 
a for patients with glabellar lines. Plast Reconst Surg. 2003:112:21S.
 2. Carruthers A, Carruthers JD, Lowe NJ, et al. One-year, ran-
domised, multicenter, two period study of the safety and efficacy 
of repeated treatments with botulinum toxin type A in patients 
with glabellar lines. Journal of Clinical Research. 2004;7:1–20.
 3. Carruthers JD, Glogau RG, Blitzer A; Facial Aesthetics Consensus 
Group Faculty. Advances in facial rejuvenation: botulinum 
toxin type a, hyaluronic acid dermal fillers, and combination 
therapies—consensus recommendations. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2008;121:5S–30S; quiz 31S.
 4. Kim EJ, Reeck JB, Maas CS. A validated rating scale for hyperki-
netic facial lines. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2004;6:253–256.
 5. Almeida AT, Boulle K. Diffusion characteristics of botulinum 
neurotoxin products and their clinical significance in cosmetic 
applications. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2007;9:17–22.
 6. Fagien S. Botulinum toxin type A for facial aesthetic enhance-
ment: role in facial shaping. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2003;112:6S–18S; 
discussion 19S.
 7. Fagien S, Raspaldo H. Facial rejuvenation with botulinum neuro-
toxin: an anatomical and experiential perspective. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther. 2007;9:23–31.
 8. Braz AV, Sakuma TH. Patterns of contraction of the frontalis 
muscle: a pilot study. Surg Cosmet Dermatol. 2010;2:191–194.
 9. Spiegel JH. Treatment of periorbital rhytids with botulinum tox-
in type A: maximizing safety and results. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 
2005;7:198–202.
 
10. Sundaram H, Signorini M, Liew S, et al. Global aesthetics con-
sensus: botulinum toxin type A—evidence-based review, emerg-
ing concepts, and consensus recommendations for aesthetic 
use, including updates on complications. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2016:137:518e–529e.
 
11. Jia Z, Lu H, Yang X, Jin X, Wu R, Zhao J, et al. Adverse events 
of botulinum toxin type A in facial rejuvenation: a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Aesthetic Plast Surg. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 
2016;40:769–77
 
12. Yiannakopoulou E. Serious and long-term adverse events associ-
ated with the therapeutic and cosmetic use of botulinum toxin. 
Pharmacology. 2015;95:65–69.
 
13. Lorenc ZP, Smith S, Nestor M, et al. Understanding the func-
tional anatomy of the frontalis and glabellar complex for opti-
mal aesthetic botulinum toxin type A therapy. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 
2013;37:975–983.
 
14. Morriss-Kay GM. The evolution of human artistic creativity. 
J Anat. 2010;216:158–176.
 
15. Basten FE. Max Factor: The Man Who Changed the Faces of the World. 
Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.; 2013.
 
16. Azer SA. The place of surface anatomy in the medical litera-
ture and undergraduate anatomy textbooks. Anat Sci Educ. 
2013;6:415–432.
 
17. Op Den Akker JW, Bohnen A, Oudegeest WJ, et al. Giving color 
to a new curriculum: bodypaint as a tool in medical education. 
Clin Anat. 2002;15:356–362.
 
18. McMenamin PG. Body painting as a tool in clinical anatomy 
teaching. Anat Sci Educ. 2008;1:139–144.
 
19. Finn GM, McLachlan JC. A qualitative study of student responses 
to body painting. Anat Sci Educ. 2010;3:33–38.
 
20. Nanjundaiah K, Chowdapurkar S. Body-painting: a tool 
which can be used to teach surface anatomy. J Clin Diagn Res. 
2012;6:1405–1408.
 
21. Torpy JM. The cover. Dynamism of a human body. JAMA. 
2012;307:543.
 
22. Bennett C. Anatomic body painting: where visual art meets sci-
ence. J Physician Assist Educ. 2014;25:52–54.
 
23. Jariyapong P, Punsawad C, Bunratsami S, et al. Body painting 
to promote self-active learning of hand anatomy for preclinical 
medical students. Med Educ Online. 2016;21:30833.
 
24. Hochman B, Nahas FX, Ferreira LM. Fotografia aplicada na pes-
quisa clínico-cirurgica. Acta Cir Bras. 2005;20:19–25.
 
25. Diepgen TL, Eysenbach G. Digital images in dermatology and the 
Dermatology Online Atlas on the World Wide Web. J Dermatol. 
1998;25:782–787.
 
26. Papier A, Peres MR, Bobrow M, et al. The digital imaging system 
and dermatology. Int J Dermatol. 2000;39:561–575.
Video Graphic 2. See video, Supplemental Digital Content 2, which 
demonstrates the botulinum toxin a (Bonta) administration tech-
nique correlating the application points with the anatomy. this 
video is available in the “related Videos” section of PrSglobalOpen.
com or at http://links.lww.com/PRSGO/A617.
