 1
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Cardiovascular Disease Risk Varies 
by Birth Month in Canines
Mary Regina Boland  
1,2,3,4, Marc S. Kraus5, Eddie Dziuk6 & Anna R. Gelzer5
The canine heart is a robust physiological model for the human heart. Recently, birth month 
associations have been reported and replicated in humans using clinical health records. While 
animals respond readily to their environment in the wild, a systematic investigation of birth season 
dependencies among pets and specifically canines remains lacking. We obtained data from the 
Orthopedic Foundation of Animals on 129,778 canines representing 253 distinct breeds. Among canines 
that were not predisposed to cardiovascular disease, a clear birth season relationship is observed with 
peak risk occurring in June-August. Our findings indicate that acquired cardiovascular disease among 
canines, especially those that are not predisposed to cardiovascular disease, appears birth season 
dependent. The relative risk of cardiovascular disease for canines not predisposed to cardiovascular 
disease was as high as 1.47 among July pups. The overall adjusted odds ratio, when mixed breeds were 
excluded, for the birth season effect was 1.02 (95% CI: 1.002, 1.047, p = 0.032) after adjusting for breed 
and genetic cardiovascular predisposition effects. Studying birth season effects in model organisms can 
help to elucidate potential mechanisms behind the reported associations.
Importance of Trans-Species Understanding of Disease. 
Trans-species polymorphisms are genetic 
polymorphisms shared across evolutionarily related species1. Five well-described ‘trans-species’ genes include 
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), the ABO blood group, antiviral genes and auto-immune related 
genes1. Many trans-species gene studies were conducted in primates. However, canines (Canis familiaris) rep-
resent a particularly relevant animal model when studying human diseases because of their cohabitation with 
humans, which has resulted in similar environmental pressures2. For example, the FGF5 gene responsible for 
determining hair length in canines3 has also been implicated in baldness in humans4. Other mutations have been 
selected for in canine populations due to their desirability. For example, chondrodysplasia has been selected for 
in breeds such as the dachshund (literally ‘badger dog’ in German) that were breed for characteristics (such as 
short stature) that made them suitable for a specific purpose (such as hunting badgers that required an animal 
that was both short and long). This selection bias by design in domesticated canines has made mutations in FGF4 
(chondrodysplasia gene) relatively common among short-legged canines2,5.
Genetic Similarity Among Species with Strong Structural Similarity. 
Structural similarity is often 
used as a proxy for genetic similarity when detailed genetic information is unavailable with an estimated 20% of 
similar structures sharing a common genetic etiology6. In the cardiovascular domain, the canine cardiovascular 
system is a commonly used model for the human cardiovascular system because of similarities in physiology 
between canine and human hearts7,8. Further, breed-specific variance in risk for certain types of cardiovascular 
disease suggests a genetic contribution to disease risk among canines9.
Role of Birth Month/Season in Canines. 
Recently, an association between birth season (using the proxy 
of birth month) and risk for cardiovascular disease has been uncovered in humans10 and replicated at other sites 
and regions11,12. Several hypotheses have been proposed in the literature, including increased perinatal influenza 
infection for those born in the winter in New York City or decreased perinatal vitamin D exposure10,11. Another 
explanation is first-trimester exposure to fine air particulates in humans, which is correlated with increased risk 
of atrial fibrillation later in life13. We expect the effect of seasonality on developing fetuses (either humans or 
1Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 2Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. 3Center for Excellence in Environmental Toxicology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. 4Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 5Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 6Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, Columbia, Missouri, USA. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.R.B. (email: bolandm@upenn.edu)
Received: 29 December 2017
Accepted: 13 April 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
canines) to be less drastic then pharmacological exposures14, however seasonal exposures still warrant further 
study13. Prior studies have established the presence of seasonal variance in animal births, which is well known 
and described15,16 the effect of birth season on disease risk in animals (especially those commonly used as animal 
models) is understudied. The majority of animal birth season research focuses on effects of food availability that 
varies with the season. Given that wild animals rely heavily on either foraging or hunting, seasonal variability in 
food supply effects the timing of their birth season and the survivability of offspring17,18.
The domesticated dog (Canis familiaris) differs widely from the wolf (Canis lupus) with regards to birth sea-
sonality. Domesticated dogs’ are not subjected to the physical constraints of living in the wild18. In addition, 
domesticated dogs are bred for various purposes (e.g., working, enjoyment) that are human-centric and there-
fore their mating season is more tightly connected with human activities then their wild counterparts. Typically 
the wolf (Canis lupus) gives birth only in April and May in the Northern hemisphere (e.g., Alaska)19. However, 
domesticated dogs (Canis familiaris) breed throughout the year, which is believed to be due to regulation of tem-
perature and food source stability20. Thus making the domesticated dog more similar to humans in that sexual 
reproduction is less tightly coupled to external climate changes and takes place throughout the year.
The purpose of this study is to investigate whether a relationship exists between birth season and cardiovas-
cular disease risk among canines given the physiological similarities of canine and humanoid cardiovascular 
systems.
Materials and Methods
Dataset. 
The Orthopedic Foundation of Animals (OFA) has created an open database of dogs and cats 
(http://www.ofa.org/index.html) that contains certain key health information pertaining to breeding and overall 
health and wellness of animals. Health information consists of various types of reports including: radiographical 
evaluations, eyes, soft tissues (e.g., thyroid), other evaluations (e.g., temperament tests) and DNA test results (for 
known genetic diseases that afflict certain breeds). The majority of this information is accessible via an online 
browser. The dataset at the patient-level is not available for direct download, but could be viewed in the browser 
at the patient-level (http://www.offa.org/display.html?regnum=NP27924804#animal), but only for breeders who 
consent to allowing their dogs’ health information to be made public. Therefore, a parser was built to process the 
publically available information from the web interface and placing it into a computer-readable format.
The parser first obtains a list of all animal ids with cardiac reports regardless of status (e.g., Normal or 
Abnormal) that was downloaded from OFA. Information on each animal was then obtained by querying that 
animal’s full OFA report using the following standardized form: http://www.offa.org/display.html?regnum=[an-
imal_ID]#animal where the animal ID was inserted into the ‘[animal_ID]’ portion of the URL. Information on 
the animal’s date of birth, fur color, sex, breed, registration number, test name, test date, report date (because the 
report date can differ from the test date) and test conclusion. This process resulted in a dataset of cats and dogs 
with cardiovascular report information. All cat breeds were excluded. The resulting dataset contained 129,783 
canines with cardiovascular reports. Five of these contained only Null reports (i.e., no information on the test 
conclusion was provided). Therefore, these were excluded. The resulting dataset contained 179,585 canine car-
diovascular reports from 129,778 unique canines representing 253 distinct dog breeds. Each of these canines 
included in our analysis had at least one publically accessible non-null cardiovascular report.
Algorithm to Determine Canine Cardiovascular Status from OFA Reports. 
The OFA database pro-
vides information per dog on the registry type (e.g., cardiac, hips, elbow) and the final conclusion. We extracted 
all OFA reports for dogs having a ‘cardiac’ test. There are three ‘final conclusion’ choices that are made available on 
the OFA browser, including ‘abnormal’
, ‘equivocal’
, and ‘normal’
. A veterinarian makes the designation of the dogs 
cardiovascular state based on the results of one or two tests, including Auscultation (i.e., listening with a stetho-
scope to the heart) and Electrocardiogram (ECG). The veterinarian then fills out the exam report and makes the 
‘final conclusion’ regarding each dog’s cardiovascular state. The ECGs are not provided by the OFA and therefore, 
we were only provided with the final conclusion result.
Because dogs can have more than one report listed in the OFA database, we build a decision tree algorithm 
(Fig. 1) to process the reports so that each dog was assigned as belonging to one of three cardiovascular health cat-
egories: abnormal, equivocal or normal. This was especially important for dogs with conflicting reports (e.g., one 
reporting ‘equivocal’ and one reporting ‘abnormal’). If any reports listed the canine as having an abnormal heart 
then the canine’s cardiac condition was listed as abnormal. If no abnormal reports exist and at least 1 report notes 
the heart as equivocal then the canine’s cardiac condition was listed as equivocal. Lastly, if no reports showed 
the heart as abnormal or equivocal (i.e., all reports listed the cardiovascular condition as being normal) then the 
canine was listed as being of normal cardiac condition.
Integrating Breed and Breed Clade Information. 
Certain canine breeds have been associated with 
increased cardiovascular risk while others show decreased risk9. Therefore, in order to appropriately investigate 
a birth season – cardiovascular disease effect in canines it is important to categorize the dog breed effect. A 2017 
paper by Parker et al. classified dog breeds into 23 distinct clades based on their genetic profiles21. A clade is a 
grouping of breeds based on genetic similarity, therefore several related breeds belong to the same clade21. For 
example, breeds like the Belgian malinois and German Shepherd would belong to the same clade while the Irish 
setter and the English setter would belong to another clade. We extracted the dog breed to clade information that 
was provided in the manuscript (Fig. 1 from their paper) to map the OFA dog breeds to clades. Of the 129,778 
unique canines in our dataset, 116,655 matched to a known clade from the Parker et al.21 paper. We placed the 
remaining 13,123 dogs into an unknown clade. Parker et al. also had an unknown clade listed, but we created our 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
own unknown category given that we investigated more distinct dog breeds (253 vs. 161 breeds) and therefore 
had more dog breeds of unknown clade.
Unfortunately, the Parker et al.21 study did not report cardiovascular disease risk by breed clade. Only over-
all genetic similarity was assessed. Therefore, we utilized a dataset from a literature review - Parker et al.22 - 
reporting the cardiovascular disease risk by dog breed for 13 distinct cardiovascular diseases (Fig. 1 from that 
paper)22. This allowed us to bin dogs into those with no known breed risk for any cardiovascular diseases and 
those with some breed risk for cardiovascular disease. We were also able to bin dogs into those at risk and those 
not at risk (due to their breed) for each of 13 common cardiovascular diseases22. Therefore, in addition to having 
breed clade information as a crude genetic relationship measure from Parker et al.21, we also had information on 
breed-cardiovascular disease risk from the Parker et al. 2006 study22.
Regression Model for Investigating the Birth Month Effect. 
To study the relationship between birth 
month and cardiovascular disease risk among canines, we constructed a logistic regression model. The model 
predicts each canine’s risk of cardiovascular disease given a set of predictors. The outcome variable is binary (i.e., 
has cardiovascular disease or has no cardiovascular disease). We previously assigned canines as belonging to one 
of three classes (abnormal, equivocal or normal, see Fig. 1). For the purposes of this binary model, we grouped 
abnormal and equivocal together since both represent some type of cardiovascular abnormality either subtle or 
overt. Normal canines are those with no cardiovascular reports of either abnormal of equivocal findings. Birth 
month is modeled as a numeric variable (1–12 representing Jan–Dec); a binary variable represents the breeds 
known association with any cardiovascular diseases from Parker et al.22; and a categorical variable represents the 
breeds clade as reported in Parker et al.21. The unknown clade in our analysis includes not only breeds not studied 
and unclassifiable in Parker et al.21, but also hybrids, mutts and other non-breeds (e.g., ‘Labradoodle’). Hybrids, 
mixed-breeds or mutts are often thought to have lower cardiovascular disease risk due to hybrid vigor23, which 
makes them important to analyze. Other studies have shown mixed-breeds to be at higher risk of obesity, which 
may increase their risk of cardiovascular disease24.
Relative Risk. 
Our regression model computes an adjusted odds ratio (OR), which is the odds that birth 
month affects risk of cardiovascular disease after accounting for the dog’s genetic predisposition for cardiovascu-
lar disease (i.e., from a breed known to be at risk for cardiovascular disease or not) and the overall breed effect, 
using the dog’s clade (i.e., a higher-level assessment of breed). Adjusted ORs can sometimes be misleading as they 
take into account all of these aforementioned confounding variables. Therefore, we also computed the Relative 
Risk (RR) of developing cardiovascular disease by birth month for dogs predisposed to cardiovascular disease 
and those not predisposed to cardiovascular disease. We used the raw proportions computed in the previous step 
to derive a RR.
Figure 1. Algorithm for Processing OFA Cardiac Reports from Canines and Categorizing Each Canine’s 
Overall Cardiac Health Status. All dog icons (“akita”
, “pomeranian”
, “doberman”
, “dalmatian”
, “poodle”) within 
the figure are by: parkjisun, from thenounproject.com.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
=
=
Relative Risk
The Absolute Risk of Events in the Treatment Group
ABT
The Absolute Risk of Events in the Control Group ABC
ABT
(
)
(
)
(1)
Total Number with Cardiovascular Disease
Total Number of Cardiovascular Disease Predisposed Dogs
where
=
ABT
Cardiovascular Predisposed Dogs with Cardiovascular Disease By Birth Month
Total Cardiovascular Predisposed Dogs By Birth Month
The formula25 shown in Equation 1, allows us to compute a RR by birth month for dogs predisposed to car-
diovascular disease. For our purposes, the Absolute risk of Events in the Control group (ABC) is the proportion 
of cardiovascular disease in the control group is the baseline incidence of cardiovascular disease in the dataset. 
Therefore, we did not use a particular birth month as our ‘control’ birth month; instead we used the baseline inci-
dence as our control. The baseline incidence for cardiovascular disease (ABC) was computed separately for dogs 
predisposed to cardiovascular and those not predisposed to cardiovascular disease.
For the proportion of cardiovascular disease in the ‘treated’ group or ABT, this was the proportion of cardio-
vascular disease incidence by birth month (i.e., the proportion of those born in a given birth month – for example 
January – with cardiovascular disease out of those born in January). Likewise, we computed RR for cardiovascular 
disease by birth month also for dogs not predisposed to cardiovascular disease using the same formula except 
substituting cardiovascular predisposed dogs in Equation 1 with non-cardiovascular predisposed dogs.
Results
OFA Dataset and Breed Clade Information. 
Our dataset contained 129,778 unique canines belonging 
to 23 distinct Parker clades (we had one clade as a catch-all clade for mixed breeds and other unclassified dog 
breeds from the Parker study). Of our canines, 10.11% belonged to this ‘unknown’ mixed-breed clade. We labeled 
each clade by the colors used in the Parker et al. paper, as they did not provide clade nomenclature21. For popular 
clades, we provide subtitles that represent the types of breeds belonging to each clade, see Fig. 2 and Table 1. The 
most popular clade was the retrievers and pointers (i.e., the red clade) with 56,224 canines representing 43.32% 
of the dataset. Prevalence of each breed clade is shown in Table 1 for clades with at least 1% prevalence in the 
OFA dataset. The percent t with cardiovascular disease within each clade is also reported in Table 1 with percent 
calculated as the number with cardiovascular disease/total canines in the clade.
The prevalence of mixed-breeds and other breeds not classified into a genetic clade was low when compared 
against other studies. We report 10.11% of canines falling into this classification compared to 27% of canines 
being reported as mixed-breed from a large >30 k canine veterinary practice dataset26. This is most likely because 
our data comes from the OFA where primarily breeders submit their dogs’ data. This is because breeders seek to 
ensure the health of their sires and dams, along with the resulting offspring. However, typical pet owners are less 
likely to submit their dog’s results. This bias shifts the population in the OFA dataset towards canines of a known 
pure breed classification versus mixed breeds.
When we binned the data into breeds that are known to be at risk for cardiovascular disease22, we found that 
92,057 canines were from breeds predisposed to cardiovascular disease compared to 37,721 canines from undis-
posed (or low cardiac risk) breeds. Therefore, 70.93% of OFA canines come from high-risk breeds and therefore 
are predisposed to cardiovascular disease.
Figure 2. Prevalence of Breed Clade in the Public OFA Dataset (left-graph) and Proportion with 
Cardiovascular Disease per Breed Clade (right-graph). Some breeds (e.g., retrievers/pointers) were very 
common (left-graph red clade) while having only moderate levels of cardiovascular disease risk (right-graph red 
clade). While other clades (e.g., grass-green clade) had a high-risk of cardiovascular disease (right graph).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
We plotted the background birth rate of the 129,778 unique canines from the OFA dataset included in our 
study (Fig. 3) illustrating a peak of births in May with March – July being the peak birth period for domesticated 
dogs. We highlight (dashed red lines in Fig. 3) April and May as these are the birth months for wild Canis lupus 
(wolf) when exposed to extreme Northern climates19. We also show the birth rate for captive maned wolves, or 
Chrysocyon brachyurus, that are indigenous to South America (right-hand graph in Fig. 3). Those born in the 
Southern Hemisphere show peak births in June and July while those born in the Northern Hemisphere (i.e., 
not the extreme Northern areas such as Alaska) show peaks in December–January. This helps to illustrate the 
differences between dogs from the OFA dataset, such as Canis familiaris, captive populations, such as Chrysocyon 
brachyurus, and wild populations, such as Canis lupus. There may be breed-specific effects that regulate the birth 
season process, however domestication is also a major factor in determining the birth season in the domesticated 
dog (left-hand graph in Fig. 3). Importantly, the peak birth month for domesticated dogs (May) differs from the 
peak birth month observed in humans in the USA (September)10.
Regression Model for Investigating the Birth Month Effect. 
We constructed a regression model 
with a binary outcome variable for cardiovascular disease (i.e., abnormal or equivocal) versus healthy (i.e., nor-
mal). We decided to group abnormal and equivocal because the number of canines belonging to those classifi-
cations was low. There were 128,997 canines listed as normal, 428 as abnormal and 353 as equivocal. Our binary 
model binned abnormal and equivocal together for a total of 781 affected canines. We also modeled several 
confounder variables including breed clade from Parker et al.21, and whether or not the breed was predisposed 
Clade
Example Breeds within Clade
Prevalence of 
Breed Clade
Percent with 
Cardiovascular Disease
Red
Retrievers/Pointers
43.32%
0.53%
Unknown
Mixed Breeds, Rare Breeds
10.11%
0.66%
Royal Blue
Mastiffs/Bulldogs
9.13%
0.50%
Teal
Doberman Pinscher, Schnauzer, Rottweiler
6.55%
0.55%
Bright Pink
Great Dane, Rhodesian Ridgeback
4.85%
0.65%
Hot Pink
Maltese, Bichon Frise
4.21%
0.26%
Grass Green
Hound/Collie/Sheepdog
3.90%
1.92%
Blue
Saint Bernard, Bernese Mountain Dog, Greater Swiss 
Mountain Dog
2.80%
0.22%
Green
Belgian Malinois
2.56%
0.47%
Sky Blue
Terriers
1.70%
1.38%
Pink
Pomeranian/Pug/Papillon
1.54%
0.36%
Purple Pink
Chihuahua, Rat Terrier, American Hairless Terrier
1.18%
0.50%
Gold
German Shepherd
1.07%
1.57%
Table 1. Prevalence of Breed Clades (for those with > = 1% Prevalence) in OFA Dataset and Incidence of 
Cardiovascular Disease.
Figure 3. Number of Canis familiaris pups born per month in the OFA dataset (left-hand graph) and 
Chrysocyon brachyurus (maned wolf) born in captivity when exposed to Northern or Southern Hemisphere 
Climate. Left-hand graph shows the crude background birth rate by month of all pups/dogs included in the OFA 
dataset analyzed in this study. April and May are highlighted as these represent wild birth month dates for Canis 
lupus in extreme Northern climates19. Right-hand graph shows data on captive maned wolves (Chrysocyon 
brachyurus) left to breed in Northern or Southern Hemispheres from Maia et Gouveia32.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
to cardiovascular disease from Parker et al.22. We also added a variable for birth month, which was modeled as 
a numerical variable similar to other work performed in humans10. Two separate models were constructed. One 
included all 129,778 canines and the other model only contained the 116,655 canines having known breed clade 
information. In the restricted model, all mixed breeds and other rare uncharacterized breeds were excluded. 
Results are shown in Table 2. We also performed a chi-square test on the estimates from the model to obtain on 
overall breed clade p-value, which was <0.001 for both models shown in Table 2.
The effect of birth month (as a proxy for birth season) on cardiovascular disease risk does not change between 
the two models and shows a steady increase in risk with an Odds Ratio (OR) of 1.02. Dogs belonging to a breed 
that is known to be at risk for cardiovascular disease are at lower risk of developing cardiovascular disease. This 
suggests the possibility of a selective breeding effect whereby breeds at risk for cardiovascular disease have screen-
ing programs in place to prevent affected dogs from reproducing. However, the significance of this protective 
effect also varies between the two models depending on whether or not the mixed-breed dogs (and other dogs of 
unknown clade) are included. Importantly, in both cases the effects were the same size and/or in the same direc-
tion (protective versus associated with increased disease risk). The p-value itself is sensitive to the sample size and 
the heterogeneity of the dogs included. Birth month was significant if dogs of unknown breed clade are excluded 
(see Discussion section). Also the overall effect of the breed clade was significant in both models. However, the 
individual breed clades that were significant and the strength of the associations varied slightly depending on the 
breed.
There is a clear relationship between birth season and risk of cardiovascular disease among dog breeds that 
are NOT predisposed to cardiovascular disease (Fig. 4, top center graph). The risk of cardiovascular disease 
among dogs born in the summer months (Jun-Aug) is greater for breeds not predisposed to cardiovascular dis-
ease (P = 0.038) versus those that are predisposed to cardiovascular disease (depicted in red in Fig. 4). We also 
include the overall cardiovascular disease risk by birth month for all dogs combined (black line in top center 
graph of Fig. 4).
We also investigated the birth season relationship among breeds pre-disposed to thirteen different cardiovas-
cular diseases as reported in Parker et al.22. Some groups were low, e.g., only a few breeds have been implicated in 
increased risk for atrial fibrillation – accounting for only 465 canines in our population. Therefore, we were not 
able to detect a signal in those graphs. Breeds known to be susceptible to other cardiovascular diseases showed 
decreased risk among the summer months, including persistent right aortic arch; tricuspid dysplasia; and mitral 
valve disease. Atrial septal defects tended to increase towards the end of the year with peak months including 
August-December. Overall, the birth season – cardiovascular disease effect does appear to be modulated by the 
breed effect and also whether or not that particular breed is predisposed to cardiovascular disease. This is sugges-
tive of a possible gene-environment interaction.
Relative Risk of Cardiovascular Disease by Birth Month: Predisposed vs. Non-Predisposed. 
We 
computed the RR of developing cardiovascular disease by birth month for dogs predisposed to cardiovascular and 
those not predisposed (Fig. 5). The RR among dogs lacking a genetic predisposition to cardiovascular disease 
peaked at 1.47 for those dogs born in July. However, among dogs with a genetic predisposition the effect was 
weaker (highest RR was 1.24 observed among those born in both September and December, with September 
highlighted in Fig. 5). The RRs for each birth month for dogs predisposed to cardiovascular disease and those not 
predisposed to cardiovascular disease are shown in Table 3.
The overall OR for birth month – cardiovascular disease risk was 1.02 in the adjusted model meaning after 
breed clade and genetic predisposition for cardiovascular disease had been accounted for in the model (Table 2). 
Importantly, genetic predisposition was only important in the model that included mixed breeds (P = 0.001), but 
became insignificant when mixed-breeds were excluded (p = 0.148). Therefore, among purebred dogs (where we 
have greater power because the majority of submissions to the OFA are from breeders), the effect of genetic pre-
disposition on cardiovascular disease was insignificant (p = 0.148) while the effect of birth month was significant 
(p = 0.032). This is important because it suggests that birth month is more informative on whether a dog will 
develop cardiovascular disease among purebred dogs in the OFA then genetic predisposition (Table 2).
Comparison Between Humans and Canines: What Can We Learn? 
We observed peak cardiovascular 
disease risk occurring for dogs born in July for dogs from breeds not at risk for cardiovascular disease and a peak 
in September for dogs from breeds at risk for cardiovascular disease (Fig. 5). Dogs born in the peak risk month 
had twice the risk of developing cardiovascular disease versus dogs born in the trough month (i.e., lowest risk 
Variable
All Canines (N = 129,778)
Breeds of Unknown Clade Excluded 
(e.g., Mixed-breeds) (N = 116,655)
OR (95% CI)
P-value
OR (95% CI)
P-value
Birth Month
1.02 (0.998, 
1.040)
0.075
1.02 (1.002, 1.047)
0.032
Breed Clade
Varies
Varies*
Varies
Varies*
Cardiovascular Disease 
Predisposition Based On Breed
0.72
0.001
0.85
0.148
Table 2. Logistic Regression Model Results for Birth Month Effect on Cardiovascular Disease Incidence in 
Canines: Two Models. *A chi-square test on the estimates from the model obtained an overall breed clade 
p-value, p-value < 0.001 for both models.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
month). Interestingly, the peak birth month for canines differs from our human studies10,11, which found peak 
cardiovascular disease risk occurring between January–April in New York City10,11. We calculated the inferred 
conception months and highlighted those in Fig. 5; we also highlighted in shaded red the region between the two 
inferred conception months in each subplot. Therefore, the shaded region for the canine subplot corresponds 
to when most dogs at risk for cardiovascular disease are conceived regardless of breed type (i.e., at risk or not at 
risk). For humans, we had two different sites in NYC and therefore the peak birth month varied from January at 
Mount Sinai Hospital (MSH) to April at Columbia University Medical Center (CUMC). This corresponds to a 
conception month of April (MSH) or August (CUMC). The shaded region is the peak conception region for births 
resulting in increased cardiovascular risk (Fig. 5).
Discussion
Acquired Cardiovascular Disease in Canines Demonstrates a Birth Season Effect. 
Cardiovascular 
disease, among dog breeds that are not predisposed to cardiac problems, appears to have a strong seasonal com-
ponent as evidenced by the increase in cardiovascular disease among summer births (i.e., dark green line in 
Fig. 4). Because these dogs were not predisposed to cardiovascular disease then it is likely that this is evidence of 
an environmental effect, which does not appear to affect dogs belonging to breeds that are predisposed to car-
diovascular disease. There are a couple of possible explanations for why this may be the case. The first is due to 
selective breeding. Dogs that are predisposed to cardiovascular disease are often monitored more than breeds that 
have no apparent risk of disease. For example, all Cavalier King Charles Spaniels are considered to have at least 
Class A cardiovascular disease even if no murmur is present27. In addition, dogs that show signs of cardiovascular 
disease that come from high-risk breeds are often prevented from breeding27 along with other disease-related 
Figure 4. Cardiovascular Disease Risk Varies by Birth Month Among Canines that are not Predisposed to 
Cardiovascular Disease. The twelve subplots in the lower portion of the figure show the break down by birth 
month of dogs that are susceptible to that particular subtype of cardiovascular disease. The y-axis displays the 
proportion within those cohorts that developed cardiovascular disease.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
conditions28. This prevents them from passing on their genes to the future generation thereby improving the stock 
quality of the breed. However, dogs belonging to breeds that are not at increased risk of cardiovascular disease 
may not undergo as stringent testing for cardiovascular disease.
Congenital cardiovascular disease is often easily detected when dogs are still puppies. This allows breeders to 
make decisions regarding which puppies to be kept for breeding purposes and which should be neutered/spayed 
and thus sold as pets. Importantly inheritance of cardiovascular disease, even among predisposed breeds, does 
not follow a Mendelian inheritance pattern29. Suggestive of other factors involved in the development of cardio-
vascular disease, beyond simply genetics.
Acquired cardiovascular disease is more difficult to detect than the congenital form and often remains latent 
until later in life. In addition, acquired cardiovascular disease is thought to be due to a myriad of factors, includ-
ing obesity, exercise, diet and also genetic factors. Because acquired cardiovascular disease is acquired later in 
life and is often less breed-specific, breeders have difficulty monitoring it as stringently as they do for congenital 
cardiovascular disease. The results of our study strongly suggest that acquired cardiovascular disease displays a 
birth-season component as evidenced by the increase in cardiovascular disease among summer births of dogs 
that were not predisposed to cardiovascular disease. Our findings appear similar to what was found in our pre-
vious human studies where acquired cardiovascular diseases (i.e., not congenital cardiovascular diseases) were 
birth month/season dependent10,11. However, the odds ratios are lower in this canine study, which could be due to 
the lack of region of birth information for the dogs included in our study. Lacking region of birth for our canines 
introduces noise because we are unable to distinguish those dogs born in southern regions (e.g., Texas) from 
Figure 5. Cardiovascular Disease Risk By Birth Month in Canines (Canis familiaris) and Humans (Homo 
sapiens). The vertical lines represent the inferred conception month for the high-risk birth month in each 
group. Canines from breeds at risk for cardiovascular disease have a peak birth month in September, which 
corresponds to a July conception month. Canines from breeds not at risk for cardiovascular disease have a peak 
birth month in July corresponding to a May conception month. Shaded in red is the period between the two 
conception months. In humans (lower graph) there is some differences between Mount Sinai Hospital (MSH) 
and Columbia University Medical Center (CUMC). Again the inferred conception month for the peak birth 
month for cardiovascular risk is highlighted (dashed vertical lines, April for MSH and June for CUMC). The 
first trimester period for both MSH and CUMC for the peak coronary arteriosclerosis birth month at both 
sites (Jan – MSH, Mar – CUMC) is highlighted in red. We highlight the first trimester in humans, as this is the 
developmental period that is most comparable with canines. Notice the overlap between the highlighted red 
regions between canines (upper graph) and humans (lower graph) with regards to peak cardiovascular disease 
risk conception periods. There is overlap between these regions for June and July.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
those born in the north (e.g., Indiana). This noise in our dataset may mean that the effect size we observe may be 
lower then the true effect size.
Gene-Environment Interactions Affecting the Birth Season Effect are Likely. 
The birth season 
effect among canines does not appear as pronounced among dogs that are predisposed to cardiovascular disease. 
Therefore, it is likely that a genetic characteristic of dogs not typically at risk for cardiovascular disease is enhanc-
ing those dogs’ susceptibility to an ‘adverse effect of seasonality’ (i.e., developing acquired cardiovascular disease 
and being born in a high-risk month). This also suggests the possibility that the gene involved in modulating this 
effect is not a typical gene thought to be involved in cardiovascular disease. If the gene were a traditional cardio-
vascular disease gene, we would most likely have observed a stronger signal among canines predisposed to car-
diovascular disease. However, since the effect was the reverse, it is likely not a traditional cardiovascular disease 
gene that is modulating the birth season effect.
Potential for Selection Bias Among Breeders of Dogs Predisposed to Cardiovascular Disease. 
 
We observed an increase of cardiovascular disease risk for dogs born in June-August that belong to breeds not 
known to be predisposed to cardiovascular disease. However, breeders are not required to submit data to the OFA 
that is publically available. They can register their dogs via a private mechanism. Dogs registered via the private 
mechanisms are not included in this study, which utilizes only publically available OFA data. Breeders decide 
whether or not they want to make their dogs’ data public and therefore there may be some selection biases in this 
respect. For example, it is possible that breeders of dogs that are known to be at risk for cardiovascular problems 
may choose not to publically share their dogs’ results. This reporting bias could affect the results in various ways 
and is the subject of future work. We mention this explicitly to make readers aware of this factor. We are encour-
aged that the birth season effect was observed in the dogs not predisposed to cardiovascular disease because we 
believe breeders of dogs not predisposed to cardiac problems may be less likely to block their dogs’ results from 
the public. However, more work is needed in assessing these biases and is the subject of our future work.
What Can We Learn About the Exposure’s Mechanism and Gestational Effects from Canines? 
 
We observe some overlap between the peak conception periods across breed types (non-cardiac risk and cardiac 
risk) in dogs (Canis familiaris) and sites in humans from NYC (Homo sapiens) as shown in Fig. 5. This sug-
gests the possibility that the cardiovascular disease risk exposure may be closer to conception then previously 
thought (i.e., conception or first-trimester exposure). Interestingly, we performed a global analysis of birth sea-
son relationships using data from the United States of America (including NYC, Nashville Tennessee and Seattle 
Washington) along with several sites in Asia (including South Korea and Taiwan) and found that first trimester 
exposure to fine air particulates (PM 2.5) was the strongest correlate to explain the birth seasonal variance in 
increased risk of atrial fibrillation in humans13. This current analysis in dogs also seems to suggest a first trimester 
exposure being the main culprit behind the increased risk of cardiovascular disease by birth month.
Mapping developmental processes across species is challenging. Puppies are born with both their eyes shut 
and ear canals closed and they remain so for the first three weeks of life. This makes newborn puppies functionally 
blind and deaf. Therefore, when comparing developmental stages such as ‘first trimester’ in humans with a similar 
stage of development in canines is challenging. However, our results suggest that the environmental exposure that 
is driving the cardiovascular disease – birth month association is an association that occurs early on in human 
development and not a perinatal exposure. This fits well with the literature on human cardiovascular develop-
ment, which has consistently demonstrated that first trimester exposure to certain chemicals increases the risk for 
structural anomalies of the heart30,31. More work is needed to explore what type of exposure may be at play and 
how the canine and hominoid hearts are affected during the course of development resulting in a latent effect of 
birth seasonality on the heart.
Birth Month
Relative Risk (RR) for Canines 
Predisposed to Cardiovascular Disease
Relative Risk (RR) for Canines Not 
Predisposed to Cardiovascular Disease
January
0.94
0.78
February
0.94
1.12
March
1.16
1
April
0.9
0.8
May
0.85
0.73
June
0.81
1.08
July
0.94
1.47
August
0.9
1.33
September
1.24
0.81
October
1.16
0.94
November
0.95
1.02
December
1.24
0.98
Table 3. Relative Risk for Cardiovascular Disease By Birth Month Among Canines Predisposed to 
Cardiovascular Disease and Those Not Predisposed to Cardiovascular Disease.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
Limitations and Future Work. 
There are several limitations of our work. The OFA dataset contains 
self-reported canine health data from breeders and owners and their test results for a variety of conditions, 
including cardiovascular conditions. This dataset is biased towards dogs that are used for breeding purposes 
(i.e., breeding stock) as breeders are required to test their animals and report the results to a variety of agencies. 
However, only those breeders who chose to provide their dogs’ data publically were included in this study, and 
this biases the sample (the OFA does have an option for owners/breeders to submit their dogs’ data without hav-
ing the data appear on the public website). Therefore, it is highly likely that breeders who receive information that 
their dog has cardiovascular issues may elect to not provide this data publically. Also in general, since these dogs 
are breeding stock, they are likely to be healthier and from more affluent owners. Many pets are also included in 
the OFA dataset, however they are under-represented. This is evidenced by the low prevalence of mixed-breeds in 
our study (10% of dogs belonged to the mixed-breed clade) when compared to other studies that report close to 
30% mixed-breed population. Additionally, we were unable to adjust for many other factors that influence cardi-
ovascular disease risk because those variables were not available in the dataset. These include, but are not limited 
to: obesity, diet, exercise regime, and region of birth.
Another limitation of this study is that the time to cardiovascular diagnosis was not considered. In most cases, 
there was only one cardiovascular test per dog, but for dogs with multiple testing, we could consider the time to 
first detection of a cardiovascular condition or anomaly per dog. This is difficult using OFA data alone, as other 
cardiovascular functioning tests may have been performed that were not reported to the OFA. Therefore, this will 
be the subject of future, more detailed, work on subpopulations with more data.
Future work includes validating our canine cardiovascular disease – birth month associations at other sites 
and datasets to further probe this interesting relationship between breed, birth season and risk of cardiovascular 
disease. We also seek to explore further the role of breeder selection bias in the decision to report cardiovascular 
test results to the public (via the open-access mechanism). In addition, we hope to include some information 
from human studies on birth month to hone in on the exposure underlying this birth season – increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease relationship13. This will allow us to effectively add birth year to our analysis to determine if 
variance in the exposure (e.g., fine air particulates) by birth year affects the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we performed a retrospective analysis of birth month’s effect on cardiovascular disease risk in 
canines. We specifically investigated a relationship between cardiovascular disease and birth month. We sought 
to investigate canines because of the physiological similarity between human and canine cardiovascular systems. 
Our analysis shows a clear birth season relationship among dogs belonging to breeds that are not predisposed to 
cardiovascular disease. This suggests that acquired cardiovascular disease may be birth season dependent among 
all dog breeds. The overall odds ratio for the birth season effect was 1.02 among all dogs while adjusting for breed 
and predisposition effects. The odds ratio observed in canines is on par with odds ratios reported in humans, 
which suggests that there may be a true birth season effect in cardiovascular disease. Our findings indicate that 
acquired cardiovascular disease among dogs, especially those that are not predisposed to cardiovascular disease, 
is birth season dependent. Studying birth season effects in model organisms can help to elucidate potential mech-
anisms behind the reported associations. We can also study birth season effects in canines to elucidate causal 
mechanisms underlying the birth season – cardiovascular disease relationship.
References
 1. Azevedo, L., Serrano, C., Amorim, A. & Cooper, D. N. Trans-species polymorphism in humans and the great apes is generally 
maintained by balancing selection that modulates the host immune response. Human Genomics 9, 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1186/
s40246-015-0043-1 (2015).
 2. Boyko, A. R. The domestic dog: man’s best friend in the genomic era. Genome biology 12, 216 (2011).
 3. Cadieu, E. et al. Coat variation in the domestic dog is governed by variants in three genes. science 326, 150–153 (2009).
 4. Hagenaars, S. P. et al. Genetic prediction of male pattern baldness. PLoS genetics 13, e1006594 (2017).
 5. Parker, H. G. et al. An expressed fgf4 retrogene is associated with breed-defining chondrodysplasia in domestic dogs. Science 325, 
995–998 (2009).
 6. Chen, B. et al. Relating chemical structure to cellular response: an integrative analysis of gene expression, bioactivity, and structural 
data across 11,000 compounds. CPT: pharmacometrics & systems pharmacology 4, 576–584 (2015).
 7. Redfield, M. M., Aarhus, L. L., Wright, R. S. & Burnett, J. C. Cardiorenal and neurohumoral function in a canine model of early left 
ventricular dysfunction. Circulation 87, 2016–2022 (1993).
 8. Hasenfuss, G. Animal models of human cardiovascular disease, heart failure and hypertrophy. Cardiovascular research 39, 60–76 
(1998).
 9. Patterson, D. F. Epidemiologic and genetic studies of congenital heart disease in the dog. Circulation Research 23, 171–202 (1968).
 
10. Boland, M. R., Shahn, Z., Madigan, D., Hripcsak, G. & Tatonetti, N. P. Birth month affects lifetime disease risk: a phenome-wide 
method. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 22, 1042–1053 (2015).
 
11. Li, L., Boland, M. R., Miotto, R., Tatonetti, N. P. & Dudley, J. T. Replicating Cardiovascular Condition-Birth Month Associations. 
Scientific Reports 6, 33166 (2016).
 
12. Melnikov, V., Suvorova, I. Y. & Belisheva, N. Central hemodynamics and arterial stiffness in adult humans depend on the conditions 
of early development in the Northern Kola Peninsula. Human Physiology 42, 150–155 (2016).
 
13. Boland, M. R. et al. Uncovering exposures responsible for birth season – disease effects: a global study. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association 25, 275–288, https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocx105 (2018).
 
14. Boland, M. R. & Tatonetti, N. P. Investigation of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase pathway to elucidate off-target prenatal effects of 
pharmaceuticals: a systematic review. The Pharmacogenomics Journal 16, 411, https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2016.48-supplementary-
information (2016).
 
15. Goldizen, A. W., Terborgh, J., Cornejo, F., Porras, D. & Evans, R. Seasonal food shortage, weight loss, and the timing of births in 
saddle-back tamarins (Saguinus fuscicollis). The journal of animal Ecology, 893–901 (1988).
 
16. Paul, A. & Thommen, D. Timing of birth, female reproductive success and infant sex ratio in semifree-ranging Barbary macaques 
(Macaca sylvanus). Folia primatologica 42, 2–16 (1984).
 
17. Côté, S. D. & Festa-Bianchet, M. Birthdate, mass and survival in mountain goat kids: effects of maternal characteristics and forage 
quality. Oecologia 127, 230–238, https://doi.org/10.1007/s004420000584 (2001).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
SCIEnTIFIC RepoRts |  (2018) 8:7130  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-25199-w
 
18. Smith, D. W. et al. Infanticide in wolves: seasonality of mortalities and attacks at dens support evolution of territoriality. Journal of 
Mammalogy 96, 1174–1183, https://doi.org/10.1093/jmammal/gyv125 (2015).
 
19. Brainerd, S. M. et al. The effects of breeder loss on wolves. Journal of Wildlife Management 72, 89–98 (2008).
 
20. Lord, K., Feinstein, M., Smith, B. & Coppinger, R. Variation in reproductive traits of members of the genus Canis with special 
attention to the domestic dog (Canis familiaris). Behavioural Processes 92, 131–142, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2012.10.009 
(2013).
 
21. Parker, H. G. et al. Genomic Analyses Reveal the Influence of Geographic Origin, Migration, and Hybridization on Modern Dog 
Breed Development. Cell Reports 19, 697–708 (2017).
 
22. Parker, H. G., Meurs, K. M. & Ostrander, E. A. Finding cardiovascular disease genes in the dog. Journal of Veterinary Cardiology 8, 
115–127 (2006).
 
23. O’Neill, D. G., Church, D. B., McGreevy, P. D., Thomson, P. C. & Brodbelt, D. C. Longevity and mortality of owned dogs in England. 
The Veterinary Journal 198, 638–643, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.09.020 (2013).
 
24. Lund, E. M., Armstrong, P. J., Kirk, C. A. & Klausner, J. S. Prevalence and risk factors for obesity in adult dogs from private US 
veterinary practices. International Journal of Applied Research in Veterinary Medicine 4, 177 (2006).
 
25. BMJ. How to calculate risk. BMJ Clinical Evidence, http://clinicalevidence.bmj.com/x/set/static/ebm/learn/665075.html (2012).
 
26. Lund, E. M., Armstrong, P. J., Kirk, C. A., Kolar, L. M. & Klausnor, J. Health status and population characteristics of dogs and cats 
examined at private veterinary practices in the United States. Journal American Veterinary Medical Association 214, 1336–1341 
(1999).
 
27. Atkins, C. et al. Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Canine Chronic Valvular Heart Disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine 23, 1142–1150, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1939-1676.2009.0392.x (2009).
 
28. Summers, J. F., Diesel, G., Asher, L., McGreevy, P. D. & Collins, L. M. Inherited defects in pedigree dogs. Part 2: Disorders that are 
not related to breed standards. The Veterinary Journal 183, 39–45, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tvjl.2009.11.002 (2010).
 
29. Patterson, D. Hereditary congenital heart defects in dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice 30, 153–165 (1989).
 
30. Bérard, A. et al. First trimester exposure to paroxetine and risk of cardiac malformations in infants: the importance of dosage. Birth 
Defects Research Part B: Developmental and Reproductive Toxicology 80, 18–27, https://doi.org/10.1002/bdrb.20099 (2007).
 
31. Cooper, W. O. et al. Major Congenital Malformations after First-Trimester Exposure to ACE Inhibitors. New England Journal of 
Medicine 354, 2443–2451, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa055202 (2006).
 
32. Maia, O. & Gouveia, A. Birth and mortality of maned wolves Chrysocyon brachyurus (Illiger, 1811) in captivity. Brazilian Journal of 
Biology 62, 25–32 (2002).
Acknowledgements
MRB was supported by generous funding by the Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania.
Author Contributions
Conceived Study Design: M.R.B. Helped with Data Access: M.R.B., A.R.G., E.D. Provided information, insights 
to study design: M.R.B., M.S.K., E.D., A.R.G. Wrote Paper: M.R.B. Reviewed, Edited, and Approved Final 
Manuscript: M.R.B., M.S.K., E.D., A.R.G.
Additional Information
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
