 Transcriptomic and morphophysiological evidence for a specialized human cortical 
GABAergic cell type 
 
Eszter Boldog1*, Trygve Bakken2*, Rebecca D. Hodge2*, Mark Novotny3, Brian D. Aevermann3, 
Judith Baka1, Sándor Bordé1, Jennie L. Close2, Francisco Diez-Fuertes3, Song-Lin Ding2, Nóra 
Faragó1, Ágnes K. Kocsis1, Balázs Kovács1, Jamison M. McCorrison3, Jeremy A. Miller2, Gábor 
Molnár1, Gáspár Oláh1, Attila Ozsvár1, Márton Rózsa1, Soraya Shehata2, Kimberly A. Smith2, 
Susan M. Sunkin2, Danny N. Tran3, Pratap Venepally3, Abby Wall2, László G. Puskás5, Pál 
Barzó6, Frank J. Steemers4, Nicholas J. Schork3, Richard H. Scheuermann3,7, Roger S. Lasken3, 
Ed S. Lein2**, Gábor Tamás1** 
 
1MTA-SZTE Research Group for Cortical Microcircuits, Department of Anatomy, Physiology and 
Neuroscience, University of Szeged, Közép fasor 52., Szeged, H-6726, Hungary 
2Allen Institute for Brain Science, 615 Westlake Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA 
3J. Craig Venter Institute, 4120 Capricorn Lane, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA 
4Illumina, Inc., 5200 Illumina Way, San Diego, CA 92122 USA 
5Laboratory of Functional Genomics, Department of Genetics, Biological Research Center, 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Temesvári krt. 62, H-6726, Szeged, Hungary 
6Department of Neurosurgery, University of Szeged, Hungary, Semmelweis u. 6., Szeged, H-
6725 Hungary 
7Department of Pathology, 9500 Gilman Drive, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093 
USA 
 
 
*These authors have equal contributions. 
**Corresponding authors 
 
Correspondence should be addressed to Ed S. Lein (EdL@alleninstitute.org) and Gábor Tamás 
(gtamas@bio.u-szeged.hu). 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Abstract 
We describe convergent evidence from transcriptomics, morphology and physiology for a 
specialized GABAergic neuron subtype in human cortex. Using unbiased single nucleus RNA 
sequencing, we identify ten GABAergic interneuron subtypes with combinatorial gene 
signatures in human cortical layer 1 and characterize a novel group of human interneurons with 
anatomical features never described in rodents having large, “rosehip”-like axonal boutons and 
compact arborization. These rosehip cells show an immunohistochemical profile (GAD1/CCK-
positive, CNR1/SST/CALB2/PVALB-negative) matching a single transcriptomically-defined cell 
type whose molecular signature is not seen in mouse cortex. Rosehip cells make homotypic gap 
junctions, predominantly target apical dendritic shafts of layer 3 pyramidal neurons and inhibit 
backpropagating pyramidal action potentials in microdomains of the dendritic tuft.  These cells 
are therefore positioned for potent local control of distal dendritic computation in cortical 
pyramidal neurons. 
 
 
Keywords 
human, neocortex, interneuron, layer 1, cell type, transcriptomics, microcircuit 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Understanding the cellular and circuit organization of the neocortex, the substrate for much of 
higher cognitive function, has been a topic of intense study since the seminal work of Ramón y 
Cajal 1. Morpho-physiological characterization using in vitro slice physiology has been the 
standard for decades 2, but this approach suffers from undersampling, difficulties in quantitative 
classification of cell types 3, and applicability largely to model organisms at sufficient scale to 
seriously handle neuronal diversity. Recent advances in single cell transcriptomics has offered a 
new approach for unbiased, high-throughput quantitative surveys of molecularly defined cell 
types 4–6 that is in principle applicable to tissues from any species including human. Initial 
application to mouse cortex has revealed approximately 50 transcriptomic types, demonstrating 
both the feasibility of the approach and the complexity of the system. There is now great 
promise in combining these traditional (morpho-electric) and nouveau (transcriptomic) 
approaches for an unbiased molecular classification and then characterization of these types. 
Recent systematic efforts in rodent have provided insight into the cellular composition and 
organization of rodent neocortical circuits, suggesting the presence of a several dozen inhibitory 
and excitatory cell types 3–5,7. However, conservation of cellular and circuit principles in human 
cortex is largely assumed but largely untested to date. Indeed there is evidence for significant 
neuronal differences between rodents and human; for example, emerging results suggest that 
distinct membrane 8,9 and synaptic 10–13 properties and dendritic complexity 14–16 of human 
neurons might contribute to human specific signal processing. With the increasing study of 
mouse cortex as a model for understanding human cognition it is essential to establish whether 
the cellular architecture of human is conserved or whether there are specialized cell types and 
system properties that cannot be modeled in rodents. Here we combine single nucleus 
transcriptomics and in vitro slice physiology to study GABAergic neurons in layer 1 of human 
cortex and provide multiple convergent lines of evidence for the identification of a cell type with 
human specialized features. 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Results 
To allow an unbiased survey of transcriptionally-defined cell types in human cortical tissue we 
adapted methods for single nucleus RNA sequencing 17,18 to profile large numbers of nuclei from 
frozen postmortem brain specimens (Fig. 1A). Briefly this method involved microdissection of 
regions of interest from fluorescent Nissl-stained vibratome sections of cortex, tissue 
homogenization to liberate nuclei, NeuN staining and FACS isolation, and Smart-seq2 based 
library preparation 19. We applied this strategy to profile n=769 quality control passed NeuN-
positive neurons and n=102 NeuN-negative non-neuronal cells across 2 individuals from 
microdissected layer 1 of the middle temporal gyrus, expected to predominantly contain 
inhibitory neurons. Iterative clustering was used to group nuclei with similar transcriptional 
profiles, thereby identifying a robust set of transcriptomic-defined cell types (Fig. 1B). Based on 
expression of known marker genes (Suppl. Fig. 1A), clusters corresponded to all major classes 
of neural cell types that were expected to be captured. These included major non-neuronal cell 
types (microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) and oligodendrocytes) and 
one excitatory neuron type sampled from upper cortical layer 2 incidentally included in the layer 
1 dissection (Fig. 1C). In addition, eleven clusters corresponding to GABAergic neuron 
subtypes were identified (numbered by relative abundance), including three highly distinctive 
clusters (i1, i2, i5) and a larger set of more closely-related cell types. 
Transcriptomic cell types displayed highly selective gene expression (Fig. 1D, Suppl. Fig. 
1A). For example, the pan-neuronal gene synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP25) 
clearly differentiated neuronal from non-neuronal types, which were in turn differentiated by 
highly specific marker genes. Glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 (GAD1) clearly delineated the 
GABAergic neurons. In cortical layers 2-6, most GABAergic neurons have mutually exclusive 
expression of parvalbumin (PVALB), somatostatin (SST) or vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) 
20. In contrast, Pvalb and Sst are not expressed in mouse layer 1 by in situ hybridization (ISH), 
while Vip labels only sparse cell populations (Suppl. Fig. 1B). Interestingly, both SST and VIP 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 (but not PVALB) are seen in human MTG layer 1 by ISH (Fig. 1E). The layer 1 MTG 
transcriptomic clusters expressed either SST (i1,i2), VIP (i6,i9,i10), or neither marker, although 
cluster i2 represents a cell type restricted to layer 2 since it also expresses LHX6 which is not 
found in layer 1 (Fig. 1D,E). Therefore, there appear to be ten inhibitory cell types within layer 1, 
although it is not clear whether any of these types are completely restricted to layer 1. These 
clusters in layer 1 express different combinations of known markers of layer 1 interneurons, 
including cholecystokinin (CCK), reelin (RELN), neuron derived neurotrophic factor (NDNF), and 
lysosomal associated membrane protein family member 5 (LAMP), many of which were 
confirmed to have expression in layer 1 by ISH (Fig. 1E). Furthermore, each cluster showed 
highly selective expression of known and previously uncharacterized individual marker genes. 
Interestingly, given the proximity of layer 1 to the overlaying pia, several of these markers 
appear to be related to interaction with endothelia, including endothelin receptor type A 
(EDNRA) and epidermal growth factor (EGF). To summarize, this unbiased transcriptomic 
approach identified ten GABAergic interneuron subtypes in layer 1 that have distinctive 
combinatorial and specific gene expression signatures suggestive of distinct morphological and 
functional properties. 
 
Rosehip cells: novel morphological features in layer 1 of the human cerebral cortex  
In parallel to the transcriptomic approach we developed an initial database of whole cell 
recorded, biocytin filled interneurons in layer 1 of 350 µm thick slices of nonpathological human 
samples prepared from surgically removed pieces of parietal, frontal and temporal cortices 
10,11,21. Initially, there was no preference when approaching particular cell types during 
recordings, apart from having the soma of the patch clamped cells in layer 1. This unbiased 
approach yielded interneurons with complete somatodendritic and axonal morphological 
recovery (n=76). Light microscopic examination of each cell identified neurons with previously 
described morphological features, e.g. neurogliaform cells (n=16, 21%; Fig. 2D) 20,22,23. 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 However, systematic analysis also revealed a novel group of layer 1 interneurons having large, 
rosehip-like individual axonal boutons forming very compact, bushy arborizations (rosehip cells, 
n=10, 13%; Fig. 2A-C). To our knowledge, interneurons having the phenotype of rosehip cells 
detailed below, have not been identified previously in layer 1 of the cerebral cortex. Somata and 
dendrites of rosehip cells were confined to layer 1 with only distal dendrites occasionally 
penetrating layer 2. Proximal dendrites and somata of rosehip cells were decorated with stub-
like spines. The axon of rosehip cells usually emerged from the basal part of the soma and gave 
rise to very compact, dense axonal trees predominantly arborizing in layer 1 with tortuous 
collaterals having spindle-shaped boutons with diameters not seen in other types of human 
layer 1 interneurons in our sample. We were unable to find evidence for rosehip cells with 
recordings performed in layer 2/3. We then systematically increased the number of recorded 
rosehip cells in our layer 1 database (n=86) and quantitatively compared dendritic and axonal 
parameters 24 of three dimensionally reconstructed rosehip cells (n=6) to neurogliaform cells 
(n=5; Fig. 2E), the best characterized cell type in the microcircuit of human layer 1 to date 25,26. 
The soma of rosehip cells gave rise to fewer primary dendrites (5.50±1.87) compared to 
neurogliaform cells (8.6±2.19, n=5, p<0.03, Mann-Whitney (MW) U-test). Total length 
(11.13±1.99 mm) and maximal horizontal extent of axons (287.75±70.15 µm) of rosehip cells 
were significantly smaller than those of neurogliaform cells (24.74±8.90 mm, 648.68±202.60 
µm, respectively; p<0.004 for both, MW U-test). We measured axonal bouton densities of 
rosehip (n=6) and neurogliaform (n=4) cells in 10 µm thick spherical shells of increasing 
diameter by Sholl analysis corrected with the portion of shells outside the brain slice. The 
bouton density of rosehip and neurogliaform cells monotonously decreased with increasing 
distances from the soma, however, bouton densities were higher in neurogliaform cells 70-220 
µm from the soma (p<0.05 for 70 µm, p<0.01 for 80-220 µm, MW U-test). Rosehip cells had 
longer interbouton intervals compared to neurogliaform cells (3.97±0.49 and 3.10±0.32 µm, 
respectively, p<0.038, MW U-test) measured as linear distances between neighboring boutons. 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Rosehip cell axons branched more frequently, with rosehip cells and neurogliaform cells having 
1.52±0.45 and 0.61±0.21 nodes along 100 µm length of their axons (p<0.004, MW U-test). The 
axon tortuosity (measured as the average ratio of the actual axonal path and linear distance 
between neighboring nodes) of rosehip cells (1.42±0.05) was similar to that of neurogliaform 
cells (1.54±0.15). Measurements based on serial section electron microscopy and three-
dimensional reconstructions revealed that the volume of axon terminals of rosehip cells 
(0.37±0.18 µm3, n=31) was approximately four times larger (p<0.001; MW U-test) compared to 
that of neurogliaform cells (0.08±0.06 µm3, n=24, Fig. 2E, 5I). The size of active zones in 
rosehip axon terminals (0.11±0.03 µm2, n=11) was not correlated to bouton volumes (rho=0.34, 
p=0.29, Spearman correlation). 
To understand the molecular identity of rosehip cells and link them to the transcriptomic 
clusters, we performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) on whole cell recorded and anatomically 
recovered cells for well characterized antibody markers of GABAergic cell types. This revealed 
that rosehip cells were immunopositive for CCK (n=6) but negative for CB1 cannabinoid 
receptor (CNR1, n=5), SST (n=3) and calretinin (CALB2; n=2; Fig. 3A). Furthermore, rosehip 
cells were immunopositive for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA; n=2), and for chicken 
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II (NR2F2; n=2), negative for the widely used 
interneuron marker molecules parvalbumin (n=3), neuronal nitric oxide synthase (n=4), 
neuropeptide Y (n=2), calbindin (n=2), and choline acetyltransferase (n=3; Suppl. Fig. 2A). 
Remarkably, this immunohistochemical profile aligned closely with a single transcriptomic 
cell type, i5, which was similarly GAD1/CCK-positive but CNR1/SST/CALB2/PVALB-negative 
(Fig. 3B, red box). This putative rosehip transcriptomic type, one of the most distinctive layer 1 
GABAergic transcriptomic types, expresses many other genes either highly specific or 
coexpressed in only one other layer 1 cell type. Intriguingly, given the rosehip synaptic 
phenotype, these markers include many genes with known associations to axon growth and 
synaptic structure and function, including synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2c (SV2C), LAMP5, 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily C member 3 (TRPC3), complexin 3 
(CPLX3), neurotrypsin (PRSS12), netrin G1 (NTNG1), histamine receptor H1 (HRH1), receptor 
tyrosine kinase like orphan receptor 2 (ROR2), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), and taxilin 
beta (TXLNB). 
Since the rosehip synaptic anatomy phenotype has not been described in rodents, we 
asked whether a transcriptomic signature similar to the rosehip transcriptomic type had been 
observed in a recently published large-scale analysis of mouse primary visual cortex using 
single cell RNA-seq analysis 4. We did not observe a transcriptional signature even closely 
resembling the marker gene profile of human rosehip cluster in mouse, either for the 
PVALB/SST/VIP-negative types (Fig. 3B, right panel) or the complete set of GABAergic types 
described in that study (Suppl. Fig. 2B). While there were two CCK+/CNR1- clusters in mouse 
cortex, they did not consistently coexpress the great majority of selective genes seen in the 
human rosehip cluster. Importantly, it is the unique combinatorial expression of many marker 
genes that defines rosehip cells.  For example, expression of LAMP5, SV2C, EYA4 and CPLX3 
is seen by ISH in human layer 1 (Fig. 3C); similarly, as predicted by transcriptomics three of 
these four genes are also expressed in mouse layer 1 whereas cells expressing Eya4 are 
extremely rare. Many other rosehip-selective genes had no evidence of expression in layer 1 
interneurons in mouse based on single cell transcriptomics (Fig. 3B, Suppl. Fig. 2B). 
To demonstrate that layer 1 neurons with combinatorial expression patterns predicted by 
transcriptomics could be found in human layer 1, and to quantify their proportions, we 
systematically performed triple fluorescent ISH using discriminating positive and negative gene 
markers. For all combinations tested we observed cells with the predicted profiles. For example, 
we observed CCK+/CNR1-/LAMP5+, CCK+/PDGFRA+/SOX13+, and CCK+/TRPC3+/CPLX3+ 
cells, as well as cells where CCK was swapped with other positive rosehip markers (Fig. 3D; 
additional gene combinations shown in Suppl. Fig 2C). Quantification of cell proportions using 
marker expression is complicated by two factors; first, markers for one cell type are often 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 expressed in others, and second, individual markers are often not expressed in every cell in a 
cluster. We used the combination of GAD1, PDGFRA and TRPC3 to quantify the proportion of 
rosehip cells among layer 1 GABAergic neurons (Fig. 3E). PDGFRA is known to be expressed 
in OPCs at extremely high levels as well (which is why it appears to only be expressed in OPCs 
in Figure 1 but appears high in rosehip cells in Figure 2 once levels are not normalized across 
all cell types including OPCs). PDGFRA+ cells represent ~15% of GAD1+ cells, therefore an 
upper bound. TRPC3 is not expressed in all cells in the rosehip cluster on the other hand. The 
proportion of GAD1+ cells that are PDGFRA+/TRPC3+ was ~10%, therefore a lower bound. 
The triple positive cells for this combination were sparsely distributed across layer 1, although 
not restricted to this layer (Suppl. Fig. 2D).  
Finally, to more concretely link morphologically and transcriptionally defined rosehip cells, 
we performed digital PCR for additional marker genes on cellular content extracted from 
individual rosehip neurons. As predicted by the transcriptome data, rosehip cells were positive 
for CCK, CPLX3, SV2C and TRPC3, and low (CNR1) or absent (NDNF) for genes not 
expressed by cells in that cluster (Fig. 3F). Together, these data strongly link the anatomically-
defined rosehip phenotype with a highly distinctive transcriptomic cell type signature that is 
found in human but not in mouse layer 1. 
 
Intrinsic electrophysiological properties of rosehip cells 
Anatomically identified rosehip cells responded to long (800 ms) suprathreshold current 
injections with stuttering or irregular spiking firing pattern 2 when activated from resting 
membrane potential (-61.34±5.8 mV, Fig. 4A, 5B,C,E,F,K). Analysis of silent and 
suprathreshold periods during rheobasic firing of rosehip cells indicated that membrane 
oscillations and firing of rosehip cells were tuned to beta and gamma frequencies (Fig. 4E-G). 
The power of averaged fast Fourier transforms (FFT) of subthreshold membrane potential 
oscillations 27 was higher between 3.8 and 80 Hz in rosehip cells compared to neurogliaform 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 and other interneurons (Fig. 4F) and intraburst frequency of stuttering firing also peaked in the 
beta-gamma range (Fig. 4G). The standard deviation of interspike intervals was higher in 
rosehip cells (87±64 ms, n=55) compared to neurogliaform (41±34 ms, n=16, p<0.001, 
Wilcoxon-test) or unclassified (47±41 ms, n=36, p<0.001, Wilcoxon-test) interneurons, indicating 
alternating silent and active periods during rheobasic stimulation. As described previously, 25 
human interneurons recorded in layer 1 had a characteristic sag when responding to 
hyperpolarizing current pulses. However, the amplitude of the sag measured in anatomically 
classified rosehip cells (1.73±0.30, n=55) exceeded that of interneurons morphologically 
identified as neurogliaform cells (1.19±0.12, n=16, p<0.001, Wilcoxon-test) or unclassified 
interneurons (1.29±0.28, n=36, p<0.001, Wilcoxon-test). Input resistances of rosehip cells 
(139.6±54.1 MΩ) were similar to that of neurogliaform cells (160.1±55.9 MΩ) and lower 
compared to other interneurons (216.3±84.4 MΩ, p<0.001, Wilcoxon-test), however, time 
constants of rosehip cells (7.3±3.7 ms) were similar to neurogliaform (8.9±2.4 ms, p<0.001) and 
faster compared to other cells (11.1±12.5 ms, p<0.001). Anatomically identified rosehip cells 
showed distinct impedance profiles relative to other layer 1 interneurons in response to current 
injections with an exponential chirp (0.2-200 Hz, Fig. 4 C-D). Impedance at the lowest 
frequency (Z0.2Hz) was similar in layer 1 interneurons (rosehip, 258±81 MΩ, neurogliaform, 
279±128 MΩ, unclassified, 261±133 MΩ, Lillefors test followed by one-way ANOVA with 
Bonferroni correction). Resonance magnitude (Q, see methods) of rosehip cells (1.77±0.34) 
was significantly higher compared to neurogliaform cells (1.31±0.07; p<0.021, Lillefors test 
followed by one way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction) and unclassified interneurons 
(1.37±0.19; p<0.049). In addition, frequencies of maximal impedance (fmax) in rosehip cells 
(4.17±1.1 Hz) were significantly higher than in neurogliaform cells (1.98±1.04 Hz; p<0.045) but 
the difference was not significant compared to unclassified interneurons (2.47±1.47 Hz, 
p<0.142). We did not find significant differences between neurogliaform cells and unclassified 
interneurons in impedance parameters. Support vector machine (SVM) based wrapper feature 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 selection of electrophysiological parameters ranked the amplitude of the sag and the standard 
deviation of interspike intervals as the two best delineators out of n=200 measured 
electrophysiological parameters for separating anatomically identified rosehip, neurogliaform 
and unclassified interneurons in layer 1 (Fig. 4B). Indeed, the best hyperplane separating 
rosehip cells from other interneuron types according to SVM analysis had a false positive rate of 
0% for identifying rosehip cells (n=37) in the total population of anatomically recovered layer 1 
interneurons (n=107). Thus, we included cells defined by the hyperplanes of SVM analysis 
referred to as SVM identified rosehip cells in case anatomical recovery was lacking in some 
experiments as indicated below.  
 
Function of rosehip cells in local microcircuits 
To assess functional connectivity of rosehip cells in the local microcircuit, we established 
recordings from rosehip cells and then searched for potential pre- and postsynaptic partners 
without any cell type preference in an area of the brain slices within a horizontal and vertical 
radius of ~100 µm and ~200 µm, respectively (Fig. 5A-F). Monosynaptic inputs were tested on 
anatomically (n=36) and SVM (n=24) identified rosehip cells. Presynaptic layer 1 interneurons 
were connected to rosehip cells with an overall coupling ratio (CR) of 45%. GABAergic cells 
evoking IPSPs on rosehip cells included layer 1 neurogliaform cells (n=10, CR 100 %), rosehip 
cells (n=2, CR 17%) and unclassified interneurons (n=14, CR 40%), however, none of the 
tested interneurons (n=9) having somata in layer 2 (defined as <70 µm below the layer 1/2 
border) were connected to rosehip cells. Fast components of IPSPs arriving to rosehip cells 
evoked by different presynaptic interneurons had similar amplitudes (0.982±0.705, 0.915±0.594 
and 1.504±1.308 mV, respectively) and showed paired pulse depression with paired pulse ratios 
of (0.42±0.48, 0.27 and 0.71±0.26, respectively). Rosehip cells received local excitatory inputs 
from layer 2-3 pyramidal cells sporadically (n=7, CR 5%) with monosynaptic EPSP amplitudes 
of 3.357±1.458 mV and paired pulse ratios of 0.68±0.12. Very large unitary EPSPs, previously 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 described to drive human basket and axo-axonic cells to suprathreshold postsynaptic responses 
10,11,28, were not encountered on rosehip cells. Thus, acknowledging the fact that some axon 
collaterals of pyramidal cells were cut during the slicing procedure (Fig. 5C) leading to a 
potential underrepresentation of pyramidal cell triggered EPSPs, local inputs to rosehip cells 
appear to be predominantly GABAergic.  
In turn, monosynaptic output connections triggered by anatomically (n=41) and SVM 
(n=13) identified rosehip cells rarely innervated postsynaptic interneurons (overall CR 8%). 
Even though a neurogliaform cell (n=1, CR 10%), rosehip cells (n=2, CR 17%), unclassified 
layer 1 interneurons (n=2, CR 5%) and superficial layer 2 pyramidal cells (n=3, CR 4%) were 
targeted, the output of rosehip cells were predominantly directed towards layer 3 pyramidal cells 
(n=12, CR 44%) having somata >70 µm below the layer 1/2 border. IPSPs elicited by rosehip 
cells were mediated by GABAA receptors based on experiments showing blockade of IPSPs by 
application of the GABAA receptor antagonist gabazine (10 µM, Fig. 5G). Amplitudes of rosehip 
cell triggered IPSPs arriving to interneurons (0.428±0.370 mV) were larger compared to those 
targeting layer 3 pyramidal cells (0.087±0.059 mV, p<0.05, MW U-test), in agreement with 
dendritic filtering of distally elicited IPSPs during signal propagation along the apical dendrite to 
the somatically placed electrode. The results above indicate that rosehip cells might 
preferentially target pyramidal cells sending terminal branches of their apical dendrites to layer 
1. Indeed, when randomly sampling the output formed by rosehip cells (n=3) using serial 
electron microscopic sections, we found that axon terminals (n=31) exclusively targeted 
dendritic shafts (Fig. 5I). Moreover, further ultrastructural analysis of postsynaptic dendrites 
(n=15) revealed dendritic spines and sparse innervation by symmetrical synapses on the shaft, 
suggesting that these dendrites belonged to pyramidal cells (n=13, 86%, Fig. 5J). A 
postsynaptic dendrite (n=1, 7%,) having no spines and receiving asymmetric synapses on the 
shaft was likely to be formed by an interneuron. Features of the remaining postsynaptic dendrite 
(n=1, 7%) were insufficient for further identification. 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Previous studies on rodent cortical interneurons containing CCK show functional 
presynaptic expression of the CB1 cannabinoid receptor 29, however, application of the CB1 
receptor antagonist AM251 was ineffective in modulating rosehip cell evoked IPSPs (n=4, Fig. 
5H), supporting our results of single cell digital PCR, IHC and ISH data (Fig. 3). Earlier reports 
on human microcircuits identified single cell triggered polysynaptic network events 10,11,28. We 
found that rosehip cells were involved in single cell activated ensembles detected through 
disynaptic IPSPs triggered by layer 2 (n=1) and layer 3 (n=2) pyramidal cells and polysynaptic 
EPSPs triggered by an axo-axonic cell, respectively (data not shown). In addition to mono- and 
polysynaptic chemical synaptic communication, human interneurons are also involved in gap 
junctional signaling 25. Rosehip cells also formed homologous electrical synapses (n=5) 
between each other (Fig. 5K) and established heterologous electrical synapses (n=1) with an 
unclassified layer 1 interneuron. 
Preferential placement of output synapses on distal dendritic shafts of pyramidal cells 
reaching layer 1 suggest that rosehip cells might specialize in the control of dendritic signal 
processing. In dual recordings of synaptically connected rosehip cells to pyramidal cell pairs 
(n=4), we loaded rosehip cells with Alexa Fluor 594 to label presynaptic axons and filled the 
postsynaptic pyramidal cells with Oregon Green BAPTA 1 in order to structurally map the 
course of dendrites and to measure dendritic Ca2+ dynamics (Fig. 6). The amplitude of the 
IPSPs triggered by the first action potential of rosehip cells and evoked on distal dendrites of the 
postsynaptic pyramidal could be detected at the soma (46.3±27.2 µV) confirming synaptic 
coupling (Fig. 6A,B). To our knowledge, backpropagation of action potentials to dendrites 30 of 
human neurons has not been addressed in previous studies, thus we tested dendritic Ca2+ 
responses following somatically elicited burst firing (100 ms current injections, 4 spikes/burst) in 
layer 3 pyramidal cells. Changes in ΔF/F (14.9±5.6%) in distal branches of the apical dendrites 
in layer 1 were consistently detected at multiple (14±6) locations on the postsynaptic neurons 
confirming action potential backpropagation into distal apical dendritic branches of human 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 pyramidal cells (Fig. 6C). We chose regions of interest on Oregon Green BAPTA 1-filled 
branches of the postsynaptic apical dendrites overlapping with the Alexa Fluor 594 labeled 
axonal arborization of presynaptic rosehip cells and triggered somatically evoked bursts in the 
pyramidal cells alone for control and together with bursts in the rosehip cell in an alternating 
fashion (Fig. 6B-F). Inputs from rosehip cells simultaneous with backpropagating action 
potentials were effective in suppressing the amplitude of Ca2+ signals relative to control (n=4, 
13.4±3.8% vs. 18.7±3.4% ΔF/F, p<0.02, Wilcoxon-test, Fig. 6C) in one or two locations 
heuristically line scanned on dendrites of postsynaptic cells (Fig. 6G). The anatomical 
arrangement of presynaptic axons and imaged segments of postsynaptic dendrites was 
recovered in n=3 pairs. Rosehip inputs simultaneous with backpropagating pyramidal action 
potentials were effective in suppressing Ca2+ signals only at sites that were neighboring (10±3 
µm) to the putative synapses between the two cells. No effect of rosehip cells was detected at 
dendritic sites one step further in distance (23±12 µm, Fig. 6D-F). This suggests that rosehip 
cells specialize in providing tightly compartmentalized control of dendritic Ca2+ electrogenesis of 
human pyramidal cells enforcing inhibitory microdomains in dendritic computation. 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Discussion 
Understanding the cellular makeup of the cortex and its conservation across species represent 
twin challenges difficult to address in human tissue. Historically, forming a representative 
overview of cell type diversity in a particular brain region has been achieved based on molecular 
marker expression cross referenced to axonal and dendritic morphology 3,4,20,31–33. Many 
conserved patterns of molecular expression and morpho-physiological features for a given cell 
type or class have been reported 2,34, but species variation has also been documented 26,35–39 
and cell types potentially characteristic to a number of species have also been described 40–43. 
Importantly, recent studies have overcome some of the difficulties associated with the scarcity 
of human tissue of sufficient quality 8–13,21,25,26,28,35,39,44–50 paving the way for an in depth 
understanding of human circuits. Here we demonstrate the strength of a modern version of this 
approach that can be applied to human postmortem and neurosurgical tissues. Single nucleus 
transcriptomics provides the scale for an unbiased survey of molecular expression, while in vitro 
human tissue physiology characterizes the functional properties of those types. Together these 
approaches provide convergent evidence for a robust description of cell type identity as well as 
multiple lines of evidence for species conservation or specialization.  
The targeted application of single nucleus sequencing reported here has demonstrated a 
significantly higher degree of GABAergic neuron complexity in just one layer of the human 
cerebral cortex (10 types) than what has previously been described in all of the cortex (8 types, 
51). This difference is likely due to a combination of improved sequencing technique and 
increased sampling in a targeted anatomical domain enriched in GABAergic neurons. This 
diversity also appears to be higher than described for layer 1 in mouse 4, although that study did 
not specifically target layer 1 and therefore is likely undersampled compared to the current 
study. On the other hand, a recent systematic characterization of rat cortex 3 described 6 
morphological types in layer 1 and 17 morpho-electric types, so our results are roughly 
consistent with the neuronal diversity described using other methods. The rosehip cell 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 represents a type with highly distinctive transcriptomic signature, a highly distinctive 
morphological, physiological and connectional phenotype, and a strong correspondence 
between these properties. In this respect, it appears similar to other highly specialized and 
distinctive cortical cell types such as chandelier cells 52,53. Supporting this correspondence 
between transcriptional and anatomical phenotypes, many of the most selective genes 
associated with rosehip cells relate to synaptic structure and function.  To our knowledge a 
similar anatomical cell type has not been described in rodent.  While we cannot prove the 
negative, given the enormous focus on cellular studies of rodent cortex such cells would have to 
be either extremely rare or experimentally difficult to study to have escaped detection to date.  
Similarly, the rosehip molecular signature appears highly distinctive from any published data 
from rodent.  Although the transcriptomic comparison is between human temporal cortex and 
mouse visual cortex, regional differences seem unlikely to account for this difference as we 
found the anatomically defined rosehip type in multiple regions of human cortex. A complete 
comparison of all cortical cell types and assessment of relative similarities between cell types 
should be possible in the future as more comprehensive transcriptome data become available 
and linked to other cellular phenotypes in multiple species.  
It is widely accepted 29 that CCK-positive cells in the rodent show selectively high 
expression of cannabinoid receptors and are involved in perisomatic inhibition. The single 
axonal bouton morphology and/or the compact axonal field of rosehip cells resembles that of 
cell types described in deeper layers of the cat cortex that innervate relatively proximal 
dendrites (dendrite targeting and clutch cells) 54,55. In contrast, rosehip cells are CCK-positive 
but cannabinoid receptor-negative, and appear to selectively target distal dendrites of pyramidal 
neurons. Moreover, when assessing layer 1 canonical inhibitory pathways in rodent with high 
throughput electrophysiology capable of sampling all cell types in layer 1,Lee at al. 56 found two 
interneuron types and two canonical pathways involving feed forward interneuron-to-interneuron 
connections. Thus, the monosynaptic pyramidal cell preferring pathway initiated by rosehip cells 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 does not appear to be a viable concept in the rodent layer 1 circuit. Furthermore, focal intralayer 
inhibition restricted by the compact axonal arbor of rosehip cells to distal dendrites of a column 
of pyramidal cells is also missing from the rodent; rather, mouse feedforward inhibitory 
connections are vertically spread to all somatodendritic domains 56.  
The addition of new human cell types, or specialization of existing types through major 
modification of cellular features, to cortical networks would be expected to alter circuit function 
3,57,58, and therefore cannot be studied in rodents. Rosehip cells may be of particular importance 
in compartmental control of backpropagating action potentials and their pairing with incoming 
excitatory inputs. The uniquely small membrane capacitance (Cm) found in human pyramidal 
cells 8 promotes backpropagation of action potentials 30 and increases excitability in human 
dendrites relative to rodent dendrites having larger Cm. As demonstrated here, action potentials 
backpropagate to distal dendrites of human pyramidal cells and can be attenuated by rosehip 
cell activation. Thus, they may represent a mechanism for supplementary inhibitory control 
required to balance the potentially higher excitability in human dendrites 8 and might form the 
basis of spatially accurate modulation of interactions between long range excitatory inputs 
arriving to layer 1 and backpropagating action potentials suggested to participate in 
interhemispheric modulation 59. The sharp resonance in the theta-range detected in individual 
rosehip cells and its potential spread through gap junctions to a rosehip network could phase-
selectively interact with long range inputs similarly to mechanisms suggested for example in 
oscillation dependent memory consolidation 31,60. 
There is great promise in convergent transcriptomic, anatomical and functional studies in 
human cortex to establish which features are conserved and divergent among mammals, and 
these studies are now feasible. The function of neuron types specific to the human circuit could 
be important in understanding pathological alterations of network functions. For example, 
several highly selective markers for rosehip cells have been implicated as risk factors for 
neuropsychiatric disease, including netrin G1 (NTNG1) for Rett syndrome 61 and neurotrypsin 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 (PRSS12) for mental retardation 62. A better understanding of human cellular and circuit 
organization may help counteract the current lack of success in translating promising rodent 
results to effective treatment against human neuropsychiatric disorders 63,64.  
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Methods 
 
Human brain specimens. After obtaining permission from decedent next-of-kin, postmortem 
adult human brain tissue was collected by the San Diego Medical Examiner’s office and 
provided to the Allen Institute for Brain Science. All tissue collection was performed in 
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act described in Health and 
Safety Code §§ 7150, et seq., and other applicable state and federal laws and regulations. The 
Western Institutional Review Board reviewed tissue collection processes and determined that 
they did not constitute human subjects research requiring IRB review. The tissue specimens 
used in this study were pre-screened for known neuropsychiatric and neuropathological history, 
and underwent routine serological testing and toxicology screening. Specimens were further 
screened for RNA quality and had an RNA integrity number (RIN) ≥7. The specimens used in 
this study were from two individual control Caucasian male donors, aged 50 and 54 years. 
Postmortem interval was 24 hours for both specimens.  
 
Tissue processing. Whole postmortem brain specimens were bisected through the midline and 
individual hemispheres were embedded in alginate for slabbing. Coronal brain slabs were cut at 
0.5-1cm intervals through each hemisphere and the slabs were frozen in a bath of dry ice and 
isopentane and stored at -80°C. Middle temporal gyrus (MTG) was identified on slabs of interest 
and removed for further sectioning. MTG tissue was then thawed in a buffer containing PBS 
supplemented with 10mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich), mounted on a vibratome 
(Leica), and sectioned at 500µm in the coronal plane. Sections were transferred to a fluorescent 
Nissl staining solution (Neurotrace 500/525, ThermoFisher Scientific) prepared in PBS with 
10mM DTT and 0.5% RNasin Plus RNase inhibitor (Promega). After staining for 5 min, sections 
were visualized on a fluorescence dissecting microscope (Leica) and layer 1 was 
microdissected using a needle blade micro-knife (Fine Science Tools).  
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
Nuclei isolation and FACS. Microdissected sections of layer 1 from MTG were transferred into 
nuclei isolation medium containing 10mM Tris pH 8.0 (Ambion), 250mM sucrose, 25mM KCl 
(Ambion), 5mM MgCl2 (Ambion) 0.1% Triton-X 100 (Sigma Aldrich), 1% RNasin Plus, 1X 
protease inhibitor (Promega), and 0.1mM DTT and placed into a 1ml dounce homogenizer 
(Wheaton). Tissue was homogenized to liberate nuclei using 10 strokes of the loose dounce 
pestle followed by 10 strokes of the tight pestle. Homogenate was strained through a 30µm cell 
strainer (Miltenyi Biotech) and centrifuged at 900xg for 10 min to pellet nuclei. Nuclei were then 
resuspended in staining buffer containing 1X PBS (Ambion), 0.8% nuclease-free BSA (Omni-
Pur, EMD Millipore), and 0.5% RNasin Plus. Mouse monoclonal anti-NeuN antibody (EMD 
Millipore) was applied to nuclei preparations at a concentration of 1:1000 and samples were 
incubated for 30 min at 4°C. Control samples were incubated with mouse IgG1,k isotype control 
(BD Pharmingen). Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 500xg to pellet nuclei and pellets 
were resuspended in staining buffer as described above. Nuclei samples were incubated with 
secondary antibody (goat anti-mouse IgG, Alexa Fluor 594, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 30 min 
at 4°C, centrifuged for 5 min at 500xg, and resuspended in staining buffer. DAPI (4′, 6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole, ThermoFisher Scientific) was applied to nuclei samples at a 
concentration of 1µg/ml. 
Single nucleus sorting was carried out on a BD FACS Aria Fusion instrument (BD 
Biosciences) using a 130µm nozzle. Nuclei were first gated on DAPI and then passed through 
doublet discrimination gates prior to being gated on NeuN (Alexa Fluor 594) signal. 
Approximately 10% of nuclei were intentionally sorted as NeuN-negative to allow for the 
collection of non-neuronal nuclei. Single nuclei were sorted into 96-well PCR plates 
(ThermoFisher Scientific) containing 2µl of lysis buffer (0.2% Triton-X 100, 0.2% NP-40 (Sigma 
Aldrich), 1U/µl RNaseOut (ThermoFisher Scientific), PCR-grade water (Ambion) and ERCC 
spike-in synthetic RNAs [Ambion]). 96-well plates containing sorted nuclei were then snap 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 frozen and stored at -80°C. Positive controls (10 nuclei pools and/or 10 pg and 1 pg total RNA) 
were included on every 96-well plate of sorted nuclei.  
 
cDNA and sequencing library preparation. cDNA libraries from single nuclei were prepared 
using Smart-seq2 65 with minor modifications. Briefly, Protoscript II (New England Biolabs) was 
used for reverse transcription, the final dilution of ERCCs in the reverse transcription reaction 
was 1:55 million, and the template switching oligonucleotide was 5’-biotinylated. Additionally, 
the number of PCR cycles used for cDNA amplification was increased to 21 to compensate for 
lower RNA content in single nuclei. cDNA yield was quantified using PicoGreen (ThermoFisher 
Scientific) and a subset of single nuclei libraries were screened for quality on a Bioanalyzer 
(High Sensitivity DNA Chip, Agilent Technologies). cDNA library quality was further assessed 
using qPCR for a housekeeping gene (ACTB) and an ERCC spike-in control RNA (ERCC-
00009) 66. 
Sequencing libraries were prepared using Nextera® XT (Illumina) with minor modifications. 
Briefly, the input amount of cDNA was 250pg per reaction, reactions were carried out a 1/4X the 
volume recommended by the manufacturer, and the tagmentation step was extended to 10 min. 
Sequencing library concentration was determined using PicoGreen and 53-57 samples were 
pooled per sequencing lane. Pooled libraries were purified using Ampure XP beads and eluted 
to a concentration of 5nM. Following purification, the pooled library size using a Bioanalyzer and 
Kapa Library QC was used to determine nM concentrations. Final library pools were then diluted 
to 3nM final concentration. Pooled samples were sequenced on a HiSeq® 4000 instrument 
(Illumina) using 150 base paired end reads at a mean untrimmed read depth of ~19 million 
reads/sample and a mean trimmed read depth of ~16 million reads/sample. 
 
RNA-Seq processing. The RNASeq data obtained from single nuclei is processed and 
analyzed according to the procedure described in detail previously 66. Briefly, following the 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 demultiplexing of the barcoded reads generated on the Illumina HiSeq platform, the 
amplification (cDNA & PCR) and sequencing primers (Illumina) and the low quality bases were 
removed using the Trimmomatic software package 67. The trimmed reads were mapped to the 
human reference genome version, GRCh38 (Ensembl) guided by the version 21 annotations 
obtained from the GENCODE repository. RSEM 68 and TOPHAT-CUFFLINKS 69 were used to 
quantify transcript expression at the transcriptome (exon) and the whole genome (exon plus 
intron) level, respectively. The fastQC (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/ 
projects/fastqc/), FASTX (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/download.html), RSeQC 70, 
RNA-seq-QC 71 programs were used to generate various sequence and alignment quality 
metrics used for classification of the sample quality. A novel pipeline (“SCavenger”, 
unpublished) was created to automate execution across statistical analysis tools, integrate pre-
formatted laboratory and clustering metrics, and calculate new statistics specific to biases 
identified in the single nuclei lab and sequence preparation protocol. The normalized expression 
counts (FPKM/TPM) generated at both gene and isoform level by RSEM and TOPHAT-
CUFFLINKS analyses and the raw counts generated from the RSEM/TOPHAT alignment (BAM) 
files by the HTSeq-count program 72 were used for differential expression analysis. 
 
RNA-Seq quality control. To remove data from low quality nuclei samples prior to downstream 
analysis, we implemented a Random Forest machine learning classification approach as 
described in detail in Aevermann et al. 73. The overall workflow for sample quality classification 
and filtering was to i) establish a training set using a representative subset of samples, ii) collect 
a series of 108 quality control metrics (e.g. percent unique reads, percent reads surviving 
trimming, transcript isoform counts) spanning both the laboratory and data analysis workflows 
as model features, iii) use these training data and quality control metrics to build a classification 
model using the Random Forest method, and iv) apply the model to the entire data set for 
quality classification and data filtering.  
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 A training set of 196 samples, including 169 single nuclei samples, was selected and a set 
of high confidence pass/fail calls for individual samples determined based on the qualitative 
assessment of data produced by fastQC, which includes quality Phred scores, GC content, 
Kmer distributions, and sequence over-representation information. Pass samples (152 samples, 
including single nuclei and purified bulk RNA positive controls) were identified as having high 
average quality per read across the entire length of the sequenced fragment and a unimodal 
average GC content around 40%, reflecting the GC content of the expressed human 
transcriptome. In contrast, two types of Fail samples were identified. One type of Fail samples 
(29 samples) exhibited a significant number of reads with low mean Phred quality, and average 
Phred quality scores that fall off down the length of the sequence read. A second type of Fail 
samples (15 samples) showed a second peak in the GC content distribution with a mean around 
48% GC; this peak appears to be generated from ERCC reads, which are derived from bacterial 
genome sequences.  
The quality control metrics for these training data were then used as features to construct 
a Random Forest model to distinguish these three quality classes (Pass, Fail-Phred, and Fail-
ERCC) comprised of one hundred thousand decision trees generated by standard bagging 
methods as implemented in KNIME v3.1.2. Using this Random Forest classification model, all 
196 samples in the training set were classified correctly with high confidence scores. To test the 
classification accuracy of the resulting random forest model, we used an independent test set of 
185 single nuclei samples classified using the same fastQC evaluation criteria applied to the 
training data, with 135 determined to be Pass samples, 29 determined to be Fails and 21 
determined to be Marginals. Application of the random forest model to these test Pass and Fail 
samples resulted in only 8 misclassifications (4.9%), for a classification accuracy of 95%. The 
Random Forest model was then applied to the remaining data and final classification 
determined. A Pass confidence cutoff of 0.6 or greater was used to select single nuclei data for 
downstream analysis. Using this Random Forest model applied to the entire Layer 1 dataset 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 including contaminating layer 2 excitatory and inhibitory nuclei, 79% of 1154 single nuclei 
samples passed quality control. For these Pass samples, the average number of reads after 
trimming was 16,383,881 (±19,810,661), the number of ERCC transcripts detected was 43.76 (± 
3.77), and the number of genes detected at a level of >1 FPKM was 6337 (± 1659), giving an 
average coverage of 879 reads per human gene detected. 
 
Gene expression calculation. For each nucleus, expression levels were estimated based on 
the scaled coverage across each gene. Specifically, bam files were read into R 74 using the 
“readGAlignmentPairs” function in the “GenomicAlignments” library, and genomic coverage was 
calculated using the “coverage” function in “GenomicRanges”75. All genes in GENCODE human 
genome GRCh38, version 21 (Ensembl 77; 09-29-2014) were included, with gene bounds 
defined as the start and end locations of each unique gene specified in the gtf file 
(https://www.gencodegenes.org/releases/21.html). Total counts for each gene (including reads 
from both introns and exons) were estimated by dividing total coverage by twice the read length 
(150bp, paired end). Expression levels were normalized across nuclei by calculating counts per 
million (CPM) using the “cpm” function in “edgeR” 76. 
 
Clustering nuclei. Nuclei that passed quality control were grouped into transcriptomic cell 
types based on an iterative clustering procedure. For each gene, log2(CPM + 1) expression was 
centered and scaled across nuclei. Gene expression dropout was more likely to occur in nuclei 
with lower quality cDNA libraries and for genes with lower average expression in nuclei isolated 
from the same cell type. Expression noise models were estimated for each nucleus based on 
the 8 most similar nuclei using the “knn.error.models” function of the “scde” R package as 
described in 77. These noise models were used to select significantly variable genes (adjusted 
variance > 1.25) and to estimate a zero-weight matrix that represented the likelihood of 
dropouts based on average gene expression levels. Dimensionality reduction was performed 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 with principal components analysis (PCA) on variable genes, and the covariance matrix was 
adjusted by the zero-weight matrix to account for gene dropouts. Principal components (PCs) 
were retained for which more variance was explained than the broken stick null distribution or 
PCs based on permuted data. If more than 2 PCs were retained, then dimensionality was 
further reduced to 2-dimensions using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE)78 with 
a perplexity parameter of 80. 
After dimensionality reduction, nuclei were clustered using a conservative procedure that 
attempted to split them into the fewest number of clusters possible. Nearest-neighbor distances 
between all nuclei were calculated and sorted, and segmented linear regression (R package 
“segmented”) was applied to estimate the distribution breakpoint to help define the distance 
scale for density clustering. Next, density clustering (R package “dbscan” 79) was applied to 
nuclei, and the number of clusters calculated for a range of 10 nearest-neighbor distances 
(parameter epsilon), starting from the maximum distance between nuclei to the distance 
breakpoint identified in the last step. If only one cluster was found using all values of epsilon, 
then the above procedure was repeated using a perplexity parameter of 50, 30, and 20 for 
tSNE, and stopping when more than one cluster was detected. Finally, if no cluster splitting was 
possible using tSNE, then a final density clustering was applied to the first two significant PCs. If 
more than one cluster was identified, then the statistical significance of each cluster pair was 
evaluated with the R package “sigclust” 80, which compares the distribution of nuclei to the null 
hypothesis that nuclei are drawn from a single multivariate Gaussian. Iterative clustering was 
used to split nuclei into sub-clusters until the occurrence of one of four stop criteria: 1) <6 nuclei 
in a cluster (because it cannot be split due a minimum cluster size of 3), 2) no significantly 
variable genes, 3) no significantly variable PCs, 4) no significant sub-clusters. 
To assess the robustness of clusters, the iterative clustering procedure described above 
was repeated 100 times for random subsamples of 80% of nuclei. A co-clustering matrix was 
generated that represented the proportion of clustering iterations that each pair of nuclei were 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 assigned to the same cluster. Average-linkage hierarchical clustering was applied to this matrix 
followed by dynamic branch cutting (R package “WGCNA”) with cut height ranging from 0.01 to 
0.99 in steps of 0.01. A cut height resulting in 25 clusters was selected to balance cohesion 
(average within cluster co-clustering) and discreteness (average between cluster co-clustering) 
across clusters. Finally, gene markers were identified for all cluster pairs, and clusters were 
merged if they lacked binary markers (gene expressed in >50% nuclei in first cluster and <10% 
in second cluster) with average CPM > 1 (see also Marker gene selection below). 
 
Cluster visualization. The relationships between cell type clusters were represented as a 
constellation diagram where the area of each disc is proportional to the number of nuclei in each 
cluster and the similarity between clusters is proportional to the width of the lines connecting 
clusters. Cluster similarity was calculated as the average co-clustering between all nuclei for 
each pair of clusters. For example, a similarity of 0.1 indicates that 1 out of 10 clustering 
iterations nuclei from one cluster were assigned to the other cluster. Similarities less than 0.05 
were not plotted. 
Next, clusters were arranged by transcriptomic similarity based on hierarchical clustering. 
First, the average expression level of each gene was calculated for each cluster. Genes were 
then sorted based on variance and the top 2000 genes were used to calculate a correlation-
based distance matrix, Dxy=1-(cor(x,y))/2, between each cluster average. A cluster tree was 
generated by performing hierarchical clustering on this distance matrix (using “hclust” with 
default parameters), and then reordered to show inhibitory clusters first, followed by excitatory 
clusters and glia, with larger clusters first, while respecting the tree structure. Note that this 
measure of cluster similarity is complementary to the co-clustering similarity described above. 
For example, two clusters with high transcriptomic similarity but a few distinct marker genes 
may have low co-clustering similarity. 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Marker gene selection. Initial sets of marker genes for each pair of clusters were selected by 
assessing significance of differential expression using the “limma” 81 R package, and then 
filtering these sets of significant genes to include only those expressed in more than 50% of 
nuclei in the “on” cluster and fewer than 20% of nuclei in the “off” cluster. Potential marker 
genes for individual clusters were chosen by ranking the significance of pairwise marker genes, 
summing the ranks across all possible pairs for a given cluster, and sorting the resulting gene 
list ascending by summed rank. The final set of marker genes was selected by comparing the 
gene expression distribution for the top ranked marker genes for each cluster using the 
visualization described below. 
 
Gene expression visualization. Gene expression (CPM) was visualized using heat maps and 
violin plots, which both show genes as rows and nuclei as columns, sorted by cluster. Heat 
maps display each nucleus as a short vertical bar, color-coded by expression level (blue=low; 
red=high), and clusters ordered as described above. The distribution of marker gene expression 
across nuclei in each cluster were represented as violin plots, which are density plots turned 90 
degrees and reflected on the Y-axis. Black dots indicate the median gene expression in nuclei 
of a given cluster; dots above Y=0 indicate that a gene is expressed in more than half of the 
nuclei in that cluster. 
 
Colorimetric in situ hybridization. In situ hybridization data for human temporal cortex and 
mouse cortex was from the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas 38 and a comparable study in human 
temporal cortex 82. All data is publicly accessible through www.brain-map.org. Data was 
generated using a semiautomated technology platform as described 38. with modifications to 
work with postmortem human tissues as described in 82. Digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes were 
generated for each human gene such that they would have >50% overlap with the orthologous 
mouse gene in the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas 38. Mouse ISH data shown is from the region most 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 closely corresponding to human temporal cortex, corresponding to the medial portion of TeA in 
Paxinos Atlas 83. 
 
Multiplex fluorescent in situ hybridization. The RNAscope multiplex fluorescent kit was used 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions for fresh frozen tissue sections (ACD Bio), with the 
exception that fixation at 4 C with 4% PFA was performed for 60 minutes on 20 µm human brain 
sections, and the protease treatment step was shortened to 15 min. Probes used to identify 
specific cell types in layer 1 were designed antisense to the following human genes: CCK (hs-
539041), CNR1 (hs-591521), CPLX3 (hs-487681-C3), GAD1 (hs-404031 and hs-404031-C3), 
LAMP5 (hs487691-C3), SV2C (hs448361-C3), PRSS12 (hs-493931-C3), SOX13 (hs-493941-
C3), TRPC3 (hs-427641-C2), NTNG1 (hs-446101), CXCL14 (hs-425291), PDGFRA (hs-
604481-C2), SOX9 (hs-404221-C2). Positive controls (POLR2A, UBC and PPIB) were used on 
each tissue sample to ensure RNA quality (ACD Bio, 320861). Following hybridization and 
amplification, FISH sections were imaged using a 40X oil immersion lens on a Nikon TiE 
fluorescent microscope. RNA spots in each channel were quantified manually using the ImageJ 
cell counting plug- in. To count the percentage of Rosehip cells in layer 1, GAD1+ cells were 
first identified, followed by the PDGFRA+ cells within that population, followed by the TRPC3+ 
cells in that population. These counts were used to calculate the percentage of the GAD1+ cells 
expressing PDGFRA and TRPC3. A total of 408 GAD1+ cells were identified from two 
individuals for this quantification. 
 
Electrophysiological recordings. All procedures were performed according to the Declaration 
of Helsinki with the approval of the University of Szeged Ethical Committee. We used 
neocortical tissue surgically removed from patients (n=32, n=18 female and n=14 male, aged 
47±16 years) in a course of five years as part of the treatment protocol for aneurysms (n=7) and 
brain tumors (n=25). Anesthesia was induced with intravenous midazolam and fentanyl (0.03 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 mg/kg, 1– 2 lg/kg, respectively). A bolus dose of propofol (1–2 mg/kg) was administered 
intravenously. To facilitate endotracheal intubation, the patient received 0.5 mg/kg rocuronium. 
After 120 seconds, the trachea was intubated and the patient was ventilated with a mixture of O2 
-N2O at a ratio of 1:2. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane at monitored anesthesia care 
(MAC) volume of 1.2–1.5. Tissue blocks were removed from prefrontal (n=16), temporal (n=6) 
and parietal (n=10) areas. Blocks of tissue were immersed in ice-cold solution containing (in 
mM) 130 NaCl, 3.5 KCl, 1 NaH2PO4, 24 NaHCO3, 1 CaCl2, 3 MgSO4, 10 d(+)-glucose, saturated 
with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 in the operating theatre. Slices were cut perpendicular to cortical 
layers at a thickness of 350 µm with a vibrating blade microtome (Microm HM 650 V) and were 
incubated at room temperature for 1 h in the same solution. The solution used during recordings 
differed only in that it contained 2 mM CaCl2 and 1.5 mM MgSO4. Somatic whole-cell recordings 
were obtained at approximately 36 ºC from up to four concomitantly recorded cells visualized by 
infrared differential interference contrast videomicroscopy at depths 60–130 µm from the 
surface of the slice. Signals were filtered at 8 kHz, digitized at 16 kHz, and acquired with 
Patchmaster software. Micropipettes (5–7 MΩ) were filled with a low [Cl]i solution containing (in 
mM) 126 K-gluconate, 4 KCl, 4 ATP-Mg, 0.3 GTP-NA2, 10 HEPES, 10 phosphocreatine, and 8 
biocytin (pH 7.20; 300 mOsm). Presynaptic cells were stimulated with brief (2–10 ms) 
suprathreshold pulses delivered at >7-s intervals, to minimize intertrial variability. For 
pharmacological experiments 10 µM gabazine and 5 µM 1-(2,4-Dichlorophenyl)-5-(4-
iodophenyl)-4-methyl-N-1-piperidinyl-1H-pyrazole-3-carboxamide (AM251) were applied and 
were purchased from (Sigma-Aldrich). Membrane properties of human neurons did not show 
significant changes for up to 20 h after slicing, but recordings included in the analysis were 
arbitrarily terminated 15 h after slice preparation. Data were analyzed with Fitmaster (HEKA) 
and Origin 7.5 (OriginLab) Data are given as mean±standard deviation (S.D.). The Mann-
Whitney U-test was used to compare datasets; differences were considered significant if 
p<0.05. 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
Firing classification analysis. First, a set of n=200 electrophysiological features had been 
calculated for each cell identified based on light microscopic investigation of the axonal arbour. 
Then a wrapper feature selection method using Support Vector Machine (SVM) was used on 
the cells (rosehip cells: n=55; non-rosehip cells: n=52) to find the best feature set which 
separated the group of rosehip cells from the group of other cells. The best feature set 
consisted of 2 features, the maximal standard deviation of interspike-intervals (ISI SD) and the 
amplitude of sag in response to hyperpolarization (-100 pA). Sweeps were discarded with less 
than 5 spikes for the calculation of ISI SD. The sag value was calculated as the ratio of the 
voltages at the onset of the hyperpolarizing step and during steady state. 
 
Measurement of impedance profile. The impedance profile was determined by sinusoidal 
current injections using a standard exponential chirp pattern (0.2-200 Hz, 10 s duration) 
generated with Patchmaster (HEKA). Measurements (7-10 traces per cell) were made at resting 
membrane potential and the peak to peak amplitude of the command current waveform was 
tuned between 40-100 pA to test subthreshold voltage responses. The impedance profile (Z) 
was determined for each trace by calculating the fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the voltage 
response and dividing the FFT component of the corresponding command current, then the 
impedance profiles were normalized to the value at 200 Hz. After anatomical identification of the 
recorded cells, the dataset was pooled according to three defined cell types then the averaged 
impedance plotted against input frequency. For statistical comparison of the impedance profiles, 
four parameters were considered: impedance at lowest frequency (Z0.2Hz); cutoff frequency 
(fcutoff); resonance magnitude (Q, the impedance magnitude at the resonance peak i.e. maximal 
impedance value divided by the impedance magnitude at the lowest input frequency of 0.2 Hz); 
and the frequency at maximum impedance (fmax). 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Two-photon calcium imaging. Structural labelling of rosehip cells was based on 40 µM Alexa 
Fluor 594 (Molecular Probes). We also applied 100 µM of Oregon Green 488 BAPTA-1 
(Molecular Probes), in order to measure intracellular Ca2+ dynamics of pyramidal cell dendrites 
in the intracellular solution (see above). Imaging with multiphoton excitation was performed 
using a modified Zeiss LSM7 MP (Oberkochen, Germany) two-photon laser scanning system 
and a FemtoRose 100 TUN (R&D Ultrafast Lasers, Hungary) titanium–sapphire laser with 
Finesse4 pumping laser (Laser Quantum, UK) providing 100 fs pulses at 80 MHz at a 
wavelength of 820 nm. Fluorescence images were acquired through a x40 water-immersion 
objective (0.8 NA; Olympus, Japan). 
 
Single cell reverse transcription and digital PCR. At the end of electrophysiological 
recordings, the intracellular content was aspirated into the recording pipettes by application of a 
gentle negative pressure while maintaining the tight seal. Pipettes were then delicately removed 
to allow outside-out patch formation, and the content of the pipettes (~1.5 μl) was expelled into 
a low-adsorbtion test tube (Axygen) containing 0.5 μl SingleCellProtectTM (Avidin Ltd. Szeged, 
Hungary) solution in order to prevent nucleic acid degradation and to be compatible with direct 
reverse transcription reaction. Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored or 
immediately used for reverse transcription. Reverse transcription of individual cells was carried 
out in two steps. The first step was performed for 5 min at 65°C in a total reaction volume of 7.5 
μl containing the cell collected in 4 μl SingleCellProtect (Avidin Ltd., Cat.No.: SCP-250), 0.45 μl 
TaqMan Assays (Thermo Fisher), 0.45 μl 10 mM dNTPs (Thermo Fisher, Cat.No.: 10297018, 
1.5 μl 5X first-strand buffer, 0.45 μl 0.1 mol/L DTT, 0.45 μl RNase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher, 
Cat.No.:N8080119) and 100 U of reverse transcriptase (Superscript III, Thermo Fisher, Cat.No.: 
18080055). The second step of the reaction was carried out at 55°C for 1 hour and then the 
reaction was stopped by heating at 75°C for 15 min. The reverse transcription reaction mix was 
stored at -20°C until PCR amplification. 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 For digital PCR analysis, the reverse transcription reaction mixture (7.5 μl) was divided 
into two parts: 6 μl was used for amplification of the gene of interest and 1.5 μl cDNA was used 
for amplifying the housekeeping gene, GAPDH. Template cDNA was supplemented with 
nuclease free water to a final volume of 8 μl. 2 μl TaqMan Assays (Thermo Fisher), 10 μl 
OpenArray Digital PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher, Cat.No.: 4458095) and nuclease free water 
(3 μl) were mixed to obtain a total volume of 20 μl and the mixture was evenly distributed on 4 
subarrays (256 nanocap­illary holes) of an OpenArray plate by using the OpenArray autoloader. 
Processing of the OpenArray slide, cycling in the OpenArray NT cycler and data analysis were 
done as previously described 84. For our dPCR protocol amplification, reactions having CT 
values less than 23 or greater than 33 were considered primer dimers or background signals, 
respectively, and excluded from the data set. 
 
Histology and reconstruction. Following electrophysiological recordings, slices were 
immersed in a fixative containing 4% paraformaldehyde (for immunohistochemistry) or 4% 
paraformaldehyde, 15% (v/v) saturated picric acid and 1.25% glutaraldehyde (for 
reconstructions) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB; pH=7.4) at 4˚C for at least 12 h. After several 
washes with 0.1 M PB, slices were frozen in liquid nitrogen then thawed in 0.1 M PB, embedded 
in 10% gelatin and further sectioned into 60 µm slices. Sections were incubated in a solution of 
conjugated avidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase (ABC; 1:100; Vector Labs) in Tris-buffered 
saline (TBS, pH=7.4) at 4˚C overnight. The enzyme reaction was revealed by 3’3-
diaminobenzidine tetra-hydrochloride (0.05%) as chromogen and 0.01% H2O2 as oxidant. 
Sections were post fixed with 1% OsO4 in 0.1 M PB. After several washes in distilled water, 
sections were stained in 1% uranyl acetate, dehydrated in ascending series of ethanol. Sections 
were infiltrated with epoxy resin (Durcupan) overnight and embedded on glass slides. Three 
dimensional light microscopic reconstructions were carried out using Neurolucida system 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 (MicroBrightField) with 100x objective. Reconstructed neurons were quantitatively analyzed with 
NeuroExplorer software (MicroBrightField). 
 
Immunohistochemistry of biocytin-labeled cells. The recorded cells were first visualized with 
incubation in Cy3-conjugated streptavidin (Jackson Immunoresearch) for 2 h, diluted 1:400 in 
TBS. After examination by epifluorescence microscopy, the sections containing the soma of the 
labeled neurons were incubated in 20% normal horse serum in TBS to block nonspecific 
antibody-binding sites. Free-floating sections containing the soma were incubated in primary 
antibodies dissolved in TBS containing 0.05% NaN3 for 72 hours at room temperature. The 
following primary antibodies were used: rabbit-anti-pro-cholecystokinin (1:2000, gift from Andrea 
Varro, Liverpool University); mouse-anti-CNR1 (1:4000, ImmunoGenes); rabbit-anti-GABA 
(1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich); mouse-anti-NR2F2 (1:700, Abcam); mouse-anti-PV (1:1500, Swant); 
rabbit-anti-nNOS (1:1000, Cayman Chemical); rabbit-anti-NPY (1:300, Peninsula Laboratories); 
rat-anti-somatostatin (1:50, Merck Millipore); rabbit-anti-calbindin (1:2000, Swant); goat-anti-
calretinin (1:700, Swant); goat-anti-acetyltransferase (1:100, Merck Millipore). After several 
washes in TBS, the immunoreactions were visualized with A488- or Cy5-conjugated secondary 
antibodies (1:500, Jackson Immunoresearch). The sections were mounted on slides in 
Vectashield (Vector Laboratories). Images were taken by confocal laser scanning microscope 
(LSM 880, Zeiss) using a 40x oil-immersion objective (1.4 NA). After photography, the sections 
were demounted, washed in 0.1 M PB, and biocytin was visualized with the avidin-biotinylated 
horseradish peroxidase method described above. 
 
Electron microscopy. Axonal boutons of biocytin filled rosehip (n=3) and neurogliaform cells 
(n=2) (identified based on distinctive electrophysiological properties and light microscopic 
investigation of the axonal arbour) were re-embedded and re-sectioned at 70 nm thickness. 
Digital images of serial EM sections were taken at magnifications ranging from 8,000x to 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 50,000x with a JEOL JEM-1400Plus electron microscope equipped with a 8 M pixel CCD 
camera (JEOL Ruby). Axon terminals were reconstructed in 3D and their volumes were 
measured using the Reconstruct software (http://synapses.clm.utexas.edu/) (n=31 boutons of 
rosehip cells; n=24 boutons of neurogliaform cells). The areas of active zones of rosehip cells 
were measured at perpendicularly cut synapses, where the rigid apposition of the pre- and 
postsynaptic membranes was visible (n=11 active zones).  
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors thank the Allen Institute for Brain Science founders, Paul G. Allen and Jody Allen, 
for their vision, encouragement and support. This work was supported by the ERC Interimpact 
project (GT), the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (GT), the National Research, Development 
and Innovation Office of Hungary GINOP-2.3.2-15-2016-00018, VKSZ-14-1-2015-0155 and by 
the National Brain Research Program, Hungary (GT). The authors thank Lena Christiansen and 
Fan Zhang from Illumina, Inc. for their assistance with RNA sequencing. 
 
Author Contributions  
Conceptualization, E.S.L., R.S.L., G.T. 
Methodology, R.D.H., M.N., J.L.C., P.B., L.G.P., G.T. 
Validation, J.L.C., S.L.D., G.M., G.T. 
Formal Analysis, T.B., B.D.A., J.M.M., J.A.M., P.V., M.R., S.B., R.H.S., E.B., J.B., G.O., G.M. 
Investigation, R.D.H., M.N., J.L.C., F.D.F., S.S., K.A.S., A.W., D.N.T., E.B., J.B., A.K.K., N.F., 
B.K., M.R., G.M., A.O.,G.O., G.T. 
Resources, E.S.L., F.J.S., N.J.S., R.H.S., R.S.L., G.T. 
Data Curation, T.B., B.D.A., J.M.M., J.A.M., P.V., S.B. 
Writing – Original Draft, T.B. R.D.H., J.L.C., J.A.M., E.S.L., E.B., G.O., G.T. 
Writing – Review and Editing, T.B., R.D.H., J.A.M., R.H.S., R.S.L., E.S.L., G.T. 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Visualization, T.B., R.D.H., J.L.C., S.L.D., J.A.M., E.B., G.M., G.O. 
Supervision, E.S.L., F.J.S., N.J.S., R.H.S., R.S.L, G.T. 
Project Administration, E.S.L., S.M.S., G.T. 
Funding Acquisition, E.S.L., F.J.S., R.S.L., G.T. 
 
Competing Financial Interests 
The authors declare no competing financial interest. 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 References 
1. 
Cajal, S. R. y. Estudios sobre la corteza cerebral humana. Corteza Vis Rev Trim Microgr 
4, 1–63 (1899). 
2. 
Ascoli, G. A. et al. Petilla terminology: nomenclature of features of GABAergic 
interneurons of the cerebral cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 557–568 (2008). 
3. 
Markram, H. et al. Reconstruction and Simulation of Neocortical Microcircuitry. Cell 163, 
456–492 (2015). 
4. 
Tasic, B. et al. Adult mouse cortical cell taxonomy revealed by single cell transcriptomics. 
Nat. Neurosci. 19, 335–346 (2016). 
5. 
Zeisel, A. et al. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell 
RNA-seq. Science (80-. ). 347, 1138–1142 (2015). 
6. 
Macosko, E. et al. Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells 
Using Nanoliter Droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015). 
7. 
Jiang, X. et al. Principles of connectivity among morphologically defined cell types in adult 
neocortex. Science (80-. ). 350, aac9462-aac9462 (2015). 
8. 
Eyal, G. et al. Unique membrane properties and enhanced signal processing in human 
neocortical neurons. Elife 5, (2016). 
9. 
Wang, B. et al. A Subtype of Inhibitory Interneuron with Intrinsic Persistent Activity in 
Human and Monkey Neocortex. Cell Reports 10, (2015). 
10. 
Molnár, G. et al. Complex events initiated by individual spikes in the human cerebral 
cortex. PLoS Biol. 6, e222 (2008). 
11. 
Molnár, G. et al. Human pyramidal to interneuron synapses are mediated by multi-
vesicular release and multiple docked vesicles. Elife 5, (2016). 
12. 
Testa-Silva, G. et al. Human synapses show a wide temporal window for spike-timing-
dependent plasticity. Front. Synaptic Neurosci. 2, 12 (2010). 
13. 
Testa-Silva, G. et al. High bandwidth synaptic communication and frequency tracking in 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 human neocortex. PLoS Biol. 12, e1002007 (2014). 
14. 
Elston, G. N. Pyramidal cells of the frontal lobe: all the more spinous to think with. J. 
Neurosci. 20, RC95 (2000). 
15. 
Morales, J. et al. Random positions of dendritic spines in human cerebral cortex. J. 
Neurosci. 34, 10078–84 (2014). 
16. 
Mohan, H. et al. Dendritic and Axonal Architecture of Individual Pyramidal Neurons 
across Layers of Adult Human Neocortex. Cereb. Cortex 25, 4839–4853 (2015). 
17. 
Lacar, B. et al. Nuclear RNA-seq of single neurons reveals molecular signatures of 
activation. Nat. Commun. 7, 11022 (2016). 
18. 
Grindberg, R. V. et al. RNA-sequencing from single nuclei. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 
19802–19807 (2013). 
19. 
Picelli, S. et al. Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat. Protoc. 9, 
171–81 (2014). 
20. 
Kawaguchi, Y. & Kubota, Y. GABAergic cell subtypes and their synaptic connections in 
rat frontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 7, 476–486 (1997). 
21. 
Komlósi, G. et al. Fluoxetine (prozac) and serotonin act on excitatory synaptic 
transmission to suppress single layer 2/3 pyramidal neuron-triggered cell assemblies in 
the human prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 32, 16369–16378 (2012). 
22. 
Cajal, S. R. y. Textura del Systema Nervioso del Hombre y los Vertebrados. (Madrid, 
Spain, Moya), Vol. 2. (1904). 
23. 
Kisvarday, Z. F. et al. Synapses, Axonal and Dendritic Patterns of GABA- 
Immunoreactive Neurons in Human Cerebral Cortex. Brain; a J. Neurol. 13, 793–812 
(1990). 
24. 
Karube, F., Kubota, Y. & Kawaguchi, Y. Axon Branching and Synaptic Bouton 
Phenotypes in GABAergic Nonpyramidal Cell Subtypes. J. Neurosci. 24, 2853–2865 
(2004). 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 25. 
Olah, S. et al. Output of neurogliaform cells to various neuron types in the human and rat 
cerebral cortex. Front Neural Circuits 1, 4 (2007). 
26. 
Varga, C., Tamas, G., Barzo, P., Olah, S. & Somogyi, P. Molecular and 
Electrophysiological Characterization of GABAergic Interneurons Expressing the 
Transcription Factor COUP-TFII in the Adult Human Temporal Cortex. Cereb. Cortex 25, 
4430–49 (2015). 
27. 
Zemankovics, R., Káli, S., Paulsen, O., Freund, T. F. & Hájos, N. Differences in 
subthreshold resonance of hippocampal pyramidal cells and interneurons: the role of h-
current and passive membrane characteristics. J. Physiol. 588, 2109–2132 (2010). 
28. 
Szegedi, V. et al. Plasticity in Single Axon Glutamatergic Connection to GABAergic 
Interneurons Regulates Complex Events in the Human Neocortex. PLoS Biol. 14, 
e2000237 (2016). 
29. 
Katona, I. & Freund, T. F. Multiple functions of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 529–58 (2012). 
30. 
Stuart, G. J. & Sakmann, B. Active propagation of somatic action potentials into 
neocortical pyramidal cell dendrites. Nature 367, 69–72 (1994). 
31. 
Freund, T. F. & Buzsáki, G. Interneurons of the hippocampus. Hippocampus 6, 347–470 
(1996). 
32. 
Packer, A. M., McConnell, D. J., Fino, E. & Yuste, R. Axo-dendritic overlap and laminar 
projection can explain interneuron connectivity to pyramidal cells. Cereb. Cortex 23, 
2790–802 (2013). 
33. 
Toledo-Rodriguez, M. et al. Correlation Maps Allow Neuronal Electrical Properties to be 
Predicted from Single-cell Gene Expression Profiles in Rat Neocortex. Cereb. Cortex 14, 
1310–1327 (2004). 
34. 
DeFelipe, J. et al. New insights into the classification and nomenclature of cortical 
GABAergic interneurons. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 202–216 (2013). 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 35. 
DeFelipe, J. Types of neurons, synaptic connections and chemical characteristics of cells 
immunoreactive for calbindin-D28K, parvalbumin and calretinin in the neocortex. J. 
Chem. Neuroanat. 14, 1–19 (1997). 
36. 
Cauli, B., Zhou, X., Tricoire, L., Toussay, X. & Staiger, J. F. Revisiting enigmatic cortical 
calretinin-expressing interneurons. Front. Neuroanat. 8, 52 (2014). 
37. 
Xu, Q., Cobos, I., De La Cruz, E., Rubenstein, J. L. & Anderson, S. A. Origins of Cortical 
Interneuron Subtypes. J. Neurosci. 24, 2612–2622 (2004). 
38. 
Lein, E. S. et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature 
445, 168–176 (2007). 
39. 
Hawrylycz, M. J. et al. An anatomically comprehensive atlas of the adult human brain 
transcriptome. Nature 489, 391–399 (2012). 
40. 
Allman, J. M., Watson, K. K., Tetreault, N. A. & Hakeem, A. Y. Intuition and autism: a 
possible role for Von Economo neurons. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 367–373 (2005). 
41. 
Gabbott, P. L. A. ‘Subpial Fan Cell’ - A Class of Calretinin Neuron in Layer 1 of Adult 
Monkey Prefrontal Cortex. Front. Neuroanat. 10, 28 (2016). 
42. 
Nimchinsky, E. A., Vogt, B. A., Morrison, J. H. & Hof, P. R. Spindle neurons of the human 
anterior cingul. Ate cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 355, 27–37 (1995). 
43. 
von Economo, C. Eine neue Art Spezialzellen des Lobus cinguli and Lobus insulae. Zschr 
ges Neurology and Psychiatry. Zschr ges Neurol. Psychiatry 100, 706–712 (1926). 
44. 
Hawrylycz, M. et al. Canonical genetic signatures of the adult human brain. Nat. 
Neurosci. 18, 1832–1844 (2015). 
45. 
Miller, J. A. et al. Transcriptional landscape of the prenatal human brain. Nature 508, 
199–206 (2014). 
46. 
Ding, S.-L. et al. Comprehensive cellular-resolution atlas of the adult human brain. J. 
Comp. Neurol. 524, 3127–3481 (2016). 
47. 
Alkondon, M., Pereira, E. F., Eisenberg, H. M. & Albuquerque, E. X. Nicotinic receptor 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 activation in human cerebral cortical interneurons: a mechanism for inhibition and 
disinhibition of neuronal networks. J. Neurosci. 20, 66–75 (2000). 
48. 
Kisvárday, Z. F. et al. Synapses, axonal and dendritic patterns of GABA-immunoreactive 
neurons in human cerebral cortex. Brain 793–812 (1990). 
49. 
Kisvárday, Z. F., Adams, C. B. T. & Smith, A. D. Synaptic connections of axo-axonic 
(chandelier) cells in human epileptic temporal cortex. Neuroscience 19, 1179–1186 
(1986). 
50. 
Szabadics, J. et al. Excitatory effect of GABAergic axo-axonic cells in cortical 
microcircuits. Science 311, 233–5 (2006). 
51. 
Lake, B. B. et al. Neuronal subtypes and diversity revealed by single-nucleus RNA 
sequencing of the human brain. Science 352, 1586–90 (2016). 
52. 
Szentágothai, J. & Arbib, M. A. Conceptual models of neural organization. Neurosci. Res. 
Program Bull. 12, 305–510 (1974). 
53. 
Somogyi, P. A specific ‘axo-axonal’ interneuron in the visual cortex of the rat. Brain Res. 
136, 345–50 (1977). 
54. 
Tamas, G., Buhl, E. H. & Somogyi, P. Fast IPSPs elicited via multiple synaptic release 
sites by distinct types of GABAergic neuron in the cat visual cortex. J Physiol 500, 715–
738 (1997). 
55. 
Kisvárday, Z. F., Martin, K. A. C., Whitteridge, D. & Somogyi, P. Synaptic connections of 
intracellularly filled clutch cells: A type of small basket cell in the visual cortex of the cat. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 241, 111–137 (1985). 
56. 
Lee, A. J. et al. Canonical Organization of Layer 1 Neuron-Led Cortical Inhibitory and 
Disinhibitory Interneuronal Circuits. Cereb. Cortex 25, 2114–26 (2015). 
57. 
Tremblay, R., Lee, S. & Rudy, B. GABAergic Interneurons in the Neocortex: From 
Cellular Properties to Circuits. Neuron 91, 260–292 (2016). 
58. 
Gjorgjieva, J., Drion, G. & Marder, E. Computational implications of biophysical diversity 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 and multiple timescales in neurons and synapses for circuit performance. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 37, 44–52 (2016). 
59. 
Palmer, L. M. et al. The Cellular Basis of GABAB-Mediated Interhemispheric Inhibition. 
Science (80-. ). 335, (2012). 
60. 
Klausberger, T. & Somogyi, P. Neuronal diversity and temporal dynamics: the unity of 
hippocampal circuit operations. Science 321, 53–7 (2008). 
61. 
Borg, I. et al. Disruption of Netrin G1 by a balanced chromosome translocation in a girl 
with Rett syndrome. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 13, 921–7 (2005). 
62. 
Molinari, F. et al. Truncating Neurotrypsin Mutation in Autosomal Recessive 
Nonsyndromic Mental Retardation. Science (80-. ). 298, 1779–1781 (2002). 
63. 
Mak, I. W., Evaniew, N. & Ghert, M. Lost in translation: animal models and clinical trials in 
cancer treatment. Am. J. Transl. Res. 6, 114–8 (2014). 
64. 
Cavanaugh, S. E., Pippin, J. J. & Barnard, N. D. Animal models of Alzheimer disease: 
historical pitfalls and a path forward. ALTEX 31, 279–302 (2014). 
65. 
Picelli, S. et al. Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat. Protoc. 9, 
171–181 (2014). 
66. 
Krishnaswami, S. R. et al. Using single nuclei for RNA-seq to capture the transcriptome 
of postmortem neurons. Nat. Protoc. 11, 499–524 (2016). 
67. 
Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina 
sequence data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–20 (2014). 
68. 
Li, B. & Dewey, C. N. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with 
or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323 (2011). 
69. 
Trapnell, C. et al. Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq 
experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat. Protoc. 7, 562–78 (2012). 
70. 
Wang, L., Wang, S. & Li, W. RSeQC: quality control of RNA-seq experiments. 
Bioinformatics 28, 2184–5 (2012). 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 71. 
DeLuca, D. S. et al. RNA-SeQC: RNA-seq metrics for quality control and process 
optimization. Bioinformatics 28, 1530–2 (2012). 
72. 
Anders, S., Pyl, P. T. & Huber, W. HTSeq--a Python framework to work with high-
throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 166–9 (2015). 
73. 
Aevermann, B. et al. PRODUCTION OF A PRELIMINARY QUALITY CONTROL 
PIPELINE FOR SINGLE NUCLEI RNA-SEQ AND ITS APPLICATION IN THE ANALYSIS 
OF CELL TYPE DIVERSITY OF POST-MORTEM HUMAN BRAIN NEOCORTEX. Pac. 
Symp. Biocomput. 22, 564–575 (2016). 
74. 
R Development Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Found. Stat. Comput. Vienna Austria 0, {ISBN} 3-900051-07-0 (2016). 
75. 
Lawrence, M. et al. Software for Computing and Annotating Genomic Ranges. PLoS 
Comput. Biol. 9, (2013). 
76. 
Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. K. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for 
differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–
140 (2010). 
77. 
Fan, J. et al. Characterizing transcriptional heterogeneity through pathway and gene set 
overdispersion analysis. Nat. Methods 13, 241–244 (2016). 
78. 
Van Der Maaten, L. J. P. & Hinton, G. E. Visualizing high-dimensional data using t-sne. J. 
Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 2579–2605 (2008). 
79. 
Ester, M., Kriegel, H. P., Sander, J. & Xu, X. A Density-Based Algorithm for Discovering 
Clusters in Large Spatial Databases with Noise. in Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 226–231 (1996). 
doi:10.1.1.71.1980 
80. 
Liu, Y., Hayes, D. N., Nobel, A. & Marron, J. S. Statistical Significance of Clustering for 
High-Dimension, Low–Sample Size Data. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 103, 1281–1293 (2008). 
81. 
Ritchie, M. et al. limma powers di erential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, e47 (2015). 
82. 
Zeng, H. et al. Large-scale cellular-resolution gene profiling in human neocortex reveals 
species-specific molecular signatures. Cell 149, 483–96 (2012). 
83. 
Paxinos, G. & Franklin, K. Paxinos and Franklin’s the Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic 
Coordinates. (Academic Press, 2012). 
84. 
Faragó, N. et al. Digital PCR to determine the number of transcripts from single neurons 
after patch-clamp recording. Biotechniques 54, 327–36 (2013). 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figures and Legends 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figure 1. Identification of transcriptomic cell types in Layer 1 of human temporal cortex. A, 
Isolation of single nuclei from post-mortem adult human cortex for RNA-sequencing. Scale 
bar=50 µm. B, Left: Nuclei were grouped based on similar gene expression profiles using a fully 
automated iterative clustering procedure. Right: Cluster robustness was assessed by randomly 
subsampling 80% of nuclei and reclustering. Red boxes along diagonal and white off-diagonal 
demonstrate consistent, well separated clusters. C, 4 non-neuronal, 1 excitatory and 11 
inhibitory neuron clusters were identified, although the excitatory cluster and one inhibitory 
cluster were likely in layer 2 incidentally captured due to incidental capture with layer 1 
dissection. For each cluster, the constellation diagram shows the broad cell class membership 
(based on canonical marker gene expression), relative size (disc area), and discreteness (line 
thickness proportional to average co-clustering) of clusters. D, Clusters arranged by 
transcriptomic similarity based on hierarchical clustering, with the expression distributions of 
selective marker genes shown across clusters as violin plots. Numbers denote the number of 
cells in each cluster. E, ISH of select marker genes in human temporal cortex at low 
magnification (left columns with near adjacent Nissl stain for cytoarchitectonic laminar 
identification) and high magnification in layers 1-3 (right column). Red arrows highlight cells 
expressing genes in layer 1. Note that LHX6 marks a single cluster (i2) that is not expressed in 
Layer 1 and therefore nuclei in this cluster were likely sampled from upper Layer 2. Other 
clusters are restricted to layer 1 (e.g. NDNF+) or may be distributed across Layers 1 and 2. 
Scale bars=250 µm (low mag), 100 µm (high mag). 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figure 2. Morphological phenotype of rosehip cells in layer 1 of the human cerebral cortex. A, 
B, Anatomical reconstructions of rosehip cells biocytin filled during whole cell recordings 
(somata and dendrites, burgundy; axons, red). C, Top, Light micrographs of rosehip cells 
showing somata and proximal dendrites with stub-like spines (arrows). Bottom, Axons of rosehip 
cells arborized densely with large, round boutons. Scale bars: 10 µm. D, Anatomical 
reconstructions of neurogliaform cells in layer 1 of the human cerebral cortex (somata and 
dendrites, dark blue; axons, light blue). E, Quantitative comparison of axonal and dendritic 
parameters of rosehip (red) and neurogliaform (blue) cells. Left, bouton densities determined by 
Sholl analysis in 10 µm thick spherical shells were higher in neurogliaform cells 70-220 µm from 
the soma. Right, Numbers of primary dendrites, total axonal length and maximal horizontal 
extent of the axon of neurogliaform cells exceeded that of rosehip cells. Axonal tortuosity was 
similar in the two cell types, however, the frequency of axonal branch points in rosehip cells was 
2.5 times that of neurogliaform cells. However, bouton volume, interbouton interval, total axon 
length, maximal horizontal axonal extent, axonal node frequency (/100 µm), and number of 
primary dendrites were significantly different (Mann-Whitney U Test, * p ≤ 0.05; ** p ≤ 0.01). 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figure 3. Molecular phenotype of rosehip cells in layer 1 of the human cerebral cortex. A, 
Whole cell recorded and biocytin (red) filled rosehip cells shows CCK (green; n=6) 
immunopositivity. All biocytin (red) labeled rosehip cells tested for CB1 cannabinoid receptors 
(CNR1; n=5), somatostatin (SST; n=3), and calretinin (CALB2; n=2) were immuno-negative in 
spite of having labeled cells in the vicinity. Scale bars, 10 µm. B, Violin plots of gene expression 
for broad cell type and putative rosehip specific markers. Expression validated for select genes 
by immunohistochemistry (red stars), colorimetric ISH (black), multiplex FISH (orange), and 
single cell digital PCR (blue) in morphologically identified rosehip cells. C, ISH of select marker 
genes in human temporal cortex (left) and mouse cortex (right). Red arrows highlight cells 
expressing genes in layer 1. Scale bars=250 µm (low mag), 100 um (high mag). D, Multiplex 
FISH validation of rosehip marker co-expression. Arrowheads and arrows show examples of 
rosehip cells that are triple- and double-positive (i.e. CNR1-), respectively, for marker genes 
based on RNA-Seq expression data. Scale bar=25 µm. E, Rosehip cells comprise 10-15% of 
layer 1 interneurons based on multiplex FISH quantification of 408 GAD1+ cells in 2 subjects. 
15% (+/- 3) of GAD1+ cells express the rosehip specific marker PDGFRA, although a small 
fraction of these cells may be oligodendrocyte precursor cells (see SI Figure 2B). 10% (+/-1) of 
GAD1+ cells express PDGFRA and a second rosehip marker TRPC3, although some rosehip 
cells may lack TRPC3 expression based on RNA-seq. Error bars represent standard deviation. 
F, Expression of rosehip cluster markers in cytoplasm of whole cell recorded rosehip cells. 
Quantified by single cell digital PCR and reported as a percentage of housekeeping gene (TBP) 
expression in 3-4 cells per gene. Note that NDNF expression was not detected in any of 3 cells. 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figure 4. Intrinsic electrophysiological properties of rosehip cells. A, Examples of different firing 
patterns induced by current injections in layer 1 interneurons. Firing pattern of a rosehip cell 
(top), a neurogliaform cell (middle) and an unidentified layer 1 interneuron (bottom). B, Support 
vector machine (SVM) based wrapper feature selection of electrophysiological parameters for 
the identification of rosehip cells. Anatomically identified rosehip cells (red dots) and other types 
of interneurons with known morphology (black dots) are mapped to the distribution of 
electrophysiological features ranked as the two best delineators by SVM. Black lines show the 
best hyperplane separating rosehip cells from other interneuron types. C-D, Rosehip cells 
exhibit distinct impedance profile relative to other human interneurons in layer 1. C, Responses 
of anatomically identified rosehip (red), neurogliaform (blue) and other (black) interneurons to 
current injections with an exponential chirp (0.2-200 Hz, top). Traces were normalized to the 
amplitude of the rosehip response at 200 Hz. D, Left, Normalized impedance (Z) profiles of 
distinct groups of interneurons. Rosehip cells had higher impedance in the range of 0.9 - 12.4 
Hz compared to neurogliaform and other interneurons. Right, Impedances were similar at the 
lowest frequency (Z0.2 Hz, left), but resonance magnitude (Q) calculated as maximal impedance 
value divided by the impedance at lowest frequency (middle) and frequencies of maximal 
impedance (fmax, right) showed significant differences (p<0.05, ANOVA with and Bonferroni post 
hoc correction). E, Automatized selection of recording periods for the assessment of 
subthreshold membrane potential oscillations (boxed segments) and detection of bursts (bars) 
for measuring intraburst spiking frequency demonstrated on a rosehip cell response to near 
rheobasic stimulation showing stuttering firing behavior. F, Averaged fast Fourier transforms 
(FFT) of membrane potential oscillations had higher power between 3.8 and 80 Hz in rosehip 
cells compared to neurogliaform and other interneurons. G, Intraburst frequency of rosehip cells 
peaked in the gamma range. 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figure 5. Connections of rosehip cells in the local microcircuit. A, Distribution of local 
connections mapped in layers 1-3 between rosehip cells (rh, red), pyramidal cells (pyr, green), 
neurogliaform cells (ngf, blue) and other types of layer 1 interneuron (int, black) based on 
unbiased targeting of postsynaptic cells. Rosehip cells predominantly innervate pyramidal cells, 
receive monosynaptic EPSPs from layer 2-3 pyramidal cells, monosynaptic IPSPs from 
neurogliaform and other types of interneurons, however, IPSPs arriving from rosehip cells were 
not encountered. In addition, rosehip cells are interconnected by homologous electrical 
synapses (gap junctions). B, Example of a neurogliaform cell to rosehip cell connection. Left, 
Firing patterns of the presynaptic neurogliaform cell (blue) and the postsynaptic rosehip cell 
(red). Right, Anatomical reconstruction of the recorded neurogliaform cell (soma, dark blue; 
axon, light blue) and rosehip cell (soma and dendrites, burgundy; axon: red). Action potentials in 
the neurogliaform cell (blue) elicited slow IPSPs in the rosehip cell (red). C, Example of a 
pyramidal cell to rosehip cell connection. Left, Anatomical reconstruction and firing pattern of the 
presynaptic pyramidal cell (firing, soma and dendrites, green; axon, black) and the postsynaptic 
rosehip cell (firing, soma and dendrites, burgundy; axon, red). Right, action potentials in the 
pyramidal cell (green) elicited EPSPs in the rosehip cell (burgundy). D, Spatial distribution of 
coupled and uncoupled neurons tested as postsynaptic targets of rosehip cells. Note the relative 
dominance of layer 2-3 pyramidal cells among neurons receiving input from rosehip cells. E, 
The only rosehip cell to neurogliaform cell connection successfully tested for synaptic coupling. 
Left, Firing patterns of the presynaptic rosehip cell (burgundy) and the postsynaptic 
neurogliaform cell (blue). Middle, Anatomical reconstruction of the rosehip cell (soma and 
dendrites, burgundy; axon, red) and the neurogliaform cell (soma and dendrites, blue; axon not 
shown). Right, Action potentials in the rosehip cell (red) elicited slow IPSPs in the neurogliaform 
cell (blue). F, Example of a rosehip cell to pyramidal cell connection. Left, Firing patterns of the 
presynaptic rosehip cell (red) and the postsynaptic pyramidal cell (green). Action potentials in 
the rosehip cell (burgundy) elicited IPSPs in the pyramidal cell (green). Right, Confocal 
fluorescence image showing the recorded rosehip cell (rh) forming its axonal cloud in the tuft of 
the apical dendrite of the layer 2-3 pyramidal cell (pyr). G, Pharmacological characterization of a 
rosehip-to-pyramidal cell connection. Presynaptic spikes in the rosehip cell (red) elicited IPSPs 
in the layer 2-3 pyramidal cell (green) which could be blocked by application of gabazine (10 
µM). H, Functional test of presynaptic CNR1expression in rosehip cells show the absence of 
modulation by the CNR1antagonist AM251. Presynaptic spikes in the rosehip cell 1 (red, top) 
elicited IPSPs in the rosehip cell 2 (red, bottom). Application of AM251 (5 µM) had no effect on 
IPSPs (black). I, Representative electron microscopic images (left) and three-dimensional 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 reconstructions (right) showing axon terminals (b, red) of biocytin filled rosehip cells (n=3) 
targeting exclusively dendritic shafts (d, green) (100%, n=31). Synaptic clefts are indicated 
between arrowheads. Scale bars: 200 nm. J, Representative electron microscopic image (left) 
and three-dimensional reconstruction (right) of a biocytin filled rosehip cell bouton (b, red) 
targeting a pyramidal dendritic shaft (d, green) identified based on emerging dendritic spines (s, 
arrows). Scale bars: 500 nm. K, Rosehip cells form a network of electrical synapses. Top left, 
firing patterns of three rosehip cells (red, rh1; orange, rh2; burgundy, rh3). Bottom left, 
Hyperpolarization of rosehip cell rh1 was reciprocally transmitted to rosehip cells rh2 and rh3 
confirming electrical coupling. Right, Route of the hyperpolarizing signals through putative 
dendro-dendritic gap junctions (arrows) between rosehip cells rh1, rh2 and rh3 is shown by 
corresponding colors in the dendritic network of the three cells (gray). 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Figure 6. Human rosehip interneurons perform segment specific regulation of action potential 
backpropagation to apical dendritic tufts of pyramidal cells. A, Top, Firing patterns of a 
presynaptic rosehip cell (burgundy) and a postsynaptic pyramidal cell (green). Bottom, Action 
potentials in the rosehip cell (burgundy) elicited IPSPs in the pyramidal cell (green). B, 
Anatomical reconstruction of the rosehip cell (soma and dendrites: burgundy; axon, red) and the 
layer 2-3 pyramidal cell (soma and dendrites, green; axon not shown). Presynaptic axonal 
boutons of the rosehip cell formed close appositions (a, b, and c) with three separate branches 
on the tuft of the pyramidal apical dendrite. C, Repetitive burst firing was triggered to initiate 
backpropagating Ca2+ signals in the pyramidal cell (green) while the output of the rosehip cell 
(red) was switched on and off timed prior and during every second pyramidal burst. 
Simultaneously, Ca2+ dynamics of the pyramidal apical dendritic tuft was measured at several 
locations and signals detected at location no.1 shown on panels E and F are shown in black. D, 
The area boxed in panel B shows the dendritic branch of the apical tuft of the pyramidal cell 
(green) with a putative synaptic contact (a) arriving from the rosehip cell. E, Confocal Z-stack 
image of the same area shown on panel D taken during paired whole cell recordings. The soma 
of the rosehip cell (rh, red), the dendrite of the pyramidal cell (pyr, green), the putative synaptic 
contact (a) arriving from the rosehip cell to the pyramidal cell and sites of line scans performed 
across the dendrite (1, 2 and 3) are indicated. Cytoplasmic lipofuscin autofluorescence 
characteristic to human tissue is seen as green patches. F, Superimposition of the anatomical 
reconstruction of panel D and the confocal image of panel E. G, Normalized amplitudes of Ca2+ 
signals during pyramidal cell firing with and without coactivation of the rosehip cell detected at 
the three sites of line scans (1, 2 and 3) on the pyramidal dendrite. Rosehip input simultaneous 
with the backpropagating pyramidal action potentials was significant (p=0.02) in suppressing 
Ca2+ signals only at site 1 which was closest (8 µm) to the putative synapse between the two 
cells, no effect (p=1 and p=0.27, respectively) of the rosehip cell was detected at sites 2 and 3 
located at distances of 21 and 28 µm, respectively from the putative synaptic contact. 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 Supplementary Information 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 SI Figure 1. Marker gene expression patterns across identified single nuclei clusters. A, 
Heatmap of log-normalized expression (CPM) in single nuclei grouped by clusters that have 
been ordered by transcriptomic similarity. Canonical gene markers (SNAP25, GAD1, SLC17A7) 
classify clusters into broad classes of excitatory and inhibitory neuron and non-neuronal cell 
types. Within these broad types, many genes discretely mark individual clusters. B, Colorimetric 
ISH in mouse cortex of marker genes shown for human temporal cortex in Figure 1. Red arrows 
highlight cells with expression in layer 1. 
 
 
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
  
 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
 SI Figure 2. Additional molecular phenotype information of rosehip cells in layer 1 of the human 
cerebral cortex. A, Further immunolabeling showed that rosehip cells were immunopositive for 
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) (n=2), and for chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter 
transcription factor II (COUP-TFII) (n=2). In addition, all tested rosehip cells were negative for 
many common interneuron markers including parvalbumin (n=3), neuronal nitric oxide synthase 
(n=4), neuropeptide Y (n=2), calbindin (n=2), and choline acetyltransferase (n=3). B, Expression 
distributions of marker genes in all cell types in human temporal cortex Layer 1 (left) and mouse 
primary visual cortex (right; data from 4). C, Multiplex FISH validation of rosehip marker co-
expression. Arrowheads show examples of rosehip cells based on marker gene expression 
identified from RNA-Seq data. D, Multiplex FISH of approximately 2 mm section of Layer 1 and 
upper layer 2 with rosehip interneurons labeled based on marker gene expression. 300 µm 
diameter circles approximate the maximum extent of rosehip axonal arbors (see Figure 2E). 
peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/216085
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Nov. 8, 2017; 
