 Thalamic projections sustain prefrontal activity during working 
memory maintenance
Scott S. Bolkan1, Joseph M. Stujenske1, Sebastien Parnaudeau2, Timothy J. Spellman3, 
Caroline Rauffenbart4,5,7, Atheir I. Abbas4,6, Alexander Z. Harris4,6, Joshua A. Gordon4,6,*, 
and Christoph Kellendonk4,5,7,*
1Graduate Program in Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA
2Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Paris 06, Institut de Biologie Paris Seine, UM119. Neuroscience 
Paris Seine, CNRS UMR8246, INSERM U1130, Paris, France
3Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA
4Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, 
New York, USA
5Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New 
York, New York, USA
6Division of Integrative Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York, 
USA
7Division of Molecular Therapeutics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York, 
USA
Abstract
The mediodorsal thalamus (MD) shares reciprocal connectivity with the prefrontal cortex (PFC) 
and decreased MD-PFC connectivity is observed in schizophrenia patients. Patients also display 
cognitive deficits including impairments in working memory, but a mechanistic link between 
thalamo-prefrontal circuit function and working memory is missing. Here, using pathway-specific 
inhibition we found directional interactions between MD and medial PFC (mPFC), with MD-to-
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence should be addressed to J.A.G. (joshua.gordon@nih.gov) or C.K. (ck491@cumc.columbia.edu). 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.S.B., J.A.G. and C.K. designed the experiments. S.S.B. performed the experiments and analyzed the data. J.M.S., S.P., T.J.S., C.R., 
A.I.A. and A.Z.H. assisted the design, performance, analysis, and interpretation of experiments. S.S.B., J.A.G. and C.K. interpreted 
the results and wrote the paper.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Publisher's Disclaimer: DISCLAIMER
This article was prepared while J.A.G. was employed at the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia University and NYSPI. The 
opinions expressed in this article are the author’s own and do not reflect the view of the National Institutes of Health, the Department 
of Health and Human Services, or the United States government.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 July ; 20(7): 987–996. doi:10.1038/nn.4568.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mPFC supporting working memory maintenance and mPFC-to-MD supporting subsequent choice. 
We further identify mPFC neurons that display elevated spiking during the delay, a feature that 
was absent on error trials and required MD inputs for sustained maintenance. Strikingly, delay-
tuned neurons had minimal overlap with spatially-tuned neurons and each mPFC population 
exhibited mutually exclusive dependence on MD and hippocampal inputs. These findings indicate 
a role for the MD in sustaining prefrontal activity during working memory maintenance. 
Consistent with this idea we found that enhancing MD excitability was sufficient to enhance task 
performance.
INTRODUCTION
The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is a locus for higher-order cognition and executive control 
across species1. In several mental disorders such as schizophrenia, PFC dysfunction is 
observed in concert with a variety of cognitive impairments, including deficits in working 
memory2–4. However, there is growing appreciation that PFC function cannot be divorced 
from that of its densely interconnected thalamic partners, such as the mediodorsal thalamus 
(MD)5–7. Indeed, not only does the PFC share dense reciprocal connectivity with the MD8, 
manipulations of MD function in animals produce cognitive impairments reminiscent of 
PFC dysfunction9–12. Brain imaging studies have also shown MD dysfunction in patients 
with schizophrenia13,14, with increasing evidence for decreased functional connectivity 
between the thalamus and PFC15–17. In spite of these findings, a circuit level understanding 
of how thalamo-prefontal circuits engage in cognition is lacking. Such an understanding will 
be essential to elucidating how circuit alterations contribute to cognitive dysfunction in 
disorders such as schizophrenia.
To address this issue we investigated thalamo-prefrontal interactions during a spatial 
working memory task in which mice had to choose a spatial location that differed from one 
they had sampled prior to a brief delay. Importantly, spatial location varied in a pseudo-
random trial-by-trial basis, thus requiring mice only to maintain information relevant to the 
present trial. Using both pathway-specific optogenetic inhibition experiments and 
directionality analyses of multi-site recordings, we found that different task phases (sample, 
delay and choice) exhibited distinct thalamo-prefrontal dependencies. While initial spatial 
sampling required no functional interactions between MD and mPFC, spatial choice 
required a directional interaction from mPFC to MD. In comparison, the delay phase 
required reciprocal interactions across the two structures with inputs from MD to mPFC 
exerting a stronger influence on behavior. Strikingly, and despite this clear behavioral 
dependence, mPFC neurons showed no evidence for maintaining a spatial memory across 
the delay, although mPFC spatial coding was readily detected during both the sample and 
choice phases. However, a subset of mPFC neurons demonstrated elevated delay phase 
spiking that indicated correct performance and was highly dependent on functional MD 
inputs. In a direct comparison of spatially-tuned and delay-elevated mPFC neurons we 
observed a double dissociation in their activity dependence on ventral hippocampal (vHPC) 
and MD inputs. This effect was moreover specific to the task phase in which each population 
was feature-selective in the task, suggesting a circuit-specific role for MD inputs in 
sustaining prefrontal activity across working memory delays. Consistent with this idea we 
Bolkan et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 found that temporally-restricted enhancement of MD excitability during the delay is 
sufficient to improve working memory performance.
Combined, these findings demonstrate a functional dissociation of prefrontal substrates for 
spatial encoding, maintenance and retrieval of working memory. We conclude that while 
vHPC inputs to the mPFC support spatial encoding as previously shown18, MD inputs to the 
mPFC support the maintenance of working memory by stabilizing task-relevant prefrontal 
activity during the delay period, and that top-down signals from the mPFC back to the MD 
guide successful memory retrieval and/or action execution.
RESULTS
Activity within topographical MD-mPFC connections is required for spatial working 
memory
While the anatomy of MD-prefrontal circuitry is well described in primates19 and rats20,21, 
there have been comparatively fewer anatomical studies in the mouse. We therefore first 
sought to extend this literature by closely examining thalamo-prefrontal connectivity in the 
mouse. Using viral-mediated synaptophysin-GFP expression to visualize MD terminals, we 
observed that mouse MD makes extensive synaptic connections with multiple prefrontal 
areas, with particularly dense terminations in the mPFC and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (Fig. 
1a,b).
To identify the MD substructures that are anatomically associated with these PFC regions in 
the mouse, we delivered the dual antereograde/retrograde tracers fluoro-emerald and fluoro-
ruby to either the OFC or mPFC (Supplementary Fig. 1a,b). We found minimal overlap in 
both the terminal fields of PFC projections to the MD and MD neurons with projections 
back to the medial and orbital walls of the PFC (Supplementary Fig. 1c). That is, while 
mPFC neurons primarily projected to and received input from the lateral and medial MD, 
OFC neurons predominately projected to and received input from the central MD 
(Supplementary Fig. 1d). Although our injections did not distinguish between dorsal and 
ventral aspects of mPFC, we generally observed denser connectivity with lateral MD when 
dorsal mPFC was densely labeled, and denser connectivity with medial MD when ventral 
mPFC was densely labeled. As recently reported in the mosue22, this reflects the presence of 
two distinct and topographically organized MD-mPFC circuits. This topographic and 
reciprocal MD-PFC organization is consistent with anatomical findings in primates19 and 
rats20,21.
Previous findings suggested that mPFC is the prefrontal region most relevant to spatial 
working memory on a delayed non-match to sample (DNMS) “win-shift” T-maze in which 
mice have to choose a spatial location that differs from the one they randomly sample prior 
to a delay period23,24 (Fig. 1c). We previously demonstrated that this task also relies on MD 
activity10. We therefore hypothesized that activity in MD-to-mPFC projections, but not MD-
to-OFC projections, would be required for task performance. To test this hypothesis we 
optogenetically inhibited MD terminals alternately in either the mPFC or OFC within the 
same animals (Fig. 1d). Both regions are sufficiently far apart such that light does not spread 
from one region to another, an observation we independently confirm by modeling the 
Bolkan et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 propagation of light in the mPFC according to our specific optogenetic parameters 
(Supplementary Fig. 2a). Terminal inhibition was achieved by delivering 532nm light 
(10mW) via flat-tipped optical fibers (200um, 0.22 NA) to MD terminals expressing the 
membrane trafficking-enhanced variant of the proton pump archaerhodopsin (eArch3.0; 
referred to as eArch hereafter), which we have previously shown to be effective for 
inhibiting ventral hippocampal (vHPC) inputs to the mPFC18,25. eYFP was used to control 
for potential effects of light alone26. We found a robust impairment of task performance 
when MD terminals were inhibited within the mPFC for the duration of a trial (Fig. 1e). No 
effect was observed when MD terminals within OFC were inhibited in an identical manner 
(Fig. 1e). Interestingly, this effect was related to delay phase length, with terminal inhibition 
only producing deficits under a more demanding long delay (60s). We previously observed a 
similar delay-dependent deficit in spatial working memory when inhibiting MD cell 
bodies10. The present results indicate that this finding is due to the inhibition of MD neurons 
projecting to the mPFC but not those projecting to the OFC.
Given the dense reciprocal connectivity between the mPFC and the MD (Supplementary Fig. 
1d), we next asked whether mPFC projections to MD were also necessary for working 
memory performance. We therefore virally expressed eArch or eYFP in mPFC, and 
implanted optical fibers over mPFC terminals in the MD. Inhibiting the mPFC-to-MD 
projection diminished task performance in a manner that depended on delay phase length, 
similar to inhibition of the reciprocal MD-to-mPFC projection (Fig. 1f,g). These results 
demonstrate involvement of reciprocal MD-mPFC circuits in spatial working memory, and 
raise the possibility that activity in these circuits could work in concert to support task 
performance.
Different task phases require distinct functional interactions between mPFC and MD
To understand the precise manner by which mPFC and MD connections engage in working 
memory, we first performed temporally-limited optogenetic inhibition of MD terminals in 
mPFC (MD-to-mPFC) and mPFC terminals in MD (mPFC-to-MD) during specific phases of 
the task. In these experiments, we restricted the delay phase length to the 60s condition, and 
terminal inhibition was limited alternately to the sample, delay, or choice phase of the task 
(Fig. 2a). Inhibiting MD-to-mPFC during the sample or choice phases did not significantly 
impact performance (Fig. 2b). In contrast, MD-to-mPFC inhibition during the delay phase 
substantially diminished performance, an effect not seen with optical illumination in the 
absence of eArch (Fig. 2b). This effect was also unrelated to the disparity between task 
phase lengths, as limiting delay inhibition to 17s (equivalent to the average sample phase 
duration) was also sufficient to impair behavioral performance (Supplementary Fig. 3). Our 
sample sizes (phase-specific inhibition: eArch=17; eYFP=11; 17s inhibition: eArch=16; 
eYFP=12) were a priori sufficiently powered to detect significant interactions based on our 
previously observed effect size when inhibiting vHPC inputs to the mPFC during the sample 
phase18. However, given non-significant tendencies for a decrease in performance when 
inhibiting MD inputs to the mPFC (phase-specific inhibition: p=0.59, β=0.91; 17s 
inhibition: p=0.21, β=0.73), we cannot exclude the possibility for a Type II error if the true 
effect size is smaller than predicted. Irrespective, these results strongly indicate that activity 
Bolkan et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in the MD-to-mPFC pathway is particularly required during the delay phase, potentially 
supporting the maintenance of working memory.
To investigate whether mPFC-to-MD engagement in the task was symmetrical to that of the 
MD-to-mPFC pathway, we performed temporally-limited inhibition of this pathway during 
prescribed phases of the task. We found that, while sample phase inhibition had no effect on 
behavior, delay phase inhibition led to diminished task performance that approached 
statistical significance (p=0.073, β=0.53; Fig. 2c). Strikingly, choice phase inhibition 
robustly impaired task performance (Fig. 2c, right), despite the brief duration of inhibition 
received (Supplementary Fig. 3a). These asymmetric effects suggest that MD-mPFC 
pathways are differentially engaged in the task. Specifically, while the MD-to-mPFC 
pathway is required during the delay phase, possibly supporting working memory 
maintenance, mPFC-to-MD pathways may also be required, but to a lesser degree. In 
contrast, mPFC-to-MD dependence during spatial choice indicates that the MD may 
function as an output station for mPFC to exert its impact on either working memory 
retrieval, action execution, or both. As our manipulations impacted the entire MD and both 
ventral- and dorsal-mPFC (Supplementary Fig. 2), which respectively share reciprocal 
connections with medial and lateral MD22, it is possible these asymmetric effects may be 
attributable to topographically discrete MD-mPFC circuits.
The asymmetric effects on working memory performance obtained by MD-to-mPFC 
inhibition compared to mPFC-to-MD suggested that functional interactions between these 
circuits are directional, and may vary in a task phase-dependent manner. To directly test this 
predication, we analyzed data from simultaneous electrophysiological recordings of mPFC 
single-units and MD local field potentials (LFPs) during the task (Fig 3a). We used a lag 
analysis of mPFC units that were significantly phase-locked to filtered MD beta oscillations 
(13–30Hz) in order to estimate the net direction of information flow between the two 
structures (Fig. 3b). During the sample phase, when inhibition of either circuit had no effect 
on behavior, there was no net directionality between the MD and mPFC (Fig. 3ci–ii). During 
the delay phase, however, MD activity led mPFC activity. This directionality suggests a 
predominance of MD-to-mPFC influence during this phase, consistent with the behavioral 
impairment seen with MD-to-mPFC terminal inhibition (Fig. 3di–ii). Finally, during the 
choice phase, mPFC activity led the MD, a result also in line with the behavioral impact of 
inhibiting this pathway (Fig. 3ei–ii). Importantly, this pattern of net information flow was 
also observable when performing a lag analysis on cross-correlations of the instantaneous 
amplitudes of filtered MD and mPFC LFPs27 (Supplementary Fig. 4a). While LFP-LFP 
cross-correlations indicated no net direction flow between MD and mPFC during the sample 
phase, MD LFPs robustly led those in the mPFC during the delay phase, and mPFC LFPs 
predominately led those in MD during the choice phase (Supplementary Fig. 4b–d). Further 
strengthening the links between these observations and our behavioral results, we found that 
MD-to-mPFC terminal inhibition during the sample phase had no effect on the net 
directionality of phase-locking between structures (Fig. 3f), while delay phase terminal 
inhibition diminished MD leading activity during the delay (Fig. 3g), although not during 
the subsequent spatial choice (Fig. 3h). Together, these findings support the conclusion that 
during the delay phase, mPFC is dependent on functional MD input for the maintenance of 
Bolkan et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 working memory, while during the subsequent choice phase, mPFC outputs to the MD guide 
the retrieval and/or action execution of successfully maintained working memory plans.
mPFC neurons show elevated spiking during the delay but no spatial tuning
Having obtained recordings from multiple mPFC single-units during the task, we 
interrogated their spiking across task phases to determine which task variables they encoded 
and when. Consistent with our prior results18 and those of others28, we found that many 
mPFC neurons were spatially-tuned towards one maze location over another during both the 
sample and choice phases (Fig. 4). This was clearly observed in both single-unit examples 
(Fig. 4b) and across the entire population of mPFC units (Fig. 4ci–iii), with spatial tuning in 
individual neurons largely overlapping between sample and choice phases (Fig 4ciii, inset). 
In contrast, we found no evidence for spatial tuning during the delay phase, whether 
analyzed by which arm was visited during the preceding sample phase (Fig. 4cii) or by 
which arm was chosen during the subsequent choice phase (Fig 4cii, inset). Moreover, 
spatial tuning was not altered by concurrent MD terminal inhibition during the sample and 
delay phases (Fig. 4di–ii), nor was it affected during the choice phase following inhibition 
during the preceding delay phase (Fig. 4diii). The same was observed when restricting 
analyses to only neurons that were significantly spatially-tuned (Supplementary Fig. 5). 
Importantly, these results were not due to a failure of terminal inhibition, as eArch activation 
produced significant modulations in mPFC firing rates compared to light illumination 
without eArch (Supplementary Fig. 6). These findings confirm previous observations that in 
rodents, mPFC neurons do not represent goal arm locations in sustained firing during the 
delay phase of T-maze tasks18,28, and further demonstrate that spatial representations of arm 
location in mPFC neurons are not dependent on MD-to-mPFC activity.
We reasoned that while mPFC neurons do not explicitly encode spatial location during the 
delay phase, they may represent other variables critical for task performance. Consistent 
with this, we found a subset of mPFC neurons (266/891) that exhibited significant elevation 
in spiking during the delay relative to the inter trial interval (ITI), where behavioral 
conditions were equivalent yet mice were not required to maintain a working memory trace. 
Elevation in spiking for each neuron was not sustained; rather, each neuron exhibited a 
preferred temporal offset during the delay phase (Fig. 5a). As a population, this activity 
pattern tiled the entire delay phase, and semi-automated clustering of the data based on 
temporal correlations in firing revealed a Poisson-like distribution pattern characterized by a 
gradual decay and broadening of clustered sub-population peaks as the delay period 
progressed (Fig 5bi). This pattern was not observed in a largely mutually exclusive group of 
mPFC neurons identified as having significantly suppressed delay activity (260/891), where 
the vast majority of peak suppression occurred within the first five seconds of the delay 
(201/260) (Supplementary Fig. 7). Moreover, shuffled versions of the entire data set both 
significantly reduced the number of neurons exhibiting delay-elevated activity and abolished 
the unique temporal structure of delay-elevated clusters (Fig 5bii–iii). These findings were 
replicated in an independent data set of mPFC single units (Fig 5c–d), together indicating 
that delay-elevated neurons are not artifacts created by spiking on a small number of trials 
and that the observed firing pattern of clustered data does not emerge by chance.
Bolkan et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Temporally sparse and sequential activation of neural ensembles have previously been 
reported in rodents performing tasks assessing both working memory and interval 
timing29–33. To assess whether delay-elevated mPFC neurons represented information 
related to interval timing, we recorded single-units in the mPFC in mice performing the T-
maze at two distinct delays – 60s and 20s. In contrast to previous findings that time coding 
neural populations scale their activity according to interval durations32, we found that only 
delay-elevated neurons with peaks in the first 20s of the 60s delay retained their temporal 
preference during the shorter 20s delay (Supplementary Fig. 8). We therefore hypothesized 
that delay-elevated mPFC activity may reflect the maintenance of a working memory-related 
representation across the delay phase. If true, we reasoned that delay-elevated activity should 
be attenuated on incorrect trials. Indeed, we observed diminished spiking in delay-elevated 
neurons in normalized firing rates across individual neurons (Fig. 6ai), across clustered sub-
populations (Fig. 6aii), in raw data examples (Fig. 6aiii), and in the ratio of incorrect/correct 
firing in neurons grouped by distinct temporal offsets (Fig 6di).
Given that MD input during the delay phase was necessary for task performance, we next 
asked whether they were also important for delay activity in the mPFC. Interestingly, MD 
terminal inhibition throughout the delay had temporally-specific effects on mPFC delay-
firing. While delay-elevated firing in clusters with early temporal offsets were largely left 
intact, firing rate in middle and late clusters were substantially diminished (Fig 6bi–iii; Fig. 
6dii). These results are not explained by an effect of light alone, as they were not observed in 
eYFP animals (Supplementary Fig. 9). Moreover, these findings are also not due to a 
nonspecific effect of removing excitatory drive to mPFC neurons, as terminal inhibition of 
vHPC inputs to the mPFC during the delay had no impact on delay-elevated firing (Fig 
6ci–iii; Fig 6diii). Indeed, the MD-dependence of delay-elevated mPFC activity is strikingly 
input- and task-phase specific. While activity in delay-elevated neurons was suppressed by 
MD terminal inhibition during the delay phase (Fig. 7ai–ii, right), activity in this same 
population was unaffected by MD terminal inhibition during the sample phase (Fig. 7aii, 
left). Moreover, these neurons were also not impacted by vHPC terminal inhibition in either 
sample or delay phases (Fig. 7bi–ii). These results suggest that MD inputs are specifically 
critical for sustaining delay-elevated mPFC representations across the delay phase. 
Strengthening this notion, the largely non-overlapping group of spatially-tuned mPFC 
neurons (Supplementary Fig. 7b) exhibited activity-dependence on vHPC inputs during the 
sample phase (Fig. 7biii), but were independent of MD inputs in both sample and delay 
phases (Fig. 7aiii). Together, these results reveal a double dissociation of the MD-
dependence and vHPC-dependence of delay-elevated and spatially-tuned mPFC neurons, 
respectively. Strikingly, the two populations only depend on their respective inputs when 
modulated by the task phase in which they are feature selective in the task.
If delay-elevated mPFC neurons represent task-relevant information that is exclusively 
dependent on MD inputs for their maintenance across the delay phase, we reasoned that 
facilitating MD activity should improve behavioral performance in a task-phase specific 
manner. To test this idea we utilized a stabilized step function opsin (SSFO), which is 
capable of broadly enhancing neural excitability in a temporally-restricted manner without 
explicitly controlling spike timing34. As such, we virally delivered SSFO (AAV2-CamKIIa-
SSFO-mCherry) to the MD, bilaterally implanted fiberoptics dorsal to it, and activated 
Bolkan et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SSFO exclusively during either the sample or delay phases in mice performing the DNMS T-
maze. Strikingly, we found that enhancing MD excitability during the delay, but not sample, 
phase of the task improved behavioral performance (Fig. 7c). This finding is consistent with 
a specific role for MD inputs in sustaining delay-elevated mPFC activity without impacting 
mPFC spatial encoding during the sample phase and provides further evidence that MD-
dependent delay-elevated mPFC activity supports the maintenance of working memory 
representations critical for task performance.
DISCUSSION
Here we demonstrate that reciprocal MD-mPFC activity is required for spatial working 
memory in mice (Fig. 1). By dissecting the role of each reciprocal projection during discrete 
task phases of the DNMS T-maze we further reveal that while MD inputs to the mPFC 
support the maintenance of working memory, mPFC inputs to the MD support the retrieval 
of memory for action execution (Fig. 2). We corroborate this model using two distinct 
directionality analyses of simultaneous mPFC and MD activity, which both revealed a 
dynamic shift from MD leading activity during the delay phase towards mPFC leading 
activity during the choice phase (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 4). Finally, we uncover a 
population of mPFC neurons whose activity is temporally sparse within individual neurons, 
and sequential across the population (Fig. 5). This activity pattern indicates correct 
performance and depends on MD inputs, but not vHPC inputs, for sustained maintenance 
across the delay (Fig. 6). We further reveal a double dissociation of the MD-dependence and 
vHPC-dependence of delay-elevated and spatially-tuned mPFC neurons, a finding that is 
also specific to the task phase in which each population is feature selective (Fig. 7). These 
findings are consistent with a role for MD inputs in sustaining mPFC working memory 
representations across a delay, a notion supported by improvements in working memory 
performance when enhancing MD activity during the delay, but not sample, phase of our 
working memory task (Fig. 7).
What is the nature of the mPFC representation supported by MD input during the delay? The 
absence of spatial-tuning across our mPFC population during the delay (Fig. 4), the largely 
exclusive nature of spatially-tuned and delay-elevated mPFC populations (Supplementary 
Fig. 7b) and the vHPC-independence of delay-elevated activity (Fig. 7bi–ii) strongly argues 
against the presence of an explicit spatial representation. This finding is surprising in the 
context of well-documented observations of spatial-tuning in PFC delay period activity in 
primates35–37. This is typically observed in delayed response tasks requiring the cacheing of 
one spatial location from multiple potential targets. Interestingly, in a two-choice version of 
this task analogous to ours, seminal work demonstrating sustained delay period activity in 
primate PFC also reported that spatial preference in delay-tuned neurons was either absent38 
or minimal39,40 (6–13% of sustained delay units). mPFC delay activity does also not appear 
to encode timing of the delay interval, as delay-elevated mPFC neurons do not scale their 
activity according to distinct delay durations (Supplementary Fig. 8), a feature observed in 
neural ensembles explicitly linked to interval timing32. Delay-elevated activity may instead 
reflect a general attentive or task-engaged state. Although our findings do not exclude this 
possibility, we did not observe overt behavioral differences between correct and incorrect 
trials, nor was the latency for mice to make a spatial choice altered by MD terminal 
Bolkan et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inhibition (data not shown). A final possibility is that explicit spatial representations are 
unnecessary for two-choice spatial working memory tasks, and that an abstract task rule, 
such as ‘go to opposite location’, is sufficient to guide behavioral performance. A direct test 
of this hypothesis within the context of our task however, would require task rule, not only 
spatial location, to vary on a trial-by-trial basis.
Nevertheless, task rule encoding in PFC neurons has been frequently reported in both 
rodents41,42 and primates43,44. Moreover, findings from a recent working memory guided, 
top-down attention task, in which task rules are varied on a trial-by-trial basis, explicitly 
demonstrate task rule encoding in mouse mPFC neurons during the delay period45. Similar 
to the delay-elevated mPFC activity in our task, this study observes temporally sparse and 
sequential mPFC spiking that codes for one of two task rules during the delay period. 
Importantly, further strengthening our inference, delay-elevated activity in this task requires 
MD activity for its sustained maintenance across the delay. Our results make clear this effect 
is due to activity in MD-to-mPFC projections, and is not due to alterations in general 
excitability.
The parallels between our findings and Schmitt et al.45 are quite striking when considering 
the difference in temporal scale between tasks. The fact that our population of mPFC 
neurons was capable of spanning a 60s delay may indicate a fundamental scalability of 
mPFC encoding and maintenance of rule representation across time scales. In this light, our 
findings extend studies that have identified sequential activation of cortical neurons in tasks 
that require working memory29–31, and support the idea that sequences of activation may be 
a common circuit function in memory-guided decision tasks. It is also interesting to note that 
we observed a gradual degradation in the quality of elevated spiking across time (Fig. 5a,b). 
This is evocative of a decay in prefrontal representation, and may explain why our MD-
mPFC manipulations did not impact behavior at shorter delays (Fig. 1e, left and Fig. 1g, 
left), where delay representations were potentially robust to activity disruptions in our task. 
Further consistent with this interpretation is the fact that mPFC delay activity with early 
peak times were unaffected by MD terminal inhibition (Fig 6b,dii and Fig 7aii). Local PFC 
circuitry may therefore be sufficient to maintain representations at short time-scales, but 
require amplification for sustained maintenance either as memory decays across time, or in 
more cognitively demanding tasks.
How does the mPFC-to-MD pathway support working memory performance? Our terminal 
inhibition experiments and directionality analyses both indicate a critical role for this 
pathway during the choice phase of our task, when mice presumably require the retrieval of 
maintained information and its translation to motor action (Fig. 2c; Fig. 3ei–ii; 
Supplementary Fig. 4). Although this finding may suggest a surprising functional 
dissociation with the reciprocal MD-to-mPFC pathway, this interpretation warrants 
significant caution. Our pathway-specific experiments do not distinguish between dorsal and 
ventral mPFC (Supplementary Fig. 2), which reciprocally connect with lateral and medial 
MD in a largely segregated manner21,22. It is therefore possible that the distinct phase-
specific behavioral impairments we observe may be attributable to activity in discrete MD-
mPFC circuits, a possibility that will be important to resolve in future research. 
Nevertheless, this observation does suggest that the lateral and/or medial MD may serve as 
Bolkan et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 an intermediate output pathway for mPFC to recruit downstream motor planning circuits. 
Indeed, the mPFC has been shown to exert strong functional control over primary motor 
cortex46, and higher order thalamic nuclei like the MD are posited to play a role in 
information transfer between cortical areas6,47. While anatomical connectivity exists 
between MD and primary and secondary motor cortex48,49, the behavioral function of these 
circuits remain entirely unexplored. An alterative possibility is that mPFC-to-MD circuits 
may be important for cortical or subcortical pathways involved in memory retrieval. Future 
efforts to expand functional circuit dissection of MD-PFC pathways and their associated 
structures with increasing precision could provide answers to these important questions.
In the context of our previous studies inhibiting vHPC-to-mPFC inputs18, our results provide 
a striking example of differential long-range circuit engagement in the DNMS T-maze. Here 
we observed limited impact of MD terminal inhibition restricted to the sample phase of the 
task and a robust behavioral impairment with inhibition restricted to the delay phase (Fig. 2b 
and Supplementary Fig. 3). In contrast, vHPC terminal inhibition specifically during the 
sample, but not delay phase robustly impairs behavioral performance18. Extending this 
dissociation further, we reveal here a double dissociation in the MD-dependence and vHPC-
dependence of delay-elevated and spatially-tuned mPFC neurons (Fig. 7a,b). This finding 
demonstrates a functional dissociation of prefrontal substrates for working memory 
encoding and maintenance in the DNMS T-maze task. Our results suggest this dissociation is 
largely due to the segregation of spatially-tuned and delay-elevated mPFC neurons into 
largely non-overlapping populations (Supplementary Fig. 7b).
Our findings should have translational relevance, particularly to schizophrenia. Patients with 
schizophrenia exhibit prefrontal-associated cognitive deficits in domains such as executive 
function and working memory and neuroimaging studies increasingly report diminished 
thalamo-prefrontal connectivity15–17. Our data provide clear evidence that these circuit 
abnormalities are likely to be causally involved in producing working memory deficits. 
Continued investigation of thalamo-prefrontal interactions in different behavioral conditions 
in patients and in animal models will be critical for advancing clinical efforts for improved 
diagnoses and more targeted therapeutic approaches50.
ONLINE METHODS
Animals
All experiments were carried out on male C57/Bl6 male mice purchased from Jackson 
Laboratory. Mice were aged 7–8 weeks at the start of experiments and housed under a 12 
hour, light-dark cycle in a temperature controlled environment with food and water available 
ad libitum. For optogenetic experiments, mice were group housed with littermates (5 mice/
cage). Mice with implanted microdrives were individually housed. During behavioral 
training and testing, mice were food restricted and maintained at 85% of their initial weight. 
All procedures were done in accordance with guidelines derived from and approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at Columbia University and the New York 
State Psychiatric Institute.
Bolkan et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surgical Procedures
Mice were first anesthetized with isoflurane and head-fixed in a stereotactic apparatus 
(Kopf). In anatomical tracing experiments, an AAV1 expressing synaptophysin-eGFP under 
the chicken beta actin (CBA) promoter was injected unilaterally into the MD at a volume of 
0.2ul (0.1ul/min). Four mice were used and results were identical across all. Viral production 
was carried out at Columbia University and shared care of the laboratory of Thomas Jessell. 
Dextran-amine coupled fluorophore tracers (fluoro-Ruby and fluoro-Emerald) were obtained 
commercially (ThermoFisher Scientific) and bilaterally injected into the mPFC or OFC at a 
volume of 0.4ul (0.1 ul/min). Four mice were used and results were identical across all. In 
optogenetic inhibition experiments, mice were bilaterally injected in the MD or mPFC with 
an AAV5 expressing either eYFP alone, or an eArch3.0-eYFP fusion construct under the 
hSynapsin promoter at a volume of 0.25 or 0.35ul, respectively (0.1 ul/min). vHPC was 
targeted with four injection sites per hemisphere at a volume of 0.2ul each (0.1 ul/min). In 
SSFO experiments, AAV2-CaMKIIa-hChR2(C128S/D156A)-mCherry was delivered 
bilaterally to the MD at a volume of 0.4ul (0.1ul/min). Opsin-expressing virus was obtained 
commercially from the University of North Carolina Viral Vector Core. Viral and tracer 
coordinates were as follows: MD coordinates (−1.2 AP, −3.2 DV skull, +/− 0.35 ML); mPFC 
coordinates (1.75 AP, −1.8 DV brain, +/−0.4 ML), vHPC coordinates (−3.0 AP, +/−3.25, 
−4.0 and −1.75 DV; −3.0 AP, +/−2.5, −3.0 DV; −3.0 AP, +/−3.4, −3.0 DV).
In optogenetic experiments, in the same procedure mice were also bilaterally implanted with 
flat tipped, ferrule-coupled optical fibers (0.22 NA, 200 um diameter) immediately dorsal to 
the targeted structure (OFC, mPFC, or MD), which were fixed to the skull with dental 
cement. Coordinates were as follows: OFC (+2.65 AP, −2.25 DV skull, +/−1.85 ML), mPFC 
(+1.75 AP, −1.2 DV brain, +/− 0.4 ML), and MD (−1.2 AP, −2.75 DV skull, +/− 0.25 ML). 
Coordinates are in mm relative to bregma (AP, ML) and skull or brain surface (DV) where 
specified.
For in vivo neurophysiology experiments, mice were implanted with a moveable microdrive 
consisting of a 32-channel electronic interface board (NeuroNexus), bilateral ferrule-coupled 
optical fibers (center-to-center distance: 700–800um), and a single stereotrode bundle. 
Stereotrodes for recording spikes were made from 13-uM tungsten fine wire (California Fine 
Wire, Grover Beach, CA) and were coupled to the optical fiber such that stereotrode tips 
were positioned 300–500uM ventral to the fiber tip. The fiber-coupled stereotrode bundle 
was then unilaterally targeted to the left mPFC. An additional 50uM tungsten wire for 
recording LFPs was implanted in the left MD and fixed to the skull with dental cement. For 
LFP signal processing, skull screws placed over the cerebellum and olfactory bulb served as 
ground and reference, respectively, while spikes were referenced to a local mPFC 
stereotrode wire. The microdrive was lowered in 80uM steps between recording sessions 
until reaching a depth of −2mm.
Behavior
Following ~5 weeks of viral expression, mice were gradually food restricted to 85% of their 
body weight. Mice were then given 2 days of habituation to the T-maze, which consisted of 
10–20min of free exploration and foraging for food rewards while tethered to optical fibers 
Bolkan et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and/or the recording tether. On the subsequent 2 days mice underwent behavioral shaping, 
which consisted of 10 runs from the start box to a baited goal arm and back to the start box. 
Runs were forced choice in alternating directions and mice were habituated to laser 
illumination on half of the runs in a random interleaved fashion. Mice then commenced 
training on the DNMS T-maze for 6 consecutive days without laser illumination. Unlike the 
delayed alternation T-maze task, sample arm runs were pseudo-randomly selected on a trial-
by-trial basis. Within this window, all mice reached a criterion level of performance defined 
as 3 consecutive days above 70% correct. During the subsequent testing phase, in all 
experiments laser illumination was delivered in a randomly interleaved fashion and with 
even distribution across trial types and animals. The experimenter was blind to the viral 
condition of mice during behavioral testing. For whole trial light experiments, testing at 10s 
and 60s delays occurred on separate days. For physiology experiments comparing mPFC 
activity at 20s and 60s delays, testing was performed within the same session. For behavior 
only and neurophysiology experiments reward consisted of either dustless pellets (Bio-Serv) 
or sweetened condensed milk (~5ul, 3:1 dilution), respectively. The inter-trial interval for all 
experiments was fixed at 40s. All behavior was conducted during the light cycle.
Optogenetic Parameters
Pathway-specific optogenetic inhibition experiments were carried out using 10 mW, 532 nm 
constant light, delivered via flat tipped 200 um diameter, 0.22 NA fiber optics. In SSFO 
experiments, a 50 ms blue light pulse (473nm, 4mW) was used for opsin activation and a 
50ms yellow light pulse (593nm, 4mW) was used for opsin deactivation. Light output from 
fiber optics was predicted using a Monte Carlo modeling approach as previously 
published26. Absorption and scattering coefficients for 532nm light were interpolated from 
data measured in vivo51. The predicted fluence rate was calculated according to our 10 mW 
output from 200 um, 0.22 NA fibers into a large cubic volume (6mm3) of gray matter. The 
volume with a fluence rate above 7.5 mW/mm2, the approximate EPD50 of eArch3.052, was 
calculated and plotted to scale on MD and mPFC brain slices from a mouse stereotactic 
reference atlas53 to predict the effectively inhibited volume. Based on the model and our 
viral expression pattern and fiber optic targeting, in all mice mPFC projections to medial, 
central and lateral MD, and MD projections to dorsal and ventral mPFC were in part 
effectively inhibited. In our MD-to-mPFC task phase-specific experiments, our viral spread 
typically included expression in the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus (PVT). 
However, viral spread in 5 of 33 mice was confirmed to spare the PVT. Our reported MD-to-
mPFC delay-phase inhibition effect was clearly observable in 4 of the 5 mice (Light OFF: 
75% +/− 2.1; ON Delay: 67% +/− 2.0).
Data Acquisition
Recordings were amplified, band-pass filtered (1–1000 Hz LFPs; 600–6000 Hz spikes) and 
digitized using a Digital Lynx system (Neuralynx). LFPs were collected at 2 kHz, while 
spikes were detected by online thresholding, collected at 32 kHz, and sorted off-line. Single 
units were automatically clustered using Klustakwik (Ken Harris) based on spike sorting of 
the first two principal components, peak voltage and energy from each stereotrode channel. 
Clusters were then accepted, merged or removed based on isolation distance, visual 
Bolkan et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inspection of feature segregation, inter-spike interval distribution, cross-correlation in spike 
timing for simultaneously recorded units, and stability across recording session.
Single-Unit Analysis
In MD-to-mPFC experiments we isolated a total of 891 and 686 single-units in 9 eArch and 
9 eYFP animals, respectively. 538 eArch and 447 eYFP units were considered well-isolated, 
while the remainder of clusters shared modest contamination with multi-unit activity. To 
assess significantly light-modulated units, we considered only well-isolated clusters. We 
found that MD-to-mPFC inhibition significantly decreased (17%, 92 single-units) and 
increased (15%, 83 single-units) firing rates. This is consistent with monosynaptic inhibition 
and polysynaptic disinhibition of cortical projection neurons via fast-spiking interneurons, as 
has been described for prefrontal projecting MD neurons in the mouse54. Results were 
similar when all clusters were included (136/891 decrease, 134/891 increase in eArch; 
52/686 decrease and 56/686 increase in eYFP). Significantly light-modulated mPFC single-
units were determined using bootstrapping. Specifically, light off and light on spike trains 
were randomly shuffled 30,000 times. If the observed light off/on firing rate difference was 
greater than 95% of the firing rate difference from shuffled data, single-units were deemed 
light-responsive. For all analyses of task-modulated single-unit activity, we included all 891 
eArch and 686 eYFP units.
In vHPC-to-MD experiments we isolated a total of 800 single-units in 6 eArch-expressing 
mice. In this cohort of mice we carried out within session testing at 60s delays with 
interleaved light off, light on sample, light on delay trials, followed by light off testing at 20s 
delays. 657/800 units were stable, well-isolated, and retained cluster features across 60s and 
20s testing and were therefore included for analysis in Supplementary Fig. 9. All 800 units 
were used for analysis of task-modulated activity with and without vHPC-to-mPFC 
inhibition.
The preferred arm of single-units was determined from the mean firing rate +/− 500ms 
around goal arrival on all left-visited versus right-visited trials in the sample or choice task 
phases. The observed preference during either sample or choice arm visits was then used for 
delay phase activity. Z-scored firing rates for arm preference were then calculated in 100ms 
(sample and choice phases) or 1s (delay phase) bins based on the mean bin x bin firing rates 
across ITIs and the standard deviation between bins. Average firing rate +/−500ms of sample 
goal arrival on all left versus right trials was used to determine significance of spatial tuning 
across all mPFC neurons (Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test, p<0.05).
Delay-modulated activity was determined from z-scored firing rates calculated in 1s bins 
based on the mean bin x bin firing rate across ITIs and the standard deviation between bins. 
If single-units exhibited a z-scored firing rate beyond +/−2 standard deviations for two 
consecutive bins or more, it was classified as a delay-elevated or delay-suppressed unit, 
respectively. The same criterion was used on shuffled versions of the entire MD-to-mPFC 
and vHPC-to-mPFC data sets. Shuffling was performed in a trial-by-trial manner that 
preserved the temporal structure of spikes. Specifically, each trial spike train was treated as a 
continuous circular vector, and a randomly selected time point in each was designated as 
time zero. This was performed 1000 times for each trial across all neurons.
Bolkan et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The pairwise distance in firing rate across time in delay-elevated neurons was used for 
clustering into six groups using the kmeans function in MATLAB. The percentage of 
variance explained as a function of the number of clusters was used to estimate optimal 
cluster number. Six clusters were sufficient to explain ~50% of the variance and parceling 
the data into greater or fewer than six clusters neither improved visualization of groups nor 
altered the observed effects.
Directionality Analyses
Functional directionality based on mPFC spikes and MD LFP was performed by 
successively calculating the pairwise phase comparison (PPC)55 of mPFC spikes to MD LFP 
when shifting mPFC spikes in 10ms steps +/− 100ms. MD LFP signal was first digitally 
band-pass filtered (13–30 Hz) using a zero-phase-delay filter (filter0, provided by K. Harris 
and G. Buzsaki) and the Hilbert transform of the bandpass-filtered signal was calculated to 
obtain oscillatory phase. The magnitude of phase-nonuniformity of spike times relative to 
the filtered LFP oscillation was then calculated at each temporal offset during each task 
phase (sample, delay, or choice). Only single-units that exhibited Bonferonni-corrected PPC 
values at peak lag (Rayleigh’s circular test, p<0.05/21) were used for analysis. In order to 
avoid spuriously high or low PPC values, only units that fired at least 100 spikes per 
condition were used. We chose to bandpass filter in the beta frequency range given our 
previous results showing task modulation of MD-mPFC beta synchrony9. While we did not 
observe effects of task phase on directionality when filtering at low (40–70Hz) or high (70–
120Hz) gamma bands, filtering at theta frequency (4–12Hz) produced results similar to 
those reported here. Prior to commencing analysis, we excluded 344 single-units due to 
improperly placed LFP electrodes or significant noise contamination in LFP signal during 
recording sessions.
Functional directionality based on MD and mPFC LFPs was performed as previously 
described27. Briefly, MD and mPFC LFP were bandoass-filtered as described above. The 
instantaneous amplitude for all points in the MD and LFP signal was calculated and the 
cross-correlation between amplitudes of the two signals was computed using the MATLAB 
function xcorr. This was done over lags ranging +/−100ms in 1ms shifts. 90 recording 
sessions were included in the analysis.
Statistics
A two-way repeated measures ANOVA was used to assess significant interactions of light 
and virus in all behavioral experiments. Throughout, where significant interactions emerged, 
post-hoc two-tailed t-tests were performed for paired comparisons between light off and 
light on conditions, unless otherwise stated. When data was non-parametric we used 
Wilcoxon’s signed-rank and rank-sum tests for paired and unpaired observations, 
respectively. Sample sizes for all experiments were based on previous work10,18 and were 
reported in all figure legends along with the p values for all statistical comparisons. Where 
appropriate, Bonferroni-corrected p values were used and indicated for multiple 
comparisons. For the comparison of proportions we used the two-sample Kolmogorov-
Smirnov goodness-of-fit test. For linear regression fit of 60s/20s peak firing times we used 
Bolkan et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the MATLAB function fitlm to perform a robust regression using the bisquare weighting 
function.
Histology
At the end of experimentation, mice were transcardially perfused with PBS followed by 4% 
PFA. For neurophysiology experiments, electrolytic lesions were induced at each recording 
site by passing current (50uA, 20s) through electrodes prior to perfusion. Fixed tissue was 
then sectioned (50uM) using a vibratome, and mounted on slides with Vectashield mounting 
medium containing DAPI (Vector Labs). Direct fluorescence of eArch-eYFP or eYFP was 
then examined under an epifluorescent microscope (Zeiss) to assess extent of viral spread 
and axon terminal expression pattern. Locations of recording site lesions were confirmed 
with visualization under DAPI (Supplementary Fig. 10 and Supplementary Fig. 11). Two 
mice were excluded from MD LFP analyses due to failed electrode targeting.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
Code availability
MATLAB code used for analysis of the data that support the findings of this study is 
available from the corresponding author upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank members of the Gordon and Kellendonk labs for technical assistance and discussions. We 
also thank M. Halassa for discussions and commentary on an initial draft of the manuscript. This work was 
supported by grants from the NIMH R01 MH096274 (J.A.G), F31 MH102041 (S.S.B) and F30 MH107204 
(J.M.S.); by the Hope for Depression Research Foundation (J.A.G.); and by the Irma Hirschl Trust (C.K.).
References
1. Fuster, JM. Anatomy, Physiology, and Neuropsychology of the Frontal Lobe. 2. Raven; New York: 
1989. The Prefrontal Cortex. 
2. Minzenberg MJ, Laird AR, Thelen S, Carter CS, Glahn DC. Meta-analysis of 41 functional 
neuroimaging studies of executive function in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009; 66:811–
822. DOI: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.91 [PubMed: 19652121] 
3. Weinberger DR, Berman KF. Prefrontal function in schizophrenia: confounds and controversies. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996; 351:1495–1503. DOI: 10.1098/rstb.1996.0135 
[PubMed: 8941961] 
4. Perlstein WM, Carter CS, Noll DC, Cohen JD. Relation of prefrontal cortex dysfunction to working 
memory and symptoms in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2001; 158:1105–1113. DOI: 10.1176/
appi.ajp.158.7.1105 [PubMed: 11431233] 
5. Mitchell AS. The mediodorsal thalamus as a higher order thalamic relay nucleus important for 
learning and decision-making. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 2015; 54:76–88. [PubMed: 
25757689] 
Bolkan et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6. Saalmann YB. Intralaminar and medial thalamic influence on cortical synchrony, information 
transmission and cognition. Front Syst Neurosci. 2014; 8:83. [PubMed: 24847225] 
7. Baxter MG. Mediodorsal thalamus and cognition in non-human primates. Front Syst Neurosci. 
2013; 7:38. [PubMed: 23964206] 
8. Jones, EG. The Thalamus. 2. Cambridge University Press; New York: 2007. 
9. Parnaudeau S, et al. Mediodorsal thalamus hypofunction impairs flexible goal-directed behavior. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 77:445–453. DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.03.020 [PubMed: 24813335] 
10. Parnaudeau S, et al. Inhibition of mediodorsal thalamus disrupts thalamofrontal connectivity and 
cognition. Neuron. 2013; 77:1151–1162. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.038 [PubMed: 
23522049] 
11. Browning PG, Chakraborty S, Mitchell AS. Evidence for Mediodorsal Thalamus and Prefrontal 
Cortex Interactions during Cognition in Macaques. Cereb Cortex. 2015; 25:4519–4534. DOI: 
10.1093/cercor/bhv093 [PubMed: 25979086] 
12. Bailey KR, Mair RG. Lesions of specific and nonspecific thalamic nuclei affect prefrontal cortex-
dependent aspects of spatial working memory. Behav Neurosci. 2005; 119:410–419. DOI: 
10.1037/0735-7044.119.2.410 [PubMed: 15839787] 
13. Byne W, Hazlett EA, Buchsbaum MS, Kemether E. The thalamus and schizophrenia: current status 
of research. Acta Neuropathol. 2009; 117:347–368. DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0404-0 [PubMed: 
18604544] 
14. Andrews J, Wang L, Csernansky JG, Gado MH, Barch DM. Abnormalities of thalamic activation 
and cognition in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2006; 163:463–469. DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.
163.3.463 [PubMed: 16513868] 
15. Woodward ND, Karbasforoushan H, Heckers S. Thalamocortical dysconnectivity in schizophrenia. 
Am J Psychiatry. 2012; 169:1092–1099. DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12010056 [PubMed: 
23032387] 
16. Anticevic A, et al. Characterizing thalamo-cortical disturbances in schizophrenia and bipolar 
illness. Cereb Cortex. 2014; 24:3116–3130. DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bht165 [PubMed: 23825317] 
17. Anticevic A, et al. Association of Thalamic Dysconnectivity and Conversion to Psychosis in Youth 
and Young Adults at Elevated Clinical Risk. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015; 72:882–891. [PubMed: 
26267151] 
18. Spellman T, et al. Hippocampal-prefrontal input supports spatial encoding in working memory. 
Nature. 2015; 522:309–314. DOI: 10.1038/nature14445 [PubMed: 26053122] 
19. Ray JP, Price JL. The organization of projections from the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus to 
orbital and medial prefrontal cortex in macaque monkeys. J Comp Neurol. 1993; 337:1–31. DOI: 
10.1002/cne.903370102 [PubMed: 7506270] 
20. Groenewegen HJ. Organization of the afferent connections of the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in 
the rat, related to the mediodorsal-prefrontal topography. Neuroscience. 1988; 24:379–431. 
[PubMed: 2452377] 
21. Alcaraz F, Marchand AR, Courtand G, Coutureau E, Wolff M. Parallel inputs from the mediodorsal 
thalamus to the prefrontal cortex in the rat. Eur J Neurosci. 2016; 44:1972–1986. DOI: 10.1111/
ejn.13316 [PubMed: 27319754] 
22. Matyas F, Lee J, Shin H, Acsady L. The fear circuit of the mouse forebrain: connections between 
the mediodorsal thalamus, frontal cortices and basolateral amygdala. European Journal of 
Neuroscience. 2014; 39:1810–1823. [PubMed: 24819022] 
23. Kellendonk C, et al. Transient and selective overexpression of dopamine D2 receptors in the 
striatum causes persistent abnormalities in prefrontal cortex functioning. Neuron. 2006; 49:603–
615. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.01.023 [PubMed: 16476668] 
24. Yoon T, Okada J, Jung MW, Kim JJ. Prefrontal cortex and hippocampus subserve different 
components of working memory in rats. Learn Mem. 2008; 15:97–105. DOI: 10.1101/lm.850808 
[PubMed: 18285468] 
25. Padilla-Coreano N, et al. Direct Ventral Hippocampal-Prefrontal Input Is Required for Anxiety-
Related Neural Activity and Behavior. Neuron. 2016; 89:857–866. [PubMed: 26853301] 
Bolkan et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. Stujenske JM, Spellman T, Gordon JA. Modeling the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Light and Heat 
Propagation for In Vivo Optogenetics. Cell Rep. 2015; 12:525–534. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.
2015.06.036 [PubMed: 26166563] 
27. Adhikari A, Sigurdsson T, Topiwala MA, Gordon JA. Cross-correlation of instantaneous 
amplitudes of field potential oscillations: a straightforward method to estimate the directionality 
and lag between brain areas. J Neurosci Methods. 2010; 191:191–200. [PubMed: 20600317] 
28. Jung MW, Qin Y, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. Firing characteristics of deep layer neurons in 
prefrontal cortex in rats performing spatial working memory tasks. Cereb Cortex. 1998; 8:437–
450. [PubMed: 9722087] 
29. Fujisawa S, Amarasingham A, Harrison MT, Buzsaki G. Behavior-dependent short-term assembly 
dynamics in the medial prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:823–833. DOI: 10.1038/nn.2134 
[PubMed: 18516033] 
30. Harvey CD, Coen P, Tank DW. Choice-specific sequences in parietal cortex during a virtual-
navigation decision task. Nature. 2012; 484:62–68. DOI: 10.1038/nature10918 [PubMed: 
22419153] 
31. Baeg EH, et al. Dynamics of population code for working memory in the prefrontal cortex. 
Neuron. 2003; 40:177–188. [PubMed: 14527442] 
32. Mello GB, Soares S, Paton JJ. A scalable population code for time in the striatum. Curr Biol. 2015; 
25:1113–1122. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.036 [PubMed: 25913405] 
33. Akhlaghpour H, et al. Dissociated sequential activity and stimulus encoding in the dorsomedial 
striatum during spatial working memory. Elife. 2016:5.
34. Yizhar O, et al. Neocortical excitation/inhibition balance in information processing and social 
dysfunction. Nature. 2011; 477:171–178. DOI: 10.1038/nature10360 [PubMed: 21796121] 
35. Goldman-Rakic PS. Cellular basis of working memory. Neuron. 1995; 14:477–485. [PubMed: 
7695894] 
36. Funahashi S. Space representation in the prefrontal cortex. Prog Neurobiol. 2013; 103:131–155. 
[PubMed: 22521602] 
37. Rao SC, Rainer G, Miller EK. Integration of what and where in the primate prefrontal cortex. 
Science. 1997; 276:821–824. DOI: 10.1126/Science.276.5313.821 [PubMed: 9115211] 
38. Fuster JM. Unit activity in prefrontal cortex during delayed-response performance: neuronal 
correlates of transient memory. J Neurophysiol. 1973; 36:61–78. [PubMed: 4196203] 
39. Niki H. Differential activity of prefrontal units during right and left delayed response trials. Brain 
Res. 1974; 70:346–349. [PubMed: 4207718] 
40. Niki H. Prefrontal unit activity during delayed alternation in the monkey. I. Relation to direction of 
response. Brain Res. 1974; 68:185–196. [PubMed: 4363757] 
41. Rich EL, Shapiro M. Rat prefrontal cortical neurons selectively code strategy switches. J Neurosci. 
2009; 29:7208–7219. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6068-08.2009 [PubMed: 19494143] 
42. Durstewitz D, Vittoz NM, Floresco SB, Seamans JK. Abrupt transitions between prefrontal neural 
ensemble states accompany behavioral transitions during rule learning. Neuron. 2010; 66:438–
44866. [PubMed: 20471356] 
43. Wallis JD, Anderson KC, Miller EK. Single neurons in prefrontal cortex encode abstract rules. 
Nature. 2001; 411:953–956. DOI: 10.1038/35082081 [PubMed: 11418860] 
44. Cromer JA, Roy JE, Miller EK. Representation of multiple, independent categories in the primate 
prefrontal cortex. Neuron. 2010; 66:796–807. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.005 [PubMed: 
20547135] 
45. Schmitt LI, et al. Sustaining cortical representations by a content-free thalamic amplifier. (In 
submission). 
46. Narayanan NS, Laubach M. Top-down control of motor cortex ensembles by dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex. Neuron. 2006; 52:921–931. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.021 [PubMed: 
17145511] 
47. Sherman SM, Guillery RW. The role of the thalamus in the flow of information to the cortex. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2002; 357:1695–1708. DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2002.1161 
[PubMed: 12626004] 
Bolkan et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 48. Oh SW, et al. A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature. 2014; 508:207–214. DOI: 
10.1038/nature13186 [PubMed: 24695228] 
49. Hunnicutt BJ, et al. A comprehensive thalamocortical projection map at the mesoscopic level. Nat 
Neurosci. 2014; 17:1276–1285. [PubMed: 25086607] 
50. Bolkan SS, Carvalho Poyraz F, Kellendonk C. Using human brain imaging studies as a guide 
toward animal models of schizophrenia. Neuroscience. 2016; 3:77–98.
51. Johansson JD. Spectroscopic method for determination of the absorption coefficient in brain tissue. 
J Biomed Opt. 2010; 15:057005. [PubMed: 21054121] 
52. Mattis J, et al. Principles for applying optogenetic tools derived from direct comparative analysis of 
microbial opsins. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:159–172.
53. Paxinos, G., Franklin, KBJ. The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Academic Press; 2001. 
54. Delevich K, Tucciarone J, Huang ZJ, Li B. The mediodorsal thalamus drives feedforward 
inhibition in the anterior cingulate cortex via parvalbumin interneurons. J Neurosci. 2015; 
35:5743–5753. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4565-14.2015 [PubMed: 25855185] 
55. Vinck M, van Wingerden M, Womelsdorf T, Fries P, Pennartz CM. The pairwise phase 
consistency: a bias-free measure of rhythmic neuronal synchronization. Neuroimage. 2010; 
51:112–122. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.073 [PubMed: 20114076] 
Bolkan et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Reciprocal MD-mPFC activity is required for spatial working memory
(a) Schema of viral delivery of AAV1-CBA-Synaptophysin-GFP for visualization of MD-to-
PFC synaptic contacts. (b) Top left: Representative expression of synaptophysin-GFP in MD 
cell bodies. Top Middle: Synaptophysin-GFP+ MD terminals in PFC. Bottom/Right: 
Confocal images of synaptophysin-GFP+ MD terminals in medial prefrontal (bottom; 
mPFC) and dorsolateral orbitofrontal cortex (right; OFC). (c) Schema of a single trial of the 
DNMS T-maze. “R” indicates reward locations. (d) Schema of viral delivery of AAV5-hSyn-
eArch3.0-eYFP to MD and illumination of MD-to-mPFC (left) or MD-to-OFC (right) 
terminals within single animals. (e) Percent correct performance in the DNMS T-maze at 10s 
(left) or 60s (right) delays in eYFP (black trace) and eArch-expressing (green trace) mice 
(eYFP n=13; eArch n=12; 10s data: 2-tailed, rmANOVA light x group, p=0.67; 60s data: 2-
tailed, rmANOVA light x group, **p=0.003, F(2,46)=6.73; 2-tailed, paired t-test eArch OFF 
vs. mPFC, *p=0.02, t(11)= −2.74). (f) Left: Schema of viral delivery of eArch-eYFP or 
eYFP to the mPFC and illumination of mPFC-to-MD terminals. Middle: Representative 
viral expression in mPFC cell bodies. Right: mPFC terminals projecting to the MD (outlined 
Bolkan et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in white and parceled by lateral, central and medial subnuclei). (g) As in e but for mice 
receiving mPFC-to-MD terminal illumination (eYFP n=13; eArch n=14; 10s data: 2-tailed, 
rmANOVA light x group, p=0.35; 60s data: 2-tailed, rmANOVA light x group, **p=0.002, 
F(1,25)=12.1; 2-tailed, paired t-test eArch light ON vs. OFF, **p=0.001, t(13)=4.19). Error 
bars depict SEM throughout.
Bolkan et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Discrete task phases depend on distinct MD-mPFC interactions
(a) Schema of terminal illumination restricted to the sample, delay or choice phase of the 
DNMS T-maze. (b) Percent correct performance in mice receiving MD-to-mPFC terminal 
illumination (eYFP, n=11, black; eArch, n=17, green) during the sample phase (rmANOVA 
light x group, p=0.59), the delay phase (2-tailed rmANOVA light x group, *p=0.016, 
F(1,26)=6.7; 2-tailed, paired t-test eArch light OFF vs. ON Delay, ***p=0.0003, t(16)=4.57) 
or choice phase (2-tailed rmANOVA light x group, p=0.51). (c) DNMS T-maze performance 
for mice receiving mPFC-to-MD terminal illumination (eYFP, n=13, black; eArch, n=14, 
green) during the sample phase (2-tailed rmANOVA light x group, p=0.94), delay phase (2-
tailed rmANOVA light x group, #p=0.073, F(1,25)=3.51) or choice phase (rmANOVA light 
x group, *p=0.02, F(1,25)=6.62; 2-tailed, paired t-test eArch light OFF vs. ON Choice, 
**p=0.002, t(13)=3.85). Error bars depict SEM throughout.
Bolkan et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. MD-mPFC functional directionality dynamically shifts across task phases
(a) Schema of simultaneous recording of MD LFP and mPFC single-units. (b) 
Representative mPFC single-unit phase-locked to MD LFP filtered in the beta frequency 
range (13–30Hz). Left: Red line depicts filtered beta oscillation overlaid on raw MD LFP 
(black line). Vertical black lines below indicate simultaneous mPFC spike times with grey 
shading displaying the trough of the simultaneously recorded MD beta oscillation. Right: 
Polar plot of the distribution of mPFC spikes relative to a single cycle of the MD beta 
oscillation for the same unit. (ci) Normalized phase-locking values (pairwise phase 
comparison (PPC)) for each mPFC neuron during the sample phase of the DNMS T-maze 
after shifting mPFC spikes in 10ms steps +/−100ms. Only mPFC units with peak PPC values 
meeting Bonferonni-corrected p values are included (Rayleigh’s circular test, p<0.05/21) 
(165/547). (cii) Histogram displaying the lag at which the peak PPC value for each neuron in 
Bolkan et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (cii) occurred. Black triangle indicates mean lag value across the population (mean=3.5ms; 
2-tailed Signrank, ns: p=0.38; z(164)=0.88). (di–ii) as in ci–ii but for significantly phase-
locked units in the delay phase (246/547; mean=−14.8; 2-tailed Signrank, ***p=0.000005; 
z(245)= −4.58). (ei–ii) as in ci–ii but for significantly phase-locked units in the choice phase 
(153/547; mean=13.3; 2-tailed Signrank, ***p=0.0002; z(152)=3.68). (f) Cumulative 
distribution of significantly phase-locked units during the sample phase across lag times. 
Solid green curve indicates light off trials and dotted green curve indicates light on sample 
trials (2-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov; ns, p=0.98; k=0.049). Horizontal black line indicates 
50% proportion, while vertical black line indicates lag time of 0. (g) As in f but for 
significantly phase-locked units during the delay phase on light off trials (solid red curve) 
and light on delay trials (dotted red curve) (2-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov; *p=0.01; 
k=0.14). (h) As in f but for significantly phase-locked units during the choice phase on light 
off trials (solid blue curve) and light on delay trials (dotted blue curve) (2-sample 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov; ns, p=0.28; k=0.11).
Bolkan et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. mPFC spatial-tuning is absent during the delay phase and independent of MD input
(a) Schema of behavior timestamps for spike alignment on a single DNMS T-maze trial. (b) 
Example mPFC single-unit spatially-tuned to left arm runs. Top: Peri-event normalized 
spike rates on left arm (red trace) or right arm (black trace) trials (top; 100ms bins for 
sample and choice, 1s bins for delay). Bottom: Raster plots of raw spike times on left and 
right trials. Colored lines in raster plots display trial x trial event timestamps indicated in a 
above. (c) Normalized firing rate on light off preferred arm trials (red trace) or light off 
unprefered arm trials (black trace) averaged across all eArch single-units (891 units from 9 
eArch mice). Arm preference was determined from firing rate differences on sample arm 
runs (ci–iii) or choice arm runs (cii–iii, insets). (d) As in c, but for trials in which MD-to-
Bolkan et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mPFC terminals were inhibited during the sample (di) or delay (dii) phases. In all 
normalized firing rate plots, red asterisks indicate bins with 2-tailed Wilcoxon sign-rank 
(population comparison) or 2-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum (single-unit comparison) 
significance at Bonferroni-corrected p values (p<0.0005 sample and choice; p<0.00083 
delay). Error bars depict SEM throughout.
Bolkan et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Delay-elevated mPFC neurons exhibit temporally sparse and sequential activity that 
tiles the delay phase
(a) Normalized firing rates during the delay phase of the DNMS T-maze in a subpopulation 
of mPFC single-units that exhibit significant elevations in delay period activity (266/891 
units from a cohort of 9 mice expressing eArch in the MD). Normalized firing rates were 
averaged across all light off trials. Single-units were then sorted by time of peak firing rate. 
(bi) Mean z-scored firing rate of delay-elevated units identified in a after clustering into six 
groups based on temporal correlation in firing rates. Inset: Proportion of all mPFC neurons 
in the data set that exhibited significant delay-elevated activity (red slice, 30%). (bii) Time-
triggered histogram and trial-by-trial raster plot of an example delay-elevated mPFC unit. 
Histograms and rasters of raw spikes from real data (top) and shuffled versions of the data 
(bottom) are shown. (biii) Delay-elevated neurons identified as in a and clustered as in bi but 
from a trial-by-trial shuffled version of the entire data set. Inset: Proportion of all mPFC 
neurons in the shuffled data set that exhibit significant delay-elevated activity according to 
criterion used in a (88/891, 10%). (c,d) As in a and bi but for mPFC units obtained from an 
independent cohort of 6 mice expressing eArch in the vHPC. (di) Inset: 290/800 units (36%) 
exhibit delay-elevated activity according to criterion in a. (diii) Inset: 47/800 units exhibit 
delay-elevated activity following trial-by-trial shuffling of the entire data set as in bii. 
Example single units are colored according to their clustered group in bi and di, respectively.
Bolkan et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Delay-elevated mPFC activity is diminished on incorrect trials and selectively depends 
on MD inputs
(ai) Normalized firing rates of delay-elevated mPFC neurons during light off trials, and 
parsed by correct or incorrect behavioral performance (266/8919 units from mice expressing 
eArch in the MD). (aii) Mean normalized firing rate of delay-elevated units after clustering 
into six groups based on temporal correlations in firing rates. (aiii) Time-triggered 
histograms and trial-by-trial raster plots from representative delay-elevated units exhibiting 
early (left) or late (right) delay peaks. Only spikes from light off trials are included, and are 
plotted separately for correct (green) or incorrect (red) trials. (bi–iii) as in ai–iii but for trials 
in which MD-to-mPFC inputs were inhibited during the delay phase. The same single-units 
shown in the light off condition in aiii are shown in the MD-to-mPFC light on delay 
condition in biii. (ci–iii) As in ai–iii but for delay-elevated mPFC units obtained from 6 mice 
expressing eArch in the vHPC (290/800). Only trials in which vHPC-to-mPFC inputs were 
inhibited during the delay are included. (di) Ratio of correct/incorrect normalized firing at 
time of peak firing on all light off trials, averaged across units grouped by early (91), middle 
Bolkan et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (83) or late (92) peak times. Groupings reflect the first two, middle two or last two clusters 
in aii. Overlaid circles display all individual single-units. Significance was determined using 
a 2-tailed t-test against a distribution with mean of 1 (***p<0.001, t(90)= −5.65; 
**p=0.0015, t(82)= −3.29; #p=0.07, t(91)= −1.82). (dii) As in (di) but for MD-to-mPFC 
light on delay trials only (**p=0.003, t(90)= −3.07; not significant (ns)). (diii) As in di but 
for vHPC-to-mPFC light on delay trials only (***p<0.001, t(102)= −6.24; *p=0.018, 
t(64)=2.42; ***p=0.0001, t(121)= −3.97). Error bars depict SEM throughout.
Bolkan et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. MD activity sustains mPFC delay activity in an input and task phase specific manner
(a) Normalized firing rates in delay-elevated (266/891) (aii) and spatially-tuned (250/891) 
(aiii) mPFC neurons obtained from 9 mice expressing eArch in the MD and receiving task-
phase specific MD-to-mPFC inhibition during either the sample or delay phases of the 
DNMS T-maze. Only correct trials are included, which are parsed by light off (black trace) 
or light on (green trace) conditions. Red asterisks denote bins with Wilcoxon sign-rank 
significance (p<0.0005 sample and choice; p<0.00083 delay). (b) As in a but for mPFC 
neurons obtained from 6 mice expressing eArch in the vHPC (800 units) and receiving task-
phase specific vHPC-to-mPFC inhibition. Delay-elevated: 290/800. Spatially-tuned: 
250/800. (ci) Schema of stabilized step function opsin (SSFO, hChr2(C128S/D156A) 
activation and deactivation of MD activity. (cii) Schema of SSFO activation at sample phase 
onset and deactivation at sample phase offset (left). Percent correct performance in the 
DNMS T-maze in 9 SSFO-expressing mice during light off and on sample trials (right). 
Transparent blue lines reveal individual mouse performance, while thick blue line indicates 
group mean performance (2-tailed, paired t-test: p=0.26; t(8)= −1.22). (ciii) As in cii but for 
mice receiving SSFO activation of the MD at delay onset and deactivation at delay offset (2-
Bolkan et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tailed rmANOVA on all trial types, Light effect: p= F(7)=7.75, p<0.01; 2-tailed, paired t-test, 
light off vs. on delay: p=0.014, t(8)= −3.14). Error bars depict SEM throughout.
Bolkan et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
