 Cerebral Cortex, 2018; 1–15
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhy014
Original Article
O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
During Mental Imagery
Michael B. Bone1,2, Marie St-Laurent1, Christa Dang1,
Douglas A. McQuiggan1, Jennifer D. Ryan1,2, and Bradley R. Buchsbaum1,2
1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M6A 2E1, and 2Department of Psychology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A1
Address Correspondence to Michael B. Bone, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A1.
Email: michael.bone@mail.utoronto.ca
Abstract
Half a century ago, Donald Hebb posited that mental imagery is a constructive process that emulates perception.
Specifically, Hebb claimed that visual imagery results from the reactivation of neural activity associated with viewing
images. He also argued that neural reactivation and imagery benefit from the re-enactment of eye movement patterns that
first occurred at viewing (fixation reinstatement). To investigate these claims, we applied multivariate pattern analyses to
functional MRI (fMRI) and eye tracking data collected while healthy human participants repeatedly viewed and visualized
complex images. We observed that the specificity of neural reactivation correlated positively with vivid imagery and with
memory for stimulus image details. Moreover, neural reactivation correlated positively with fixation reinstatement,
meaning that image-specific eye movements accompanied image-specific patterns of brain activity during visualization.
These findings support the conception of mental imagery as a simulation of perception, and provide evidence consistent
with the supportive role of eye movement in neural reactivation.
Key words: eye tracking, fMRI, memory, MVPA, vividness
Introduction
The idea that mental imagery involves the reactivation of neu-
ral activity patterns elicited at perception has now been firmly
established (Ishai et al. 2002; Polyn et al. 2005; Slotnick et al.
2005; Buchsbaum et al. 2012; Johnson and Johnson 2014; Cabeza
et al. 2015; Naselaris et al. 2015). To date, much of the work on
the neural basis of visual imagery has examined the phenome-
non as if mental images were visual snapshots appearing in
their totality to a passive inner observer (but see Chen et al.
2017). However, mental imagery is an active, constructive pro-
cess (Bartlett 1932; Hassabis and Maguire 2009) that is subject
to the very kinds of capacity limitations that constrain percep-
tion and working memory (Hesslow 2012), leading some to pro-
pose that people engage with mental images in much the same
way as they explore the sensory world—using eye movements
to shift the focus of attention to different parts of a mental
image (Hebb 1968; Noton and Stark 1971; Brandt and Stark 1997;
Richardson and Spivey 2000; Laeng and Teodorescu 2002;
Johansson et al. 2006, 2012; Wynn et al. 2016). Currently, how-
ever, there is scant neuroscientific evidence showing that eye
movement patterns are related to the neural representations
that support mental imagery for complex visual scenes.
In a seminal paper, Donald O. Hebb (1968) proposed a theory
of mental imagery comprising 3 core claims: 1) imagery results
from the reactivation of neural activity associated with the
sequential perception of “part-images” (i.e., the spatially orga-
nized elements of a mental image); 2) analogous to the role of
saccades and fixations during perception, eye movements dur-
ing imagery temporally organize the neural reinstatement of
such “part-images”, thereby facilitating imagery by reducing
interference between different image parts; and 3) the vivid-
ness and detail of mental imagery is dependent on the order
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 (first-, second-, third-order, etc.) of neuronal cell assemblies
undergoing reactivation, such that reactivation extending into
lower order visual regions would elicit greater subjective vivid-
ness than reactivation limited to higher-order areas.
Hebb’s first claim that imagery requires the reinstatement of
perceptual neural activity has received considerable empirical
support over the last decade. The advent of multi-voxel pattern
analysis (MVPA; Haxby 2012) has facilitated the assessment of
neural reactivation, which is when stimulus-specific activity
patterns elicited at perception are reactivated during retrieval
(Danker
and
Anderson
2010;
Rissman
and
Wagner
2012).
Researchers have consistently reported substantial similarities
between neural regions activated by visual imagery and visual
perception (Ganis et al. 2004; Polyn et al. 2005; Slotnick et al.
2005), and there is now significant evidence that measures of
neural reinstatement reflect the content (Buchsbaum et al. 2012;
Johnson and Johnson 2014; St-Laurent et al. 2014; Cabeza et al.
2015; Naselaris et al. 2015) and vividness (Cui et al. 2007;
Johnson et al. 2015; St-Laurent et al. 2015; Dijkstra et al. 2017) of
mental imagery.
Hebb’s third claim that vivid mental imagery is the result of
neural reinstatement within early visual areas (e.g., V1) has also
received some neuroscientific support, although evidence is
more limited. While the hierarchical organization of the visual
cortex is well understood (Felleman and Van Essen 1991; Vogels
and Orban 1994; Logothetis and Sheinberg 1996; DiCarlo et al.
2012), the precise manner in which mental imagery is embedded
in this representational structure is still a matter of debate
(Pylyshyn 2002; Kosslyn et al. 2006). Recently, Naselaris et al.
(2015) showed that visualizing an image leads to the activation
of low-level visual features specific to that image within early
visual areas V1 and V2, supporting earlier work (see also Slotnick
et al. 2005; Thirion et al. 2006). Some tentative evidence that
reactivation within early visual areas correlates with the vivid-
ness of mental imagery has also emerged (e.g., Lee et al. 2012;
although the results were grouped together for the striate and
extrastriate cortices, leaving the relation between reinstatement
within V1/V2 and vividness unresolved).
In contrast to Hebb’s other 2 claims, support for his claim that
eye movements facilitate neural reactivation during imagery
remains largely at the behavioral level. Research indicates that
stimulus-specific spatiotemporal fixation patterns elicited during
perception are reinstated during retrieval (Noton and Stark 1971;
Brandt and Stark 1997; Laeng and Teodorescu 2002; Altmann
2004; Laeng et al. 2014), even in complete darkness (Johansson
et al. 2006). Furthermore, this phenomenon of fixation reinstate-
ment appears to facilitate mental imagery (Laeng and Teodorescu
2002; Johansson et al. 2012; Johansson and Johansson 2014; Laeng
et
al.
2014)—although,
some
countervailing
evidence
exists
(Richardson and Spivey 2000; Spivey and Geng 2001; Martarelli
and Mast 2013). If eye movements facilitate mental imagery by
coordinating shifts of attention to the elements of a remembered
visual scene, then it follows that eye movement reinstatement
should be associated with neural reactivation of distributed mem-
ory representations. To date, however, there is little neuroscien-
tific evidence supporting this foundational claim.
The goal of the present study was therefore to examine how
neural reactivation evoked during mental imagery was related
to concurrently measured eye movement patterns. To capture
neural reactivation and eye movement reinstatement, we col-
lected functional MRI (fMRI) and eye tracking data simulta-
neously while 17 healthy participants viewed and visualized
a set of complex colored photographs. In the encoding (perception)
condition, participants were repeatedly shown a set of 14 images
identified by a unique title and were instructed to remember
them in detail. Participants then visualized these images in the
mental imagery condition. Our paradigm was also designed to
examine how recency of stimulus presentation influenced neu-
ral reactivation patterns and fixation reinstatement. Each men-
tal imagery trial began with a sequence of 3 images (from the set
of 14) shown in rapid succession, followed by a cue (title) that
identified an image from the set. Participants visualized the
image that matched the title, and then rated the vividness of
their mental image (Fig. 1A, In-Scan Task). The recency of the
image to be visualized was manipulated in 4 conditions: long-
term memory (LTM), wherein the visualized image was not
among the 3-image sequence; and working memory 1, 2 and 3
(WM1, WM2, WM3), wherein the visualized image was presented
in the first, second or third position in the 3-image sequence. A
post-scan task completed immediately after scanning (Fig. 1A,
Post-Scan Task) served as a behavioral measure of memory acu-
ity. As in the in-scan mental imagery condition, participants
were shown a sequence of 3 images (from the in-scan stimulus
set) in rapid succession, immediately followed by an image from
the set that was either intact or modified (Fig. 1B). Participants
were required to determine whether a subtle change had been
made to the image.
We applied MVPA to the fMRI signal to quantify the specificity
of neural reactivation during mental imagery. We also developed
a multivariate spatial similarity analysis method which we
applied to the eye tracking data to quantify image-specific pat-
terns of fixation reinstatement. Using these techniques, we inves-
tigated 3 hypotheses. First, based on Hebb’s claim that fixation
reinstatement
should
contribute
to
neural
reactivation,
we
hypothesized that the 2 metrics should correlate positively during
both immediate (WM1-3) and delayed (LTM) retrieval, and that
the correlation should be strongest at corresponding mental
imagery time-points (i.e., when comparing fixation reinstatement
at imagery-time x with neural reinstatement at imagery-time x).
Although a correlational approach cannot determine the causal
directionality of the relationship between fixation reinstatement
and neural reactivation, a null finding would count as evidence
against Hebb’s theory. Here, we hypothesized that fixation rein-
statement should facilitate greater memory acuity indirectly
through its effect on neural reactivation. If so, we expected in-
scan vividness ratings and post-scan behavioral memory perfor-
mance—a subjective and an objective marker of memory acuity,
respectively—to correlate with in-scan metrics of neural reactiva-
tion and, to a lesser extent, with fixation reinstatement. Finally,
we examined Hebb’s claim that reactivation within early visual
areas should contribute positively to the vividness of mental
imagery. For this, we correlated perceived vividness with neural
reactivation in pre-defined visual cortical regions that included
the occipital pole and calcarine sulcus.
Our results revealed widespread neural reactivation through-
out the time period allocated for visualization. Of interest, imag-
ery vividness ratings correlated positively with reactivation in
regions that included the occipital lobe, the ventral and dorsal
visual cortex, as well as the calcarine sulcus. Of central impor-
tance to our study, neural reactivation was found to correlate
positively with fixation reinstatement—even after controlling
for neural activity that may have reflected eye movements and
fixation position rather than stimulus representations held in
memory. The correlation between fixation reinstatement and
neural reactivation was strongest when comparing correspond-
ing time-points from mental imagery trials. To our knowledge,
these results provide the first neuroscientific evidence for Hebb’s
claim regarding the role of eye movement in mental imagery, as
2
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 well as support for modern theories of fixation reinstatement,
which posit a critical role for eye movements in the facilitation
of mental imagery (Ferreira et al. 2008; Richardson et al. 2009).
Materials and Methods
Participants
Twenty-three right-handed young adults (6 males and 17
females, 20–30 years old [mean: 24.1], 14–21 years of education
[mean: 16.9]) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no
history of neurological or psychiatric disease were recruited
through the Baycrest subject pool, tested and paid for their par-
ticipation per a protocol approved by the Rotman Research
Institute’s Ethics Board. Subjects were either native or fluent
English speakers and had no contraindications for MRI. Data
from 6 of these participants were excluded from the final
analyses for the following reasons: excessive head motion (2),
poor eye tracking signal (1), misunderstood instructions (1), fell
asleep (2). Thus, 17 participants were included in the final anal-
ysis (5 males and 12 females, 20–28 years old [mean: 23.7]). One
additional participant was removed from analyses of the post-
scan change-detection data due to incorrect labeling of the
post-scan task images, reducing the total participants to 16 in
this limited case (4 males and 12 females, 20–28 years old
[mean: 23.7]).
Stimuli
Nineteen complex colored photographs were gathered from
online sources and resized to 757 by 522 pixels in Adobe
Photoshop. Five images were used for practice, and the remain-
ing 14 were used during the in-scan and post-scan tasks
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Each image was paired with a short
descriptive title in 30-point Courier New font during in-scan
encoding; this title served as a retrieval cue during the in-scan
and post-scan memory tasks. Four different “modified” ver-
sions of each image were also created using Adobe Photoshop
for a post-scan memory test: a minor local element of the
image was either added, removed or transformed in a way that
was realistic and congruent with the image (Fig. 1B).
Figure 1. Task procedures and post-scan image modification. (A) See Materials and Methods for an in-depth description of the tasks. (B) One example of the small
modifications that participants were asked to detect during the post-scan behavioral task. Shown images were either modified (right) or identical to the original image
(left) held in memory. In this case, the twig the monkey is holding has been lengthened. See Supplementary Figure 1 for a depiction of all 14 original stimuli (images)
used in the task.
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 Procedure
In-Scan
Before undergoing MRI, participants were trained on a practice
version of the task incorporating 5 practice images. Inside the
scanner, participants completed 3 encoding runs and 6 mental
imagery runs of functional MRI. To keep participants engaged
with the task, we interspaced the encoding and the imagery
runs (each encoding run was followed by 2 imagery runs). A
high-resolution structural scan was acquired between the sixth
(imagery) and seventh (encoding) functional runs, which pro-
vided a mid-task break. Eye tracking data was acquired during
all functional runs.
Encoding runs were 7 m 18 s long. Each run started with 10 s
of warm up during which instructions were displayed on-
screen. Each trial began with a title shown in the top portion of
the screen (0.5 s; font = Courier New, font size = 30), followed
by the appearance of the matching image in the center of the
screen (4.75 s; the title remained visible above the image).
Images occupied 757 by 522 pixels of a 1024 by 768 pixel screen.
Between trials, a cross-hair appeared in the center of the screen
(font size = 50) for either 1 s, 1.75 s, 2.5 s or 3.25 s. Participants
were instructed to pay attention to each image and to encode
as many details as possible so that they could visualize the
images as precisely as possible during the task. During the sec-
ond and third encoding runs, participants were encouraged to
pick up details they had missed and to integrate them into
their memory representation. Each image was shown 4 times
per run, for a total of 12 encoding trials per image throughout
the experiment. Within each run, the entire set of images was
shown in a randomized order before the set could be shown
again (e.g., each image needed to be shown twice before an
image could be presented for the third time).
Mental imagery runs were 8 m 17 s long, starting with 13 s of
warm up during which instructions appeared on-screen. Each
trial began with three 757 by 522 pixel images shown in succes-
sion in the center of the screen for 1.5 s each. Then, an image
title appeared in the center of the screen for 1 s (font = Courier
New, font size = 30). For most trials, this title matched 1 of the
3 images in the sequence. The first, second and third image
from the sequence were each cued during working memory
conditions 1, 2 and 3, respectively (WM1, WM2 and WM3).
WM1, WM2 and WM3 trials each corresponded to 1/4 of the
total number of trials. In the remaining 1/4 of trials, the title
corresponded to an image from the stimulus set that was not
included in the sequence (the LTM condition). After 1 s, the title
was replaced by an empty rectangular box shown in the center
of the screen (8 s), and whose edges corresponded to the edges
of the stimulus images (757 by 522 pixels). Participants were
instructed to visualize the image that corresponded to the title
as accurately and in as much detail as they could within the
confines of the box. Once the box disappeared, participants
were prompted to rate the vividness of their mental image on a
1–8 scale (2 s) using 2 four-button fiber optic response boxes
(1 in each hand; 1 = left little finger; 8 = right little finger).
Between each trial, a cross-hair (font size = 50) appeared in the
center of the screen for 1.25 s. Participants were instructed to
attribute ratings of 4 or 5 for trials whose vividness felt “aver-
age for them”. There were 28 trials per run (7 trials in each con-
dition: WM1, WM2, WM3 and LTM), and 42 trials per condition
for the entire scan. The same condition was never repeated
more than twice in a row.
Each image was tested 3 times per condition (twice per run
in 2 different conditions). Each image also appeared 27 times as
“filler”, that is, as part of an image sequence when another
image was cued (9 times in each of the 3 sequence positions,
2–3 times for each of the other images). Each image was shown
5–7 times per run, either as a filler or as the image cued from
the sequence. An image was never tested twice on consecutive
trials, and it did not appear in the next trial’s sequence imme-
diately after it was tested.
Post-Scan
A post-scan change-detection task was conducted shortly after
scanning to obtain behavioral measures of memory specificity
as a function of task condition for the same 14 images encoded
and retrieved inside the scanner. For each original image, 4
modified versions were created (Fig. 1B) which were used as dif-
ficult recognition probes to test each individual’s memory acu-
ity for the 14 images. Participants were instructed on the new
task and completed a practice that included the 5 practice
images shown during pre-scan training. The task involved 4
consecutive retrieval blocks separated by short breaks and, if
needed, eye tracking recalibration. For each trial, 3 images (757
by 522 pixels) from the set were presented consecutively in the
center of a 1024 by 768 pixel screen for 1.5 s each. Then, in a
manner analogous to the in-scan mental imagery task, an
image title appeared in the center of the screen (1 s; font =
Courier New, font size = 30) that either matched the first
(WM1), second (WM2) or third (WM3) image from the sequence,
or that corresponded to an image from the set that was not
included in the sequence (LTM; 1/4 of trials were assigned to
each condition). The title was followed immediately by a ver-
sion of the corresponding image that was either intact or modi-
fied. Participants were given 6 s to determine whether the
image was intact or modified using a keyboard button press
(right hand; 1 = intact, 2 = modified). After 6 s, the image was
replaced by a 1 s fixation cross (font size = 50) during which
participants’ response could still be recorded. The images
shown in the 3-image sequence were always intact. Each of the
4 modified versions of an image appeared only once in the
experiment (for a single trial), each in a different condition.
During the inter-trial interval, participants were required to fix-
ate on the inner portion of a small circle in the center of the
screen. The experimenter pressed a button to correct for drifts
in calibration and to trigger the onset of the next trial.
Participants were informed they could move their gaze freely
during the rest of the trial.
There were 28 trials in each of the 4 blocks (7 trials per block
for each condition: WM1, WM2, WM3 and LTM), and 28 trials
per condition for the entire session for a total of 112 trials (half
modified). Half the trials were modified within each block. Each
of the 14 images was tested 8 times in total: twice per condition
(once intact and once modified) and twice per block (always in
2 different conditions). Each image also appeared 18 times as
“filler”, that is, as part of the image sequence when another
image was cued (6 times in each of the 3 sequence positions).
Each image appeared 6 times in a sequence per block, either as
filler or as the image cued from the sequence. An image was
never tested twice on consecutive trials, and it did not appear
in the next trial’s sequence immediately after it was tested.
For each original image, the 4 modified versions (Fig. 1B) were
arbitrarily labeled modified images 1–4. Across participants, we
counterbalanced the conditions in which an image was tested
within each block, the condition to which an image’s modified
version was attributed, and the block in which a modified image’s
version appeared.
4
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 Setup and Data Acquisition
Participants were scanned with a 3.0-T Siemens MAGNETOM
Trio MRI scanner using a 12-channel head coil system. A high-
resolution gradient-echo multi-slice T1-weighted scan coplanar
with the echo-planar imaging scans (EPIs) was first acquired for
localization. Functional images were acquired using a 2-shot
gradient-echo T2*-weighted EPI sequence sensitive to BOLD
contrast (22.5 × 22.5 cm field of view with a 96 × 96 matrix size,
resulting in an in-plane resolution of 2.35 × 2.35 mm for each of
26 3.5-mm axial slices with a 0.5-mm interslice gap; repetition
time = 1.5 s; echo time = 27 ms; flip angle = 62°). A high-
resolution whole-brain magnetization prepared rapid gradient-
echo (MP-RAGE) 3-D T1-weighted scan (160 slices of 1 mm
thickness, 19.2 × 25.6 cm field of view) was also acquired for
anatomical localization.
Both the in-scan and the post-scan task were programmed
with Experiment Builder version 1.10.1025 (SR Research Ltd.,
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). In the scanner, stimuli and but-
ton
press
responses
were
presented
and
recorded
using
EyeLink 1000 (SR Research Ltd., Mississauga, Ontario, Canada).
Visual stimuli were projected onto a screen behind the scanner
made visible to the participant through a mirror mounted on
the
head
coil.
In-scan
monocular
eye
movements
were
recorded with an EyeLink 1000 infrared video-graphic camera
equipped with a telephoto lens (sampling rate 1000 Hz) set up
inside the scanner bore behind the participant’s head. The
camera picked up the pupil and corneal reflection from the
right eye viewed from the flat surface mirror attached inside
the radio frequency coil. Nine-point eye movement calibration
was performed immediately before the first functional run. If
needed,
manual
drift
correction
was
performed
mid-scan
immediately prior to the onset of the next trial, and calibration
was re-done in-between subsequent runs.
Post-scan stimuli were presented on a 19-in. Dell M991 mon-
itor (resolution 1024 × 768) from a 24-inch distance. Monocular
eye movements (the most accurate eye was selected during cal-
ibration) were recorded with a head-mounted Eyelink II eye
tracker (sample rate 500 Hz) set to detect the pupil only. Eye
movement calibration was performed at the beginning of the
experiment, and drift correction (>5°), if needed, was performed
immediately prior to the onset of each trial.
In-scan and post-scan eye tracking and behavioral data (viv-
idness ratings, accuracy, and response time) were analyzed
with Dataviewer version 1.11.1 (SR Research Ltd.). Saccades
were determined using the built-in EyeLink saccade-detector
heuristic. Acceleration (9500°/s/s) and velocity (30°/s) thresholds
were set to detect saccades greater than 0.5° of visual angle.
Blinks were defined as periods in which the saccade-detector
signal was missing for 3 or more samples in a sequence.
Fixations were defined as the samples remaining after the cate-
gorization of saccades and blinks.
fMRI and Neural Reactivation Measures
All statistical analyses were first conducted on realigned func-
tional images in native EPI space. Functional images were con-
verted into NIFTI-1 format, motion-corrected and realigned to
the average image of the first run with AFNI’s (Cox 1996) 3dvol-
reg program, and smoothed with a 4-mm FWHM Gaussian ker-
nel. The maximum displacement for each EPI image relative to
the reference image was recorded.
For each subject, shrinkage discriminant analysis (SDA,
Ahdesmäki et al. 2014; http://strimmerlab.org/software/sda) was
used to train a pattern classifier to discriminate between the set
of 14 images using fMRI data from the encoding runs. The full-
brain, “all” ROI, pattern classifier was trained in 2 steps. First, a
multivariate searchlight analysis using an 8 mm radius and
using leave-one-run-out cross-validation was used to detect
regions with above chance performance in classifying the label
associated with the 14 images. The searchlight classification
accuracy maps were then thresholded at Z > 1.65 (binomial dis-
tribution with chance accuracy = 1/14) to create separate feature
masks for each subject (Fig. 4A). A second SDA classifier was
then trained on the encoding runs using all voxels falling inside
the subject’s feature mask, producing a final full-brain classifier
that could be used to evaluate image-specific reactivation dur-
ing the mental imagery task.
For the ROI reinstatement analyses, the subject-specific fea-
ture masks (Fig. 4A) were divided into “dorsal”, “occipital” and
“ventral” regions (Fig. 4B), based upon 2-Streams hypothesis
(Goodale and Milner 1992)—where “occipital” ROIs are not pre-
dominantly associated with one of the streams (see Supplementary
Table 5 for a list of the bilateral FreeSurfer ROIs that comprise
each region). 3 SDA classifiers per subject, 1 for each ROI, were
then trained on the encoding runs using all voxels falling inside
the subject’s feature mask and the ROI’s mask. In a similar
manner, occipital pole and calcarine sulcus ROI analyses were
performed with 2 SDA classifiers per subject, 1 for each ROI, but
they were trained using all voxels within the corresponding
FreeSurfer bilateral ROIs.
The SDA pattern classifiers trained on the set of encoding
trials were then applied to data from the same brain regions
acquired during the mental imagery task. First, the time-series
data for each individual memory trial was divided into 16 inter-
vals of 1.5 s (spanning 0–24 s), where the first interval (0–1.5 s) is
aligned to the start of the trial, which is defined as the onset of
the first image from the 3-image sequence (see Fig. 1A). Next,
the SDA classifiers were applied to each time-point of each
imagery trial, producing a time-course of classifier confidence
for each trial. To control for the cortical activation caused by
the recency condition (i.e., the 3 images shown at the onset of
imagery trials), we produced an “adjusted classifier confidence”
(see Supplementary Fig. 2 for an explanatory diagram). A trial’s
classifier confidence was adjusted by subtracting the average
classifier confidence for trials during which the target trial’s
visualized image was shown in the same serial position (or not
shown at all, as in the “LTM” condition), but was not imagined
(e.g., for a “WM2” trial where the visualized image “Baby
Monkey” is shown in position 2, the average classifier confi-
dence for all “non-WM2” trials where “Baby Monkey” is shown
in position 2 is subtracted). With this metric, a value greater
than 0 indicated neural reinstatement. The adjusted classifier
confidence for each time-point was smoothed by convolving
the data with a Gaussian filter (SD = 2 s), and a single adjusted
classifier confidence score was calculated for each trial by aver-
aging across the 5 time-points corresponding to the visualiza-
tion period (5.5–13 s offset by 6 s, i.e., 11.5–19 s, to account for
hemodynamic delay; the last 0.5 s were cut to avoid overlap
with the vividness judgment).
Fixation Reinstatement Measure
Fixation reinstatement—the similarity between spatial fixation
patterns during encoding and mental imagery—was assessed
by calculating the correlation between fixation density maps
(Pomplun et al. 1996; Wooding 2002). To create fixation density
maps, a 3D Gaussian distribution was centered on each fixation
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 made during the trial. The Gaussian’s “height” was propor-
tional to the fixation’s duration and its width was such that
1 standard deviation was about 1° of visual angle, approximat-
ing the width of the fovea. For each pixel on the screen, the dif-
ferent Gaussians’ values (1 per fixation) at that pixel were
summed, and the resulting map was normalized so that the
sum over all pixel values was 1. To speed up computational
processing time, maps were calculated at 1/32 the resolution of
the original screen.
Multiple studies have shown that the dispersion of fixations
is lower when an image is visualized rather than perceived.
This effect varies significantly between individuals (Brandt and
Stark 1997; Gbadamosi and Zangemeister 2001; Johansson et al.
2006) and is linked to differences in spatial imagery, so that
participants
with
higher
OSIVQ
scores
(Blazhenkova
and
Kozhevnikov 2009) have more spatially constrained fixations
(Johansson et al. 2011). Counter-intuitively, those with superior
spatial imagery may therefore show less similarity between
encoding and imagery fixation density maps. To control for this
contraction of fixations during mental imagery, we aligned
encoding and imagery fixation density maps using the orthogo-
nal Procrustes transformation (Bibby et al. 1979; Wang and
Mahadevan 2008)—a geometric transformation that uses trans-
lation, rotation and scaling to minimize the distance between a
2 sets of paired points.
To calculate fixation similarity, we first generated encoding
fixation maps by combining fixations made within the spatial
boundaries of the image for the entire period when it was on-
screen. Encoding fixations were combined across trials for each
subject-image combination (14 encoding maps per subject).
Imagery fixations were divided into 29 time windows that
spanned the trial’s visualization period (window duration/
width = 1 s, temporal distance between windows/stride = 0.25 s),
Fixations that straddled the border of a window had their dura-
tions limited to the duration spent within the window. Imagery
maps were created by pooling all fixations made within the on-
screen rectangular visualization box, for each subject-image-
time window combination (fixations were pooled across trials;
14 ∗ 29 maps per subject). Trial-specific imagery maps were also
generated for each subject-trial-time window combination (29
maps per trial per subject). For cross-validation, we also generated
imagery maps for each subject-trial-time window combination
that incorporated all fixations made by a subject within a certain
time window during trials with the same target image as a partic-
ular trial (across conditions)—excluding that trial’s fixations.
To correct for each subject’s individual tendency to system-
atically alter fixations during mental imagery, imagery maps
were aligned with encoding maps using the Procrustes trans-
formation. Crucially, alignment parameters were calculated in
a single step using a subject’s encoding and imagery fixation
data from all 14 stimulus images, yielding a transformation
matrix that optimally rotates the set of imagery fixation maps
to match the set of encoding fixation maps. Thus, this method
does not compute a separate transformation for each image,
but rather discovers a single transformation that optimally
aligns the 2 sets of 14 fixation maps. Moreover, to evaluate the
test performance of the Procrustes method, a leave-one-out
cross-validation approach was used in which the transform
was calculated on all trials except for the “left out” test trial.
Specifically, a separate Procrustes transformation matrix was
calculated for each subject-trial-time window combination by
jointly aligning two 14 by 768 matrices—1 for encoding and 1
for imagery. Matrix rows represented the 14 stimulus images,
and columns represented pixel-specific elements from the
vectorized fixation maps. Rows from a subject’s encoding
matrix corresponded to vectorized encoding fixation maps
(1 map per image, with fixations combined over trials). A differ-
ent imagery matrix was created for each subject-trial-time win-
dow
combination:
elements from
the
target
image’s
row
corresponded
to
the
“cross-validation”
fixation
map
that
excluded that trial’s fixations but included fixations from other
trials with the same target image made within the target time
window. Other rows corresponded to the other images’ vector-
ized imagery fixation maps (combined across trials) for the tar-
get time window.
For each subject-trial-time window combination, alignment
resulted in a transformation matrix that was used to transform
the fixation map specific to that mental imagery trial and time
window. The transformed imagery fixation map was then corre-
lated with each of the subject’s 14 encoding fixation maps (1 for
each image). To match the temporal profile of our neural reacti-
vation measure, correlations for each of the 29 time windows
were reduced to 5 values by convolving them with 5 Gaussians
(means = 0.8, 2.4, 4.0, 5.6, 7.2 s; SD = 2 s); a single non-temporal
correlation value was also calculated as the mean of the 5 tem-
poral values. For both the 5 temporal correlations and the non-
temporal correlation, the final fixation reinstatement value was
calculated as the difference (subtraction) between the correla-
tion with the encoding fixation map corresponding to that trial’s
target image, and the average correlation with the other fixation
maps for the non-target images. For this measure, a value
greater than zero indicates fixation reinstatement.
Bootstrap and Randomization Statistics
All bootstrap statistics were calculated with 10 000 samples. For
the calculation of correlation statistics using a linear mixed-
effects (LME) model, bootstrap analyses were calculated with
the BootMer function (Bates et al. 2015). For the calculation of
mean statistics using a LME model, an array was created with
each dimension representing a random effect—in this case,
participants (17 rows) and images (14 columns). Each element
of the array is the mean value for the element’s combination of
random effects (e.g., row 3, column 5 contains the mean value
for participant 3, image 5). To generate a bootstrap distribution
of the mean, 10 000 new matrices were generated by randomly
sampling the rows and columns of the original matrix with
replacement, and then the 10 000 means of the matrices’ ele-
ments were calculated. For the paired-samples variant of the
preceding procedure, each element of the array was a differ-
ence of means (i.e., the difference between the means gener-
ated by 2 different fixation similarity algorithms).
To address the possibility that the observed correlation
between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation was the
result of fMRI signals directly caused by eye movements, as
opposed to imagery-related neural activity patterns, we performed
a randomization test. If the null hypothesis is true, then similarity
between patterns of eye movements made at encoding and during
mental imagery would result in greater correspondence between
patterns of brain activity irrespective of the image being brought
to mind. If so, then the similarity of imagery fixation patterns
made while visualizing image x to encoding fixation patterns
made while perceiving image y should predict neural reactivation
of image y to the same degree that fixation reinstatement of image
x predicts neural reactivation of the corresponding image x. We
generated a null distribution by randomly reassigning the labels of
the target images visualized during imagery trials, and then re-
calculating the correlation between fixation reinstatement and
6
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 neural reactivation. Specifically, each visualized image was ran-
domly reassigned to another image from the set with 2 con-
straints: an image was never assigned to itself, and an image was
never assigned to more than 1 image (i.e., all trials during which
“Baby Monkey” was the visualized image were assigned the same
new label). After image assignment, all variables that were depen-
dent on the identity of the visualized image were recalculated
(i.e., recency condition, fixation reinstatement, and neural reac-
tivation), and the correlation between fixation reinstatement
and neural reactivation, corrected for range restriction of the fix-
ation reinstatement variable using Thorndike Case 2 (Thorndike
1949), was recorded. This process was repeated 1000 times, pro-
ducing a 1000 sample null distribution, which was then com-
pared to the original correlation between fixation reinstatement
and neural reactivation.
Results
Relation between Fixation Reinstatement and Neural
Reactivation
We first asked whether patterns of eye fixations made during
image encoding are reinstated when the image is visualized at
recall. We tested this hypothesis by computing pairwise similar-
ity measures of fixation patterns captured at encoding and
recall, which is a form of “representational similarity analysis”
(Kriegeskorte et al. 2008) applied to eye movements. Importantly,
participants
tend
to
“contract”
their
patterns
of
fixations
towards the center of the screen during visualization relative to
encoding (Brandt and Stark 1997; Gbadamosi and Zangemeister
2001; Johansson et al. 2011). To account for this tendency, we
developed a method of spatial fixation pattern alignment based
upon the orthogonal Procrustes transform (Bibby et al. 1979;
Wang and Mahadevan 2008). Using this novel measure—which
greatly outperformed a traditional (unaligned) approach, as
measured by recalled image classification accuracy (Fig. 2A)—
fixation reinstatement was observed within all recency condi-
tions, with no significant difference between conditions (see Fig.
2B,C and Supplementary Table 1).
To assess neural reactivation, we trained a multivariate pat-
tern classifier to discriminate each of the 14 images using brain
imaging data from the 3 runs of encoding task. The trained classi-
fier was then applied to the data from the mental imagery task to
yield a time point-by-time point estimate of classifier evidence
over the course of the visualization window (“cross-decoding”;
Kriegeskorte 2011; Lewis-Peacock et al. 2012). We performed this
Figure 2. Fixation reinstatement. N = 238; Data are represented as mean ± 1 SEM; FDR corrected 1-tailed P-value: ∙ < 0.1, * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001. (A) Image classifi-
cation accuracy based on the original (untransformed) and Procrustes transformed fixation maps. Y-axis starts at chance (1/14, or 7.14%). All other fixation reinstate-
ment results are derived from the Procrustes transformed maps. (B and C) Fixation reinstatement for each recency condition (B), and as divided into imagery-period
temporal windows (C). See also Supplementary Table 1. (D) Examples of encoding and mental imagery fixation density distributions (averaged over all trials) for the
subjects with the highest (top row), and lowest (bottom row) average fixation reinstatement.
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 analysis across the whole-brain using feature-selection, which
identified voxels concentrated in the posterior half of the brain
(Fig. 4A). Separate analyses were performed within dorsal, occipi-
tal, and ventral cortical regions of interest (ROIs) (Fig. 4B and
Supplementary Table 5) to separate reactivation in early visual
cortex and ventral visual cortex from regions associated with spa-
tial overt attention/eye movements (e.g., intraparietal sulcus)
while minimizing multiple comparisons. Neural reactivation was
found within the whole-brain and all ROIs for all recency condi-
tions (see Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 2).
Having observed that fixation reinstatement and neural
reactivation were both present during our mental imagery task,
we then examined the relationship between the 2 phenomena.
To calculate the correlation between neural reactivation and
fixation reinstatement, it was necessary to model several fixed
and random factors—including participant, recency condition
(LTM, WM1, etc.), recalled image, and recall number (the num-
ber of times the current trial’s target image had been previously
recalled)—so we used a LME model. In an analysis of the data
from all imagery trials, we modeled neural reactivation (trial-spe-
cific adjusted classifier performance) as a dependent variable
(DV), fixation reinstatement (trial-specific fixation reinstatement
score) and recall number as scalar independent variables (IV),
recency condition as a categorical IV, and participant and image
as crossed random effects (random-intercept only, due to model
complexity limitations). Statistical assessments were performed
using bootstrap analyses.
Figure 4C and D illustrates the correlation between fixation
reinstatement and neural reactivation. After correcting for mul-
tiple comparisons (FDR with 1-tailed alpha set to 0.05), fixation
reinstatement correlated positively with reactivation within
the feature-selected full-brain when trials from all recency con-
ditions were included (the “all” measure). Correlations specific
to recency conditions or limited to signal from specific ROIs
were also significant (FDR corrected). We addressed the possi-
bility that the observed correlations were driven by fMRI signals
caused by similar eye movements made at encoding and imag-
ery, rather than imagery-related neural patterns per se. If true,
the similarity between patterns of eye motion made at encod-
ing and during imagery would result in greater correspondence
between patterns of brain activity irrespective of the image
being brought to mind (i.e., through random/accidental correla-
tions between eye movement patterns unrelated to image con-
tent). We tested this hypothesis by performing a randomization
test for which we generated a null distribution of 1000 random-
ized “all” correlations (see Materials and Methods: Bootstrap
and Randomization Statistics). For each randomized sample,
we randomly reassigned the labels of the visualized images
(e.g., all imagery trials for which “Stairs to Nowhere” was the
target image were relabeled as “Chocolate Cake”), and recalcu-
lated fixation reinstatement, neural reactivation and their cor-
relation. We found the true “all” correlation to be significantly
greater than this null distribution (P = 0.009), while the null dis-
tribution was not significantly greater than zero (mean = 0.020,
SE = 0.023, P = 0.19), providing strong evidence that the rela-
tionship between neural activity and fixations is explained by
imagery, and not merely by eye movement induced patterns
unrelated to mental imagery.
Figure 4E and F shows the correlation between fixation
reinstatement and neural reactivation across the 8-s visuali-
zation period. For the feature-selected full-brain correlation
including all recency conditions, labeled “all”, the correlation
peaked approximately in the middle of the visualization period
with all windows significantly greater than zero. A qualitative
examination of Figure 4E suggests that the time of peak correla-
tion may differ between conditions, but an ANOVA analysis (see
Supplementary Statistics) found no significant effect (F3,64 = 1.78,
P = 0.16). Correlations specific to ROIs and recency conditions dis-
played no consistent temporal pattern, although all groups had
at least 1 significant temporal window—except for “WM2” (FDR
corrected). No significant effects were uncovered by a 3-way (ROI
by recency condition by time) repeated-measures ANOVA per-
formed on the ROI-specific (dorsal, occipital, ventral) correlation
data (all P-values > 0.30).
Figure 4G shows the relationship between fixation reinstate-
ment and full-brain neural reactivation over time for all condi-
tions. If eye movements during imagery temporally organize the
neural reinstatement of part-images, we hypothesized that the
correlation between fixation reinstatement and neural reactiva-
tion would be strongest when both measures overlapped in time,
that is, neural reactivation at time x should correlate most
strongly with fixation reinstatement at time x. Qualitatively, the
diagonal trend from top-left to bottom-right in Figure 4G supports
this hypothesis. To test this observation, we first calculated sepa-
rate correlations between fixation reinstatement and neural reac-
tivation for each time-point and participant combination. Each
correlation was calculated using the LME approach described
above, with the exception that participant was not included as a
random effect. We then performed an LME analysis with the cor-
relations between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation
as the DV, fixation reinstatement time and neural reactivation
time (1–5 scalar valued) as IVs, the absolute difference between
fixation reinstatement time and neural reactivation time as an IV,
and participant as a random effect. Statistical assessments were
performed using bootstrap analyses. We found that the absolute
difference between fixation reinstatement time and neural reacti-
vation time correlated negatively with the correlation between
fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation (r = −0.083, P =
0.035). In other words, fixation reinstatement and neural reactiva-
tion measures were more consistent with each other when taken
from time bins that were closer in time, indicating a temporal
relationship between the 2 measures. To address the possibility
that the temporal effect was an artifact of the WM conditions, an
analysis limited to the LTM condition was performed and found to
be significant (r = −0.069, P = 0.045). We also explored whether the
temporal profile in Figure 4G differed between recency conditions.
Using a paired-samples bootstrap approach (see Supplementary
Statistics), there was no significant difference between condi-
tions for any time-point after correction for multiple compari-
sons across time-points using FDR (all P-values ≥ 0.20). Overall,
the results are consistent with Hebb’s claim that eye move-
ments facilitate the neural reinstatement of part-images during
mental imagery.
Post-Scan Memory Task Performance and In-Scan
Vividness Ratings
The final analyses investigated post-scan memory task perfor-
mance, vividness ratings and their relation to neural reactiva-
tion and fixation reinstatement. Our goal was 2-fold: 1) assess
whether trials that received high vividness ratings (a subjective
measure of imagery) also ranked highly on fixation reinstate-
ment and neural reactivation measures, and 2) determine
whether individuals with more detailed memories (those who
performed better on the post-scan behavioral memory test)
had more specific memory representations (as revealed by in-
scan neural reactivation) and relied more heavily on eye move-
ment recapitulation during imagery.
8
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 The post-scan memory task was designed to be difficult, but
participants performed above chance, with each individual provid-
ing more correct than incorrect answers (% correct: mean = 64.8,
P (less than or equal to chance at 50%) <0.0001; statistics calcu-
lated with bootstrap analyses). To determine whether indivi-
duals with good post-scan memory performance (% correct) also
Figure 3. Neural reinstatement. N = 238; Data are represented as mean ± 1 SEM; FDR corrected 1-tailed P-value: ∙ < 0.1, * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001. (A) Adjusted classi-
fier confidence—a measure of neural reinstatement—for each recency condition over time. The visualization period, offset by 6 s to account for hemodynamic
response delay, is indicated by the gray dashed box. (B) Visualization period neural reinstatement for each recency condition. The “all” category, which was included
in multiple graphs as a point of reference, refers to the full-brain measure that included all 4 levels of recency. (C) Visualization period neural reinstatement for each
ROI. As in B, the “all” category refers to the full-brain measure that included all 4 recency conditions. (D) Neural reinstatement for each recency condition divided into
visualization period temporal windows. For D and E, neural reinstatement is offset by 6 s to account for hemodynamic delay. (E) Neural reinstatement for each ROI
divided into visualization period temporal windows. See also Supplementary Table 2.
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 obtained high fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation
scores, during the in-scan task, we first computed average fixa-
tion reinstatement and neural reactivation scores for each partic-
ipant, and then correlated these values with the participants’
memory performance. We covaried out head motion using the
maximum displacement (mm) for each subject within the scan-
ner using standard multiple regression. Bootstrap analyses were
used to calculate the statistics. Post-scan memory performance
correlated strongly with neural reactivation (r = 0.624, P = 0.0003,
1-tailed), but did not correlate with fixation reinstatement (r =
−0.015, P = 0.51, 1-tailed).
Given previous findings of a positive correlation between
vividness ratings and neural reinstatement (Lee et al. 2012;
St-Laurent et al. 2015), we set out to replicate these results, and
Figure 4. Surface maps of ROIs and the correlation between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation. (A) Percentage of subject-specific feature masks that con-
tain each voxel. Thresholded at 10%. (B) Two-stream ROI masks. See Supplementary Table 5 for a list of the FreeSurfer ROIs that compose each region. (C–F) Data are
represented as correlation coefficient ± 1 SE; FDR corrected 1-tailed P-value: ∙ < 0.1, * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001. “all”, “dorsal”, “occipital”, “ventral” N = 2720; “LTM”
N = 681; “WM1” N = 679; “WM2” N = 683; “WM3” N = 677. (C) The correlation between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation for each recency condition. The
“all” category, which was included in multiple graphs as a point of reference, refers to the full-brain measure that included all recency conditions. (D) The correlation
between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation for each ROI. (E) The correlation between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation for each recency con-
dition divided into imagery-period temporal windows. For E–G, neural reactivation is offset by 6 s to account for hemodynamic delay. (F) The correlation between fixa-
tion reinstatement and neural reactivation for each ROI divided into imagery-period temporal windows. (G) The correlation between fixation reinstatement and
neural reactivation divided into imagery-period temporal windows, wherein the columns are neural reactivation windows and the rows are fixation reinstatement
windows. See also Supplementary Table 3.
10
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 also to assess whether fixation reinstatement correlated with
vividness in the same manner. The within-subject correlations
were calculated with a LME model on data from all mental
imagery trials, wherein either neural reactivation or fixation
reinstatement was the dependent variable (DV), vividness rating
and recall number were entered as scalar independent variables
(IV), recency condition was a categorical IV, and participant and
image were crossed random effects (random-intercept only, due
to model complexity limitations). Statistical assessments were
performed using bootstrap analyses. Consistent with previous
findings, vividness ratings (1–8 scale wherein 1 is very-low and 8
is very-high; mean = 5.57, SD = 1.42) correlated positively with
full-brain measures of neural reinstatement (Fig. 5A), indicating
that image-specific patterns of neural reactivation—an index of
memory representation—were more specific during trials per-
ceived as more vivid by the participants. Vividness also corre-
lated with reactivation within the ventral, dorsal and occipital
ROIs (Fig. 5A and C). A 2-way (ROI by time) repeated-measures
ANOVA revealed that the effects of ROI, time and their interac-
tion were not significant (ROI: F1.81,28.90 = 0.86, P = 0.42; time:
F2.23,17.87 = 2.46, P = 0.13; ROI-time interaction: F2.04,32.71 = 2.39,
P = 0.11). Against our hypothesis, no significant positive correla-
tion was observed between vividness and fixation reinstatement
(r = 0.026, P = 0.10, 1-tailed).
We also tested Hebb’s claim (1968) that neural reactivation in
early visual areas elicited more vivid visual mental imagery.
Looking specifically at the signal from early visual ROIs, namely
the occipital pole and calcarine sulcus, we found no significant
correlations between reactivation and vividness after FDR cor-
rection (Fig. 5B and D). A 2-way (ROI by time) repeated-measures
ANOVA revealed that the effects of ROI, time and their interac-
tion were non-significant (ROI: F1,16 = 1.90, P = 0.18; time:
F1.46,23.37 = 1.25, P = 0.29; ROI by time interaction: F1.33,21.33 = 2.00,
P = 0.16). Because neural reinstatement decreased approxi-
mately linearly over imagery time (Fig. 3), an ANOVA—which
does not assume any relation between time-points—may be
underpowered. To address this issue, we ran an LME model that
assumed a linear relation between time-points. In this model,
the correlation between vividness and neural reinstatement,
calculated for each subject-ROI-time combination, was the DV;
ROI, time and their interaction were IVs; and participant was a
random effect. The main effect of ROI and the ROI-time interaction
Figure 5. Correlation between vividness rating and neural reactivation. N = 2720; Data are represented as correlation coefficient ± 1 SE; FDR corrected 1-tailed P-value: ∙ < 0.1,
* < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001. (A) The correlation between vividness rating and neural reactivation for each ROI. The “all” category refers to the full-brain measure which
included all recency conditions. (B) The correlation between vividness rating and neural reactivation for the calcarine sulcus and occipital pole. (C) The correlation between
vividness rating and neural reactivation for each ROI divided into iamgery-period temporal windows. (D) The correlation between vividness rating and neural reactivation for
the calcarine sulcus and occipital pole divided into imagery-period temporal windows. FDR multiple comparison correction was applied sequentially, starting at the first
time-point. See also Supplementary Table 4.
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
11
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 were significant, indicating that the correlation between neural
reinstatement and vividness was significantly stronger within the
calcarine sulcus than the occipital pole—particularly near the
start of the visualization period (ROI: coefficient = 0.183, P =
0.0058; time: coefficient = −0.109, P = 0.09; ROI-time interaction:
coefficient = −0.146, P = 0.024; calculated via bootstrap analyses).
Based upon this finding, we re-analyzed the correlation between
vividness and neural reactivation over time by assessing each
time window sequentially, starting from the beginning of the
visualization period and including all previous time windows in a
multiple comparison analysis using FDR. Using this method, we
found the first (0–1.5 s) visualization time window for the calcar-
ine sulcus to be significant (0–1.5 s: r = 0.041, P = 0.03, 1-tailed),
whereas all other windows for both ROIs were not significant.
To determine whether these results were limited by our
ability to detect neural reactivation in these early visual
regions, we assessed neural reactivation over time within the
occipital pole and calcarine sulcus. We performed random
effects (subjects and items) bootstrap analyses for each mental
imagery time-point—controlling for multiple comparisons by
assessing the time-points sequentially using FDR, as described
above. Only the first visualization time window (0–1.5 s) was
found to be significant for the calcarine sulcus (0–1.5 s: adjusted
classifier confidence (%) = 1.51, P = 0.03, 1-tailed), mirroring the
correlation results.
These results document the spatiotemporal relationship
between neural reactivation and the perceived vividness of
mental images. While we observed significant correlations
between vividness and reactivation across the visual cortex, we
found limited evidence in support of Hebb’s claim (1968) that
reactivation in early visual cortices leads to vivid mental imag-
ery. That being said, our capacity to detect reactivation in early
visual cortices may have been affected by our study design,
which allowed subjects to move their eyes during visualization,
a limitation that we address further in the discussion.
Discussion
Neural Reactivation and Eye Movement Reinstatement
The primary goal of the current study was to test whether eye
movements contribute to the creation of mental images by
examining the relationship between fixation reinstatement—as
measured by a novel Procrustes-transform-based algorithm—
and neural reactivation. Our results provide evidence in favor
of Hebb’s claim (1968) that eye movements help coordinate the
construction of mental images. We observed a significant posi-
tive correlation between a novel measure of fixation reinstate-
ment and neural reactivation. This correlation increased when
fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation metrics were
calculated for time-points that were closer in time, demonstrat-
ing that the 2 phenomena peaked in synchrony, and establish-
ing a link between eye movement and the neural mechanism
of mental imagery.
Previous research has assessed the link between fixation
reinstatement and mental imagery using behavioral measures
of imagery rather than neural reactivation. For example, Laeng
and Teodorescu (2002), and Johansson et al. (2012), found that
the degree of fixation reinstatement predicted behavioral per-
formance on an imagery task. Thus, our findings provide the
first direct neuroimaging evidence consistent with Hebb’s claim
and the currently dominant fixation reinstatement theories
(Brandt and Stark 1997; Spivey and Geng 2001; Ferreira et al.
2008; Richardson et al. 2009).
Our analyses also addressed the relationship between fixa-
tion reinstatement, neural reactivation and behavioral memory
performance. Given the relation we observed between fixation
reinstatement and neural reactivation, as well as previous find-
ings linking memory performance to fixation reinstatement
(Laeng and Teodorescu 2002; Johansson et al. 2012) and to neu-
ral reactivation (Johnson and Johnson 2014; St-Laurent et al.
2014; Cabeza et al. 2015), respectively, we hypothesized that fix-
ation reinstatement and neural reactivation should both be
associated with objective and subjective indices of memory
acuity. Specifically, we hypothesized that in-scan vividness rat-
ings and performance on the post-scan change-detection task
would correlate both with in-scan metrics of neural reactiva-
tion and with fixation reinstatement—with the fixation rein-
statement correlations mediated by neural reactivation. Our
results were partially congruent with these predictions. We
observed that neural reactivation correlated strongly with both
objective and subjective behavioral measures of memory per-
formance (as well as with fixation reinstatement), but that fixa-
tion reinstatement was a poor predictor of either form of
behavior.
Research into the relationship between fixation reinstate-
ment and memory acuity has been mixed (Hale and Simpson
1971; Richardson and Spivey 2000; Spivey and Geng 2001; Laeng
and Teodorescu 2002; Johansson et al. 2012; Laeng et al. 2014).
For example, when fixations were constrained to a region that
either did or did not correspond to the previous location of
objects to be recalled, Johansson and Johansson (2014) found
that memory performance was superior in the “corresponding”
condition, whereas Martarelli and Mast (2013) did not. These
inconsistent results may be due to differences in the features
to be recalled: spatial features (orientation and relative posi-
tion) in Johansson and Johansson (2014), and primarily non-
spatial features (e.g., color) in Martarelli and Mast (2013).
Consistent with this interpretation, de Vito et al. (2014) demon-
strated that incongruent eye movements preferentially disrupt
spatial recollection. Our objective measure of memory perfor-
mance, the post-scan change-detection task, included both
spatial (e.g., size, position) and non-spatial (e.g., color, object
identity)
image
modifications.
Therefore,
we
may
have
observed a larger correlation between in-scan fixation rein-
statement and post-scan change detection if the task only had
spatial modifications. Similarly, subjective vividness ratings
reflected an overall impression of the crispness of the mental
image, rather than its spatial features per se.
In summary, we provided the first evidence that fixation rein-
statement is linked to neural reactivation, thereby providing pre-
liminary evidence in favor of Hebb’s theory of imagery, as well
as current fixation reinstatement theories which also posit that
reciprocal facilitation occurs between fixation reinstatement and
internal memory representations (Ferreira et al. 2008; Richardson
et al. 2009). Nonetheless, we must consider alternative interpre-
tations of our results. It is possible that the observed correlation
between fixation reinstatement and neural reactivation was pre-
dominantly driven by neural signals that reflected eye position,
rather than the reactivation of a mental image. A randomization
test designed to address this possibility provided strong evidence
against this hypothesis. Moreover, positive correlations based on
signal limited to the occipital and ventral ROIs provide further
evidence against this hypothesis, as these ROIs exclude areas
strongly associated with eye movement control, such as the
frontal eye fields and posterior intraparietal sulcus (Blanke and
Seeck 2003; Williams and Smith 2010). A second concern is that
fixation reinstatement and/or its role in mental imagery is
12
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 fundamentally different in the WM conditions relative to the
LTM condition. Contrary to this hypothesis, we found no signifi-
cant differences between recency conditions for fixation rein-
statement (Fig. 2B and C), the correlation between fixation
reinstatement and neural reactivation (Fig. 4C and E), or the tem-
poral relationship between fixation reinstatement and neural
reactivation (Fig. 4G). Although consistent with previous findings
linking fixation reinstatement to visuospatial WM performance
(Olsen et al. 2014; Wynn et al. in press), caution should be taken
when interpreting these results because the WM conditions are
not process-pure: the low capacity of WM (Brady et al. 2016)
would not be sufficient to fully capture the complex naturalistic
images in detail, likely causing participants to supplement their
WM with LTM. The goal of the current study was to assess the
effect of the recency of image presentation on fixation reinstate-
ment and neural reactivation, not to provide a process-pure
comparison between LTM and WM—a promising direction for
future research.
Finally, while our correlational findings reveal a relationship
between eye movement and imagery, they cannot conclusively
determine the causality and directionality of this relationship.
To address this unresolved issue, future research could take
advantage of the high temporal resolution of techniques such
as magnetoencephalography to link distinct patterns of neural
activity to specific portions of seen and imagined complex
images. If reciprocal facilitation occurs between fixation rein-
statement and internal memory representations (Ferreira et al.
2008; Richardson et al. 2009), then neural reactivation should
predict, and be predicted by, eye movements towards the loca-
tion associated with the neural activity pattern.
Imagery Vividness and Reinstatement within Early
Visual Cortical Areas
We also tested Hebb’s claim (1968) that highly vivid mental
imagery requires cortical reactivation within early visual areas,
that is, V1 and V2. As such, we hypothesized that reactivation
within the occipital pole and the calcarine sulcus would corre-
late positively with vividness. Consistent with previous find-
ings (Lee et al. 2012; Johnson et al. 2015; St-Laurent et al. 2015),
we observed correlations between vividness and reactivation
within dorsal, ventral and occipital ROIs that were sustained
throughout the imagery task. Looking specifically at early visual
areas, a significant correlation was observed between vividness
ratings and reinstatement within the calcarine sulcus (the
brain region wherein V1 is concentrated; DeYoe et al. 1996), but
not the occipital pole, in the first 1.5 s of visualization.
The simplest explanation for the null result within the occip-
ital pole is that vivid mental images can be conjured up without
its contribution to neural reactivation. However, other factors
need to be considered. First, St-Laurent et al. (2015) found that
activity levels within the occipital pole correlated strongly and
positively with the perceived vividness of videos mentally
replayed from memory, which suggests that this area contri-
butes to the perceived vividness of mental imagery. Second, we
only observed evidence of neural reactivation during the first
1.5 s of visualization within the calcarine sulcus, and not within
the occipital pole, mirroring our correlation results. This finding
suggests that the observed correlation between reactivation
within early visual regions and vividness was limited by our
ability to detect reactivation within these regions.
Research by Naselaris et al. (2015) provides strong evidence of
reactivation of neural patterns associated with low-level visual
features within the early visual cortex during scene imagery. One
significant methodological difference between this study and
our own is that the authors asked their participants to fixate
centrally throughout their task, thereby eliminating the natural
eye movements that occur during mental imagery—which were
the explicit focus of our study. This significant constraint on the
participants’ fixations would have eliminated the
variance
caused by the image’s neural representation shifting across the
retinotopically organized early visual cortex due to eye move-
ments, but at the cost of being able to study the functional role
of eye movements during imagery (Johansson et al. 2012). Note
that the occipital pole and posterior calcarine sulcus are pre-
dominantly responsible for central vision, which has high spatial
resolution, whereas the anterior calcarine sulcus is predomi-
nantly responsible for peripheral vision, which has relativity low
spatial resolution (DeYoe et al. 1996). Consequently, visual repre-
sentations within the calcarine sulcus should be less sensitive to
eye movements than visual representations within the occipital
pole, which is consistent with our results. We therefore suspect
that free eye movements may have caused our null reactivation
finding within the occipital pole. By extension, our methods
could not adequately quantify the correlation between vividness
and reactivation within the occipital pole and calcarine sulcus,
and limited our capacity to test Hebb’s claim that early visual
cortical reactivation leads to vivid imagery. To preserve ecologi-
cal validity, future research concerning neural reactivation dur-
ing
mental
imagery
should
avoid
artificial
constraints
on
fixations, and instead develop and utilize measures of neural
reactivation that explicitly model the effect of eye movements
on neural activity within the visual cortex.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the results from this study are consistent with the
3 major claims of the Hebbian theory of mental imagery: 1) imag-
ery involves the reinstatement of perceptual neural activity; 2)
reinstatement of fixations during imagery facilitates neural rein-
statement; 3) the vividness of mental imagery is associated with
reactivation within early visual areas (calcarine sulcus). The find-
ings reported here provide a promising avenue to establish how
fixations contribute to the neural processes underlying mental
imagery. Future work should clarify the fine-scale temporal rela-
tionship between eye movement reinstatement and memory
reactivation in a way that can unravel the causal connection
between these interacting neural processes.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at Cerebral Cortex online.
Funding
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (2015-04181 to B.R.B.).
Notes
We thank Morris Moscovitch and Jordana Wynn for their
insightful discussions. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
References
Ahdesmäki M, Zuber V, Gibb S, Strimmer K. 2014. Shrinkage
discriminant analysis and CAT score variable selection. URL:
http://strimmerlab.org/software/sda.
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
13
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 Altmann GT. 2004. Language-mediated eye movements in
the absence of a visual world: the ‘blank screen paradigm’.
Cognition. 93:B79–B87.
Bartlett FC. 1932. Remembering: an experimental and social
study. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University.
Bates D, Maechler M, Bolker B, Walker S. 2015. Fitting linear
mixed-effects models using lme4. J Stat Softw. 67:1–48.
Bibby JM, Kent JT, Mardia KV. 1979. Multivariate analysis.
London: Academic Press.
Blanke O, Seeck M. 2003. Direction of saccadic and smooth eye move-
ments induced by electrical stimulation of the human frontal
eye field: effect of orbital position. Exp Brain Res. 150:174–183.
Blazhenkova O, Kozhevnikov M. 2009. The new object‐spatial‐
verbal cognitive style model: theory and measurement.
Appl Cogn Psychol. 23:638–663.
Brady TF, Störmer VS, Alvarez GA. 2016. Working memory is
not fixed-capacity: more active storage capacity for real-
world objects than for simple stimuli. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 113:7459–7464.
Brandt SA, Stark LW. 1997. Spontaneous eye movements during
visual imagery reflect the content of the visual scene. J Cogn
Neurosci. 9:27–38.
Buchsbaum BR, Lemire-Rodger S, Fang C, Abdi H. 2012. The
neural basis of vivid memory is patterned on perception.
J Cogn Neurosci. 24:1867–1883.
Cabeza R, Ritchey M, Wing EA. 2015. Reinstatement of individ-
ual past events revealed by the similarity of distributed acti-
vation
patterns
during
encoding
and
retrieval.
J
Cogn
Neurosci. 27:679–691.
Chen J, Leong YC, Honey CJ, Yong CH, Norman KA, Hasson U.
2017. Shared memories reveal shared structure in neural
activity across individuals. Nat Neurosci. 20:115–125.
Cox RW. 1996. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of
functional
magnetic
resonance
neuroimages.
Comput
Biomed Res. 29:162–173.
Cui X, Jeter CB, Yang D, Montague PR, Eagleman DM. 2007.
Vividness of mental imagery: individual variability can be
measured objectively. Vision Res. 47:474–478.
Danker JF, Anderson JR. 2010. The ghosts of brain states past:
remembering reactivates the brain regions engaged during
encoding. Psychol Bull. 136:87.
de Vito S, Buonocore A, Bonnefon JF, Della Sala S. 2014. Eye
movements disrupt spatial but not visual mental imagery.
Cogn Process. 15:543–549.
DeYoe EA, Carman GJ, Bandettini P, Glickman S, Wieser JO, Cox R,
Miller D, Neitz J. 1996. Mapping striate and extrastriate visual
areas in human cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 93:
2382–2386.
DiCarlo JJ, Zoccolan D, Rust NC. 2012. How does the brain solve
visual object recognition? Neuron. 73:415–434.
Dijkstra N, Bosch SE, van Gerven MA. 2017. Vividness of visual
imagery depends on the neural overlap with perception in
visual areas. J Neurosci. 37:1367–1373.
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. 1991. Distributed hierarchical pro-
cessing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex. 1:1–47.
Ferreira F, Apel J, Henderson JM. 2008. Taking a new look at
looking at nothing. Trends Cogn Sci. 12:405–410.
Ganis G, Thompson WL, Kosslyn SM. 2004. Brain areas underly-
ing visual mental imagery and visual perception: an fMRI
study. Cogn Brain Res. 20:226–241.
Gbadamosi J, Zangemeister WH. 2001. Visual imagery in hemia-
nopic patients. J Cogn Neurosci. 13:855–866.
Goodale MA, Milner AD. 1992. Separate visual pathways for per-
ception and action. Trends Neurosci. 15:20–25.
Hale SM, Simpson HM. 1971. Effects of eye movements on the
rate of discovery and the vividness of visual images. Attent
Percept Psychophys. 9:242–246.
Hassabis D, Maguire EA. 2009. The construction system of the
brain. Philos Trans R Soc London B Biol Sci. 364:1263–1271.
Haxby JV. 2012. Multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI: the early
beginnings. Neuroimage. 62:852–855.
Hebb DO. 1968. Concerning imagery. Psychol Rev. 75:466.
Hesslow G. 2012. The current status of the simulation theory of
cognition. Brain Res. 1428:71–79.
Ishai A, Haxby JV, Ungerleider LG. 2002. Visual imagery of
famous faces: effects of memory and attention revealed by
fMRI. Neuroimage. 17:1729–1741.
Johansson R, Holsanova J, Dewhurst R, Holmqvist K. 2012. Eye
movements during scene recollection have a functional
role, but they are not reinstatements of those produced dur-
ing encoding. J Exp Psychol. 38:1289.
Johansson R, Holsanova J, Holmqvist K. 2006. Pictures and spo-
ken descriptions elicit similar eye movements during men-
tal imagery, both in light and in complete darkness. Cogn
Sci. 30:1053–1079.
Johansson R, Holsanova J, Holmqvist K. 2011. The dispersion of
eye movements during visual imagery is related to individ-
ual differences in spatial imagery ability. In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
1200–5.
Johansson R, Johansson M. 2014. Look here, eye movements
play a functional role in memory retrieval. Psychol Sci. 25:
236–242.
Johnson MR, Johnson MK. 2014. Decoding individual natural
scene representations during perception and imagery. Front
Syst Neurosci. 8:59.
Johnson MK, Kuhl BA, Mitchell KJ, Ankudowich E, Durbin KA.
2015. Age-related differences in the neural basis of the sub-
jective vividness of memories: evidence from multivoxel
pattern
classification.
Cogn
Affect
Behav
Neurosci.
15:
644–661.
Kosslyn SM, Thompson WL, Ganis G. 2006. The case for mental
imagery. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kriegeskorte N. 2011. Pattern-information analysis: from stimu-
lus decoding to computational-model testing. Neuroimage.
56:411–421.
Kriegeskorte N, Mur M, Bandettini PA. 2008. Representational
similarity analysis-connecting the branches of systems neu-
roscience. Front Syst Neurosci. 2:4.
Laeng B, Bloem IM, D’Ascenzo S, Tommasi L. 2014. Scrutinizing
visual images: the role of gaze in mental imagery and mem-
ory. Cognition. 131:263–283.
Laeng B, Teodorescu DS. 2002. Eye scanpaths during visual
imagery reenact those of perception of the same visual
scene. Cogn Sci. 26:207–231.
Lee SH, Kravitz DJ, Baker CI. 2012. Disentangling visual imagery
and
perception
of
real-world
objects.
Neuroimage.
59:
4064–4073.
Lewis-Peacock JA, Drysdale AT, Oberauer K, Postle BR. 2012.
Neural evidence for a distinction between short-term mem-
ory and the focus of attention. J Cogn Neurosci. 24:61–79.
Logothetis NK, Sheinberg DL. 1996. Visual object recognition.
Annu Rev Neurosci. 19:577–621.
Martarelli CS, Mast FW. 2013. Eye movements during long-term
pictorial recall. Psychol Res. 77:303–309.
Naselaris T, Olman CA, Stansbury DE, Ugurbil K, Gallant JL. 2015. A
voxel-wise encoding model for early visual areas decodes men-
tal images of remembered scenes. Neuroimage. 105:215–228.
14
|
Cerebral Cortex
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
 Noton D, Stark L. 1971. Scanpaths in saccadic eye movements
while viewing and recognizing patterns. Vision Res. 11:929–IN8.
Olsen RK, Chiew M, Buchsbaum BR, Ryan JD. 2014. The relation-
ship between delay period eye movements and visuospatial
memory. J Vis. 14:8–8.
Polyn SM, Natu VS, Cohen JD, Norman KA. 2005. Category-
specific cortical activity precedes retrieval during memory
search. Science. 310:1963–1966.
Pomplun M, Ritter H, Velichkovsky B. 1996. Disambiguating
complex visual information: towards communication of per-
sonal views of a scene. Perception. 25:931–948.
Pylyshyn ZW. 2002. Mental imagery: in search of a theory.
Behav Brain Sci. 25:157–182.
Richardson DC, Altmann GT, Spivey MJ, Hoover MA. 2009. Much
ado about eye movements to nothing: a response to Ferreira
et al.: taking a new look at looking at nothing. Trends Cogn
Sci. 13:235–236.
Richardson DC, Spivey MJ. 2000. Representation, space and
Hollywood Squares: looking at things that aren’t there any-
more. Cognition. 76:269–295.
Rissman J, Wagner AD. 2012. Distributed representations in
memory: insights from functional brain imaging. Annu Rev
Psychol. 63:101–128.
Slotnick SD, Thompson WL, Kosslyn SM. 2005. Visual mental
imagery
induces
retinotopically organized
activation
of
early visual areas. Cereb Cortex. 15:1570–1583.
Spivey MJ, Geng JJ. 2001. Oculomotor mechanisms activated by
imagery and memory: eye movements to absent objects.
Psychol Res. 65:235–241.
St-Laurent M, Abdi H, Bondad A, Buchsbaum BR. 2014. Memory
reactivation in healthy aging: evidence of stimulus-specific
dedifferentiation. J Neurosci. 34:4175–4186.
St-Laurent M, Abdi H, Buchsbaum BR. 2015. Distributed patterns
of reactivation predict vividness of recollection. J Cogn
Neurosci. 27:2000–2018.
Thirion B, Duchesnay E, Hubbard E, Dubois J, Poline JB, Lebihan D,
Dehaene S. 2006. Inverse retinotopy: inferring the visual con-
tent of images from brain activation patterns. Neuroimage. 33:
1104–1116.
Thorndike RL. 1949. Personnel selection: test and measurement
techniques. New York: Wiley.
Vogels R, Orban GA. 1994. Activity of inferior temporal neurons
during orientation discrimination with successively pre-
sented gratings. J Neurophysiol. 71:1428–1451.
Wang C, Mahadevan S. 2008. Manifold alignment using pro-
crustes analysis. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Machine Learning. 1120–1127.
Williams AL, Smith AT. 2010. Representation of eye position in
the human parietal cortex. J Neurophysiol. 104:2169–2177.
Wooding DS. 2002. Eye movements of large populations: II.
Deriving regions of interest, coverage, and similarity using
fixation maps. Behav Res Methods. 34:518–528.
Wynn JS, Bone MB, Dragan MC, Hoffman KL, Buchsbaum BR,
Ryan
JD.
2016.
Selective
scanpath
repetition
during
memory-guided visual search. Vis Cogn. 24:15–37.
Wynn JS, Olsen RK, Binns M, Buchsbaum BR, Ryan JD. in press.
Fixation reinstatement supports visuospatial memory in
older adults. J Exp Psychol.
Eye Movement Reinstatement and Neural Reactivation
Bone et al.
|
15
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cercor/bhy014/4836786
by University of Toledo Libraries user
on 03 February 2018
