 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 29, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 25 
723
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Update of Recommendations for Use of Once-Weekly Isoniazid-Rifapentine 
Regimen to Treat Latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection
Andrey S. Borisov, MD1; Sapna Bamrah Morris, MD1; Gibril J. Njie, MPH1; Carla A. Winston, PhD1; Deron Burton, MD1; Stefan Goldberg, MD1; 
Rachel Yelk Woodruff, MPH1; Leeanna Allen, MPH1; Philip LoBue, MD1; Andrew Vernon, MD1
Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) is critical 
to the control and elimination of tuberculosis disease (TB) in 
the United States. In 2011, CDC recommended a short-course 
combination regimen of once-weekly isoniazid and rifapentine 
for 12 weeks (3HP) by directly observed therapy (DOT) for 
treatment of LTBI, with limitations for use in children aged 
<12 years and persons with human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infection (1). CDC identified the use of 3HP in those 
populations, as well as self-administration of the 3HP regimen, 
as areas to address in updated recommendations. In 2017, a 
CDC Work Group conducted a systematic review and meta-
analyses of the 3HP regimen using methods adapted from the 
Guide to Community Preventive Services. In total, 19 articles 
representing 15 unique studies were included in the meta-
analysis, which determined that 3HP is as safe and effective as 
other recommended LTBI regimens and achieves substantially 
higher treatment completion rates. In July 2017, the Work 
Group presented the meta-analysis findings to a group of TB 
experts, and in December 2017, CDC solicited input from 
the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis 
(ACET) and members of the public for incorporation into 
the final recommendations. CDC continues to recommend 
3HP for treatment of LTBI in adults and now recommends 
use of 3HP 1) in persons with LTBI aged 2–17 years; 2) in 
persons with LTBI who have HIV infection, including acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and are taking antiret-
roviral medications with acceptable drug-drug interactions 
with rifapentine; and 3) by DOT or self-administered therapy 
(SAT) in persons aged ≥2 years.
Systematic Review
A CDC Work Group including epidemiologists, health 
scientists, physicians from CDC’s Tuberculosis Elimination 
program, and a CDC library specialist, was convened to con-
duct the systematic literature review using methods adapted 
from the Guide to Community Preventive Services (2,3). The 
library specialist used a systematic search strategy to identify 
and retrieve intervention studies on the use of 3HP to treat 
LTBI that were published from January 2006 through June 
2017 and indexed in the MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, 
Cochrane Library, Scopus, and Clinicaltrials.gov databases. To 
identify missed studies, reference lists from included articles 
were reviewed, and CDC’s TB experts were consulted. This 
review included English language articles that met the follow-
ing criteria: 1) the study design was randomized controlled 
trial, quasi-experimental, observational cohort, or other design 
with a concurrent comparison group; 2) the target population 
included, but was not restricted to, persons aged ≥12 years, 
children aged 2–11 years, or persons with HIV infection; and 
3) outcomes reported were prevention of TB disease, treatment 
completion, adverse events while on 3HP
, discontinuation as a 
result of adverse events while on 3HP
, or death while on 3HP
.
Two reviewers from the CDC Work Group independently 
screened citations obtained from the search and retrieved full-
text articles in the relevant literature to be synthesized. Using a 
standard data abstraction form, the reviewers abstracted data on 
intervention characteristics, outcomes of interest, demograph-
ics, benefits, harms, considerations for implementation, and 
evidence gaps. Each study was also assessed for threats to inter-
nal and external validity per Guide to Community Preventive 
Services standards (2,3). Any disagreement between reviewers 
was resolved by consensus of the CDC Work Group members.
The CDC Work Group reviewed 292 citations retrieved 
from the librarian’s search. Of these, 30 full-text articles were 
ordered and screened for inclusion. No eligible studies includ-
ing children aged <2 years were identified. In total, 19 articles 
representing 15 unique studies were included in the meta-
analysis. Findings from the meta-analysis indicated that 3HP 
is as safe and effective as other recommended LTBI regimens 
and achieves significantly higher treatment completion rates. 
Complete results of the systematic review and meta-analysis 
have been published elsewhere (4). Overall, the majority of 
included studies were of greatest design suitability and good 
quality of execution, as defined by the Guide to Community 
Preventive Services (2,3). Issues related to poor reporting of 
appropriate analytic methods and possible selection bias were 
the most common limitations assigned to the body of evidence.
Recently published randomized control trials that were heav-
ily weighted in the meta-analyses and drug interaction studies 
(5–9) are summarized as follows:
Study of 3HP in children. A large randomized clinical trial 
of 3HP administered by DOT, which included children aged 
2–17 years, demonstrated that 3HP was as well-tolerated and 
as effective as 9 months of daily isoniazid (9H) for preventing 
TB (5). The trial also reported that 3HP was safe and had 
higher treatment completion rates than 9H (5). Data on the 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
724 
MMWR / June 29, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 25
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
safety and pharmacokinetics of rifapentine in children aged 
<2 years are not available.
Studies of 3HP in persons with HIV infection, including 
AIDS. In 2011, CDC recommended the 3HP regimen for 
treatment of LTBI in persons with HIV infection, including 
AIDS, who are otherwise healthy and who are not taking 
antiretroviral medications (1). Since that time, additional data 
confirm not only the effectiveness of 3HP in persons with HIV 
infection who are not taking antiretroviral therapy, but also 
demonstrate the absence of clinically significant drug interac-
tions between once-weekly rifapentine and either efavirenz or 
raltegravir in persons with HIV infection who are treated with 
those antiretroviral medications (4,6–8).
Study of self-administered therapy. A randomized clinical 
trial demonstrating noninferior treatment completion and 
safety of 3HP-SAT compared with 3HP-DOT in persons aged 
≥18 years in the United States provides the primary evidence 
on 3HP administration by SAT (9). The 3HP-SAT regimen 
has not been studied in randomized controlled trials in persons 
aged <18 years.
Expert Consultation
In July 2017, CDC met with nine non-CDC subject matter 
experts in TB and LTBI diagnosis, treatment, prevention, sur-
veillance, epidemiology, clinical research, pulmonology, pediat-
rics, HIV/AIDS, public health programs, and patient advocacy. 
CDC presented the systematic review results and proposed 
recommendations to the experts, who provided 1) individual 
perspectives on the review; 2) experience with implementation 
of the 3HP regimen in various settings and populations; and 
3) individual viewpoints on the proposed updates. Subject 
matter experts from programs prescribing 3HP described 
benefits of this regimen, including increased acceptance and 
completion of treatment. Some experts reported that several 
health departments are currently using 3HP
, with high treat-
ment completion, in children as young as age 2 years. Some 
noted that the 2011 recommendation to administer 3HP by 
DOT limits use of the regimen. In December 2017, CDC 
solicited input from ACET and members of the public for 
incorporation into the final recommendations.
With regard to pediatric use, the 2011 recommendations 
had included limited use of the 3HP regimen for treatment 
of LTBI in children aged <12 years (1). New data on efficacy 
and safety of 3HP in children were determined sufficient to 
recommend the 3HP regimen for treatment of LTBI in chil-
dren aged ≥2 years (4).
Concerning patients with HIV infection, information 
about interactions between specific antimycobacterial 
agents, including rifamycins (e.g., rifampin, rifabutin, and 
rifapentine) and antiretroviral agents, is available in the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services Guidelines for 
the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and 
Adolescents. These frequently updated guidelines include a 
section addressing management of LTBI in persons with HIV 
coinfection and tables with information on drug interactions.* 
Use of concomitant LTBI treatment and antiretroviral agents 
should be guided by clinicians experienced in the management 
of both conditions.
In 2011, CDC recommended use of the 3HP regimen by 
DOT (1). Treatment completion rates are highest when the 
regimen is administered by DOT (4). However, the burden 
and expense of DOT is greater than that for SAT (9). During 
the expert consultation and again during review by ACET, 
some subject matter experts strongly recommended permit-
ting use of SAT, when combined with clinical monitoring, in 
children aged ≥2 years. Based on this expert opinion, ACET 
formally recommended expansion of the option of parentally 
administered SAT to children. Some experts still prefer DOT 
for treating LTBI in children aged 2–5 years, in whom risk 
for TB progression and severe disease is higher than that in 
older children and adults. Health care providers should make 
joint decisions about SAT with each individual patient (and 
parent or legal guardian), considering program resources and 
the patient’s age, medical history, social circumstances, and 
risk factors for progression to severe TB disease. Subject mat-
ter experts stressed the importance of educating providers and 
patients about 3HP
.
Recommendations
Based on evidence on effectiveness, safety, and treatment 
completion rates from the systematic review, and after consid-
eration of viewpoints from TB subject matter experts and input 
from ACET and the public, CDC continues to recommend 
3HP for treatment of LTBI in adults and now recommends 
use of 3HP 1) in persons with LTBI aged 2–17 years; 2) in 
persons with LTBI who have HIV infection, including AIDS, 
and are taking antiretroviral medications with acceptable drug-
drug interactions with rifapentine; and 3) by DOT or SAT in 
persons aged ≥2 years.
The health care provider should choose the mode of admin-
istration (DOT versus SAT) based on local practice, individual 
patient attributes and preferences, and other considerations, 
including risk for progression to severe forms of TB disease. 
Use of concomitant LTBI treatment and antiretroviral agents 
should be guided by clinicians experienced in the management 
of both conditions (Box 1).
* https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines/html/1/adult-and-adolescent-arv/367/overview.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 29, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 25 
725
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BOX 1. Updated recommendations for once-weekly isoniazid-rifapentine 
for 12 weeks (3HP) for the treatment of latent tuberculosis infection  
CDC continues to recommend use of the short-course 
combination regimen of once-weekly isoniazid-rifapentine 
for 12 weeks (3HP) for treatment of latent tuberculosis 
infection (LTBI) in adults. With regard to age limits, HIV 
infection, and administration of the treatment, CDC now 
also recommends the following:
• use of 3HP in persons aged 2–17 years;
• use of 3HP in persons with LTBI who are living with 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, 
including acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
and taking antiretroviral medications with acceptable 
drug-drug interactions with rifapentine*; and
• use of 3HP by directly observed therapy (DOT) or 
self-administered therapy (SAT) in persons aged 
≥2 years; the health care provider should choose the 
mode of administration (DOT versus SAT) based on 
local practice, individual patient attributes and 
preferences, and other considerations, including risk 
for progression to severe forms of tuberculosis disease.
* https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines/html/1/adult-and-adolescent-arv/367/
overview.  
Patient monitoring and adverse events. Hepatic enzymes 
and other blood tests should be performed for certain patients 
before initiation of 3HP therapy (Box 2). Approximately 4% 
of all patients using 3HP experience flu-like or other systemic 
drug reactions, with fever, headache, dizziness, nausea, muscle 
and bone pain, rash, itching, red eyes, or other symptoms 
(4,10). Approximately 5% of persons discontinue 3HP because 
of adverse events, including systemic drug reactions (4,10); 
these reactions typically occur after the first 3–4 doses, and 
begin approximately 4 hours after ingestion of medication (10). 
Hypotension and syncope have been reported rarely (two cases 
per 1,000 persons treated) (4,10). If symptoms suggestive of a 
systemic drug reaction occur, patients should stop 3HP while 
the cause is determined. Symptoms usually resolve without 
treatment within 24 hours. Neutropenia and elevation of liver 
enzymes occur uncommonly (4,10). CDC recommends that 
health care providers educate patients to report adverse events. 
Patient use of symptom checklists might facilitate timely rec-
ognition and reporting.†
Rifapentine is a rifamycin compound; like rifampin, it 
induces metabolism of many medications. CDC recommends 
monitoring of patients when 3HP is prescribed with interacting 
† Examples of patient’s medication intake log and symptoms checklists are available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/pamphlets/12-doseregimen.htm.
BOX 2. Guidance to health care providers during treatment of latent 
tuberculosis infection (LTBI) with a combination regimen of isoniazid 
and rifapentine in 12 once-weekly doses (3HP)   
• Evaluate all patients for active tuberculosis disease both 
before and during treatment of LTBI.
• Inform the patient or parents or legal guardians about 
possible adverse effects and instruct them to seek 
medical attention when symptoms of possible adverse 
reaction first appear; particularly drug hypersensitivity 
reactions, rash, hypotension, or thrombocytopenia.
• Conduct monthly evaluations to assess treatment 
adherence and adverse effects, with repeated patient 
education regarding adverse effects at each visit.
• Order baseline hepatic chemistry blood tests (at least 
aspartate aminotransferase [AST]) for patients with the 
following specific conditions: human 
immunodeficiency virus infection, liver disorders, 
postpartum period (≤3 months after delivery), regular 
alcohol use, injection drug use, or use of medications 
with known possible interactions.
• Conduct blood tests at subsequent clinical encounters 
for patients whose baseline testing is abnormal and for 
others at risk for liver disease. Discontinue 3HP if a 
serum AST concentration is ≥5 times the upper limit 
of normal in the absence of symptoms or ≥3 times the 
upper limit of normal in the presence of symptoms.
• In case of a possible severe adverse reaction, discontinue 
3HP and provide supportive medical care. 
Conservative management and continuation of 3HP 
under observation can be considered in the presence of 
mild to moderate adverse events as determined by 
health care provider.  
medications (e.g., methadone or warfarin). Rifapentine can 
reduce the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives; therefore, 
women who use hormonal birth control should be advised to 
add, or switch to, a barrier method. Women should be advised 
to inform their health care provider if they decide to try to 
become pregnant or become pregnant during 3HP treatment.
Because altered dosing might reduce effectiveness or safety, 
patients on 3HP SAT should be encouraged to record medica-
tion intake and report deviations from the prescribed regimen. 
Persons on 3HP regimens should be evaluated monthly (in 
person or by telephone) to assess adherence and adverse effects.
Additional studies are needed to understand the pharmaco-
kinetics, safety, and tolerance of 3HP in children aged <2 years; 
adherence and safety of 3HP-SAT in persons aged <18 years; 
and safety of 3HP during pregnancy (4).
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
726 
MMWR / June 29, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 25
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Any LTBI treatment–associated adverse effect leading to 
hospital admission or death should be reported by health 
care providers to local or state health departments for inclu-
sion in the National Surveillance for Severe Adverse Events 
Associated with Treatment for LTBI (e-mail: ltbidrugevents@
cdc.gov). Serious drug side effects, product quality problems, 
and therapeutic failures should be reported to the Food and 
Drug Administration’s MedWatch program (https://www.
fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/default.htm) or by 
telephoning 1-800-FDA-1088.
Additional information regarding 3HP is available at 
https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/ltbi/ltbiresources.
htm. Questions also can be directed to CDC’s Division of 
Tuberculosis Elimination by e-mail (cdcinfo@cdc.gov) or by 
telephoning 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636).
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC.
Corresponding author: Andrey S. Borisov, aborisov@cdc.gov, 404-639-8056.
References
1. CDC. Recommendations for use of an isoniazid-rifapentine regimen with 
direct observation to treat latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011;60:1650–3.
2. Briss PA, Zaza S, Pappaioanou M, et al.; The Task Force on Community 
Preventive Services. Developing an evidence-based Guide to Community 
Preventive Services—methods. Am J Prev Med 2000;18(Suppl):35–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(99)00119-1
 3. Zaza S, Wright-De Agüero LK, Briss PA, et al.; Task Force on Community 
Preventive Services. Data collection instrument and procedure for systematic 
reviews in the Guide to Community Preventive Services. Am J Prev Med 
2000;18(Suppl):44–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(99)00122-1
 4. Njie GJ, Morris SB, Woodruff RY, Moro RN, Vernon AA, Borisov AS. 
Isoniazid-rifapentine for latent tuberculosis infection: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med 2018. Epub June 11, 2018. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2018.04.030
 5. Villarino ME, Scott NA, Weis SE, et al.; International Maternal Pediatric 
and Adolescents AIDS Clinical Trials Group; Tuberculosis Trials 
Consortium. Treatment for preventing tuberculosis in children and 
adolescents: a randomized clinical trial of a 3-month, 12-dose regimen 
of a combination of rifapentine and isoniazid. JAMA Pediatr 
2015;169:247–55. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.3158
 6. Sterling TR, Scott NA, Miro JM, et al.; Tuberculosis Trials Consortium; 
AIDS Clinical Trials Group for the PREVENT TB Trial. Three months 
of weekly rifapentine and isoniazid for treatment of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis infection in HIV-coinfected persons. AIDS 2016;30:1607–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/QAD.0000000000001098
 7. Weiner M, Egelund EF, Engle M, et al. Pharmacokinetic interaction of 
rifapentine and raltegravir in healthy volunteers. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2014;69:1079–85. https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dkt483
 8. Podany AT, Bao Y, Swindells S, et al.; AIDS Clinical T
rials Group A5279 
Study Team. Efavirenz pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in HIV-
infected persons receiving rifapentine and isoniazid for tuberculosis prevention. 
Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:1322–7. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ464
 9. Belknap R, Holland D, Feng PJ, et al.; TB Trials Consortium iAdhere 
Study Team. Self-administered versus directly observed once-weekly 
isoniazid and rifapentine treatment of latent tuberculosis infection: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2017;167:689–97.
 
10. Sterling TR, Moro RN, Borisov AS, et al.; Tuberculosis Trials 
Consortium. Flu-like and other systemic drug reactions among persons 
receiving weekly rifapentine plus isoniazid or daily isoniazid for treatment 
of latent tuberculosis infection in the PREVENT Tuberculosis study. 
Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:527–35. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ323  
