 1
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
EEG Analytics for Early Detection of 
Autism Spectrum Disorder: A  
data-driven approach
William J. Bosl1,2,3, Helen Tager-Flusberg4 & Charles A. Nelson1,2,5
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex and heterogeneous disorder, diagnosed on the basis 
of behavioral symptoms during the second year of life or later. Finding scalable biomarkers for early 
detection is challenging because of the variability in presentation of the disorder and the need for 
simple measurements that could be implemented routinely during well-baby checkups. EEG is a 
relatively easy-to-use, low cost brain measurement tool that is being increasingly explored as a 
potential clinical tool for monitoring atypical brain development. EEG measurements were collected 
from 99 infants with an older sibling diagnosed with ASD, and 89 low risk controls, beginning at 3 
months of age and continuing until 36 months of age. Nonlinear features were computed from EEG 
signals and used as input to statistical learning methods. Prediction of the clinical diagnostic outcome 
of ASD or not ASD was highly accurate when using EEG measurements from as early as 3 months of age. 
Specificity, sensitivity and PPV were high, exceeding 95% at some ages. Prediction of ADOS calibrated 
severity scores for all infants in the study using only EEG data taken as early as 3 months of age was 
strongly correlated with the actual measured scores. This suggests that useful digital biomarkers might 
be extracted from EEG measurements.
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is defined by a heterogeneous constellation of behavioral symptoms that 
emerge over the first years of life. A recent Centers for Disease Control (CDC) report estimates that the preva-
lence of ASD in the United States is 1 in 68, a significant increase in the past decade1. As research on ASD contin-
ues at rapid pace, the etiology and developmental course appear to be increasingly diverse, resulting in a view of 
ASD with diverse cognitive, behavioral and neural trajectories and subtypes2.
High-risk infant siblings studies have demonstrated that the defining behavioral features of ASD emerge dur-
ing the latter part of the first and second years of life3. Because ASD is behaviorally and not biologically defined, 
a formal diagnosis of ASD before three years of age remains challenging4,5 and children often do not receive a 
diagnosis until the preschool years or later6. Milder forms of ASD are particularly difficult to detect early, in part 
because a broad range of neurodevelopmental symptoms are common to several diagnoses, including ASD7. Even 
in cases of diagnostic uncertainty, reliable biomarkers that detect emerging ASD symptoms might be useful for 
developing appropriate early interventions4.
The brain develops rapidly during the first years of life and atypical neurodevelopment is likely due to a com-
bination of genetics, biological, and environmental conditions, all compounded by adaptations that result from 
atypical interactions between the developing child and his or her environment8. An emerging view is that the 
behavioral symptoms that define ASD may be the end result of early brain adaptation, rather than the direct con-
sequence of ongoing neural pathology9. This view suggests the possibility that the primary neural impairments 
that lead to ASD are transitory and thus difficult to detect after a critical developmental period8.
Neural Correlates of Behavior. 
Because atypical brain development that leads to ASD symptoms is likely 
to precede atypical behavior by months or even years, a critical developmental window for early intervention may 
be missed if diagnosis or screening is based solely on behavioral features. This has fueled a search for early neural 
correlates or biological indicators that could identify ASD in the prodromal phase.
Some models of ASD are based on atypical development of neural connectivity10–12, with excessive local 
connectivity within neural assemblies and deficits in long-range connectivity between functional brain regions 
1Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, USA. 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. 3University of San Francisco, 
San Francisco, USA. 4Boston University, Boston, USA. 5Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, USA. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to W.J.B. (email: william.bosl@childrens.harvard.edu)
Received: 15 August 2017
Accepted: 28 March 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
implicated. Recent studies suggest the involvement of somatosensory, default mode, visual, and subcortical 
networks13. Microstructural properties of the uncinate fasciculus in 6-month-old infants were found to predict 
behavioral response to joint attention three months later, indicating the potential importance of this tract in social 
development14. Further, microstructural organization of the splenium of the corpus callosum was associated with 
atypical oculomotor function in 7-month old infants who later developed ASD15. These studies suggest that early 
atypical neural function, due to atypical neural structure, may be associated with the behavioral symptoms of 
ASD that appear later. The challenge from a clinical perspective is how to measure atypical neural function for use 
in monitoring neurodevelopment.
A recent fMRI study of 59 6-month-old infants demonstrated significant differences in the brains of children 
who would develop a diagnosis of ASD at 24 months of age12. While these results are scientifically promising, two 
significant challenges remain before biomarker measurement methods can be developed for clinical use. First, to 
be viable in a primary care setting, any brain measurement method should be low cost and simple to administer 
in the context of a well-baby checkup. Second, ASD is a spectrum disorder that exhibits a heterogeneous set of 
defining behavioral characteristics. A simple binary determination of ‘autism’ or ‘not-autism’ may not be adequate 
for broad clinical application, such as monitoring changing risk profiles as a child develops or response to thera-
peutic interventions.
EEG for Functional Brain Measurement. 
Our previous studies have attempted to use traditional spectral 
power analysis to find early biomarkers for autism16. While differences were found between high risk siblings and 
low risk controls, they were not correlated with outcome. A recent study using data from the same infants as in the 
present study found that reduced frontal high-alpha power at 3 months was associated with lower expressive lan-
guage skills at 12 months, but did not predict ASD-specific outcomes. Notably, the association between 3-month 
frontal power and expressive language skills appeared to be developmentally time-locked to the 12-month time 
point, with no evidence of this association persisting over the second and third years of life in our sample17.
The potential for EEG to be used as a functional brain imaging modality continues to improve as new methods 
for analyzing and extracting information from biophysical signals are developed. Methods for analyzing complex 
time series produced by complex networks, such as the brain, may enable network structural differences to be 
inferred from time series measurements18, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Based on this, a set of nonlinear or complex 
system parameters or ‘invariant measures’ from EEG signals in principle should characterize the neural dynamics 
of the brain that generates the signals.
The implication is that the complex time series obtained from EEG contains information about neural net-
work structure that may provide valuable clues about atypical function19,20. This has clinical implications because 
a new generation of low cost, easy to use EEG devices are becoming available21,22, which would make routine 
brain measurements a possibility in a primary care setting.
The challenge for developmental clinical neuroscience is to determine which combinations of invariant meas-
ures and scalp locations are most relevant to the detection and monitoring of characteristics relevant to ASD. A 
data-driven approach may be sufficient for identifying useful clinical biomarkers. Data-driven discovery may also 
Figure 1. Time series and complex networks are related, and methods for reconstructing essential elements of 
one from the other have been developed. See, for example18.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
point in the direction of the likely neural correlates of relevant behavioral constructs or cognitive phenotypes19. 
The goal of this study is to demonstrate that nonlinear analysis of EEG signals, together with pattern classification 
methods, can extract information as early as 3 months of age that predicts an infant will develop a clinical diag-
nosis of ASD. Furthermore, the severity of ASD symptoms, as measured by the Autism Diagnostic Observation 
Scale (ADOS), can also be predicted from EEG data taken as early as 3 months of age, with strong correlation to 
the real ADOS scores that the child has at three years of age. Our results, while promising, point to many more 
questions about the underlying brain-behavior relationships that might explain why nonlinear EEG measures are 
useful digital biomarkers of ASD.
Methods
Participants. 
Participants were infants enrolled in an IRB-approved collaborative longitudinal study con-
ducted at Boston Children’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School and Boston University. All components of the 
study were approved by the IRB review boards at both institutions and are covered under IRB guidelines approved 
by both institutions. Written, informed consent was provided by the parents or guardians prior to their child’s 
participation in the study.
Participants are classified into one of three outcome groups based on their original family recruitment group 
and the clinical determination of whether the child had a positive or negative diagnosis for ASD at the end of the 
study. Infants in the low risk controls (LRC) family recruitment group had at least one typically developing older 
sibling and no first-degree relatives with a known developmental disorder, based on a screening questionnaire. 
Infants recruited into the high risk for ASD (HRA) recruitment group had an older sibling with an ASD diag-
nosis (not due to a known genetic disorder; e.g. Fragile X syndrome). The older siblings all had expert clinical 
community diagnoses, which were confirmed by a member of the study staff using the Social Communication 
Questionnaire (SCQ)23 or the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS-2)24. Once enrolled, infants were 
scheduled for visits from 3 to 36 months of age. Children who completed at least two of the visits (scheduled at 3, 
6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36 months) and completed one visit at 18 months or later, during which they were given a clinical 
evaluation for ASD, were included in this study. Most infants completed the final 36-month evaluation for ASD.
There were 3 outcome groups: LRC−
: infants from the low risk recruitment group who did not receive an ASD 
diagnosis; HRA−
: infants from the high-risk recruitment group who did not receive an ASD diagnosis; ASD: 
infants from either recruitment group who received an ASD diagnosis. Table 1 shows the number of participants 
in each of the family recruitment groups, their distribution into outcome groups, and the number of participants 
at each age. Note that not all participants provided data at every scheduled visit. The distribution of ages for the 
latest clinical diagnosis is also illustrated in Table 1.
Clinical Evaluations. 
ASD diagnoses for the participants were based on the ADOS24 and expert clinical 
judgment at 18, 24, or 36 months, whichever is latest. The ADOS is a semi-structured, standardized assessment 
that consists of social and play activities to elicit behaviors related to diagnosis of ASD. In addition to a binary 
diagnosis of either ASD or not-ASD, a Calibrated Severity Score (CSS) with numerical range 1–10 was obtained 
from the ADOS for each participant. The CSS offers a method of quantifying ASD severity with relative inde-
pendence from individual characteristics such as age and verbal IQ25.
The ADOS was administered by research staff with extensive experience in testing children with developmen-
tal disorders and co-scored by an ADOS-reliable researcher via video recording. Cases of concern (those meeting 
criteria on the ADOS or coming within 3 points of cutoff) were reviewed by a licensed clinical psychologist who 
evaluated video recordings of behavioral assessments along with the scores from those assessments to determine 
(a) Family Recruitment Group
Outcome groups
LRC− LRC, 
not autism
ASD Autism 
diagnosed
HRA− HRA, 
not autism
Low Risk Controls (LRC): 89
86
3
—
High Risk for Autism (HRA): 99
—
32
67
Age of clinical outcome 
determination
36 m
69
29
52
24 m
9
3
11
18 m
8
3
4
(b) EEGs available and analyzed by age
LRC−
ASD
HRA−
Age of EEG
Number of 
subjects at age
3
41
14
11
16
6
131
69
8
43
9
154
73
26
53
12
158
77
31
49
18
125
56
25
44
24
129
60
26
43
36
138
65
31
42
Table 1. The distribution of the 188 participants from each of the family recruitment groups is shown by (a) 
outcomes and (b) the number of EEG measurements available for analysis from each evaluation age.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
final clinical judgment: no clinical concern/typically developing, ASD, or non-spectrum concerns (e.g., symptoms 
of ADHD, anxiety, language delay). Infants were included in the ASD group if they had a CSS score of 4 or higher 
and received a final clinical judgment of ASD. In total, 150 participants received a final clinical evaluation at 36 
months, 23 participants at 24 months, and 15 participants at 18 months.
Final diagnostic outcomes and EEG measurements from at least two visits were available from a total of 188 
children and were included in this study. For the purposes of this study, all visits were treated as independent 
encounters. For example, all EEG measurements taken at 12-month visits were used to predict outcomes inde-
pendent of measurements taken at other ages for the same participant. Although a growth trajectory analysis was 
beyond the scope of this study, we performed one classification test by combining measurements from 6 months 
and 9 months into a single set of features for subjects who had both 6- and 9-month visits.
EEG Collection Procedure. 
Infants were seated on their mothers’ laps in a dimly lit, electrical- and 
sound-shielded testing room. An experimenter was in the room and blew bubbles throughout the procedure to 
maintain the infants’ interest, limit movement and increase tolerance of the electrode net. The baby’s head was 
measured and marked with a washable wax pencil to ensure accurate placement of the net, which was then placed 
over the scalp. Prior to fitting the sensor net over the scalp, the sponges were soaked in electrolyte solution (6cc 
KCL/liter distilled water) in order to facilitate electrical contact between the scalp and the relevant electrode. 
Scalp impedances were checked on-line using NetStation software (EGI, Inc, Eugene OR), the recording software 
package that runs this system. For most participants, at least two minutes of baseline activity were recorded, but 
depending on the willingness of the infant, recording periods may have been limited to two minutes.
Continuous EEG was recorded using either a 64-channel Geodesic Sensor Net or a 128-channel HydroCel 
Geodesic Sensor Net (Electrical Geodesics Inc., Eugene, OR; https://www.egi.com/research-division/
geodesic-sensor-net) referenced online to vertex (Cz). The data were amplified, filtered (band pass 0.1-100.0 Hz), 
and sampled at a frequency of either 250 Hz or 500 Hz. The latter were downsampled to 250 Hz before further 
analysis. Signals were digitized with a 12-bit National Instruments Board (National Instruments Corp., Woburn 
MA). Data from 19 sensors uniformly distributed across the scalp were used in our analysis. The locations of the 
sensors chosen for analysis are the standard 10–20 montage: Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, P7, 
P3, Pz, P4, P8, O1, O2. The same subset of sensors was used regardless of which Geodesic Sensor Net was used 
to measure the data.
EEG Data Analysis. 
Each of the EEG samples was processed in an identical manner by the following steps. 
Continuous 30-second segments were selected from the beginning of each of the EEG recordings for each subject 
when the child was sitting quietly. No splicing of segments or selection based on review was performed.
Frequency Bands. 
The signal or time series from each sensor was decomposed into multiple frequency 
bands using a wavelet transform26. We note that the Haar wavelet transform yields a multiscale decomposition 
that is mathematically equivalent to the coarse-graining procedure introduced by Costa et al.27 for multiscale 
entropy analysis of biological signals. The coarse-graining procedure for signal decomposition has been used in 
previous studies for multiscale entropy analysis of EEG28. In the present study, we used the Daubechies (DB4) 
wavelet, which is very similar to the Haar wavelet, but is more commonly used for signal analysis29.
Using the wavelet transform, each sensor signal is decomposed into six power-of-two frequency bands that are 
approximately equal to the commonly used definitions of delta, theta, alpha, beta, gamma, and gamma + bands 
used for EEG analysis. The specific software used for the wavelet transform is publicly available, along with 
instructions and python code, at: https://pywavelets.readthedocs.io. Table 2 shows the six frequency bands used 
in this study. For the remainder of this paper the standard frequency band labels will be used, but these refer spe-
cifically to the power-of-two bands shown in Table 2.
Nonlinear Signal Features. 
Nine nonlinear features were computed for each of the frequency bands derived 
 
from each of the 19 sensors used in our analysis. A broad range of nonlinear features was computed to give as 
complete a characterization of the signal dynamics as possible. The features computed included:
(i) Seven values derived from Recurrence Quantitative Analysis (RQA). RQA is an empirical approach to 
analyzing time series data that is in principle capable of characterizing all of the essential dynamics of a 
complex system. It has been found to be useful for analyzing “real-world, noisy, high dimensional data”30. 
Wavelet level
Wavelet frequency range
Approximate EEG label
1
64–128 Hz
high gamma
2
32–64 Hz
gamma
3
16–32 Hz
beta
4
8–16 Hz
alpha
5
4–8 Hz
theta
6
0–4 Hz
delta
Table 2. Raw EEG signals are collected with a sampling rate of 256 samples per second, then decomposed by 
powers of two into the frequency bands shown using a wavelet decomposition. The resulting frequency bands 
are approximately equivalent to the standard EEG frequency band labels.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
Software for computing recurrence plot statistics is publicly available in the python package pyRQA 0.1.031. 
A more complete discussion of RQA analysis may be found in the literature30,32. Seven of the most com-
monly used recurrence plot values (RR, DET, LAM, L_max, L_entr, L_mean, and TT) were computed and 
used in this study.
 (ii) Sample entropy and Detrended Fluctuation Analysis, denoted by SampE and DFA, respectively, were also 
computed. Sample entropy was the sole nonlinear feature used in our previous analysis of a subset of the 
data analyzed for this study33. DFA quantifies a different signal property and is a measure of the “long-term 
memory” of a time series. It can be used to determine whether the time series is more, less, or equally likely 
to increase if it has increased in previous steps. SampE and DFA were computed using publicly available 
software “Nonlinear measures for dynamical systems” or nolds, version 0.3.2, which can be downloaded 
from (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/nolds).
These 9 measures and their general meaning are summarized in Table 3. In principle, these measures charac-
terize the dynamical features of the EEG time series, which should correlate to functional characteristics of the 
neural network or brain that produced the time series. Although these measures are well-established physical and 
mathematical values, their meaning in the context of neural science has only recently begun to be explored. To 
our knowledge, this study is the first application of RQA and the other measures described here to developmental 
neuroscience.
Feature Selection and Classification. 
The total feature set computed from each EEG session consists of 
9 nonlinear values computed on 6 scales or frequency bands for each of 19 sensors, totaling 1026 features. Many 
of these features are likely to be correlated. For example, spatially close sensors might have correlated signal 
properties. SampE and L_entr are both measures of entropy, though derived by entirely different algorithms. 
Discovering the most informative features for predicting emerging ASD was accomplished using feature-ranking 
methods.
Several different learning algorithms were initially tested and compared for this study, including k nearest 
neighbors, random forest, and support vector machine. All were found to give similar classification results. For 
the remainder of this paper, all classification and prediction results reported were computed using the support 
vector machine (SVM) method with radial basis functions. Feature selection was done with a recursive feature 
elimination algorithm as described in34, using the rfecv method in the Python open source package scikit-learn 
(www.scikit-learn.org). Scikit-learn was used for all machine learning calculations, using all default parameters.
Prediction of ASD and Symptom Severity. 
A prediction of the binary diagnostic outcome, either ASD 
or not-ASD, was computed from the nonlinear features described above using a leave-one-out cross validation 
Nonlinear Invariant Variable
Symbol
Description
Invariant measures computed with the NOLDS software package
Sample Entropy
SampE
Sample entropy measures the complexity of a time-series, based on approximate 
entropy as discussed in our previous study28
Detrended Fluctuation Analysis
DFA
The hurst exponent is a measure of the “long-term memory” of a time series. It can be 
used to determine whether the time series is more, less, or equally likely to increase 
if it has increased in previous steps. DFA measures the Hurst parameter H, which is 
very similar to the Hurst exponent. The main difference is that DFA can be used for 
non-stationary processes
Invariant measures derived from Recurrence Quantitative Analysis (RQA)
Entropy derived from recurrence plot
L_entr
A measure of entropy derived from the diagonal lines of the recurrence plot, most 
closely associated with the Shannon entropy. It is related to other measures of entropy, 
such as the sample entropy above.
Max line length
L_max
Lmax is related to the largest Lyapunov exponent of a chaotic signal, which is a 
dynamic complexity measure that describes the divergence of trajectories starting at 
nearby initial states69. Higher Lyapunov exponents (lower Lmax values) are typically 
associated with pathological conditions70,71.
Mean line length
L_mean
The time that two segments of the recurrence plot trajectory are close to each other, 
and can be interpreted as the mean prediction time of the signal, a measure of chaos or 
divergence from an initial point
Recurrence rate
RR
The probability that a system state recurs in a finite time. RR has been found useful 
for detecting evoked response potentials (ERPs) using single trials72. The concept is 
similar to periodicity, but is more general.
Determinism
DET
DET comes from repeating patterns in the system and is an indication of its 
predictability. Regular, deterministic signals, such as sine waves or deterministic chaos, 
will have higher DET values, while uncorrelated time series, such as random numbers, 
will cause low DET.
Laminarity
LAM
Laminarity represents fast transitions and instabilities, or the frequency of transitions 
from one state to another, without describing the length of these transition phases. 
More frequent appearance of laminar states may relate to more frequent “seeds” for 
synchronized dynamics73.
Trapping time
TT
Trapping time is an estimate of the time that a system will remain in a given state, such 
as the length of transition states, as opposed to the time for the transition to take place 
(compare to LAM).
Table 3. Nonlinear invariant measures of a time series and their physical interpretation.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
procedure. The cross-validation procedure is illustrated in Fig. 2 using three dimensions to represent three fea-
tures. The procedure is as follows.
The training set is used to find the model or separating hyperplane that divides the feature space into halves. 
The SVM method is a formal algorithm for finding the plane that best separates the two groups. The plane that 
separates two groups is illustrated in Fig. 2. We note that the axes in this illustration represent the nonlinear EEG 
features. In practice, there are as many dimensions as there are features. The training set of data containing data 
points for each outcome group is used to define the plane. New data points can then be classified using their EEG 
features to determine the location in feature space, which lies on one side of the plane or the other.
Ideally, the training set is a large set used to find the model plane and the test set is an entirely new set of sub-
jects that are classified to find sensitivity and specificity of the model. When such large independent data sets are 
not available, cross validation is a process whereby a single subject is left out of the training set, and the resulting 
plane is then used to classify the left-out subject. This process is repeated for every subject. For our data, ASD and 
LRC−
 subjects are used for the training set with a leave-one-out cross validation scheme. The HRA−
 subjects are 
also classified, using all the ASD and LRC−
 subjects for the training set. Thus, the outcome of every subject is pre-
dicted from data derived from the other subjects of the same age group. This prediction can then be compared to 
the known outcome and determined to be true positive, true negative, false positive, or false negative. Sensitivity, 
specificity and PPV are computed from these quantities with standard definitions.
The distance of a subject from the hyperplane can be used to estimate severity. This distance was scaled to 
approximate the Calibrated Severity Score (CSS), where 1.0 is the lowest score for children with no autism symp-
toms and 10 is the highest score for the most severe autism cases. Prediction of CSS values used the same training 
sets and leave-one-out cross validation as was used for the classification of binary outcomes.
Significance Testing. 
The significance of the classification results for each method was estimated empiri-
cally using the permutation approach described in35. Because classification accuracies were high, the empirical 
p-value in every case was 0, or p < .01 since 100 trials were used.
Multiscale and Frequency Bands. 
Multiscale entropy was first described by Costa et al.27 as a method for 
analyzing physiological signals. The scaling procedure generally uses the coarse-graining or averaging algorithm 
illustrated in Fig. 3. For power-of-two scales (2, 4, 8, 16, …) the time series produced by this procedure are iden-
tical to the Haar wavelet transform26. Multiscale analysis is applied to all of the measures computed in this paper, 
including sample entropy, which is the primary measure for multiscale entropy.
The connection between the coarse-graining algorithm and wavelets is important because a great deal is 
known about the properties of wavelet transforms. In particular, wavelets can be associated with common 
frequency bands. For example, if an EEG signal has a sampling rate of 256 Hz, then the signal contains frequen-
cies up to 128 Hz, as determined by the standard Nyquist limit36. Scale 2 in the coarse-graining procedure is 
equivalent to wavelet approximation level 1, and contains all frequencies up to one-half of the original signal, 
0 to 64 Hz. The averaging process removed the highest frequencies. Continuing the averaging process gives the 
results shown in Table 4, which shows the relationship between coarse-graining scales and frequency bands. 
The approximate frequencies used in neurophysiology, delta (0–4 Hz), theta (4–7 Hz) and so on, are also shown 
in Table 4. We note that the signals recorded in our study were hardware bandpass filtered in the 0.1–100 Hz 
Figure 2. A schematic representation of classification with a support vector machine (SVM) method is shown 
with 3 dimensions representing 3 features. The training set is used to create a model or separating hyperplane 
in the feature space. Axes of the feature space are the nonlinear EEG features. Test subjects are then classified by 
determining which side of the plane the subject’s features places them. ASD and LRC- subjects are used for the 
training set. Leave-one-out cross validation leaves out a single subject from the training set and then makes a 
prediction for the left-out subject. The distance of a subject from the hyperplane can be used to estimate severity. 
This distance was scaled to approximate the Calibrated Severity Score (CSS), where 1.0 is the lowest score for 
children with no autism symptoms and 10 is the highest score for the most severe autism cases.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
range. Thus, the band labeled high gamma has signals in the 64–100 Hz range, and the delta band has signals 
in the 0.1–4 Hz range.
Wavelet transforms decompose a time series similarly to the coarse-graining procedure, but also retain the 
details that have been removed in each step. Wavelet approximations are equivalent to the multiscale ranges, 
while the wavelet details contain the higher frequencies that have been removed. Thus, the multiscale procedure 
introduced by27 may be identically replaced by a wavelet transform if the approximations are used. Alternatively, 
multiscale values might be computed on the wavelet details, which contain frequency ranges that are similar to 
the traditional EEG signal bands.
For this study, we used the more appropriate DB4 wavelet transform to derive the wavelet details, which are 
power-of-two frequency bands. The closest traditional labels (delta, theta, alpha, beta, gamma, and gamma-plus) 
to the wavelet detail are shown in Table 4. For the remainder of this paper, six non-overlapping frequency bands 
are used for all analysis and the traditional frequency band labels are used in figures. The original signal, denoted 
by scale 1 in the coarse-grain procedure or the level 0 wavelet, was included in our early analysis, but the feature 
ranking and selection algorithms never chose the full spectrum original signal for classification. Thus, only the 
wavelet details as shown in Table 4 are considered further.
Required Software Packages. 
All computations performed for this study were carried out using python 
code. All required calculations used standard python packages, including numpy and scipy, and other publicly 
available packages listed here:
eegtools (for reading edf files): https://github.com/breuderink/eegtools
pywavelets (for wavelet decomposition): https://pywavelets.readthedocs.io
pyrqa (RQA calculations): https://pypi.python.org/pypi/PyRQA/
nolds (Sample entropy and DFA calculations): https://pypi.python.org/pypi/nolds
scikit-learn (feature ranking and machine learning): http://scikit-learn.github.io/stable
Unless noted otherwise, default parameters were used for all function calls, such as feature selection and 
machine learning computations.
EEG Data Availability. 
The methods described above can be applied to any set of EEG data, together with 
diagnostic labels. The specific participant data used for our study was consented specifically for use by researchers 
Figure 3. The coarse-graining procedure introduced by Costa et al.27 is illustrated. For powers of 2, the 
resulting scaled time series are identical to Haar wavelet transform approximations.
Coarse-grain 
averaging scales
Wavelet 
level
Frequency range
Wavelet approximation
Wavelet detail
Frequencies
EEG Band
1
0
0–128 Hz
original signal
2
1
0–64 Hz
64–128 Hz
high gamma
3
2
0–32 Hz
32–64 Hz
gamma
4
3
0–16 Hz
16–32 Hz
beta
8
4
0–8 Hz
8–16 Hz
alpha
16
5
0–4 Hz (delta)
4–8 Hz
theta
Table 4. The coarse-graining procedure is mathematically identical to the Haar wavelet transform. For signal 
collected with a sampling rate of 256 samples per second, the frequency bands contained in the scales, wavelet 
approximations, and wavelet details are shown.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
affiliated with the Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience at Boston Children’s Hospital or the Tager-Flusberg 
laboratory at Boston University. For this reason, the raw EEG data cannot be released publicly.
Results
Three principle results were found and are reported here.
 1. Early detection of emerging ASD. Classification methods were able to distinguish the ASD from the LRC−
 
infants with nearly 100% sensitivity and specificity using EEG measurements from each age beginning 
at 3 months. The HRA−
 outcome group was also classified with significantly high accuracy, but presents 
challenges for cases for which the EEG data places them near the diagnostic borderline. A dip in predictive 
accuracy is seen at 12 months of age.
 2. Quantitative Estimate of CSS. The severity of ASD symptoms, as determined by the CSS, was predicted 
from EEG measurements taken from each age beginning at 3 months. The predicted scores correlated 
relatively strongly with the actual CSS scores.
 3. Significant Differences in ASD Features. Significant differences were found between the ASD and LRC−
 
groups for many of the nonlinear measures computed in this study. An apparent shift in the difference 
between ASD and not-ASD mean group values is evident at about 12 months of age.
These results are described in more detail in the following sections.
Early Detection of Emerging ASD. 
Participants in this study were measured at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 36 
months, but not every participant was measured at every possible age. Thus, for predictions, the set of all meas-
urements at each age was treated independently and used in a leave-one-out cross validation computation to 
determine predictive accuracy of the features. Three sets of classification results are shown in Table 5. As noted 
previously, a classification experiment was also performed by simply combining 6- and 9-month measurements 
for subjects that came for both of these visits.
Leave-one-out cross validation was used to predict the outcome of every subject from data derived from the 
other subjects of the same age group. This prediction can then be compared to the known outcome and deter-
mined to be true positive, true negative, false positive, or false negative. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive pre-
dictive values were computed from the usual definitions.
Set (a), labeled “
ASD and LRC−
 Only”
, used only these two outcome groups in the classification calculations. 
These two groups were considered the end-point cases with either no ASD symptoms, or a confirmed diagnosis 
of ASD. At every age from 3 to 36 months, classification accuracy between LRC−
 and ASD groups was excellent, 
with perfect specificity and positive predictive value (PPV). However, an apparent dip in sensitivity occurs at 12 
months. For subjects that participated in both 6- and 9-month visits, EEG measurements were also combined 
into a single set containing nonlinear features from both measurements as a simple test of how accuracy might 
improve with measurements from more than one age.
The calculations for the next classification, labeled (b) ASD & (LRC−
 + HRA−
) in Table 5, included all par-
ticipants. The final predicted binary outcome of the HRA−
 participants is significantly accurate, but less so than 
for the two other outcome groups (LRC−
 and ASD), resulting in lower overall specificity and PPV. The accuracy 
of the HRA−
 outcome predictions was better at younger ages (3 to 9 months), then dipped in accuracy starting 
at 12 months.
As will be explained more fully in the next section, the distance of a participant’s EEG features from the sep-
arating plane can be computed to provide a simulated CSS score. In general, a score of 4 or above is considered 
indicative of ASD. Using this criterion, a score between 3.5 and 4.5 might be considered “too close to call” or 
Age of 
testing
N subjects
(a) ASD & LRC− only
(b) ASD & 
(LRC− + HRA−)
(c) ASD & (LRC− + HRA−) 
with uncertain HRC− removed
Number of 
Uncertain HRA−
LRC−
ASD
HRA−
Sens
Spec
PPV
Sens
Spec
PPV
Sens
Spec
PPV
3
14
11
16
0.82
1.0
1.0
0.82
0.99
0.97
0.82
0.92
0.82
4
6
70
18
43
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.99
0.95
1.0
0.99
0.95
15
9
75
26
53
0.96
1.0
1.0
0.96
0.90
0.65
0.96
1.0
1.0
28
6 + 9
62
15
39
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.96
0.79
1.0
1.0
1.0
7
12
78
31
49
0.87
1.0
1.0
0.87
0.90
0.71
0.90
0.93
0.78
17
18
56
25
44
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.90
0.71
1.0
0.98
0.93
17
24
60
26
43
0.96
1.0
1.0
0.96
0.88
0.67
1.0
0.96
0.87
11
36
65
21
42
0.95
1.0
1.0
0.95
0.89
0.63
0.95
1.0
1.0
9
Table 5. Predictive classification of 36-month outcomes based on EEG feature classification. Sens = Sensitivity, 
Spec = Specificity, PPV = Positive Predictive Value. The age represents the age at which EEG was taken. The 
‘6 + 9’ row was derived by combining all nonlinear features from measurements at 6 and 9 months from 
participants who had both visits. Columns (a) are results from classifying low risk controls without autism 
(LRC−
) and ASD infants. (b) results from classifying the outcome of all participants. The last set of results, (c) 
was obtained by computing simulated CSS scores based on distance from the model hyperplane, as illustrated 
in Fig. 2, then removing participant scores that fell in the 3.5 to 4.5 range. These were labeled as “uncertain”
. 
Sensitivity, specificity, and PPV were then computed for all of the remaining participants.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
uncertain. Using this threshold, scores in this range we labeled as ‘uncertain’ and the remaining participants were 
classified. The results of this classification are in the columns of Table 5 denoted by (c). For these results, every 
participant was labeled as either ASD, not-ASD, or uncertain. We note that when 6 and 9 month features for each 
participant were combined, the classification accuracy was 100%, with only 7 of 39 HRA−
 infants labeled uncer-
tain. Predictions at 12 months of age were consistently the lowest.
In summary, the classification of the two primary groups, ASD and LRC−
 was high at every age from 3 
months to 36 months. HRA−
 infants were more difficult to classify, perhaps because some exhibit subtle ASD 
symptoms and thus their EEG features are intermediate between not-ASD and ASD features (Charman et al., 
2016). Empirical p-values35 were exactly 0.0 after 100 trial classifications with shuffled labels for every method at 
every age, demonstrating that the classification accuracy was unlikely to be due to chance.
Quantitative Estimate of ADOS CSS. 
While an early binary prediction of a future diagnosis of ASD is 
of clinical value, an early estimate of future severity of ASD symptoms might be of greater utility for planning 
services and interventions, as well as for monitoring changes related to early therapy.
Using the method described previously, and illustrated in Fig. 2, estimates of CSS values were computed from 
EEG nonlinear features, treating data at each age independently as before. A plot of predicted CSS values, along 
with confidence intervals, are shown in Fig. 4. The measured CSS values (with assessment ages as noted in the 
methods section) are also shown as solid colored lines for reference. Correlation coefficients were computed for 
measured CSS values for each child and the predicted values. These values are shown as Xs connected by a black 
line.
Predicted LRC−
 CSS scores are quite low, with narrow confidence intervals, as are the assessed CSS values. 
Similarly, the predicted ASD scores average close to 5, similar to the actual CSS values. Predicted scores computed 
at all ages for both LRC−
 and ASD at are close to the actual measured scores.
The predicted HRA−
 scores are intermediate between the LRC−
 and ASD scores, and considerably higher 
than the actual CSS values for the HRA−
 group. Correlation coefficients are strong for predictions at all ages, 
though we note, as in the previous analysis, a decline at age 12.
Figure 4. Measured CSS scores for each outcome group (solid lines), along with predicted scores derived from 
EEG features at each age are shown (dashed lines). Confidence intervals are shaded for predicted values. The age 
refers to the age at which EEG data was collected and used for the prediction. Correlation coefficients between 
predicted scores and the measured CSS values are shown by Xs if the axis values are multiplied by 10−
1.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
In summary, the distance from the model classification hyperplane enabled an estimated ADOS calibrated 
severity score to be computed from EEG features alone as early as 3 months of age. The estimated scores were 
strongly correlated with the actual 36-month CSS values.
Significant Group Differences. 
Significant differences between the ASD and LRC−
 groups were found in 
several sensors, frequency bands, and nonlinear measures, as shown in Figs 5–7. These plots display differences 
between group values using color for every nonlinear value, at every sensor location (horizontal axis of subplots) 
and every frequency band (vertical axis on subplots). Red colors indicate that the values for this feature are higher 
in the ASD group. Blue colors indicate that ASD values are lower for that feature. Color saturation (darker red or 
darker blue) is correlated to the significance of the group differences. The scale on the right of the figure shows 
p-values of the color saturation. White areas with washed-out color indicate p-values close to 1.0, hence no sig-
nificant differences.
The plots can be interpreted as follows: The vertical axis for each subplot represents six frequency bands, from 
low (delta) to high (gamma+), as defined in Table 4. The horizontal axis for each subplot is the scalp location. 
The axis labels are shown in a single large horizontal label across the bottom of the plot. The left or right side of 
each subplot corresponds to left or right sensors, respectively. Centrally located sensor values are in the center of 
the subplots.
Though these plots contain a lot of detailed information, two main points are evident. First, there are many sig-
nificant differences between ASD and LRC−
 groups, where significance level is determined by a strict Bonferroni 
criterion of p < 5 ×
 10−
5, with 1026 features assumed to be independent. This is shown by the dark or saturated 
red and blue values and circled. Secondly, there is a clear shift from mostly blue to red (SampE and DFA) or from 
mostly red to blue (all other nonlinear values) as age increases from the 3–12 month range to 12–36 month range. 
That is, a shift is occurring at around 12 months of age.
Figure 5. Differences between ASD and LRC−
 group values for SampE, DFA, and DET are shown using color 
for every nonlinear value. The vertical axis for each subplot represents six frequency bands, from low (delta) to 
high (gamma+), as defined in Table 2. The horizontal axis for each subplot is the scalp location. The axis labels 
are shown in a single large horizontal label across the bottom of the plot. The left or right side of each subplot 
corresponds to left or right sensors, respectively. Centrally located sensor values are in the center of the subplots. 
Red colors indicate that the values for this feature are higher in the ASD group. Blue colors indicate that ASD 
values are lower for that feature. Color saturation (darker red or darker blue) is correlated to the significance 
of the group differences. The scale on the right of the figure shows p-values of the color saturation. White areas 
with washed-out color indicate p-values close to 1.0, hence no significant differences.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
Developmental Trends in Selected Features. 
Several scientific questions that emerge from this work 
concern the fundamental neurophysiological explanations for the nonlinear features, sensors, and frequencies 
that are correlated with or predictive of ASD. Detailed answers are beyond the scope of this research. It is hoped 
that this study will encourage other researchers to contribute to this approach to help further develop the neu-
rodevelopmental applications of nonlinear EEG analysis.
Visual inspection of Figs 5–7 reveals that several nonlinear values and sensor regions appear to exhibit signif-
icant differences among the three groups. First, we note that several features derived from RQA showed similar 
developmental trends (DET, L_max, RR) and thus may contain redundant information. DET may be represent-
ative of these values. Other features showed trends that did not appear to differentiate the three groups. Sample 
entropy appeared to follow a different trend than the RQA features and thus may represent independent informa-
tion from the other measures. Thus, as an initial examination of developmental trends in these nonlinear features, 
SampE and DET were selected for closer review. Trends in these values in selected brain regions are shown in 
growth plots in Figs 8–12 and discussed briefly.
Research on physiological signals has consistently revealed that lower entropy over many scales or frequency 
bands is often associated with pathological conditions27,37–39. Higher determinism (DET) in EEG signals was 
found to be associated with absence epilepsy and autism20. Sample Entropy and DET represent different signal 
qualities that are not fully understood in the context of neurophysiology, but, as discussed above, appear to be 
independent of each other. We emphasize again that the this is only an initial evaluation of the many features that 
have been used in this study and further research will be required to fully explore the neurophysiological meaning 
of nonlinear EEG analysis.
Developmental trends in either SampE or DET are now reviewed in one of five brain regions that appear to 
be relevant to ASD. The plot lines shown in Figs 8–12 are derived from the value of the nonlinear feature, either 
SampE or DET, by averaging all the values at the sensor(s) indicated, and averaging over all the indicated frequen-
cies. Plots for each sensor (19 of them), every frequency band (6), and every nonlinear value (9) may be revealing 
in future studies, but is well beyond the scope of this paper.
Left temporal. 
The T7 sensor reveals that SampE in higher frequencies (beta and gamma) follows a different 
trajectory in the LRC−
 group than in the other groups. From 3–9 months, HRA−
 and ASD groups are similar, 
and different from the LRC−
 group. These are seen in Fig. 8. Thereafter, from 9 to 36 months, HRA−
 and LRC−
 
are very close, while the ASD group first decreases from 9 to 18 months, then increases and crosses the other two 
trajectories.
Figure 6. Similar to Fig. 5: differences between ASD and LRC−
 group values for RR, L_max, and TT are shown 
using color for every nonlinear value.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
Figure 7. Similar to Fig. 5: differences between ASD and LRC−
 group values for LAM, L_mean, and L_entr are 
shown using color for every nonlinear value.
Figure 8. Developmental trajectories for SampE in the left temporal region (T7 sensor) in higher frequencies 
(beta + gamma) for ASD, LRC−
, and HRA−
.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
Right temporal-parietal. 
Figure 9 shows changes in sample entropy in the right temporal-parietal region 
(sensors T8, P4, P8). Frequencies in the theta, alpha, beta, and gamma bands were found to have similar trends and 
magnitudes, so are considered as a whole here. The sample entropy is similar in all three groups until 6 months, but 
then diverges significantly by 9 months and the groups continue to diverge through 36 months, maintaining con-
sistent and significant differences. The ASD and LRC−
 groups are the farthest apart, with the HRA−
 group having 
values intermediate between the higher LRC−
 and the lower ASD entropy values. We note that the HRA−
 group 
appears to follow the ASD trend from 9 to 12 months, but then stops the downward trend of the ASD group and 
tends to normalize back toward the LRC−
 group, similar to the trajectory in T7 as seen in Fig. 8.
Figure 9. Developmental trajectories for SampE in the right temporal-parietal region (T8 + P4 + P8 sensors) in 
frequencies theta through gamma for ASD, LRC−
, and HRA−
.
Figure 10. Developmental trajectories for DET in the left lateral-frontal region (F7 sensor) in frequencies theta 
through gamma for ASD, LRC−
, and HRA−
.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
Left frontal-temporal (F7). 
We see in Fig. 10 that DET in frequencies theta through gamma is consistently 
lower in the LRC−
 group, distinct from both the HRA−
 and ASD groups, as early as 3 months. The trajectories of 
the three groups converge at 12–18 months, then diverge again. The intermediate HRA−
 group appears to follow 
the ASD group more closely than the LRC−
 group. These findings suggest that classification at early ages (3–9 
months) would be better using features from this region, with less discriminatory ability around 12 months of age.
Frontal. 
As shown in Fig. 11, DET in the entire frontal region (F7, F3, Fp1, Fp2, F4, F8) across frequency 
bands theta-alpha-beta-gamma are not significantly different until after 15–18 months of age, after which the 
values for the LRC−
 group drop significantly away from the other two groups. Lower DET is generally associated 
with healthy neural signals20. Values for the ASD group continues to rise moderately from 9 to 36 months. The 
HRA−
 group remains intermediate between the LRC−
 and ASD groups consistently after about 12 months. This 
seems to be consistent with the later development of the frontal region, where differentiation between groups is 
not apparent until after 12 months.
Posterior region. 
SampE of the delta frequency band in the posterior region (O1, O2 sensors) is similar 
across all three groups until 9 months of age, when the ASD group diverges from the LRC−
 and HRA−
 groups, 
which follow similar trajectories. The sample entropy is lower in the ASD group throughout. Integrated EEG and 
eye-tracking studies found atypicalities in occipital delta rhythms in children with ASD40. The authors suggest 
that development in this brain region is associated with joint attention. Joint attention begins to emerge in typical 
infants at about 9 months and is fully developed by 18 months41. The consistently lower sample entropy seen in 
Fig. 12 may be related to underdevelopment of joint gaze in infants later diagnosed with ASD.
Discussion
The goal of this study was to demonstrate that nonlinear values computed from relatively short segments of rest-
ing state EEG signals contain information that may be used as biomarker profiles to enable an early prediction of a 
future outcome of ASD. The finding that several measures of signal complexity, taken from multiple brain regions, 
rather than a single variable or biological parameter, is consistent with the view of ASD as an “an emergent dis-
order that is characterized by the loss of social communication skills in the period between 9 and 24 months … 
defined on the basis of alterations in the developmental trajectories across multiple domains”42.
Behavioral markers of ASD, such as differences in social engagement, have not yet been identified within the 
first year of life. It has been proposed that ASD emerges only after a typical developmental trajectory in the first 
12 months becomes atypical in later infancy and toddlerhood43. Moreover, “these core developmental constructs 
appear to be more sensitive to risk status (i.e. high risk versus low risk) rather than ASD outcome”43. Alternatively, 
it may be that atypical behaviors associated with core ASD symptoms are not observed in early infancy. In either 
case, it is possible that subtle behavioral characteristics might introduce artifacts into the EEG signals, particularly 
in frontal regions due to facial muscles or eye movements. However, since efforts to explicitly measure these in 
young infants have so far failed, it is unlikely that artifacts could completely account for the results presented here.
Figure 11. Developmental trajectories for DET in the entire frontal region (Fp1 + F7 + Fz + F8 + Fp2 sensors) 
in higher frequencies (beta + gamma) for ASD, LRC−
, and HRA−
.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
15
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
A recent study using data from the same infants used in the present manuscript found that reduced frontal 
high-alpha power at 3 months was associated with reduced expressive language skills at 12 months, but did not 
predict ASD-specific outcomes. No evidence that this association persists over the second and third years of life 
was found17. An earlier study with this data examined the relationship of spectral power to outcome16. While 
group differences were found, they were not predictive of outcome. A review of EEG analysis methods for detect-
ing ASD risk concluded that “current EEG signal analysis is not able to identify children with ASD with sufficient 
sensitivity or specificity to be clinically useful at this time”44. The methods reviewed included spectral power 
analysis (21 studies), functional connectivity by correlation or synchronization (12 studies), and information 
dynamics, which includes nonlinear methods (7 studies). Nonlinear methods were the least studied EEG analysis 
method, yet showed promise as an early biomarker for ASD33,37, and many later studies. A review of EEG methods 
for mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) detection also found that spectral power measures were not adequate as 
a biomarker, yet nonlinear methods were described as having as yet “unknown, but high perceived potential”45.
The motivation for selecting the signal features was simply to use a broad range of features that might be used 
for functional characterization of a complex system through time series analysis36,46,47. Power in each frequency 
band was computed, but feature-ranking algorithms did not select power as a contributor to the predictions, so 
it was not included here. The list of features used here is unlikely to be complete, as new approaches will continue 
to be developed. However, multiscale analysis of entropy, DFA, and the several recurrence quantitative analysis 
(RQA) values are a reasonably complete list at this time. RQA is a relatively new nonlinear analysis approach that 
purports to give a complete characterization of nonlinear dynamical systems and might be sufficient alone32,48. 
This remains to be evaluated. RQA contains measures of entropy, a measure related to the Lyapunov exponent, 
and several others. In future research, we will work to optimize this list and identify the most diagnostically useful 
measures, as well as the most useful sensor locations and scales or frequency bands. But this will be a very large 
optimization problem that will likely require much larger datasets and a concerted effort by the cognitive neuro-
science community together with data scientists.
It is not known how many EEG sensors, or what placement, is optimal for an effective biomarker profile to 
detect ASD. The 64 or 128 sensor nets chosen for this study were found to be relatively easy to place on young 
infants, and were well-tolerated by participants. For this study, a 19-sensor subset was initially used. From a 
purely computational perspective, even using 19 sensors results in a large feature set, as discussed previously and 
illustrated in Figs 5–7. Some studies have suggested that 19 sensors might be sufficient to detect ASD20,49. Thus, 
nineteen sensors uniformly distributed across the scalp using the standard 10–20 montage were chosen in this 
study as the minimum necessary to sample most of the scalp. Because predictive results were excellent with this 
set of sensors, there was no need to incorporate more than our initially chosen 19 sensors. Future studies may 
explore whether fewer sensors are adequate, or whether incorporating more sensors, perhaps focused in certain 
regions, would enable greater accuracy, or detection of a variety of ASD subtypes. A practical protocol for incor-
porating EEG measurements into primary care will have to consider issues such as cost, ease of use, and tolerance 
by infants and children of all ages, but these questions are beyond the scope of this study.
Although the number of infants available for the 3 month assessments is approximately one-third the num-
ber at other age groups (41 total: 11 ASD, 14 LRC−
, 16 HRA), the size of the data set is still sufficient to draw 
meaningful conclusions. A recent study used 3-month data for analysis and found significant results17. The results 
Figure 12. Developmental trajectories of SampE for the posterior region (O1 + O2 sensors) in low frequency 
(delta) for ASD, LRC−
, and HRA−
.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
16
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
found at 3 months are consistent with those at 6 months, and the trend from 3–6–9 and so on, is consistent. 
This at least suggests that significant and potentially useful information can be found at 3 months of age. Taken 
together, the 3-month data does not detract from results and conclusions from the other age groups, and adds 
support to the hypothesis that neural correlates of a later diagnosis of ASD may be found before 6 months of age, 
possibly 3 months or even earlier.
Although the EEG measurements used in this study are different from the functional MRI measures used in 
the recent study by12, the machine learning methodology used to predict ASD outcomes in the first year of life is 
similar in both studies, and relatively standard. Our approach to analyzing EEG as a set of time series produced by 
a complex system yields similar predictive results. Moreover, our results suggest that measurable brain activity as 
early as 3 months of age may be sufficient to predict the severity of ASD symptoms years later.
Recently, performance-based measures such as atypical eye gaze patterns50–52, unusual vocalization51, or fixa-
tion on geometric patterns53 have highlighted the many potential early markers of ASD risk. Many brain record-
ing (ERP) and imaging techniques such as DTI54,55 and sleep fMRI53 have shown great promise to identify brain 
correlates of prodromal ASD, but may not be practical for routine testing of normal infants due to their cost and 
difficulty. The significant EEG feature differences found in our study may be neural correlates of these behavioral 
measures and is an area for future exploration. For example, the quantitative results in Figs 5–7 might be corre-
lated with specific behavioral measures.
Significant differences were found in a number of EEG features, as shown graphically in Figs 5–7. Visual 
inspection reveals that a subtle but significant change occurs at about 12 months. More focused examination of 
changes in specific regions in sample entropy and determinism reveal that the convergence in the three months 
before and after 12 months is consistent across most regions, features, and frequency ranges. This can also be seen 
in the regional trajectories in Figs 8–12.
The neural interpretation of nonlinear electrophysiological results presented here require further exten-
sive research, analogous perhaps to the micro- and macro- neural structural interpretation of Diffusion Tensor 
Imaging (DTI) indices that are still subject to ongoing research56. Nevertheless, some general interpretations 
are suggested by our results. Atypical development in the frontal and temporal lobes are believed to be involved 
in ASD56,57. The left frontal (Fig. 10) and total bilateral frontal (Fig. 11) trajectories appear to support this. 
Divergence of ASD in both of these regions appears after 18 months of age. Since frontal regions develop later 
than posterior regions, these may not be as useful for early detection of ASD.
Atypical lateralization of language areas has been found to be common in people with ASD58,59, including 
reduced structural asymmetry in fronto-temporal language regions, with more atypical asymmetries linked to more 
substantive language impairment60. Typical Sylvian Fissure (SF) asymmetry has been associated with typical anterior 
and posterior parietal asymmetry59. Finch et al.61 found differences in lateralization patterns of ERPs to speech stim-
uli across the same groups as the present study by 12 months of age, with the ASD group showing reversed laterali-
zation compared to the LRC−
 group61. Taken together, significant differences between ASD and non-ASD subjects 
may be present as early as 12 months or before in temporal, frontal and temporal-parietal regions.
The differing trajectories in left temporal (T7) region for our three groups, as shown in Fig. 8, may reflect dif-
ferences in a critical auditory process that develops during this time. We speculate that the deviation of the ASD 
development in this region from the LRC−
 group is related to auditory processing.
Figure 9 shows the HRA−
 and ASD groups following parallel paths until 9 months, significantly different 
from the LRC−
 group, in the right temporal-parietal region. Starting at 12 months, the HRA−
 curve breaks from 
the ASD trajectory and begins to parallel the LRC−
 group, though at an intermediate level. Both EEG and MEG 
studies show atypical brain activity in children with autism in primary and association auditory cortices62. This 
atypical activity may be reflected by the significantly different entropy levels found in the right temporal-parietal 
region after 6 months.
An apparent shift in the EEG-derived values at 12 months can be seen in the overall feature maps of Figs 5–7 
as well as in some of the regional curves shown in Figs 8–12. This 12-month shift may correspond to the drop 
accuracy of HRA−
 classification as that occurs around this age. In Table 5(b), HRA−
 prediction is >95% for 3 
and 6 month infants, then drops to between 63% and 71% thereafter (79% if 6 and 9 month values are combined). 
Also, the numbers of uncertain participants that are too close to the dividing plane increases considerably in the 
9 to 12 month range and remains high thereafter.
One of the future challenges with our analysis is to create developmental high-dimensional trajectories that 
cannot be visualized in three dimensions. The trajectories in Figs 8–12 show distinct changes and differences 
between the three groups that may be indicators of atypical developmental paths in those regions that are associ-
ated with the later emergence of autistic characteristics.
Predicted Severity Scores. 
The relatively strong correlation between predicted and actual measured CSS 
scores suggests that the EEG analysis presented herein may be useful not only as a means of predicting a future 
diagnosis of ASD, but also for assessing the severity of future symptoms. We note that a number of participants 
labeled as ASD had ADOS summary scores of 1 or 2, which and some non-ASD participants in the HRA−
 group 
had ADOS scores of 3 to 5. The correlations are reduced considerably by these seemingly inconsistent or heter-
ogeneous summary scores. The predicted summary scores for the HRA−
 group are somewhat higher than the 
actual scores, which are only slightly higher than the LRC−
 group. It is not known which scores might be more 
closely indicative of actual real-world behaviors. Importantly, the predicted summary scores predict the actual 
group membership quite well, with relatively narrow confidence intervals around the mean.
Research suggests that features of ASD are not restricted to individuals who are diagnosed with ASD, and that 
there is pronounced variation within the general population relating to ASD traits, which reflect similar (though 
less severe) social-cognitive and behavioral features to those observed in ASDs63. Cognitive tests in another 
study revealed similarities between children with ASD and non-ASD siblings of children with ASD on standard 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
17
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
intelligence tests, suggesting that the common cognitive profile could be an intermediate phenotype of this syn-
drome64. Studies of older children have found that siblings and parents are more likely to show mild impairments 
in language65,66, non-verbal communication (Ruser et al.66), theory of mind67,68 and face processing compared 
to controls68. These findings about the heterogeneity of ASD in the general population suggest that our results 
regarding the CSS scores might be expanded to include more refined subtypes of ASD.
The results in Table 5 warrant further examination. When training a classifier to recognize EEG features that 
predict a specific outcome, the training sets must be distinct. Because ASD occurs along a spectrum, training a 
classifier to make a binary decision (ASD or not) with subjects that have essentially the full range of ASD char-
acteristics leads to problems with the very definition of ASD. Subjects that have ADOS summary scores that put 
them near the borderline of “mild ASD” versus “not ASD, but exhibiting ASD-like characteristics” requires the 
EEG classifier to make decisions that result in for which even human clinicians have low inter-rater agreement. 
This is exactly what we see in Table 5.b. The age trend is interesting as well: at 3 and 6 months, even the HRA−
 
subjects are easily classified “correctly” as not-ASD. This may simply be because ASD brain function has not yet 
fully emerged. After 9 months, the HRA−
 subjects are more difficult to classify, perhaps because ASD-like brain 
function, associated with CSS summary scores that approach the borderline, is emerging.
This situation is remedied in Table 5.c where we allow 3 classification outcomes: ASD, not-ASD, and ‘uncer-
tain’
. The latter category occurs when the EEG features lead to a score that puts the subject very near the classifi-
cation plane, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Using this approach, 116 subjects with data at 6 and 9 months were classified 
perfectly, with only 7 of the 116 labeled as “uncertain”
. It may be that a longitudinal risk assessment model that 
updates with each new measurement might enable these uncertainties to be resolved as the child passes 12 
months, or 18 months. This remains an area for future research.
Examining the results in Table 5.c, it appears that the lowest predictive accuracy occurs at 12 months. Also, 
the largest number of infants labeled as “uncertain” occurs at 9, 12, and 18 months. This seems to correlate with 
the shift in EEG feature values that occurs at around 12 months. By 36 months, the number of uncertain labels 
has decreased and the predictive accuracy has improved again. However, the predictive accuracy appears to be 
somewhat lower at 36 months. In Figs 8–12 it is quite apparent that the confidence intervals become much wider 
at 36 months, suggesting that all groups are becoming more diverse in their electrophysiological activity.
The greatest remaining challenge in the evaluation of nonlinear signal analysis methods is to discover the neural and 
behavioral meaning of the various EEG measures. Terms used to label the features used in this study are derived from 
physical systems. Entropy, determinism, laminarity, and so on have meaning in the context of turbulent fluid flow, for 
example. The RQA-derived values appeared to be similar, and distinctly different from SampE and DFA. Thus, regional 
plots (Figs 8–12) examined only SampE and DET. Further research is required to determine if more information, 
perhaps subtle, can be found in the array of RQA, or other nonlinear, signal features. Translating these mathematical 
constructs to networks of millions of neural generators cannot be done through analytical mathematics alone, but 
may require many empirical studies whereby differences in entropy, for example, are compared to many cognitive and 
behavioral phenotypes. Machine learning algorithms are useful for recognizing that significant correlations between 
patterns of features and outcomes exist, but these are unable to interpret these correlations in electrophysiological 
terms. One of the goals of this study is to encourage the broader neuroscience community to become involved in this 
research and contribute to a better and deeper understanding of the relationship between nonlinear (and multiscale) 
analysis of electrophysiological signals and their meaning in the context of brain-behavior relationships.
Conclusions
The results presented in this paper are consistent with and greatly extend our previous study with a subset from 
this cohort of infants (Bosl et al., 2011). Nonlinear analysis of EEG signals extracts information that is signifi-
cantly different in children who develop ASD, as early as 3 months of age. Predictions of the diagnostic outcomes 
were highly accurate using measurements as early as 3 months of age. Our analytic approach was not only asso-
ciated with the binary outcome, but also strongly correlated with symptom severity as measured by CSS scores. 
Developmental trajectories of SampE and DET in key brain regions associated with ASD revealed significant dif-
ferences between the three groups. In general, the ASD group diverged from the LRC−
 group at early ages in the 
left temporal and right temporal-parietal regions, and diverged later, after 18 months, in frontal regions. Predicted 
severity scores were significantly correlated with actual scores using EEG measurements taken at 3 months of age 
and older. This suggests that EEG measurement using the method presented here is a promising technology for 
monitoring neural development in a broad population of children. Future research with larger and more diverse 
populations is needed to determine the clinical applicability of this approach to ASD detection in general popula-
tions. As our results when combining 6- and 9-month suggest, longitudinal studies that create trajectories rather 
than point measurements at a single age might yield further insights.
References
 1. Baio, J. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years - autism and developmental disabilities monitoring 
network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR Surveill Summ 63, 1–21, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6302a1.
htm?s_cid = ss6302a1_w (2014).
 2. Amaral, D. G. et al. In pursuit of neurophenotypes: The consequences of having autism and a big brain. Autism Res 10, 711–722, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1755 (2017).
 3. Ozonoff, S. et al. A prospective study of the emergence of early behavioral signs of autism. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry 49(256–266), e251–252 doi:00004583-201003000-00009 (2010).
 4. Reiersen, A. M. Early Identification of Autism Spectrum Disorder: Is Diagnosis by Age 3 a Reasonable Goal? Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 56, 284–285, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2017.02.003 (2017).
 5. Sheldrick, R. C. & Garfinkel, D. Is a Positive Developmental-Behavioral Screening Score Sufficient to Justify Referral? A Review of 
Evidence and Theory. Acad Pediatr 17, 464–470, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acap.2017.01.016 (2017).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
18
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
 6. Steiner, A. M., Goldsmith, T. R., Snow, A. V. & Chawarska, K. Practitioner’s guide to assessment of autism spectrum disorders in 
infants and toddlers. J Autism Dev Disord 42, 1183–1196, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-011-1376-9 (2012).
 7. Pettersson, E., Anckarsater, H., Gillberg, C. & Lichtenstein, P. Different neurodevelopmental symptoms have a common genetic 
etiology. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 54, 1356–1365, https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12113 (2013).
 8. Gliga, T., Jones, E. J., Bedford, R., Charman, T. & Johnson, M. H. From early markers to neuro-developmental mechanisms of 
autism. Dev Rev 34, 189–207, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2014.05.003 (2014).
 9. Johnson, M. H., Jones, E. J. & Gliga, T. Brain adaptation and alternative developmental trajectories. Dev Psychopathol 27, 425–442, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579415000073 (2015).
 
10. Hernandez, L. M., Rudie, J. D., Green, S. A., Bookheimer, S. & Dapretto, M. Neural signatures of autism spectrum disorders: insights 
into brain network dynamics. Neuropsychopharmacology: official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 
40, 171–189, https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2014.172 (2015).
 
11. Kana, R. K., Libero, L. E. & Moore, M. S. Disrupted cortical connectivity theory as an explanatory model for autism spectrum 
disorders. Phys Life Rev 8, 410–437, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2011.10.001 (2011).
 
12. Emerson, R. W. et al. Functional neuroimaging of high-risk 6-month-old infants predicts a diagnosis of autism at 24 months of age. 
Sci Transl Med 9, https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aag2882 (2017).
 
13. Chen, C. P. et al. Diagnostic classification of intrinsic functional connectivity highlights somatosensory, default mode, and visual 
regions in autism. Neuroimage Clin 8, 238–245, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2015.04.002 (2015).
 
14. Elison, J. T. et al. Frontolimbic neural circuitry at 6 months predicts individual differences in joint attention at 9 months. Dev Sci 16, 
186–197, https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12015 (2013).
 
15. Elison, J. T. et al. White matter microstructure and atypical visual orienting in 7-month-olds at risk for autism. The American journal 
of psychiatry 170, 899–908, https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12091150 (2013).
 
16. Tierney, A. L., Gabard-Durnam, L., Vogel-Farley, V., Tager-Flusberg, H. & Nelson, C. A. Developmental trajectories of resting EEG 
power: an endophenotype of autism spectrum disorder. PLoS One 7, e39127, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0039127 (2012).
 
17. Levin, A. R., Varcin, K. J., O’Leary, H. M., Tager-Flusberg, H. & Nelson, C. A. EEG Power at 3 Months in Infants at High Familial 
Risk for Autism. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders 9, 1–13 (2017).
 
18. Gao, Z. & Jin, N. Complex network from time series based on phase space reconstruction. Chaos 19, 033137, https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.3227736 (2009).
 
19. Bosl, W. In Neurophenotypes: Advancing Psychiatry and Neuropsychology in the “OMICS” Era Innovations in Cognitive Neuroscience 
(eds Vinoth Jagaroo & Susan Santangelo) (Springer, 2016).
 
20. Bosl, W. J., Loddenkemper, T. & Nelson, C. A. Nonlinear EEG Analysis Reveals Commonalities and Differences in Autism and 
Absence Epilepsy. Neuropsychiatric Electrophysiology 3, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40810-017-0023-x (2017).
 
21. David Hairston, W. et al. Usability of four commercially-oriented EEG systems. J Neural Eng 11, 046018, https://doi.
org/10.1088/1741-2560/11/4/046018 (2014).
 
22. Maskeliunas, R., Damasevicius, R., Martisius, I. & Vasiljevas, M. Consumer-grade EEG devices: are they usable for control tasks? 
PeerJ 4, e1746, https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1746 (2016).
 
23. Rutter, M., Bailey, A. & Lord, C. In Western Psychological Services (2003).
 
24. Lord, C. et al. The autism diagnostic observation schedule-generic: a standard measure of social and communication deficits 
associated with the spectrum of autism. J Autism Dev Disord 30, 205–223 (2000).
 
25. Gotham, K., Pickles, A. & Lord, C. Standardizing ADOS scores for a measure of severity in autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev 
Disord 39, 693–705, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-008-0674-3 (2009).
 
26. Walker, J. S. A primer on wavelets and their scientific applications. 2nd edn, (Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2008).
 
27. Costa, M., Goldberger, A. L. & Peng, C. K. Multiscale entropy analysis of biological signals. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 
71, 021906 (2005).
 
28. Bosl, W
. J., Tager-Flusberg, H. & Nelson, C. A. EEG Complexity as a Biomarker for Autism Spectrum Disorder. BMC medicine 9 (2011).
 
29. Bhyri, C., Hamde, S. T. & Waghmare, L. M. ECG feature extraction and disease diagnosis. J Med Eng Technol 35, 354–361, https://
doi.org/10.3109/03091902.2011.595530 (2011).
 
30. Webber, C. L. & Zbilut, J. P. In Tutorials in contemporary nonlinear methods for the behavioral sciences (eds M. A. Riley & G. Van 
Orden) (National Science Foundation, 2005).
 
31. Marwan, N., Recurrence Plots and Cross Recurrence Plots. http://www.recurrence-plot.tk, (2012).
 
32. Marwan, N., Romano, M. C., Thiel, M. & Kurths, J. Recurrence plots for the analysis of complex systems. Physics Reports 438, 
237–329 (2007).
 
33. Bosl, W., Tierney, A., Tager-Flusberg, H. & Nelson, C. EEG complexity as a biomarker for autism spectrum disorder risk. BMC 
medicine 9, https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-9-18 (2011).
 
34. Guyon, I., Weston, J., Barnhill, S. & Vapnik, V. Gene selection for cancer classification using support vector machines. Machine 
Learning 46, 389–422 (2002).
 
35. Golland, P. & Fischl, B. Permutation tests for classification: towards statistical significance in image-based studies. Inf Process Med 
Imaging 18, 330–341 (2003).
 
36. Drongelen, W. v. Signal processing for neuroscientists: introduction to the analysis of physiological signals. (Academic Press, 2007).
 
37. Catarino, A., Churches, O., Baron-Cohen, S., Andrade, A. & Ring, H. Atypical EEG complexity in autism spectrum conditions: a 
multiscale entropy analysis. Clin Neurophysiol 122, 2375–2383, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2011.05.004 (2011).
 
38. Takahashi, T. et al. Antipsychotics reverse abnormal EEG complexity in drug-naive schizophrenia: a multiscale entropy analysis. 
Neuroimage 51, 173–182, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.009 (2010).
 
39. Vandendriessche, B. et al. A multiscale entropy-based tool for scoring severity of systemic inflammation. Crit Care Med 42, 
e560–569, https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000000299 (2014).
 
40. Billeci, L. et al. An integrated EEG and eye-tracking approach for the study of responding and initiating joint attention in Autism 
Spectrum Disorders. Sci Rep 7, 13560, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-13053-4 (2017).
 
41. Bruinsma, Y., Koegel, R. L. & Koegel, L. K. Joint attention and children with autism: a review of the literature. Ment Retard Dev 
Disabil Res Rev 10, 169–175, https://doi.org/10.1002/mrdd.20036 (2004).
 
42. Tager-Flusberg, H. The origins of social impairments in autism spectrum disorder: Studies of infants at risk. Neural Networks Aug 
6, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2010.07.008 (2010).
 
43. Varcin, K. J. & Jeste, S. S. The emergence of autism spectrum disorder: insights gained from studies of brain and behaviour in high-
risk infants. Curr Opin Psychiatry 30, 85–91, https://doi.org/10.1097/YCO.0000000000000312 (2017).
 
44. Gurau, O., Bosl, W. J. & Newton, C. R. How Useful Is Electroencephalography in the Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorders and 
the Delineation of Subtypes: A Systematic Review. Front Psychiatry 8, 121, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00121 (2017).
 
45. Rapp, P. E. et al. Traumatic brain injury detection using electrophysiological methods. Frontiers in human neuroscience 9, 11, https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00011 (2015).
 
46. Kantz, H. & Schreiber, T. Nonlinear time series analysis. 2nd edn, (Cambridge University Press, 2004).
 
47. Sörnmo, L. & Laguna, P. Bioelectrical signal processing in cardiac and neurological applications. (Elsevier Academic Press, 2005).
 
48. Webber, C. L. & Marwan, N. In Understanding Complex Systems (Springer, New York, 2015).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
19
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
 
49. Heunis, T. M., Aldrich, C. & de Vries, P. J. Recent Advances in Resting-State Electroencephalography Biomarkers for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder-A Review of Methodological and Clinical Challenges. Pediatr Neurol 61, 28–37, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pediatrneurol.2016.03.010 (2016).
 
50. Bedford, R. et al. Precursors to social and communication difficulties in infants at-risk for autism: gaze following and attentional 
engagement. J Autism Dev Disord 42, 2208–2218, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-012-1450-y (2012).
 
51. Jones, W. & Klin, A. Attention to eyes is present but in decline in 2-6-month-old infants later diagnosed with autism. Nature 504, 
427–431, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12715 (2013).
 
52. Wagner, J. B., Hirsch, S. B., Vogel-Farley, V. K., Redcay, E. & Nelson, C. A. Eye-tracking, autonomic, and electrophysiological 
correlates of emotional face processing in adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. J Autism Dev Disord 43, 188–199, https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10803-012-1565-1 (2013).
 
53. Pierce, K., Conant, D., Hazin, R., Stoner, R. & Desmond, J. Preference for geometric patterns early in life as a risk factor for autism. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 68, 101–109, https://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.113 (2011).
 
54. Elsabbagh, M. et al. The development of face orienting mechanisms in infants at-risk for autism. Behav Brain Res 251, 147–154, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2012.07.030 (2012).
 
55. Elsabbagh, M. et al. Infant neural sensitivity to dynamic eye gaze is associated with later emerging autism. Curr Biol 22, 338–342, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.056 (2012).
 
56. Hoppenbrouwers, M., Vandermosten, M. & Boet, B. Autism as a disconnection syndrome: A qualitative and quantitative review of 
diffusion tensor imaging studies. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 8, 387–412 (2013).
 
57. Geschwind, D. H. & Levitt, P. Autism spectrum disorders: developmental disconnection syndromes. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17, 
103–111, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2007.01.009 (2007).
 
58. Knaus, T. A. et al. Language laterality in autism spectrum disorder and typical controls: a functional, volumetric, and diffusion 
tensor MRI study. Brain Lang 112, 113–120, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2009.11.005 (2010).
 
59. Knaus, T. A., Tager-Flusberg, H. & Foundas, A. L. Sylvian fissure and parietal anatomy in children with autism spectrum disorder. 
Behav Neurol 25, 327–339, https://doi.org/10.3233/BEN-2012-110214 (2012).
 
60. Lindell, A. K. & Hudry, K. Atypicalities in cortical structure, handedness, and functional lateralization for language in autism 
spectrum disorders. Neuropsychol Rev 23, 257–270, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-013-9234-5 (2013).
 
61. Finch, K. H., Seery, A. M., Talbott, M. R., Nelson, C. A. & Tager-Flusberg, H. Lateralization of ERPs to speech and handedness in the 
early development of Autism Spectrum Disorder. J Neurodev Disord 9, 4, https://doi.org/10.1186/s11689-017-9185-x (2017).
 
62. Marco, E. J., Hinkley, L. B., Hill, S. S. & Nagarajan, S. S. Sensory processing in autism: a review of neurophysiologic findings. Pediatric 
research 69, 48R–54R, https://doi.org/10.1203/PDR.0b013e3182130c54 (2011).
 
63. Gokcen, E., Petrides, K. V., Hudry, K., Frederickson, N. & Smillie, L. D. Sub-threshold autism traits: the role of trait emotional 
intelligence and cognitive flexibility. Br J Psychol 105, 187–199, https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12033 (2014).
 
64. Gizzonio, V., Avanzini, P., Fabbri-Destro, M., Campi, C. & Rizzolatti, G. Cognitive abilities in siblings of children with autism 
spectrum disorders. Exp Brain Res 232, 2381–2390, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-014-3935-8 (2014).
 
65. Lindgren, K. A., Folstein, S. E., Tomblin, J. B. & Tager-Flusberg, H. Language and reading abilities of children with autism spectrum 
disorders and specific language impairment and their first-degree relatives. Autism Res 2, 22–38, https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.63 
(2009).
 
66. Ruser, T. F. et al. Communicative competence in parents of children with autism and parents of children with specific language 
impairment. J Autism Dev Disord 37, 1323–1336, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-006-0274-z (2007).
 
67. Baron-Cohen, S. & Hammer, J. Parents of Children with Asperger Syndrome: What is the Cognitive Phenotype? J Cogn Neurosci 9, 
548–554, https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1997.9.4.548 (1997).
 
68. Dawson, G. et al. Neurocognitive and electrophysiological evidence of altered face processing in parents of children with autism: 
implications for a model of abnormal development of social brain circuitry in autism. Dev Psychopathol 17, 679–697, https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0954579405050327 (2005).
 
69. Gomez, C. & Hornero, R. Entropy and Complexity Analyses in Alzheimer’s Disease: An MEG Study. Open Biomed Eng J 4, 223–235, 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1874120701004010223TOBEJ-4-223 (2010).
 
70. Goldberger, A. L. Fractal variability versus pathologic periodicity: complexity loss and stereotypy in disease. Perspect Biol Med 40, 
543–561 (1997).
 
71. Peng, C.-K., Costa, M. & Goldberger, A. L. Adaptive Data Analysis of Complex Fluctuations in Physiologic Time Series. Advances in 
Adaptive Data Analysis 1, 61–70 (2009).
 
72. Schinkel, S., Marwan, N. & Kurths, J. Brain signal analysis based on recurrences. J Physiol Paris 103, 315–323, doi:S0928-
4257(09)00029-110.1016/j.jphysparis.2009.05.007 (2019).
 
73. Hirata, Y. & Aihara, K. Statistical Tests for Serial Dependence and Laminarity on Recurrence Plots. International Journal of 
Bifurcation and Chaos, 1077–1084 (2011).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) grant R21 MH 093753 (to WJB), 
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD) grant R21 DC08647 (to HTF), 
NIDCD grant R01 DC 10290 (to HTF and CAN) and a grant from the Simons Foundation (to CAN, HTF, and 
WJB). We are especially grateful to the staff and students who worked on the study and to the families who 
participated.
Author Contributions
W.J.B. conceived of the analytical methods used in this paper, wrote computer codes for signal processing, 
performed calculations and statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript. C.A.N. and H.T.F. are co-Principal 
Investigators on the larger Infant Sibling Project upon which this paper was based, contributed to the study 
design, interpretation of developmental implications of the results and were responsible for coordinating 
recruitment and testing of all participant data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Additional Information
Competing Interests: W.J.B. is named on a provisional patent application submitted by the Boston Children’s 
Hospital Technology Development Office that includes parts of the signal analysis methods discussed in this 
article. The authors declare that they have no other competing financial or nonfinancial interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
20
SCiEntiFiC REPoRTS |  (2018) 8:6828  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
