 The mPower study, Parkinson
disease mobile data collected using
ResearchKit
Brian M. Bot1, Christine Suver1, Elias Chaibub Neto1, Michael Kellen1, Arno Klein1,
Christopher Bare1, Megan Doerr1, Abhishek Pratap1, John Wilbanks1, E. Ray Dorsey2,
Stephen H. Friend1 & Andrew D. Trister1
Current measures of health and disease are often insensitive, episodic, and subjective. Further, these
measures generally are not designed to provide meaningful feedback to individuals. The impact of high-
resolution activity data collected from mobile phones is only beginning to be explored. Here we present
data from mPower, a clinical observational study about Parkinson disease conducted purely through an
iPhone app interface. The study interrogated aspects of this movement disorder through surveys and
frequent sensor-based recordings from participants with and without Parkinson disease. Benefitting from
large enrollment and repeated measurements on many individuals, these data may help establish baseline
variability of real-world activity measurement collected via mobile phones, and ultimately may lead to
quantification of the ebbs-and-flows of Parkinson symptoms. App source code for these data collection
modules are available through an open source license for use in studies of other conditions. We hope that
releasing data contributed by engaged research participants will seed a new community of analysts working
collaboratively on understanding mobile health data to advance human health.
Design Type(s)
observation design • time series design • repeated measure design
Measurement Type(s)
disease severity measurement
Technology Type(s)
Patient Self-Report
Factor Type(s)
Sample Characteristic(s)
Homo sapiens
1Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. 2Center for Human Experimental Therapeutics, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials
should be addressed to A.D.T. (email: trister@sagebase.org).
OPEN
SUBJECT CATEGORIES
» Research data
» Neurology
» Parkinson’s disease
» Medical research
Received: 07 December 2015
Accepted: 02 February 2016
Published: 3 March 2016
www.nature.com/scientificdata
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
1
 Background & Summary
Parkinson disease (PD) is a movement disorder related to loss of dopamine producing cells in the
midbrain. Manifestations of the disease can include tremor, changes in gait, slowness (bradykinesia) and
rigidity. There is significant variability in the presentation and progression of these symptoms, and while
there is no known cure for PD, treatments can mitigate the effects of these symptoms. Given that typical
PD patients have visits with a physician every 4–6 months, the day-to-day variability of symptoms and
the effects of medications on these symptoms could reveal opportunities for interventions that might
improve quality of life for those with PD. We hypothesize that more frequent quantitative assessments
could lead to a better understanding of the disease heterogeneity, as well as provide individual benefit to
those living with the condition. Mobile phones and other networked devices offer a unique opportunity to
engage research participants without requiring physical interactions. This approach allows classic
implements, such as surveys, to be administered remotely. More interestingly, sensors such as
accelerometers, gyroscopes, and microphones can provide quantitative surrogates of PD symptoms with
minimal or no interruption in the participant’s daily life1.
In March 2015, we launched mPower (https://github.com/Sage-Bionetworks/mPower), an observa-
tional smartphone-based study developed using Apple’s ResearchKit library (http://researchkit.org/) to
evaluate the feasibility of remotely collecting frequent information about the daily changes in symptom
severity and their sensitivity to medication in PD. These data provide the ability to explore classification
of control participants and those who self-report having PD, as well as to begin to measure the severity of
PD for those with the disease. There are myriad additional questions from each of the varying streams of
data that will require a community of researchers to explore fully.
The study utilized a novel remote approach to enrollment in which participants self-guide through
visually engaging yet complete informed consent process prior to deciding to join the study. A critical
aspect of this transparent consent process is providing participants with an explicit decision point
specifying if the data they donate to the study can also be used for secondary research purposes. Data
described and made available here are derived from the first six months of the mPower study exclusively
from those participants who chose to make their data broadly available for secondary research. We are
hopeful that the data donated by mPower participants will encourage the formation of a broad, diverse,
and collaborative community of PD researchers. We invite you to join this community to accelerate the
research on how mobile technologies can impact PD, and together improve the quality of life for people
living with PD.
Methods
Participant onboarding
The mPower app was made available starting in March 2015 through the Apple App Store (https://itunes.
apple.com/us/app/parkinson-mpower-study-app/id972191200?mt = 8) only in the United States and for
iPhone 4S or newer requiring a minimum of iOS 8. Enrollment was open to individuals diagnosed with
PD as well as anyone interested in participating as a control. Following download, prospective
participants self-navigated through eligibility criteria (18 years of age or older, live in the United States,
comfortable reading and writing on iPhone in English) and then through an interactive e-consent process
(http://sagebase.org/pcc/). Ethical oversight of the study was obtained from Western Institutional Review
Board. Prior to signing an electronically rendered traditional informed consent form, prospective
participants had to pass a five-question quiz evaluating their understanding of the study aims, participant
rights, and data sharing options. After completing the e-consent process and electronically signing the
informed consent form, participants were asked for an email address to which their signed consent form
was sent and allowing for verification of their enrollment in the study.
Participants were given the option to share their data only with the mPower study team and
partners (‘share narrowly’) or to share their data more broadly with qualified researchers worldwide,
and had to make an active choice to complete the consent process (no default choice was presented).
The data presented here consist of all individuals who chose to have their data shared broadly
(Figure 1).
Study tasks
Once enrolled, participants were presented with a ‘dashboard’ of study tasks. Table 1 lists these tasks and
their periodicity. Participants could skip any task or question within a survey at any time. A one-time
baseline survey (Table 2, Data Citation 1) was the first task the participants were asked to complete.
Additional standard surveys used for PD assessment, Parkinson Disease Questionnaire 8 (PDQ-8,
Table 3, Data Citation 2) (ref. 2) and a subset of questions from the Movement Disorder Society
Universal Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS, Table 4, Data Citation 3) (ref. 3), were
presented at baseline as well as monthly throughout the course of the study. Due to the length of the
MDS-UPDRS instrument, we included only a subset of questions taken from the patient questionnaire
focusing largely on self-evaluation of the motor symptoms of PD. The data obtained from these surveys is
subject to the copyright holder’s license. All surveys represent self-reported outcomes and thus
occasionally contain typographic errors and possibly inconsistent information.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
2
 Participants were presented four separate activities (referred to as ‘memory’, ‘tapping’, ‘voice’, and
‘walking’) which they could complete three times a day. Participants who self-identified as having a
professional diagnosis of PD were asked to do these four tasks (1) immediately before taking their
medication, (2) after taking their medication (when they are feeling at their best), and (3) at some other
time. Participants who self-identified as not having a professional diagnosis of PD (the controls) could
complete these tasks at any time during the day, with the app suggesting to complete each activity three
times per day.
The memory activity (Data Citation 4) was developed to evaluate short-term spatial memory (Personal
Communication with Katherine Possin). Participants observed a grid of flowers that illuminated one at
and time and were then asked to replicate the illumination pattern by touching the flowers in the same
order. The first release of the app (version 1.0, build 7) did not include this memory activity, however
subsequent releases (starting April 21) included the activity. Included in these data are samples of where
and when participants tapped on the iPhone screen and if that was a correct location as per the random
pattern presented to them.
The tapping activity (Data Citation 5) measured dexterity and speed. Participants were instructed to
lay their phone on a flat surface and to use two fingers on the same hand to alternatively tap two
stationary points on the screen for 20 s. Included in these data are samples of where and when
participants tapped on the iPhone screen as well as accelerometer readouts of how the phone was moving
during the activity.
The voice activity (Data Citation 6) recorded participants’ sustained phonation by instructing them to
say ‘Aaaaah’ into the microphone at a steady volume for up to 10 s. The data from this activity include
audio files containing measurements from the iPhone microphone for both the 10 s of phonation as well
as for the 5 s countdown leading up to the activity.
The walking activity (Data Citation 7) evaluated participants’ gait and balance. The first release of the
app (version 1.0, build 7) instructed participants to walk 20 steps in a straight line, turn around, stand still
for 30 s, then walk 20 steps back. Subsequent releases omitted the return walk. For each leg of this activity,
data included measurements from the phone’s accelerometer and gyroscope in both raw and processed
formats.
provided consent and passed quiz
(n=16,585)
email address verified
(n=14,684)
withdrew from study
(n=2,483)
email not verified
(n=1,901)
opted to share broadly
(n=9,520)
opted to share narrowly
(n=2,681)
downloaded mPower app
(n=48,104)
did not enroll
(n=31,519)
Figure 1. mPower study cohort description.
Task name
Type of task and schedule
Citation
unique participants
unique tasks
Demographics
Survey—once
Data Citation 1
6,805
6,805
PDQ8
Survey—monthly
Data Citation 2
1,334
1,641
UPDRS
Survey—monthly
Data Citation 3
2,024
2,305
Memory
Activity—t.i.d.
Data Citation 4
968
8,569
Tapping
Activity—t.i.d.
Data Citation 5
8,003
78,887
Voice
Activity—t.i.d.
Data Citation 6
5,826
65,022
Walking
Activity—t.i.d.
Data Citation 7
3,101
35,410
Table 1. Data available for each survey and activity completed by study participants.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
3
 Question
Variable name
Variable details
How old are you?
age
integer
What is your sex?
gender
one of {‘Female’, ‘Male’, ‘Prefer not to answer’}
Which race do you identify
with?
race
check all that apply {‘Black or African’, ‘Latino/Hispanic’, ‘Native American’, ‘Pacific Islander’,
‘Middle Eastern’, ‘Caribbean’, ‘South Asian’, ‘East Asian’, ‘White or Caucasian’, ‘Mixed’}
What is the highest level of
education that you have
completed?
education
one of {‘2-year college degree’, ‘4-year college degree’, ‘Doctoral Degree’, ‘High School Diploma/
GED’, ‘Master's Degree’, ‘Some college’, ‘Some graduate school’, ‘Some high school’}
What is your current
employment status?
employment
one of {‘A homemaker’, ‘A student’, ‘Employment for wages’, ‘Out of work’, ‘Retired’, ‘Self-
employed’, ‘Unable to work’}
What is your current marital
status?
maritalStatus
one of {‘Divorced’, ‘Married or domestic partnership’, ‘Other’, ‘Separated’, ‘Single, never married’,
‘Widowed’}
Are you a spouse, partner or
care-partner of someone who
has Parkinson disease?
are-caretaker
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
Have you ever participated in a
research study or clinical trial
on Parkinson disease before?
past-participation
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
How easy is it for you to use
your smartphone?
smartphone
one of {‘Difficult’, ‘Easy’, ‘Neither easy nor difficult’, ‘Very Difficult’, ‘Very easy’}
Do you ever use your
smartphone to look for health
or medical information online?
phone-usage
one of {‘true’, ‘false’, ‘Not sure’}
Do you use the Internet or
email at home?
home-usage
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
Do you ever use the Internet to
look for health or medical
information online?
medical-usage
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
Did you happen to do this
yesterday, or not?
medical-usage-yesterday
one of {‘true’, ‘false’, ‘don’t know’}
Do you ever use your
smartphone to participate in a
video call or video chat?
video-usage
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
Have you been diagnosed by a
medical professional with
Parkinson disease?
professional-diagnosis
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
In what year did your
movement symptoms begin?
onset-year
integer input
In what year were you
diagnosed with Parkinson
disease?
diagnosis-year
integer input
In what year did you begin
taking Parkinson disease
medication? Type in 0 if you
have not started to take
Parkinson medication.
medication-start-year
integer input
What kind of health care
provider currently cares for
your Parkinson disease?
healthcare-provider
one of {‘Don't know’, ‘General Neurologist (non-Parkinson Disease specialist)’, ‘Nurse Practitioner
or Physician's Assistant’, ‘Other’, ‘Parkinson Disease/Movement Disorder Specialist’, ‘Primary Care
Doctor’}
Have you ever had Deep Brain
Stimulation?
deep-brain-stimulation
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
Have you ever had any surgery
for Parkinson disease, other
than DBS?
surgery
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
Have you ever smoked?
smoked
one of {‘true’, ‘false’}
How many years have you
smoked?
years-smoking
integer input
On average, how many packs
did you smoke each day?
packs-per-day
one of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
When is the last time you
smoked (put today’s date if you
are still smoking)?
last-smoked
year last smoked
Has a doctor ever told you that
you have any of the following
conditions? Please check all
that apply.
health-history
Multiple choice from {‘Acute Myocardial Infarction/Heart Attack’, ‘Alzheimer Disease or Alzheimer
dementia’, ‘Atrial Fibrillation’, ‘Anxiety’, ‘Cataract’, ‘Kidney Disease’, ‘Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD) or Asthma’, ‘Heart Failure/Congestive Heart Failure’, ‘Diabetes or
Prediabetes or High Blood Sugar’, ‘Glaucoma’, ‘Hip/Pelvic Fracture’, ‘Ischemic Heart Disease’,
‘Depression’, ‘Osteoporosis’, ‘Rheumatoid Arthritis’, ‘Dementia’, ‘Stroke/Transient Ischemic Attack
(TIA)’, ‘Breast Cancer’, ‘Colorectal Cancer’, ‘Prostate Cancer’, ‘Lung Cancer’, ‘Endometrial/Uterine
Cancer’, ‘Any other kind of cancer OR tumor’,‘Head Injury with Loss of Consciousness/Concussion’,
‘Urinary Tract infections’, ‘Obstructive Sleep Apnea’, ‘Schizophrenia or Bipolar Disorder’,
‘Peripheral Vascular Disease’, ‘High Blood Pressure/Hypertension’, ‘Fainting/Syncope’, ‘Alcoholism’,
‘Multiple Sclerosis’, ‘Impulse control disorder’, ‘AIDS or HIV’, ‘Liver Disease’, ‘Leukemia or
Lymphoma’, ‘Ulcer Disease’, ‘Connective Tissue Disease’, ‘Coronary Artery Disease’,
‘Anemia’,‘Asthma’}
Table 2. Demographics Survey.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
4
 Data collection and Distribution
The app recorded all data collected for this study through interactions with the Bridge Server, a set of web
services developed and operated by Sage Bionetworks. Bridge exposes a REST style web services API
designed to allow collection and management of mobile health data from a variety of apps. This service
has been used by Sage and other research organizations to support a variety of health studies, including
all five of the initial Research Kit apps launched in March 2015. Bridge provides apps the ability to
securely create accounts for participants, and record consent and other personal information separately
from study data intended to be shared with research teams.
Coded study data, consisting of survey responses and mobile sensor measurements, is exported to
Synapse for distribution to researchers. Synapse4 is a general-purpose data and analysis sharing service
where members can work collaboratively, analyze data, share insights and have attributions and
provenance of those insights to share with others. Synapse is developed and operated by Sage
Bionetworks as a service to the health research community. In addition to mobile health data, we have
used this system to develop communities centered around shared clinical, genomic, imaging, and other
types of biomedical data5–7. In the context of this study, Synapse also hosts the analysis of a small subset
of participants that begins to show the usefulness of collecting data from PD patients in this way as well
as the power of building personalized metrics of PD derived from the activities in mPower8.
Code availability
The mPower mobile app (https://github.com/Sage-Bionetworks/mPower) was built using Apple’s
ResearchKit framework (http://researchkit.org/), which is open source and available on GitHub (https://
github.com/researchkit/researchkit). AppCore (https://github.com/ResearchKit/AppCore) is a layer built
on top of ResearchKit share among the five initial ResearchKit apps. The Bridge iOS SDK (https://github.
com/Sage-Bionetworks/Bridge-iOS-SDK) provides integration with Sage Bionetworks’ Bridge Server, a
back-end data service designed for collection of participant donated study data (https://sagebionetworks.
jira.com/wiki/display/BRIDGE/Bridge+REST+API). Example code for accessing data through Synapse as
well as code used for summary statistics and generating figures for this paper are also made available
(https://github.com/Sage-Bionetworks/mPower-sdata).
Data Records
A total of 9,520 participants consented to the study and agreed to share their data broadly with the
research community. 8,320 participants completed at least one survey or task after joining the study. Of
the 6,805 participants who completed the enrollment survey, 1,087 self-identified as having a professional
diagnosis of PD while 5,581 did not (137 opted not to answer the question). Data contributed by
participants for each survey and activity are enumerated in Table 1 and cumulative tasks completed for
each activity are presented in Figure 2. Due to the nature of the study, follow up is nonuniform across
individuals, however 898 participants contributed data at least five separate days over the course of the
first six months of the study. The number of days participants contributed data were similarly distributed
between those who self-reported as having a diagnosis of PD and those participating as controls
(Figure 3).
All coded data sets (Table 1, Data Citation 1, Data Citation 2, Data Citation 3, Data Citation 4, Data
Citation 5, Data Citation 6, Data Citation 7) are stored and accessible via the Synapse platform in a public
project with associated metadata and documentation (https://www.synapse.org/mPower).
Question
Variable name
Variable details
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you had
difficulty getting around in public?
PDQ8-1
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you had
difficulty dressing yourself?
PDQ8-2
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you felt
depressed?
PDQ8-3
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you had
problems with your close personal relationships?
PDQ8-4
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you had
problems with your concentration, e.g. when reading or watching TV?
PDQ8-5
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you felt unable
to communicate with people properly?
PDQ8-6
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you had
painful muscle cramps or spasms?
PDQ8-7
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Due to Parkinson’s disease, how often during the last month have you felt
embarrassed in public due to having Parkinson’s disease?
PDQ8-8
one of: {‘Never’, ‘Occasionally’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Often’, ‘Always’}
Table 3. PDQ8 Survey.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
5
 Technical Validation
The data provided herein are derived from Apple iPhone devices with proprietary technical validation.
We do not provide test-retest nor other technical validation data sets here, however others have reported
technical validation of the coreMotion sensor in a different context9.
Usage Notes
Due to the novel nature and collection method for these data, governance structures have been put in
place in order to respect the balance between the desire of participants to share their data with qualified
researchers and the respect for privacy of those participants.
Researchers who are interested in accessing these data need to complete the following steps:
(1) Have a Synapse account (https://synapse.org)
(2) Have their Synapse User Profile validated by the Synapse Access and Compliance Team (ACT)
Question
Variable name
Variable details
How good or bad is your health TODAY (0 means the
worst health you can imagine, 100 means the best health
you can imagine)?
EQ-5D1
sliding scale from 0-100
Over the past week, how many times did you do the
following kinds of exercise for more than 15 minutes?
Strenuous exercise (heart beats rapidly):
GELTQ-1a
integer input
Over the past week, how many times did you do the
following kinds of exercise for more than 15 minutes?
Moderate exercise (not exhausting):
GELTQ-1b
integer input
Over the past week, how many times did you do the
following kinds of exercise for more than 15 minutes?
Minimal effort:
GELTQ-1c
integer input
During your leisure time in the past week, how often do
you engage in any regular activity long enough to work up
a sweat (heart beats rapidly)?
GELTQ-2
one of: {‘Often’, ‘Sometimes’, ‘Never/Rarely’}
Over the past week have you had problems remembering
things, following conversations, paying attention, thinking
clearly, or finding your way around the house or in town?
MDS-UPDRS1.1
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week have you felt low, sad, hopeless, or
unable to enjoy things?
MDS-UPDRS1.3
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week have you felt nervous, worried or tense?
MDS-UPDRS1.4
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you felt indifferent to doing
activities or being with people?
MDS-UPDRS1.5
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you had trouble going to sleep at
night or staying asleep through the night? Consider how
rested you felt after waking up in the morning.
MDS-UPDRS1.7
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you had trouble staying awake
during the daytime?
MDS-UPDRS1.8
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you had problems with your
speech?
MDS-UPDRS2.1
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you usually had troubles handling
your food and using eating utensils? For example, do you
have trouble handling finger foods or using forks, knives,
spoons, chopsticks?
MDS-UPDRS2.4
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you usually had problems
dressing? For example, are you slow or do you need help
with buttoning, using zippers, putting on or taking off your
clothes or jewelry?
MDS-UPDRS2.5
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you usually been slow or do you
need help with washing, bathing, shaving, brushing teeth,
combing your hair, or with other personal hygiene?
MDS-UPDRS2.6
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have people usually had trouble
reading your handwriting?
MDS-UPDRS2.7
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you usually had trouble doing
your hobbies or other things that you like to do?
MDS-UPDRS2.8
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, do you usually have trouble turning
over in bed?
MDS-UPDRS2.9
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you usually had shaking or
tremor?
MDS-UPDRS2.10
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, have you usually had problems with
balance and walking?
MDS-UPDRS2.12
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Over the past week, on your usual day when walking, do
you suddenly stop or freeze as if your feet are stuck to the
floor?
MDS-UPDRS2.13
one of: {‘Normal’, ‘Slight’, ‘Mild’, ‘Moderate’, ‘Severe’} mapping to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
Table 4. UPDRS Survey.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
6
 0
20000
40000
60000
80000
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
Memory Activity
Walking Activity
Voice Activity
Tapping Activity
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Date
Cumulative Count
Count
participants
tasks
Figure 2. Cumulative participation for activities over time.
control (n=748)
parkinson (n=150)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
50
100
150
Days on app
Density
Figure 3. Participation shown as number of days visiting the app for all participants who completed at least
one task on five separate days.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
7
 (3) Become a Synapse Certified user by completing a short quiz (https://www.synapse.org/#!Quiz:
Certification)
(4) Submit an Intended Data Use statement
(5) Agree to the Conditions for Use associated with each data source (see DOIs for each data source)
While certain data types may have additional Conditions for Use (e.g. survey copyrights), the
overarching Conditions for Use are as follows:
● You confirm that you will not attempt to re-identify research participants for any reason, including for
re-identification theory research.
● You reaffirm your commitment to the Synapse Awareness and Ethics Pledge.
● You agree to abide by the guiding principles for responsible research use and data handling as
described in the Synapse Governance documents (https://www.synapse.org/#!Help:Governance).
● You commit to keeping these data confidential and secure.
● You agree to use these data exclusively as described in your submitted Intended Data Use statement.
● You understand that these data may not be used for commercial advertisement or to re-contact
research participants.
● You agree to report any misuse or data release, intentional or inadvertent to the ACT within 5 business
days by emailing act@sagebase.org.
● You agree to publish findings in open access publications.
● You promise to acknowledge the research participants as data contributors and mPower
study investigators on all publication or presentation resulting from using these data as follows:
‘These data were contributed by users of the Parkinson mPower mobile application as part of the
mPower study developed by Sage Bionetworks and described in Synapse [https://www.synapse.org/
mPower].’
Examples of client interactions with these data are provided in GitHub: https://github.com/Sage-
Bionetworks/mPower-sdata
References
1. Trister, A. D. et al. Smartphones as new tools in the management and understanding of Parkinson's disease. npj Parkinson's Disease
2, 16006 doi:10.1038/npjparkd.2016.6 (2016).
2. Jenkinson, C., Fitzpatrick, R., Peto, V., Greenhall, R. & Hyman, N. The PDQ-8: development and validation of a short-form
parkinson's disease questionnaire. Psychol. Health 12, 805–814 (1997).
3. Goetz, C. et al. Movement Disorder Society-sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS):
Scale presentation and clinimetric testing results. Movement Disord. 23, 2129–2170 (2008).
4. Derry, J. M. J. et al. Developing predictive molecular maps of human disease through community-based modeling. Nat. Gen. 44,
127–130 (2012).
5. Omberg, L. et al. Enabling transparent and collaborative computational analysis of 12 tumor types within The Cancer
Genome Atlas. Nat. Gen. 45, 1121–1126 (2013).
6. Akbarian, S. et al. The PsychENCODE project. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1707–1712 (2015).
7. Guinney, J. et al. The consensus molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer. Nat. Med. 21, 1350–1356 (2015).
8. Neto, E. C. et al. Personalized Hypothesis Tests for Detecting Medication Response in Parkinson Disease Patients Using iPhone
Sensor Data. Pac. Symp. Biocomput. 21, 273–284 (2016).
9. Yu, Y. et al. Initial Validation of Mobile-Structural Health Monitoring Method Using Smartphones. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. N 2015
274391 (2015).
Data Citations
1. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511429.1 (2016).
2. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511433.1 (2016).
3. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511432.1 (2016).
4. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511434.1 (2016).
5. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511439.1 (2016).
6. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511444.1 (2016).
7. Bot, B. M., et al. Synapse http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn5511449.1 (2016).
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the donations of time and data from all of the mPower study
participants, engineering contributions from Dwayne Jeng, Erin Mounts, Alx Dark, Eric Wu, Shannon
Young for support of the mPower app and data-collection system (Bridge). Furthermore we are thankful
for the guidance from Caroline Tanner on design of the study and Katherine Possin and Joel Kramer for
design and providing the memory activity. Y Media Labs for early app development, Apple for initial app
development and open-source ResearchKit framework. Funding was provided by the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation.
Author Contributions
B.M.B, C.S., M.K., A.K., J.W., E.R.D, S.H.F, and A.D.T. designed the study. B.M.B., C.S., M.D., and J.W.
developed the e-consent process and data governance procedures. B.M.B., E.C.N., A.K., C.B., and A.P.
assembled the data. B.M.B. and A.D.T. wrote the manuscript. All authors provided editorial feedback and
contributed to the final approval of the manuscript.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
8
 Additional Information
Competing financial interests: SF was an employee at Apple at the time of the ResearchKit launch.
How to cite: Bot, B. M. et al. The mPower Study, Parkinson Disease Mobile Data Collected Using
ResearchKit. Sci. Data 3:160011 doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The
images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the
Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
Metadata associated with this Data Descriptor is available at http://www.nature.com/sdata/ and is released
under the CC0 waiver to maximize reuse.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 3:160011 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.11
9
