 316
© 2017 Journal of Craniovertebral Junction and Spine | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow
ABSTRACT
Context: Cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM) is a progressive disease that can result in significant disability. Single‑level stenosis can 
be effectively decompressed through either anterior or posterior techniques. However, multilevel pathology can be challenging, especially 
in the presence of significant spinal stenosis. Three‑level anterior decompression and fusion are associated with higher nonunion rates and 
prolonged dysphagia. Posterior multilevel laminectomies with foraminotomies jeopardize the bone stock required for stable fixation with lateral 
mass screws (LMSs).
Aims: This is the first case series of multilevel laminectomy and fusion for CSM instrumented with posterior cervical cages.
Settings and Design: Three patients presented with a history of worsening neck pain, numbness in bilateral upper extremities and gait 
disturbance, and examination findings consistent with myeloradiculopathy. Cervical magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated multilevel 
spondylosis resulting in moderate to severe bilateral foraminal stenosis at three cervical levels.
Materials and Methods: The patients underwent a multilevel posterior cervical laminectomy and instrumented fusion with intervertebral 
cages placed between bilateral facet joints over three levels. Oswestry disability index and visual analog scores were collected preoperatively 
and at each follow‑up. Pre‑ and post‑operative images were analyzed for changes in cervical alignment and presence of arthrodesis.
Results: Postoperatively, all patients showed marked improvement in neurological symptoms and neck pain. They had full resolution of radicular 
symptoms by 6 weeks postoperatively. At 12‑month follow‑up, they demonstrated solid arthrodesis on X‑rays and computed tomography scan.
Conclusions: Posterior cervical cages may be an alternative option to LMSs in multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion for cervical 
spondylotic myeloradiculopathy.
Keywords: Cervical, intervertebral cage, laminectomy, myelopathy, spondylosis
INTRODUCTION
In 1952, Brain et al. were the first to describe cervical 
spondylotic myelopathy (CSM) and its presentation spanning 
minor symptoms to significant neurological compromise.[1] 
Symptoms of CSM range from pain and numbness to weakness, 
gait instability, bowel and bladder dysfunction, and ultimately 
significant disability.[1‑3] The clinical course of CSM usually 
follows steadily progressive course of neurologic dysfunction. 
Treatment consists of decompression and fusion and may be 
performed through anterior, posterior, or combined surgical 
approaches. The anterior approach is commonly used for 
one‑ or two‑segment pathology and offers better correction 
of kyphotic deformity and restoration/maintenance of sagittal 
balance.[4] Posterior techniques are preferred in cases of 
multisegmental involvement[5‑7] although such an approach is 
associated with a higher risk of postoperative kyphosis.[8] The 
literature reflects comparable efficacy of both techniques in 
multisegmental pathology in improving pain and functional 
outcomes.[7,9]
Multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion with posterior 
cervical cages
Access this article online
Website:
www.jcvjs.com
Quick Response Code
DOI:
10.4103/jcvjs.JCVJS_69_17
Original Article
Jad N Bou Monsef, Krzysztof B Siemionow
Department of Orthopaedics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA
Address for correspondence: Dr. Krzysztof B Siemionow, 
835 South Wolcott Avenue, Rm E‑270, Chicago,  
Illinois 60612, USA. 
E‑mail: siemiok@gmail.com
How to cite this article: Bou Monsef JN, Siemionow KB. Multilevel cervical 
laminectomy and fusion with posterior cervical cages. J Craniovert Jun 
Spine 2017;8:316-21.
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and 
build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as the author is credited and the new creations 
are licensed under the identical terms.
For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
 Bou Monsef and Siemionow: Multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion with posterior cervical cages
317
Journal of Craniovertebral Junction and Spine / Volume 8 / Issue 4 / October-December 2017
Facetal distraction as a treatment of cervical spondylosis 
with radiculopathy and myelopathy was described by 
Goel.[10,11] Recently, intervertebral cervical cages implanted 
by a posterior approach bilaterally between the facet joints 
have demonstrated[12‑15] good clinical and radiological 
outcome at 24 months.[16] Stabilization achieved after 
bilateral posterior cervical cage implantation is reported to 
be similar to anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) 
and lateral mass screws (LMSs) in biomechanical studies.[17,18] 
This technique stabilizes the facet with instrumented 
distraction and achieves indirect posterior cervical nerve 
root decompression by significantly increasing foraminal 
area.[19] Results have supported its safety and efficacy for 
treatment of single‑level cervical radiculopathy.[20] This is 
the first reported case series of multilevel laminectomies 
and fusions for CSM instrumented with posterior cervical 
cages.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Between 2015 and 2016, three patients with cervical 
spondylotic disease were treated using the proposed 
technique. Written informed consent was obtained from all 
patients. These patients were analyzed prospectively, and all 
patients underwent surgery performed by the corresponding 
author. The indication for the procedure was characteristic 
cervical spondylotic disease manifested by secondary canal 
stenosis. Patients had progressive neurological symptoms, 
bowel or bladder alterations, and failure of nonoperative 
management. None of the patients had ossification of the 
posterior longitudinal ligament, posttraumatic injuries, 
associated infective and tumorous pathology, and rheumatoid 
disease.
Three patients with ages ranging from 63 to 80 years 
presented with a history of progressively worsening neck 
pain, radiculopathy, and mild to moderate gait disturbance. 
Clinical history and neurological examination were 
consistent with myeloradiculopathy in all patients. All 
patients were evaluated using static and dynamic cervical 
spine radiography, computed tomography scanning, and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Static neutral lateral 
radiographs were used to assess cervical sagittal balance, 
whereas anteroposterior radiographs were used to exclude 
preoperative abnormal coronal alignment. All radiographic 
measurements were obtained with the neck in neutral 
position [Figure 1].
Cervical MRI demonstrated multilevel spondylosis resulting 
in moderate to severe bilateral foraminal stenosis at 
three cervical levels. The patients underwent a multilevel 
posterior cervical laminectomy and instrumented fusion 
with intervertebral cages placed between bilateral 
facet joints from C4 to C7, C2 to C5, and C3 to C6, 
respectively. Oswestry disability index (ODI) and visual 
analog score (VAS) were collected preoperatively and 
at postoperative follow‑up at 14 days, 6 months, and 
12 months. Preoperative and postoperative images were 
analyzed for changes in cervical alignment and presence 
of arthrodesis [Figure 2].
The technique relied on a Mayfield head holder with the 
patients positioned prone on a Jackson table and the neck 
placed in neutral position. A midline approach was performed 
and the posterior elements were exposed. At this point, 
posterior cervical cages were placed in between the facet 
joints[20] [Figure 3].
A high‑speed burr was used to drill a trough between 
the junction of the lamina and the lateral mass. The 
lamina was removed en bloc with a Leksell Rongeur 
and the spinal cord was exposed. The lamina bone was 
ground down in a bone mill and used posterolaterally for 
autograft. In addition, 30cc of allograft chips was added 
posterolaterally [Figure 4].
RESULTS
At initial examination, all three patients had moderate neck 
pain (mean VAS 8/10) and cervical radiculopathy (mean VAS 
8/10), mean ODI of 60%. Initial treatment was nonoperative 
for 6 months, including 6 weeks of physical therapy. They 
experienced no improvement in pain or function, and the next 
step was referral to pain management for cervical epidural 
steroid injections. The injections also failed to provide any 
symptomatic or functional improvement. Shortly thereafter, 
the symptoms progressed to include numbness and weakness 
Figure 1: Preoperative lateral X-ray demonstrating multilevel spondylosis
 Bou Monsef and Siemionow: Multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion with posterior cervical cages
318
Journal of Craniovertebral Junction and Spine / Volume 8 / Issue 4 / October-December 2017
in bilateral upper and lower extremities. Bladder and bowel 
function were normal [Figure 5].
All patients showed marked improvement in neurological 
symptoms and neck pain postoperatively. The patients 
achieved full recovery of bilateral upper and lower 
extremity function at 14 days postoperatively and reported 
a mean VAS arm score of 4/10, VAS neck score of 6/10, and 
mean ODI 40. They reported full resolution of radicular 
symptoms by 6 weeks postoperatively. At 6 months, the 
pain had markedly improved, with mean VAS arm score 
of 2/10, VAS neck score of 3/10, and ODI 28. Sagittal 
radiographs of the cervical spine revealed solid arthrodesis 
in all cases. At 12‑month follow‑up, the patients reported 
a mean ODI of 28, cervical VAS for neck of 2/10, arm 
of 1/10, and solid arthrodesis on X‑rays. No kyphotic 
deformity, implant failure, or loosening was observed. No 
kyphotic deformity, implant failure, or loosening has been 
observed [Figure 6].
DISCUSSION
Surgical management of cervical spondylosis may 
be performed through the anterior, posterior, and 
combined (i.e., anterior and posterior) surgical approach.[21] 
Pathology location, number of levels involved, cervical 
alignment, and degree of neck pain are some of the 
factors that influence approach selection. The alternative 
is posterior laminectomy or laminotomy/foraminotomy 
for lateral or foraminal discs, which could be performed 
through minimally invasive incisions. Cervical laminectomy 
can effectively decompress the spinal cord but carries 
the risk of postlaminectomy kyphosis, segmental 
instability, and neurological deterioration.[22‑24] Posterior 
laminoforaminotomy has proven to be effective for cervical 
mononeuropathy, with the advantage of maintaining stability 
and near‑normal biomechanics.[25,26] However, treatment of 
multilevel cervical spine myelopathy is subjected to several 
different considerations than single level disease.[9]
Figure 2: Midsagittal magnetic resonance imaging (a) demonstrating left
 
C4–C5 paracentral disc herniation with spinal cord compression (inset). 
Parasagittal magnetic resonance imaging (b) demonstrating left C5–C7 
foraminal stenosis and lateral recess stenosis dorsal to the vertebral body 
of C5 and C6
b
a
Figure 5: Sagittal computed tomography scan (a) of the cervical spine 
obtained 12 months after surgery demonstrating evidence of bridging bone 
(arrow) with no evidence of cage migration or subsidence. Axial computed 
tomography scan (b) of the cervical spine obtained 12 months after surgery 
demonstrating location of cervical cage in relationship to the facet joint
b
a
Figure 4: Illustration demonstrating surgical technique which starts with 
placement of the cervical cages (a), followed by drilling of the laminectomy 
trough (b), en bloc removal of the lamina (c), and placement of autograft 
posterolaterally (d)
d
c
b
a
Figure 3: Lateral X-rays obtained intraoperatively demonstrate no change 
in cervical lordosis before (a) and after (b) placement of C5–C6 cage. The 
biggest determinant of postoperative alignment is cervical lordosis obtained 
in the Mayfield on the operative table
b
a
 Bou Monsef and Siemionow: Multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion with posterior cervical cages
319
Journal of Craniovertebral Junction and Spine / Volume 8 / Issue 4 / October-December 2017
Conventionally, anterior approaches have been preferred for 
patients with one‑ or two‑segment pathology and posterior 
techniques for patients with multisegmental involvement in 
the absence of kyphosis.[9,27] The anterior approach may be 
particularly difficult in such cases and carries a subsequent 
risk of adjacent segment degeneration in the future. The 
advantages of the minimally invasive approach would be 
significantly reduced due to the wide exposure required.[5] 
Furthermore, a multilevel ACDF may not achieve sufficient 
decompression of spinal cord. The technique optimally 
addresses compression secondary to disc herniation and 
osteophytes located at the posterior edges of vertebral 
body and the posterior longitude ligament.[5] However, it 
is unable to address degenerative and enlarged facet joints 
which were present in this particular patient scenario. The 
alternative then would be a posterior multilevel laminectomy 
or laminotomy/foraminotomy.[28] The drawback of posterior 
foraminotomy for root decompression is the technical 
difficulty when performed through minimal access incisions 
as well as the risk of axial neck pain and even instability as 
the segment is not stabilized. Furthermore, foraminotomy at 
C4‑5 has been associated with motor palsies of the C‑5 root. 
Posterior laminectomy with wide opening of the foraminal 
space would be favorable in this particular case, allowing 
decompression away from the offending pathology including 
osteophytes, ligaments, and discs. This would, however, 
require fusion which is usually achieved through posterior 
LMS fixation systems[29] [Table 1].
Posterior cervical cages have shown comparable efficacy 
and safety to ACDF for treatment of single level cervical 
radiculopathy as well as foraminal stenosis.[19,20] The cervical 
cage is a titanium cage designed to be placed into the 
cervical facets.[10,11,30] By taking advantage of the inclination 
of the cervical facet in the transverse plane, the cage 
achieves indirect root decompression by opening the neural 
foramina. The distraction stabilizes the facet, while rasp and 
decorticator are used to promote definitive bone healing. 
The biomechanical stability achieved by the construct is 
comparable to that of a posterior LMS systems.[18]
Multilevel laminectomy increases the size of the spinal canal 
and allowed us to address cord compression. The choice of 
posterior cervical cage as opposed to LMSs to address the 
radiculopathy was multifactorial. Using LMSs would require 
performing foraminotomies to decompress the nerve roots. 
Performing such a procedure during laminectomy requires 
more extended bone removal of the cervical laminae at all 
3 levels, which may compromise the bone stock required to 
achieve a stable fixation with LMS as well as it potentially 
distorts the visual landmarks for LMS entry points. The bone 
loss associated with foraminotomies along with the space 
occupied by LMS decreases the surface area available for bone 
graft placement increasing the risks of pseudoarthrosis. In the 
described technique, fewer implants are required to stabilize 
the treated levels (6 cages vs. 8 screws + rods + locking 
caps) significantly reducing the number of steps in the 
instrumentation part of the case. The risk of vertebral artery 
injury with cervical screws fixation must always be taken into 
consideration. The posterior cervical cage technique has not 
been associated with any vertebral artery injuries. Cervical 
laminectomy with the posterior cervical cage placement 
provides direct decompression of the central spinal canal and 
indirect decompression of the neural foramina and stabilizes 
the subaxial cervical spine while fusion takes place.
It is important to note that if the patient is placed in a 
Mayfield head‑holder, as was the case with the patient in 
this case report, the cervical lordosis is dictated by head 
positioning in the Mayfield. Placement of cages will maintain 
the cervical lordosis obtained on the table without a kyphosis 
effect. This was demonstrated with intraoperative lateral 
X‑rays. The final lordosis did not differ from immediate 
postoperative lordosis. Careful attention to preoperative 
cervical alignment is advised.
CONCLUSIONS
Combined laminectomy with posterior cervical cage 
application achieved safe and effective decompression of 
both central and foraminal stenosis, restoration of cervical 
stability, and subsequent bone fusion. This technique may 
have advantages over other techniques in decompression 
and stabilization of multilevel CSM with foraminal stenosis.
Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.
Conflicts of interest
Medical Director Providence Medical Technology.
Figure 6: Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) cervical X rays obtained 12 
months postoperatively demonstrating solid arthrodesis from C4 to C7. 
There was no change in cervical lordosis between 6 and 12 months
b
a
 Bou Monsef and Siemionow: Multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion with posterior cervical cages
320
Journal of Craniovertebral Junction and Spine / Volume 8 / Issue 4 / October-December 2017
REFERENCES
1. 
Brain WR, Northfield D, Wilkinson M. The neurological manifestations
of cervical spondylosis. Brain 1952;75:187‑225.
2.
Toledano M, Bartleson JD. Cervical spondylotic myelopathy. Neurol
Clin 2013;31:287‑305.
3.
Hofstetter CP, Wang MY. Diagnostic and therapeutic challenges of
cervical myelopathy. World Neurosurg 2014;82:e173‑5.
4.
Greenberg MS. Degenerative cervical disc disease and cervical
myelopathy. In: Handbook of Neurosurgery. 8th ed., Ch. 71. New York, 
USA: Thieme; 2016.
5.
Caridi JM, Pumberger M, Hughes AP. Cervical radiculopathy: A review.
HSS J 2011;7:265‑72.
6.
Matz PG, Holly LT, Groff MW, Vresilovic EJ, Anderson PA, Heary RF, 
et al. Indications for anterior cervical decompression for the treatment of 
cervical degenerative radiculopathy. J Neurosurg Spine 2009;11:174‑82.
7.
Ruetten S, Komp M, Merk H, Godolias G. Full‑endoscopic cervical
posterior foraminotomy for the operation of lateral disc herniations
using 5.9‑mm endoscopes: A prospective, randomized, controlled study. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 2008;33:940‑8.
8.
Suda K, Abumi K, Ito M, Shono Y, Kaneda K, Fujiya M. Local
kyphosis reduces surgical outcomes of expansive open‑door
laminoplasty for cervical spondylotic myelopathy. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 
2003;28:1258‑62.
9.
Lebl DR, Bono CM. Update on the diagnosis and management of cervical 
spondylotic myelopathy. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2015;23:648‑60.
10.
Goel A, Shah A. Facetal distraction as treatment for single‑ and multilevel
cervical spondylotic radiculopathy and myelopathy: A preliminary
report. J Neurosurg Spine 2011;14:689‑96.
11.
Goel A. Facet distraction spacers for treatment of degenerative disease of
the spine: Rationale and an alternative hypothesis of spinal degeneration. 
J Craniovertebr Junction Spine 2010;1:65‑6.
12.
Goel A. Interfacetal intra‑articular spacers: Emergence of a concept.
J Craniovertebr Junction Spine 2016;7:72‑4.
13.
Goel A, Shah A, Patni N, Ramdasi R. Immediate postoperative reversal 
of disc herniation following facetal distraction‑fixation surgery: report
of four cases. World Neurosurg 2016;94:339‑44.
14.
Goel A.  Facet distraction spacers for treatment of degenerative disease of
the spine: Rationale and an alternative hypothesis of spinal degeneration. 
J Craniovertebr Junction Spine 2010;1:65‑6.
15.
Goel A, Facet distraction‑arthrodesis technique: Can it revolutionize 
spinal stabilization methods? J Craniovertebr Junction Spine
2011;2:1‑2.
16.
Siemionow K, Janusz P, Phillips FM, Youssef JA, Isaacs R,
Tyrakowski M, et al. Clinical and radiographic results of indirect
decompression and posterior cervical fusion for single‑level cervical
radiculopathy using an expandable implant with 2‑year follow‑up.
J Neurol Surg A Cent Eur Neurosurg 2016;77:482‑8.
17.
Voronov LI, Siemionow KB, Havey RM, Carandang G, Phillips FM,
Patwardhan AG. Bilateral posterior cervical cages provide biomechanical 
stability: Assessment of stand‑alone and supplemental fixation
for anterior cervical discectomy and fusion. Med Devices (Auckl)
2016;9:223‑30.
18.
Voronov LI, Siemionow KB, Havey RM, Carandang G, Patwardhan AG. 
Biomechanical evaluation of DTRAX(®) posterior cervical cage
stabilization with and without lateral mass fixation. Med Devices (Auckl) 
2016;9:285‑90.
19.
Siemionow K, Janusz P, Glowka P. Cervical cages placed bilaterally in 
the facet joints from a posterior approach significantly increase foraminal
area. Eur Spine J 2016;25:2279‑85.
Table 1: Reported complications of posterior cervical cage and posterior screw stabilization
Author/Trial
Neurological complications
Vascular complications
Other complications
Posterior cervical cage
Dtrax
n=169
1.81%
0
1.8%
Posterior screws 
stabilization
Moh’d[25]
n=110
20.3%
0
8.5%
Gordon[26]
n=21
9.52%
0
8.5%
Dhruv[27]
n=198
17.2%
0
23.9%
Mokbel[28]
n=44
6.8%
0
0
Hwang[29] n=32
0
0
12.5%
Lali H. S [30]
n=143
2.79%
0
13.28%
Katonis[31]
n=225
3.5%
0
0.8%
Barbarawi[41]
n=430
8.14%
0
3.25%
Graham[42]
n=21
14%
0
4.8%
Abumi[43]
n=180
1.7%
0.6%
2.22%
Fehlings[44]
n=44
0
0
27.3%
Heller[45]
n=78
5.1%
0
7.7%
Levine[46]
n=24
25%
0
29.2%
Wellman[47]
n=43
0%
0
9.3%
 Bou Monsef and Siemionow: Multilevel cervical laminectomy and fusion with posterior cervical cages
321
Journal of Craniovertebral Junction and Spine / Volume 8 / Issue 4 / October-December 2017
20.
McCormack BM, Bundoc RC, Ver MR, Ignacio JM, Berven SH,
Eyster EF. Percutaneous posterior cervical fusion with the DTRAX 
Facet System for single‑level radiculopathy: Results in 60 patients. 
J Neurosurg Spine 2013;18:245‑54.
21.
Odate S, Shikata J, Kimura H, Soeda T. Hybrid decompression
and fixation technique versus plated three‑vertebra corpectomy for
four‑segment cervical myelopathy. J Spinal Disord Tech 2013;29:226‑33. 
[Doi: 10.1097/bsd.0b013e31827ada34].
22.
Dai L, Ni B, Yuan W, Jia L. Radiculopathy after laminectomy for cervical 
compression myelopathy. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1998;80:846‑9.
23.
Guigui P, Benoist M, Deburge A. Spinal deformity and instability
after multilevel cervical laminectomy for spondylotic myelopathy.
Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 1998;23:440‑7.
24.
Lonstein JE. Post‑laminectomy kyphosis. Clin Orthop Relat Res
1977;28:93‑100.
25.
Zdeblick TA, Zou D, Warden KE, McCabe R, Kunz D, Vanderby R.
Cervical stability after foraminotomy. A biomechanical in vitro analysis. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1992;74:22‑7.
26.
Heary RF, Ryken TC, Matz PG, Anderson PA, Groff MW, Holly LT, et al.
Cervical laminoforaminotomy for the treatment of cervical degenerative 
radiculopathy. J Neurosurg Spine 2009;11:198‑202.
27.
Lawrence BD, Brodke DS. Posterior surgery for cervical myelopathy:
Indications, techniques, and outcomes. Orthop Clin North Am
2012;43:29‑40, vii‑viii.
28.
Dodwad SJ, Dodwad SN, Prasarn ML, Savage JW, Patel AA, Hsu WK. 
Posterior cervical foraminotomy: Indications, technique, and outcomes.
Clin Spine Surg 2016;29:177‑85.
29.
Khuyagbaatar B, Kim K, Park WM, Kim YH. Effect of posterior
decompression extent on biomechanical parameters of the spinal cord
in cervical ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Proc Inst 
Mech Eng Part H 2016;230:545‑52.
30.
Shah A. Morphometric analysis of the cervical facets and the feasability, 
safety and effectiveness of Goel inter‑facet spacer distraction technique.
J Craniovertebr Junction Spine 2014;5:9‑14.
Disclaimer: Some uses of the device described in this publication have not been approved or cleared by the FDA.
