 The Long-Term Impacts of Medicaid Exposure in Early 
Childhood: Evidence from the Program's Origin*
Michel H. Boudreauxa, Ezra Golbersteinb, and Donna D. McAlpinec
a Department of Health Services Administration, School of Public Health, University of Maryland. 
3310 School of Public Health Building, College Park, MD 20742†
b Division of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health and Minnesota Population 
Center, University of Minnesota. 420 Delaware Street SE, 15-213 PWB MMC 729 Minneapolis, 
MN 55455, United States. egolber@umn.edu
c Division of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota. 
420 Delaware Street SE, 15-232 PWB MMC 729 Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States. 
mcalp004@umn.edu
Abstract
This paper examines the long-term impact of exposure to Medicaid in early childhood on adult 
health and economic status. The staggered timing of Medicaid's adoption across the states created 
meaningful variation in cumulative exposure to Medicaid for birth cohorts that are now in 
adulthood. Analyses of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics suggest exposure to Medicaid in 
early childhood (age 0-5) is associated with statistically significant and meaningful improvements 
in adult health (age 25-54), and this effect is only seen in subgroups targeted by the program. 
Results for economic outcomes are imprecise and we are unable to come to definitive conclusions. 
Using separate data we find evidence of two mechanisms that could plausibly link Medicaid's 
introduction to long-term outcomes: contemporaneous increases in health services utilization for 
children and reductions in family medical debt.
*This project was supported by an Interdisciplinary Doctoral Fellowship from the University of Minnesota, by grant number 
R36HS021690 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and by the Minnesota Population Center Grant from the Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (5R24HD041023). The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
or any other funder. The collection of data [The Panel Study of Income Dynamics] used in this study was partly supported by the 
National Institutes of Health under grant number R01 HD069609 and the National Science Foundation under award number 1157698. 
Portions of the paper are based on restricted use data from the National Health Interview Survey. The findings and conclusions drawn 
from these data are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Research Data Center, the National Center 
for Health Statistics, or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Doug Almond, Hillary Hoynes, Amy Finkelstein, Martha 
Bailey and Andrew Goodman-Bacon generously provided data from the 1960's and 1970's and guided us in their use. We are grateful 
to Marianne Bitler, Aaron Sojourner, David Frisvold, Martha Bailey, Bryan Dowd, and seminar participants at the Human Capital 
Research Collaborative, the Rethinking Barker Conference, the American Society of Health Economists Biennial Conference, the 
AcademyHealth Annual Research Meeting, Virginia Commonwealth University, University of Kansas, University of Maryland, 
George Washington University and Vanderbilt University for their helpful comments. We also thank the editor and the anonymous 
reviewers.
(Corresponding Author) mhb@umd.edu. 301-405-6118.. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Health Econ. 2016 January ; 45: 161–175. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.11.001.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Medicaid; health and human capital
1. Introduction
Poor health in early life has long-term consequences, including reduced health and 
socioeconomic status in adulthood (Almond and Currie, 2010; Currie and Rossin-Slater, 
2014). Recent research highlights the possibility that health investments in the early 
childhood period may yield long-run returns (Hoynes et al., 2014; Bharadwaj et al., 2013). 
With few exceptions, the literature has not considered the long-term impact of large public 
programs that specifically target child health. The United States (U.S.) spends significant 
sums on in-kind transfers of medical care, often with the explicit goal of influencing low-
income children's future health and socioeconomic prospects.3 Considerable evidence exists 
on the short-term effects of these programs, but little is known about whether they have 
long-term benefits.
This paper examines the long-term effect of Medicaid, the main source of public health 
insurance for children and pregnant women in the U.S. The program finances 48% of all 
deliveries and provides coverage to 35% (28 million) of all children under the age of 19 
(Markus et al., 2013; SHADAC, 2013). The program consumes 8% of all federal spending 
and 16% of state budgets, on average (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2012).
Medicaid could influence the long-term outcomes of children by increasing access to 
effective medical interventions that improve childhood health in ways that persist into 
adulthood. Take-up of Medicaid also could reduce a family's inframarginal medical 
spending, freeing up resources that are subsequently directed towards other investments in 
children. Evaluations of Medicaid's short and medium-term effects suggest that Medicaid 
encourages consumption of medical services, improves health, and potentially reduces the 
risk of catastrophic out-of-pocket spending, for very low-income children (Howell and 
Kenny, 2012; Currie and Gruber, 1996a,b; Currie et al., 2008; Sommers and Oellerich, 
2013). These outcomes are known to shape the evolution of health and socioeconomic 
status.
We add to this literature by studying Medicaid's long-term impact, leveraging the program's 
staggered adoption across the states and comparing households that were more and less 
likely to have received Medicaid benefits. Medicaid's adoption, which occurred mainly 
between 1966 and 1970, created meaningful variation in early life exposure to the program 
for birth cohorts that are now in midlife, which is plausibly exogenous with respect to 
midlife health and economic outcomes. Furthermore, eligibility rules created additional 
3For example, while advocating on the Senate floor for the creation of the State Children's Health Insurance Program, Sen. Edward 
Kennedy remarked, “Providing health care for children is sound public policy and also sound economics. It's an investment in the 
future” (105 Congressional Register S134). That same year Sen. Kennedy remarked in support of the Early Childhood Development 
Act, “Recent research has clearly demonstrated what parents and others have intuitively known for generations: that experiences in the 
early childhood years lay the foundation for much of later development... Quality child care, quality nutrition, and quality health care 
can make all the difference in enabling infants and children to reach their full potential and become contributing members of society” 
(105 Congressional Register S4501).
Boudreaux et al.
Page 2
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 variation in Medicaid participation that we use to isolate Medicaid's impact. Using the Panel 
Study of Income Dynamics we track the 1955-1980 birth cohorts from conception into 
adulthood (age 25-54). We use state-of-birth and county-of-birth identifiers to link 
individual records with Medicaid adoption dates and a detailed set of area-by-year controls 
that describe characteristics of health care markets and the availability of other public 
programs.
Our results indicate that for low-income children exposure to Medicaid eligibility 
throughout the period from conception to the 6th birthday is associated with a 0.35 standard 
deviation improvement in adult health (age 25-54), measured using a composite index that 
combines information on high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease/heart attack, and 
obesity. Models that more closely approximate the effect of the treatment-on-the-treated 
suggest large effects, a 3.15 standard deviation reduction in the composite condition index. 
We also examined Medicaid's long-term impact on economic outcomes, but our results are 
very imprecise. At a 95% confidence level, our treatment-on-the-treated model can only rule 
out effects larger than a 5 standard deviation increase in adult economic well-being, 
measured using a composite index of income-to-poverty ratios, educational attainment and 
family wealth. We also use historical survey data to document two potential mechanisms 
through which the program's introduction might have affected long-run outcomes: health 
services use during early childhood and medically-related family economic strain.
Our analysis suggests that the value of covering expectant mothers and young children 
through the Medicaid program extends beyond contemporaneous measures of health and 
financial hardship. This finding has implications for cost-benefit valuations of Medicaid and 
may also speak to the potential benefits of current health insurance expansions. By focusing 
on a specific policy action to improve health among disadvantaged children, this paper also 
contributes to the literature on the long-run impacts of early life health which has focused 
primarily on the developmental consequences of early life health insults. Specifically, we 
are one of the first to examine of the long-run benefits of Medicaid coverage in childhood in 
addition to the short-term effects of Medicaid's introduction on health service utilization and 
financial outcomes.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review evidence on Medicaid's impact 
over the medium term which suggests that the health benefits of Medicaid may be persistent. 
We then describe the links between childhood health, health investments, and adult 
attainments to help motivate our focus on the early childhood period. Next, we turn to the 
setting of the current study by describing the institutional background of Medicaid's 
introduction. In Section 3 we describe data and methods, in Section 4 we present main 
results, and in Section 5 we examine two mediating mechanisms. Section 6 concludes.
2. Background
2.1 Medium-Term Impacts of Medicaid
Medicaid coverage in childhood could improve childhood health by reducing the out-of-
pocket price of health care which leads to increased utilization of effective medical 
interventions. As we describe in section 2.2, improvements in childhood health facilitated by 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 3
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Medicaid could play an important role in determining the risk of later disease, human capital 
accumulation, and adult economic outcomes. Obtaining Medicaid coverage could also free 
up a household's inframarginal health care spending which could be subsequently directed 
toward investments in children (Sommers and Oellerich, 2013; Shaefer et al., 2011).4 
Increased economic resources in early childhood are known to improve long-run outcomes 
by increasing child investment and reducing psychological stress (Duncan et al., 2010).
Empirical evidence from a small set of papers supports the idea that Medicaid coverage in 
early childhood is associated with downstream benefits – specifically with improved health 
in later childhood. Using a simulated eligibility instrument Currie, Decker, and Lin (2008) 
show that eligibility at ages 2-4 is associated with improved self-reported health at ages 
9-17. Likewise, using a regression discontinuity approach, Wherry and Meyer (2015) show 
that increased cumulative eligibility between the ages of 8 to 14 is associated with declines 
in mortality for black children at ages 15-19. They find smaller effects for whites who were 
substantially less likely to be eligible for Medicaid. Some evidence suggests that public 
health insurance in early childhood is associated with increased academic performance. 
Levine and Schanzenbach (2009) find that eligibility for public health insurance at birth is 
associated with modest gains in reading, but not math scores for 9 and 14 year olds. The 
only other study to examine the medium-term effects of Medicaid coverage in childhood 
found that gaining Medicaid eligibility at ages 5-18 is associated with improved 
contemporaneous utilization of preventative care, but that a 5-year lagged measure of 
eligibility was not associated with improvement in self-reported health, missed school days, 
or obesity (De La Mata, 2012).
This small, but important set of papers suggests that the value of Medicaid may extend 
beyond contemporaneous measures of health and financial well-being. We build on those 
papers by extending the follow up period to midlife.
Four concurrent papers also consider Medicaid's longer-term impact using program 
expansions during the 1980's and 1990's as a source of identifying variation. Using detailed 
administrative records, Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie (2014) find that childhood exposure to 
Medicaid increases wages, decreases reliance on government transfers, and decreases 
mortality by age 31. Cohodes and colleagues (2015) find evidence of improved educational 
attainment. Wherry et al. (2015) find that Medicaid exposure in early life reduces 
hospitalization and emergency department utilization for chronic conditions for 25 year olds 
and Miller and Wherry (2015) find that Medicaid coverage during the prenatal period 
reduces obesity and chronic conditions when affected cohorts reach their mid-20's. Our work 
complements these papers and also has distinct strengths. Because we study the program's 
introduction, rather than its later expansions, we are able to track cohorts further into 
adulthood (the average age in our sample is 38), when effects could be more pronounced. 
Unlike Cohodes et al. (2015), Wherry et al. (2015), and Miller and Wherry (2015) we 
observe socioeconomic status in early childhood, which allows us to examine subgroups that 
4While both Sommers and Olerich (2013) and Shaefer, Grogan, and Pollack (2011) suggest that Medicaid is associated with a 
meaningful level of implicit cash transfers (on the order of $1,500/year), it has been difficult to tie these transfers to increased 
spending on non-medical goods. Leininger, Levy, and Schanzenbach (2010) find modest increases in transportation and retirement 
spending in response to expanded public insurance for children and Saloner (2013) finds no evidence of a reduction in food insecurity.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 4
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were specifically targeted by eligibility rules. We also are able to use historical survey data 
to examine two potential mediators of the effect of Medicaid's introduction on long-run 
outcomes, namely health services utilization and medically-related household financial 
strain.
2.2 Early Childhood Health and Long-Run Outcomes
A compelling body of work across different disciplines shows that early childhood, starting 
in the fetal period, is a particularly sensitive time in which shocks or investments can have 
important long-term consequences for adult chronic disease risk (Shonkoff et al., 2009; 
Currie and Almond, 2011; Ben-Shlomo and Ku, 2002). The empirical evidence supporting 
the importance of early childhood is robust and growing, but the causal mechanisms behind 
these relationships are not fully understood. A prominent explanation is the fetal origins 
hypothesis, which, strictly interpreted, suggests that malnutrition during the fetal period can 
disrupt the development of internal organs and physiological processes and result in 
increased risk of heart disease, diabetes, and obesity (Barker, 1997). The developmental 
principles underlying the fetal origins hypothesis have been extended to other harmful fetal 
exposures such as environmental toxins and maternal disease (Gluckman et al., 2007; 
Almond and Currie, 2010). More broadly, economists have conceptualized early childhood 
as a particularly sensitive period because it lays the developmental groundwork that future 
investments need to be fully productive (Cunha and Heckman, 2006).
Correlational evidence on early life health and long-run health outcomes dates back to the 
1930's (Kermack et al., 1934), but more recent work takes advantage of natural experiments 
in which exposures are plausibly unrelated to unobserved variables such as genetic 
predisposition or family background characteristics. For example, children exposed to 
famine events or diurnal fasting in utero and in the first few years of life have increased risk 
of disability, heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and cancer (Chen and Zhou, 2006; Almond and 
Mazumder, 2011; Schulz, 2010). Exposure to influenza during the prenatal period and the 
first few years of life, compared to no exposure and exposure in later years of childhood, has 
also been linked to disability and heart disease in adulthood (Almond, 2006; Mazumder et 
al., 2009). In addition to cohort comparisons, sibling differences in birth weight (a common 
proxy for the fetal environment) reveal that low birth weight infants have 2-6 times larger 
hazard rates of asthma, hypertension, heart disease and stroke in adulthood (Johnson and 
Schoeni, 2011).
Evidence on the downstream economic impacts of early health shocks comes from cohort 
comparisons driven by natural experiments and from studies of intra-twin differences in 
birth weight that hold constant common genetic factors and family environments.5 For 
example, using a dataset of Norwegian twins, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007) 
estimate that a 10% increase in birth weight is associated with a 1 percentage point increase 
in high school completion, a 3 percentage point increase in full time work, and a 1 percent 
increase in earnings. Similar findings from twin fixed effects models have been reported in 
the U.S. context (Figlio et al., 2014; Royer, 2009). To put these magnitudes in perspective, 
5It should be noted that while twin fixed effects studies hold constant a large share of the parental environment it remains possible that 
parents adjust their investments in response to the health of the child.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 5
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Currie (2011) demonstrates that that the correlation between birth weight and wages at age 
24-27 is roughly the same as the correlation between academic test scores and wages.
Evidence of the long-run effects of poor childhood health has spurred interest in the ability 
of child health investments to promote health and economic attainment in adulthood. Recent 
studies in this area largely focus on economic outcomes. Bharadwaj, Løken, and Neilson 
(2013) show that the infants born just below the very low birth weight threshold, who 
receive more intensive medical care compared to their slightly heavier counterparts due to 
medical guidelines, score higher on standardized academic tests during school age. 
Randomized Nurse-Family visitation interventions that provide pre-natal and early life 
health services have been shown to improve economic attainment by young adulthood 
(Eckenrode et al., 2010). Bhalotra and Venkatarmani (2011) find that sulfa antibiotic use, 
which dramatically decreases the incidence of childhood pneumonia, is associated with 
higher education and income and decreased disability in adulthood. Lee (2013) finds that 
mandatory school vaccination laws increase high school completion, labor force 
participation, wages, and returns to schooling. Another study finds that the improvements in 
access to health care for black infants in the U.S. that emerged from hospital desegregation 
resulted in significant gains in cognitive skills measured at the transition to adulthood (Chay 
et al., 2009). These studies lend credence to the notion that improvements in access to health 
care in early childhood can improve long-run economic outcomes.
The most pertinent study to the present paper in terms of methodology is Hoynes, 
Schanzenbach, and Almond's (2014) (henceforth HSA) evaluation of the food stamp 
program. Using data from the PSID and treatment variation brought about by the program's 
gradual implementation across the country, they find that access to food stamps through the 
duration of early childhood (ages 0-5), compared to its absence, is associated with a 0.3 
standard deviation improvement in an index of adult health conditions. They also find that 
access to food stamps improved socioeconomic outcomes in women, but not men.
Our paper departs from previous work on health investments by considering the long-term 
impacts of public health insurance in a low income population. While literature on 
Medicaid's health effects is mixed, Medicaid in childhood has previously been shown to 
increase access and use of health services and to improve objective measures of health such 
as mortality and avoidable hospitalizations (see review in Howell and Kenny, 2012). In this 
paper we examine whether Medicaid exposure in early life is associated with improved 
health and economic status in adulthood. Medicaid is a particularly important intervention to 
study because it is a large program affecting millions of pregnant women and children. It 
constitutes 15% of all national health care expenditures ($407 billion), it plays an important 
role in coverage expansions included the Affordable Care Act, and it is of consistent interest 
to state and federal policy makers.
2.3 The Institutional Background of Medicaid's Introduction
Individuals’ and families’ participation in Medicaid is voluntary and it is likely that 
unobserved factors correlated with enrollment decisions are also correlated with a child's 
long-term outcomes. To overcome this endogeneity we examine exposure to Medicaid 
policy rather than participation in the program. Specifically, our identification strategy uses 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 6
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Medicaid's staggered implementation across the states in combination with individual-level 
variation in the probability to participate in Medicaid which was influenced by eligibility 
rules and long-standing state differences in public program generosity. This section 
describes the institutional arrangements of Medicaid's introduction and introduces our 
analytic approach.
Although all states now participate in Medicaid, the program is a voluntary federal-state 
partnership. The first states to implement Medicaid started in 1966, and nearly all states 
implemented the program by 1970. This created variation in age at first exposure which 
depends only on the location and date of a child's birth. Because no state repealed Medicaid 
once adopted, the timing of first exposure is perfectly correlated with the amount of 
exposure over a given age-range, assuming negligible interstate migration. Medicaid's 
adoption is a useful tool for understanding the program's long-term benefits because it 
targeted a group of very low-income families that had few health insurance alternatives, and 
because it occurred sufficiently long ago that we can trace its impact over more than four 
decades.
Prior to Medicaid's passage into federal law in 1965, cash-assistance recipients received 
medical benefits through vendor payment programs that varied substantially by eligibility 
category and state. When a state provided any services at all, the benefits were modest. In 
only nine states did per beneficiary spending reach at least half the level of age-and-sex 
adjusted per-person medical spending in the general population (U.S. House Committee on 
Ways and Means, 1961).
The goal of the Medicaid program was to increase access to care and ultimately improve the 
health of low income families. It was a large, though incremental change to the existing 
system (Stevens and Stevens, 1974). Medicaid continued the existing practice of delivering 
medical care by paying private providers directly (at levels below private market rates) 
through joint state and federal financing. The key changes included A) a requirement that 
states cover all people on public assistance; B) a mandate that all states cover a set of 
essential benefits that included physician visits, hospital stays, lab and x-ray services with no 
cost-sharing and an extended set of services at the states’ option; C) a consolidation of the 
existing public assistance medical care programs; D) increased federal participation in 
financing; and E) an extension of coverage to the medically needy at the states’ option 
(Holahan, 1975). Medicaid covered a set of basic services for both pregnant women and 
children that could have improved both short and long-run health. Such services include 
vaccinations, antibiotic treatment of conditions such as pneumonia, hospital services, 
neonatal intensive care, nutritional treatments for disorders such as anemia, and medical 
supervision during pregnancy.
Adoption of Medicaid by the states was voluntary, but all federal financing through the pre-
existing welfare medicine programs ended on December 31, 1969. The first allowable date 
to begin a program was January 1, 1966. Twenty-six states had adopted programs by the end 
of 1966 and by 1970 all states, save Alaska (1972) and Arizona (1982), had a program.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 7
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The largest group of non-elderly Medicaid participants was participants in Aid to Families 
with Dependent Children (AFDC) who were mandated to be automatically enrolled in 
Medicaid. AFDC was provided primarily to low income unmarried mothers and their 
children. For a family of 3 in 1970 the needs standard ranged from $149/month in Arkansas 
(58% of poverty) to $351/month in California (136% of poverty) (U.S. House Committee on 
Ways and Means, 1996). Strict eligibility rules limited the AFDC program to a relatively 
small fraction of the population. In 1970, there were approximately 8.5 million recipients, 
comprising roughly 4% of the general population or 36% of people in families with less than 
$3,000 in family income. Despite the close link between Medicaid and AFDC at Medicaid's 
inception, it would be an overstatement to say that Medicaid was exclusively a benefit 
extended to single parent families on welfare. Twenty-nine states had medically needy 
programs, 30 states covered income-eligible women pregnant with their first child, and 18 
states covered needy children under the age of 21, regardless of their categorical AFDC 
eligibility (Davis and Schoen, 1978; Foltz, 1975).
Few empirical studies examine Medicaid's introduction even though it was one of the largest 
public health investments for low-income populations in U.S. history. Decker and Gruber 
(1993) using a difference-in-difference design, find that Medicaid's introduction reduced the 
incidence of low birth weight in the low-income population (less than $2,000, nominal 
dollars) by a striking 60%.6 Using a different study deign, Goodman-Bacon (2015) finds 
that the introduction of Medicaid reduced mortality for non-white children under age 15 by 
24 percent for groups that participated in the program. Both papers support the idea that the 
introduction of Medicaid improved children's health in ways that could be important over 
the long-term. Goodman-Bacon's results are particularly important because they suggest that 
Medicaid increased the probability of surviving past childhood. We assume that the children 
who survived as a result of Medicaid were in worse health than the general population and 
therefore our results represent a conservative estimate of Medicaid's effect.
Historical data from the National Health Interview Surveys suggest that Medicaid's 
introduction had significant effects on health services use for children. In Figure 1 we 
describe the unadjusted differences in the probability of any overnight hospital stay and any 
annual physician visit for low-income children, who were targeted by Medicaid, and their 
moderate income counterparts who were not. In 1964, just prior to Medicaid's introduction, 
low income children were 0.8 percentage points less likely to have any hospital visits and 
nearly 20 percentage points less likely to have had a physician visit compared to moderate 
income children. By 1974, after all states but Arizona had adopted Medicaid, low-income 
children were using more hospital services compared to moderate income children and the 
physician visit difference had been cut by nearly 80% of its base level. These raw data 
suggest that Medicaid had a large effect on access to health services for low income 
children. We return to this issue in Section 5 where we conduct a more detailed analysis of 
hospital stays.
6The authors note that their estimates have serious limitations because their data excluded a large share of the potentially eligible 
population.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 8
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2 describes Medicaid's rollout across the states, indexed by quarter. The dates in 
Figure 2 represent implementation dates and are used throughout this paper to represent 
Medicaid adoption timing.7 States likely differed in the exact timing of beneficiary 
notification. For example, New York's program was implemented in May of 1966 and the 
state's 575,000 AFDC beneficiaries were automatically enrolled at that time. However, 
identification cards were not mailed until October 1966, the same month the state began 
accepting applications from non-welfare eligibles (New York Times, 1966a,b). 
Unfortunately, we do not observe notification dates for the rest of the states and we know of 
no source that describes public knowledge of the program. Therefore, we rely on 
implementation dates which are a policy relevant and measurable marker of the presence of 
Medicaid.
The general pattern in Figure 2 corroborates historical reports that states with relatively 
generous existing welfare medicine programs (primarily concentrated in the Northeast) had 
incentives to adopt programs quickly so that expenditures could be shifted to the federal 
budget (Stevens and Stevens, 1974). In states with less generous programs (particularly in 
the South) Medicaid represented a new expenditure and adoption tended to occur later. 
However, there are clear breaks in the general geographic pattern—e.g. New Jersey adopted 
relatively later than its neighbors and Louisiana and Georgia adopted relatively sooner than 
the rest of the Deep South.
An obvious concern with Medicaid adoption timing is its potential correlation with other 
factors that also affected the outcomes of interest. Strumpf (2011) reports that a series of 
pre-Medicaid state-level factors (i.e. local welfare spending, age distribution, etc.) were not 
correlated with the timing of Medicaid's adoption, but her analysis was only based on 14 
state observations. Other research suggests that the timing of Medicaid's adoption was 
correlated with other meaningful changes. Finkelstein (2007) suggests that the timing of 
Medicaid adoption was spuriously correlated with changes in hospital capacity. We use two 
methods to address potential confounding with provider supply. First, our models directly 
control for county-by-year per capita hospital supply (using the same data described in 
Finkelstein, 2007) and county-by-year per capita physician supply (obtained from the Area 
Health Resources File). Second, changes in hospital capacity would not only affect the 
population eligible for Medicaid. Moderate income families also experienced substantial 
access barriers, but were not eligible for Medicaid (Davis and Schoen 1978). This suggests a 
useful falsification exercise: Medicaid's adoption ought to have no impact on children raised 
in moderate income families who experienced similar resource constraints, but were not 
income eligible for the program.
Goodman-Bacon (2015) suggests that the timing of Medicaid adoption was correlated with 
pre-treatment declines in non-white infant mortality (he could not reject the equality of pre-
trends for white infants born in early versus late adopting states). However, he finds that pre-
treatment changes in infant mortality, child poverty rates, single-parent households, and 
7Implementation dates were obtained from Characteristics of State Medical Assistance Programs under Title XIX of the Social 
Security Act (U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare 1970). This list was cross-checked and supplemented by a list 
obtained from the Office of the Historian at the Social Security Administration.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 9
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AFDC benefit standards, were not correlated with relative state-level participation rates for 
AFDC—the principal pathway through which people gained access to Medicaid. In similar 
analyses we found that state level AFDC rates and growth trends were poor predictors of 
Medicaid adoption timing (Boudreaux 2014). State level differences in the intensity of 
exposure to Medicaid, via AFDC rules, provides a useful additional source of variation to 
further isolate the impact of Medicaid. We leverage that variation in triple difference 
comparisons in Section 4.2. The models estimate the relative impact of Medicaid exposure 
for groups with varying predicted probabilities of AFDC participation. These predicted 
probabilities are estimated using arguably exogenous characteristics used in eligibility 
determination (see below) including relative state level AFDC eligibility thresholds in 1970.
Our empirical strategy, described in more detail below, relies on variation from within-state 
changes in Medicaid availability over time, cross-state differences in Medicaid availability 
at a point in time, and between-group differences in the propensity to participate in 
Medicaid. Using fixed effects, we control for any time-invariant state level factors or any 
unique cohort factors that could be correlated with the timing of adoption and the outcomes 
of interest. We also include a detailed set of geography-by-year controls and find that our 
results are robust to state-specific linear time trends.
3. Methods
3.1 Data and Descriptive Statistics
To examine Medicaid's long-term impact we use microdata from the 1968-2009 Panel Study 
of Income Dynamics (PSID) (Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 2012). The PSID began in 
1968 and annually (biennially as of 1997) follows participants and their descendants. The 
original sample consisted of about 5,000 households, including an oversample of low-
income families that allows us to focus specifically on groups that had a high probability of 
participating in Medicaid. The PSID maintains extraordinarily high wave-to-wave response 
rates (~98%), but given the length of the panel these small losses result in appreciable 
attrition. Attrition bias due to earnings, education, marriage and welfare receipt appears 
minimal (Gouskova et al., 2008; Fitzgerald et al., 1998).
We restrict the analytic sample to cohorts born between 1955 and 1980. This provides 6 
cohorts that had no exposure to Medicaid prior to age 6 (we define early childhood as 
ending in the month of the 6th birthday), 10 cohorts that were exposed starting at conception, 
and 10 that were exposed starting at some point in the early childhood period. Our definition 
of the early childhood period, encompassing the ages 0-5, has been used in previous studies 
of child development (e.g., Duncan et al., 1994; HSA, 2014), and covers the period prior to 
typical entrance into school.8 We include only observations that are observed when they are 
household heads or spouses and are age 25 and over. We restrict the sample to age 25 and 
over to ensure completed education. Thus, the sample of interest includes only adults, but by 
utilizing the longitudinal nature of the PSID in combination with retrospectively reported 
variables, we observe their childhood characteristics. We drop observations whose first 
8Our results are robust to defining the early childhood period from conception to the 5th birth day and the appendix provides 
additional analyses of heterogeneous effect by the timing of first exposure.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 10
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PSID interview occurred after age 13 because we cannot determine their early life covariates 
with confidence. We also remove children born in Arizona because its Medicaid start time is 
a clear outlier.9
State of residence is available on the public use PSID. This allows us to identify the state of 
birth for each observation. For cohorts born prior to 1968 we infer state of birth from the 
family's residence in 1968 (the first year of interview). To reduce measurement error in state 
of birth we restrict the sample born prior to 1968 to those that did not move between birth 
and the 1968 interview, identified using retrospective mobility questions.10 Using state of 
birth we assign Medicaid adoption dates (measured to the year and month). The PSID also 
ascertains month of birth. Similar to HSA and in the spirit of other work (e.g. Bleakley 
2007), we measure Medicaid availability as the fraction of months exposed during early 
childhood. The early childhood period spans from the approximate month of conception to 
the month of the 6th birth day for a total of 81 possible months of exposure. To account for 
potential non-random migration the exposure variable is calculated based on state of birth.11 
Because all states eventually adopted a program and none repealed after implementation, a 
higher value for the Medicaid exposure measure represents having been first exposed to 
Medicaid at a relatively earlier point in life.
Figure 3 plots the number of months exposed to Medicaid by birth cohort, as observed in the 
data. Beginning in the 1960 birth cohort, the average level of exposure increases by 5-10 
months a year. By the 1972 birth cohort all sample members were exposed to a Medicaid 
program starting at conception. The error bars mark 1 standard deviation above and below 
the mean to provide a sense of the intra-cohort variability in the data that is driven by state 
and month of birth. The graph demonstrates substantial variability in months of exposure 
during the early childhood period. In the 1962 birth cohort, exposure to Medicaid averaged 
roughly 10 months and in the 1970 cohort averaged just less than 80 months. The staggered 
introduction of Medicaid across states also created within cohort variation. For example, 
roughly 20% of the 1965 cohort was exposed to Medicaid for less than 20 months in early 
childhood, 47% were exposed for 20 to 60 months and 33% were exposed for longer than 60 
months.
Since its inception, the PSID has collected extensive data on socioeconomic and 
demographic characteristics. The childhood characteristics we consider include the 
education of family head, poverty level, and marital status of the mother at birth. We also 
use the socioeconomic data measured during adulthood to observe a set of economic 
outcomes including years of completed education (top coded at 17 years), the continuous 
ratio of family income to the federal poverty line and family wealth measured in 2000 year 
dollars.12 To handle the skewed distribution of family wealth which includes zero and 
9Less than 1% of the analytical sample was born in Arizona. Thus, this exclusion has a negligible effect on the results.
10In practice this step removes a very small fraction of the sample: 179 unique persons or 1.4% of people born prior to the 1968 
interview.
11A weighted 6.1% of our analytical sample moved states during the early childhood period. This is less than Census Bureau's 
estimate of interstate migration for the population 5 years and older between 1965-1970 (8.6%). All results presented here are 
qualitatively robust to the removal of subjects that migrated states in the early childhood period. However, we prefer including these 
cases and calculating their exposure from their birth state of residence because it gives an intent-to-treatment estimate that is more 
realistic of the alternative policy choices. See the online technical appendix for the migration robustness results.
12Poverty is defined using the federal poverty levels suggested by Grieger et al. 2007.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 11
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 negative values we measure family wealth by categorizing the sample distribution into 
deciles. The average level of wealth in the lowest decile is $-33,172, $17,454 in the fifth 
decile and $1,074,344 in the tenth decile.
In 1999, respondents began providing detailed information on specific health conditions 
including hypertension, heart disease, heart attack, and diabetes. The PSID questionnaire 
ascertains whether the head or spouse was ever diagnosed with a condition and the age at 
first diagnosis. The survey also collects measures of self-reported height and weight that we 
use to construct body mass index (BMI) and an indicator of obesity (BMI≥30). Previous 
work suggests that these health outcomes are sensitive to early life conditions (Gluckman, et 
al., 2007; Currie and Almond, 2011; Montez and Hayward, 2011). Specifically, life-long 
disease risk is partially determined by exposures in the prenatal environment and/or through 
childhood health conditions that can lead to chronic inflammation responses. Medicaid 
could intervene in these processes by improving the prenatal environment through the 
provision of prenatal care or by improving the general health of the mother prior to 
conception. In addition Medicaid could prevent childhood illness through preventative care 
(e.g. vaccinations) or by increasing access to effective treatments of childhood disease when 
it occurs, thereby reducing the severity of long-run sequelae. Additionally, Medicaid could 
free-up family income to be spent on nutrition or to improve a family's physical environment 
The health data are coded to indicate undesirable outcomes (i.e. ever being diagnosed with 
heart disease, etc.). Heart disease and heart attack are combined to accommodate their low 
prevalence. The diabetes indicator is set such that only cases that report an age of onset 
greater than or equal to 18 are considered to have the condition. We focus on adult onset 
diabetes because diabetes is a relatively common childhood condition and we want to ensure 
that our estimates reflect Medicaid's impact on adult health and not Medicaid's impact on the 
detection of childhood conditions.
We summarize the individual health condition and economic outcomes by creating a chronic 
condition index variable and an economic index variable. By summarizing the outcome 
variables we gain statistical precision and reduce problems associated with multiple-
comparisons (Andersen, 2008). Following previous authors (Andersen, 2008; Hoynes, et al., 
2014), the indexes are constructed as the equally-weighted average across each variable's z-
score. The condition index includes high blood pressure, heart disease/heart attack, adult 
onset diabetes, and obesity and is constructed such that increasing values indicate worse 
health (i.e. increasing prevalence of conditions). The economic index, including years of 
education, poverty level, and decile of family wealth, is constructed such that increasing 
values indicate a greater level of economic resources. The distribution of the chronic 
condition index gives some intuitive meaning to the health index: the average health index 
value for those without any condition is −0.4 and ranges to 3.1 for those with 4 conditions. 
A 1 standard deviation increase in the condition index is associated with an increase in the 
number of chronic conditions by 1.4, on average.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics from the analytical sample which is constrained to the 
1999-2009 waves and consists of adults age 25 and above. The data are organized into 
person-year observations. There are 17,125 person-year observations with non-missing 
condition index values, representing 3,830 unique individuals. On average each person has a 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 12
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 non-missing condition index for 4.6 years (out of a possible of 6).13 The average exposure 
to Medicaid, measured as the fraction of time exposed in early childhood, is 0.53. 47% of 
the sample is male and 82% is white. Roughly 19% had family incomes below 150% of the 
poverty line during early childhood and 37% lived in moderate income families with family 
income between 175 and 300% of poverty. In adulthood, 9% of the sample reported being in 
fair health or worse; 14% reported ever being diagnosed with hypertension; 3% with heart 
disease or heart attack; and 25% met the threshold for obesity. The weighted mean of the 
condition index was −0.05 (the unweighted mean was −0.001). The average number of years 
of education was 13.6, the average income to poverty ratio was 5.3 and the average wealth 
decile value was 6.1. The weighted mean of the economic index was 0.16 (the unweighted 
mean was −0.003). In the appendix we examine how these characteristics differ between 
early and late adopting states. As expected, the population in later adopting states was more 
likely to be low-income and to be exposed to lower levels of public assistance spending in 
early childhood.
3.2 Empirical Strategy
To identify the effect of Medicaid's long term impact we regress a given health or economic 
outcome on the fraction of months a person was exposed to the Medicaid program during 
early childhood. The model takes the form described in equation 1:
(1),
where yinst is a health or economic outcome, for person i at adult interview year n, born in 
state s and year t. MCAIDSHARE is the continuous measure of Medicaid availability in the 
early childhood period and measures the effect of moving from no exposure to full exposure 
(i.e. MCAIDSHARE increasing from 0 to 1). Because the Medicaid programs were never 
repealed, every person in the 1955-1980 cohorts was exposed to Medicaid at some point in 
their lives (albeit perhaps not until after the early childhood period). As a result of this 
feature of the policy experiment, the coefficient on our exposure measure captures the effect 
of a marginal increase in exposure earlier in life.14 It includes the effects of both duration 
and timing.
Xinstis a set of individual level controls, including gender, race (white vs. other), a quadratic 
in age, and marital status.15 These variables control for compositional differences correlated 
with Medicaid exposure and will improve the precision of the model. Zst is a set of 
geography-by-year controls that we describe in more detail below. The model includes 
interview year fixed effects (ρn), year of birth fixed effects (δt) and state of birth fixed 
effects (γs). These hold constant any stable, but unobserved period or state effect. In the 
appendix we demonstrate that our results are robust to removing the demographic and area-
13The average condition index is statistically indistinguishable for cases that have complete data versus cases that are have at least one 
year of data, but are missing 1 or more years (difference= .01; p=0.38). The same holds for the Medicaid exposure variable and the 
economic index. Therefore, we assume that item missingness occurs completely at random.
14Take, for example, a person with 45 months of exposure versus a person with 81 months of exposure. The former person's exposure 
to Medicaid began on their third birthday (assuming 9 months of gestation) whereas the later was exposed since conception.
15We were concerned about the collinearity of age given the presence of interview year and birth year fixed effects. However, results 
are robust to measuring age in categories or removing age entirely from the model. Results are also robust to excluding current marital 
status which is potentially endogenous.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 13
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by-year controls and to including state specific trends in birth cohort. In all analyses the 
PSID weights are used to adjust for the differences in the initial probability of selection and 
attrition over time (Gouskova et al., 2008). Standard errors are clustered on state of birth 
(Bertrand et al., 2004; Cameron and Miller, 2015) and in the appendix we show our 
inferences are robust to bootstrap estimation. Models using continuous outcomes are 
estimated with OLS and regressions of binary outcomes use linear probability models.
As discussed above, the eligibility criteria for Medicaid provides an additional dimension of 
variation to help identify the effect of exposure to Medicaid in early childhood. We estimate 
equation (1) on sub-groups that vary in their propensity to be eligible for Medicaid in early 
childhood. Finding effects in groups with relatively high Medicaid participation and null 
results in non-targeted placebo groups with low participation will support the assumption 
that adoption timing was not correlated with other meaningful secular trends, such as 
medical technology diffusion or changes in social and economic environments that affected 
the entire population. The “high impact” subgroup is composed of adults raised in families 
that had incomes less than 150% of the poverty level, on average, during early childhood. 
The low impact “placebo” subgroup is composed of adults raised in moderate income 
families that had incomes between 175-300% of poverty.16 We chose to focus on a 
moderate income group as the placebo comparison because that group experienced barriers 
to health care access at the time of Medicaid's introduction, but were not eligible for the 
program (Davis and Schoen, 1978). 17 In practice, the PSID does not include observations 
for each of these sub-groups in every state. Our low-income sample consists of observations 
from 36 states and the moderate income group includes observations from 39 states. The 
appendix shows that the sub-group samples have Medicaid adoption distributions that are 
nearly identical to Figure 3 and that constraining both sub-groups to be a balanced state 
panel leads to nearly identical results as those presented here.
The PSID has also tracked AFDC participation since 1968, but we chose not to examine 
AFDC participants directly because AFDC participation decisions are clearly endogenous 
and because the increase in AFDC participation after the introduction of Medicaid (Decker 
and Selk, 2011) could contribute to compositional biases. In section 4.2 we examine a triple-
difference specification that approximates the effect of the treatment-on-the-treated without 
relying directly on indicators of AFDC participation. This approach also utilizes more 
sources of variation in the likelihood of Medicaid participation compared to income 
stratification alone. Consistent results across models will provide support for our findings.
It is possible that some unobserved factor that improved the life chances of low SES 
children, but not higher SES children, is correlated with Medicaid adoption time. The period 
of Medicaid's implementation was characterized by an explosion in public assistance 
programs. The Food Stamp Program, Head Start, and Community Health Centers were all 
16150% of the federal poverty line roughly translates to the un-weighted average of “gross” income eligibility limits for a 3 person 
family that prevailed across the states in 1970. Thus, this group approximates the group of income eligible. The early childhood period 
for the purpose of defining the low income group runs from conception through age 5 for those conceived in 1968 or later and 
1968-1972 for those conceived prior to 1968. Forcing all cohorts to have the 1968-1972 childhood period has no qualitative effect on 
the results.
17In the appendix we also show placebo results for children born in high-income families. Those results generally mirror results for 
moderate income families however the treatment variable showed a stronger and negative correlation with the economic index.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 14
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 rolling out around the same time as Medicaid's introduction. If these programs have long-
term impacts that are concentrated in the high impact subgroups then the effect of Medicaid 
could be overstated and null results in the high SES groups would not be as informative.
To account for that possibility we include a detailed set of contextual controls that are linked 
by state or county of birth.18 At the county level we observe the number of per capita 
doctors and short-term general hospitals, real per capita spending on public assistance (e.g. 
AFDC, general assistance, food stamps, and SSI), and whether the county of birth had one 
of several War on Poverty era programs that was implemented at the county level (Food 
Stamps, Head Start, Community Health Centers, Family Planning, Maternal and Child 
Health grants, other health related programming, and job training grants).19 The health care 
market and public expenditure data are measured as the average level in the early childhood 
period and the program variables are specified as the fraction of months exposed during 
early childhood (the exception is family planning which is specified as an indicator if a 
program existed at the time of conception). At the state level we observe unemployment, 
real AFDC benefit standards and per capita AFDC caseloads, all measured as the average in 
the early childhood period. We also include an indicator if the adult was conceived in a state 
and year with legalized abortion. County-level covariate data were not available for Alaska, 
Hawaii, the District of Columbia, and Virginia, and that portion of the sample was dropped 
(n=3,068; 4.4% of the total sample). All models control for the full set of contextual controls 
(Zst).
4. Main Results
In Table 2 we report the coefficients for the Medicaid exposure variable in the health 
outcome models for each of the subgroups described above.20 Each set of results come from 
models that control for the full set of demographic controls, area-by-year controls, and fixed 
effects. The top panel includes results for the condition index and the bottom panel describes 
results for self-reported health status and the 4 chronic condition indicators that constitute 
the index (ever being told that you have high blood pressure, heart disease or heart attack, 
diabetes after the age of 18, and meeting the BMI threshold for obesity).
In the low income group, the results imply that the effect of moving from no exposure to full 
exposure is a 0.35 standard deviation reduction in the condition index (indicating improved 
health). The estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level. Looking at the specific 
health measures, the results for the indicator of fair or poor health are small and quite 
imprecise. The Medicaid exposure coefficients for specific condition indicators are all 
negative as expected. However, we are only able to detect a significant effect to high blood 
pressure. The coefficient in the low income group implies that that full exposure to Medicaid 
in early childhood, versus its absence, is associated with a 22 percentage point decline in 
prevalence of high blood pressure, significant at the 5% level.
18County of residence is a restricted use variable which we obtained through special arrangement with the University of Michigan.
19We are indebted to Doug Almond, Hillary Hoynes, Amy Finkelstein, Martha Bailey and Andrew Goodman-Bacon for providing 
and assisting us with these contextual data. The online appendix provides a fuller description of each source.
20The full set of results is available in the appendix.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 15
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The right hand panel of Table 2 describes model results in the moderate income (placebo) 
sample. For all outcomes considered, the coefficients are small and not statistically 
significant. For example, the coefficient for the condition index is a non-significant −0.07. 
The pattern of results in the placebo groups suggest that the health impacts observed in the 
high impact group are not being driven by unmeasured underlying trends correlated with 
adoption timing.
Table 3 presents outcomes for the economic outcomes. The table is organized in the same 
fashion as Table 2. The outcomes include the economic index, years of education, the ratio 
of family income to the poverty line, and the decile of family wealth. Regardless of the 
impact group or the outcome measure there is no statistically conclusive evidence that 
exposure to Medicaid in childhood improves adult economic status. For example, the 
coefficient for the economic index in the low income group is negative (suggesting worse 
economic outcomes), but not significant. However, the standard errors are large and we 
cannot exclude a large range of effects. In the placebo group the effect of Medicaid's 
introduction on the economic index is positive and non-significant. In the case of family 
wealth the coefficient in the placebo group is significant at the 10% level (p=0.08).
4.2 Triple Differences
In Table 4, we focus more squarely on groups targeted by the program and formalize the 
comparison of treatment effects across the impact groups. To do so we use a triple 
difference approach run on the full sample of adults. Following the procedure suggested by 
Bleakley (2007), Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009), and HSA, we modify equation (1) by 
interacting the Medicaid exposure variable and the predicted probability of being enrolled in 
AFDC in early childhood (recall that Medicaid and AFDC were mechanically linked at 
Medicaid's inception). AFDC participation probabilities come from the 1970 Census Long 
Form and are simple means defined within 48 demographic cells. The groups consist of fully 
cross-classified characteristics of the family head: age (3 levels), race (white/non-white), 
marriage (married/not-married), education (less than high school/high school or more) and 
whether or not the family resided in a state that had above national-average AFDC income 
eligibility. The participation rate groups were chosen to be characteristics that people have 
little control over in the short-run, but which were meaningful determinants of AFDC 
participation.21 The rates are merged back to the analytical sample according to each adult's 
family background characteristics defined at birth or early life. The participation rate 
variable captures a higher degree of variation in Medicaid participation compared to the low 
and moderate income groups examined in the previous section. Particularly, the inclusion of 
marital status and state AFDC eligibility thresholds gives us a much clearer look at groups 
that were most strongly affected by Medicaid's introduction. For example, the average 
predicted probability of AFDC participation in the low-income group examined in the 
previous section was 0.1 and in the moderate income group was 0.03. In contrast, predicted 
probabilities of AFDC participation range from 0.01 to 0.48 across the 48 cells. The triple 
difference models include the same set of demographic controls, fixed effects and area-by-
year controls as equation (1), in addition to the full set of fixed effects for the 48 cells 
21The potential exception to this is marriage, but it provides substantial variation in AFDC participation.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 16
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (which obviates the “main effect” of predicted participation),22 interactions of the predicted 
probability measure with the demographic covariates (save for race due to collinearity), and 
with the cohort, state of birth, and interview year fixed effects. The key interaction of 
Medicaid exposure*the probability of AFDC participation captures the effect of exposure to 
Medicaid for people with a probability of participating of 1, compared to a probability of 
participating of 0.
In the top panel of Table 4 we present results from triple difference models of the chronic 
condition and economic index. As expected, the main effect for Medicaid exposure for both 
outcomes was small and non-significant. In the condition index model, the effect of full 
exposure to Medicaid in early childhood for those with predicted probability of AFDC 
participation of 1 was −3.15 and significant at the 1% level. The coefficient suggests that for 
groups that were likely to have participated in Medicaid, exposure in early childhood was 
associated with substantial improvements in adult heath. The larger effect size, compared to 
results in Table 2, reflects the fact that the participation rate groups provide a more targeted 
look at Medicaid participants compared to the low income group. Indeed, scaling the 
estimates from Table 2 by the average predicted probability of AFDC participation within 
the low-income group suggests a similar magnitude (−0.35/0.1= −3.5). In the economic 
index models the impact of Medicaid for those with predicted AFDC participation was 1.30, 
which suggests positive effects, but our estimates were not statistically significant. Similar 
to the results in Table 3, the standard errors are sufficiently imprecise that we cannot rule out 
meaningful impacts.
In the bottom panel of Table 4 we present results from the same model after removing the 
demographic controls and the area-by-year controls (we duplicate this robustness test for the 
stratified analyses in the appendix). If the coefficients are sensitive to these exclusions it 
would suggest that there may be other unobserved factors that were changing according to 
the same pattern of Medicaid's introduction and biasing results. However, the point 
estimates suggest similar effects.
4.3. Effects of Medicaid exposure at different ages
The main focus of this study is the long-run impact of first exposure to Medicaid in the 
earliest years of life. However, exposure at other points in childhood could also be 
important. In the appendix we present results of auxiliary analyses of the relative effects of 
first exposure to Medicaid at different ages. It is important to recognize that effects might 
differ by age at first exposure because of relative sensitivity to the effects of Medicaid at 
different developmental stages (i.e. heterogeneous treatment effects by age), because more 
overall exposure is better, or because of age-based differences in program participation 
conditional on eligibility. Unfortunately, our models cannot distinguish between those 
channels. However, our results provide some insight into how the long-run impact of 
Medicaid policy might evolve across different ages at first exposure. The analyses examine 
the chronic condition and economic indexes and we include 10 additional cohorts so that we 
have a sample born from 1945-1980. Including additional cohorts improves our examination 
22The inclusion of the cell fixed effects implies that the variation of interest comes from the interactions between the cells.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 17
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of first exposure in later years of life, but prevents us from including area-by-year controls 
because they are unavailable for earlier cohorts. Age at first exposure is measured by 
replacing the continuous fraction exposed variable in equation 1 with categorical age at first 
exposure, measured in 2 year bins and ranging from 5 years prior to birth to age 25. We 
estimate the models for high and low impact samples defined using both income and 
predicted AFDC participation.
In the high impact groups (low-income and high predicted AFDC participation), exposure 
starting prior to birth is associated with large improvements in adult health, but additional 
years of exposure prior to birth are not associated with additional improvement (Appendix 
Figure 1). The effects attenuate for delays in exposure and become relatively stable for 
additional years of delay by age 8. In the low-impact (placebo) groups (high income and low 
predicted AFDC), the effects were consistently near 0 until age 14 after which there was a 
small but stable decline in health. We found generally consistent results after pooling the 
impact groups (to maximize sample size) and extending the cohorts to 1935. We also 
estimated models using the share of months exposed during different childhood periods. The 
results of those models did not reveal evidence for an effect of exposure starting in later 
childhood or a non-linearity in exposure starting in the prenatal period. The results for the 
economic index are not as consistent and our models do not allow us to come to any definite 
conclusions about differences in age at first exposure (Appendix Figure 2).
We treat these auxiliary results with caution. We estimated wide confidence intervals for 
every age category. While the models suggest larger effects for exposure starting in the 
earliest years, which would be consistent with a sensitive developmental period, we cannot 
determine if the results are due to effect heterogeneity, increased duration, or participation 
probabilities that differ by age. Finally, a potential use of these graphs could be to examine 
our models for differential pre-trending. Doing so would require cohorts that were never 
exposed to Medicaid at any age, or the unrealistic assumption that exposure starting after 
age six had no effect on Medicaid participants. Our study design and the details of Medicaid 
preclude us from having truly “unexposed” cohorts—children were eligible until age 18 
(and sometimes older). Adults were not as likely to be eligible, but could still obtain 
coverage due to childbearing, through participation in an unemployed father or medically 
needy program, or some other eligibility pathway.
5. Mechanisms
As noted in Section 2, several mechanisms could link early childhood Medicaid exposure to 
later life health outcomes, including improved access to health services and reductions in 
medical-related household financial strain. In this section we provide evidence that the 
introduction of Medicaid affected both of those channels.
5.1 Effects on Health Service Use
We use data on health service use from the 1963-1980 restricted use National Health 
Interview Survey (NHIS).23 We make use of harmonized variables obtained from the 
23For more information on the NHIS, see http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/quest_data_related_1996_prior.htm
Boudreaux et al.
Page 18
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Integrated Health Interview Series (Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access 
Data Assistance Center, 2012). During this period the NHIS consistently collected data on 
hospitalizations, but not outpatient physician visits. Hospital utilization is an imperfect 
measure because it confounds access and morbidity. If Medicaid improved access to 
physicians the additional visits could have reduced the need for hospitalizations. However, 
due to the inconsistent physician visit data we are limited to focusing on the probability of 
any overnight hospital stay.
Our empirical strategy shares the same basic approach as our analysis of the PSID. We 
estimate a model that regresses a 0/1 indicator of prior year overnight hospitalization on an 
indicator of Medicaid availability that is determined by the state and year of interview 
relative to the date a state adopted a program. The sample of interest includes children age 
0-5 that have family incomes less than $3,000 in 1970 dollars. We then re-estimate the 
models for a placebo group of moderate income children with family incomes 
$5,000-10,000. The model controls for simple demographics, state-by-year health market 
(per capital hospitals and physicians) and public policy controls (e.g. public assistance 
spending and Community Health Center availability, among others), state fixed effects, year 
fixed effects and state specific trends in survey year. The results, described in Table 5, 
suggest that Medicaid increased hospital utilization for low-income children by 4 percentage 
points. There was no impact for higher income children that had a low probability of being 
eligible for the program. This lends further support to our study design.24 This evidence 
from the NHIS suggests that the introduction of Medicaid increased use of medical services, 
which is one plausible channel for Medicaid's longer-term effects.
5.2 Effects on Household Medical Debt
We were able to find one data source that included data on household financial issues 
around the time of Medicaid's introduction. The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) was 
conducted annually from 1946 to 1971. The SCF collected data on household debt, income, 
assets, and financial expectations, and available documentation notes that the sample is 
intended to be representative of the U.S.25 The SCF includes information on household 
composition and demographics, along with state identifiers. We focus on a single outcome 
from the SCF: whether the household reported having any medical debt, which was 
collected in 1962, 1963, 1967, 1968, and 1969. In these years, the SCF interviewed between 
2,051 and 3,179 households annually. We chose to focus on household medical debt since it 
is the most proximate measure of financial strain that we would expect to be affected by 
Medicaid's introduction. This measure is also very comparable to the survey question on 
medical debt collected by the recent Oregon Medicaid Experiment (Finkelstein et al., 2012).
The analysis of probability of medical debt in the SCF is similar to the PSID and NHIS 
analyses, but is distinct in several ways. First, the unit of analysis is not the child (as in the 
PSID and NHIS models), but the household. Second, because the household is the unit of 
analysis, we are able to introduce an additional source of variation into our identification 
24We obtain qualitatively similar results when we use a measure of predicted AFDC participation in a triple difference specification. 
We also obtain similar results to alternative placebo groups such as low income single adult men.
25More information on the SCF is available at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACDA/series/00055.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 19
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 strategy: whether the household had any children under the age of 18, since childless 
households would not have been eligible for Medicaid. We restrict our analysis to 
households where the head is age 18-59, since we wanted to avoid complications related to 
the introduction of Medicare in 1965 for older households while still allowing for the fact 
that grandparents could be affected by Medicaid if they had grandchildren in their 
household.
We present two models of any medical debt. The first is a triple-difference model, and looks 
at the effect of Medicaid's introduction, interacted with a dummy variable for low (<$3,000 
in real 1970 dollars) versus moderate ($5,000-$10,000 in real 1970 dollars) family income. 
This model includes all households with heads age 18-59 who had at least one child under 
18 in the household. Similar to the PSID and NHIS models, we include a full set of state and 
year fixed effects, we interact income category with the year and state dummies, and we 
control for household head age, race, and sex. The second model has the same specification 
as the first, but is restricted to households with no children under 18. This serves as a 
“placebo” model, since we would expect to see no effect of Medicaid's introduction on the 
probability of any medical debt.
The results of the SCF models are described in Table 6. The left panel displays the results of 
the models for families with children. The introduction of Medicaid was associated with a 
reduction of the probability of having any household debt of 0.11 in low-income households 
compared to moderate-income households. This is estimated precisely, with p=0.03. When 
we look at the results for the households without children in the right panel, we see no 
evidence of a drop in the likelihood of having medical debt. The coefficient on the 
Medicaid*low-income is actually positive (0.02) although this coefficient is measured 
imprecisely, its 95% confidence intervals rule out a reduction in the probability of medical 
debt of the magnitude that we observed in the low-income sample.
6. Discussion
In this paper we present some of the first estimates of the long-term effects of exposure to 
Medicaid in early childhood. We observe the longest follow-up period of any study to date. 
Our identification strategy relied on Medicaid's staggered introduction across the states in 
combination with family-level variation in predicted propensities to participate. Depending 
on the specification, the effect in groups targeted by the program ranged from a 0.35 to a 
3.15 standard deviation improvement in a composite index of health conditions. We observe 
that exposure to the Medicaid program through the duration of early childhood, compared to 
its absence, improves long term health. We also present evidence that two mechanisms of 
these long-term effects may have been an increase in health services use and a reduction in 
medical debt.
The magnitude of the triple-difference result for the chronic condition index is large and two 
limitations should be kept in mind. It has a treatment-on-treated interpretation, comparing 
someone with a predicted probability of AFDC of 0 with a predicted probability of 1. 
However, that is an extrapolation beyond the empirical support of the predicted participation 
variable, which ranges from 0.01 to 0.48 in our data. Second, while the key point estimate is 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 20
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significant, the confidence intervals still encompass a wide range of estimates. With these 
limitations in mind, it is reassuring that the stratified models (Table 2) suggest the same 
treatment-on-the-treated magnitude after adjusting for the average predicted participation 
probability in the low-income sample (0.1).
The triple difference results can be interpreted both on the predicted probability of 
participation margin and the time exposed margin. Increasing the predicted participation 
probability by 0.1 for someone exposed to the program throughout early childhood, an 
analogous movement to an eligibility expansion, results in a reduction of the chronic 
condition index by 0.31 standard deviations. If we were to assume that years of participation 
have equal effect at any age, then the triple difference model suggests that an additional year 
of participation during early childhood, for someone likely to participate, reduces the 
condition index by 0.46 standard deviations (−3.15/6.75 years). Our use of composite 
indexes improved our statistical precision, but these results are admittedly not easy to 
interpret, beyond sign and significance. Another way of describing the effect of increasing 
the predicted participation probability by 0.1 for someone exposed to the program 
throughout early childhood is that it reduces the number of chronic conditions by 0.37.26
These results are broadly consistent with other concurrently conducted work (e.g. Wherry et 
al. 2015; Miller and Wherry 2015). Miller and Wherry (2015) whose data and study design 
differ from ours, find that prenatal Medicaid coverage, on a treatment-on-the-treated basis, 
reduces the prevalence of obesity in adulthood by 56 percentage points. In some models they 
estimate a 37 percent point decline in the prevalence of any chronic condition, but this result 
is sensitive to including state specific time trends.
The results for specific chronic conditions in Table 2 are more readily interpretable. Those 
results suggested that high blood pressure was particularly sensitive to early life Medicaid 
exposure. We estimated that full exposure to Medicaid in early life was associated with a 22 
percentage point reduction in high blood pressure (the average prevalence of high blood 
pressure in the low-income sample is 21%).27 The magnitude of our blood pressure results 
are quite large, yet consistent with recent work examining the long-run health impacts of the 
Abecedarian program, a randomized intensive early childhood intervention that included 
health care, social and cognitive components (Campbell et al., 2014; Conti et al., 2015). 
Like Abecedarian, which reduced adult hypertension in men by 33-35 percentage points, 
Medicaid coverage in childhood appears to produce larger effects on adult blood pressure 
than contemporaneous behavioral interventions (Ebrahim et al., 2011). Finding the largest 
effects for blood pressure is not surprising given that the average age of adults in the sample 
was 38.
We also examined Medicaid's long-term economic impact. However, our point-estimates 
were imprecisely estimated and we could not exclude a large range of potentially 
26A 1 unit change in the index is associated with a 1.17 change in the sum of chronic conditions. Thus, a .31 decrease in the chronic 
condition index is associated with a .31*1.17=0.37 change in the sum of chronic conditions.
27The sample average prevalence reflects the treatment effect of early childhood Medicaid exposure, and our study design precludes 
identifying a clean “untreated” sample to use as the basis for calculating relative effects. Another potential reference point for our 
results is the national prevalence of high blood pressure among poor adults, estimated to be 33% by the CDC (National Center for 
Health Statistics 2012).
Boudreaux et al.
Page 21
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 meaningful effect sizes on the order of those reported in Brown, Kowalski and Lurie (2014) 
and Cohodes et al. (2015). Our economic index combined data on years of education, family 
income, and family wealth. We chose to exclude measures of labor-force participation or 
employment because choosing to remain out of the labor force does not necessarily signal 
reduced economic well-being. However, in robustness tests we found very similar effects 
when including measures of employment and public program participation or removing 
index components such as wealth. While our results for educational outcomes are 
inconclusive they do align with Royer (2009) who found relatively small impacts of low 
birth weight on the educational outcomes of a cohort of U.S. twins, but relatively large 
effects on measures of adult health.
The early origins literature suggests that the earliest years of life are critical for development 
(Almond and Currie, 2010; Currie, 2011). Understanding the contribution of policy 
exposures at specific critical periods versus marginal increase in duration (regardless of age) 
is important because it informs about the implications of distributing public resources across 
the lifecycle. The nature of Medicaid's rollout was such that our estimates reflected the 
effect of additional exposure occurring earlier in life and so our findings were consistent 
with the idea that earlier exposure is better. We also examined age at first exposure from the 
prenatal period to early adulthood, the results of which suggested the largest effects for 
exposure starting during the prenatal period and more moderate effects lasting into later 
childhood. However, we are unable to determine if we were observing effect heterogeneity 
by age, duration of exposure effects, or differences in program participation across age.
We control for a number of relevant coincident policy changes, but like all observational 
studies, a limitation is the possibility that the effect of some unobserved variable was 
absorbed in the coefficient of interest. For instance, school and hospital desegregation 
created important institutional shifts around the time Medicaid was introduced and we 
lacked specific data on the roll-out of desegregation. Robustness to the inclusion of state-
specific time trends helps to mitigate concern that bias might arise from these unobserved 
variables. However, to get a better sense of whether desegregation is likely to bias or 
otherwise explain our results, we ran a robustness check that dropped southern-born non-
whites from the sample, as that is the group most likely to be affected by desegregation. Our 
estimates were consistent (see appendix), which increases our confidence that the results 
reflect the effect of the Medicaid program. Another potential area of concern is that 
potentially eligible beneficiaries living in late adopting states could have moved in order to 
gain access to Medicaid in an early adopting state, despite little evidence of Medicaid 
induced migration in the existing literature (Schwartz et al. 2014). However, as shown in the 
appendix, our results are robust to excluding adults who moved across states in their early 
childhood years.
The introduction of Medicaid is not perfectly generalizable to the contemporary Medicaid 
program and all studies of long-term effects must grapple with the problem that the exposure 
of interest occurred at some past date that might not generalize to the present. At its 
inception Medicaid targeted a lower-income group than it now covers and it is reasonable to 
expect that the low-income population of the late 1960's differed in substantial ways from 
the low-income population of today. However, the primary hypothesized mechanism linking 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 22
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Medicaid in childhood to later life outcomes – decreasing financial barriers to medical care 
that returns immediate health and financial gains that persist throughout the lifecycle – 
remains relevant. Improvements in the productivity of medical technology since Medicaid's 
introduction would suggest that more recent cohorts would receive more benefit from 
Medicaid than earlier cohorts. This paper suggests that a full accounting of Medicaid 
expansions and other policies that aim to increase health insurance coverage, such as the 
ACA, should consider downstream benefits that accrue decades in the future.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
References
Almond D. Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero Influenza Exposure 
in the Post-1940 U.S. Population. Journal of Political Economy. 2006; 114(4):672–712.
Almond D, Currie J. Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives. 2010; 25(3):153–172. [PubMed: 25152565] 
Currie, J.; Almond, D. Human Capital Before Age 5.. In: Card, David; Ashenfelter, Orley, editors. 
Handbook of Labor Economics 4 (B). Elsevier; 2011. p. 1315-1486.
Currie J, Rossin-Slater M. Early-Life Origins of Life-Cycle Well-Being: Research and Policy 
Applications. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 2014; 34(1):208–242. [PubMed: 
25558491] 
Almond D, Mazumder B. Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The effect of Ramadan 
Observance During Pregnancy. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 2011; 3(4):56–
85.
Andersen ML. Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention: A 
Reevaluation of Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Programs. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association. 2008; 103(484):1481–1495.
Barker DJP. The Fetal Origins of Coronary Disease. Acta Paediatrica. 1997; 86(S422):78–82. 
[PubMed: 9298799] 
Ben-Shlomo Y, Kuh D. A Life Course Approach to Chronic Disease Epidemiology: Conceptual 
Models, Emperical Challenges and Interdesciplinary Perspectives. International Journal 
Epidemiology. 2002; 31:285–293.
Bernard SE, Feindgold E. The Impact of Medicaid. Wisconsin Law Review. 1970:726–755.
Bertrand M, Duflo E, Mullainathan S. How Much Should We Trust Difference-in-Differences 
estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2004; 119(1):249–275.
Bhalorta S, Venkataramani A. The Captain of the Men of Death and His Shadow: Long-Run Impacts 
of Early Life Pneumonia Exposure. IZA Discussion Paper 6041. 2011
Bharadwaj P, Vellesen Løken Katrine, Neilson Chris. Early Life Interventions and Academic 
Achievement. American Economic Review. 2013; 103(5):1862–1891.
Black SE, Devereux PJ, Salvanes KG. From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth 
Weight on Adult Outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2007; 122(1):409–439.
Blackwell DL, Hayward MD, Crimmins EM. Does Childhood Health Affect Chronic Morbidity in 
Later Life? Social Science & Medicine. 2001; 52:1269–1284. [PubMed: 11281409] 
Bleakley H. Disease and Development: Evidence From Hook Worm Eradication in the American 
South. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2007; 122(1):73–117. [PubMed: 24146438] 
Brown, D.; Kowalski, AE.; Lurie, IZ. Medicaid as an Investment in Children: What is the Long-Term 
Impact on Tax Receipts?. Monograph. 2014. Available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~ak669/
medicaid.latest.draft.pdf
Boudreaux, M. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Minnesota; Minneapolis, MN: 2014. The Long-Term 
Effects of Exposure to Medicaid in Early Childhood.. 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 23
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Campbell F, Conti G, Heckman JJ, Moon SH, Pinto R, Pungello E, Pan Y. Early Childhood 
Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health. Science. 2013; 343:1478–1485. [PubMed: 
24675955] 
Chay KY, Guryan J, Mazumder B. Birth Cohort and the Black-White Achievement Gap: The Role of 
Access and Health Soon After Birth. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working 
Paper 15078. 2009
Chen Y, Zhou L. The Long-Term Health and Economic Consequences of the 1959-1961 Famine in 
China. Journal of Health Economics. 2006; 26(4):659–681. [PubMed: 17289187] 
Cohen, RA.; Makuc, DM.; Bernstein, AM.; Bilheimer, LT.; Powell-Griner, E. National Health 
Statistics Reports; no 17. National Center for Health Statistics; Hyattsville, MD: 2009. Health 
insurance Coverage Trends, 1959–2007: Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey.. 
Cohodes S, Kleiner S, Lovenheim M, Grossman D. The Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on 
Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions. Journal of Human Resources 
Forthcoming. 2015
Conti G, Heckman JJ, Pinto R. The Effects of Two Influential Early Childhood Interventions on 
Health and Healthy Behaviors. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 
21454. 2015
Conti G, Heckman JJ, Urzua S. The Education-Health Gradient. American Economic Review: Papers 
& Proceedings. 2010; 100(2):234–238.
Cunha F, Heckman JJ. The Technology of Skill Formation. The American Economic Review. 97(2):
31–47.
Currie J. Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences. American Economic Journal: Papers & 
Proceedings. 2011; 101(3):1–22.
Currie J, Gruber J. Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid 
Eligibility of Pregnant Women. The Journal of Political Economy. 1996a; 104(6):1263–1296.
Currie J, Gruber J. Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and Child Health. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 1996b; 111(2):431–466.
Currie J, Decker S, Lin W. Has Public Insurance for Older Children Reduced Disparities in Access to 
Care and Health Outcomes? Journal of Health Economics. 2008; 27(6):1567–1581. [PubMed: 
18707781] 
Dave D, Decker S, Kaestner R, Simon K. Re-examining the Effects of Medicaid Expansions for 
Pregnant Women. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. 14591. 
2008
Davis, K.; Schoen, C. Health and the War on Poverty: A Ten-Year Appraisal. The Brookings 
Institution; Washington, DC.: 1978. 
Decker SL, Selk FW. The Effect of the Original Introduction of Medicaid on Welfare Participation and 
Female Labor Supply. Review of Economics of the Household. 2011; 10(4):541–556.
Decker, SL.; Gruber, J. PhD Dissertation. Harvard University; 1993. The Effect of Medicaid on 
Access to Health Care and Welfare Participation.. 
De La Mata D. The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility, Coverage, Utilization, and Children’s Health. 
Health Economics. 2012; 21(9):1061–1079. [PubMed: 22807287] 
Duncan GJ, Ziol-Guest KM, Kalil A. Early-Childhood Poverty and Adult Attainment, Behavior, and 
Health. Child Development. 2010; 81(1):306–325. [PubMed: 20331669] 
Duncan GJ, Brooks-Gunn J, Klebanov PK. Economic Deprivation and Early Childhood Development. 
Child Development. 1994; 65(2):296–318. [PubMed: 7516849] 
Ebrahim, S.; Fiona, T.; Ward, K.; Beswick, A.; Burke, M.; Smith, G. Multiple Risk Factor 
Interventions for Primary Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease. Cochrane Library; 2011. 
Figlio DN, Guryan J, Karbownik K, Roth J. The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s 
Cognitive Development. American Economic Review. 2014; 104(12):3921–3955.
Finkelstein A. The Aggrigate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of 
Medicare. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2007; 122(1):1–37.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 24
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Finkelstein A, Taubman S, Wright B, Berstein M, Gruber J, Newhouse JP, Allen H, Baiker K, Oregon 
Health Study Group. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2012; 127(3):1057–1106. [PubMed: 23293397] 
Fitzgerald J, Gottschalk P, Moffitt R. An Analysis of Sample Attrition in Panel Data: The Michigan 
Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Journal of Human Resources. 1998; 33(2):251–299.
Foltz AM. The Development of Ambiguous Federal Policy: Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and 
Treatment (EPSDT). The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly. 1975; 53(1):35–64.
Gluckman PD, Hanson MA, Beedle AS. Early Life Events and Their Consequences for Later Disease: 
A Life History and Evolutionary Perspective. American Journal of Human Biology. 2007; 19(1):
1–19. [PubMed: 17160980] 
Goodman-Bacon, A. Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid Implementation. 2015. 
http://www-personal.umich.edu/~ajgb/medicaid_ajgb.pdf
Gouskova, E.; Heeringa, S.; McGonagle, K.; Schoeni, R.; Stafford, F. Survey Research Center-
Institute for Social Research. University of Michigan; 2008. Panel Study of Income Dynamics 
Revised Longitudinal Weights.. Technical Paper Series #08-05
Holahan, J. Financing Health Care for the Poor: The Medicaid Experience. Lexington Press; 
Lexington, MA: 1975. 
Howell, Embry M.; Kenny, Genevieve M. The Impact of Medciaid/CHIP Expansions on Children: A 
Synthesis of the Evidence. Medical Care Research and Review. 2012; 69(4):372–396. [PubMed: 
22451618] 
Hoynes HW, Schanzenbach DW. Consumption Responses to In-Kind Transfers: Evidence Form the 
Introduction of the Food Stamp Program. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 2009; 
1(4):109–139.
Hoynes, HW.; Schanzenbach, DW.; Almond, D. Long Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety 
Net. 2014. https://gspp.berkeley.edu/assets/uploads/research/pdf/Hoynes-Schanzenbach-
Almond-4-14.pdf
Huxley R, Neil A, Collins R. Unraveling the Fetal Origins Hypothesis: Is There Really an Inverse 
Association between Birth weight and Subsequent Blood Pressure? Lancet. 2002; 360(9334):659–
665. [PubMed: 12241871] 
Johnson RC, Schoeni RF. Early-life Origins of Adult Disease: National Longitudinal Population-
Based Study of the United Sates. American Journal of Public Health. 2011; 101(12):2317–2324. 
[PubMed: 22021306] 
Henry, J.; Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 5 Key Questions on Medicaid and its Role in State/
Federal Budgets. 2012. http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8139-02.pdf
Kermack WO, McKendrick AG, McKinlay PL. Death Rates in Great Britain and Sweden. Some 
General Regularities and Their Significance. Lancet. 1934; 31:698–703.
Lee, DN. [July 1, 2013] The Long Term Effects of Post-Neonatal Childhood Health: Evidence from 
Mandatory School Vaccination Laws. 2013. http://web.missouri.edu/~leedn/MSVL_DLee.pdf.
Leininger L, Levy H, Schanzenbach D. Consequences of SCHIP Expansions for Household Well-
Being. Forum of Health Economics & Policy. 2010; 13(1) Article 3. 
Levine PB, Schanzenbach D. The Impact of Children's Public Health Insurance Expansions on 
Educational Outcomes. Forum for Health Economics and Policy. 2009; 12(1) Article 1. 
Markus AR, Andres E, West KD, Garro N, Pellegrini C. Medicaid Covered Births, 2008 Through 
2010, in the Context of the Implementation of Health Reform. Women's Health Issues. 2013; 
23(5):e273–e280. [PubMed: 23993475] 
Mazumder B, Almond D, Park K, Crimmins EM, Finch CE. Lingering Effects of the 1918 Influenza 
Pandemic on Cardiovascular Disease. Journal of Developmental Origins of Health and Disease. 
2009; 1(1):26–34. [PubMed: 20198106] 
Miller, S.; Wherry, L. The Long-Term Health Effects of Early Life Medicaid Coverage. 2015. http://
www-personal.umich.edu/~mille/MillerWherry_Prenatal2015.pdf
Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access Data Assistance Center. Integrated Health 
Interview Series: Version 5.0. University of Minnesota; Minneapolis: 2012. 
Montez, JK.; Hayward, MD. Early Life Conditions and Later Life Mortality.. In: Rogers, Richard G.; 
Crimmins, Eileen, editors. International Handbook of Adult Mortality. Vol. 2. Springer; 2011. 
Boudreaux et al.
Page 25
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2011: With Special Emphasis on 
Socioeconomic Status and Health. Hyattsville, MD.: 2012. 
New York Times. Medicaid Rolls Will Open Today: Applicant May Register at 23 City Welfare 
Centers. October. 1966a; 3:1966.
New York Times. Medicaid Notices to be Mailed Oct. 1. September. 1966b; 17:1966.
Saloner B. Does Expanding Public Health Insurance Prevent Material Hardship for Families with 
Children? Medical Care Research and Review. 2013; 70(3):267–286. [PubMed: 23295439] 
Shonkoff J, Boyce T, McEwen BS. Neuroscience, Molecular Biology, and the Childhood Roots of 
Health Disparities: Building a New Framework for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. The 
Journal of the American Medical Association. 2009; 201(21):2252–2259. [PubMed: 19491187] 
Panel Study of Income Dynamics [restricted use data]. Produced and distributed by the Survey 
Research Center. Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan; Ann Arbor, MI: 2012. 
Royer H. Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth Weight. American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics. 2009; 1(1):49–85.
Schulz LC. The Dutch Hunger Winter and the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease. 
Proceedings of the National Academies of Science. 2010; 107(39):16757–16758.
Schwartz AL, Sommers B. Moving for Medicaid? Recent Eligibility Expansions Did Not Induce 
Migration from Other States. Health Affairs. 2014; 33(1):88–94. [PubMed: 24395939] 
Shaefer LH, Grogan CM, Pollack HA. Transitions from Private to Public Health Coverage among 
Children: Estimating Effects on Out-of-Pocket Medical Costs and Health Insurance Premium 
Costs. Health Services Research. 2011; 46(3):840–858. [PubMed: 21306364] 
Social Security Administration, Office of the Historian (SSA). Personal Communication. 2013
Sommers BD, Oellerich D. The Poverty-Reducing Effect of Medicaid. Journal of Health Economics. 
2013; 32(5):816–832. [PubMed: 23835200] 
State Health Access Data Assistance Center (SHADAC). Data Center; 2013. http://www.shadac.org/
datacenter
Stevens, R.; Stevens, R. Welfare Medicine in America: A Case Study of Medicaid. Free Press/
MacMillian; New York, NY: 1974. 
Strumpf E. Medicaid's Effect on Single Women's Labor Supply: Evidence from The Introduction of 
Medicaid. Journal of Health Economics. 2011; 30(3):531–548. [PubMed: 21507494] 
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (DHEW). Number of recipients and amounts of 
payments under Medicaid. National Center for Social Statistics; Washington DC: 1968. 
U.S. Department of Health Education and Welfare (DHEW). Characteristics of State Medical 
Assistance Programs Under Title XIX of the Social Security Act. U.S. Government Printing 
Office; Washington, DC: 1970. 
U.S. House Committee on Ways and Means (DHEW). Background Material and Data on the Programs 
within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means (Green Book). U.S. Government 
Printing Office; Wahsington, DC: 1996. 
Wherry LR, Meyer BD. Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate Effects of Medicaid 
Eligibility. Journal of Human Resources. 2015 Forthcoming. 
Wherry LR, Miller S, Kaestner R, Meyer MB. Childhood Medicaid Coverage and Later Life Health 
Care Utilization. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. 20929. 
2015
Boudreaux et al.
Page 26
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Percentage Point Differences In Utilization Outcomes for Low and Moderate Income 
Children ages 0-5, 1964 and 1974
Notes: Source: 1964 and 1974 National Health Interview Survey. Low income is defined as 
family income less than $3,000 in 1974 dollars and moderate income is between $5,000 and 
$10,000. The statistical significance of the difference in differences between years is 
denoted by *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 27
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Medicaid Adoption by Quarter
Notes: Adoption dates come from the Department of Health Education and Welfare (1970) 
& Social Security Administration (2013). The map is shaded relative to the quarter of 
adoption and states are labeled with the month and year of adoption.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 28
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Number of Months Exposed to Medicaid during Early Childhood, by Birth Cohort
Notes: Source: The 1955-1980 birth cohorts from the 1968-2009 PSID (person level 
observations). Error bars represent 1 standard deviation above (below) the mean and are not 
constrained by 81 months.
Boudreaux et al.
Page 29
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Boudreaux et al.
Page 30
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
Mean
SD
Min
Max
Medicaid Exposure
    Fraction of Months Exposed in Early Childhood
0.53
0.45
0
1
Basic Demographics
    Gender (Male)
0.47
0.50
0
1
    Race (White)
0.82
0.38
0
1
    Age
38.24
7.27
25
54
    Married
0.69
0.46
0
1
Family Background
    Poverty Ratio Less than 1.5, Early Childhood
0.19
0.39
0
1
    Poverty Ratio between 1.75 and 3.0, Early Childhood
0.37
0.48
0
1
    Childhood Head Less Than High School
0.30
0.46
0
1
Health Outcomes
    Health Index
−0.05
0.55
−0.4
4
    Fair Health or worse
0.09
0.29
0
1
    High Blood Pressure
0.14
0.35
0
1
    Heart Disease or Heart Attack
0.03
0.16
0
1
    Adult Onset Diabetes
0.02
0.15
0
1
    Obese
0.25
0.44
0
1
Economic Outcomes
    Economic Index
0.16
0.78
−2.8
28
    Years of Education, Top code at 17
13.59
2.08
1
17
    Harmonized Income to Poverty Ratio
5.32
8.27
0
570.2
    Decile of Family Wealth
6.11
2.94
1
10
Selected Area-by-Year Controls
    Average per capita Public Assistance Spending, Age 0-5 (2000 yr $)
197.88
264.97
0
6474.8
    Average # Hospitals per 100,000 people, Age 0-5
3.45
4.40
0
43.6
    Average # Physicians per 100,000 people, Age 0-5
124.61
82.30
0
829.8
    Food Stamp Program Exposure
0.47
0.45
0
1
    Community Health Center Exposure
0.13
0.32
0
1
    Maternal and Child Health Program Exposure
0.47
0.45
0
1
Sample Size
    Person-Year Observations
17,125
    Unique Person Observations
3,830
    Years Observed
4.6
1
6
Source: 1968-2009 PSID. See text for a description of the analytical sample. All estimates are weighted. Sample size describes observations with 
non-missing condition index values which applies only to the 1999-2009 waves.
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Boudreaux et al.
Page 31
Table 2
The Impact of Exposure to Medicaid in Early Childhood on Adult Health, by Income
Low Income (<150% FPL)
Moderate Income (175-300% FPL)
Coefficient
SE
Coefficient
SE
Chronic Condition Index
−0.35**
0.17
−0.07
0.14
Sample Size
5,607
5,330
Mean of Y
0.08
−0.06
R2
0.18
0.11
Fair Health or Worse
−0.01
0.13
−0.01
0.06
High Blood Pressure
−0.22**
0.10
−0.12
0.10
Heart Disease/Heart Attack
−0.02
0.05
−0.05
0.05
Adult Onset Diabetes
−0.04
0.05
0.04
0.04
Obesity (BMI≥30)
−0.22
0.16
−0.04
0.17
Source: PSID 1968-2009. All parameters are from separate regressions. Models include a quadratic in age, gender, race, marital status, the full set 
of contextual controls described in the text, interview year fixed effects, state of birth fixed effects, and year of birth fixed effects. See text for an 
explanation of the analytical sample, the income groups, and construction of the chronic condition index. All estimates are weighted and standard 
errors are clustered on state of birth.
*p<0.1
***p<0.01
**p<0.05
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Boudreaux et al.
Page 32
Table 3
The Impact of Exposure to Medicaid in Early Childhood on Adult Economic Attainment, by Income
Low Income (<150% FPL)
Moderate Income (175-300% FPL)
Coefficient
SE
Coefficient
SE
Economic Index
−0.08
0.18
0.16
0.25
Sample Size
5,973
5,739
Mean of Y
−0.31
0.13
R2
0.30
0.14
Years of Education
0.10
0.64
0.87
0.71
Continuous Income to Poverty Ratio
−1.04
0.84
−2.04
2.20
Decile of Family Wealth
−0.17
0.74
1.50*
0.83
Source: PSID 1968-2009. All parameters are from separate regressions. Models include a quadratic in age, gender, race, marital status, the full set 
of contextual controls described in the text, interview year fixed effects, state of birth fixed effects, and year of birth fixed effects. See text for an 
explanation of the analytical sample, the impact groups, and construction of the SES index. All estimates are weighted and standard errors are 
clustered on state of birth.
**p<0.05
***p<0.01
*p<0.1
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Boudreaux et al.
Page 33
Table 4
Triple Difference Models
Chronic Condition Index
Economic Index
Coefficient
SE
Coefficient
SE
Full Model
    Medicaid Exposure*Predicted Participation
−3.15***
0.83
1.30
1.75
    Medicaid Exposure
0.05
0.10
−0.18
0.13
    Sample Size
16,834
17,923
    Mean of Y
−0.05
0.16
    R2
0.13
0.27
Without Controls
    Medicaid Exposure*Predicted Participation
−3.32***
0.83
1.68
1.93
    Medicaid Exposure
0.03
0.10
−0.16
0.15
    Sample Size
17,125
18,113
    Mean of Y
−0.05
0.16
    R2
0.13
0.23
Source: PSID 1968-2009. The top panel reports results from models that include a quadratic in age, gender, marital status, race, the participation 
rate groups, the full set of area-by-year controls described in the text, interview year fixed effects, state of birth fixed effects, year of birth fixed 
effects, and interactions of the predicted participation rate and state, cohort, and interview year fixed effects. The bottom panel reports results after 
removing the demographic controls, and area-by-year controls. See text for an explanation of the analytical sample and construction of the outcome 
variables. All estimates are weighted and standard errors are clustered on state of birth.
*p<0.1
**p<0.05
***p<0.01
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Boudreaux et al.
Page 34
Table 5
The Impact of Medicaid's Introduction on the Probability of Any Annual Hospital Visit, by Income, Age 0-5
Low Income
Moderate income
Coefficient
SE
Coefficient
SE
Medicaid
0.04***
0.013
−0.002
0.004
Sample Size
24,520
101,793
Base Rate
0.06
0.07
Source: NHIS 1963-1980. Low-income is family income less than $3,000 and moderate income between $5,000 and $10,000 (in real 1970 terms). 
All estimates are from separate regressions. Estimates are average marginal effects derived from logistic regression models. Models control for age 
(in dummies), race, gender, household head's age, household head's education, state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state specific trends in the 
calendar year of survey. Medicaid is a 0/1 variable that equals 1 when Medicaid exists at the beginning of the 12 month hospital visit reference 
period. Standard errors (SE) are based on state clusters. All estimates are weighted.
*p<0.1
**p<0.05
***p<0.01.
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Boudreaux et al.
Page 35
Table 6
The Impact of Medicaid's Introduction on the Probability of Any Medical Debt, by Household Structure
Households with Children
Households without Children (placebo)
Coefficient
SE
Coefficient
SE
Medicaid * Low Income
−0.110**
0.049
0.02
0.059
Medicaid
0.028
0.025
0.037**
0.018
Low Income
0.150**
0.056
0.394***
0.057
Sample Size
2,555
1,659
Mean of Y
0.238
0.097
R2
0.125
0.291
Source: Survey of Consumer Finances, 1962-1963 and 1967-1969. Models include covariates for age, sex, race, and education of household head 
as described in the text. Models include full set of interview year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and interactions between low-income and the 
state and year fixed effects. See text for an explanation of the analytical sample. Standard errors are clustered on the state.
*p<0.1
**p<0.05
***p<0.01
J Health Econ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
