 1
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Non-invasive detection of severe 
neutropenia in chemotherapy 
patients by optical imaging of 
nailfold microcirculation
Aurélien Bourquard1,2, Alberto Pablo-Trinidad2, Ian Butterworth1, Álvaro Sánchez-Ferro  
1,3, 
Carolina Cerrato4, Karem Humala4, Marta Fabra Urdiola4, Candice Del Rio5, Betsy Valles5, 
Jason M. Tucker-Schwartz1, Elizabeth S. Lee6, Benjamin J. Vakoc7, Timothy P. Padera  
8, 
María J. Ledesma-Carbayo2, Yi-Bin Chen5, Ephraim P. Hochberg5, Martha L. Gray1,6 &  
Carlos Castro-González1,2
White-blood-cell (WBC) assessment is employed for innumerable clinical procedures as one indicator 
of immune status. Currently, WBC determinations are obtained by clinical laboratory analysis of whole 
blood samples. Both the extraction of blood and its analysis limit the accessibility and frequency of 
the measurement. In this study, we demonstrate the feasibility of a non-invasive device to perform 
point-of-care WBC analysis without the need for blood draws, focusing on a chemotherapy setting 
where patients’ neutrophils—the most common type of WBC—become very low. In particular, we 
built a portable optical prototype, and used it to collect 22 microcirculatory-video datasets from 11 
chemotherapy patients. Based on these videos, we identified moving optical absorption gaps in the 
flow of red cells, using them as proxies to WBC movement through nailfold capillaries. We then showed 
that counting these gaps allows discriminating cases of severe neutropenia (<500 neutrophils per µL), 
associated with increased risks of life-threatening infections, from non-neutropenic cases (>1,500 
neutrophils per µL). This result suggests that the integration of optical imaging, consumer electronics, 
and data analysis can make non-invasive screening for severe neutropenia accessible to patients. More 
generally, this work provides a first step towards a long-term objective of non-invasive WBC counting.
White-blood-cell (WBC) status is used as one indicator of immunological status in the diagnosis and treatment of 
multiple medical conditions, including cancer1, infectious diseases2,3, sepsis4, autoimmune disorders5, and in the 
use of immunosuppressant drugs6. However, all current methods require a blood sample which involves a visit to 
a healthcare center and trained clinical personnel, even with finger-prick technologies7,8. This limitation inher-
ently restricts how frequently and quickly monitoring can be performed. In addition, traditional blood testing 
requires specific reagents and sterile conditions, which precludes applicability in resource-limited environments9. 
By contrast, a non-invasive approach to WBC measurement could circumvent these requirements, and may ena-
ble quick and self-administered testing in outpatient care, including at the patient’s home or walk-in clinics, 
drawing parallels to existing non-invasive technologies for the monitoring of blood oxygen saturation levels10.
As a first step towards non-invasive WBC analysis, we focused on whether one could non-invasively screen 
for severe neutropenia11, defined as low levels of neutrophils (<500 per µL)—the most common WBC type. This 
1Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Biomedical 
Image Technologies, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid and CIBER-BBN, Madrid, Spain. 3Centro Integral en 
Neurociencias HM CINAC, HM Hospitales, Móstoles, Madrid, Spain. 4Departamento de Hematología, Hospital 
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. 5Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. 6Institute of Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA, USA. 7Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. 8Edwin L. Steele Laboratories, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to A.B. (email: aurelien@mit.edu) or C.C.-G. (email: ccastro@mit.edu)
Received: 17 November 2017
Accepted: 15 March 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
condition is one of the main toxicities in patients receiving common chemotherapy regimens. It is responsible 
for a significant amount of morbidity and a significant risk of mortality because of its associated increased risk 
of infection12. Yet, the monitoring of severe neutropenia is currently insufficient for the aforementioned reasons. 
This barrier to rapid clinical care interferes with the timely life-saving interventions of prophylactic antibiotics or 
granulocyte-colony stimulating factors in afebrile patients with prolonged severe neutropenia. In that regard, a 
non-invasive method could substantially impact the outpatient care and management of patients at high risk for 
severe neutropenia-related immunosuppression13,14.
Our approach aims to provide a screening tool for severe neutropenia based on non-invasive and portable 
optical visualization of capillaries. In doing so, we do not intend to be as accurate as current laboratory tests 
or replace the way clinical decisions are ultimately made. Rather, our approach could be employed as a trigger 
where patients would be referred to state-of-the-art blood tests if severe neutropenia is detected. Conceptually, 
when capillary diameter approaches WBC diameter (10–20 um), the latter completely fills the capillary lumen. 
This causes a red-blood-cell (RBC) depletion downstream of the WBC in the microcirculation where WBCs 
flow slower than RBCs15. Therefore, if the illumination renders WBCs transparent and RBCs dark—as it occurs 
at specific wavelengths—the passage of a WBC will appear as an optical absorption gap in the continuous RBC 
stream that moves through the capillary.
Using white-light transillumination microscopy, Schmid-Schoenbein et al. observed this “gap” phenomenon 
in a rabbit ear window model. They showed that RBCs accumulated upstream of WBCs with a RBC-depleted 
area downstream15 when the capillary and WBC diameters were comparable. Sinclair et al.16 observed the same 
phenomenon in rat-cremaster and bat-wing microcirculation, using blue-light transillumination to maximize 
contrast between RBCs—peak absorption for oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin is 420-nm blue17—and low-absorption 
regions lacking RBCs. By observing the flow of RBCs over time, they first identified the capillary morphology, and 
then brighter regions associated with optical-absorption gaps inside the capillary lumen. They also used fluores-
cent labeling to confirm that gaps were associated with WBCs.
The idea that such absorption gaps relate to WBCs was investigated in humans by taking advantage of the 
blue entoptic phenomenon where WBCs let blue light through as they flow in front of the retina, thus creating 
bright spots that the subject can see18. In other previous studies19–21, subjects had their eyes illuminated with blue 
light and were asked how many bright spots they perceived. Group differences in amounts of perceived spots 
between baseline, leukopenic, and leukocytotic subjects—related to normal, abnormally low, and abnormally 
high ranges of WBC counts—were reported. A limitation of these methods, however, is their reliance on subject 
self-assessment, which is prone to individual biases and poor repeatability. This does not make them amenable 
for clinical screening.
Overall, these findings suggest that flowing gaps in capillaries could provide a basis for a new method to assess 
WBCs non-invasively. Our implementation focused on nailfold capillaries that are superficial, i.e., 50–100-µm 
deep22, run parallel to the skin surface, so that they can be visualized non-invasively with simple, affordable 
optical equipment23–27, and have diameters comparable to WBC size27. Similar to existing non-invasive devices 
that measure features of blood, our method relied on the light-absorption properties of hemoglobin. However, in 
contrast to our approach, existing devices do not obtain any spatially resolved information (i.e., images), which 
we require in order to see flowing gaps. For instance, CO-oximetry28 and occlusion spectroscopy29,30 measure the 
bulk attenuation of light transmitted at a number of wavelengths through the finger wherein differences in oxy-
genation of hemoglobin lead to spectral differences that can be resolved to a measurement. In addition, whereas 
hemoglobin devices use red and infrared wavelengths (to ensure transmission through the finger, while being 
sensitive to oxygenated versus deoxygenated hemoglobin), we used wavelengths in the deep-blue range (420 nm) 
to maximize the contrast between the red blood cells and flow gaps in the superficial capillaries of interest.
In this work, we demonstrate the ability of optical imaging to screen for severe neutropenia in human subjects 
by counting events defined as instances of moving optical absorption gaps in the nailfold microcirculation. To do 
so, we devised a portable prototype to produce optical microscopy videos of capillaries (Fig. 1). Our design max-
imizes RBC-to-non-RBC contrast over multiple capillaries within one field of view (FOV) while ensuring ade-
quate resolution, depth of focus, stability, and frame rate. Based on this prototype, we conducted a clinical study 
(Fig. 2) involving 11 patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem-cell transplant (ASCT)31. 
Figure 1. Clinical prototype. (a) 3D model of the custom-made portable prototype employed to record 
microscopy videos of the microcirculation in nailfold capillaries of patients, with its different components.  
(b) Patients place their ring finger in a 3D-printed holder, which plays a dual role: achieving stability throughout 
the one-minute recording duration and holding the oil employed for optical coupling. (c) The finger is placed so 
that illumination and imaging is directed at the nailfold area (dashed purple line).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
For each patient, we acquired one-minute videos of the same capillaries at two time points: pre-chemotherapy 
baseline (>1,500 neutrophils per µL) and severe neutropenia (<500 neutrophils per µL) (Fig. 3). Based on these 
data, we developed and validated a method to tag events (Figs 4 and 5) and count them to discriminate between 
baseline and severe neutropenia across patients (Figs 6–7).
Methods
Study design. 
We conducted a pilot diagnostic validation study to test the a-priori hypothesis that our approach 
allows the classification of severe neutropenia (<500 neutrophils/µL) versus the baseline status (>1,500 neutro-
phils/µL) in patients. We enrolled a cohort of patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy followed by ASCT. The 
kinetics of neutrophil values in these patients was predictable because the intensity of the chemotherapy applied 
prior to transplantation ensures the passage through a severe-neutropenia stage followed by recovery (Fig. 2). 
 
In this proof-of-concept study, no power analysis was carried out and a convenience sample of 22 measurements 
from 11 subjects, as selected from our initial patient pool (see “Data collection”), was considered sufficient to test 
the study hypothesis. Non-parametric tests were used as well as receiver-operating-characteristic curve analyses. 
All human raters who analyzed the data were blinded (see “Capillary selection” and “Event rating”).
In total, 26 patients were recruited, with 17 and 9 patients from the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), 
Boston, MA, USA, and Hospital Universitario La Paz (HULP), Madrid, Spain, respectively. Each recruited 
patient signed an informed consent. All the information obtained was anonymous and the participants were not 
identifiable.
Figure 2. Patient acquisition time points. The patients enrolled in our study are undergoing an ASCT, process 
that results in a predictable evolution of their neutrophil counts due to the controlled administration of 
chemotherapy. This provides an opportunity to record capillary videos at two different time points for each 
patient: (1) baseline (>1,500 neutrophils/µL) and (2) severe neutropenia (<500 neutrophils/µL).
Figure 3. Example of raw acquisitions. This pair of wide-field videos (Supplementary Movie S1) was acquired 
with our optical prototype from one ASCT patient at two time points where the same capillaries can be 
observed (three numbered capillary pairs shown). (a) Baseline (neutrophils > 1,500/µL). (b) Severe neutropenia 
(neutrophils < 500/µL).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
The patient inclusion criteria used for recruitment were the following: (a) patients must have a scheduled 
ASCT of hematopoietic progenitors; (b) patients must be 18 years or older; (c) patients must have the ability to 
understand and the willingness to sign a written consent document; (d) at baseline, patients must have a leuko-
cyte count equal to or greater than 3,000 cells/µL and a neutrophil count equal to or greater than 1,500 cells/µL. 
Patients were excluded if suffering from myelodysplasia or from a history of allergic reactions to components of 
chemical compositions similar to the oil used for optical coupling in our clinical device, or if their skin phototype 
was larger than four on the Fitzpatrick scale32.
The MGH clinical study was approved by the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center institutional review board, 
and by the MIT Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects as Protocol #1610717680. This study 
was also registered and posted at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02512666) starting from July 31, 2015. The HULP clinical 
study was approved by the HULP Ethics Committee in the document HULP PI-2353. The analysis of anonymized 
data from these pilot studies was also approved by the Ethics Committee of Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
and Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guide-
lines and regulations. In particular, written informed consent was obtained from all participants and all HIPAA 
identifiers were anonymized.
Equipment and settings. 
For every patient, one-minute capillary videos were acquired using our optical 
prototype (Fig. 1). This prototype uses a 5 ×
 Edmund Optics TECHSPEC lens with a Thorlabs DCC3240N cam-
era of 1280 ×
 1024 pixels, corresponding to a 1360 ×
 1088 um FOV. Acquisitions were performed at a frame rate 
60 frames per second (FPS). The bit depth was 10 bits per pixel in monochrome, the displayed brightness covering 
the full range of the data. More detailed information on the device components is provided in the Supplementary 
Methods section “Optical-device components”
.
Acquisitions were done at room temperature with optical-coupling oil in the finger well, using the Labview 
software (National Instruments, USA). Raw videos were subsequently flattened using the ImageJ software 
(National Institutes of Health, USA), i.e., the local brightness was normalized through Gaussian filtering to com-
pensate for the effects of non-uniform illumination.
Two units of this prototype were mounted and employed at MGH and HULP, respectively. Following every use 
on a patient, disinfectant wipes were employed on the device components. The use of this device was approved for 
clinical research by the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center protocol #15-070.
Data collection. 
For every patient, raw videos were acquired at baseline and during severe neutropenia using 
our optical prototype. Out of the 26 recruited patients, one dataset was left incomplete because one participant at 
HULP had a serious adverse event and died of a neutropenia-related sepsis. The complication developed before 
the second measurement, i.e., before severe neutropenia, and was hence considered unrelated to our study. No 
other adverse event (serious or non-serious) was reported. For the remaining 25 patients, 6 video datasets were 
excluded due to insufficient imaging or capillary quality. However, we only analyzed video datasets containing 
same sets of capillaries at baseline and during severe neutropenia, thus excluding 8 additional patients that con-
tained unpaired capillaries.
Tracking the same capillaries aimed at avoiding bias in the capillary selection, and at minimizing potential 
confounding factors, e.g., discrepancies in capillary volume, thus ensuring that changes in event counts best 
reflect the underlying changes in WBC values between both time points. Note that, while suitable results may 
be obtained from unpaired capillaries, this remains the topic of further study; conversely, the idea of tracking 
Figure 4. Example of event. (a–e) The image sequence shows several raw frames of a video (Supplementary 
Movie S2) centered on one capillary acquired with our prototype on one of the patients at baseline. The dark 
loop corresponds to the capillary vessel filled with RBCs that absorbs light at the illumination wavelength. An 
optical absorption gap in the microcirculation, approximately the same size as the capillary width (~15 µm) can 
be observed flowing through the arterial limb of the capillary (black triangular arrowheads). Frame numbers 
are labeled at the top right corner. The frame rate was 60 FPS and the exposure time 16.7 ms. The contrast was 
adjusted for the ROI shown.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
the same capillaries could be further exploited to devise calibration strategies in the future (see “Discussion”). To 
follow the same capillaries in a given patient, the optical-prototype user had to locate same capillary areas at both 
time points. This process was performed manually during live data acquisition using the characteristic capillary 
Figure 5. Blind event rating. Three raters independently labeled one same event they observed in one of the 106 
capillaries of the study. (a–c) Capillary-video frames (indexed top right) with cross-shaped event marks from 
rater 1 (blue), 2 (green) and 3 (yellow). (d) Aggregated positions of all event marks from all three raters. (e) ST 
map displaying the recorded brightness levels along the segmented capillary length (vertical axis) as a function 
of time (horizontal axis) for a 1.7-second interval around the event of interest. A bright trajectory created by the 
passage of the event is clearly identified in the center of the ST map. Blue, green, and yellow crosses correspond 
to the ST coordinates where each rater labeled the event.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
distributions and morphologies to identify previously acquired regions. The problem was reduced to a 1D search 
by choosing areas closely adjacent to the nail boundary.
For each of the 11 compliant datasets, at least one pair of videos—corresponding to acquisitions of one same 
capillary area in both clinical states—was deemed suitable for further processing. Two distinct capillary regions 
were used for both Patients 01 and 02. In total, 53 capillaries were selected, followed, and analyzed.
Our study protocol required videos to be acquired within eight hours of a blood test providing reference infor-
mation. This time window was chosen to maximize the chances that the ground-truth blood-draw measurements 
would still be valid by the time our data acquisition happened. Accordingly, total-leukocyte, absolute-neutrophil, 
and lymphocyte concentrations from state-of-the-art blood-cell analytics were obtained for every patient and 
time point (Table 1). These reference values reveal the sharp decrease in neutrophil concentration between base-
line and severe neutropenia. In addition, the reference total-leukocyte values of Table 1 imply that all WBC 
subtypes are scarce during severe neutropenia, even though the decrease in lymphocyte concentration was less 
pronounced than for neutrophils.
Figure 6. Number of majority events per minute in all studied capillary pairs. Capillary counts at baseline 
(blue dots) showed a statistically significant difference compared to the corresponding values during severe 
neutropenia (red squares). All capillaries were analyzed at both timepoints (53 pairs in total; black dotted lines). 
Only majority events were considered to maximize the objectivity of the event selection.
Figure 7. Discrimination between baseline and severe neutropenia. The median numbers of majority events 
observed per minute, when averaging across all available capillaries per patient, allow discriminating between 
baseline (blue dots) and severe neutropenia (red dots) for the 22 video datasets and 11 patients of our study. The 
corresponding cross-capillary variability is also shown for each patient (blue and red bars with notch extremes 
determined as q2 ± 1.57(q3 −
 q1)/N1/2, where the qi are the respective quartiles, and where N = 11 is the amount 
of paired data points). The optimal threshold to separate baseline from severe neutropenia was seven events per 
capillary minute (dotted black line). The X-axis is labeled with the patient IDs together with their amount of 
analyzed capillaries in brackets. The median amount of capillaries used per patient was four. The difference in 
patient counts between baseline and severe neutropenia was statistically significant.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
Capillary selection. 
Given the raw videos of the patients, two independent experts selected the capillaries 
suitable for further analysis based on the following empirical a-priori criteria: (A) Illumination. Capillaries must 
be visible with sufficient contrast to an observer; (B) Focus. Detailed capillary structures/dynamics must be visible 
and not blurred out; (C) Flow. Blood flow must exist to allow for potential events to be identified and counted; 
(D) Stability. Capillaries must fully remain within the video FOV in all frames; (E) Visibility. No object (e.g., air 
bubbles) can occlude capillaries. (F) Morphology. Capillaries must exhibit clear arterial and venous limbs; (G) 
Criteria (A)-(F) must hold in both baseline and severe-neutropenia acquisitions, the goal being to gather paired 
capillary videos for every patient.
Each expert first evaluated the baseline videos according to Criteria (A)-(F). The sets of candidate capillaries 
acquired during severe neutropenia were then pre-constrained by the choices already made at baseline. To min-
imize bias, only those capillaries selected by both raters were included in the study. The resulting capillary-video 
pairs—at least one per patient—were thus the ones complying with Criteria (A)-(G) according to both experts 
(Supplementary Figs S1–S13).
Creation of capillary videos. 
Based on the raw videos, individual videos were created for all selected capil-
laries through (a) the definition, on the first video frame, of a rectangular region of interest (ROI) enclosing every 
selected capillary, using a graphical user interface, and (b) the use of motion compensation (see Supplementary 
Methods section “Motion compensation of capillary videos”), which locally corrects camera movements and ensures 
that the position of every capillary remains stable within the corresponding ROI during the whole sequence.
Event rating. 
Three independent human raters identified all events in the capillary videos, following specific 
visual criteria. These criteria stem from existing literature that describes the consequence of the passage of a WBC 
through a capillary of similar diameter as the creation of a region depleted of RBCs15,16,33. Specifically, moving 
optical-absorption gaps referred to as events:
• 
Are noticeably brighter than the surrounding capillary flow
• 
Can be identified as clear objects moving along the capillary flow
• 
Occupy the whole capillary diameter and extend along the flow direction
Raters were blinded with respect to the others and to the blood-analytics, physiological state, patient, and 
temporal information. This experimental protocol ensured that image analysis was performed without observer 
bias. Each rater labeled the frames and spatial locations inside the capillary where these events occurred, using a 
graphical user interface. Following this process, the labeled events could be visualized on the capillary videos or 
on spatio-temporal (ST) maps (see Supplementary Methods section “Event visualization on videos and ST maps” 
and Supplementary Fig. S14 for technical details).
The indexing of the videos used by the raters for event identification and counting in every given patient was 
obtained by randomly shuffling the original-video names, rendering access to the original indexing or (non-)
neutropenic state impossible. All capillary videos contained strictly equal amounts of frames. No information in 
the video content or naming contained patient information.
Statistical analysis. 
For event counting, we required the majority of the human raters to agree on an event 
being observed, based on the labels obtained from all raters. By convention, we assumed that at least R raters have 
jointly marked a given event if the average mark times from at least R raters lie within at most ten frames from 
each other, i.e., 1/6 second at 60 FPS, which is substantially shorter than average times between consecutive events 
(Supplementary Fig. S15). Exact spatial overlay of the labels was not required. Counts were obtained accordingly 
for every capillary and time point, i.e., summing all majority events from the corresponding videos (Fig. 6).
Patient ID
Leukocytes (cells/µL)
Neutrophils (cells/µL)
Lymphocytes (cells/µL)
Baseline
Severe N.
Baseline
Severe N.
Baseline
Severe N.
01
5500
100
4060
10
500
120
02
2000
300
1280
10
420
10
03
5860
210
5660
0
100
110
04
4290
40
2830
20
970
10
05
2640
20
2480
10
130
0
06
2390
100
1840
30
350
0
07
7430
90
7100
0
141
34
08
6370
50
6040
0
150
20
09
3180
40
2770
10
160
20
10
5350
120
3700
0
979
67
11
7760
10
7260
0
357
9
Table 1. Reference values obtained from hospital clinical laboratory. Measurements were carried out using 
state-of-the-art blood-cell analytics, and the values provided in rounded form. These reference values are also 
represented graphically in Supplementary Fig. S23. Our study protocol required video data to be acquired 
within eight hours of the corresponding blood draw.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
This approach based on three independent raters mimicked strategies others have used for image-analysis 
applications34–38. For example, a “ground truth” was established for cell-tracking studies by (1) three human 
experts independently tagging the datasets and (2) using a “majority-vote” mechanism to determine the ground 
truth for specific cell components being tracked34–36. In our case, as in prior literature, this approach using human 
raters serves as a first step towards developing an algorithmic approach39.
To explain further, the rationale for using multiple human raters is that visual evaluation of images or videos 
is intrinsically subjective and can be particularly sensitive to noise. Differences in the judgment by human raters 
explain discrepancies between the amounts of events tagged by a majority of raters versus those tagged by an 
individual rater (see “Results”). Our strategy to reduce noise (i.e., to reduce the likelihood that a tagged event was 
just noise) was to adopt the majority-rater approach34–38.
At the patient level, majority-event counts were averaged across all available capillaries (Fig. 7). The use of 
multiple capillaries is beneficial because counting precision in single capillaries (a) is limited by shot noise, which 
is proportional to the square root of the amount of counts, (b) is limited by potential WBC phenomena not cap-
tured by our event-detection criteria and occurring in some capillaries, such as margination15,33, (c) depends on 
the particular capillary morphology and flow rate, and (d) depends on the particular positioning of the capillary 
in the underlying capillary network40. While averaging across capillaries will not fully eliminate the aforemen-
tioned sources of variability, it proved sufficient to discriminate between baseline and severe neutropenia (Fig. 7). 
The beneficial effect of averaging across capillaries was also corroborated by the fact that classification results 
improved with the amount of capillaries used per patient (Supplementary Fig. S16).
When comparing individual or average capillary-count values between baseline and severe neutropenia, the 
Wilcoxon two-sided signed-rank test was used on our paired data. The use of this method avoided the statisti-
cal assumption that counts are normally distributed while testing the hypothesis H0 that there is no difference 
between counts obtained at baseline and during severe neutropenia for the same capillaries. The significance 
level for this test was set as α
 = 0.05. Besides this statistical test, receiver-operating-characteristic curves were 
generated to assess the performance of binary-class classification between baseline and severe neutropenia as a 
function of a varying threshold count.
Data availability. 
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from 
the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Results
Portable optics allows acquiring stable high-speed and high-contrast videos of multiple nail-
fold capillaries in-vivo. 
We designed a portable and custom optical prototype (Fig. 1) to record high-qual-
ity microscopy videos of the microcirculation in human nailfold capillaries, which we employed on the ASCT 
patients of our study (Fig. 2). A three-dimensional (3D) model of our device is shown in Fig. 1A. The patient’s 
finger is inserted from the top into the well of a 3D-printed semi-spherical easily sanitized hand rest (Fig. 1B) 
designed to ergonomically hold the patient’s hand with sufficient stability to record one-minute videos. Capillary 
videos are acquired from the nailfold region in the patient’s finger (Fig. 1C).
Several features of our prototype were optimized from the perspective of event detection, as opposed to 
generic off-the-shelf solutions used in prior work such as capillaroscopes. In particular, our device maximizes 
RBC-to-non-RBC contrast and allows acquiring high-resolution videos at 60 FPS, while providing enhanced 
stability during acquisition through its hand rest. This allows to track event movement with sufficient temporal 
resolution, knowing that the range of flow speeds in nailfold capillaries is 100–1,000 µm/s41,42. By contrast, the 
lower frame rate of capillaroscopy videos—typically 15 FPS at high resolution39—makes such tracking challeng-
ing; events approaching 1,000 µm/s would typically be missed or appear on only one frame.
To minimize the acquisition time per patient, our prototype was also designed to image multiple capillaries 
within one same FOV (Fig. 3; Supplementary Movie S1). Single acquisitions could contain up to 10 capillaries of 
suitable quality (Supplementary Figs S1–S13); this could not be achieved when employing off-the-shelf capillaro-
scopes. Our simple optical approach made the acquisition of multiple capillaries particularly convenient, unlike 
other techniques proposed for capillary imaging, such as encoded confocal microscopy, which focuses on single 
capillaries33.
The capillaries that we imaged are so narrow, with typical widths of 10–20 microns27, that WBCs are forced to 
squeeze through them one by one. Considering one example capillary (Fig. 4; Supplementary Movie S2), video 
frames reveal the passage of an event in the microcirculation, which can be perceived as a moving “bright” object 
of approximately of the same size as the capillary diameter (~15 µm), and whose brightness is substantially higher 
than the surrounding RBCs.
Event movements could be clearly followed across successive video frames, and, as such, were visually iden-
tifiable by a human observer. Accordingly, we instructed three blinded human raters to tag all events in our cap-
illary videos (Fig. 5), following specific visual criteria (see “Methods”). ST maps provide a convenient alternative 
representation for visualizing all event trajectories with the marks from these raters in the one-minute capillary 
videos (Supplementary Movie S3). Our empirical observation is that event trajectories visible on the ST map 
corresponded well with events identified by the raters from the videos (Fig. 5).
Microcirculation events with specific features constitute usable proxies of WBC. 
Based on our 
optical prototype, we recorded and analyzed 22 video datasets from 11 ASCT patients undergoing chemotherapy 
at two different time points (Fig. 2): pre-chemotherapy baseline (>1,500 neutrophils per µL) and severe neutro-
penia (<500 neutrophils per µL). The same sets of capillaries were acquired at baseline and during severe neutro-
penia for every patient (Fig. 3) to ensure the consistency of the results and avoid potential confounding factors 
(see “Methods”). The choice to acquire one-minute videos was motivated by the need to overcome the shot noise 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
associated with the discrete nature of the events (see Supplementary Methods section “Acquisition time under 
shot noise”).
In these videos, the consistency with which events were identified by the human raters in the capillary micro-
circulation depended on whether acquisitions were performed at baseline or during severe neutropenia. In 
baseline cases, most identified events (62%) were majority events, i.e., events tagged by two or more raters (see 
“Methods”). In severe-neutropenia cases, only 22% of them were majority events, which was associated with 
lesser amounts of consistent visual features (Supplementary Fig. S17). This highlights the importance of our 
majority-rater approach to reduce noise (see “Methods”).
The number of majority events in a capillary acquired during severe neutropenia was consistently lower than 
in the same capillary acquired during baseline (Fig. 6). Overall, paired capillary counts showed a highly statis-
tically significant difference (Wilcoxon two-sided signed-rank test, N = 53, P = 5 ⋅ 10−
9) between baseline and 
severe neutropenia. However, when considering non-majority events, i.e., events tagged by single raters, this 
difference was substantially less significant (Wilcoxon two-sided signed-rank test, N = 53, P = 0.04) than with 
majority events (Supplementary Fig. S18).
The above results suggest that events with consistently detectable visual features correlate with the presence of 
WBC and neutrophils. Majority events were thus treated as proxies to WBCs. Additionally, when diameters were 
recorded at the capillary segments where majority events were tagged, their distribution fell within the range of 
WBC diameters, i.e., 10-20 µm (Supplementary Fig. S19), even though human raters were not instructed to label 
flow gaps at locations of any specific diameter (see Methods). This provides additional confidence that majority 
events could be associated with WBCs flowing in single file.
Counts of microcirculation events allow classifying the baseline state from the severe-neutropenic 
state non-invasively. 
Counts from distinct capillaries tended to vary for the same patient, sometimes reaching 
low values even at baseline. Such variations may be associated with several factors—such as an uneven distribution 
of WBCs across the capillary network40—which motivated the averaging of counts across several capillaries for every 
patient to increase results robustness (see “Methods”).
When averaging majority-event counts across all capillaries for a given patient and time point, the paired 
differences in patient counts between the neutropenic and baseline states remained apparent (Fig. 7) and highly 
statistically significant (Wilcoxon two-sided signed-rank test, N = 11, P = 0.00097) with a median difference of 
30 counts between baseline and severe neutropenia. Counts displayed very little overlap between baseline and 
severe neutropenia, which allowed for relatively robust classification. Specifically, at a threshold of seven counts, 
median counts across all capillaries of every given patient could correctly classify all baseline cases and 10 of 
11 neutropenic cases. Patient 06 displayed a lower level of discrimination because of three capillaries with low 
majority-event counts at baseline, particularly in one of them (Supplementary Movie S4; second capillary of 
Patient 06 from the left in Fig. 6). The misclassification in Patient 10 was associated with a high event count in 
one capillary at nadir (Fig. 6). This outlier played a critical role because only two capillary pairs were available for 
this patient.
Majority events yielded substantially better results in patient counts than events marked by single raters 
(Supplementary Fig. S20), where count differences below statistical significance were obtained between baseline 
and severe neutropenia (Wilcoxon two-sided signed-rank test, N = 11, P = 0.17), with a median difference of only 
eight counts. The amount of capillaries used per patient positively correlated with the classification performance, 
with areas under curve of 0.68, 0.84, 0.88, 0.95, and 1.00 obtained for majority-event counts from one, two, three, 
four and five capillaries—when available—per patient, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S16). The two or three 
first added capillaries accounted for most gain in classification performance.
These results indicate that, while observations based on single capillaries or single-rater-event counts can yield 
high rates of erroneous classifications, the averaging of majority-event counts across more than three capillaries 
per patient allows for a robust discrimination between baseline and severe neutropenia.
Discussion
The goal of this study was to investigate whether severe neutropenia can be detected non-invasively in humans 
based on optical imaging. From that perspective, our results demonstrate the relevance of using non-invasive vid-
eos of the microcirculation in nailfold capillaries. They also validate our overall classification strategy as a proof 
of principle towards the long-term objective of non-invasive WBC counting using a portable optical prototype 
and data analysis.
By design, our clinical study focused on absolute-neutrophil-count levels at baseline (>1,500 neutrophils/µL) 
and severe neutropenia (<500 neutrophils/µL) in the same patients. While our classification approach was not 
assessed in the mild (grade II, >500 and <1,500 neutrophils/µL) and moderate (grade III, >500 and <1,000 neu-
trophils/µL) neutropenia cases, our current observations may be extrapolated to these additional ranges, assum-
ing that event counts vary accordingly. This will have to be confirmed in additional studies with additional data 
throughout the different grades of neutropenia. Overall, more patients, time points, and ranges will be needed to 
define the range of detection of differences in cell concentration, before such a device can be deployed. Additional 
data will also allow to assess performance depending on skin thickness and Fitzpatrick index, and under con-
founding factors such as clubbing, vasculopathy, thrombophilia, and hemorrhage, to name a few. Potential alter-
ations in capillary morphology after chemotherapy may also constitute a confounding factor. In that regard, 
prior literature suggests that chemotherapy drugs can cause epithelial damage to vessels in humans43 and luminal 
constrictions in animal models44. Within our ability to measure, no statistically significant changes in capillary 
diameter were observed in our clinical data between before and after chemotherapy (Supplementary Fig. S21). 
This thus also remains a future topic of investigation.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
Our method does not intend to replace the gold standard laboratory tests. It rather serves as a monitoring 
mechanism to flag high-risk patients, who could be promptly referred to further state-of-the-art blood analysis 
in case of a positive measurement. This precludes the need for a strict correspondence between the estimates 
from our method and the golden standard. Meanwhile, as a preliminary observation, the event counts obtained 
for each patient in our study (Fig. 7) are indeed consistent with the corresponding reference WBC concentra-
tions (Table 1) on average. Indeed, assuming an average blood-flow speed of 800 µm/s and an average capillary 
diameter of 15 µm27,41, the median values of the patient counts for baseline and severe neutropenia (Fig. 7), i.e., 
32.00 and 2.00, yield WBC-concentration estimates of about 3,773 and 236 cells/µL. Both estimates fall within the 
ranges of the corresponding reference values from the gold-standard laboratory assays (Table 1).
Moving forward, the event rating could be performed automatically on the segmented capillary videos 
(Supplementary Fig. S14). Such an algorithm could follow approaches proposed to detect objects moving through 
capillaries39,45 or more advanced strategies such as machine learning. Several event features, such as contrast, 
size, or persistence, could be employed. The accumulation of red cells upstream from flow gaps15 could also be 
leveraged as an additional feature to best distinguish gaps created by the passage of WBCs from mere pockets 
of plasma. In relation to our study, no direct velocity or flow-rate measurements, e.g., using a photo-acoustic46 
technique, were carried out. In further work, flow-rate estimation could be exploited to improve our measure-
ments. In particular, using the same types of prototype and capillary videos as in this study, capillary blood flow 
could also be estimated algorithmically based on image-processing techniques47–50. Flow measurements may then 
allow discarding capillaries with flow rates that are too low to receive leukocytes40 and/or to normalize counts by 
flow volume. Finally, further refinements on our optical prototype could increase the amounts of capillaries per 
patient satisfying the quality and consistency criteria required for further analysis (see “Methods”). This will be 
key for a future translation of this technology into clinical practice, knowing that the current failure rates should 
be reduced for practical usability. The use of more capillaries per patient is also expected to mitigate the influence 
of outliers (e.g., misclassified case in Patient 10) since the amount of analyzed capillaries per patient were shown 
to positively correlate with the classification performance (Supplementary Fig. S16). Acquiring more videos in 
one or multiple fingers may also serve this goal in future studies.
The constraint of tracking the same capillaries between consecutive time points for the same patients (see 
“Methods”) may be relaxed to ease the clinical applicability of the method; this remains a topic for further investi-
gations. Another strategy for future work may be to rather exploit this tracking to calibrate our instrument, based 
on the count and/or reference blood-draw information obtained at the first time point for every patient, and pro-
duce more quantitative WBC assessment. In the context of our study, where the goal was to identify severely neu-
tropenic patients, we observed that eliminating capillaries associated with lower counts at baseline—perhaps due 
to limited flow or to some inhomogeneous WBC distribution in the capillary network in some cases40—further 
improved the separation and classification between baseline and severe neutropenia (Supplementary Fig. S22). 
These preliminary results suggest that some capillaries may be more suitable for counting and could be identified 
based on such strategies. Further studies with more time points and a larger patient sample will be required to 
determine the validity of these approaches. The current proof-of-concept results obtained in this work do moti-
vate and constitute a basis for further improvements in accuracy and automation, although, as mentioned above, 
the accuracy of our approach need not match the one of standard blood analyzers, particularly if our approach is 
used as a companion pre-screening tool.
One extension to this study would be to investigate whether specific WBC ranges can be identified beyond 
mere screening for severe neutropenia. This could broaden the applicability of our approach not only within 
the context of chemotherapy, but also to new settings, such as infectious diseases or leukostasis. In addition, 
non-invasive differential counting may also be achieved. Besides opening up new use cases, differential infor-
mation could increase accuracy for neutrophil counting, as potential false-positive detections due to other cell 
subtypes would be avoided. At this point, we can conclude that, despite the potential presence of such false 
detections, our event-counting procedure yielded satisfactory classification results on our clinical data. In future 
work, differential counts could be obtained based on techniques and data that are similar to the ones employed 
in this study because WBC subtypes are known to exhibit distinct optical properties and image features, e.g., 
non-granular and granular subtypes correspond to distinct gap lengths and backscattering properties in a capil-
lary15,33,51. In that regard, an interesting path for future work is to explore how the length or the frequency of gaps 
is influenced by the cell size and subtype under consideration.
Overall, this study proved that chemotherapy-induced severe neutropenia can be detected non-invasively 
through the fingernail with a custom-made portable prototype. It represents the first proof of concept for a tech-
nology that could measure an important toxicity of chemotherapy by non-invasive optical means. The automa-
tion, replication, and refinement of these results may lead to a new paradigm in the monitoring of cancer patients 
at risk of severe neutropenia. Furthermore, from a more general standpoint, the proposed imaging technique and 
conceptual approach could constitute one first step towards non-invasive, in-vivo WBC counting.
References
 1. Crawford, J., Dale, D. C. & Lyman, G. H. Chemotherapy‐induced neutropenia: risks, consequences, and new directions for its 
management. Cancer 100, 228–237 (2004).
 2. Van Wolfswinkel, M. E. et al. Predictive value of lymphocytopenia and the neutrophil-lymphocyte count ratio for severe imported 
malaria. Malar. J. 12, 101 (2013).
 3. Honda, T., Uehara, T., Matsumoto, G., Arai, G. & Sugano, M. Neutrophil left shift and white blood cell count as markers of bacterial 
infection. Clin. Chim. Acta 457, 46–53 (2016).
 4. Newman, T. B., Draper, D., Puopolo, K. M., Wi, S. & Escobar, G. J. Combining immature and total neutrophil counts to predict early 
onset sepsis in term and late preterm newborns: use of the I/T2. Pediat. Infect. Dis. J. 33, 798 (2014).
 5. Velo-García, A., Castro, S. G. & Isenberg, D. A. The diagnosis and management of the haematologic manifestations of lupus. J. 
Autoimmun. 74, 139–160 (2016).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
 6. Dale, D. C. Understanding neutropenia. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 21, 1–2 (2014).
 7. Hollis, V. S. et al. Comparison of venous and capillary differential leukocyte counts using a standard hematology analyzer and a 
novel microfluidic impedance cytometer. PloS one 7, e43702 (2012).
 8. Ghai, C. L. A Textbook Of Practical Physiology (JP Medical Ltd, 2012).
 9. Sharma, S., Zapatero-Rodríguez, J., Estrela, P. & O’Kennedy, R. Point-of-care diagnostics in low resource settings: present status and 
future role of microfluidics. Biosensors 5, 577–601 (2015).
 
10. Mendelson, Y. Pulse oximetry: theory and applications for noninvasive monitoring. Clin. Chem. 38, 1601–1607 (1992).
 
11. Trotti, A. et al. CTCAEv3.0: development of a comprehensive grading system for the adverse effects of cancer treatment. InSemin. 
Radiat. Oncol. 13, 176–181 (2003).
 
12. Lyman, G. H., Poniewierski, M. S., Crawford, J., Dale, D. C. & Culakova, E. Cost of hospitalization in patients with cancer and febrile 
neutropenia and impact of comorbid conditions. Blood 126, 2089–2089 (2015).
 
13. Lyman, G. H., Lyman, C. H. & Agboola, O. Anc Study Group. Risk models for predicting chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. 
Oncologist 10, 427–437 (2005).
 
14. De Naurois, J. et al. Management of febrile neutropenia: ESMO clinical practice guidelines. Ann. Oncol. 21, v252–v256 (2010).
 
15. Schmid-Schönbein, G. W., Usami, S., Skalak, R. & Chien, S. The interaction of leukocytes and erythrocytes in capillary and 
postcapillary vessels. Microvasc. Res. 19, 45–70 (1980).
 
16. Sinclair, S. H., Azar-Cavanagh, M., Soper, K. A., Tuma, R. F. & Mayrovitz, H. N. Investigation of the source of the blue field entoptic 
phenomenon. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 30, 668–673 (1989).
 
17. Roggan, A., Friebel, M., Dörschel, K., Hahn, A. & Muller, G. Optical properties of circulating human blood in the wavelength range 
400-2500 nm. J. Biomed. Opt. 4, 36–46 (1999).
 
18. Uji, A. et al. The source of moving particles in parafoveal capillaries detected by adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. 
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 53, 171–178 (2012).
 
19. Schmidt-Gross, U. E. B. Entoptische Beurteilung der Leukocytenzahl. Klin. Wochenschr. 32, 817–819 (1954).
 
20. Rimmer, T., Kohner, E. M. & Goldman, J. M. Retinal blood velocity in patients with leukocyte disorders. Arch. Ophthalmol. 106, 
1548–1552 (1988).
 
21. Fuchsjäger-Mayrl, G. et al. Effects of granulocyte colony stimulating factor on retinal leukocyte and erythrocyte flux in the human 
retina. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 43, 1520–1524 (2002).
 
22. Curtis, C. E., Iacono, W. G. & Beiser, M. Relationship between nailfold plexus visibility and clinical, neuropsychological, and brain 
structural measures in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry. 46, 102–109 (1999).
 
23. Lefford, F. & Edwards, J. C. Nailfold capillary microscopy in connective tissue disease: a quantitative morphological analysis. Ann. 
Rheum. Dis. 45, 741–749 (1986).
 
24. Nagy, Z. & Czirjak, L. Nailfold digital capillaroscopy in 447 patients with connective tissue disease and Raynaud’s disease. J. Eur. 
Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 18, 62–68 (2004).
 
25. Mercer, L. K. et al. Quantitative nailfold video capillaroscopy in patients with idiopathic inflammatory myopathy. Rheumatology 49, 
1699–1705 (2010).
 
26. Murray, A. K. et al. The influence of measurement location on reliability of quantitative nailfold videocapillaroscopy in patients with 
SSc. Rheumatology 51, 1323–1330 (2012).
 
27. Hofstee, H. M. et al. A multicentre study on the reliability of qualitative and quantitative nail-fold videocapillaroscopy assessment. 
Rheumatology 51, 749–755 (2011).
 
28. Berkow, L., Rotolo, S. & Mirski, E. Continuous Noninvasive Hemoglobin Monitoring During Complex Spine Surgery. Anesth. Analg. 
6, 1396–1402 (2011).
 
29. Gayat, E. et al. Performance Evaluation of a Noninvasive Hemoglobin Monitoring Device. Ann. Emerg. Med. 57, 330–333 (2011).
 
30. Coquin, J., Bertarrex, A., Dewitte, A., Lefevre, L. & Joannes-Boyau, O. Accuracy of Determining Hemoglobin Level Using Occlusion 
Spectroscopy in Patients with Severe Gastrointestinal Bleeding. Crit. Care Med 118, 640–648 (2013).
 
31. Simnett, S. J., Stewart, L. A., Sweetenham, J., Morgan, G. & Johnson, P. W. Autologous stem cell transplantation for malignancy: a 
systematic review of the literature. Clin. Lab. Haematol. 22, 61–72 (2000).
 
32. Fitzpatrick, T. B. The validity and practicality of sun-reactive skin types I through VI. Arch. Dermatol. 124, 869–871 (1988).
 
33. Golan, L., Yeheskely-Hayon, D., Minai, L., Dann, E. J. & Yelin, D. Noninvasive imaging of flowing blood cells using label-free 
spectrally encoded flow cytometry. Biomed. Opt. Express. 3, 1455–1464 (2012).
 
34. Ulman, V. et al. An objective comparison of cell-tracking algorithms. Nat. Methods 14, 1141 (2017).
 
35. Maška, M. et al. A benchmark for comparison of cell tracking algorithms. Bioinformatics 30, 1609–1617 (2014).
 
36. Foggia, P., Percannella, G., Soda, P. & Vento, M. Benchmarking HEp-2 cells classification methods. IEEE Trans. Med. Imag. 32, 
1878–1889 (2013).
 
37. Luengo-Oroz, M. A., Arranz, A. & Frean, J. Crowdsourcing malaria parasite quantification: an online game for analyzing images of 
infected thick blood smears. J Med Internet Res. 14 (2012).
 
38. Bogovic, J. A. et al. Approaching expert results using a hierarchical cerebellum parcellation protocol for multiple inexpert human 
raters. NeuroImage 64, 616–629 (2013).
 
39. Bourquard, A. et al. Analysis of white blood cell dynamics in nailfold capillaries. In Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 37th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE, 7470–7473 (2015).
 
40. Schmid-Schönbein, G. W., Skalak, R., Usami, S. & Chien, S. Cell distribution in capillary networks. Microvasc. Res. 19, 18–44 (1980).
 
41. Mugii, N. et al. Reduced red blood cell velocity in nail-fold capillaries as a sensitive and specific indicator of microcirculation injury 
in systemic sclerosis. Rheumatology 48, 696–703 (2009).
 
42. Shih, T. C. et al. Hemodynamic analysis of capillary in finger nail-fold using computational fluid dynamics and image estimation. 
Microvasc. Res. 81, 68–72 (2011).
 
43. Nuver, J., De Haas, E. C., Van Zweeden, M., Gietema, J. A. & Meijer, C. Vascular damage in testicular cancer patients: a study on 
endothelial activation by bleomycin and cisplatin in vitro. Oncol. Rep. 23, 247–253 (2010).
 
44. Kohn, S. et al. Endothelial injury of capillaries in the stria vascularis of guinea pigs treated with cisplatin and gentamicin. Ultrastruct. 
Pathol. 21, 289–299 (1997).
 
45. Castro-González, C., Butterworth, I., Bourquard, A. & Sanchez-Ferro, A. Systems, apparatus, and methods for analyzing blood cell 
dynamics. U.S. Patent Application No. 14/951,260 (2015).
 
46. Chen, S. L., Xie, Z., Carson, P. L., Wang, X. & Guo, L. J. In vivo flow speed measurement of capillaries by photoacoustic correlation 
spectroscopy. Opt. Lett. 36, 4017–4019 (2011).
 
47. Wu, C. C., Zhang, G., Huang, T. C. & Lin, K. P. Red blood cell velocity measurements of complete capillary in finger nail-fold using 
optical flow estimation. Microvasc. Res. 78, 319–324 (2009).
 
48. Huang, T. C., Lin, W. C., Wu, C. C., Zhang, G. & Lin, K. P. Experimental estimation of blood flow velocity through simulation of 
intravital microscopic imaging in micro-vessels by different image processing methods. Microvasc. Res. 80, 477–483 (2010).
 
49. Wu, C. C. et al. Accuracy evaluation of RBC velocity measurement in nail-fold capillaries. Microvasc. Res. 81, 252–260 (2011).
 
50. Lee, J., Wu, W., Lesage, F. & Boas, D. A. Multiple-capillary measurement of RBC speed, flux, and density with optical coherence 
tomography. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33, 1707–1710 (2013).
 
51. Wu, C. H. et al. Imaging cytometry of human leukocytes with third harmonic generation microscopy. Sci. Rep. 6, 37210, https://doi.
org/10.1038/srep37210 (2016).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
SCIENTIfIC RePoRTS |  (2018) 8:5301  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Tom Vettenburg for his involvement in the event-rating process and Arrate Muñoz Barrutia for 
providing advice and mentoring. We thank the Madrid-MIT M + Vision Consortium faculty for their guidance 
in developing this project. This work was supported by the Comunidad de Madrid through the Madrid-MIT 
M + Visión Consortium; the Center For Future Technologies in Cancer Care through grant NIH U54 (award 
no. 4U54EB015403-05); the Wallace H. Coulter Foundation at BU; the Deshpande Center for Technology 
Innovation; the MIT Sandbox Innovation Fund and the EU FP7-PEOPLE-2011-COFUND Program within the 
M + Visión Project of Fundación Madri + d (Comunidad de Madrid); Fundación Ramón Areces; and the MIT 
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP).
Author Contributions
A.B. made substantial contributions to the conception of the initial technological concept, to the acquisition, 
analysis, interpretation of data, and design of the experimental framework, and took part in the literature review 
and drafting the article; A.P.T. made substantial contributions to the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation 
of data; I.B. made substantial contributions to the conception of the initial technological concept and to the 
conception and design of the optical prototype and acquisition software; A.S.F. made substantial contributions 
to the conception of the initial technological concept and to the acquisition and interpretation of data; C.C. 
made substantial contributions to the conception and design of our clinical study with ASCT patients and to 
patient recruitment and data acquisition at HULP; K.H. made substantial contributions to patient recruitment 
and data acquisition at HULP; M.F.U. made substantial contributions to patient recruitment and data acquisition 
at HULP; C.D.R. made substantial contributions to patient recruitment and data acquisition at MGH; B.V. 
made substantial contributions to patient recruitment and data acquisition at MGH; J.M.T.S. made substantial 
contributions to the conception and design of the optical prototype; E.S.L. made substantial contributions to the 
analysis of data; B.J.V., T.P.P., M.J.L.C., and M.L.G. made substantial contributions to the interpretation of data 
and provided regular advice/mentoring; Y.B.C. and E.P.H. made substantial contributions to the conception and 
design of our clinical study with ASCT patients; and C.C.G. made substantial contributions to the conception of 
the initial technological concept, the design of the clinical study, experimental framework, optical prototype, data 
acquisition, the analysis and interpretation of data and took part in drafting the article. All authors revised the 
article critically for important intellectual content.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-23591-0.
Competing Interests: C.C.G., I.B., A.B., A.S.F. filed a patent on the proposed technology under application 
number 14/951,260 and is titled “Systems, Apparatus, and Methods for Analyzing Blood Cell Dynamics”
. No 
other authors have competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
