 Mind-body therapies and control of inflammatory biology: A 
descriptive review
Julienne E. Bower, Ph.D.1,2,3 and Michael R. Irwin, M.D.1,2,3
1Department of Psychology, UCLA
2Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, UCLA Semel Institute for Neuroscience
3Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine
Abstract
The use of mind-body therapies, including Tai Chi, Qigong, yoga, and meditation, has grown 
steadily in recent years. These approaches have been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms 
and improving quality of life, and research has begun to examine the impact of these therapies on 
biological processes, including inflammation. A review of 26 randomized controlled trials was 
conducted to describe the effects of mind-body therapies (MBTs) on circulating, cellular, and 
genomic markers of inflammation. This qualitative evaluation showed mixed effects of MBTs on 
circulating inflammatory markers, including CRP and IL-6, and on measures of stimulated 
cytokine production. More consistent findings were seen for genomic markers, with trials showing 
decreased expression of inflammation-related genes and reduced signaling through the 
proinflammatory transcription factor NF-κB. Potential mechanisms for these effects are discussed, 
including alterations in neuroendocrine, neural, and psychological and behavioral processes.
Keywords
Tai Chi; Qigong; Yoga; Meditation; Inflammation; Review
Introduction
Mind-body therapies, or MBTs, have been broadly defined as a group of therapies that 
emphasize use of the brain in conjunction with the body to assist the healing process 
(Spencer, 2003). These therapies, the majority of which are based on ancient practices and 
traditions, are believed to have beneficial effects on mental and physical health and are 
widely used to manage symptoms and improve well-being. Indeed, in a nationwide survey 
of community-dwelling adults in the US conducted in 2007, 19% reported that they had used 
at least one mind-body therapy in the past year, and rates are even higher among clinical 
populations (Barnes, Bloom, & Nahin, 2008). Over the past two decades, the efficacy of 
Julienne E. Bower, Ph.D., UCLA Department of Psychology, Los Angeles, CA 90095, Phone: 310-825-3004, jbower@ucla.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Brain Behav Immun. 2016 January ; 51: 1–11. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2015.06.012.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 these approaches has been subjected to empirical scrutiny through randomized controlled 
trials conducted in clinical and non-clinical populations. Meta-analyses of these trials 
suggest that MBTs are effective in reducing symptoms and improving quality of life and 
certain functional outcomes (Bussing, Ostermann, Ludtke, & Michalsen, 2012; Goyal et al., 
2014; Wang, Collet, & Lau, 2004).
Alterations in inflammatory processes are thought to play a role in many of the symptoms 
and conditions that are responsive to MBTs, including fatigue, depression, and pain (Irwin 
& Cole, 2011). Given the importance of inflammation on these patient-reported outcomes, a 
growing number of trials have evaluated effects of MBTs on markers of inflammation. The 
goal of this review is to qualitatively evaluate the evidence that MBTs lead to changes in 
these markers, and to discuss potential mechanisms and issues in this emerging area of 
research. We include results of randomized controlled trials that assessed inflammatory 
cytokine activity at multiple levels, including circulating, cellular, and genomic markers of 
inflammation.
We focus here on four types of MBTs that have received considerable research attention and 
are widely available to clinical and community populations: Tai Chi, Qigong, yoga, and 
meditation. Tai Chi and Qigong are practices from traditional Chinese medicine that 
combine specific movements or postures, coordinated breathing, and mental focus. Yoga has 
its origins in ancient Indian philosophy; as practiced in the West, it typically includes 
physical postures, breathing, and meditation or relaxation, though there is considerable 
variability across different schools of yoga and specific interventions. Meditation refers to a 
broad range of practices that involve training the mind, typically to focus attention. In 
particular, mindfulness meditation teaches individuals to bring attention to present moment 
experiences with openness, curiosity, and non-judgment.
To identify studies for inclusion in this qualitative review, we searched MEDLINE (from 
1946), through November 1, 2014. Searches were limited to human studies and the English 
language. We searched using the following terms: mind-body therapies, tai chi, qigong, 
meditation, mindfulness, or yoga; and inflammation, cytokines, or proinflammatory. In 
addition, we screened the reference lists of selected reviews and primary articles for 
additional publications.
Effects of MBTs on circulating markers of inflammation
CRP
The most common inflammatory marker assessed in the MBT trials reviewed here is C 
reactive protein (CRP), a well-established marker of inflammatory activity. We identified 14 
RCTs that reported effects of a MBT on CRP, described in Table 1. The majority of these 
trials evaluated Tai Chi or Qigong (n=7), with additional studies of yoga (n=3) and 
meditation (n=4). Various control conditions were used including health education, usual 
care or wait-list, aerobic exercise, and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). All studies 
assessed CRP at pre- and post-treatment, and several also included follow-ups from 6 weeks 
to 3 months post-treatment, although one had a one-year post-treatment follow-up (Irwin et 
al., 2014, 2015).
Bower and Irwin
Page 2
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A previous meta-analysis had reported that these various types of MBTs, typically lasting 
eight to twelve weeks, yielded decreases in circulating levels of CRP (Morgan, Irwin, 
Chung, & Wang, 2014). However, results inclusive of research published since that review 
show that findings for CRP were evenly split; seven of the trials yielded decreases in 
circulating levels of CRP, and seven yielded no significant changes in this marker. Hence, at 
best, it appears that MBTs have mixed effects on CRP, although this conclusion is tempered 
by the absence of a meta-analytic approach as compared to the prior review. There is some 
evidence that Tai Chi or Qigong, and possibly yoga, which incorporate physical activity 
components, are more likely to reduce levels of CRP, relative to meditation; the majority of 
studies using Tai Chi/Qigong or yoga showed decreases in CRP, whereas none of the 
meditation studies showed this effect (though two reported marginally significant reductions 
of CRP; Creswell et al., 2012; Malarkey, Jarjoura, & Klatt, 2013). Nevertheless, the number 
of studies categorized by treatment type is too small to make any conclusions about the 
relative benefit of one treatment or another.
Interestingly, patient type may be more relevant, as those studies that enrolled participants 
who were likely to have elevated levels of CRP at baseline due to depression, cancer 
diagnosis, diabetes, or cardiovascular disease appear to show decreases in CRP; such 
decreases in response to intervention were not found in studies that focused on healthy 
adults or healthy older adults for whom substantial medical co-morbidities were an 
exclusion criteria. The latter conclusion is supported by meta-analytic results from Morgan 
et al. (2014) who found that CRP was likely to be reduced following mind-body therapies in 
populations with disease conditions, but not in healthy persons.
However, even this conclusion is mixed. Bower et al. found no change in CRP in two trials 
conducted with breast cancer survivors; one used a 12-week yoga intervention for survivors 
with persistent fatigue (Bower et al., 2014) and the other used a 6-week mindfulness 
intervention for younger breast cancer survivors (Bower et al., 2015). Likewise, Irwin et al. 
in two different populations, breast cancer survivors (Irwin et al., 2014) and older adults 
with insomnia (Irwin et al., 2014; Irwin et al., 2015), found inconsistent results. Tai Chi 
yielded a decrease in CRP in older adults with insomnia when administered for 16 weeks 
(Irwin et al., 2014; Irwin et al., 2015), but not in breast cancer survivors with insomnia in 
which Tai Chi was administered for only 12 weeks (Irwin et al., 2014). Average levels of 
CRP were similar in these two independent samples suggesting that higher baseline levels in 
one vs. the other did not account for differential responses. Alternatively the duration of Tai 
Chi administration in the breast cancer survivors may have been too short to detect changes. 
CRP is regulated in part by IL-6, and Tai Chi-related reduction of IL-6 at 16 weeks (Irwin & 
Olmstead, 2012) is reportedly followed by reductions of CRP at 24 weeks (Lavretsky et al., 
2011). Interestingly, we had previously reported that cognitive behavioral therapy for 
insomnia (CBT-I) induced a remission of insomnia in the older adults, and this remission 
was associated with sustained decreases in CRP during the one-year follow-up period (Irwin 
et al., 2014). Nevertheless, other studies have found decreases in CRP to occur as early as 8–
10 weeks after administration of a mind-body treatment (e.g., Oh et al., 2008, 2010, 2012; 
Pullen et al., 2008, 2010). There is another issue related to the interpretation of these results. 
As noted in Table 1, some of the reported “decreases” in the intervention group are 
accounted for by increases in the control condition, either due to a confounding influence in 
Bower and Irwin
Page 3
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the controls that produced the reported increase in CRP or that the intervention resulted in an 
attenuated age-related increase in inflammation; the latter seems a more tenuous explanation 
given that many of the interventions only lasted weeks to months.
IL-6
A total of 12 trials were identified which examined effects of a MBT on circulating 
concentrations of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6, including studies using Tai Chi or 
Qigong (n=4), yoga (n= 3) and meditation (n=5). Again, a variety of controls were used such 
as wait list, education, or social support. Overall, it appears that IL-6 does not show any 
consistent changes following the administration of these various MBTs, with three studies 
showing modest decreases, and the remaining nine studies showing no change. Two of the 
three trials that found decreases in IL-6 were trials of yoga for patients with heart failure, a 
group with pronounced elevations in inflammation (Pullen et al., 2008, 2010). None of the 
Tai Chi/qigong or meditation trials yielded decreases in IL-6. However, it is notable that 
decreases in IL-6 were found among individuals with higher baseline levels of this marker in 
a trial of Tai Chi in healthy older adults (Irwin & Olmstead, 2012) and among individuals 
with more hours of meditation practice in trials of mindfulness (Bower et al., 2014) and 
compassion meditation (Pace et al., 2009).
TNF-α and other circulating inflammatory cytokines
Seven of the listed studies also evaluated the effects of mind-body therapies on other 
inflammatory markers such as TNF-α IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), and IL-18. The 
limited data for any of these other circulating outcomes do not allow for any conclusions, 
although two of the studies that administered yoga and measured TNF or its soluble receptor 
found stable levels in the yoga group vs. controls (Bower et al., 2014; Rao et al., 2008). Both 
of these trials focused on breast cancer patients and one specifically targeted women with 
cancer-related fatigue, who have previously been shown to have elevated concentrations of 
soluble TNF receptor type II (sTNF-RII; Bower et al., 2011).
Effects of MBTs on cellular markers of inflammation
Systemic changes in circulating markers of inflammation might be due to effects of MBTs 
on the release of cytokines such as IL-6 from non-immune sources such as adipose tissue. 
To evaluate whether mind-body therapies have specific effects on immune cells, which 
might account for increases in circulating markers of inflammation, various cellular assays 
have been used to determine changes in stimulated production of IL-6, TNF, and IL-1 before 
and after administration of Tai Chi (n=3), yoga (n=1), and meditation (n=2). The total 
number of studies is small (n=6), and the findings are again mixed, which might be due to 
differences in assay methods as well as length of treatment administration and/or follow-up 
duration. For example, 4 studies evaluated the production of proinflammatory cytokines 
using ex vivo methods in whole blood or mixed peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(Elsenbruch et al., 2005; Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2014; McCain et al., 2008; Zautra et al., 
2008), whereas 2 studies examined the intracellular production of IL-6 and TNF at the level 
of the monocyte, the primary source of proinflammatory cytokines (Irwin et al., 2014; Irwin 
et al., 2015). In addition, some studies have focused on changes immediately after 8–10 
Bower and Irwin
Page 4
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 weeks of treatment (Elsenbruch et al., 2005; McCain et al., 2008), whereas other studies 
have examined changes at follow-ups lasting 3 months to one year post-treatment (Irwin et 
al., 2014; Irwin et al., 2015; Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2014). Given the varying approaches and 
findings from these different studies, results from the individual trials are reviewed below, 
stratified by type of assay method. Studies are also summarized in Table 2.
Elsenbruch et al. (2005) evaluated the effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) 
on lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated production of proinflammatory cytokines using 
whole blood. Despite significant improvements in patient-reported outcomes of health 
functioning and colitis symptoms, no change in the stimulated production of TNF was 
found. Moreover, the intervention did not have effects on other biologic markers such as 
cortisol that might regulate cellular production of inflammatory cytokines. Similar negative 
findings were found in two other studies that showed improvements in behavioral and/or 
patient-reported outcomes without showing changes in cellular production of 
proinflammatory cytokines (McCain et al., 2008; Zautra et al., 2008). However in the Zautra 
et al. study, a significant reduction in the production of IL-6 was found with the CBT group, 
but not in the mindfulness meditation group, as compared to the education control.
In contrast to the above findings that assessed proinflammatory cytokine production after 8 
to 12 weeks of treatment, differences may emerge when assessment occurs later during the 
follow-up period. For example, Kiecolt-Glaser et al. (2014) found no differences LPS 
stimulated production of IL-6, TNF, and IL-1 in isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
in 200 breast cancer survivors after a 12 week yoga intervention, but significant group 
differences were identified at 3 month follow-up. Furthermore, such differences were 
associated with the frequency of yoga practice, which predicted changes in these 
inflammatory markers. Additionally, sleep quality improved along with fatigue. Given that 
sleep disturbance can activate inflammatory signaling and increase markers of inflammation, 
it was suggested that improvements in sleep might have accounted for the decreases in 
cellular inflammation in this sample of breast cancer survivors.
To evaluate a cellular source of inflammation, Irwin et al. have examined the effects of Tai 
Chi on monocyte production of IL-6 and TNF in two independent samples of insomnia 
patients (Irwin et al., 2014; Irwin et al., 2015). Assessment of cellular inflammation focused 
on LPS or Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 stimulated production of IL-6 and TNF in monocytic 
populations, as compared to prior studies that had used mixed mononuclear cell cultures or 
whole blood. Tai Chi administration over 12 or 16 weeks reversed the insomnia-related 
increases in the percentage of monocytes expressing IL-6 alone, expressing TNF alone, and 
co-expressing IL-6 and TNF, with significant decreases for each of these measures (Irwin et 
al. 2014; Irwin et al., 2015). Interestingly, Tai Chi administration induced decreases as early 
as 2 months, with effects maintained over the course of a one year follow-up.
Effects of MBTs on gene expression inflammatory pathways
As demonstrated in several studies in the growing field of social genomics, significant life 
adversity is associated with alterations in gene transcriptional programs expressed under 
basal conditions in circulating immune cells (Cole, 2014). Indeed, genome wide 
Bower and Irwin
Page 5
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transcriptional profiling of leukocytes from individuals experiencing a range of life 
adversities (e.g., bereavement, loneliness, low socioeconomic status) has shown a common 
pattern of increased expression of proinflammatory genes, which is often accompanied by a 
focal suppression of genes involved in innate antiviral responses (Irwin & Cole, 2011). 
Bioinformatic analyses of these gene expression data have identified specific transcription 
factors (TFs) as potential mediators of this transcriptional shift, with evidence of activation 
of proinflammatory NF-κB/Relfamily TFs and GATA-family TFs, decreased activity of 
interferon response factors (IRFs), and decreased activity of the glucocorticoid receptor 
(Cole, 2014). The glucocorticoid receptor would otherwise antagonize NF-κB/Rel factors 
and reduce inflammation.
Building on this work, genomics-based methods have been recently used to assess 
inflammation and the ability of MBTs to reverse inflammatory gene expression. Seven 
RCTs have examined the effects of MBTs on inflammation-related gene expression, 
including trials of Tai Chi (n=3), meditation (n=3), and yoga (n=1), described in Table 3. 
These studies have included a variety of control and comparison groups, including CBT, 
health education, and wait list. Results are consistent across trials and approaches; all have 
been shown to reverse the pattern of leukocyte transcriptional alterations including 
activation of genes regulated by the proinflammatory NF-κB/Rel family.
The effects of three different types of meditation on gene expression profiles have now been 
examined in various samples – lonely older adults (Creswell et al., 2012), adult caregivers 
(Black et al., 2014), and women with early stage breast cancer (Bower et al., 2015) – 
yielding consistent findings across each type of meditation. Creswell et al. (2012) identified 
143 genes showing greater than 25% differential change over time with mindfulness based 
stress reduction (MBSR), in which the MBSR group showed a down-regulation of 69 genes 
and an up-regulation of 74 genes relative to the wait list controls. Using a TELiS 
bioinformatics analytic strategy, there was evidence of reduced activity of NF-κB target 
genes in the MBSR subjects that were prominently found in the monocytes consistent with 
prior studies on the cellular production of inflammatory cytokines. Black et al. (2014) 
generated a similar set of results using a yogic meditation intervention, in which the yogic 
meditation group showed a down-regulation of 49 genes and an up-regulation of 19 genes 
relative to a control group that listened to relaxing music. Down-regulated transcripts 
included a number of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL8) as well as activation-related 
immediate-early genes (e.g., JUN, FOSB). Given the prior findings by Creswell et al. 
(2012), 3 other prototypical proinflammatory cytokines were examined with small 
reductions in IL-6 and IL-1 transcripts and a small increase in TNF transcripts. Nevertheless, 
promoter-based bioinformatic analysis again showed reduced expression of genes bearing 
NF-κB-response elements in the yogic meditation group as compared to controls. Finally, 
Bower et al. (2015) interrogated differences in a 19-transcript composite of proinflammatory 
genes to reveal a significantly greater decline from baseline to post-intervention in a 
mindfulness training group versus wait list control. Reduced activity of the proinflammatory 
transcription factor NF-κB and increased activity of anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid 
receptor was again implicated using TELiS based bioinformatics analyses.
Bower and Irwin
Page 6
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Consistent with these homogenous effects using various types of meditation, yoga appears to 
generate similar differences in inflammatory gene expression. In a study of yoga for breast 
cancer survivors with persistent fatigue, Bower et al. (2014) identified 435 gene transcripts 
showing a >15% differential change over time; 282 transcripts showed up-regulation, and 
153 transcripts showed down-regulation in the yoga group relative to health education 
controls. TELiS promoter-based bioinformatic analyses of these differentially regulated 
genes again demonstrated reduced activity of NF-kB, and also showed increased activity of 
the glucocorticoid receptor in the yoga group vs. controls.
Finally, Irwin et al. (2014, 2015) have shown that Tai Chi produced decreases in 
inflammatory gene expression, similar to the effects of meditation and yoga. In a study of 
breast cancer survivors with insomnia, analyses of an a priori-selected set of 19 
proinflammatory gene transcripts showed a 9.0% (± 2.5%) greater decline over time in 
average expression in TCC participants relative to CBT-I participants (Irwin et al., 2014). 
Genome wide analysis of this sample showed a ≥1.2-fold down-regulation of 68 gene 
transcripts in the TCC group relative to CBT-I, of which inflammatory transcripts were 
prominently identified. In a study of older adults with insomnia, Tai Chi similarly induced a 
down-regulation of genes transcripts involved in immunological activation and 
inflammation (e.g., IL-6, IFNGR1, CD69, FOSB, FOS, IFNG, JUNB, IL-8, IL-1B, PTGS2) 
(Irwin et al., 2015). TELiS analyses in both studies implicated reduced activity of NF-κB 
with the primary cellular context being the monocyte population. Only one small study has 
directly measured changes in activation of NF-κB (as opposed to the TELiS-based 
inferential analyses) and found that the practice of Tai Chi relative to a health education 
control attenuated the rise in NF-κB found in the controls(Black et al., 2014).
One issue relevant for interpretation of results from these trials that have evaluated gene 
expression profiling is the use of a single social genomics lab. Cole et al. have performed the 
gene expression assays and associated bioinformatics analyses for all 7 studies. However, 
there are corroborating data from another group that found decreased NF-kB activity 
following acute induction of the relaxation response (Bhasin et al., 2013). Because these 
results were not obtained as part of an RCT, the findings were not included in the overall 
review. Additional studies are needed to substantiate the positive findings seen in these 
initial trials.
Summary of results
Over the past decade investigators have become increasingly interested in the impact of 
MBTs on markers of inflammation. We reviewed a total of 26 trials that examined effects of 
Tai Chi, Qigong, meditation, and yoga interventions on inflammatory outcomes. The 
majority of studies (n = 19) focused on circulating markers, particularly CRP. We found 
mixed evidence that the MBTs evaluated in these trials led to alterations in circulating 
concentrations of CRP, with half of the studies showing decreases (or attenuated increases) 
of CRP in the intervention group and the other half of the trials showing no significant 
change of CRP. The evidence for effects of MBTs on IL-6 and other inflammatory markers 
was also mixed, with the majority of studies showing no change. Of note, the trials that 
yielded non-significant results for inflammatory markers did show beneficial effects on 
Bower and Irwin
Page 7
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 symptoms and other outcomes, indicating that the therapies were effective in improving 
some aspects of health.
Studies that evaluated cellular markers of inflammation, assessed by production of 
proinflammatory cytokines after ex vivo stimulation, were somewhat more promising. 
Among these studies, 50% (3 of 6) of the trials showed that production of inflammatory 
cytokines was reduced following Tai Chi or yoga administration. Two of the trials that 
showed a reduction of inflammatory cytokines were conducted with breast cancer survivors, 
though trials conducted with other populations at risk for elevated inflammatory activity 
(HIV, ulcerative colitis) did not show such effects.
Results for trials examining genomic inflammatory markers consistently indicated a 
decrease in inflammatory gene expression profiles; each of the 7 trials that assessed genomic 
markers of inflammation showed effects on inflammatory signaling pathways, specifically 
reductions in NF-kB activity. These effects were seen in trials of yoga, Tai Chi, and 
meditation, and occurred in diverse populations. Further, effects on genomic markers were 
seen even in trials that did not evidence decreases in circulating inflammatory markers, 
suggesting that alterations in molecular signaling pathways may be more sensitive to these 
interventions, at least in the short term. More sustained practice may be required to alter 
circulating markers, such as CRP, that provide a more integrated, comprehensive measure of 
systemic inflammatory activity. Indeed, in the exercise literature, year-long physical activity 
interventions have been required to reduce circulating levels of CRP (e.g., Nicklas et al., 
2008).
The limitations of the current literature are several fold. First, many of the RCTs included 
only a small number of subjects, and did not rely on estimates of statistical power to 
determine sample size needed for outcomes related to inflammation. Hence, inability of 
several studies to identify reductions in markers of inflammation may be a consequence of 
inadequate statistical power, as opposed the lack of efficacy of the MBTs. Second, subjects 
included within studies, and across RCTs, showed considerable heterogeneity in terms of 
age as well as clinical characteristics (i.e., healthy adults vs. patient populations) which 
might contribute to mixed results. Third, studies did not routinely evaluate levels of 
inflammation as an inclusion criteria for study entry; inclusion of subjects who show no or 
little evidence of inflammation at baseline might limit the ability to determine whether 
MBTs or other interventions reduce inflammation given limits of assay sensitivity and 
potential “floor effects”. Fourth, many of the interventions were administered over weeks 
and such a short time frame may not be adequate to detect changes in circulating or systemic 
markers of inflammation. This possibility is particularly salient given evidence of more 
consistent effects of MBTs to reduce inflammatory gene expression profiles and cellular 
markers of inflammation; such upstream changes in the inflammatory cascade would likely 
be occurring prior to changes in circulating markers. Fifth, the latter issue is relevant to the 
vast majority of RCTs that did not conduct longer term follow-up following administration 
of the MBTs. Sixth, many of the RCTs relied on wait list or usual care controls, and it is 
possible that the effects of MBTs on the inflammatory markers might be a consequences of 
non-specific factors such as social support due to group participation or expectation for 
benefit. Finally, many of the RCTs did not systematically evaluate fidelity of intervention 
Bower and Irwin
Page 8
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 administration and/or effects of participant adherence on changes in the inflammatory 
outcomes.
Mechanisms
What are the mechanisms through which these diverse approaches might lead to changes in 
inflammation, particularly changes in cellular and genomic markers? A number of 
conceptual models have been proposed to explain the effects of MBTs on a broad range of 
outcomes (Creswell & Lindsay, 2014; Gard, Noggle, Park, Vago, & Wilson, 2014; Holzel et 
al., 2011; Taylor, Goehler, Galper, Innes, & Bourguignon, 2010), all of which emphasize the 
important of self-regulation as a central goal of MBTs. We draw from these models, and 
from the empirical literature, to identify pathways that are most relevant to inflammation, 
including neuroendocrine, neural, and psychological/behavioral mechanisms. These 
pathways are illustrated in Figure 1. Of note, although we focus here on “top down” 
pathways, MBTs may also have more direct physiological effects, as discussed in the section 
on active ingredients.
Neuroendocrine mechanisms
At the most proximal level, alterations in the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis likely play an important role in structuring 
intervention-related changes in inflammatory activity. These systems are key regulators of 
inflammatory gene expression (Irwin & Cole, 2011) and, as mediators of the stress response, 
are targeted by mind-body interventions.
Autonomic nervous system—Focusing first on the ANS, preliminary evidence 
indicates that MBTs are associated with decreases in sympathetic activity and increases in 
parasympathetic activity (Audette et al., 2006; Creswell & Lindsay, 2014; Motivala, Sollers, 
Thayer, & Irwin, 2006), reflecting greater sympathovagal balance. These alterations have 
been observed at rest, following practice of the technique, and in response to acute stress, 
although results may depend on the nature of the stimulus. Sympathovagal balance is 
thought to reduce inflammation via decreased adrenergic signaling. Indeed, Irwin et al. 
found that TCC led to reduced activity of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) 
family transcription factors, which is consistent with reduced sympathetic nervous system 
signaling through β-adrenergic receptors, in tandem with decreases in NF-kB activity (Irwin 
et al., 2015). Similar changes in CREB signaling were found in a yoga trial that also showed 
reduced NF-kB activity (Bower et al., 2014). Increases in parasympathetic nervous system 
activity may also reduce inflammation via the anti-inflammatory cholinergic pathway 
(Tracey, 2009). However, the mediating role of the ANS in intervention-induced reductions 
in inflammation has not been formally tested. Future studies should incorporate 
sophisticated measures of ANS activity along with inflammatory signaling to explicate these 
links.
HPA axis—Cortisol, the end product of HPA axis activity, has potent anti-inflammatory 
effects. Thus, alterations in cortisol production or in glucocorticoid receptor sensitivity have 
the potential to modulate inflammatory processes. In terms of cortisol production, there is 
mixed evidence that MBTs influence cortisol reactivity to acute stress; for example, a study 
Bower and Irwin
Page 9
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of compassion meditation found no effect on cortisol reactivity to the Trier Social Stress 
Task (TSST), a standardized psychosocial stressor (Pace et al., 2009), whereas a study of 
brief mindfulness training found increased reactivity to the TSST (Creswell, Pacilio, 
Lindsay, & Brown, 2014). Effects on measures of diurnal cortisol output are similarly 
mixed. However, several trials have shown that MBTs lead to changes in glucocorticoid 
receptor signaling, which may in turn influence inflammatory processes. Specifically, 
studies of Tai Chi, mindfulness, and yoga have shown increases in anti-inflammatory GR 
signaling in the intervention group vs. control, which co-occur with decreases in NF-κB 
(Bower et al., 2014; Bower et al., 2015; Irwin et al., 2014; Irwin et al., 2015). This pattern of 
results – namely, that MBTs influence GR signaling without affecting cortisol production – 
suggests that receptor sensitivity may be modulated by these interventions. This is important 
given that the increased inflammatory activity seen in the context of chronic stress is 
hypothesized to be due to alterations in GR sensitivity (Miller et al., 2008). Thus, targeting 
GC signaling mechanisms may have substantial benefit for altering these dynamics.
Neural mechanisms
Activity in the ANS and HPA axis is modulated by threat-related areas of the brain, 
including the amygdala, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula, and periaqueductal 
gray. These areas have been described as a “neural alarm system” that detects and elicits 
adaptive responses to impending danger or harm (Eisenberger & Cole, 2012). Given that 
many MBTs either implicitly or explicitly involve a focus on promoting relaxation and 
decreasing threat reactivity, it plausible that activity in these “neural alarm” regions may be 
responsive to mind-body approaches and may mediate downstream effects on inflammation. 
Most of the research on neural correlates of MBTs has focused on meditative practices, and 
there is preliminary evidence that mindfulness is associated with alterations in threat-related 
brain regions, including decreased amygdala reactivity (Goldin & Gross, 2010) and reduced 
functional connectivity of the amygdala with other threat-related regions (Taren et al., 
2014).
MBTs may also influence regulatory areas of the brain that modulate activity in threat-
related regions. In particular, mindfulness training interventions have been shown to 
increase recruitment of the prefrontal cortex in the context of emotion-regulation tasks 
(Creswell & Lindsay, 2014). These findings are consistent with the focus of mindful training 
on enhancing emotion regulation. Further, it is possible that mindfulness and other MBTs 
may influence activity in reward-related regions, such as the ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
(VMPFC), ventral striatum, and septal area, which also have inhibitory effects on threat-
related physiological responding (Eisenberger & Cole, 2012).
Although we have focused primarily on the stress-reducing effects of MBTs, other 
dimensions of these approaches may also be relevant for inflammation. In particular, a key 
component of all of the MBTs reviewed here is focused bodily awareness. The insular 
cortex receives afferent signals from the body via viscerosensory pathways and is involved 
in the representation and integration of this information; it also modulates autonomic output. 
Thus, to the extent that MBTs lead to alterations in these signals, or to their neural 
representation and integration by the insula and other neural regions, this may drive changes 
Bower and Irwin
Page 10
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in downstream autonomic processing and inflammatory activity. Indeed, there is evidence 
that mindfulness training leads to alterations in insula activity as well as changes in 
connectivity with prefrontal areas (Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2013). Yoga is also 
hypothesized to facilitate integration of “top down” and “bottom up” neural processes, 
although this has not been evaluated (Gard et al., 2014).
Psychological and behavioral mechanisms
At the psychological level, MBTs target psychological processes that have been directly and 
indirectly linked to threat-, reward-, and regulatory brain regions and to stress-related 
physiological systems. For example, MBTs lead to decreases in perceived stress, depression, 
and anxiety, along with increases in control, self-efficacy, emotion regulation, and peace and 
meaning life (Gard et al., 2014; Goyal et al., 2014; Holzel et al., 2011). Changes in these 
domains have been shown to be associated with MBSR effects on telomerase activity 
(Jacobs et al., 2011), but such pathways have not been tested for inflammatory outcomes. 
Certain MBTs may also have effects on processes that are not directly targeted by the 
intervention, but still have relevance for inflammation. For example, Creswell et al. found 
that MBSR led to decreases in loneliness, which has been associated with elevated 
inflammatory activity (Creswell et al., 2012). Further, MBTs may influence health behaviors 
relevant for inflammation, such as sleep (Irwin et al., 2014). Of course, therapies that 
involve physical activity may have
Active ingredients
Mind-body treatments include multiple components, including breathing, focused attention, 
meditation, and physical movements. The different MBTs place different emphasis on these 
components. For example, mindfulness and other meditative practices focus on conscious 
and intentional mental activities. Physical movements, if they are included as part of the 
intervention, are typically performed in the service of cultivating awareness of one’s body 
and its interaction with the environment. On the other hand, Tai Chi is a more physical 
practice; indeed, the flowing physical movements that are performed during Tai Chi can 
achieve 50% to 74% of the maximal heart rate, depending on the age of the individual and 
the intensity of practice. Yoga is also a more physical practice that emphasizes the 
importance of postures (asanas) for treatment effects. Although our review did not identify 
systematic differences between these approaches for inflammatory outcomes, it is certainly 
plausible that different MBTs may work through different mechanisms, which may 
modulate effects on inflammatory biology. Certainly effects on other outcomes (functional, 
behavioral, psychological) may differ by approach.
Another important issue in the literature on MBTs is the degree to which intervention effects 
are due to what are thought to be the “active ingredients” of the intervention, or to non-
specific factors, such as expectations, attention from an experienced instructor, and/or group 
context. Carefully designed control groups are required to test these alternative hypotheses. 
In conducting this review, it is encouraging to find that many of the trials assessing 
inflammatory outcomes did use active control groups, including health education, support/
counseling, and exercise. The optimal control group will, of course, depend on the question 
under investigation. For example, to determine whether the effects of Tai Chi are primarily 
Bower and Irwin
Page 11
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 due to physical activity, an exercise control group would be optimal. Or, to determine 
whether the effects of yoga are primarily due to stretching and associated changes in 
muscle-derived inflammatory markers, a stretching control would be preferred. Of note, 
research comparing yoga to stretching has shown mixed effects on psychological and 
physiological measures (e.g., Chandwani et al., 2014; Corey et al., 2014), though differential 
effects on inflammatory processes have not been examined.
One potential complication in the selection of control groups is the possibility that they may 
control for what is considered to be an essential part of the intervention. For example, we 
have elected not to use relaxation as a control condition in our yoga research, as relaxation is 
an integral part of yoga. Given that many of these practices have been developed over 
thousands of years, it is unclear whether dismantling them to identify active ingredients will 
be particularly useful. An alternative approach is to use control groups that control for non-
specific elements of the intervention, such as meeting in a group and learning something you 
consider useful; in this case, health education might be optimal. Indeed, health education has 
been recommended for use in yoga trials (Sherman, 2012). In general, decisions about 
control groups will depend on the question under investigation in a particular study.
Typically, investigators have examined MBTs separately from other intervention 
approaches. However, it is possible that combining MBTs with other approaches may have 
additive or synergistic effects on inflammation. In particular, combining MBTs with 
pharmacologic therapies that target inflammation may enhance the anti-inflammatory effects 
of each. For example, in regards to anti-viral immune response (as opposed to 
inflammation), Irwin et al. (2007) found that Tai Chi together with varicella zoster virus 
vaccination augmented the immune response in older adults to a greater extent than either 
Tai Chi or vaccination alone. MBTs might also be combined with dietary approaches (e.g., 
omega-3s) and other interventions that are thought to reduce inflammation for maximal 
benefit. As a related issue, MBTs are rarely compared with each other, which would provide 
information about specificity of effects. Further, few trials examine combined MBT 
approaches (e.g., yoga and TCC), although in practice many patients may use these therapies 
simultaneously.
Conclusions
There is a growing literature examining effects of MBTs on inflammatory processes, 
reflecting increasing use of these approaches and recognition of the importance of 
inflammation for physical and mental health. Results from this review suggest that effects of 
these approaches may initially be reflected in alterations in gene expression profiles and 
indicators of proinflammatory signaling; indeed, alterations in inflammatory gene 
expression were identified even after relatively short (6 week) interventions (Bower et al., 
2015) and generally appeared to be driven by reduced proinflammatory gene expression in 
the monocyte population. Studies examining cellular markers of inflammation also suggest 
that monocytes may be particularly sensitive to effects of MBTs, with effects on monocyte 
production of proinflammatory cytokines observed as early as 8 weeks after intervention 
onset (Irwin et al., 2015). Effects on non-specific markers, including circulating 
inflammatory markers, may take longer to emerge, and may require more intensive practice 
Bower and Irwin
Page 12
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of the treatment (e.g., Bower et al., 2014; Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2014; Pace et al., 2009). One 
of the compelling features of MBTs is the ability to integrate these practices into one’s daily 
life, with the potential for long-term benefit. A critical next step in research on MBTs is to 
determine how to maintain these practices and to examine longer-term effects on 
inflammation and health.
Acknowledgments
Supported in part by R01 CA160427 and funding from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation to JEB; by R01 
CA160245, R01 AG034588, R01 AG026364, R01 CA119159, R01 HL095799, R01 DA032922, and P30 
AG028748 to MRI; and by UCLA CTSI UL1TR000124, the Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, and 
P30-AG028748 UCLA Claude D. Pepper Older Americans Independence Center.
References
Audette JF, Jin YS, Newcomer R, Stein L, Duncan G, Frontera WR. Tai Chi versus brisk walking in 
elderly women. Age Ageing. 2006; 35(4):388–393. [PubMed: 16624847] 
Barnes PM, Bloom B, Nahin RL. Complementary and alternative medicine use among adults and 
children: United States, 2007. Natl Health Stat Report. 2008; 12:1–23. [PubMed: 19361005] 
Bhasin MK, Dusek JA, Chang BH, Joseph MG, Denninger JW, Fricchione GL, et al. Relaxation 
response induces temporal transcriptome changes in energy metabolism, insulin secretion and 
inflammatory pathways. PLoS One. 2013; 8(5):e62817. [PubMed: 23650531] 
Black DS, Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Ji E, Crabb Breen E, Motivala SJ. Tai chi meditation effects on 
nuclear factor-kappaB signaling in lonely older adults: a randomized controlled trial. Psychother 
Psychosom. 2014; 83(5):315–317. [PubMed: 25116908] 
Bower JE, Crosswell AD, Stanton AL, Crespi CM, Winson D, Arevalo J, et al. Mindfulness meditation 
for younger breast cancer survivors: a randomized controlled trial. Cancer. 2015; 121:1231–40. 
[PubMed: 25537522] 
Bower JE, Ganz PA, Irwin MR, Kwan L, Breen EC, Cole SW. Inflammation and behavioral symptoms 
after breast cancer treatment: do fatigue, depression, and sleep disturbance share a common 
underlying mechanism? J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29(26):3517–3522. [PubMed: 21825266] 
Bower JE, Greendale G, Crosswell AD, Garet D, Sternlieb B, Ganz PA, et al. Yoga reduces 
inflammatory signaling in fatigued breast cancer survivors: A randomized controlled trial. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014; 43:20–29. [PubMed: 24703167] 
Bussing A, Ostermann T, Ludtke R, Michalsen A. Effects of yoga interventions on pain and pain-
associated disability: a meta-analysis. J Pain. 2012; 13(1):1–9. [PubMed: 22178433] 
Chandwani KD, Perkins G, Nagendra HR, Raghuram NV, Spelman A, Nagaranthna R, Johnson K, 
Fortier A, Arun B, Wei Q, Kirschbaum C, Haddad R, Morris GS, Scheetz J, Chaoul A, Cohen L. 
Randomized, controlled trial of yoga in women with breast cancer undergoing radiotherapy. J Clin 
Oncol. 2014; 32:1058–65. [PubMed: 24590636] 
Chen HH, Yeh ML, Lee FY. The effects of Baduanjin qigong in the prevention of bone loss for 
middle-aged women. Am J Chin Med. 2006; 34(5):741–747. [PubMed: 17080541] 
Chen SC, Ueng KC, Lee SH, Sun KT, Lee MC. Effect of t’ai chi exercise on biochemical profiles and 
oxidative stress indicators in obese patients with type 2 diabetes. J Altern Complement Med. 2010; 
16(11):1153–1159. [PubMed: 20973735] 
Cole SW. Human social genomics. PLoS Genet. 2014; 10(8):e1004601. [PubMed: 25166010] 
Corey SM, Epel E, Schembri M, Pawlowsky SB, Cole RJ, Araneta MR, Barrett-Connor E, Kanaya 
AM. Effect of restorative yoga vs. stretching on diurnal cortisol dynamics and psychosocial 
outcomes in individuals with the metabolic syndrome: The PRYSMS randomized controlled trial. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014; 49:260–71. [PubMed: 25127084] 
Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JM, Ma J, et al. Mindfulness-Based 
Stress Reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inflammatory gene expression in older adults: 
Bower and Irwin
Page 13
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a small randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun. 2012; 26(7):1095–1101. [PubMed: 
22820409] 
Creswell JD, Pacilio LE, Lindsay EK, Brown KW. Brief mindfulness meditation training alters 
psychological and neuroendocrine responses to social evaluative stress. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014; 44:1–12. [PubMed: 24767614] 
Creswell JD, Lindsay EK. How does mindfulness training affect health? A mindfulness stress 
buffering account. Current Directions in Psychological Science. 2014
Eisenberger NI, Cole SW. Social neuroscience and health: neurophysiological mechanisms linking 
social ties with physical health. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15(5):669–674. [PubMed: 22504347] 
Elsenbruch S, Langhorst J, Popkirowa K, Muller T, Luedtke R, Franken U, et al. Effects of mind-body 
therapy on quality of life and neuroendocrine and cellular immune functions in patients with 
ulcerative colitis. Psychother Psychosom. 2005; 74(5):277–287. [PubMed: 16088265] 
Farb NA, Segal ZV, Anderson AK. Mindfulness meditation training alters cortical representations of 
interoceptive attention. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2013; 8(1):15–26. [PubMed: 22689216] 
Gard T, Noggle JJ, Park CL, Vago DR, Wilson A. Potential self-regulatory mechanisms of yoga for 
psychological health. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014; 8:770. [PubMed: 25368562] 
Goldin PR, Gross JJ. Effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on emotion regulation in 
social anxiety disorder. Emotion. 2010; 10(1):83–91. [PubMed: 20141305] 
Goyal M, Singh S, Sibinga EM, Gould NF, Rowland-Seymour A, Sharma R, et al. Meditation 
Programs for Psychological Stress and Well-being: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2014; 174(3):357–368. [PubMed: 24395196] 
Holzel BK, Lazar SW, Gard T, Schuman-Olivier Z, Vago DR, Ott U. How Does Mindfulness 
Meditation Work? Proposing Mechanisms of Action From a Conceptual and Neural Perspective. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science. 2011; 6(6):537–559. [PubMed: 26168376] 
Irwin MR, Cole SW. Reciprocal regulation of the neural and innate immune systems. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2011; 11(9):625–632. [PubMed: 21818124] 
Irwin MR, Olmstead R. Mitigating cellular inflammation in older adults: a randomized controlled trial 
of Tai Chi Chih. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012; 20(9):764–772. [PubMed: 21934474] 
Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Oxman MN. Augmenting immune responses to varicella zoster virus in older 
adults: a randomized controlled trial of Tai Chi. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007; 55:511–7. [PubMed: 
17397428] 
Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Witarama T, Carrillo C, Sadeghi N, et al. Tai Chi, Cellular 
Inflammation, and Transcriptome Dynamics in Breast Cancer Survivors With Insomnia: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. JNCI Monographs. 2014; 2014(50):295–301.
Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Carrillo C, Sadeghi N, Breen EC, Witarama T, et al. Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy and Tai Chi Reverses Cellular and Genomic Markers of Inflammation in Late Life 
Insomnia: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Epub ahead of print. 10.1016/
j.biopsych.2015.01.010
Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Carrillo C, Sadeghi N, Breen EC, Witarama T, et al. Cognitive behavioral 
therapy vs. Tai Chi for late life insomnia and inflammatory risk: a randomized controlled 
comparative efficacy trial. Sleep. 2014; 37(9):1543–1552. [PubMed: 25142571] 
Jacobs TL, Epel ES, Lin J, Blackburn EH, Wolkowitz OM, Bridwell DA, et al. Intensive meditation 
training, immune cell telomerase activity, and psychological mediators. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011; 36(5):664–681. [PubMed: 21035949] 
Janelsins MC, Davis PG, Wideman L, Katula JA, Sprod LK, Peppone LJ, et al. Effects of Tai Chi 
Chuan on insulin and cytokine levels in a randomized controlled pilot study on breast cancer 
survivors. Clin Breast Cancer. 2011; 11(3):161–170. [PubMed: 21665136] 
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Bennett JM, Andridge R, Peng J, Shapiro CL, Malarkey WB, et al. Yoga’s impact 
on inflammation, mood, and fatigue in breast cancer survivors: a randomized controlled trial. J 
Clin Oncol. 2014; 32(10):1040–1049. [PubMed: 24470004] 
Lavretsky H, Alstein LL, Olmstead RE, Ercoli LM, Riparetti-Brown M, Cyr NS, et al. Complementary 
use of tai chi chih augments escitalopram treatment of geriatric depression: a randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011; 19(10):839–850. [PubMed: 21358389] 
Bower and Irwin
Page 14
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Malarkey WB, Jarjoura D, Klatt M. Workplace based mindfulness practice and inflammation: a 
randomized trial. Brain Behav Immun. 2013; 27(1):145–154. [PubMed: 23078984] 
Manzaneque JM, Vera FM, Rodriguez FM, Garcia GJ, Leyva L, Blanca MJ. Serum cytokines, mood 
and sleep after a qigong program: is qigong an effective psychobiological tool? J Health Psychol. 
2009; 14(1):60–67. [PubMed: 19129338] 
McCain NL, Gray DP, Elswick RK, Robins JW, Tuck I, Walter JM, et al. A randomized clinical trial 
of alternative stress management interventions in persons with HIV infection. J Consult Clin 
Psychol. 2008; 76(3):431–441. [PubMed: 18540736] 
Miller GE, Chen E, Sze J, Marin T, Arevalo JM, Doll R, et al. A functional genomic fingerprint of 
chronic stress in humans: blunted glucocorticoid and increased NF-kappaB signaling. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2008; 64(4):266–272. [PubMed: 18440494] 
Morgan N, Irwin MR, Chung M, Wang C. The effects of mind-body therapies on the immune system: 
meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014; 9(7):e100903. [PubMed: 24988414] 
Motivala SJ, Sollers J, Thayer J, Irwin MR. Tai Chi Chih acutely decreases sympathetic nervous 
system activity in older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2006; 61(11):1177–1180. 
[PubMed: 17167159] 
Nicklas BJ, Hsu FC, Brinkley TJ, Church T, Goodpaster BH, Kritchevsky SB, et al. Exercise training 
and plasma C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 in elderly people. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008; 56(11):
2045–2052. [PubMed: 19016938] 
Oh B, Butow P, Mullan B, Clarke S. Medical Qigong for cancer patients: pilot study of impact on 
quality of life, side effects of treatment and inflammation. Am J Chin Med. 2008; 36(3):459–472. 
[PubMed: 18543381] 
Oh B, Butow P, Mullan B, Clarke S, Beale P, Pavlakis N, et al. Impact of medical Qigong on quality 
of life, fatigue, mood and inflammation in cancer patients: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Oncol. 2010; 21(3):608–614. [PubMed: 19880433] 
Oh B, Butow PN, Mullan BA, Clarke SJ, Beale PJ, Pavlakis N, et al. Effect of medical Qigong on 
cognitive function, quality of life, and a biomarker of inflammation in cancer patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. Support Care Cancer. 2012; 20(6):1235–1242. [PubMed: 21688163] 
Oken BS, Fonareva I, Haas M, Wahbeh H, Lane JB, Zajdel D, et al. Pilot controlled trial of 
mindfulness meditation and education for dementia caregivers. J Altern Complement Med. 2010; 
16(10):1031–1038. [PubMed: 20929380] 
Pace TW, Negi LT, Adame DD, Cole SP, Sivilli TI, Brown TD, et al. Effect of compassion meditation 
on neuroendocrine, innate immune and behavioral responses to psychosocial stress. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009; 34(1):87–98. [PubMed: 18835662] 
Pullen PR, Nagamia SH, Mehta PK, Thompson WR, Benardot D, Hammoud R, et al. Effects of yoga 
on inflammation and exercise capacity in patients with chronic heart failure. J Card Fail. 2008; 
14(5):407–413. [PubMed: 18514933] 
Pullen PR, Thompson WR, Benardot D, Brandon LJ, Mehta PK, Rifai L, et al. Benefits of yoga for 
African American heart failure patients. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010; 42(4):651–657. [PubMed: 
19952833] 
Rao RM, Nagendra HR, Raghuram N, Vinay C, Chandrashekara S, Gopinath KS, et al. Influence of 
yoga on mood states, distress, quality of life and immune outcomes in early stage breast cancer 
patients undergoing surgery. Int J Yoga. 2008; 1(1):11–20. [PubMed: 21829279] 
Robins JL, McCain NL, Elswick RK Jr, Walter JM, Gray DP, Tuck I. Psychoneuroimmunology-Based 
Stress Management during Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Early Breast Cancer. Evid Based 
Complement Alternat Med. 2013; 2013:372908. [PubMed: 23762127] 
Sherman KJ. Guidelines for developing yoga interventions for randomized trials. Evid Based 
Complement Alternat Med. 2012; 2012:143271. [PubMed: 23082079] 
Spencer, JW.; Jacobs, JJ. Complentary and Alternative Medicine: an Evidence Based Approach. St. 
Louis, MO: Mosby; 2003. 
Taylor AG, Goehler LE, Galper DI, Innes KE, Bourguignon C. Top-down and bottom-up mechanisms 
in mind-body medicine: development of an integrative framework for psychophysiological 
research. Explore (NY). 2010; 6(1):29–41. [PubMed: 20129310] 
Tracey KJ. Reflex control of immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 9(6):418–28. [PubMed: 19461672] 
Bower and Irwin
Page 15
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Wang C, Collet JP, Lau J. The effect of Tai Chi on health outcomes in patients with chronic 
conditions: a systematic review. Arch Intern Med. 2004; 164(5):493–501. [PubMed: 15006825] 
Zautra AJ, Davis MC, Reich JW, Nicassario P, Tennen H, Finan P, et al. Comparison of cognitive 
behavioral and mindfulness meditation interventions on adaptation to rheumatoid arthritis for 
patients with and without history of recurrent depression. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2008; 76(3):
408–421. [PubMed: 18540734] 
Bower and Irwin
Page 16
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
We conducted a qualitative review of randomized controlled trials that 
examined effects of mind-body therapies (MBTs) on markers of inflammation
•
26 trials were identified, including studies of Tai Chi, Qigong, yoga, and 
meditation
•
Studies that examined genomic markers of inflammation showed consistent 
reductions in inflammatory signaling; more mixed effects were seen for 
circulating and cellular markers of inflammation
Bower and Irwin
Page 17
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Potential pathways linking mind-body therapies and inflammatory biology, focusing on 
neuroendocrine mechanisms. Mind-body interventions may influence neural regions that 
regulate downstream stress response pathways, including the autonomic nervous system 
(ANS) and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The ANS and the HPA axis may, 
in turn, influence the production of proinflammatory cytokines via effects of their ligands on 
adrenergic, cholinergic, and glucocorticoid receptors on immune cells. Stimulation of 
adrenergic receptors by epinephrine and norepinephrine can activate proinflammatory 
transcription factors such as NF-kB, whereas stimulation of GC receptors can inhibit 
proinflammatory cytokine production. Randomized controlled trials of mind-body therapies 
have demonstrated reduced pro-inflammatory signaling through NF-kB and increased anti-
inflammatory GR signaling, suggesting that these approaches may modulate gene expression 
to reduce inflammation. However, effects on stimulated production of proinflammatory 
cytokines and circulating cytokine concentrations are mixed.
Bower and Irwin
Page 18
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bower and Irwin
Page 19
Table 1
Randomized controlled trials evaluating the effects of mind-body therapies on circulating markers of inflammation
Study
Population
N, % Female
Mean age (range)
Intervention Duration, Type
Intervention Frequency, Style
Control Group
Finding
Circulating Markers of Inflammation
Bower 2014
Breast cancer survivors with 
fatigue
31(100%)
54 (40–65)
12 weeks, Yoga
90 min, 2 ×/week Iyengar yoga
Health education
sTNFRII − 
(stable in 
yoga vs. 
increase in 
controls)
IL-1RA ns
CRP ns
IL-6 ns
Bower 2014
Breast cancer survivors
71 (100%)
46.9 (28–60)
6 weeks, Meditation
2 hrs, 1×/week Mindful 
Awareness Practices
Wait-list control
CRP ns
IL-6 ns
sTNFRII ns
Chen 2006
Healthy middle-aged women
87 (100%)
45
12 weeks, Qi Gong
3 ×/week, Baduanjin
No specified activities
IL-6 −
Chen 2010
Adults with diagnosis of 
Type II diabetes and BMI 
30–35
104 (43%)
58
12 weeks, Tai Chi
60 min, 3 ×/week, Chen-Style 
Tai Chi Chuan 99-form
Conventional aerobic exercise
CRP −
Creswell 2012
Healthy older adults
40 (80%)
65 (55–85)
8 weeks, Meditation
2 hrs, 1 ×/week Mindfulness 
based stress reduction
Wait-list control
CRP − 
(trend)
IL-6 ns
Irwin 2012
Healthy older adults
83 (63%)
70 (59–86)
16 weeks, Tai Chi
40 min, 3 ×/week Tai Chi Chih
Health education
IL-6 ns 
(marg 
decrease in 
TCC group 
with high 
IL-6 at 
baseline)
CRP ns
IL-1ra ns
sIL-6R ns
sICAM ns
IL-18 ns
Irwin 2014
Breast cancer survivors with 
insomnia
90 (100%)
59.8 (42–83)
12 weeks, Tai Chi
2 hrs, 1 ×/week Tai Chi Chih
Cognitive behavioral therapy
CRP ns
Irwin 2015
Older adults with insomnia
123 (73%)
65 (55–85)
16 weeks, Tai Chi
2 hrs, 1 ×/week Tai Chi Chih
Health education; Cognitive 
behavioral therapy
CRP −
Lavretsky 2011
Elderly adults with major 
depression
73 (62%)
71
10 weeks, Tai Chi Chih
120 min, 1 ×/week Tai Chi 
Chih
Health education
CRP −
Malarkey 2013
Adults with elevated CRP 
>3.0 mg/ml, cardiovascular 
risk
186 (88%)
50
8 weeks, Meditation
1 hr, 1 ×/week, Mindfulness 
based stress reduction
Lifestyle education
CRP − 
(trend)
IL-6 ns
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bower and Irwin
Page 20
Study
Population
N, % Female
Mean age (range)
Intervention Duration, Type
Intervention Frequency, Style
Control Group
Finding
Janelsins 2011
Breast cancer survivors
19 (100%)
53 (43–78)
12 weeks, Tai Chi
60 min, 3 × /week Yang style 
Tai Chi
Psychosocial support group
IL-6 ns
Manzaneque 2009
Healthy college students
39, (87%)
18–21
4 weeks, Qi Gong
30 min, 3 ×/week Ba Duan Jin
No specified activities
TNF ns
Oh 2008
Cancer patients
30 (75%)
54 (35–75)
8 weeks, QiGong
2 ×/week Medical QiGong
Normal activities
CRP − 
(attenuated 
increase vs. 
controls)
Oh 2010, 2012
Cancer patients
162 (57%)
60 (31–86)
10 weeks, Qi Gong
90 min, 1–2 ×/week, Medical 
Qi Gong
Usual care
CRP −
Oken 2010
Dementia caregivers
31 (81%)
65 (45–85)
7 weeks, Meditation
90 min, 1× per week 
Mindfulness based cognitive 
therapy
Education class; Respite only
CRP ns
IL-6 ns
TNF ns
Pace 2009
Healthy college students
61 (52%)
19 (17–19)
6 weeks, Meditation
50 min, 2 ×/week Compassion 
meditation
Health discussion group
IL-6 ns
Pullen 2008
Heart failure patients (Class 
I–III)
19 (53%)
51
8 weeks, Yoga
70 min, 2 ×/week Hatha Yoga
Standard medical therapy
CRP −
IL-6 −
Pullen 2010
Heart failure patients (Class 
I–III)
40 (43%)
54 (31–76)
8–10 weeks, Yoga
60 min, 2 × /week Hatha Yoga
Standard medical therapy
CRP −
IL-6 −
Rao 2008
Breast cancer patients 
undergoing surgery
69 (100%)
49
4 weeks, Yoga
4 sessions, individual practice 
Integrated Yoga
Counseling + exercise 
rehabilitation
TNF − 
(increase in 
controls)
sIL-2R ns
Robins 2013
Breast cancer patients 
undergoing chemotherapy
145 (100%)
50 (27–75)
10 weeks, Tai Chi
90 min, 1×/week
Spiritual growth group, usual 
care
Multiplex 
panel:
IL-1β ns
IL-2 ns
IL-4 ns
IL-5 ns
IL-6 ns
IL-7 ns
IL-8 ns
IL-10 ns
IL-12 ns
IL-13 ns
IL-17 ns
G-CSF ns
GM-CSF ns
IFN-γ ns
MCP ns
MCAF ns
MIP-1β ns
TNF ns
Notes: The symbol “−” is used to indicate a significant decrease (or attenuated increase) in a particular inflammatory marker. “Trend” is used to indicate marginally significant findings (0.05 < p < .10), and 
“ns” is used to indicate non-significant findings.
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bower and Irwin
Page 21
Table 2
Randomized controlled trials evaluating the effects of mind-body therapies on cellular production of markers of inflammation
Study
Population
N, % Female
Mean age (range)
Intervention Duration, Type
Intervention Frequency, Style
Control Group
Finding
Cellular Markers of Inflammation
Elsenbruch 2005
Adults with ulcerative colitis
30 (67%)
42
10 weeks, Meditation
6 hrs, 1×/week Mindfulness 
based stress reduction program
Wait-list control
TNF ns
Irwin 2014
Breast cancer survivors with 
insomnia
90 (100%)
59.8 (42–83)
12 weeks, Tai Chi
2 hrs, 1×/week Tai Chi Chih
Cognitive behavioral therapy
IL-6 −
TNF −
Irwin 2015
Older adults with insomnia
123 (73%)
65 (55–85)
16 weeks, Tai Chi
2 hrs, 1×/week Tai Chi Chih
Health education; Cognitive 
behavioral therapy
IL-6 −
TNF −
Kiecolt-Glaser 2014
Breast cancer survivors
200 (100%)
51.6 (27–76)
12 weeks, Yoga
90 min, 1×/week Hatha yoga
Wait-list
IL-6 −
TNF −
IL-1 − 
(all at 
3-
month 
FU)
McCain 2008
Adults with diagnosis of 
HIV
252 (40%)
42
10 weeks, Tai Chi
90 min, 1 ×/week Short form 
Tai Chi
Cognitive behavioral 
relaxation training; Spiritual 
growth; Wait-list control
IL-6 ns
TNF ns
Zautra 2008
Rheumatoid arthritis patients
144 (68%)
56
8 weeks, Meditation
2 hrs, 1 ×/week Mindfulness 
based stress reduction without 
yoga
Cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT) for pain; Education 
only
IL-6 ns 
in 
MBSR; 
IL-6 − 
in CBT
Notes: The symbol “−” is used to indicate a significant decrease (or attenuated increase) in a particular inflammatory marker. “Trend” is used to indicate marginally significant findings (0.05 < p < .10), and 
“ns” is used to indicate non-significant findings.
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bower and Irwin
Page 22
Table 3
Randomized controlled trials evaluating the effects of mind-body therapies on inflammatory gene expression pathways
Study
Population
N, % Female
Mean age (range)
Intervention Duration, Type
Intervention Frequency, Style
Control Group
Finding
Gene Expression Inflammatory Pathways
Black 2013
Adult caregivers
39 (92%)
60.5
8 weeks, Meditation
12 min, 7 days/week Kirtan 
Kriya
Relaxing music
NF-κB −
IRF +
Black 2014
Older adults
26 (80.8%)
67.1 (60–72)
12 weeks, Tai Chi
60 min, 1 ×/week
Health education
NF-κB − 
(attenuated 
increase vs 
controls)
Bower 2014
Breast cancer survivors 
with fatigue
31(100%)
54 (40–65)
12 weeks, Yoga
90 min, 2 ×/week Iyengar yoga
Health education
NF-κB −
IRF +
Bower 2014
Breast cancer survivors
71 (100%)
46.9 (28–60)
6 weeks, Meditation
2 hrs, 1×/week Mindful 
Awareness Practices
Wait-list control
NF-κB −
Creswell 2012
Healthy older adults
40 (80%)
65 (55–85)
8 weeks, Meditation
2 hrs, 1×/week Mindfulness 
based stress reduction
Wait-list control
NF-κB −
IRF +
Irwin 2014
Breast cancer survivors 
with insomnia
90 (100%)
59.8 (42–83)
12 weeks, Tai Chi
2 hrs, 1 ×/week Tai Chi Chih
Cognitive behavioral therapy
NF-κB −
IRF +
Irwin 2015
Older adults with 
insomnia
123 (73%)
65 (55–85)
16 weeks, Tai Chi
2 hrs, 1 ×/week Tai Chi Chih
Health education; Cognitive 
behavioral therapy
NF-κB −
IRF +
Abbreviations: NF-κB = nuclear factor kappa B; IRF = interferon response factor
Notes: The symbol “−” is used to indicate a significant decrease (or attenuated increase) in a particular inflammatory marker.
Brain Behav Immun. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
