                           
Bowers, J. S. (2016). The Practical and Principled Problems with Educational
Neuroscience. Psychological Review, 123(5), 600-612.
https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000025
Peer reviewed version
Link to published version (if available):
10.1037/rev0000025
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document
This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via APA at http://psycnet.apa.org/psycarticles/2016-10827-001. Please refer to any applicable terms of use of
the publisher.
University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms
 Running   head:   EDUCATIONAL   NEUROSCIENCE   
1   
 
 
 
 
The Practical and Principled Problems with Educational Neuroscience 
 
Jeffrey S. Bowers 
University of Bristol 
 
 
Keywords:  educational neuroscience; education; instruction; neuroscience; mind, 
brain, and education. 
 
 
Author Note: 
 
Jeffrey S. Bowers, School of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol. 
 
Acknowledgments:  I would like to think Patricia Bowers and Peter Bowers 
for comments on previous drafts. 
 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Jeffrey S 
Bowers, School of Experimental Psychology, 12a Priory Road, Bristol, BS8-1TU. 
Email j.bowers@bristol.ac.uk 
 
 
   
 
 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
2   
Abstract 
The core claim of educational neuroscience is that neuroscience can improve teaching 
in the classroom.  Many strong claims are made about the successes and the promise 
of this new discipline.  By contrast, I show that there are no current examples of 
neuroscience motivating new and effective teaching methods, and argue that 
neuroscience is unlikely to improve teaching in the future.   The reasons are two-fold. 
First, in practice, it is easier characterize the cognitive capacities of children on the 
basis of behavioral measures than on the basis of brain measures.  As a consequence, 
neuroscience rarely offers insights into instruction above and beyond psychology. 
Second, in principle, the theoretical motivations underpinning educational 
neuroscience are misguided, and this makes it difficult to design or assess new 
teaching methods on the basis of neuroscience. Regarding the design of instruction, it 
is widely assumed that remedial instruction should target the underlying deficits 
associated with learning disorders, and neuroscience is used to characterize the deficit.  
However, the most effective forms of instruction may often rely on developing 
compensatory (non-impaired) skills. Neuroscience cannot determine whether 
instruction should target impaired or non-impaired skills.  More importantly, regarding 
the assessment of instruction, the only relevant issue is whether the child learns, as 
reflected in behavior.  Evidence that the brain changed in response to instruction 
irrelevant.  At the same, an important goal for neuroscience is to characterize how the 
brain changes in response to learning, and this includes learning in the classroom. 
Neuroscientists cannot help educators, but educators can help neuroscientists. 
 
Keywords: educational neuroscience; education; instruction; neuroscience; mind, 
brain, and education. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
3   
  
There is growing interest in the claim that neuroscience can improve 
education.  New journals (Mind, Brain, and Education; Trends in Neuroscience and 
Education), research centres (e.g., Cambridge Centre for Neuroscience in Education), 
as well as research degrees and conferences have been established.  A number of 
recent high-profile papers in Nature, Nature Neuroscience, Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, Science, and Neuron (Butterworth, Varma, & Laurillard, 2011; Carew 
& Magsamen, 2010; Eden & Moats, 2002; Gabrieli, 2009; Goswami, 2006; 
McCandliss, 2010; Meltzoff, Kuhl, Movellan, & Sejnowski, 2009; Sigman, Peña, 
Goldin, & Ribeiro, 2014) all attest to the promise of this approach.   Although there 
are a growing number of sceptics (e.g., Alferink & Farmer-Dougan, 2010; Bishop, 
2013; Coltheart & McArthur, 2012; Della Sala & Anderson, 2012; Schrag, 2011a), it 
is widely claimed that the future is bright for forging links between neuroscience and 
education, and indeed, this collaborative approach is often described as a new 
discipline and given the name Educational Neuroscience.    
The most fundamental claim associated with educational neuroscience is that 
new insights about the brain can improve classroom teaching.  Neuroscientists 
contribute because their findings are used to develop new teaching practices.  Strong 
claims of this sort are common.  For example: 
We believe that understanding the brain mechanisms that underlie learning 
and teaching could transform educational strategies and enable us to design 
educational programmes that optimize learning for people of all ages and of 
all needs. (Blakemore & Frith, 2005, p. 459) 
Teachers should also play a central role by adopting these new teaching methods in 
their classrooms. Furthermore, it is claimed that teaching teachers about neuroscience 
will inspire better instruction (Carew & Magsamen, 2010; Coch & Ansari, 2009; 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
4   
Dehaene, 2009; Dubinsky, 2010; Eden & Moats, 2002; Gabrieli, 2009; Goswami, 
2006; Katzir & Pare-Blagoev, 2006; McCandliss, 2010; Meltzoff et al., 2009; 
Pickering & Howard-Jones, 2007; Sigman et al., 2014). As Dehaene  (2011) puts it, 
“…educators who can visualize how the child’s brain works will, spontaneously, 
conceive better ways of teaching” (p. 26). Recommendation 2 (of 4) from a Royal 
Society (2011) report on neuroscience and education is to provide teacher training in 
neuroscience, and an increasing number of researchers are calling for reform of 
teacher training to include neuroscience (e.g., Ansari, 2005; Ansari, Coch, & De 
Smedt, 2011; Dubinsky, Roehrig, & Varma, 2013; Sigman et al., 2014).  
In addition, there are claim that neuroscience can help to diagnose learning 
disorders early when instruction can be most effective, and claims that neuroscience 
can lead to medical treatments that facilitate learning in persons with learning 
disorders.  I will briefly consider these later hypotheses, but the focus of this article 
concerns the core claim of educational neuroscience; namely, that neuroscience can 
improve teaching in the classroom.  Here I side with the sceptics, and show that 
educational neuroscience has not yet contributed to any new and useful teaching 
practices, and detail why educational neuroscience is unlikely to improve classroom 
instruction in the future. 
The paper is organized as follows.  First I review the empirical success of 
educational neuroscience thus far.  I conclude that there are no examples of 
neuroscience motivating new teaching methods that are effective.  Indeed, few novel 
forms of instruction have even been proposed. Second, I argue that the theoretical 
motivations underpinning educational neuroscience are misguided.  The core problem 
is that the goal of understanding the brain is irrelevant to designing and assessing 
teaching strategies.  This raises serious questions of whether educational neuroscience 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
5   
will prove useful for classroom instruction in the future. Third, I give a case study of 
educational neuroscience in the domain of literacy instruction that highlights both the 
practical and principled problems with this approach.  Fourth, I briefly consider the 
claims that educational neuroscience can be used for diagnosis or to improve medical 
treatments for learning disorders, and finally, I conclude by noting that whereas 
neuroscience cannot help education in the classroom, the question of how education 
impacts the brain is fundamental to neuroscience.  
The Empirical Failures of Educational Neuroscience 
As a first step in evaluating the promise of educational neuroscience it is 
worth considering the achievements thus far.  Unfortunately, a careful reading of the 
literature reveals that the successes are either (1) trivial, in the sense that the 
recommendations are self-evident, (2) misleading, in the sense that the 
recommendations are already well established (based on behavioral studies), or (3) 
unwarranted, in the sense that the recommendations are based on misrepresentations 
of neuroscience or the conclusions do not follow from the neuroscience.  
Trivial Justifications for Educational Neuroscience 
When highlighting the successes and promise of educational neuroscience 
authors often use neuroscience to motivate claims that are obvious and long 
understood.   Perhaps the most common example is the claim that imaging studies 
reveal the potential of the brain to learn beyond early childhood years.  According to 
many advocates of educational neuroscience, it is important to pass on this insight to 
teachers (e.g., Blakemore & Frith, 2005; Dubinsky, 2010; Goswami, 2006, 2008; 
Oliver, 2011; Tallel, 2004).  For example:   
Until relatively recently, it was widely believed that the adult brain was 
incapable of change….But research is beginning to show that this view of the 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
6   
brain is too pessimistic: the adult brain is flexible, it can grow new cells and 
make new connections, at least in some regions, such as the hippocampus. 
Although laying down new information becomes less efficient with age, we 
believe it is important to make people aware that there is no age limit for 
learning. (Blakemore & Frith, 2005, p. 460) 
or: 
Studies of the brain also suggest that it is never too late to learn. Some neural 
structures are still developing in the mid-twenties (e.g. the frontal cortex), and 
experience-dependent plasticity means that fibre connections continue to form 
to represent new learning throughout adulthood…This principle of learning 
provides empirical support for the efficacy of lifelong access to education 
(‘lifelong learning’).  (p 394, Goswami, 2008) 
Two comments are worth making.  First, the claim that neuroscience has only 
recently demonstrated that the brain is plastic is a misreading of the literature.  Studies 
have provided evidence that new neurons in the dentate gyrus (part of the 
hippocampal formation) develop in adulthood (Erikkson et al., 1998), a phenomenon 
known as neurogenesis.  This did challenge the long-standing assumption that new 
neurons do not form in adult humans.  But the hypothesis that neurons change their 
connections in adulthood has long been established.  Indeed, unless one is a dualist, 
the brain necessarily changes whenever learning takes place.  Second, and more 
important for present purposes, teachers already know that learning continues 
throughout life.  There would be no point in school, universities, and adult education 
otherwise.   It is unclear what benefit or encouragement can be taken from the fact 
that the brain changes in response to learning throughout life.   Phrases like “brain-
based” learning (e.g., Jensen, 2008), “brain-compatible” learning (e.g., Tate, 2005), 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
7   
“brain-friendly” learning (Perez, 2008), “brain-targeted” learning (e.g., Hardiman, 
2003) should be seen for what they are -- tautologies.  When learning occurs in the 
classroom, then it was mediated by neural changes. 
Neuroscience is also used to motivate the conclusion that emotion is relevant 
to learning in schools.  For instance: 
It is increasingly recognized that efficient learning does not take place when 
the learner is experiencing fear or stress... The main emotional system within 
the brain is the limbic system, a set of structures incorporating the amygdala 
and hippocampus. The ‘emotional brain’ (LeDoux, 1996) has strong 
connections with frontal cortex (the major site for reasoning and problem 
solving). When a learner is stressed or fearful, connections with frontal cortex 
become impaired, with a negative impact on learning. (Goswami, 2004, p. 10) 
Similar points are made repeatedly (e.g., Gruart, 2014; Hardiman, 2003; Hart, 1983; 
Zull, 2002).  But again, this conclusion is trivial: Everyone knows that stressed or 
fearful students make poor learners. Many other examples of educational 
neuroscience supporting trivial conclusions have been made, including: adequate 
sleep and diet is important for learning (e.g., Sigman et al., 2014); that an enriched 
environment and exercise is good for learning whereas neglect, abuse, and 
malnutrition is bad (e.g., Carew & Magsamen, 2010), that learning is a social 
phenomenon, and as a consequence, learning with others is often more effective than 
learning alone (Goswami, 2008), motivation and study in quite environments 
improves learning (e.g., Knowland, & Thomas, 2014), etc.  Given that we already 
know all this, it is hard to argue that neuroscience has influenced teaching in any of 
these situations. 
 
 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
8   
Misleading Justifications for Educational Neuroscience  
When neuroscience is used to make less obvious claims regarding instruction 
it is almost always the case that the instruction was first motivated by behavioral data.  
So again, the neuroscience is not contributing anything new to education. 
For example, US children are often not introduced to a second language until 
secondary school given the widespread assumption that English might suffer from 
learning a second language too early.  However, careful assessment of language skills 
shows that early exposure to a second language does not compromize the first 
language, and that mastery of two languages is best when the two languages are learnt 
early (Petitto, Katerelos, Levy, Gauna, Tetreaut, & Ferrao, 2001).  Petitto and 
colleagues have gone on to show in fMRI studies that the blood-oxygen-level 
dependent (BOLD) signal in early bilinguals while they speak in either language 
looks more like the BOLD signal in monolingual speakers compared to bilinguals 
who learned one language early and one late.  Based on the brain imaging, Petitto 
makes strong claims about educational neuroscience: 
We have dedicated ourselves both to launching the discipline as well as to 
promoting educational neuroscience [italics in original], an exciting and timely 
new field that provides a most relevant level of analysis for addressing today’s 
core problems in education… Here, we will show how language research, be it 
in monolinguals or bilinguals, in educational neuroscience has the fullest 
potential to fundamentally advance contemporary educational policy and 
practice—and soon. (Petitto, 2009, p. 185). 
The problem with this is that the neuroscience is all but irrelevant to the argument that 
children should be taught a second language early – the critical behavioral data 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
9   
preceded the neuroscience, and whatever the fMRI results showed the conclusion 
would be the same.   
Another finding from psychology that is often cited in support of educational 
neuroscience is the so-called “testing effect”.  Typically teachers give tests in order to 
assess students’ learning, and the educational value of testing is largely ignored.  
However, the testing of information often improves learning more than additional   
study.  For instance, Roediger and Kaprike (2006) asked students to read fact-filled 
passages about various subjects, and then students were asked to take a seven-minute 
test on the passage, or re-read the passage for another seven minutes.   After a short 
retention interval students remembered most in the extra study condition, but after a 
two-day delay, memory was substantially better in the test condition.  Indeed, 
Roediger et al. (2011) showed that the testing effect works in the classroom, with 
robust advantage in a classroom of 11-12 year olds who learned in a quiz compared to 
non-quiz condition.  What is striking about the testing effect is that students (and 
teachers) do not appreciate the power of the effect.  When students were asked to 
predict how well they will remember something following testing vs. study 
conditions, they did not appreciate that their memory will be better in the test 
condition (also see Rohrer & Pashler, 2010).    
Although these findings are purely behavioral, the results are often presented 
in support of educational neuroscience.  For example, Carew and Magsamen (2010) 
summarized this work in a review article published in Neuron entitled “Neuroscience 
and Education: An Ideal Partnership for Producing Evidence-Based Solutions to 
Guide 21st Century Learning” and write:  
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
10   
Moreover, since memory retrieval and the consolidation of learning are basic 
components of education and are deeply explored topics in neuroscience, what 
a great place to start building bridges to span the two disciplines. (p. 686-687 ) 
But again, neuroscience has had nothing to contribute to the findings, and Carew and 
Magsamen make no proposal about how neuroscience could contribute to education 
above and beyond what psychology has already established. Roediger, Finn, & 
Weinstein (2012) also nicely highlight the relation between their work and that of 
educational neuroscience: 
Of course, neural processes underlie any cognitive processes, so in a broad 
(and vacuous) sense our chapter can be conceived as being about neuroscience 
and education.  However, we certainly do not make this claim.  We seek to 
generalize findings from behavioral studies to possible educational practice (p. 
128). 
Or consider suggestions regarding mathematics.  A number of imaging studies 
suggest that regions of the parietal cortex are specialized for numerical quantity (e.g., 
Cantlon, Brannon, Carter, Pelphrey, 2006; Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003) 
and that these regions are functionally impaired in dyscalculic subjects (Kucian et al., 
2006; Price, Holloway, Räsänen, Vesterinen, & Ansari, 2007).  Although imaging 
results are somewhat mixed (e.g., Rotzer et al., 2008), the findings are generally taken 
to support the long-standing hypothesis that a “number sense” plays a foundational 
role in more complex mathematics  (e.g., Gallistel & Gelman, 2000; Gelman & 
Gallistel, 1978).  In addition, the neuroscience is often taken to support the claim that 
remediation programs in mathematics should target the number sense.  For instance, 
Butterworth et al. (2011) argue that instruction in set enumeration (naming the 
number of items in a set) and comparison (comparing the number of items in different 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
11   
sets to decide which set has more) should be emphasized. This is in line with pervious 
suggestions by Gelman and Gallistel (1978) based on behavioral data, and there is no 
indication how the neuroscience provides any additional insight into how instruction 
should be designed.   Similarly, Dehaene (2007) uses neuroscience to argue that a 
number sense can be improved in children by encouraging finger counting, using 
concrete analogies to make fractions clearer (e.g., considering proportions of a pie 
when adding the fractions 1/2 and 1/3), using number lines to understand the concepts 
of zero and negative numbers, etc.  Indeed, Dehaene takes the neuroscience to support 
earlier educational practices that emphasized the importance of making the concept of 
numbers concrete, writing: “Number sense –indeed, common sense—is making a 
comeback” (p. 297).  So once again, it seems that neuroscience is not providing any 
novel ideas about how to best carry out instruction (see Schrag, 2011a for similar 
critique of the value of educational neuroscience to math).   
A somewhat different result was reached by Supekar et al. (2013) who carried 
out functional and structural MRI analyses on grade 3 children (aged 8-9) prior to an 
intensive eight-week one-on-one math tutoring programme that focused on conceptual 
aspects of number knowledge and speeded practice on counting strategies (conceptual 
and procedural skills, respectively).  The critical finding was that hippocampal 
volume and intrinsic connectivity of the hippocampus with dorsolateral and 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortices and the basal ganglia predicted training gains, 
whereas various behavioral measures did not.  That is, brain regions associated with 
learning and memory, rather than arithmetic processing, predicted learning outcomes 
best.  Based on these findings the authors conclude: “Characterization of predictive 
biomarkers in each child may facilitate the development of targeted training and 
intervention programs” (p. 8234).  But again this conclusion is unjustified.  The 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
12   
behavioral findings suggest that the intervention was successful (children improved 
overall), but the authors do not provide any suggestions about how the biomarkers in 
each child might be used.  Indeed, it is not clear that studies that highlight the 
importance of the parietal cortex (Dehaene et al., 2003) vs. the hippocampus and 
related structures (Supekar et al., 2013) have different implications for education. 
Finally, consider the case of literacy instruction. A great deal of research in 
psychology suggests that phonics instruction is better than many alternative 
approaches to teaching literacy (e.g., National Reading Panel, 2000).  Indeed, based 
on behavioral research, phonics is currently legally required instruction in all UK state 
schools and is a standard teaching method in the US and Canada.  More recently, 
neuroscience has been used to support phonics instruction based on the finding that 
dyslexic children often show abnormal brain activation or structure in regions 
associated with phonological processing (e.g., Heim & Grande, 2012; Meyers et al., 
2015; Peterson & Pennington, 2012; Saygin et al., 2013).  Below I consider in more 
detail whether the neuroscience licences any strong conclusions regarding phonics 
instruction, but for present purposes, the main point is that neuroimaging data is often 
used to support a form of instruction that already has widespread support based on 
behavioral data.   
I do not think I am being unfairly selective in my review of the evidence.  To 
illustrate the lack of any novel or useful contribution to classroom teaching it is worth 
considering a recent article published in Nature Neuroscience that summarizes the 
best achievements of educational neuroscience thus far (Sigman, et al., 2014).  The 
authors organized their review in four sections. First they note that a good diet, 
exercise, and sleep are important for learning, and cite evidence that all three factors 
impact the brain.  But you did not need neuroscience to tell you that these factors have 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
13   
an impact on learning, and the neuroscience is irrelevant to the proposed solutions 
(e.g., starting school later in the day during the teenage years).  Second, they note that 
medical interventions can facilitate language learning outside the classroom.  For 
instance, providing hearing disabled children with cochlear implants before 3 years of 
age has a positive impact on language learning.  This is indeed an important outcome, 
but is not an example of neuroscience improving teaching in the classroom. I consider 
medical treatments briefly below. Third, they argue that neuroscience is relevant to 
developing policies regarding bilingual education.  But as noted above, the relevant 
findings were first advanced based on behavioural work.  Finally, the authors 
highlight imaging data suggesting that dyslexia is associated with phonological 
impairments, and claim that EEG data that may be useful for early diagnosis of 
dyslexia.  But again, the psychological evidence for phonological deficits in dyslexia 
long predated the neuroscience, and there are strong reasons to question the value of 
neuroscience in the early diagnosis of dyslexia (see below). 
Unwarranted Uses of Neuroscience to Motivate Instruction 
In addition, neuroscience is often mischaracterized in order to support 
conclusions regarding education. For example, Tommerdahl (2010) argues that 
Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) models of word naming provide one of the best 
examples of teaching being informed by neuroscience.  Tommerdahl highlights the 
biological constraints on PDP models and notes that PDP models of word naming 
learn to map letters to sounds. She uses this to support phonics instruction.   
However, PDP models of reading are very far from biologically constrained.  
Indeed, advocates of PDP models often distance their models from neurobiology: 
…there are clearly many aspects of the standard PDP framework that do not 
emulate known aspects of neurophysiology: the lack of separate excitatory and 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
14   
inhibitory cell populations, the purely linear integration of inputs with no 
consideration of dendritic geometry, the use of a real-valued symmetric 
activation function, no consideration of metabolic constraints, and the 
propagation of error signals back through forward-going connections, to 
mention only a few. However, as has repeatedly been emphasized, PDP 
models are generally not intended to emulate all aspects of the underlying 
neural substrate: The models are intended to abstract away from many details 
(Plaut & McClelland, 2010, p. 287). 
Furthermore, the way PDP models of word naming learn is unrealistic in a 
number of ways.  First, the models are presented the correct pronunciation of each 
word every time.  This is very unlike the conditions in which children learn to read 
(e.g., Share, 1995).  Second, the models tend to be trained in an “interleaved” manner 
so that they learn all words slowly in parallel. Again this is very unlike learning in 
children.  Third, the PDP model Tommerdahl appears to be referring to in order to 
support phonics (Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989) only learned to translate letters to 
sounds for monosyllable words.  Accordingly, it is unjustified to use this model as 
evidence for phonics as opposed to alternative approaches that emphasize the role of 
semantic or morphological processes in instruction.  Whatever the merits of PDP 
models and their relevance to literacy instruction, the biological plausibility of these 
models should not be used to support phonics instruction. 
Similarly, Fisher, Goswami, and Geake (2010) cite recent Bayesian models of 
neural processing as providing evidence relevant to educational neuroscience.  They 
claim that Bayesian models learn better under noisy conditions, citing a paper by Ma, 
Beck, Lathan, and Pouget (2006).  According to Fisher et al.: “Insights like these may 
be critical to advancing a new field like educational neuroscience, where educators 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
15   
are continually faced with “noisy systems” (vis. Children!).” (p. 73).  Apart from the 
fact that the authors do not specify how this insight might help, it is not true that 
Bayesian models perform better under noisy conditions (they deal optimally with 
noise, but the more noise, the worse they perform).  Instead, Ma et al. showed that it 
is easier to implement certain Bayesian computations in neurons that have a certain 
form of noise (Poisson noise).  The link between Bayesian models of cortical 
computation and education is hard to see, and indeed, there are reasons to question the 
claim that brains compute in a Bayesian-like way (e.g., Bowers & Davis, 2012; Jones 
& Love, 2011)    
More often neuroscience is mischaracterized in more extreme ways to make 
unwarranted conclusions.  For example, claims regarding left and right brain 
functioning, brain learning styles, that we only use 10% of our brain, etc. are used to 
justify a wide variety of instructional programs (typically very expensive) that have 
little or no empirical support. A number of authors (e.g., Goswami, 2004; Howard-
Jones, 2014a) argue that educational neuroscience is useful in this context in that 
teacher training in neuroscience puts teachers in a stronger position to reject bogus 
methods justified with neuroscience.  That is, educational neuroscience can be a good 
antidote to so-called “neuromyths”.  But given the common misuse of neuroscience 
by advocates of educational neuroscience, this is not a promising solution. Rather 
than introducing neuroscience to teacher training it would be better to just avoid all 
forms of instruction that are motivated by neuroscience.  
Even when the neuroscience is well characterized there are logical problems 
relating the results to recommendation for classroom instruction.  So even here the 
conclusions regarding education are unwarranted.  I consider these problems next. 
 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
16   
Logical Problems with Educational Neuroscience 
When educational neuroscience is challenged, the most common criticism is 
that the gap between neuroscience and education is too wide to be of any use; Bruer 
(1997) introduced the phrase “a bridge too far”.  This analogy might be taken to 
suggest that we just don’t know enough in order to apply neuroscience to education, 
and that future advances might bridge this gap (although Brurer himself raises doubts 
about whether neuroscience will ever be relevant to classroom teaching).  I disagree 
that future advances will help.  The fundamental problem is not with the quality of the 
neuroscience but in the logical flaws motivating educational neuroscience.  As a 
consequence, neuroscience is poorly suited for designing new forms of instruction as 
well as assessing the efficacy of instruction, as detailed below. 
Educational Neuroscience Provides a Misguided Approach to Designing 
Instruction 
One of the primary reasons why educational neuroscience is thought to be so 
promising is that it can provide unique insights into the nature of learning disorders.  
This is considered to be critical because instruction can then target these deficits.  A 
colourful example of this reasoning can be found in the following analogy:  
My firm conviction is that every teacher should have some notion of how 
reading operates in the child’s brain.  Those of us who have spent many hours 
debugging computer programs or repairing broken washing machines (as I 
have done) know that the main difficulty in accomplishing these tasks consists 
in figuring out what the machine actually does to accomplish a task. To have 
any hope of success, one must try to picture the state in which it is stuck, in 
order to understand how it interprets the incoming signals and to identify 
which interventions will bring it back to the desired states.  
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
17   
Children’ brains can also be considered formidable machines whose function 
is to learn.  Each day spent at school modifies a mind-boggling number of 
synapses.  Neuronal preferences switch, strategies emerge, novel routines are 
laid down, and new networks begin to communicate with each other.  If 
teachers, like the repairman, can gain an understanding of all these internal 
transformations, I am convinced that they will be better equipped to discover 
new and more efficient education strategies…. (Dehaene, 2009, p. 232-233) 
As detailed below psychology is generally in a better position to identify and 
characterize the learning difficulties of a child.  But for the sake of argument, consider 
the case in which neuroscience does identify a cognitive deficit that was missed in 
behavioral studies. Does this constitute an example where neuroscience is poised to 
improve instruction?  No it does not. 
The problem is that is not clear that interventions should target an underlying 
disorder.  Instead, interventions might be best when they are designed to enhance 
alternative skills (compensatory approach) as opposed to ameliorating the deficits 
themselves (restitutive approach).  Indeed, in the context of acquired brain disorders 
(rather than developmental disorders), there is strong evidence that a compensatory 
(or sometimes called “strategy training”) approach is more effective than the 
restitutive approach (Cicerone et al., 2005).  So when neuroscience identifies a novel 
explanation for some cognitive deficit it is not clear what one should do with this new 
insight.  One conclusion would be to develop an intervention that targets this disorder; 
the other would be to focus on other skills or some combination of skills. This is not 
very helpful.  
 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
18   
Educational Neuroscience Provides a Misguided Approach to Assessing the 
Efficacy of Instruction 
But the most serious difficulty is that educational neuroscientists often lose 
sight of the only thing that matters from the point of view of the teacher and the child, 
namely, whether the child learns.  Many authors highlight the fact that the brain 
changes in response to teaching, and take this as relevant to the assessment of 
teaching instruction.  For example, Oliver (2011) writes: “Imaging studies can 
provide confirmatory evidence of behavioral changes” (p 216).  But this is misguided: 
Behavioral change cannot be confirmed (or disconfirmed) by neuroscience.  Behavior 
changes or not, and if it does, it is a given that the brain has changed in some way. 
Similarly, according to a recent government report in the UK, neuroscience can be a 
“tool for science-based education policy, which can help assess the performance and 
impact of different educational approaches” (Royal Society, 2011, p.9).  Again this is 
confused thinking.  The only relevant measure of performance is behavioral, and the 
only way to assess change in performance is to measure behavior.  Any observed 
brain changes may or may not have an impact on the relevant behavior.  
     
Indeed, sometimes it is claimed that neuroscience provides a more “direct” 
way of measuring the impact of learning than behavior itself.  For example, Goswami 
(2004) writes:  
Although it is frequently assumed that specific experiences have an effect on 
children, neuroimaging offers ways of investigating this assumption directly... 
For example, on the basis of the cerebellar theory of dyslexia, remedial 
programmes are available that are designed to improve motor function. It is 
claimed that these programmes will also improve reading. Whether this is in 
fact the case can be measured directly via neuroimaging (p. 9). 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
19   
But this is getting the things exactly backwards.  The direct test to see whether these 
teaching instructions improve reading is to measure reading.  All that matters is 
whether the child reads better.  Coltheart and McArthur (2012) make the same point 
regarding the faulty logic of looking at brain as opposed to behavior when assessing 
the efficacy of an educational intervention. 
 
A possible defence of educational neuroscience is that imaging can provide a 
more sensitive measure of learning, such that it can pick up changes before they are 
manifest in performance.  If so, it might be argued that imaging results could provide 
some guide as to what teaching practices should be pursued further, with the 
assumption that more training will manifest itself in behavior as well (e.g., James, 
2010).  There are two problems with this.  The first (practical) difficulty is that claims 
regarding the greater sensitivity of fMRI compared to behavioral measures may 
reflect false-positive results.  Indeed, many recent papers are highlighting how 
unreliable many imaging results can be (e.g., Button et al., 2013; David et al., 2013; 
Vul & Kanwisher, 2010). Accordingly, reports of significant BOLD changes in the 
absence of behavioral change should be treated with caution.  The second (in 
principle) difficulty is that if performance does not improve in a reasonable amount of 
training, the instruction does not work.  Rather than using (expensive) fMRI to look 
for a weak training effect that may or may not manifest itself in behavior following 
further training, researchers should explore whether more extensive (cheaper) 
behavioral training does indeed result in useful changes in behavior in a practical 
amount of time.  
Another possible defence of educational neuroscience is that it can help 
explain why a given behavioral intervention worked.  For example, imagine that a 
specific method of instruction was effective in teaching children algebra, and further, 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
20   
this instruction led to changes in the BOLD signal in language centres of the brain.  
This would provide some evidence that language was somehow involved in the 
improved performance (ignoring all the difficulties in linking changes in BOLD 
signals to the underlying skills that support performance; see below).  However, the 
results do not provide any insight into whether it was the best form of instruction.  In 
the current example, perhaps there is a much better way to teach algebra that would 
engage another (e.g., spatial) part of the brain. 
In sum, neuroscience is not well suited for proposing new forms of instruction, 
nor for assessing the efficacy of instruction. This may help explain why there are no 
examples of neuroscience improving instruction in the classroom.  
At the same time, it is important to emphasize that psychology does have an 
important role to play in improving teaching in the classroom, and indeed, as noted 
above, educational neuroscience often takes credit for findings reported in 
psychology.  More generally, a wide variety of findings from psychology provide 
specific and well motivated suggestions about how to improve educations across a 
variety of domains (e.g., Dunlosky, Rawson, Marsh, Nathan, & Willingham, 2013; 
Roediger, 2013; Roediger & Pyc, 2012).  The critical difference between psychology 
and neuroscience that explains this contrasting success is that psychology is 
concerned with behavior, and behavior is the only relevant metric when assessing the 
value of an instructional intervention.  Even areas of neuroscience that focus on both 
brain and behavior, such as cognitive neuroscience, are only relevant to education to 
the extent that they provide new insights into behavior.  Of course, theories regarding 
how the brain supports behavior are relevant to psychologists and neuroscientists, but 
for the teacher, all that matters are hypotheses regarding behavior that can be used to 
design better forms of instruction.   
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
21   
This is not to dismiss the relevance of all forms of theory, only theories that do 
not have implications for behavior.  Indeed, theory from a variety of domains has 
already led to teaching innovations.  For example, Gigerenzer and colleagues have 
developed a theory of “ecological rationality” according to which human reasoning is 
based on an adaptive toolbox of simple heuristics that work well in specific contexts.  
Based on this theory a range of heuristics have been hypothesized, and this in turn has 
led to proposals regarding how to improve reasoning across a range of tasks and 
conditions (e.g., Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999).  Outside psychology altogether, 
linguistics has provided a detailed theory of how the English orthographic system is 
designed: rather than the common view that letters are primary designed to represent 
sounds, English is a morphophonemic system in which spellings have evolved to 
represent an interrelation of morphology, etymology and phonology.  As Venezky 
(1999, p 4) wrote:  
“English orthography is not a failed phonetic transcription system, invented 
out of madness or perversity. Instead, it is a more complex system that 
preserves bits of history (i.e., etymology), facilitates understanding, and also 
translates into sound”.   
This has obvious implications for literacy instruction given that learning and 
memory is better when information is encoded in a meaningful and well-organized 
manner (e.g., Bower, Clark, Lesgold, & Winzenz, 1969).  Indeed, based on insights 
from linguistics and psychology, P. Bowers & Kirby (2010) have developed new 
methods and tools to teach literacy to young children.  It is hard to see how theories of 
brain function could lead to these sorts of teaching innovations, and again, behavioral 
testing is the only method to assess the efficacy of these proposals.   
Case study of Educational Neuroscience When Applied to Literacy Instruction 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
22   
Some of the strongest claims regarding the success and promise of educational 
neuroscience have been made with regards to literacy instruction (e.g., Gabrieli, 2009; 
Katzir & Pare-Blagov, 2006; Howard-Jones, 2014b).  For this reason it is worth going 
into more detail regarding the practical and principled problems in relating 
neuroscience to education. 
Practical Problems  
Most of neuroscience research taken to be relevant to literacy instruction was 
designed to characterize the deficits associated with dyslexia.  The hope is that a 
better understanding of the deficit will determine what skills need to be targeted in 
remedial instruction.  The practical problem with this agenda is that psychology does 
a better job in identifying the cognitive deficits of dyslexia.  Not only is it difficult to 
relate brain states to cognitive disorders, the results from neuroscience are often 
highly mixed. 
For example, many fMRI studies have reported abnormal BOLD signals in the 
dyslexic brain; most often the temporoparietal cortex involved in phonological 
processes, and the ventral occipito-temporal cortex (often referred to as the visual 
word form area, or VWFA) involved in representing the visual forms of words (e.g., 
Brunswick, McCrory, Price, Frith, & Frith, 1999; Kronbichler et al., 2006; Paulesu et 
al., 2001; Rumsey, Nace, & Donohue, 1997; Shaywitz et al., 2007).  Abnormal 
activation in either of these areas has been used to support the claim that phonological 
deficits are responsible for the dyslexia.  The most common conclusion is that 
instruction should target phonological processes, typically phonics (e.g., Dehaene, 
2009), but also in other ways (e.g., Temple et al., 2003). 
A first point to note is that inferring a phonological deficit in dyslexia on the 
basis of an abnormal BOLD signal in the temporoparietal cortex might seem 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
23   
reasonable given its involvement in phonological processing.  But why make the same 
conclusion on the basis of an abnormal BOLD signal in the VWFA?  The standard 
argument is that the abnormal BOLD signal in the VWFA is secondary to the primary 
dysfunction of the temporoparietal cortex (McCandliss & Noble, 2003; Pugh et al., 
2000).  This is plausible, but it also highlights a difficulty in relating the locus of an 
abnormal BOLD signal to claims regarding the locus of the deficit: Just as an 
abnormal BOLD signal in VWFA is attributed to a core deficit outside the VWFA, an 
abnormal BOLD signal in the temporoparietal cortex may be attributed to a core 
deficit outside the temporoparietal cortex.  In which case, this abnormal BOLD signal 
does not provide unequivocal evidence for a phonological basis of dyslexia.   
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of the dyslexic brain 
have found many areas of abnormal BOLD activation, including the under activation 
of inferior parietal, superioral temporal, middle and inferior temporal, fusiform, and 
inferior frontal gyrus of the left hemisphere.  There was also over activation in the 
primary motor cortex and anterior insula in the left hemisphere (Richlan, Kronbichler, 
& Wimmer, 2009).  The wide range of abnormal BOLD signals across studies may all 
reflect a disordered phonological processing system within the temporoparietal 
cortex, but it is difficult to make a strong case that phonology is the root cause of 
dyslexia based on these findings. 
Another set of findings taken to support a phonological basis of dyslexia is 
that the abnormal BOLD signals in phonological areas often become more normal 
following phonics and related phonological interventions (Barquero, Davis, & 
Cutting, 2014; Eden et al., 2004; Heim & Grande, 2012 for review see; Shaywitz et 
al., 2004; Simos et al., 2002). But again, BOLD signal changes are not restricted to 
reading areas.  For example, Shaywitz et al., (2004) reported that a dyslexic group 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
24   
who received phonics instruction showed increased BOLD activation in the VWFA 
compared to a dyslexic group who did not receive special instruction (a finding taken 
to be consistent with a phonological account of dyslexia).  However, the dyslexic 
group who received phonics instruction also showed an increased BOLD signal in the 
inferior frontal gyrus and a decrease in the BOLD signal in the caudate (a brain region 
that is not known to be involved in reading).  Furthermore, the dyslexic group who 
received phonics instruction only showed an increased BOLD activation in the 
caudate compared to a control (non dyslexic) group.  If anything, the results should be 
taken as a puzzle for a phonological theory of dyslexia. 
But even if future studies show that successful phonics instruction leads to a 
selective normalization in the BOLD signal in temporoparietal cortex, it is difficult to 
conclude that changes in temporoparietal cortex mediated the behavioral change.  
Consider a recent paper by Olulade, Napoliello and Eden (2013) that showed that 
developmental dyslexia was associated with a reduced BOLD signal in V5/MT 
(visual cortex) in response to a visual motion processing task.  Furthermore, the 
authors found that a phonologically based reading intervention lead to increased 
activation in V5/MT in response to a visual processing task, such that brain activation 
in this visual region became more normal.  Although this imaging result might appear 
to support the claim that visual deficits are associated with dyslexia, Oludade et al. 
argued that the return to normal in the V5/MT BOLD signal was an incidental by-
product of learning elsewhere (the phonological system).  This is plausible, but it 
again highlights the difficulty in associating BOLD signal changes with the locus of a 
cognitive disorder. Making causal claims regarding the locus of learning (as opposed 
to processing) is particularly difficult using fMRI because the BOLD signal is not 
linked to the biological processes that support learning (Dorjee & Bowers, 2012).  
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
25   
Somewhat more consistent findings have been reported with structural fMRI 
studies that provide evidence that various measures of reading related skills are 
correlated with increase white matter associated with the left arcuate fasciculus.  For 
instance, Saygin et al. (2013) found increased white matter was associated with 
increased phonological awareness skills of pre-reading and early-reading kindergarten 
children.  Similarly, Meyers et al. (2015) found evidence that increased white matter 
in kindergarten children predicted reading performance in Grade 3.  The arcuate 
fasciculus is thought to link the visual word form area with inferior parietal regions 
associated with phonological knowledge and therefore may support grapheme-to-
phoneme-conversion.  Given that increased myelination provides a measure of 
stronger connectivity between regions, these findings suggest that skilled reading is 
linked with the ability to convert graphemes to phonemes.  This in turn is often taken 
as evidence in support of phonics. 
Although the structural fMRI findings may provide stronger evidence in 
support of the claim that phonological processing deficits are related in dyslexia it 
should be noted that the arcuate fasciculus also projects to the angular gyrus that may 
play a role in the translation of orthography to semantics (Vigneau et al., 2006).  So in 
principle these results may also relate to the skill of linking visual word forms to 
meaning (which may suggest different conclusions regarding instruction).  It is also 
worth noting that these studies were carried out on children who are very likely being 
taught to read with phonics.  Whether the same association between reading and the 
arcuate fasciculus would be found following a different type of instruction that does 
not emphasize grapheme-phoneme correspondences to the same extent (e.g., reading 
instruction that also highlights the morphological structure of words) is not yet clear. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
26   
But in any case, the most important point is that we already know that 
phonological processes are implicated in dyslexia in alphabetic languages. 
Psychological tests show that most children with reading difficulties have difficulties 
with a range of phonological skills. For example, a recent meta-analysis of 235 
behavioral studies (Melby-Lervåg et al., 2012) showed that dyslexics have the 
greatest difficulties in phonemic awareness in relation to typically developing 
children of the same age (pooled effect size estimate: -1.37) as well as deficits in rime 
awareness and verbal short-term memory (pooled effect size estimates: -0.93, and 
verbal short-term memory, -0.71).  The neuroscience described above, at best, is 
providing confirmatory (and less direct) evidence in support of what we already 
know.  According, statements like this are unjustified: 
Whether neuroscience can be informative to educational theory and practice is 
not debatable - it has been. For example, behavioral data were not decisive in 
determining whether dyslexia was primarily a visual perceptual disorder, or 
whether phonology was the more fundamental problem (for a review, see 
(McCardle, Scarborough, & Catts, 2001). Brain imaging data (e.g., Rumsey et 
al., 1992) showed reduced activation in left temporo-parietal cortex, a region 
known from other studies to support phonology, thus strongly supporting the 
phonological theory.  (Willingham, 2009, p. 544) 
If educational neuroscience was only providing converging theoretical 
motivation for phonics instruction, then at least it would be supporting an 
instructional method that has been shown to improve reading.  However, neuroscience 
is often used to support interventions that have little or no empirical support.  For 
example, Bishop (2013) reviewed all studies between 2003-2011 that reported 
measures of brain function in children before and after an intervention for language 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
27   
learning difficulties and found serious methodological problems in them all.  Three of 
these studies assessed an intervention called Fast ForWord that is based on the 
hypothesis that a rapid auditory temporal processing deficit underlies dyslexia.  In 
order to treat dyslexia, Fast ForWord uses a set of computer programmes that trains 
children on processing sounds in an attempt to ameliorate this deficit.  Although all 
three imaging studies were taken to support this approach, a detailed meta-analysis of 
behavioral outcomes showed no benefit to this form of instruction (Strong, Torgerson, 
Torgerson, & Hulme, 2011).  Another of the neuroimaging studies claimed that a 
programme called “Earobics” designed to improve reading improves the cortical 
representation of speech.  But again, not only did Bishop find the study flawed, 
behavioral assessments have failed to support the conclusion that it improves literacy 
(Pokorni, Worthington,  & Jamison, 2004).  Similarly, an intervention designed to 
improve phonological and motor skills in children with developmental disorders of 
speech and language was flawed (although this was not specially about literacy).  
Nevertheless, the results from neuroscience are often taken as more informative than 
psychological studies, consistent with research that shows that people are often worse 
at distinguishing good from poor explanation of psychological phenomena when 
irrelevant neuroscience is added to the mix (Weisberg, Keil, et al., 2008).   
Principled Problems Applying Neuroscience to Literacy Instruction  
The first principled problem with making any conclusions regarding literacy 
instruction on the basis of these neuroimaging results is that it is unclear whether 
instruction should target processes that are inferred to be impaired. Instead, as noted 
above, it is equally plausible that instruction should target other skills.  Indeed, some 
of the neuroimaging results could be taken as evidence that compensatory (non-
phonological) processes play a key role in improvement.  For instance, Hoeft et al. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
28   
(2011) carried out a longitudinal study with children with and without dyslexia and 
found that greater right prefrontal BOLD activation at the beginning of the 
experiment predicted later reading gains in dyslexics. The authors concluded that this 
frontal activation may reflect compensatory processes engaged by individuals with 
phonological deficits (also see Shaywitz & Shaywitz, 2005).   
Does this evidence for compensatory processes in dyslexia constitute a 
potential contribution to instruction?  At best, it suggests that something above and 
beyond phonics is appropriate, but nothing more than that.  Based on the evidence 
that there are abnormal activations in phonological and non-phonological regions of 
the brain it is hard to make any suggestions regarding how to better design literacy 
instruction.  
The second principled problem of applying neuroscience to literacy instruction 
is that neuroscience is irrelevant for assessing the success of any intervention. For 
example, consider again the hypothesis literacy instruction should be designed to 
teach children the logic of their writing system, with English speakers being taught of 
the joint constraints of phonology, morphology, and etymology on word spellings 
(Bowers & Kirby, 2010).  This is an alternative to phonics instruction that selectively 
stresses letter-sound correspondences. In any future study that compares the relative 
efficacy of these two approaches, it is the behavior of the children not the 
normalization of their brain that is relevant to consider. Furthermore, any subsequent 
neuroscience data that provides some insight into how a new form of instruction 
works is irrelevant to assessing the efficacy of the instruction.  For example, if it turns 
out that teaching children the logic of the writing system is the more effective 
approach to literacy instruction, the finding that some brain area associated with 
morphological processing is also normalized does not constitute an example of a 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
29   
success of educational neuroscience: This finding will not have motivated the 
instruction in the first place, nor constitute the relevant measure of the success of the 
method. 
I have gone into great detail into the practical and principled problems of 
educational neuroscience in the domain of literacy instruction, but equivalent 
problems apply to all domains of instruction.  It is hard to see how neuroscience will 
ever improve teaching in the classroom. 
Other Forms of Educational Neuroscience 
Diagnosis  
Another common claim is that educational neuroscience can be used as a tool 
to predict developmental learning disorders before they manifest in behavior.  This 
will allow teachers to provide specialized instructions to children early when they 
have the greatest effect.  Note, this form of educational neuroscience is not subject to 
the criticisms above because the design and assessment of instruction could be based 
entirely on behavioral evidence.   
Perhaps the strongest claims regarding educational neuroscience and diagnosis 
has been made in the domain of reading disorders. For instance, Gabrieli (2009) 
writes:  
Perhaps the most practical, near-term synergy between education and 
cognitive neuroscience arises from an integration of behavioral and brain 
measures in the service of predicting reading difficulty and then offering 
intervention to avoid reading failure 
But again, there are reasons to be cautions about making any strong conclusions. 
First consider an fMRI by Hoeft et al. (2007).  The authors tested children 
between 8 and 12 years of age identified by teachers at the start of a school year as 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
30   
being at risk for reading difficulty.  Children received a standardized test of decoding, 
12 additional behavioral measures of language and reading, and underwent brain 
imaging. The behavioral and brain measures taken at the beginning of the school year 
were then related to the children’s decoding ability at the end of the same school year. 
The critical finding was that behavioral and imaging results accounted for 65% and 
57% of the variance in end-of-year decoding performance, respectively, but the 
combination of behavioral and brain measures accounted for significantly more of the 
variance (81%).   That is, the imaging added unique variance that could be used to 
predict performance.   
Is this a success?  The first point to note is that a significant increase in 
prediction is often of little practical utility when deciding whether a given child 
should be given remedial instruction (e.g., Bishop, 2000).  The issue is whether the 
neuroscience improves the sensitivity of prediction (the proportion of children with a 
learning disorder that are identified as having a disorder) and the specificity of 
prediction (the proportion children without a learning disorder that are identified as 
not having a disorder) in the relevant population to such an extent as to make the test 
clinically useful.  The authors have not demonstrated this. 
Second, the unique contribution of the imaging data in the Hoeft et al. (2007) 
study almost certainly rests on leaving out other relevant behavioral predictors.  For 
instance, the study did not consider low-level visual and attentional factors that also 
explain unique variation in reading performance after controlling for various reading 
related tasks (Franceschini et al., 2012). Indeed, Hoeft et al. (2007) did not include 
one of the strongest predictors of future dyslexia into their regression studies, namely, 
whether one (or both) of the parents are dyslexic.  If all these factors were entered in a 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
31   
regression then the unique contribution of imaging data would almost certainly be 
reduced.  
Similar claims have been made on the basis of structural MRI scans (Hoeft et 
al., 2007; Meyers et al., 2015; Saygin et al., 2013) where abnormal brain structures 
have been reported in children prior to the diagnosis of dyslexia.  But again, the value 
of the neuroscience as a diagnostic tool depends on whether the increase in sensitivity 
and specificity in the relevant population is clinically relevant. This has not been 
shown.  And again in all cases, all the relevant behavioral measures have not been 
included in the regressions, so there may be simpler methods to improve prediction.   
Even more dramatic claims have been made on the basis of event-related 
potentials (ERPs).  Here a number of authors that have suggested the ERPs collected 
soon after birth (Guttorm, Leppänen, Hämäläinen, Eklund, & Lyytinen, 2010; 
Guttorm, Leppanen, Poikkeus, Eklund, Lyytinen, & Lyytinen, 2005; Molfese, 2000), 
or prior to reading instruction (Maurer, et al, 2009), are anomalous in children who 
will go on to develop dyslexia, and accordingly, it is claimed that ERPs can be used to 
diagnosis very early.  
However, there are reasons to be cautious regarding these studies.  For 
example, Bishop (2007) reviewed a series of ERP studies that claimed to provide 
evidence that poor auditory temporal processing deficits play a role in dyslexia.  She 
noted a range of problems across the studies, including that they tended to be 
underpowered, and that the statistical analyses of the studies were unsystematic, with 
the possibility of false positives given the number of possible differences in a 
waveform that can be used to predict later reading performance.  These problems 
make it difficult to make any strong conclusions in these studies despite the fact that 
the results were based on averaging ERPs across groups of individuals.  It is much 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
32   
more challenging to make predictions on the basis of ERPs at the individual level, and 
there is no indication that EEG studies designed to make early predictions of dyslexia 
are immune to these methodological criticisms (e.g., Maurer, et al., 2009, noted that 
the limited sample size of their study limited their ability to make some key 
conclusions).  
The task of making diagnosis very early (predicting dyslexia soon after birth) 
is especially difficult given the lack of stability in language difficulties during early 
childhood (e.g., Nation, Plunkett, and Bishop, 2015).  But even if we assume that 
neurobiological markers will in the future become clinically accurate for diagnosis, 
another question that is rarely considered is whether this can inform instruction?  It is 
widely claimed that it is important to make diagnosis early, but at least in the case of 
literacy, the most effective forms of instruction require children to work with letters in 
order to convert them to sounds (Hatcher et al., 2006) or appreciate both the 
phonological and morphological structure of words (e.g., P. Bowers et al., 2010).  
These forms of intervention cannot be started before the child is starting to read.  
Furthermore, the forms of instruction that can be carried out earlier (training on 
sounds; e.g., Temple et al., 2003) have been found to be ineffective (Strong et al., 
2011).  So at least in the domain of literacy, it is unclear if there is any benefit to 
identifying the disorder very early.  
In sum, the problems with using educational neuroscience as a diagnostic tool 
are more practical than principled, but it is far from clear that this is a promising 
approach.  Indeed, if early diagnosis is going to be one of the main contributions of 
educational neuroscience it will be important to demonstrate that early instruction is 
important (or even possible) in ameliorating the learning difficulty.   
Medical Treatments 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
33   
Briefly, advocates of educational neuroscience sometimes note how 
neuroscience has introduced medical breakthroughs that have educational 
implications.  For instance, Goswami (2009) highlights that neuroscience contributed 
to the development of cochlear implants that are effective in improving language 
learning in hearing disabled children.   And in contrast with her criticism of 
educational neuroscience more generally, Bishop (2013) notes how so called “smart 
drugs” may be helpful to treat attention deficit disorders and notes that in the future a 
range of medications may be useful for range of developmental disorders.   
I agree.  This is a domain in which neuroscience can improve learning, but this is 
quite a different version of educational neuroscience.  Indeed, almost all of the work 
involves neuroscientists and medics.  The only role for educators here is to teach these 
children who are now better prepared to learn.  Schrag (2011b) provides an excellent 
summary of the promise of neuroscience to improve education through medical 
interventions.  He calls this link between neuroscience and education an 
“…alternative kind of marriage, one that needn’t be consummated in school 
classrooms and might not involve teachers”.    
Summary 
In sum, it is hard to see how neuroscience is relevant to teaching in the 
classroom.  At present the strong claims regarding the successes of educational 
neuroscience are either (1) trivial, in the sense that the recommendations are self-
evident, (2) misleading, in the sense that the recommendations are already well 
established (based on behavioral studies), or (3) unwarranted, in the sense that the 
recommendations are based on misrepresentations of neuroscience or the conclusions 
do not follow from neuroscience.  From my reading of the literature there are no 
examples of novel and useful suggestions for teaching based on neuroscience thus far. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
34   
More importantly, there are principled reasons to think that educational neuroscience 
will not help improve teaching methods in the future.  First, the common approach of 
using neuroscience to improve our understanding of a learning difficulty is 
problematic as it is not clear whether remedial instruction should target the deficits or 
target the preserved skills of children.  The only way to find out is to carry out 
behavioral studies in psychology.  Second, changes in brain states are irrelevant for 
evaluating the efficacy of an instruction.  What matters is not whether the brain 
changes, but whether the child learns as expressed in behavior. 
At the same time, it is important to emphasize that an important goal for 
neuroscience is to characterize how the brain changes in response to learning, and this 
includes learning in the classroom. So although neuroscientists cannot help teachers 
in the classroom, teachers can help neuroscientists by changing the brains of their 
students (by teaching). This suggests that critics of educational neuroscience might 
reconsider the analogy of a bridge too far.  Perhaps a more appropriate analogy is that 
there is a one-way street linking education to neuroscience.  Educational neuroscience 
is trying to travel in the wrong direction.  
 
 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
35   
 
References 
Alferink, L. A., & Farmer-Dougan, V. (2010). Brain-(not) Based Education: Dangers 
of Misunderstanding and Misapplication of Neuroscience Research. 
Exceptionality, 18(1), 42–52. doi:10.1080/09362830903462573 
Ansari, D. (2005). Time to use neuroscience findings in teacher training. Nature, 
437(7055), 26. 
Ansari, D., Coch, D., & De Smedt, B. (2011). Connecting Education and Cognitive 
Neuroscience: Where will the journey take us?. Educational Philosophy and 
Theory, 43(1), 37-42 
Barquero, L. A., Davis, N., & Cutting, L. E. (2014). Neuroimaging of Reading 
Intervention: A Systematic Review and Activation Likelihood Estimate Meta-
Analysis. Plos One, 9(1), e83668. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0083668 
Bower, G. H., Clark, M. C., Lesgold, A. M., & Winzenz, D. (1969). Hierarchical 
retrieval schemes in recall of categorized word lists. Journal of Verbal Learning 
and Verbal Behavior, 8, 323-343. 
Bishop, D. V. M. (2000). How does the brain learn language? Insights from the study 
of children with and without language impairment. Developmental Medicine & 
Child Neurology, 42(02), 133-142. 
Bishop, D. V. M. (2007). Using mismatch negativity to study central auditory 
processing in developmental language and literacy impairments: where are we, 
and where should we be going?. Psychological bulletin, 133(4), 651. 
Bishop, D. (2013). Research Review: Emanuel Miller Memorial Lecture 2012 – 
Neuroscientific studies of intervention for language impairment in children: 
interpretive and methodological problems. Journal of Child Psychology and 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
36   
Psychiatry, 54.3, 247-259 
Blakemore, S.-J., & Frith, U. (2005). The learning brain: Lessons for education. 
Blackwell Publishing. 
Bowers, J. S., & Davis, C. J. (2012). Bayesian just-so stories in psychology and 
neuroscience. Psychological Bulletin, 138(3), 389-414. 
Bowers, P. N., & Kirby, J. R. (2010). Effects of morphological instruction on 
vocabulary acquisition. Reading and Writing, 23(5), 515-537. 
Bruer, J. T. (1997). Education and the Brain: A Bridge Too Far. Educational 
Researcher, 26(8), 4–16. 
Brunswick, N., McCrory, E., Price, C. J., Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (1999). Explicit 
and implicit processing of words and pseudowords by adult developmental 
dyslexics. Brain, 122(10), 1901-1917. 
Butterworth, B., Varma, S., & Laurillard, D. (2011). Dyscalculia: from brain to 
education. science, 332(6033), 1049-1053. 
Button, K. S., Ioannidis, J. P. A., Mokrysz, C., Nosek, B. A., Flint, J., Robinson, E. S. 
J., & Munafo, M. R. (2013). Power failure: why small sample size undermines 
the reliability of neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(5), 365–376 
Cantlon, J.F., Brannon, E.M., Carter, E.J., Pelphrey, K.A., 2006. Functional imaging 
of numerical processing in adults and 4-y-old children. PLoS Biol. 4, e125 
Carew, T. J., & Magsamen, S. H. (2010). Neuroscience and Education: An Ideal 
Partnership for Producing Evidence-Based Solutions to Guide 21(st) Century 
Learning. Neuron, 67(5), 685–688. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.028 
Cicerone, K. D., Dahlberg, C., Malec, J. F., Langenbahn, D. M., Felicetti, T., Kneipp, 
S., et al. (2005). Evidence-Based Cognitive Rehabilitation: Updated Review of 
the Literature From 1998 Through 2002. Archives of Physical Medicine and 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
37   
Rehabilitation, 86(8), 1681–1692. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2005.03.024 
Coch, D., & Ansari, D. (2009). Thinking about mechanisms is crucial to connecting 
neuroscience and education Discussion. Cortex, 45(4), 546–547.  
Coltheart, M., & McArthur, G. (2012). Neuroscience, education and educational 
efficacy research (pp. 215-221). In S. Della Sala, & M. Anderson (eds.) 
Neuroscience in Education: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly.  Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.   
David, S. P., Ware, J. J., Chu, I. M., Loftus, P. D., Fusar-Poli, P., Radua, J., et al. 
(2013). Potential Reporting Bias in fMRI Studies of the Brain. Plos One, 8(7). 
Dehaene, S. (2007). Small heads for big calculations. The Jossey-Bass Reader on the 
Brain and Learning, 273-300. 
Dehaene, S. (2009). Reading in the brain: The new science of how we read. Penguin. 
Dehaene, S. (2011). The massive impact of literacy on the brain and its consequences 
for education. Human neuroplasticity and education. Pontifical Academy of 
Sciences, 19-32. 
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003). Three parietal circuits for 
number processing. Cognitive neuropsychology, 20(3-6), 487-506. 
Della Sala, S., & Anderson, M. (2012). Neuroscience in Education: The good, the 
bad, and the ugly.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Dorjee, D., & Bowers, J. S. (2012). What can fMRI tell us about the locus of 
learning? Cortex, 48(4), 509–514. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2011.06.016 
Dubinsky, J. M. (2010). Neuroscience Education for Prekindergarten-12 Teachers. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 30(24), 8057–8060.  
Dubinsky, J. M., Roehrig, G., & Varma, S. (2013). Infusing neuroscience into teacher 
professional development. Educational Researcher, 0013189X13499403. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
38   
Duff, F. J., Nation, K., Plunkett, K., & Bishop, D. V. (2015). Early prediction of 
language and literacy problems: is 18 months too early?. PeerJ, 3, e1098. 
Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K. A., Marsh, E. J., Nathan, M. J., & Willingham, D. T. 
(2013). Improving students’ learning with effective learning techniques 
promising directions from cognitive and educational psychology.Psychological 
Science in the Public Interest, 14(1), 4-58. 
Eden, G. F., Jones, K. M., Cappell, K., Gareau, L., Wood, F. B., Zeffiro, T. A., et al. 
(2004). Neural Changes following Remediation in Adult Developmental 
Dyslexia. Neuron, 44(3), 411–422. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2004.10.019 
Eden, G. F., & Moats, L. (2002). The role of neuroscience in the remediation of 
students with dyslexia. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1080–1084. doi:10.1038/nn946 
Eriksson, P. S., Perfilieva, E., Björk-Eriksson, T., Alborn, A. M., Nordborg, C., 
Peterson, D. A., & Gage, F. H. (1998). Neurogenesis in the adult human 
hippocampus. Nature Medicine, 4(11), 1313-1317. 
Fischer, K. W., Goswami, U., & Geake, J. (2010). The future of educational 
neuroscience. Mind, Brain, and Education, 4(2), 68-80. 
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2009). Dyslexia: A New Synergy Between Education and 
Cognitive Neuroscience. Science, 325(5938), 280–283. 
doi:10.1126/science.1171999 
Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal numerical cognition: From reals to 
integers. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(2), 59-65. 
Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C. (1978). Young children's understanding of numbers. 
Cambraidge MA:  Harvard University Press. 
Gigerenzer, G. & Todd, P.M. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford 
University Press, USA. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
39   
Goswami, U. (2004). Neuroscience and education. British Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 74(1), 1-14. 
Goswami, U. (2006). Neuroscience and education: from research to practice? Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 7(5), 406–411. 
Goswami, U. (2008). Principles of learning, implications for teaching: A cognitive 
neuroscience perspective. Journal of Philosophy of Education, 42(3‐4), 381-
399. 
Goswami, U. (2009). Mind, brain, and literacy: Biomarkers as usable knowledge for 
education. Mind, Brain, and Education, 3(3), 176-184. 
Gruart, A. (2014). The role of Neurosciences in Education… and vice versa. 
International Journal of Educational Psychology, 3(1), 21-48. 
Guttorm, T. K., Leppänen, P. H., Hämäläinen, J. A., Eklund, K. M., & Lyytinen, H. J. 
(2010). Newborn event-related potentials predict poorer pre-reading skills in 
children at risk for dyslexia. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 43(5), 391-401. 
Guttorm, T. K., Leppänen, P. H., Poikkeus, A. M., Eklund, K. M., Lyytinen, P., & 
Lyytinen, H. (2005). Brain event-related potentials (ERPs) measured at birth 
predict later language development in children with and without familial risk for 
dyslexia. Cortex, 41(3), 291-303. 
Hardiman, M. M. (2003). Connecting brain research with effective teaching: The 
brain-targeted teaching model. Scarecrow Press. 
Hatcher, P. J., Hulme, C., Miles, J. N. V., Carroll, J. M., Hatcher, J., Gibbs, S., et al. 
(2006b). Efficacy of small group reading intervention for beginning readers 
with reading-delay: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology 
& Psychiatry (47), 820–827. 
Heim, S., & Grande, M. (2012). Fingerprints of developmental dyslexia. Trends in 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
40   
Neuroscience and Education, 1(1), 10–14. doi:10.1016/j.tine.2012.09.001 
Hoeft, F., McCandliss, B. D., Black, J. M., Gantman, A., Zakerani, N., Hulme, C., ... 
& Gabrieli, J. D. (2011). Neural systems predicting long-term outcome in 
dyslexia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(1), 361-366. 
Hoeft, F., Meyler, A., Hernandez, A., Juel, C., Taylor-Hill, H., Martindale, J. L., ... & 
Deutsch, G. K. (2007). Functional and morphometric brain dissociation between 
dyslexia and reading ability. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 104, 4234-4239. 
Howard-Jones, P. A. (2014a). Neuroscience and education: myths and 
messages. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 15, 817–824. 
Howard-Jones, P. (2014b). Neuroscience and education: A review of educational 
interventions and approaches informed by neuroscience. Full report and 
executive summary for the education endowment foundation. 
James, K. H. (2010). Sensori‐motor experience leads to changes in visual processing 
in the developing brain. Developmental science, 13(2), 279-288. 
Jensen, E. (2008). Brain-based learning: The new paradigm of teaching. Corwin 
Press. 
Jones, M., & Love, B. C. (2011). Bayesian fundamentalism or enlightenment? On the 
explanatory status and theoretical contributions of Bayesian models of 
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34(04), 169-188. 
Katzir, T., & Pare-Blagoev, J. (2006). Applying Cognitive Neuroscience Research to 
Education: The Case of Literacy. Educational Psychologist, 41(1), 53–74. 
Knowland, V. C., & Thomas, M. S. (2014). Educating the adult brain: How the 
neuroscience of learning can inform educational policy. International Review of 
Education, 60(1), 99-122. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
41   
Kronbichler, M., Hutzler, F., Staffen, W., Mair, A., Ladurner, G., & Wimmer, H. 
(2006). Evidence for a dysfunction of left posterior reading areas in German 
dyslexic readers. Neuropsychologia, 44(10), 1822–1832.  
Kucian, K., Loenneker, T., Dietrich, T., Dosch, M., Martin, E., & Von Aster, M. 
(2006). Impaired neural networks for approximate calculation in dyscalculic 
children: a functional MRI study. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 2(31), 1-17. 
LeDoux, J. (1996). Emotional networks and motor control: a fearful view. Progress 
in Brain Research, 107, 437-446. 
Ma, W. J., Beck, J. M., & Pouget, A. (2008). Spiking networks for Bayesian 
inference and choice. Current opinion in neurobiology, 18(2), 217-222. 
Maurer, U., Bucher, K., Brem, S., Benz, R., Kranz, F., Schulz, E., ... & Brandeis, D. 
(2009). Neurophysiology in preschool improves behavioral prediction of 
reading ability throughout primary school. Biological Psychiatry, 66(4), 341-
348. 
 McCandliss, B. D. (2010). Educational neuroscience: The early years. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(18), 
8049–8050.  
McCandliss, B. D., & Noble, K. G. (2003). The development of reading impairment: 
A cognitive neuroscience model. Mental Retardation and Developmental 
Disabilities Research Reviews, 9(3), 196–204. doi:10.1002/mrdd.10080 
Melby-Lervåg, M., Lyster, S.-A. H., & Hulme, C. (2012). Phonological skills and 
their role in learning to read: A meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 
138(2), 322–352. doi:10.1037/a0026744 
Meltzoff, A. N., Kuhl, P. K., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2009). Foundations for 
a New Science of Learning. Science, 325(5938), 284–288.  
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
42   
Molfese, D. L. (2000). Predicting dyslexia at 8 years of age using neonatal brain 
responses. Brain and Language, 72, 238–245 
Myers, C. A., Vandermosten, M., Farris, E. A., Hancock, R., Gimenez, P., Black, J. 
M., ... & Hoeft, F. (2014). White matter morphometric changes uniquely predict 
children’s reading acquisition. Psychological Science, 25(10), 1870-1883. 
 National Reading Panel (2000). Teaching children to read: An evidence-based 
assessment of the scientific research literature on reading and its implications 
for reading instruction. Bethesda MD: National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development. 
Oliver, M. (2011). Towards an understanding of neuroscience for science educators. 
Studies in Science Education, 47(2), 211–235. 
doi:10.1080/03057267.2011.604478 
Olulade, O. A., Napoliello, E. M., & Eden, G. F. (2013). Abnormal Visual Motion 
Processing Is Not a Cause of Dyslexia. Neuron, 79(1), 180–190. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.002 
Paulesu, E., Demonet, J. F., Fazio, F., McCrory, E., Chanoine, V., Brunswick, N., et 
al. (2001). Dyslexia: Cultural diversity and biological unity. Science, 291(5511), 
2165–2172. 
Perez, K. (2008). More than 100 brain-friendly tools and strategies for literacy 
instruction. Corwin Press. 
Peterson, R. L., & Pennington, B. F. (2012). Developmental dyslexia. The 
Lancet, 379(9830), 1997-2007. 
Pickering, S. J., & Howard-Jones, P. (2007). Educators’ Views on the Role of 
Neuroscience in Education: Findings From a Study of UK and International 
Perspectives. Mind, Brain, and Education, 1(3), 109–113. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
43   
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., & Patterson, K. (1996). 
Understanding normal and impaired word reading: computational principles in 
quasi-regular domains. Psychological Review, 103(1), 56-115. 
Pokorni, J. L., Worthington, C. K., & Jamison, P. J. (2004). Phonological awareness 
intervention: comparison of Fast ForWord, Earobics, and LiPS. The Journal of 
Educational Research, 97(3), 147-158. 
Price, G. R., Holloway, I., Räsänen, P., Vesterinen, M., & Ansari, D. (2007). 
Impaired parietal magnitude processing in developmental dyscalculia. Current 
Biology, 17(24), R1042-R1043. 
Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Jenner, A. R., Katz, L., Frost, S. J., Lee, J. R., et al. 
(2000). Functional neuroimaging studies of reading and reading disability 
(developmental dyslexia). Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities 
Research Reviews, 6(3), 207–213. 
Richlan, F., Kronbichler, M., & Wimmer, H. (2009). Functional Abnormalities in the 
Dyslexic Brain: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis of Neuroimaging Studies. 
Human Brain Mapping, 30(10), 3299–3308. doi:10.1002/hbm.20752 
Roediger III, H. L., Agarwal, P. K., McDaniel, M. A., & McDermott, K. B. (2011). 
Test-enhanced learning in the classroom: long-term improvements from 
quizzing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(4), 382-395. 
Roediger, H. L., Finn, B., & Weinstein, Y. (2012). Applications of cognitive science 
to education. In S. Della Salla & M. Anderson (Eds.), Neuroscience in 
education: The good, the bad and the ugly, (pp. 128-151). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). Test-enhanced learning taking memory 
tests improves long-term retention. Psychological science, 17(3), 249-255. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
44   
Roediger III, H. L., & Pyc, M. A. (2012). Inexpensive techniques to improve 
education: Applying cognitive psychology to enhance educational practice. 
Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 1(4), 242-248. 
Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2010). Recent research on human learning challenges 
conventional instructional strategies. Educational Researcher, 39(5), 406-412. 
Rotzer, S., Kucian, K., Martin, E., Von Aster, M., Klaver, P., & Loenneker, T. 
(2008). Optimized voxel-based morphometry in children with developmental 
dyscalculia. Neuroimage, 39(1), 417-422. 
Royal Society (2011). Brain Waves Module 2: Neuroscience implications for 
education and lifelong learning. The Royal Society: London. 
Rumsey, J. M., Andreason, P., Zametkin, A.J., Aquino, T., King, A.C., Hamburger, 
S.D., et al. (1992). Failure to Activate the Left Temporoparietal Cortex in 
Dyslexia - an O-15 Positron Emission Tomographic Study. Archives of 
Neurology, 49(5), 527–534. 
Rumsey, J. M., Nace, K., Donohue, B., Wise, D., Maisog, J. M., & Andreason, P. 
(1997). A positron emission tomographic study of impaired word recognition 
and phonological processing in dyslexic men. Archives of Neurology, 54(5), 
562-573. 
Saygin, Z. M., Norton, E. S., Osher, D. E., Beach, S. D., Cyr, A. B., Ozernov-Palchik, 
O., ... & Gabrieli, J. D. (2013). Tracking the roots of reading ability: white 
matter volume and integrity correlate with phonological awareness in 
prereading and early-reading kindergarten children. The Journal of 
Neuroscience, 33(33), 13251-13258. 
Schrag, F. (2011a). Does neuroscience matter for education? Educational 
theory, 61(2), 221-237. 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
45   
Schrag, F. (2011b). Education and neuroscience: What kind of marriage? 
Cortex, 47(9), 1066-1067. 
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A distributed, developmental model 
of word recognition and naming. Psychological Review, 96(4), 523-568. 
Share, D. L. (1995). Phonological recoding and self-teaching: Sine qua non of 
reading acquisition. Cognition, 55(2), 151-218. 
Shaywitz, B. A., Shaywitz, S. E., Blachman, B. A., Pugh, K. R., Fulbright, R. K., 
Skudlarski, P., et al. (2004). Development of left occipitotemporal systems for 
skilled reading in children after a phonologically-based intervention. Biological 
Psychiatry, 55(9), 926–933. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2003.12.019 
Shaywitz, B. A., Skudlarski, P., Holahan, J. M., Marchione, K. E., Constable, R. T., 
Fulbright, R. K., et al. (2007). Age-related changes in reading systems of 
dyslexic children. Annals of Neurology, 61(4), 363–370. doi:10.1002/ana.21093 
Shaywitz, S. E., & Shaywitz, B. A. (2005). Dyslexia (specific reading disability). 
Biological Psychiatry, 57(11), 1301-1309. 
Sigman, M., Peña, M., Goldin, A. P., & Ribeiro, S. (2014). Neuroscience and 
education: prime time to build the bridge. Nature Neuroscience, 17(4), 497–
502. doi:10.1038/nn.3672 
Simos, P. G., Fletcher, J. M., Bergman, E., Breier, J. I., Foorman, B. R., Castillo, E. 
M., et al. (2002). Dyslexia-specific brain activation profile becomes normal 
following successful remedial training. Neurology, 58(8), 1203–1213.  
Strong, G. K., Torgerson, C. J., Torgerson, D., & Hulme, C. (2011). A systematic 
meta-analytic review of evidence for the effectiveness of the “Fast ForWord” 
language intervention program. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
52(3), 224–235. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02329.x 
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
46   
Supekar, K., Swigart, A. G., Tenison, C., Jolles, D. D., Rosenberg-Lee, M., Fuchs, L., 
& Menon, V. (2013). Neural predictors of individual differences in response to 
math tutoring in primary-grade school children. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 110(20), 8230-8235. 
Tallal, P. (2004). Improving language and literacy is a matter of time. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 5(9), 721-728. 
Tate, M. L. (2005). Reading and language arts worksheets don't grow dendrites: 20 
literacy strategies that engage the brain. Corwin Press. 
Temple, E., Deutsch, G. K., Poldrack, R. A., Miller, S. L., Tallal, P., Merzenich, M. 
M., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2003). Neural deficits in children with dyslexia 
ameliorated by behavioral remediation: evidence from functional MRI. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(5), 2860-2865.  
Tommerdahl, J. (2010). A model for bridging the gap between neuroscience and 
education. Oxford Review of Education, 36(1), 97-109. 
Venezky, R. (1999). The American Way of Spelling. New York: Guilford. 
Vigneau, M., Beaucousin, V., Herve, P. Y., Duffau, H., Crivello, F., Houde, O., ... & 
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2006). Meta-analyzing left hemisphere language areas: 
phonology, semantics, and sentence processing. Neuroimage, 30(4), 1414-1432. 
Vul, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2010). Begging the question: The non-independence error 
in fMRI data analysis. Foundational Issues in Human Brain Mapping, 71-91. 
Weisberg, D. S., Keil, F. C., Goodstein, J., Rawson, E., & Gray, J. R. (2008). The 
seductive allure of neuroscience explanations. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 20(3), 470-477. 
Willingham, D. T. (2009). Three problems in the marriage of neuroscience and 
education. Cortex, 45(4), 544-545.  
 EDUCATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE 
47   
Zull, J. E. (2002). The art of changing the brain: Enriching teaching by exploring the 
biology of learning. Stylus Publishing, LLC. 
 
  
   
