 842   
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
ABSTRACT
Advances in left ventricular assist device (LVAD) therapy 
have resulted in increasing numbers of adult LVAD 
recipients in the community. However, device failure, 
stroke, bleeding, LVAD thrombosis and systemic infection 
can be life-threatening emergencies. Currently, four LVAD 
systems are implanted in six UK transplant centres, each 
of which provides device-specific information to local 
emergency services. This has resulted in inconsistent 
availability and content of information with the risks of 
delayed or inappropriate decision-making. In order to 
improve patient safety, a consortium of UK healthcare 
professionals with expertise in LVADs developed 
universally applicable prehospital emergency algorithms. 
Guidance was framed as closely as possible on the 
standard ABCDE approach to the assessment of critically 
ill patients.
InTRoduCTIon
Clinical trials have established the efficacy of 
left ventricular assist device (LVAD) therapy for 
advanced heart failure.1–4 Ongoing technological 
improvements and a growing mismatch between 
the demand for donor hearts for transplanta-
tion and their supply have resulted in a progres-
sive increase in the number of patients receiving 
LVAD support in the UK.5 6 In January 2016, 207 
adult patients were receiving LVAD therapy in the 
UK, 184 (89%) as outpatients.i These numbers 
are predicted to increase more rapidly following 
endorsement of LVAD use as destination therapy 
(LVAD therapy without planned heart transplanta-
tion) by the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence.7 8 
Four types of LVAD system are implanted 
in the six UK adult heart transplant centres, 
in Birmingham, Glasgow, Harefield (London), 
Manchester, Newcastle and Papworth (Cambridge): 
Medtronic Inc. HVAD, St Jude Medical Inc. Heart-
mate II with original controller or with pocket 
controller and Heartmate 3. All contain a rotating 
i 
Audit data provided by CB, NW
, PL, SK, LM and JD 
(January 2016).
impeller that propels blood from the left ventricle 
to the aorta.9 LVAD recipients are normally ambula-
tory adult outpatients who, despite subnormal exer-
cise tolerance,10 travel extensively within the UK. 
However, LVAD failure is a life-threatening emer-
gency.11–15 This dependency arises for two reasons: 
(1) without support, the dysfunctional left ventricle 
may not be able to generate an adequate cardiac 
output to sustain life and (2) the device contains no 
valves, so when an LVAD fails, there is retrograde 
blood flow through the device during ventricular 
diastole limiting systemic perfusion.16 Moreover, 
LVAD outpatients are vulnerable to other compli-
cations,17 18 particularly stroke,19 bleeding,20 21 
systemic infection22 23 and LVAD thrombosis,.24 25 
The modus operandi and troubleshooting of LVADs 
is reviewed in the current issue of this journal.26 
Individual VAD centres have developed local poli-
cies to support discharge of their LVAD recipients 
Review
Algorithms to guide ambulance clinicians in the 
management of emergencies in patients with 
implanted rotary left ventricular assist devices
Christopher T Bowles,1 Rachel Hards,1 Neil Wrightson,2 Paul Lincoln,3 Shishir Kore,4 
Laura Marley,5 Jonathan R Dalzell,6 Binu Raj,1 Tracey A Baker,1 Diane Goodwin,3 
Petra Carroll,1 Jane Pateman,7 John J M Black,8 Paul Kattenhorn,9 Mark Faulkner,10 
Jayan Parameshwar,3 Charles Butcher,1 Mark Mason,1 Alexander Rosenberg,1 
Ian McGovern,1 Alexander Weymann,1 Carl Gwinnutt,11 Nicholas R Banner,1 
Stephan Schueler,2 Andre R Simon,1 David W Pitcher11
To cite: Bowles CT, 
Hards R, Wrightson N, 
et al. Emerg Med J 
2017;34:842–849.
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Christopher T Bowles, 
Department of Cardiothoracic 
Transplantation and Mechanical 
Circulatory Support, Royal 
Brompton and Harefield NHS 
Foundation Trust, Harefield 
Hospital, London UB9 6JH, UK;  
 
c. 
bowles@ 
rbht. 
nhs. 
uk
Received 5 July 2016
Revised 27 July 2017
Accepted 2 September 2017
 
► http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
emermed- 
2015- 
204912
Key messages
What is already known on this subject?
 
► There are increasing numbers of left ventricular 
assist device (LVAD) recipients in the 
community.
 
► These patients are vulnerable to device failure, 
stroke, bleeding, systemic infection and LVAD 
thrombosis, all of which can be life-threatening 
for the patient and a significant challenge for 
ambulance clinicians.
 
► Centres which implant LVADs provide device-
specific information to local emergency services 
when a patient leaves hospital, but this has 
resulted in inconsistent availability and content 
of information, risking delayed or inappropriate 
decision-making in an emergency.
What this study adds
 
► If distributed to and used by ambulance 
clinicians in the UK, the algorithms presented 
here can improve safety for adult LVAD 
recipients who experience an out-of-hospital 
emergency.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 843
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Figure 1 Guiding principles identified for the development of emergency algorithms. LVAD, left ventricular assist device; DC, direct current.
Review
into the community, including provision of information for 
ambulance clinicians and EDs.27 However, there is no universal 
LVAD-specific training standard for emergency medical services 
in either the USA or Europe and this has resulted in inconsistent 
availability and content of information, with attendant risks of 
delayed or inappropriate decision-making.28–30 The aim of this 
initiative was to develop emergency algorithms, applicable to all 
current LVAD systems, for national distribution to ambulance 
clinicians.
MeThodS
A consortium of UK healthcare professionals—VAD coordina-
tors, heart failure and VAD cardiologists, cardiac electrophys-
iologists, cardiothoracic surgeons with expertise in VADs and 
transplantation, cardiothoracic intensivists, trauma consultants, 
resuscitation practitioners, senior paramedics, medical direc-
tors of UK ambulance services and clinicians from the Resusci-
tation Council (UK)—contributed to the initiative. Discussion 
was guided by published LVAD emergency guidance,31 including 
web-based information, case reports and anecdotal UK experi-
ence. The guiding principles identified are shown in figure 1.
Preparing for a future emergency at hospital discharge
We have previously recommended that, at the time an LVAD patient 
is discharged from the hospital, local emergency services and emer-
gency departments (EDs) are notified and offered information and 
training to support any response to an LVAD emergency,27 including 
the VAD centre 24/7 emergency contact telephone number, the 
patient’s address, home telephone number and key medical informa-
tion. This is referred to as the Patient Specific Protocol (PSP) which 
should be updated to reflect significant changes in clinical status, for 
example, heart transplantation and consequent LVAD removal. In the 
event of an emergency call from the patient’s home, relevant infor-
mation can thereby be made available to ambulance clinicians prior 
to patient contact. Discussion revealed anecdotal evidence that PSPs 
have allowed advance contact with UK VAD centres with attendant 
benefits, that is, the provision of relevant recent medical history and 
telephone guidance to ambulance clinicians by the VAD coordinator 
during emergency treatment. Establishing advance contact with the 
VAD centre following notification of an emergency, provided it does 
not result in delayed treatment, is recommended (see Algorithm 1).
elements of the emergency algorithms
It was not feasible to present all the information required on a 
single page while maintaining legibility. Instead, three sequential 
LVAD-specific algorithms were developed, as follows:
1. Initial assessment of the LVAD patient (including airway and 
breathing stages)
2. LVAD troubleshooting
3. Ensuring adequate circulation to sustain life.
These algorithms are presented as figures 2–4, respectively. 
Also provided are illustrations to allow identification of the 
LVAD system and provide instructions on disconnection and 
reconnection of the external components; diagrams showing the 
external components of the Medtronic HVAD, St Jude Heartmate 
II (original version), Heartmate II (pocket controller version) 
and the Heartmate three are presented as online supplementary 
figures 1–4, respectively.
Initial assessment of the LVAd patient (Algorithm 1)
Information
The algorithm encourages obtaining early information whenever 
possible—from the PSP
, by contacting the VAD centre and from 
the patient, their family or other bystanders.
Important note: These algorithms are intended only for use 
with LVAD recipients who have experienced sudden clinical 
deterioration. For clinically compromised LVAD recipients, 
where the LVAD has been non-functional for more than a few 
minutes, restarting the LVAD carries a theoretical risk of release 
of thrombus from the LVAD and embolic stroke. However, 
this risk may be offset by bidirectional blood flow through 
the non-functional LVAD16 and systemic anticoagulation. In a 
patient who is critically ill or in circulatory arrest, the balance 
of risk and benefit favours restarting a non-functioning LVAD. If 
LVAD non-function is suspected in a patient who is not severely 
compromised, immediate advice should be sought from the VAD 
centre.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 844
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Figure 2 Initial assessment of the left ventricular assist device (LVAD) patient (Algorithm 1).
Review
Initial assessment
Airway and breathing
This starts with a rapid assessment of the patient’s responsiveness 
and breathing. In an unresponsive patient who is not breathing 
normally despite an open airway, that is, not breathing or giving 
only infrequent ‘agonal’ gasps (the features usually used to iden-
tify cardiac arrest32), ambulance clinicians should consider that 
a likely cause is that the LVAD has stopped and should proceed 
to the assessment of circulation. In the patient who is breathing 
normally, administration of oxygen and assessment to identify 
other respiratory conditions should follow standard Advanced 
Life Support guidelines.33
Circulation
This part of the assessment starts by determining if the LVAD 
is running. Unresponsiveness and absence of normal breathing 
usually implies circulatory arrest. In an LVAD recipient, sudden 
failure of the LVAD is the cause most likely to be corrected by 
prompt, appropriate intervention.
Sudden LVAD failure does not always cause circulatory arrest, 
so in an LVAD patient who is very ill but breathing, it is still 
important to check at this stage whether the LVAD is running. 
Clinicians should minimise delay by avoiding futile repeated 
attempts to palpate a pulse and record the arterial BP and oxygen 
saturation as these may be difficult or impossible to detect in 
compromised LVAD recipients (see Further assessment of circu-
lation section for more details).
A loud alarm coming from the controller is likely to indicate 
a stopped LVAD, unless the display shows another explanation. 
If no alarm is sounding, LVAD failure is still a possibility (due to 
alarm battery depletion or alarm failure), so a stethoscope should 
be placed over the apex of the heart to listen for a humming 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 845
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Figure 3 Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) troubleshooting (Algorithm 2).
Review
sound. Absence of a humming sound indicates that the LVAD is 
not working. If a loud alarm is sounding, (with no other cause 
shown) or the pump is inaudible via stethoscope, the clinician is 
directed to Algorithm 2 (LVAD troubleshooting). If the LVAD is 
running normally (no alarm and audible hum via stethoscope), 
they are directed to Algorithm 3 (ensuring adequate circulation 
to sustain life).
LVAd troubleshooting (Algorithm 2)
If the LVAD has stopped, the most effective resuscitation 
manoeuvre is to restart it without delay. Operation of the LVAD 
is dependent on:
1. secure connection of an external controller to the 
percutaneous cable (driveline) of the implanted blood 
pump, AND
2. the supply of power to the external controller, either via a 
rechargeable battery or mains power (figure 3).
The percutaneous driveline usually exits the skin over the 
abdomen to the right of the umbilicus (see figure 3). All adult 
LVADs in use in the UK have two power connections to the 
controller, both of which are usually connected, although 
only a single working power source is needed for the LVAD to 
operate. This allows replacement of one power source, without 
interrupting LVAD operation. The controller and batteries may 
be carried in a bag, contained within pockets of the patient’s 
clothing or belt-mounted.
If the LVAD is not running, first, check the external compo-
nents of the LVAD. The clinician should open the LVAD bag 
containing the controller and batteries to expose the contents, 
and check that all connections to the controller are fully engaged 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 846
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Figure 4 Ensuring adequate circulation to sustain life (Algorithm 3). CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; VF, 
ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Review
and secure. Next, they should check the battery charge by pressing 
a button on the battery that illuminates a display similar to a fuel 
gauge. If the battery charge level is low, the power source must 
be changed. Depleted batteries should be replaced with charged 
ones or with a mains power supply. If a mains power supply is in 
use and potentially defective, the device should be switched to a 
charged battery.
If these measures fail to restart the LVAD, it is presumed 
that the controller is defective. The spare controller (carried by 
the patient at all times) should be connected to a charged battery 
(or mains power). Then, the driveline should be disconnected 
from the presumed-defective controller and connected to the 
replacement controller whereupon the LVAD should restart.
If these actions do not restart the LVAD, the possibility of cable 
fracture within the driveline causing loss of electrical continuity 
should be considered. If suspected, gentle manipulation of the 
driveline may restore LVAD operation, in which case, the drive-
line should be stabilised (using tape).
If the LVAD cannot be restarted, or in the unlikely event 
that an LVAD patient is found in an unconscious state with a 
non-functioning LVAD and no spare equipment, the clinician 
should proceed to Algorithm 3 and the VAD centre should be 
contacted using a telephone number located on:
a. an identification card or bracelet
b. an Immediate Action Notice—in an envelope in the bag with 
the controller in use
c. on the LVAD controller itself or
d. in an emergency bag carried separately by the patient.
Active LVAD audible alarms are often accompanied by 
warning messages displayed on the controller screen. Such 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 847
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Review
messages either indicate an LVAD fault which may cause rapid 
clinical deterioration or may be indicative of a clinical problem 
causing LVAD parameters to fall outside the normal operating 
range. Alarm messages thus facilitate diagnosis of LVAD-related 
or medical issues and should be reported to the VAD centre 
coordinator who can provide appropriate advice. The exception 
to this is the Heartmate II operating with the original controller, 
which does not display a message.
ensuring adequate circulation to sustain life (Algorithm 3)
Overview
Whether the LVAD was found to be running, or an attempt has 
been made to restart a non-functioning LVAD, the third algorithm 
should always be followed irrespective of clinical status and aims 
to ensure an adequate circulation. This includes checking the 
underlying cardiac rhythm, looking for signs of adequate perfu-
sion and treating if necessary. Subsequently, the patient should be 
assessed for disabilities (eg, stroke, glucose, drugs) and examined 
for evidence of bleeding and infection. Finally, transfer arrange-
ments are made in consultation with the VAD centre.
Cardiac rhythm management
Many LVAD recipients also have a cardiac resynchronisation 
therapy (CRT) pacemaker and, in some, their device incorpo-
rates an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD). Some have an 
ICD without CRT. An ICD would be expected to deliver a shock 
in the event of ventricular fibrillation (VF) or rapid ventricular 
tachycardia (VT). If a patient is unresponsive, and has VF or 
VT (with ICD not present or ineffective), immediate defibril-
lation (VF) or cardioversion (VT) is indicated. Some LVAD 
recipients without ICDs may be temporarily tolerant of what 
would normally be considered to be life-threatening ventricular 
arrhythmia (VF or VT) because LVAD operation is ECG indepen-
dent and passive blood flow through the right heart and pulmo-
nary circulation may sustain enough venous return to the LVAD 
to maintain systemic blood flow and consciousness.34 A respon-
sive patient with VT or VF should be transported to the hospital 
for urgent treatment. If the patient becomes unresponsive during 
an episode of VT or VT prior to arrival at hospital, they should 
receive immediate defibrillation or cardioversion.
Further assessment of circulation
In addition to cardiac rhythm assessment and treatment (if indi-
cated), ambulance clinicians should look for clinical signs of an 
adequate circulation (eg, capillary refill time less than 2 
s, absence 
of pallor/cyanosis). Emergency treatment must not be delayed 
while repeated attempts are made to measure arterial BP or 
pulse oximetry in LVAD patients; contemporary pumps produce 
continuous (non-pulsatile) blood flow, resulting in an attenuated 
arterial pulse pressure which typically renders ineffective usual 
sphygmomanometry35 and pulse oximetry.30 31 If arterial BP can 
be recorded, hypotension is a normal finding in LVAD recipients; 
a mean arterial BP between 60 and 90 
mm Hg would be consid-
ered acceptable.36 37 Of the LVAD systems currently in use in the 
UK, all except the St Jude Medical Inc. HeartMate II—Original 
Controller (see online supplementary figure 2) can display LVAD 
blood flow rate. Normally, the Medtronic HVAD (online supple-
mentary figure 1) displays the flow rate continuously on the 
controller screen unless an alarm message is displayed, in which 
case the flow can be displayed by pressing the button adjacent to 
the display marked with an arrow. The St Jude Medical Inc. Heart-
Mate II—Pocket Controller (Online supplementary file 3) and 
HeartMate 3 (online supplementary figure 4) display LVAD flow 
rate if the controller button with a square symbol is depressed 
twice. In adults, flow is normally in the range of 3.5–6.5 
L/min, 
and flow persistently less than 3.0 
L/min should be regarded 
as critically low. In an LVAD patient who is unresponsive, not 
breathing normally and has evidence of inadequate circulation 
(despite a running LVAD or all attempts to restart it), cardiopul-
monary resuscitation (CPR) should be considered.
CPR in LVAD recipients
There is controversy as to whether chest compressions (CCs) 
should be applied to LVAD recipients. The controversy centres 
on safety, efficacy and when to start CCs. Resolution of these 
issues has been hampered by absence of high-quality evidence 
and insufficient detail to draw conclusions from published case 
reports. Foremost concerns arise because of perceived risks of 
LVAD cannula dislodgment or anastomotic rupture. Although 
LVAD manufacturers warn of these dangers, risks may have 
been overestimated.38 A recent questionnaire of 148 members 
of the International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation 
(71% from the USA) revealed that 28% would instruct emer-
gency medical services to deliver CCs.28 Forty-one per cent of 
respondents reported that LVAD recipients had received CCs in 
their institution with only one (1.7%) reporting that this had 
resulted in cannula dislodgement contributing to death. Eleven 
per cent of respondents said that they would sanction CCs 
after a predefined period following LVAD implantation (range 
10–30 
days), that is, following initial postoperative healing, 
when the perceived risk of dislodgement/rupture is reduced. 
Thirty-two per cent of respondents said they would sanction 
CCs in outpatients. There is limited published evidence of a low 
risk of cannula/anastomosis rupture from CCs after 50 
days of 
LVAD support.29 38
Evidence of CC efficacy in the presence of an LVAD is tenuous. 
Unsurprisingly, long periods of CC were associated with poor 
outcome. Short periods of CCs appeared to be associated with 
favourable outcomes, in keeping with a low risk of harm to an 
LVAD patient receiving CPR briefly, provided definitive treat-
ment of the cause of circulatory arrest is not delayed.38
It is unclear whether CCs confer benefit if they are imple-
mented prior to trying to restart an LVAD. It is reasonable to 
conclude that the balance of risks favours delivery of high-quality 
CCs by ambulance clinicians to LVAD recipients with out-of-hos-
pital circulatory arrest either if attempts to restart an LVAD have 
failed or as a temporising measure until definitive intervention 
is possible, for example, while searching for missing emergency 
LVAD equipment to restart a LVAD which is not running.
Patients receiving CPR should have ECG monitoring in stan-
dard fashion; those with recurrent VF or VT should receive 
immediate defibrillation. Epinephrine may be given during CPR 
according to standard ALS guidelines.
Assessing for hypovolaemia
Hypovolaemia can reduce LVAD flow to critical levels. If this 
is the case, CPR should be commenced prior to the assessment 
of hypovolaemia. Otherwise, hypovolaemia can be assessed and 
treated without CPR. Hypovolaemia may be recognised by the 
display showing low LVAD flow (<3 
L/min), with or without an 
audible alarm. Risk factors for hypovolaemia include a history 
of bleeding (notably gastrointestinal). When hypovolaemia is 
suspected, intravenous fluid should be given. Sustained passive 
elevation of the legs may provide a transient increase in venous 
return and help to maintain perfusion until the fluid has been 
administered.39 40 If passive leg raising is followed by a transient 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 848
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 849
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Review
increase in flow rate through the LVAD (sometimes for less than 
a minute), this supports the likely need for intravenous fluid. 
Positive responses to fluid administration include an increase in 
the displayed LVAD flow rate and clinical evidence of improved 
circulation. However, administration of excessive fluid can 
potentiate right heart failure; further advice can be provided by 
the VAD centre.
Pump thrombosis
LVAD thrombosis is a serious complication which may be 
accompanied by signs of an inadequate circulation and is usually 
characterised in one of two ways: (1) Persistently low LVAD 
flow despite euvolaemia; this can be due to partial occlusion of 
the LVAD blood path by thrombus. (2) Thrombus formation at 
the impeller/pump-housing interface causes increased friction 
on the impeller, resulting in excessive LVAD power consump-
tion that may be intermittent or continuous and may activate a 
high-LVAD power alarm. Impinging thrombus causing excessive 
power consumption can lead to overestimation of pump flow.
If signs of an inadequate circulation persist despite appro-
priate treatment, pump thrombosis should be suspected and the 
situation discussed with the VAD centre.
Disability and exposure
If the circulation has been stabilised or was stable from the 
outset, potential causes of clinical compromise (eg, haemorrhagic 
or embolic stroke, bleeding, sepsis or drug therapy) should be 
considered using the ‘Disability’ and ‘Exposure’ components of 
the ABCDE approach.
Planning transfer to hospital
Whether a patient should be transported to the local ED or to 
the VAD centre should be determined by dialogue with the VAD 
centre. This decision will depend on the patient’s clinical condi-
tion and logistic considerations. Appropriately trained caregivers 
should be encouraged to accompany the patient during ambu-
lance transfer to hospital. It is of paramount importance that 
all emergency LVAD equipment (including the spare controller, 
rechargeable batteries, mains power adapter and battery charger) 
is transferred to hospital with the patient, as sustained LVAD 
function is dependent on the availability of these components. It 
is important to monitor the patient continuously during transfer 
as clinical deterioration can be sudden.
dISCuSSIon
The increasing prevalence of LVAD use,5 6 the high propor-
tion of all LVAD recipients in the community and their vulner-
ability to life-threatening complications11–15 21–25 underscore 
the importance of making appropriate resuscitation guidance 
widely available to ambulance clinicians. Although there have 
been improvements in the training of emergency medical service 
providers, the information provided and training methods 
remained inconsistent.28
The provision of effective training of healthcare providers 
in prehospital management of LVAD-related emergencies is 
a substantial challenge. The use of multiple LVAD designs has 
rendered comprehensive, device-specific training of ambulance 
clinicians impractical. To address these limitations, the strategy 
adopted here was to develop emergency algorithms generalisable 
to different LVAD designs and to avoid potentially counterpro-
ductive complexity. Emphasis has been placed on establishing 
communication with the implanting VAD centre and provision 
of readily accessible resources for use in an emergency. This 
initiative has the support of the UK Joint Royal Colleges Ambu-
lance Liaison Committee. Further work is needed to implement 
the proposals fully and assess their impact.
Advance statements, living wills, advance decisions to refuse 
treatment and do-not-attempt-CPR decisions
There is evidence of sporadic initiation of advance statements 
(living wills) or Advance Decisions to Refuse Treatment (England 
and Wales), (ADRTs), in UK LVAD outpatients. More frequently, 
do-not-attempt-CPR decisions have been recorded by health-
care professionals for LVAD inpatients typically with participa-
tion of the patient in the decision-making process if they have 
the capacity or otherwise their family or authorised representa-
tive.41 The increasing international use of LVADs for destination 
therapy in more elderly patients has focused debate on end-of-
life care planning, with more patients preferring to die in their 
home rather than in hospital.42 The consortium recommends 
that the existence and location of advance statements, ADRTs 
and recommendations about CPR and/or other life-sustaining 
treatments should be recorded in the PSP
. Unless there is a valid 
and applicable advance statement, ADRT or other recommenda-
tions warranting a different response in a community setting, the 
measures recommended in these algorithms may be assumed to 
be appropriate for any critically ill LVAD recipient.
Limitations
The information provided is neither comprehensive nor directly 
applicable to partial-support LVADs (where the left ventricle 
continues to contribute to systemic blood flow), biventricular 
assist devices, total artificial hearts (where the heart is replaced 
with two prosthetic ventricles), to certain LVAD designs used in 
younger children or to alternative forms of mechanical circula-
tory support. However, in the UK, such treatments are currently 
very rare, and so are unlikely to be encountered by ambulance 
clinicians.
ConCLuSIon
It is anticipated that the distribution of these emergency algo-
rithms to ambulance clinicians will increase the probability that 
out-of-hospital emergencies in LVAD recipients will be managed 
appropriately. The efficacy of this initiative should be deter-
mined by means of a national audit.
Author affiliations
1Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation and Mechanical Circulatory Support, 
Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
2Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK
3Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation, Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge, UK
4Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation, Wythenshawe Hospital, University 
Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK
5Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation, Queen Elizabeth Hospital 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
6Scottish Advanced Heart Failure Service, Golden Jubilee National Hospital, Glasgow, 
UK
7Anaesthetic Department, Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton, UK
8Clinical Directorate, South Central Ambulance Service Foundation Trust, Oxfordshire, 
UK
9East of England Ambulance Service Headquarters, Whiting Way, Melbourn, Cambs., 
SG8 6EN., East of England Ambulance Service Headquarters, Melbourn, Cambs, UK
10London Ambulance Service, Medical Directorate Office, London, UK
11Resuscitation Council, London, UK
Acknowledgements The consortium is indebted to Mr Garry Johnson, Medtronic 
for agreeing to provide financial support for this initiative, to Mr Martin Smith of 
Origin8Design and Anne Wadmore for illustration services and to Rhiannon Taylor, 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
 850
Bowles CT, et al. Emerg Med J 2017;34:842–849. doi:10.1136/emermed-2016-206172
Review
Senior Statistician, National Heart Service Blood and Transplant, UK for LVAD 
population statistics. 
Contributors CTB chaired the consortium and is guarantor of the manuscript’s 
content. RH, NW, PL, SK, LM and JD and MF provided audit data. CTB, BR, JB, CB, 
MM, AR, IMG, CG, NRB, SS, AS and DP contributed to algorithm development. TB, 
DG, PC, JP, PK made contributions during the meetings. All authors contributed to the 
development of the manuscript and approved the final version.
Competing interests RH and AS have had remunerated consultancy agreements 
with Medtronic which provided funding for this initiative.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, et al. Advanced heart failure treated with 
continuous-flow left ventricular assist device. N Engl J Med 2009;361:2241–51.
 2 Aaronson KD, Slaughter MS, Miller LW, et al. Use of an intrapericardial, continuous-
flow, centrifugal pump in patients awaiting heart transplantation. Circulation 
2012;125:3191–200.
 3 Miller LW, Pagani FD, Russell SD, et al. Use of a continuous-flow device in patients 
awaiting heart transplantation. N Engl J Med 2007;357:885–96.
 4 Birks EJ, Tansley PD, Hardy J, et al. Left ventricular assist device and drug therapy for 
the reversal of heart failure. N Engl J Med 2006;355:1873–84.
 5 Emin A, Rogers CA, Parameshwar J, et al. Trends in long-term mechanical circulatory 
support for advanced heart failure in the UK. Eur J Heart Fail 2013;15:1185–93.
 6 National Health Service. 2015. Annual report on ventricular assist devices. 
UK:  National Health Service Blood and Transplant.
 7 Slaughter MS, Meyer AL, Birks EJ. Destination therapy with left ventricular assist 
devices: patient selection and outcomes. Curr Opin Cardiol 2011;26:232–6.
 8 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Implantation of a left ventricular assist device 
for destination therapy in people ineligible for heart transplantation. UK: National 
Institute for Clinical Excellence, 2015. Report No: IPG 516.
 9 Harris P, Kuppurao L. Ventricular assist devices. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, 
Critical Care & Pain 2012;12:145–51.
 
10 Jakovljevic DG, McDiarmid A, Hallsworth K, et al. Effect of left ventricular assist device 
implantation and heart transplantation on habitual physical activity and quality of life. 
Am J Cardiol 2014;114:88–93.
 
11 Bischof D, Graves K, Genoni M, et al. Fatal disconnection of a ventricular assist device 
in an out-of-hospital setting. Emerg Med J 2012;29:247–8.
 
12 Cubillo EI, Weis RA, Ramakrishna H. Emergent reconnection of a transected left 
ventricular assist device driveline. J Emerg Med 2014;47:546–51.
 
13 Schima H, Stoiber M, Schlöglhofer T, et al. Repair of left ventricular assist device 
driveline damage directly at the transcutaneous exit site. Artif Organs 2014;38:422–5.
 
14 Man survives after LVAD battery almost fails. J Emerg Med Serv 2010 http://www. 
jems. 
com/ 
articles/ 
2010/ 
08/ 
man- 
survives- 
after- 
lvad- 
batter- 
0. 
html (accessed Nov 
2016).
 
15 Tigges-Limmer K, Schönbrodt M, Roefe D, et al. Suicide after ventricular assist device 
implantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 2010;29:692–4.
 
16 Noor MR, Ho CH, Parker KH, et al. Investigation of the characteristics of Heartware 
HVAD and thoratec Heartmate II under steady and pulsatile flow conditions. Artif 
Organs 2016;40:549–60.
 
17 MacGowan GA, Schueler S. Right heart failure after left ventricular assist device 
implantation: early and late. Curr Opin Cardiol 2012;27:296–300.
 
18 Patil NP, Sabashnikov A, Mohite PN, et al. De novo aortic regurgitation after 
continuous-flow left ventricular assist device implantation. Ann Thorac Surg 
2014;98:850–7.
 
19 Harvey L, Holley C, Roy SS, et al. Stroke after left ventricular assist device implantation: 
outcomes in the continuous-flow era. Ann Thorac Surg 2015;100:535–41.
 
20 Islam S, Cevik C, Madonna R, et al. Left ventricular assist devices and gastrointestinal 
bleeding: a narrative review of case reports and case series. Clin Cardiol 
2013;36:190–200.
 
21 Bhat P, Nassif ME, Vader JM, et al. Epistaxis in patients with left ventricular assist 
devices - incidence, risk factors, and implications. J Heart Lung Transpl 2014;33:S246.
 
22 Stulak JM, Davis ME, Haglund N, et al. Adverse events in contemporary continuous-
flow left ventricular assist devices: A multi-institutional comparison shows significant 
differences. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2016;151:177–89.
 
23 Koval CE, Thuita L, Moazami N, et al. Evolution and impact of drive-line infection in 
a large cohort of continuous-flow ventricular assist device recipients. J Heart Lung 
Transpl 2014;33:1164–72.
 
24 Starling RC, Moazami N, Silvestry SC, et al. Unexpected abrupt increase in left 
ventricular assist device thrombosis. N Engl J Med 2014;370:33–40.
 
25 Najjar SS, Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, et al. An analysis of pump thrombus events in 
patients in the HeartWare ADVANCE bridge to transplant and continued access 
protocol trial. J Heart Lung Transpl 2014;33:23–34.
 
26 Vierecke J, Schweiger M, Feldman D, et al. Emergency procedures for patients with a 
continuous flow left ventricular assist device. Emerg Med J 2016: Nov 15 (Epub ahead 
of print).
 
27 Bowles C. Left ventricular assist devices in the community. Perfusion 2000;15:373–4.
 
28 Powell KR, Flattery MP, Cei LF, et al. Pre-hospital care for VAD patients: where are the 
gaps? J Heart Lung Transpl 2015;34:S23.
 
29 Shah KB, Cei LF, Pinney SP, et al. Emergency care for patients with continuous flow left 
ventricular assist devices. J Heart Lung Transpl 2014;33:S220–1.
 
30 Bramstedt KA, Simeon DJ. The challenges of responding to “high-tech” cardiac 
implant patients in crisis. Prehosp Emerg Care 2002;6:425–32.
 
31 Moazami N. Patients with a ventricular assist device need special considerations. J 
Emerg Med Serv 2012 http://www. 
jems. 
com/ 
articles/ 
print/ 
volume- 
37/ 
issue- 
2/ 
patient- 
care/ 
patients- 
ventricular- 
assist- 
device- 
need. 
html.
 
32 Resuscitation Council. Resuscitation Guidelines 2015. Adult basic life support and 
automated external defibrillation. www. 
resus. 
org. 
uk/ 
resuscitation- 
guidelines/ 
adult- 
basic- 
life- 
support- 
and- 
automated- 
external- 
defibrillation (accessed Nov 2016).
 
33 Resuscitation Council. Resuscitation Guidelines 2015. Adult advanced life support. 
www. 
resus. 
org. 
uk/ 
resuscitation- 
guidelines/ 
adult- 
advanced- 
life- 
support (accessed Nov 
2016).
 
34 Busch MC, Haap M, Kristen A, et al. Asymptomatic sustained ventricular fibrillation in 
a patient with left ventricular assist device. Ann Emerg Med 2011;57:25–8.
 
35 Bennett MK, Roberts CA, Dordunoo D, et al. Ideal methodology to assess systemic 
blood pressure in patients with continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices. J Heart 
Lung Transpl 2010;29:593–4.
 
36 Lanier GM, Orlanes K, Hayashi Y, et al. Validity and reliability of a novel slow 
cuff-deflation system for noninvasive blood pressure monitoring in patients with 
continuous-flow left ventricular assist device. Circ Heart Fail 2013;6:1005–12.
 
37 Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, Rogers JG, et al. Clinical management of continuous-flow 
left ventricular assist devices in advanced heart failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2010;29:S1–39.
 
38 Shinar Z, Bellezzo J, Stahovich M, et al. Chest compressions may be safe in arresting 
patients with left ventricular assist devices (LVADs). Resuscitation 2014;85:702–4.
 
39 Muthiah K, Gupta S, Otton J, et al. Body position and activity, but not heart rate affect 
pump flows in patients with continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices. J Am Coll 
Cardiol: Heart Fail 2014;2:323–30.
 
40 Monnet X, Teboul JL. Passive leg raising: five rules, not a drop of fluid!. Crit Care 
2015;19:18.
 
41 MacIver J, Ross HJ. Withdrawal of ventricular assist device support. J Palliat Care 
2005;21:151–6.
 
42 Brush S, Budge D, Alharethi R, et al. End-of-life decision making and implementation 
in recipients of a destination left ventricular assist device. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2010;29:1337–41.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://emj.bmj.com/
Emerg Med J: first published as 10.1136/emermed-2016-206172 on 10 November 2017. Downloaded from 
