 Vibratory Urticaria Associated with a Missense Variant in 
ADGRE2
Steven E. Boyden, Ph.D., Avanti Desai, M.S., Glenn Cruse, Ph.D., Michael L. Young, 
M.S.P.H., Hyejeong C. Bolan, M.S.N., Linda M. Scott, M.S.N., A. Robin Eisch, R.N., R. Daniel 
Long, B.S., B.A., Chyi-Chia R. Lee, M.D., Ph.D., Colleen L. Satorius, B.S., Andrew J. 
Pakstis, Ph.D., Ana Olivera, Ph.D., James C. Mullikin, Ph.D., Eliane Chouery, Ph.D., André 
Mégarbané, M.D., Ph.D., Myrna Medlej-Hashim, Ph.D., Kenneth K. Kidd, Ph.D., Daniel L. 
Kastner, M.D., Ph.D., Dean D. Metcalfe, M.D., and Hirsh D. Komarow, M.D.
Inflammatory Disease Section, National Human Genome Research Institute (S.E.B., C.L.S., 
D.L.K.), Mast Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, (A.D., 
G.C., H.C.B., L.M.S., A.R.E., A.O., D.D.M., H.D.K.), Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer 
Institute (C.-C.R.L.), and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Intramural Sequencing Center, 
National Human Genome Research Institute (J.C.M.), NIH, Bethesda, and Clinical Research 
Directorate–Clinical Monitoring Research Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Frederick 
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick (M.L.Y.) — both in Maryland; Veterinary 
Pathology Section, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, NIH, Hamilton, MT (R.D.L.); the Department of Genetics, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT (A.J.P., K.K.K.); Medical Genetics Unit, Saint Joseph University, Beirut 
(E.C.) and Department of Life and Earth Sciences, Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese University, 
Fanar (M.M.-H.) — both in Lebanon; and Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris (A.M.)
SUMMARY
Patients with autosomal dominant vibratory urticaria have localized hives and systemic 
manifestations in response to dermal vibration, with coincident degranulation of mast cells and 
increased histamine levels in serum. We identified a previously unknown missense substitution in 
ADGRE2 (also known as EMR2), which was predicted to result in the replacement of cysteine 
with tyrosine at amino acid position 492 (p.C492Y), as the only nonsynonymous variant 
cosegregating with vibratory urticaria in two large kindreds. The ADGRE2 receptor undergoes 
autocatalytic cleavage, producing an extracellular subunit that noncovalently binds a 
transmembrane subunit. We showed that the variant probably destabilizes an autoinhibitory 
subunit interaction, sensitizing mast cells to IgE-independent vibration-induced degranulation. 
(Funded by the National Institutes of Health.)
Address reprint requests to Dr. Komarow at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bldg. 10, Rm. 1C129A1, MSC 
1960, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, or at komarowh@mailnih.gov. 
The content of this article does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does 
mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. government.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Published in final edited form as:
N Engl J Med. 2016 February 18; 374(7): 656–663. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1500611.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Physical urticarias are disorders in which localized hives develop in response to any of 
various stimuli.1 The histamine release that is associated with urticarias has implicated 
aberrant degranulation of mast cells in their pathogenesis.2 Isolated or syndromic cold 
urticaria can be caused by variants in NLRP3,3 which encodes a component of the 
inflammasome signaling complex, or in PLCG2,4 which encodes a regulatory 
phospholipase. Otherwise, no pathogenic variants underlying physical urticarias have been 
identified.
ADGRE2 encodes a member of the epidermal growth factor (EGF)–seven transmembrane 
(TM7) subclass of adhesion G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs); the ADGRE2 protein 
has an N-terminal extracellular region that consists of five tandem EGF-like adhesion 
domains, an internal mucin-like stalk domain containing a short G-protein proteolytic site, 
and a C-terminal seven-pass transmembrane domain.5 Like many adhesion GPCRs, 
ADGRE2 undergoes autocatalytic cleavage within its G-protein proteolytic site motif6; 
ADGRE2 cleavage occurs between residues p.L517 and p.S518.7 The resulting extracellular 
α subunit is noncovalently bound to the transmembrane β subunit.8 A p.S518A mutant of 
ADGRE2 is resistant to cleavage6 and, unlike nonmutant ADGRE2, is unable to induce 
cellular migration.9 ADGRE2 is expressed predominantly in myeloid leukocytes, most 
strongly on neutrophils5 and macrophages8 but also on the surface of lung mast cells and the 
HMC1 human mast-cell line.10 The endogenous ligand of ADGRE2 is dermatan sulfate,11 
which is the predominant glycosaminoglycan in skin.12 ADGRE2 is also ligated by the 
monoclonal antibody 2A1, which can increase migration, adhesion, degranulation, and 
cytokine production in myeloid cells.9,13,14
The most closely related paralogue of ADGRE2 is ADGRE5 (also called CD97).15 Under 
static conditions, ligand binding of ADGRE5 mediates cell–cell adhesion of leukocytes. 
However, shear stress destabilizes this adhesion, probably through disruption of the 
interaction between the α and β subunits.16 Furthermore, studies of N-terminal truncation 
mutants of the adhesion GPCRs ADGRE5,17 ADGRB2 (BAI2),18 and ADGRG1 (GPR56)19 
have shown that their β subunits are constitutively active. Noncovalent binding of an 
autoinhibitory extracellular α subunit thus provides a plausible regulatory mechanism for 
signaling in response to physical forces. In this report, we describe the identification of a 
novel missense variant in ADGRE2 in families with a rare, hereditary, vibration-induced 
urticaria, implicating the encoded adhesion GPCR as a mechanosensor in mast cells.
METHODS
We evaluated the participants’ clinical and family history, results of a forearm vortex 
challenge, serum histamine measurements, and findings on skin biopsy. We performed 
genetic analysis of the families with vibratory urticaria by means of linkage scans, exome 
sequencing, and Sanger sequencing. The effects of the p.C492Y substitution were 
investigated with the use of patient and control primary mast cells or transfected mast cells. 
Additional details regarding the methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix, 
available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
Boyden et al.
Page 2
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
CASE REPORTS
We ascertained a multiplex Lebanese family (Family 1) with vibratory urticaria that 
segregated as an autosomal dominant trait (Fig. 1A). In response to repetitive mechanical 
stimulation of the skin, such as clothing contact during exercise or towel drying, the affected 
family members had localized, erythematous, edematous, pruritic hives (Fig. 1B), 
sometimes accompanied by facial flushing, headache, or the sensation of a metallic taste. 
Identical symptoms could be provoked by vibration of the forearm on a laboratory vortex. 
Symptoms appeared within 5 minutes after stimulation and subsided within 60 minutes. The 
patients tested negative for dermatographism as assessed by means of a scratch test with a 
dermographometer set at four different pressures (20 to 144 g per square millimeter). 
Episodes of vibratory urticaria were marked by an increase in the histamine level in serum 
(Fig. 1C), which could account for the systemic manifestations. Tryptase levels in serum did 
not increase in response to vibration (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix), a finding 
consistent with our previous report on cold urticaria.20 Immunohistochemical staining of 
dermal mast-cell tryptase revealed degranulation resulting from vortex challenge that was 
more prevalent in patients than controls (Fig. 1D).
This presentation closely matched a previous description of dermo-distortive urticaria, 
which also segregated in an autosomal dominant pattern in another Lebanese family (Family 
2).21 We subsequently ascertained the proband from a third Lebanese family with dominant 
vibratory urticaria (Family 3) (Fig. 1A). None of these families were known to be related to 
one another, although the similarities in their phenotypes and origins strongly suggested a 
shared ancestor.
MISSENSE VARIANT IN ADGRE2
Linkage scans of DNA from members of Families 1 and 2 conclusively implicated a 2.2-Mb 
region on chromosome 19p13, with a combined logarithm of the odds ratio (LOD) score of 
7.224 (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). Exome sequencing of DNA samples from 
Family 1 revealed three variants within the linkage interval that met the filtering criteria; 
Sanger sequencing showed that one of these was a false positive call, and one was validated 
as a true call but was absent from affected members of Family 2. The sole remaining 
candidate variant was c.1475G→A in ADGRE2 (NCBI reference sequence NM_013447.3), 
which was predicted to result in a p.C492Y missense substitution (NP_038475.2). Amino 
acid position 492 lies within the G-protein proteolytic site motif of the α subunit, 26 amino 
acids upstream from the cleavage site (Fig. 2A). ADGRE2 is located within a 1.7-Mb 
haplotype shared by affected members of Families 1 and 2, and the c.1475G→A variant 
perfectly cosegregated with the vibratory urticaria phenotype in all 10 available members of 
Family 1 and all 25 available members of Family 2; it was also heterozygous in the sole 
available member of Family 3, the proband. The variant was absent from multiple databases 
(Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix), as well as from 1105 unaffected Lebanese and 
100 unaffected Israeli controls. None of the 7 affected members of Family 1 had a rare 
coding or splice-site variant in either NLRP3 or PLCG2, and these genes were also ruled out 
by linkage analysis.
Boyden et al.
Page 3
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Within the linkage interval, there were 54 protein-coding exons in which all 7 exome-
sequenced affected participants from Family 1 had at least one nucleotide position with a 
depth of coverage of less than 20×. We performed Sanger sequencing on these exons in 
DNA from an affected participant, but no other candidate variants were found, which left 
p.C492Y in ADGRE2 as the only rare, cosegregating nonsynonymous or splicing variant 
within known exons in the candidate interval. The coding exons of ADGRE2 were screened 
by means of Sanger sequencing in a panel of 60 patients with various sporadic physical 
urticarias (Table S2 in the Supplementary Appendix), and no additional rare coding or splice 
variants were identified.
EXPRESSION OF ADGRE2
ADGRE2 mRNA was expressed in multiple primary human mast-cell populations and mast-
cell lines and was ubiquitously detectable in a panel of human tissues, although its 
expression appeared to be qualitatively higher in primary human mast cells and the LAD2 
human mast-cell line than in other tissues. Flow cytometric assessment of both surface and 
total ADGRE2 protein levels revealed robust expression in multiple types of mast cells (Fig. 
S3 in the Supplementary Appendix).
VIBRATION-DEPENDENT DEGRANULATION OF MAST CELLS
Primary mast cells from two patients and one control in Family 1 were allowed to adhere to 
plates, which were then vibrated on an orbital shaker to mimic the stimuli that provoke 
symptoms in patients with vibratory urticaria. Cells that were adhered to a substrate of 
polylysine had minimal degranulation in response to vibration. However, when they were 
adhered to either dermatan sulfate (the endogenous ligand of ADGRE2) or the monoclonal 
anti-ADGRE2 antibody 2A1, cells from patients but not from controls had a significant 
increase in degranulation in response to vibration. This response was dependent on the 
presence of calcium in the buffer during vibration, a finding consistent with activation of an 
intracellular signaling mechanism (Fig. 2B). There were no significant differences between 
experiments performed with different plate coatings, buffers, or samples of cells in the 
percentage of detached cells after vibration (data not shown), so the absence of 
degranulation when calcium was not present was not a result of more cells being detached 
from the substrate. In a separate experiment, patient cells from Family 2 showed modest 
vibration-induced degranulation when adhered to polylysine, but they degranulated to a 
greater extent when ADGRE2 was ligated through adhesion to dermatan sulfate or to the 
2A1 antibody (Fig. 2C).
EXPRESSION AND PROCESSING OF MUTANT ADGRE2
There was no apparent difference between patient and control primary mast cells in the basal 
expression of either the α or the β subunit of ADGRE2, which suggested that the mutant 
protein is normally expressed. Because p.C492Y is located within the G-protein proteolytic 
site motif, we assessed whether the substitution affected ADGRE2 cleavage. LAD2 mast 
cells were efficiently transfected with either control vector or one of five ADGRE2 
expression constructs, with little effect on viability and with similar expression levels. 
Immunoblotting against both ADGRE2 subunits showed no difference between cells 
Boyden et al.
Page 4
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expressing nonmutated ADGRE2 and those expressing p.C492Y ADGRE2 in the abundance 
of full-length protein, α subunit, or β subunit. Likewise, both transfectants had lower levels 
of full-length protein and higher levels of cleavage products than were present in the 
cleavage-deficient p.S518A and p.[C492Y; S518A] mutants. Moreover, we observed no 
substantial difference between cells transfected with nonmutated ADGRE2 and those 
transfected with p.C492Y ADGRE2 in their ability to adhere to dermatan sulfate–coated 
plates, nor did we observe differences among any transfected cells in ADGRE2 trafficking 
to the cell surface (Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Appendix).
VIBRATION-INDUCED SUBUNIT DISSOCIATION
In transfected mast cells that were not subjected to vibration, both the nonmutant and 
p.C492Y α subunits localized to the plasma membrane with the transmembrane β subunit. 
After vibration, the p.C492Y α subunit was lost from the cell surface (Fig. 3A), which 
resulted in reduced co-localization of the subunits (Fig. 3B). This dissociation suggests that 
the p.C492Y substitution destabilizes the interaction between the α and β subunits, such that 
shear stress that is incurred during vibration disrupts their noncovalent attachment.
CONSTITUTIVE DEGRANULATION ELICITED BY THE β SUBUNIT
In nonvibrated transfected LAD2 cells, an N-terminal truncation mutant expressing only the 
transmembrane β subunit of ADGRE2 elicited greater constitutive degranulation than did all 
full-length clones (Fig. 3C). This observation is consistent with studies of other adhesion 
GPCRs, which have shown that the β subunit, on its own, is constitutively active17–19; this 
suggests that the extracellular α subunit inhibits signaling by the β subunit.
CLEAVAGE-DEPENDENT, VIBRATION-INDUCED DEGRANULATION
In response to vibration, nonmutated ADGRE2 induced greater degranulation of transfected 
LAD2 cells than did the control vector, and p.C492Y ADGRE2 induced greater 
degranulation than did nonmutated ADGRE2 (Fig. 3D). There were no significant 
differences among any of the non-vibrated cell populations (Tables S3 and S4 in the 
Supplementary Appendix). These data suggest that nonmutant ADGRE2 is somewhat 
sensitive to vibration and corroborate the hypothesis that the p.C492Y variant is 
hypermorphic. Neither the p.S518A nor the p.[C492Y; S518A] cleavage-deficient mutant 
elicited significantly greater degranulation than did the control vector, and the p.[C492Y; 
S518A] mutant did not induce greater degranulation than did the p.S518A mutant; this 
indicates that cleavage is required for degranulation that is induced by either nonmutated 
ADGRE2 or p.C492Y ADGRE2. This result is also consistent with a model in which 
liberation of the inhibitory α subunit from the transmembrane β subunit is responsible for 
ADGRE2-mediated degranulation, since covalent attachment of the subunits precludes the 
response. Vibration 8 hours after transfection did not elicit a greater response from N-
truncated ADGRE2 than from the other clones, probably because constitutive degranulation 
of these cells during incubation had depleted their secretory granules.
Boyden et al.
Page 5
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
We identified a novel missense variant in ADGRE2 as the basis of autosomal dominant 
vibratory urticaria, a clinical and pathophysiological entity that is distinct from 
dermatographism and other physical urticarias. Moreover, ADGRE2 encodes a cell-surface 
receptor, in contrast to the mutant cytoplasmic proteins underlying cold urticarias.3,4 Our 
data suggest that the p.C492Y substitution effects a pathogenic gain of function in ADGRE2 
by destabilizing the inhibitory interaction between the α and β subunits, thereby sensitizing 
mast cells to vibration-induced degranulation. Consistent with this mechanism, the 
hereditary vibratory urticaria phenotype probably reflects an exaggeration of a normal 
cellular response to dermal vibration that remains asymptomatic in unaffected persons. We 
observed a modest increase in systemic histamine in a control participant after vortex 
challenge, and LAD2 cells transfected with nonmutated ADGRE2 showed greater 
degranulation after vibration than did cells transfected with control vector, although the 
response was not as great as that in cells transfected with p.C492Y ADGRE2. In addition, 
the vortex challenge that is sometimes used to ascertain vibratory urticaria can be 
nonspecific.22 The evolution of an autocatalytic cleavage mechanism that permits even a 
nonmutant α subunit to dissociate from the β subunit under certain conditions further 
supports the hypothesis that the noncovalent subunit interaction has a regulatory function.
The physiological role of ADGRE2 in mast cells and other myeloid cell types remains to be 
determined. The orthologue of ADGRE2 has been lost in the murid lineage,15 which 
suggests either that it is not essential or that another gene compensates for its absence in 
mice and rats. However, the selective expression of ADGRE2 in myeloid cells and the 
previously described ability of antibody-mediated ADGRE2 ligation to alter neutrophil and 
macrophage behaviors9,13,14 generally suggest a role for ADGRE2 in innate immunity, 
possibly in the host response to an as yet unidentified pathogen. Collectively, the 
predominance of its ligand dermatan sulfate in the skin,12 the sensitivity of its paralogue 
ADGRE5 to shear stress,16 and the response of ADGRE2 to vibration shown here support a 
role for ADGRE2 in the detection of and response to physical stimuli.
Our data, together with those of previous studies,16,23 establish the sensitivity of EGF-TM7 
adhesion GPCRs to shear stress, a finding that is consistent with their cleavage and retention 
of a noncovalently bound extracellular subunit. Vibration alone was sufficient to cause 
significant degranulation in primary patient-derived mast cells, indicating a purely 
mechanical means of inducing an allergy-like response. IgE-independent degranulation of 
mast cells can also be induced through other GPCRs, by stimuli such as complement C5a,24 
which suggests that GPCR signaling may have a general role in the modulation of mast-cell 
responses. The aberrant degranulation associated with vibratory urticaria suggests that 
dermal mast cells may respond to physical forces through ADGRE2, in addition to their 
known response to allergenic stimuli through the IgE receptor FcεRI. This dual role defines 
a novel facet of the biology of mast cells that may also be important in other urticarias.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Boyden et al.
Page 6
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
Supported by the Intramural Research Programs of the National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health, and 
by a contract from the National Cancer Institute (HHSN261200800001E, to Mr. Young).
We thank the families for their participation in this study; Elon Pras for providing control DNA samples; Rebecca 
Rosenke and Eva Haigh for technical assistance; Alasdair Gilfillan, Keith Choate, and Lynn Boyden for helpful 
discussions; and the staff of the NIH Intramural Sequencing Center for performing exome sequencing.
REFERENCES
1. Abajian M, Schoepke N, Altrichter S, Zuberbier T, Maurer M. Physical urticarias and cholinergic 
urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2014; 34:73–88. [PubMed: 24262690] 
2. Cohen RW, Rosenstreich DL. Discrimination between urticaria-prone and other allergic patients by 
intradermal skin testing with codeine. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1986; 77:802–807. [PubMed: 
3711548] 
3. Hoffman HM, Mueller JL, Broide DH, Wanderer AA, Kolodner RD. Mutation of a new gene 
encoding a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and 
Muckle-Wells syndrome. Nat Genet. 2001; 29:301–305. [PubMed: 11687797] 
4. Ombrello MJ, Remmers EF, Sun G, et al. Cold urticaria, immunodeficiency, and autoimmunity 
related to PLCG2 deletions. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:330–338. [PubMed: 22236196] 
5. Lin HH, Stacey M, Hamann J, Gordon S, McKnight AJ. Human EMR2, a novel EGF-TM7 
molecule on chromosome 19p13.1, is closely related to CD97. Genomics. 2000; 67:188–200. 
[PubMed: 10903844] 
6. Lin HH, Chang GW, Davies JQ, Stacey M, Harris J, Gordon S. Autocatalytic cleavage of the EMR2 
receptor occurs at a conserved G protein-coupled receptor proteolytic site motif. J Biol Chem. 2004; 
279:31823–31832. [PubMed: 15150276] 
7. Chang GW, Stacey M, Kwakkenbos MJ, Hamann J, Gordon S, Lin HH. Proteolytic cleavage of the 
EMR2 receptor requires both the extracellular stalk and the GPS motif. FEBS Lett. 2003; 547:145–
150. [PubMed: 12860403] 
8. Kwakkenbos MJ, Chang GW, Lin HH, et al. The human EGF-TM7 family member EMR2 is a 
heterodimeric receptor expressed on myeloid cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2002; 71:854–862. [PubMed: 
11994511] 
9. Huang YS, Chiang NY, Hu CH, et al. Activation of myeloid cell-specific adhesion class G protein-
coupled receptor EMR2 via ligation-induced translocation and interaction of receptor subunits in 
lipid raft microdomains. Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 32:1408–1420. [PubMed: 22310662] 
10. Florian S, Sonneck K, Czerny M, et al. Detection of novel leukocyte differentiation antigens on 
basophils and mast cells by HLDA8 antibodies. Allergy. 2006; 61:1054–1062. [PubMed: 
16918507] 
11. Stacey M, Chang GW, Davies JQ, et al. The epidermal growth factor-like domains of the human 
EMR2 receptor mediate cell attachment through chondroitin sulfate glycosaminoglycans. Blood. 
2003; 102:2916–2924. [PubMed: 12829604] 
12. Trowbridge JM, Gallo RL. Dermatan sulfate: new functions from an old glycosaminoglycan. 
Glycobiology. 2002; 12(9):117R–125R.
13. Yona S, Lin HH, Dri P, et al. Ligation of the adhesion-GPCR EMR2 regulates human neutrophil 
function. FASEB J. 2008; 22:741–751. [PubMed: 17928360] 
14. Chen TY, Hwang TL, Lin CY, et al. EMR2 receptor ligation modulates cytokine secretion profiles 
and cell survival of lipopolysaccharide-treated neutrophils. Chang Gung Med J. 2011; 34:468–477. 
[PubMed: 22035891] 
15. Kwakkenbos MJ, Matmati M, Madsen O, et al. An unusual mode of concerted evolution of the 
EGF-TM7 receptor chimera EMR2. FASEB J. 2006; 20:2582–2584. [PubMed: 17068111] 
16. Karpus ON, Veninga H, Hoek RM, et al. Shear stress-dependent downregulation of the adhesion-G 
protein-coupled receptor CD97 on circulating leukocytes upon contact with its ligand CD55. J 
Immunol. 2013; 190:3740–3748. [PubMed: 23447688] 
Boyden et al.
Page 7
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Ward Y, Lake R, Yin JJ, et al. LPA receptor heterodimerizes with CD97 to amplify LPA-initiated 
RHO-dependent signaling and invasion in prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:7301–7311. 
[PubMed: 21978933] 
18. Okajima D, Kudo G, Yokota H. Brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 2 (BAI2) may be activated 
by proteolytic processing. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2010; 30:143–153. [PubMed: 
20367554] 
19. Paavola KJ, Stephenson JR, Ritter SL, Alter SP, Hall RA. The N terminus of the adhesion G 
protein-coupled receptor GPR56 controls receptor signaling activity. J Biol Chem. 2011; 
286:28914–28921. [PubMed: 21708946] 
20. Meyer J, Gorbach AM, Liu WM, et al. Mast cell dependent vascular changes associated with an 
acute response to cold immersion in primary contact urticaria. PLoS One. 2013; 8(2):e56773. 
[PubMed: 23451084] 
21. Epstein PA, Kidd KK. Dermo-distortive urticaria: an autosomal dominant dermatologic disorder. 
Am J Med Genet. 1981; 9:307–315. [PubMed: 7294069] 
22. Mathelier-Fusade P, Vermeulen C, Leynadier F. Vibratory angioedema. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 
2001; 128:750–752. (In French.). [PubMed: 11460039] 
23. Scholz N, Gehring J, Guan C, et al. The adhesion GPCR latrophilin/CIRL shapes 
mechanosensation. Cell Rep. 2015; 11:866–874. [PubMed: 25937282] 
24. Yu Y, Blokhuis BR, Garssen J, Redegeld FA. Non-IgE mediated mast cell activation. Eur J 
Pharmacol. 2015 Jul 8. (Epub ahead of print). 
Boyden et al.
Page 8
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Inheritance and Clinical Features of Vibratory Urticaria
Panel A shows the pedigrees of the three families originating from Lebanon that had 
autosomal dominant inheritance of vibratory urticaria. The numbered family members in the 
pedigrees were available for genotyping and sequencing. Squares denote male family 
members, circles female family members, solid symbols affected family members, and open 
symbols unaffected family members. Slashes indicate deceased family members, and arrows 
indicate the proband in each family. Panel B shows the results of the forearm vortex 
challenge. Pronounced hives developed in a patient after the challenge, with redness evident 
Boyden et al.
Page 9
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to either side of prominent swelling at the site of vortex contact. Panel C shows serial 
measurements of histamine in serum after forearm vortex challenge; substantially greater 
histamine release was seen in patients than in the control. Histamine levels peaked within 5 
minutes after the challenge and subsided within 60 minutes. BL denotes baseline 
(prechallenge level). The data points indicate the means and I bars the standard error for two 
technical replicates. Panel D shows immunohistochemical staining of tryptase (red) in 
samples obtained by means of skin biopsy; this staining labels both intact and degranulated 
mast cells, as well as secreted granules (indicated by arrows in the postchallenge higher-
magnification views) and extracellular tryptase (diffuse red staining). Release of the 
granular contents of mast cells after vibration was widespread in a patient sample and 
limited in a control sample.
Boyden et al.
Page 10
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Vibration-Induced, ADGRE2-Enhanced Degranulation of Mast Cells from Patients
Panel A shows a schematic diagram of ADGRE2 domain structure, with five epidermal 
growth factor (EGF)–like adhesion domains (triangles) and a central stalk in the 
extracellular N-terminal α subunit, the autocatalytic cleavage site between residues p.L517 
and p.S518, and the seven-pass transmembrane domain in the C-terminal β subunit, depicted 
noncovalently bound to the α subunit. Blue bars represent disulfide bonds predicted on the 
basis of homology to other EGF domain–containing proteins and EGF–seven 
transmembrane (TM7) adhesion G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs). The red bar 
Boyden et al.
Page 11
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 represents the location of the p.C492Y substitution. Dermatan sulfate is the endogenous 
ligand for ADGRE2 and binds its fourth EGF domain. The monoclonal antibody (mAb) 2A1 
was raised against the stalk domain. Panels B and C show the results of assays for vibration-
induced degranulation of mast cells (measured as the release of β-hexosaminidase) in 
Families 1 and 2. Primary mast cells (PMCs) were derived in parallel from two patients and 
one control member of Family 1 and allowed to adhere to plates coated with substrate as 
indicated, then vibrated in the presence or absence of calcium chloride, and finally assayed 
for degranulation (Panel B). PMCs from two patients in Family 2, PMCs from an unrelated 
control, and stock human mast cells (HuMCs) were also assayed (Panel C). PMCs from 
patients and controls were derived in parallel from CD34+ progenitors isolated from fresh 
whole blood, whereas HuMCs were derived from frozen CD34+ progenitors that were 
previously isolated from peripheral blood after granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-
CSF) stimulation and apheresis. Data are the means and standard errors of two independent 
experiments, each assayed in duplicate, from cells derived from a single blood sample from 
either the patient or the control.
Boyden et al.
Page 12
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Cleavage-Dependent Degranulation Elicited by p.C492Y Mutant ADGRE2 Associated 
with a Loss of Surface α Subunit
Panel A shows confocal slice micrographs of transfected murine bone marrow–derived mast 
cells. As detected by immunostaining with the 2A1 antibody (red), the p.C492Y mutant α 
subunit, but not the nonmutant α subunit, is lost from the plasma membrane in response to 
vibration. In contrast, as determined by fluorescent detection of GFP (green), the GFP-
tagged β subunit is retained in the membrane. Yellow indicates an overlap of the red and 
green signal. The scale bars indicate 5 µm. Panel B shows the significance of the decrease in 
colocalization. The α subunit staining evident in cells expressing CAT–GFP fusion control 
Boyden et al.
Page 13
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vector is nonspecific; however, it was confined to the cytoplasm, whereas the β subunit of 
ADGRE2–GFP fusion clones was located primarily in the plasma membrane. Therefore, 
cytoplasmic α subunit staining was masked out for the colocalization analysis (see the 
Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix). Each data point is the Pearson’s 
coefficient, measuring the correlation between the location and intensity of the α and β 
subunits, in the colocalized volume of a stack of high-power-field images through the depth 
of the cells. Data are combined from two independent experiments. There is no mouse 
orthologue for ADGRE2, so only transfected human ADGRE2 is detected. Panels C and D 
show the measurement of constitutive (Panel C) and vibration-induced (Panel D) 
degranulation. To measure constitutive degranulation, transfected LAD2 cells were 
incubated for 5 hours to allow protein expression, and nonvibrated cells were assayed. To 
measure vibration-induced degranulation, transfected LAD2 cells were incubated for 5 hours 
to allow protein expression and were adhered to dermatan sulfate–coated plates for 3 hours; 
parallel cultures were then either vibrated at 750 rpm for 20 minutes or not vibrated and then 
were assayed. In Panels C and D, the data are means and standard errors for four 
independent experiments, each performed in duplicate (Panel C) or triplicate (Panel D). A 
single asterisk denotes P<0.05, a double asterisk P<0.01, and a triple asterisk P<0.001.
Boyden et al.
Page 14
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
