 Toll-like receptor-5 agonist, entolimod, suppresses
metastasis and induces immunity by stimulating
an NK-dendritic-CD8+ T-cell axis
Craig M. Bracketta, Bojidar Kojouharova, Jean Veitha, Kellee F. Greenea, Lyudmila G. Burdelyaa, Sandra O. Gollnicka,
Scott I. Abramsb,1, and Andrei V. Gudkova,c,1
aDepartment of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263; bDepartment of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo,
NY 14263; and cCleveland BioLabs, Inc., Buffalo, NY 14203
Edited by Ruslan Medzhitov, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, and approved January 5, 2016 (received for review October 28, 2015)
Activation of an anticancer innate immune response is highly
desirable because of its inherent ability to generate an adaptive
antitumor T-cell response. However, insufficient safety of innate
immune modulators limits clinical use to topical applications. Toll-
like receptor 5 (TLR5) agonists are favorably positioned as potential
systemic immunotherapeutic agents because of unusual tissue
specificity of expression, uniquely safe profile of induced cytokines,
and antitumor efficacy demonstrated in a number of animal models.
Here, we decipher the molecular and cellular events underlying the
metastasis suppressive activity of entolimod, a clinical stage TLR5
agonist that activates NF-κB–, AP-1–, and STAT3–driven immuno-
modulatory signaling pathways specifically within the liver. Used
as a single agent in murine colon and mammary metastatic cancer
models, entolimod rapidly induces CXCL9 and -10 that support homing
of blood-borne CXCR3-expressing NK cells to the liver predominantly
through an IFN-γ signaling independent mechanism. NK cell-depen-
dent activation of dendritic cells is followed by stimulation of a
CD8+ T-cell response, which exert both antimetastatic effect of ento-
limod and establishment of tumor-specific and durable immune mem-
ory. These results define systemically administered TLR5 agonists as
organ-specific immunoadjuvants, enabling efficient antitumor vaccina-
tion that does not depend on identification of tumor-specific antigens.
cancer immunotherapy | liver | colorectal cancer | breast cancer |
innate immunity
R
ecent advancements in the field of anticancer immunother-
apy have been primarily focused on development of T-cell–
based approaches because of recognition of the inherent ability of
adaptive immunity to efficiently eradicate neoplastic disease (1, 2).
Innate immune responses play important roles in T-cell activation,
but their potential relevance for prevention and treatment of cancer
remains underappreciated (3–5). Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are
gaining attention as potential therapeutic targets capable of stimu-
lating antitumor immunity by initiating innate responses (6) and
subsequent adaptive T-cell–based immunity (7). Although proof-of-
principle for this concept has been demonstrated with agonists of
several TLRs (TLR3, -7, and -9) (8), only one, the TLR7 agonist
Imiquimod, has been approved for clinical use [however, this is
limited to topical treatment of basal cell carcinoma (9)]. The major
clinical limitations of many TLR agonists are the risk of dose-lim-
iting toxicities associated with their systemic delivery (10–12) and
metastasis stimulation (13–15). Furthermore, some previously in-
vestigated TLR agonists are restricted to injection directly into tu-
mor tissue (3, 16–18), an approach that will likely have limited
therapeutic value in cancer patients with metastatic disease.
TLR5 is unique among TLRs as a potential target for systemic
anticancer immunotherapy. Studies have shown that the only
known natural TLR5 agonist, flagellin, flagellin-expressing Sal-
monella bacteria, and a pharmacologically optimized flagellin
derivative named entolimod (CBLB502) have antitumor effects
in several tumor models (19–23), including mouse models of
liver metastases (24–26). Moreover, systemic administration of
TLR5 agonists is uniquely safe because of the restricted pattern
of expression of TLR5 (primarily in the gut, liver, and bladder)
and the nature of the cytokines induced following TLR5 stimu-
lation. In particular, TLR5 agonists are significantly less toxic
than agonists of some other TLRs as a result of the lack of in-
duction of self-amplifying “cytokine storm”-inducing cytokines,
such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-2, which can cause septic shock
(27–29). Instead, TLR5 agonists induce rapid and short-lived
production of high levels of G-CSF, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10 in all
tested species, including rodents, nonhuman primates, and hu-
mans (29–31).
The liver shows the strongest TLR5 activation response fol-
lowing systemic entolimod administration characterized by dramatic
activation of NF-κB–, STAT3–, and AP-1–driven transcription
leading to cytokine production (as described above) and mobiliza-
tion of different classes of immune cells into the liver (26). In
particular, entolimod-driven recruitment of natural killer (NK) cells
to the liver was shown to be critical for the antitumor efficacy of the
drug in murine tumor models (26, 32) and for its antiviral activity in
a mouse model of cytomegalovirus infection (33). The liver is a
common site of colorectal cancer (CRC) tumor metastasis (34) and
the location of large numbers of NK cells (35), which have been
reported to have antitumor activity in the liver (36, 37). NK cells are
Significance
Innate immune modulators can generate a potent antitumor T-cell
response and are thus a desirable approach to immunotherapy.
However, their use is limited by the risk of induction of acute
inflammation. In this regard, bacterial flagellin is unique among
other innate immune modulators because of a significantly safer
cytokine profile induced upon activation by its target, Toll-like
receptor 5 (TLR5). We show here that systemic administration of
entolimod, a pharmacologically optimized flagellin derivative, in-
duces a cascade of cell–cell signaling resulting in mobilization to
the liver of various components of innate and adaptive immunity,
followed by suppression of liver metastases and development of
long-term antitumor immune memory. Thus, TLR5 agonists can be
considered as an organ-specific immunotherapy for the treatment
and prevention of metastases.
Author contributions: C.M.B., L.G.B., S.O.G., S.I.A., and A.V.G. designed research; C.M.B.,
B.K., J.V., and K.F.G. performed research; C.M.B., L.G.B., S.O.G., S.I.A., and A.V.G. analyzed
data; and C.M.B., S.I.A., and A.V.G. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: A.V.G. and L.G.B. are coinventors of entolimod and, along
with C.M.B. and S.O.G., are paid consultants for Cleveland Biolabs, a biotech company
that holds the license for clinical use of entolimod and runs its development.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: scott.abrams@roswellpark.org or
andrei.gudkov@roswellpark.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1521359113/-/DCSupplemental.
E874–E883
|
PNAS
|
Published online February 1, 2016
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521359113
 classified as effectors of innate immunity that provide an early host
response against viruses, bacteria, and tumors, and play a pivotal
role in bridging the innate and adaptive arms of the immune re-
sponse (38, 39). One mechanism by which NK cells connect innate
and adaptive immune responses is through the ability of NK cells to
license dendritic cells (DCs), which then stimulate T-cell activation,
resulting in development of antigen-specific T-cell–dependent im-
munity (40–42).
A recent study demonstrated that flagellin up-regulated CXCL10
expression in the cornea and that this contributed to fungal clearance
through a CXCR3-dependent NK cell response (43). CXCL9,
CXCL10, and CXCL11 are members of the IFN-inducible CXC
chemokine family that act through interaction with the CXCR3 (44,
45) receptor found on a variety of cell types, including NK cells (45,
46). Production of chemokines that are CXCR3 ligands leads to
chemotactic migration of CXCR3-expressing NK cells to sites of
inflammation, infection, and malignancy (47, 48). Levels of CXCL10
are strongly increased (∼20-fold) in the plasma of mice after systemic
entolimod treatment (29). These findings led us to hypothesize that
entolimod treatment might suppress liver metastases and stimulate
long-term T-cell–dependent protective antitumor immunity through
CXCR3-dependent homing of NK cells to the liver.
Testing of this hypothesis in mouse models of syngeneic CT26
CRC experimental liver metastasis and spontaneous liver and lung
metastasis of 4T1 mammary tumors showed that entolimod treat-
ment
generates
protective
CD8+
T-cell–dependent
antitumor
memory. In the CT26 model, the entolimod-elicited NK cell re-
sponse was essential for dendritic cell licensing and activation of
CD8+ effector T cells in the liver independently of CD4+ T cells. In
contrast, we found that antimetastatic activity of entolimod in the
spontaneous 4T1 metastatic model was less dependent on NK cells
but dependent on both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. In addition,
CXCR3 expressed by NK cells regulates the therapeutic efficacy of
entolimod by supporting their blood-borne homing to the liver
where entolimod stimulates production of the CXCR3 ligands
CXCL9 and -10. Interestingly, whereas entolimod stimulates pro-
duction of IFN-γ in the liver and CXCL9 and CXCL10 are known to
be IFN-γ–regulated (49, 50), expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10
was, at least in part, IFN-γ–independent in this system. These results
indicate that entolimod treatment leads to development of systemic
T-cell–dependent antimetastatic activity by altering the liver micro-
environment. Therefore, pharmacological targeting of TLR5 repre-
sents a novel therapeutic strategy for safe and effective treatment of
what are currently the most poorly treatable cancer cases.
Methods
Mice. Pathogen-free BALB/cAnNCr and C57BL/6NCr mice were obtained
from the National Cancer Institute; C.B-Igh-1blcrTac-Prkdcscid/Ros (SCID)
mice were obtained from Laboratory Animal Resources at Roswell Park
Cancer Institute (RPCI); C.129S4-Cxcr3tm1Arsa/SoghJ (Cxcr3−/−) and C57BL/
6N-Ifngr1tm1.2Rds/J (Ifngr1−/−) were bred and maintained by RPCI Laboratory
Animal Resources. All mice were female and were housed in microisolator
cages in a laminar flow unit under ambient light. The RPCI Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee approved all procedures carried out in this study.
Reagents. The TLR5 agonist entolimod (CBLB502) is a cGMP-manufactured
drug product that was obtained from Cleveland BioLabs, Inc. (29).
Cell Lines. Murine colon carcinoma CT26 cells and mammary carcinoma
4T1 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection and culti-
vated in RPMI medium with 10% (vol/vol) FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, and
L-glutamine in a humidified chamber at 37 °C with 5% CO2.
Experimental and Spontaneous Liver Metastasis Models. Experimental liver
metastases of CT26 CRC tumors were established via intrasplenic injection of
2 × 105 CT26 tumor cells in 100 μL of PBS followed by splenectomy, as pre-
viously described (26, 51). In the 4T1 model, metastasis was evaluated in a clin-
ically relevant set-up following surgical removal of orthotopic 4T1 tumors (26,
52) established by subcutaneous inoculation of 105 4T1 cells in 50 μL of PBS into
the mammary fat pad. Primary tumors were resected when they reached
200 mm3 in volume and mice were treated with PBS or entolimod on days 1, 3,
and 5 postsurgery. Unless otherwise noted, entolimod (or PBS vehicle control)
treatment was subcutaneously with a dose of 1 μg per mouse in a dosing volume
of 100 μL PBS.
FACS Staining and Analysis. Single-cell suspensions were obtained from mouse
livers by in vivo perfusion with a solution of 0.5 μM EGTA (Sigma-Aldrich)
containing 0.2 mg/mL collagenase type IV (Worthington Biochemical) followed
by mechanical disruption and in vitro digestion for 30 min at 37 °C. Mouse blood
was collected via the submandibular vein into tubes with heparin (10% of final
volume) and red blood cells were lysed using a solution of ammonium chloride
for 5 min at room temperature. Single-cell suspensions of liver or blood cells
were stained for 20 min at 4 °C with the following mixtures of monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs): (i) APC-efluor780 CD45 (clone 30-F11), Brilliant violet (BV) 785
CD3e (clone 145-2C11), APC NKp46 (clone 29A1.4), BV510 CD8 (clone 53-6.7),
PerCPCy5.5 CD4 (clone RM4-5), FITC CD44 (clone IM7), BV421 CXCR3 (clone
CXCR3-173), and PE-Cy7 IFN-γ (clone XMG1.2); and (ii) CD45, BV605 CD11c (clone
N418), PerCPCy5.5 CD40 (clone 3/23), and PE CD86 (clone GL-1). Anti-NKp46, anti-
CD44, anti-CD11c, anti-CD40, and anti-CD86 were purchased from BioLegend;
anti-CD45 was from eBioscience; and anti-CD3e, anti-CD8, anti-CD4, anti-CXCR3,
and anti–IFN-γ were from BD Biosciences. After staining, cells were fixed in 2%
ultrapure formalin. For intracellular IFN-γ staining, samples were processed in the
presence of GolgiStop (BD Biosciences) and staining was performed using FoxP3/
Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (eBioscience) according to the manu-
facturer’s protocol. Data were acquired on a LSRII Fortessa instrument (Becton
Dickinson), stored in Listmode format, and analyzed using WinList software
(Verity House Software).
Lymphocyte Depletion in Mice. BALB/c mice were injected intraperitoneally
with mAbs against CD8 (clone 53-6.7; BioXcell) or CD4 (clone GK1.5; BioXcell)
at a dose of 400 μg per injection or asialo GM1 (Wako Chemicals) at a dose of
50 μg per injection to establish and maintain CD8, CD4, or NK cell depletion,
respectively, during the treatment period as previously described (53). Ap-
propriate isotype controls (BioXcell) were injected using the same dose and
regimen as the depletion Abs. Depletion was confirmed by FACS analysis of
blood samples collected 2 d after Ab injections.
Competitive Short-Term NK Cell Homing Assay. Naïve NK cells were purified
from the spleens of BALB/c or Cxcr3−/− mice using negative isolation kits pur-
chased from Miltenyi Biotec; purity was confirmed by FACS analysis and was
routinely greater than 95%. BALB/c NK cells were labeled with Vybrant CFDA SE
Cell Tracer Kit (Invitrogen) and Cxcr3−/− NK cells were labeled with CellTracker
Orange CMTMR (CTO; Molecular Probes). An equal ratio of BALB/c to Cxcr3−/−
NK cells (106 cells of each genotype) was adoptively transferred intravenously
into mice 2.5 h after entolimod or PBS treatment. Livers were harvested 2 h later
by in vivo perfusion followed by in vitro digestion as described above to assess
presence of adoptively transferred BALB/c and Cxcr3−/− NK cells by FACS analysis.
Measurement of Chemokine Levels. Livers and EDTA-treated blood were
collected at the indicated time points posttreatment. Centrifugation was
used to obtain plasma from EDTA-treated blood. Livers were flash-frozen on
dry ice to generate total protein lysates as previously described (26). Briefly,
frozen liver tissue was pulverized into a powder and then lysed with RIPA
buffer containing protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma). Cellular debris was
removed by centrifugation. Total protein concentrations were determined
using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay. ELISA kits specific for murine IFN-γ, CXCL9,
CXCL10, and CXCL11 were purchased from R&D Systems and used according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Results obtained from liver lysates and
plasma were normalized per microgram of total protein or per ml plasma,
respectively.
T-Cell Studies in SCID Mice. Naïve CD8+ or CD4+ T cells were purified from the
spleens of BALB/c mice using negative isolation kits purchased from Miltenyi
Biotec. The purity of the obtained cells was confirmed by FACS analysis and
was routinely greater than 95%. One day (for survival studies) or 5 d (for
FACS studies) after intrasplenic inoculation of CT26 tumor cells, T cells were
adoptively transferred into SCID mice by intravenous injection in a volume of
200 μL. NK cell depletion antibodies (anti-asialo GM1, given at 50 μg in a
volume of 200 μL per injection) were administered intraperionteally the day
of CT26 inoculation (d0) and again on days 1, 7, and 14 (for survival studies)
or days 4, 5, and 11 after CT26 inoculation (for FACS studies); rabbit IgG
isotype controls were injected using the same dose and regimen. Entolimod
was administered on days 2 and 3 for survival studies and days 5 and 6 for
FACS studies.
Brackett et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 1, 2016
|
E875
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 Assessment of T-Cell Memory. BALB/c mice that remained free of CT26 liver
tumors or 4T1 metastases for more than 100 d from the time of CT26 in-
oculation or 4T1 surgery, respectively, were considered cured. To test for
the presence of T-cell–dependent antitumor memory in mice cured of CT26
metastases by entolimod treatment, the cured mice were depleted of CD8+
or CD4+ T cells using mAbs, as described above, and then challenged sub-
cutaneously with 2 × 105 CT26 tumor cells. Depletion was confirmed by FACS
analysis of blood samples collected 2 d after Ab injections. Growth of sub-
cutaneous tumors was monitored by measurement with a digital caliper. For
mice cured of 4T1 metastases by entolimod treatment, splenic T cells from
4T1-cured or naïve mice were expanded in vitro with anti-CD3/anti-CD28
dynabeads (Invitrogen) + plate-bound anti-41BB (clone 3H3; 10 μg/mL;
BioXcell) for 4 d followed by Miltenyi negative purification of either CD8+ or
CD4+ T cells; purity was routinely greater than 95%. These cells were then
transferred intravenously into BALB/c mice inoculated intravenously with
either 4T1 (5 × 104) or CT26 (2 × 105) tumor cells 3 d prior (1 × 106 each of
CD8+ and/or CD4+ T cells per mouse). Mice were killed on day 30 after tumor
cell injection and lungs were harvested to quantify the number of lung tumors
under a dissecting microscope.
Antibody-Mediated Depletion of IFN-γ. Mice were injected intraperitoneally
with purified anti-mouse IFN-γ (clone XMG1.2) or an appropriate isotype control
(both purchased from BioXcell) at a dose of 250 μg 24 h and 30 min before
subcutaneous injection of entolimod, as previously described (54). Livers and
blood were collected at the indicated times after entolimod injection for
assessing expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10 by ELISA, as described above.
Tumor Growth Measurements. Orthogonal diameters of tumors were mea-
sured every other day with digital calipers. Tumor volume, V, was calculated
using the formula V = (lw2/2), where l is the longest axis of the tumor and
w is the axis perpendicular to l. Tumors were monitored until they reached a
volume greater than 400 mm3, at which time the mice were killed. Animals
were considered cured if they had no detectable tumor for more than 100 d.
Statistical Evaluation. All measured values are presented as mean ± SEM.
Nonpaired Student’s t tests were used for comparisons between groups in all
experiments except for survival experiments, which were analyzed by log-
rank test. In all cases, statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.
Results
Entolimod Suppresses CRC Liver Metastasis and Generates CD8+ T-Cell
Immunity Through NK Cell-Dependent DC Activation. Entolimod
treatment of mice bearing experimental CT26 CRC liver me-
tastases increased the proportion of animals that remained tu-
mor free for at least 60 d (26). Here, we investigated the role of
T cells in the antitumor activity of entolimod by using Abs to
deplete CD8+, CD4+, or both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells before
entolimod treatment in mice given experimental CT26 liver
metastases. As expected, treatment with entolimod (and rat IgG
control Ab) led to a significant increase in animal survival time
indicative of reduced CT26 metastasis (Fig. 1A). This survival
benefit of entolimod was eliminated by depletion of CD8+ T
cells, but was not affected by depletion of CD4+ T cells.
We previously reported that the entolimod-elicited NK cell
response within the liver is important for the antimetastatic ac-
tivity of the drug (26). Because NK cells promote T-cell activa-
tion (55), we hypothesized that generation of CD8+ T-cell–
dependent tumor immunity by entolimod is regulated by NK
cells. To test this hypothesis, we used a two-pronged approach
that included: (i) antibody-mediated cell depletion in BALB/c
mice, and (ii) naïve T-cell reconstitution of NK cell-sufficient
(rabbit IgG-treated) or NK cell-depleted (anti-asialo GM1-
treated) SCID mice. Depletion of NK cells eliminated the anti-
tumor activity of entolimod in BALB/c mice given CT26 liver
metastases (Fig. 1B), a finding consistent with our previous work
(26). In NK cell-depleted BALB/c (Fig. 1B) or SCID mice (Fig.
1C), the presence or absence of CD8+ T cells had no effect on
survival, indicating that interaction between NK and CD8+ T
cells is important for the metastasis-suppressive effects of ento-
limod. Moreover, adoptive transfer of naïve CD8+ T cells into
NK cell-sufficient SCID mice followed by entolimod treatment
restored the antimetastatic activity of the drug, indicating that
the response does not involve CD4+ T cells.
Natural killer T (NKT) cells are liver resident cells that re-
spond to entolimod (26) and can activate antitumor immunity
(56). We therefore assessed the response of NKT cells in the
CT26 tumor-bearing liver 24 h post-entolimod and whether anti-
asialo GM1 antibodies depleted NKT cells. In contrast to the re-
sponse in naïve livers (26), entolimod had no effect on the NKT cell
response in CT26 tumor-bearing livers (Fig. S1), a finding consistent
with our recent work in the liver metastatic uveal melanoma model
(32). Administration of anti-asialo GM1 antibodies significantly
reduced the number of NKT cells in the liver. NKT cells likely play
a very minor role in the antimetastatic activity of entolimod, which
is supported by the data in Fig. 1C, showing that adoptive transfer of
CD8+ T cells into SCID mice, which lack NKT cells (57), re-
capitulated the antimetastatic activity of entolimod in BALB/c mice.
Entolimod treatment of SCID mice reconstituted with naïve
CD8+ T cells led to an increase in the absolute number of total
NK cells in the blood stream on day 7 after treatment (de-
termined by FACS analysis) (Fig. S2A). The proportion of NK
cells that were activated (CD69+) in the blood increased by day 7
post-entolimod and remained significantly elevated for at least
21 d posttreatment. In addition, entolimod activated CD8+ T
cells in the blood of CD8+ T-cell–reconstituted SCID mice via an
NK cell-dependent mechanism (Fig. S2B).
To directly demonstrate that NK cells stimulate a CD8+ T-cell
response in entolimod-treated mice independent of CD4+ T cells,
T-cell activation was measured by FACS analysis on livers from NK
cell-sufficient (rabbit IgG-treated) or -depleted (anti-asialo GM1-
treated) SCID mice that were inoculated intrasplenicaly with CT26
cells and, 5 d later, given adoptive transfer of naïve splenic T cells
(both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells) and entolimod injection (Fig. 1D).
The number of effector CD8+ T cells (Fig. 1D, Left) and IFN-γ
producers (Fig. 1D, Right) in the liver on day 10 after entolimod
treatment was significantly diminished in NK cell-depleted mice
compared with NK cell-sufficient mice. CD4+ T cells were unable to
compensate for the generation of an effector CD8+ T-cell response
in NK cell-depleted mice. This was not because of absence of a
CD4+ T-cell response since NK cell depletion had no effect on
CD4+ T-cell effector numbers in the liver following entolimod
treatment. However, NK cell depletion did significantly reduce the
proportion of IFN-γ–producing effector CD4+ T cells.
NK cells can promote DC activation and augment their ability
to stimulate naïve T-cell activation (reviewed in ref. 55). This,
together with our finding that NK cells are key mediators of
entolimod-induced CD8+ T-cell activation, led us to test whether
NK cells promote CD8+ T-cell activation through DC activation in
the liver after entolimod treatment. Mice were inoculated intra-
splenically with CT26 cells, treated with anti-asialo GM1 to de-
plete NK cells (or rabbit IgG as a control), and then treated with
entolimod (or left untreated, shown as “0 h”). FACS analysis of
total liver cells showed that entolimod treatment stimulated an
increase in the absolute number of total CD11c+ DCs in the liver,
independent of the presence/absence of NK cells (Fig. 1E, Left).
Entolimod treatment also resulted in an increase in the frequency
of activated (CD40-expressing) DCs in the livers of NK cell-suf-
ficient mice (Fig. 1E, Right), but this effect was significantly di-
minished by NK cell depletion. Similarly, the increases in CD86+
activated DC frequency in the liver and CD86 expression level
(mean fluorescence intensity, MFI) observed upon entolimod
treatment of NK cell-sufficient mice were almost completely ab-
sent in NK cell-depleted mice (Fig. S3).
Mice given experimental CT26 metastases via intrasplenic
tumor cell inoculation/splenectomy that survived for at least
100 d after entolimod treatment were considered “entolimod-
cured” and were assessed for anti-CT26 immune memory by
rechallenging them with a subcutaneous inoculation of CT26
tumor cells. Entolimod-cured mice effectively resisted tumor
E876
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521359113
Brackett et al.
 A
D
E
B
C
F
Fig. 1.
Entolimod-induced CD8+ T-cell immunity is mediated by NK cell-dependent DC activation. (A and B) Effect of T-cell and NK cell depletion on survival of entolimod-
treated mice following intrasplenic CT26 tumor cell inoculation/splenectomy. (A) Mice were treated with anti-CD8 or anti-CD4 depletion antibodies or control rat IgG on
days 4 and 11 postinoculation in combination with entolimod given on days 5 and 6. (B) Mice were treated with anti-asialo GM1 (on days 4, 5, and 11 postinoculation) or
anti-CD8 depletion antibodies (on days 4 and 11 postinoculation) or appropriate control antibodies (rabbit or rat IgG) in combination with entolimod given on days 5 and
6. In all instances, control mice were treated with PBS on days 5 and 6 postinoculation (no Ab treatment). P values were determined by log-rank test. (C) Effect of NK cell
depletion on entolimod-mediated metastasis suppression in T-cell–reconstituted SCID mice. Mice were treated intraperitoneally with anti-asialo GM1 or rabbit IgG on days
0, 1, and 7 after CT26 intrasplenic inoculation and received adoptive transfer of purified naïve BALB/c splenic CD8+ T cells (1.5 × 106 per mouse) on day 1 and entolimod on
days 2 and 3. P values were determined by log-rank test. (D) Effect of NK cell depletion on the absolute number of CD8+ and CD4+ T effector cells and proportion of IFN-γ+
cells in the livers of T-cell–reconstituted SCID mice. Mice were treated intraperitoneally with anti-asialo GM1 or rabbit IgG on days 4, 5, and 11 after CT26 intrasplenic
inoculation and received entolimod followed 2 h later by adoptive transfer of purified naïve BALB/c splenic CD8+ and CD4+ T cells (5 × 106 of each per mouse) on day 5.
Total liver cells were isolated on day 10 after entolimod treatment and stained for FACS analysis for effector T cells (CD45+CD3e+CD8+ or CD4+ and CD44hi) and activated
effectors (IFN-γ+). Mean ± SEM; n = 5 mice per group. P values were determined by Student’s t test. (E) Fold-change in the absolute number of total DCs and proportion of
CD40+ DCs in the livers of NK cell-sufficient (rabbit IgG) or -depleted (anti-asialo GM1) entolimod-treated BALB/c mice relative to untreated (0 h) mice. Mice were treated
with anti-asialo GM1 or rabbit IgG antibodies (on days 4 and 5 after intrasplenic CT26 inoculation) in combination with entolimod given on days 5 and 6. Total liver cells
isolated at the indicated times after entolimod treatment were stained for FACS. DCs were defined as CD45+CD11c+ and activated DCs were defined by percentage of
CD40+ among total DCs. Mean ± SEM; n = 5 mice per group. P values were determined by Student’s t test. *P < 0.01 for comparison with 0 h, #P < 0.005 for comparison
with rabbit IgG. (F) Effect of T-cell depletion on entolimod-induced immune memory against CT26 tumors. BALB/c mice that survived for >100 d after intrasplenic CT26
inoculation with entolimod treatment (“Entolimod-cured”) were depleted of CD8+ and/or CD4+ T cells or mock depleted with rat IgG. One week later, the mice were
rechallenged subcutaneously with CT26 tumor cells and the percentage remaining free of subcutaneous tumors for at least 100 d was determined. “Naïve (PBS)” and
“naïve (Entolimod)” mice were age-matched animals that were treated with PBS or entolimod, respectively, on days 5 and 6 after splenectomy without intrasplenic CT26
inoculation. After 100 d, these mice were injected subcutaneously with CT26 cells and monitored as described above. Mean ± SEM; n = 10 mice per group. P values were
determined by log-rank test. *P < 0.02 to Naïve, #P < 0.05 to entolimod-cured + rat IgG.
Brackett et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 1, 2016
|
E877
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 rechallenge compared with age-matched naïve PBS– or entolimod-
treated mice that had not been previously exposed to CT26 cells
(Fig. 1F), increasing the percentage of mice surviving to day 100
after rechallenge from 29% or 47%, respectively, to 86%.
Age-matched naïve mice treated with entolimod showed significant
tumor control compared with PBS-treated mice, indicating that
entolimod has a general effect on immune responses. To assess the
importance of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells for the observed immune
memory response against CT26, groups of entolimod-cured mice
were antibody-depleted of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells before CT26
rechallenge. Depletion of CD8+ T cells alone or both CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells had similar effects, significantly reducing the ability of
entolimod-cured mice to resist tumor rechallenge (Fig. 1F). In
contrast, depletion of only CD4+ T cells did not cause any di-
minishment in anti-CT26 immunity upon rechallenge of entolimod-
cured mice. Taken together, these results show that entolimod
stimulates a CD8+ T-cell response capable of suppressing CRC liver
metastasis through NK cell-dependent activation of DCs. More-
over, the entolimod-elicited immune response includes formation of
durable CD8+ T-cell memory sufficient for protection against tumor
cell rechallenge.
The Therapeutic Efficacy of Entolimod Is Regulated by CXCR3-
Dependent Blood-Borne Homing of NK Cells to the Liver. Given
that NK cells are essential for the antimetastatic activity of
entolimod, we next sought to determine the mechanism of
entolimod-elicited NK cell accumulation in the liver. Entolimod
induces a 20-fold increase in the plasma of the CXCR3 ligand
CXCL10 (29). Further characterization of the expression of
CXCR3 binding chemokines post-entolimod identified that both
CXCL9 and -10 were induced in the liver and plasma of BALB/c
mice; however, CXCL11 was not induced by entolimod (Fig. S4).
This provided the foundation for the hypothesis that entolimod-
elicited CXCL9 and CXCL10 production supports the homing of
CXCR3-expressing NK cells to the liver. Entolimod treatment
resulted in an increase in the total number of NK cells in the livers
of BALB/c mice, but not CXCR3-deficient mice (Fig. 2A). To di-
rectly test whether CXCR3 supports migration of blood-borne NK
cells to the liver after entolimod treatment, we performed a com-
petitive homing assay in which naïve NK cells purified from the
spleens of BALB/c or Cxcr3−/− mice were labeled with different
fluorescent dyes (see Methods) and transferred intravenously into
mice 2.5 h after entolimod or PBS treatment. FACS analysis of
livers isolated 4.5 h after entolimod treatment showed that
entolimod stimulated homing of BALB/c NK cells to the liver to a
much greater extent than Cxcr3−/− NK cells (Fig. 2B). The ratio of
BALB/c to Cxcr3−/− NK cells in the liver increased significantly
from 1.4 in control PBS-treated mice to 5.3 in entolimod-treated mice.
The absence of an NK cell response in CXCR3-deficient mice
post-entolimod led us to assess the efficacy of entolimod against
CT26 metastasis (using animal survival as a readout) in mice
globally deficient for CXCR3 (Cxcr3−/−) versus BALB/c mice. The
survival benefit provided by entolimod in this experimental system
to wild-type mice was completely absent in Cxcr3−/− mice (Fig. 2C).
Moreover, survival time was significantly shorter for control (no
entolimod treatment) Cxcr3−/− mice bearing experimental CT26
liver metastases than for corresponding control BALB/c mice, in-
dicating more rapid development of liver metastases due to absence
of CXCR3-dependent tumor immunosurveillance.
Given that entolimod promotes NK cell-dependent DC activa-
tion and that the NK cell response is abrogated in Cxcr3−/− mice, we
next evaluated the DC response to entolimod in Cxcr3−/− mice
versus BALB/c mice by quantifying the DC content of livers by
FACS. The number of total CD11c+ DCs in the liver after entoli-
mod treatment was similar between BALB/c and Cxcr3−/− mice,
except at 5 h posttreatment (Fig. 2D, Left). However, the frequency
of CD40-expressing DCs (Fig. 2D, Right) and CD86-expressing DCs
and CD86 intensity (MFI) (Fig. S5) were significantly lower in
entolimod-treated Cxcr3−/− mice than in BALB/c mice. These re-
sults indicate that the role of NK cells in DC activation following
entolimod treatment is fully dependent on CXCR3.
Expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10 is IFN-γ–regulated (49,
50). Entolimod stimulated production of IFN-γ in the livers of
mice 2 h posttreatment (Fig. 3A). We therefore sought to un-
derstand whether entolimod treatment up-regulates CXCL9 and
CXCL10 expression downstream of IFN-γ production, thereby
providing the signal leading to recruitment of CXCR3-expressing
NK cells to the liver. To test this hypothesis, expression of CXCL9
and CXCL10 and NK cell recruitment to the liver in response to
entolimod treatment was assessed by antibody-mediated depletion
of IFN-γ, which effectively eliminated IFN-γ in the liver (Fig. S6)
and IFN-γ receptor-deficient (Ifngr1−/−) mice. Depletion of IFN-γ
only had a significant impact on CXCL10 plasma levels, showing a
50% reduction at both 2 and 5 h post-entolimod (Fig. 3B). NK cell
recruitment to the liver by entolimod was not significantly affected
(P = 0.1001) in IFN-γ–depleted mice (Fig. 3C). Mice lacking the
IFN-γ receptor showed a 50% reduction in entolimod-elicited
plasma levels of CXCL9 but not CXCL10 5 h posttreatment (Fig.
S7A). NK cell recruitment to the livers of these mice 5 h post-
entolimod was partially dependent upon IFN-γ receptor signaling,
showing a fivefold increase in wild-type mice and a fourfold increase
in Ifngr1−/− mice (Fig. S7B).
Collectively, these data provide support for a mechanism of
entolimod’s antimetastasis activity that relies upon CXCR3-
dependent, predominantly IFN-γ or IFN-γ signaling independent,
homing of NK cells to the liver where they stimulate CD8+ T-cell
responses through activation of DCs.
CXCR3 Regulates Antimetastatic Activity of Entolimod Against
Spontaneous Metastatic Mammary Cancer. To extend our findings
to another model of tumor metastasis, we used the 4T1 mammary
tumor model in which tumors spontaneously metastasize to the liver
and lungs following surgical removal of primary tumors growing
orthotopically in the mammary fat pad. Our previous work (26) in
this model demonstrated that entolimod significantly extended
long-term survival, which despite the presence of disseminated liver
metastases, is primarily a reflection of lung metastases (52).
Therefore, the survival benefit provided by entolimod in the 4T1
model suggests that the drug may be efficacious against both liver
and lung metastases. To examine whether this involves a CXCR3-
dependent mechanism, we compared survival of BALB/c versus
Cxcr3−/− mice after surgical removal of primary orthotopic 4T1
tumors and treatment with PBS or entolimod on days 1, 3, and 5
postsurgery. Consistent with our previous work (26), entolimod
treatment significantly prolonged long-term survival of wild-type
mice, indicating suppression of tumor metastases (Fig. 4A). How-
ever, this effect was completely absent in identically treated 4T1-
bearing Cxcr3−/− mice. Notably, as in the experimental CT26 liver
metastasis model, survival was significantly diminished in control
(PBS-treated) Cxcr3−/− mice compared with control wild-type mice,
indicating that CXCR3 is also important for immunosurveillance
independent of entolimod. Upon necropsy at the time of death,
mortality in this experiment was confirmed to be a result of sig-
nificant lung metastases.
We assessed the contribution of NK, CD8+, and CD4+ T cells
to the antimetastatic activity of entolimod using antibody-medi-
ated cellular depletion after surgical removal of primary 4T1
tumors. Although depletion of NK cells with anti-asialo GM1
diminished the survival benefit provided by entolimod (Fig. 4B),
this difference was not statistically significant (P = 0.2187). In
contrast, depletion of either CD8+ or CD4+ T cells significantly
reduced survival to the same extent as simultaneous depletion of
all three cell types (NK, CD8+, and CD4+ T cells). Depletion of
CD4+ T cells had a slightly greater negative effect on entolimod-
mediated survival compared with depletion of NK or CD8+ T
cells. Although administration of rabbit IgG antibodies appeared
E878
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521359113
Brackett et al.
 to reduce the antimetastatic activity of entolimod, this was not
significantly different (P > 0.1691) from entolimod-treated mice
given either rat IgG or a combination of rabbit and rat IgG. This
finding suggests that unlike in the CT26 experimental liver meta-
static model, CD4+ T cells are required for entolimod-elicited
generation of antitumor immunity against spontaneous mammary
cancer metastases.
To determine whether the antitumor mechanisms induced by
entolimod could provide protective immune memory against 4T1
tumors, mice that survived for at least 100 d after primary tumor
removal in the experiment shown in Fig. 4A were rechallenged with
a subcutaneous injection of 4T1 cells in the opposite mammary fat
pad (without any further treatment). Naïve mice (100%) developed
4T1 tumors in the fat pad within 16 d of inoculation, compared with
only 45% of mice previously “cured” by entolimod treatment (Fig.
4C). Additionally, these mice remained free of detectable tumors
for at least 100 d following subcutaneous 4T1 rechallange. Impor-
tantly, although there were a small number of control vehicle-
treated mice that did not develop 4T1 metastases after the original
inoculation/surgery (Fig. 4A), these animals did not display pro-
tective immunity against 4T1 rechallenge (100% developed tumors
by day 21 after rechallenge).
We next used an adoptive T-cell transfer approach to assess
the effector memory response of T cells from “4T1-cured” mice
(survivors from the rechallenge in Fig. 4C) against lung tumors
established via intravenous injection of 4T1 tumor cells, as previously
described (58). Following in vitro expansion and purification, CD8+,
CD4+, or CD8+ and CD4+ T cells from naïve or 4T1-cured mice
were adoptively transferred into BALB/c mice 3 d after establishing
4T1 lung tumors. Naïve T cells (CD8+, CD4+, or CD8+ and CD4+)
did not provide any significant antitumor benefit to these mice (Fig.
4D, Left). In contrast, transfer of CD8+ T cells from 4T1-cured mice
resulted in effective control of 4T1 lung tumor development. CD4+
T cells from 4T1-cured mice did not provide protection against 4T1
tumors and the effect of CD4+ plus CD8+ T cells was no greater
than that of CD8+ T cells alone. The tumor-specificity of the effector
memory response was tested in a second cohort of mice injected
intravenously with CT26 tumor cells, which leads to development of
lung tumors. Both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells from 4T1-cured mice
suppressed development of CT26 lung tumors when transferred
separately (Fig. 4D, Right). However, these effects were considerably
weaker than what was observed against 4T1 tumors with transfer of
4T1-cured CD8+ or CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, indicating tumor-type
specificity of the generated memory immune response.
Overall, these data indicates that the antimetastatic activity of
entolimod is not limited to a particular tumor model or to liver-
metastasizing cancers, but is also relevant to lung metastasizing
cancers. The mechanism underlying entolimod-mediated suppres-
sion of 4T1 mammary tumor metastasis to the lung was found to be
similar to that involved in suppression of CT26 CRC tumor me-
tastasis to the liver in that CXCR3 is required along with T cells.
However, in contrast to the CT26 model, metastasis suppression in
the 4T1 model did not absolutely depend upon NK cells, and in
addition to CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells were also important. Tumor
type-specific immune memory generated in entolimod-treated mice
was primarily mediated by CD8+ T cells.
A
C
B
D
Fig. 2.
Entolimod stimulates CXCR3-dependent homing of NK cells to the
liver. (A and B) Mice were injected (subcutaneously) with PBS (untreated) or
entolimod on day 5 after intrasplenic CT26 tumor cell inoculation. Data are
represented as mean ± SEM. P values were determined by Student’s t test.
(A) Absolute number of total NK cells in the livers of CT26-inoculated PBS- or
entolimod-treated BALB/c or Cxcr3−/− mice. FACS analysis for NK cells was
performed on total liver cells isolated 0 h (untreated) or 5 h after entolimod
treatment using mAb against CD45, CD3e, and NKp46. Results are reported
as the absolute number of NK cells per liver. n = 8–23 mice per group; *P =
0.0007 for comparison with control, #P = 0.0008 for comparison with 5-h
BALB/c. (B) Competitive homing assay demonstrating that entolimod-
induced homing of NK cells to the liver is CXCR3-dependent. Purified splenic
NK cells from BALB/c or CXCR3-deficient mice were labeled with CFDA or
CellTracker orange, respectively, and adoptively transferred (in an equal
ratio) into PBS- or entolimod-treated BALB/c mice, as described in Methods.
Livers were collected 4.5 h after treatment for FACS analysis. NK cells of the
different genotypes were detected based on the fluorescent cell label in
combination with CD45, CD3e, and NKp46 markers (using mAbs). n = 5 mice
per group; *P < 0.02 for comparison with control, #P = 0.01 for comparison
with 5-h BALB/c NK cells. (C) Kinetics of mortality for BALB/c or Cxcr3−/− mice
that were injected (subcutaneously) with PBS (control) or entolimod on days
5 and 6 after intrasplenic CT26 tumor cell inoculation. P values were de-
termined by Log-rank test. *P = 0.0001 for comparison with control, #P <
0.01 for comparison with BALB/c. (D) Fold-change in the absolute number of
total DCs defined by CD45+CD11c+ and proportion of CD40+ DCs in the livers
of BALB/c or Cxcr3−/− treated with entolimod or PBS (0h). Total liver cells
were isolated at the indicated times after entolimod/PBS treatment and
stained for FACS with a mixture of mAbs against CD45, CD11c, and CD40. n =
5 mice per group; *P < 0.03 for comparison with control, #P < 0.01 for
comparison with BALB/c.
Brackett et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 1, 2016
|
E879
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 Discussion
Recent major breakthroughs in cancer immunotherapy include
the development of chimeric antigen receptor therapy (59) and
immune checkpoint blockade (60), both of which have rein-
vigorated the promise of this explosive field of oncologic re-
search. Despite some remarkable successes, however, clinical
efficacy has been limited to specific patient populations, such as
those with certain B-cell malignancies or advanced melanoma
(61). This illustrates the complexities facing the cancer immu-
notherapy field, but also reaffirms that continued successes may
be achieved if development of new treatment paradigms is paired
with improved understanding of the biology of different tumor
types and relevant antitumor immune mechanisms.
In addition to chimeric antigen receptor therapy and immune
checkpoint blockade, considerable interest has been placed on
strategies that engage the TLR system, a critical component of
host defense that bridges innate and adaptive immunity (7).
Although at least nine distinct TLRs have been discovered in
mammals (62), drug development efforts have focused on tar-
geting TLRs 3, 7, and 9, because they are thought to effectively
integrate innate and adaptive immune responses (63). However,
the promise of such TLR agonist-based therapies has not been
borne out in the clinic, not only because little attention has been
paid to identifying the most suitable target tumor types, but also
because systemic administration of the pharmacologics used to
engage these particular TLR pathways have led to “cytokine
storm”-related dose-limiting toxicities (10–12). This led us to
consider that the therapeutic value of the “TLR agonist concept”
might be markedly improved by exploiting a TLR system in-
trinsic to the tumor microenvironment. Based on the knowledge
of TLR5 expression in vivo, and the fact that the liver (i.e., he-
patocytes) is a dominant sink for the action of TLR5 agonists
(26), we hypothesized that liver-associated malignancies would
represent rational targets for TLR5-directed immunotherapy.
In agreement with this central hypothesis, earlier studies in
our laboratory showed that treatment with the TLR5 agonist
entolimod significantly prolonged survival of mice in experi-
mental models of liver metastatic tumors (26). This activity was
mediated by an NK cell-dependent mechanism and did not
cause cytokine-storm–associated side effects (29). Despite these
promising preliminary findings, a number of fundamental ques-
tions surrounding the antimetastatic activity of entolimod remain
to be resolved, namely: (i) Does entolimod treatment prolong
survival of tumor-bearing hosts by engaging a combination of
both innate and adaptive immune cellular elements, such as NK
cells and CD8+ or CD4+ T cells? (ii) If the antimetastatic activity
of entolimod enhances survival of tumor-bearing hosts through
a T-cell–dependent mechanism, does this lead to generation of
a memory immune response enabling surviving hosts to reject a
subsequent tumor challenge? (iii) If both innate and adaptive
immune cellular elements are necessary for entolimod-mediated
enhancement of survival, what is the dynamic relationship be-
tween these two arms of the cell-mediated immune system? (iv)
How general is the antimetastatic activity of entolimod (e.g., is
efficacy observed with other tumor types or other nonliver
sites of metastasis)?
Altogether, and in contrast to what has been observed in
studies of TLR3 or -9 targeting, our results show that activation
of the TLR5 pathway using entolimod as a single-agent systemic
monotherapy: (i) leads to antimetastatic activity by recruiting
and engaging both NK and T-cell responses; (ii) enables the
generation of CD8+ T-cell–dependent antitumor memory, which
A
B
C
Fig. 3.
Entolimod stimulates expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10 and NK cell recruitment to the liver independently of IFN-γ. (A) Effect of entolimod treatment
on expression of IFN-γ in the mouse liver. Mice were treated on day 5 after CT26 inoculation with entolimod and livers were collected at the indicated time
points for preparation of total protein lysates. IFN-γ levels were measured by ELISA and normalized per μg total protein. Mean ± SEM, n = 4 mice per group.
*P < 0.02 for comparison with 0 h (Student’s t test). (B) Effect of entolimod treatment on expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10 in the livers and plasma of IFN-
γ–depleted and nondepleted mice. Mice were treated with rat IgG or anti–IFN-γ antibodies on days 4 and 5 after CT26 inoculation and livers were collected at
the indicated time points for preparation of total protein lysates. CXCL9 and CXCL10 levels were measured by ELISA and normalized per μg total protein for
liver and per ml plasma. Mean ± SEM, n = 4 mice per group. *P < 0.02 for comparison with 0 h, #P < 0.03 for comparison with rat IgG (Student’s t test).
(C) Effect of IFN-γ depletion on entolimod-elicited NK cell response in the liver. Mice were treated with rat IgG or anti–IFN-γ antibodies on days 4 and 5 after
CT26 inoculation and livers were collected at the indicated time points for FACS analysis. NK cells were defined as CD45+CD3e−NKp46+. Results are reported as
the absolute number of NK cells per liver. n = 3–5 mice per group; *P < 0.01 for comparison with control.
E880
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521359113
Brackett et al.
 leads to tumor rejection upon rechallenge; (iii) suppresses tumor
development and metastasis through a mechanism involving
CXCR3-dependent homing of NK cells to the liver; and (iv) is
efficacious against metastasis to the lung as well as the liver for
primary tumors of multiple types (demonstrated in murine CT26
CRC and 4T1 mammary tumor models). The overall finding that
entolimod treatment as a single-agent can induce long-term
antitumor immune control in multiple preclinical models not
only suggests that entolimod is likely superior to current TLR-
based approaches, but that TLR agonists that engage or hone in
on immune reactions within a relevant pathologic microenvi-
ronment (such as TLR5 in the liver) are likely to be more ef-
fective than those that act systemically or distally from the
relevant target site. This organ-specific activity of TLR5-acti-
vating agents is supported by recent work demonstrating that T
cells capable of secreting bacterial flagellin have enhanced an-
titumor activity through their ability to reshape the local tumor
microenvironment into one that is conducive for an antitumor
immune response (64).
Paradoxically, both tumor-promoting inflammation and anti-
tumor immunity have been linked to TLR5. In fact, activation of
TLR5 by commensal bacteria was shown to drive malignant pro-
gression at extramucosal locations through the promotion of in-
flammation, which dampened antitumor immunity by expanding
immunosuppressive networks (65). In contrast, we and others have
shown that TLR5 activation has tumor growth suppressive effects
and stimulates antitumor immunity (19–26, 53). Earlier studies in
our laboratory showed that entolimod displayed a growth-inhibitory
effect on a TLR5-expressing mouse xenograft model of human
lung adenocarcinoma A549 (23), supporting a direct effect of TLR5
stimulation on tumor growth suppression. However, our more
recent work (26), in conjunction with the work presented here,
indicate a second indirect mechanism through TLR5-mediated
changes in the liver microenvironment. TLR5 activation in the
liver is sufficient for the generation of antitumor immunity, as
evident in the TLR5 nonresponsive CT26 liver metastatic model.
Hence, TLR5 stimulation suppresses tumor growth and generates
antitumor immunity through two mechanisms: (i) directly via tumor
cells, and (ii) indirectly through microenvironmental changes of
the liver. The relative impact of these two mechanisms on the
generation of antitumor immunity by TLR5 activation is a focus
of our future work.
Although immune interactions within the liver in response to
TLR5 activation are complex and remain to be fully understood,
earlier studies have identified hepatocytes as a direct and major
entolimod-responsive cell type in vivo (26). The results presented
herein offer new clues into how engagement of this pathway
leads to tumor growth control. Fig. 5 illustrates our working
model for how entolimod suppresses experimental colorectal
liver metastasis by engaging both innate and adaptive immune
effector mechanisms. Together with our previous work, this
study shows how entolimod stimulates homing of NK cells to
naïve (26) and tumor-bearing livers (32). Our data herein show
that entolimod-elicited NK cell homing to the liver occurs pre-
dominantly through a CXCR3-dependent blood-borne mecha-
nism, but that an alternate mechanism also exists. NK cells have
been reported to express multiple chemokine receptors, in-
cluding CXCR 1–4, CCR4, CCR5, CCR7, CCR8, and CX3CR1
(66). Because entolimod induces expression of the CXCR1/2
chemokine CXCL1 (29), this chemokine axis may contribute to
NK cell homing to the liver. Two other potential candidates
are CCL3 (67) and CCR5 (68), both of which control NK cell
Fig. 4.
CXCR3 regulates entolimod-mediated generation of antitumor im-
munity against spontaneous mammary cancer metastases. (A and B) Mice
were injected (subcutaneously) with PBS (untreated) or entolimod on days 1, 3,
and 5 after surgical removal of orthotopic primary 4T1 tumors. P values were
determined by log-rank test. (A) Effect of entolimod treatment on BALB/c and
Cxcr3−/− animal survival in the 4T1 metastasis model. (B) Effect of NK, CD8+, or
CD4+ T-cell depletion on survival of entolimod-treated mice in the 4T1 metastasis
model. Mice were treated with anti-asialo GM1 (days 0, 1, and 7 postsurgery),
anti-CD8 or anti-CD4 (days 0 and 7 postsurgery), or control Abs (rabbit or rat IgG,
respectively) in combination with entolimod given on days 1, 3, and 5 post-
surgery. (C) Entolimod-induced immune memory against 4T1 tumors. Naïve
BALB/c mice or entolimod- or PBS (control)-treated mice that survived for >100 d
after surgery in the experiment described in A were rechallenged with 4T1
tumor cells injected subcutaneously in the opposite mammary fat pad. The
percentage of mice showing no development of subcutaneous tumors is plotted
over time. P values were determined by log-rank test. (D) Effect of transferred T
cells from mice cured of 4T1 tumors by entolimod treatment or from naïve mice
on development of 4T1 or CT26 tumors in the lungs of naïve mice. Naïve BALB/c
mice were given an intravenous transfer of naïve or “4T1-cured” T cells (CD4+,
CD8+ or CD4+ + CD8+ T cells) 3 d after intravenous injection of 4T1 (Left) or CT26
(Right) tumor cells. The “PBS” control groups were injected with tumor cells, but
did not receive T cells (injected with PBS instead). Mice were killed on day 30
after tumor cell injection and lungs were harvested to quantify the number of
lung tumors under a dissecting microscope. Data are shown as mean number of
tumors per lung ± SEM (n = 5 mice per group). P values were determined by
Student’s t test. *P < 0.03 for comparison with PBS or naïve control, #P < 0.003
for comparison with 4T1-cured CD4+ T cells.
Fig. 5.
Schematic illustration of the proposed antimetastatic mechanism of
entolimod against experimental colorectal cancer liver metastases.
Brackett et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 1, 2016
|
E881
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 recruitment to the liver in response to bacterial infection.
The coordinated relationship between NK cells and CD8+ T cells
leading to optimal therapeutic efficacy of entolimod was demon-
strated by subset-specific depletion (loss-of-function) experiments
or adoptive transfer (add-back/reconstitution of individual subsets)
approaches. Moreover, NK cell depletion studies were used to
show that DCs bridged the temporal relationship between NK and
CD8+ T cells within the liver tumor microenvironment. Recent
work by Riise et al. (69) showing that TLR7-stimulated neutrophils
instruct NK cells to stimulate DC maturation may be a potential
mechanism for entolimod-mediated NK cell activation of DCs.
In contrast to the CT26 liver metastatic model, suppression of
spontaneous mammary metastases in the 4T1 model by entoli-
mod did not absolutely depend upon NK cells, but rather was
completely dependent on both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. An
important difference in the metastatic spread of these two
models, which may contribute to the difference in the antitumor
mechanisms of entolimod, is that the CT26 model produces only
liver metastases, whereas the 4T1 model develops both liver and
lung metastases. Although the role of CD4+ T cells for the
antitumor mechanism of entolimod in the 4T1 model remains
unclear, CD4+ T cells potentially provide help for DC activation,
costimulatory molecule expression, and production of IL-12 and
IFN-γ. A direct interaction of CD4+ T cells with 4T1 tumor cells is
unlikely due to the lack of MHC II expression by 4T1 tumor cells
(70). The mechanism by which entolimod facilitates the interaction
of CD4+ T cells and DCs is unknown and should be a future focus
of study.
Although the work of others has shown that NK cells are di-
rectly tumoricidal against tumor cells in the liver (36, 37), our
findings indicate that NK cells play a regulatory role by stimu-
lating DC activation but not recruitment to the liver post-ento-
limod. This finding is supported by the current knowledge that
NK cells influence T-cell immunity via DC-dependent pathways
(as reviewed in ref. 55). Although the mechanism remains un-
clear, NK cell produced IFN-γ facilitates DC maturation/acti-
vation by stimulating increased expression of costimulatory
molecules CD86 and CD40 on DCs and production of IL-12 and
IFN-γ, all of which are critical for T-cell activation, differentia-
tion, and expansion (71, 72). Similar to other models (42), we
identified that entolimod stimulates an NK-DC cross-talk to
activate antitumor CD8+ T cells independently of CD4+ T-cell
help. Our findings showing that DC activation is not completely
abolished in NK cell-depleted mice suggest a minor NK cell-
independent mechanism also exists. Entolimod may directly acti-
vate liver-specific DCs, which is supported by in vitro studies
showing that: (i) splenic CD11c+ cells respond directly to ento-
limod by up-regulation of costimulatory molecules CD80 and
CD86 (53), and (ii) flagellin directly activates bone marrow DCs
in vitro (73) and lamina propria DCs in vivo (74) to drive a
Th1 response.
Given the apparent central importance of NK cells as “initi-
ators” of entolimod-mediated antitumor immune responses, we
sought to identify the molecular mechanism regulating the
entolimod-elicited NK cell response. Induction of the CXCR3
ligand CXCL10 by entolimod in the plasma of treated mice (29)
provided the rationale to explore whether this axis regulates the
NK cell response induced by entolimod. We demonstrated that
abrogation of the NK cell response either by antibody-mediated
depletion of NK cells or by disruption of CXCR3-directed NK
cell homing (in Cxcr3−/− mice) prevented DC activation. This
clearly establishes that CXCR3-dependent NK cell homing to
the liver after entolimod treatment is required for both DC ac-
tivation and downstream activation of T-cell–dependent antitumor
immunity. Intriguingly, our work shows that entolimod may regulate
expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10 through a unique mechanism
that is predominantly IFN-γ or IFN-γ signaling-independent.
Although the mechanism is unknown, a potential candidate is
IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1). Activation of TLRs can directly
induce IRF-1 expression (75), which in turn can transcriptionally
control expression of the genes for CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11
(76, 77). Moreover, IRF-1 expression was shown to be essential for
expression of CXCL11 and suppression of pulmonary metastases by
CXCR3-expressing NK cells (78).
In summary, our results demonstrate that entolimod can serve
as an effective systemic monotherapy to generate protective
antitumor T-cell immunity through coordination with CXCR3-
expressing NK cells. Our finding that entolimod mediates antitumor
effects in several mouse models, including a model of spontaneous
metastasis to distal sites, suggests that entolimod treatment alone or
in concert with other conventional or experimental therapies could
have a major impact on cancer treatment outcomes. The safety of
systemically administered entolimod has been demonstrated in
several mammalian species, including rodents, nonhuman primates,
and humans (29, 30). Together with this established safety profile,
the mechanistic findings of the work reported here provide a strong
foundation for initiation of a phase I clinical trial of entolimod in
patients with metastatic liver disease to assess its safety as well as its
ability to induce innate/adaptive immune responses as surrogate
measurements of efficacy (30).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Patricia Baker for her help with the editing
of this manuscript; Dr. Joshua Farber for the kind gift of Cxcr3−/− mice on the
BALB/c background; Liliya Novototskaya for the breeding and maintenance
of this colony; and Dr. Xuefang Cao for the samples pertaining to the
Ifngr1−/− studies. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grants R01GM095874 and R01AI080446 (to A.V.G.), and R01CA140622 and
R01CA172105 (to S.I.A.); Department of Defense Grant BC140507 (to A.V.G.); a
contract from Cleveland BioLabs, Inc. to Roswell Park Cancer Institute (Principal
Investigator A.V.G.); and grants from the Roswell Park Alliance Foundation
(Principal Investigators S.I.A. and A.V.G.).
1. Restifo NP, Dudley ME, Rosenberg SA (2012) Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer:
Harnessing the T cell response. Nat Rev Immunol 12(4):269–281.
2. Puré E, Allison JP, Schreiber RD (2005) Breaking down the barriers to cancer immu-
notherapy. Nat Immunol 6(12):1207–1210.
3. Drobits B, et al. (2012) Imiquimod clears tumors in mice independent of adaptive
immunity by converting pDCs into tumor-killing effector cells. J Clin Invest 122(2):
575–585.
4. O’Sullivan T, et al. (2012) Cancer immunoediting by the innate immune system in the
absence of adaptive immunity. J Exp Med 209(10):1869–1882.
5. Smyth MJ, et al. (2000) Differential tumor surveillance by natural killer (NK) and NKT
cells. J Exp Med 191(4):661–668.
6. Kanzler H, Barrat FJ, Hessel EM, Coffman RL (2007) Therapeutic targeting of innate
immunity with Toll-like receptor agonists and antagonists. Nat Med 13(5):552–559.
7. Akira S, Takeda K, Kaisho T (2001) Toll-like receptors: Critical proteins linking innate
and acquired immunity. Nat Immunol 2(8):675–680.
8. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Medzhitov R (2009) Toll-like receptors and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
9(1):57–63.
9. Stanley MA (2002) Imiquimod and the imidazoquinolones: Mechanism of action and
therapeutic potential. Clin Exp Dermatol 27(7):571–577.
10. Adams S, et al. (2008) Immunization of malignant melanoma patients with full-length NY-
ESO-1 protein using TLR7 agonist imiquimod as vaccine adjuvant. J Immunol 181(1):776–784.
11. Khan AL, Heys SD, Eremin O (1995) Synthetic polyribonucleotides: Current role and
potential use in oncological practice. Eur J Surg Oncol 21(2):224–227.
12. Manegold C, et al. (2008) Randomized phase II trial of a Toll-like receptor 9 agonist
oligodeoxynucleotide, PF-3512676, in combination with first-line taxane plus plati-
num chemotherapy for advanced-stage non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
26(24):3979–3986.
13. Huang B, et al. (2007) Listeria monocytogenes promotes tumor growth via tumor cell
toll-like receptor 2 signaling. Cancer Res 67(9):4346–4352.
14. Pidgeon GP, et al. (1999) The role of endotoxin/lipopolysaccharide in surgically in-
duced tumour growth in a murine model of metastatic disease. Br J Cancer 81(8):
1311–1317.
15. Harmey JH, et al. (2002) Lipopolysaccharide-induced metastatic growth is associated
with increased angiogenesis, vascular permeability and tumor cell invasion. Int J
Cancer 101(5):415–422.
16. Fan H, et al. (2012) Intracerebral CpG immunotherapy with carbon nanotubes abro-
gates growth of subcutaneous melanomas in mice. Clin Cancer Res 18(20):5628–5638.
E882
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1521359113
Brackett et al.
 17. Le Mercier I, et al. (2013) Tumor promotion by intratumoral plasmacytoid dendritic
cells is reversed by TLR7 ligand treatment. Cancer Res 73(15):4629–4640.
18. Palamara F, et al. (2004) Identification and characterization of pDC-like cells in normal
mouse skin and melanomas treated with imiquimod. J Immunol 173(5):3051–3061.
19. Sfondrini L, et al. (2006) Antitumor activity of the TLR-5 ligand flagellin in mouse
models of cancer. J Immunol 176(11):6624–6630.
20. Garaude J, Kent A, van Rooijen N, Blander JM (2012) Simultaneous targeting of Toll-
and nod-like receptors induces effective tumor-specific immune responses. Sci Transl
Med 4(120):120ra16.
21. Cai Z, et al. (2011) Activation of Toll-like receptor 5 on breast cancer cells by flagellin
suppresses cell proliferation and tumor growth. Cancer Res 71(7):2466–2475.
22. Rhee SH, Im E, Pothoulakis C (2008) Toll-like receptor 5 engagement modulates tumor
development and growth in a mouse xenograft model of human colon cancer.
Gastroenterology 135(2):518–528.
23. Burdelya LG, et al. (2012) Toll-like receptor 5 agonist protects mice from dermatitis
and oral mucositis caused by local radiation: Implications for head-and-neck cancer
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 83(1):228–234.
24. Soto LJ, 3rd, et al. (2003) Attenuated Salmonella typhimurium prevents the estab-
lishment of unresectable hepatic metastases and improves survival in a murine model.
J Pediatr Surg 38(7):1075–1079.
25. Yam C, et al. (2010) Monotherapy with a tumor-targeting mutant of S. typhimurium
inhibits liver metastasis in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. J Surg Res 164(2):
248–255.
26. Burdelya LG, et al. (2013) Central role of liver in anticancer and radioprotective ac-
tivities of Toll-like receptor 5 agonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(20):E1857–E1866.
27. Carvalho FA, Aitken JD, Gewirtz AT, Vijay-Kumar M (2011) TLR5 activation induces
secretory interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (sIL-1Ra) and reduces inflammasome-
associated tissue damage. Mucosal Immunol 4(1):102–111.
28. Vijay-Kumar M, et al. (2008) Toll-like receptor 5-deficient mice have dysregulated
intestinal gene expression and nonspecific resistance to Salmonella-induced typhoid-
like disease. Infect Immun 76(3):1276–1281.
29. Burdelya LG, et al. (2008) An agonist of Toll-like receptor 5 has radioprotective ac-
tivity in mouse and primate models. Science 320(5873):226–230.
30. Adjei A (2011) Entolimod in treating patients with locally advanced or metastatic
solid tumors that cannot be removed by surgery. Clinical trial no. NCT01527136.
Avaliable at ClinicalTrials.gov. Accessed October 24, 2015.
31. Krivokrysenko VI, et al. (2015) The Toll-like receptor 5 agonist entolimod mitigates
lethal acute radiation syndrome in non-human primates. PLoS One 10(9):e0135388.
32. Yang H, et al. (2015) The Toll-like receptor 5 agonist entolimod suppresses hepatic
metastases in a murine model of ocular melanoma via an NK cell-dependent mech-
anism. Oncotarget, 10.18632/oncotarget.6500.
33. Hossain MS, Ramachandiran S, Gewirtz AT, Waller EK (2014) Recombinant TLR5 ag-
onist CBLB502 promotes NK cell-mediated anti-CMV immunity in mice. PLoS One 9(5):
e96165.
34. Lise M, Mocellin S, Pilati P, Nitti D (2005) Colorectal liver metastasis: Towards the
integration of conventional and molecularly targeted therapeutic approaches. Front
Biosci 10:3042–3057.
35. Kim S, et al. (2002) In vivo developmental stages in murine natural killer cell matu-
ration. Nat Immunol 3(6):523–528.
36. Bahjat KS, et al. (2007) Activation of immature hepatic NK cells as immunotherapy for
liver metastatic disease. J Immunol 179(11):7376–7384.
37. Dupaul-Chicoine J, et al. (2015) The Nlrp3 inflammasome suppresses colorectal cancer
metastatic growth in the liver by promoting natural killer cell tumoricidal activity.
Immunity 43(4):751–763.
38. Moretta L, et al. (2006) Effector and regulatory events during natural killer-dendritic
cell interactions. Immunol Rev 214:219–228.
39. Biron CA, Nguyen KB, Pien GC, Cousens LP, Salazar-Mather TP (1999) Natural killer
cells in antiviral defense: Function and regulation by innate cytokines. Annu Rev
Immunol 17:189–220.
40. Gerosa F, et al. (2002) Reciprocal activating interaction between natural killer cells
and dendritic cells. J Exp Med 195(3):327–333.
41. Mocikat R, et al. (2003) Natural killer cells activated by MHC class I(low) targets prime
dendritic cells to induce protective CD8 T cell responses. Immunity 19(4):561–569.
42. Adam C, et al. (2005) DC-NK cell cross talk as a novel CD4+ T-cell-independent
pathway for antitumor CTL induction. Blood 106(1):338–344.
43. Liu X, et al. (2014) Flagellin-induced expression of CXCL10 mediates direct fungal
killing and recruitment of NK cells to the cornea in response to Candida albicans
infection. Eur J Immunol 44(9):2667–2679.
44. Luster AD, Ravetch JV (1987) Biochemical characterization of a gamma interferon-
inducible cytokine (IP-10). J Exp Med 166(4):1084–1097.
45. Loetscher M, et al. (1996) Chemokine receptor specific for IP10 and mig: Structure,
function, and expression in activated T-lymphocytes. J Exp Med 184(3):963–969.
46. Loetscher M, Loetscher P, Brass N, Meese E, Moser B (1998) Lymphocyte-specific
chemokine receptor CXCR3: Regulation, chemokine binding and gene localization.
Eur J Immunol 28(11):3696–3705.
47. Martín-Fontecha A, et al. (2004) Induced recruitment of NK cells to lymph nodes
provides IFN-gamma for T(H)1 priming. Nat Immunol 5(12):1260–1265.
48. Wendel M, Galani IE, Suri-Payer E, Cerwenka A (2008) Natural killer cell accumulation in
tumors is dependent on IFN-gamma and CXCR3 ligands. Cancer Res 68(20):8437–8445.
49. Farber JM (1990) A macrophage mRNA selectively induced by gamma-interferon
encodes a member of the platelet factor 4 family of cytokines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
87(14):5238–5242.
50. Luster AD, Unkeless JC, Ravetch JV (1985) Gamma-interferon transcriptionally regu-
lates an early-response gene containing homology to platelet proteins. Nature
315(6021):672–676.
51. Jain A, et al. (2003) Synergistic effect of a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulat-
ing factor-transduced tumor vaccine and systemic interleukin-2 in the treatment of
murine colorectal cancer hepatic metastases. Ann Surg Oncol 10(7):810–820.
52. Pulaski BA, Ostrand-Rosenberg S (1998) Reduction of established spontaneous
mammary carcinoma metastases following immunotherapy with major histocom-
patibility complex class II and B7.1 cell-based tumor vaccines. Cancer Res 58(7):
1486–1493.
53. Leigh ND, et al. (2014) A flagellin-derived toll-like receptor 5 agonist stimulates cy-
totoxic lymphocyte-mediated tumor immunity. PLoS One 9(1):e85587.
54. Sturge CR, et al. (2013) TLR-independent neutrophil-derived IFN-γ is important for host
resistance to intracellular pathogens. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(26):10711–10716.
55. Crouse J, Xu HC, Lang PA, Oxenius A (2015) NK cells regulating T cell responses:
Mechanisms and outcome. Trends Immunol 36(1):49–58.
56. Terabe M, Berzofsky JA (2008) The role of NKT cells in tumor immunity. Adv Cancer
Res 101:277–348.
57. Jordan MA, Fletcher J, Baxter AG (2004) Genetic control of NKT cell numbers.
Immunol Cell Biol 82(3):276–284.
58. Ryan MH, Bristol JA, McDuffie E, Abrams SI (2001) Regression of extensive pulmonary
metastases in mice by adoptive transfer of antigen-specific CD8(+) CTL reactive
against tumor cells expressing a naturally occurring rejection epitope. J Immunol
167(8):4286–4292.
59. Barrett DM, Singh N, Porter DL, Grupp SA, June CH (2014) Chimeric antigen receptor
therapy for cancer. Annu Rev Med 65:333–347.
60. Pardoll DM (2012) The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy.
Nat Rev Cancer 12(4):252–264.
61. Hinrichs CS, Rosenberg SA (2014) Exploiting the curative potential of adoptive T-cell
therapy for cancer. Immunol Rev 257(1):56–71.
62. O’Neill LA, Golenbock D, Bowie AG (2013) The history of Toll-like receptors—Redefining
innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 13(6):453–460.
63. Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R (2004) Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive immune
responses. Nat Immunol 5(10):987–995.
64. Geng D, et al. (2015) TLR5 ligand-secreting T cells reshape the tumor microenviron-
ment and enhance antitumor activity. Cancer Res 75(10):1959–1971.
65. Rutkowski MR, et al. (2015) Microbially driven TLR5-dependent signaling governs
distal malignant progression through tumor-promoting inflammation. Cancer Cell
27(1):27–40.
66. Maghazachi AA (2003) G protein-coupled receptors in natural killer cells. J Leukoc Biol
74(1):16–24.
67. Salazar-Mather TP, Orange JS, Biron CA (1998) Early murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV)
infection induces liver natural killer (NK) cell inflammation and protection through
macrophage inflammatory protein 1alpha (MIP-1alpha)-dependent pathways. J Exp
Med 187(1):1–14.
68. Khan IA, et al. (2006) CCR5 is essential for NK cell trafficking and host survival fol-
lowing Toxoplasma gondii infection. PLoS Pathog 2(6):e49.
69. Riise RE, et al. (2015) TLR-stimulated neutrophils instruct NK cells to trigger dendritic
cell maturation and promote adaptive T cell responses. J Immunol 195(3):1121–1128.
70. Huang X, et al. (2002) Combined therapy of local and metastatic 4T1 breast tumor in
mice using SU6668, an inhibitor of angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases, and the
immunostimulator B7.2-IgG fusion protein. Cancer Res 62(20):5727–5735.
71. Yoo JK, Cho JH, Lee SW, Sung YC (2002) IL-12 provides proliferation and survival
signals to murine CD4+ T cells through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling
pathway. J Immunol 169(7):3637–3643.
72. Curtsinger JM, Agarwal P, Lins DC, Mescher MF (2012) Autocrine IFN-γ promotes naive
CD8 T cell differentiation and synergizes with IFN-α to stimulate strong function.
J Immunol 189(2):659–668.
73. Vicente-Suarez I, Brayer J, Villagra A, Cheng F, Sotomayor EM (2009) TLR5 ligation by
flagellin converts tolerogenic dendritic cells into activating antigen-presenting cells
that preferentially induce T-helper 1 responses. Immunol Lett 125(2):114–118.
74. Uematsu S, et al. (2008) Regulation of humoral and cellular gut immunity by lamina
propria dendritic cells expressing Toll-like receptor 5. Nat Immunol 9(7):769–776.
75. Honda K, Taniguchi T (2006) IRFs: Master regulators of signalling by Toll-like receptors
and cytosolic pattern-recognition receptors. Nat Rev Immunol 6(9):644–658.
76. Kanda N, Shimizu T, Tada Y, Watanabe S (2007) IL-18 enhances IFN-gamma-induced
production of CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 in human keratinocytes. Eur J Immunol
37(2):338–350.
77. Harikumar KB, et al. (2014) K63-linked polyubiquitination of transcription factor IRF1
is essential for IL-1-induced production of chemokines CXCL10 and CCL5. Nat
Immunol 15(3):231–238.
78. Ksienzyk A, et al. (2011) IRF-1 expression is essential for natural killer cells to suppress
metastasis. Cancer Res 71(20):6410–6418.
Brackett et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 1, 2016
|
E883
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
