 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 8 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Introduction
Due to an aging population, it is predicted that by 2040, neurode-
generative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), will be the 
second most common cause of morbidity in the developed world, 
after cancer (1). The current frontline symptomatic treatment for 
AD are acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors (2). These drugs 
act to increase cholinergic transmission, which is reduced in AD 
due to a loss of cholinergic innervation to key brain regions (3, 4). 
Despite some clinical benefit, the nonselective mode of action of 
AChE inhibitors results in significant dose-related adverse effects 
that can limit clinical usage (2).
To circumvent these adverse effects, more selective approaches 
to the improvement of cholinergic transmission specifically associ-
ated with memory have been pursued. In particular, activation of the 
M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (M1 mAChR) has procogni-
tive effects (5–8), making this muscarinic receptor subtype an attrac-
tive therapeutic target for AD (7). However, due to the highly con-
served nature of the muscarinic receptor orthosteric ligand-binding 
site (9, 10), the identification of M1 mAChR–selective ligands has 
been challenging (11). This lack of receptor subtype selectivity has 
resulted in the failure of numerous M1 mAChR drug discovery pro-
grams, exemplified by the mAChR ligand xanomeline — a drug that 
relieved some of the behavioral and cognitive deficits in AD patients 
(12, 13), but that failed in clinical trials due to side effects possibly 
due to the fact that, in addition to M1 mAChRs, xanomeline has 
significant action on other muscarinic receptor subtypes, including 
cardiac M2 mAChRs and peripheral M3 mAChRs (14, 15).
An alternative strategy would be to target the M1 mAChR 
with positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) that bind to spatially 
distinct allosteric sites located within nonconserved receptor 
regions and thereby display exquisite receptor-subtype selectiv-
ity (16, 17). Although muscarinic receptor PAMs have been shown 
to have an impact on learning and memory (18–21), these ligands 
have not been tested in models of progressive neurodegeneration 
that ultimately results in end-stage disease. Testing the action 
of M1 mAChR PAMs in the context of disease where cholinergic 
The current frontline symptomatic treatment for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is whole-body upregulation of cholinergic 
transmission via inhibition of acetylcholinesterase. This approach leads to profound dose-related adverse effects. An 
alternative strategy is to selectively target muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, particularly the M1 muscarinic acetylcholine 
receptor (M1 mAChR), which was previously shown to have procognitive activity. However, developing M1 mAChR–selective 
orthosteric ligands has proven challenging. Here, we have shown that mouse prion disease shows many of the hallmarks 
of human AD, including progressive terminal neurodegeneration and memory deficits due to a disruption of hippocampal 
cholinergic innervation. The fact that we also show that muscarinic signaling is maintained in both AD and mouse prion 
disease points to the latter as an excellent model for testing the efficacy of muscarinic pharmacological entities. The memory 
deficits we observed in mouse prion disease were completely restored by treatment with benzyl quinolone carboxylic acid 
(BQCA) and benzoquinazoline-12 (BQZ-12), two highly selective positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) of M1 mAChRs. 
Furthermore, prolonged exposure to BQCA markedly extended the lifespan of diseased mice. Thus, enhancing hippocampal 
muscarinic signaling using M1 mAChR PAMs restored memory loss and slowed the progression of mouse prion disease, 
indicating that this ligand type may have clinical benefit in diseases showing defective cholinergic transmission, such as AD.
M1 muscarinic allosteric modulators slow prion 
neurodegeneration and restore memory loss
Sophie J. Bradley,1 Julie-Myrtille Bourgognon,2 Helen E. Sanger,3 Nicholas Verity,2 Adrian J. Mogg,3 David J. White,4  
Adrian J. Butcher,2 Julie A. Moreno,2 Colin Molloy,1 Timothy Macedo-Hatch,2 Jennifer M. Edwards,2 Jurgen Wess,5  
Robert Pawlak,6 David J. Read,2 Patrick M. Sexton,7 Lisa M. Broad,3 Joern R. Steinert,2 Giovanna R. Mallucci,2,8  
Arthur Christopoulos,7 Christian C. Felder,9 and Andrew B. Tobin1
1The Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. 2MRC 
Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. 3Eli Lilly and Co., Neuroscience, Windlesham, Surrey, United Kingdom. 4Central Research Facility, University of Leicester, Leicester,  
United Kingdom. 5Molecular Signaling Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 6Institute of Biomedical  
and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. 7Drug Discovery Biology, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Department of 
Pharmacology, Monash University, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. 8Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 9Eli Lilly and Co., Neuroscience,  
Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
Authorship note: J.M. Bourgognon and H.E. Sanger contributed equally to the study.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
License: This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Submitted: March 11, 2016; Accepted: November 3, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(2):487–499.  
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI87526.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 8 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
lar loop of the receptor as highly sensitive to agonist stimulation 
(35) (Supplemental Figure 2A). Using this antibody biosensor for 
M1 mAChR activation, we determined that M1 mAChR activity 
was increased in the dentate gyrus and CA3 and CA1 regions of 
the hippocampus following fear conditioning (Figure 1D), regions 
that also showed increased neuronal activity, as determined by 
the increased expression of markers for neuronal activity-related 
cytoskeleton-associated protein (ARC) (Figure 1E) and cFOS (Sup-
plemental Figure 2B). These behavioral and biochemical data indi-
cate an important role for M1 mAChR activation in hippocampal- 
dependent learning and memory.
Cholinergic innervation and muscarinic receptor signaling in 
prion disease. To establish the impact of M1 mAChR ligands on 
learning and memory in neurodegenerative disease, we used 
prion-diseased mice that had progressive neurodegenerative 
disease with mechanistic, behavioral, and neuroanatomical cor-
relates to human and animal disorders (36, 37). Consistent with 
previous studies (38, 39), inoculation of mice (Tg37 hemizygous) 
with Rocky Mountain Laboratory (RML) prion–infected brain 
homogenate resulted in the accumulation of misfolded insoluble 
prion protein (PrPSc) in the hippocampus and cortex (Figure 2A) 
that was insensitive to proteinase K digestion (Figure 2B). There 
was also a notably higher expression of prion protein in the cor-
tex compared with the hippocampus (Figure 2B). Prion-infected 
brains also showed significant astrogliosis (Figure 2, C and D) and 
spongiosis (Figure 2E) as well as progressive neuronal loss in the 
CA1 region of the hippocampus from 9 weeks post inoculation 
(w.p.i.), as evidenced by histological staining of the hippocam-
pus (Figure 2E) and a reduction in the staining of the marker for 
neuronal cell bodies, NeuN (Figure 2, F and G). Importantly, the 
loss of neuronal cell bodies was also associated with a disruption 
of cholinergic innervation in the hippocampus, as evidenced by a 
fragmentation of neurons staining positively for choline acetyl-
transferase (ChAT), a marker of cholinergic neurons (Figure 3A). 
This correlated with a deficit in burrowing behavior (Figure 3B), as 
previously reported (24, 26), but also a deficit in contextual fear–
conditioning learning and memory (Figure 3C), whereas levels of 
locomotion, anxiety, and pain thresholds were not affected (Fig-
ure 3, D and E). It is important to note that these behavioral tests 
were conducted at a time point (9 to 10 w.p.i.) at which the mice 
showed no physical signs of disease. Physical symptoms of mouse 
prion disease, including ataxia, impairment of righting reflex, 
dragging of limbs, and sustained hunched posture, occur later in 
disease progression (from 12 w.p.i.).
The current frontline treatment of AD is administration of 
AChE inhibitors, such as the clinically approved drug donepezil, 
which increases cholinergic transmission by preventing acetyl-
choline degradation. Administration of donepezil (0.5 mg/kg) 60 
minutes prior to fear-conditioning training significantly augment-
ed learning and memory in prion-infected mice (Figure 3F), indi-
cating that the memory loss in prion-diseased mice was mecha-
nistically linked to a deficit in cholinergic transmission — a feature 
common to memory loss observed in AD.
A further correlation between murine prion disease and AD 
was revealed through the investigation of the expression and sig-
naling status of hippocampal muscarinic receptors. The expres-
sion levels of mAChRs were determined by radioligand binding 
transmission is compromised, as it is in AD, is important given 
the fact that PAMs can act by enhancing the action of the endog-
enous ligand acetylcholine, thereby maintaining the spatiotempo-
ral signaling of the endogenous ligand (17, 22), and/or by directly 
activating the receptor as so-called “PAM agonists.” Establishing 
which of these primary mechanisms operates to affect memory 
and learning in a disease setting of end-stage neurodegeneration 
is fundamental to understanding the clinical potential of musca-
rinic receptor PAMs.
The challenge lies in the fact that none of the current mouse 
AD models feature continued neuronal loss that ultimately results 
in terminal disease (23); thus, the impact and mechanism of action 
of muscarinic ligands in relieving symptoms of neurodegenera-
tion or modification of disease progression in the context of pro-
gressive neurodegenerative disease have not yet been tested (24).
In contrast to mouse AD models, mouse prion disease, which 
is characterized by an accumulation of misfolded prion protein 
aggregates (3, 15, 25), results in progressive neuronal loss and 
eventual terminal disease (24, 26, 27). Here, we show that mouse 
prion disease shares a number of key features with AD that include 
a loss of hippocampal cholinergic innervation and a cholinergic 
deficit that results in defective learning and memory while main-
taining postsynaptic muscarinic receptors and signaling. These 
findings prompted us to test the activity of muscarinic ligands 
in prion disease, where we determined that the prion-mediated 
deficit in learning and memory was completely restored by the 
muscarinic receptor agonist xanomeline (28, 29) as well as by the 
highly selective M1 mAChR PAMs benzyl quinolone carboxylic 
acid (BQCA) (30–32) and benzoquinazoline-12 (BQZ-12) (33). Fur-
thermore, since the mechanism of action of the M1 mAChR PAMs 
resulted in reduced adverse effects, we were able to test whether 
prolonged treatment with BQCA could slow disease progression. 
We found that daily dosing with BQCA significantly (P < 0.001) 
increased the survival of prion-diseased mice, indicating that M1 
mAChR–selective PAMs have the potential to achieve clinical effi-
cacy in alleviating cognitive deficits in neurodegenerative disease 
as well as to slow disease progression.
Results
M1 mAChR in hippocampal learning and memory. We used a series of 
mAChR knockout mice, in combination with radioligand binding, 
using the nonselective muscarinic receptor antagonist [3H]-N-methyl 
scopolamine ([3H]-NMS]) to establish that the predominant mAChR 
subtype expressed in the hippocampus of mice is the M1 mAChR 
(Supplemental Figure 1; supplemental material available online 
with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI87526DS1). In contex-
tual fear conditioning, a behavioral test of hippocampal-dependent 
learning and memory (34), M1 mAChR knockout (M1-KO) mice 
demonstrated a significant deficit (Figure 1A), whereas pain thresh-
old and locomotor activity were not altered (Figure 1, B and C).
To further probe the involvement of the M1 mAChR in hip-
pocampal-dependent learning and memory, we investigated the 
activation status of the M1 mAChR following fear-conditioning 
training using an antibody-based biosensor of receptor activation. 
This biosensor was developed from mass spectrometry–based 
(MS-based) phospho-proteomics on the M1 mAChR that identi-
fied phosphorylation at serine 228 (S228) in the third intracellu-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 8 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
we found that in the AD patient samples, the mAChR population 
was not significantly changed when compared with nondiseased 
controls (Figure 3H). The coupling of mAChRs to cognate G pro-
teins, as determined by receptor-mediated [35S]-GTPγS binding, 
and found to be unchanged in prion disease up to 10 w.p.i. (Figure 
3G and Supplemental Figure 3, A and B), as was the expression of 
M1 mAChRs (Supplemental Figure 3C), which have previously 
been reported to have a postsynaptic localization (40). Similarly, 
Figure 1. M1 mAChRs play an important role in hippocampal-dependent learning and memory. (A) Fear-conditioning response of WT and M1-KO mice. 
Statistical analysis by 2-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison test. ***P < 0.001. (B) Pain thresholds for WT and M1-KO mice. Statistical analysis 
by Student’s t test. (C) Locomotion of WT and M1-KO mice was determined by total distance traveled during an open field test. Data were analyzed using 
2-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons. All WT and M1-KO behavioral data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 8 mice. (D) An antibody-based 
biosensor for M1 mAChR activation (phosphorylation of the M1 mAChR on S228 in the third intracellular loop) was used to assess M1 mAChR activity in 
the hippocampus. Following fear-conditioning training, phosphorylation at S228 of the M1 mAChR was increased in the CA1 and CA3 regions and dentate 
gyrus of the hippocampus relative to control mice that received a 2-second unpaired foot shock. Magnification of the CA1 region (indicated by the rect-
angle) is shown in lower panels. (E) Fear-conditioning training increased neuronal activity, as assessed by an increase in ARC immunostaining, in the same 
regions of the hippocampus as those observed for activated M1 mAChR. D and E are composited images. Magnification of the CA1 region (indicated by the 
rectangle) is shown in lower panels (see D and E). Scale bars: 200 μm (upper panels); 100 μm (lower panels). 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Figure 2. Mouse prion disease is associated with the accumulation of misfolded prion protein, astrogliosis, spongiosis, and hippocampal neuronal 
loss. (A) Lysates from control or prion-infected (10 w.p.i.) mouse hippocampus and cortex were probed in Western blots with an antibody that detected 
both cellular (PrPc) and misfolded (PrPSc) prion protein. The presence of misfolded PrPsc is evident by lower molecular weight species in the prion-infected 
lysates. (B) Lysates from A were treated with proteinase K before probing in Western blots for prion protein. (C) Astrogliosis during prion disease was 
determined in Western blots of lysates prepared from control mice or mice 9 and 10 w.p.i. and probed with glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a marker for 
astrocytes. (D) Immunohistochemical staining of the hippocampal CA1 region probed with anti–glial fibrillary acidic protein antibody (green) to determine 
the level of astrogliosis. The nuclei were stained blue with DAPI. Scale bars: 50 μm. (E) Spongiosis in prion-infected hippocampi (upper panels) and CA1 
region (lower panels) was visualized by H&E stain of mouse hippocampus from paraformaldehyde-fixed mouse brain from control mice injected with NBH 
(control), prion-infected mice 9 w.p.i., and prion-infected mice 10 w.p.i. Scale bars: 200 μm (upper panels); 100 μm (lower panels). (F) Determination of 
neuronal loss of pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the hippocampus of mice 9 and 10 w.p.i. was determined by immunohistochemical staining of neu-
ronal cell bodies using antibodies to NeuN (green). The nuclei were stained blue with DAPI. Scale bars: 50 μm. (G) Quantification of NeuN staining in the 
CA1 of mice at various stages of prion disease. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. n = 3 mice, 3 sections per mouse. **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA. 
Blots and images shown are representative of at least 3 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
to nonconserved regions of the M1 mAChR (16, 17) and act by 
modulating the action of the natural ligand acetylcholine (Figure 
5A), thereby maintaining the spatiotemporal features of cholin-
ergic transmission (54). BQCA (structure in Figure 5B) has previ-
ously been described as a highly selective M1 mAChR PAM that 
markedly increases the affinity of orthosteric agonists at the M1 
mAChR (30–32). Here, we demonstrate that BQCA acts as a PAM 
in hippocampal membranes derived from control, 9 and 10 w.p.i. 
prion-infected mice, where it augments the action of an ortho-
steric agonist (in this case oxotremorine-M) as evidenced by the 
progressive leftward shift in the oxotremorine-M [35S]-GTPγS 
concentration–response curve with increasing concentrations 
of BQCA (Figure 5B). Importantly, the PAM activity of BQCA is 
also evident in membranes derived from both AD patient samples 
and nondisease controls, indicating that BQCA acts to enhance 
the activity of orthosteric agonists in the context of both murine 
prion disease and AD (Figure 5C). The maximal effect of BQCA 
in prion disease and AD was to enhance the potency of agonists 
by approximately 100-fold (see negative logarithm of the half-
maximal effective concentration [pEC50] values in Supplemental 
Table 2). In addition, BQCA displayed some direct intrinsic ago-
nist activity in mouse hippocampal membranes, a response evi-
dent at high BQCA concentrations (i.e., 3 μM) (Figure 5B), identi-
fying this compound as a PAM agonist in this tissue. This intrinsic 
activity can entirely be attributed to the action of BQCA at hip-
pocampal M1 mAChRs, since there is a complete absence of the 
BQCA [35S]-GTPγS response in membranes derived from M1-KO 
mice (Supplemental Figure 6). Interestingly, no intrinsic activity 
of BQCA was noted in the AD patient samples, highlighting that in 
the human tissues, the compound behaved as a pure PAM.
Previous pharmacokinetic studies have demonstrated that 
BQCA reaches maximal brain exposure after 30 to 60 minutes 
and remains stable for approximately 4 hours after i.p. adminis-
tration (19). Our studies are consistent with these data and show 
that BQCA (15 mg/kg; i.p.) administered 30 minutes prior to con-
textual fear–conditioning training resulted in brain exposure at 
concentrations at which BQCA would be expected to show only 
PAM activity (Supplemental Table 1). Thus, any in vivo effects at 
this exposure of BQCA in the mice would not be attributable to 
any potential intrinsic activity of BQCA (i.e., “PAM-agonist” activ-
ity), but only attributable to its PAM activity. Under these condi-
tions, single administration of BQCA prior to training resulted in 
a complete restoration of the contextual fear–conditioning learn-
ing and memory deficit observed in prion-infected mice at 9 to 10 
w.p.i. (Figure 5D). Electrophysiological evaluation of the action of 
BQCA revealed that, similarly to xanomeline, BQCA was able to 
restore AMPA-dependent glutamate transmission in prion-infect-
ed hippocampal slices (Supplemental Figure 7).
A recent chemistry program developed an M1 mAChR PAM, 
BQZ-12 (structure in Figure 5E), which is structurally related to 
BQCA, but shows higher functional potency based largely on a 
substantial improvement in allosteric site–binding affinity (33). 
We established that the affinity for BQZ-12 at the M1 mAChR in 
prion-infected hippocampus was approximately 40-fold greater 
than that of BQCA (Figure 5E). Administration of BQZ-12, at a 
dose 10-fold lower than that previously used for BQCA, 30 min-
utes prior to contextual fear–conditioning training of prion-infect-
was found to be the same in hippocampal membranes prepared 
from control and prion-infected mice (Figure 3I). Importantly, the 
coupling of mAChRs in cortical membranes from AD patients was 
also the same as in nondiseased controls (Figure 3J). Thus, our 
data indicate that cholinergic transmission is defective in prion 
disease due to a disruption of the presynaptic cholinergic input, 
while the postsynaptic cholinergic signaling apparatus remains 
intact — features that murine prion disease shares with AD, as evi-
denced in our study and that of others (41, 42).
Targeting mAChRs restores the memory deficit in prion disease. 
To test the hypothesis that targeting mAChRs in prion disease can 
have an impact on the learning and memory deficit, we used the 
M1/M4-preferring mAChR orthosteric ligand xanomeline (43, 44) 
(Figure 4A), which acts as a partial agonist for G protein coupling 
to mAChRs in the hippocampus of control and prion-infected mice 
(Figure 4B). As further evidence of the similarities in pharmacolog-
ical agent responsiveness in prion disease and AD, we found that 
xanomeline also acts as a partial agonist in human cortical samples 
in a manner that is not affected in AD patient samples (Figure 4C). 
Our brain and plasma exposure data are consistent with previous 
pharmacokinetic (45) data and show that xanomeline has good 
bioavailability in murine hippocampus 30 minutes after i.p. admin-
istration (Supplemental Table 1). In behavioral studies, admin-
istration of xanomeline (5 mg/kg) 30 minutes before contextual 
fear–conditioning training and 30 minutes before context retrieval 
resulted in a complete restoration of the contextual fear–condition-
ing deficit in prion-infected mice (Figure 4D). This effect appeared 
specific to hippocampal responses associated with learning and 
memory, since the burrowing response of prion-infected mice, a 
hippocampal-based innate behavior not associated with memory 
(46, 47), was not affected (Figure 4E).
It is well established that hippocampal glutamatergic trans-
mission is closely associated with learning and memory (48). We 
therefore investigated the relationship between mAChR activa-
tion and glutamate transmission in prion disease. Electrophysi-
ological assessment of hippocampal slices determined that the 
glutamatergic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazolepropionate 
(AMPA) receptor current in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons 
was not affected by xanomeline treatment in control samples, as 
indicated by analysis of the AUC (Figure 4F). In contrast, xanome-
line significantly upregulated the AMPA receptor current in the 
hippocampi of prion-infected mice (Figure 4, G and H), an effect 
that can be attributed entirely to an increase in the decay time, 
since no change in evoked current amplitude was detected (Sup-
plemental Figure 4, A and B). The upregulation of AMPA receptor–
mediated glutamatergic transmission in response to xanomeline 
in prion disease correlated with a decrease in the phosphorylation 
status of the AMPA subunit GluR2 at S880 (Figure 4, I and J). This 
dephosphorylation event has previously been shown to promote 
the interaction between GluR2 and PICK1 and thereby regulate 
GluR2 internalization, intracellular trafficking, and long-term 
depression (LTD) (49–53). Interestingly, the action of xanomeline 
was selective for GluR2, since phosphorylation of GluR1 at S831 
and S845 was not affected (Supplemental Figure 5).
Highly selective M1 mAChR PAMs rescue the memory deficit in 
prion disease. In contrast to orthosteric ligands, such as xanome-
line, M1 mAChR PAMs provide exquisite selectivity by binding 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
ed mice (9 to 10 w.p.i.) resulted in complete restoration of the 
learning and memory deficit in these mice (Figure 5F).
Hence, our results indicate that selective enhancement of hip-
pocampal M1 mAChR activity via PAMs is able to restore the learn-
ing and memory deficit in prion disease to an extent equal to that 
observed with the clinically validated muscarinic orthosteric ligand 
xanomeline. To test this notion directly, we conducted a head-to-
head comparison of the efficacy of xanomeline and BQCA and 
found that indeed they both showed similar efficacy in the augmen-
tation of the memory response in prion-diseased mice (Figure 6).
Daily treatment of prion-diseased mice with BQCA prolonged sur-
vival. The selective nature of M1 mAChR PAMs and the mechanism 
of action that maintains the spatiotemporal aspects of endogenous 
acetylcholine transmission has led us to posit that M1 mAChR 
PAMs will have lower adverse effects than orthosteric muscarinic 
receptor agonists (e.g., xanomeline) and AChE inhibitors (done-
pezil). This notion is supported by our study of the adverse effects 
of escalating doses of xanomeline, donepezil, BQCA, and BQZ-
12, where we saw no evidence of adverse responses to BQCA or 
BQZ-12 at doses in excess (2×) of those necessary for efficacy in 
learning and memory responses (Supplemental Table 3). In con-
trast, there were significant adverse reactions to both xanomeline 
and donepezil at doses twice that required to restore learning and 
memory. The lack of adverse reactions to BQCA prompted us to 
test the possibility that continued daily dosing of prion-infected 
mice with BQCA might modify disease progression. Daily dosing 
of prion-infected mice (15 mg/kg) from 7 w.p.i (a time point just 
prior to the appearance of unfolded prion protein; ref. 26) resulted 
in no adverse drug reactions during the time course of the experi-
ment (up to 13 w.p.i.). Also, there was no significant change in the 
body mass of mice injected daily with either vehicle or BQCA from 
7 w.p.i. up to the onset of clinical disease (Supplemental Figure 
8). Importantly, the mice dosed with BQCA showed a significant 
delay in the onset of confirmatory scrapie diagnosis (Figure 7), 
data that support the notion that targeting the M1 mAChR with 
selective PAMs affects not only the symptoms, but also the pro-
gression of neurodegenerative disease.
Discussion
M1 mAChRs are considered viable targets in human neurode-
generative disease (7, 14). However, drug development has been 
unsuccessful due to the problems of generating sufficiently selec-
tive orthosteric M1 mAChR agonists. In the current study, we tested 
the notion that the barriers presented by subtype selectivity could 
be overcome by the use of highly selective M1 mAChR PAMs. The 
question, however, is whether PAMs that operate by enhancing the 
action of the endogenous agonist acetylcholine would show suffi-
cient activity or positive cooperativity to have an impact on mem-
ory and learning in neurodegenerative disease associated with 
cholinergic dysfunction. In order to test this hypothesis, we used 
mice with prion disease, which we show here to be a neurodegen-
erative disease, with mechanistic, behavioral, and neuroanatomi-
cal correlates to animal and human disorders (36, 37). In particular, 
there are disruptions of hippocampal cholinergic innervation and 
associated memory loss similar to those described in AD patients 
(41). Furthermore, we show that postsynaptic muscarinic receptor 
expression and signaling, including that of M1 mAChR, remains 
intact in prion disease as it does in AD patients (42). The correlation 
between prion disease and AD was further extended by the find-
ing that the clinically approved AChE inhibitor donepezil restored 
the learning and memory deficit in prion disease, indicating that 
diminished cholinergic transmission was mechanistically linked to 
the memory loss observed in prion disease.
We determined that M1 mAChR PAMs, BQCA (30–32), and 
BQZ-12 (33), which show high levels of selectivity and functional 
cooperativity at the M1 mAChR, also retain these pharmacological 
properties at hippocampal M1 mAChRs in the context of both pri-
on disease and AD patient samples. Importantly, pharmacokinetic 
analysis revealed that the brain exposure levels of BQCA in mice 
were such that this ligand would act as a pure PAM at these con-
centrations. Moreover, only PAM activity was noted in the human 
AD patient samples. Collectively, therefore, any in vivo activity of 
BQCA is likely to reflect pure PAM activity and not a mixture of 
PAM and intrinsic agonist (i.e., PAM-agonist) activity. Administra-
tion of both BQCA and BQZ-12 completely restored the learning 
and memory response in prion-diseased mice. In so doing, these 
PAMs mimicked the response of the orthosteric M1/M4-preferring 
agonist xanomeline, which was previously shown to restore some 
of the behavioral disturbances associated with AD and schizophre-
nia (12, 13). Hence, the level of functional cooperativity displayed 
by M1 mAChR PAMs used in this study was sufficient to restore 
the learning and memory response of prion-diseased mice, where 
defective memory was associated with cholinergic dysfunction. 
The clinical implication of these findings is that M1 mAChR PAMs 
might similarly show sufficient functional cooperativity to enhance 
Figure 3. Prion disease is associated with a disruption in hippocampal 
cholinergic innervation, a deficit in learning, and memory rescued 
by donepezil, while maintaining muscarinic receptor expression and 
signaling. (A) Cholinergic innervation of the hippocampus was assessed 
by ChAT (green) immunostaining of the CA1 region of the hippocampus 
in mice at 9 and 10 w.p.i. Data shown are representative of 3 individual 
mice per group. Scale bars: 50 μm. (B) Burrowing response of control and 
prion-infected mice. n = 4–9 mice. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA. 
(C) Fear-conditioning response of control and prion-infected mice at 9–10 
w.p.i. n = 19 mice per group. ***P < 0.001, 2-way ANOVA with Sidak’s 
multiple comparison test. (D) Pain threshold response of control and prion-
infected mice at 9–10 w.p.i. n = 6 mice per group. Unpaired Student’s t test. 
(E) Anxiety levels of control and prion-infected mice at 9–10 w.p.i. were 
assessed by elevated plus maze. n = 6 mice per group. Unpaired Student’s 
t test. (F) Fear-conditioning response of prion-infected mice (9–10 w.p.i.) 
treated with vehicle or donepezil (0.5 mg/kg) 60 minutes before training. 
n = 9 (vehicle); n = 15 (donepezil). ***P < 0.001, 2-way ANOVA with Sidak’s 
multiple comparison test. (G) Determination of the total muscarinic recep-
tor population by [3H]-NMS binding to hippocampal membranes prepared 
from control or prion-infected mice (10 w.p.i.). Nonspecific binding was 
determined by the addition of atropine (1 μM). Data are expressed as fmol/
mg protein (n = 3). Bmax, maximal binding capacity. (H) Total [3H]-NMS 
binding to membranes prepared from the frontal cortex of control or AD 
patients. n = 10. (I) Stimulation of [35S]-GTPγS binding to membranes 
prepared from control or prion-infected mice (9–10 w.p.i.) in response to 
oxotremorine-M. Data shown are increases in [35S]-GTPγS binding over 
basal; mean pEC50 values of 6.45 ± 0.03, 6.63 ± 0.01, and 6.50 ± 0.04, 
respectively (n = 3). (J) [35S]-GTPγS binding to membranes prepared from 
the frontal cortex of control or AD patients in response to acetylcholine. 
Data are the percentage of the maximal [35S]-GTPγS binding stimulated 
by oxotremorine-M. Mean pEC50 values of 6.00 ± 0.09 and 5.86 ± 0.11, 
respectively (n = 3).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
direct activation of the receptor with xanomeline or by function-
al cooperativity between an M1 mAChR PAM (BQCA) and the 
endogenous ligand acetylcholine. The effect of M1 mAChR activa-
tion on glutamate transmission was associated with a change in 
the phosphorylation of GluR2 at S880 — a phosphorylation event 
shown previously to promote GluR2 internalization and mediate 
LTD (49–53). Our observations, therefore, suggest a mechanism 
whereby M1 mAChR activation, through orthosteric or allosteric 
ligands, can have an impact on learning and memory deficits in 
prion disease by promoting dephosphorylation of GluR2 at S880, 
defective cholinergic transmission, and thereby restore functions 
such as learning and memory, in human neurodegenerative dis-
eases that show a deficit in cholinergic transmission, such as AD.
Since synaptic plasticity mediated by AMPA receptor activ-
ity has long been associated with learning and memory (55), we 
investigated whether there was any correlation between mAChR-
mediated rescue of learning and memory in prion disease and 
hippocampal glutamatergic transmission. We determined that, 
in prion disease, AMPA receptor–mediated glutamatergic trans-
mission was upregulated by enhancing M1 mAChR activity via 
Figure 4. The orthosteric mAChR agonist xanomeline restores the learning and memory deficit in prion-infected mice. (A) Chemical structure of xanomel-
ine. (B) [35S]-GTPγS binding to membranes prepared from control or prion-infected mice (9–10 w.p.i.) in response to xanomeline are expressed as a percent-
age of the maximal response observed with oxotremorine-M. Mean pEC50 for xanomeline on control membranes = 7.67 ± 0.04, prion 9 w.p.i. membranes 
= 7.73 ± 0.06, and prion 10 w.p.i. membranes = 7.65 ± 0.13. n = 3. (C) [35S]-GTPγS binding to membranes prepared from the frontal cortex of control or AD 
patients in response to xanomeline. Data are expressed as the percentage of the maximal [35S]-GTPγS binding stimulated by oxotremorine-M. Mean pEC50 
values of 8.14 ± 0.28 (control) and 7.34 ± 0.36 (AD). n = 3. (D) Fear-conditioning response of control and prion-infected mice following administration of 
vehicle or xanomeline (5 mg/kg) 30 minutes prior to training and retrieval. n ≥ 6. Statistical analysis by 1 -way ANOVA. **P < 0.01. (E) Burrowing response of 
control and prion-infected mice following administration of vehicle or xanomeline (5 mg/kg) 30 minutes before each burrowing session (from 7 w.p.i.). (F, 
G, and H ) AUC of AMPA receptor–mediated currents before and after treatment with xanomeline in control (F, n = 10) and prion-infected (G and H, n = 12) 
hippocampi. *P < 0.05, paired Student’s t test. Also shown in G are representative traces of paired whole cell CA1 glutamatergic current recordings in vehicle-
treated (black) and xanomeline-treated (100 nM) (red) hippocampal slices of a prion-infected mouse. (I) Western blot of hippocampal lysates prepared from 
prion-infected mice treated with vehicle or xanomeline (Xan, 5 mg/kg) and probed with an antibody that detects phospho-S880 of GluR2 AMPA receptor 
subunits (total GluR2 was used as a loading control). (J) Quantification of I. n = 3. **P < 0.01, paired Student’s t test. Data are shown as mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
mediated by a mechanism that maintains the spatiotemporal 
signaling of the endogenous ligand acetylcholine and/or by act-
ing in a saturable manner, resembling the characteristic “ceiling” 
effect of acetylcholine (16, 17). Collectively, these features suggest 
that M1 mAChR PAMs might show clinical efficacy with reduced 
adverse responses. Certainly, the relatively nonselective nature 
of AChE inhibitors has resulted in dose-limiting adverse effects. 
That PAMs might have a superior safety profile compared with 
that of AChE inhibitors and orthosteric ligands is supported by 
thereby promoting maintenance of AMPA receptors at synaptic 
membranes with a subsequent strengthening of AMPA receptor–
mediated transmission. It is likely that this mechanism would run 
in parallel with other effects of M1 mAChR activation observed 
here in prion-diseased hippocampus, such as enhanced hippo-
campal M1 mAChR signaling.
M1 mAChR PAMs have been suggested to hold an advan-
tage over orthosteric muscarinic ligands as drug candidates due 
to their higher degree of M1 AChR selectivity. This selectivity is 
Figure 5. PAMs of the M1 mAChR rescue the fear-conditioning learning and memory deficit in prion-infected mice. (A) Schematic summarizing the 3 
possible effects of an allosteric modulator, namely, modulation of orthosteric ligand affinity, signaling efficacy, and/or direct activation. (B) BQCA (inset; 
chemical structure of BQCA) causes equivalent leftward shifts (black arrow) of the oxotremorine-M (Oxo-M) [35S]-GTPγS-assay concentration-response 
curve and displays intrinsic activity (red arrow) in hippocampal membranes derived from control and prion-infected mice (9 and 10 w.p.i.). Data are shown 
as mean ± SEM. n = 3. (C) Acetylcholine-stimulated [35S]-GTPγS binding to membranes prepared from the frontal cortex of control or AD patients in the 
absence and presence of BQCA (3 μM). Data are expressed as the percentage of the maximal [35S]-GTPγS binding stimulated by oxotremorine-M. Mean ± 
SEM. n = 3. (D) Fear-conditioning response of control and prion-infected mice following administration of vehicle or BQCA (15 mg/kg) 30 minutes prior to 
training. Mean ± SEM. n = 6–18. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA. (E) Radioligand competition binding between [3H]-NMS (~0.3 nM) and increas-
ing concentrations of BQCA or BQZ-12 (inset, chemical structure of BQZ-12) in hippocampal membranes from control and prion-infected mice (9 and 10 
w.p.i.). n = 3–4. The affinities (pKi) of BQCA and BQZ-12 at hippocampal membranes from prion-diseased mice (10 w.p.i.) were 6.15 ± 0.08 and 4.25 ± 0.12, 
respectively. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. n = 3. (F) Fear-conditioning response of control and prion-infected mice following administration of vehicle or 
BQZ-12 (1.5 mg/kg) 30 minutes prior to training. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. n = 12–19. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
diseases showing defective cholinergic transmission, such as AD, 
but may also have the potential to slow disease progression.
Methods
Mouse maintenance and diet. Mice were fed ad libitum with a standard 
mouse chow. The mAChR knockout mice were backcrossed for at 
least 10 generations onto the black C57BL6/NTAC background. The 
Tg37 mouse line that overexpresses mouse prion protein has been 
described previously (26).
Drug administration and pharmacokinetics. Compounds were 
administered via i.p. injection 30 minutes prior to tissue/blood col-
lection. Following this, mice were anesthetized with 3% isoflurane 
(2 l/min O2), and blood was collected by cardiac puncture of the left 
ventricle. Blood was immediately transferred to EDTA tubes and cen-
trifuged at 1,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C; supernatant was collected 
and frozen. Brains from each mouse were also dissected and snap-
frozen on dry ice.
Brain samples were homogenized in 3 volumes of methanol/
water (1:4, v/v) by weight. A 25 μl aliquot of each study sample, cali-
bration standard, and control sample were added to a 96-well plate, 
then mixed with 180 μl of acetonitrile/methanol (1:1, v/v) containing 
internal standard. After mixing, the samples were centrifuged, and the 
resulting supernatants were diluted 12.5-fold with methanol/water 
(1:1, v/v) prior to analyzing 10 μl aliquots by liquid chromatography–
MS/MS (LC-MS/MS).
The sample extracts were analyzed with an Applied Biosystems/
MDS Sciex API 4000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. The ana-
lytes were chromatographically separated using a ThermoHypersil 
Betasil C18 2 × 20 mm 5-micron Javelin HPLC column, with a gradi-
ent LC system composed of water/trifluoroacetic acid/1 M ammo-
nium bicarbonate, (1000:4:1, v/v) (mobile phase A), and acetonitrile/
trifluoro 
acetic acid/1 M ammonium bicarbonate, (1000:4:1, v/v) 
(mobile phase B). Data were acquired and processed with Applied Bio-
systems/MDS Sciex Analyst software (version 1.4.2).
The unbound fraction of drug in brain was estimated using fast 
gradient elution LC-MS/MS to estimate the percentage of compound 
bound to brain over a 4.5-hour incubation period at 37°C while under-
going orbital shaking. The assay was performed using a HT dialysis 
micro-equilibrium device, using dialysis membrane strips (molecular 
weight cut off, 12–14 k). At time 0, a sample of brain homogenate was 
taken, and samples were taken from both the protein side and buffer 
our study, where no significant adverse responses to M1 mAChR 
PAMs were observed at concentrations that exceeded those nec-
essary for restoration of learning and memory. The high level of 
tolerability to M1 mAChR PAMs in our study allowed us to test 
whether prolonged daily dosing with BQCA could have any impact 
on prion disease progression. We show here that continued dosing 
significantly reduced the onset of clinical signs of prion disease, 
thereby extending the life span of prion-diseased mice.
Mechanistically, BQCA (and BQZ-12) act by increasing the 
affinity of M1 mAChRs for acetylcholine by approximately 100-
fold (33, 35, 56). There is no evidence that these M1 mAChR 
PAMs can also increase the intrinsic efficacy of acetylcholine at 
M1 mAChRs over and above any effects on acetylcholine-binding 
affinity. In addition, the in vivo concentrations of unbound brain 
BQCA are at levels where BQCA would not be expected to show 
any intrinsic agonist activity in its own right, but would rather 
act as a pure PAM. Thus, the in vivo responses (on both memory 
and disease progression) likely reflect actions on the binding of 
acetylcholine to M1 mAChRs rather than any direct stimulatory 
actions on the receptor itself or changes in its inherent signaling 
properties. Whereas this mechanism of action likely underlies 
the potential safety profile of the PAMs used here (see above), 
one clinical implication is that, as disease progresses, the cho-
linergic deficit may fall to a level where even an enhancement of 
acetylcholine affinity by 100-fold will not be sufficient to restore 
functional responses such as learning and memory. In these cir-
cumstances, it might also be necessary to consider PAMs that also 
possess either greater intrinsic activity and/or cooperativity at the 
level of agonist-receptor signal transduction properties to restore 
function in cases of advanced neurodegenerative disease associ-
ated with cholinergic deficit.
In conclusion, our study provides evidence that activating M1 
mAChRs can not only restore memory loss in neurodegenerative 
disease in a manner that is associated with an upregulation of glu-
tamatergic transmission, but can also be disease modifying, slowing 
the onset of severe clinical symptoms. This opens the door to the 
prospect that M1 mAChR PAMs might have not only a clinical impact 
on the symptomatic treatment of memory loss in neurodegenerative 
Figure 6. Orthosteric agonists and PAMs of the M1 mAChR are equiva-
lently efficacious in restoring fear-conditioning learning and memory 
deficit in prion-infected mice. Fear-conditioning response of prion-infect-
ed mice following administration of vehicle, xanomeline (5 mg/kg), or 
BQCA (15 mg/kg) 30 minutes prior to training (n = 13–18). Data are shown 
as mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01, 1-way ANOVA.
Figure 7. PAMs of the M1 mAChR significantly increase survival in prion-
diseased mice. Kaplan-Meier survival plots for prion-infected mice treated 
with vehicle (5% glucose; n = 10; black line) or BQCA (15 mg/kg; n = 10; blue 
line) daily from 7 w.p.i. ***P < 0.001, Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
(50 × 50 cm), and activity was tracked for a 10-minute period using 
ANY-maze software.
Elevated plus maze. The elevated plus maze apparatus consisted of 
4 nontransparent arms (50 × 10 cm): 2 enclosed arms (with black walls 
of 30-cm height) that formed a cross shape with 2 open arms opposite 
each other. The open arms were dimly illuminated. Mice were placed 
at the center of the maze facing an open arm. Mice were tracked for 5 
minutes, and their tendency toward dark, enclosed spaces versus the 
open spaces was used as a measure of anxiety. The number of entries 
of the animal from the central platform into the enclosed or open arms 
was counted, and data were recorded using the ANY-maze software.
See Supplemental Information for methods for the following: gen-
eration of M1 mAChR phospho-S228–specific antiserum, radioligand 
binding assays, [35S]-GTPγS assay, electrophysiology, immunocyto-
chemistry, and immunoblotting.
Statistics. Statistical analyses were performed using 2-tailed 
Student’s t test, 1-way ANOVA, or 2-way ANOVA. Significance was 
defined as P < 0.05. All statistical tests were performed using Graph-
Pad Prism software.
Study approval. All animal work conformed to the United Kingdom 
Home Office regulations. All procedures (both nonregulated and reg-
ulated) were conducted under a Home Office project licence awarded 
to Andrew Tobin under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. 
Human brain tissue from post mortem healthy and AD patients was 
provided to Eli Lilly from the Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Center and 
covered under the Human Tissue Act 2004.
Author contributions
SJB conducted and coordinated the study, analyzed data, and con-
tributed to writing the paper. JMB conducted the electrophysiol-
ogy study and contributed to the behavior study. AJB contributed 
to the experimental design and generated the anti-S228 antibody. 
HES conducted the [S35]-GTPγS experiments on prion and AD 
samples. AJM conducted the AD radioligand binding experiments. 
DJW, NV, JAM, CM, and GRM supported prion mouse breeding, 
inoculation, and analysis of data. RP provided equipment for pre-
liminary experiments. TMH provided technical support. JME and 
DJR supported histology and imaging. JW provided muscarinic 
knockout mice. PMS and AC contributed analysis of PAM data, 
provided BQZ-12, and contributed to writing the paper. LMB and 
CCF supported experimental design and analysis of data. JRS con-
ducted and analyzed electrophysiological experiments. ABT con-
ceived the study, led the program, and wrote the paper.
Acknowledgments
ABT, AC, and PMS received funding from a Wellcome Trust Col-
laborative Award (201529/Z/16/Z). ABT, SJB, AJB, and TMH were 
funded through a Medical Research Council programme leader 
grant provided by the MRC Toxicology Unit. CCF, LMB, AJM, and 
HES were funded by the Eli Lilly Company. JMB received fund-
ing through a Lilly Research Award Program (LRAP) grant (Eli 
Lilly). RP received funding from the Marie Curie grant “Extra-
brain” (European Commission). AC is a senior principal research 
fellow and PMS a principal research fellow of the National Health 
and Medical Research Council of Australia. Tissue samples were 
from Randy Woltjer at the Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Center. 
The Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Center is supported by NIH 
side of the membrane after 4.5 hours of incubation. Drug concentrations 
were measured as described previously (57). Fraction unbound was cal-
culated by dividing the concentration of the buffer side by the concen-
tration of the protein side.
Prion infection of mice. Tg37 hemizygous mice were inoculated 
by intracerebral injection into the right parietal lobe with 1% brain 
homogenate of RML prions aged 3 to 4 weeks as described previously 
(26). Control mice received 1% normal brain homogenate (NBH).
Survival studies. Tg37 mice were inoculated with NBH or RML 
prions as above. Mice were treated (i.p.) with vehicle (5% glucose) or 
BQCA (15 mg/kg) daily from 7 w.p.i. Animals were culled when they 
developed clinical signs of scrapie; prion-infected mice were scored 
according to the appearance of recognized early indicator and confir-
matory signs of prion disease. Early indicator signs included piloerec-
tion, sustained erect ears, erect penis, clasping of hind legs when lifted 
by tail, rigid tail, unsustained hunched posture, mild loss of coordina-
tion, and being subdued. Confirmatory signs of prion disease includ-
ed ataxia, impairment of righting reflex, dragging of limbs, sustained 
hunched posture, and significant abnormal breathing. The presence 
of 2 early indicator signs plus 1 confirmatory sign or of 2 confirmatory 
signs alone was used to diagnose clinical disease.
Fear-conditioning learning and memory test. For behavioral testing 
of C57BL6/NTAC or M1-KO mice, 8- to 12-week-old male mice were 
used. For prion-infected mice and the relevant control mice, behavior-
al experiments were conducted on male mice between 9 and 10 w.p.i. 
with NBH or RML prions prior to the appearance of clinical symptoms 
(listed above). Mice were acclimatized to the behavioral room for at 
least 2 hours prior to the test. For fear conditioning, mice were placed 
in the conditioning chamber (Stoelting ANY-maze Fear Conditioning 
System) and, after a 2-minute adaptation period, received 3 tone/foot 
shock pairings where the foot shock (unconditioned stimulus [US]; 
2 seconds; 0.4 mA) always coterminated with a tone (conditioned 
stimulus [CS]; 2.8 kH; 85 dB; 30 seconds). The CS-US pairings were 
separated by 1-minute intervals. After completion of training, the mice 
remained in the conditioning chamber for 1 minute and were then 
returned to their home cages. The next day, mice were placed back in 
the conditioning chamber, and time spent immobile was recorded for 
3 minutes to assess context-dependent learning. Data were analyzed 
using ANY-maze software.
Pain threshold. The mice were placed on the grid floor of the con-
ditioning chamber (described above for fear conditioning) and were 
given 2-second foot shocks of increasing intensity (0.10 to 0.4 mA) 
at 10-second intervals. The level of the electric current needed to 
elicit startle, running/jumping, and vocalization responses was deter-
mined. All animals were foot shock naive before the experiment and 
were not used for any subsequent tests.
Burrowing. Assessment of burrowing was conducted on mice from 
7 w.p.i. The burrowing test involved mice being placed into individual 
cages with a plastic cylinder filled with 140 g of food pellets. Food 
remaining in the cylinders after 2 hours was weighed and the amount 
displaced (“burrowed”) was calculated. Prior to the burrowing test, 
mice were placed in the burrowing cage for a 2-hour period. On the 
following day, mice received vehicle or xanomeline (5 mg/kg) via i.p. 
injection 30 minutes prior to the burrowing test. This was then repeat-
ed on a weekly basis.
Open field. This test was used to analyze general locomotor activ-
ity levels. The mice were placed into a clear Perspex square arena 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Address correspondence to: Andrew B. Tobin, The Centre for 
Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cell and Sys-
tems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, G12 8QQ. Phone: 
0141.330.8494; E-mail: andrew.tobin@glasgow.ac.uk.
grant P30AG008017. The authors would also like to thank Peter 
Scammells and Shailesh Mistry for synthesis of BQZ-12; Graham 
Wishart for providing the exposure data; Richard Vivier, Donna 
Farley, Mark Ward, and Siobhan Dennis for technical assistance; 
and Kok Choi Kong for initial fear-conditioning experiments.
 1. Altenbach C, Kusnetzow AK, Ernst OP, Hofmann 
KP, Hubbell WL. High-resolution distance map-
ping in rhodopsin reveals the pattern of helix 
movement due to activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 2008;105(21):7439–7444.
 2. Massoud F, Gauthier S. Update on the pharma-
cological treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr 
Neuropharmacol. 2010;8(1):69–80.
 3. Coyle JT, Price DL, DeLong MR. Alzheimer’s 
disease: a disorder of cortical cholinergic inner-
vation. Science. 1983;219(4589):1184–1190.
 4. LaFerla FM, Green KN, Oddo S. Intracellular 
amyloid-beta in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2007;8(7):499–509.
 5. Nathan PJ, et al. The potent M1 receptor allosteric 
agonist GSK1034702 improves episodic memory 
in humans in the nicotine abstinence model of 
cognitive dysfunction. Int J Neuropsychopharma-
col. 2013;16(4):721–731.
 6. van der Zee EA, Luiten PG. Muscarinic acetyl-
choline receptors in the hippocampus, neocortex 
and amygdala: a review of immunocytochemical 
localization in relation to learning and memory. 
Prog Neurobiol. 1999;58(5):409–471.
 
7. Wess J, Eglen RM, Gautam D. Muscarinic ace-
tylcholine receptors: mutant mice provide new 
insights for drug development. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov. 2007;6(9):721–733.
 8. Young SL, Bohenek DL, Fanselow MS. Scopol-
amine impairs acquisition and facilitates consoli-
dation of fear conditioning: differential effects 
for tone vs context conditioning. Neurobiol Learn 
Mem. 1995;63(2):174–180.
 9. Kruse AC, et al. Structure and dynamics of the 
M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. Nature. 
2012;482(7386):552–556.
 10. Haga K, et al. Structure of the human M2 musca-
rinic acetylcholine receptor bound to an antago-
nist. Nature. 2012;482(7386):547–551.
 11. Kruse AC, et al. Muscarinic receptors as model 
targets and antitargets for structure-based ligand 
discovery. Mol Pharmacol. 2013;84(4):528–540.
 12. Bodick NC, et al. Effects of xanomeline, a selec-
tive muscarinic receptor agonist, on cognitive 
function and behavioral symptoms in Alzheimer 
disease. Arch Neurol. 1997;54(4):465–473.
 13. Shekhar A, et al. Selective muscarinic recep-
tor agonist xanomeline as a novel treatment 
approach for schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 
2008;165(8):1033–1039.
 14. Langmead CJ, Watson J, Reavill C. Muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors as CNS drug targets. 
Pharmacol Ther. 2008;117(2):232–243.
 15. Wood MD, et al. Functional comparison of 
muscarinic partial agonists at muscarinic 
receptor subtypes hM1, hM2, hM3, hM4 and 
hM5 using microphysiometry. Br J Pharmacol. 
1999;126(7):1620–1624.
 16. May LT, Avlani VA, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A. 
Allosteric modulation of G protein-coupled recep-
tors. Curr Pharm Des. 2004;10(17):2003–2013.
 17. May LT, Leach K, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A. 
Allosteric modulation of G protein-coupled recep-
tors. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2007;47:1–51.
 18. Lange HS, Cannon CE, Drott JT, Kuduk SD, 
Uslaner JM. The M1 muscarinic positive allo-
steric modulator PQCA improves performance 
on translatable tests of memory and atten-
tion in rhesus monkeys. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2015;355(3):442–450.
 19. Ma L, et al. Selective activation of the M1 mus-
carinic acetylcholine receptor achieved by 
allosteric potentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2009;106(37):15950–15955.
 20. Puri V, Wang X, Vardigan JD, Kuduk SD, Uslaner 
JM. The selective positive allosteric M1 mus-
carinic receptor modulator PQCA attenuates 
learning and memory deficits in the Tg2576 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Behav Brain 
Res. 2015;287:96–99.
 21. Vardigan JD, et al. Improved cognition without 
adverse effects: novel M1 muscarinic potentiator 
compares favorably to donepezil and xanomeline 
in rhesus monkey. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2015;232(11):1859–1866.
 22. Wootten D, Christopoulos A, Sexton PM. Emerg-
ing paradigms in GPCR allostery: implica-
tions for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2013;12(8):630–644.
 23. Laurijssens B, Aujard F, Rahman A. Animal 
models of Alzheimer’s disease and drug 
development. Drug Discov Today Technol. 
2013;10(3):e319–e327.
 24. Mallucci GR, et al. Post-natal knockout of prion 
protein alters hippocampal CA1 properties, but 
does not result in neurodegeneration. EMBO J. 
2002;21(3):202–210.
 25. Radford H, Moreno JA, Verity N, Halliday M, 
Mallucci GR. PERK inhibition prevents tau-
mediated neurodegeneration in a mouse model 
of frontotemporal dementia. Acta Neuropathol. 
2015;130(5):633–642.
 26. Mallucci G, Dickinson A, Linehan J, Klöhn PC, 
Brandner S, Collinge J. Depleting neuronal PrP 
in prion infection prevents disease and reverses 
spongiosis. Science. 2003;302(5646):871–874.
 27. Halliez S, et al. Targeted knock-down of cellular 
prion protein expression in myelinating Schwann 
cells does not alter mouse prion pathogenesis.  
J Gen Virol. 2013;94(Pt 6):1435–1440.
 28. Bymaster FP, et al. Neurochemical effects 
of the M1 muscarinic agonist xanomeline 
(LY246708/NNC11-0232). J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1994;269(1):282–289.
 29. Shannon HE, et al. Xanomeline: a novel mus-
carinic receptor agonist with functional selec-
tivity for M1 receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1994;269(1):271–281.
 30. Abdul-Ridha A, Lane JR, Sexton PM, Canals 
M, Christopoulos A. Allosteric modulation of a 
chemogenetically modified G protein-coupled 
receptor. Mol Pharmacol. 2013;83(2):521–530.
 31. Canals M, Lane JR, Wen A, Scammells PJ, Sex-
ton PM, Christopoulos A. A Monod-Wyman-
Changeux mechanism can explain G protein-
coupled receptor (GPCR) allosteric modulation.  
J Biol Chem. 2012;287(1):650–659.
 32. Mistry SN, Valant C, Sexton PM, Capuano B, 
Christopoulos A, Scammells PJ. Synthesis and 
pharmacological profiling of analogues of benzyl 
quinolone carboxylic acid (BQCA) as allosteric 
modulators of the M1 muscarinic receptor. J Med 
Chem. 2013;56(12):5151–5172.
 33. Abdul-Ridha A, et al. Mechanistic insights into 
allosteric structure-function relationships at 
the M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. J Biol 
Chem. 2014;289(48):33701–33711.
 34. Phillips RG, LeDoux JE. Differential contribu-
tion of amygdala and hippocampus to cued and 
contextual fear conditioning. Behav Neurosci. 
1992;106(2):274–285.
 35. Butcher AJ, et al. An antibody biosensor estab-
lishes the activation of the M1 muscarinic acetyl-
choline receptor during learning and memory.  
J Biol Chem. 2016;291(17):8862–8875.
 36. Halliday M, Mallucci GR. Review: Modulating 
the unfolded protein response to prevent neuro-
degeneration and enhance memory. Neuropathol 
Appl Neurobiol. 2015;41(4):414–427.
 37. Halliday M, et al. Partial restoration of protein 
synthesis rates by the small molecule ISRIB 
prevents neurodegeneration without pancreatic 
toxicity. Cell Death Dis. 2015;6:e1672.
 38. Radford HE, Mallucci GR. The role of GPI-
anchored PrP C in mediating the neurotoxic 
effect of scrapie prions in neurons. Curr Issues 
Mol Biol. 2010;12(2):119–127.
 39. Collinge J. Prion diseases of humans and animals: 
their causes and molecular basis. Annu Rev Neu-
rosci. 2001;24:519–550.
 40. Levey AI, Edmunds SM, Koliatsos V, Wiley RG, 
Heilman CJ. Expression of m1-m4 muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptor proteins in rat hippocam-
pus and regulation by cholinergic innervation.  
J Neurosci. 1995;15(5 Pt 2):4077–4092.
 41. Bartus RT, Dean RL, Beer B, Lippa AS. The cho-
linergic hypothesis of geriatric memory dysfunc-
tion. Science. 1982;217(4558):408–414.
 42. Mash DC, Flynn DD, Potter LT. Loss of M2 
muscarine receptors in the cerebral cortex in 
Alzheimer’s disease and experimental cholinergic 
denervation. Science. 1985;228(4703):1115–1117.
 43. Andersen MB, et al. The muscarinic M1/M4 
receptor agonist xanomeline exhibits antipsy-
chotic-like activity in Cebus apella monkeys. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003;28(6):1168–1175.
 44. Shannon HE, et al. Xanomeline, an M(1)/M(4) 
preferring muscarinic cholinergic receptor ago-
nist, produces antipsychotic-like activity in rats 
and mice. Schizophr Res. 2000;42(3):249–259.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 9 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
 45. Mirza NR, Peters D, Sparks RG. Xanomeline and 
the antipsychotic potential of muscarinic recep-
tor subtype selective agonists. CNS Drug Rev. 
2003;9(2):159–186.
 46. Deacon RM. Burrowing in rodents: a sensitive 
method for detecting behavioral dysfunction. 
Nat Protoc. 2006;1(1):118–121.
 47. Deacon RM, Croucher A, Rawlins JN. Hippo-
campal cytotoxic lesion effects on species-
typical behaviours in mice. Behav Brain Res. 
2002;132(2):203–213.
 48. Riedel G, Platt B, Micheau J. Glutamate receptor 
function in learning and memory. Behav Brain 
Res. 2003;140(1–2):1–47.
 49. Chung HJ, Steinberg JP, Huganir RL, Linden DJ. 
Requirement of AMPA receptor GluR2 phos-
phorylation for cerebellar long-term depression. 
Science. 2003;300(5626):1751–1755.
 50. Seidenman KJ, Steinberg JP, Huganir R, Malinow 
R. Glutamate receptor subunit 2 Serine 880 
phosphorylation modulates synaptic transmis-
sion and mediates plasticity in CA1 pyramidal 
cells. J Neurosci. 2003;23(27):9220–9228.
 51. Daw MI, et al. PDZ proteins interacting with C-ter-
minal GluR2/3 are involved in a PKC-dependent 
regulation of AMPA receptors at hippocampal 
synapses. Neuron. 2000;28(3):873–886.
 52. Kim CH, Chung HJ, Lee HK, Huganir RL. Inter-
action of the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2/3 
with PDZ domains regulates hippocampal 
long-term depression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2001;98(20):11725–11730.
 53. Duprat F, Daw M, Lim W, Collingridge G, Isaac 
J. GluR2 protein-protein interactions and the 
regulation of AMPA receptors during synaptic 
plasticity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond, B, Biol Sci. 
2003;358(1432):715–720.
 54. Conn PJ, Christopoulos A, Lindsley CW. Alloste-
ric modulators of GPCRs: a novel approach for 
the treatment of CNS disorders. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov. 2009;8(1):41–54.
 55. Chater TE, Goda Y. The role of AMPA receptors 
in postsynaptic mechanisms of synaptic plastic-
ity. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014;8:401.
 56. Abdul-Ridha A, et al. Molecular determinants 
of allosteric modulation at the M1 musca-
rinic acetylcholine receptor. J Biol Chem. 
2014;289(9):6067–6079.
 57. Witkin KM, et al. In vitro pharmacological and rat 
pharmacokinetic characterization of LY3020371, 
a potent and selective mGlu2/3 receptor antago-
nist [published online ahead of print December 
31, 2015]. Neuropharmacology. https:/
/doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.021.
