 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
Introduction
Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen-
erative disorder and is characterized by the preferential loss of 
dopamine (DA) neurons leading to motoric dysfunction including 
bradykinesia, rest tremor, rigidity, and postural instability (1, 2). 
Moreover, other regions of the nervous system are also affected, 
which contribute to the nonmotor symptoms including autonomic 
dysfunction, cognitive and neuropsychiatric disorders, and sleep 
disorders, among others (3). Neuropathologically, PD is character-
ized by the accumulation and aggregation of α-synuclein, which 
contributes to the formation of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites 
(4–6). Numerous studies indicate that aggregation and accumula-
tion of α-synuclein is intimately linked to the degenerative process 
(4–8). Mutations (A53T, A30P, and E46K) or duplication or tripli-
cation of WT α-synuclein have been associated with rare forms of 
familial PD (9–12). Many α-synuclein transgenic mouse models of 
the familial forms of PD due to mutations in α-synuclein have been 
created (7, 13–17). These models replicate many of the features of 
α-synucleinopathy–induced neurodegeneration that is present in 
human PD and diffuse Lewy body disease (7, 13–17). Posttransla-
tional modifications of α-synuclein such as nitrosylation, oxida-
tion, and phosphorylation play a role in modulating α-synuclein 
aggregation and toxicity (18–21).
c-Abl is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that is activated by oxi-
dative and cellular stress (22). c-Abl is activated in human post-
mortem PD brain in the striatum and substantia nigra (23, 24). 
Recently, there have been a few reports indicating that c-Abl inhi-
bition might be beneficial in PD and α-synucleinopathies (23, 25, 
26). However, the lack of selectivity of the c-Abl inhibitors used in 
these studies has made it difficult to conclude whether c-Abl inhi-
bition could be an effective neuroprotective strategy.
Here we report that c-Abl activation plays a significant and sub-
stantial role in the pathogenesis of the human A53T α-synuclein 
transgenic model of neurodegeneration. In particular, expression 
of a constitutively active form of c-Abl (BCR-ABL) markedly exac-
erbates the pathology and shortens the lifespan of human A53T 
α-synuclein transgenic mice (PrP-SNCAA53T, herein referred to as 
hA53Tα-syn mice). Importantly, expression of BCR-ABL in WT 
mice leads to α-synuclein pathology and loss of DA neurons. On 
the other hand, knockout of c-Abl markedly reduces the pathol-
ogy and extends the lifespan of hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. By 
this dual approach, we provide evidence that c-Abl activation sig-
nificantly modulates α-synuclein neurodegeneration. Moreover, 
c-Abl phosphorylates α-synuclein on tyrosine 39, and phosphoryla-
tion of tyrosine 39 of α-synuclein increases α-synuclein’s propen-
sity to aggregate. Phosphorylation of tyrosine 39 of α-synuclein 
Aggregation of α-synuclein contributes to the formation of Lewy bodies and neurites, the pathologic hallmarks of Parkinson 
disease (PD) and α-synucleinopathies. Although a number of human mutations have been identified in familial PD, the 
mechanisms that promote α-synuclein accumulation and toxicity are poorly understood. Here, we report that hyperactivity 
of the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase c-Abl critically regulates α-synuclein–induced neuropathology. In mice expressing a 
human α-synucleinopathy–associated mutation (hA53Tα-syn mice), deletion of the gene encoding c-Abl reduced α-synuclein 
aggregation, neuropathology, and neurobehavioral deficits. Conversely, overexpression of constitutively active c-Abl in 
hA53Tα-syn mice accelerated α-synuclein aggregation, neuropathology, and neurobehavioral deficits. Moreover, c-Abl 
activation led to an age-dependent increase in phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein. In human postmortem samples, there was an 
accumulation of phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein in brain tissues and Lewy bodies of PD patients compared with age-matched 
controls. Furthermore, in vitro studies show that c-Abl phosphorylation of α-synuclein at tyrosine 39 enhances α-synuclein 
aggregation. Taken together, this work establishes a critical role for c-Abl in α-synuclein–induced neurodegeneration and 
demonstrates that selective inhibition of c-Abl may be neuroprotective. This study further indicates that phosphotyrosine 39 
α-synuclein is a potential disease indicator for PD and related α-synucleinopathies.
Activation of tyrosine kinase c-Abl contributes to 
α-synuclein–induced neurodegeneration
Saurav Brahmachari,1,2,3 Preston Ge,1,2,3 Su Hyun Lee,1,2 Donghoon Kim,1,2,4 Senthilkumar S. Karuppagounder,1,2,3  
Manoj Kumar,1,2,3 Xiaobo Mao,1,2,3  Joo Ho Shin,1,2,3 Yunjong Lee,1,2,3 Olga Pletnikova,5 Juan C. Troncoso,2,5  
Valina L. Dawson,1,2,3,6,7 Ted M. Dawson,1,2,3,7,8 and Han Seok Ko1,2,4
1Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, and 2Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.  
3Adrienne Helis Malvin Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. 4Diana Helis Henry Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. 5Department of Pathology,  
Division of Neuropathology, 6Department of Physiology, 7Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, and 8Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences,  
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: November 23, 2015; Accepted: May 5, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(8):2970–2988. doi:10.1172/JCI85456.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
under the threshold, and thus it does not cause any detrimental 
effects on mice (31). The PrP-tTA hA53Tα-syn mice live an average 
of 9.4 months with no significant difference in lifespan compared 
with hA53Tα-syn mice (Figure 2B). The BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn 
PrP-tTA mice live an average of 6.5 months, and doxycycline 
restores the survival of BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice to the 
extent of the lifespan of the hA53Tα-syn mice (Figure 2B).
The different cohorts of mice were assessed for expression lev-
els of BCR-ABL, phospho–c-Abl, and α-synuclein at 3 months of age 
in brain stem, spinal cord, and cortex (Figure 2, C–H). Equivalent 
levels of α-synuclein are overexpressed in the hA53Tα-syn mice 
compared with the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice, and doxy-
cycline has no effect on the levels of α-synuclein (Figure 2, C–H). 
Increased phospho–c-Abl is observed in the BCR-ABL PrP-tTA 
mice and the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice, which is sup-
pressed by doxycycline in the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice 
(Figure 2, C–H). Interestingly, the levels of BCR-ABL are increased 
in the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice (Figure 2, C–H).
At 2 months of age there is no significant difference in body 
weight between the different genotype cohorts, but at 6 months 
of age when the animals are symptomatic the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-
syn PrP-tTA mice exhibit a significant reduction in body weight 
by approximately 20%, that is prevented by doxycycline admin-
istration (Supplemental Figure 1A). Behavior was assessed over 
time (Supplemental Figure 1, B and C). According to previous 
reports, hA53Tα-syn mice show increased horizontal and verti-
cal activities at preclinical ages (from 5 months onward to 5 days 
before onset of symptoms) compared with nontransgenic mice 
when examined under open field (27, 32). Increased hyperac-
tivity indicates increased susceptibility of hA53Tα-syn mice to 
neurodegeneration. Therefore we wondered whether BCR-ABL 
hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice have any altered activities. Open-field 
monitoring reveals no significant difference in vertical activity 
among the genotypes at 4 months of age, but at 5 months of age 
it is increased in BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA compared with 
the nontransgenic mice (Supplemental Figure 1C). Horizontal 
activity is increased at 5 months of age in the hA53Tα-syn and 
increased at 4 and 5 months of age in the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn 
PrP-tTA mice, which is significantly greater than that observed 
in the hA53Tα-syn mice (Supplemental Figure 1B). Doxycycline 
prevents the change in horizontal activity (Supplemental Fig-
ure 1B). These data suggest that BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA 
mice might be at higher risk of neurodegeneration. As deficits 
in rotarod activities are linked to early defects in motor neurons 
(27), we assessed rotarod performance for all different genotypes. 
There is no difference in an accelerating rotarod paradigm at 3 
and 5 months of age between the different genotypes (S. Brah-
machari, unpublished observations).
In symptomatic BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice at 
approximately 6 months of age, there is substantial neuronal accu-
mulation of human phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein in a number of 
brain regions, including the brain stem and cerebellum (Figure 3A). 
Since neuronal accumulation of ubiquitin is a prominent indicator 
of pathology, ubiquitin immunoreactivity was examined. There is 
a prominent accumulation of ubiquitin in neurites and cell bodies 
in the brain stem and cerebellum (Figure 3B). Glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) was analyzed as an indirect indication of overall 
correlates with disease pathogenesis and progression in hA53Tα-
syn mice and is contained within Lewy bodies in human PD. These 
findings suggest that phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein might be a 
progression marker for PD and α-synucleinopathies.
Results
c-Abl overactivation in α-synuclein transgenic mice. To study the 
potential role of c-Abl in α-synuclein–induced neurodegenera-
tion, the G2-3 human A53T α-synuclein (hA53Tα-syn) transgenic 
model, in which human A53T α-synuclein transgene is driven by 
the mouse prion promoter, was used (27). These mice exhibit a 
progressive neurodegenerative disorder that leads to premature 
lethality and exhibit substantial neurodegeneration accompa-
nying typical α-synuclein pathology including serine 129 phos-
phorylation, the formation of α-synuclein fibrils, and markers of 
mitochondrial and oxidative damage (27–30). In symptomatic 
hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice, c-Abl activation was monitored 
via IB analysis of tyrosine 245 autophosphorylation of c-Abl (23, 
24, 26) in affected versus nonaffected CNS regions. A greater 
than twofold activation of c-Abl is observed in areas of pathology 
including the spinal cord (Figure 1, A and B) and brain stem (Figure 
1, C and D) in hA53Tα-syn mice, whereas no activation is observed 
in the cortex, which is relatively unaffected (Figure 1, E and F). 
There is no c-Abl activation observed in the ventral midbrain as 
well, a region that lacks pathology in these mice (Supplemental 
Figure 9; supplemental material available online with this article; 
doi:10.1172/JCI85456DS1). Immunostaining of phospho–c-Abl 
colocalizes with α-synuclein in the brain stem of the hA53Tα-syn 
mice (Figure 1G). To determine whether c-Abl activation is co-inci-
dent with pathology, immunostaining for α-synuclein phosphory-
lated at serine 129 was performed. Phospho–c-Abl colocalizes with 
phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein in the brain stem of the hA53Tα-
syn mice, suggesting that c-Abl activation occurs in the setting of 
α-synuclein pathology (Figure 1H). In the cortex, which is unaf-
fected, there is no colocalization of phospho–c-Abl with α-synu-
clein or phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein (Figure 1, G and H).
c-Abl overexpression exacerbates α-synuclein pathologies. To test 
the role of c-Abl in α-synuclein neurodegeneration, the hA53Tα-
syn mice were cross-bred to the BCR-ABL Tet-Off transgenic mice 
[FVB/N-Tg(tetO-BCR/ABL1)2Dgt/J (Jax #006202); referred to as 
BCR-ABL mice]. BCR-ABL is a constitutively active form of c-Abl 
(22). Since human A53T α-synuclein is driven by the mouse prion 
promoter (PrP), the PrP-tTA driver was used to drive BCR-ABL 
expression. BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn bigenic mice were created and 
cross-bred to the PrP-tTA driver mice. From this cross-breeding, 
littermates with the following genotypes were separated and aged: 
nontransgenic, BCR-ABL PrP-tTA transgenic, hA53Tα-syn trans-
genic, PrP-tTA hA53Tα-syn transgenic, and BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn 
PrP-tTA mice. In addition, another cohort of the trigenic, BCR-
ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice were treated with doxycycline to 
suppress BCR-ABL expression (Figure 2A). The different genotype 
cohorts were aged, and survival was monitored. As previously 
described, hA53Tα-syn mice live an average of 10 months (27); 1 
mouse lived to 18 months of age (Figure 2B). The nontransgenic 
mice and the BCR-ABL PrP-tTA live a normal lifespan. According 
to previous reports, the tetracycline-controlled transactivator (tTA) 
may have mild toxicity, but its expression level usually remains 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
of insoluble phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein and high–molecular 
weight species of α-synuclein, as well as proteolytic fragments of 
α-synuclein. Doxycycline treatment in the BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn 
PrP-tTA mice prevents the accumulation of insoluble high–molec-
ular weight species of α-synuclein, monomeric α-synuclein, and 
insoluble phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein (Figure 3, F and G). No 
abnormalities are observed in the other genotypes. Mild accumu-
lation of soluble high–molecular weight species of α-synuclein as 
well as phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein is detected in hA53Tα-syn 
and BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice with or without dox-
ycycline, but no significant difference in their levels is observed 
among them (Figure 3, D and E). Taken together, these results 
neurodegeneration, and there is substantial GFAP immunoreac-
tivity in the brain stem and cerebellum of BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn 
PrP-tTA mice (Figure 3C). At 6 months of age there is no signif-
icant accumulation of phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein, ubiquitin, 
or GFAP in any of the other mouse genotypes (Figure 3, A–C). The 
accumulation of detergent-insoluble A53T α-synuclein species 
in biochemical fractionation assays is associated with pathologic 
neuronal accumulation of α-synuclein in transgenic mice (27, 30); 
thus the brain stem of the different genotypes was fractionated 
into detergent-soluble and -insoluble fractions (Figure 3, D–G). 
Immunoblotting of these fractions demonstrates that in the brain 
stem of BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice there is accumulation 
Figure 1. c-Abl is overactivated in symptomatic hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. (A, C, and E) Representative immunoblots of c-Abl, pY245 c-Abl, α-synuclein 
(α-syn), and β-actin in the spinal cord, brain stem, and cortex from symptomatic hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice and age-matched nontransgenic (Non-Tg) litt-
ermate controls. (B, D, and F) Quantification of pY245 c-Abl protein levels normalized to c-Abl (n = 4 per group). Data are from 3 independent experiments. 
Statistical significance was determined by 2-tailed unpaired Student’s t test. Quantified data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. (G) 
Representative immunofluorescent images of pY245 c-Abl (green) and α-syn (red) in the brain stem and cortex from symptomatic hA53Tα-syn transgenic 
mice and age-matched nontransgenic littermate controls (n = 3 per group). Scale bar: 50 μm. (H) Representative confocal images of pY245 c-Abl (green) and 
pS129 α-syn (red) in the brain stem and cortex from symptomatic hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice and age-matched nontransgenic littermate controls (n =3 per 
group). Enlarged image (zoom-in, ×35; original magnification, ×40) at right shows colocalization of pY245 c-Abl and pS129 α-syn. Scale bar: 50 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
(S. Brahmachari, unpublished observations). Interestingly, there is 
a marked decrease of TH immunoreactivity in the LC region as evi-
dent from a 50% reduction in TH-positive as well as Nissl-positive 
neurons (Supplemental Figure 2, G and H). The loss in TH immuno-
reactivity indicates degeneration of norepinephrine (NE) neurons 
in the LC. This finding is consistent with previous evidence that NE 
neurons in the LC undergo degeneration, which often precedes DA 
neuronal loss in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNPc) (33, 34). 
Future studies are needed to evaluate whether LC neurons under-
go early degeneration in this model, prior to the loss of DA neurons 
in the SNPc. Furthermore, the IB analysis in the ventral midbrain 
region of these mice shows substantial increase in the levels of 
activated c-Abl (BCR-ABL and pY245 c-Abl), phosphotyrosine 39 
α-synuclein (see below), and phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein along 
with accumulation of high–molecular weight species of α-synuclein 
(Supplemental Figure 6, I and J).
c-Abl deletion reduces α-synuclein pathologies. To directly test 
the role of c-Abl in α-synuclein pathology, the hA53Tα-syn mice 
were cross-bred to conditional c-Abl knockout mice. Since germ-
indicate that c-Abl activity is capable of accelerating A53T α-synu-
clein–induced neuropathology and neurobehavioral deficits.
c-Abl overexpression in WT mice leads to DA neuron degeneration 
and WT α-synuclein pathologies. BCR-ABL PrP-tTA transgenic mice 
were aged and examined. At 2 years of age there is significant loss of 
DA neurons as assessed by quantitative unbiased stereology with a 
30% reduction in tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity and 
Nissl staining (Supplemental Figure 2, A and B). Accompanying the 
reduction in DA neurons there is a significant reduction in striatal 
TH fiber density (Supplemental Figure 2, C and D). These results 
suggest that overactivation of c-Abl is sufficient to cause degenera-
tion of DA neurons. To determine whether the loss of DA neurons 
is selective, we examined the cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, 
locus coeruleus (LC), and nucleus basalis. There are no discernible 
abnormalities of the cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum (Supple-
mental Figure 2E). In addition, stereologic counts of cortical neu-
rons reveal no significant difference between BCR-ABL PrP-tTA 
mice and age-matched nontransgenic mice (Supplemental Figure 
2F), and there is a trend toward a loss of nucleus basalis neurons 
Figure 2. c-Abl overexpression decreases survival of hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. (A) Breeding strategy to generate BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA 
trigenic mice. (B) Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis for hA53Tα-syn, PrP-tTA hA53Tα-syn, BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA trigenic, and BCR-ABL hA53Tα-
syn PrP-tTA trigenic mice with doxycycline (n = 20–30 mice per group). Statistical analysis was performed by Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test. (C, E, and G) 
Representative immunoblots of BCR-ABL, pY245 c-Abl, α-syn, and β-actin in the brain stem, spinal cord, and cortex from 3-month-old BCR-ABL hA53Tα-
syn PrP-tTA trigenic mice with or without doxycycline and age-matched littermate controls. (D, F, and H) Quantification of BCR-ABL, pY245 c-Abl, and 
α-syn protein levels normalized to β-actin (n = 3 per group). Data are from 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by 1-way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s post-test of multiple comparisons. Quantified data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
line c-Abl knockout mice are embryonic lethal (35, 36), conditional 
c-Abl knockout mice were used in which c-Ablfl/fl were cross-bred to 
Nestin-Cre driver mice to selectively delete c-Abl from neurons as 
previously described (23, 37). c-Ablfl/fl mice were cross-bred to the 
hA53Tα-syn mice to create c-Ablfl/fl hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice, 
which were then cross-bred to c-Ablfl/– Nestin-Cre+ mice. From this 
cross-breeding, littermates with the following genotypes were 
separated and aged: c-Ablfl/– hA53Tα-syn Nestin-Cre+ (referred 
to as c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn), c-Ablfl/fl hA53Tα-syn (referred to as 
c-AblWT hA53Tα-syn), c-Ablfl/– Nestin-Cre+ (referred to as c-AblKO), 
and c-Ablfl/fl (referred to as c-AblWT) (Figure 4A). The different gen-
otype cohorts were aged, and survival was monitored. As previ-
ously described, hA53Tα-syn mice live an average of 10 months 
(27). Knockout of c-Abl significantly prolongs the survival of the 
hA53Tα-syn mice by 3 months (Figure 4B). The different cohorts 
of mice were assessed for expression levels of c-Abl and α-synucle-
in at 2 months of age in brain stem, spinal cord, and cortex (Figure 
4, C–H). Equivalent levels of α-synuclein are expressed among the 
different genotypes (Figure 4, C–H). The different cohorts of mice 
were also assessed for c-Abl by immunofluorescence at 9 months 
of age in the brain stem (Supplemental Figure 8, A and B). At 5 
months of age when the mice are asymptomatic, there is no weight 
loss in the hA53Tα-syn mice. There is an approximately 20% loss 
of weight in the c-AblKO mice that is not exacerbated by the coex-
pression of hA53Tα-syn (Supplemental Figure 3A). At 9 months 
of age there is a significant weight loss in hA53Tα-syn mice, with 
no further loss of weight in the c-AblKO or the c-AblKO hA53Tα-
syn mice (Supplemental Figure 3A). Behavior was assessed over 
time (Supplemental Figure 3, B and C). Open-field monitoring 
reveals no significance in vertical and horizontal activity among 
the genotypes at 4 months of age (S. Brahmachari, unpublished 
observations). At 6 months of age there is a significant increase in 
horizontal and vertical activity in hA53Tα-syn mice as previous-
ly described (32) (Supplemental Figure 3, B and C), which is sig-
nificantly reduced in the c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice (Supplemental 
Figure 3, B and C). These results suggest that c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn 
mice exhibit delayed neurodegeneration.
In symptomatic hA53Tα-syn mice at approximately 9 months 
of age, there is substantial neuronal accumulation of human phos-
phoserine 129 α-synuclein in a number of brain regions, including 
the brain stem and cerebellum (Figure 5A). There is a prominent 
accumulation of ubiquitin in neurites and cell bodies in all affected 
regions (Figure 5B). There is substantial GFAP immunoreactivity 
in the hA53Tα-syn mice (Figure 5C). At 9 months of age there is no 
significant accumulation of phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein, ubiq-
uitin, or GFAP in any of the other mouse genotypes (Figure 5, A–C). 
The brain stem of the different genotypes was fractionated into 
detergent-soluble and -insoluble fractions (Figure 5, D–G). Immu-
noblotting of these fractions demonstrates that in the hA53Tα-syn 
mice there is accumulation of insoluble phosphoserine 129 α-synu-
clein and high–molecular weight species of α-synuclein. However, 
no abnormalities are observed in the other genotypes (Figure 5, F 
and G). Mild accumulation of soluble phosphoserine 129 α-synu-
clein and high–molecular weight species of α-synuclein as well as 
proteolytic fragments of α-synuclein is detected in hA53Tα-syn and 
c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice, but no significant difference in their lev-
els is observed among them (Figure 5, D and E).
c-Abl phosphorylates α-synuclein. Since the transgenic c-Abl 
gain- and loss-of-function studies suggest that c-Abl activation 
plays a role in the pathogenesis of α-synucleinopathies, experi-
ments were performed to determine whether α-synuclein interacts 
with and is phosphorylated by c-Abl. To determine whether c-Abl 
interacts with α-synuclein, cotransfection experiments in SH-SY5Y 
cells were performed. GFP-tagged c-Abl (GFP-c-Abl) coimmu-
noprecipitates myc-tagged α-synuclein (myc-α-syn) (Figure 6A). 
Interestingly, a kinase-dead (KD) version (lysine 290 arginine) 
of c-Abl fails to interact with α-synuclein. IP of α-synuclein from 
mouse brain coimmunoprecipitates c-Abl, indicating that c-Abl 
and α-synuclein interact in vivo. c-Abl fails to coimmunoprecipi-
tate with mouse IgG, which indicates that the interaction between 
c-Abl and α-synuclein is specific (Figure 6B). To further determine 
the specificity of the interaction, IP was compared between WT, 
c-AblKO, hA53Tα-syn, and c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice. Antibodies to 
α-synuclein coimmunoprecipitate c-Abl from WT and hA53Tα-syn 
but not c-AblKO nor c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice (Figure 6C).
An in vitro kinase assay was performed using recombinant 
c-Abl and recombinant α-synuclein to determine whether c-Abl 
is competent to phosphorylate α-synuclein. Phosphorylation was 
monitored with 32P-ATP. c-Abl phosphorylates α-synuclein, and 
the c-Abl family kinase inhibitor STI-571 prevents the phosphor-
ylation of α-synuclein by c-Abl (Figure 6D). To determine the site 
of phosphorylation of α-synuclein by c-Abl, 2-dimensional gel 
electrophoresis (2-DE) gel electrophoresis was used to separate 
phosphorylated from nonphosphorylated α-synuclein (Figure 6E). 
c-Abl–phosphorylated α-synuclein was submitted for mass spec-
trometry for the determination of the phosphorylation site. Mass 
spectrometric analysis provided 100% sequence coverage of 
α-synuclein, and all tyrosine residues were investigated for phos-
phorylation status. Only tyrosine 39 is phosphorylated, whereas 
none of the other tyrosines were phosphorylated (Figure 6E). To 
confirm that tyrosine 39 was the sole site of phosphorylation by 
c-Abl, tyrosine 39 in α-synuclein, as well as tyrosine 125, 133, and 
136, was mutated to phenylalanine. Cotransfection experiments in 
SH-SY5Y indicate that WT α-synuclein is phosphorylated by c-Abl 
Figure 3. c-Abl overexpression exacerbates α-synuclein pathologies. 
(A–C) Representative pS129 α-syn, ubiquitin, and GFAP IHC in the brain 
stem and cerebellum of 6-month-old symptomatic BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn 
PrP-tTA trigenic mice with or without doxycycline and age-matched litt-
ermate controls (n = 3 per group). Enlarged images (zoom-in, ×30; original 
magnification, ×40) of the indicated regions are shown at right. Scale bars: 
50 μm. (D) Representative immunoblots of α-syn, pS129 α-syn, BCR-ABL, 
and β-actin in the detergent-soluble fraction of brain stem from 6-month-
old symptomatic BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA trigenic mice with or with-
out doxycycline and age-matched littermate controls. (E) Quantification of 
α-syn monomer and pS129 α-syn protein levels in D normalized to β-actin 
and α-syn monomer, respectively (n = 5 mice per group). (F) Representative 
immunoblots of α-syn, pS129 α-syn, and β-actin in the detergent-insoluble 
fraction of brain stem from 6-month-old symptomatic BCR-ABL hA53Tα-
syn PrP-tTA trigenic mice with or without doxycycline and age-matched 
littermate controls. (G) Quantification of α-syn monomer and pS129 α-syn 
protein levels in F normalized to β-actin and α-syn monomer, respectively 
(n = 5 mice per group). (D–G) Data are from 3 independent experiments. 
Statistical significance was determined by 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s 
post-test of multiple comparisons. Quantified data are expressed as the 
mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
but not c-Abl-KD. c-Abl is not able to phosphorylate α-synuclein 
Y39F, but is able to tyrosine-phosphorylate α-synuclein Y125F, 
Y133F, and Y136F (Figure 6F). These results taken together indi-
cate that c-Abl exclusively phosphorylates α-synuclein on tyrosine 
39. To further explore phosphorylation of α-synuclein on tyrosine 
39, a phospho-specific antibody was generated and confirmed to 
specifically recognize phosphotyrosine 39 on α-synuclein (Figure 
6F and Supplemental Figure 4A).
The levels of phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein were monitored 
in the brain stem and cortex of the hA53Tα-syn mice and com-
pared with phosphoserine 129 at different ages by biochemical 
fractionation assays (Figure 7 and Supplemental Figure 4, B–E). As 
previously reported, phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein is increased 
in the brain stem of hA53Tα-syn mice and is completely absent 
from the nontransgenic controls (29, 38) (Figure 7). The levels of 
phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein in the detergent-soluble fractions 
of the brain stem do not change during the lifespan of the hA53Tα-
syn mice (Figure 7, C and D). In contrast, phosphotyrosine 39 α-sy-
nuclein is detected at 2 months of age and increases significantly 
in asymptomatic (4 and 6 months) hA53Tα-syn mice and then 
decreases, but it still remains significantly increased in symptom-
atic hA53Tα-syn mice compared with 2 months of age (Figure 7, C 
Figure 4. c-Abl deletion extends survival of hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. (A) Breeding strategy to generate conditional c-AblKO hA53T α-syn (c-Ablfl/– 
hA53Tα-syn Nestin-Cre) mice. (B) Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis for c-AblWT hA53Tα-syn and c-AblKO hA53T α-syn mice (n = 20–30 mice per group). 
Statistical analysis was performed by Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test. P < 0.01. (C, E, and G) Representative immunoblots of c-Abl, α-syn, and β-actin in the 
brain stem, spinal cord, and cortex from 2-month-old c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice and age-matched littermate controls. (D, F, and H) Quantification of α-syn 
protein levels normalized to β-actin (n = 3 per group). Data are from 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by 1-way ANOVA 
with Tukey’s post-test of multiple comparisons. Quantified data are expressed as the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
tyrosine 39 phosphorylation, or serine 129 phosphorylation of 
α-synuclein in the cortex (Figure 8, E and F), a region relatively 
unaffected in PD (39). Most importantly, there is marked accu-
mulation of phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein in Lewy bodies in PD 
postmortem brain substantia nigra (Figure 8, G and H). In addi-
tion, there is also substantial accumulation of phosphoserine 129 
α-synuclein in Lewy bodies (Figure 8, I and J).
Phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein shows increased propensity for 
aggregation. Since phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein increases with 
aging and disease progression in hA53Tα-syn mice, we asked 
whether phosphorylation of α-synuclein at tyrosine 39 plays 
any role in aggregation. To determine this, we used a previously 
described cell-based aggregation assay system (40). Myc-tagged 
WT α-synuclein alone or along with kinase-active c-Abl (c-Abl-
KA) or the KD version, or myc-tagged WT-Y39F α-synuclein 
along with c-Abl-KA, was overexpressed in HEK293T cells, and 
immunostaining with antibodies against myc epitope tag on the 
expressed α-synuclein proteins was performed to quantify the 
aggregates. Increased aggregation of α-synuclein is observed only 
when α-synuclein is co-overexpressed with c-Abl-KA, but not with 
the KD version of c-Abl, nor did we observe increased aggregation 
with co-overexpression of WT-Y39F α-synuclein and c-Abl-KA 
(Figure 9, A and B). To further assess the role of tyrosine 39 phos-
phorylation in α-synuclein aggregation, WT, A53T, A53T-Y39F, or 
A53T-Y39E α-synuclein was overexpressed in HEK293T cells (Fig-
ure 9, E and F) or human neurons (Supplemental Figure 7), and 
aggregation of α-synuclein was assessed. A53T α-synuclein shows 
a marked increase in aggregation compared with the WT α-synu-
clein, whereas the A53T phospho-deficient mutant (A53T-Y39F) 
shows significantly reduced aggregation (Figure 9, E and F, and 
Supplemental Figure 7, A and B). The phosphomimetic A53T-Y39E 
α-synuclein exhibits aggregation similar to that of A53T α-synu-
clein. Quantification of immunoblots ensures that an equivalent 
level of myc-tagged α-synuclein is expressed (Figure 9, C, D, G, 
and H), indicating that the observed differences in aggregation 
are not due to differences in α-synuclein expression level. To con-
firm that α-synuclein punctates are fibrillar aggregates, thioflavin 
S and α-synuclein dual immunostaining was performed to exam-
ine whether α-synuclein punctates are thioflavin S positive (Figure 
9I). The α-synuclein punctates show complete colocalization with 
thioflavin S, indicating that these punctates are fibrillar aggregates 
of α-synuclein. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that 
tyrosine 39 phosphorylation of α-synuclein promotes the aggrega-
tion of α-synuclein.
Discussion
The major finding of this study is that c-Abl activation plays a key 
role in α-synuclein neurodegeneration. Activation of c-Abl leads 
to tyrosine 39 phosphorylation of α-synuclein, which strongly cor-
relates with disease progression in hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. 
Overexpression of a constitutively active form of c-Abl, BCR-ABL, 
substantially and significantly increases the pathology of hA53Tα-
syn transgenic mice and leads to DA and NE neuron degeneration 
in aged WT mice. On the other hand, knockout of c-Abl signifi-
cantly decreases the pathology of hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. 
Importantly, phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein increases over time 
as hA53Tα-syn mice become more symptomatic. In addition, this 
and D). However, in the detergent-insoluble fractions, the level of 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein is mildly to moderately detected, 
and phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein is barely detectable in asymp-
tomatic hA53Tα-syn mice at 2, 4, and 6 months of age, but their 
levels dramatically and significantly increase in the brain stem of 
early-symptomatic mice at 7–8 months of age and increase fur-
ther in late-stage symptomatic mice at 9–12 months of age, when 
high–molecular weight species of α-synuclein are observed (Fig-
ure 7, E–G). Accompanying the increase in phosphotyrosine 39 
α-synuclein is an increase in phospho–c-Abl (Figure 7, C–F). Simi-
lar results are observed in the spinal cord (S. Brahmachari, unpub-
lished observations). Interestingly, biochemical fractionation 
assays in the cortex region of hA53Tα-syn mice indicate that there 
is a significant increase in phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein level 
in the detergent-soluble fractions of asymptomatic (6 months) 
but not of symptomatic hA53Tα-syn mice, which is also associat-
ed with mild accumulation of high–molecular weight species of 
α-synuclein without any noticeable detection of phosphoserine 
129 α-synuclein (Supplemental Figure 4, B and C). In contrast, no 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein or phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein 
is detected in the detergent-insoluble fractions (Supplemental Fig-
ure 4, D and E). Immunostaining for phosphotyrosine 39 α-synu-
clein demonstrates that phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein accumu-
lates in affected brain regions of symptomatic hA53Tα-syn mice 
including brain stem and cerebellum, but not in unaffected brain 
regions such as the cortex (Supplemental Figure 5, A, B, and D). 
Phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein levels are increased in the BCR-
ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-tTA mice (Supplemental Figure 5C), and 
they are markedly reduced in the c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn as assessed 
by immunostaining (Supplemental Figure 5D). In addition, the 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein levels are not significantly differ-
ent between the different mouse strains in the soluble brain stem 
fractions (Supplemental Figure 6, A and D), but they are increased 
in the insoluble brain stem fraction of BCR-ABL hA53Tα-syn PrP-
tTA mice (Supplemental Figure 6, B and D). In the c-AblKO hA53Tα-
syn mice, phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein levels are unchanged in 
the soluble fraction (Supplemental Figure 6, E and G) and mark-
edly reduced in the insoluble fraction (Supplemental Figure 6, F 
and H). There is also an increase in phosphotyrosine 39 α-synucle-
in and pathologic accumulation of α-synuclein and phosphoserine 
129 α-synuclein in the BCR-ABL PrP-tTA mice versus age-matched 
nontransgenic mice (Supplemental Figure 6, I and J).
Phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein is elevated in sporadic PD 
and accumulates in Lewy bodies. The potential pathophysiologic 
relevance of tyrosine 39 phosphorylation of α-synuclein was 
monitored in human postmortem tissues from PD patients and 
age-matched controls (Supplemental Tables 1 and 2). Total tis-
sue lysates were prepared from substantia nigra, striatum, and 
cortex. As previously reported, there is a significant increase in 
tyrosine-phosphorylated c-Abl from PD brain samples over age-
matched control tissue in substantia nigra and striatum (Figure 
8, A–D). There is also a significant increase in tyrosine 39 phos-
phorylation of α-synuclein in PD substantia nigra and striatum 
over age-matched controls (Figure 8, A–D). Phosphoserine 129 
α-synuclein is also increased in the substantia nigra and striatum 
over age-matched controls (Figure 8, A–D). There is no significant 
difference between the levels of tyrosine-phosphorylated c-Abl, 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 7 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
significantly high in symptomatic mice compared with 2-month-
old hA53Tα-syn mice. This decrease after 6 months of age is likely 
due to its shift to the insoluble fraction. It is also mildly to mod-
erately elevated in the detergent-insoluble fraction in asymptom-
atic mice, but the levels of detergent-insoluble phosphotyrosine 
39 α-synuclein increase dramatically with disease severity in 
hA53Tα-syn mice, similarly to the dramatic increase in the level of 
phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein in the detergent-insoluble fraction. 
Since phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein increases throughout the 
disease course of the hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice, whereas phos-
phoserine 129 α-synuclein levels are stable until α-synuclein shifts 
to the detergent-insoluble fraction, phosphotyrosine 39 α-synu-
clein levels may be a more robust disease and progression indicator 
for PD. Future studies exploring this possibility are warranted.
Recently, Mahul-Mellier and colleagues (46) reported that 
c-Abl phosphorylated α-synuclein on both tyrosine 39 and 125 
with only 66% coverage of the α-synuclein protein by mass spec-
trometry. Since no mass spectrometry data were provided for 
phosphorylation of tyrosine 125, and we had 100% coverage of 
α-synuclein, it is difficult to compare our findings with theirs. In 
addition, our mutational analysis strongly suggests that tyrosine 
39 is exclusively phosphorylated by c-Abl. In contrast to our find-
ings, Mahul-Mellier and colleagues did not observe an increase in 
tyrosine 39 phosphorylation of α-synuclein in PD; however, their 
analysis was limited to the cortex, which is not affected and where 
we also did not observe an increase.
Overactivation of c-Abl is emerging as a consistent feature 
of sporadic PD (23, 25, 46–48). c-Abl levels as well as markers of 
c-Abl activity are increased in sporadic PD (23, 25, 46–48). c-Abl 
overexpression markedly accelerates the behavioral abnormal-
ities and pathology of hA53Tα-syn mice and shortens their life-
span. More importantly, c-Abl overexpression in WT mice leads to 
DA neuron degeneration at 2 years of age, suggesting that c-Abl 
alone is sufficient to cause neurodegeneration. Accompanying the 
degeneration of DA neurons is an elevation of phosphotyrosine 
39 α-synuclein and pathologic accumulation of α-synuclein, sug-
gesting that phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein may contribute to 
the degeneration of DA neurons. Other reports further suggest 
that c-Abl activation is associated with accumulation of α-synu-
clein in the mouse models of α-synuclein overexpression (25, 46). 
Interestingly, c-Abl also phosphorylates parkin on tyrosine 143, 
leading to its inactivation and accumulation of parkin substrates 
(23, 24, 26), raising the possibility that elevation of parkin sub-
strates may contribute to the pathogenesis of sporadic PD (49). 
c-Abl inhibitors may also affect neuroinflammation induced by 
α-synuclein and facilitate autophagic clearance of α-synuclein 
(50, 51). Inhibition of c-Abl may also be protective by inhibiting 
p38α (52). In addition, c-Abl inhibition may also have symptomatic 
effects as it normalizes striatal motor behaviors in the 1-methyl-4- 
phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) model of PD (53). 
Future studies are indicated to determine the major pathway by 
which c-Abl inhibition provides neuroprotection.
Previous studies indicate that brain-penetrant c-Abl inhibitors 
protect against MPTP neurotoxicity (26, 48) and normalize stria-
tal motor behaviors (53), as well as reverse the loss of DA neurons 
and improve motor behavior in a viral α-synuclein model of PD 
(25). However, a major caveat of these reports is that the inhibitors 
is the first report showing that phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein is 
elevated in the substantia nigra and striatum of PD postmortem 
brains and that it accumulates in the Lewy bodies. Phosphory-
lation of α-synuclein at tyrosine 39 seems to be a key posttrans-
lational modification driving aggregation. Taken together, our 
data strongly suggest that c-Abl is an important contributor to the 
pathogenesis of α-synuclein–induced neurodegeneration and that 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein may be a progression marker for 
PD and related α-synucleinopathies, and that it also plays a central 
role in α-synuclein aggregation.
Phosphorylation of α-synuclein has been studied extensively 
(41), particularly with regard to phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein 
(18, 42). Phosphorylation of serine 129 of α-synuclein is thought 
to be a marker of α-synuclein pathology since 90% of α-synuclein 
found in Lewy bodies is phosphorylated at serine 129 (42) and the 
levels increase with the burden of Lewy bodies (43). Controver-
sially, phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein is thought to contribute to 
the pathogenesis of PD and related α-synucleinopathies (42). We 
find that the level of phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein is elevated in 
the detergent-soluble fraction of hA53Tα-syn mice as early as 2 
months of age. However, the level of phosphoserine 129 α-synu-
clein in the detergent-soluble fraction does not change over time, 
but becomes elevated in the detergent-insoluble fraction when the 
mice become symptomatic at 7–8 months of age when high–molec-
ular weight species of α-synuclein become manifest. Phosphoser-
ine 129 α-synuclein has been investigated as a potential biomarker 
in PD, and its concentrations correlated weakly with PD severity 
(44). In addition, α-synuclein levels alone are not sufficient as a PD 
biomarker (45). Combined total α-synuclein and phosphoserine 
129 α-synuclein levels might distinguish different parkinsonian 
disorders (44). Thus, the utility of total α-synuclein and serine 129 
phosphorylation of α-synuclein does not seem to be overly prom-
ising (44, 45). In particular, phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein does 
seem to be a suitable progression marker in human PD; whether it 
will be suitable as a diagnostic marker requires further study (44).
On the other hand, detergent-soluble phosphotyrosine 39 
α-synuclein shows a marked increase in asymptomatic mice from 2 
months to 4 and 6 months of age and then decreases, but remains 
Figure 5. c-Abl deletion reduces α-synuclein pathologies. (A–C) Rep-
resentative pS129 α-syn, ubiquitin, and GFAP IHC in the brain stem and 
cerebellum of 9-month-old symptomatic c-AblWT hA53Tα-syn mice versus 
c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice and age-matched littermate control mice (n = 3 
per group). Enlarged images (zoom-in, ×30; original magnification, ×40) of 
the indicated regions are shown at right. Scale bars: 50 μm. (D) Represen-
tative immunoblots of c-Abl, α-syn, pS129 α-syn, and β-actin in the deter-
gent-soluble fraction of brain stem from 9-month-old symptomatic c-AblWT 
hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice versus c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice 
and age-matched littermate controls. (E) Quantification of α-syn monomer 
and pS129 α-syn protein levels in D normalized to β-actin and α-syn mono-
mer, respectively (n = 7 mice per group). (F) Representative immunoblots of 
c-Abl, α-syn, pS129 α-syn, and β-actin in the detergent-insoluble fraction of 
brain stem from 9-month-old symptomatic c-AblWT hA53Tα-syn transgenic 
mice and age-matched littermate controls. (G) Quantification of α-syn 
monomer and pS129 α-syn protein levels in F normalized to β-actin and 
α-syn monomer, respectively (n = 7 mice per group). (D–G) Data are from 3 
independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by 1-way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s post-test of multiple comparisons. Quantified data are 
expressed as the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
order of inhibitory potencies): DDR1>DDR2>BCR-ABL>PDG-
FRα/β>KIT>CSF-1R. In addition nilotinib has also been found 
to affect MAPK activity (55). Therefore, due to this well-known 
nonselectivity of nilotinib, one cannot make a definitive conclu-
sion regarding the role of c-Abl activation in the pathogenesis of 
PD and α-synucleinopathies. Using both BCR-ABL overexpression 
used in these studies have a broad range of inhibitory activities on 
several kinases. They are nonspecific kinase inhibitors, and thus 
one cannot conclude that c-Abl inhibition accounts for the neuro-
protection observed. For instance, nilotinib, which was shown to 
be protective in a viral α-synuclein model (25), has several kinase 
targets (54). Nilotinib inhibits the following kinases (listed in the 
Figure 6. c-Abl interacts with and phosphorylates α-synuclein. (A) Coimmunoprecipitation of myc-tagged α-syn (myc-α-syn) and GFP-tagged c-Abl (GFP- 
c-Abl) by anti-myc antibody in SH-SY5Y cells cotransfected with myc-α-syn and GFP-c-Abl or kinase-dead (KD) (lysine 290 arginine) version of c-Abl (GFP-
c-Abl-KD) followed by IB. (B) Coimmunoprecipitation of α-syn and c-Abl by anti–α-syn antibody in the brain stem from nontransgenic mice followed by IB. 
Anti-IgG was used as a negative control. (C) Coimmunoprecipitation of α-syn and c-Abl by anti–α-syn antibody in the brain tissue lysates from WT, c-Abl 
knockout (c-AblKO), hA53Tα-syn, and c-AblKO hA53Tα-syn mice followed by IB. (D) In vitro kinase assay showing that c-Abl phosphorylates α-syn. Autoradio-
gram indicates that STI-571, a c-Abl kinase inhibitor, dose-dependently reduced phosphorylation of α-syn and c-Abl. Immunoblot in the bottom panel shows 
equivalent amount of α-syn used in the experiment. (E) c-Abl phosphorylates α-syn on tyrosine (Y) 39. Mass spectrometric analysis reveals 100% sequence 
coverage of α-syn, showing that all tyrosine residues were investigated for phosphorylation status. Phosphorylated Y39 is indicated in red; other tyrosines are 
indicated in green (top). α-Syn phosphorylated by c-Abl was separated by 2-DE followed by IB (bottom left). The arrows indicate tyrosine phosphorylation of 
α-syn. Both nonphosphorylated and phosphorylated α-syn were subjected to liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify the 
phosphorylation site (bottom right). LC-MS/MS spectra of the nonphosphorylated peptide (EGVLYVGSK) and the phosphorylated peptide (EGVLpYVGSK) are 
compared, demonstrating that there is the 80-Da shift for the Y39 ion containing the phosphate moiety. The phosphorylated amino acid is preceded by a “p” 
and highlighted in red. (F) IP of myc-α-syn by anti-myc antibody in SH-SY5Y cells cotransfected with indicated plasmids followed by IB with anti-myc, anti-
pY39 α-syn, anti-pTyr, or anti-pY125 α-syn antibodies. Inputs were immunoblotted with anti-GFP antibodies. All experiments were repeated at least 3 times.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
Figure 7. Phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein increases in the brain stem of hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice. (A) Representative immunoblots of α-syn, pY39 α-syn, 
pS129 α-syn, pY245-c-Abl, c-Abl, and β-actin in the brain stem from nontransgenic mice of different ages. (B) Quantification of α-syn monomer and c-Abl 
protein levels in A normalized to β-actin (n = 5 mice per group). (C) Representative immunoblots of α-syn, pY39 α-syn, pS129 α-syn, pY245-c-Abl, c-Abl, and 
β-actin in the detergent-soluble fraction of brain stem from hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice of different ages. Asterisk indicates nonspecific band. (D) Quantifi-
cation of pY245-c-Abl protein level normalized to c-Abl and pY39 α-syn and pS129 α-syn protein levels normalized to α-syn monomer in A (n = 5–10 mice per 
group). (E) Representative immunoblots of α-syn, pY39 α-syn, pS129 α-syn, pY245-c-Abl, c-Abl, and β-actin in the detergent-insoluble fraction of brain stem 
from hA53Tα-syn transgenic mice of different ages. (F and G) Quantification of pY245-c-Abl protein level normalized to c-Abl and pY39 α-syn and pS129 α-syn 
protein levels normalized to α-syn monomer in E (n = 5–10 mice per group). Data are from 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined 
by 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-test of multiple comparisons. Quantified data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
Figure 8. Phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein level is elevated in PD patients and accumulates in Lewy bodies. (A, C, and E) Representative immunoblots 
of c-Abl, pY245 c-Abl, pY39 α-syn, pS129 α-syn, α-syn, and β-actin in the total lysates from substantia nigra, striatum, and cortex regions from PD patient 
brains and age-matched controls. (B) Quantification of c-Abl protein level normalized to β-actin, pY245 c-Abl protein level normalized to c-Abl, and pY39 
α-syn and pS129 α-syn protein levels normalized to α-syn in the substantia nigra (control n = 5, PD n = 8). (D and F) Quantification of pY245 c-Abl protein 
level normalized to c-Abl and pY39 α-syn and pS129 α-syn protein levels normalized to α-syn in the striatum (control n = 5, PD n = 7) (D) and cortex (control 
n = 7, PD n = 6). Data are from 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by 2-tailed unpaired Student’s t test. Quantified data 
are expressed as the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. (G and I) Representative pY39 α-syn and pS129 α-syn IHC in the substantia nigra from PD patient 
brains and age-matched controls (n = 2). Scale bars: 250 μm. (H and J) High-magnification images of G and I. Scale bars: 25 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
P-flanked c-Abl gene exon 5 (c-Ablfl/fl-Nestin-Cre+) were previously 
described and were used in this study (37). Randomized mixed-gen-
der cohorts were used for all animal experiments. All mice were accli-
matized for 3 days in the procedure room before any experiments were 
started. We have taken great effort to reduce animal suffering from 
pain and discomfort.
Antibodies. Rabbit polyclonal phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein anti-
bodies were generated as described below. Primary antibodies used 
include the following: mouse anti–α-synuclein (610787; BD Transduc-
tion Laboratories), mouse anti–α-synuclein LB509 (ab27766; Abcam), 
mouse anti–α-synuclein Syn 204 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit 
anti–α-synuclein (2642; Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti-pY245 
c-Abl (2861; Cell Signaling Technology), mouse anti–c-Abl (554148; 
BD Transduction Laboratories), mouse anti-pS129 α-synuclein 
(pSyn#64) (015-25191; Wako), rabbit monoclonal anti-pS129 α-synu-
clein (ab168381; Abcam), rabbit anti–BCR-ABL (3902; Cell Signaling 
Technology), mouse anti-ubiquitin (MAB1510; Millipore), rabbit anti- 
GFAP (Z0334; Dako), rabbit anti-Y125 α-synuclein (ab124955; Abcam), 
rabbit anti-phosphotyrosine (610009; BD Transduction Laborato-
ries), rabbit anti-GFP (ab290; Abcam), and mouse anti–c-myc (Roche 
Diagnostics). Secondary antibodies used include the following: phos-
photyrosine, 4G10 platinum-peroxidase (Millipore), actin-peroxidase 
(Sigma-Aldrich), myc-peroxidase (Roche Diagnostics), anti-rabbit and 
anti-mouse IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-phosphotyrosine, and 
peroxidase-linked species-specific whole antibody (GE Healthcare).
Plasmid constructions. The full-length WT human α-synuclein was 
cloned into pRK5-myc vector (Stratagene). The full-length WT and 
A53T human α-synucleins cloned into pCMV5 used for expressions in 
HEK293T cells or human neurons were gifts from Thomas C. Sudhof 
(Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA). To generate human α-synuclein mutant plasmids (WT-Y39F, 
WT-Y125F, WT-Y133F, WT-Y136F, A53T-Y39F, and A53T-Y39E), 
site-directed mutagenesis was carried out using the QuikChange 
site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) with the pRK5-myc-WT 
α-synuclein or pCMV5-myc-WT α-synuclein plasmids as templates. 
All mutation sites were confirmed by DNA sequencing analysis. GFP-
c-Abl-KA (kinase-active) and GFP-c-Abl-KD (kinase-dead) were pro-
vided by Z.M. Yuan (Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA).
Reagents. The following chemicals were used: c-Abl recombi-
nant protein (SE 290; BIOMOL International), α-synuclein human 
recombinant protein (55456; Anaspec), c-Abl kinase inhibitor STI-
571 (Novartis Pharma AG), Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II and III 
[P5726 (II), P044 (III)], thioflavin S (Sigma-Aldrich), citrate-based 
antigen unmasking solutions (Vector Laboratories), and Lipofect-
amine Plus reagent and Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen).
Immunofluorescence analysis. Immunofluorescence in tissue sec-
tions was performed as described previously (56) with some modifi-
cations. 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS (pH 7.4)–fixed coronal brain sec-
tions were blocked with 10% donkey serum (Sigma-Aldrich)/PBS plus 
0.3% Triton X-100 and incubated with indicated antibodies. After 
brief washes with PBS, floating brain sections were incubated with 
corresponding secondary antibodies conjugated with fluorescent dyes 
(Alexa Fluor 555–conjugated donkey antibody to mouse IgG and Alexa 
Fluor 488–conjugated donkey antibody to rabbit IgG). Thioflavin S 
staining was performed as described previously (57). Transfected cells 
and conditional c-Abl knockouts, we provide, to our knowledge, 
the first conclusive evidence that c-Abl activation plays a role in the 
pathogenesis of α-synucleinopathies and PD, strongly implicating 
that inhibition of c-Abl alone could be neuroprotective. Since the 
c-Abl inhibitors currently in use have substantial toxicity and side 
effects due to their broad range of activities, our study provides a 
strong rationale to develop selective, brain-penetrant c-Abl inhib-
itors with better safety records than the current c-Abl inhibitors 
used in oncology clinics. If future studies indicate that markers of 
c-Abl activation such as phosphotyrosine 245 of c-Abl, phosphoty-
rosine 143 of parkin, and/or phosphotyrosine 39 of α-synuclein are 
detectable in the cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients, inhibition of 
c-Abl in the treatment of PD may be particularly attractive, since 
one would then have a tool to monitor treatment efficacy.
The strong correlation between phosphotyrosine 39 α-synu-
clein levels and the development of neuropathology as observed in 
our mouse models suggests that phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein 
may play a role in neurodegeneration. Consistent with this notion, 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein is found in Lewy bodies of PD 
brain. Our cell culture–based aggregation assays using HEK293T 
cells indicate that c-Abl increases α-synuclein aggregation, which 
is significantly prevented by the KD version of c-Abl or by the phos-
pho-deficient mutant of α-synuclein (Y39F). In addition, aggrega-
tion assays using HEK293T cells as well as human neuronal culture 
further indicate that phospho-deficient A53T α-synuclein (A53T-
Y39F α-synuclein), but not the phosphomimetic mutant (A53T-
Y39E α-synuclein), markedly reduces aggregation, suggesting that 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein plays a role in aggregation. Since 
aggregation of α-synuclein is thought to play a central role in its 
neurotoxicity, our results strongly imply that phosphotyrosine 39 
α-synuclein may play a role in neurodegeneration. Future studies 
will be required to directly test this possibility.
In summary, we report a key and defining role for c-Abl activa-
tion in α-synuclein–induced neurodegeneration. In particular, our 
study implicates that selective inhibition of c-Abl could be neuro-
protective. In addition, the strong correlation of phosphotyrosine 
39 α-synuclein with disease progression in hA53Tα-syn mice, as 
well as its increased propensity for aggregation, suggests that 
phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein could be a progression marker 
and contribute to the pathogenesis of PD and α-synucleinopathies.
Methods
Human postmortem brain tissues for IB analysis. Substantia nigra, stria-
tum, and cortex samples from neurologically unimpaired subjects 
 
(n = 5 for each region) and from subjects with PD (n = 8 for substantia 
nigra, n = 7 for striatum and for cortex) were obtained from the Divi-
sion of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins 
University. Diagnosis of PD was confirmed by pathologic and clinical 
criteria. The average age of subjects was 78.2 ± 1.6 years in the PD 
group and 76.3 ± 3.6 years in the control group (P = 0.62). Average 
postmortem delay was 12.45 days and was not significantly different 
between the 2 groups (P = 0.36).
Animals. The generation of transgenic mice that overexpress 
human A53T α-synuclein using the mouse prion protein (PrP) pro-
moter has been described previously (27). Tetracycline-controllable 
BCR-ABL transgenic mice [FVB/N-Tg(tetO-BCR/ABL1)2Dgt/J] were 
purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Mice possessing the lox-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
(Sigma-Aldrich) before imaging under a microscope (Axiophot pho-
tomicroscope; Carl Zeiss Vision).
Quantitative analysis of IHC. Every fourth serial section (60 μM for 
substantia nigra region and 40 μM for cortex, hippocampus, cerebel-
lum, brain stem, and striatum regions) was stained for TH and/or Nissl. 
TH-positive and Nissl-positive neurons from the SNPc and LC regions 
or only Nissl-positive neurons from cortical, hippocampal, and cerebel-
lar regions and the nucleus basalis were counted through optical frac-
tionators, the unbiased method for cell counting. This method was car-
ried out using a computer-assisted image analysis system consisting of 
an Axiophot photomicroscope (Carl Zeiss Vision) equipped with a com-
puter-controlled motorized stage (Ludl Electronics), a Hitachi HVC20 
camera, and Stereo Investigator software (MicroBrightField). The total 
number of TH-stained neurons and/or Nissl counts was calculated 
under ×100 (numerical aperture 1.4, coefficient of error 0.17) magni-
fication (58–61). Serial striatal sections were processed for TH staining 
following the same procedure as above. Fiber density in the striatum 
was quantified by optical density (OD). ImageJ software (NIH) was 
used to analyze the OD as previously described (62).
IHC for PD postmortem brain. Slides with 10-μm thickness of for-
malin-fixed paraffin-embedded human postmortem substantia nigra 
tissues (n = 2 for each of control and PD) were obtained from the Divi-
sion of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins 
University (Supplemental Table 2). The tissue sections were deparaf-
finized and rehydrated, and then heat-induced epitope retrieval was 
performed with citrate-based antigen unmasking solutions (Vector 
Laboratories). Then, the slides were stained with rabbit monoclonal 
phosphoserine 129 α-synuclein antibodies (ab168381; Abcam) or rab-
bit polyclonal phosphotyrosine 39 α-synuclein antibodies. All sections 
were stained with H&E.
Cell culture and transfection. Human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells 
(ATCC) or HEK293T cells (Invitrogen) were grown in DMEM containing 
10% FBS and antibiotics in a humidified 5% CO2/95% air atmosphere 
at 37°C. Human embryonic stem cells (H1; WiCell) were cultured using 
standard protocol on feeders. For neural induction, cells were harvested 
with collagenase (1 mg/ml), and single-cell suspensions were made 
using Accutase (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were seeded on Matrigel-coated 
plates at a density of 40,000 cells/cm2 in neural induction medium 
(Stem Cell Technologies) for the first 10 days and then in neurobasal 
medium supplemented with B27 for the next 21 days. For transient 
transfection, cells were transfected with 4 μg (for IP in 100-mm dishes) 
or 0.5 μg (for immunofluorescence in 24-well plates) of each plasmid of 
target vector using Lipofectamine Plus or Lipofectamine 2000 reagent, 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Two days 
after transfection, cells were either harvested for IP/IB or fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde followed by immunostaining.
Tissue lysate preparation. Tissue lysates were prepared as described 
previously (27) with some modifications. Nonionic detergent-solu-
ble and -insoluble fractions were made by homogenization of tissue 
in brain lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM 
EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II and 
III [Sigma-Aldrich], and complete protease inhibitor mixture). The 
homogenate was centrifuged for 20 minutes at 4°C, 100,000 g, and 
the resulting pellet (P1) and supernatant (S1, soluble) fractions were 
collected. The P1 was washed once in brain lysis buffer containing 
nonionic detergent (0.5% Nonidet P-40), and the resulting pellet (P2, 
nonionic detergent-insoluble) was homogenized in brain lysis buffer 
were washed with PBS and incubated with 0.01% thioflavin S (Sigma- 
Aldrich) for 8 minutes. Cells were then fixed with 4% paraformalde-
hyde for 30 minutes for subsequent immunocytochemistry. Images 
were obtained using a fluorescent microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200M) 
or a confocal microscope (Zeiss Confocal LSM 710). Immunofluores-
cence in transfected HEK293T cells or human neurons was performed 
as described previously (40). Transfected HEK293T cells or human 
neurons were washed 3 times with PBS, and fixed for 20 minutes at 
room temperature in PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde. Following 
3 washes with PBS, the fixed cultures were permeabilized for 5 min-
utes (PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100; Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were 
washed 3 times with PBS and blocked for 20 minutes with 5% BSA 
in PBS. α-Synuclein expression was monitored using myc antibodies 
(monoclonal, 1:200; Roche Diagnostics). Images were obtained using 
a confocal microscope (Zeiss Confocal LSM 710).
Quantitative analysis of aggregates. Immunopositive aggregates 
were quantified using ImageJ software. Immunofluorescence images 
of α-synuclein were converted to grayscale, a threshold was set up for 
the immunostaining based on particle size, and the area of puncta 
was defined. Based on this parameter, the number of aggregates per 
field was counted.
IHC for mouse brain. IHC was performed as described previously 
(26, 56). Mice were intracardially perfused with ice-cold PBS and 
4% paraformaldehyde/PBS (wt/vol, pH 7.4) after deep anesthesia by 
i.p. injection of Nembutal sodium solution (50 μl of twofold dilution 
in PBS of pentobarbital sodium 50 mg/ml; Lundbeck). Brains were 
removed and postfixed for 16 hours in the same fixative. After cry-
oprotection in 30% sucrose/PBS (wt/vol, pH 7.4), brains were fro-
zen on dry ice, and serial coronal sections (40-μm sections of brain 
stem, cerebellum, cortex, hippocampus, and striatum or 60-μm 
sections of midbrain) were cut with a microtome. Free-floating sec-
tions were blocked with 4% goat serum (vol/vol; Sigma-Aldrich)/
PBS plus 0.2% Triton X-100 (vol/vol) and incubated with indicated 
antibodies, followed by incubation with biotin-conjugated second-
ary antibodies to rabbit or mouse, ABC reagents (Vector Labora-
tories), and Sigmafast DAB tablets (Sigma-Aldrich). Sections were 
counterstained with Nissl (0.09% thionin, wt/vol) after desired 
antigen staining as described previously (58). A set of cortical, hip-
pocampal, and cerebellar sections were directly stained with Nissl 
as described above. Sections were dehydrated in 100% ethanol and 
cleared in Xylene (Fisher Scientific) followed by mounting with DPX 
Figure 9. Phosphorylation of α-synuclein at tyrosine 39 triggers aggrega-
tion. (A and E) Representative immunofluorescent images of myc-tagged 
α-syn (red) or GFP-tagged c-Abl and myc-tagged α-syn (merge) in HEK293T 
cells transfected with indicated plasmids. Single-headed arrows indicate 
aggregates. Double-headed arrow indicates area with no aggregation. 
Scale bars: 50 μm; 5 μm (inset). (B and F) Number of immunopositive 
aggregates per field was quantitated and compared with WT levels. (C and 
G) Immunoblots of cell lysates with antibodies against the myc epitope. 
(D and H) Quantifications of myc as percentage of WT levels. (I) Repre-
sentative immunofluorescent images of thioflavin S staining in HEK293T 
cells overexpressing indicated myc-tagged α-syn. Single-headed arrows 
indicate colocalization of thioflavin S and α-syn. Scale bar: 25 μm. Data 
are from at least 3 independent experiments. (B, D, F, and H) Statistical 
significance was determined by 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-test of 
multiple comparisons. Quantified data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
for second-dimensional separation. Immediately after the second- 
dimension run, gels were transferred to PVDF membrane and anti–
α-synuclein or anti-phosphotyrosine antibody was applied for 2-DE 
immunoblotting. The corresponding phosphospot in Coomassie-
stained 2-DE gel was used for identification of the phosphorylation 
site via tandem mass spectrometry.
Phosphorylation analysis by liquid chromatography–tandem mass 
spectrometry. Excised 2-DE spots were subjected to a modified in-gel 
trypsin digestion procedure exactly as described previously (23). Pep-
tide sequences (and hence protein identity) was determined by match-
ing of protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired 
fragmentation pattern by the software program Sequest (Thermo Finn-
igan) (63). The modification of 79.9663 mass units to serine, threon-
ine, and tyrosine was included in the database searches to determine 
phosphopeptides. Each phosphopeptide that was determined by the 
Sequest program was also manually inspected to ensure confidence.
Open-field assay. Open-field test was performed by placing of ani-
mals into an infrared beam chamber. Activity was monitored using 
the photobeam Activity System (San Diego Instruments), which pro-
vides a grid of infrared beams. The total number of beam breaks over 
a period of 30 minutes was recorded and analyzed.
Phospho-Y39 α-synuclein polyclonal antibody generation. The α-synu-
clein phosphopeptide TKEGVLY(p)VGSKTKEGC was conjugated to 
KLH and injected into rabbits for polyclonal antibody generation. Phos-
pho-Y39 α-synuclein antibody was purified from crude sera by affinity 
depletion and purification.
Statistics. Comparisons between 2 groups were performed with 
2-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests, and those between more than 2 
groups were performed with 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-test of 
multiple comparisons. A P value less than 0.05 was considered statis-
tically significant. Statistical analysis for the survival curves was per-
formed by the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test.
Study approval. All procedures involving animals were approved 
by and conformed to the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care 
Committee of Johns Hopkins University. The Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institution Joint Committee on Clinical Investigations decided that 
the studies in this proposal involving human postmortem brains were 
exempt from human subjects approval because of Federal Register 
46.101 exemption number 4.
Author contributions
VLD, HSK, and TMD supervised the project. SB, VLD, HSK, 
and TMD formulated the hypothesis. SB, VLD, HSK, and TMD 
designed experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. 
SB, PG, SHL, DK, SSK, MK, XM, and YL performed experiments. 
OP and JCT provided human postmortem tissues.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS, NIH) (NS38377, 
the Morris K. Udall Parkinson’s Disease Research Center, and 
NS082205) and the JPB Foundation. P. Ge was supported by 
a Parkinson’s Disease Foundation Summer Student Fellow-
ship (PDF-SFW-1572). T.M. Dawson is the Leonard and Madlyn 
Abramson Professor in Neurodegenerative Diseases. The authors 
acknowledge the joint participation by the Adrienne Helis Malvin 
Medical Research Foundation and the Diana Helis Henry Medi-
containing 1% SDS and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate. The homoge-
nate was centrifuged, and the resulting supernatant (nonionic deter-
gent-insoluble) was collected. Total lysates were prepared by homoge-
nization of tissue in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 
1% Nonidet P-40, 1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, Phosphatase 
Inhibitor Cocktail II and III [Sigma-Aldrich], and complete protease 
inhibitor mixture). The homogenate was centrifuged for 20 minutes at 
4°C, 100,000 g, and the resulting supernatant was collected.
IP and IB analysis. For coimmunoprecipitation from cell cultures, 
SH-SY5Y cells were transiently transfected with indicated plasmids. 
After 48 hours, cells were washed with cold PBS and harvested in IP 
buffer (1% Triton X-100, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II and III 
[Sigma-Aldrich], and complete protease inhibitor mixture in PBS). The 
lysate was then rotated at 4°C for 1 hour, followed by centrifugation at 
18,000 g for 20 minutes. The supernatants were then combined with 50 
μl of Dynabeads protein G (Life Technologies) preincubated with indi-
cated antibodies, followed by rotating for 2 hours or overnight at 4°C. 
The protein G was pelleted and washed 3 times using IP buffer or buffer 
with an additional 500 mM NaCl, followed by 3 washes with PBS, and 
samples were prepared by addition of 2× sample loading buffer (Bio-
Rad). Protein levels in tissue lysates were quantified using a Pierce BCA 
protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). For coimmunoprecipitation using 
mouse brains, tissues were homogenized and prepared in lysis buffer 
(10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet 
P-40 [vol/vol], 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholic acid [wt/
vol], Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II and III [Sigma-Aldrich], and 
complete protease inhibitor mixture) in PBS. IP was then performed 
as described above. The immunocomplexes were then washed with IP 
buffer 4 times, and samples were prepared as described above. IB anal-
ysis of mouse or human brain samples using total, detergent-soluble, 
or detergent-insoluble samples was performed as described previously 
(23, 27). Brain tissue lysates or immunoprecipitated samples were elec-
trophoresed on SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose mem-
branes. Membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk (wt/vol) in 
TBS-T and incubated with primary antibodies. After HRP-conjugated 
secondary antibody incubation, the IB signal was detected using chem-
iluminescent substrates (Thermo Scientific).
In vitro kinase assay. In vitro kinase assay was performed with 
purified recombinant human c-Abl and α-synuclein. Proteins were 
incubated in a kinase assay buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 5 mM 
EGTA, 20 mM β-glycerophosphate, 20 mM MgCl2, 10 μM ATP, 
and 0.5 μCi of γ-32P-ATP at a combined volume of 30 μl). The reac-
tion mixture was incubated at 30°C for 30 minutes. Reactions were 
quenched by the addition of SDS–sample loading buffer, heated to 
70°C for 10 minutes, and then loaded onto 4%–20% polyacrylamide 
gels for SDS-PAGE. Following electrophoresis, gel was transferred to 
PVDF membrane, heat-sealed in hybridization bags, and exposed to a 
phosphoimaging screen overnight at room temperature for assessing 
radioactive 32P incorporation.
2-DE gel electrophoresis and IB analysis. Recombinant nonphos-
phorylated α-synuclein or phosphorylated α-synuclein by c-Abl was 
subjected to 2-DE gel electrophoresis followed by immunoblot-
ting exactly as described previously (23). Briefly, following sample 
suspension in appropriate buffers, followed by concentration and 
desalting, samples were applied on immobilized pH 4–7 nonlinear 
gradient strips. Strips were then equilibrated in appropriate equilibra-
tion buffers and subsequently loaded on 9%–16% gradient SDS gels 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
hko3@jhmi.edu. Or to: Ted Dawson, Neuroregeneration and 
Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, 733 North Broadway, Suite 731, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. Phone: 410.614.3359; E-mail: 
tdawson@jhmi.edu.
Yunjong Lee’s present address is: Division of Pharmacology, 
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan Universi-
ty School of Medicine, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, 
Suwon, South Korea.
cal Research Foundation through their direct engagement in the 
continuous active conduct of medical research in conjunction with 
Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine and the foundations’ Parkinson’s Disease Programs, 
H-1 and M-2014.
Address correspondence to: Han Seok Ko, Neuroregeneration and 
Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, 733 North Broadway, Suite 751A, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. Phone: 410.502.5454; E-mail: 
 1. Savitt JM, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. Diagnosis 
and treatment of Parkinson disease: molecules to 
medicine. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(7):1744–1754.
 2. Dauer W, Przedborski S. Parkinson’s dis-
ease: mechanisms and models. Neuron. 
2003;39(6):889–909.
 3. Bonnet AM, Jutras MF, Czernecki V, Corvol JC, 
Vidailhet M. Nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson’s 
disease in 2012: relevant clinical aspects. Parkin-
sons Dis. 2012;2012:198316.
 4. Goedert M. α-Synuclein and neurodegenerative 
diseases. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2001;2(7):492–501.
 5. Goedert M, Spillantini MG, Del Tredici K, Braak 
H. 100 years of Lewy pathology. Nat Rev Neurol. 
2013;9(1):13–24.
 6. Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ. Mechanisms of Par-
kinson’s disease linked to pathological alpha-sy-
nuclein: new targets for drug discovery. Neuron. 
2006;52(1):33–38.
 
7. Dawson TM, Ko HS, Dawson VL. Genetic ani-
mal models of Parkinson’s disease. Neuron. 
2010;66(5):646–661.
 8. Maries E, Dass B, Collier TJ, Kordower JH, 
Steece-Collier K. The role of alpha-synuclein in 
Parkinson’s disease: insights from animal mod-
els. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2003;4(9):727–738.
 9. Polymeropoulos MH, et al. Mutation in the α-synu-
clein gene identified in families with Parkinson’s 
disease. Science. 1997;276(5321):2045–2047.
 10. Zarranz JJ, et al. The new mutation, E46K, of 
α-synuclein causes Parkinson and Lewy body 
dementia. Ann Neurol. 2004;55(2):164–173.
 11. Krüger R, et al. Ala30Pro mutation in the gene 
encoding α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease. Nat 
Genet. 1998;18(2):106–108.
 12. Martin I, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. Recent 
advances in the genetics of Parkinson’s disease. 
Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2011;12:301–325.
 13. Bezard E, Yue Z, Kirik D, Spillantini MG. Animal 
models of Parkinson’s disease: limits and rele-
vance to neuroprotection studies. Mov Disord. 
2013;28(1):61–70.
 14. Chesselet MF, Richter F. Modelling of Par-
kinson’s disease in mice. Lancet Neurol. 
2011;10(12):1108–1118.
 15. Deng H, Yuan L. Genetic variants and animal 
models in SNCA and Parkinson disease. Ageing 
Res Rev. 2014;15:161–176.
 16. Fernagut PO, Chesselet MF. α-Synuclein and 
transgenic mouse models. Neurobiol Dis. 
2004;17(2):123–130.
 17. Lee Y, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. Animal models 
of Parkinson’s disease: vertebrate genetics. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2(10):a009324.
 18. Fujiwara H, et al. α-Synuclein is phosphorylat-
ed in synucleinopathy lesions. Nat Cell Biol. 
2002;4(2):160–164.
 19. Gao HM, Kotzbauer PT, Uryu K, Leight S, Tro-
janowski JQ, Lee VM. Neuroinflammation and 
oxidation/nitration of α-synuclein linked to 
dopaminergic neurodegeneration. J Neurosci. 
2008;28(30):7687–7698.
 20. Hodara R, et al. Functional consequences of 
α-synuclein tyrosine nitration: diminished bind-
ing to lipid vesicles and increased fibril forma-
tion. J Biol Chem. 2004;279(46):47746–47753.
 21. Giasson BI, et al. Oxidative damage linked to 
neurodegeneration by selective α-synuclein 
nitration in synucleinopathy lesions. Science. 
2000;290(5493):985–989.
 22. Hantschel O, Superti-Furga G. Regulation of the 
c-Abl and Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinases. Nat Rev Mol 
Cell Biol. 2004;5(1):33–44.
 23. Ko HS, et al. Phosphorylation by the c-Abl protein 
tyrosine kinase inhibits parkin’s ubiquitination 
and protective function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2010;107(38):16691–16696.
 24. Imam SZ, et al. Novel regulation of parkin func-
tion through c-Abl-mediated tyrosine phosphory-
lation: implications for Parkinson’s disease.  
J Neurosci. 2011;31(1):157–163.
 25. Hebron ML, Lonskaya I, Moussa CE. Nilotinib 
reverses loss of dopamine neurons and improves 
motor behavior via autophagic degradation of 
α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease models. Hum 
Mol Genet. 2013;22(16):3315–3328.
 26. Karuppagounder SS, Brahmachari S, Lee Y, Daw-
son VL, Dawson TM, Ko HS. The c-Abl inhibitor, 
nilotinib, protects dopaminergic neurons in a 
preclinical animal model of Parkinson’s disease. 
Sci Rep. 2014;4:4874.
 27. Lee MK, et al. Human α-synuclein-harboring 
familial Parkinson’s disease-linked Ala-53 
--> Thr mutation causes neurodegenerative 
disease with alpha-synuclein aggregation 
in transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2002;99(13):8968–8973.
 28. Martin LJ, et al. Parkinson’s disease α-synuclein 
transgenic mice develop neuronal mitochon-
drial degeneration and cell death. J Neurosci. 
2006;26(1):41–50.
 29. Colla E, Jensen PH, Pletnikova O, Troncoso JC, 
Glabe C, Lee MK. Accumulation of toxic α-sy-
nuclein oligomer within endoplasmic reticulum 
occurs in α-synucleinopathy in vivo. J Neurosci. 
2012;32(10):3301–3305.
 30. Giasson BI, Duda JE, Quinn SM, Zhang B, Tro-
janowski JQ, Lee VM. Neuronal alpha-synucle-
inopathy with severe movement disorder in mice 
expressing A53T human α-synuclein. Neuron. 
2002;34(4):521–533.
 31. Shockett P, Difilippantonio M, Hellman N, Schatz 
DG. A modified tetracycline-regulated system 
provides autoregulatory, inducible gene expres-
sion in cultured cells and transgenic mice. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995;92(14):6522–6526.
 32. Smith WW, et al. Synphilin-1 attenuates neu-
ronal degeneration in the A53T α-synuclein 
transgenic mouse model. Hum Mol Genet. 
2010;19(11):2087–2098.
 33. Von Coelln R, et al. Loss of locus coeruleus neu-
rons and reduced startle in parkin null mice. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(29):10744–10749.
 34. von Coelln R, et al. Inclusion body formation and 
neurodegeneration are parkin independent in a 
mouse model of α-synucleinopathy. J Neurosci. 
2006;26(14):3685–3696.
 35. Schwartzberg PL, et al. Mice homozygous for the 
ablm1 mutation show poor viability and deple-
tion of selected B and T cell populations. Cell. 
1991;65(7):1165–1175.
 36. Tybulewicz VL, Crawford CE, Jackson PK, 
Bronson RT, Mulligan RC. Neonatal lethality 
and lymphopenia in mice with a homozygous 
disruption of the c-abl proto-oncogene. Cell. 
1991;65(7):1153–1163.
 37. Moresco EM, Donaldson S, Williamson A, Kole-
ske AJ. Integrin-mediated dendrite branch main-
tenance requires Abelson (Abl) family kinases. J 
Neurosci. 2005;25(26):6105–6118.
 38. Bétemps D, et al. α-Synuclein spreading in M83 
mice brain revealed by detection of pathological 
α-synuclein by enhanced ELISA. Acta Neuro-
pathol Commun. 2014;2:29.
 39. Cunnington R, Iansek R, Johnson KA, Bradshaw 
JL. Movement-related potentials in Parkinson’s 
disease. Motor imagery and movement prepara-
tion. Brain. 1997;120 (pt 8):1339–1353.
 40. Burré J, Sharma M, Südhof TC. Systematic muta-
genesis of α-synuclein reveals distinct sequence 
requirements for physiological and pathological 
activities. J Neurosci. 2012;32(43):15227–15242.
 41. Schmid AW, Fauvet B, Moniatte M, Lashuel HA. 
α-Synuclein post-translational modifications as 
potential biomarkers for Parkinson disease and 
other synucleinopathies. Mol Cell Proteomics. 
2013;12(12):3543–3558.
 42. Sato H, Kato T, Arawaka S. The role of Ser129 
phosphorylation of α-synuclein in neurodegen-
eration of Parkinson’s disease: a review of in vivo 
models. Rev Neurosci. 2013;24(2):115–123.
 43. Lue LF, et al. Biochemical increase in phosphor-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 9 8 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
ylated α-synuclein precedes histopathology 
of Lewy-type synucleinopathies. Brain Pathol. 
2012;22(6):745–756.
 44. Wang Y, et al. Phosphorylated α-synucle-
in in Parkinson’s disease. Sci Transl Med. 
2012;4(121):121ra20.
 45. Gao L, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein as 
a biomarker for Parkinson’s disease diagnosis: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Neuro-
sci. 2015;125(9):645–654.
 46. Mahul-Mellier AL, et al. c-Abl phosphorylates 
α-synuclein and regulates its degradation: impli-
cation for α-synuclein clearance and contribution 
to the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Hum 
Mol Genet. 2014;23(11):2858–2879.
 47. Gaki GS, Papavassiliou AG. Oxidative stress- 
induced signaling pathways implicated in the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Neuromolec-
ular Med. 2014;16(2):217–230.
 48. Imam SZ, et al. Neuroprotective efficacy of 
a new brain-penetrating C-Abl inhibitor in a 
murine Parkinson’s disease model. PLoS One. 
2013;8(5):e65129.
 49. Dawson TM, Dawson VL. Parkin plays a role in 
sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurodegener Dis. 
2014;13(2–3):69–71.
 50. Hebron ML, Lonskaya I, Moussa CE. Tyro-
sine kinase inhibition facilitates autophagic 
SNCA/α-synuclein clearance. Autophagy. 
2013;9(8):1249–1250.
 51. Hebron ML, Lonskaya I, Olopade P, Selby ST, 
Pagan F, Moussa CE. Tyrosine kinase inhibition 
regulates early systemic immune changes and 
modulates the neuroimmune response in α-synu-
cleinopathy. J Clin Cell Immunol. 2014;5:259.
 52. Wu R, et al. c-Abl-p38α signaling plays an import-
ant role in MPTP-induced neuronal death. Cell 
Death Differ. 2016;23(3):542–552.
 53. Tanabe A, Yamamura Y, Kasahara J, Morigaki R, 
Kaji R, Goto S. A novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
AMN107 (nilotinib) normalizes striatal motor 
behaviors in a mouse model of Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014;8:50.
 54. Manley PW, et al. Extended kinase profile and 
properties of the protein kinase inhibitor nilotinib. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010;1804(3):445–453.
 55. Konig H, et al. Enhanced BCR-ABL kinase inhi-
bition does not result in increased inhibition of 
downstream signaling pathways or increased 
growth suppression in CML progenitors. Leuke-
mia. 2008;22(4):748–755.
 56. Lee Y, et al. Parthanatos mediates AIMP2-activat-
ed age-dependent dopaminergic neuronal loss. 
Nat Neurosci. 2013;16(10):1392–1400.
 57. Smith WW, et al. α-Synuclein phosphorylation 
enhances eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclu-
sion formation in SH-SY5Y cells. J Neurosci. 
2005;25(23):5544–5552.
 58. Shin JH, et al. PARIS (ZNF746) repression of 
PGC-1α contributes to neurodegeneration in Par-
kinson’s disease. Cell. 2011;144(5):689–702.
 59. Dauer W, et al. Resistance of α-synuclein null 
mice to the parkinsonian neurotoxin MPTP. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99(22):14524–14529.
 60. Hunot S, et al. JNK-mediated induction of 
cyclooxygenase 2 is required for neurodegener-
ation in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(2):665–670.
 61. Luk KC, et al. Pathological α-synuclein trans-
mission initiates Parkinson-like neurode-
generation in nontransgenic mice. Science. 
2012;338(6109):949–953.
 62. Lane EL, Winkler C, Brundin P, Cenci MA. The 
impact of graft size on the development of dys-
kinesia following intrastriatal grafting of embry-
onic dopamine neurons in the rat. Neurobiol Dis. 
2006;22(2):334–345.
 63. Griffin PR, MacCoss MJ, Eng JK, Blevins RA, 
Aaronson JS, Yates JR. Direct database searching 
with MALDI-PSD spectra of peptides. Rapid 
Commun Mass Spectrom. 1995;9(15):1546–1551.
