 POSITION ARTICLE AND GUIDELINES
Open Access
The Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer
consensus statement on immunotherapy
for the treatment of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC)
Julie R. Brahmer1, Ramaswamy Govindan2, Robert A. Anders3, Scott J. Antonia4, Sarah Sagorsky5,
Marianne J. Davies6, Steven M. Dubinett7, Andrea Ferris8, Leena Gandhi9, Edward B. Garon10,
Matthew D. Hellmann11, Fred R. Hirsch12, Shakuntala Malik13, Joel W. Neal14, Vassiliki A. Papadimitrakopoulou15,
David L. Rimm16, Lawrence H. Schwartz17, Boris Sepesi18, Beow Yong Yeap19, Naiyer A. Rizvi20 and Roy S. Herbst21*
Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide, with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
accounting for over 85% of all cases. Until recently, chemotherapy – characterized by some benefit but only rare
durable responses – was the only treatment option for patients with NSCLC whose tumors lacked targetable
mutations. By contrast, immune checkpoint inhibitors have demonstrated distinctly durable responses and
represent the advent of a new treatment approach for patients with NSCLC. Three immune checkpoint inhibitors,
pembrolizumab, nivolumab and atezolizumab, are now approved for use in first- and/or second-line settings for
selected patients with advanced NSCLC, with promising benefit also seen in patients with stage III NSCLC.
Additionally, durvalumab following chemoradiation has been approved for use in patients with locally advanced
disease. Due to the distinct features of cancer immunotherapy, and rapid progress in the field, clinical guidance is
needed on the use of these agents, including appropriate patient selection, sequencing of therapies, response
monitoring, adverse event management, and biomarker testing. The Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer (SITC)
convened an expert Task Force charged with developing consensus recommendations on these key issues.
Following a systematic process as outlined by the National Academy of Medicine, a literature search and panel
voting were used to rate the strength of evidence for each recommendation. This consensus statement provides
evidence-based recommendations to help clinicians integrate immune checkpoint inhibitors into the treatment
plan for patients with NSCLC. This guidance will be updated following relevant advances in the field.
Keywords: Cancer immunotherapy, Consensus statement, Lung cancer, Non-small cell lung cancer, Guideline
Background
Lung cancer is associated with profound medical, psy-
chosocial, economic, and societal burden. In the U.S.
alone, an estimated 222,500 people will be diagnosed
with lung cancer and approximately 155,870 people are
expected to die of the disease in 2017 [1, 2]. Worldwide,
lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related
mortality, accounting for nearly 20% of all cancer-related
deaths [3]. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) ac-
counts for about 85% of all primary lung cancers, and
most patients present with advanced, unresectable
disease at the time of diagnosis [3, 4]. For several de-
cades, cytotoxic chemotherapy was the only treatment
that could prolong survival in patients with advanced
NSCLC
[4,
5].
However,
advances
in
sequencing
technology and increased understanding of tumor cell
biology
have
led
to
the
development
of
targeted
therapies for NSCLC [5–7], including small molecule
* Correspondence: roy.herbst@yale.edu
21Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, WWW221, New Haven, CT 06520-8028, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2018, corrected publication July/2018. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40425-018-0382-2
 inhibitors for specific oncogenic driver alterations [8,
9]. Although these therapies have demonstrated effi-
cacy in advanced NSCLC, resistance to targeted ther-
apies remains inevitable [7, 10].
Cancer
immunotherapy
is
a
treatment
modality
used to mobilize the immune system to recognize
and destroy cancer cells [11–13]. Immune checkpoint
inhibitors have been developed to target self-tolerance
pathways that are exploited by tumors to escape im-
mune recognition and destruction [14, 15]. These
agents act by modulating T cell function and have the
potential
to
augment
the
host
immune
response
against malignant cells [4, 6, 13, 16]. To date, four
immune
checkpoint
pathway
inhibitors
have
been
approved
by
the
United
Stated
Food
and
Drug
Administration
(FDA)
for
use
in
patients
with
NSCLC: nivolumab and pembrolizumab, both target-
ing the programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) receptor, as
well as atezolizumab and durvalumab, targeting the
anti-programmed death- ligand 1 (PD-L1) [9, 17].
Alongside these approvals, companion and comple-
mentary diagnostic assays measuring PD-L1 as a pre-
dictive
biomarker in
the
tumor microenvironment
have been approved to aid in patient selection [18].
However, variability in assay systems, tissue prepar-
ation and processing, and cutoff values have compli-
cated the interpretation and consensus use of these
assays [18–20].
The adoption of immunotherapy in routine clinical
practice for NSCLC has come exceptionally quickly,
starting from the first report of objective response to
PD-1 blockade in 2012, to the first FDA approval in
2015 [21]. In this context, medical professionals who
care for patients with NSCLC must keep pace with
emerging evidence-based data, current practice guide-
lines, and new drug developments, to facilitate patient
counseling and maximize clinical outcomes. In order
to facilitate provider education, the Society for Im-
munotherapy of Cancer (SITC) established a Cancer
Immunotherapy Guidelines Task Force for Lung Can-
cer (Additional file 1) charged with developing guide-
lines on the appropriate use of immunotherapy for
the treatment of patients with lung cancer. The Task
Force consisted of physician, physician assistant, and nurse
practitioner experts in the management of patients with
NSCLC, as well as a statistician and patient advocate. Five
main topics were considered: (1) appropriate use of im-
mune checkpoint blockade; (2) the role of PD-L1 bio-
marker
testing
in
determining
patient
eligibility
for
treatment; (3) measuring and monitoring response to im-
mune checkpoint inhibitors; (4) contraindications to treat-
ment
with
immune
checkpoint
inhibitors;
and
(5)
recognizing, monitoring, and managing immune-related
adverse events (irAEs).
Methods
Consensus statement policy
The National Academy of Medicine’s (NAM, formerly
the Institute of Medicine) March 2011 Standards for De-
veloping Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines [22]
served as a model for organizing and preparing this con-
sensus statement on the use of immunotherapy for the
treatment of NSCLC. Previous SITC consensus guide-
lines on immunotherapy for the treatment of prostate
carcinoma [23], renal cell carcinoma [24], hematologic
malignancies [25], and cutaneous melanoma [26] served
as
models
in
the
development
of
this
consensus
statement.
Consensus panel
In April 2016, SITC convened a one-day meeting of
multidisciplinary experts to develop consensus guide-
lines on the use of immunotherapy in patients with
NSCLC. The consensus panel, which included SITC
members and non-members, comprised 10 medical
oncologists, 1 pulmonologist, 1 oncologist/pathologist, 1
lung cancer physician scientist, 1 thoracic surgeon, 2
pathologists, 1 radiologist, 1 statistician, 1 physician
assistant, 1 nurse practitioner, and 1 patient advocate
(Additional file 1). All panel members were based in the
U.S. Four members – all medical oncologists – served
on a Steering Committee tasked with leading the
in-person
meeting,
guiding
development
of
the
manuscript and supplementary bibliography of NSCLC
literature, and convening periodic conference calls with
the wider panel to ensure that content kept pace with
emerging data.
At the meeting, the consensus panel reviewed results
from
a
previously
distributed
questionnaire
that
solicited
information
on
their
practice
using
FDA-approved agents to treat patients with NSCLC. A
post-meeting questionnaire (May 2017) and follow-up
survey questions (February 2018) were circulated to the
consensus panel to ensure that the final guideline
recommendations reflected the most recent clinical
trial data, drug approvals, and clinical experience. Due
to differences in drug approval, availability and regula-
tions between countries, discussions focused solely on
agents approved by the FDA for the treatment of
patients in the U.S., and on issues pertaining to
U.S-based clinical practice.
This statement represents expert consensus on the
management of patients with NSCLC. The recommen-
dations of the consensus panel, as set forth in this
manuscript,
are intended to
provide guidance
and
should not be used as a substitute for the individual pro-
fessional judgment of the treating physician. The full
version of this and other consensus statements can be
found on the SITC website [27].
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 2 of 15
 Disclosures and conflicts of interest
All members of the consensus panel disclosed potential
conflicts of interest using the SITC disclosure form,
which mandates full financial or other disclosures in-
cluding relationships with regulatory or commercial en-
tities that might reasonably be expected to have a direct
impact on, or benefit from, the document. No commer-
cial funding was used to support the consensus panel,
literature review, or preparation of the manuscript. The
final version of this consensus statement was made avail-
able to the entire SITC membership during an open
comment period (Additional file 2).
Literature search
A search of the medical literature was executed using
MEDLINE and PubMed databases, to develop a compre-
hensive bibliography of literature pertaining to immuno-
therapy in NSCLC. The main MeSH search phrase –
non-small cell lung cancer– was paired with other
search terms including nivolumab, ipilimumab, pembro-
lizumab, durvalumab, atezolizumab, vaccines, PD-L1/
PD-1,
immunotherapy,
combination
immunotherapy,
and immunotherapy adverse events. The search, which
was limited to clinical trials, meta-analyses, practice
guidelines in humans, randomized controlled trials, con-
trolled clinical trials, and clinical studies, includes arti-
cles published between January 1, 2008 and February 12,
2018. After removing duplicates, reviewing articles for
accuracy, and supplementing the literature search with
additional articles identified as relevant by the Task
Force, a 151-item bibliography was finalized (Additional
file 3).
The literature was graded according to a previously
established rating system in which Level A represents
strong evidence-based data derived from prospective,
randomized clinical trials and meta-analyses; Level B
represents moderately supported data derived from un-
controlled, prospective clinical trials; and Level C repre-
sents weak supporting data derived from reviews and
case reports [26].
Consensus recommendations
Clinical question 1: What is the appropriate use of immune
checkpoint blockade in patients with NSCLC?
Over half of patients newly diagnosed in the U.S. with
NSCLC
present
with
advanced
disease
that
has
already metastasized [2]. At this stage, there have
historically been no curative treatment options and
few patients (< 5%) survived five or more years [2].
However, there are several treatment options available
that can prolong survival in patients with metastatic
disease.
The Task
Force
considered
the
following
immunotherapy options for patients with advanced
disease:
pembrolizumab
as
a
single
agent
in
the
first-line setting; nivolumab, pembrolizumab, or atezo-
lizumab in the second-line setting; pembrolizumab in
combination with carboplatin and pemetrexed in the
first-line setting; and durvalumab in the maintenance/
adjuvant setting. Additionally, the Task Force consid-
ered durvalumab following chemoradiation in patients
with locally, advanced disease.
Initial assessment
In order to determine eligibility for these agents, patients
with advanced NSCLC should undergo a comprehensive
diagnostic workup, including a complete review of clin-
ical, radiological, and pathological information. This
workup should include determination of tumor histo-
logical subtype, and molecular analysis to identify target-
able driver mutations. The Task Force was in agreement
that the analysis of PD-L1 expression by an immunohis-
tochemistry (IHC)-based test to determine PD-L1 ex-
pression levels should be routine for all patients with
newly diagnosed advanced NSCLC. Prior to initiation of
immunotherapy, tests recommended by the majority of
the Task Force included computerized tomography (CT)
of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis (88% recommended)
and thyroid function tests (81%).
The Task Force did not reach a majority in recom-
mending tests including creatinine clearance (50%);
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain (50%);
and pulmonary function tests (50%). Of note, National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines for
the treatment of NSCLC agree with the Task Force rec-
ommendation for CT scans of all patients, but differ by
recommending brain MRI across all disease stages.
NCCN only recommends pulmonary function tests in
specific cases and if surgery is an option [7].
Literature review and analysis
Nivolumab
In two large, international phase III trials of patients
with advanced squamous or non-squamous NSCLC
whose
disease
had
progressed
on
platinum-based
chemotherapy, nivolumab, a fully human IgG4 monoclo-
nal antibody against PD-1, dosed at 3 mg/kg every
2 weeks, demonstrated improved survival over docetaxel
[28, 29]. In the trials of squamous cell NSCLC, nivolu-
mab improved median overall survival (OS) in 272 pa-
tients with previously treated, advanced squamous cell
NSCLC (OS: 9.2 vs. 6.0 months; hazard ratio [HR] 0.59;
95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.44–0.79; p < 0.001) [28].
In non-squamous NSCLC, nivolumab demonstrated
superior median OS versus docetaxel in 582 patients
(OS: 12.2 months versus 9.4 months; HR 0.73, 95%
CI: 0.60–0.89; p = 0.002) [29]. In these two trials,
treatment-related
AEs
grade ≥ 3
were
reported
in
≤10% of patients receiving nivolumab compared with
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 3 of 15
 ~ 55% of those in the docetaxel group [28, 29]. Based
on these results, nivolumab was approved by the
FDA, at a dose of 240 mg IV every 2 weeks, for
patients with previously-treated, metastatic squamous
(March 2015) and non-squamous (October 2015) cell
lung carcinoma who have progressed on platinum-
containing therapy [30]. Additionally, a fixed dose
schedule of nivolumab at 480 mg IV every 4 weeks
was recently approved by the FDA for use in all
previously-approved indications to treat patients with
NSCLC [30].
Nivolumab
was
also
tested
against
standard
platinum-doublet chemotherapy in the first-line setting,
in a randomized phase III study in 541 treatment-naïve
patients with advanced PD-L1 positive (≥ 5% per IHC
28–8 pharmDx assay) NSCLC [31]. However, this study
did
not
reach
its
primary
endpoints:
neither
progression-free survival (PFS) nor OS were improved
with nivolumab compared to platinum-based chemo-
therapy, even in the PD-L1 ≥ 50% positive group.
Results from the CheckMate 227 phase III clinical trial
indicate that patients with advanced NSCLC – squamous
and non-squamous – and high tumor mutational bur-
den (TMB, measured with the FoundationOne CDx™
assay) had increased PFS when treated with first-line
combination nivolumab + ipilimumab compared to
chemotherapy, regardless of tumor PD-L1 expression
(HR 0.58; 97.5%CI: 0.41–0.81; p < 0.001). Recently pre-
sented data from this study also indicate that patients
with
advanced
NSCLC
treated
with
nivolumab
+
chemotherapy
also
had
increased
median
PFS
compared to patients treated with chemotherapy alone
(5.6 mos vs 4.7 mos, respectively; HR = 0.74 [95% CI:
0.58–0.94]) [32]. CheckMate 227 also includes cohorts
to compare combination nivolumab + ipilimumab effi-
cacy against nivolumab monotherapy, but these data
are not mature at the time of writing [33]. The
CheckMate 227 trial is ongoing and FDA approvals for
combination nivolumab + ipilimumab and nivolumab +
chemotherapy have not
yet been granted for the
treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC.
Pembrolizumab
Pembrolizumab, a humanized IgG4 monoclonal anti-
body against PD-1, was first tested at a dose of 2 mg/kg
or 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks, or 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks,
in a large phase I dose expansion trial in 495 patients
with advanced NSCLC [34]. The reported overall re-
sponse rate (ORR) in this study was 19.4% (95% CI: 16–
23.2), with response rates of 18% (95% CI: 14.4–22.2) in
394 patients with previously treated disease, and 24.8%
(95% CI: 16.7–34.3) in 101 patients with untreated dis-
ease [34]. In this study, patients with intermediate or
high PD-L1 expression (defined as tumor proportion
score
[TPS] ≥ 1%
or ≥ 50%,
respectively,
using
the
anti-PD-L1 antibody clone 22C3 in an IHC assay) had
improved outcomes compared to those with no PD-L1
expression. An additional 55 patients enrolled in the
study were not part of the primary efficacy analysis, but
results in this supplementary cohort confirmed efficacy
at 2 mg/kg. A subsequent phase II/III study in 1034 pre-
viously treated patients with a PD-L1 TPS ≥ 1% com-
pared pembrolizumab (2 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg) with
docetaxel. Median OS was significantly longer for pem-
brolizumab 2 mg/kg (HR 0.71, 95% CI: 0.58–0.88; p =
0.001) and 10 mg/kg (HR·0.61, 95% CI: 0.49–0.75; p <
0.001) versus docetaxel. Moreover, grade ≥ 3 adverse
events were less common with pembrolizumab [35].
Based on these data, on October 2, 2015 the FDA ap-
proved the use of pembrolizumab, at a dose of 200 mg
IV every 3 weeks, to treat patients with PD-L1-positive
(TPS ≥ 1%, as determined by an FDA-approved test),
metastatic NSCLC whose disease has progressed on or
following platinum-containing chemotherapy and dis-
ease progression on FDA-approved therapy for patients
with EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations [36].
These results paved the way for a phase III trial compar-
ing pembrolizumab monotherapy with platinum-doublet
chemotherapy
in
the
first-line setting [37]. In this
open-label study, 305 patients with untreated advanced
NSCLC, no actionable EGFR or ALK mutations, and
PD-L1 TPS score ≥ 50% were randomized to receive
pembrolizumab (200 mg fixed dose every 3 weeks) or
investigator’s choice of platinum-based chemotherapy.
Pembrolizumab demonstrated significantly longer PFS
(median 10.3 vs. 6.0 months; HR 0.5, 95% CI: 0.37–0.68, p
< 0.001) and a higher rate of OS at 6 months compared
with chemotherapy [80.2% vs. 72.4% (HR 0.6, 95% CI:
0.41–0.89, p = 0.005)] [37]. Based on these results, on
October 24, 2017 the FDA expanded the approval of
pembrolizumab to include first-line treatment of patients
with high PD-L1-expression (TPS ≥ 50%, as determined by
an FDA-approved test) metastatic NSCLC with no EGFR
or ALK genomic aberrations.
In a randomized, phase II study pembrolizumab was
also tested as first-line therapy in combination with
chemotherapy
(in
this
instance,
carboplatin
and
pemetrexed),
versus
chemotherapy
alone,
in
123
treatment-naive patients with metastatic NSCLC, inde-
pendent of PD-L1 expression. In this trial, pembrolizu-
mab plus chemotherapy demonstrated an ORR nearly
double that of chemotherapy alone (55% [95% CI: 42–
68] vs. 29% [95% CI: 18–41]; p = 0.0032). The addition of
pembrolizumab led to improvement in PFS (HR 0.53,
95% CI: 0.31–0.91; p = 0.02), with a median PFS of
13.0 months (95% CI: 8.3-not estimable) for patients
treated with pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy com-
pared
to
8.9
months
(95%
CI:
4.4–10.3)
with
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 4 of 15
 chemotherapy alone [38]. There was an increase in grade
3/4 treatment-related adverse events with the addition of
pembrolizumab (39% vs. 26%), the most common being
anemia, neutropenia, and sepsis. No statistically significant
OS benefit was reported. These results nevertheless led to
the accelerated approval of pembrolizumab in combin-
ation with carboplatin and pemetrexed for first-line treat-
ment
of
patients
with
non-squamous
NSCLC,
independent of PD-L1 status, on May 10, 2017. Subse-
quent data from this trial at a median follow-up of
18.7 months demonstrated ongoing, statistically signifi-
cant benefits to PFS (19.0 vs 8.9 months; HR 0.54 [95% CI:
0.33–0.88; p = 0.007] and ORR (57 vs. 32% [95% CI: 7–
41%]; p = 0.003) with the pembrolizumab/chemotherapy
combination [39]. HR for OS using the combination
showed ongoing improvement (HR 0.59 [95% CI: 0.34–
1.05; p = 0.03]) and median OS had not been reached at
the time of data cutoff (vs. 20.9 months with chemother-
apy alone). Grade ≥ 3 treatment-related AEs occurred in
41% vs. 29% of patients in the pembrolizumab/chemother-
apy vs. chemotherapy only arms, respectively. These data
were verified in a recently reported phase III trial, in-
dicating that first-line pembrolizumab plus chemo-
therapy (pemetrexed plus cisplatin or carboplatin) in
patients with advanced or metastatic NSCLC, irre-
spective of PD-L1 expression, reduced risk of death
by 51% at median follow up (10.5 months) compared
to patients receiving doublet chemotherapy (HR 0.49;
95% CI: 0.38–0.64; p < 0.001) [40].
Pembrolizumab has also been tested in combination
with carboplatin + nab-paclitaxel/paclitaxel as first-line
treatment in patients with advanced, squamous cell
NSCLC. Recent data from the phase III KEYNOTE-407
clinical trial demonstrated increased OS at median
follow-up (7.8 months) in patients who were treated
with combination pembrolizumab + chemotherapy com-
pared to patients treated with chemotherapy alone (HR
= 0.64, 95% CI: 0.49–0.85, p = 0.0008). Additionally, OS
benefit
provided
by
combination
pembrolizumab
+
chemotherapy was observed in patients regardless of
tumor PD-L1 status (TPS < 1%, HR = 0.61 [95% CI:
0.35–0.98]; TPS 1–49%, HR = 0.57 [95% CI: 0.36–0.90];
TPS > 50%, HR = 0.64 [95% CI: 0.37–1.10]). Grade 3–5
AEs were comparable across the pembrolizumab/chemo-
therapy and placebo cohorts (69.8% vs. 68.2%, respect-
ively) [41]. Based on these data, a supplemental Biologics
License Application concerning combination pembrolizu-
mab + chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with
advanced, squamous cell NSCLC was submitted to the
FDA in May 2018, and is under review as of this writing.
Atezolizumab
Atezolizumab, a humanized monoclonal IgG1 antibody
against PD-L1, was shown in two open-label, phase II
studies to have clinical activity in patients with NSCLC.
In the first study, 659 chemotherapy-naïve and previ-
ously treated patients with PD-L1-positive (TPS ≥ 5% on
tumor or infiltrating immune cells) NSCLC were treated
with atezolizumab in three different cohorts [42]. Cohort
1 comprised chemotherapy-naïve patients, while cohorts
2 and 3 had received prior treatment (second-line or
third- and beyond, respectively). Atezolizumab met its
primary objective of ORR vs. historical controls: at the
12 month follow-up, ORR was 18–22% for the three co-
horts, with median OS of 23.5 months, 15.5 months,
and 13.2 months in cohorts 1–3, respectively. PD-L1 ex-
pression levels were modestly associated with clinical
benefit [42]. In the second study, atezolizumab was
found to be superior to docetaxel in 284 patients with
previously treated advanced or metastatic NSCLC: OS in
the intention-to-treat population was 12.6 months for
atezolizumab versus 9.7 months for docetaxel (HR 0.73,
95% CI 0.53–0.99; p = 0.04) [43]. These studies led to the
approval of atezolizumab at a dose of 1200 mg IV every
3 weeks for patients with previously treated metastatic
NSCLC regardless of PD-L1 expression, on October 18,
2016 [44]. The results were confirmed in a randomized,
phase III, multicenter trial that compared atezolizumab
with docetaxel in 850 patients who had progressed fol-
lowing one or more platinum-containing combination
regimens [45]. OS (primary endpoint) was longer with
atezolizumab in the intent-to-treat population, with a
median OS of 13.8 months vs. 9.6 months (HR 0.74,
95% CI: 0.63–0.87; p = 0.0004) [45].
In April 2018, data from the IMpower 150 phase III
clinical
trial
indicate
that
patients
with
advanced,
non-squamous NSCLC – including patients with a
sensitizing EGFR mutation or ALK translocation with
disease progression, or intolerance of treatment with
one or more approved targeted therapies – treated with
quadruplet
therapy
including
atezolizumab,
doublet
chemotherapy, and anti-vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor A (VEGF-A) bevacizumab. Patients receiving quad-
ruplet therapy had improved median PFS compared to
patients receiving combination bevacizumab + chemo-
therapy (8.3 mos vs. 6.8 mos, respectively. HR 0.62; 95%
CI: 0.52–0.74, p < 0.0001). PFS benefits were irrespective
of patient tumor PD-L1 status [46]. This trial is ongoing
and this regimen is not presently FDA approved for the
treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC.
Recent data from the phase III IMpower 131 trial
indicate that first-line atezolizumab + carboplatin &
nab-paclitaxel increased PFS in patients with advanced
squamous NSCLC compared to the chemotherapy doub-
let (6.3 mos vs 5.6 mos, respectively; HR = 0.71 [95% CI:
0.60–0.85], p < 0.0001). In patients with high-PD-L1, OS
benefit from atezolizumab + chemotherapy was ob-
served compared to patients treated with chemotherapy
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 5 of 15
 (23.6 mos vs 14.1 mos, HR = 0.56 [95% CI: 0.32–0.99]. In
PD-L1 low or negative subgroups, however, no OS dif-
ference was observed between patients treated with ate-
zolizumab
+
chemotherapy
or
chemotherapy
alone
(PD-L1 low: 12.4 mos vs 16.6 mos, HR = 1.34 [95% CI:
0.95–1.90]; PD-L1 negative: 13.8 mos vs 12.5 mos, HR =
0.86 [95% CI: 0.65–1.15]) [47]. This trial is ongoing.
Durvalumab
Late stage clinical trial results have recently been re-
ported for durvalumab, a fully human IgG1 monoclonal
antibody against PD-L1, in patients with locally ad-
vanced, unresectable stage III NSCLC [48]. In this ran-
domized,
phase
III
study,
713
patients
received
durvalumab (n = 476) or placebo (n = 237) as consolida-
tion therapy following chemoradiation. Median PFS was
significantly longer in patients who received durvalumab
compared with placebo (16.8 vs. 5.6 months; HR 0.52;
95% CI: 0.42–0.65; p < 0.001), with an ongoing PFS rate
advantage at 18-months (44.2% vs. 27.0%; p < 0.0001).
Results
were
consistent
across
pre-specified
demo-
graphic and clinical subgroups, including never-smokers,
irrespective of baseline PD-L1 tumor expression. In
addition, durvalumab illustrated superior outcomes for
secondary endpoints including overall response rate
(26% vs. 14%; p < 0.001) and median duration of re-
sponse (72.8% vs. 46.8% at 18 months). The incidence of
grade 3/4 adverse events was similar with durvalumab
(29.9%) and placebo (26.1%), although a higher propor-
tion of patients taking durvalumab discontinued treat-
ment as a result (15.4% vs. 9.8%). OS results from this
study remain immature. On February 16th, 2018, durva-
lumab gained approval at a dose of 10 mg/kg IV every
2 weeks, for a maximum of 1 year, for patients with lo-
cally advanced, unresectable NSCLC whose disease has
not progressed following chemoradiotherapy.
Consensus management of stage III NSCLC
Maintenance/adjuvant therapy
A majority of the task force agreed that durvalumab
should be used in stage III patients who have not pro-
gressed post-chemoradiation, based on Level A evidence.
Limited data is available concerning durvalumab dur-
ation, and this recommendation will be reassessed as
more results become available.
Consensus management of metastatic NSCLC
First-line therapy
The Task Force unanimously agreed that pembrolizumab
should be used first-line in patients with PD-L1-positive
(TPS ≥ 50%) non-squamous metastatic NSCLC (Fig. 1),
based on Level A evidence. The Task Force notes that
first-line pembrolizumab plus pemetrexed and carbopla-
tin
may
also
be
appropriate
for
patients
with
non-squamous histology and PD-L1 TPS ≥ 50% in a
case-by-case basis. For patients with non-squamous, ad-
vanced NSCLC with PD-L1 TPS < 50% and no action-
able mutations, the Task Force unanimously agreed that
patients
should
receive
first-line
pembrolizumab
+
pemetrexed and carboplatin, based on Level A evidence
(Fig. 1). For patients with non-squamous, advanced
NSCLC and one or more actionable mutations (EGFR,
ALK, or ROS1+), the Task Force recommends the use of
targeted therapies over pembrolizumab + chemotherapy,
based on Level A evidence (Fig. 1).
Concerning treatment recommendations for patients
with squamous histology, the Task Force recognized that
KEYNOTE-407 data has been positive thus far and FDA
review is under way. As such, the Task Force decided to
prospectively consider combination pembrolizumab +
chemotherapy as an option for the treatment of patients
with advanced, squamous cell NSCLC, and supports its
use in appropriate patient subgroups if and when FDA
approval is official.
In all, the majority of the Task Force recommended
pembrolizumab monotherapy for patients with squa-
mous cell NSCLC and PD-L1 TPS ≥ 50%, based on Level
A evidence (Fig. 1). Some Task Force members answered
that if FDA approval is granted, combination pembroli-
zumab + carboplatin & nab-paclitaxel/paclitaxel can be
considered for this patient subgroup (Fig. 1). For pa-
tients with squamous histology and PD-L1 TPS < 50%,
the Task Force unanimously recommended combination
pembrolizumab + chemotherapy pending FDA approval,
based on Level A evidence.
All of the above recommendations will be continually
revisited and updated as new data and FDA approvals
become available, especially those concerning combin-
ation nivolumab + ipilimumab, nivolumab + chemother-
apy,
as
well
as
atezolizumab-based
combination
therapies.
Second-line therapy
Based on Level A evidence, the Task Force unanimously
agreed that atezolizumab, nivolumab, and pembrolizumab
(TPS ≥ 1%) should be used as third-line therapy in all pa-
tients with actionable mutations after disease progression
with targeted agents followed by platinum-containing
chemotherapy (Fig. 1). The Task Force also recommends
these therapies second-line in patients with squamous
histology and PD-L1 TPS < 50% who were not previously
treated with a checkpoint inhibitor. In the second-line set-
ting, the Task Force reported using pembrolizumab less
frequently than nivolumab or atezolizumab in order to
avoid the need for PD-L1 testing before starting treat-
ment. However, there is no evidence to support the use of
one drug over the other; this decision should depend upon
patient eligibility, schedule preference (Q2W vs Q3W vs
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 6 of 15
 Q4W), experience of the treating physician, and drug
availability/insurance coverage. In addition to PD-L1 ex-
pression (71%), the Task Force felt that history of smoking
(29%) was predictive of patients who would be likely to re-
spond to checkpoint inhibitor therapy.
Clinical question 2: What is the role of PD-L1 testing in
determining eligibility for treatment with immune
checkpoint inhibitors?
Currently, four assays that utilize distinct antibody
clones (22C3, 28–8, SP263, and SP142), unique assay
conditions,
and
independent
scoring
systems
are
FDA-approved as either complementary (to aid in pa-
tient selection) or companion (required prior to the ini-
tiation of treatment) diagnostics to measure PD-L1
expression in patients with NSCLC. Several of these are
also approved in other indications. Although PD-L1 has
been shown to be a predictive biomarker for response to
checkpoint inhibitor therapy in NSCLC, it is neither
fully sensitive nor specific. Moreover, variation in both
the clinical indication and technical aspects of the stan-
dardized PD-L1 IHC assays has led to uncertainty about
their optimal use (see Table 1). The Task Force, there-
fore, discussed the preferred tissue for PD-L1 testing
(archived or fresh tissue), optimal assay and antibody,
when to test and initiate treatment, and whether to
retest PD-L1-negative patients after disease progression.
Literature review and analysis
PD-L1 expression analysis as a complementary diagnostic
Based on early studies showing correlation between
PD-L1 expression and clinical benefit from nivolumab
[21, 49], the 28–8 pharmDx test was developed as a
standardized IHC assay to measure the proportion of
Fig. 1 Advanced/metastatic NSCLC treatment algorithm. All treatment options shown may be appropriate and final selection of therapy should
be individualized based on patient eligibility, prior treatment, and treatment availability at the treating physician’s discretion. These algorithms
represent consensus sequencing suggestions by the panel. (1) All patients should be evaluated by a multidisciplinary team to determine
histological subtype, identify targetable driver mutations, and perform PD-L1 testing. The Task Force unanimously agreed that all newly
diagnosed patients should receive testing for PD-L1. (2) For patients with squamous NSCLC with TPS ≥ 50%, the Task Force supports
pembrolizumab monotherapy first-line. When FDA approval is granted, the Task Force also supports pembrolizumab in combination with
carboplatin & (nab-) paclitaxel in specific cases. (3) When approved by the FDA, the Task Force recommends combination pembrolizumab +
pemetrexed & (nab-) paclitaxel first-line in patients with squamous histology and PD-L1 TPS < 50%. (4) In patients with non-squamous cell NSCLC
tumors positive for EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 aberrations, appropriate targeted therapy should be administered. (5) Patients with squamous or non-
squamous cell NSCLC who have progressed on platinum-containing chemotherapy and who have not previously received a checkpoint inhibitor
should be considered for atezolizumab, nivolumab, or pembrolizumab. (6) The Task Force unanimously agreed that patients with non-squamous
cell NSCLC without EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 aberrations and TPS < 50% should receive combination pembrolizumab + pemetrexed & carboplatin. (7)
In patients with non-squamous cell NSCLC without EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 aberrations and TPS ≥ 50%, the Task Force recommends pembrolizumab
monotherapy, but recognizes that combination pembrolizumab + pemetrexed & carboplatin can be appropriate in specific cases
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 7 of 15
 tumor cells that express PD-L1. Whether PD-L1 expres-
sion is predictive of response to nivolumab remains un-
clear. In patients with squamous cell NSCLC, tumor
PD-L1 expression did not correlate with clinical benefit
from nivolumab [28, 50]. However, in a retrospective
analysis of tumor samples from a phase III study of nivo-
lumab vs. docetaxel in patients with NSCLC, PD-L1 ex-
pression ≥ 1, ≥ 5, and ≥ 10% was associated with longer
OS and PFS with nivolumab compared to chemotherapy
[29]. In these studies a small portion of patients classi-
fied as PD-L1-negative also experienced clinical benefit
from nivolumab. The 28–8 assay was therefore labeled
as a complementary diagnostic assay by the FDA.
The
PD-L1
IHC
assay,
using
clone
SP142,
was
employed to determine eligibility for the randomized,
phase
II
trials
evaluating
atezolizumab
as
first
or
subsequent-line therapy [42], or atezolizumab vs. doce-
taxel [42, 43, 51] in previously treated patients with
NSCLC. In this assay, PD-L1 positivity is categorized by
cell type – tumor (TC) or immune cell (IC) – and
scored by the proportion of expressing cells (< 1% [TC0
or IC0], 1–4% [TC1 or IC1], 5–49% [TC2 or IC2], and ≥
50% [TC3 or IC3]). Based on the improvement in OS as-
sociated with PD-L1 expression (TC1/2/3 or IC1/2/3) in
these studies, the SP142 assay was used to stratify
patients in the phase III study supporting the FDA
approval of atezolizumab. Although the co-primary
endpoint of the study was OS in the PD-L1-positive
population (TC1/2/3 or IC1/2/3), patients with low or
undetectable PD-L1 expression (TC0 or IC0) also dem-
onstrated improved OS with atezolizumab (12.6 months
vs. 8.9 months; HR 0.75, 95% CI: 0.59–0.96) [45]. Ac-
cordingly, the PD-L1 SP142 assay was labeled as a com-
plementary diagnostic and is not required prior to
initiating treatment with atezolizumab in this setting.
PD-L1 expression analysis as a companion diagnostic
Currently, the 22C3 pharmDx assay is the only PD-L1
assay labeled as a companion diagnostic. Its use is there-
fore required prior to initiating first-line treatment with
pembrolizumab
monotherapy,
and
following
disease
progression on platinum-based chemotherapy. A rela-
tionship between PD-L1 expression and pembrolizumab
was initially observed in early phase I testing [52], result-
ing in an amendment to the protocol to only include
patients whose tumors had a TPS ≥ 1%. A co-primary ef-
ficacy endpoint was also added in patients with tumors
that expressed a high level of PD-L1, based on an opti-
mal cutoff for PD-L1 positivity of ≥ 50% [34]. The subse-
quent phase II/III study of pembrolizumab vs. docetaxel
for previously treated NSCLC used the 22C3 pharmDx
test to classify patients into three categories based on ex-
pression of PD-L1: high (TPS ≥50%), intermediate (TPS
1–49%), or low (TPS < 1%) [35]. In patients with high
PD-L1 TPS, OS was significantly longer in the 2 mg/kg
pembrolizumab cohort (HR 0.54, 95% CI: 0.38–0.77, P =
0.0002) and the 10 mg/kg pembrolizumab cohort (HR
0.50, 95% CI: 0.36–0.70; P < 0.0001) compared with
docetaxel. Patients with a TPS ≤ 1% were excluded from
this study and the 22C3 pharmDx assay was approved
by the FDA as a companion diagnostic to identify
patients with a PD-L1 TPS ≥ 1% in October 2016. Based
on these results, the phase III trial of pembrolizumab in
untreated patients included only those with a PD-L1
TPS ≥ 50% [37]. The 22C3 pharmDx assay was therefore
labeled as a companion diagnostic to identify patients
eligible to receive first-line pembrolizumab (TPS ≥ 50%).
Laboratory-developed PD-L1 assays
In addition to the FDA-approved commercial assays,
laboratory-developed tests (LDTs) have been developed
Table 1 PD-L1 assay characteristics and performance in NSCLC
Assay
Antibody
FDA-approved Indication in NSCLC
Cutoff Value
Performancea
22C3 IHC
pharmDx
Monoclonal
mouse anti-PD-
L1, Clone 223
Approved as a companion diagnostic to select
patients with advanced NSCLC for treatment with
pembrolizumab first-line (TPS ≥ 50%) or after pro-
gression on a platinum containing chemotherapy
regimen (TPS ≥ 1%)
• TPS < 1% PD-L1 negative
• TPS 1–49% PD-L1 positive
• TPS ≥ 50% High PD-L1 expression
Found to be closely
aligned with 28–8
and SP263 IHC assays
28–8 IHC
pharmDx
Monoclonal
Rabbit anti-PD-
L1, Clone 28–8
Approved as a complementary diagnostic to aid in
non-squamous NSCLC patient selection for treatment
with nivolumab
Qualitative test reported as a percentage
of tumor cells exhibiting positive
membrane staining
Found to be closely
aligned with 22C3
and SP263 IHC assays
PD-L1
(SP142)
Assay
Monoclonal
Rabbit anti-PD-
L1, Clone
SP142
Approved as a complementary diagnostic to aid in
NSCLC patient selection for treatment with
atezolizumab
PD-L1 expression in ≥ 50% tumor cells
or ≥ 10% immune-infiltrating cells is asso-
ciated with enhanced survival
Consistently stained
fewer PD-L1 tumor
cells
PD-L1
(SP263)
Assay
Monoclonal
Rabbit anti-PD-
L1, Clone
SP263
CE mark only, not approved by the FDA for patients
with NSCLC
The CE mark was granted and expanded
based on demonstrated equivalency to
the 28–8 and the 22C3 IHC assays
Found to be closely
aligned with 22C3
and 28–8 IHC assays
Abbreviations IHC immunohistochemistry, NSCLC non-small cell lung cancer, PD-L1 programmed cell death ligand 1, TPS tumor proportion score
aAs assessed in Phase I of the Blueprint PD-L1 IHC assay Comparison Project [56]
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 8 of 15
 in
Clinical
Laboratory
Improvement
Amendments
(CLIA)-certified laboratories to measure PD-L1 expres-
sion. LDTs are tests developed, manufactured, and used
within a single laboratory and are not currently required
by the FDA to demonstrate clinical validity [53]; how-
ever, CLIA requires evidence of certain performance
metrics to demonstrate the analytical validity of the
assay. The antibodies designed to measure PD-L1 ex-
pression in LTDs have shown high concordance with
FDA-approved assays, which suggests that assays using
distinct antibody clones have the potential to yield con-
cordant results if properly validated [54].One such ex-
ample is an LDT that utilizes the E1L3N antibody clone
to detect PD-L1 expression and has demonstrated ana-
lytical concordance with the 22C3 and 28–8 assays [55].
LTDs with analytical validity have been developed for
PD-L1 and are used by many institutions to measure
PD-L1 expression.
PD-L1 assay compatibility
The Blueprint PD-L1 IHC Assay Comparison Project
was designed to compare the analytical and clinical com-
patibility of the available PD-L1 assays. In the first phase
of this study, 39 NSCLC tumors were stained with one
of the PD-L1 IHC assays (22C3, 28–8, SP142, or SP263)
and evaluated for the proportion of tumor and immune
cells staining positive for PD-L1 at any intensity [56].
The diagnostic performance of each assay was assessed
by comparing how experts classified patients based on
(above or below) a given cutoff value for PD-L1 expres-
sion. Analytical performance was comparable between
the 22C3, 28–8, and SP263 assays, but the SP142 assay
was found to stain fewer cells overall. However, the
applicability of these results is limited as the study was
underpowered and did not include an LDT [56].
The analytical
performance
of
four
PD-L1
assay
platforms using the antibody clones 28–8, 22C3, SP142,
and
E1L3N
was
also
compared
in
a
prospective,
multi-institutional study [55]. In this study, serial histo-
logical sections from 90 archival NSCLC tissue speci-
mens were distributed to 3 independent sites to perform
each assay. The resulting slides were scanned and scored
by 13 pathologists who estimated the percentage of
tumor and immune cells expressing PD-L1. Consistent
with the results of the Blueprint project, the SP142 assay
demonstrated a significantly lower mean PD-L1 expres-
sion score in both tumor and immune cells. However,
the 28–8, 22C3, and E1L3N assays showed high con-
cordance and the resulting classifications were found to
be reproducible when read by pathologists. Subse-
quently, other studies carried out using LDTs developed
with identical as well as distinct antibody clones have
also shown analytic compatibility with FDA-approved
platforms [57]. Thus, as long as the assays are carefully
validated, LDTs can provide a reliable measurement of
PD-L1 expression.
Consensus recommendations
There is unanimous agreement that PD-L1 testing
should be performed in newly diagnosed patients with
metastatic disease, including those tested for EGFR/
ALK/ROS1 mutations whose results are awaited, based
on Level A evidence from multiple studies. The Task
Force reported using PD-L1 testing in almost 100% of
patients
with
newly
diagnosed
metastatic
NSCLC.
Responses varied on the use of archived or fresh biopsy
tissue for PD-L1 testing: the majority of Task Force
members reported using archived tissue blocks, if avail-
able, and obtaining fresh tissue as needed. Previously cut
slides < 3 months old may also be used to measure
PD-L1 staining. Nearly all Task Force members (83%)
reported performing PD-L1
testing
locally,
and all
reported waiting for PD-L1 test results before initiating
treatment in the first-line setting. The majority (72%) of
Task Force members did not retest PD-L1-negative
patients after disease progression on first-line therapy.
Of note, clinical trial data concerning combination
nivolumab + ipilimumab from CheckMate 227 indicate
that tumor mutational burden may also be predictive of
therapeutic efficacy in patients with advanced NSCLC,
independent of PD-L1 status [33, 58]. As such, the Task
Force recognizes that testing for tumor mutational bur-
den may become appropriate as studies mature and new
therapies are granted FDA approval.
Clinical question 3: How should radiographic response to
immune checkpoint inhibitors be measured and monitored?
Unlike cytotoxic or targeted agents that act directly on
malignant cells, immune checkpoint inhibitors enhance
the immune system’s ability to recognize and eliminate
cancer cells. These therapies are associated with distinct
response kinetics and radiographic response patterns
that make monitoring clinical response challenging. In
particular, the phenomenon of pseudoprogression, de-
fined as an initial increase in tumor burden or appear-
ance of new lesions followed by a response to therapy,
has been described in patients with NSCLC receiving
immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. To address these
challenges,
the
Task
Force
discussed
radiographic
monitoring of clinical response in patients receiving
immunotherapy.
Literature review and analysis
A set of immune-related response criteria (irRC) has
been developed for use in clinical trials of immunother-
apy [59]. The key distinguishing features of these criteria
are 1) inclusion of new lesions in the total tumor
burden, and 2) a requirement for confirmation of
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 9 of 15
 progressive disease (appearance of new lesions or tumor
burden increase of > 20%) on two consecutive scans at
least 4 weeks apart [59]. irRC were later optimized to
increase concordance with traditional Response Evalu-
ation Criteria in Solid Tumors v1.1 (RECIST1.1), and
there is now the option to use either traditional or
immune-related RECIST response criteria when evaluat-
ing treatment response in cancer immunotherapy trials
[60, 61]. However, since the majority of clinical trials
that led to FDA approval of checkpoint inhibitors pre-
date the introduction of iRC, data from these trials may
fail to capture unique immune-related response patterns,
such as pseudoprogression [62].
Two small retrospective studies compared RECIST1.1
with irRC to identify patients with NSCLC who were
wrongly classified in clinical trials as having progressive
disease [63, 64]. In these studies, pseudoprogression was
very infrequently observed in patients with NSCLC, with
the
highest
frequency
reported
being
2/41
(4.9%)
patients [63]. Although pseudoprogression was particu-
larly seen in patients with melanoma, it seems to be very
uncommon in NSCLC. Further study is warranted to
determine whether treatment with immune checkpoint
inhibitors beyond RECIST1.1 disease progression bene-
fits patients with NSCLC.
Consensus recommendations
In the absence of robust data, the majority of Task Force
members (62%) reported obtaining the first CT scan 6–
9 weeks after starting immune checkpoint inhibitor ther-
apy. If asymptomatic or minimal disease progression is
observed at this time, most Task Force members (69%)
would continue treatment as long as the patient was
clinically stable. In cases where treatment with an
immune
checkpoint
inhibitor
is
continued
beyond
evidence of disease progression, the majority of Task
Force members would repeat a CT scan after 4 weeks
(31%) or after 8 weeks (39%).
Clinical question 4: Should patients with NSCLC and a co-
existing autoimmune disorder be treated with immune
checkpoint inhibitors?
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are often withheld from
patients with preexisting or active autoimmune disorders
based on the assumption that autoimmune toxicity
could be exacerbated. However, because individuals with
active autoimmune disease have typically been excluded
from clinical trials of immunotherapy, data are insuffi-
cient to determine whether immune-based therapies are
contraindicated. The Task Force, therefore, discussed
whether autoimmune disorders are a contraindication to
treatment, including whether the type and/or severity of
autoimmune disease could affect patient eligibility.
Literature review and analysis
There are limited data concerning the use of any check-
point inhibitors in patients with preexisting autoimmune
disorders. In a retrospective review of patients with
advanced melanoma who received ipilimumab therapy,
30 patients in the treatment arm had active preexisting
autoimmune disorders (rheumatoid arthritis, n = 6; psor-
iasis, n = 5; inflammatory bowel disease, n = 6; systemic
lupus erythematosus, n = 2; multiple sclerosis n = 2;
autoimmune thyroiditis, n = 2; other, n = 7), and 43%
(13/30) were receiving immunosuppressive therapy [65].
Following
ipilimumab
treatment,
8
patients
(27%)
required corticosteroid treatment for exacerbation of an
autoimmune
condition.
Severe
(grade
3–5)
irAEs
occurred in 10 patients, of whom 2 responded fully to
corticosteroids or infliximab; one patient (psoriasis) died
of presumed immune-related colitis. Fifteen patients had
no autoimmune disease flare. In all, 6 patients (20%)
experienced an objective response, with a single durable
complete response [65].
The same clinical question was addressed in a system-
atic review of 45 cases, the majority of which involved
patients with melanoma and an autoimmune disorder
(95.6%) who received ipilimumab (88.9%). In this review,
40% of patients did not experience irAEs or disease
worsening despite having active autoimmune disease at
the time of treatment [66].
In a small prospective study, 119 patients with ad-
vanced melanoma, 52 with preexisting autoimmune dis-
orders and 67 with major toxicity with ipilimumab, were
treated with anti-PD-1 agents (109 pembrolizumab and
10 nivolumab). Among patients with preexisting auto-
immune disorders, the response rate was 33%. Twenty
(38%) patients reported autoimmune flares requiring im-
munosuppression, including 7/13 with rheumatoid arth-
ritis, 3/3 with polymyalgia rheumatica, 2/2 with Sjögren’s
syndrome, 2/2 with immune thrombocytopenic purpura,
and 3/8 with psoriasis; only 2 (4%) patients discontinued
treatment due to autoimmune flare, and there were no
treatment-related deaths [67].
The literature on immunotherapy in organ transplant
recipients is extremely limited. A systematic review iden-
tified 19 cases of cancer patients who had received solid
organ transplant (Cancer type: melanoma = 11, cutane-
ous squamous cell = 3, NSCLC = 2, hepatocellular = 2,
duodenal = 1;
transplant
type:
kidney = 12,
liver = 5,
heart = 2) being treated with checkpoint inhibitors (me-
dian time to start therapy: 11 years; 53% nivolumab, 26%
ipilimumab, 21% pembrolizumab). Most patients were
receiving
immunosuppressive
regimens
–
including
low-dose prednisone and mTOR inhibitors – prior to
initiating checkpoint inhibitor therapy. Ten patients ex-
perienced graft rejection (7 kidney, 2 liver, 1 heart) after
checkpoint inhibitor therapy (median time to rejection
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 10 of 15
 = 21 days). Biopsy samples suggested T cell mediated
rejection [68]. There are currently no guidelines on the
use of immunotherapy in transplant recipients, and
more research is needed to clarify the safety and efficacy
of immunotherapy in this setting.
Although there may be increased risk of toxicity in
patients with autoimmune conditions, and among those
with an organ transplant, published reports indicate that
toxicity is not universal and benefits can be seen.
Consensus recommendations
The Task Force recognized that very little is known
about contraindications to immunotherapy in patients
with NSCLC, and that many of the above examples con-
cern anti-CTLA-4 ipilimumab that hold no approvals
for this disease. Because patients with autoimmune dis-
ease are typically excluded from immunotherapy clinical
trials, the use of checkpoint inhibitors in these patients
is still considered investigational. Only 6% of the Task
Force felt that a history of multiple sclerosis would be
an absolute contraindication. Furthermore, in the con-
text of an otherwise fatal illness such as lung cancer
there may be greater willingness to accept the risk of
toxicity, particularly in the absence of alternative effect-
ive therapies. Of note, the majority of the Task Force
(75%) felt that prior liver transplant was an absolute
contraindication to immune checkpoint therapy as some
deaths and organ rejection have been described. Until
further data are available, particularly from real-world
clinical settings, close monitoring in conjunction with
appropriate specialist care is recommended to ensure
early identification and effective management of irAEs.
Clinical question 5: How should treatment-related adverse
events, in particular pulmonary adverse events, be
recognized, monitored, and managed in patients with
NSCLC?
Cancer immunotherapy agents are associated with toxic-
ities that are distinct from those observed with cytotoxic
or targeted agents. Early recognition and close monitor-
ing of these toxicities can improve clinical outcomes
while minimizing harm to patients. Overall, serious
immune-related toxicities are quite rare. Treatment-
related pneumonitis has been reported as a cause of
death in patients with NSCLC, but this occurs in < 2% of
patients
[69].
The
overall
incidence
of
individual
immune-related toxicities is low, but the absolute bur-
den on patients is substantial due to the broad use of
these agents. The prevalence of irAEs may also increase
with future use of combination regimens.
Literature review and analysis
Data concerning the incidence of pulmonary irAEs have
been
mostly
reported
in
large
prospective
trials
supporting FDA-approval of the agents in question. Ac-
cording to these safety trials, immune-mediated pneu-
monitis was observed in 61/1994 (3.1%) of patients
receiving nivolumab, 94/2799 (3.4%) of patients receiv-
ing pembrolizumab, and 38/1027 (3.7%) of patients who
received atezolizumab [44]. The median time to onset of
immune-mediated pneumonitis was 3.5 months for
nivolumab and 3.3 months for both pembrolizumab and
atezolizumab. The majority of patients who developed
pneumonitis while undergoing treatment were managed
with corticosteroids (89, 67, and 55%, respectively). Al-
though most irAEs were grade 1–2 and eventually re-
solved, two immune-related pneumonitis deaths were
reported.
Consistent with safety reports, a large retrospective
analysis of patients receiving anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents re-
ported immune-related pneumonitis in 43/915 (4.6%)
patients [70], with similar incidence in patients with
NSCLC (26/532 [5%]) and melanoma (9/209 [4%]). Time
to onset ranged from 9 days to 19.2 months (median
2.8 months) and was shorter in patients treated with
combination therapy compared with single agents (me-
dian 2.7 vs 4.6 months; p = 0.02). Of the reported cases,
72% were grade 1 to 2, and 86% improved or resolved
once immunotherapy was withheld and immunosup-
pression initiated. Treatment for pneumonitis included
withholding drug (n = 15, all grade 1), initiating cortico-
steroids (n = 23, 2 grade 1, 14 grade 2, 6 grade 3, 1 grade
4), and using corticosteroids with additional immuno-
suppression from infliximab with or without cyclophos-
phamide (n = 5, all grade ≥ 3). During treatment for
pneumonitis, five patients died but only one death was
directly attributable to pneumonitis. Of note, three pa-
tients died from infections related to immunosuppression,
highlighting the need for improved immunosuppression
strategies [70].
Risk of pneumonitis is generally increased in patients
with NSCLC, including after radiation and chemother-
apy [71–73]. Concerning pneumonitis caused by check-
point inhibition, a meta-analysis of 4496 patients across
20 PD-1/PD-L1 trials, the frequency of pneumonitis was
found to be higher in patients treated with combination
compared with monotherapy regimens (all-grade: 6.6%
vs. 1.6%; p < 0.001; grade ≥ 3: 1.5% vs. 0.2%, p = 0.001)
[74]. In addition, patients with NSCLC were found to
have a higher incidence of all-grade (4.1% vs 1.6%; p =
0.002) and grade ≥ 3 pneumonitis (1.8% vs. 0.2%; p <
0 .001) compared with patients with melanoma. Moreover,
in a large meta-analysis of more than 5000 NSCLC
patients, the incidence of any-grade (3.6% vs. 1.3%) and
grade ≥ 3/4 (1.1% vs. 0.4%) pneumonitis was higher
with
PD-1
inhibitors
than
PD-L1
inhibitors
[75].
Treatment-naïve patients were found to have a higher inci-
dence of grade 1–4 pneumonitis compared with previously
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 11 of 15
 treated patients
(4.3%
vs.
2.8%)
[75]. Predictors of
immune-related toxicity remain to be clarified although
family history of autoimmune disease, concomitant use of
other agents with known autoimmune effects, tumor loca-
tion, previous viral infection and elevated serum levels of
eosinophils and IL-17 have all been proposed based on
varying degrees of evidence [76]. It is important to note
that irAEs can present after cessation of immunotherapy.
For example, patients with breast cancer enrolled in
KEYNOTE 012 developed irAEs over a year after halting
pembrolizumab [77].
Consensus recommendations
In order to ensure irAEs are properly identified and
managed, the Task Force recommended close monitor-
ing and cross-collaboration with disease specialists.
When managing immune-related toxicities, over 50% of
the Task Force routinely collaborated with radiologists
(79%),
pulmonologists
(71%),
dermatologists
(71%),
rheumatologists (71%), and endocrinologists (71%). In
addition to the baseline tests recommended prior to
starting immunotherapy (described earlier), tests rou-
tinely used by ≥50% of Task Force members to monitor
patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors
included: thyroid function studies (93%), liver function
tests (93%), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine
(86%), and whole body imaging (71%). The importance
of closely monitoring patients’ oxygen saturation at rest
and on ambulation was also noted.
To ensure prompt diagnosis and management of
pneumonitis, the Task Force recommended frequent
monitoring of, and patient education on, signs or symp-
toms of possible pneumonitis such as new or worsening
cough, wheezing, dyspnea, or fatigue. In addition, all pa-
tients with radiographic and/or clinical evidence of
pneumonitis should be referred to a pulmonary special-
ist. In cases of grade 2 pneumonitis, immunotherapy
should be withheld and steroids (e.g., prednisone 1 mg/
kg daily) administered. Grade 3/4 pneumonitis warrants
permanently discontinuing immunotherapy and initiat-
ing treatment with steroids, including consideration of
IV steroids and hospitalization. Specific recommenda-
tions on the management of pulmonary irAEs are pro-
vided in detail by SITC’s Toxicity Management Working
Group [78].
Conclusions
With encouraging clinical activity, manageable side ef-
fects, and the potential for durable responses, immune
checkpoint inhibitors have quickly become the standard
of care for eligible patients with NSCLC within academic
centers. Currently, clinical trials with cancer immuno-
therapy agents alone and in combination with other
immune-based agents, targeted therapies, and cytotoxic
agents (chemotherapy and radiation therapy) are under-
way [79]. The eagerly anticipated results from these
trials will determine what role these agents will play in
treating patients with early stage disease, including the
neoadjuvant
and
adjuvant
settings.
In
addition
to
advances in treatment strategies, identifying and refining
the use of predictive biomarkers will also be essential to
identify patients who will most likely benefit from
therapy. Practice-changing updates from ongoing studies
will be incorporated into future versions of this guideline
document.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Cancer Immunotherapy Guidelines- Lung Task Force
Roster. (DOCX 13 kb)
Additional file 2: Comments from Member Open Review. (DOCX 14 kb)
Additional file 3: SITC NSCLC CIG Bibliography. (DOCX 62 kb)
Abbreviations
ALK: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase; CT: Computerized tomography;
EGFR: Epidermal growth factor receptor; FDA: U.S. Food and Drug
Administration; IC: Immune cell; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; irAEs: Immune-
related adverse events; irRC: Immune-related response criteria;
MMF: Mycophenolate mofetil; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging;
NSCLC: Non-small cell lung cancer; ORR: Overall response rate; OS: Overall
survival; PD-1: Programmed cell death 1; PD-L1: Programmed cell death
ligand 1; PFS: Progression-free survival; RECIST1.1: Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors v1.1; SITC: Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer;
TC: Tumor cell; TPS: Tumor proportion score
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge medical writing support provided by Chelsey
Meier, PhD, Esther Berkowitz, MBChB, MA, and Peter J. Intile, PhD, on behalf
of SITC. Additionally, the authors thank the entire SITC staff for administrative
support.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Authors’ contributions
CM, EB, and PJI used opinions and data from the in-person meeting, telecon-
ferences, and clinical surveys to draft the manuscript with guidance from the
authors. All authors provided reviews and edits, ensured accuracy of the con-
sensus opinions, and have read and approved the final version of this
manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
JRB has participated on advisory boards and/or served as a consultant
to Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, Celgene, and Eli Lilly. In addition, she has
received research funding/grant support from Bristol-Myers Squibb,
MedImmune/AstraZeneca, and Merck. RG has received honoraria for his
service on the advisory board at Abbvie and for consulting with Genen-
tech/Roche. He has also served on the advisory boards of Inivata, Pfizer,
EMD Serono, AstraZeneca, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. RAA has received
financial research support from from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck Sharpe
& Dohme, Five Prime Therapeutics, Stand Up 2 Cancer, the National
Institutes of Health and FLX Bio. SJA participates on the advisory boards
for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Merck, Cellular Biomedicine Group,
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 12 of 15
 Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Memgen, and FLX Bio.
He also has a research contract with Novartis. SS has received an honor-
arium from Bristol-Myers Squibb. MJD has participated in speakers bur-
eaus for Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Genentech/Roche and Merck.
SMD serves on the advisory board at AstraZeneca. LG serves on the ad-
visory boards at Genentech/Roche, Merck, AstraZeneca, Ignyta and Syn-
dax. Additionally, she receives institutional research support from Bristol-
Myers Squibb. EBG has received institutional research support from Astra-
Zeneca, Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Genentech/
Roche, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Mirati, Dynavax and Novartis. MDH has received fi-
nancial support for the provision of consultation services to Genentech/
Roche, Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Mirati, Janssen, and
Shattuck Labs. Additionally, MDH has received research funding from
Bristol-Myers Squibb. FRH serves on scientific advisory boards for Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Genentech/Roche, Merck, AstraZeneca, Ventana, HTG Mo-
lecular Diagnostics, Biocept, Eli Lilly, Loxo Oncology, Abbvie, Novartis
and Pfizer. JWN serves as an advisor and/or provides consultation to Clo-
vis Oncology, Boehringer Ingelheim, Takeda, and Eli Lilly. In addition, he
has received institutional research support from Genentech/Roche, Merck,
Novartis, Exelixis, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Nektar. VAP has been a
steering committee member on the advisory boards at Merck, AstraZe-
neca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Nektar Therapeutics and Genentech/Roche.
DLR is a consultant and advisor for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, A2
Pharma, and Cell Signaling Technology. Additionally, his lab receives re-
search support from AstraZeneca and Eli Lilly. LHS has provided consult-
ation and endpoint analysis, and is a member of the Data Safety and
Monitoring Boards for Merck and Novartis. BYY’s spouse serves on the
scientific advisory board at the LUNGevity Foundation. NAR is a co-
founder and shareholder of Gritstone Oncology, is on the Board of Di-
rectors for and is a shareholder of ARMO Bioscience, and has served on
the advisory boards at Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech/Roche, AstraZe-
neca, Merck, EMD Serono, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, Abbvie, Regeneron, and Novar-
tis. RSH has served as a consultant to AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Genentech/
Roche, Merck, and Pfizer. In addition, he has received clinical trial sup-
port/grants from Genentech/Roche and Merck. AF, SM, and BS declare
no competing interests.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1Bloomberg Kimmel Immunotherapy Institute, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer
Center, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. 2Division of Oncology, Washington
University, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. 3Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. 4H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. 5Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. 6Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale
University School of Nursing, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 7University of
California Los Angeles Lung Cancer Research Program, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 8LUNGevity,
Chicago, IL 60604, USA. 9Department of Medicine, New York University,
Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016,
USA. 10Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA 90404, USA. 11Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. 12University of Colorado Denver School of
Medicine, Denver, CO 80011, USA. 13National Cancer Institute, Division of
Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program,
Rockville, USA. 14Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 15University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 16Department of
Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
17Department of Radiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons and New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York City, NY 10032,
USA. 18Thoracic Surgical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 19Department of Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
20Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10028, USA. 21Yale
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street,
WWW221, New Haven, CT 06520-8028, USA.
Received: 22 March 2018 Accepted: 27 June 2018
References
1.
About non-small cell lung cancer [https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/
CRC/PDF/Public/8703.00.pdf].
2.
SEER stat fact sheets: lung and bronchus cancer [http://seer.cancer.gov/
statfacts/html/lungb.html].
3.
Midha A, Dearden S, McCormack R. EGFR mutation incidence in non-small-
cell lung cancer of adenocarcinoma histology: a systematic review and
global map by ethnicity (mutMapII). Am J Cancer Res. 2015;5(9):2892–911.
4.
Zago G, Muller M, van den Heuvel M, Baas P. New targeted treatments for
non-small-cell lung cancer - role of nivolumab. Biologics. 2016;10:103–17.
5.
Marrone KA, Naidoo J, Brahmer JR. Immunotherapy for lung Cancer: no
longer an abstract concept. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2016;37(5):771–82.
6.
Hirsch FR, Suda K, Wiens J, Bunn PA Jr. New and emerging targeted
treatments in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Lancet. 2016;388(10048):
1012–24.
7.
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines). Non-
small cell lung cancer. Version 5.2017 – 2017 (http://www.nccn.org/
professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nscl.pdf).
8.
Le AD, Alzghari SK, Jean GW, La-Beck NM. Update on targeted therapies for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer: nivolumab in context. Ther Clin Risk
Manag. 2017;13:223–36.
9.
Drugs@FDA: FDA approved drug products (https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?event=browseByLetter.page&productLetter=B).
10.
Davies M. New modalities of cancer treatment for NSCLC: focus on
immunotherapy. Cancer Manag Res. 2014;6:63–75.
11.
Hoos A. Development of immuno-oncology drugs - from CTLA4 to PD1 to
the next generations. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2016;15(4):235–47.
12.
Papaioannou NE, Beniata OV, Vitsos P, Tsitsilonis O, Samara P. Harnessing
the immune system to improve cancer therapy. Ann Transl Med. 2016;
4(14):261.
13.
Peterson JJ, Steele-Moses SK. Update on new therapies with immune
checkpoint inhibitors. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2016;20(4):405–10.
14.
Pennock GK, Chow LQ. The evolving role of immune checkpoint inhibitors
in Cancer treatment. Oncologist. 2015;20(7):812–22.
15.
Reiss KA, Forde PM, Brahmer JR. Harnessing the power of the immune
system via blockade of PD-1 and PD-L1: a promising new anticancer
strategy. Immunotherapy. 2014;6(4):459–75.
16.
Naidoo J, Page DB, Wolchok JD. Immune modulation for cancer therapy.
Br J Cancer. 2014;111(12):2214–9.
17.
Remon J, Besse B, Soria JC. Erratum to: successes and failures: what did we
learn from recent first-line treatment immunotherapy trials in non-small cell
lung cancer? BMC Med. 2017;15(1):82.
18.
Patel SP, Kurzrock R. PD-L1 expression as a predictive biomarker in Cancer
immunotherapy. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015;14(4):847–56.
19.
Grigg C, Rizvi NA. PD-L1 biomarker testing for non-small cell lung cancer:
truth or fiction? J Immunother Cancer. 2016;4:48.
20.
Carbone DP, Gandara DR, Antonia SJ, Zielinski C, Paz-Ares L. Non-small-cell
lung Cancer: role of the immune system and potential for immunotherapy.
J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(7):974–84.
21.
Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF,
Powderly JD, Carvajal RD, Sosman JA, Atkins MB, et al. Safety, activity, and
immune correlates of anti–PD-1 antibody in Cancer. New Engl J Med. 2012;
366(26):2443–54.
22.
Institute of Medicine Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy
Clinical Practice G. In: Graham R, Mancher M, Miller Wolman D, Greenfield S,
Steinberg E, editors. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington:
National Academies Press (US) Copyright 2011 by the National Academy of
Sciences. All rights reserved; 2011.
23.
McNeel DG, Bander NH, Beer TM, Drake CG, Fong L, Harrelson S, Kantoff PW,
Madan RA, Oh WK, Peace DJ, et al. The Society for Immunotherapy of
Cancer consensus statement on immunotherapy for the treatment of
prostate carcinoma. J Immunother Cancer. 2016;4:92.
24.
Rini BI, McDermott DF, Hammers H, Bro W, Bukowski RM, Faba B, Faba
J, Figlin RA, Hutson T, Jonasch E, et al. Society for Immunotherapy of
Cancer consensus statement on immunotherapy for the treatment of
renal cell carcinoma. J Immunother Cancer. 2016;4:81.
25.
Boyiadzis M, Bishop MR, Abonour R, Anderson KC, Ansell SM, Avigan D,
Barbarotta L, Barrett AJ, Van Besien K, Bergsagel PL, et al. The Society
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 13 of 15
 for Immunotherapy of Cancer consensus statement on immunotherapy
for the treatment of hematologic malignancies: multiple myeloma,
lymphoma, and acute leukemia. J Immunother Cancer. 2016;4:90.
26.
Kaufman HL, Kirkwood JM, Hodi FS, Agarwala S, Amatruda T, Bines SD,
Clark JI, Curti B, Ernstoff MS, Gajewski T, et al. The Society for
Immunotherapy of Cancer consensus statement on tumour
immunotherapy for the treatment of cutaneous melanoma. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2013;10(10):588–98.
27.
SITC Cancer Immunotherapy CONNECT: Cancer Immunotherapy Guidelines
(http://www.sitcancer.org/research/cancer-immunotherapy-guidelines).
28.
Brahmer J, Reckamp KL, Baas P, Crino L, Eberhardt WE, Poddubskaya E,
Antonia S, Pluzanski A, Vokes EE, Holgado E, et al. Nivolumab versus
docetaxel in advanced squamous-cell non-small-cell lung Cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2015;373(2):123–35.
29.
Borghaei H, Paz-Ares L, Horn L, Spigel DR, Steins M, Ready NE, Chow LQ, Vokes
EE, Felip E, Holgado E, et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel in advanced
nonsquamous non-small-cell lung Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(17):1627–39.
30.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company: Nivolumab [package insert]. In. Princeton; 2018.
31.
Socinski M, Creelan B, Horn L, Reck M, Paz-Ares L, Steins M, Felip E, Mvd H,
Ciuleanu TE, Badin F, et al. NSCLC, metastaticCheckMate 026: A phase 3 trial
of nivolumab vs investigator's choice (IC) of platinum-based doublet
chemotherapy (PT-DC) as first-line therapy for stage iv/recurrent
programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1)−positive NSCLC. Ann Oncol. 2016;
27(suppl_6) (1 October 2016):LBA7_PR
32.
Borghaei H, Hellmann MD, Paz-Ares LG, Ramalingam SS, Reck M, O'Byrne KJ,
Bhagavatheeswaran P, Nathan FE, Brahmer JR. Nivolumab (Nivo) +
platinum-doublet chemotherapy (Chemo) vs chemo as first-line (1L)
treatment (Tx) for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with <1%
tumor PD-L1 expression: Results from CheckMate 227. J Clin Oncol. 2018;
36(15_suppl):9001.
33.
Hellmann MD, Ciuleanu TE, Pluzanski A, Lee JS, Otterson GA, Audigier-
Valette C, Minenza E, Linardou H, Burgers S, Salman P, et al. Nivolumab plus
Ipilimumab in lung Cancer with a high tumor mutational burden. N Engl J
Med. 2018;378(22):2093-2104.
34.
Garon EB, Rizvi NA, Hui R, Leighl N, Balmanoukian AS, Eder JP, Patnaik A,
Aggarwal C, Gubens M, Horn L, et al. Pembrolizumab for the treatment of
non–small-cell lung Cancer. New Engl J Med. 2015;372(21):2018–28.
35.
Herbst RS, Baas P, Kim D-W, Felip E, Pérez-Gracia JL, Han J-Y, Molina
J, Kim J-H, Arvis CD, Ahn M-J, et al. Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel
for previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer (KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
387(10027):1540–50.
36.
Merck & Co. I. Pembrolizumab [package insert]. NJ: Whitehouse Station; 2016.
37.
Reck M, Rodriguez-Abreu D, Robinson AG, Hui R, Csoszi T, Fulop A, Gottfried
M, Peled N, Tafreshi A, Cuffe S, et al. Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy
for PD-L1-positive non-small-cell lung Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(19):
1823–33.
38.
Langer CJ, Gadgeel SM, Borghaei H, Papadimitrakopoulou VA, Patnaik A,
Powell SF, Gentzler RD, Martins RG, Stevenson JP, Jalal SI, et al. Carboplatin
and pemetrexed with or without pembrolizumab for advanced, non-
squamous non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomised, phase 2 cohort of the
open-label KEYNOTE-021 study. Lancet Oncol. 17(11):1497–508.
39.
Borghaei H LC, . Gadgeel S, Papadimitrakopoulou VA, Patnaik A, Powell SF,
Gentzler RD, Martins RG, Stevenson JP, Jalal SI, Panwalkar A, Yang JC,
Gubens M, Sequist L, Awad MM, Fiore J, Saraf S, Raftopoulos H, Gandhi L:
Updated results from KEYNOTE-021 cohort G: a randomized, phase 2 study
of pemetrexed and carboplatin (PC) with or without pembrolizumab
(pembro) as first-line therapy for advanced nonsquamous NSCLC. Ann
Oncol 2017, 28(Suppl 5):605–649.
40.
Gandhi L, Rodriguez-Abreu D, Gadgeel S, Esteban E, Felip E, De Angelis F,
Domine M, Clingan P, Hochmair MJ, Powell SF, et al. Pembrolizumab plus
chemotherapy in metastatic non-small-cell lung Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2018;
378(22):2078-2092.
41.
Paz-Ares LG, Luft A, Tafreshi A, Gumus M, Mazieres J, Hermes B, Senler FC,
Fülöp A, Rodriguez-Cid J, Sugawara S, et al. Phase 3 study of carboplatin-
paclitaxel/nab-paclitaxel (Chemo) with or without pembrolizumab (Pembro)
for patients (Pts) with metastatic squamous (Sq) non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(15_suppl):105.
42.
Peters S, Gettinger S, Johnson ML, Janne PA, Garassino MC, Christoph D,
Toh CK, Rizvi NA, Chaft JE, Carcereny Costa E, et al. Phase II Trial of
Atezolizumab As First-Line or Subsequent Therapy for Patients With
Programmed Death-Ligand 1-Selected Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancer (BIRCH). J Clin Oncol. 2017; https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2016.71.9476.
43.
Fehrenbacher L, Spira A, Ballinger M, Kowanetz M, Vansteenkiste J, Mazieres
J, Park K, Smith D, Artal-Cortes A, Lewanski C, et al. Atezolizumab versus
docetaxel for patients with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer
(POPLAR): a multicentre, open-label, phase 2 randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 387(10030):1837–46.
44.
Genentech I. Atezolizumab [package insert]. San Francisco; 2016.
45.
Rittmeyer A, Barlesi F, Waterkamp D, Park K, Ciardiello F, von Pawel J,
Gadgeel SM, Hida T, Kowalski DM, Dols MC, et al. Atezolizumab versus
docetaxel in patients with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer
(OAK): a phase 3, open-label, multicentre randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2017;389(10066):255–65.
46.
Kowanetz MSM, Zou W, et al. IMpower150: Efficacy of atezolizumab
plus bevacizumab and chemotherapy in 1L metastatic nonsquamous
NSCLC across key subgroups. Chicago: 2018 AACR Annual Meeting;
2018. Abstract CT076
47.
Jotte RM, Cappuzzo F, Vynnychenko I, Stroyakovskiy D, Abreu DR, Hussein
MA, Soo RA, Conter HJ, Kozuki T, Silva C, et al. IMpower131: Primary PFS and
safety analysis of a randomized phase III study of atezolizumab +
carboplatin + paclitaxel or nab-paclitaxel vs carboplatin + nab-paclitaxel as
1L therapy in advanced squamous NSCLC. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(18_suppl):
LBA9000.
48.
Antonia SJ, Villegas A, Daniel D, Vicente D, Murakami S, Hui R, Yokoi T,
Chiappori A, Lee KH, de Wit M, et al. Durvalumab after Chemoradiotherapy in
stage III non-small-cell lung Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(20):1919-1929.
49.
Brahmer JR, Drake CG, Wollner I, Powderly JD, Picus J, Sharfman WH,
Stankevich E, Pons A, Salay TM, McMiller TL, et al. Phase I study of single-
agent anti-programmed death-1 (MDX-1106) in refractory solid tumors:
safety, clinical activity, pharmacodynamics, and immunologic correlates.
J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(19):3167–75.
50.
Rizvi NA, Mazieres J, Planchard D, Stinchcombe TE, Dy GK, Antonia SJ, Horn
L, Lena H, Minenza E, Mennecier B, et al. Activity and safety of nivolumab,
an anti-PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, for patients with advanced,
refractory squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (CheckMate 063): a phase 2,
single-arm trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(3):257–65.
51.
Ascierto PA, Schadendorf D, Berking C, Agarwala SS, van Herpen CM,
Queirolo P, Blank CU, Hauschild A, Beck JT, St-Pierre A, et al. MEK162 for
patients with advanced melanoma harbouring NRAS or Val600 BRAF
mutations: a non-randomised, open-label phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol.
2013;14(3):249–56.
52.
Gandhi L, Balmanoukian A, Hui R, Hamid O, Rizvi NA, Leighl N, Gubens M,
Goldman JW, Lubiniecki GM, Emancipator K, et al. MK-3475 (anti-PD-1
monoclonal antibody) for non-small cell lung cancer: antitumor activity and
association with tumor PD-L1 expression. Cancer Res. 2014;74:CT105.
53.
Laboratory Developed Tests [https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
ProductsandMedicalProcedures/InVitroDiagnostics/
LaboratoryDevelopedTests/default.htm].
54.
Gaule P, Smithy JW, Toki M, Rehman J, Patell-Socha F, Cougot D, Collin P,
Morrill P, Neumeister V, Rimm DL. A quantitative comparison of antibodies
to programmed cell death 1 ligand 1. JAMA Oncol. 2016; https://doi.org/10.
1001/jamaoncol.2016.3015
55.
Rimm DL, Han G, Taube JM, Yi ES, Bridge JA, Flieder DB, Homer R, West
WW, Wu H, Roden AC, et al. A prospective, multi-institutional, pathologist-
based assessment of 4 immunohistochemistry assays for PD-L1 expression
in non-small cell lung Cancer. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3(8):1051–8.
56.
Hirsch FR, McElhinny A, Stanforth D, Ranger-Moore J, Jansson M, Kulangara K,
Richardson W, Towne P, Hanks D, Vennapusa B, et al. PD-L1
Immunohistochemistry Assays for Lung Cancer: Results from Phase 1 of the
Blueprint PD-L1 IHC Assay Comparison Project. J Thorac Oncol. 12(2):208–22.
57.
Scheel AH, Baenfer G, Baretton G, Dietel M, Diezko R, Henkel T, Heukamp LC,
Jasani B, Johrens K, Kirchner T, et al. Interlaboratory-concordance of PD-L1
immunohistochemistry for non-small cell lung cancer. Histopathology. 2017;
72(3):449-459.
58.
Carbone DP, Reck M, Paz-Ares L, Creelan B, Horn L, Steins M, Felip E, van den
Heuvel MM, Ciuleanu TE, Badin F, et al. First-line Nivolumab in stage IV or
recurrent non-small-cell lung Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(25):2415–26.
59.
Wolchok JD, Hoos A, O'Day S, Weber JS, Hamid O, Lebbe C, Maio M, Binder
M, Bohnsack O, Nichol G, et al. Guidelines for the evaluation of immune
therapy activity in solid tumors: immune-related response criteria. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009;15(23):7412–20.
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 14 of 15
 60.
Nishino M, Giobbie-Hurder A, Gargano M, Suda M, Ramaiya NH, Hodi FS.
Developing a common language for tumor response to immunotherapy:
immune-related response criteria using unidimensional measurements. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013;19(14):3936–43.
61.
Nishino M, Tirumani SH, Ramaiya NH, Hodi FS. Cancer immunotherapy and
immune-related response assessment: the role of radiologists in the new
arena of cancer treatment. Eur J Radiol. 2015;84(7):1259–68.
62.
Chiou VL, Burotto M. Pseudoprogression and immune-related response in
solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(31):3541–3.
63.
Kim HK, Heo MH, Lee HS, Sun JM, Lee SH, Ahn JS, Park K, Ahn MJ.
Comparison of RECIST to immune-related response criteria in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer treated with immune-checkpoint inhibitors.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2017;
64.
Nishino M, Ramaiya NH, Chambers ES, Adeni AE, Hatabu H, Janne PA, Hodi
FS, Awad MM. Immune-related response assessment during PD-1 inhibitor
therapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients. J Immunother
Cancer. 2016;4:84.
65.
Johnson DB, Sullivan RJ, Ott PA, Carlino MS, Khushalani NI, Ye F, Guminski A,
Puzanov I, Lawrence DP, Buchbinder EI, et al. Ipilimumab therapy in patients
with advanced melanoma and preexisting autoimmune disorders. JAMA
Oncol. 2016;2(2):234–40.
66.
A-WHSMS-A M. Use of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment of
patients with cancer and preexisting autoimmune diseases: a systematic
review of case reports. Arthritis Rheum. 2016;68(suppl 10)
67.
Menzies AM, Johnson DB, Ramanujam S, Atkinson VG, Wong ANM, Park JJ,
McQuade JL, Shoushtari AN, Tsai KK, Eroglu Z, et al. Anti-PD-1 therapy in
patients with advanced melanoma and preexisting autoimmune disorders
or major toxicity with ipilimumab. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(2):368–76.
68.
Hassan NA, Abudayyeh A, Shah M, Johnson DH, Suarez-Almazor ME, Diab A.
The outcome of checkpoint inhibitor therapy in patients with cancer and
solid organ transplant: a systematic review of the literature. J Clin Oncol.
2018;36(5_suppl):41.
69.
Gettinger SN, Horn L, Gandhi L, Spigel DR, Antonia SJ, Rizvi NA, Powderly
JD, Heist RS, Carvajal RD, Jackman DM, et al. Overall survival and long-term
safety of Nivolumab (anti-programmed death 1 antibody, BMS-936558,
ONO-4538) in patients with previously treated advanced non-small-cell lung
Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2004–12.
70.
Naidoo J, Wang X, Woo KM, Iyriboz T, Halpenny D, Cunningham J, Chaft JE,
Segal NH, Callahan MK, Lesokhin AM, et al. Pneumonitis in patients treated
with anti-programmed Death-1/programmed death ligand 1 therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2017;35(7):709–17.
71.
White DA, Schwartz LH, Dimitrijevic S, Scala LD, Hayes W, Gross SH.
Characterization of pneumonitis in patients with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer treated with everolimus (RAD001). J Thorac Oncol. 2009;4(11):
1357–63.
72.
Thomas AL, Cox G, Sharma RA, Steward WP, Shields F, Jeyapalan K, Muller S,
O'Byrne KJ. Gemcitabine and paclitaxel associated pneumonitis in non-small
cell lung cancer: report of a phase I/II dose-escalating study. Eur J Cancer.
2000;36(18):2329–34.
73.
Mehta V. Radiation pneumonitis and pulmonary fibrosis in non-small-cell
lung cancer: pulmonary function, prediction, and prevention. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63(1):5–24.
74.
Nishino M, Giobbie-Hurder A, Hatabu H, Ramaiya NH, Hodi FS. Incidence of
programmed cell death 1 inhibitor-related pneumonitis in patients with
advanced Cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol. 2016;
2(12):1607–16.
75.
Khunger M, Rakshit S, Pasupuleti V, Hernandez AV, Mazzone P, Stevenson J,
Pennell NA, Velcheti V. Incidence of pneumonitis with use of programmed
death 1 and programmed death-ligand 1 inhibitors in non-small cell lung
Cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of trials. Chest. 2017;152(2):
271–81.
76.
Hopkins AM, Rowland A, Kichenadasse G, Wiese MD, Gurney H, McKinnon
RA, Karapetis CS, Sorich MJ. Predicting response and toxicity to immune
checkpoint inhibitors using routinely available blood and clinical markers. Br
J Cancer. 2017;117(7):913–20.
77.
Nanda R, Chow LQ, Dees EC, Berger R, Gupta S, Geva R, Pusztai L, Pathiraja
K, Aktan G, Cheng JD, et al. Pembrolizumab in patients with advanced
triple-negative breast Cancer: phase Ib KEYNOTE-012 study. J Clin Oncol.
2016;34(21):2460–7.
78.
Puzanov I, Diab A, Abdallah K, Bingham CO 3rd, Brogdon C, Dadu R, Hamad
L, Kim S, Lacouture ME, LeBoeuf NR, et al. Managing toxicities associated
with immune checkpoint inhibitors: consensus recommendations from the
Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer (SITC) toxicity management working
group. J Immunother Cancer. 2017;5(1):95.
79.
Search results for available studies for immunotherapy agents in Lung
Cancer [https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=lung+cancer&term=
immunotherapy&cntry1=&state1=&recrs=ab].
Brahmer et al. Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer  (2018) 6:75 
Page 15 of 15
