 Tissue-Specific Progenitor and Stem Cells
Engineered Mesenchymal Cells Improve Passive
ImmuneProtectionAgainstLethalVenezuelanEquine
Encephalitis Virus Exposure
LORENA R. BRAID,a,b WEI-GANG HU,a JOHN E. DAVIES,c,d LES P. NAGATAa
Key Words. Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus x Prophylaxis x Gene therapy x Cell therapy x
Mesenchymal stromal cells x Passive immunity
ABSTRACT
Mesenchymalstromalcells(MSCs)arebeingexploitedasgenedeliveryvectorsforvariousdiseaseand
injury therapies. We provide proof-of-concept that engineered MSCs can provide a useful, effective
platform for protection against infectious disease. Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) is a
mosquito-borne pathogen affecting humans and equines and can be used in bio-warfare. No licensed
vaccine or antiviral agent currently exists to combat VEEV infection in humans. Direct antibody ad-
ministration (passive immunity) is an effective, but short-lived, method of providing immediate pro-
tectionagainstapathogen.Wecomparedtheprotectiveefficacyofhumanumbilicalcordperivascular
cells (HUCPVCs; a rich source of MSCs), engineered with a transgene encoding a humanized VEEV-
neutralizing antibody (anti-VEEV), to the purified antibody. In athymic mice, the anti-VEEV antibody
had a half-life of 3.7 days, limiting protection to 2 or 3 days after administration. In contrast, engi-
neered HUCPVCs generated protective anti-VEEV serum titers for 21–38 days after a single intramus-
cular injection. At 109 days after transplantation, 10% of the mice still had circulating anti-VEEV
antibody. The mice were protected against exposure to a lethal dose of VEEV by an intramuscular
pretreatment injection with engineered HUCPVCs 24 hours or 10 days before exposure, demon-
stratingbothrapidand prolongedimmuneprotection.Thepresentstudy isthefirst todescribeengi-
neered MSCs as gene delivery vehicles for passive immunity and supports their utility as antibody
delivery vehicles for improved, single-dose prophylaxis against endemic and intentionally dissem-
inated pathogens. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1026–1035
SIGNIFICANCE
Direct injection of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) is an important strategy to immediately protect the
recipient from a pathogen. This strategy is critical during natural outbreaks or after the intentional
release of bio-weapons. Vaccines require weeks to become effective, which is not practical for first
responders immediately deployed to an infected region. However, mAb recipients often require
booster shots to maintain protection, which is expensive and impractical once the first responders
have been deployed. The present study has shown, for the first time, that mesenchymal stromal cells
are effective gene delivery vehicles that can significantly improve mAb-mediated immune protection
in a single, intramuscular dose of engineered cells. Such a cell-based delivery system can provide ex-
tended life-saving protection in the event of exposure to biological threats using a more practical,
single-dose regimen.
INTRODUCTION
The concept of engineering mesenchymal stro-
mal cells (MSCs) to express therapeutically rele-
vant biomolecules is an active area of research
development. It is well known that MSCs have a
lowimmunogenicprofile[1–5],makingthemsuit-
able gene therapy vectors for a range of indica-
tions and therapeutic molecules [6–16]. Drugs
expressed by engineered MSCs have shown im-
proved kinetics and therapeutic efficacy com-
pared with direct administration of the same
drug [17, 18]. Thus, engineered MSCs provide
an attractive alternative to both direct injection
of biologic agents, which could have inherent
limitations in manufacturing, delivery, or half-
life, and viral-based gene transfer strategies
[19–21], which pose a high clinical risk for ad-
verse effects and immune reactions [22, 23].
Important opportunities also exist to use stra-
tegically engineered MSCs as prophylactics against
both endemic and weaponized pathogens. As
evidenced in the 2014–2015 Ebola outbreak,
aBio-Threat Defence Section,
Defence Research and
Development Canada,
Suffield Research Centre,
Ralston, Alberta, Canada;
bAurora BioSolutions Inc.,
Medicine Hat, Alberta,
Canada; cInstitute of
Biomaterials and
Bioengineering, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; dTissue
Regeneration Therapeutics,
Inc., Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
Correspondence: Wei-Gang Hu,
Ph.D., Bio-Threat Defence
Section, Defence Research and
Development Canada, Suffield
Research Centre, Box 4000
Station Main, Medicine Hat,
Alberta T1A 8K6, Canada.
Telephone: 403-544-4674;
E-Mail: wei-gang.hu@drdc-rddc.
gc.ca.
Received November 10, 2015;
accepted for publication March
14, 2016; published Online First
on June 22, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0341
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1026–1035 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
TISSUE-SPECIFIC PROGENITOR AND STEM CELLS
 manufacturing and delivery bottlenecks limit the real-world use-
fulness of prophylactic antibodies [24, 25]. However, we pre-
dicted that the protective window of a given antibody could be
extended using engineered MSCs as an antibody delivery plat-
form, whereby the cells constitute a renewable antibody source
that compensates for the antibody’s natural rate of degradation.
Although in many therapeutic contexts, autologous cell therapy
is ideal, only a stockpiled allogeneic source would be suitable
for prophylactic use or in crisis situations. The advantage of using
MSCs as the therapeutic agent is that they are considered
immune-privileged or, at least, immune-evasive; thus, they can
be used allogeneically, as shown in hundreds of registered MSC
clinical trials. This approach requires a cell population that is ame-
nabletogeneticengineering,isfaciletoharvestandstockpile,and
displays functional efficacy in vivo. We selected human umbilical
cord perivascular cells (HUCPVCs), a rich source of MSCs [26–30]
derived from Wharton’s jelly that rapidly expand to clinically rel-
evant numbers and is similar to bone marrow-derived MSCs [26,
27, 31]. HUCPVCs are particularly ideal for military applications,
because they are obtained noninvasively from tissue classified
as medical waste and are amenable to stockpiling in either native
or engineered form [32].
For the present proof-of-concept study, we selected Venezuelan
equine encephalitis virus (VEEV), an alphavirus endemic to South
and Central America [33, 34], as our infectious disease model.
The mosquito-borne virus is naturally transmitted to humans
and equines through a reservoir of infected rodents [20], and
VEEV outbreaks are increasingly being reported in the southern
United States [34].In humans, VEEV infection results in an acute,
febrile illness that can progress to neurological symptoms, includ-
ing encephalitis [35]. The most recent natural outbreak occurred
in Columbia in 1995, affecting 75,000 people and resulting in more
than 300 fatalities [36].
VEEV is also classified as a category B priority biodefense
agent by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Evidence
from animal studies and documented accidental laboratory expo-
sures indicates that aerosol exposure to VEEV is highly infectious
and results in abrupt onset of symptoms 2–5 days after exposure
[20, 37]. Moreover, VEEV is readily amplified to high titers in tis-
sue culture and exhibits sufficient stability to be aerosolized and
disseminated on a large scale [38]. Consequently, VEEV repre-
sents a significant biodefense threat.
Currently, no licensed vaccines or antiviral agents are avail-
able to protect humans against VEEV exposure. Two previously
developed vaccines, TC-83 and C-84, have been used in humans
under Investigational NewDrug status but were not approved be-
cause of their high rate of reversion and poor immunogenicity,
respectively [39]. More recently, the live-attenuated vaccine
V3526 was shown to be unsafe for use in humans [40] despite
its success in rodent and nonhuman primate animal models of
VEEV infection [41–43]. To address the current lack of licensed
medical countermeasures to combat VEEV infection, we previ-
ously developed a humanized antibody that neutralizes VEEV
[44, 45]. This antibody fully protects mice from a lethal dose of
VEEV when administered 24 hours before, or after, exposure
[45]. Ideally, a single administration of the anti-VEEV antibody
should protect military personnel or first-responders deployed
to endemic regions or areas affected by intentional release, for
several months—this is not possible using a single administered
dose of the purified antibody.
In the present study, we tested the utility of HUCPVCs as a
gene delivery platform to improve passive immunity against a
pathogen. Compared with the purified anti-VEEV antibody, we
show that a single intramuscular injection (IM) of anti-VEEV-
engineered HUCPVCs can generate, and maintain, highercirculat-
ing antibody titers. Most critically, pretreatment with engineered
HUCPVCssignificantly improvedbothsurvivalandmorbidity after
exposure to a high lethal dose of highly virulent VEEV. Engineered
HUCPVCs maintained the protective anti-VEEV titers for up to 38
days after implantation into mice and continued to secrete anti-
VEEV antibody for more than 3 months. Thus, engineered
HUCPVCs represent an attractive antibody delivery modality that
improves the efficacy of already existing prophylactic counter-
measures to infectious disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture
HUCPVCs [26] cryopreserved at passage 2 were provided by Tis-
sue Regeneration Therapeutics, Inc. (TRT; Toronto, ON, Canada,
http://www.verypowerfulbiology.com). HUCPVCs were thawed
according to TRT’s proprietary standard operating procedures.
HUCPVCs were expanded in proliferation media comprising min-
imal essential medium-a GlutaMAX, with no riboxynucleosides
or deoxynucleosides (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences,
Waltham, MA, http://www.thermofisher.com), supplemented
with 15% mesenchymal stem cell-fetal bovine serum (MSC-FBS;
Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences). At 70%–80% confluence,
HUCPVCs were enzymatically detached fromthe culture vessel by
brief incubation with TrypLE Select (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life
Sciences) and reseeded at a density of 4,000 cells per cm2. HUCPVC
culture conditions were maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2, and 80% rela-
tive humidity, with media replacement every 3–4 days.
For the in vivo studies, the HUCPVCs were engineered within
10 days of thawing and implanted 4 days after transduction with
recombinant adenovirus. HUCPVCs were harvested by enzymatic
detachment with TrypLE Select and washed once with Hank’s
balanced salt solution (HBSS), without calcium or magnesium
(Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences). After centrifugation,
HUCPVCs were resuspended in an appropriate volume of HBSS
to generate 150-ml doses (75 ml per thigh) and immediately
injected.
Recombinant Adenovirus Constructs and Transduction
A single open reading frame, encoding the full-length, humanized
anti-VEEV antibody, was previously cloned into a recombinant
adenovirus serotype 5 vector (pAd5-anti-VEEV [44]) using the
pAd-Easy system (Stratagene, Mississauga, ON, Canada, http://
www.agilent.com). Custom good laboratory practice-grade
pAd5-anti-VEEV was produced by Norgen Biotek Corp. (Thorold,
ON,Canada,http://www.norgenbiotek.com).Arecombinantad-
enovirus encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (pAd-eGFP;
Vector BioLabs, Philadelphia, PA, http://www.vectorbiolabs.
com) was used to optimize transduction protocols and to gener-
ate sham-engineered HUCPVCs for in vivo negative controls.
Recombinant adenovirus expressing firefly luciferase (pAd5-luc;
Vector BioLabs) was used to generate bioluminescent HUCPVCs
for in vivo optical imaging.
HUCPVCs were transduced by 2-hour incubation with a
minimal volume of recombinant adenovirus suspended in
Braid, Hu, Davies et al.
1027
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 nonproliferationmediumcomprisingDulbecco’smodifiedEagle’s
medium, high glucose, GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life
Sciences) supplemented with 2% MSC-FBS, without the addition
of transfection mediators. Following viral transformation, engi-
neered HUCPVCs were maintained in nonproliferating media.
Optimization of large-scale adenovirus-mediated transduc-
tion of HUCPVCs was performed by incubating confluent
HUCPVCs, cultured in 150-cm2 culture flasks, with a range of
1–400 pAd5-eGFP viral particle units per cell. The nuclei of cells
were stained with Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life
Sciences). At 24 and 48 hours after transduction, the images were
captured at 34 and 310 magnification with an EVOS digital
inverted microscope (Advanced Microscopy Group, Burlington,
ON, Canada, http://www.thermofisher.com). Transduction effi-
ciency was determined by calculating the percentage of eGFP-
positive cells using ImageJ, version 1.47 (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, http://www.imagej.nih.gov/ij). These re-
sults were validated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis. The percentage and relative intensity of eGFP-positive
cells in lots of 250,000 engineered HUCPVCs were analyzed using
a BD FACS AriaIIu (BD BioSciences, Mississauga, ON, Canada,
http://www.bdbiosciences.com), equipped with BD FACSDiva,
version 6.1.3.
Proliferation and Directed Differentiation Assays
Standard proliferation and differentiation assays were used to as-
sess the effects of genetic engineering. A minimum of three
HUCPVC lots were tested in each experiment, with unengineered
and engineered HUCPVCs cultured in parallel. Proliferation was
assessed using the 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5 diphenyl tetra-
zolium bromide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with four sam-
ples from each cell population tested 24 hours and 7 days after
seeding.
For directed differentiation assays, StemPro Chondrogenesis,
Adipogenesis and Osteogenesis Differentiation Kits (Thermo
Fisher Scientific Life Sciences) were used according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions. A minimum of three HUCPVC lots were
tested in each experiment, with unengineered and engineered
HUCPVCs cultured in parallel. Uninduced cells were cultured
and analyzed in parallel; spontaneous induction of the analyzed
markerswasnotobserved.Bright-fieldandphasecontrastimages
of stained cultures were captured before dye extraction at 310
and 320 magnification using an Axiocam ERc 5s camera mounted
to a Zeiss Axiovert 40CFL inverted microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Ger-
many, http://www.zeiss.com).
Chondrogenic-specific proteoglycans were detected in chon-
drogenesis micromass cultures by staining with alcian blue
(Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON, Canada, http://www.sigmaaldrich.
com). The cells were fixed for 20 minutes with 10% neutral buff-
ered formalin (NBF; Fisher Scientific Ltd., Ottawa, ON, Canada,
http://www.fishersci.ca), and then incubated with 1% alcian blue
in 0.1 M hydrochloride (HCl; Sigma-Aldrich) overnight (3–7-day
cultures) or for 1–2 hours (7-day or older cultures). The cultures
were rinsed once with 0.1 M HCl, three times with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) and kept in solution for imaging. Alcian blue
staining was extracted by incubating overnight in 6 M guanidine
HCl, with absorbance measured at 620 nm. Adipocytes were de-
tected by Oil Red O (Sigma-Aldrich) staining. The cells were rinsed
twice with PBS, fixed in 10% NBF, and gently rinsed again. The
cultures were incubated for 5 minutes with 60% isopropanol
(Sigma-Aldrich) and then for 30 minutes to 1 hour with freshly
prepared Oil Red O working solution (three parts 0.3% Oil Red
O in isopropanol to two parts dH2O). The cultures were liberally
washed with tap water and counterstained with Hematoxylin Gill
number3(Sigma-Aldrich). OilRedOdyewasextractedfromlipids
by incubation with 100% isopropanol for 10 minutes by shaking,
with absorbance measured at 510 nm. Induction of osteogenesis
was assessed by alkaline phosphatase staining, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Leukocyte Alkaline Phosphatase
kit 86R; Sigma-Aldrich). The cultures were counterstained with
Hematoxylin Gill number 3.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
For in vitro analyses, engineered HUCPVCs were seeded in
150-cm2 culture flasks at a density of 2.5 million cells per flask,
with media changes every 2–3 days. Total anti-VEEV IgG in the
conditioned media was assayed by functional enzyme-linked im-
munosorbent assay (ELISA), as described previously [45]. In brief,
microwell plates were incubated for 2 hours at room tempera-
ture with live VEEV-attenuated vaccine strain TC-83 suspended
in 13 coating buffer. The plates were washed three times with
phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-T)
and blocked with SuperBlock (PBS) Blocking Buffer (Pierce Bio-
technology, Rockford, IL, http://www.thermofisher.com) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were serially
dilutedinSuperBlockandincubatedinantigen-coatedmicrowells
for 1 hour at room temperature. Following three PBS-T washes,
anti-human IgG conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (Abcam,
Toronto, ON, Canada, http://www.abcam.com) was diluted to
1:5,000 in SuperBlock and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C.
The plates were washed three times with PBS-T before the
addition of 1-Step Ultra-TMB (Pierce Biotechnology) chromo-
genic substrate. The plates were incubated at room tempera-
ture, in the dark, for 10–15 minutes, with the reaction
stopped by the addition of an equal volume of 2 M phospho-
ric acid (Sigma-Aldrich). Absorbance was read at 420 nm by
a microplate autoreader (Molecular Devices, Toronto, ON,
Canada, http://www.moleculardevices.com). Standard curves
were generated for each assay using serially diluted humanized
anti-VEEV IgG [44]. In addition to standard chromagen and zero
blanks, conditioned media from unengineered HUCPVCs served
as a negative control. The limit of detection, defined as 1.2 times
the average absorbance of culture media from unengineered
HUCPVC controls, was subtracted from the experimental samples.
All samples were analyzed in triplicate at threefold serial dilutions
ranging from 1:10 to 1:1350. Concentrations of antibody were
extrapolated from a polynomial standard curve with a correlation
coefficient of 0.996 (in vitro assay) or 0.999 or 1 (in vivo assays).
Serum titers of anti-VEEV IgG inmice treated with purified an-
tibody or engineered HUCPVCs were quantified using the ELISA,
as described. Blood samples were collected from a superficial tail
vein at various time points, with the sera recovered by centrifu-
gation. The limit of detection was generated for each microplate
using serum obtained from mice injected with unengineered
HUCPVCs and applied against experimental samples.
Animal Studies
The animal experiments were performed in accordance with
Canadian Council on Animal Care-approved protocols and
1028
Engineered Mesenchymal Cells for Viral Prophylaxis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 institution standards of care. Eight- to 10-week-old female
BALB/cnu/nu mice (Charles River Laboratories, Gatineau, QC, Canada,
http://www.criver.com) were housed in pathogen-free condi-
tions and provided with sterilized water and irradiated chow ad
libitum. Groups of five age-matched mice received an intramus-
cular injection of 2.5 million engineered HUCPVCs or 50 mg of pu-
rified anti-VEEV antibody suspended in sterile saline. HUCPVCs
were administered as 75-ml injections to each thigh (150 ml total
permouse).Challengestudieswereperformedinabiosafetylevel
3 (BSL3) containment suite using the Trinidad Donkey strain of
VEEV (VEEV TrD). Under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia, the
mice were intranasally inoculated with 1 3 104 VEEV TrD
plaque-forming units (PFUs) suspended in 50 ml of PBS. To main-
tain objectivity, clinical symptoms of infectivity (weight loss,
piloerection, hunching, inactivity, excitability, and paralysis) were
assessed blind by staff otherwise uninvolved in the study. The se-
verity of clinical signs was measured on a scale of 1–4, with 0 in-
dicating the absence of clinical symptoms. Any mouse scoring 4
was humanely euthanized. The mice were evaluated for 21 days
after exposure. Only data from days 1–14 are reported, because
no significant changes were observed between days 15 and 21.
Neutralization Assay for In Vitro Assessment of
Anti-VEEV IgG Activity in Serum
For plaque reduction neutralization titer (PRNT) determination,
the serum was pooled for each group selected for comparison.
The pooled serum for the unchallenged mice on days 24, 31,
and 38 days after treatment with engineered HUCPVCs was lim-
ited to samples positive for antibody. The serum was heat inacti-
vated at 56°C for 30 minutes and then diluted in twofold serial
dilutions and coincubated with diluted VEEV TC83 for 30 minutes
at room temperature. The serum-virus mixture was applied to
monolayers of VERO cells in six-well culture plates and incubated
at 37°C for 1 hour. The mixture was replaced with Tragacanth
Gum(Sigma-Aldrich)dilutedinmaintenancemediumandthenin-
cubated for 2 days at 37°C. After 48 hours, the overlay was re-
moved, the cells were fixed and stained with 0.3% crystal violet
(Sigma-Aldrich) in HistoPrep (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sci-
ences), and the plaques were counted. The assays were per-
formed in duplicate.
Bioluminescence Imaging
Bioluminescence imaging was performed using the Xenogen In
Vivo Imaging System Spectrum (PerkinElmer, Hopkinton, MA,
http://www.perkinelmer.com), equipped with Living Image soft-
ware, version 4.3.1. HUCPVCs were batch-engineered with pAd5-
luc at 200 multiplicity of infection (MOI), as described. Three mice
were treated with a single dose of 2.5 million engineered
HUCPVCs suspended in 75 ml of HBSS and injected intramuscu-
larly into the left hind limb. Eight minutes before imaging,
the mice received an intraperitoneal injection of 150 ml of
D-luciferinUltrasaltsolution(PerkinElmer).Themicewereimmo-
bilized by isoflurane anesthesia delivered through a nose cone in
the imaging chamber. Images were obtained immediately before
cell injection and then periodically, starting at 2 hours after injec-
tion and up to 123 days after cell injection. For quantification, the
scale intensity of the longitudinal images was normalized, and a
regionof interest (ROI)wasselected according tothe signal inten-
sity. The ROI was kept constant and the total flux (photons
emitted per second) measured. The study was terminated at
123 days before the loss of bioluminescence.
RESULTS
HUCPVCs are readily transduced using various methods [28, 31],
including adenovirus, which does not alter the important immu-
nological properties of MSCs [46]. Batch-scale transduction of up
to five million cells per culture vessel was optimized using a
recombinant adenovirus expressing enhanced green fluorescent
protein (pAd5-eGFP). The transduction efficiency exceeded 98%
using 200 MOI of viral particles per cell, as determined by micro-
scopic analysis of unfixed cells and confirmed by counts of eGFP-
positive cells using FACS (Fig. 1A, 1B). Varying eGFP intensity in
cocultured cells was observed by FACS and fluorescent micros-
copy, suggesting that many cells can express multiple transgene
copies or can express the transgene at different levels.
We had previously cloned the humanized anti-VEEV antibody
gene into a single open reading frame to generate a recombinant
serotype 5 adenovirus construct (pAd5-anti-VEEV) [44]. HUCPVCs
were engineered with the recombinant pAd5-anti-VEEV at 200
MOI with no apparent toxicity. The effects of genetic engineer-
ing on the proliferation and multidifferentiation potential of
HUCPVCswereassessed.Comparedwithunengineeredcellsfrom
thesamecord,theproliferationofHUCPVCsexpressinganti-VEEV
was reduced within 24 hours of seeding and stalled by day 7 (Fig.
2A, 2B). Reduced cell division in the engineered cells is advanta-
geous, because the high proliferative capacity of HUCPVCs can
limit the longevity of the episomal transgene [31], leading to po-
tentially stochastic results. In directed differentiation assays,
unengineered and antibody-secreting HUCPVCs induced equiva-
lent levels of chondrogenic, adipogenic, and osteogenic lineage
markers (Fig. 2C–2E). Early expression of these markers was also
detected at the same time in the engineered and control cells
(data not shown). Thus, HUCPVCs are phenotypically unaltered
by adenovirus-mediated genetic engineering, despite constitu-
tive expression of the exogenous antibody.
TodeterminewhetherengineeredHUCPVCscansecretether-
apeutically useful quantities of the anti-VEEV antibody in vitro,
culture supernatant was harvested from the engineered cells
every 3–4days, and theantibody levelswerequantifiedbyfunc-
tional ELISA. Four days after transduction, one million engi-
neered HUCPVCs secreted 6–10 mg of anti-VEEV IgG daily
(Fig. 3), increasing to approximately 28 mg/day by day 7 (Fig.
3).Thisratecouldbemaintainedfor21daysinculture,depending
on the cell lot and despite stalled proliferation. The inherent var-
iabilityinsustained antibodyproduction after day7 wasobserved
in HUCPVCs isolated from different donors, although reproduc-
ible results were obtained using individual cell lots (Fig. 3). In a
previous study, administration of 50 mg of purified anti-VEEV
IgG per mouse protected the mice against VEEV exposure [45].
Less than 25 mg of this injected antibody reached the circula-
tion (Fig. 4A); thus, we predicted that an approximate dose of
two million engineered HUCPVCs would generate protective se-
rum anti-VEEV titers in mice within 24 hours of administration. If
the engineered HUCPVCs persisted, they could potentially regen-
erateprotectivetitersdailyforupto3weeks(Fig.3)andreplenish
the antibody lost by natural degradation.
We next assessed the level and duration of circulating anti-
VEEV produced by engineered HUCPVCs in vivo. IM injection is
the most practical route of administration in combat theaters;
Braid, Hu, Davies et al.
1029
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 thus, we developed our animal model using this scheme. In vivo
testing was performed using athymic (nude) mice, because
MSCs are not suitable for xenogeneic grafting despite being
nonalloreactive in humans [47]. Nude mice received an IM in-
jection of 2.5 million antibody-secreting HUCPVCs per mouse 4
days after genetic engineering. The control groups received
50 mg of purified anti-VEEV antibody per mouse intramuscu-
larly or 2.5 million sham HUCPVCs engineered with eGFP per
mouse. No adverse effects were observed after IM adminis-
tration of the cells or antibody. The serological profiles of
circulating anti-VEEV were generated from blood samples
taken at various time points. The purified anti-VEEV antibody
Figure 1.
HUCPVCs are engineered at high efficiency. Scaled-up transduction efficiency of HUCPVCs with a recombinant adenovirus encoding
eGFP reporter at 200 multiplicity of infection. (A): Twenty-four hours after transduction, nearly all the cells were positive for eGFP. Nuclei were
stained with Hoechst 33324 (blue) (original magnification 310). (B): Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis of 250,000 cells in (A) verified
that 98.6% of cells were GFP-positive. The GFP-negative population is shown in blue. Abbreviations: eGFP, enhanced green fluorescent protein;
FITC-A, fluorescein isothiocyanate A; HUCPVCs, human umbilical cord perivascular cells.
Figure 2.
In vitro characterization of engineered HUCPVCs. (A, B): HUCPVCs engineered with the anti-VEEV transgene showed reduced pro-
liferative capacity compared with unengineered HUCPVCs in 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide assays. (A): Within
24 hours, proliferation was stalled in the engineered HUCPVCs. (B): By day 7, the unengineered cells had more than doubled and the number of
engineered cells had not significantly increased after seeding. (C–F): Differentiation potential of HUCPVCs was retained after engineering with
theanti-VEEVtransgene.(C):Chondrogenesismicromassculture.Cellspositivefortheproteoglycanmarkeralcianbluewereevident7daysafter
induction (original magnification 310). (D): Adipogenesis. Lipid vesicles stained with Oil Red O were visible 7 days after induction. (E, F): Osteo-
genesis.Alkaline phosphatase-positive cells(violet)weredetected 7(E)and14(F)daysafterinduction(originalmagnification 320).(F):Nascent
bone nodules were observed at day 14. (D–F): Nuclei were counterstained with hematoxylin (blue). Abbreviations: HUCPVCs, human umbilical
cord perivascular cells; VEEV, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.
1030
Engineered Mesenchymal Cells for Viral Prophylaxis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 administered by direct injection exhibited a serum half-life
of 3.7 6 0.5 days (Fig. 5).
The passively administered purified anti-VEEV immediately
began to deteriorate (Fig. 4A). In contrast, the serum antibody ti-
ters of mice receiving engineered HUCPVCs increased for up to 10
days after implantation (Fig. 4A). The predicted protective titers
were maintained for up to 38 days after implantation in 40% of
mice, despite an apparent decline in antibody synthesis. Intrigu-
ingly, serum antibody was still detected at day 109 in 10% of the
mice,albeitatmarginallevels(Fig.4A).Therateofantibodydecay
in the mice treated with HUCPVCs expressing anti-VEEV never fit
the half-life profile for the passively transferred antibody. To-
gether, these findings indicate the successful engraftment of a
small population of engineered HUCPVCs, which resulted in sus-
tained antibody synthesis and that the cells are not quiescent but
retain metabolic activity in vivo.
The persistence of transgene-expressing HUCPVCs after IM
injection was unexpected; therefore, we used in vivo optical im-
aging to validate this finding. Consistent with the anti-VEEV anti-
bodystudies,HUCPVCswerebatch-engineeredwithrecombinant
adenovirus encoding firefly luciferase (pAd5-luc) at 200 MOI and
implanted by IM injection in the left hind limb. Luciferase-
expressing cells were detected at the site of injection at least
123 days after transplantation (Fig. 4B; supplemental online
Fig. 1). The implanted HUCPVCs appeared to remain in situ in
healthy animals, because bioluminescence was not detected at
remote sites.
The serological data suggest that engineered HUCPVCs could
extend protection against VEEV exposure, perhaps for as long as
38 days after prophylactic treatment. We directly tested this pre-
diction in a challenge study, in which the mice were intranasally
infected with a lethal dose of the highly virulent VEEV TrD in BSL3
containment. Mice were pretreated with either 50 mg of purified
antibody or 2.5 million antibody-secreting HUCPVCs, 24 hours or
10 days before challenge. The control groups were pretreated
with saline (untreated) or HUCPVCs engineered with pAd5-
eGFP (sham HUCPVCs). Clinical signs of infection were assessed
blind using a five-point scale reflecting weight loss and clinical
symptoms; the mice were humanely euthanized if the score
was 4. The efficacy of the humanized anti-VEEV antibody was
previously demonstrated in wild-type mice receiving a low dose
of 30–50 PFUs of VEEV TrD [45]. However, in the present
study, the mice were challenged with a 200-fold higher dose of
10,000PFUspernude mouse.Thedoseincrease wasnecessitated
Figure 3.
Engineered HUCPVCs can produce therapeutically useful
quantities of anti-VEEV antibody in culture. Culture supernatants
were harvested every 3–4 days from HUCPVCs engineered with the
anti-VEEV transgene. Functional humanized anti-VEEV IgG was quan-
tified in the conditioned media by enzyme-linked immunosorbent as-
say, using live VEEV strain TC-83 as antigen. Results from triplicate
experiments for HUCPVCs harvested from two representative umbil-
ical cords (white and black) are shown. The rate of antibody secretion
was consistent between HUCPVC lots for the first 7 days after trans-
duction, increasing to approximately 28 mg/million cells per day. In-
herentvariabilityinthecapacityofdonor-specificHUCPVCstosustain
antibody synthesis is evident after this point, although reproducible
results were obtained using cells from the same lot. The peak rate of
anti-VEEV IgG synthesis could be maintained for up to 21 days after
engineering (dark gray). Abbreviations: HUCPVCs, human umbilical
cord perivascular cells; VEEV, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.
Figure 4.
Engineered HUCPVCs can prolong therapeutic levels of cir-
culating anti-VEEV antibody. (A): Mice treated with 2.5 million engi-
neered HUCPVCs (red) per mouse exhibited significantly higher levels
of functional serum anti-VEEV antibody compared with passive trans-
fer of 50 mg of purified antibody per mouse (blue). Predicted protec-
tive titers were maintained for up to 38 days in 40% of mice, and low
levels of antibody were still detected at day 109 in 10% of mice. Pos-
itive serum titers were never observed from the sham-treated group
receiving HUCPVCs engineered with recombinant adenovirus encod-
ingenhanced green fluorescent protein (data notshown). Circlesrep-
resent individual mice from duplicate studies (n = 5 mice per study).
Horizontal bars represent the average from both studies. (B): Biolu-
minescence for individual mice captured by optical imaging over 123
days and quantified as total flux (photons per second). No photon
emissionsweredetectedbeforeinjection (day0).Nudemicereceived
2.5 million HUCPVCs, engineered with recombinant adenovirus
expressing firefly luciferase in the left hind-limb muscle. Intense bio-
luminescence was detected 2 hours after transplantation. After an
initial decline in bioluminescence to day 7, the bioluminescence
was relatively maintained until at least day 123, indicating successful
engraftment and continued transgene expression. Migration of cells
away from the site of injection was not detected. Abbreviations:
HUCPVCs,humanumbilicalcordperivascularcells;IM,intramuscular;
VEEV, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.
Braid, Hu, Davies et al.
1031
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 by the immune-compromised mouse model, in which the ab-
sence of T cells likely impedes the rapid hyperinflammatory re-
sponse that produces lethal encephalitis in wild-type mice.
Although 50 mg of purified anti-VEEV fully protected mice
against 30–50 PFUs of VEEV [45], it was insufficient to protect
against 10,000 PFUs delivered intranasally (Fig. 6A). In contrast,
pretreatment with engineered HUCPVCs 24 hours or 10 days be-
fore exposure fully protected the mice from intranasal VEEV ex-
posure (Fig. 6A). The protection can be attributed to successful
HUCPVC-mediated synthesis of anti-VEEV IgG in vivo, because
the mice pretreated with sham HUCPVCs were unprotected
and followed the survival curve of untreated mice (Fig. 6A). The
mice pretreated with engineered HUCPVCs not only survived
the challenge but also exhibited considerably less morbidity than
did the mice pretreated with the antibody alone (Fig. 6B).
The serological data (Fig. 4A) suggest that mice pretreated
with engineered HUCPVCs might continue to be protected 24,
31,or38daysafteradministration.Toreducetherequirementfor
animals, we tested this hypothesis in vitro. The VEEV-neutralizing
activityofpooledserumobtainedfrommicepretreatedwithanti-
VEEV-expressing HUCPVCs immediately before lethal challenge,
or 21, 31, and 38 days after administration, was assayed by PRNT
[48]. VEEV-neutralizing antibody titers (PRNT50) are expressed as
the highest dilution of serum producing a 50% or greater reduc-
tion in plaque count compared with the negative controls in
which virus was incubated with diluent. Average serum titers
were calculated from individual serum titers obtained previously
by functional ELISA (Fig. 4A). The serum from mice that remained
asymptomatic in the lethal challenge study had considerably
more neutralizing activity (PRNT50, 5,120) than did the mice that
exhibited clinical signs of infection but eventually recovered
(PRNT50,3,840;Table1).Serumobtainedfromunchallengedmice
21 days after administration of engineered HUCPVCs had equiv-
alent neutralizing activity to the challenged mice that recovered
(Table 1), suggesting that mice would still be protected 21 days
after engineered cell treatment. Although less potent, significant
neutralizing activity was still detected in serum obtained 31 and
38 days after transplantation of HUCPVCs expressing anti-VEEV
(Table 1). These data suggest that mice could be partially pro-
tected from lethal exposure to VEEV for up to 38 days after pro-
phylactic treatment with engineered HUCPVCs.
Figure5.
Thepurifiedanti-VEEVantibodyhasahalf-lifeof3.7daysin
nude mice. The average serum titers from four studies (n = 19 mice
total) are shown. Blood samples were taken from the mice on days
1, 3, 7, 10, and 17 after IM injection of 50 mg of purified anti-VEEV
antibody per mouse. The serum half-life best fits an exponential rate
of decay of 3.7 6 0.5 days. Abbreviations: IM, intramuscular; VEEV,
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.
Figure 6.
Prophylactic treatment with antibody-secreting HUCPVCs
confers protection against lethal exposure to VEEV. (A): Survival
curve. Pretreatment with HUCPVCs expressing anti-VEEV, either
24 hours or 10 days before exposure (red and maroon, respec-
tively), protected mice against lethal VEEV exposure. Similar pre-
treatment with 50 mg of purified antibody was only partially
protective when given 1 day (dark blue) or 10 days (light blue)
before exposure. Pretreatment with sham-engineered HUCPVCs
(white) had no benefit and closely recapitulated the survival curve
of untreated mice (black). (B): Morbidity scores. Pretreatment with
HUCPVCs expressing anti-VEEV reduced the frequency and severity
of clinical signs of infection. Clinical symptoms were objectively
scored on a scale from 0 (blue; normal weight and behavior) to 4
(red; $ 35% weight loss and/or severe signs of infection). The mice
were terminated if the score was 4. Untreated and sham-treated
mice exhibited significant clinical symptoms by day 6, followed
by rapid mortality within 3 days. Mortality was delayed in mice pre-
treated with purified antibody; however, most of the mice eventu-
ally succumbed. Mice pretreated with engineered HUCPVCs not
only survived the challenge but also exhibited only mild, if any, clin-
ical signs of infection and weight loss. Collective data from dupli-
cate studies are shown (n = 5 mice per group per study), with
the exception of mice that failed to recover from anesthesia after
intranasal inoculation. Abbreviations: Eng., engineered; HUCPVCs,
human umbilical cord perivascular cells; PE, pre-exposure; VEEV,
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.
1032
Engineered Mesenchymal Cells for Viral Prophylaxis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 DISCUSSION
Theimportanceoftargetedmonoclonalantibodies(mAbs)forim-
mune protection has long been overshadowed by the easy appeal
of broad-spectrum drugs [24]. However, the site-specific nature
of mAbs makes them invaluable tools in many contexts, including
the fight against multidrug-resistant pathogens. mAbs are a critical
component of the catalog of medical countermeasures against in-
fectious agents but have largely failed to reach the clinic in this
context owing to manufacturing costs, the challenge of timely (pre-
symptomatic) administration of effective doses, and the multiple
dosing regimens often required to maintain efficacy. Despite the
successful development of mAbs for the treatment of autoimmune
diseases and cancer, and the wealth of published data describing
development of mAbs targeted against infectious pathogens, still
only two mAbs have been licensed for infectious disease [24].
The cell-based modality for delivery of medical countermea-
sures we have described offers several advantages over current
paradigms. For example, the plant-produced countermeasure for
Ebola virus, ZMapp, is a cocktail of three synergistic mAbs [49] that
had limited usefulness during the Ebola outbreak because suffi-
cient quantities could not be manufactured in a timely fashion
[25]. In animal models, the protective efficacy of ZMapp was fur-
ther enhanced by coadministration of Ad-vectored interferon-a
[50, 51]. In contrast, the efficacy of implanting cocktails of engi-
neered HUCPVCs for osteogenic repair has already been shown
[32]; thus, we propose this paradigm as an alternative approach
to deliver single-dose, synergistic cocktails of antibodies and adju-
vants.Thecell-basedmodalityalsolendsitselftofutureapplications
in personalized medicine, because cocktails of pre-engineered cells
could be designed and administered at the point of care.
The HUCPVC cell-based delivery platform successfully im-
proved the prophylactic efficacy of an existing medical counter-
measure, the humanized anti-VEEV antibody, and dramatically
reduced both morbidity and mortality in recipients. Although
we used athymic nude mice, they can still mount an adaptive an-
tibody response against human antigens [52] and thereby trun-
cate the half-life of the humanized antibody. We have shown in
the present study that the serum half-life of anti-VEEV in nude
mice is only slightly longer than previously observed in wild-
type mice [45] (3.7 vs. 2.25 days, respectively). Because human-
ized antibodies typically exhibit a prolonged half-life of up to 28
days after human administration [53], such a reduced rate of an-
tibody turnover creates a scenario in which fewer engineered
HUCPVCs could sustain protective antibody titers for a longer pe-
riod of time in humans. This species-related immune response
might, in part, explain the differences reported by Bartholomew
et al. [54] in the secretory activity of human MSCs delivered intra-
muscularly into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunode-
ficiency (NOD/SCID) mice (28 days) or subcutaneously, within
immune-isolatory devices, in baboons (137 days). Thus, it is plau-
sible to expect that protective anti-VEEV serum titers might be
sustained for a longer period of time by administering engineered
HUCPVCs to humans.
An empirical prediction of the required IgG dose to protect or
treat humans infected with VEEV is not possible, because the
number of viral particles required to make a patient sick is currently
unknown. However, if one assumes the dosing of anti-VEEV IgG
would be similar to the 15 mg/kg per month dosing of the commer-
cial anti-respiratory syncytial virus antibody [55] and that the half-
life is 2 weeks, the average monthly titer would be 7.5 mg/kg. As
shown in Figure 3, one million engineered HUCPVCs can secrete
25 mg of IgG per day (0.75 mg/month). Therefore, 10 million
HUCPVCscouldbeexpectedtoproduce7.5mgantibodypermonth
in a human. Such a cell dose is considerably lower than the com-
monly used clinical dose of 100 million MSCs per adult.
The recombinant replication-defective pAd5 system is ideal
for engineering HUCPVCs with a genetic payload on a large scale.
HUCPVCs were engineered with the anti-VEEV transgene by sim-
ple incubation with the recombinant adenovirus, without the ad-
dition of transduction mediators, resulting in nearly 100% gene
transfer efficiency. We observed similar transduction efficiencies
using recombinantpAd5 vectors encoding other therapeutic mol-
ecules and reporter genes ([32]; L.R. Braid, unpublished data),
which abrogates the need to screen out untransformed cells.
MSCs derived from other sources such as bone marrow are more
refractory to transduction by recombinant adenovirus [56, 57],
making the HUCPVC population particularly well-suited for this
gene transfer paradigm.
Ex vivo transduction of the cells is an important aspect of the
engineeredcellplatform;therecipientisneverexposedtothelive
adenovirus that, in large doses, has been shown to elicit adverse
effects in clinical trials [22, 23]. Moreover, the transgene remains
episomal, mitigating the concerns associated with integration-
based gene therapy approaches, including insertional mutagene-
sis, position effects on transgene expression, and uncontrolled
propagation of the transgene. Consistent with other reports that
the inherent properties of MSCs such as immune-modulation are
unchanged by adenoviral-mediated gene transduction [28, 31,
46], engineered HUCPVCs retained their differentiation plasticity
in our study. However, our in vitro analyses revealed that
HUCPVCs isolated from different umbilical cords had variable in-
trinsic capacity to sustain anti-VEEV synthesis, which correlated
with reduced biological activity in other assays (unpublished
data). However, the current protocols for HUCPVC isolation, cryo-
preservation, and expansion in serum-free conditions have re-
duced such variability. Taken together with the documented
high-proliferative capacity, ex vivo stability, and availability of
HUCPVCs from biological waste material, these observations in-
dicate the high suitability of the HUCPVC-mediated gene transfer
modality for scale-up and clinical applications.
Finally, wedocumented cellengraftment exceeding 3months
after IM implantation. In subsequent studies, which will be re-
ported later, we have documented cell survival in excess of 5
months, using smaller doses of 1 and 0.5 million bioluminescent
Table 1. Serological VEEV-neutralizing activity implies prolonged
protection against lethal VEEV exposure by pretreatment with
engineered HUCPVCs
Variable
PRNT50
a
Average serum
titer (mg/ml)
Challengedmice(asymptomatic)
5,120
62.3
Challenged mice (recovered)
3,840
24.5
Day 21
3,840
27.1
Day 31
2,560
20.4
Day 38
2,560
15.3
aThe highest dilution of serum producing a 50% or greater reduction in
plaque count compared with negative controls in which virus was
incubated with diluent.
Abbreviations:HUCPVCs,humanumbilicalcordperivascularcells;PRNT,
plaque reduction neutralization test; VEEV, Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus.
Braid, Hu, Davies et al.
1033
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 cells. Histological examination of biopsy specimens of the injec-
tionsiteshowedcellsbetweenthemusclefibers,exhibitinganun-
differentiated morphologyand noevidenceof other mesenchymal
tissue lineage differentiation (L.R. Braid, unpublished data). Such
persistence is a consequence of IM implantation, as it is not ob-
served when cells are administered by other routes. Our results
corroborate those described by Liu et al. [17], who reported peak
circulatinglevelsofhumansolubletumornecrosisfactorreceptorII
(hsTNFR)onday7afterIMinjectionofengineeredMSCsintoNOD/
SCID mice, followed by declining hsTNFR titers to day 30. Using lu-
ciferase as a bioluminescent tracker, Vilalta et al. [58] similarly re-
ported that adipose-derived MSCs survived 8 months in situ
following IM implantation, and Nakabayashi et al. [59] has also
shown robustIMdwelltimeofallogeneicMSCsinrats.Thesurvival
of engineered HUCPVCs following IM implantation potentiates a
single dose treatment modality better suited for military field con-
texts than the current requirement for intravenous infusion of pro-
phylacticantibodiesorstemcelltreatmentsinaclinicalsetting.We
anticipatethatfuturerefinementoftheengineeringandtransplant
protocols will further extend the window of protection demon-
strated here. For example, preliminary data indicates that a lower
dose of cells may generate more stable serum titers, effectively el-
evating antibody levels at later time points (L. Braid, unpublished
data).Together withtherapiddeclineinIgG(Fig.4A)andluciferase
(Fig. 4B)expression in the initial days after transplantation, this ob-
servation suggests that an optimal dose that facilitates diffusion of
cells throughout the muscle and thus is adequately supported by
the vasculature immediately after transplantation will minimize
the initial loss of cells and stabilize dosing.
CONCLUSION
Thepresent proof-of-concept study identified HUCPVC-mediated
antibody gene therapy as a novel technology for immediate and
sustained passive immunity against a significant bio-warfare
threat.Thiscell-basedmodalityoffersadvantagesovertraditional
administration of purified antibody, including single-dose, IM im-
plantation for extended immune protection against infectious
disease. Given the success of this pilot study, we expect that
HUCPVC-mediated gene therapy will provide a broad-spectrum
solution for stealth delivery of therapies for a range of applica-
tions and biologic agents, including delivery of additional medical
countermeasures for biological and chemical defense purposes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to Lori McLaws for technical assistance with the
fluorescence-activated cell sorting and enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assays; to BSL3 staff Melissa Crichton, Nicole Barab´
e,
Scott Jager, Mary Christopher, Sarah Hayward, and Fay Schmaltz;
and to Damon Chau for generating the original pAd5-anti-VEEV
construct. Funding was provided by Directorate Industrial Re-
search Project W2207-08ES02/001/SV, DGSTO (14fe05) Agility
Funds, and Defence Research and Development Canada Applied
Research funds from Thrust 14f (WBE 14fe04). The work was per-
formed at Defence Research and Development Canada Suffield
Research Centre, Ralston, Alberta, Canada.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
L.R.B.:conception and design,collection and/or assemblyof data,
data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing; W.-G.H.:
conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data, man-
uscript review, final approval of manuscript; J.E.D.: conception
and design, provision of study material or patients, manuscript
writing, manuscript review, final approval of manuscript; L.P.N.:
conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data, man-
uscript review, final approval of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
L.R.B. is chief executive officer and chief scientist of Aurora Bio-
Solutions, Inc., has a research contract from the Department of
National Defence awarded to Aurora BioSolutions Inc., has stock
options from Tissue Regeneration Therapeutics, Inc. (TRT), and
has received an honorarium from TRT for providing expert testi-
mony to support U.S. patent 9,005,599. J.E.D. is an officer and a
shareholder of TRT, which provided the cells for the study, and re-
ceivesinventorroyaltypaymentsandhasstockandstockoptionsin
TRT. The other authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Chamberlain G, Fox J, Ashton B et al. Con-
cisereview:Mesenchymalstemcells:Theirphe-
notype,differentiationcapacity,immunological
features, and potential for homing. STEM CELLS
2007;25:2739–2749.
2
Nauta AJ, Fibbe WE. Immunomodulatory
properties of mesenchymal stromal cells. Blood
2007;110:3499–3506.
3
AtouiR,ChiuRC.Concisereview:Immuno-
modulatory properties of mesenchymal stem
cellsincellulartransplantation:Update,contro-
versies, and unknowns. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL
MEDICINE 2012;1:200–205.
4
Klyushnenkova E, Mosca JD, Zernetkina V
et al. T cell responses to allogeneic human mes-
enchymal stem cells: Immunogenicity, toler-
ance, and suppression. J Biomed Sci 2005;12:
47–57.
5
Aggarwal S, Pittenger MF. Human mesen-
chymal stem cells modulate allogeneic immune
cell responses. Blood 2005;105:1815–1822.
6
Hodgkinson CP, Gomez JA, Mirotsou M
etal.Geneticengineeringofmesenchymalstem
cells and its application in human disease ther-
apy. Hum Gene Ther 2010;21:1513–1526.
7
Kumar S, Chanda D, Ponnazhagan S. Ther-
apeutic potential of genetically modified mesen-
chymal stem cells. Gene Ther 2008;15:711–715.
8
Yan C, Li S, Li Z et al. Human umbilical cord
mesenchymal stem cells as vehicles of CD20-
specific TRAIL fusion protein delivery: A double-
target therapy against non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Mol Pharm 2013;10:142–151.
9
Frank RT, Najbauer J, Aboody KS. Concise
review: Stem cells as an emerging platform for
antibody therapy of cancer. STEM CELLS 2010;
28:2084–2087.
10
Compte M, Cuesta AM, S´
anchez-Mart´
ın
D et al. Tumor immunotherapy using gene-
modified human mesenchymal stem cells loaded
into synthetic extracellular matrix scaffolds. STEM
CELLS 2009;27:753–760.
11
Mangi AA, Noiseux N, Kong D et al. Mes-
enchymal stem cells modified with Akt prevent
remodeling and restore performance of in-
farcted hearts. Nat Med 2003;9:1195–1201.
12
BalyasnikovaIV,FergusonSD,SenguptaS
et al. Mesenchymal stem cells modified with a
single-chain antibody against EGFRvIII success-
fully inhibit the growth of human xenograft ma-
lignant glioma. PLoS One 2010;5:e9750.
13
Balyasnikova IV, Franco-Gou R, Mathis
JM et al. Genetic modification of mesenchymal
stem cells to express a single-chain antibody
against EGFRvIII on the cell surface. J Tissue
Eng Regen Med 2010;4:247–258.
14
Young JS, Kim JW, Ahmed AU et al.
Therapeutic cell carriers: A potential road
to cure glioma. Expert Rev Neurother 2014;
14:651–660.
15
Wyse RD, Dunbar GL, Rossignol J. Use of
geneticallymodifiedmesenchymalstemcellsto
treat neurodegenerative diseases. Int J Mol Sci
2014;15:1719–1745.
16
Cucchiarini M, Venkatesan JK, Ekici M
et al. Human mesenchymal stem cells overex-
pressing therapeutic genes: From basic science
1034
Engineered Mesenchymal Cells for Viral Prophylaxis
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 to clinical applications for articular cartilage re-
pair. Biomed Mater Eng 2012;22:197–208.
17
Liu LN, Wang G, Hendricks K et al. Com-
parisonofdrugandcell-baseddelivery:Engineered
adult mesenchymal stem cells expressing soluble
tumor necrosis factor receptor II prevent arthritis
in mouse and rat animal models. STEM CELLS
TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2013;2:362–375.
18
Wang G, Lui LN, Keunmyoung L et al.
Comparison of drug and cell-based delivery—
Engineering adult mesenchymal cells to deliver
human erythropoietin. Gene Ther Mol Biol
2009;13:321–330.
19
Hu W-G, Nagata LP. Antibody gene-based
prophylaxisandtherapyforbiodefence.HumVac-
cin 2008;4:74–78.
20
Nagata LP, Wong JP, Hu WG et al. Vac-
cines and therapeutics for the encephalitic
alphaviruses. Future Virol 2013;8:661–674.
21
Ho DT, Wykoff-Clary S, Gross CS et al.
Growth inhibition of an established A431 xeno-
graft tumor by a full-length anti-EGFR antibody
following gene delivery by AAV. Cancer Gene
Ther 2009;16:184–194.
22
Edelstein ML, Abedi MR, Wixon J. Gene
therapy clinical trials worldwide to 2007—An
update. J Gene Med 2007;9:833–842.
23
Committee on the Independent Review
and Assessment of the Activities of the NIH
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee; Board
onHealthSciencesPolicy;InstituteofMedicine;
Lenzi RN, Altevogt BM, Gostin LO, eds. Over-
sight and Review of Clinical Gene Transfer Pro-
tocols: Assessing the Role of the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academies Press, 2014.
24
Casadevall A, Pirofski LA. The Ebola epi-
demic crystallizes the potential of passive anti-
body therapy for infectious diseases. PLoS
Pathog 2015;11:e1004717.
25
Wong G, Kobinger GP. Backs against the
wall: Novel and existing strategies used during
the 2014-2015Ebola virus outbreak. Clin Micro-
biol Rev 2015;28:593–601.
26
Sarugaser R, Lickorish D, Baksh D et al.
Human umbilical cord perivascular (HUCPV)
cells: A source of mesenchymal progenitors.
STEM CELLS 2005;23:220–229.
27
Ennis J, G¨
otherstr¨
omC, LeBlanc K et al.In
vitro immunologic properties of human umbil-
ical cord perivascular cells. Cytotherapy 2008;
10:174–181.
28
Ennis J, Sarugaser R, Gomez A et al. Isola-
tion, characterization, and differentiationof hu-
man umbilical cord perivascular cells (HUCPVCs).
Methods Cell Biol 2008;86:121–136.
29
Schugar RC, Chirieleison SM, Wescoe KE
et al. High harvest yield, highexpansion, andphe-
notype stability of CD146 mesenchymal stromal
cells from whole primitive human umbilical cord
tissue. J Biomed Biotechnol 2009;2009:789526.
30
Farias VA, Linares-Fern´
andez JL,Pe~
nalver
JL et al. Human umbilical cord stromal stem cell
express CD10 and exert contractile properties.
Placenta 2011;32:86–95.
31
Baksh D, Yao R, Tuan RS. Comparison of
proliferative and multilineage differentiation
potentialof humanmesenchymalstemcellsde-
rived from umbilical cord and bone marrow.
STEM CELLS 2007;25:1384–1392.
32
Vallejo CE. Characterization of Geneti-
cally Modified HUCPVCs as an Osteogeneic
Cell Source. Toronto, ON, Canada: University
of Toronto; 2013.
33
Weaver SC, Ferro C, Barrera R et al.
Venezuelan equine encephalitis. Annu Rev
Entomol 2004;49:141–174.
34
Adams AP, Navarro-Lopez R, Ramirez-
Aguilar FJ et al. Venezuelan equine encephalitis
virus activity in the Gulf Coast region of Mexico,
2003-2010. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2012;6:e1875.
35
Dal Canto MC, Rabinowitz SG. Central
nervous system demyelination in Venezuelan
equine encephalomyelitis infection. J Neurol
Sci 1981;49:397–418.
36
Rivas F, Diaz LA, Cardenas VM et al. Epi-
demic Venezuelan equine encephalitis in La
Guajira, Colombia, 1995. J Infect Dis 1997;
175:828–832.
37
Steele KE, Twenhafel NA. Review paper:
Pathology of animal models of alphavirus en-
cephalitis. Vet Pathol 2010;47:790–805.
38
Hawley RJ, Eitzen EM Jr. Biological
weapons—A primer for microbiologists. Annu
Rev Microbiol 2001;55:235–253.
39
Pittman PR, Makuch RS, Mangiafico JA
et al. Long-term duration of detectable neutral-
izing antibodies after administration of live-
attenuated VEE vaccine and following booster
vaccination with inactivated VEE vaccine. Vac-
cine 1996;14:337–343.
40
Gale S. Interscience Conference on Anti-
microbial Agents and Chemotherapy—48th An-
nual Meeting and Infectious Diseases Society of
America—46th Annual Meeting Updates on ther-
apeutic research—Part 1. IDrugs 2009;12:1–2.
41
Fine DL, Roberts BA, Terpening SJ et al.
NeurovirulenceevaluationofVenezuelanequine
encephalitis (VEE) vaccine candidate V3526 in non-
human primates. Vaccine 2008;26:3497–3506.
42
Reed DS, Lind CM, Lackemeyer MG et al.
Genetically engineered, live, attenuated vaccines
protect nonhuman primates against aerosol chal-
lenge with a virulent IE strain of Venezuelan
equine encephalitis virus. Vaccine 2005;23:
3139–3147.
43
PrattWD,DavisNL,JohnstonREetal.Ge-
netically engineered, live attenuated vaccines
for Venezuelan equine encephalitis: Testing in
animal models. Vaccine 2003;21:3854–3862.
44
Hu WG, Chau D, Wu J et al. Humanization
and mammalian expression of a murine mono-
clonal antibody against Venezuelan equine en-
cephalitis virus. Vaccine 2007;25:3210–3214.
45
Hu WG, Phelps AL, Jager S et al. A
recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody
completely protects mice against lethal chal-
lenge with Venezuelan equine encephalitis vi-
rus. Vaccine 2010;28:5558–5564.
46
Treacy O, Ryan AE, Heinzl T et al. Adeno-
viraltransductionofmesenchymalstemcells:In
vitro responses and in vivo immune responses
after cell transplantation. PLoS One 2012;7:
e42662.
47
Grinnemo KH, M˚
ansson A, Dellgren G
et al. Xenoreactivity and engraftment of human
mesenchymal stem cells transplanted into in-
farcted rat myocardium. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 2004;127:1293–1300.
48
Schmidt NJ, Dennis J, Lennette EH. Plaque
reduction neutralization test for human cyto-
megalovirus based upon enhanced uptake of
neutral red by virus-infected cells. J Clin Micro-
biol 1976;4:61–66.
49
Qiu X, Wong G, Audet J et al. Reversion of
advanced Ebola virus disease in nonhuman pri-
mates with ZMapp. Nature 2014;514:47–53.
50
Qiu X, Wong G, Fernando L et al. mAbs
and Ad-vectored IFN-a therapy rescue Ebola-
infected nonhuman primates when administered
after the detection of viremia and symptoms. Sci
Transl Med 2013;5:207ra143.
51
Qiu X, Wong G, Fernando L et al. Mono-
clonal antibodies combined with adenovirus-
vectored interferon significantly extend the
treatment window in Ebola virus-infected
guinea pigs. J Virol 2013;87:7754–7757.
52
Stigbrand T, Ull´
en A, Sandstr¨
om P et al.
Endogenous anti-tumor antibody responses
in nude mice. Cancer 1997;80(suppl):2404–
2410.
53
Beck A, Wurch T, Bailly C et al. Strategies
and challenges for the next generation of ther-
apeutic antibodies. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:
345–352.
54
Bartholomew A, Patil S, Mackay A et al.
Baboon mesenchymal stem cells can be ge-
netically modified to secrete human erythro-
poietin in vivo. Hum Gene Ther 2001;12:
1527–1541.
55
TheIMpact-RSVStudyGroup..Palivizumab,
a humanized respiratory syncytial virus mono-
clonal antibody, reduces hospitalization from
respiratory syncytial virus infection in high-risk
infants. . Pediatrics 1998;102:531–537.
56
Conget PA, Minguell JJ. Adenoviral-
mediated gene transfer into ex vivo expanded
human bone marrow mesenchymal progenitor
cells. Exp Hematol 2000;28:382–390.
57
Tsuda H, Wada T, Ito Y et al. Efficient
BMP2 gene transfer and bone formation of
mesenchymal stem cells by a fiber-mutant ade-
noviral vector. Mol Ther 2003;7:354–365.
58
Vilalta M, D´
egano IR, Bag´
o J et al. Biodis-
tribution, long-term survival, and safety of
human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal
stem cells transplanted in nude mice by high
sensitivity non-invasive bioluminescence imag-
ing. Stem Cells Dev 2008;17:993–1003.
59
Nakabayashi A, Kamei N, Sunagawa T
et al. In vivo bioluminescence imaging of mag-
netically targeted bone marrow-derived mes-
enchymal stem cells in skeletal muscle injury
model. J Orthop Res 2013;31:754–759.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Braid, Hu, Davies et al.
1035
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
